488 
SHARMA & POOLE 
UAJ2001 
Symmetric Collaborative Filtering Using the Noisy Sensor Model 
Rita Sharma 
Department of Computer Science 
University of British Columbia 
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4 

Abstract 
Collaborative filtering is the process of mak­
ing recommendations regarding the potential 
preference of a user, for example shopping on 
the Internet, based on the preference ratings 
of the user and a number of other users for 
various items. This paper considers collabo­
rative filtering bMed on explicit multi-valued 
ratings. To evaluate the algorithms, we con­
sider only pure collaborative filtering, using 
ratings exclusively, and no other information 
about the people or items. 
Our approach is to predict a user's prefer­
ences regarding a particular item by using 
other people who rated that item and other 
items rated by the user as noisy sensors. The 
noisy sensor model uses Bayes' theorem to 
compute the probability distribution for the 
user's rating of a new item. 
We give two 
variant models: in one, we learn a classical 
normal linear regression model of how users 
rate items; in another, we assume different 
users rate items the same, but the accuracy 
of the sensors needs to be learned. We com­
pare these variant models with state-of-the­
art techniques and show how they are sig­
nificantly better, whether a user has rated 
only two items or many. We report empir­
ical results using the EachMovie database 1 
of movie ratings. We also show that by con­
sidering items similarity along with the users 
similarity, the accuracy of the prediction in­
creases. 
1 
Introduction 
Collaborative filtering is a key technology used to build 
Recommender Systems on the Internet. It has been 
1http:/ /research.compaq.com/SRC/eachmovie/ 
David Poole 
Department of Computer Science 
University of British Columbia 
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4 

used by Recommender Systems such as Amazon.com 
-a book store on the web, CDNow.com- a CD store 
on the web, and MovieFinder .com - a movie site on 
the internet [Schafer, Konstan and Riedl, 1999]. 
Collaborative filtering (CF) is the process of making 
predictions whether a user will prefer a particular item, 
given his or her ratings on other items and given other 
people's ratings on various items including the one in 
question. CF relies on the fact that people's prefer­
ences are not randomly distributed; there are patterns 
within the preferences of a person and among simi­
lar groups of people, creating correlation. 
The user 
for whom we are predicting a rating is called the ac­
tive user. In collaborative filtering, the main premise 
is that the active user will prefer items which like­
minded people prefer, or even that dissimilar people 
don't prefer. 
The problem can be formalized: given 
a set of ratings for various user-item pairs, predict a 
rating for a new user-item pair. It is interesting that 
the abstract problem is symmetric between users and 
items. 
Collaborative filtering has been an active area of re­
search in recent years. 
Several collaborative filter­
ing algorithms have been suggested, ranging from bi­
nary to non-binary rating, implicit and explicit rating. 
Initial collaborative filtering algorithms were based 
on statistical methods using correlation between user 
preferences [Resnick, Iacovou, Suchak, Bergstrom and 
Riedl, 1994; Shardanand and Maes, 1995]. These cor­
relation based algorithms predict the active user rat­
ings as a similarity-weighted sum of the other users 
ratings. 
These algorithms are also referred to as 
memory based algorithms [Breese, Heckerman and 
Kadie, 1998]. Collaborative filtering is different to the 
standard supervised learning task because there are 
only two attributes, each with a large domain; it is 
the structure within the domains that are important 
to the prediction, but this structure is not provided ex­
plicitly. Recently, some researchers have used machine 
learning methods [Breese et al., 1998; Ungar and Fos-

UAI2001 
SHARMA & POOLE 
489 
ter, 1998) for collaborative filtering algorithms. These 
methods essentially discover the hidden attributes for 
users and items, which explain the similarity between 
users and items. 
Breese et al. [Breese et a!., 1998] proposed and eval­
uated two probabilistic models for model based col­
laborative filtering algorithms: 
cluster models and 
Bayesian networks. In the cluster model, users with 
similar preferences are clustered together into classes. 
The model's parameters, the number of clusters, and 
the conditional probability of ratings given a class are 
estimated from the training data. In the Bayesian net­
work, nodes correspond to items in the database. The 
training data is used to learn the network structure 
and the conditional probabilities. 
Pennock et al.[Pennock, Horvitz, Lawrence and Giles, 
2000] proposed a collaborative filtering algorithm 
called personality diagnosis (P D) and showed that 
PD makes better predictions than other memory and 
model based algorithms. This algorithm is based on a 
probabilistic model of how people rate items, which is 
similar to our noisy sensor model approach. 
In this paper we propose and evaluate a probabilis­
tic approach based on a noisy sensor model, which is 
symmetric between users and items. Our approach is 
based on the idea that to predict an active user's rating 
for a particular item, we can use all those people who 
rated that item and other items rated by the active 
user as the noisy sensors. We view the noisy sensor 
model as a belief network. The conditional probabil­
ity table associated with each sensor reflects the noise 
in the sensor. 
To model how another user (user u) can act as a noisy 
sensor for the active user a's rating, we need to find a 
relationship between their preferences. Unfortunately, 
there is usually very little data, so we need to make a 
priori some assumptions about the relationship. Here 
we give two variants of the general idea for learning 
the noisy sensor model for explicit multi-valued rat­
ing data: one, where we learn a classical normal lin­
ear regression model of how users rate items (Noisyl); 
and another, where we assume that the different users 
rate items the same and learn the accuracy of the sen­
sor(Noisy2). 
In order to avoid a perfect fit with sparse data we add 
some dummy points before fitting the relationship. We 
use hierarchical prior to distribute the effect of dummy 
points over all possible rating pairs. 
After learning the noisy sensor model (i.e. the con­
ditional probability table associated with each sensor 
node), we use Bayes' theorem to compute the proba­
bility distribution of the user a's rating of a new item. 
We evaluate both Noisyl and Noisy2 on the Each­
Movie database of movie ratings and compare them 
to the state-of-the-art techniques. We also show that 
symmetric collaborative filtering, which employs both 
user and item similarity, offers better accuracy than 
asymmetric collaborative filtering. 
2 
Filtering Problem and 
Mathematical Notation 
Let N be the number of users and M be the total num­
ber of items in the database. S is an N x M matrix of 
all user's ratings for all items; Sui is the rating given 
by user u to item i. Let the ratings be on a cardi­
nal scale with m values that we denote v1, v2, .. . , Vm· 
Then each rating Sui has a domain of possible values 
(v1,v2, •
.
.
 , vm) · In collaborative filtering, S, the user­
item matrix, is generally very sparse since each user 
will only have rated a small percentage of the total 
number of items. Under this formulation, the collabo­
rative filtering problem becomes predicting those Sui 
which are not defined in S, the user-item matrix. 
3 
Collaborative Filtering Using the 
Noisy Sensor Model 
We propose a simple probabilistic approach for sym­
metric collaborative filtering using the noisy sensor 
model for predicting the rating by user a (active user) 
of an item j. We use as noisy sensors: 
• all users who rated the item j 
• all items rated by user a 
The sensor model is depicted as a naive Bayesian net­
work in Figure 1. The direction of the arrow shows 
that the prediction of user a for item j causes the sen­
sor u to take on a particular prediction for item j. The 
sensor model is the conditional probability table asso­
ciated with each sensor node. The noise in the sensor 
is reflected by the probability of incorrect prediction; 
that is, by the conditional probability table associated 
with it. To keep the model simple we use the indepen­
dence assumption that the prediction of any sensor for 
item j is independent of others, given the prediction 
of user a for item j. 
We need the following probabilities for Figure 1: 
Pr (SuiiSaj) : the probability of user u's prediction 
for item j, given the prediction of user a for item j. 
Pr (SakiSaj) : the probability of user a's prediction 
for item k, given the prediction of user a for item j. 

490 
SHARMA & POOLE 
UAI2001 
Figure 1: Naive Bayesian Network Semantics for the 
Noisy Sensor Model 
Pr (Saj) : the prior probability of active user a's pre­
diction for item j. 
We 
compute 
the 
prior 
probability 
distribution 
Pr (Saj =vi) of user a's rating for item j by the 
fraction of rating vi in the training data set, where 
ViE (vt,V2, . .. ,vm) · 
Given the conditional probabilities table for all sen­
sors, we can compute the probability distribution for 
user a's rating of an unseen item j, using the noisy 
sensor model as described in Figure 1. By applying 
Bayes' rule we can have the following: 
Pr (Saj I (Slj, ... , SNj) 1\ (Sal, ... , SaM)) 
N 
M 
ex: Pr (Saj) . II Pr (Suj ISaj). II Pr (SakI Saj) 
u=l 
k=l 
(1) 
To use the noisy sensor model for collaborative fil­
tering we need the probability table for probabilities: 
Pr(SuilSa.i) and Pr(Sa.k/Sa.J)· 
Consider first the problem of estimating Pr (Sui ISai ), 
which is the problem of estimating user u's rating for 
item j given user a's rating of it. There is typically 
sparse data for the m x m probability table and we 
need to make some prior assumptions about the rela­
tionship. We assume that there is a linear relation­
ship with Gaussian error between the preferences of 
users and, similarly, between the ratings received by 
the items. Suppose the rating of user a (the indepen­
dent variable) is denoted by x, and that the rating of 
user u (the dependent variable) is denoted by y. Sup­
pose that user a and user u co-rated n items and their 
ratings over n co-rated items are denoted by n pairs of 
observations (xl,yl),(x2,Y2), ... ,(xn,Yn)-
We want 
to find a straight line which best fits these points. We 
assume that the mean of y can be expressed as a lin­
ear function of independent variable x. Since a model 
based on an independent variable cannot in general 
predict exactly the observed values of y, it is neces­
sary to introduce the error e;. For the ith observation, 
we have the following: 
y; = a + (3x; + e; 
We assume that unobserved errors (e;) are indepen­
dent and normally distributed with a mean of zero 
and the variance (]"2• If Yi is the linear function of e;, 
which is normally distributed, then y; is also normally 
distributed. We assume the same variance for all the 
observations. The mean and variance of y; are given 
thus: 
E (yi) = a + (3x; 
var (y,) == (]"2 
For the ith observation, the probability distribution 
function of y which is normally distributed can be writ­
ten thus: 
p (y = y;Jx == x;) 
== V2a2 exp [ ;:. (y;-,u;)2] 
where ,Ui = a + (3x, 
The joint probability distribution function (or the like­
lihood function denoted by LF (a, (3, a2)) is the prod­
uct of the individual P (y;lx;) over all observations. 
n 
LF (a,j3,a2) 
= IT P(y;Jx;) 
= 
We apply the maximum likelihood method [Gujarati, 
1995] to estimate unknown parameters (a, (3, (]"2). The 
likelihood is maximum at the following values of the 
parameters: 
a== 1/n(LYi- f32:x;) 
After calculating the parameters a, (3 and (]"2 we can 
write the expression of the probability distribution of 
user u's preference for item j given the user a's pref­
erence for it as follows: 
Pr (Suj = Xuj ISaj = Xaj) = P (y = Xuj Jx == Xa.j) 

UAI2001 
SHARMA & POOLE 
491 
1 
[ -1 
2] 
= 
ƃexp -
2 2 (Xuj- (a+ /3Xaj)) 
v 27fcr2 
u 
To estimate Pr (SakiSaj), we use the same model as 
described above for computing Pr (Suj ISaj) . In this 
case the independent variable x denotes the rating re­
ceived by item j, while dependent variable y denotes 
the rating received by item k. 
And, the n pairs of 
observations {xl,Yl), (x2,Y2), . . . , (xn,Yn) are the rat­
ings over item j and k by those n users, who have 
co-rated both items j and k. 
After 
computing 
the 
probability 
distribution 
Pr (SujiSaj) for all users (u) 
who rated item j, 
and Pr (SakiSaj) for all items (k) rated by user a, we 
can compute the probability distribution of the user 
a rating for item j using Equation (1). In this model 
we need to compute 3 * (u + i) free parameters (a, {3, 
and (!2 ) , where u is the number of users who rated 
the item j and i is the number of items rated by user 
a. 
When the linear relationship exceeds the maximum 
value of the rating scale, we use the maximum value; 
when it is lower than the minimum value of the rating 
scale, we use the minimum value. 
To predict a rating (for example, to compare it with 
other algorithms that predict ratings), we predict the 
expected value of the rating. The expected value of 
the rating is defined as follows: 
E (Saj) = 3;:1 Pr (Saj =Vi IX)* Vi 
where X= (Slj, ... , SNi) I\ (Sal, ... , SaM). 
3.1 
K Dummy Observations 
While trying to fit Jines with sparse data, we often 
find a perfect linear relationship, even though the sen­
sor isn't perfect. If there is a perfect fit between users 
a and u, then the variance will be zero according to the 
above calculations. Therefore, the sensor u's predic­
tion for item j will be perfect, or deterministic; that is, 
the conditional probability table associated with sen­
sor u will be purely deterministic. 
We do not want 
this for our noisy sensor model because a determinis­
tic sensor will discount the effects of other sensors. For 
example, often one or two co-rated items always have 
a perfect fit, even though such a user is not a good 
sensor. 
We hypothesize that this problem can be overcome if 
we add K dummy observations along with n obser­
vations (co-rated items). We assume that user a and 
user u give ratings over K dummy items (K > 0) in 
such a way that their ratings for K dummy items are 
distributed over all possible rating pairs. For m scale 
rating data there are m2 possible combination of the 
rating pairs. 
We compute the prior distribution of 
each rating pair by its frequency in the training data. 
We use the prior distribution of rating pairs for dis­
tributing the effect of K dummy points over all rating 
pairs like hierarchical prior. 
This, however, reduces 
our ability to guarantee the ratings for K items will 
be distributed over all possible rating pairs. We have 
experimented with parameter K, and we found that 
Noisyl performs better with K = 1. For subsequent 
experiments we, therefore, chose K = 1 for Noisyl. 
3.2 
Selecting Noisy Sensors 
For determining the reliability of the noisy sensors, 
we consider the goodness of fit of the fitted regression 
line to a set of observations. We use the coefficient of 
determination r2 [Gujarati, 1995], a measure that tells 
how well the regression line fits the observations. This 
coefficient measures the proportion or percentage of 
the total variation in the dependent variable explained 
by the regression model. r2 is calculated as follows 
[Gujarati, 1995}: 
= 
"'"'e2 
1-
L., 
j 
ś (Yi- fJ)2 
where y is the mean of the ratings of user u. 
The value of r2 lies between 0 and 1 ( 0 ::; r2 ::; 1) . 
If r2 = 1, there exists a perfect linear relationship 
between the preferences of user a and user u; that 
is, e; = 0 for each observation (co-rated item). 
On 
the other hand, if r2 = 0, it means there is no linear 
relationship between users a and u and the best fit line 
is horizontal line going through the mean y. We order 
the user and item noisy sensors according to r2. We 
use the best U user noisy sensors and best I item noisy 
sensors for making the predictions. 
The parameter 
settings for U and I are explained in the next section. 
3.3 
Variant Noisy2 of Noisyl 
The problem with Noisyl is that we must often fit lin­
ear relationships with very little data (co-rated items). 
It may be better to assume a priori the linear model 
and then simply learn the noise. The algorithm Noisy2 
is based on the idea that different users rate items the 
same and, similarly, different items receive the same 
rating. We assume that the preferences of user a and 
user u are the same; that is, the expected value of user 
u's preference of any item is equal to active user a's 
preference for that item. 
E (Yilx = x;) = 11 = x; 
We learn the variance of user u's prediction. The al­
gorithm Noisy2 can be derived from algorithm Noisyl 

492 
SHARMA & POOLE 
UAI2001 
by making the regression coefficients a = 0 and /3 = 1. 
In this model we need to compute ( u + i) free param­
eters ( a2), where u is the number of users who rated 
the item j and i is the number of items rated by user 
a. We also add the K dummy observations because 
the same problem (as discussed in Subsection 3.1) can 
arise in Noisy2. We have experimented with parame­
ter K, and we found that Noisy2 also performs better 
with K 
= 1. For subsequent experiments we, there­
fore, chose K = 1 for Noisy2 also. 
In Noisy2 we are not fitting the relationship between 
user a and user u, but we assume an equal relation­
ship. So, it doesn't make sense to use the coefficient of 
determination r2 for finding the reliability of the noisy 
sensors. Rather, to find the reliability of the noisy sen­
sor, we use the variance; the less variance, the more 
reliable the noisy sensor. We use the best U user noisy 
sensors and best I item noisy sensors for making the 
predictions. The parameter settings for U and I are 
explained in the next section. 
4 
Evaluation Framework 
To evaluate the accuracy of collaborative filtering al­
gorithms we used the training and test set approach. 
In this approach, the dataset of users (and their rat­
ings) is divided into two: a training set and a test set. 
The training set is used as the collaborative filtering 
dataset. The test set is used to evaluate the accuracy 
of the collaborative filtering algorithm. We treat each 
user from the test set as the active user. To carry out 
testing, we divide the ratings by each test user into two 
sets: Ia and Pa. The set Ia contains ratings that we 
treat as observed ratings. The set Pa contains the rat­
ings that we attempt to predict using a CF algorithm 
and observed ratings (Ia) and training set. 
To evaluate the accuracy of the collaborative filtering 
algorithm we use the average absolute deviation met­
ric, as it is the most commonly used metric [Breese 
et al., 1998]. The lower the average absolute deviation, 
the more accurate the collaborative filtering algorithm 
is. For all users in the test set we calculate the average 
absolute deviation of the predicted rating against the 
actual rating of items. Let the number of predicted 
ratings in the test set for the active user be na; then 
the average absolute deviation for a user is given as 
follows: 
Sa= ,;, LjEPa IPa,j- ra,jl, 
where Pai is user a's observed rating for item j and raj 
is user a's predicted rating for item j. 
These absolute deviations are then averaged over all 
users in the test set. 
4.1 
Data and protocols 
We compared both versions of our noisy sensor model 
to PD (Personality Diagnosis) [Pennock et al., 2000] 
and Correlation (Pearson Correlation) [Resnick et al., 
1994]. To compare the performance we used the same 
subset of the EachMovie database as used by Breese et 
al. [Breese et al., 1998] and Pennock et al. [Pennock 
et al., 2000], consisting of 1,623 movies, 381,862 rat­
ings, 5,000 users in the training set, and 4,119 users 
in the test set. In EachMovie database the ratings are 
elicited on a integer scale from zero to five. We also 
tested the algorithms on other subsets to verify that 
we are not finding peculiarities of the subset. 
We ran experiments with different amounts of ratings 
in set Ia to understand the effect of the amount of 
the observed ratings on the prediction accuracy of 
the collaborative filtering algorithm. 
As in [Breese 
et al., 1998] for the AllBut1 Protocol, we put a sin­
gle randomly selected rating for each test user in the 
test set Pa and the rest of the ratings in the observed 
set I<+. As in [Breese et al., 1998] for each GivenX Pro­
tocol, we place X ratings randomly for each test user 
in the observed set Ia, and the rest of the ratings in 
the test set Pa. We did the experiments for X = 2, 5 
and 10. 
4.2 
Selecting Noisy Sensors 
After learning the noisy sensor model we determine 
which noisy sensors should be used in making the pre­
diction for the active user. Figure 2 shows the varia­
tion of average absolute deviation with best user noisy 
sensors for different numbers of best item noisy sensors 
for Noisy1. We used the dataset as described above 
but the test rating and the observed ratings for each 
user of the test set were selected randomly. 
Figute 2 shows that the average absolute deviation de­
creases with the increase in number of item sensors. 
There is no significant improvement in accuracy when 
the number of item sensors is more than twenty. It 
also shows that the average absolute deviation first 
decreases with the increase in number of user sensors 
and then increases as more user sensors are used for 
prediction. This is because the large number of user 
sensors results in too much noise for those user sensors 
that have good reliability. 
From the experiments, we found that both algo­
rithms give better performances with ten-to-twenty 
item noisy sensors and forty-to-seventy user noisy sen­
sors 2• For the experiments reported in the following 
section, we use the best fifty user noisy sensors and 
2We didn't use the test set for finding the number of 
user and item noisy sensors. 

UAI2001 
SHARMA & POOLE 
493 
12 5 
2 
1.1 5 
1 
Ǻ 
5 ' 
' ' 
1;\ 
1 
' 
• 
09 5 
9 
' ' 
0 
0 Item noisy senson;; 
S IWI'n noisy sensors 
10 item nol.ay sen:Kit1 
-
 15 item nol:&y sensors 
. 20 ilem noisy sensors 
+ 
25 ilem no!!l_ sensors 
·.li-Ƃlj:O 
ki 
• Žlf \1 ƀyƁ ż 11žſ il-ily  
i-
 il 
-<11-
 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
so 
60 
70 
60 
90 
100 
110 
120 
130 
140 
150 
user noisy sensors 
Figure 2: The average absolute deviation as a function 
of the number of best user noisy sensors for different 
numbers of best item noisy sensors. 
best twenty item noisy sensors (i.e. U 
= 50 and I 
= 20) for both Noisyl and Noisy2. The parameters U 
and I depend on the database. In the case of the Each­
Movie database, the number of users are more than the 
movies, also each user has rated only few movies. Due 
to this possibility more best user noisy sensors (U) are 
selected than the best item noisy sensors (I). 
From Figure 2 we also see that the minimum aver­
age absolute deviation is .936 when we use both user 
and item noisy sensors (with sixty user and twenty 
item noisy sensors). It is .964 when we use only the 
user noisy sensors, shown by the zero item noisy sen­
sors case, and 1.027 when we use only the item noisy 
sensors, shown on the y-axis for ten item noisy sen­
sors. This indicates that when we include the item 
noisy sensors along with the user noisy sensors, the 
quality of the prediction improves considerably. It 
also shows that if we use only the item noisy sensors 
for prediction, then the average absolute deviation be­
comes greater than when we use only user noisy sen­
sors. Therefore, symmetric collaborative filtering of­
fers better accuracy than asymmetric collaborative fil­
tering. 
4.3 
Comparison with Other Methods 
We compared the algorithms Noisyl, Noisy2, Corre­
lation and PD using the same training and test set as 
Pennock et al. [Pennock et al., 2000]. For each test 
user in the test set we use the same set of observed 
(Ia) and test ratings (Pa) as Pennock et al. 
The results·of comparing Noisyl, Noisy2, Correlation 
and PD are shown in Table 1. We re-implemented 
Personality Diagnosis. Our results for Personality Di-
agnosis match exactly with those reported in Pennock 
et al. [Pennock et al., 2000]. We took the results 
for Correlation directly from Pennock et al. [Pennock 
et al., 2000]. 
Noisyl performed better than PD and Correlation 
for AllButl and Givenl 0 protocols. For GivenS and 
Given2 protocols Noisyl performance is better than 
Correlation but not better than PD. We believe that 
Noisy1's poor performance can be explained by the 
fact the lines that are fitted to very small data sets 
are often poor fit to the actual relationship. The algo­
rithm Noisy2, based on an equal relationship between 
users, doesn't suffer from the same problem, and out­
performed all algorithms under all protocols. 
Table 1: Average absolute deviation scores on the 
EachMovie data for Noisy1, Noisy2, PD and Corre­
lation (note: lower scores are better). 
Algorithm 
Protocol 
AllButl 
Given10 
GivenS 
Given2 
Noisy2 
.893 
.943 
.974 
1.012 
Noisyl 
.943 
.983 
1.021 
1.196 
PD 
.964 
.986 
1.016 
1.039 
Carrel 
.999 
1.069 
1.145 
1.296 
Shardanand and Maes [Shardanand and Maes, 1995] 
and Pennock et al. [Pennock et al., 2000] proposed 
that the accuracy of a collaborative filtering algorithm 
should be evaluated on extreme ratings (very high or 
very low ratings) for items. The supposition is that, 
most of the time, people are interested in suggestions 
about items they might like or dislike, but not about 
items they are unsure of. Pennock et al. [Pennock 
et al., 2000] defined the extreme ratings as those which 
are 0.5 above and 0.5 below the average rating in the 
subset. To compare the performance of algorithms 
with extreme ratings we computed the predicted rat­
ings for those test cases from the test set Pa of all 
protocols, whose observed rating is less than R- 0.5 
or greater than R + 0.5, where R is the overall average 
rating in the subset. 
Table 2: Average absolute deviation scores on Each­
Movie data for Noisyl, Noisy2, PD and Correlation 
for extreme ratings. 
Algorithm 
Protocol 
AllButl 
Given10 
GivenS 
Given2 
Noisy2 
1.001 
1.057 
1.087 
1.124 
Noisyl 
.997 
1.063 
1.125 
1.249 
PD 
1.029 
1.087 
1.128 
1.163 
Carrel 
1.108 
1.127 
1.167 
1.189 

494 
SHARMA & POOLE 
UAI2001 
The results for the extreme ratings are shown in Ta­
ble 2. 
The results for extreme ratings show that 
Noisy1 performs better than Noisy2 for AllBut1 proto­
col. It also performs better than PD and Correlation 
over Given10 and GivenS protocols. Noisy2 performs 
better than the other three algorithms over Given1 0, 
GivenS and Given2 protocols. 
Table 3: Significance levels of the differences in aver­
age absolute deviation between Noisy1 and PD, and 
between Noisy2 and PD, on EachMovie data (note: 
low significance levels indicate that the differences in 
results are unlikely to be coincidental). 
Protocol 
Noisy1 
PD vs. 
Noisy2 
PD vs . 
vs. PD 
Noisy1 
vs. PD 
Noisy2 
AllBut1 
.0006 
. 9994 
.0001 
.9999 
AllBut1 
.0003 
.9997 
.0127 
.9873 
(extreme) 
Given10 
.1377 
.8623 
.0001 
.9999 
Given10 
.0211 
.9789 
.0009 
.9991 
(extreme) 
Given5 
.9064 
.0936 
.0043 
.9957 
Given5 
.2897 
.7103 
.0001 
.9999 
(extreme) 
Given2 
.9999 
.0001 
.0019 
.9981 
Given2 
.9999 
.0001 
.0001 
.9999 
(extreme) 
To determine the statistical significance of these re­
sults, we computed the significance levels for the dif­
ferences in average absolute deviation between Noisy1 
and PD, PD and Noisy1, Noisy2 and PD, and PD and 
Noisy2for all protocols. To do this, we divided the test 
set for all protocols into 60 samples of equal size and 
used randomization paired sample test of differences of 
means [Cohen, 1995]. This method calculates the sam­
pling distribution of the mean difference between two 
algorithms by repeatedly shuffling and recalculating 
the mean difference in 10,000 different permutations. 
The shuffling reverses the sign of the difference score 
for each sample with a probability of .5. 
The statistical significance results of the EachMovie 
data results are shown in Table 3; it shows the prob­
ability of achieving a difference less than or equal to 
the mean difference. That is, it shows the probability 
of incorrectly rejecting the n ull hypothesis that both 
algorithms' deviation scores arise from the same dis­
tribution. 
5 
Conclusion 
In this paper, we have concerned ourselves with sym­
metric collaborative filtering based on explicit ratings 
used for making recommendations to a user based on 
ratings of various items by a number of people, and 
the user's ratings of various items. 
We have described a new probabilistic approach for 
symmetric collaborative filtering based on a noisy sen­
sor model. We have shown that the noisy sensor model 
makes better predictions than other state-of-the-art 
techniques. The results for Noisy2 are highly statis­
tically significant. We have also shown that by includ­
ing the items similarity along with users similarity, the 
accuracy of prediction increases. This paper has only 
considered the accuracy of the noisy sensor model, not 
on the computational issues involved. It is beyond the 
scope of this paper to consider the trade-off between 
off-line and online computation and effective indexing 
to find the best matches . 
6
