Improving Training Result of Partially Observable Markov Decision 
Process by Filtering Beliefs  
Oscar LiJen Hsu 
Keywords: Partially Observable Markov decision process, POMDP  
, Control policy, Planning, beliefs filter 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
In this study I proposed a filtering beliefs method for 
improving performance of Partially Observable Markov 
Decision Processes(POMDPs), which is a method wildly 
used in autonomous robot and many other domains 
concerning control policy. My method search and compare 
every similar belief pair. Because a similar belief have 
insignificant influence on control policy, the belief is filtered 
out for reducing training time. The empirical results show 
that the proposed method outperforms the point-based 
approximate POMDPs in terms of the quality of training 
results as well as the efficiency of the method. 
 Introduction   
A point-based POMDP method uses sampling beliefs’ 
idea to generate a limited belief set. Based on approximate 
idea, by analyzing the result of the sampling beliefs, many 
of the beliefs are similar and another approximate method is 
emergence. In Figure 1, two sample beliefs from hallway2 
problem are given for explaining this idea. There are ninety-
two elements in a vector. The dots symbol represents the 
elements which smaller than 0.001. Only few elements are 
detailed in a vector, and the positions of those elements are 
2, 19, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 92. The visualization of this two 
belief vectors are shown in Figure 2 and Figure 3. 
 
 
 
𝑣! =
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎡
⋮
0.4794
⋮
0.0195
⋮
0
0
0
0
0.0195
⋮
0.4794⎦
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎤
 , 𝑣" =
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎡
⋮
0.4795
⋮
0.0196
⋮
0
0
0
0
0.0196
⋮
0.4795⎦
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎤
 
 
Figure 1: two sample beliefs 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: the visualization of the belief v1 
 

 
A belief of Hallway2 problem is visualized as Figure 2. Each 
point represents one over one thousand probability and the 
number of points is decided by a belief. Points are randomly 
distributed in a triangle. Because there are ninety-two states 
in Hallway2 problem, there are ninety-two triangles in 
Figure 2 and each square includes four triangles which 
indicate four directions, up, right, down, left. Each triangle 
can be mapped to each element in a belief; therefore, the 
number of points is the number of probability. A triangle 
will be clearly shaped if the probability is large enough. A 
probability which less than one over one thousand is 
represented by one point. By the visualization of Figure 2, it 
is obvious that the belief intend to be located on two states 
which is two direction positions. 
 
 
 
Figure 3: the visualization of the approximate Belief v2 
 
 
There is another approximate belief Figure 3 which look 
almost like Figure 2. Based on that I like to solve Hallway2 
problem by an approximate solution, the belief in Figure 3 
can be filtered out for decreasing the time of finding solution.  
Building on this insight, the goal of this study is to 
decrease computational time of value iteration in POMDP 
but with the same quality of control policy; in another 
words, this study increase quality of control policy but with 
the same computational time. 
 
Literature review 
In this section, two important names are going to be detailed. 
They are the benchmark which is going to be computed, and 
the method of the control group which is going to be 
compared. The Hallway2 problem is a classical POMDP 
model which used to be called “large problem”, it has been 
used in most POMDP research as a benchmark. A point-
based approximate POMDP method, PERSEUS, is a good 
method for solving POMDP model and it provide Matlab 
program which is unsealed source code online. Most 
fundamental program in this study is modified from 
PERSEUS. Based on those, PERSEUS is chosen to be a 
control group in this study. However, this study is not that 
trying to prove a drawback of PERSEUS but that attempting 
to give a general filtering method which can be added into 
any point-based approximate POMDP method for 
improving training results.  
 
The Hallway2 problem 
 
 
Figure 4: The positions and the order 
 
The basic idea of this model, is that there is an agent 
searching around an office. The region has been divided into 
twenty-three blocks. The states of Hallway2 are visualized 
as Figure 2. Each block includes four states that represent 
four different directions. The relationship between the order 
of states and positions with directions is as Figure 4. The 
numbers with underline are goal states, where are the 
objective to be achieved by the agent. The agent has five 
actions it can take, which include forward as Figure 5, turn-
left as Figure 6, turn-right as Figure 7, turn-around as Figure 
8, and stay.  
Additionally, the agent is equipped four short range 
sensors to provide information about whether adjacent to 
walls. There are total seventeen observations of Hallway2 
problem and these sensors give sixteen observations. The 
observations are combinations of four sides by four 
independent sensors which each have two possible 
probability value. 0.9 will be given by a sensor if there is an 
adjacent wall and the sensor senses the wall. 0.05 will be 
given by a sensor if there is no wall and the sensor senses a 

wall. The probabilities of observations of every states are 
given by multiplying four value from four sensors. 
There are no sensors that give the current orientation of 
the agent, but there is an extra observation of the goal. This 
observation is only occurrence in the goal state and occurs 
deterministically. The goal state gives a reward of +1 while 
all other states give zero reward.(Littman et al., 1995) 
 
 
Figure 5 : Transition probabilities for a forward action 
  
 
Figure 6 : Transition probabilities for the turn-left action 
 
 
 
Figure 7 : Transition probabilities for a turn-right action 
 
 
 
Figure 8 : Transition probabilities for a turn-around action 
 
 
A point-based approximate POMDP method, PERSEUS 
Spaan and Vlassis(2005) showed a modified method to 
obtain an approximate solution of POMDP. They used 
about ten thousand samples of belief vectors, the amount 
is difference between problems, to estimate the value 
function. The way they generated sample beliefs is to find 
the successor belief bn+1 from current belief bn 
according to the Bayes’ rule while the action, the next 
state and the observation are randomly chosen. An action 
is chosen according to a uniformly probability 
distribution; the next state is chosen according to the 
probability in the transition matrix of the action; and an 
observation is chosen according to the probability in the 
observation matrix of the action and the next state. The 
belief sampling process starts with finding a successor of 
the initial belief that could be a uniform belief. The 
process will keep finding a sequence of successor beliefs 
by finding a successor of the successor belief repeatedly 
until the total number of beliefs reaches the given required 
number. The approximate method of PERSEUS can 
improve the training time and make POMDP method 
more feasible. Because the backup stage of PERSEUS 
would be performed many times, more than one hundred 
rounds, to terminate, I can limit the training time or the 
number of repeat times as in practice, to get an acceptable 
result that approaches to the optimal. The evaluation 
results of PERSEUS shows, as compared with other 
method, a better control quality including terms of high 
expected reward and less training time. 
Equations (1) (2) (3) (4) define backup projectors. (4) 
gives initial alpha vector in which each element is 
calculated from a minimum reward in reward 
parameters and discount factor γ. In (3), p(o|s’,a) 
represents observation model and p(s’|s,a) represents 
transition model. In (2), ra represents a reward for a 
specific action a. b is a belief. 
 
backup(b) = 𝛼#$!
%
= 𝑎𝑟𝑔max
&'!"(!∈$
𝑏∙𝑞)%    (1) 
 
𝑞)% = 𝑟) + 𝛾∑𝑎𝑟𝑔max
&'!,&
'
('
𝑏∙𝑞),+
,
+
    (2) 
Algorithm 1 PERSEUS backup stage: 𝑉!"# ←𝐻#$%&'%('𝑉! 
Input:  
𝑉! 
Output:  
𝑉!"# 
1:  
Set 𝑉!"# ←∅ 
2: 
Initialize 𝐵% ←𝐵 
3: 
repeat 
4:   
 
Sample a belief point b uniformly at random 
from 𝐵% 
5: 
 
Compute α ←backup(b) 
6: 
 
if b ∙α ≥𝑉!(𝑏) 𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑛 
7: 
 
 
𝐚𝐝𝐝 α to 𝑉!"# 
8: 
 
else 
9: 
 
 
𝐚𝐝𝐝 𝑎$ = 𝑎𝑟𝑔max
%&!,#'#
𝑏∙𝛼!,)  𝑡𝑜 𝑉!"# 
10: 
 
end if 
11: 
 
Compute 𝐵% ←{𝑏∈𝐵: 𝑉!"#(𝑏) < 𝑉!(𝑏)} 
12: 
until 𝐵% = ∅ 

 
𝑞),+
,
≡I
𝑞),+
, (𝑠1)
𝑞),+
, (𝑠2)
⋮
L                                                      (3) 
,𝑞),+
, (𝑠) = ∑
𝑝(𝑜|𝑠-, 𝑎)𝑝(𝑠-|𝑠, 𝑎)𝛼#
, (𝑠-)
.(
 
  
 
𝛼/ = {𝑣⃗}, ∀𝑥∈𝑣⃗, 𝑥=
012 (5)
(!78)      (4) 
Algorithm 1 describes a point-based method to get 
optimal control policy. This algorithm is not performed 
one time to get solution. It is performed many times to 
improve solution at each time instead. At each time, this 
algorithm tries every belief in sample beliefs set. A 
backup projector α is computed for a belief. If a product 
of belief andαis bigger than maximum product of the 
same belief and a vector in Vn, this α will be preserved 
in output Vn+1. Otherwise, if the product of a vector in 
Vn is bigger than α , the vector will be preserved. After 
it is confirm that each belief has bigger maximum product 
than the product in Vn, the control policy of this round 
is done. 
It is obvious that the number and quality of sample 
beliefs is one of the important effect on control policy. A 
beliefs set with many duplicate and bias belief will lead 
to a low quality of control policy.  
Method 
 
 
Figure 9: the flow chart of the evaluation process in this 
study. 
 
The core of the method of I propose in this study is to add 
an extra stage, Beliefs Filter, in the original point-based 
approximate POMDP method. Figure 9 represents the 
operational flow chart of the method. Initially, a number, n, 
serves as the input of the sampling beliefs and the function 
will generate numbers of beliefs. Then a "Beliefs Filter" 
function, the core of the proposed method, filters out 
redundant approximate beliefs.  The filtered beliefs are sent 
to “PERSEUS” for finding optimal policy. Then the next 
stage "Sampling Reward" simulates situations for 
evaluating the value function (i.e., control policy.) I 
employed "Hallway2" model as the benchmark function on 
this stage. 
 
  The function of the "beliefs filter" stage is to reduce the 
complexity of the repertoire of beliefs by eliminate similar 
beliefs. Specifically, this function carries out pairwise 
comparisons across all beliefs. The most important 
algorithm in “beliefs filter” stage is detailed in Algorithm 2 
which calculates the distance between "A" and "B" vectors. 
If the distance is less than a "threshold", one of the two 
vectors can be eliminated. The value of threshold can be set 
between 0 and 1. The larger threshold, the more belief 
vectors will be eliminated by the "Beliefs Filter" function. 
The evaluation of PERSEUS with and without "Beliefs 
Filter" was carried out by "Sampling Reward" module 
(Algorithm 3). The starting states are all the states in 
POMDP model to the exclusion of goal states. In hallway2 
Algorithm 2: isSimilar function 
function isSimilar(A,B, threshold) 
INPUT: A,B = two vectors which going to be 
compared each other. 
threshold = the minimum difference for accept 
that A and B are similar. 
OUTPUT: TRUE for A and B are similar, otherwise 
FALSE. 
return ( max(abs(A-B))< threshold) 

problem, there are 88 non-goal states, which leads to 88 
loops.   
The input, value functions VF, is a set of vectors with 
corresponding best action. Each element of reward vector R 
stores the score of each trial in “SamplingRewards” 
(Algorithm 3). Line 11 in Algorithm 3 finds the best action 
for vector v such that the product of b on v is maximal. Line 
14 determines the next belief by the traditional Bassian rule 
in POMDP(Russell and Norvig, 2009). Line 15 accumulates 
the value of each element in the reward vector R for each 
round by adding up the discounted reward scores of each 
step. The goal reward will be degraded significantly if it 
takes too many steps for reaching the goal. Line 18 is to 
check the goal state is reached, and, if has reached, reset to 
next round. Line 21, because each starting state is tried 
“Trial_Per_Start” times, the number of round divides by 
“Trial_Per_Start” and the ceiling number is a starting state. 
Finally, the algorithm returned mean of vector R, which 
returned an average score of all rounds.  
Evaluation 
Table 1 : the result is from comparing original PERSEUS 
method with a method which have extra belief filtering 
stage. The number with underline is what I prefer to. 
Original 
Beliefs Filter .01 
Sampling Beliefs 
3212 
3212 
Threshold 
N/A 
0.01 
Convergence 
0.0001 
0.001 
Control Policy 
1031 
1376 
Iteration 
142 
95 
Expected 
Reward 
0.3468 
0.3545 
Training Time 
(sec) 
1602 
1420 
Filter Time (sec) 
N/A 
156 
Total Time (sec) 
1602 
1576 
 
The empirical result is shown in Table 1. The mainframe of 
the test environment in this study is as below. 
l 
Memory: DDR3-1333 28GB with ECC 
l 
CPU: Intel Xeon 1230 v2 
l 
OS: Windows 7 64bits 
l 
Matlab R2013a 64bits 
 
The original method includes 3212 random sample beliefs, 
which compares with the method with beliefs filter that 
includes 3212 sample beliefs which filtered from ten 
thousand random sample beliefs. The threshold is a 
parameter which be manually set in Algorithm 2. In this 
evaluation, the threshold is set to 1%. The convergence is as 
(5). “VB” is a matrix in which each element represents that 
each value function multiply each sample belief. “n” 
represents the number of iteration. 
convergence =
9:0(;<)*+)
9:0(;<)) −1          (5) 
 “Control Policy” represents the vector number of policy, 
and a larger number represent a better solution in a situation. 
The iteration is the value iteration for improving value 
functions. The expected reward is a final score of value 
functions, it is generated from Algorithm 3. The filter time 
is how long it take to filtering the original sample beliefs. 
The result shows that the beliefs filter group have better 
quality of control policy by better expected reward and 
larger control policy. The empirical result shows that an 
approximate point-based POMDP method with beliefs filter 
does improve the training result, and the difference will be 
more significant when the training time is longer. In another 
perspective, the training speed will be faster when the 
training result is remained. 
Algorithm 3: testing the control quality of a POMDP 
solution 
function sampleRewards 
% Input VF: value function 
% Output mean(R): Expected Reward 
% variable R: Reward Vector 
01: Trial_Per_Start  = 10 
02: Number_Of_States = 88  
03: b0 = a uniform Belief 
05: start = a vector which include all of the non-goal 
states number. 
07: s0 = start(1) 
08: step = 0 
09: round = 1 
10: while round ≤ (Number_Of_States * 
Trial_Per_Start)  
11:   a = action( arg max
=∈;?(𝑏∗𝑣)) 
12:   draw s1 from P(s1|s0,a) 
13:   draw o from P(o|s1,a) 
14:   b = BassianRuleInPOMDP(b,a,o) 
15:   R(round) = R(round)+ 
RewardTable(s1,s0,a)*0.95^step 
16:   step= step+1 
17:   s0 = s1 
18:   if s0 ∈ {Goal states}  
19:     b = a uniform belief 
20:     round = round+1 
21:     s0 = start( ceil(round/ Trial_Per_Start) ) 
22:     step = 0 
23:   end 
24: end  
25: return mean( R ) 

Discussion 
To clearly explain evaluation result, two states POMDP 
model and two dimensional value functions are shown in 
Figure 10. This example came from famous Tiger problem. 
In Figure 10(a), seven sample beliefs are generated and used. 
Those beliefs bias to one side in belief space, and many 
beliefs are redundant. It results that the final optimal policy 
can only handle limited situations, and the training time of 
redundant beliefs are unnecessary. It should be noticed that 
there is no “open right” action in Figure 10(a) because there 
is no such beliefs that can lead to this action. In Figure 10(b), 
seven filtered beliefs which refined from one hundred 
sample beliefs are used. It results that the beliefs cover all of 
the situation, and the final optimal policy will get higher 
expected reward in a simulation, and that explain the reason 
of the result in the evaluation.  
POMDP could be used to solve complex Sequential decision 
problems and is wildly used in so many domains. Because 
the performance of the traditional formulas of POMDPs is 
too poor to be of practical use, the point-based approximate 
method, PERSEUS, shows a feasible method which is used 
in this study as a fundamental algorithm and a control group 
method. In a point-based method, some sample beliefs may 
look similar. Based on that the approximate solutions are 
acceptable in the used of the approximate method, an 
approximate sampling belief can be filtered out naturally. 
This study presents an extra beliefs filter stage in the point-
based approximate POMDP method for increasing result 
quality and performance. The Hallway2 problem, a classical 
POMDP problem, is used as a benchmark. The empirical 
result shows that an approximate point-based POMDP 
method with beliefs filter does improve the performance. 
Some people may over-generalize the approximate filtering 
concept in sampling method. It was not said that the filtering 
method in this study can be used in any sampling algorithm. 
For example, to calculate π by Monte Carlo method, the 
result will be a disaster if the similar sampling points is 
filtered out. 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 10: A two dimensional value functions of the backup 
stage in two states POMDP model. The solid lines are final 
policy, and “a” is action. There are two “listen” and one 
“open left”. The dotted lines are results of previous backup 
stage. The dashed lines with arrow are beliefs. (a) Seven un-
filtered beliefs (b) seven filtered beliefs which came from 
one hundred sample beliefs.
