Graph2Tac: Online Representation Learning of Formal Math Concepts
Lasse Blaauwbroek * 1 Miroslav Olˇs´ak * 2 † Jason Rute * 3 Fidel Ivan Schaposnik Massolo 1 Jelle Piepenbrock 4 5
Vasily Pestun 1 3 ‡
Abstract
In proof assistants, the physical proximity be-
tween two formal mathematical concepts is a
strong predictor of their mutual relevance. Fur-
thermore, lemmas with close proximity regularly
exhibit similar proof structures. We show that
this locality property can be exploited through on-
line learning techniques to obtain solving agents
that far surpass offline learners when asked to
prove theorems in an unseen mathematical set-
ting. We extensively benchmark two such online
solvers implemented in the Tactician platform for
the Coq proof assistant: First, Tactician’s online
k-nearest neighbor solver, which can learn from
recent proofs, shows a 1.72× improvement in the-
orems proved over an offline equivalent. Second,
we introduce a graph neural network, Graph2Tac,
with a novel approach to build hierarchical rep-
resentations for new definitions. Graph2Tac’s
online definition task realizes a 1.5× improve-
ment in theorems solved over an offline base-
line. The k-NN and Graph2Tac solvers rely on
orthogonal online data, making them highly com-
plementary. Their combination improves 1.27×
over their individual performances. Both solvers
outperform all other general-purpose provers for
Coq, including CoqHammer, Proverbot9001, and
a transformer baseline by at least 1.48× and are
available for practical use by end-users.
1. Introduction
Formal libraries of mathematics are structured hierarchically.
Definitions build on top of each other and lemmas are proven
*Equal contribution
1IHES 2University of Cambridge 3IBM
Research 4Radboud University 5Czech Technical University in
Prague †Work performed at IHES ‡Work performed while at
IHES and IBM Research until June 2022. Correspondence to:

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
with the help of other lemmas. On a high level, entire
formalization projects concerning different mathematical
topics may also depend on one another. The result is an
enormous web of formal mathematical knowledge. In its
center, one finds the most foundational parts of mathematics
such as logic and arithmetic. Towards the outskirts of the
web, the mathematics becomes increasingly specialized, as
knowledge is built towards specific goals such as proving
the four-color theorem (Gonthier, 2008). As the web of
formal mathematics matures, its core stabilizes into static
knowledge while the outskirts are ever-changing, as new
insights emerge, connections are made and new theorems
are developed.
A good mathematician, whether human or artificial, should
possess a deep and intuitive understanding of the static,
foundational core of mathematics. This is gained through
training and practice (in the case of an AI, on a large, off-
line corpus). However, a mathematician must also have the
capability to quickly gain a working understanding of the
concepts, lemmas, and proving techniques in a new math-
ematical domain. This is a learned skill. An experienced
mathematician can grok a new math concept from its def-
inition and perhaps by looking at a few examples. For an
AI, this amounts to “online representation learning”: It must
have a procedure to quickly build new representations for
concepts, without having to retrain from scratch.
In this work, we explore online representation learning
for the Coq proof assistant (The Coq Development Team,
2023) through the Tactician platform (Blaauwbroek, 2023;
Blaauwbroek et al., 2020b). This platform provides a large-
scale dataset and machine-to-machine interaction protocols
that give an external proving agent (solver) online access to
the full internal formal knowledge base loaded into Coq. We
evaluate the capabilities of two online solvers, Tactician’s
built-in k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) solver (Blaauwbroek
et al., 2020a; Zhang et al., 2021) and a novel model called
Graph2Tac against a number of baselines.
Figure 1 summarizes the the paradigm of both online solvers.
During offline training, the model develops a deep under-
standing of the mathematics found in a static Coq dataset. It
also learns to represent new information in an online man-
ner. During evaluation, Graph2Tac incorporates information
1
arXiv:2401.02949v3  [cs.LG]  23 Jun 2024

Graph2Tac: Online Representation Learning of Formal Math Concepts
from new definitions and theorems, and the online k-NN
incorporates information from new proofs. When the user
invokes Tactician’s Suggest command, the model uses
the current state to suggest a next proof step, called a tactic
in Coq. Each tactic is made up of an instruction followed by
arguments. When the user invokes Tactician’s synth tac-
tic, a solver searches for a full proof of the current theorem,
calling the model at each step of the search.
Figure 1. Our two paradigms of online learning: the online k-NN
learns from recent proofs and the GNN (Graph2Tac) from recent
definitions.
The two online solvers we discuss in Section 3, k-NN and
Graph2Tac, operate on entirely different kinds of online
data and as a result have orthogonal capabilities (discussed
in Section 3.4). The k-NN solver can learn on-the-fly from
tactic scripts written by users. As a result, it can make highly
relevant suggestions when the proof of the current lemma
bears similarities to the surrounding proofs.
Graph2Tac, shown in Figure 2, is a novel graph neural
network (GNN) that, in addition to standard offline learning
capabilities, contains a novel definition embedding neural
network and task. Our goal is to provide representations for
definitions (including theorems) both seen during training
and inference. For definitions seen during training, the
model learns a table of definition embeddings (center of
the figure). These are used for representing definitions in
proof states, where the graph of each proof state is used by
the proof step neural network to suggest a tactic for that
proof state. They are also used for representing lemmas and
other possible tactic arguments, and are incorporated into
argument prediction. For new definitions, not seen during
training, the definition embedding neural network computes
an embedding from the definition graph. In order to make
sure these calculated embeddings agree with the learned
embeddings, we co-train with a definition embedding task
(upper right of the figure) which keeps them aligned. Each
calculated embedding is hierarchical, depending not only
on the graph of this definition, but the representations of
component definitions.
Contributions
We demonstrate the crucial importance of
incorporating online information into models. Comparing
an offline and online version of the k-NN solver demon-
strates a proving performance improvement from 15.0%
to 25.8% (1.72x). Section 3.2 introduces a new definition
training task for GNNs that improves performance from
17.4% to 26.1% (1.5x). Our Graph2Tac model is based on
an encoding of Coq’s mathematical knowledge as a single
interconnected mono-graph (Section 2) that enables calcu-
lating hierarchical representations of definitions. Due to
integration with the Tactician platform, Graph2Tac is the
first neural network model conveniently available to Coq
end-users. Graph2Tac and k-NN are highly complementary,
together proving 33.2% of the test set.
We compare the online models to a variety of other general-
purpose solvers for Coq, including a transformer baseline,
CoqHammer, Proverbot9001, ASTactic, TacTok and Pass-
port (Section 3.3). Both online solvers prove at least 1.48x
more theorems than any of the comparisons, making them
the strongest by some margin. An extensive analysis of our
experiments is in Section 4 and several appendices. Our
code is publicly available, and every step of our work is
fully reproducible (Appendix A).
Background and Related work
This work fits into a
growing body of work on machine learning and theorem
proving. For a full account, see Appendix C. While the
online capabilities of existing models are fairly limited, one
common source of online information is argument selection
(also called premise selection or lemma selection), where
the model selects useful lemmas or definitions arguments for
either the current theorem, proof state, or tactic. In argument
selection, the proof state and lemmas are encoded via simi-
lar methods and the lemmas most related to the proof states
are selected. Proof states and lemmas can be represented by
hand-crafted features (Gauthier et al., 2017), S-expressions
(Bansal et al., 2019; Sanchez-Stern et al., 2020), trees (Yang
& Deng, 2019), pretty printed text (Yang et al., 2023), or
graphs (Paliwal et al., 2020). They are then encoded with ap-
propriate machine learning models. Transformer-language
based approaches (Han et al., 2021) even forgo argument se-
lection, synthesizing lemma arguments directly from mem-
ory of the training data. While convenient, this removes the
ability to predict online arguments.
Tactician (Blaauwbroek et al., 2020b) uses a different online
approach, relying on online classifiers (including the afore-
2

Graph2Tac: Online Representation Learning of Formal Math Concepts
Figure 2. Our novel definition training task. At the center is a table of learned definition embeddings (orange). During training (above
the line), we train both a proof step network to predict tactics (including arguments) and a definition network to calculate definition
embeddings (blue) similar to those in the table. During inference (below the line), the definition network is used to calculated hierarchical
embeddings (blue) for new definitions that may in turn be used to represent proof states and predict tactic arguments.
mentioned online k-NN) to select tactic commands from
available proof data.
However, none of these methods incorporate online defi-
nition information, in neither the representations of proof
states nor lemmas. While some models may use the def-
inition name either as a token or a string (Sanchez-Stern
et al., 2023), they do not “look inside” the definition. This
is the main novelty of Graph2Tac’s hierarchical definition
representation.
2. Graph-based Interaction with Coq
In this work, we use a new graph-based data format to com-
municate between solvers and Coq. In this format, all Coq
definitions and proof states are stored in one large intercon-
nected graph (Blaauwbroek, 2024; 2023). Figure 3 shows
a subset of this large graph that represents the proof state
and environment at the start of the Suggest command in
Figure 1. This novel graph encoding provides the follow-
ing advantages: (1) The graph is designed to faithfully en-
code all kernel objects in Coq’s environment in a reversible
manner (2) References to global definitions, such as + in
Figure 3, are explicitly referenced by edges to the definition
node, avoiding any ambiguity with name resolution. (3)
Local variables are connected to their binders, e.g. ∀, λ, via
edges. This eliminates the need for local variable names.
(4) By using a novel graph hashing algorithm (Blaauwbroek
et al., 2024), equal terms are shared across parts of the graph
leading to more compact representations.
This mono-graph can contain hundreds of millions of nodes
and is too large for a graph neural network. See Appendix D
for an illustration. Instead, our models hierarchically pro-
cess subgraphs representing proof states and definitions.
Each proof state and definition has a root node in the large
graph. To obtain a smaller graph, we calculate the forward
closure from the root node, stopping when a definition node
is encountered. Theorems are special cases of definitions
where the root node references both the theorem statement
and its proof term. We omit the proof term from the theo-
rem’s definition graph to reduce the graph size.1 In Figure 3
each subgraphs received a different color. Each color corre-
sponds to either T1, =, f, +, N, or the current proof state
of theorem T2, which is still under construction. Notice that
1This is justified by the principle of proof irrelevance: To use a
theorem one does not need to know its proof.
3

Graph2Tac: Online Representation Learning of Formal Math Concepts
∀

=

2∗

f
↑
hyp 1 (x)
proof state
∀
N
+

λ
↑
T1
prf
Figure 3. A graph-based representation of the example given in
Figure 1. Each color represents a unique definition or proofstate
subgraph. These colored subgraphs are used as inputs to our neural
networks. Green corresponds to the function f, red to the theorem
T1, and blue to the proof state from the example. Each node is
either a definition node (T1, f, N, =, +) or a node representing

is a variable whose outgoing edge points to its binder. Edges are
labeled, but not shown here. Triangles represent portions of the
graph which we didn’t expand for clarity. Some nodes are shared
by multiple colored regions such as the subgraph for 2∗. Definition
nodes (but not the rest of the definition) are also shared with all
colored regions they touch. The proof terms for T1 is excluded
from its colored region. See Blaauwbroek (2024) for full details.
T1 and the proof state share the subterm associated with 2∗
(not drawn in full detail).
Mutually recursive definitions, such as inductive datatypes,
have multiple root nodes that reference each other. Such
definition clusters are treated as a single unit. The subgraphs
extracted from the mono-graph are topologically ordered ac-
cording to their dependencies, so that they can be processed
in an appropriate order by the neural network.
To train the model, a large dataset of proofs is extracted
where each proof state has an associated tactic. A tac-
tic such as rewrite plus_comm in H is decomposed
into a base tactic rewrite _ in _, and arguments
plus_comm and H. While arguments may be arbitrary Coq
terms and even other kinds of objects, our prediction model
only predicts local hypotheses or global definitions. See
Appendix D for more information on the dataset.
The Tactician synth tactic and Suggest command can
communicate via this graph format with a Python client
running a machine learning model. Tactician sends the en-
tire mono-graph of global definitions along with the current
proof state. The client returns a list of suggested tactics and
scores. This integration makes our solver usable in practice
and allows us to perform a massively parallel benchmark of
our model on any Coq Opam package.
3. Description of Solvers
Here, we describe the solvers that are part of the comparison
in this paper, including the online k-NN in Section 3.1, our
novel Graph2Tac architecture 3.2 and a number of baseline
comparisons in Section 3.3.
3.1. Online k-Nearest Neighbor
The fastest practical solver currently available in the Tac-
tician framework is an online k-nearest neighbor (k-NN)
model (Blaauwbroek et al., 2020a). It builds a database of
proof states and associated tactics and extracts hand-crafted
features from those proof states (Zhang et al., 2021). When
the model is queried, it looks up proof states with the most
similar features to the current proof state and returns the
corresponding tactics, ordered by similarity. It does not
require any training. The online k-NN uses a simple search
over the 1000 most recent tactic proof steps in the global
context. We also compare to an offline version that searches
over all currently loaded proofs that are part of our train-
ing data. The offline k-NN uses locality sensitive hashing
forests (LSHF) to speed up the search, similar to the k-NN
solver found in Tactician2. See Appendix L for additional
k-NN variations and ablations.
3.2. Graph Neural Network and Definition Task
Graph2Tac primarily consists of two parts, a definition task
and a prediction task, shown in Figure 4. The input to
each of these is a directed graph with labeled nodes and
edges representing either a definition for the definition task
or a proof state for the prediction task. We additionally
associate metadata with each graph. Definition graphs have
root nodes (node f in the figure), one for each definition
defined in that graph. Inductive data types define multiple
mutually dependent concepts in the same graph, e.g. bool,
true, false, and may therefore have multiple roots. A
proof state graph comes with local context nodes, one for
each hypothesis. Both types of graphs contain definition
nodes, which are leaf nodes that reference definitions in
the global context. With each definition node, we store an
index to the definition embedding table described in the next
paragraph. For the prediction task, in addition to the proof
state graph, the input includes the indices of all definitions
2We do not limit the offline k-NN to 1000 examples because
the obvious “recency” selection criterion does not apply.
4

Graph2Tac: Online Representation Learning of Formal Math Concepts
Figure 4. Detailed Graph2Tac model architecture, composed of a definition task (the top path going from the definition of f to its
embedding) and prediction task (the path going from the proof state 2 ∗x = fx to the predicted tactic apply T1). The edge and node
embedding tables are excluded from the image.
and tactics currently available in Coq’s global context.
There are four learned embedding tables: edge labels and
node labels (not shown in Figure 4), base tactics that occur
in the training dataset, and definitions that occur in the
training dataset. All embeddings have dimension equal to
the model’s hidden dimension, hdim = 128. The definition
and node embeddings are constrained to be unit-normalized.
During inference, the definition table will be dynamically
updated with new definitions as discussed later.
We transform the input graph, be it a proof state or defi-
nition graph, using the following approach (Figure 4, step
A). Each graph is pruned to 1024 nodes. For effective mes-
sage passing, we duplicate all edges to go in both directions
and also add self-edges. The edges are assigned edge em-
beddings from the corresponding embeddings table. This
table has 2E + 1 entries, accounting for the E original edge
labels, the E reverse edge labels, and the self-edge label.
Non-definition nodes are assigned embeddings from the
node embeddings table based on their node label. Definition
nodes are instead assigned embeddings from the definition
embeddings table, except for the root nodes in the definition
task. Those are masked with null embeddings, as the goal of
the definition task is to predict the corresponding definition
embeddings.
The transformed graphs are put into a message-passing GNN
(Figure 4, step B). The GNN consists of 8 hops where the
tth hop transforms a node embedding xt
n according to the
following two steps:
ˆxt+1
n
= ReLU



1
deg(n)
X
m,e: m
e−→n
Denseθt(e, xt
m)



xt+1
n
= Layernorm
 xt + Dropout0.1(MLPψt(ˆxt+1
n
))

The first step is a graph convolution layer where each node
embedding is updated according to incoming edges from
neighboring nodes. Here, deg(n) is the number of incom-
ing edges m
e−→n with target n and edge embedding e.
The dense layer has output dimension hdim. The next step
consists of a 2-layer MLP (Dense, ReLU, Dense) with an
inner hidden dimension of 2hdim, then Dropout, Residual,
and Layernorm. The weights for each hop are separate, but
the definition and prediction tasks both use the same GNN
backbone, sharing the same weights.
The output of the GNN is a graph with the same structure
as the input, but with updated node embeddings. Both the
5

Graph2Tac: Online Representation Learning of Formal Math Concepts
definition and prediction tasks use mean pooling (Figure 4,
step C) to obtain a single vector embedding for the graph.
For the definition task, the pooled embedding is concate-
nated with each of the embeddings of the root nodes for
the definition, then fed into a two-layer MLP, and finally
unit normalized (step D). Optionally, along with each root
node embedding, we additionally concatenate a name em-
bedding for the definition, using a bidirectional LSTM (not-
shown) to embed the fully qualified Coq identifier string, e.g.
“Coq.Init.Logic.and”. For the prediction task, the pooled
embedding is fed into a two-layer MLP (step E). The out-
put is multiplied by the tactic embedding table using inner
product and put through a softmax layer to obtain the base
tactic probabilities.
To predict the arguments for a tactic, we use a simple two-
layer RNN (Figure 4, step F). The initial hidden state of the
RNN is the embedding for the chosen tactic in the tactic
embedding table. (During training the ground truth tactic
is provided as input. The decoding method used during
inference is described below.) The number of steps of the
RNN corresponds to the number of arguments required by
the given tactic.
Each argument is predicted as follows (Figure 4, step G).
The RNN output is fed into a pair of two-layer MLPs (Dense,
ReLU, Dense), resulting in a pair of query embeddings, one
for global argument prediction and one for local argument
prediction. The global argument prediction query is unit
normalized. For global arguments, we take the inner product
of the global argument query with each definition in the em-
bedding table resulting in a logit for each definition. Since
the inner product is bounded (as both vectors in the inner
product are unit normalized), we scale the global logits by
a learned temperature parameter. For each local argument,
we use the GNN output embedding for that local node in
the graph and take the inner product with the local argu-
ment query. Concatenating the local and global logits and
performing softmax we get a distribution over all possible
arguments.
Since many of the calculations used in our model take place
on variable-size lists of objects, e.g. local arguments, our
implementations rely heavily on ragged tensors in Tensor-
Flow (Abadi et al., 2015) and graph tensors in TF-GNN (Fer-
ludin et al., 2022).
We train on batches of 512 definitions and 512 proof states.
The loss for the definition task is cosine similarity.3 The loss
for the training task is the cross-entropy for the full tactic
sequence. For example, for the tactic apply T1 the loss
is −log P(apply _) −log P(T1 | apply _) using the
probabilities coming from the model. The combined loss of
3If a definition graph contains multiple definitions, the loss is
divided by √n where n is the number of entry points.
the two tasks is L = 1000 Ldef + Ltactic.
During inference, the tactic embedding table is masked for
tactics which both occur in the training data and are avail-
able in the Coq’s current state. Similarly, the definition
embedding table is masked for all definitions available in
the current global context. However, for new definitions
not seen during training, we first calculate an embedding
using the definition task. If there are multiple new defini-
tions, we compute embeddings from each definition graph
individually, updating the embeddings in a topologically
sorted order so that those for dependencies are computed
before those for latter definitions which depend on those
dependencies.
At inference time, the output of the tactic task is a list of
tactic suggestions, where each sequence starts with a base
tactic, e.g. apply _ and then contains the arguments for
that tactic, if they are required. We use beam search de-
coding with a beam width of 256 to generate 256 tactic
suggestions for each proof state.
We train three models: G2T-Named uses the name embed-
ding in step D, whereas G2T-Anon does not. G2T-NoDef is
trained without a definition task. Each of these is run with
three configurations on the definition model during infer-
ence: The Recalc configuration calculates embeddings for
all definitions, Update only calculates embeddings for new
definitions—i.e. those not seen during training, and Frozen
uses random unit normalized embeddings in place of the
definition model. G2T-NoDef is only used as G2T-NoDef-
Frozen. G2T-Anon-Update is the primary model.
3.3. Baselines for Comparison
We formally compare the Graph2Tac and k-NN models
with three baselines outlined below. Note that some obvi-
ous baselines, such as SMTCoq (Armand et al., 2011) and
Itauto (Besson, 2021) were excluded because they are not
general purpose solvers. Furthermore, the online random
forest described by Zhang et al. (2021) is excluded because
it does not scale to large formalizations.
firstorder auto with * As a baseline, we use
Coq’s built-in firstorder reasoning tactic combined
with the programmable proof search tactic auto, with all
available hint databases.
CoqHammer (Czajka & Kaliszyk, 2018) translates theories
expressed in Coq to a first-order language understood by the
external automated theorem provers Vampire, CVC4, Z3
and Eprover. Once an external proof is found, the premises
required for the proof are extracted, and the proof is re-
constructed inside of Coq through the sauto family of
higher-order solving tactics (Czajka, 2020).
Proof State Text-based Transformer We implement a
6

Graph2Tac: Online Representation Learning of Formal Math Concepts
decoder-only transformer baseline that operates on the tex-
tual representations of the proof states, and predicts a textual
representation of the tactic. We use the GPT2 implemen-
tation available via the Transformers Python library (Wolf
et al., 2020). The embedding size is set to 768 and it has 12
layers, as in one of the models described in that paper. Our
approach is similar to that of Han et al. (2021); Jiang et al.
(2022); Yang et al. (2023), except our transformer models
are trained from scratch only on Coq proof data.
Informal Comparisons Appendix I contains informal com-
parisons to highly relevant neural solvers such as Prover-
bot9001 (Sanchez-Stern et al., 2020), ASTactic (Yang &
Deng, 2019) and their derivatives. Due to technical differ-
ences, a direct comparison was not achievable. Nonetheless,
we are confident that Graph2Tac and k-NN significantly out-
perform these solvers for two reasons. First, CoqHammer
is known to outperform these neural solvers. Given that
Graph2Tac and the k-NN significantly outperform Coq-
Hammer, we can conclude that they also surpass the other
neural solvers. Second, Appendix I contains informal exper-
iments that directly compare to the k-NN solver.
3.4. Capabilities of Graph2Tac vs k-NN vs Transformer
The Graph2Tac, online k-NN, and transformer solvers are
all based on the Tactician platform. Nevertheless, their input
and output capabilities are quite different. The online k-NN
model sees tactics and their arguments as a black box. It
can only predict the exact tactic expressions available in
its database. Its power comes from speed and the ability
to amend its database with new proof scripts. Graph2Tac
uses a fixed set of tactics and cannot learn from new proof
scripts. However, it can choose lemmas and hypotheses as
arguments for these tactics. Due to its definition embedding
task, it can predict lemmas not available in the training set.
Finally, the transformer has no online learning capabilities.
However, unlike the k-NN and Graph2Tac, it can gener-
ate tactics with arbitrary terms as arguments (but it must
“hallucinate” references to new lemmas).
4. Evaluation
Experimental Setup
To evaluate the performance of the
solvers described above, we randomly choose 2000 theo-
rems from the Coq packages in our testing set. The solvers
are given a time limit of 10 minutes per theorem to syn-
thesize a proof. To look at package-specific results, we
sample up to 500 test theorems per package with a time
limit of 5 minutes. The search procedure utilized by the
solvers based on the Tactician framework is a modification
of Dijkstra’s algorithm that performs iterative deepening in
order to relieve memory pressure and has an optimization
that avoids backtracking between independent subgoals. For
more information, see Appendix G.
During evaluation, each solver is limited by the operating
system to one CPU with two hyperthreads. All processes,
including Coq and any external processes such as neural
networks and ATP’s, must share this CPU. An exception is
made for the Transformer-GPU solver, which is permitted
to utilize a dedicated GPU.
We explore two artificially aggregated solvers, that simulate
running n solvers concurrently while still adhering to the
one-CPU computational budget. The number of theorems
“solved” by the aggregate solvers in time t is the number
solved by any of the components in time t/n. “G2T-Anon-
Update + k-NN-online” is intended to simulate a solver
capable of learning both from new definitions in the global
context and new tactic proof scripts. “CoqHammer com-
bined” is an aggregate of all four ATP backends and the
reconstruction tactic called best. This simulates the intent
of CoqHammer’s authors to run many backends in parallel,
while maintaining a fair comparison with other solvers.
Results
The left plot of Figure 5 shows the fraction of test
theorems solved over time for various solvers. One can see
both the progress over time and an indication of the startup
cost of each solver. The right plot of Figure 5 replaces time
with the number of calls to the underlying model, giving an
indication of the usefulness of that model’s predictions in
search irrespective of model speed.4. This and other plots
remove the results from the hott package because HoTT
replaces Coq’s built-in standard library, upon which Coq-
Hammer depends. The tlc package is also removed because
G2T-Anon-Update was able to exploit an inconsistency as
explained in Appendix Q.
Among the k-NN solvers, the online k-NN solves many
more theorems (25.8% vs 15.0%) showcasing the impor-
tance of incorporating of recent online proof data. (Further
k-NN ablations are found in Appendix L.)
Among the G2T solvers, the online solvers using the defi-
nition task to compute embeddings for new definitions out-
perform the G2T-NoDef-Frozen baseline (26.1% vs 17.4%)
which does not compute embeddings for new definitions.
Note our baseline G2T-NoDef-Frozen performs similarly
to the transformer baselines in terms of model calls (and
even better in per-time performance). This suggests that
our baseline is at least comparable to the common trans-
former baselines in other papers. The addition of names in
G2T-Named-Update fares slightly worse than the main G2T
solver G2T-Anon-Update. (Further G2T ablations are found
in Appendix N.)
CoqHammer combined fairs better than the transformer
solver, even the variant using a GPU for model inference.
4Pass rate is also impacted by the number of tactic suggestions
returned in a model call. Too few tactics may lead to the search
terminating early. Our faster models also return more suggestions.
7

Graph2Tac: Online Representation Learning of Formal Math Concepts
Figure 5. Fraction of theorems proved over time and per number of calls to the model. Online solvers are dashed, offline solvers are solid,
and symbolic solvers are dotted.
Figure 6. Venn diagram of the theorems proved.
See Appendix J for a detailed breakdown of the CoqHammer
results.
The k-NN solvers benefit from being fast, hence both k-NN
solvers excel at lower time limits. In Appendix I we suggest
the online k-NN is at least as powerful as existing neural
Coq solvers in the literature. However, for higher time limits,
the G2T-Anon-Update model starts to overtake, suggesting
that if larger amounts of search are required, there is value
in more sophisticated neural models. It is similar relative to
model calls.
Moreover, the online k-NN and G2T approaches are quite
complementary as the combined solver G2T-Anon-Update
+ k-NN is much better than either approach alone. We also
see this in the Venn Diagram in Figure 6.
To investigate the effect of the online setting, Figure 7 breaks
down per-time pass rate by the number of new dependencies
not seen during training, including transitive dependencies.
The online models significantly outperform the offline mod-
els when a theorem has at least 10 new dependencies. See
Appendix P for a more in-depth analysis.
Figure 7. Cumulative pass rate by number of new dependencies.
8

Graph2Tac: Online Representation Learning of Formal Math Concepts
5. Discussion and Future Work
Our definition task improved a neural theorem prover from
17.4% to 26.1% in the difficult setting of proving theorems
in never-before-seen packages. This, in addition to the
success of the online k-NN approach, shows the importance
of online learning in this setting. We leave as future work
how to unify the G2T and online k-NN approaches shown
in Figure 1. Ideally, such a model should also account for
new tactics, as well as learn from how new definitions and
tactics are used in new theorems. One avenue is exploring
if our model can be fine-tuned in real time.
To improve the definition task, given that G2T-Anon-Update
outperformed G2T-Named-Update, we wonder if adding the
names makes the definition task too easy for the model.
There may also be alternatives to our definition task, using
ideas in self-supervised or contrastive learning, or using
social-network-size graph models to process the entire graph
of interconnected definitions at once.
Theorem proving and programming share a lot of similari-
ties and concerns, so it is useful to explore how this work
relates to code generation. We leave open how our methodol-
ogy could apply to text-based models. Retrieval augmented
transformers are a possible approach (Yang et al., 2023), but
may not scale to the full definition hierarchy.
9

Graph2Tac: Online Representation Learning of Formal Math Concepts
Impact Statement
In a world increasingly dependent on technology, the need
for verifiably safe and secure hardware and algorithms is
becoming increasingly urgent. This is even more so as a
larger amount of computer code is written by AI agents.
While interactive theorem provers, such as Coq, have been
repeatedly used to verify critical systems, the process is
still too labor-intensive for widespread adoption. Machine
learning research, such as ours, which improves the state
of the art in automated theorem proving for ITPs has the
potential to revolutionize the development of safe and secure
code.
