Value Iteration with Options and State Aggregation
Kamil Ciosek
David Silver
Centre for Computational Statistics and Machine Learning
University College London
January 19, 2015
Abstract
This paper presents a way of solving Markov Decision Processes that combines state abstraction
and temporal abstraction. Speciﬁcally, we combine state aggregation with the options framework
and demonstrate that they work well together and indeed it is only after one combines the two that
the full beneﬁt of each is realized. We introduce a hierarchical value iteration algorithm where we
ﬁrst coarsely solve subgoals and then use these approximate solutions to exactly solve the MDP. This
algorithm solved several problems faster than vanilla value iteration.
1
Introduction
Finding solutions to discrete discounted Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) is an important problem
in Reinforcement Learning. The basic problem is to obtain the optimal policy of the MDP so that the
overall discounted reward obtained as we follow this policy within the MDP is maximized.1 In this work,
we do not work with the optimal policy directly but compute the optimal value function instead.
The approach we take in this paper is to modify the well-known value iteration (VI) algorithm [2].
The basic idea of VI is to keep iterating the Bellman optimality equation. This is well-known to converge
to the optimal value function. Our framework is conceptually based on a natural extension of the Bellman
optimality equation where matrix models take the place of vector value functions.
In order to solve large problems, table-lookup algorithms are not practical because of the sheer number
of states, which VI must loop over.
Hence the need for state abstraction.
For this work, we chose
aggregation [3], which can be nicely integrated into our framework of the modiﬁed Bellman optimality
equation.
Algorithms based on single-step models of primitive actions are impractical, because long
solution paths require many iterations of VI. Hence the need for temporal abstraction.2 We solve this
problem via the use of options [19, 13] — we construct option models which can be used interchangeably
with the models we have for primitive actions.
To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst paper where an algorithm using options and value iteration ef-
ﬁciently solves medium-sized MDPs (our 8-puzzle domain has 181441 states). Unlike prior work [16],
we demonstrate a modest improvement in runtime performance as well as a signiﬁcant reduction in the
number of iterations. Also, we have the ﬁrst convergent VI-style algorithm where options (temporal
abstraction) are combined with a framework for state abstraction, yielding far better results than the
use of either idea alone. Furthermore, our algorithm is based on a principled extension of the Bellman
equation. We emphasise that our algorithm converges to the optimal value function — although we ﬁnd
approximate solutions to the subgoals, these solutions are then used as inputs to solve the original MDP
exactly, regardless of the choice of subgoals.
2
Background and Prior Work
2.1
State Aggregation
Consider3 [3] an MDP with |A| actions; for an action a the probability transition matrix is Pa, deﬁned
by Pa(i, j) = γPr(it+1 = j|it = i, at = a) and the vector of expected rewards for each state is Ra, where
the element corresponding to state i is deﬁned by Ra(i) = E [rt|it = i, at = a]. There are m aggregate
states. We introduce the aggregation [3] matrix Φ and the disaggregation [3] matrix D of dimensions
1Our framework works for the discount factor γ < 1 as well as for those cases with γ = 1 where standard value termination
converges (for example if there is a ‘sink’ state).
2Note that there is some evidence [15] that subgoal-based hierarchical RL is similar to the processes actually taking
place in the human brain.
3We refer the reader to the more elaborate introductory section in the appendix
1
arXiv:1501.03959v1  [cs.AI]  16 Jan 2015

n × m and m × n respectively. Under the state aggregation approximation [3], solving the original MDP
may be replaced by solving a much smaller aggregate MDP, by computing ˜Pa = DPaΦ and ˜Ra = DRa.
The solution can then be computed by any known algorithm. VI is convergent because the matrices ˜Pa
and ˜Ra deﬁne a valid MDP. This gives us a value function in terms of the aggregate states.
2.2
Options and Matrix Models
An option [20, 19, 13] is a tuple ⟨µ, β⟩, consisting of a policy µ, mapping states to actions, as well as
a binary termination condition β, where β(i) tells us whether the option terminates in state i. We will
now discuss models [19, 20] for options and for primitive actions. A model consists of a transition matrix
P and a vector of expected rewards R. For a primitive action a, we deﬁned Pa and Ra in section 2.1.
For options they have an analogous meaning. R(i) is the expected total discounted reward given the
option was executed from state i, R(i) = E[Pτ
t=0 γtrt|i0 = i] where τ is the (random) duration of the
option and i0 is the starting state. The element P(i, i′), is the probability of the option terminating in
state i′, given we started in state i, considering the discounting: P(i, i′) = P∞
τ=1 γτPr(τ, iτ = i′|i0 = i).
Denote by i0 the starting state of trajectory and by iτ the ﬁnal state. It is convenient [20] to arrange
P and R in a block matrix of size (n + 1) × (n + 1), in this way:
 1
0
R
P

. Now model composition
corresponds to matrix multiplication, i.e. if M (1) and M (2) are block matrices, M (1)M (2) is also a block
matrix corresponding to ﬁrst executing the option deﬁned in M (1) and then the one deﬁned in M (2). In
this paper, we assume that the action set A = {A1, . . . , Al} is already given in this matrix format. We
introduce a similar format for value functions. The value function V is represented as a vector of length
n + 1 with 1 in the ﬁrst index and the values for each state in the subsequent indices. MV is a new value
function, corresponding to ﬁrst executing the option deﬁned in M and then evaluating the states with
V . Element i + 1 of the vector V to state i, as does row i + 1 of the action model. We use MATLAB
notation, i.e. V (i + 1) is element i + 1 of vector V and M(i + 1, :) is row i + 1 of the matrix M.
2.3
Other Ways of Using Hierarchies to Improve Learning
We give a brief survey of known approaches to hierarchical learning. We stress that our approach is
novel for two reasons: we compose macro-operators at run-time and we have no ﬁxed hierarchy. This
has not been done to date, except in the work on options and VI [16], which introduced generalizations
of the Bellman equation, versions of which we use. But it did not include state abstraction, slowing the
resulting algorithm — it only produced a decrease in the iteration count required to solve the MDP,
while we provide better solution time. Other approaches include using macro-operators to gain speed
in planning [10], but for deterministic systems only. Prior work on HEXQ [6] is largely orthogonal to
ours – it focuses on hierarchy discovery, while we describe an algorithm given the subgoals. The work
on portable options [9] only discusses a ﬂat, ﬁxed (unlike this work) options hierarchy. MAXQ [5] also
involves a pre-deﬁned controller hierarchy (the MAXQ graph)4. Combining the use of temporal and
state abstraction was tried before, but diﬀerently from this work. The abstraction-via-statistical-testing
approach [7] only works for transfer learning — options are only constructed after the original MDP
has been solved. The U-tree approach [8] does not guarantee convergence to V ⋆for all MDPs. The
modiﬁed LISP approach [1] uses a ﬁxed option hierarchy and the policy obtained is only optimal given
the hierarchy, i.e. it may not be the optimal policy of the MDP without the hierarchy constraint.
3
Table-lookup Value Iteration
We begin by describing the table-lookup algorithm for computing the value function of the MDP. It is
similar to the one described in previous work [16], but not the same — here, termination is implemented
in a diﬀerent, more intuitive, way. We start with plain VI and then proceed to more complicated variants.
In MATLAB notation (see section 2.2), VI can be described as follows for state i.
V(k+1)(i + 1) ←max
a
Aa(i + 1, :)V(k)
(1)
Here, a selects an action (control). We rewrite this update to construct a model corresponding to the
optimal value function — this is not useful on its own, but will come in handy later. The following is
executed for each state i.
a ←argmax
a
Aa(i + 1, :)M(k)[1, 0, . . . , 0]⊤;
M(k+1)(i + 1, :) ←Aa(i + 1, :)M(k)
(2)
4One can learn a MAXQ hierarchy [22], but only in a way when it is ﬁrst learned and then applied.
2

We note that the multiplication M(k)[1, 0, . . . , 0]⊤simply extracts the total reward in the model M(k)
(the current value function) — hence eq. 3 is equivalent to plain VI. However, it serves an an important
stepping stone to introducing subgoals, which is what we do next. Assume that we are, for the moment, not
interested in maximizing the overall reward. Instead, we want to reach some other arbitrary conﬁguration
of states deﬁned by the subgoal vector G of length n + 1. The entry i + 1 of G deﬁnes the value we
associate with reaching state i. We will show later how picking such subgoals judiciously can improve
the speed of the overall algorithm. Our new update, for subgoal G is the following, which we execute for
each state i.
a ←argmax
a
Aa(i + 1, :)M(k)G;
M(k+1)(i + 1, :) ←Aa(i + 1, :)M(k)
(3)
This iteration converges [16] to a model M∞, which corresponds to the policy for reaching the subgoal
G. However, this policy executes continually, it does not stop when a state with a high subgoal value of
G(i + 1) is reached. We will now ﬁx that by introducing the possibility of termination — in each state,
we ﬁrst determine if the subgoal can be considered to be reached and only then do we make the next
step. This is a two-stage process, given below. First, we compute the termination condition β(i) for each
state i, according to the following equation.
β(k)(i) ←
argmax
β(k)(i)∈[0,1]
β(k)(i)G(i + 1) +
(1 −β(k)(i))M(k)(i + 1, :)G
(4)
We note that this optimization is of a linear function, therefore we will either have β(k)(i) = 1 (terminate
in state i), or β(k)(i) = 0 (do not terminate in state i). Conceptually, this update can be thought of as
converting the non-binary subgoal speciﬁcation G into a binary termination condition β. Once we have
computed β(k), we deﬁne the diagonal matrix β(k) = diag(1, β(k)(1), β(k)(2), . . . , β(k)(n)) as well as the
new matrix B as follows.5
B(β(k), M(k)) = β(k)I + (I −β(k))M(k)
Here, I is the identity matrix. B summarizes our termination condition — it behaves like model M(k)
for the states where we do not terminate and like the identity model for the states where we do. Once
we have this, we can deﬁne the actual update, which is executed for each state i.
a ←argmax
a
Aa(i + 1, :)B(β(k), M(k))G;
M(k+1)(i + 1, :) ←Aa(i + 1, :)B(β(k), M(k))
(5)
By iterating this many times, we can obtain M∞, which will tend to go from every state to states with
high values of the subgoal G. The elements of G are speciﬁed in the same units as the rewards — i.e.
this algorithm will go, for the non-terminating states, to a state with a particular value of the subgoal if
the value of being in the subgoal exceeds the opportunity loss of reward on the way. For the terminating
states, the model will still make one step according to the induced policy (see discussion in section 2.2).
There is one more way we can speed up the algorithm — through the introduction of initiation sets.
In this case, instead of selecting an action from the set of all possible actions, we only select an action
from the set of allowed actions for a given state (the initiation set). More formally, let Sa(i) be a boolean
vector which has ‘true’ in the entries where action a is allowed is state i and ‘false’ otherwise. Equation
3 then becomes the following.
a ←argmax
a:Sa(i)
Aa(i + 1, :)B(β(k), M(k))G;
M(k+1)(i + 1, :) ←Aa(i + 1, :)B(β(k), M(k))
(6)
The beneﬁt of using initiation sets is that by not considering irrelevant actions, the whole algorithm
becomes much faster. We defer the deﬁnition of initiation sets used to section 6.3.
Finally, we solve for several subgoals simultaneously.
We use the current state of every model
in every iteration, to compute the next iteration for both itself and other models.
Denote our sub-
goals by G(1), G(2), . . . , G(g) and the k-th iteration of the models trying to solve these subgoals by
M (1)
(k), M (2)
(k), . . . , M (g)
(k).
Deﬁne the set Ω(k) as the set of all models (macro-actions) allowed at itera-
tion k, i.e. Ω(k) = {A1, A2, . . . , Al, M (1)
(k), M (2)
(k), . . . , M (g)
(k)}. This gives rise to the update given below, for
5The reader will notice that our matrix B can be understood to be the expected model given the termination condition:
B(β(k), Mk) = Eβ(k)[I, M(k)]. However, in our algorithm it is enough to consider it just a matrix.
3

each subgoal q and for each state i. We now compute the termination condition.
β(q)
(k)(i) ←
argmax
β(k)(i)∈[0,1]
β(k)(i)G(q)(i + 1) +
(1 −β(k)(i))M (q)
(k)(i + 1, :)G(q)
(7)
The we compute one step of the algorithm according to the equation.
O ←argmax
O∈Ω(k)
O(i + 1, :)B(β(q)
(k), M (q)
(k))G(q);
M (q)
(k+1)(i + 1, :) ←O(i + 1, :)B(β(q)
(k), M (q)
(k))
(8)
Solving several subgoals simultaneously can improve the algorithm [16]. The immediate availability of
the partial solution to every subgoal leads to faster convergence. In other words, this feature can be used
to construct the macro-operator hierarchy at run time of the algorithm.6 This is in contrast to many
other approaches, where the hierarchy is ﬁxed before the algorithm is run.
4
Combining State Aggregation and Options
We saw in section 2.1 that given the aggregation7 matrix Φ and the disaggregation matrix D, we can
convert an action with the transition matrix P and expected reward vector R to an aggregate MDP by
using ˜P = DPΦ and ˜R = DR. In our matrix model notation, this becomes as follows.
˜A =
 1
0
0
D

A
 1
0
0
Φ

, where A =
 1
0
R
P

(9)
This can be viewed as compressing the dynamics, given our aggregation architecture Φ of size n × m,
where m is the number of the aggregate states. We stress that the compressed dynamics deﬁne a valid
MDP — therefore the algorithms described in the previous section are convergent.
The main idea of our algorithm is the following: deﬁne a subgoal, solve it (i.e. obtain a model for
reaching it) and then add it to the action set of the original problem and use it as a macro-action,
gaining speed.
We repeat this for many subgoals.
Solving subgoals is fast because we do it in the
small, aggregate state space. To be precise, we pick a subgoal ˜G (see section 6 for examples) and an
approximation architecture Φ. We then compress our actions with eq. 9 and use compressed actions in
VI according to eqs. 4 and 3. This gives us a model ˜
M∞solving the subgoal in the aggregate state space.
We want to use this model to help solve the original MDP.
However, we cannot do this directly since our model ˜
M∞is deﬁned with respect to the aggregate state
space and has size (m + 1) × (m + 1) — we need to ﬁnd a way to convert it to a model deﬁned over the
original state space, of size (n + 1) × (n + 1). The new model also has to be valid, i.e. correspond to a
sequence of actions.8
The idea is to make the following transformation: from the aggregate model, we compute the option
in the aggregate state space, we then up-scale the option to the original state space, construct a one-
step model and then construct the long-term model from it. Concretely, we ﬁrst compute the option
corresponding to the model ˜
M∞. The option consists of the policy µ and the termination condition β.
We obtain the termination condition by using eq. 4 for the aggregate states. The policy µ is obtained
greedily for each aggregate state x.
µ(x) = argmax
c
˜
Ac(x + 1, :)B(β, ˜
M∞) ˜G
(10)
Now, we can ﬁnally build a one-step model in terms of the original state-space. We do this according to
the following equation, which we use for each state i.
M ′(i + 1, :) = (1 −β(φ(i))) Aµ(φ(i))(i + 1, :) +
β(φ(i)) I(i + 1, :)
(11)
In the above, we denote by I the identity matrix of size (n + 1) × (n + 1) and by φ(i) the aggregate state
corresponding9 to the original state i. In more understandable terms, M ′ has rows selected by the policy
6By this we mean that the option models are built up in run time, possibly using other models.
The subgoals are
pre-deﬁned and constant.
7In the work done in this paper, we used hard aggregation so that each row of Φ contains a one in one place and zeros
elsewhere, and the matrix D is a renormalized version of Φ⊤, so that the rows sum to one.
8That is why it is not possible to just upscale the model by writing:
 1
0
0
Φ

˜
M∞
 1
0
0
D

.
9Note that the equation could be easily generalized to the case where the aggregation is soft — i.e. there are several
aggregate states corresponding to i, simply by summing all the possibilities as weighted by the aggregation probabilities.
4

µ wherever the option does not terminate and rows from the identity matrix wherever it does. Now, we
do not just need a model that takes us one step towards the subgoal — we want one that takes us all the
way. Therefore, we continually evaluate the option by exponentiating the model matrix, producing M ′∞.
Now, this new model still has rows from the identity matrix where the option terminates — therefore it
does not correspond to a valid combination of primitive actions. To solve this problem, we compute M ′′,
according to the following equation (for each state i).
M ′′(i + 1, :) = (1 −β(φ(s))) M ′∞(i + 1, :) +
β(φ(s)) Aµ(φ(s))(i + 1, :)
(12)
M ′′ contains rows from M ′∞where the option does not terminate and rows dictated by the option policy
where it does. This guarantees it is a valid combination of primitive actions and can be added to the
action set and treated like any other action. We now run value iteration (equation 1) using the extended
action set — the original actions and the subgoal models (M ′′)(q) corresponding to each subgoal q. This
is s faster than using the original actions alone, even after factoring in the time used to compute the
subgoal models (see section 6).
Observation 1. Value Iteration with the action set A∪{(M ′′)(1), . . . , (M ′′)(g)} converges to the optimal
value function of the MDP.
Proof outline. The addition of subgoal macro-operators to the action set does not change the ﬁxpoint of
value iteration because the macro-operators are, by construction, compositions of the original actions.
See supplement to existing work [16] for a formal proof of a more general proposition.
This observation tells us that our algorithm will always exactly solve the MDP, computing V ⋆. The
worst thing that can happen is that the subgoal macro-operators will be useless i.e. the resulting value
iteration will take as many iterations as without them.
5
Why not Use Linear Features
Looking at eqn. 9 one may ask if this is the best way to compress actions. It may seem that using
linear features [4, 11, 21] may be better because they are more expressive and easier to come up with
than Φ and D. Speciﬁcally, consider the following way of compressing actions, as an alternative to eq.
9. Deﬁne the approximation architecture ˘V = Ψw for modelling value functions, the sequence of which
will converge to the optimal value function. We begin by deﬁning the projection operator [12, 17] that
compresses a table-lookup model M into a model that works with linear features,
˘
M Ψ,Ξ(M) =
 1
0
0
Π-

M
 1
0
0
Ψ

(13)
In the above, Π- = (Ψ⊤ΞΨ)−1Ψ⊤Ξ, and Ξ is a diagonal matrix with entries corresponding to a distri-
bution over the original states of the MDP. We introduce names for the minor matrices of the models:
˘
M Ψ,Ξ(M) =
 1
0
q
F

and M =
 1
0
R
P

. We note that eq. 13 ensures that the model ˘
M Ψ,Ξ(M)
is the best approximation of the model M in the sense that it solves the optimization problems:10
F = argminF ∥ΨF −PΨ∥Ξ and q = argminq ∥Ψq −R∥Ξ. In the above, the optimization is applied to
the transition and reward components separately; also, each column of F is treated independently of the
others. The semantics of the above is as such: each column k of F should be such as to make the entry
s of the corresponding k-th column of ΨF as close as possible to the feature number k of the next state,
where the index of the current state is s. Similarly, Ψq is picked so as to approximate the expected next
reward for each state. In other words, F is a linear dynamical system that models the one-step dynamics
on features of the Markov chain corresponding to an action. One might hope that this F and q linear
dynamical system could be used in much the same way as the MDP compressed with state aggregation
to ˜P and ˜R.
But there is a problem with the compressed models deﬁned according to eq. 13. Consider an action
with the transition matrix and approximation architecture Ψ given below.
P = γ


1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0

;
Ψ =


1
1
1
0
0
1
0
0

;
F = γ 1
3
 2
3
2
0

It can be easily shown that this, paired with a uniform distribution Ξ, produces the matrix F given
above. But this matrix has spectrum outside of the unit circle for some γ < 1 — hence if this action is
10The norms are deﬁned in the following way: ∥V ∥Ξ =
√
V ⊤ΞV and ∥A∥Ξ =
q
trace
 A⊤ΞA

.
5

Figure 1: Run-times of our algorithm, plain VI and model VI. All algorithms compute V ⋆.
options +
Domain
plain VI
model VI
aggr.
Taxi (determ.)
6.43 s.
11.64 s.
4.57 s.
Taxi (stoch.)
8.30 s.
47.80 s.
4.83 s.
Hanoi (determ.)
23.45 s.
51.65 s.
11.57 s.
Hanoi (stoch.)
27.31 s.
357.52 s.
21.71 s.
8-puzzle (determ.)
100.19 s.
221.20 s.
85.94 s.
composed with itself time and again, the VI algorithm will diverge. The argument given above shows that
we cannot11 use eq. 13 for arbitrary features Ψ and distributions Ξ. On the other hand, our framework
based on eq. 9 does not suﬀer from the described divergent behaviour. Also, it does not depend on any
distribution over the states, meaning there is one less parameter to the algorithm.
6
Experiments
We applied our approach to three domains: Taxi, Hanoi and 8-puzzle. In each case we compared several
variants of VI, including our approach combining state aggregation and options.
For vanilla VI we
considered algorithms based on both eq. 1 (the familiar algorithm, denoted plain VI) and eq. 3 (model
VI, where complete models are constructed). Figure 1 summarises the solution times for each domain;
more details are given in the following domain-speciﬁc subsections. We, however, stress beforehand that
our algorithm produced a speeed-up for each of the domains we tried.
6.1
The TAXI Problem
TAXI [5] is a prototypical example of a problem which combines spatial navigation with additional
variables. Denote the number of states as n (here n = 7000 + 1) and the number of aggregate states as
m (here m = 25 + 1). The one state is the sink state.
In our ﬁrst experiment, we ran four algorithms computing the same optimal value function., one for
each combination of using (or not) state aggregation and options. Consider using neither aggregation
nor options — this is model VI, one iteration of which has a complexity of O(n2|A| + n3), in practice
it is O(n|A|) because of sparsity. It takes 22 iterations to complete. Now consider the version with
subgoals but no aggregation. Here, we have 5 subgoals: one for getting to each pick-up location or the
fuel pump. An iteration now has complexity O(g((|A| + g)n2 + n3)). Because of sparsity, this becomes
O(g((|A| + g)n + n)) = O(g((|A| + g)n). The algorithm needs 8 iterations less to converge, because
subgoals allow it to make jumps. However, due to the increased cost of each iteration, the time required
to converge increased. Now look at the version with aggregation (see section 4) and no options. There
are 26 aggregate states. We map each original state to one of 25 states by taking the taxi position and
ignoring other variables. Sink state (state 7001) gets mapped to the aggregate sink state (state 26).
We proceed in two stages. First, all actions are compressed (eq. 9). Then, the problem is solved using
model VI in this smaller state-space. This takes 330 iterations, but is fast because m is small — the
complexity is O(m2| ˜
A| + m3). We then obtain the value function of the aggregate system and upscale it,
then we use the new value function to obtain a greedy model (i.e. each row comes from the action that
maximizes that row times ¯V ), which we use as initialization in our iteration, which takes 3 iterations
less than our original algorithm. Now consider the ﬁnal version, where the beneﬁts of aggregation and
options are combined. Again, the algorithm consists of two stages. First, we use compressed actions to
compute models for getting to the ﬁve subgoals. This requires 17 iterations; the complexity of each is
O(g((| ˜
A|+g)m2 +m3)), where g = 5. This is fast since m is small. We now upscale these models. We see
that if we add the ﬁve macro-actions, we do not need the original four actions for moving, as all sensible
movement is to one of the ﬁve locations.
The algorithm now takes only 7 iterations to converge.12
The run-time13 is 6.55 s, i.e. a speed-up of 1.8 times over model VI. Results for all four versions are
11If Ξ is chosen to be the diagonal matrix with entries from the left principal eigenvector of the state transition matrix
of the P, it turns out [4] that, the matrix F has spectrum within the unit circle, which leads to a convergent algorithm.
However, the problem is that this approach only takes into account the long-term eﬀects of actions. For instance in a
two-dimensional grid-world, for the action that goes right, such a distribution will be non-zero only along the rightmost
edge of the grid-world. In practice P will seldom be ergodic and all information in the non-recurrent part will be lost. This
cannot lead to good overall solutions of the MDP.
12We need an iteration to: (1) go to the fuel pump, (2) ﬁll in fuel, (3) go to passenger, (4) pick up passenger, (5) go to
destination, (6) drop oﬀpassenger. The 7th iteration comes from the termination condition.
13This is slightly diﬀerent from the result in ﬁg. 1 since after the models have been upscaled, we can proceed either with
plain VI (as is ﬁg. 1) or with model VI, which we do here to make the comparison fair.
6

Figure 2: Run-times of the algorithm in the deterministic and stochastic versions of TAXI .
deter.
no aggreg.
aggregation
no options
22 iter.
330 + 19 iter.
11.64 s.
11.73 s.
options
14 iter.
17 + 7 iter.
78.20 s.
6.55 s.
stoch.
no aggreg.
aggregation
no options
30 iter.
331 + 28 iter.
47.80 s.
26.04 s.
options
18 iter.
20 + 7 iter.
256.04 s.
6.78 s.
summarized in ﬁgure 2. We also constructed a stochastic version of the problem, with a probability of
0.05 of staying in the original state when moving. Results are qualitatively similar and are in ﬁgure 2.
The speed-up from combining options with aggregation was greater at 7.1 times. We stress the main
result.14 In the deterministic case, we replace many O(n) iterations with many O(m3) iterations followed
by few O(n) iterations. For stochastic problems, we replace many O(n3) iterations with many O(m3)
iterations followed by few O(n3) iterations.
In our second experiment, as a digression from the main thrust of the paper, we tried a diﬀerent
approach: we can use the aggregation framework to compute an approximate value function, gaining
speed. Our actions are compressed as deﬁned by eq. 9, and we simply apply eq. 1. This process gives
us a value function ˜V ⋆deﬁned over the aggregate state space (in the ﬁrst case we need to extract it
from the reward part of the model).
We upscale this value function to the original states using the
equation ¯V =
 1
0
0
Φ

˜V ⋆. Of course, the obtained value function ¯V is only approximately optimal in
the original problem. Consider a Φ with 501 aggregate states — the aggregation happens by eliminating
the fuel variable and leaving others intact. The algorithm used is given by eq. 3, applied to compressed
actions. It takes 2.94 s / 28 iterations to converge (determ.) and 3.08 s / 30 iterations (stoch.). The
learned value function corresponds to a policy which ignores fuel, never visits the pump, but otherwise,
if there is enough fuel, transports the passenger as intended. We have shown an important principle —
if we have an aspect of a system that we feel our solution can ignore, we can eliminate it and still get an
approximate solution. The beneﬁt is in the speed-up. — in our case, with respect to solving the original
MDP using plain VI, it is 2.2 (determ.) / 2.7 (stoch.).
6.2
The Towers of Hanoi
For r disks, our state representation in the Towers of Hanoi is an r-tuple, where each element corresponds
to a disk and takes values from {1, 2, 3}, denoting the peg.15 There are three actions, two for moving
the smallest disk and one for moving a disk between the remaining two pegs. It is known that VI for
this problem takes 2r iterations to converge. To speed up the iteration, we introduced the following
state abstraction. There are r −2 sub-problems of size 2,...,r −1. First, we solve the problem with 2
disks, i.e. our abstraction only considers the position of the two smallest disks, ignoring the rest. There
are three subgoals, one for placing the two disks on each of the pegs. Then, once we obtained three
models for the subgoals, we use them to solve the sub-problem of size 3, ignoring all disks except the
three smallest ones. Again, there are three subgoals. We proceed until we solve the problem with r
disks. For each subgoal, we need 4 iterations (Three moves and the 4th is required for the convergence
criterion). The total number of iterations is 4 × 3 × r, i.e. it is linear in the state space. For 8 disks this
means the following speed-up: 11.57 s (with subgoals) vs. 51.65 s (model VI) vs. 23.45 s (plain VI). We
note however, that the time complexity of the algorithm with subgoals is still exponential in r, because
whereas the number of iterations is only linear, in each iteration we need to iterate the whole state space,
which is exponential.16 For a stochastic version, the run-times were 357.52 s for model VI, 27.31 s for
plain VI and 21.71 s for computing the same optimal value function with options with aggregation.
7

Figure 3: The subgoal used and run-times for the 8-puzzle. All algorithms compute V ⋆.
iter.
time elapsed
model VI
32
221.20 s.
plain VI
33
100.19 s.
subgoal
25
109.51 s.
subgoal w. init. set
25
85.94 s.
A A A
B B B
C C
6.3
The 8-puzzle
The 8-puzzle [18, 14] is well-known in the planning community. Our subgoal is shown in ﬁgure 3.17
‘A’,‘B’, and ‘C’ denote groups of tiles. The subgoal consists in arranging the tiles so that each group is
in correct place (but tiles within each group are allowed to occupy an incorrect place). The matrix Φ is
such that the original conﬁguration of the tiles is mapped onto one where each tile is only marked with
the group it belongs to. Using the subgoal alone did not result in a speed-up, so we used the notion
of initiation sets [19]. We trained the subgoal for 9 iterations (the number 9 was obtained by trial and
error), so the obtained model is only able to reach the subgoal for some starting states (the ones at most
9 steps away from the subgoal in terms of primitive actions). We upscaled the model, but this time the
new model had an initiation set containing only those states from which the subgoal is reachable. The
iteration we then used is plain value iteration, extended to initiation sets. The intuition behind initiation
sets is that it only makes sense to use a subgoal if we are already in a part of the state space close to
it. Thus, we obtained a total run-time of 85.94 seconds, which amounts to a speed-up of 1.17 over plain
value iteration. The results are in ﬁgure 3.
7
Conclusions
We introduced new Bellman optimality equations that facilitate VI with options. These equations can be
combined with state aggregation in a sound way, and therefore can be applied to the solution of medium-
sized MDPs.18 This is the ﬁrst algorithm combining options and state abstraction which is guaranteed
to converge. This is notable because other proposed approaches, notably based on linear features, are
known to diverge even for small problems. Finally, we have shown experimentally that the beneﬁts of
options and state aggregation are only realized when they are applied together.
