CHATBOTS AS PROBLEM SOLVERS: PLAYING TWENTY 
QUESTIONS WITH ROLE REVERSALS 
 
David Noever1 and Forrest McKee2  
PeopleTec, 4901-D Corporate Drive, Huntsville, AL, USA, 35805 

       
 
ABSTRACT 
New chat AI applications like ChatGPT offer an advanced understanding of question context and memory 
across multi-step tasks, such that experiments can test its deductive reasoning. This paper proposes a multi-
role and multi-step challenge, where ChatGPT plays the classic twenty-questions game but innovatively 
switches roles from the questioner to the answerer. The main empirical result establishes that this 
generation of chat applications can guess random object names in fewer than twenty questions (average, 
12) and correctly guess 94% of the time across sixteen different experimental setups. The research 
introduces four novel cases where the chatbot fields the questions, asks the questions, both question-answer 
roles, and finally tries to guess appropriate contextual emotions. One task that humans typically fail but 
trained chat applications complete involves playing bilingual games of twenty questions (English answers 
to Spanish questions). Future variations address direct problem-solving using a similar inquisitive format 
to arrive at novel outcomes deductively, such as patentable inventions or combination thinking. Featured 
applications of this dialogue format include complex protein designs, neuroscience metadata, and child 
development educational materials.  
 
KEYWORDS 
Transformers, Text Generation, Malware Generation, Generative Pre-trained Transformers, GPT 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
When large, high-quality natural language processors (NLP) surged after 2018 [1-3], the field added many 
challenging tasks, including question-answering (QA) benchmarks that recently approached fifty 
challenges [4-5]. Stanford's SQuAD benchmark [6] represents an example of knowledge crowd-sourced 
from Wikipedia in 2016 and formatted as 108,000 QA pairs. For large language models (LLMs), most 
benchmarks follow this format of "prompt-response" pairs and the underlying knowledge base stored 
answers [5], but the training on question datasets did not embed memory or long-conversational cues [7-
10]. Domain-specific QA datasets include common sense and trivia about movies, news, Wikipedia, 
Tweets, search engines, and books [4-5]. As a format, the familiar game of Twenty Questions [11-16] 
features multi-hop reasoning, which often condenses to "Animal-Vegetable-Mineral" as opening questions 
that narrow the theme [17]. The advent of ChatGPT (Generative Pre-trained Transformers, [18]) added 
memory across questions (up to 8000 tokens or 20-25 pages). Appendix A lists the 48 specialty tasks 
currently provided to guide users in creating capabilities and NLP prompts [19]. Examples like code 
generation specialists, either codex or copilot, show a grasp of complex behavior for debugging, program 
suggestions, and commentary [19-20]. One of the innovative ChatGPT extensions offers new QA sessions 
that span multiple requests [18,21].  
 
The present work applies the familiar QA challenge, Twenty Questions [11-16], with ChatGPT playing as 
either participant- the one who knows the answer and fields the questions, but also the one who doesn't 
know the answer but asks the questions. We call this role reversal a two-player conversation between "Bob" 
and "Alice." While Twenty Questions dates back to 1882 [11], the applied problem-solving method [22] 

now spans various challenging fields, including protein folding [23] and design [24], image segmentation 
[25], child development [26-27], neuroscience [28] and diagnostic medicine,  and crowd-sourced emotional 
indices [30]. Variants of the game rules include role reversals [31], liars [32], and word relationships [33] 
outside of simple categories such as "pertaining to" suggestions [34]. Our particular research interests 
center on whether LLMs like ChatGPT offer constructive means for innovative problem-solving through 
crafted language prompts and logical question sequences. This effort empirically assesses the model's 
capability for deductive discovery. We summarize two problem statements in this area of deductive 
discovery, "Can a chatbot play both roles in deductive question and answering conversations?" and if so, 
"What can Twenty Questions reveal about future directions for LLMs?".   
 
2. METHODS 
 
The approach is to test experimentally how well an LLM handles open-ended games like Twenty Questions 
[11-16]. We employ the December 2022 research model from Open AI called ChatGPT [18]. We prompt 
it to impersonate both roles [31], the one that knows the answer and the one that tries to guess it deductively. 
We run four trials using each persona ("Bob" or "Alice"), and 80 questions are available to guess the object 
or concept. We mix up the animate-inanimate fields and introduce concepts like alphabetic letters. We 
report metrics for the mean and median number of questions required to guess the correct answer and failure 
rates. We also score the exchange against the machine-written detector to determine ChatGPT's broad 
capability to provide "real" or "fake" text outputs as judged by OpenAI's original GPT2 Detector [35]. The 
detector features a high-dimensional pattern detector that provides initial confidence that human writing 
might sample differently than transformer-based output regarding word choice and order, repetition, and 
other syntax outliers. 
 
Example variants of this pattern include forcing the QA session towards bilingual communication, thus 
combining two tasks (translation and QA) in multi-hop conversations [5]. We also generalize the format to 
elicit emotional indices based on crowd-sourced Emotion Twenty Questions (EMO20Q) [30]. Rather than 
trying to guess an object, we query for one of 23 emotional states, such as "surprise" or "anger." As the 
dataset designers [30] remarked, "The EMO20Q game requires that an emotionally intelligent agent can 
understand emotions without observing them, thanks to natural language and empathy." EMO20Q emotions 
include the following as candidates for twenty-question discovery:  admire, adore, anger, awe, boredom, 
bravery, calm, confidence, confusion, contempt, disgust, enthusiasm, frustration, gratefulness, jealousy, 
love, proud, relief, serenity, shame, silly, surprised, and thankful. 
 
The structure of the paper follows Appendices B-E closely. First, in Appendix B, we establish that ChatGPT 
comprehends the game rules and recognizes properties of the object X to guess sufficiently to answer basic 
questions such as "Is X an animal?". The sequence also establishes an exclusionary acceptance of "yes" and 
"no" answers only without further elaborations. This case covers the traditional role of "Bob," who knows 
the object of interest X and answers affirmatively or negatively throughout the game. The game also 
underscores the unique memory of ChatGPT across multi-step deductive stages and builds toward a 
successful conclusion to recall the object name in less than 40 steps (1 prompt and one answer over 20 
iterations). We also set out to test the overall rule retention over four repetitions of the game punctuated 
only by "Let's play again" without attempting to reset the rules while giving a new object X. 
 
Secondly, Appendix C reverses the previous game, such that the human experimenter thinks of an object 
or concept X, and ChatGPT plays the role of "Alice" when asking the questions. The prompt establishes 
the reversed roles in a new session and again reiterates that the prompter cannot lie but can only answer 
"yes" or "no." As in the previous case, four repetitions spanning eighty possible interactions. This case 
establishes the deductive goal, "What is object X?" which also satisfies all the previous interactions such 
that enough description includes the object of interest, "X is an animal," and excludes the alternatives, "X 

is not a bird." A notable feature of this challenge spans multiple deductive steps and establishes a chain of 
reasoning to arrive at a guess. ChatGPT requires no prompt for the final guess, and the model proposes its 
terminating action, "Is it an X?" to end the game.   
 
Both Appendix B and C mirror the familiar human game of twenty questions and introduce no new features 
excluded from ChatGPT's training data. To raise the difficulty level, Appendix B highlights some non-
traditional concepts. For instance, concepts might prove scarce in previously seen online play, such as 
answering truthfully to probing questions that seek to name the alphabetic letter "Q." Another challenging 
variation works through identifying "X" as a food by listing its ingredients ("tiramisu"), but in the same 
session introduces a recipe change ("eggless tiramisu") before launching into probing questions.  
 
Appendix C also raises the difficulty further and forces ChatGPT to combine two of its established subtasks 
("question-answer" and "language translation"). The motivation for this test stems from the hypothesis that 
LLMs parrot and mix up what previously corresponded to the internet of human training data. For twenty 
questions, however, a Google search on "bilingual twenty-question examples" yield no definitive training 
examples for ChatGPT to memorize or encode. Given a detailed prompt describing how the questions may 
be asked or answered in Spanish or English, the game proceeds outside what typically would represent 
human gameplay. Appendix C combines deductive reasoning, memory, and context and forces the game 
into what might be considered "out-of-distribution" sampling. Thus, both multi-step and multi-lingual tasks 
describe the ChatGPT challenge problem.  
 
Thirdly, Appendix D introduces both QA roles as completing without human intervention once two browser 
instances of ChatGPT exchange the initial rules. We call this example dueling twenty questions since the 
two-headed LLM now must both ask and answer its questions between two non-communicating models of 
itself ("Bob" vs. "Alice") with no human prompts. While this example centers on a simple object 
("chicken"), one can envision a lengthy and detailed exchange driven by an automated Application 
Programming Interface or API that extends the conversation to the limit of token lengths (about 20-25 typed 
pages). This self-questioning interface may also enable sophisticated future applications that sequentially 
build a knowledge base or comprehensive assessment examination from scratch. For example, "tell me all 
you know about gall bladder surgery" may not provide a compelling or thought-provoking essay in the style 
of training data or Wikipedia. The back-and-forth format of QA previously has yielded better human 
performance in medical test contexts [28-29]. One might compare this example to an instance of "semi-
supervised" learning for a chatbot. 
 
Finally, for EMO20Q formats, Appendix E removes the requirement that X be an object to guess and 
substitutes one of twenty-three emotions. One motivation for exploring the emotional quotient (EQ) of 
ChatGPT stems from OpenAI's filtering of opinions and biases. To the authors' knowledge, this example 
represents the first application of a chatbot deducing emotional states in a guessing game without any pre-
programmed pairs of pattern-template exchanges [9]. In other words, no explicit guidance provides 
appropriate intent for the question "Describe emotions one might feel at a birthday party?" with the user 
goal to elicit "surprise" as a deductive leap to the correct answer through repeated probing. We explore this 
EQ aspect as previous chatbots might have approached the problem. Appendix E finally displays the open-
ended emotional context in a known prompt-response template called "Artificial Intelligence Markup 
Language (AIML)," which offers training data for more traditional conversation templates in restricted 
domains like customer service or AI assistants performing a narrow task [9].  
 
3. RESULTS 
 
Figure 1 summarizes the experimental cases and associated metrics for all the twenty question games in 
Appendices B-E. The main finding supports a general ChatGPT capability to play all aspects of the game, 

including guessing and answering or both roles in the same game. The average number of questions required 
to get the answer was 11.6, with a median of 13 owing to a few more demanding cases that reached the 20-
question limit. The addition of bilingual rules did not increase the number of required prompts (14) or force 
the model to give up ("correct guess").   Similarly, the introduction of abstract objects like the alphabetic 
letter "Q" or deceptive animals like "humans" did not significantly change the number of guesses (9-14) or 
steer the conversation off-track from a final correct answer. 
 
Over the sixteen tests and 185 exchanges, ChatGPT scored an overall correct guess rate of 94%. The only 
incorrect answer ("paper clip" instead of "hammer") appeared to trigger prematurely, as ChatGPT declared 
at guess number fourteen that the model had run out of questions and guessed incorrectly.  
 
As described in the Methods section, the Open AI online detector [35] scores the majority of the exchanges 
as "real," meaning not machine-generated by its GPT-2 model [1]. The 2018 detection model offered fewer 
parameters and smaller training sets by at least several orders of magnitude compared to current generations 
[18-19]. While the referenced detection accuracy for GPT-2 reached 95%, the scored detections flag only 
26% of the game content as "fake" or machine-generated text. Since the customized content involves some 
human intervention as questions, answers, and rule prompts, one can postulate that the syntactic patterns 
follow a semi-human or hybrid dialogue outside the detector's target patterns.  
4. DISCUSSION  
 
The research literature on twenty questions provides a framework for probing with chat applications and 
LLMs. In addition to systematically progressing through alternative scenarios, the output of the 
conversation mirrors a binary search or decision tree. A particularly notable way to convert LLMs to 
comparable knowledge graphs involves continuous probing and feedback until sufficient tree depth 
Figure 1. Experimental results for ChatGPT across multiple QA sessions 

describes a technical field of interest. Previous work [22-30] has used this 
approach to describe neuroscience metadata and train medical students to 
pass practice exams. Others [16-17] have also noted that the basic 20Q 
format simplifies some complex search problems. As an interesting 
historical note, a 2001 paper [36] addressed a similar problem as 
insurmountable: "When will machine learning and pattern recognition rival 
human ability to play Twenty Questions?" The present research 
demonstrates not only can ChatGPT rival human ability and play more 
demanding roles than a human might contemplate in virtually any field, 
including discerning human emotions. To reproduce this ChatGPT output 
with question templating systems or entity extraction poses an enormous 
manual task to handle all the possible cases. The same paper [36] asks: "Can 
we hope to stock a classification system with enough questions to play a 
decent game, or must we instead focus on endowing with question-making 
skills? How many classes and how many documents might be of interest?"  
 
5. CONCLUSIONS 
 
The experimental plan tests ChatGPT as an LLM capable of playing multiple roles in verbal games like 
twenty questions. The work demonstrates 94% accuracy in correctly guessing across numerous challenges 
and an average question-answer length of 12. For the first time, dueling roles combine two chatbots in self-
play. An innovative application for future probing involves guessing objects and concepts and human 
emotions for a given context or social situation.
