“Why is ‘Chicago’ deceptive?”
Towards Building Model-Driven Tutorials for Humans
Vivian Lai
University of Colorado

Han Liu
University of Colorado

Chenhao Tan
University of Colorado

ABSTRACT
To support human decision making with machine learning
models, we often need to elucidate patterns embedded in the
models that are unsalient, unknown, or counterintuitive to hu-
mans. While existing approaches focus on explaining machine
predictions with real-time assistance, we explore model-driven
tutorials to help humans understand these patterns in a train-
ing phase. We consider both tutorials with guidelines from
scientiﬁc papers, analogous to current practices of science
communication, and automatically selected examples from
training data with explanations. We use deceptive review
detection as a testbed and conduct large-scale, randomized
human-subject experiments to examine the effectiveness of
such tutorials. We ﬁnd that tutorials indeed improve human
performance, with and without real-time assistance. In par-
ticular, although deep learning provides superior predictive
performance than simple models, tutorials and explanations
from simple models are more useful to humans. Our work
suggests future directions for human-centered tutorials and
explanations towards a synergy between humans and AI.
INTRODUCTION
Interpretable machine learning (ML) has attracted signiﬁcant
interest as ML models are used to support human decision
making in societally critical domains such as justice systems
and healthcare [13, 21, 41]. In these domains, full automation
is often not desired and humans are the ﬁnal decision makers
for legal and ethical reasons. In fact, the Wisconsin Supreme
Court ruled that “a COMPAS risk assessment should not be
used to determine the severity of a sentence or whether an
offender is incarcerated”, but does not eliminate the use of
ML models if “judges be made aware of the limitations of risk
assessment tools” [40, 54]. Therefore, it is crucial to enhance
human performance with the assistance of machine learning
models, e.g., by explaining the recommended decisions.
However, recent human-subject studies tend to show lim-
ited effectiveness of explanations in improving human per-
formance [7, 23, 34, 62]. For instance, Lai and Tan [34]
show that explanations alone only slightly improve human
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a

CHI ’20, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USA.
© 2020 Association of Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6708-0/20/04 ...$15.00.
https://dx.doi.org/10.1145/10.1145/3313831.3376873
performance in deceptive review detection; Weerts et al. [62]
similarly ﬁnd that explanations do not improve human perfor-
mance in predicting whether one’s income exceeds 50,000 in
the Adult dataset. These studies explain a machine prediction
by revealing model internals, e.g., via attributing importance
weights to features and then visualizing feature importance.
We refer to such assistance as real-time assistance because
they are provided as humans make individual decisions.
To understand such limited effectiveness, we argue that it is
useful to distinguish two distinct modes in which ML models
are being used: emulating and discovering. In tasks such as
object recognition [11, 22], datasets are crowdsourced because
humans are considered the gold standard, and ML models are
designed to emulate human intelligence.1 In contrast, in the
discovering mode, datasets are usually collected from observ-
ing social processes, e.g., whether a person commits crime
on bail for bail decisions [28] and what the writer intention is
for deceptive review detection [1, 47]. ML models can thus
often identify patterns that are unsalient, unknown, and even
counterintuitive to humans, and may even outperform humans
in constrained datasets [28, 47, 56]. Notably, many critical
policy decisions such as bail decisions resemble the discov-
ering mode more than the emulating mode because policy
decisions are usually challenging (to humans) in nature [29].
Studies on how explanations affect human performance tend
to employ these challenging tasks for humans (the discovering
mode for ML models) because humans need little assistance
to perform tasks in the emulating mode (except for scalability).
This observation highlights different roles of explanations in
these two modes. In the emulating mode, explanations can
help debug and identify biases and robustness issues in the
models for future automation. In the discovering mode, if
the patterns embedded in ML models can be elucidated for
humans, they may enhance human knowledge and improve
human decision making.2 Moreover, it might help humans
identify spurious patterns in ML models and account for po-
tential mistakes to generalize beyond a constrained dataset.
To further illustrate the difﬁculty of interpreting explanations
in the discovering mode, Fig. 1(a) shows an example from a de-
ceptive review detection task, where the goal is to distinguish
deceptive reviews written by people who did not stay at the
hotel from genuine ones. “Chicago” is highly associated with
1As a corollary, it is usually considered overﬁtting the dataset when
machine learning models outperform humans in these tasks.
2It is worth noting that these two modes represent two ends of a
continuum, e.g., emulating experts lead to discoveries for novices.
arXiv:2001.05871v1  [cs.HC]  14 Jan 2020

4
a
b
c
Figure 1. Illustration of example-driven tutorials and guidelines shown to participants during the training phase: a) top 10 features of the review text
are highlighted in green and red (signed highlights), where green words are associated with genuine reviews and red words are associated with deceptive
reviews; b) participants are presented the actual label, the predicted label, and textual explanations for a review after choosing the label of the review
in example-driven tutorials; c) a list of guidelines for identifying deceptive reviews extracted from scientiﬁc papers.
deceptive reviews because people are more likely to mention
the city name instead of speciﬁc places when they imagine
their experience. Such a pattern can be hard to comprehend for
humans, especially when the highlights are shown as real-time
assistance without any other information.
Instead of throwing people in at the deep end directly with
real-time assistance, we propose a novel training phase that
can help humans understand the nature of a task and the pat-
terns embedded in a model. This training step is analogous
to ofﬂine coaching and can be complementary to real-time
assistance in explaining machine predictions. We consider
two types of model-driven tutorials: 1) guidelines extracted
from scientiﬁc papers [39, 46, 47] (Fig. 1(c)), which reﬂects
the current practices of science communication; 2) example-
driven tutorials where we select examples from the training
data and present them along with explanations in the form of
highlights (Fig. 1(a)&(b)). We also develop a novel algorithm
that incorporates spaced repetition to help humans understand
the patterns in a machine learning model, and conduct an
in-person user study to reﬁne the design of our tutorials.
Our main contribution in this work is to design large-scale,
randomized, pre-registered human-subject experiments to in-
vestigate whether tutorials provide useful training to humans,
using the aforementioned deceptive review detection task as a
testbed. We choose this task because 1) deceptive information
including fake news is prevalent on the Internet [2, 19, 35, 45]
and mechanical turkers can provide a reasonable proxy for
humans facing this challenge compared to other tasks such as
bail decisions and medical diagnosis that require domain ex-
pertise; 2) while humans struggle with detecting deception [6],
machine learning models are able to learn useful patterns in
constrained settings (in particular, ML models achieve an ac-
curacy of above 85% in our deceptive review detection task);
3) full automation might not be desired in this case because
the government should not have the authority to automatically
block information from individuals, and it is important to en-
hance human ability with a machine in the loop. Speciﬁcally,
we focus on the following three research questions:
• RQ1: Do model-driven tutorials improve human perfor-
mance without any real-time assistance?
• RQ2: How do varying levels of real-time assistance affect
human performance after training?
• RQ3: How do model complexity and explanation methods
affect human performance with/without training?
In all experiments, if training is provided, human subjects ﬁrst
go through a training phase with model-driven tutorials, and
then enter the prediction phase to determine whether a review
is deceptive or genuine. The prediction phase allows us to
evaluate human performance after training.
Our ﬁrst experiment aims to compare the effectiveness of dif-
ferent model-driven tutorials. Ideally, we would hope that
these tutorials can help humans understand the patterns em-
bedded in the ML models well enough that they can perform
decently in the prediction phase without any real-time assis-
tance. Our results show that human performance after tutorials
are always better than without training, and the differences
are statistically signiﬁcant for two types of tutorials. However,
the improvement is relatively limited: human performance
reaches ∼60%, while the ML models are above 85%. Mean-
while, there is no statistically signiﬁcant difference between
human performance after any type of tutorial, which suggests
that all model-driven tutorials are similarly effective.
One possible reason for the limited improvement of human
performance in Experiment 1 is that the patterns might be
too complicated for humans to apply in the prediction phase
without any real-time assistance. Therefore, our second ex-
periment is designed to understand the effect of tutorials with
real-time assistance. Inspired by Lai and Tan [34], we develop
a spectrum with varying levels of real-time assistance between
full human agency and full automation (Fig. 2). Our results
demonstrate that real-time assistance can indeed signiﬁcantly
improve human performance to above 70%. However, com-
pared to Lai and Tan [34], the best human performance is
not signiﬁcantly improved.3 It suggests that given real-time
assistance, tutorials are mainly useful in that humans can per-
form similarly well in the prediction phase with only signed
highlights, thus retaining a higher level of human agency.
3We only discuss qualitative differences from [34], as these are
separate experiments subject to different randomization processes.

Finally, in order to understand how our results generalize to
different kinds of models, we would like to examine the effect
of model complexity and methods of deriving explanations.
Our ﬁrst two experiments use a linear SVM classiﬁer because
linear models are typically deemed interpretable, but deep
learning models are increasingly prevalent because of their su-
perior predictive power. While it is well recognized that deep
learning models are more complex, it remains an open ques-
tion how human performance changes with assistance from
deep learning models (e.g., BERT) vs. simple models (e.g.,
linear SVM). Our results show that tutorials and explanations
of simple models lead to better human performance than deep
learning models, which highlights the tradeoff between model
complexity and interpretability. We also show that for BERT,
post-hoc signed explanations from LIME are more effective
than built-in explanations derived from attention mechanisms.
Moreover, tutorials are effective in improving human perfor-
mance for both kinds of models compared to without training.
Overall, our results show that model-driven tutorials can some-
what improve human performance with and without real-time
assistance, and humans also ﬁnd these tutorials useful. How-
ever, the limited improvement also points to future directions
of human-centered interpretable machine learning. We high-
light two implications here and present further discussions in
the Discussion section. First, it is important to explain beyond
the surface patterns and facilitate humans in reasoning about
why a feature is important. A strategy is to develop interactive
explanations that allow humans to explore the patterns in both
the training and the prediction phase. Second, it is useful to
bridge the gap between training and generalization in devel-
oping tutorials because the model behavior and performance
in training data might differ from that on unseen data. The
ability to understand this difference is crucial for humans to
calibrate trust and generalize beyond the constrained dataset.
RELATED WORK
We start by introducing recent methods for interpretable ML,
and then discuss experimental studies on human interaction
with explanations and predictions derived from ML models.
We end by summarizing related work on deception detection.
Methods for interpretable machine learning
A battery of studies propose various algorithms to explain
a machine prediction by uncovering model internals (also
known as local explanations) [21]. Most relevant to our work
is feature attribution that assigns an importance weight to each
feature [37, 42, 50, 51]. For instance, Ribeiro et al. [50]
propose LIME that ﬁts a sparse linear model to approximate
local machine predictions, and coefﬁcients in this linear model
are used as explanations. Lai et al. [33] compare the built-in
and post-hoc explanations methods in text classiﬁcation and
show that different methods lead to very different explanations,
in particular, deep learning models lead to explanations with
less consistency than simple models such as linear SVM. Other
popular approaches include 1) example-based [26, 27, 43, 52,
61], e.g., counterfactual explanations ﬁnd alternative examples
that would have obtained a different prediction, and 2) rule-
based [3, 20] that summarizes local rules (e.g., via decision
trees). Notably, SP-LIME is an algorithm that selects examples
to provide a global understanding of the model [50], which
aligns with our goal of generating tutorials. However, to the
best of our knowledge, there have not been any human-subject
experiments with such example-driven tutorials.
Human interaction with explanations and models
The importance of human-subject experiments is increasingly
recognized in understanding the effectiveness of explanations
because they are ultimately used by humans. In addition to
studies mentioned in the introduction, researchers have investi-
gated other desiderata of explanations [5, 8, 17, 18, 32, 49, 65].
For instance, Binns et al. [5] examine perception of justice
given multiple styles of explanations and conclude that there
is no best approach to explaining algorithmic decisions. Cai
et al. [8] show that a user-centered design improves human
perception of an image-search tool’s usefulness, but does not
improve human performance. Green and Chen [17] ﬁnd that
humans underperformed a risk assessment tool even when pre-
sented with its predictions, and exhibited behaviors that could
exacerbate biases against minority groups. Yin et al. [65]
examine the effect of stated accuracy and observed accuracy
on humans’ trust in models, while Kunkel et al. [32] study the
effect of explanations on trust in recommender systems. This
line of work on trust also relates to the literature on appropriate
reliance with general automation [36, 38]. Retaining human
agency is particularly important in societally critical domains
where consequences can be dire. Finally, Bansal et al. [4] pro-
vide feedback during decision making, which can be seen as a
form of continuous learning. Our focus is to understand the
effect of ofﬂine tutorials, which can be potentially combined
with real-time assistance/feedback in practice.4
Deception detection
Deception is a ubiquitous phenomenon and has been studied
in many disciplines [60]. In psychology, deception is deﬁned
as an act that is intended to foster in another person a be-
lief or understanding which the deceiver considers false [31].
Computer scientists have been developing machine learning
models to identify deception in texts, images, and videos [1,
15, 16, 24, 47, 48, 63, 66]. An important challenge in studying
deception is to obtain groundtruth labels because it is well
recognized that humans struggle at detecting deception [6].
Ott et al. [47] created the ﬁrst sizable dataset in deception
detection by employing workers on Amazon Mechanical Turk
to write imagined experiences in hotels.
As people increasingly rely on information on the Internet
(e.g., online reviews for making purchase decisions [10, 57,
64, 68]), deceptive information also becomes prevalent [9,
45, 53]. The issue of misinformation and fake news has also
attracted signiﬁcant attention from both the public and the
research community [14, 19, 35, 59, 67]. Our work employs
the deceptive review detection task in Ott et al. [46, 47] to
investigate the effectiveness of model-driven tutorials. While
this task is a constrained case of deception and may differ from
intentionally malicious deception, it represents an important
issue that people face on a daily basis and can potentially
beneﬁt from assistance from ML models.
4Although feedback (e.g., true labels) on real decisions such as bail
decisions can take a long time to observe.

METHODS
In this section, we introduce the preliminaries for our predic-
tion task, machine learning models, and explanation methods.
We then develop tutorials to help humans understand the em-
bedded patterns in the models in the training phase. Finally, we
present types of real-time assistance in the prediction phase. A
demo is available at https://deception.machineintheloop.com.
Dataset, models, and explanations
Dataset and prediction task. We employ the deceptive re-
view detection task developed by Ott et al. [46, 47], consisting
of 800 genuine and 800 deceptive hotel reviews for 20 ho-
tels in Chicago. The genuine reviews were extracted from
TripAdvisor and the deceptive ones were written by turkers
who were asked to imagine their experience. We use 80%
of the reviews as the training set and the remaining 20% as
the test set. We evaluate human performance based on their
accuracy on sampled reviews from the test set. The task for
both humans and ML models is to determine whether a review
is deceptive or genuine based on the text.
Models. We consider a linear SVM classiﬁer with unigram
bag-of-words as features, which represents a simple model,
and BERT [12], which represents a deep learning model with
state-of-the-art performance in many NLP tasks. The hyperpa-
rameter for linear SVM was selected via 5-fold cross validation
with the training set; BERT was ﬁne-tuned on 70% of the re-
views and the other 10% of the reviews in the training set were
used as the development set for selecting hyperparameters.
Table 1 shows their accuracy on the test set.
Model
Accuracy (%)
SVM
86.3
BERT
90.9
Table 1. Accuracy of machine learning models on the test set.
Methods of deriving explanations. We explain a machine
prediction by highlighting the most important 10 words. For
linear SVM, we use the absolute value of coefﬁcients to de-
termine feature importance, and the highlights are signed be-
cause coefﬁcients are either positive or negative. For BERT,
we consider two methods following Lai et al. [33]: 1) BERT
attention based on the built-in mechanism of Transformer [58]
(speciﬁcally, feature importance is calculated using the aver-
age attention values of 12 heads used by the ﬁrst token at the
ﬁnal layer; these highlights are unsigned because attention
values range between 0 and 1); 2) BERT LIME, where feature
importance comes from LIME by ﬁtting a sparse linear model
to approximate local model predictions (these highlights are
signed as they come from coefﬁcients in a linear model).
Tutorial generation
Our main innovation in this work is to introduce a training
phase with model-driven tutorials before humans interact with
ML models. We consider the following two types of tutorials.
Guidelines. We follow the current practice of science commu-
nication and summarize ﬁndings in scientiﬁc papers [46, 47,
39] as a list of guidelines. These guidelines are observations
derived from the ML model (see “Fig. 1(c)”) and paraphrased
by us. A “Next” button is enabled after a 30-second timer.
Example-driven tutorials. Inspired by Ribeiro et al. [50],
another way to give humans a global sense of a model is to
present a sequence of examples along with predicted labels and
explanations of predictions. For each example in our tutorial,
informed by our in-person user study, we ﬁrst ask participants
to determine the label of the example, and then reveal the
actual label and the predicted label along with explanations in
the form of highlights. The algorithm selects 10 examples that
are representative of the patterns that the ML model identiﬁes
from the training set.5 There could be genuine insights as well
as spurious patterns. Ideally, these examples allow participants
to understand the problem at hand and then apply the patterns,
including correcting spurious ones, in the prediction phase.
Fig. 1(a)&(b) presents an example review after the label is
chosen and the predicted label and its explanations are shown.
A “Continue” button is enabled after a 10-second timer. See
the supplementary material for screenshots.
We consider the following algorithms for example selection:
• Random. 10 random examples are chosen.
• SP-LIME. Ribeiro et al. [50] propose SP-LIME to select ex-
amples with features that provide great coverage in the train-
ing set. To do that, the global importance of each feature is
deﬁned as Ij =
p
∑n
i=1Wij, where Wij is the importance of
feature j in the i-th instance. Since we only highlight the
top 10 features, Wij = 0 for any other features. Then, 10
examples are selected to maximize the following objective
function: argmaxS,|S|≤B ∑d
j=1 1(∃i ∈S : Wij > 0)Ij, where
B = 10 and d represents the dimension of features. This ob-
jective function presents a weighted coverage problem over
all features, and is thus submodular. A greedy algorithm
provides a solution with a constant-factor approximation
guarantee of 1−1/e to the optimum [30].
• Spaced repetition (SR). We propose this algorithm
to leverage insights from the education literature re-
garding the effectiveness of spaced repetition (e.g.,
on long-term retention) [25, 55].
Speciﬁcally, we
develop the following novel objective function so
that users can be exposed to important features re-
peatedly:
argmaxS,|S|≤B ∑d
j=1U({Wk j}1≤k≤|S|)Ij, where
U({wk j}1≤k≤|S|) = 1(max({k,Wk j > 0}) −min({k,Wk j >
0}) ≥3). The key difference from SP-LIME is that the
weight of a feature is included only if it is repeated in two
examples with a gap of at least three.
Finally, we consider the combination of guidelines and ex-
amples selected with spaced repetition by ﬁrst showing the
guidelines for 15 seconds, 10 examples selected with spaced
repetition, and the guidelines again for 15 seconds.
Real-time assistance
In addition to tutorials in the training phase, we introduce
varying levels of real-time assistance in the prediction phase.
Inspired by Lai and Tan [34], we design six levels of real-time
assistance, as illustrated in Fig. 2.
5We chose 10 so that an experiment session ﬁnishes within a reason-
able amount of time (30 minutes), and all examples happened to be
classiﬁed correctly by the model (since machine performance is even
better on the training set).

Signed explanations
Signed explanations
+ predicted label
Signed explanations +
predicted label + guidelines
Unsigned explanations
Signed explanations + 
predicted label + guidelines
+ accuracy statement
Full human agency
Full automation
Figure 2. An adapted spectrum between full human agency and full automation from Lai and Tan [32]. The order approximates our intuition, but the
distance does not reﬂect linear changes in machine inﬂuence. In particular, guidelines do not necessarily increase the inﬂuence of predicted labels.
Figure 3. Unsigned highlights for the example review in Fig. 1(a).
• No machine assistance. Participants are not exposed to
any real-time machine assistance.
• Unsigned highlights. Top 10 features are highlighted in
shades of blue. The darker the color, the more important
the feature. See Fig. 3 for an example.
• Signed highlights.
Top 10 features are highlighted in
shades of green and red: green words are associated with
genuine reviews, while red words are associated with de-
ceptive reviews. The darker the color, the more important
the feature. See Fig. 1(a) for an example.6
• Signed highlights + predicted label. In addition to signed
highlights, we display the predicted label.
• Signed highlights + predicted label + guidelines. We ad-
ditionally provide the option of revealing guidelines.
• Signed highlights + predicted label + guidelines + accu-
racy statement. We further add an accuracy statement, “It
has an accuracy of approximately 86%”, emphasizing the
strong performance of the ML model.
These six levels gradually increase the amount of information
and prime users towards machine predictions. Ideally, we hope
to retain human agency as much as possible while achieving
strong human performance.
IN-PERSON USER STUDY
To obtain a qualitative understanding of human interaction
with model-driven tutorials, we conduct an in-person semi-
structured user study. This user study allows us to gather
in-depth insights on how humans learn and apply our tutorials
through interviews, as well as feedback on the interface before
conducting large-scale, randomized experiments.
Experimental design
We employ a concurrent think-aloud process with partici-
pants [44]. Each participant went through a tutorial and deter-
mined the label of 20 reviews from the test set. They were told
to verbalize the reason before deciding on the label both in the
training and the prediction phase with the following syntax: I
think the review is predicted label because reason. After the
prediction phase, we conducted an interview to gather gen-
eral feedback on tutorials. We manually transcribed the audio
recordings after an initial pass with the Google Cloud API.
A total of 16 participants were recruited from mailing lists
in our department: 3 were female and 13 were male, ranging
6We use an attention check question to make sure that participants
can distinguish red from green.
between age 20 and 35. All participants were engineering
graduate students and most of them studied computer sci-
ence. Participants were invited to the lab where the study
occurred. Either a personal or a provided laptop was used.
Participants were compensated between $15 and $20 for $10
every 30 minutes. Four types of tutorials (guidelines, examples
selected with SP-LIME, examples selected with SR, guide-
lines + examples selected with SR) were randomly assigned
to participants and each tutorial type had a sample size of 4.
Thematic analysis was undertaken to identify common themes
in participants’ think-aloud processes. Thematic codes were
collectively coded by the ﬁrst two authors.
Results
We summarize the key themes into the following three parts.
Tutorial training and application. 8 out of 8 participants
with access to guidelines remembered a couple of “rules” and
applied them in the prediction phase. P13 said (the number
is randomly assigned), “I believe it is deceptive based on rule
No. one and No. three, if I remembered them correctly, it just
describes its experience, and does not have a lot of details”.
7 out of 12 participants exposed to selected examples adopted
pure memorization or pattern-matching during the prediction
phase. Participants remembered key deceptive words such as
“chicago” to help them decide the review label: P2 said, “My
husband is deceptive, I is deceptive, Chicago is deceptive”.
Some participants were even able to generate similar theories
to our guidelines without exposure to it. P14 commented, “The
review didn’t have anything speciﬁc to offer” before deciding
that the respective review was deceptive. However, reasoning
about the patterns is generally challenging. Quoting from P2,
this is mainly because they “can’t seem to ﬁnd a rhyme or
reason for those words being genuine or deceptive”.
Participants also created theories such as length of review
when predicting. P8 remarked, “no one would take that much
time to write a review so it won’t cross more than 5 lines”.
Improvements on tutorials. Participants thought that the
guidelines should be available during the prediction phase to
better assist them. 4 out of 4 participants felt that they were
unable to remember as there were too many guidelines to be
memorized. P11 felt that “the tutorial is helpful but it’s just
hard not being able to reference it” and P9 said that he could
“keep checking if it is on the top right corner”.
12 out of 12 participants exposed to selected examples ex-
pressed confusion about why the features were highlighted
as deceptive or genuine but made up their own reasonings
for ease of memory. They felt that they would have learned

better if some form of explanations were given to justify each
feature’s indication. P16 remarked that “it would be nice if it
can let me know why exactly it thinks the word is deceptive”
and P10 commented that on top of the current explanations
in selected examples, “more detailed explanation would be
helpful” to help understand.
Improvements on the interface. We found that some par-
ticipants thought that deceptive reviews are written by an
AI without reading the instructions, which is false. We thus
introduced three additional questions for our large-scale exper-
iments: 1) how are deceptive reviews deﬁned in this study?;
2) identify the color that highlights a word; 3) reiterate the
training process and ask user to answer true or false to ensure
that the participants know which treatment they are exposed
to. We also changed the ﬂow of showing explanations in the
training phase: users need to ﬁrst determine the label for a
review before the explanations, the actual label, and the pre-
dicted label are shown for at least 10 seconds. Refer to the
video and detailed feedback in the supplementary material.
EXPERIMENT 1: DO TUTORIALS IMPROVE HUMAN PER-
FORMANCE WITHOUT ANY REAL-TIME ASSISTANCE?
As introduced in the Methods section, we hope to build tuto-
rials that can help humans understand the embedded patterns
in ML models, which can sometimes be unsalient, unknown,
or even counterintuitive to humans. Ideally, humans reﬂect
on these patterns from our tutorials and can apply them in
their decision making without any further real-time assistance
from ML models. Therefore, we start with RQ1: do tutorials
improve human performance without any real-time assistance?
Experimental treatments & hypotheses
We consider the following treatments to examine the effective-
ness of various tutorials proposed in the Methods section: 1)
guidelines; 2) random examples; 3) examples selected with
SP-LIME; 4) examples selected with SR; 5) guidelines + ex-
amples selected with SR. All the tutorials and explanations
in the tutorials are based on the linear SVM classiﬁer in the
Methods section. After a training phase, participants will then
decide whether a review is deceptive or genuine based on the
text. Note that ML models also rely exclusively on textual
information. In addition to these tutorials, we include a control
setup where no training was provided to humans.
We hypothesize that 1) training is important for humans to
understand this task, since it has been shown that humans
struggle with deception detection [6]; 2) it would be easier for
participants to understand the patterns embedded in the ML
model situated with examples; 3) carefully chosen examples
provide more comprehensive coverage and can better familiar-
ize participants with the patterns [25, 55]; 4) guidelines and
examples have complementary effects in the training phase.
To summarize, our hypotheses in Experiment 1 are as follows:
• (H1a) Any tutorial treatment leads to better human perfor-
mance than the control setup.
• (H1b) Examples (including random examples, examples
selected with SP-LIME and SR) lead to better human per-
formance than guidelines.
• (H1c) Selected examples (with SP-LIME or SR) lead to
better human performance than random examples.
• (H1d) Examples selected with spaced repetition lead to
better human performance those selected with SP-LIME.
• (H1e) Guidelines + examples selected with SR lead to the
best performance.
These ﬁve hypotheses were pre-registered on AsPredicted.7
Experimental design
To evaluate human performance under different experimen-
tal setups, participants were recruited via Amazon Mechan-
ical Turk and ﬁltered to include only individuals residing in
the United States, with at least 50 Human Intelligence Tasks
(HITs) completed and 99% of HITs approved. Each partici-
pant is randomly assigned to one of the six conditions (ﬁve
types of tutorials + control). We did not allow any repeated
participation. We adopted this between-subject design because
exposure to any type of tutorial cannot be undone.
In our experiment, each participant ﬁnishes the following
steps sequentially: 1) reading an explanation of the task and a
consent form; 2) answering a few attention-check questions
depending on the experimental condition assigned; 3) undergo-
ing a set of tutorials if applicable (training phase); 4) predicting
the labels of 20 randomly selected reviews in the test set (pre-
diction phase); 5) completing an exit survey. Participants who
failed the attention-check questions are automatically disqual-
iﬁed from the study. Based on feedback from our in-person
user study, for each example in the tutorials, a participant ﬁrst
chooses genuine or deceptive without any assistance, and then
the answer is revealed and the predicted label and explanations
are shown (Fig. 1(a)&(b)). In the exit survey, participants were
asked to report basic demographic information, if the tutorial
was helpful (yes or no), and feedback in free responses.8
Each participant was compensated $2.50 and an additional
$0.05 bonus for each correctly labeled test review. 80 subjects
were recruited for each condition so that each review in the
test set was labeled ﬁve times. In total 480 subjects completed
Experiment 1. They were balanced on gender (224 females,
251 males, and 5 preferred not to answer). Refer to the supple-
mentary material for additional information about experiments
(e.g., education background, time taken).
To quantify human performance, we measure it by the percent-
age of correctly labeled instances by humans. In other words,
the prediction phase provides an estimate of human accuracy
through 20 samples. In addition to this objective metric, we
also report subject perception of tutorial usefulness reported
in the exit surveys.
Results
We ﬁrst present human accuracy in the prediction phase, an
objective measurement of tutorial effectiveness. Our results
7The anonymized pre-registration document is available at https:
//aspredicted.org/blind.php?x=v8f7zh. A minor inconsistency is
that we did not experiment with “guidelines + examples selected
from SP-LIME” as we hypothesized that SR is better.
8Feedback from Turkers generally conﬁrmed ﬁndings in the in-
person user study. See the supplementary material for an analysis.

50
55
60
65
70
75
80
Accuracy (%)
SR+Guidelines
SR
SP-LIME
Random
Guidelines
Control
54.6
60.4
60.9
57.8
57.9
59.2
Figure 4. Human accuracy without any real-time assistance after dif-
ferent types of tutorials. Error bars represent standard errors. Human
accuracy after tutorials is always better than that without any training.
Differences are statistically signiﬁcant between random and control, and
guidelines and control based on post-hoc Tukey’s HSD test.
0
20
40
60
80
100
Perception of usefulness (%)
SR+Guidelines
SR
SP-LIME
Random
Guidelines
80.0
61.3
72.5
65.0
90.0
Figure 5. Subjective perception of tutorial usefulness. Error bars repre-
sent standard errors. Differences are statistically different in the follow-
ing pairs based on post-hoc Tukey’s HSD test: guidelines vs. random,
random vs. SR+guidelines, and SR vs. SR+guidelines.
suggest that tutorials are useful to some extent: all tutorials
lead to better human performance (∼60%) than the control
setup without any training (Fig. 4). To formally compare the
treatments, we conduct an one-way ANOVA and ﬁnd a statis-
tically signiﬁcant effect (η2 = 0.033; p = 7.70×10−3). We
further use post-hoc Tukey’s HSD test to identify pairs of ex-
perimental conditions in which human performance exhibits
signiﬁcant differences. The only statistically signiﬁcant differ-
ences are guidelines vs. control (p = 1.75×10−2) and random
vs. control (p = 7.0×10−3) (the difference between guide-
lines+SR and control is borderline signiﬁcant with p = 0.10).
In other words, our experiment results provide partial support
to H1a, and reject all other hypotheses in Experiment 1. These
results suggest that although tutorials provide somewhat useful
training, different tutorials are similarly effective. The limited
improvement in human performance across all tutorials indi-
cates that the utility of tutorials is small. We hypothesized that
it is too challenging for humans to remember all the patterns
after a short tutorial (supported by feedback from in-person
user study), which motivated Experiment 2 to understand the
effect of real-time assistance in conjunction with tutorials. An-
other contributing factor certainly lies in the design of tutorials,
which we will further discuss in the Discussion section.
As for subjective perception of tutorial usefulness, we ﬁnd
that participants generally ﬁnd our tutorials useful: 73.8%
of 400 participants reported that the tutorial was useful (ex-
cluding 80 participants in the control setup). Fig. 5 shows
the results by types of tutorials. Among different treatments,
participants in guidelines and guidelines + examples selected
with SR ﬁnd the tutorials most useful, as high as 90% in
guidelines + examples selected with SR. Formally, post-hoc
Tukey’s HSD test shows that the differences between the fol-
lowing pairs are statistically different: guidelines vs. random
(p = 0.048), random vs. SR+guidelines (p < 0.001), and
SR vs. SR+guidelines (p = 0.003). The difference between
SP-LIME and SR+guidelines is borderline signiﬁcant with
p = 0.078. These results suggest that tutorials provide strong
positive effects in humans’ subjective perception.
EXPERIMENT 2: HUMAN PERFORMANCE WITH VARYING
REAL-TIME ASSISTANCE AFTER TUTORIALS
Our second experiment is concerned with human performance
with varying levels of real-time assistance after going through
the training phase. While Experiment 1 suggests that tutorials
provide somewhat useful training, the improvement is limited
without any real-time assistance. We hypothesize that human
performance could be further improved by introducing real-
time assistance. We adapt a spectrum with varying levels of
real-time assistance from Lai and Tan [34] (Fig. 2). Moving
along the spectrum, the inﬂuence of the machine generally
becomes greater on the human as more information from the
model is presented. For instance, a statement of strong ma-
chine performance is likely to bias humans towards machine
predictions. Lai and Tan [34] ﬁnd that there exists a tradeoff
between human performance and human agency, i.e., as the
real-time assistance gives stronger priming along the spectrum,
human performance improves and human agency decreases.
Explanations such as highlighting important words can moder-
ate this tradeoff when predicated labels are given. It remains
an open question how this tradeoff unfolds after training.
Experimental treatments & hypotheses
All conditions in Experiment 2 used the guidelines + selected
examples with spaced repetition tutorial in the training phase
because all tutorials are similarly effective and our participants
ﬁnd this one most useful in subjective perception. To exam-
ine how humans perform under different levels of real-time
assistance from machine learning models, we consider the
spectrum in Fig. 2, inspired by Lai and Tan [34].
We hypothesize that 1) real-time assistance results in improved
human performance, since it has been shown that highlights
and predicted labels improve human performance [34]; 2)
signed highlights result in better human performance com-
pared to unsigned highlights because signed highlights reveal
information about directionality; 3) predicted labels result in
better human performance compared to highlights alone; 4)
guidelines and signed highlights might moderate the tradeoff
between human performance and human agency while achiev-
ing the same effect as when an accuracy statement is shown.
To summarize, our hypotheses are as follows:
• (H2a) Real-time assistance leads to better human perfor-
mance than no assistance.
• (H2b) Signed highlights lead to better human performance
than unsigned highlights.

50
55
60
65
70
75
80
Accuracy (%)
Signed + predicted label
+ guidelines + accuracy
Signed + predicted label
+ guidelines
Signed + predicted label
Signed
Unsigned
No assistance
60.4
57.8
70.7
72.3
70.5
74.0
Figure 6. Human accuracy with varying levels of real-time assistance af-
ter training. Error bars represent standard errors. With the exception of
unsigned highlights, human accuracy with real-time assistance is better
than without real-time assistance. Differences between no assistance and
any assistance with signed highlights are statistically signiﬁcant based on
post-hoc Tukey’s HSD test.
• (H2c) Predicted label leads to better human performance
than highlights alone.
• (H2d) Signed highlights + predicted label + guidelines +
accuracy statement leads to the best performance.
• (H2e) Signed highlights + predicted label + guidelines
and Signed highlights + predicted label perform as well as
Signed highlights + predicted label + guidelines + accuracy
statement.
These ﬁve hypotheses were pre-registered on AsPredicted.9
Experimental design
We adopted the same experimental design as stated in Experi-
ment 1 except that real-assistance is provided in the prediction
phase when applicable. In total 480 subjects completed the ex-
periment (80 participants in each type of real-time assistance).
They were balanced on gender (238 females, 237 males, and 5
preferred not to answer). Refer to the supplementary material
for additional information about experiments (e.g., education
background, time taken).
Human performance is measured by the percentage of cor-
rectly predicted instances by humans, which provides an objec-
tive measure of human performance with real-time assistance.
We also consider the percentage of humans whose perfor-
mance exceeds machine performance for the corresponding
20 reviews in the prediction phase.10
Results
We ﬁrst present human accuracy in the prediction phase. Our
results suggest that real-time assistance is indeed effective:
all the levels of real-time assistance except unsigned high-
lights lead to better human performance than the setup with-
out machine assistance in Fig. 6. To formally compare the
treatments, we conduct an one-way ANOVA and ﬁnd a statis-
tically signiﬁcant effect (η2 = 0.23; p = 5.15×10−25). We
further use post-hoc Tukey’s HSD test to identify pairs of ex-
perimental conditions in which human performance exhibits
signiﬁcant differences. With the exception of no assistance
9The anonymized pre-registration document is available at http:
//aspredicted.org/blind.php?x=fi8kz8.
10We also pre-registered trust as a measure and present the results in
the supplementary material for space reasons.
vs. unsigned highlights (p = 0.67), differences in remaining
setups compared to no assistance are all statistically signiﬁ-
cant (p < 0.001). Moreover, the difference between unsigned
highlights and signed highlights is signiﬁcant (p < 0.001),
demonstrating the effectiveness of signed highlights. Finally,
the difference between signed highlights and any other real-
time assistance with stronger priming (signed highlights +
predicted labels, signed highlights + predicted labels + guide-
lines, signed highlights + predicted labels + guidelines +
accuracy statement) is not signiﬁcant.
In summary, our experimental results support H2a with the
exception of unsigned highlights, H2b, H2e, and reject H2c
and H2d in Experiment 2 (note that signed highlights + pre-
dicted label + guidelines + accuracy statement indeed leads to
the best performance but the difference with other methods is
not always statistically signiﬁcant). These results suggest that
signed highlights provide sufﬁcient information for improving
human performance, and we do not gain much from presenting
additional information with stronger priming. While there is
signiﬁcant improvement in human performance with real-time
assistance (from ∼60% to ∼70%), the improvement is still
limited compared to the machine performance, which is above
85%. This improvement is similar to results reported in Lai
and Tan [34], which did not use any tutorials other than mini-
mal examples to introduce the task. These observations taken
together suggest that the utility of our tutorials mainly lies in
that humans can perform well with only signed highlights, a
type of real-time assistance with relatively weak priming.
Another ambitious measurement is how frequent humans out-
perform the ML model. It was rare in Experiment 1 (2 of
480, 0.4%). With effective real-time assistance (i.e., signed
highlights included), we ﬁnd that 26 of 320 (8.1%, 20 times
the percentage in Experiment 1) of our participants are able
to outperform the ML model. The difference between 8.1%
and 0.4% is statistically signiﬁcant using chi-squared tests
(p < 0.001). This observation suggests that with the help of tu-
torial and real-time assistance, there exists hope for a synergy
of humans and AI outperforming AI alone. We hypothesize
that facilitating hypothesis generation is important and present
detailed discussions in the Discussion section.
EXPERIMENT 3: THE EFFECT OF MODEL COMPLEXITY
AND METHODS OF DERIVING EXPLANATIONS
Our experiments so far are based on explanations (coefﬁcients)
from a linear SVM classiﬁer. Meanwhile, deep learning mod-
els are being widely adopted because of their superior pre-
dictive power. However, it is also increasingly recognized
that they might be more complex and harder to interpret for
humans. Our ﬁnal experiment investigates how model com-
plexity and methods of deriving explanations relate to human
performance and effect of training.
Experimental treatments & hypotheses
Participants are exposed to two different treatments: pres-
ence of training and methods of deriving highlights. Where
training is present, we use the selected examples with spaced
repetition tutorial in this experiment. Note that example se-
lection depends on the model and the explanation method

(i.e., which features are considered important). In comparison,
guidelines are static and are extracted from papers based on
linear SVM, so they are not appropriate here. Based on re-
sults from Experiment 2, we adopted signed highlights as our
real-time assistance in the prediction phase when applicable.11
To summarize, we consider the following setups to examine
how humans perform when exposed to training and different
methods of deriving explanations: 1) no training + SVM co-
efﬁcients; 2) no training + BERT attention; 3) no training +
BERT LIME; 4) training + SVM coefﬁcients; 5) training +
BERT attention; 6) training + BERT LIME.
Note that the deep learning model (BERT) leads to both dif-
ferent real-time assistance and examples selected for tutorials
because they consider different words important. We can only
use unsigned highlights for BERT attention because attention
values range between 0 and 1. Refer to the Methods section
for details of BERT attention and BERT LIME.
We hypothesize that 1) SVM results in better performance
compared to BERT, since it is a common assumption that
linear models are more interpretable and it has been shown that
SVM results in important features with lower entropy [33];
2) BERT LIME results in better performance compared to
BERT attention because signed highlights can reveal more
information about the underlying decision; 3) participants
would perform better with training than without training. To
summarize, our hypotheses in Experiment 3 are as follows:
• (H3a) The simple model (SVM) leads to better human per-
formance than the deep learning model (BERT).
• (H3b) BERT LIME leads to better human performance than
BERT attention.
• (H3c) Training leads to better human performance than
without training.
These three hypotheses were pre-registered on AsPredicted.12
Experimental design
We adopted the same experimental design as in Experiment 1.
In total 480 subjects completed the experiment (80 participants
in each experimental setup). They were balanced on gender
(239 females, 240 males, and 1 preferred not to answer). Refer
to the supplementary material for additional information about
experiments (e.g., education background, time taken).
To quantify human performance, we measure it by the percent-
age of correctly predicted instances by humans. In addition
to this objective metric, we also report subject perception of
tutorial usefulness reported in the exit surveys (note that this
is only applicable for the experimental setups with training).
Results
We ﬁrst present human accuracy in the prediction phase. Our
results suggest that methods of deriving explanations make a
signiﬁcant difference (Fig. 7): 1) human performance is con-
sistently better when important words derived from the linear
SVM are highlighted as compared to deep models; 2) BERT
11Since BERT performs better than linear SVM, only showing signed
highlights also avoids the potential effect of predicted labels.
12The anonymized pre-registration document is available at http:
//aspredicted.org/blind.php?x=vy794a.
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
Accuracy (%)
BERT-LIME
BERT-ATT
SVM
64.1
54.1
59.2
72.8
58.2
64.9
No training
Training
Figure 7. Human accuracy grouped by methods of deriving explanations.
Error bars represent standard errors. SVM explanations lead to better
human performance than explanations based on BERT. Training (sec-
ond bar from the top in each method) also consistently improves human
performance for all explanation methods.
0
20
40
60
80
100
Perception of usefulness (%)
BERT-LIME
BERT-ATT
SVM
85.0
47.5
57.5
Figure 8. Human perception of tutorial usefulness. Error bars repre-
sent standard errors. Participants are more likely to ﬁnd SVM tutorials
useful (differences between (SVM, BERT attention) and (SVM, BERT
LIME) are statistically signiﬁcant using post-hoc Tukey’s HSD test).
LIME leads to better human performance than BERT attention.
It also reinforces the point that training leads to better human
performance as compared to no training: humans achieve bet-
ter performance with training with any kind of explanation
methods. To formally compare the treatments, we conduct a
two-way ANOVA and ﬁnd a statistically signiﬁcant effect of
tutorials (η2 = 0.049; p = 1.50×10−7) and methods of deriv-
ing explanations (η2 = 0.13; p = 4.66×10−16). Differences
among all pairs of treatments are also statistically signiﬁcant
using post-hoc Tukey’s HSD test (p < 0.001).13
In other words, our experiment results provide support to
all hypotheses in Experiment 3. These results suggest that
tutorials are indeed useful in improving human performance,
albeit improvement is still limited in the sense that human
performance is ∼70% after training with real-time assistance,
echoing results in Experiment 2. It also suggests that simple
models are preferred to deep learning models when serving
as explanations to support human decision making. Between
explanations derived from post-hoc and built-in methods from
BERT, attention provides the least value for humans, again
demonstrating the importance of signed highlights.
The effectiveness of training for simple models is further val-
idated by subjective perception of tutorial usefulness. Fig. 8
shows that participants are much more likely to ﬁnd the tu-
torials derived from SVM explanations useful: 85% of our
participants ﬁnd it useful. The differences between the follow-
13It is reduced to t-test for the training/no training treatment since the
degree of freedom is 1.

ing pairs are statistically different using post-hoc Tukey’s HSD
test: SVM vs. BERT attention (p < 0.001) and SVM vs. BERT
LIME (p < 0.001). Interestingly, with real-time assistance,
humans also ﬁnd the tutorials more useful compared to the
same tutorial in Fig. 5. These results underscore our ﬁndings
in Experiment 3 that simple models provide more interpretable
tutorials and explanations than deep models.
DISCUSSION
In this paper, we conduct the ﬁrst large-scale, randomized, pre-
registered human-subject experiments to investigate whether
model-driven tutorials can help humans understand the pat-
terns embedded in ML models and improve human perfor-
mance. We ﬁnd that tutorials can indeed improve human
performance to some extent, with and without real-time assis-
tance, and humans also ﬁnd them useful. Moreover, real-time
assistance is crucial for further improving human performance
in such challenging tasks. Finally, we show that simple models
like linear SVM generate more useful tutorials and explana-
tions for humans than complex deep learning models.
Towards human-centered tutorials. Both quantitative re-
sults from our randomized experiments and qualitative feed-
back from in-person user study demonstrate that humans can
beneﬁt from model-driven tutorials, which suggests that devel-
oping model-driven tutorials is a promising direction for future
work in human-centered interpretable machine learning.
However, the improvement in human performance remains
limited compared to machine performance in the deceptive
review detection task. In order to further advance the synergy
between humans and AI, we need to develop human-centered
tutorials. Many participants commented that they could not
understand why certain words were deceptive or genuine (an
example reason could be that imaginative writing does not
cover speciﬁc details). These results highlight the importance
of facilitating hypothesis generation in the tutorials. It is insuf-
ﬁcient to highlight important features via feature attribution
methods, and these tutorials need to also explain why some
features are useful. While it is challenging to develop au-
tomatic methods that can propose theories about particular
features, we might prompt humans to propose theories and
evaluate them through the ML model.
Another reason that tutorials had limited improvement in hu-
man performance is that the tutorials failed to establish proper
trust in machine predictions. It is important to highlight both
strengths and caveats of ML models in the tutorials, echoing
recent work on understanding trust [32, 65]. A challenge lies
in how to bridge the gap between training and generalization in
tutorials, i.e., model behavior and performance in the tutorials
might differ from that in unseen data.
Beyond static explanations. Another important direction is
to design interactive explanations beyond static explanations
such as simply highlighting important words. Interactive ex-
planations allow humans to experiment with their hypothesis
about feature importance. One strategy is to enable humans
to inquire about the importance of any word in a review. An
alternative strategy is to assess model predictions of counter-
factual examples. For instance, humans can remove or add
words/sentences in a review, which can help humans under-
stand model behavior in new scenarios.
Choice of tasks. We would like to highlight the importance of
task choice in understanding human-AI interaction. Deception
detection might simply be too challenging a task for humans,
and a short tutorial is insufﬁcient to help humans understand
the patterns embedded in ML models. There may also exist
signiﬁcant variation between understanding text and interpret-
ing images, because the former depends on culture and life
experience, while the latter relies on basic visual cognition.
We believe that it is important to study human-AI interaction
in challenging tasks where human agency is important be-
cause the nature of explanations in decision making is distinct
from that in debugging. While machines excel at identifying
patterns from existing datasets, humans might be able to com-
plement ML models by deriving theories and appropriately
correcting machine predictions in unseen data, e.g., spotting
mistakes when machines apply patterns (“chicago” becomes
a speciﬁc comparison point for reviews about a hotel in New
York City). So there exists hope for further advancing human
performance in these challenging tasks.
Limitation of our samples. Our study is limited by our sam-
ples of human subjects. The in-person user study was con-
ducted with university students who tend to have a computer
science education, and large-scale, randomized, pre-registered
experiments were conducted with Mechanical Turkers from
the United States. While our samples are likely to face the
challenges of deception on the Internet and would beneﬁt from
enhancements in deception detection, they may not be rep-
resentative of the general population. The effectiveness of
model-driven tutorials can also potentially depend on prop-
erties of the sample population. In general, we did not ﬁnd
any consistent differences between demographic groups based
on age, gender, education background, and review experience
(see the supplementary material). It is certainly possible that
other demographic information could affect the effectiveness
of tutorials. We leave that for future studies.
It is important to point out that our setup employs a random
split to obtain training and testing data, which is a standard
assumption in supervised machine learning. While humans
can ideally improve generalization in this case, humans might
be more likely to correct generalization errors in machine
learning models when the testing distribution differs from
training. In that case, understanding the embedded patterns,
especially spotting spurious ones, can help humans generalize
these data-driven insights.
In summary, our work highlights the promise of (automat-
ically) building model-driven tutorials to help humans un-
derstand the patterns embedded in ML models, especially
in challenging tasks. We hope to encourage future work on
human-centered tutorials and explanations beyond static real-
time assistance towards a synergy between humans and AI.
Acknowledgments. We thank helpful comments from anony-
mous reviewers. All experiments were approved by the Uni-
versity of Colorado IRB (18-0558). This work was supported
in part by NSF grants IIS-1837986, 1849931, and 1927322.
