256 
The Lumiere Project: Bayesian User Modeling for Inferring 
the Goals and Needs of Software Users 
Eric Horvitz, Jack Breese, David Heckerman, David Hovel, Koos Rommelset 
Microsoft Research 
Redmond, WA 98052-6399 

Abstract 
The Lumiere Project centers on harnessing 
probability and utility to provide assistance 
to computer software users. We review work 
on Bayesian user models that can be em­
ployed to infer a user's needs by consider­
ing a user's background, actions, and queries. 
Several problems were tackled in Lumiere 
research, including ( 1) the construction of 
Bayesian models for reasoning about the 
time-varying goals of computer users from 
their observed actions and queries, (2) gain­
ing access to a stream of events from soft­
ware applications, (3) developing a language 
for transforming system events into observa­
tional variables represented in Bayesian user 
models, ( 4) developing persistent profiles to 
capture changes in a user's expertise, and (5) 
the development of an overall architecture for 
an intelligent user interface. Lumiere proto­
types served as the basis for the Office Assis­
tant in the Microsoft Office '97 suite of pro­
ductivity applications. 
1 
Introduction 
Uncertainty is ubiquitous in attempts to recognize 
an agent's goals from observations of behavior. The 
Lumiere project at Microsoft Research has been fo­
cused on leveraging methods for reasoning under un­
certainty about the goals of software users. At the 
heart of Lumiere research and prototypes are Bayesian 
user models that capture the uncertain relationships 
among the goals and needs of a user and observations 
about program state, sequences of actions over time, 
and words in a user's query. Motivating problems in­
clude the computation and use of probability distri­
butions over a user's goals for providing appropriate 
assistance or automated services, for dynamically tai­
loring language models in speech recognition, and for 
appropriately guiding the allocation of computational 
resources in an operating system. 
t Presently at Applicare Medical Imaging B. V., Box 
936, 3700 AX Zeist, Netherlands. 
We present challenges with the construction of key 
components of the Lumiere/Excel prototype for the 
Excel spreadsheet application. The Lumiere project 
was initiated in 1993, and the initial Lumiere/Excel 
prototype was first demonstrated to the Microsoft Of­
fice division in January 1994. Research on new appli­
cations and extensions continued in parallel with ef­
forts to integrate portions of the prototype into com­
mercially available software applications. In January 
1997, a derivative of Lumiere research shipped as the 
Office Assistant in Microsoft Office '97 applications. 
We will describe key issues with user modeling and 
provide an overview of Bayesian reasoning and deci­
sion making about user needs. Then, we will discuss 
user modeling for identifying the needs of users work­
ing with desktop productivity software. We will re­
view the components and overall architecture of the 
Lumiere system. Finally, we will discuss the influence 
of Lumiere research on software products. 
2 
Bayesian User Models 
We shall focus on the use of Bayesian networks and 
influence diagrams in embedded applications to make 
inferences about the goals of users-and to take ideal 
actions based on probability distributions over these 
goals. We found that Bayesian models can be effective 
in diagnosing a user's needs and can provide useful en­
hancements to legacy software applications when em­
bedded within these programs. Additionally, Bayesian 
user models can provide an infrastructure for building 
new kinds of services and applications in software. 
To date, graphical probabilistic models have been em­
ployed largely for such diagnostic tasks as computing 
the likelihood of alternate diseases in patients or dis­
orders in machines (Horvitz, Breese & Henrion, 1988; 
Heckerman, Horvitz & Nathwani, 1992; Heckerman, 
Breese & Rommelse, 1995). However, there has been 
growing interest in the application of Bayesian and 
decision-theoretic methods to the task of modeling the 
beliefs, intentions, goals, and needs of users (Jameson, 
1996; Horvitz, 1997). Such user modeling problems 
typically are dominated by uncertainty. 
Representations of probability and utility have been 

explored previously in a variety of user-modeling ap­
plications. Models of user expertise and abilities have 
been used in the context of custom-tailoring the behav­
ior of Bayesian decision-support systems to users. For 
example, multiattribute utility models were employed 
in early versions of the Pathfinder pathology diagnostic 
system for pathology to custom-tailor question asking 
and explanation to users with differing levels of exper­
tise (Horvitz, Heckerman, Nathwani & Fagan, 1984). 
Bayesian networks were employed as user models in 
the Vista system to model the interpretation of pat­
terns of evidence by flight engineers at the NASA Mis­
sion Control Center. In that application, concurrent 
inference with the user and expert models is used to se­
lect the most valuable information to display (Horvitz 
& Barry, 1995). In the realm of modeling the goals of 
users, temporal probabilistic models of a pilot's goals 
were explored by Cooper, et al., guided by the chal­
lenge of custom-tailoring information displayed to pi­
lots of commercial aircraft (Cooper, Horvitz, Hecker­
man & Curry, 1988). Probabilistic models have been 
explored as a representation for recognizing common­
sense plans (Charniak & Goldman, 1993), for mak­
ing inferences about the goals of car drivers in nav­
igating in traffic (Pynadath & Wellman, 1995), and 
for predicting actions in a multiuser computer game 
(Albrecht, Zukerman, Nicholson & Bud, 1997). In­
terest has also been growing steadily on applications 
of Bayesian user modeling in educational systems. In 
particular, there have been efforts to model compe­
tency and to diagnose problems with understanding 
computer-based tutoring (Conati, Gertner, VanLehn 
& Druzdzel, 1997). 
The high-level goals of the Lumiere project are cap­
tured by the influence diagram displayed in Figure 1 
which represents key aspects of user modeling and au­
tomated assistance in computing applications. The de­
cision model considers a user's goals and needs. Goals 
are target tasks or subtasks at the focus of a user's at­
tention. Needs are information or automated actions 
that will reduce the time or effort required to achieve 
goals. In some situations, we can exploit a predeter­
mined mapping between goals and needs. However, we 
typically must consider uncertainties and dependencies 
among these and related variables. As indicated by the 
variables and dependencies in the influence diagram, 
a user's acute needs are influenced by the acute goals 
as well as the user's competency with using software. 
Prior assistance in the form of online help and the 
user's background representing experience with com­
puting applications influence the user's competence. 
A user's needs directly influence or cause patterns of 
activity that might be sensed by watching a user's ac­
tivity. Such activity includes sequences of user actions 
recorded as the user interacts with a mouse and key­
board as well as visual and acoustic clues that might 
be sensed by a video camera and microphone. A user's 
goals also influence the set of active documents and the 
presence, instantiation, and display of data structures 
(e.g., Does a user-authored chart exist in a spread­
sheet project? Is the chart currently visible? Does it 
currently have system focus?). 
Bayesian User Modeling 
257 
Figure 1: An influence diagram for providing intel­
ligent assistance given uncertainty in a user's back­
ground, goals, and competency in working with a soft­
ware application. 
At times, a user may explicitly request assistance. A 
user's acute needs influence the terms appearing in 
a user's explicit typed or vocalized queries. As indi­
cated in the influence diagram, the overall goal is to 
take automated actions to optimize the user's expected 
utility. A system taking autonomous action to assist 
users needs to balance the benefits and costs such ac­
tions. The value of actions depend on the nature of the 
action, the cost of the action, and the user's needs. As­
sessing and integrating such user models would allow 
a system to compute a probability distribution over a 
user's informational needs in real time, given a set of 
observations about activity and explicit queries, when 
such queries are issued. 
3 
Framing, Constructing, and 
Assessing Bayesian User Models 
Moving from a high-level specification of the prob­
lem of Bayesian user modeling to specific domains 
and prototypes requires a detailed consideration of dis­
tinctions and relationships for particular software pro­
grams and settings. To better understand the needs 
and behaviors of users as they encounter problems with 
the use of a software application, we worked with psy­
chologists at Microsoft's usability laboratory to per­
form studies with human subjects. 
One of the goals of the studies was to gauge the ability 
of experts to perform the task of guessing users' goals 
and to provide assistance by simply watching the user's 
actions through the "keyhole" of the interface. Diffi­
culties noted by experts in the study would be taken as 
an indication of the difficulty of automating the task of 
assisting users. We were also interested in identifying 
evidential distinctions that experts might be using to 
infer ( 1) the likelihood that a user needed assistance, 
and (2) the type of help that was needed given that 
assistance was desired. 
The studies were based on a "Wizard of Oz" design. 
In the studies, naive subjects with different levels of 

258 
Horvitz, Breese, Heckerman, Hovel, and Rommelse 
competence in using the Microsoft Excel spreadsheet 
application were given a set of spreadsheet tasks. Sub­
jects were informed that an experimental help system 
would be tracking their activity and would be occa­
sionally making guesses about the best way to help 
them. Assistance would appear on an adjacent com­
puter monitor. Experts were positioned in a separate 
room that was isolated acoustically from the users. 
The experts were given a monitor to view the subjects' 
screen, including their mouse and typing activity, and 
could type advice to users. Experts were not informed 
about the nature of the set of spreadsheet tasks given 
to the user. Both subjects and experts were told to 
verbalize their thoughts and the experts, subjects, and 
the subjects' display were videotaped. 
The studies led to several insights. We found that ex­
perts had the ability to identify user goals and needs 
through observation. However, recognizing the goals 
of users was a challenging task. Experts were typically 
uncertain about a user's goals and about the value of 
providing different kinds of assistance. At times, goals 
would be recognized with an "Aha!" reaction after 
a period of confusion. We learned that poor advice 
could be quite costly to users. Even though subjects 
were primed with a description of the help system as 
being "experimental," advice appearing on their dis­
plays was typically examined carefully and often taken 
seriously; even when expert advice was off the mark, 
subjects would often become distracted by the advice 
and begin to experiment with features described by 
the wizard. This would give experts false confirmation 
of successful goal recognition, and would bolster their 
continuing to give advice pushing the user down a dis­
tracting path. Such patterns of poor guesses and "con­
firmatory" feedback could lead to a focusing on the 
wrong problem and a loss in efficiency. Experts would 
become better over time with this and other problems, 
learning, for example, to becoming conservative with 
offering advice, using conditional statements (i.e., "if 
you are trying to do x, then ... "), and decomposing ad­
vice into a set of small, easily understandable steps. 
3.1 
Identification of Distinctions with 
Relevance to User Needs 
The studies with human subjects helped us to iden­
tify several important classes of evidential distinctions. 
These observational clues appeared to be valuable for 
making inferences about a user's problems and for 
making an assessment of the user's need for assistance. 
The classes of evidence include: 
• Search: Repetitive, scanning patterns associated 
with attempts to search for or access an item 
or functionality. 
Such distinctions include ob­
servation of the user exploring multiple menus, 
scrolling through text, and mousing over and 
clicking on multiple non-active regions. 
• Focus of attention: Selection and/or dwelling on 
graphical objects, dwelling on portions of a docu­
ment or on specific subtext after scrolling through 
the document. 
• Introspection: A sudden pause after a period of 
activity or a significant slowing of the rate of in­
teraction. 
• Undesired effects: Attempts to return to a prior 
state after an action. These observations include 
undoing the effect of recent action, including is­
suing an undo command, closing a dialog box 
shortly after it is opened without invocating an 
operation offered in the context of the dialog. 
• Inefficient command sequences: User performing 
operations that could be done more simply or ef­
ficiently via an alternate sequence of actions or 
through easily accessible shortcuts. 
• Domain-specific syntactic and semantic content: 
Consideration of special distinctions in content 
or structure of documents and how user inter­
acts with these features. These include domain­
specific features associated with the task. 
These classes, when subclassed with specific types of 
data structures and displayed objects, provide a rich 
set of observations with probabilistic links to a user's 
goals. 
In our initial systems, we avoided detailed 
modeling of deeper commonsense knowledge associ­
ated with the syntactic and semantic content of doc­
uments and application functionality, and focused ini­
tially on the other classes of distinctions. 
3.2 
Structuring Bayesian User Models 
Given the results of the user studies, we set out to 
build and assess Bayesian models with the ability to 
diagnose a user's needs. We were interested in the 
quality of inference we might achieve through consid­
ering a user's background, ongoing and long-term user 
actions, data structures, as well as words in a user's 
query when such a query was issued. 
Building effective user models hinges on defining ap­
propriate variables and states of variables. The as­
sessed (or learned) conditional probabilities and the 
monitoring of users hinge on crisp and appropriate def­
initions of states of variables. For example, with the 
use of discrete Bayesian networks, we need to clearly 
define the specific quantity of time we define to be a 
"pause after activity." 
Figure 2 displays a small Bayesian network that rep­
resents the dependency between a pause after activity 
and the likelihood that a user would welcome assis­
tance. According to the model, a user being in the 
state of welcoming assistance would shift the proba­
bility distribution of observing pauses in activity. The 
state of desiring assistance also influences the prob­
ability of detecting a recent search through multiple 
menus. We consider also the influence of a user's ex­
pertise and the difficulty of a task on the likelihood 
that a user will need assistance. We also note that 
a user will pause if he or she is distracted by events 
unrelated to the user's task. As indicated in Figure 
2, we may wish to assert in the Bayesian user model 

Figure 2: A portion of a Bayesian user model for infer­
ring the likelihood that a user needs assistance, con­
sidering profile information as well as observations of 
recent activity. 
that the difficulty of a task also directly influences the 
likelihood that a user will become distracted by other 
events. 
We worked with experts to construct, assess, and test 
Bayesian models for several applications, tasks, and 
subtasks. Some of our models were built to be "appli­
cation covering" while others were designed to operate 
as simpler, context-sensitive agents that would be in­
voked when specific patterns of activity were observed. 
As an example, we built and assessed a Bayesian model 
focused on assisting users with the Start button in 
Windows 95 shell to be invoked when a user was engag­
ing the start button and spending more than a small 
amount of time navigating within this menu or revis­
iting the start button multiple times within a prede­
fined horizon. Figure 3 displays a portion of an early 
application-covering Bayesian network that we con­
structed for diagnosing a user's goals with the Excel 
spreadsheet application. 
4 
Temporal Reasoning about User 
Actions 
Bayesian user modeling from a sequence actions over 
time poses a challenging temporal reasoning prob­
lem. Explicit temporal reasoning adds significant com­
plexity to probabilistic representations and inference 
(Cooper, Horvitz & Heckerman, 1989). Investigation 
of temporal reasoning with dynamic Bayesian net­
work models has focused on problems and approxi­
mations for models that consider dependencies among 
variables within as well as between time slices (Dean 
& Kanazawa, 1989; Dagum, Galper & Horvitz, 1992; 
Nicholson & Brady, 1994). 
In the general case, we consider temporal dependen­
cies between a user's goals at different times and the 
user's behavior. Figure 4 captures a Markov represen­
tation of the temporal Bayesian user-modeling prob­
lem, where we consider dependencies among variables 
at adjacent time periods. As displayed in the tem­
poral Bayesian network, we include temporal depen­
dencies between goals at the present moment ( Goalto) 
and at earlier time periods ( Goalt;), as well as among 
observations E; made at different time periods. Some 
Bayesian User Modeling 
259 
Figure 3: Partial structure of an early formulation of 
a Bayesian user model for inferring a user's needs for 
the Excel spreadsheet application. 
variables, such as the node labeled Profile in Figure 4, 
capturing the expertise of a user, may change slowly 
or simply persist over time (as indicated by the arc 
represented by a broken line). 
We studied several approaches to temporal reasoning 
for user assistance, including dynamic network models 
and single-stage formulations of the temporal reason­
ing problem. In the single-stage temporal analyses, 
we define the target diagnostic problem as inferring 
the likelihood of alternative goals at the present mo­
ment and embed considerations of time within the def­
initions of observational variables or introduce time­
dependent conditional probabilities. 
In our earliest Bayesian networks for Lumiere/Excel, 
including the model displayed in Figure 3, we repre­
sented and assessed temporal relationships as part of 
definitions of observations, such as the event, "user 
performed action x less than y seconds ago." We also 
experimented with approximations based on direct as­
sessment of parameters of functions that specify the 
probabilities of observations conditioned on goals as a 
function of the amount of time that has transpired be­
tween the observation and the present moment. The 
intuition behind the approach is that observations seen 
at increasingly earlier times in the past have decreas­
ing relevance to the current goals of the user. 
The time-dependent probability approach can be 
viewed as a temporal model-construction methodol­
ogy. As highlighted in Figure 5 we formulate the prob­
lem as a set of single stage inference problems about a 
user's present goals, and define observations in terms 
of the amount of time t that has transpired between 
the present moment and the most recent occurrence 
of an action, Ei,t· We assess the conditional prob­
abilities of time-indexed actions, p(Ei,tiGoaltJ· We 
found through assessment that a typical temporal dy­
namic for the conditional probability of observing ac­
tions given goals is where the probability decays to the 
value for the case where the evidence is not observed. 
That is, the conditional probabilities of observations 

260 
Horvitz, Breese, Heckerman, Hovel, and Rommelse 
Figure 4: Markov model for temporal reasoning as­
suming dependencies among the goals of a user in ad­
jacent time periods. A persistent Profile variable in­
fluences goals and observations in all periods. 
given goals range from the update associated with an 
action occurring immediately, p(E;,tJGoaltJ, to the 
probability assigned for the case where the observa­
tion was not seen within the horizon of the analysis, 
p(E; = falsejGoaltJ· We make the assumption that 
the rates of decay of likelihoods are independent of one 
another, conditioned on goals. If an observational vari­
able is influenced by multiple variables, we must assess 
the decays as a function of all of the states of its par­
ents. For cases where the influence of parent nodes are 
identified to be causally independent (noisy-or), con­
ditional probabilities can be constructed dynamically 
from the time-dependent probabilities assessed sepa­
rately for each parent. 
In practice, we found it useful to assess the decay of 
conditional probabilities of actions given current goals 
with parametric functions. For specially tagged ob­
servational variables in the Lumiere/Excel model, ex­
perts assessed evidential horizon and decay parame­
ters. The evidential horizon is the number of actions 
or the amount of time that probabilistic relationships 
persist without change. The decay variables specify 
the functional class (linear, exponential, etc.) and the 
parameter defining the details of how the conditional 
probabilities change after a horizon is reached, as a 
function of either the amount of time that has passed 
or the number of actions that have occurred since the 
observation was noted to become true. For the expo­
nential case, we found it useful to assess a "likelihood 
half-life" as a function of the number of user actions 
that had transpired since the event was noted. 
5 
Bridging the Gulf Between System 
Events and User Actions 
To embed Bayesian user models into software appli­
cations, it is critical to gain access to a stream of 
user actions. Unfortunately, systems and applications 
have not been written with an eye to user modeling. 
Thus, a critical problem in developing probabilistic 
and decision-theoretic enhancements for user interface 
applications is establishing a link between user actions 
and system events. We found it challenging to gain ac­
cess to appropriate streams of user and system events. 
Establishing a rapport with the Excel development 
team was crucial for designing special instrumented 
lag of event from present moment 
Figure 5: Formulation of the temporal reasoning prob­
lem as a set of single-stage problems. We directly as­
sess conditional probabilities of actions as a function 
of the time that has passed since actions occurred. 
versions of Excel with a usable set of events. Even 
so, we were limited in the nature of events we could 
perceive and had to adapt the definition of evidential 
variables to mesh with available evidence. 
A special version of Excel was created that yielded 
information about subsets of mouse and keyboard ac­
tions, as well as information about the status of data 
structures in Excel files. The events included access 
to menus being visited and dialog boxes being opened 
and closed. In addition, we could gain information 
on the selection of specific objects, including drawing 
objects, charts, cells, rows, and columns. 
We built an events system to establish a fluid link be­
tween low-level, atomic events and the higher-level se­
mantics of user action we employed in user models. 
The Lumiere events architecture continues to moni­
tor the stream of time-stamped atomic events and to 
convert these events into higher-level predicates, or 
modeled events representing user actions. We found 
that transforming system events into such modeled 
events as "menu surfing," "mouse meandering," and 
"menu jitter" to be a challenging endeavor. Defining 
these and other events required detailed analysis of 
the atomic event streams and iterative composition of 
temporal functions that could map the atomic event 
sequences into higher-level observations. 
To make the definition of modeled events from atomic 
events more efficient and flexible, we developed the 
Lumiere Events Language. 
This temporal pattern 
recognition language allows atomic events to be used 
as modeled events directly, as well as for streams of 
atomic events to be formed into Boolean and set­
theoretic combinations of the low-level events. The 
language also allows system designers to compose 
new modeled events from previously defined modeled 
events and atomic events. The events language allowed 
us to build and modify transformation functions that 
would be compiled into run-time filters for modeled 
events. As an example, the following primitives are 
provided in the event language: 
• Rate( x;, t): The number of times an atomic event 
x; occurs in t seconds or commands. 
• Oneof( {x1, . . .  , Xn},t): At least one event of a de­
noted set of events occurs in t. 

Figure 6: A high-level v1ew of the architecture of 
Lumiere/Excel. Events are transformed into obser­
vations represented in the Bayesian model. A control 
system works to periodically analyze an event queue 
and perform inference on findings. 
• All( { X1, ... , Xn} ,t): All events of a denoted set of 
events occur at least once in any sequence within 
t. 
• Seq(x1, ... ,xn,t): Events occur in a specified or­
der within t. 
• TightSeq(x1, ... , Xn,t): Events occur in a specified 
order within t and no other events occur. 
• Dwell(t): There is no user action for at least t 
seconds. 
We can use these and other operators in the Lumiere 
Events Language to define filters for higher-level 
events, such as user dwelled for at least t seconds fol­
lowing a scroll. We found it useful to include in the 
language an efficient means for abstracting sets of low­
level events into event classes specified as disjunctions 
of events (e.g., we specify that a user saving a file via 
a toolbar icon or keyboard action is to be generalized 
to file saved.) To adapt events defined in terms of 
durations to different rates of working, we added the 
ability to expand or contract time to a user-specific 
scaled time, based on detecting the average rate at 
which commands were executed by users. 
6 
The Lumiere/Excel System 
The Lumiere/Excel prototype for the Excel spread­
sheet application was constructed to demonstrate the 
potential of Bayesian user modeling to the Microsoft 
Office division. We constructed a Bayesian user model 
that reasoned about approximately 40 problems span­
ning a large portion of the Excel application. The 
Lumiere Events Language was used to specify obser­
vations as a function of the events emitted by the Excel 
application. The system was wedded with a Bayesian 
term-spotting methodology for reasoning about free­
text queries (Heckerman & Horvitz, 1998). 
The 
Bayesian information retrieval system recognizes ap­
proximately 600 terms and considers the probabilistic 
Bayesian User Modeling 
261 
relevance of these terms to the areas of assistance con­
Ĩidered by Lumiere/Excel. When queries are available, 
mference about a user goals, conditioned on a user's 
actions and the status of data structures, are com­
bined with inference about a user's goals from words. 
Temporal reasoning was performed with the dynamic 
temporal modeling approach described in Section 4. 
6.1 
Overall Lumiere/Excel Architecture 
The overall Lumiere/Excel architecture is displayed in 
Figure 9. Events from the interface are transformed 
into time-stamped observations. The observations are 
input to a Bayesian model and a probability distribu­
tion over user needs is inferred. If a query is made 
available, the posterior probabilities from the events 
system and the Bayesian term-spotting approach are 
combined through a weighted multiplication to yield a 
final posterior distribution over needs. Beyond reason­
ing about the probability distribution over user prob­
lems, the system also infers the likelihood that a user 
needs assistance at the present moment. This proba­
bility is used to control the autonomous display of as­
sistance when the system is running behind the scenes. 
A user-specified probability threshold is used to con­
trol the autonomous assistance. 
6.2 
Lumiere/Excel Control Policies 
We experimented with several overall control schemes 
for the system. In a pulsed strategy the system clock 
makes a call at a regular interval to a cycle of event 
analysis, inference, and interface action (depending 
on the inferred results and the user-specified thresh­
old). In an event-driven control policy, specific sets 
of atomic and or modeled events are labeled as trig­
ger events. When such events occur, a broader events 
analysis and an inference cycle is triggered. We also 
experimented with an augmented pulsed approach, 
where the system calls an analysis cycle at specific 
time intervals, but also when specific events are noted. 
In a deferred analysis, we attempt to do an analysis 
at prespecified time intervals but only when idle time 
is detected. Other opportunities for control include 
the use of a relatively simple probabilistic or decision­
theoretic analysis to make decisions about invoking a 
larger, less tractable analysis. 
6.3 
Capturing and Harnessing a User Profile 
We explored several approaches to custom-tailoring 
the performance of Lumiere/Excel to users with differ­
ent expertise. In a basic approach to custom-tailoring 
assistance, we assessed from experts probability dis­
tributions over a user's needs for different classes of 
user expertise, and allowed users to specify their back­
ground when using the system. 
We also developed the means for updating these prob­
abilities dynamically based on observation of sets 
of competency indicator tasks being completed suc­
cessfully or specific help topics being accessed and 
dwelled upon. 
Beyond analyzing real-time events, 

262 
Horvitz, Breese, Heckerman, Hovel, and Rommelse 
Figure 7: Inference behind the scenes. Components pictured include (from left to right), a display of the atomic 
event stream, probability distribution over needs, probability that a user would appreciate help at the current 
moment, and the user interface for the prototype. 
Lumiere/Excel maintains a persistent competency pro­
file in the operating system's registry. The system was 
given the ability to capture at store at run time sets 
of key tasks completed and help topics reviewed. This 
profile can be used to update the probability distribu­
tion over needs. In a more general approach, a version 
of Lumiere was created that enables experts to au­
thor special competency variables in the Bayesian user 
model. These variables have values that reflect the na­
ture and number of times the user demonstrates suc­
cessful manipulation of different functionalities. These 
variables can be integrated into the model as any other 
variable but their states are stored in the persistent 
user profile. 
6.4 
Lumiere/Excel in Operation 
In operation, the Lumiere/Excel system continues to 
monitor events and to update a probability distribu­
tion over a user's needs. Given a stream of user events, 
the system infers needs as well as the overall probabil­
ity that the user would like assistance immediately. 
Figure 7 displays a snapshot of Lumiere's instrumen­
tation. The small window in the background of the 
figure displays the stream of atomic events and ob­
servations derived from the events. The bar graph in 
front of the event monitor displays the inferred prob­
ability distribution over the needs of the user, given 
the stream of evidence. Overlayed at the top of the 
inferred needs, is a bar graph representing the likeli­
hood that the user would like to be notified with some 
assistance immediately. A user interface for displaying 
results and interacting with Lumiere/Excel appears in 
the foreground. The left text box of the interface dis­
plays recommended assistance sorted by likelihood. A 
input field allows users to input free-text queries to the 
system. A menu below the query field allows users to 
specify their level of competency. 
Figure 8 displays the Lumiere prototype's user inter­
face, which displays a sorted list of user goals ranked 
by their probabilities. The figure also highlights the 
integration of a Bayesian analysis of words in a user's 
query. Figure 8(a) displays a probability distribution 
over needs before a query is processed. This proba­
bility distribution is computed solely from the user's 
actions. Figure 8(b) displays an updated probability 
distribution over needs. This distribution was created 
by combining the Bayesian action analysis with the 
output of a Bayesian analysis of terms in the user's 
free-text query. 
If the main assistance interface is not displayed by the 
user, the system will continue to infer the likelihood 
a user would like to be offered assistance. When the 
probability that a user needs assistance exceeds a user­
specified threshold, a small window containing the in­
ferred assistance is displayed. 
Figure 9 highlights Lumiere's autonomous assistance 
mode. In the example, help was offered autonomously 
after a user searched through multiple menus, se­
lected the entire spreadsheet, and paused. The as­
sistance window contains a "volume control" which 

User query 
(a) 
Bayesian User Modeling 
263 
(b) 
Figure 8: Folding in an analysis of a free-text query into ongoing inference about user needs. (a) Inference results 
based on actions and (b) revised distribution considering additional information about terms in a user's query. 
allows users to modify the probability threshold that 
determines when the system will provide assistance. 
If the user does not hover over or interact with the 
autonomous assistance, the window will timeout and 
disappear after a brief apology for the potential dis­
traction. Recommendations for assistance are noted 
and the autonomous help will not be offered again un­
til there is a change in the most likely topics. Beyond 
a user controlled probability threshold, we have ex­
perimented with the use of a cost-benefit analysis to 
control the thresholds at which autonomous assistance 
is provided, based on the preferences of the user for be­
ing alerted. 
6.5 
Beyond Real-Time Assistance 
Information about the usage of software can be learned 
in a variety of settings. The context for most of Lu­
miere research has been in the domain of real-time 
assistance. However, there is opportunity for using 
Bayesian user models to design and tailor assistance 
for offline review. Beyond providing assistance in real 
time, Lumiere was endowed with the ability to track 
in real-time patterns of weakness in skills for using 
a software application. 
During a session, the sys­
tem continues to monitor the likelihoods of user prob­
lems. Lumiere/Excel tracks the frequency that dif­
ferent problems are encountered during a session and 
makes recommendations at the end of a session about 
information the user may wish to review offline. We 
considered several approaches to identifying the con­
tent for a custom-tailored offline tutorial. The method 
employed in the Lumiere/Excel prototype considers, 
for each area of assistance that is not reviewed during 
a session, the number of times that the probabilities of 
user needs for that area exceed a predefined probabil-
ity threshold. Figure 10 demonstrates the automated 
generation of recommendations for further reading by 
Lumiere's help backgrounder. 
7 
Components of Lumiere in the Real 
World: Office Assistant 
Our research team has worked closely with the Mi­
crosoft Office division at implementing methods de­
veloped in Lumiere research. The first phase of port­
ing Lumiere to the real world occurred with the com­
pletion of the Office '97 product suite, containing the 
Office Assistant. Figure 11 displays the interface for 
the Office Assistant. As demonstrated in Figure 11, 
the Office team committed to a character-based front 
end to relay the results of Bayesian inference. Com­
pared with Lumiere/Excel, the Office Assistant em­
ploys broader but shallower models reasoning up to 
thousands of user goals in each Office application. The 
system uses a rich set of context variables that capture 
information about the current view and document. 
However, the system does not employ persistent user 
profile information and does not reason about com­
petency. Also, the system does not use rich combi­
nations of events over time. Rather, the system only 
considers a small set of relatively atomic user actions. 
Furthermore the system employs a small event queue 
and considers only the most recent events. The sys­
tem also separates the analysis of words and of events. 
When words are available, the system does not exploit 
information about context and recent actions. Finally, 
the automated facility of providing assistance based on 
the likelihood that a user may need assistance or on 
the expected utility of such autonomous action was not 
employed. Rather, the results of inference are available 

264 
Horvitz, Breese, Heckerman, Hovel, and Rommelse 
More... 
. . ... BolherMe ..... 
Figure 9: 
Autonomous display of assistance in 
Lumiere/Excel. Shortly after a user searched through 
several menus, selected the entire spreadsheet, and 
paused, the system reaches a probability threshold and 
posts inferred assistance. 
 YoumayfrtdtheloloM'IghelptopicsusefutfOJ 
9
.
 
_ 
 peumg\lllhenyou have some tine. 
8 
I
:Format cells and their contents 
-
Insert new rows ond columns 
-
Delete rows and columns 
;;;;; 
ChttnQina size of rows and columns 
:_ 
Figure 
10: 
Inference about long-term needs. 
Lumiere/Excel observes patterns of needs in the back­
ground and recommends topics for offline perusal at 
the end of a session. 
only when the user requests assistance explicitly. We 
are continuing to work closely with the Office division 
and other product groups on the technology transfer 
of more sophisticated implementations of Bayesian and 
decision-theoretic user modeling. 
8 
Ongoing Research on Bayesian User 
Modeling 
The Lumiere/Excel prototype was useful for demon­
strating and communicating key ideas on Bayesian 
user modeling. However, the prototype includes a sub­
set of functionalities that we have been exploring as 
part of our research on user modeling. Key areas of on­
going work on user modeling include harnessing meth­
?ds for #earning Bayesian models from user log data, 
mtegratmg new sources of events, and employing auto­
mated dialog for engaging users in conversations about 
goals and needs. 
New sources of events can enhance the abilities of a 
user modeling system to recognize goals and provide 
appropriate assistance. We have been pursuing oppor­
tunities for integrating vision and gaze-tracking into 
Figģre 11: The Office Assistant. The fielded Office 
Asszstant m the Office '97 suite of applications is based 
on Lumiere research. 
user modeling systems. Even coarse gaze information 
supplement mouse and keyboard actions with ongoing 
streams of activity about the attention of a user to 
regions of a display. 
We have also been exploring the use of value-of­
information computations to engage the user in dialog 
and to access costly information about user activity 
and program state. In the early days of Lumiere re­
search, we experimented with the use of approxima­
tions of value of information to consider the costs and 
benefits of evaluating previously unobserved variables. 
At any time in a session, value-of-information iden­
tifies previously unobserved variables that would be 
most valuable to evaluate. In particular rather than 
rely_ing on inference to generate a prob"bility distri­
but_wn over user goals, we can simply ask users about 
then goals and needs. Our work on Lumiere/Excel 
focused on delivering applications that would simply 
wa_tĤh and "listen" for queries rather than making in­
qmnes. However, such dialog can be appropriate and 
useful. 
9 
Summary and Conclusions 
We described the Lumiere project with a focus on the 
Lumiere/Excel prototype. We discussed our studies 
with human subjects to elucidate sets of distinctions 
that are useful for making inferences about a user's 
goals and needs and our construction of Bayesian user 
models. We touched on issues, approximations, and 
assessment methods for the problem of making infer­
ences from a stream of user actions over time. We 
prĥsented a baĦic events-definition language and de­
scnbed an architecture for detecting and making use 
?f events. We al_so presented our work to integrate ev­
Ideħce from actwns and words in a user's query. We 
reviewe! work on autonomous decision making about 
user assistance controlled by a user-specified probabil­
ity threshold. Finally, we discussed real-time inference 
to support the custom-tailoring of tutorial materials 
for review in offline settings. 

Lumiere/Excel and its descendant, the Office Assis­
tant, represent initial steps in making software applica­
tions more intuitive about the goals and needs of users. 
The dominance of uncertainty in understanding and 
supporting the goals of people highlights the rich op­
portunities ahead for harnessing probability and utility 
at the computer-human interface.
