Searching, fast and slow, through product catalogs
Dayananda Ubrangala 1 Juhi Sharma 1 Sharath Kumar Rangappa 1 Kiran R 1 Ravi Prasad Kondapalli 1
Laurent Bou´e 1
Abstract
String matching algorithms in the presence of abbreviations, such as in Stock Keeping Unit (SKU) product
catalogs, remains a relatively unexplored topic. In this paper, we present a unified architecture for SKU search
that provides both a real-time suggestion system (based on a Trie data structure) as well as a lower latency search
system (making use of character level TF-IDF in combination with language model vector embeddings) where
users initiate the search process explicitly. We carry out ablation studies that justify designing a complex search
system composed of multiple components to address the delicate trade-off between speed and accuracy. Using
SKU search in the Dynamics CRM as an example, we show how our system vastly outperforms, in all aspects,
the results provided by the default search engine. Finally, we show how SKU descriptions may be enhanced via
generative text models (using gpt-3.5-turbo) so that the consumers of the search results may get more context and
a generally better experience when presented with the results of their SKU search.
Keywords: String matching ; Data structures ; Large Language Models ; Search Engine Architecture
1. Introduction
Having a dependable and efficient search engine embedded
within a Customer Relationship Management (CRM) sys-
tem is vital. It empowers sales teams and support staff to
swiftly retrieve pricing, availability, and other product de-
tails, enabling them to respond accurately and promptly to
customer queries. Unfortunately, due to their multifaceted
nature, the search functionality of CRMs often leans to-
wards simplicity. The resulting reduced search accuracy is
especially pronounced when users seek information with
complex abbreviations as is a common scenario for search-
ing through Stock Keeping Units (SKUs) catalogs.
In this work, we use the Dynamics CRM as an example
of where SKU search is performed daily by thousands of
Microsoft sellers. At the time of writing, the product catalog
contains ≈87, 000 active SKUs from multiple pricelists.
1Microsoft, CX Data Cloud + AI. Correspondence to:

Our goal is to describe the multiple components we have put
into place to design a comprehensive and production-ready
search system that not only supports abbreviated strings but
also offers a vastly superior performance and user experi-
ence to that of the existing Dynamics CRM.
We start in Section 3 by describing a minimal dataset of
features one may use for SKU search. Next, we realize
that a useful search engine requires the capability to handle
both dynamic search (which provides instant results as the
user types each character) and complete search (activated
when the user hits the search button). Dynamic search
offers rapid feedback allowing users to refine their queries
on the fly. In Section 5, we show how dynamic search
may be solved using a Trie data structure. We continue in
Section 6 by showing how top accuracy may be achieved
by combining character-level TF-IDF with language model
embeddings together. This leads to Section 6.4 where we
describe the overall search system that strikes a balance
between speed and accuracy. Finally, we show in Section 8
how the SKUs descriptions’ may be enhanced using a GPT-
based generative text model.
1
arXiv:2401.00737v1  [cs.IR]  1 Jan 2024

2. Related work
Currently the search functionality of the Dynamics CRM
is provided by invoking custom SQL queries that almost
entirely rely on the contains keyword [1]. Although this
predicate may be extended to support some form of fuzzy
matching, in practice, the results have not been satisfactory
with many queries.
The Dynamics CRM search receives an average of ≈
11, 000 daily search requests. Among those, about ≈18%
return zero results while another ≈35% return an unrea-
sonably high number of 50 or more product suggestions.
Currently, these search results are not sorted based on any
criteria. Instead, they consist of randomly selected results
returned by the contains predicate. Furthermore, the
average response time is rather slow at ≈1 second.
We start in Section 3 by describing the set of features we
extracted from the Dynamics CRM. Those features are kept
to a minimum and not specific to Dynamics so that other
CRMs should also benefit from this paper. Then we move
on to the 3 main modules that define our search system: part
number pattern matching (Section 4), dynamic suggestions
(Section 5) and user-initiated search (Section 6). Next, we
present the fast and slow trade-off between accuracy and
latency. Finally, we conclude in Section 8 with a descrip-
tion of a generative text module based on ChatGPT text
completion to generate helpful SKU description.
3. Stock Keeping Unit dataset
3.1. Minimal set of product features
The dataset can be presented in a tabular format of approxi-
mately 87, 000 rows where each row represents a product
present in the catalog. The minimal set of features charac-
terizing a Stock Keeping Unit (SKU) is composed of:
• Part number. Those are explained in Section 4.
• Item name. This is a highly abbreviated name which
is hard to understand for any new reader. This has
been like this for several years because of constraints
in the legacy systems, for example on the length of the
Item Name in the UI and the length constraints in the
backend database systems.
• Product friendly name. This is an expanded name
for the SKU for easy understanding and will greatly
help sellers in picking the right SKUs. However, these
expanded names are available for approximately 30%
of the products and our abbreviation expansion strategy
is described in Section 3.2.
Those 3 fields are typically the ones that sellers would be
searching for in their CRM queries and some examples are
displayed in Fig. 1. Obviously other SKU attributes (such
as product family name, release dates and others...) may
be added to have an even more accurate description of the
SKUs. For the purpose of this paper, we focus only on those
fields that are most likely to exist in the catalog of any SKUs
in any CRMs.
3.2. Expanding abbreviations
As mentioned in the previous section, item names often
contain rather cryptic and domain-specific abbreviations. In
many cases, sellers are not even aware of the meaning of
those abbreviations and therefore are unlikely to use them
in their search queries. The process of expanding those
abbreviations to turn normal item names into their “friendly”
names requires extensive exploratory data analysis (EDA)
of the catalog.
First of all, with the help of domain experts, we have com-
piled a dictionary of ≈540 known abbreviations and their
expansions. However, the main difficulty lies in the way
that item names are defined without separator characters
between the abbreviations. As an example, a typical item
name shown in the first row of Fig.1 may start with
SrfLpt413ini7/16/512
Given this string, we have devised a custom algorithm that
splits the above example into a series of fields {SrfLpt4
, 13in , i7, 16, 512}. Essentially, the algorithm heavily
relies on the catalog statistics revealed by our extensive EDA
to which we apply very specific string matching splits. This
algorithm is successful at parsing about 10% of the catalog.
The next step in our abbreviation expansion strategy consists
in going over all the item names and the fields extracted
from the first step (when applicable) to look for strings
that follow a camel case convention [2]. Those are good
candidates for further splitting into abbreviated terms. For
example, SrfLpt4 may be split into {Srf, Lpt, 4} under
this captital letter assumption.
Finally, we look up those possible abbreviated terms in
our known dictionary of abbreviations to look for exact
matches. Continuing on the above example, we would then
expand Srf into Surface and Lpt into Laptop. This
expansion can be seen in the last column of Fig.1. Overall,
this approach allows us to expand about 30% of the item
names into so-called product friendly names.
We reserve a more systematic treatment of abbreviation
expansion and discovery to a future extension of the
model [3, 4].

Figure 1. Example samples of the minimal set of features we are considering for the SKU product search system. More details about the
part number matcher can be found in Section 4 and about how product friendly names are generated in Section 3.2.
4. Part number pattern matching
One common search scenario is for sellers to copy / paste
what they think is a good part number directly into the search
box. So what we implemented first is a pattern matching
system where we classify the search queries to see if they
potentially match a part number template. If they do, then
even if the part number that the seller is searching for is
no longer active, there may be other part numbers that are
closely related and we show these ones as the search results.
Typically part numbers follow established conventions de-
pending on the specific CRM we are considering. In the
case of the Dynamics CRM, part numbers are built as
□□□
| {z }
serial ID
– □□□□□
|
{z
}
product ID
where □stands as a placeholder for an alpha-numeric char-
acter. Each serial ID may have different product IDs that
fall under it to denote specific versions of a product or even
closely related products. For example, the item in the first
row of Fig.1 would have a serial ID of LF1 and a product
ID of 00018 and this particular serial ID is also associated
with distinct 69 [00001 to 00069] product IDs (not shown
in the Figure).
To start with, we consider all part numbers in the catalog and
store them in a key-value structure where keys correspond
to serial IDs and values correspond to the list of product IDs
that fall under this serial ID. This step is done offline and
results in a hash map with about ≈5899 serial IDs each
with an average of ≈14 product IDs.
At run-time, given a user query, the first step consists of
assessing if it matches the pattern of characters that define a
part number. If it does, we split the query on the separator
character and look up its serial ID in the offline dictionary.
Assuming that this key does exist, we then return a list
of 10 items ranked according to their longest common sub-
sequence with the user’s query. This ensures that if there
is an exact match between the query and an existing item,
this item will be returned first but we also show a few other
related products as those may also be of interest to the seller.
This section described the “part number pattern matching”
module shown in the overall architecture in Fig.4. If any
of these dictionary look-up or part number matching fails,
the search system continues forward with the “dynamic
suggestions” module which is the topic of the next section.
5. Dynamic suggestions
It is intended that search results should be presented in the
form of dynamic suggestions as soon as users begin typing
characters into the search box. Furthermore, those results
should be refreshed immediately after each new character.
Trie data structures [6, 7] are a well-suited solution for
handling dynamic search due to their retrieval complexity
growing linearly with the number of characters in the query,
independent of the number of nodes in the Trie. As users
type more characters, the Trie efficiently navigates through
the branches, instantly offering relevant suggestions even
for very large datasets. An example of a simple Trie data
structure is presented in Fig 2.

Figure 2. Example of a Trie data structure storing 10 strings [5].
Notice how unlike a binary search tree, all the children of a node
have a common prefix of the string associated with that parent
node. As soon as the user types (for example), the letter “t”, the
Trie can immediately suggest 4 possible matches corresponding
to leaf nodes 7, 3, 4 and 12. As the user continues to type more
characters the space of possible matches rapidly (exponentially)
decreases.
In our case, we have populated the leaf nodes of the Trie with
the part numbers, item names and friendly names (when
available) resulting in ≈228, 000 leaf nodes. Overall the
Trie occupies ≈50 MB of memory. Its performance is
discussed in Section 7 and its place in the overall search
architecture is explained in Fig.4.
Successful Trie retrieval assumes that the order in which
characters are typed form an exact subsequence match to at
least one of the strings stored in the leaf nodes of the Trie.
Although there have been attempts to generalize Tries [8, 9],
we have limited the scope of our current implementation
to exact subsequence matches so that the size of the result-
ing Trie remains rather small and reserve fuzzy subsequce
matches as a future extension.
6. User-activated search
While the previous section shows how dynamic suggestions
can be returned quickly to the user, those results do not
consider contextually similar terms.
6.1. Spell checker
Once the query is completely written into the search box,
we start by processing it using the pyspellchecker [11,
12] library. This sophisticated spell checker works by com-
paring permutations within a predefined Levenshtein dis-
tance based on a set of default dictionaries.
As can be seen in the 3rd row of Table 3, the query pre-
SEARCH METHOD
ACCURACY
LATENCY (MS)
WORD TF-IDF (∼2000)
47.86
66.2
WORD TF-IDF (∼5000)
53.69
153.2
WORD TF-IDF (∼10000)
49.61
277.7
CHAR TF-IDF (∼2000)
72.76
63.4
CHAR TF-IDF (∼5000)
75.09
153.1
CHAR TF-IDF (∼10000)
68.09
268.8
Table 1. Performance
for
different
configurations
of
TF-
IDF.
We
experimented
with
embedding
dimensionali-
ties {2000, 5000, 10000}. One can see that the peak performance
is obtained with 5000. We note also that the latency starts to
approach the (real-time) requirement of ∼300ms we need to
satisfy. We also experimented with different granularities, word
vs.
character, of the TF-IDF. As explained in the main text,
character-level TF-IDF is far more accurate than its word-level
counterpart. Latency is reported in milliseconds (ms).
processing with the spell checker significantly improves the
performance by almost 4%. In our case, we have noticed an
even slightly better performance by enhancing the default
dictionaries of pyspellchecker with the ≈540 known
abbreviations discussed in Section 3.2.
6.2. Similarity between vector representations of queries
and items
In order to extend the scope of possible results returned by
our search system, we resort to two types of information
retrieval techniques:
• The first one is based on the classical Term Frequency
- Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF) [13] albeit
implemented at the character-level. The output of the
TF-IDF on a list of characters is a vector 1 of dimen-
sionality 5000 (see Table 1 for performance compar-
ison for other embedding dimensions). Ranking the
cosine similarity between the TF-IDF embedding and
the product embeddings generates a list of k1 prod-
uct candidates that best resemble the user query. (In
practice we have used k1 = 50.)
As discussed in more detail in Section 7, because
of the abbreviations and relatively short queries in
CRMs, it is important to create character-level rep-
resentations rather than word level as is more common
in the general-purpose search literature.
• The second one is based vector similarity of
pre-trained Large Language Model (LLM) em-
beddings.
In this work we use the symmet-
1Overloading common ML terminology, we will refer to this
vector as an embedding since it serves the same purpose as LLM
embeddings.

Figure 3. User-initiated search. Model training) We start by encoding the catalog of products using both a pre-trained LLM and into
character-level TF-IDF vectors. In our case, the pre-trained LLM was chosen to be multi-qa-MiniLM-L6-cos-v1 [10] as explained
in Section 6 but others may be used as drop-in replacements. Those representations of the items in the catalog are then cached into memory.
Model scoring) Once the user pushed the “search” button, the seller query is transformed into a character-level TF-IDF vector as well as a
second vector obtained by running this query into a pre-trained LLM. At this point, the process resembles the model training phase with
the only difference that we are now vectorizing only a single seller query at the run-time of the search. Once both embedding vectors are
obtained, we compare them respectively with the product embeddings we had stored during the model training phase. We decide to keep
the top k1 (resp. top k2) highest cosine similarity pairs between the character-level TF-DF embeddings (resp. LLM embeddings). Given
that there may be duplicates between both lists, we keep only the top-k (where k ≤k1 + k2) of their union. This final list of k product
candidates is finally re-ranked according to the highest LCS scores between the candidates and the original seller query.
ric multi-qa-MiniLM-L6-cos-v1 [10] model
which maps input text into 384-dimensional embed-
dings. This model is trained on ≈215, 000 ques-
tion/answer pairs from various sources and domains,
including StackExchange, Yahoo Answers, Google &
Bing search queries and many more. Similarly to the
first technique, we rank the cosine similarity between
the user query and the product embeddings to generate
another list of k2 product candidates that best resemble
the user query. (In practice we have used k2 = 50.)
Although LLM embeddings have grown immensely in
popularity recently, the performance of this technique
lags behind TF-IDF, in our case, for reasons explained
in Section 7. We use them here as a supplement that
brings in additional performance for longer, more struc-
tured queries that are not very frequent in CRM prod-
uct search queries. A few different experiments are
presented in Table 2 where we also report the perfor-
mance of more traditional embeddings such as GloVe
840B [15, 16] and word2vec-GoogleNews [17].
A complete illustration of how TF-IDF and LLM embed-
dings are connected together is offered in Fig.3. Contrary
to the dynamic suggestions of Section 5, both of these tech-
niques require to have the complete user query typed into
the search box. The search process itself is initiated when
the user clicks on a “search button”.
6.3. Ensemble re-ranking
Taking the set union of the two lists of k1 (resp. k2) product
candidates generated via TF-IDF (resp. LLM) embeddings
produces a final list of k candidates. Note that k < k1 + k2
since there may be duplicated candidates. In practice we
have found that this yields an average of k ≈90 candidates.
The final step consists in re-ranking the k candidates. We
do this by sorting according to the pairwise normalized
longest common subsequence (nLCS) score between the
original user query and the actual product names (i.e. not
embeddings) of the k candidates. LCS normalization is done
by dividing the length of each LCS with the length of the

SEARCH METHOD
ACCURACY
LATENCY
(MS)
MULTI-QA-MINILM-L6-
COS-V1
35.99
48.1
GLOVE 840B
33.65
6.34
WORD2VEC-
GOOGLENEWS
28.21
5.41
MSMARCO-DISTILBERT-
BASE-V4
24.31
85.29
Table 2. We experimented with different LLMs from the
sentence transformers HuggingFace library.
It turns out
that
multi-qa-MiniLM-L6-cos-v1
[10]
which
is
a
symmetric encoder gives the best performance compared
to msmarco-distilbert-base-v4 [14] which is an asym-
metric encoder.
We also report the performance of sim-
pler embedding techniques such as GloVe 840B [15, 16]
and word2vec-GoogleNews [17]. Because of their relative
simplicity, those embeddings are able to run in much faster laten-
cies but still display a significant performance gap with respect
to multi-qa-MiniLM-L6-cos-v1. Latency is reported in
milliseconds (ms).
user query. This way a nLCS of 1 indicates a perfect match
not only in LCS but also in the length of the candidate and
the query. This step is illustrated as the “LCS re-ranking”
box in the bottom right of Fig. 3.
6.4. Complete search system architecture
Combining together the part number pattern matcher
(see Section 4) with the dynamic suggestions (see Section 5)
and the user-activated search (see Section 6) under a sin-
gle architecture presents a powerful solution for handling a
more thorough set of search scenarios that happen in CRM
product searches.
Since all of the other constitutive components have been
covered in the previous relevant sections, we now refer the
reader to Fig. 4 where the overall architecture connecting
all these individual components is presented.
The next section will be dedicated to the performance eval-
uation and ablation study of the search system presented
in Fig. 4.
7. Fast and slow, the accuracy / latency
trade-off
In order to evaluate the performance of our architecture, we
manually labeled 513 sellers’ queries that in the existing
MSX search did not return anything. However, upon closer
examination with domain experts, we discovered that those
queries should have returned a relevant SKU existing in the
catalog. So we manually pair those queries with the correct
SKU that the seller intended to see and then we can evaluate
the performance of the search system on those queries.
Accuracy is measured as the average (over those 513 man-
ually labeled search queries) number of times the correct
SKU is returned as part of the top-10 search results. Mean
Reciprocal Rank – MRR is also a popular evaluation metric.
In practice we have observed a very high degree of corre-
lation between MRR and the accuracy so, for the sake of
simplicity, the performance tables report only the accuracy

With our search solution deployed as an Azure Machine
Learning - AML endpoint, latency is quantified simply as
the average response time of the API. Requirements from
our stakeholder teams dictate that the search latency should
not exceed 300ms.
Some noteworthy observations from Table 3 and Fig 5 are
that:
• As expected, the rapid nature of dynamic search is as-
sociated with lower accuracy whereas complete search
ensures a more thorough and accurate retrieval of in-
formation by allowing the search engine more time to
process the query.
• As already discussed in Section 6.2 and Table 1, the
performance of the word-level TF-IDF is very poor
with an accuracy of only about ≈54%. This is due to
the nature of CRM product SKUs which tend not to be
words and also typically contain many abbreviations.
• It is interesting to note that removing the character-
level TF-IDF and relying entirely on the LLM embed-
dings results in a very poor performance. This is due
to the fact that LLMs are typically trained on longer
text that resemble more English queries than the short
abbreviated product names sellers tend to search for
in CRMs. The fusion between character-level TF-IDF
and LLM embeddings allows for a more nuanced un-
derstanding of user intent and enables the system to
retrieve results that align better with the user’s query.
Note that those long queries represent less than 2% of
the real-world search queries used by sellers so that the
bulk of the performance is given by the TF-IDF branch
and not the LLM one; We discuss in the conclusion
future LLM extensions that will attempt to correct this.
8. SKU description generation
Although it is not directly part of the search algorithm itself
it is tremendously helpful for sellers to see a full-fledged En-
glish description of the SKUs when they review the search
results.
We performed iterative prompt engineering based on the

Figure 4. High-level summary of the complete SKU product search architecture for CRMs. The first component consists of the part
number pattern matcher discussed in Section 4. In case, the search query cannot be handled by this module, it moves on to the dynamic
suggestions detailed in Section 5. Finally, the last component consists of the user-initiated search which is detailed in Section 6 and Fig. 3.
SEARCH METHOD
ACCURACY
LATENCY (MS)
1
TRIE
70.82
22.7
2
TF-IDF
75.01
152.38
3
TF-IDF + SPELL CHECK
79.96
152.29
4
TF-IDF + SPELL CHECK + LCS RE-RANK
80.93
161.93
5
TF-IDF + PRETRAINED LLM + SPELL CHECK + LCS RE-RANK
84.63
269.88
Table 3. Summary of the selected search modules from Section 5 and Section 6 that we used in the overall search architecture. The same
data is also represented visually in Fig. 5. Latency is reported in milliseconds (ms).
Figure 5. Illustration of the trade-off between response time and
accuracy of the model. The dashed black line illustrates the linear
growth in model accuracy as the response time gets longer when
more modules are added into the overall architecture.
chat completion API of GPT-3.5-Turbo. In the absence of
available labeled data we used zero shot learning for gener-
ating descriptions from the LLM. We designed prompts
in a way that the model can generate a summary for a
SKU without any specific examples or training data related
to that particular SKU. We set the maximum token limit
for the response to control the length of the output and
reduce variability. This allows us to generate determinis-
tic SKU descriptions for the entire MSX catalog. Using
low-temperature-settings to further improve responses, we
make another API request to summarize the description in a
maximum of 250 characters.
We observed an average latency of 2.7s (max of 7s) per
API request. With such a high API response time, process-
ing 87, 000 MSX catalog items is network bound and may
take considerable time, 60+ hours, if implemented na¨ıvely.
We optimized using parallel processing of sending 20+ con-
current API requests to complete the entire process in less
than 120 minutes (excluding IO time of writing to ADLS).
As an example, for part number LF1-00018 which we show
in Fig.1, the SKU description comes out to be: “The Surface
Laptop 4 is a 13-inch device with an i7 processor, 16GB
RAM, and 512GB storage. It comes with Windows 11 and is
designed for commercial use. The hardware is in Ice Blue
color and the SKU is AUSTL/NZ”. We can clearly see the
description is much more easily readable for the seller than
the Product Friendly Name and Item Name from Fig.1. for
the same part number and helps the seller in picking the
right SKU/part number quickly.

9. Conclusion
In this paper, we show that by combining traditional tech-
nique of character-level TF-IDF with pre-trained LLMs, we
can significantly reduce the rate of “zero search results” and
“too many results” problems which exist for SKU search in
today’s CRM systems. This architecture is now pending
production deployment in the Dynamics CRM where it is
expected to improve seller satisfaction ratings and save time
for sellers when searching for products.
By offering a system that relies on multiple and orthogonal
search modules, our search solution caters to varying user
preferences and needs. Based on the search latency results
presented here, we expect our top level accuracy model to
perform at least as fast as the existing CRM search once the
model is integrated to the enhanced overall CRM system.
Although one would also like to consider more modern
and potentially more accurate embeddings such as those
offered by OpenAI [18], we have to satisfy strict latency
requirements of providing search results within 300 ms for a
peak volume of approximately ≈20, 000 daily searches. At
this point, those Service Level Agreements – SLAs imposed
on us by our stakeholder teams, coupled with our own Azure
subscription quotas, exclude us from leveraging OpenAI
embeddings though we hope to explore this path more going
forward.
In future work, we intend to investigate possible lift in per-
formance by fine-tuning the language models instead of re-
lying on their pre-trained versions. In addition, we intend to
develop our own semantic abbreviation embeddings specif-
ically trained on abbreviations so we can capture some se-
mantic similarity, not at the word / sentence level but rather
at the abbreviation level. We also plan to explore ways to
automatically discover abbreviations and their expansion
rules [3, 4].
10. Acknowledgements
We thank our colleagues in CX Data and SPS for their feed-
back and support. In particular, we thank the ML Review
board constituting of Daniel Yehdego, Vijay Agneeswaran
and Ivan Barrientos for their valuable inputs on this model.
We also thank Manpreet Singh for his inputs on pre-trained
LLM models and in deploying the real-time AML endpoint.
We thank the SPS PM team of Ullas Gupta and Melinda
Amoratis for bringing this key MSX Search problem to
us and continuously evaluating our solution and getting us
feedback from domain experts. We also thank Chandra
Mouleswar, Dhana Vujjini and Lony Choudhury from SPS
engineering team in deploying this solution in MSX.
