NID-SLAM: Neural Implicit Representation-based
RGB-D SLAM In Dynamic Environments
1st Ziheng Xu
School of Computer Science
Beihang University
Beijing, China

2nd Jianwei Niu
School of Computer Science
Beihang University
Beijing, China

3rd Qingfeng Li
School of Computer Science
Beihang University
Beijing, China

4th Tao Ren†
State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Game
Institute of Software Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing, China

5th Chen Chen
Big Data and Industrial Intelligent Networking Laboratory
Hangzhou Innovation Institute of Beihang University
Hangzhou, China

Abstract—Neural implicit representations have been explored
to enhance visual SLAM algorithms, especially in providing
high-fidelity dense map. Existing methods operate robustly
in static scenes but struggle with the disruption caused by
moving objects. In this paper we present NID-SLAM, which
significantly improves the performance of neural SLAM in
dynamic environments. We propose a new approach to enhance
inaccurate regions in semantic masks, particularly in marginal
areas. Utilizing the geometric information present in depth
images, this method enables accurate removal of dynamic objects,
thereby reducing the probability of camera drift. Additionally,
we introduce a keyframe selection strategy for dynamic scenes,
which enhances camera tracking robustness against large-scale
objects and improves the efficiency of mapping. Experiments on
publicly available RGB-D datasets demonstrate that our method
outperforms competitive neural SLAM approaches in tracking
accuracy and mapping quality in dynamic environments.
Index Terms—neural implicit representation, semantic segmen-
tation, visual SLAM
I. INTRODUCTION
Visual simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM)
plays a crucial role in various applications such as robot
navigation, augmented reality (AR), and virtual reality (VR).
Visual SLAM algorithms utilize data collected by sensors, e.g.,
monocular, stereo and RGB-D cameras, to estimate the camera
pose in previously unknown environments and incrementally
build maps of the surrounding scenes [1]. Among diverse
visual sensors, RGB-D cameras concurrently record color and
depth data, offering a more efficacious and precise basis for the
acquisition of three-dimensional environmental information.
This capability enhances the 3D reconstruction performances
of most SLAM algorithms.
Recent methods [2] have introduced neural implicit rep-
resentation into SLAM. The most notable example, neural
radiance fields (NeRF) [3], encodes scene color and volume
† Corresponding author.
(a) Input RGB-D frames with dynamic objects.
(b) Output map of the scene after removing dynamic objects.
Fig. 1.
The 3D reconstruction results of NID-SLAM on our self-captured
large dynamic scene.
density into the weights of a neural network, directly learn-
ing high-frequency scene details from the data, significantly
enhancing mapping smoothness and coherence. Combined
with rendering methods based on volumetric representation
[4], NeRF, through training, can re-synthesize input images
and generalize to adjacent, unseen viewpoints. However, most
neural SLAM algorithms are based on the assumption of
a static environment, with some capable of handling small
dynamic objects in synthetic scenes [5]. In real-world dynamic
scenarios, these algorithms could experience a significant
performance-degradation in terms of dense reconstruction and
camera tracking accuracy. This could be largely caused by
the existence of dynamic objects in the scene that induce
incorrect data associations, thereby severely disrupting the
pose estimation during the tracking process. Additionally,
information about dynamic objects is often incorporated into
arXiv:2401.01189v2  [cs.RO]  16 May 2024

the map, hindering its long-term applicability.
Semantic information has been introduced in many studies
to address the challenges faced by visual SLAM algorithms in
dynamic scenes [6], [7]. The main idea is to integrate semantic
information with geometric constraints to eliminate dynamic
objects from the scene. However, on the one hand, due to
the reduction of static information in the scene, the texture
and coherence of the map in these algorithms are poor. On
the other hand, due to the absence of reasonable geometric
prediction capabilities for unobserved areas, these algorithms
often suffer from the non-negligible holes contained in the
restored backgrounds.
To address the issue, we propose Neural Implicit Dynamic
SLAM (NID-SLAM). We integrate accuracy-improved depth
information with semantic segmentation to detect and remove
dynamic objects, and project the static map into the current
frame to inpaint backgrounds occluded by these objects.
Overall, we make the following contributions:
• We present a neural implicit representation-based ap-
proach capable of achieving robust camera tracking and
predictive, high-quality mapping in real-world dynamic
environments.
• We propose a depth-guided semantic mask enhancement
method to largely eliminate inaccuracies along edge re-
gions.
• We introduce a dynamic scene-oriented keyframe selec-
tion strategy, which reduces the impact of unreliable
frames, thereby improving tracking accuracy.
II. RELATED WORK
The masks, obtained from semantic segmentation networks,
effectively label dynamic objects in images, serving as stable
and reliable prior constraints to guide dynamic SLAM systems.
Methods such as [6]–[8] typically integrate semantic and
geometric constraints, yet lack attention to depth information,
leading to less precise priors and may include noise blocks.
SaD-SLAM [9] adopts semantic-depth-based movable object
tracking, offering enhanced accuracy, while Blitz-SLAM [10]
revises the object mask using depth information. Contrasting
these methods, our NID-SLAM dynamically detects and elimi-
nates areas with inaccurate depth information, thus specifically
enhancing the edge areas of semantic masks that are prone to
errors.
Neural implicit represetations [3], [11], [12], which encode
the 3D geometry and appearance of scenes into the weights of
neural networks, have gained popularity due to their compact
and precise results. When applied to visual SLAM, this tech-
nique enables the construction of environmental maps and the
estimation of camera poses. Previous methods [2], [5], [13]–
[16] have demonstrated the feasibility of using neural networks
to model the color and geometric information of static scenes;
however, they have not fully exploited the potential of neural
implicit representations in dynamic environments. Instead of
the approach used in [5], which resolves small dynamic objects
in synthetic scenes by discarding outliers in losses, we employ
a comprehensive removal method to address large dynamic
objects in real-world scenes.
III. METHODS
Figure 2 illustrates the overall framework of NID-SLAM.
Given an RGB-D image stream as input, we first remove
dynamic objects using a specialized dynamic processing pro-
cedure. Subsequently, we accomplish tracking and mapping
by jointly optimizing camera poses and neural scene repre-
sentations. Utilizing semantic priors and depth information,
dynamic objects are eliminated, and occluded backgrounds are
restored through the static map. In each iteration of mapping,
keyframes are selected to optimize scene representations and
camera poses. Rendering is performed by sampling viewing
rays and integrating predicted values at various points along
these rays.
A. Dynamic object removal
Depth revision. Due to the limitations of depth cameras, the
accuracy of depth estimation decreases as the distance between
the object and the camera increases. Depth information with
significant errors can result in incorrect data associations,
disrupting the stability of camera tracking. In highly dynamic
environments, these inaccuracies become more pronounced,
increasing the probability of camera drift. Additionally, due to
errors in depth information, the constructed map can exhibit
layering phenomena, where image blocks that should be at
the same depth are represented at different depths on the map.
Therefore, we detect and remove inaccurate depth information.
Specifically, we compute the image gradients of the depth map,
utilizing these gradients as indicators to assess the accuracy
of depth information. When the horizontal or vertical gradient
of an image surpasses a predefined threshold τ1, indicating
significant depth variation, we set the depth of the subsequent
pixel point in the gradient direction to zero to mitigate depth
errors.
Depth-based semantic segmentation. To detect dynamic ob-
jects, we employ a bounding box-based network for semantic
segmentation of the input image, using the YOLO algorithm
in our experiments. The network takes RGB raw images
as input and outputs binary masks of potential dynamic or
movable objects in the image. The semantic masks exhibit
two primary shortcomings. Firstly, they may not fully cover
dynamic objects, potentially incorporating other objects from
the environment. Secondly, the masks are prone to errors in
boundary areas. Therefore, we utilize depth information to
refine the masks. For each boundary point of the original
mask, we examine a five-pixel radius area centered around
it, calculating the range of depth values for the pixels within
the mask in this region. For the part inside the mask in this
region, we calculate the range of depth values of all pixels. For
pixels outside the mask in this area, those with depth values
within the calculated range are considered part of the mask
and subsequently integrated.
Background inpainting. For the removed dynamic objects,
we repair the occluded backgrounds using static information

Fig. 2.
System overview. 1) Dynamic object removal: by employing semantic segmentation and mask revision, dynamic objects within RGB-D images
are precisely eliminated, followed by a thorough restoration of the occluded backgrounds. 2) Tracking: camera poses {R, t} are optimized by minimizing
losses. 3) Mapping: a mask-guided strategy is employed to select keyframes for the optimization of feature grids scene representation. 4) Scene representation:
efficient rendering of predicted color and depth values is achieved through surface-focused point sampling.
obtained from previous viewpoints, synthesizing a realistic
image without dynamic objects. The repaired image contains
more scene information, making the appearance of the map
more accurate and enhancing the stability of camera tracking.
Utilizing the known positions of both previous and current
frames, we project a sequence of prior keyframes onto the
segmented area’s RGB and depth images in the current frame.
Some regions remain unfilled because these areas either have
not yet appeared in the scene or appeared but lack valid
depth information. Figure 1 shows three frames from our self-
captured dataset as input and the final reconstructed scene. It
is noticeable that dynamic objects are successfully removed,
with most of the segmented parts well repaired.
B. Mask-guided keyframe selection
For the tracked input frames, we select a set of keyframes,
denoted as K. Our preference for keyframes leans towards:
1. Frames with a lower ratio of dynamic objects; 2. Frames
with a lower overlap ratio with the previous keyframe. We use
I.Rd and I.Ro to represent the two ratios respectively for an
input frame I. When the sum of these two ratios is less than
threshold τ2, we insert the current frame into the keyframe
set. To address the inaccuracies and missing information in
background inpainting, we reduce the proportion of dynamic
objects within keyframes. This approach ensures integration
of more reliable information, enhancing the accuracy and
stability of camera tracking. Meanwhile, smaller overlaps
between keyframes allow keyframe set to include more scene
information. In static scenes, this strategy defaults to selection
based on overlap ratio.
When selecting keyframes from K for scene representa-
tion optimization, we alternate between coverage-based [17]
and overlap-based [5] strategies, aiming to strike a balance
between optimization efficiency and quality. The coverage-
based strategy prefers frames covering the largest scene area,
ensuring comprehensive optimization, particularly of edge
regions. However, this approach method often requires nu-
merous iterations to optimize relatively small edge areas,
diminishing the overall optimization efficiency. It also leads
to repetitive selection results, as the coverage area of frames
is constant, and frames with large coverage areas maintain
higher priority. The overlap-based strategy involves random
selection from keyframes that visually overlap with the current
frame. To avoid excessive focus on edge regions and recurrent
optimization of the identical area, we first optimize the entire
scene using the coverage-based strategy, then employ the
overlap-based strategy multiple times, periodically repeating
this process.
C. Scene representation & image rendering
Scene representation. For scene representation, we adopt
multiresolution geometric feature grid Gα = {Gl
α}L
l=1 and
color feature grid Cϕ, where l ∈{0, 1, 2} is referred to coarse,
mid and fine-level scene details. Feature vectors Gα (x) and
Cϕ (x) at each sampled point x are queried via trilinear
interpolation. Each feature grid corresponds to an MLP de-
coder, with the geometric decoder denoted as f l and the
color decoder denoted as g. The geometry decoder outputs
the predicted occupancy ox as:
ol
x = f l  x, Gl
α (x)

, ox =
L
X
l=1
ol
x.
(1)
We also encode the color information allowing us to render
RGB images which provides additional signals for tracking.
The color decoder predicts the color value cx as:
cx = gϕ (x, Cϕ (x)) .
(2)
Here θ = {α, ϕ} are the learnable parameters for geometric
and color feature grids.
Image rendering. Given the camera pose, we can compute
the viewing direction r at pixel coordinates. We sample rays at
each pixel and subsequently sample M points xi = o+dir, i ∈

{1, . . . , M} along each ray, where o represents the camera
origin and di denotes to the depth value of xi. Following [2],
[5], for each sampled point, after obtaining the predicted color
ci, color and depth can be rendered as
ˆC =
1
PM
i=1 wi
M
X
i=1
wici,
ˆD =
1
PM
i=1 wi
M
X
i=1
widi,
(3)
where wi = oxi
Qi−1
j=1
 1 −oxj

is the computed weight along
the ray.
For ray-wise sampling, alongside Mstrat points for stratified
sampling, we use surface sampling, specifically targeting Msurf
points within a distance of less than a threshold τ3 from
surface. In total, we sample M = Mstrat+Msurf points for each
ray. We then verify whether these sampling points fall within
valid feature grids. Points outside these grids are excluded, as
they contribute no value to the rendering process, enhancing
rendering efficiency.
D. Mapping and tracking
In mapping process, we sample N pixels from the selected
keyframes to optimize scene representation. Subsequently, we
adopt a staged approach to optimization, aiming to minimize
both geometric and photometric losses.
Geometric loss and photometric loss are applied as the L1
loss between the predicted and ground truth values for color
and depth, respectively, as follows:
Lg = 1
N
N
X
n=1
Dn −ˆDn
 , Lp = 1
N
N
X
n=1
Cn −ˆCn
 .
(4)
We jointly optimize feature θ and the camera extrinsic
parameters {Ri, ti} of K selected keyframes as
min
θ,{Ri,ti} (Lg + λpLp) ,
(5)
where λp is the loss weighting factor.
In parallel, we run a tracking process, sampling Nt pixels
from the current frame and applying the same Lg var as in
[5] to optimize the camera poses {R, t} of the current frame
as:
min
R,t (Lg var + λptLp) .
(6)
Overall, our algorithmic framework is shown in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Framework of NID-SLAM
Input: Raw RGB-D frames: {I1, ..., In}
Output: Rendered RGB-D frames :{R1, ..., Rn}
1: for each frame Ii do
2:
Remove dynamic objects in Ii
3:
if Ii.Rd + Ii.Ro < τ2 then
4:
Insert Ii into keyframe set K
5:
end if
6:
Select frames for optimization from K
7:
Optimize Gα and Cϕ using selected frames
8:
Predict color cx for sampled points x by (2)
9:
Render Ri by (3)
10: end for
IV. EXPERIMENTS
A. Experimental setup
Datasets. We evaluate NID-SLAM on a variety of scenes
from three different datasets. For dynamic environments, we
evaluate pose estimation results on 8 scenes from TUM RGB-
D dataset. We follow the same pre-processing step for TUM
RGB-D as in [18]. We also evaluate on a self-cpatured room
as a larger dynamic scene. Following iMAP and NICE-SLAM,
we quantitatively evaluate the reconstruction quality on 8
synthetic scenes from Replica [19].
Metrics. We evaluate camera tracking using Absolute Tra-
jectory Error (ATE) and Relative Pose Error (RPE). For
evaluation of the reconstruction quality, we adopt Depth L1
(cm), Accuracy (cm), Completion (cm), and Completion ratio
(%) with a threshold of 5cm.
Implementation details. We run NID-SLAM on a desktop
PC with a 3.20GHz Intel Core i9-12900KF CPU and NVIDIA
RTX 3090 GPU. In all our experiments, we set the number
of sampling points on a ray to Mstrat = 32 and Msurf = 16;
we select K = 5 keyframes and sample N = 1000 pixels for
optimization, along with Nt = 200 pixels for tracking. Note
that iMAP⋆denotes the iMAP reimplementation released by
the NICE-SLAM [5] authors.
B. Evaluation of mapping and tracking
Evaluation on TUM RGB-D [18]. To evaluate camera track-
ing performance, we use the dynamic TUM RGB-D dataset.
For fair comparison, we provided iMAP⋆and NICE-SLAM
with the same dynamic-object-free input as our method. As
shown in Table I, our approach achieves the best ATE results
among neural SLAM methods and surpasses ORB-SLAM2 in
several scenarios. Table II and Table III present the result of
translational RPE and rotational RPE, our method significantly
outperforms other neural SLAM approaches. However, due
to the inherent gap in tracking performance between neural
SLAM methods and classic SLAM approaches, NID-SLAM
is not yet able to outperform Dyna-SLAM. Nevertheless, our
method significantly narrows the performance gap in tracking
between these two categories of methods in dynamic envi-
ronments. Figure 3 qualitatively presents the reconstruction
results on TUM RGB-D. Notably, our approach achieves ac-
curate removal of dynamic objects, significantly improving the
reconstruction quality and completeness of dynamic scenes.
Evaluation on Replica [19]. We also evaluate the reconstruc-
tion quality on Replica while using the same rendered RGB-D
sequence provided by the authors of NICE-SLAM. With the
keyframe selection method, our method ensures high-quality
reconstruction across both central and edge regions. In Table
IV, we present a quantitative comparison of the reconstruction
and rendering performance of our method and the baselines.
The results demonstrate that our approach outperforms the
baselines for both 2D and 3D metrics. Qualitatively, we can
see from Fig. 3 that the mesh obtained by our method features
notably smoother floors and more details on small objects,
such as table lamps and ornaments.

TABLE I
CAMERA TRACKING RESULTS ON TUM RGB-D. ATE RMSE [m](↓) IS USED AS EVALUATION METRIC. \ REPRESENTS CORRESPONDING DATA IS NOT
MENTIONED IN THE RESPECTIVE LITERATURE.
fr3/w/half
fr3/w/xyz
fr3/w/rpy
fr3/w/static
fr3/s/half
fr3/s/xyz
fr3/s/rpy
fr3/s/static
iMAP⋆[2]
0.638
0.410
0.834
0.102
0.812
0.420
0.364
0.074
NICE-SLAM [5]
0.629
0.302
0.724
0.092
0.569
0.394
0.099
0.029
NID-SLAM(Ours)
0.071
0.064
0.648
0.062
0.105
0.075
0.086
0.019
ORB-SLAM2 [1]
0.467
0.721
0.784
0.387
0.019
0.009
0.019
0.009
Dyna-SLAM [7]
0.029
0.015
0.136
0.007
0.025
0.013
\
\
fr3/w/xyz
Sequence
NICE-SLAM w/o mask
iMAP⋆w mask
NICE-SLAM w mask
NID-SLAM(Ours)
fr3/s/half
fr3/s/static
Fig. 3. Reconstruction results on TUM RGB-D. The red box highlights areas with dynamic object.
TABLE II
Translational RPE RMSE RESULTS [m](↓) ON TUM.
fr3/w/half
fr3/w/xyz
fr3/s/half
fr3/s/xyz
iMAP⋆[2]
0.990
0.656
1.278
0.787
NICE-SLAM [5]
0.978
0.493
0.925
0.890
NID-SLAM
0.105
0.096
0.149
0.114
ORB-SLAM2 [1]
0.348
0.394
0.023
0.012
Dyna-SLAM [7]
0.028
0.022
0.024
0.014
Evaluation on a larger dynamic scene. To evaluate the
scalability of our method, we captured a sequence in a large
conference room with two people sitting or walking in it. Fig. 1
shows the reconstruction results obtained using NID-SLAM,
demonstrating that our approach’s ability to accurately capture
geometric details while eliminating holes.
C. Ablation study
Depth revision. We demonstrate the effectiveness of depth
revision on TUM [18]. As shown in Table V, failing to revise
depth information and further refining semantic masks not only
TABLE III
Rotational RPE RMSE RESULTS [m](↓) ON TUM.
fr3/w/half
fr3/w/xyz
fr3/s/half
fr3/s/xyz
iMAP⋆[2]
96.650
36.240
75.195
25.547
NICE-SLAM [5]
81.731
15.286
73.552
39.729
NID-SLAM
3.227
2.114
4.922
2.760
ORB-SLAM2 [1]
7.214
7.785
0.601
0.489
Dyna-SLAM [7]
0.784
0.628
0.705
0.504
TABLE IV
RECONSTRUCTION RESULTS IN THE REPLICA DATASET (AVERAGE OVER 8
SCENES).
iMAP⋆
DI-Fusion [20]
NICE-SLAM
Ours
Depth L1 ↓
7.64
23.33
3.53
2.87
Acc. ↓
6.95
19.40
2.85
2.72
Comp. ↓
5.33
10.19
3.00
2.56
Comp. Ratio ↑
66.60
72.96
89.33
91.16
significantly reduces tracking accuracy but also leads to less

NICE-SLAM [5]
room-0
room-1
office-2
Ours
GT
Fig. 4. Reconstruction results on Replica dataset. The red box highlights the
improved areas.
TABLE V
ABLATION STUDY OF OUR DESIGN CHOICES ON THE TUM SEQUENCE
FR3/W/HALF AND FR3/W/XYZ.
Depth
Keyframe
Sampling
fr3/w/half
fr3/w/xyz
Revision
Strategy
Strategy
×
✓
✓
0.094
0.069
✓
×
✓
0.099
0.073
✓
✓
×
0.094
0.067
✓
✓
✓
0.071
0.064
robustness.
Keyframe selection. We test our method using overlap-
based strategy (as shown in the second row of Table V),
where they simply perform equidistant selection. In contrast,
our specially designed strategy for dynamic scenes not only
enhances tracking robustness but also enriches the keyframe
set with extensive scene information, playing a vital role in
accurate tracking.
Sampling. In Table V, we also illustrate the effectiveness of
our pixel sampling strategy. Results indicate that performing
surface-based sampling and filtering out irrelevant points for
rendering enhances the quality of sampled points, thereby
improving the accuracy of camera tracking.
V. CONCLUSION
We introduce NID-SLAM, a dynamic RGB-D neural SLAM
approach. We demonstrate that neural SLAM is capable of
achieving high-quality mapping and plausible hole filling in
dynamic scenes. Leveraging dynamic objects removal, our
approach enables stable camera tracking and creates reusable
static maps. The accurately obtained images, with dynamic
objects removed, may also be utilized in further applications
such as robotic navigation.
Limitations. The real-time performance of our method is cur-
rently limited by the speed of segmentation network. Finding
a balance between segmentation quality and speed remains
a direction for future research. Instead of solely relying on
the static map, integrating the predictive capabilities of neural
networks could lead to more comprehensive and accurate
background inpainting.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partially supported by the Key R&D Program
of Zhejiang Province (No. 2023C01181)
