Emerging multidisciplinary research across database 
management systems  
Anisoara Nica1, Fabian M. Suchanek2 * and Aparna S. Varde3 
1. Sybase iAnywhere, Waterloo, ON, Canada 
2. INRIA Saclay, Paris, France 
3. Department of Computer Science, Montclair State University, Montclair, NJ, USA 

                                                                 
* The work by Fabian Suchanek has been partially funded by the European Research Council under the European Community's Seventh 
Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) / ERC grant Webdam, agreement 226513. http://webdam.inria.fr/  
ABSTRACT 
The database community is exploring more and more 
multidisciplinary avenues: Data semantics overlaps with 
ontology management; reasoning tasks venture into the 
domain of artificial intelligence; and data stream 
management and information retrieval shake hands, e.g., 
when processing Web click-streams. These new research 
avenues become evident, for example, in the topics that 
doctoral students choose for their dissertations. This 
paper surveys the emerging multidisciplinary research by 
doctoral students in database systems and related areas. It 
is based on the PIKM 2010, which is the 3rd Ph.D. 
workshop at the International Conference on Information 
and Knowledge Management (CIKM). The topics 
addressed include ontology development, data streams, 
natural language processing, medical databases, green 
energy, cloud computing, and exploratory search. In 
addition to core ideas from the workshop, we list some 
open research questions in these multidisciplinary areas. 
 
1. SURVEY OF TOPICS 
Our survey groups the topics of the workshop 
into six research domains. We start with two core areas of 
database research, data mining and stream processing. We 
proceed to the sister domain of database management, 
Information Retrieval, before venturing into Information 
Extraction and the relatively new area of Privacy and 
Trust. We conclude with an application-driven domain, 
data warehouse management. We shed light on new 
research proposals in each of these domains, as well as on 
open issues. 
 
1.1. Data mining 
Data mining, the science of discovering 
meaningful knowledge in data, has always been a core 
area of database research. Nowadays, with the advent of 
large semantic knowledge bases, the area faces new 
challenges, for example with the task of integrating and 
aligning ontologies. The keynote of our workshop, 
Leveraging Logical and Statistical Inference in Ontology 
Alignment [9] by Professor Renée J. Miller from the 
University of Toronto, gave an overview on the work 
done in this area. It also presented a new approach, 
“Integrated Learning In Alignment of Data and Schema” 
(ILIADS), which combines data matching and logical 
reasoning to achieve better matching of ontologies. 
Professor Miller ended her talk with advice for graduate 
students based on her own experience – both as a student 
and as a graduate adviser. 
Another problem in the area of data mining is 
frequent subgraph mining. Garcia et al. [5] study this 
problem with techniques available inside a database 
management 
system. 
Three 
fundamental 
research 
problems under a database approach are discussed: 
efficient graph storage and indexing, searching for 
frequent subgraphs and finding subgraph isomorphism 
using SQL. The solutions toward these problems are 
outlined, together with the preliminary experimental 
validation, focusing on query optimizations and time 
complexity. 
Park et al. [13] research the issue of finding 
statistical correlations among pairs of attribute values in 
relational database systems. By extending the Bayesian 
network models the authors provide a probabilistic 
ranking function based on a limited assumption of value 
independence. Experimental results show that the 
proposed model improves the retrieval effectiveness on 
real datasets and has a reasonable query processing time 
compared to previous related work.  
Discussions with the speakers at the workshop 
pointed to open research avenues in the area of data 
mining in general. One such avenue, inspired by the 
keynote talk, is investigating the usefulness of data 
mining in the Semantic Web: Data can be mined from the 
Semantic Web (for tasks such as summarization or 
alignment) as well as for the Semantic Web (with the 
purpose of adding new knowledge to an ontology). The 
interplay of these two directions appears still largely 
unexplored. 

 
1.2. Stream processing 
As more and more data (such as sensor data) 
becomes available in the form of continuous streams, new 
avenues of research open up. Amiguet et al. [2], for 
example, address the issue of semantic changes 
(annotations) in the stream data processing of sensor 
networks. The propagation of annotations through the 
workflow, as part of the data processing, raises interesting 
research questions related to how the propagation 
depends on the structural and temporal contributions, and 
on the annotation significance. The work shows its 
practical viability through a case study from a climate 
forecasting application that processes temperature sensor 
data. This paper won the best paper award in the PIKM 
2010 workshop. 
Another problem in stream processing is the 
adaptation of the system to different utilizations. Farag et 
al. [4] propose new algorithms for providing good data 
stream system performance during periods of peak load 
and periods of delays. The “External Memory Sliding 
Window Join” (EM-SWJoin) algorithm utilizes external 
memory data structures to adapt to the variable data 
arrival rates while keeping disk access latency at 
minimum. The “ADaptive Execution of DAta Streams” 
(ADEDAS) algorithm guarantees ordered release of 
output results to the user/application while controlling the 
impact of delays over stream processing. Thus, it 
addresses the problem of releasing output results in an 
increasing order of timestamp when the input data items 
arrive out-of order. The authors exemplify their approach 
through a system that monitors online stocks. 
In some scenarios, several data streams come 
together. Huq et al. [6] discuss how different data streams 
can be coordinated, how storage space can be optimized 
and how the database state can be kept consistent in a 
distributed scenario. The main application the authors 
have in mind is sensor-based experiments, for example 
based on motion sensors. 
This last talk brought up the idea to investigate 
column-oriented data representations in data stream 
environments. Such a representation will require stronger 
coordination (horizontally in addition to vertically), but 
might potentially improve output efficiency and overall 
system performance. 
 
1.3. Information retrieval 
Recent years have seen an opening up of the 
border between the database research and information 
retrieval. Storing data and querying data go hand in hand, 
and this applies to both structured data and unstructured 
data. In many scenarios, queries can be classified into 
“lookup searches” and “exploratory searches”. In lookup 
searches, users “look up” details on topics known to 
them; in exploratory searchers they “explore” new 
information. Mirizzi et al. [10] propose to combine these 
two concepts. They present a Web-based tool called 
“Lookup Discover Explore” (LED) that improves lookup 
search by adding exploration capabilities. LED supports a 
lookup step, an exploratory step and a meta search 
process. Given a keyword query, their system can display 
DBpedia resources with a graph explorer, a ranker and a 
context analyzer. One of the contributions of their work is 
a novel approach to browsing by exploiting the Semantic 
Web. 
Di Buccio et al. [3] address the related problem 
of querying a document collection with short textual 
queries. Newer systems use relevance feedback from 
different sources of evidence. In this paper, the authors 
propose a uniform model for these evidence sources. 
One area of Information Retrieval that is gaining 
more and more attention lately is the exploitation of the 
deep Web. Tjin-Kam-Jet [17] proposes to address this 
challenge in a distributed environment. Given the fact that 
the deep Web is up to two orders of magnitude larger than 
the surface Web, they argue that distribution might be the 
key to scalability. This work proposes to automatically 
convert free-text queries to structured queries for complex 
web forms in order to make the deep web more easily 
searchable. Challenges include developing a formal query 
description syntax, translating queries with correct 
interpretation, bridging the gap between user expectations 
and system capabilities, adapting query description for 
resource selection, ranking top k resources, merging 
results from resources to maximize precision, recall and 
suggestion ranking for users with respect to resources. He 
aims to evaluate this solution with a prototype system and 
user studies, criteria being processing time and user 
satisfaction. 
Discussions following the talk [17] brought up 
the idea of studying distributed deep web searches in the 
context of handheld mobile devices. As mobile devices 
become practically ubiquitous (and reasonably powerful, 
too), it might become possible to utilize their capacities 
for distributed query processing. 
 
1.4. Information extraction 
Information extraction, in its widest sense, is the 
extraction of structured data from unstructured data. One 
domain where large corpora of unstructured text would 
particularly benefit from information extraction is the 
medical domain. Raghavan et al. [15] are concerned with 
extracting information from medical reports. A medical 
report is a natural language description of diagnoses, 
treatments or medications, together with structured 
information about the patient. The goal is to extract a 
chronology of events from the reports. Such chronologies 
can then be used to review a patient’s history or to gather 
statistical data about the effectiveness or consequences of 

 
medical treatments. The task is challenging, because the 
reports use medical jargon and colloquial temporal 
expressions (“two days ago”). The paper conducts two 
initial case studies: In the first, machine learning on 
medical reports is used to determine whether patients 
qualify for Leukemia trials. In the second, a bio-specimen 
repository is augmented with data from medical reports. 
This additional data facilitates the classification of tissue 
probes and also information retrieval on the specimen 
database.  
Kliegr [7] discusses the problem of noun phrase 
classification: Given a noun phrase (such as an image 
caption) and given a set of classes (such as “Nature” or 
“City”), the task is to assign a class to the noun phrase. 
This problem is challenging, because the classes are user-
defined and the noun phrases do not necessarily have 
context. The paper proposes to map the noun phrase to a 
weighted set of related Wikipedia articles (a “bag of 
articles”, BOA). Likewise, each class is mapped to a 
BOA. Then, the classification problem is reduced to 
determining the similarity between the noun phrase BOA 
and the class BOAs. 
This last talk [7] has shown us that the 
possibilities that Wikipedia offers for information 
extraction are not yet fully exploited. The first talk [15] 
has pointed us to an area where Information Extraction 
(and possibly data mining) could find attractive 
applications: the medical domain. 
 
1.5. Privacy and Trust  
As more and more data is being produced, stored 
and made public, issues such as security, trust and privacy 
gain more and more attention. Consider for example 
pervasive health care systems. These are systems that 
monitor medical indicators on the patient and send their 
data to a medical center. These systems can greatly 
increase efficiency and safety, but come with the problem 
of data security. Acharya et al. [1] address the possible 
security threats in pervasive health care systems. One 
particular security loophole is the need to exchange 
encryption keys. The paper proposes a communication 
scheme that eliminates the need to broadcast encryption 
keys. 
Security and trust are even more obvious issues 
when it comes to sharing data in cloud computing 
systems. Driven by this insight, Thorpe [16] develops a 
trust paradigm for the cloud. The paper considers 
interactions, reputation, knowledge and experience with 
respect to the cloud. Concepts such as user trust, cloud 
trust, cloud trust peer and cloud distrust are defined and 
an algorithm is proposed for a trust cloud context graph. 
The algorithm takes all the variables into account that are 
relevant to the cloud, i.e., machines, storage components 
and connected nodes. This encourages work on a context-
neutral autonomous cloud monitor agent.  
Just as [15], the authors of [1] target the medical 
domain. We take this as an indication that this domain 
can attract research from different areas of computer 
science, including security, privacy, data management, 
information extraction and systems research.  
 
1.6. Workflow and Management  
Research in databases can also touch quite 
practical issues such as the management of data centers. 
As data centers grow larger and larger and ever more 
powerful, pragmatic concerns such as heat management 
and environmental compatibility arise. Pawlish et al. [14], 
for example, are concerned with the environment-friendly 
management of data centers. The ultimate aim is to 
provide the data center manager with a tool that can help 
decide management questions, such as whether to buy 
new hardware and what hardware, in order to minimize 
the environmental impact of the facility. For this purpose, 
the paper first explains what data is necessary to support 
such decisions. These include, e.g., data on energy use, 
humidity, acoustic levels, and the carbon footprint of the 
center. For proof of concept, the authors have collected 
such data for one data center. Then, the paper proposes to 
build decision trees on top of these data and to use case 
based reasoning in order to determine economically 
sensible management steps. The paper outlines this 
framework supported by some real world examples. 
Another issue in data warehousing environments 
is the problem of consistent data quality. As warehousing 
environments are often dynamically changing the quality 
of various resources and also the users’ quality 
requirements, there is a need to capture quality changes 
on-the-fly 
and 
also 
provide 
automated 
quality 
notifications back to end users. Therefore, Li et al. [8] 
propose 
an 
extended 
data 
warehousing 
systems 
architecture that incorporates and extends the concepts of 
the “Quality Factory” (QF) and the “Quality Notification 
Service” (QNS), and adopts the “Data Warehouse 
Quality” (DWQ) methodology to provide both subjective 
and objective quality assessments of the end-users’ 
quality requirements. 
Apart from quality, efficiency of processes is 
also almost always an issue. Naseri et al. [11] are 
concerned with optimizing workflow management. They 
propose to systematically store, analyze and mine data 
about successful workflow executions in order to 
optimize workflow composition, workflow selection and 
workflow refinement. 
Discussions 
during 
the 
workshop 
were 
particularly attracted to the concept of managing data 
warehouses. This area touches not just several domains of 
computer science (such as storage, querying, and quality 

 
estimation), but also other domains such as economics, 
the environmental sciences and the legal domain. The 
talks in this session have raised awareness for the 
practical impacts of our ever-growing amounts of data, 
their quality and their storage. 
 
2. CONCLUSIONS 
This paper presents a short survey of emerging 
research across database systems and related areas. It 
focused on the work that doctoral students presented at 
the PIKM workshop in ACM CIKM 2010. From a 
research point of view, the work is spread over areas as 
diverse 
as 
information 
extraction 
and 
workflow 
management, stream processing and security. From an 
application point of view, the work is concerned with 
cloud computing systems, sensor networks, practical 
aspects of data warehouse management and Web search. 
The medical domain with its applications has also 
attracted particular interest. The new research proposals 
as well as discussions with the students have illuminated 
some of the new research avenues in the domain of 
databases and beyond.  
 
3. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We sincerely thank the CIKM 2010 organizers for their 
help and support in organizing the Ph.D. workshop 
PIKM. In particular we thank the General Chair, Jimmy 
Huang and the Workshops Chair, Mounia Lalmas, for 
their cooperation. We also express our sincere gratitude 
towards the 24 PC members of PIKM, spread over 12 
countries across the globe. They comprised well-known 
experts from industry and academia and their exhaustive 
reviews helped to make this workshop a fruitful and 
enriching experience. All of this helped set the stage for 
writing this article.  
 
4. REFERENCES 
[1] D. Acharya and V. Kumar. A secure pervasive health care 
system using location dependent unicast key generation 
scheme. In PIKM 2010. 
[2] J. Amiguet, A. Wombacher, and T. E. Klifman. 
Annotations: 
Dynamic 
semantics 
in 
stream 
processing. In PIKM 2010. 
[3] E. Di Buccio and M. Melucci. Toward the design of a 
methodology to predict relevance through multiple 
sources of evidence. In PIKM 2010. 
[4] F. Farag, M. Hammad, and R. Alhajj. Adaptive query 
processing in data stream management systems under 
limited memory resources. In PIKM 2010. 
[5] W. Garcia, C. Ordonez, K. Zhao, and P. Chen. 
Efficient algorithms based on relational queries to 
mine frequent graphs. In PIKM 2010. 
[6] M. R. Huq, A. Wombacher, and P. M. G. Apers. 
Identifying the challenges for optimizing the process 
to 
achieve 
reproducible 
results 
in 
E-science 
applications. In PIKM 2010. 
[7] T. Kliegr. Entity classification by bag of Wikipedia 
articles. In PIKM 2010. 
[8] Y. Li and K. M. Osei-Bryson. Quality factory and 
quality notification service in data warehouse. In 
PIKM 2010. 
[9] R. J. Miller, Leveraging Logical and Statistical 
Inference in Ontology Alignment, Keynote Talk In 
PIKM 2010. 
[10] R. Mirizzi and T. Di Noia. From exploratory search 
to web search and back. In PIKM 2010. 
[11] M. Naseri and S. A. Ludwig. A multi-functional 
architecture 
addressing 
workflow 
and 
service 
challenges using provenance data. In PIKM 2010. 
[12] A. Nica and A. S. Varde, editors. Proceedings of the 
Third Ph.D. Workshop in CIKM, PIKM 2010, 
Nineteenth ACM Conference on Information and 
Knowledge Management, CIKM 2010, Toronto, 
Canada, Oct. 2010. ACM. 
[13] J. Park and S. G. Lee. Probabilistic ranking for 
relational databases based on correlations. In PIKM 
2010. 
[14] M. J. Pawlish and A. S. Varde. A decision support 
system for green data centers. In PIKM 2010. 
[15] P. Raghavan and A. M. Lai. Leveraging natural 
language processing of clinical narratives for 
phenotype modeling. In PIKM 2010. 
[16] S. Thorpe. Modeling a trust cloud context. In PIKM 
2010. 
[17] K.T. Tjin-Kam-Jet. Research proposal for distributed 
deep web search. In PIKM 2010.
