Topic-based Evaluation for Conversational Bots
Fenfei Guo∗, 1 Angeliki Metallinou,2 Chandra Khatri,2
Anirudh Raju,2 Anu Venkatesh,2 Ashwin Ram2
1University of Maryland, Department of Computer Science and UMIACS, 2Amazon Alexa

Abstract
Dialog evaluation is a challenging problem, especially for non task-oriented dialogs
where conversational success is not well-deﬁned. We propose to evaluate dialog
quality using topic-based metrics that describe the ability of a conversational bot to
sustain coherent and engaging conversations on a topic, and the diversity of topics
that a bot can handle. To detect conversation topics per utterance, we adopt Deep
Average Networks (DAN) and train a topic classiﬁer on a variety of question and
query data categorized into multiple topics. We propose a novel extension to DAN
by adding a topic-word attention table that allows the system to jointly capture
topic keywords in an utterance and perform topic classiﬁcation. We compare our
proposed topic based metrics with the ratings provided by users and show that
our metrics both correlate with and complement human judgment. Our analysis is
performed on tens of thousands of real human-bot dialogs from the Alexa Prize
competition and highlights user expectations for conversational bots.
1
Introduction
Voice powered personal assistants like Amazon Alexa, Google Assistant and Apple Siri have become
popular among consumers as they are intuitive to use and resemble human communication. However,
most such assistants are designed for short, task-oriented dialogs, such as playing music or asking
for information, as opposed to longer free-form conversations. Achieving sustained, coherent and
engaging dialog is the next frontier for conversational AI, which would enable Artiﬁcially Intelligent
agents to lead natural and enjoyable conversations with their human interlocutors.
Evaluation of a conversational quality for non task-oriented bots is a challenging and understudied
research problem [14]. Conversational success is not well deﬁned for such bots and, as with human-
human dialogs, an interlocutor’s satisfaction with a bot could be related to how engaging, coherent
and enjoyable was the conversation. A conversation could be viewed as an exchange of information
and opinions on a ﬂow of topics; therefore we propose topic-based metrics to evaluate conversational
bot quality. Speciﬁcally, we examine (1) Topic breadth - the ability of a bot to converse on a variety
of coarse and ﬁne grained topics without repeating itself, and (2) Topic depth - the ability to sustain
long and coherent conversations on a given topic. These metrics are proposed for evaluating bots that
are designed to initiate conversations on various topics and maintain user engagement in the dialog.
To classify the conversation topics, we adopt Deep Average Networks (DAN) [6] and train a supervised
topic classiﬁer on internal Question data and Alexa knowledge-query data to identify topics per
utterance. Next, we extend DAN with a topic-wise attention table which learns topic-word weights
across the vocabulary so that it can detect topic-speciﬁc keywords per utterance. This enables our
topic classiﬁer to not only identify the coarse level topic of an utterance such as “Politics”, but also
to highlight ﬁne-grained topic words like “Trump” which indicates the entity that the user is talking
about. Both models are used to analyze tens of thousands of human-bot conversations collected as
part of the Alexa Prize competition, a university competition sponsored by Amazon Alexa.
∗Work done during an internship at Amazon Alexa
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.
arXiv:1801.03622v1  [cs.CL]  11 Jan 2018

We show that the topic classiﬁer and topic keyword detector achieves good accuracy on left-out
internal test sets that are similar to conversational data, and can detect meaningful keywords per
topic. Using the hypothesis of our topic and keyword detector we deﬁne conversational quality
metrics that describe topic depth and breadth. We show that the ability of a bot to maintain long
topic-speciﬁc coherent sub-conversations correlate well with user satisfaction measured by live user
ratings and are therefore valid both the effectiveness of our trained topic classiﬁer and the data-driven
metrics for assessing conversation quality. Further analysis shows that some topic metrics, such as
the topic-speciﬁc keywords coverage, can complement human judgment and uncover problems of a
dialog system that are obscured by the user ratings due the intrinsic limitations of live data collection.
Our analysis of tens of thousands of human-bot dialogs offers automatic and interpretable metrics of
conversational bot quality and sheds light into user expectations from a good conversational bot.
2
Related Work
Automatic dialog evaluation is a challenging research area. Previous work has introduced evaluation
metrics related to task success for evaluating task-based bots [22]. However, there is no well-deﬁned
measure of success for conversational bots, and there can be multiple valid bot responses for a given
user utterance. Dialog researchers have used metrics of word overlap between a bot response and a
reference valid response [19, 10, 23, 24], such as BLEU [17], METEOR [2], and embedding based
metrics [24]. However, such metrics don’t account well for the signiﬁcant diversity between multiple
valid bot responses, and have recently been shown to correlate poorly with human judgments of
response quality [12]. Galley et al. [5] proposed deltaBLEU, a modiﬁed BLEU that considers multiple
human-evaluated ground truth responses; however, such annotations are very expensive to collect
in practice. Lowe et al. [14] proposed an Automatic Dialogue Evaluation Model (ADEM) which
learns to predict human-like scores to input responses. However, ADEM requires human ratings
for each response instead of conversation-level ratings, which are expensive to collect, noisy, and
lack interpretability if users do not clarify their evaluation criteria. Here, we propose dialog-level
interpretable evaluation metrics for the evaluation of topic coherence and diversity.
Deep learning advances have had a profound inﬂuence on natural language and dialog research,
and researchers have experimented with Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs)[11], [20], [13] and
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [9], [4], [8] for text classiﬁcation and summarization tasks.
Recent work indicates that simpler bag-of-words neural models, like Deep Averaging Networks
(DAN) [6] or FastText [7], can achieve state of the art results for sentence classiﬁcation tasks like
sentiment analysis and factoid question answering [6], and are efﬁcient to train. In this work, we
take advantage of such simple and efﬁcient bag-of-word models for topic classiﬁcation.
3
The Alexa Prize Competition
Alexa Prize [21] is a competition organized by Amazon Alexa machine learning [1] that aims
to advance the state of conversational AI. This competition enables university research teams to
innovate on AI technologies using large-scale live conversational data from real users. As part of
the competition, 15 university teams were selected among hundreds of proposals and competed to
win a large monetary prize to fund their research. They were provided data, funding, infrastructure,
access to a large user base and expert guidance to develop socialbots that can converse engagingly
and coherently on various popular topics and current events such as entertainment, sports, politics,
and others. These 15 socialbots were deployed to the Alexa Service and released to millions of Alexa
users. Alexa users could converse with a randomly selected bot on any Alexa-enabled device by
using the phrase “Alexa, let’s chat”. For each conversation, a random bot was matched with a user.
At the end of the conversation, the users were prompted to rate the socialbot quality and had the
option to provide feedback to the university teams.
4
Datasets
4.1
Conversational Analysis data
Conversation data
We analyze tens of thousands of conversations between Alexa users and the
socialbots collected over one month of the competition.2 Each conversation has a live user rating.
The average number of turns per conversation is 12. Table 2 shows an example conversation.
2We used one month of data for this work, which was the data that has RER (see next page) annotations
available during the timespan that this work was performed.
2

Internal Question data
Alexa knowledge-query data
Topic
Example
Topic
Example
Entertainment_Movies
Who made the movie ‘Interstellar’?
Politics
How old is Donald Trump?
Politics_Government
Can an American join the British SAS?
Sports
Who is pitching for the Red Sox?
Sports_Baseball
When is the Atlanta Braves next game?
Science
How far is the moon from the earth?
Business_Corporate
What is godaddy dot com
Phatic
How are you?
Table 1: Left: examples from the internal Question dataset containing questions from different topics (without
answers); Right: examples from topic speciﬁc knowledge queries by customers interacting with Alexa
Live user ratings
At the end of each conversation, the user is prompted to rate the socialbot on
a scale of 1 to 5 stars, based on whether they would like to chat with that socialbot again. While
individual ratings are subjective, by averaging multiple ratings at the bot level we expect the average
rating to indicate user satisfaction and reﬂect conversational bot quality. We use the live user ratings
to validate our proposed topic-based metrics of conversational bot quality (Section 7.3).
Response Error Rate (RER) for measuring coherence
To capture the coherence of the conver-
sation, we annotated tens of thousands of randomly selected interactions for incorrect, irrelevant, or
inappropriate responses. The Response Error Rate (RER) for each socialbot is deﬁned as the ratio
of the number of turns with erroneous responses (incorrect, irrelevant, inappropriate) over the total
number of turns. Manual annotations of coherence are useful because the diversity of possible valid
bot responses makes the dialog evaluation problem subjective. Here, manual RER metrics are used
to validate the live user ratings and our proposed automatic topic-based metrics, since all of those
metrics reﬂect dialog quality and are expected to correlate well with each other (Section 7.3).
4.2
Training data
The Alexa Prize conversations were not annotated in terms of topics. We used the internal Question
data and Alexa knowledge-query data to train the supervised topic classiﬁer.
Internal Question data
This is a large Amazon internal resource containing about 5 million
questions that are categorized into 55 topics. See the left side of Table 1 for some examples. This
dataset provides a rich source of named entities, however it is a few years out of date.
Alexa knowledge-query data
We annotated around 750K general knowledge queries from internal
Alexa user data into 26 topics including Science, Politics, Sports, etc. This dataset comes from actual
Alexa users and is more up-to-date. The right side of Table 1 shows a few examples. Phatic indicates
non-topical chit-chat utterances that may include user preference ( “I like you”), acknowledgement
(“thanks”, “sounds good”), personal questions (“how are you”) and other non-topical utterances.
5
Topic Classiﬁcation
We build supervised topic classiﬁers to both identify the topic of each utterance and detect topic-
speciﬁc keywords for the purpose of topic-based analysis of conversations. The training data, i.e.
internal Question and Alexa knowledge-query data, cover a range of topics that we expect to ﬁnd in
bot conversations. However, the data consists mostly of questions while the human-bot utterances
could also be statements, opinions, requests, greetings, etc. To prevent overﬁtting our classiﬁer on the
syntactic structure of the training data, we adopt the bag-of-word assumption.
5.1
The DAN topic classiﬁer model
We adopt the Deep Averaging Network (DAN) model proposed by Iyyer et al. [6] as our ﬁrst classiﬁer.
DAN is a bag-of-words neural model (see Figure 1) that averages the word embeddings in each input
utterance as the utterance representation s. s is passed through a series of fully connected layers, and
fed into a softmax layer for classiﬁcation. Assume an input utterance of length L, and corresponding
word embeddings ei, i = 1, · · · L, then the utterance representation is: s = 1
L
PL
i=1 ei.
DAN has been proven a state-of-the-art model for the Factoid Question Answering task [6] because
of its ability to memorize keywords and its robustness to noise. This meets well our needs for
topic classiﬁcation, therefore DAN is an effective and efﬁcient classiﬁer choice. Speed is a crucial
requirement, as we want to efﬁciently process large amounts of Alexa Prize conversations. The
simple feedforward multi-layer fully-connected structure can be accelerated with the usage of GPUs.
3

Figure 1: The structure of DAN.
Figure 2: The structure of ADAN.
5.2
Attentional DAN: An interpretable model for topicwise keywords detection
While the DAN model can classify the topic of an utterance, it does not explain why a certain
classiﬁcation decision was made. We also want to know which topic-speciﬁc keywords in each
utterance relate most to its topic. For example, for “when is the atlanta braves next game”, we want
to both classify the topic as Sports, and identify topic-speciﬁc keywords like “game” and “braves”.
This allows a more ﬁne-grained understanding of the topics and named entities in an utterance.
We propose an Attentional Deep Average Network (ADAN) to jointly learn the topic-wise word
saliency for each input utterance along with the classiﬁcation objective. In the probabilistic topic
model, a topic is deﬁned as a distribution over a ﬁxed vocabulary [3]. Here, we model this distribution
by a topic-word attention table of size K ×|V | as shown in Figure 2, where |V | is the vocabulary size
and K the number of topics in our classiﬁcation task. ADAN maintains the bag-of-words assumption
and applies weighted average over the input word embeddings with learned attentions to obtain
the utterance representation. Speciﬁcally, the saliency weight wk,i in the topic-word attention table
corresponds to the saliency of word xi given topic tk. Assuming an utterance [e1, · · · , eL] of length
L, where ei is the embedding of the ith word, we compute the attention weights [αk,1, · · · , αk,L] by
normalizing the saliency wk,i with a softmax function (we normalize across utterance of length L as
opposed to across the whole vocabulary to reduce computation cost). The utterance representation sk
per topic is computed through weighted average:
[αk,1, · · · , αk,L] = softmax([wk,1, · · · , wk,L]), sk = 1
L
L
X
i=1
αk,iei
(1)
In Figure 2, the topic-speciﬁc sentence representation S is a K × D matrix where each row is a topic
speciﬁc representation sk and D is the embedding dimension. S is passed through a series of fully
connected layers and fed through a softmax. The word embedding matrix can be initialized with any
pre-trained embeddings such as GloVe [18] and Word2Vec [15, 16], while the topic-word attention
matrix is initialized randomly and is learnt from data. We use ReLUs as the nonlinearity. During
testing, the learnt topic-word weights can be examined for each test utterance to detect the most
salient words for a given topic classiﬁcation decision k. Speciﬁcally, we examine the corresponding
weight matrix [w1,k, · · · , wL,k] for topic k, rank the words according to descending weights w1,k
and pick the top most informative words in the utterance. The ADAN model is interpretable as it
allows uncovering the salient words that contribute most to the topic classiﬁcation decision.
6
Topic Based Evaluation Metrics for Conversational Bots
We introduce interpretable dialog-level and system-level quality metrics that measure conversation
topic depth and breadth. We hypothesize that if a bot is able to converse on a wide range of topics
without repeating itself and can sustain lengthy conversations on a topic, it’s more likely to result in
an enjoyable conversation. In Section 6, we examine this hypothesis by computing correlations of
our metrics with the live user ratings collected in the Alexa Prize competition. Below, we deﬁne the
following concepts as the basis of proposed topic related metrics.
Topic-speciﬁc turn T : Deﬁned as a pair of user utterance and conversational bot response where
both utterances belong to the same topic, excluding Phatic. For example turns 1, 2, 3 in Table 2 are
all topic-speciﬁc turns about Music. Phatic is excluded as it does not have a deﬁned topic, and can be
assumed to be chit-chat in the context of the current topic.
4

Topic coherent sub-conversation S: Deﬁned as a series of consecutive topic-speciﬁc turns which
contain at least two consecutive turns, and the Phatic turn is excluded. For example, turns 1-3 in
Table 2 is a sub-conversation on Music.
Length of sub-conversation ls: Deﬁned as the number of topic-speciﬁc turns it contains. For
example, the Music sub-conversation of Table 2 has length 3.
Length of consecutive conversation lc: Deﬁned as the total number of the topic-speciﬁc turns. For
example, the conversation of Table 2 has length 4.
Table 2: Example socialbot conversation turns and corresponding topics
Turns
Utterances
Topics
1. User
Let’s talk about music
Music
1. Socialbot
Sure, what’s your favorite musician?
Music
2. User
Bob Dylan
Music
2. Socialbot
Bob Dylan is an American songwriter, singer, painter, and writer.
Music
3. User
Cool
Phatic
3. Socialbot
Do you want to know more about Bob Dylan?
Music
4. User
No, let’s talk about politics instead
Politics
4. Socialbot
Sure, here are the latest updates about Donald Trump [...]
Politics
6.1
Conversational topic depth
By the deﬁnition of a sub-conversation, the more consecutive turns a sub-conversation has on a
speciﬁc topic, the deeper the conversation goes into this topic. Suppose a conversation Ci has m
sub-conversations Sij, j = 1, ..., m, we can deﬁne:
Dialog-level average topic depth D(Ci) as the average length of all sub-conversations in each
user-bot conversation: D(Ci) = 1
m
Pm
j=1 ls(Sij)
System-level average topic depth D(B) is the average length of all sub-conversations Ci, i = 1, ..., n
generated by a conversational bot B.
6.2
Conversational topic breadth
Conversational topic breadth measures the diversity of topics in each dialog. We measure diversity of
both coarse-grain topics like Sports and ﬁne-grain topic words like “yankees”.
6.2.1
Coarse topic domain coverage
Dialog-level coarse topic breadth Br(Ci) is the number of distinct topics tk that occur during at
least one sub-conversation in conversation Ci. A large Br(Ci) means the user chats with the bot
about multiple topics and each topic is sustained for at least 2 turns, which may indicate an enjoyable
conversation.
System-level coarse topic breadth Bravg(B) = 1
n
Pn
i=1 Br(Ci), where n is the number of conver-
sations generated by bot B, shows the general ability of B to engage in diverse conversations.
System-level coarse topic count N(B, tk) is the total number of sub-conversations with topic tk in
all conversations Ci by B. The histogram of N(B, tk) across topics shows whether a bot mostly talks
about a few topics or tends to talk equally about a range of topics. By normalizing this histogram, we
obtain the System-level coarse topic frequency F(B, tk). A low standard deviation or high entropy
of F(B, tk) shows that B has a balanced ability to talk across a range of topics.
6.2.2
Topic-speciﬁc keywords coverage
The system-level topic-speciﬁc keyword coverage metrics are deﬁned to measure the ability of a
conversational bot to cover a variety of ﬁne-grained topics without repeating itself across dialogs. For
example, a bot that always talks about “Dunkirk” as part of a Movies conversation would probably
not be enjoyable to users that interact regularly with it. We use the top-2 most salient keywords per
utterance detected by ADAN (Section 5.2) to compute the following metrics.
System-level topic keyword coverage Cfine(B) is the total number of distinct topic keywords
across all conversations Ci generated by conversational bot B.
System-level topic keyword count N(B, wk) is the total count of topic keywords wk across all
conversations Ci by B. By averaging over topic keywords, we get the System-level topic keyword
frequency F(B, wk).
5

7
Results and Discussion
We evaluate our proposed topic classiﬁers by separating both internal Question data and Alexa
knowledge-query data (see Section 4.2) into training, dev and test sets by the ratio 8:1:1.
7.1
Topic classiﬁcation with DAN
By varying the network structure we ﬁnd no signiﬁcant improvements with a network of more than
1 hidden layer. Therefore, to prevent overﬁtting and ensure data processing efﬁciency, we ﬁx our
network structure with an embedding dimension of 300 and one hidden layer with 500 nodes.
The results on the internal Question test data are presented in Table 3, where the ﬁrst column
shows classiﬁcation accuracy of the 55 ﬁne grained topics, while the second column shows accuracy
when merging similar topics into 26 coarser topics (e.g., Sports_Baseball, Sports_Football and
Sports_Scores were merged into Sports). Accuracy reaches over 80% for the latter case.
Method
Accuracy
55 topics
26 merged topics
Random initialization
71.2%
–
Fixed GloVe [18] initialization
75.6%
77.1%
GloVe [18] + ﬁne tune
77.3%
82.4%
Table 3: DAN model topic classiﬁcation accuracy on the internal Question test data
We also evaluate DAN on the Alexa knowledge-query data which are annotated into 26 topics. As
described in Section 4, this data set contains 750K annotated utterances, 10% of which are left as a
test set, and 10% as a dev set. The data is highly imbalanced in topics, e.g., 32.7% of utterances are
Phatic whereas only 1.2% are annotated as Literature. In Table 4 we show test set accuracy Overall,
for Phatic and Non-phatic classes separately, and for Literature as an example under-represented topic.
To achieve more balanced accuracy across topics we tried downsampling the Phatic class and transfer
learning, e.g., transferring the embeddings and weights of hidden layers from a network trained on the
larger internal Question dataset. For the latter, the ﬁnal output layer was replaced to be consistent with
the Alexa knowledge-query labels, and the network was ﬁne tuned on the Alexa knowledge-query
data. That way, we are able to use both the internal Question and Alexa knowledge-query data, and
achieve the highest accuracy overall and reasonable accuracy for under-represented topics, see Table
4. We applied this last model for Alexa Prize topic classiﬁcation.
7.2
Topic-speciﬁc keywords identiﬁcation with ADAN
In section 5.2, we propose the ADAN model that jointly classiﬁes topics and detects salient topic-
speciﬁc keywords for each utterance. We evaluate ADAN on the internal Question data, and observe
a slight accuracy decrease compared to DAN (82.4% vs 80.6% on 26 Question topics). This can be
attributed to the large increase of randomly initialized parameters, e.g., attention table, for ADAN.
Detailed results are omitted for lack of space. We tolerate this decrease as ADAN offers interpretability
and keyword detection. We examine the keyword detection quality by looking at the top-2 keywords
for the most likely topic for various input utterances, as in Table 5, and observe reasonable model
behavior. We have manually veriﬁed the detected keyword quality for many example utterances,
while in future we plan to perform more systematic evaluation. We also examine representative topic
keywords overall, by computing top-2 keywords per utterance for the internal Question test data,
and visualizing the most frequent keywords per topic, in Table 6. Again, we observe that the most
frequent keywords relate highly to their topics.
Method
Accuracy
Overall 26 category
Phatic
Non-Phatic
Literature
Randomly initalized word embeddings
68.2%
87.5%
58.9%
27.2%
GloVe +ﬁne tune
75.6%
88.3%
61.8%
34.6%
GloVe +ﬁne tune + downsample Phatic
71.3%
79.1%
67.5%
43.3%
Transfer weights from Question data + ﬁne tune
77.3%
88.2%
64.8%
41.9%
Table 4: DAN model topic classiﬁcation accuracy on Alexa knowledge-query test data
6

Example Utterances
Topic
Top-2 keywords
“My favorite show is
Movies_TV
show,
Star Trek”
Trek
“What are the ingredients
Food_Drink
apple,
for apple pie”
ingredients
Table 5: Examples of topic classiﬁcation and corre-
sponding topic keywords by ADAN for input utterances
Topic
Most frequent keywords
Shopping
cost, walmart, price, worth,
gift, stores, cheapest,...
Religion
bible, life, believe, love,
catholic, christian, jewish,...
Table 6: Examples of most frequent topic words for
the internal Question test data obtained by ADAN
7.3
Conversational analysis results
We apply DAN to tens of thousands of human-bot conversations across all 15 socialbots from the
Alexa Prize competition and obtain the hypothesis topics for both user utterances and socialbot
responses, and use ADAN to obtain the topic-speciﬁc keywords. We use the ensemble results of the
two best performing classiﬁers trained on the internal Question data and Alexa knowledge-query
data respectively. Speciﬁcally, for a given utterance, we compare the normalized entropy of the
two classiﬁcation results and use the one with lower entropy, which indicates higher conﬁdence.
While there is no ground truth for the conversation data, through manual observation we noticed that
ensemble results are more robust than that of a single classiﬁer. Ensembling allows us to combine
the merits of both datasets: the internal Question data which contains richer named entities, and the
Alexa knowledge-query data which are more current. Ensembling also provides richer topics, e.g.,
the internal Question data doesn’t contain Phatic while the Alexa knowledge-query data doesn’t
contain Games, and by ensembling we can detect both.
We noticed that the live user ratings collected for each conversation are very noisy and have high
average standard deviation within each bot (~1.52). Therefore, we decided to compare our evaluation
with human judgment at the system level. To have a reference for comparison, we compute the
Spearman’s rank correlation coefﬁcient ρ between the aggregated live user ratings and the Response
Error Rate (RER). From Table 7, we can see that the RER correlates well negatively with the user
ratings for 15 chatbots (ρ = −0.717). This is reasonable since the fewer erroneous responses there
are, a higher user rating is expected. Therefore, we can use the absolute value |ρ| = 0.717 as
a reference to evaluate our proposed topic metrics. The analysis below presents correlations of
individual metrics with user ratings, while combination of multiple metrics is left as future work.
7.3.1
Evaluating conversational topic depth
We assume that the longer the conversation goes on a speciﬁc topic, the deeper that topic is explored
and the more satisﬁed the user is. To examine this assumption, we compare the system-level topic
depth D(B), i.e., the average length of topic-speciﬁc sub-conversations, with the human judgments
in Table 7. We can see that its correlation with the user ratings is almost as high as the absolute
correlation of RER (|ρRER| = 0.707) with human. To highlight the importance of the topic-speciﬁc
metric, we compute the correlation for the average length of the whole conversations (regardless
of topics) as well. From Table 7, we can see that the topic depth correlates better with the human
judgment than the conversation length. This demonstrates our assumption, i.e , although generally
longer conversations are preferred (ρ = 0.575), the user is more satisﬁed if the bot is able to sustain
longer sub-conversations on the same topic. We can use D(B) as a proxy for user satisfaction. These
results also show the effectiveness of our trained topic classiﬁer for Alexa Prize conversations.
Metrics
Annotated RER
Avg. sub-conversation length D(B)
Avg. conversation length
ρ
-0.717
0.707
0.575
Table 7: Correlation between topic depth metrics and human judgments across 15 socialbots within one month.
Each Spearman’s correlation score ρ is computed with system-level aggregated live user ratings
7.3.2
Evaluating conversational topic breadth
A. Coarse-grain topic breadth evaluation
We compare the topic breadth metrics of Section 6.2 with the human judgments in Table 8. The
average topic breadth Bravg(B) within each conversation correlates reasonably well with user ratings
(ρ = 0.512), which means that when users chat with a bot about various topics in the same conversation,
they tend to rate the bot higher. However coarse topic frequency F(B, tk), which describes the bot’s
7

ability to chat about topics in a balanced way as opposed to preferring certain topics, does not correlate
highly with user rating (ρ = 0.291). This could be a side-effect of the competition protocol, where
users are randomly matched with one of 15 bots for each conversation, so most users would only rate
a speciﬁc bot a handful of times at most and may not notice if a bot is repetitive across conversations.
However, avoiding repetition is important when a conversational bot interacts frequently with the
same user, which is a common commercial use case. Our breadth metric is capturing complementary
information to the user ratings, as it is explicitly designed to describe repetitiveness.
Metrics
Annotated RER
Avg. coarse topic breadth Bravg(B)
Entropy of coarse topic frequency F(B, tk)
ρ
-0.717
0.512
0.291
Table 8: Correlation between topic breadth metrics and human judgments across 15 socialbots within one month.
Each Spearman’s correlation score ρ is computed with system-level aggregated live user ratings
B. Fine-grain topic breadth evaluation
To detect if a bot repeats itself about topic-speciﬁc named entities, we design ﬁne-grained topic
breadth metrics (see Section 6.2). Table 9 compares the behavior of bots and users in the human-bot
dialogs for the top-6 ranked socialbots in the competition using the ﬁne-grain metrics Cfine(B) and
F(B, wk). Although the bot ratings are reasonably good (over 3 out of 5 stars), their behaviors are
quite different. For example, B6 has a lower topic keywords coverage Cfine(B) and a higher topic
keyword frequency F(B, wk), which indicates that this bot tends to talk about a narrower range of
ﬁne-grained topics and repeats itself more often. Note that the corresponding metrics of the user
behavior are relatively stable across the bots, e.g., users do not constrain their conversation to certain
ﬁne-grained topics and respond with a broad vocabulary in general. Similarly to the coarse frequency
F(B, tk), the ﬁne topic word frequency F(B, wk) describes repetitiveness at a ﬁne-grained keyword
level. As described earlier, repetitiveness is not well captured by the user ratings in our setup, since a
typical user gets to rate just a few random bots, and may not notice if a bot repeats itself.
B1
B2
B3
B4
B5
B6
Average live user ratings
–
3.51
3.38
3.19
3.06
3.21
3.13
Topic keyword frequency F(B, wk)
Bot
9.49
6.23
10.21
8.86
12.35
20.56
Topic keyword frequency F(B, wk)
User
5.98
7.00
6.69
5.29
5.72
6.09
Topic keyword coverage Cfine(B)
Bot
2469
3159
2562
3022
1944
904
Topic keyword coverage Cfine(B)
User
3041
1859
2976
2520
1576
2247
Table 9: Comparing the bot and user behavior for top 6 ranked socialbots by ﬁne-grained topic breadth metrics.
In the second column,“Bot” indicates that the metrics are computed with purely bot responses in all dialogs;
“User” indicates that only user utterances are used.
8
Conclusions and Future Work
The purpose of this work is to design interpretable metrics for evaluating non-task chat-oriented
dialog systems and provide meaningful guidance for designing the pipeline of a conversational AI.
Along these lines, we proposed several dialog-level/system-level evaluation metrics based on topic
coherence, diversity and depth. These metrics are designed for evaluating conversational bots that
are developed to lead and sustain engaging conversations on a variety of topics. We developed a
novel attention-based neural topic model, the Attentional Deep Average Network (ADAN), that
jointly learns a topic-word attention table along with the classiﬁcation objective. This enabled us to
identify both the most likely topic and the most salient topic-speciﬁc keywords in each utterance. Our
model was trained and evaluated on a variety of internal datasets. Our results demonstrate good topic
classiﬁcation accuracy and the ADAN model’s ability to identify reasonable topic-speciﬁc keywords.
Using the results of both DAN [6] and ADAN and our proposed topic-based metrics, we evaluated
multiple aspects of a bot’s quality including for how long it can sustain coherent sub-conversation on a
topic and whether it can lead non-repetitive dialogs on a variety of ﬁne and coarse grained topics. We
showed that a user’s satisfaction correlates well with long and coherent on-topic conversations, while
metrics of topic breadth may provide complementary information to user ratings, as the repetitiveness
of topics is hardly captured in user ratings due to the intrinsic limitations of live user data collection.
Future work will address how to incorporate such metrics for improving the quality of a conversational
bot. We also plan to investigate unsupervised topic modeling methods to learn latent topics from
large amounts of unlabeled human-bot interactions as well as develop topic models that incorporate
conversation context from both interaction parties.
8
