1
Modeling context and situations in pervasive
computing environments
Preeti Bhargava, Shivsubramani Krishnamoorthy, Ashok Agrawala
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park

Abstract—In pervasive computing environments, various entities often have to cooperate and integrate seamlessly in a
situation which can, thus, be considered as an amalgamation of the context of several entities interacting and coordinating
with each other, and often performing one or more activities. However, none of the existing context models and ontologies
address situation modeling. In this paper, we describe the design, structure and implementation of a generic, ﬂexible
and extensible context ontology called Rover Context Model Ontology (RoCoMO) for context and situation modeling
in pervasive computing systems and environments. We highlight several limitations of the existing context models and
ontologies, such as lack of provision for provenance, traceability, quality of context, multiple representation of contextual
information, as well as support for security, privacy and interoperability, and explain how we are addressing these
limitations in our approach. We also illustrate the applicability and utility of RoCoMO using a practical and extensive
case study.
Keywords—Context-aware Computing, Context Modeling and Representation, Situation Modeling
!
1
INTRODUCTION
Recent years have witnessed rapid advances
in enabling technologies for pervasive comput-
ing environments - an important step being
context-awareness in systems. Dey and Abowd
[1] describe a context-aware system as one that
“uses context to provide relevant information
and/or services to the user, where relevancy
depends on the user’s task.” Context aware-
ness enables a new class of applications in
pervasive computing that can help users navi-
gate through unfamiliar territory, ﬁnd preferred
restaurants nearby, receive messages in the least
obtrusive manner, get extra sleep when meet-
ings are canceled, ﬁnd people with similar in-
terests, and so on. The use of context informa-
tion in these applications reduces the amount of
human effort and attention that an application
needs to service the user’s requests.
Moreover, in pervasive computing environ-
ments, various entities often have to cooper-
ate and integrate seamlessly in a Situation to
achieve a common objective. Thus, Situation
Awareness can be deﬁned as “the capability
of the entities in pervasive computing environ-
ments to be aware of situation changes and au-
tomatically adapt themselves to such changes
to satisfy user requirements, including security
and privacy.” and a Situation can be described
as “a set of contexts in the application over a
period of time that affects future system behav-
ior.” [2]. A situation can be considered as an
amalgamation of the context of several entities
interacting and coordinating with each other,
and often performing one or more activities.
The context model forms the underlying
framework for modeling and representing con-
text in the pervasive computing environment
and context-aware systems. To support context-
and situation-awareness, and adaptation of the
entities in pervasive computing environments,
it is necessary to model and specify context and
situations in a suitable way such that the con-
textual information can be easily exchanged,
shared and reused. As discussed in several
papers including Chen et al. [3] and Krish-
namoorthy et al. [4], ontologies are a powerful
tool for modeling context and the encompass-
ing situations in context-aware systems because
they promote knowledge sharing and reuse
across different applications and services inter-
acting in a pervasive computing environment,
thus, enhancing their interoperability. They al-
low context-aware systems to use existing logic
reasoning mechanisms to deduce high-level,
conceptual context from low-level, raw context,
and handle uncertainty and inconsistency in
context. They can be combined to form a more
complex ontology and save the effort.
However, none of the existing context models
arXiv:1503.07159v1  [cs.CY]  24 Mar 2015

2
and ontologies address situation modeling in
a dynamic environment where the situation
constantly evolves. To address this limitation,
we described the design of a general and intel-
ligent context-aware middleware called Rover
II and its general, ﬂexible and extensible con-
text model for context and situation model-
ing, called Rover Context Model (RoCoM), in
Krishnamoorthy et al. [4] and Bhargava et al.
[5]. RoCoM has four Primitives - Entity, Event,
Activity and Relationship. These Primitives are
the building blocks of every context-aware sys-
tem or middleware built using this model. Any
piece of contextual information in the system
can be attached to one of these primitives and
any situation can be modeled via them.
We introduced the Rover Context Model On-
tology (RoCoMO), which is the underlying on-
tology for RoCoM and is currently deployed
and implemented in Rover II, in [5]. In this pa-
per, we describe its design, structure and imple-
mentation in detail. Each primitive of RoCoM
corresponds to a top level concept in RoCoMO
from which other concepts are derived. Our
main contributions in this paper are:
•
Highlighting
several
shortcomings
of
other existing standard models and on-
tologies for context and situation mod-
eling and demonstrating the utility of
RoCoMO’s capabilities that address those
shortcomings,
•
Illustrating the beneﬁts, applicability and
utility of RoCoMO, as opposed to other
existing models and ontologies, using a
simple and practical case study for con-
text and situation modeling in pervasive
computing environments.
The rest of this paper is organized as fol-
lows. In Section 2, we describe a case study
which we use in this paper to motivate and
illustrate the beneﬁts and utility of RoCoMO.
We brieﬂy discuss the existing approaches to
context and situation modeling, and highlight
their limitations in Section 3. In Section 4, we
explain the design and implementation of Ro-
CoMO and how it addresses several limitations
of contemporary approaches such as lack of
provision for provenance, quality of context,
multiple representations of contextual informa-
tion as well as support for security etc. We
illustrate the beneﬁts of RoCoMO by revisiting
the case study in Section 6. We conclude and
outline future work in Section 7.
2
MOTIVATION
We describe a simple but practical case study
here in order to motivate and illustrate the var-
ied nature of context, and the capabilities that
context models and ontologies should possess
for representing and modeling this situation
in real time pervasive computing systems and
environments. We will return to this case study
in Sections 5 and 6 to illustrate RoCoMO’s
modeling capabilities. For illustration, we have
selected a situation from the domain of rescue
and evacuation but this, by no means, restricts
RoCoMO’s applicability and generality.
A ﬁre incident takes place in a room on the fourth
ﬂoor of a building on a university campus. Fire
ﬁghters and responders are using a context-aware
system to coordinate the rescue efforts. A responder,
using the system, gets updated readings from two
temperature sensors in the room on ﬁre. Using this
contextual information, the system determines the
time that responders have to evacuate the building
before the whole building is engulfed in ﬂames. The
temperature information also has a quality measure
attached to it to convey any inaccurate or incomplete
information. Another responder is accessing the sys-
tem to get conﬁdential ﬂoor maps of the building and
also determine the evacuation route people should
take based on the ﬂoormaps and the time remaining.
Representing and modeling this situation in a
context-aware system (such as Rover II), using
the existing ontologies, is not trivial. It involves
interaction between several entities such as re-
sponders which perform one or more activities.
The entire situation is catalyzed by an event
like the ﬁre incident and the goal of the situa-
tion is to evacuate the building. Each activity,
whether being performed by the system or an
entity, is driven by the goal or a sub-goal.
Some of the activities can occur simultaneously,
for instance, calculating the time remaining for
evacuation and accessing the ﬂoor maps of
the building. Other activities need to be per-
formed sequentially - the evacuation routes can
be determined only when the ﬂoor maps are
available. The room has contextual information,
that needs to be modeled and represented,
such as the temperature readings of the room.
To avoid ambiguity, the information must be
clearly marked with its source (which sensor it
is coming from) as well as the encoding format
(whether it is in Celsius or Fahrenheit). This
requires support for encoding format as well
as provenance. The model should also support

3
attachment of quality attributes to contextual
information such as probability or certainty.
Also, since the readings are getting updated at a
ﬁxed time interval, they should be timestamped
to help determine the most recent reading.
Another aspect of the system is security - only
authorized personnel such as responders have
access to the ﬂoor maps of the building. All
these requirements call for a deeper under-
standing of modeling situations.
3
RELATED WORK IN CONTEXT AND
SITUATION MODELING
We brieﬂy describe some of the existing context
models and their underlying ontologies in this
section, and examine their limitations.
CoBrA-Ont[6] is a collection of ontologies for
describing places, agents and events and their
associated properties in an intelligent meeting-
room domain. SOUPA[3] was developed to
provide pervasive computing developers with
a shared and upper ontology that combines
many useful vocabularies from different con-
sensus ontologies such as FOAF, DAML-Time,
RCC, BDI, and Rei policy ontology. A full list
of these well known ontologies can be found at
[7].
Other
contemporary
ontologies
include
CONON[8] where the context ontologies are
divided into upper ontology and domain-
speciﬁc ontologies; CoDAMoS[9] where the
context
ontology
is
centered
around
four
entities - user, environment, platform and
service; ASC/CoOL[10] that enables context
awareness and interoperability; Gaia [11] that
incorporates ontologies for context awareness,
service
discovery
and
matchmaking,
and
interoperation between entities in a pervasive
computing
infrastructure
mainly
geared
towards
smart
spaces;
and
GLOSS[12]
which
employs
ontologies
for
the
precise
understanding of various contexts and services
in smart spaces.
Several surveys such as those by Reichle et
al. ([13], Krummenacher et al. [14] and Bettini
et al. [15]) have asserted that, of all the current
ontologies used for context modeling, SOUPA
is the most comprehensive ontology. However,
both SOUPA and CoBrA-Ont have no provision
for provenance, quality of context and multiple
representations. CONON enables provenance
by using the concept of sensed, derived, ag-
gregated or deduced context but lacks features
like comparability. Gaia takes on the challenge
of modeling uncertainty and reasoning over
it. However, their ontologies are restricted to
the smart spaces domain. They do not model
provenance either. A more detailed evaluation
of all these ontologies can be found in the
surveys mentioned.
Moreover, a major shortcoming of general
and exhaustive ontologies such as OpenCyc
[16] is that they become too cumbersome to
use in a system that is designed to be used
efﬁciently and effectively in real time. Also, it
is not possible for a small group of people to
enumerate all the possible concepts and rela-
tionships between them that could be used in
a practical mobile or desktop application or
system. Hence, in our opinion, it is better to de-
velop the base ontology and make it extensible
for users just as most of the previous context
models and ontologies have done. Our goal in
this paper is to follow a similar approach and
go one step further by addressing all the limi-
tations that these existing ontologies posses.
We do not ﬁnd much work in the literature
where context-aware systems are extensively
married to situational modeling. For modeling
a situation (such as the Fire Incident mentioned
earlier), none of the existing ontologies is ade-
quate. This is mainly because these situations
are rich and include events, which set a goal
for the context-aware system to achieve, as well
as entities interacting and performing a number
of activities, along with their associated context.
Moreover, a number of them have no provision
for provenance, encoding bias and quality of
context, and are often restricted to a single
domain of use such as smart spaces.
To address all these shortcomings, RoCoMO
has been designed with an extensive ontologi-
cal model-driven foundation along with capa-
bilities to model both context and situation in
a coherent and cohesive fashion.
4
STRUCTURE, DESIGN
AND IMPLE-
MENTATION OF ROCOMO
Figure 1 shows how a situation can be repre-
sented in terms of the different concepts of Ro-
CoMO - entities, events, activities and relation-
ships. Each of them has contextual information
associated with it such as location, identity etc.
At time t0, the Event catalyzes the context-
aware system and sets the Goal for it. To achieve

4
Event 
Goal 
Activity1 
Activity2 
Activity3 
Activity4 
Sub-
goal
1 
Sub-
goal
2 
Sub-
goal 
3 
Entity1 
Entity2 
Context 
(Entity1) 
Time 
Context 
(Entity2) 
Context 
(Activity3) 
Context 
(Activity4) 
Context 
(Activity1) 
Context 
(Activity2) 
Legend: 
Entity 
Goal 
Event 
Context 
Activity 
Interaction Legend: 
hasContext 
Relationship 
involvedIn 
sequence 
Has/sets 
t=t0 
t=t1 
t=t2 
t=t3 
t=t4 
Fig. 1: Interaction between the primitives
the goal, different Entities - Entity1 and Entity2
perform a sequence of Activities, such as Activ-
ity1 and Activity2 beginning at time t1. Every
activity is driven by its own goal - which can
be the overall goal that is set by the event, as
in case of Activity4, or a sub-goal, as in case
of Activity1. Every activity has a start time, an
end time and a duration associated with it (as
shown on the Time scale). It has a pre-condition
and a post-condition which are goal(s) that
should have been met before the activity starts
and once the activity ends respectively. For
instance, Activity3 starts at time t2, when both
SubGoal1 and SubGoal2 have been met, and
ends at time t3, when its own goal, SubGoal3,
has been met. The duration for this activity
is t3 - t2. An activity can be atomic and non-
interruptable.
RoCoMO has been developed in OWL2 DL
and has two components:
1)
RoCoM Core Ontology which is divided
into two upper level ontologies:
•
RoCoM Domain ontology - This on-
tology includes concepts that char-
acterize the knowledge of the do-
main i.e. the primitives Entities and
Events, along with concepts that
represent Location and Time. Ex-
amples of entities include persons,
devices etc. while events can range
from a simple service request to a
road accident.
•
RoCoM Task ontology - This ontol-
ogy characterizes the problem solv-
ing structure of the domain and
provides primitives for describing
the problem solving process i.e. Ac-
tivities as well as their Goals. Ex-
amples of Activities include Calling,
Scheduling etc.
2)
RoCoM Application Ontology which has
concepts that extend the core ontology
concepts and are speciﬁc to an applica-
tion.
Figure 2 shows a partial view of the Ro-
CoM Core and Application Ontologies. The
classes representing the primitives such as ‘en-
tity’, ‘event’ and ‘activity’, along with ‘loca-
tion’, ‘time’ and ‘goal’ are derived from the
default OWL class ‘Thing’ and form the top
level classes in the RoCoM Core Ontology.
Each of the classes derived from these top
level classes represents a different, unique and
unambiguous concept in the ontology. For in-
stance, ‘physicalentity’ is derived from ‘entity’
and can be used to denote any entity that has
a physical or logical form. It has more speciﬁc
derived classes such as ‘person’, ‘device’ or ‘or-

5
Location 
Time 
Entity 
Activity 
Event 
Goal 
Thing 
Communicate 
External 
Activity 
Internal 
Activity 
Assign 
Virtual Entity 
Physical 
Entity 
Service 
Environment 
Application 
Person 
Vehicle 
Structure 
Organization 
Device 
Building 
Closed 
Space 
Open Space 
House 
Elevator 
Room 
Place 
Rail Vehicle 
Road Vehicle 
Water 
Vehicle 
Car 
Van 
M-Urgency 
assignment 
M-Urgency 
Officer 
M-Urgency 
Event 
Core Ontology 
Task Ontology 
Application 
Ontology 
Domain 
Ontology 
M-Urgency 
Dispatcher 
Fig. 2: Partial view of The RoCoM Ontology Version 1.0
ganization’. The fourth primitive ‘relationship’
can be represented in OWL in many ways:
between two classes (as a subclass/superclass),
a class and an individual (as a member) or a
speciﬁc relationship between two individuals
(as object properties). The context of any ele-
ment - entity, event or activity is represented
using datatype properties in OWL.
The following shows an OWL code snippet
for the description of an individual instance
named “xyz” of class ‘person’ which has a
relationship with another entity (represented
by the object property termed ‘daughter’) and
contextual information such as food preference
(represented by the datatype property termed
‘likesfood’).
⟨Class rdf:about=”&person;person”⟩
⟨rdfs:label xml:lang=”en”⟩person⟨/rdfs:label⟩
⟨rdfs:subClassOf rdf:resource=”http://mind7.cs.umd.edu:8134/Rover/
physicalentity#physicalentity”/⟩
⟨/Class⟩
⟨ObjectProperty rdf:about=”&person;daughter”⟩
⟨rdf:type rdf:resource=”&owl;FunctionalProperty”/⟩
⟨rdf:type rdf:resource=”&owl;InverseFunctionalProperty”/⟩
⟨rdfs:label xml:lang=”en”⟩daughter⟨/rdfs:label⟩
⟨rdfs:subPropertyOf rdf:resource=”&person;contact”/⟩
⟨inverseOf rdf:resource=”&person;father”/⟩
⟨inverseOf rdf:resource=”&person;mother”/⟩
⟨/ObjectProperty⟩
⟨DatatypeProperty rdf:about=”&person;likesfood”⟩
⟨rdfs:label xml:lang=”en”⟩likesfood⟨/rdfs:label⟩
⟨rdfs:subPropertyOf rdf:resource=”&person;likes”/⟩
⟨/DatatypeProperty⟩
⟨NamedIndividual rdf:about=“&person;xyz”⟩
⟨rdf:type rdf:resource=“&person;person”/⟩
⟨rdfs:label xml:lang=“en”⟩xyz⟨/rdfs:label⟩
⟨person:likesfood rdf:datatype=“&xsd;string”⟩indian⟨/person:likesfood⟩
⟨/NamedIndividual⟩
The core ontology can be further extended to
concepts speciﬁc to an application, such as M-
Urgency [17], to form a part of the Application
Ontology. M-Urgency is a public safety appli-
cation that enables mobile users to stream live
video from their devices to local PSAP (Public
Safety Answering Point) along with the audio
stream, the real time location information and
any personal and relevant information about
the caller.
Thus, a simple M-Urgency scenario can in-
volve the entities (corresponding RoCoMO
classes in parentheses): caller (‘person’), dis-
patcher (‘murgencydispatcher’ extended from
‘person’) and responder (‘murgencyofﬁcer’ ex-
tended from ‘person’). For instance, because of
an accident that is an event (‘murgencyevent’
extended from ‘event’), a series of activities
follow such as, the caller calls the police,
the dispatcher accepts the call, the dispatcher
assigns (‘murgencyassignment’ extended from
‘Assign’) a responder or ofﬁcer to the call etc.
This is only an illustration of how the concepts
in the core ontology can be extended to model
concepts speciﬁc to an application.
5
ANALYSIS AND EVALUATION OF RO-
COMO
Bettini et al. [15] and Ye et al. [18] have speciﬁed
a set of requirements that both context models

6
and ontologies for pervasive computing envi-
ronments should support. We assess RoCoM
and RoCoMO on the basis of these criteria and
explain how it addresses them:
5.1
Representation of static and dynamic
information
Contextual information can be static i.e. those
aspects of a pervasive system that are invariant,
such as a person’s date of birth. However, the
majority of contextual information is dynamic,
such as location, with its persistence being
highly variable. Every element of the RoCoM
ontology, beginning with the top level classes
like ‘entity’, ‘activity’ and ‘event’, have their
contextual information separated into two hier-
archies - static and dynamic. This enables ease
of distinction between contextual information
that is persistent over a long period of time
(static) and that which needs to be updated
frequently based on its freshness (dynamic).
5.2
Representation of temporal character-
istics of primitives
For every primitive such as an entity, activity
or event, we have deﬁned a time class that
records properties such as its start time - time
at which the event/activity started or the en-
tity came into being, end time - time at which
the event/activity ended or the entity ceased
to exist (equivalent to the current time if the
individual still exists), duration or life time of
an individual (difference of the start time and
the end time) and recurrence - frequency of
repetition for an event/activity. The following
OWL code snippet shows the time class:
⟨Class rdf:about=”http://mind7.cs.umd.edu:8134/Rover/time#time”⟩
⟨/Class⟩
⟨owl :DatatypeProperty rdf:about=”http://mind7.cs.umd.edu:8134/
Rover/time#startTime”⟩
⟨rdfs:domain rdf:resource=”http://mind7.cs.umd.edu:8134/Rover/
time#time/⟩
⟨rdfs:range rdf:resource=”&xsd;dateTime”/⟩
⟨rdfs:subPropertyOf rdf:resource=”&owl;topDataProperty”/⟩
⟨/owl:DatatypeProperty⟩
..........
⟨owl:DatatypeProperty rdf:about=”http://mind7.cs.umd.edu:8134/Rover
/time#repetition”⟩
⟨rdfs:range:resource=”&xsd;string”/ ⟩
⟨rdfs:subPropertyOf rdf:resource=”&owl;topDataProperty”/ ⟩
⟨/owl:DatatypeProperty ⟩
5.3
Timestamping
Timestamping the dynamic contextual informa-
tion allows the system to determine the fresh-
ness and versioning of the contextual informa-
tion which further enables resolution of con-
ﬂicts and ambiguity. In RoCoMO, the contex-
tual information is timestamped at two levels:
1)
ﬁne-grained level - timestamping every
dynamic contextual information of an
individual instance of a primitive to keep
track of when it was last modiﬁed and by
which entity and
2)
coarse-grained level - timestamping the
individual instance itself to determine
when it was modiﬁed and by which
entity.
The following OWL code snippet shows how
the hasMood context of an individual xyz of the
person class in RoCoMO is assigned a value
happy and is timestamped to determine when
the contextual information was last updated.
⟨Axiom⟩
⟨annotatedTarget rdf:datatype=”&xsd;string”⟩happy⟨/annotatedTarget⟩
⟨rocomo-schema:timeStamp rdf:datatype=”&xsd;dateTime”⟩
2012-09-18T14:00:00⟨/rocomo-schema:timeStamp⟩
⟨annotatedProperty rdf:resource=”&person;hasMood”/⟩
⟨annotatedSource rdf:resource=”&person;xyz”/⟩
⟨/Axiom⟩
5.4
Machine-interpretable representation of
contextual information, Efﬁcient context pro-
visioning and Granularity of context
The
model
and
ontology
must
employ
a
machine-interpretable representation of context
to tackle heterogeneity by using semantic anno-
tations. These annotations can enable automatic
exploitation and transformation of information
in distributed context sharing scenarios as well
as automatic context reasoning. They should
provide efﬁcient access paths to contextual in-
formation and represent it at different levels
of abstraction. For instance, location of a user
can be represented at a ﬁne-grained level in
terms of latitude/longitude and at a coarse-
grained level in terms of the name of a city or
a building.
RoCoMO
is
implemented
in
OWL2
DL
which is expressive and allows more versatile
knowledge representation. In OWL, context can
be represented as annotated semantics via data
properties and relationships between different
elements can be represented via object proper-
ties. It also enables automatic context reason-
ing. Also, OWL represents information hierar-
chically which allows efﬁcient provisioning of
context and representation at multiple levels of
abstraction or granularity.
5.5
Encoding bias/ Comparability
Contextual information sources constitute a va-
riety of sensors and devices which often use
different measurement and encoding systems,

7
thus, resulting in a heterogeneous set of values
describing the same entities. Hence, the context
model and ontology must not depend on a
particular symbol-level encoding, such as the
representation of date in a particular format. It
should provide means to compare and convert
values with different scale and encodings.
To address this, we annotate any measur-
able contextual information with an annotation
property, called ‘scale’, deﬁned in a RoCoMO
schema (This schema enables reiﬁcation of ev-
ery OWL statement that is part of RoCoMO).
This removes the model’s dependency on any
particular encoding or measurement unit and
also facilitates comparison or conversion from
one unit to another.
For instance, a person’s context can include
height which can be in feet, meters or any other
unit. Thus, for person “xyz”, we can represent
height and its measurement unit as:
⟨Axiom⟩
⟨annotatedTarget rdf:datatype=”&xsd;ﬂoat”⟩6.0⟨/annotatedTarget⟩
⟨rocomo-schema:unit rdf:datatype=”&xsd;string”⟩feet⟨/rocomo-schema:unit⟩
⟨annotatedProperty rdf:resource=”&person2;height”/⟩
⟨annotatedSource rdf:resource=”&person2;xyz”/⟩
⟨/Axiom⟩
5.6
Quality of Context (QoC)
Pervasive computing environments are highly
dynamic and hence context data is character-
ized by properties such as incompleteness, am-
biguity, uncertainty, inaccuracy, and temporal
nature. For instance, in some environments, the
contextual information may be incorrect due
to a faulty sensor or incomplete due to lack
of sufﬁcient input. The model and ontology
should be able to represent this imperfection.
Several papers including Gray and Salber
[19] introduced the notion of attaching informa-
tion quality attributes to every piece of sensed
context. To facilitate this, we have deﬁned
seven QoC attributes that model imperfection
in contextual information - accuracy to represent
correctness, probability or conﬁdence to repre-
sent the certainty of being correct, coverage to
represent the range, resolution to represent the
smallest perceivable element, meanError to rep-
resent average error, and recurrence to measure
repeatability. These annotations are deﬁned in
the RoCoMO schema and can be attached to the
appropriate contextual information or a rela-
tionship and can be propagated to applications.
For instance, a person’s context can include
his/her weight which can be in kgs, pounds or
any other scale. Also, the weight measure can
have a mean error attached to it depending on
the sensitivity of the instrument. Thus, person
“xyz” having weight 55 Kgs with an average
error of 1 Kg, can be represented as:
⟨Axiom⟩
⟨annotatedTarget rdf:datatype=”&xsd;ﬂoat”⟩55.0⟨/annotatedTarget⟩
⟨rocomo-schema:scale rdf:datatype=”&xsd;string”⟩kgs⟨/rocomo-schema:scale⟩
⟨rocomo-schema:meanError rdf:datatype=”&xsd;ﬂoat”⟩
1.0⟨/rocomo-schema:meanError⟩
⟨annotatedProperty rdf:resource=”&person2;weight”/⟩
⟨annotatedSource rdf:resource=”&person2;xyz”/⟩
⟨/Axiom⟩
5.7
Provenance and Traceability
In order to provide adequate control and inter-
pretation of contextual information, the model
and ontology should provide the means to de-
termine the source of data and transformations
made to it. In RoCoMO, this is done at a
coarse-grained level where we store, when the
contextual information of any instance or an
individual was created, when was it last modi-
ﬁed, the last modiﬁcation made to the instance
and the entity by which it was made. However,
we are not tracking every single modiﬁcation
made to every unique attribute or contextual
information since this is too cumbersome at
the modeling level. This can be achieved at
the system level by logging context history and
transformations.
For instance, in our case study, we require the
temperature of a room along with its source,
its measurement scale, its time stamp and its
certainty. Thus, the following OWL snippet rep-
resents an instance of an environment having
temperature reading of 100 degree Fahrenheit,
with certainty 0.9, created by a sensor instance
‘sensor1’ at 2 pm on 09-18-2013.
⟨owl:NamedIndividual rdf:about=”&environment;envreading1”⟩
⟨rdf:type rdf:resource=”&environment;environment”/⟩
⟨rdfs:label xml:lang=”en”⟩envreading1⟨/rdfs:label⟩
⟨environment:temperature rdf:datatype=”&xsd;ﬂoat”⟩100.0⟨
/environment:temperature⟩
⟨entity:createdBy rdf:resource=”http://mind7.cs.umd.edu:8134/
Rover/sensor#sensor1”/⟩
⟨/owl:NamedIndividual⟩
⟨Axiom⟩
⟨rocomo-schema:probability rdf:datatype=”&xsd;ﬂoat”⟩0.9⟨
/rocomo-schema:probability⟩
⟨rocomo-schema:timeStamp rdf:datatype=”&xsd;dateTime”⟩
2013-09-18T14:00:00⟨/rocomo-schema:timeStamp⟩
⟨owl:annotatedTarget rdf:datatype=”&xsd;ﬂoat”⟩100.0⟨/owl:annotatedTarget⟩
⟨rocomo-schema:scale rdf:datatype=”&xsd;string”⟩Fahrenheit
⟨/rocomo-schema:scale⟩
⟨owl:annotatedSource rdf:resource=”&environment;envreading1”/⟩
⟨owl:annotatedProperty rdf:resource=”&environment;temperature”/⟩
⟨/owl:Axiom⟩
5.8
Heterogeneity and Mobility
Pervasive computing environments are charac-
terized by distribution, heterogeneity, unpre-
dictability and unreliable communication links.
Thus, the model and ontology should support
these requirements and enable the aggregation

8
and merging of the data when needed. RoCoM
is an ontological model and promotes knowl-
edge sharing and reuse across distributed sys-
tems and applications in pervasive comput-
ing environments. Hence, even if the sources
of context are heterogeneous, distributed and
partitioned, the contextual information can be
shared and aggregated across environments.
5.9
Ease of development
RoCoMO is developed on the principle of
Model-Driven Development. The ontology is
also available publicly. Hence, developers have
adequate support for development and imple-
mentation.
5.10
Flexibility, extensibility, applicability,
generality, evolvability and completeness
Context models and ontologies should not be
rigid but ﬂexible and extensible. Thus, they
should not be restricted to a single domain,
and should be able to support new and varied
application domains. They should evolve with
the applications and their context needs.
RoCoMO is structured in a modular fashion
with clear distinction between the Core and
Application ontologies. Also, as the applica-
tions evolve, more concepts can be added to it.
Thus, it is easily extensible, ﬂexible and evolv-
able. It does not target any speciﬁc domain in
pervasive computing and is intended to be gen-
eral and applicable across several applications
and domains. As a result, we do not claim that
the ontology is complete.
5.11
Interoperability
Since several existing projects use standard up-
per ontologies, every generic ontology should
be interoperable i.e. its term deﬁnitions must
be consistent with other standard, generic and
consensus ontologies such as SOUPA [3]. This
also enables reuse of domain knowledge [8].
We have designed RoCoMO to be inter-
operable with other ontologies, for instance
SOUPA[3], via the equivalentClass and equiva-
lentProperty OWL statements. The example be-
low shows that the RoCoMO person class is
deﬁned equivalent to the person class in SOUPA
and the dateofbirth property is deﬁned equiva-
lent to birthDate property in SOUPA.
⟨Class rdf:about=”&person;person”⟩
⟨rdfs:label xml:lang=”en”⟩person⟨/rdfs:label⟩
⟨equivalentClass rdf:resource=”http://pervasive.semanticweb.org/ont/2004
/06/person#person”/⟩
⟨rdfs:subClassOf rdf:resource=”http://mind7.cs.umd.edu:8134/Rover/
physicalentity#physicalEntity”/⟩
⟨/Class⟩
⟨DataProperty rdf:about=”&person;dateofbirth”⟩
⟨rdfs:label xml:lang=”en”⟩dateofbirth⟨rdfs:label⟩
⟨rdfs:subClassOf rdf:resource=”&person;personalinfo”/⟩
⟨equivalentProperty rdf:resource=”http://pervasive.semanticweb.org/ont/
2004/06/person#birthDate”/⟩
⟨/DataProperty⟩
5.12
Clarity, Coherence, Redundancy and
Orthogonality
The concepts in RoCoMO are unique, unam-
biguous, independent and consistent.
5.13
Security and Privacy
These are implemented in RoCoM using Role
Based Access Control (RBAC) for groups and
members. A group is an instance of type ‘ac-
cessgroup’ class. This class has object properties
like ‘groupmember’ which includes the entities
like users or devices that can be assigned to an
instance of the group. The ‘accessgroup’ class
also has an object property called ‘privileges’
which deﬁnes the permissions that the group
can have. These permissions can be in the form
of an ‘activity’ that the group is allowed to
perform. Every entity can belong to multiple
access groups while each access group can have
multiple entities and privileges. This form of
access control, obtained by assigning users to
groups and granting privileges to groups rather
than individual users, reduces the number of
associations involved that need to be managed.
Hence, it is easier to deﬁne security policies
around this framework.
6
MODELING THE FIRE INCIDENT CASE
STUDY USING ROCOMO
In this section, we revisit the Fire Incident
case study from Section 2 and illustrate how
RoCoMO can be used to model it. Figure 3
shows a graphical representation of the situ-
ation modeled in RoCoMO. At time t0, the
Fire Incident Event triggers the situation that
follows and sets the Goal Evacuate. This goal
can be subdivided into smaller sub-goals which
can be performed by one or more activities.
Entity Responder1 performs the Activity Get
updated temperature readings, at time t1, to get
the context information of room Room123 - the
updated temperature readings from the tem-
perature sensors TempSensor1 and TempSensor2.

9
Fire 
Incident 
Evacuate  
Get updated 
temperature 
readings 
Access building 
floor maps 
Evacuate 
people 
Determine 
time left 
for 
evacuation  
Room123 
Responder2 
Location 
Role: Responder 
AccessGroup: Responders 
TempSensor1 
TempSensor2 
Responder1 
Determine 
exit routes 
for 
evacuation  
Temp=150 
Unit=Fahrenheit 
Probability=0.9 
CreatedBy:TempSensor2 
Role: Responder 
AccessGroup: Responders 
Legend: 
Entity 
Goal 
Event 
Context 
Activity 
Temp=10 
Unit=Fahrenheit 
Probability=0.1 
CreatedBy:TempSensor1 
Interaction Legend: 
hasContext 
Relationship 
involvedIn 
sequence 
contains 
contains 
Time 
t=t0 
t=t1 
t=t2 
t=t3 
Has/sets 
Fig. 3: Fire Incident Case Study modeled using RoCoMO
The Goal for this activity is Determine time left
for evacuation. Since the information is times-
tamped, the system can refresh it periodically
based on its freshness and this resolves any
ambiguity.
The contextual information also has a prob-
ability measure attached to it. As shown in the
ﬁgure, the probability of temperature reading,
from TempSensor1, being correct is 0.1 which
means it is highly unreliable and that the sensor
could be faulty. This is evident by the fact that
it shows a reading of 10 deg Fahrenheit while
the other sensor shows a reading of 150 deg
Fahrenheit. Also, the contextual information
has source or provenance information attached
to it and so this determines which reading came
from which sensor. Based on the temperature
reading and its encoding (Fahrenheit in this
case), the system can calculate how much time
it will take till the temperature reaches the
value at which the building bursts into ﬂames.
This is the amount of time that the responders
have for evacuation.
Simultaneously, another entity Responder2 is
performing the activity Access building ﬂoormaps
with the Goal - Determine exit routes for evacu-
ation. Since the responders belong to the Ac-
cessGroup responders, the system checks their
privileges (which are inherited from the ‘re-
sponders’ accessgroup) and grants access to
the temperature readings from the sensor and
building ﬂoor plans. Once these two activities
have achieved their goals, both the responders
start the activity Evacuate people, at time t2, and
achieve the goal set by the event.
7
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we described a generic, ﬂexible
and extensible ontology called Rover Context
Model Ontology(RoCoMO) and illustrated its
beneﬁts for context and situation modeling in
pervasive computing environments, via a prac-
tical case study. We highlighted several short-
comings of contemporary context models and
ontologies and explained how RoCoMO ad-
dresses them. We also established the utility of
its capabilities by evaluating it against several
criteria that ontologies for context and situa-
tion modeling should possess. Our next step
is to develop a GUI to allow users to browse
and explore the RoCoM ontologies, and further
extend and modify them. An API for working
with the ontology will also be available. Our
aim is to encourage users to build applications
and systems using this ontology so that they
can be used in both in an isolated manner or
integrated with Rover II.

10
