Joint Goal and Strategy Inference across Heterogeneous
Demonstrators via Reward Network Distillation
Letian Chen

Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA
Rohan Paleja

Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA
Muyleng Ghuy

Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA
Matthew Gombolay

Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA
ABSTRACT
Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved tremendous success as a
general framework for learning how to make decisions. However,
this success relies on the interactive hand-tuning of a reward func-
tion by RL experts. On the other hand, inverse reinforcement learn-
ing (IRL) seeks to learn a reward function from readily-obtained
human demonstrations. Yet, IRL suffers from two major limitations:
1) reward ambiguity - there are an infinite number of possible re-
ward functions that could explain an expert’s demonstration and 2)
heterogeneity - human experts adopt varying strategies and prefer-
ences, which makes learning from multiple demonstrators difficult
due to the common assumption that demonstrators seeks to maxi-
mize the same reward. In this work, we propose a method to jointly
infer a task goal and humans’ strategic preferences via network
distillation. This approach enables us to distill a robust task reward
(addressing reward ambiguity) and to model each strategy’s objec-
tive (handling heterogeneity). We demonstrate our algorithm can
better recover task reward and strategy rewards and imitate the
strategies in two simulated tasks and a real-world table tennis task.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Theory of computation →Inverse reinforcement learn-
ing; • Computing methodologies →Learning from demon-
strations; Neural networks.
KEYWORDS
Inverse Reinforcement Learning; Heterogeneous Demonstration;
Preference Learning
ACM Reference Format:
Letian Chen, Rohan Paleja, Muyleng Ghuy, and Matthew Gombolay. 2020.
Joint Goal and Strategy Inference across Heterogeneous Demonstrators
via Reward Network Distillation. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM/IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI ’20), March 23–26,
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission

HRI ’20, March 23–26, 2020, Cambridge, United Kingdom
© 2020 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6746-2/20/03...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3319502.3374791
2020, Cambridge, United Kingdom. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 10 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3319502.3374791
1
INTRODUCTION
Despite the success reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved in
recent years [12, 17, 25, 40], this optimization technique still re-
quires human RL experts to carefully design reward functions to be
effective. Researchers, with the best intentions, can naïvely specify
a reward function that results in an RL policy that catastrophically
fails to meet the researcher’s latent expectations [3]. Unfortunately,
the field of RL lacks a standard, repeatable process by which we
can specify robotic tasks and have the robot autonomously synthe-
size sensible policies via RL. Prior research has further shown the
difficulty human experts have in defining a desired policy for the
robots even though they can readily demonstrate the task [6, 34].
As such, researchers have often turned to Imitation Learning (IL),
an IRL techniques within Learning from Demonstration (LfD).
Although IL is a relatively straightforward approach that seeks
to directly learn a mapping from states to actions, the learned policy
is highly intertwined with environment dynamics. Slight changes
in dynamics or highly stochastic environments could cause IL to
easily fail due to a “covariate" shift [37]. In contrast, the demon-
strated reward function is a more transferable and robust definition
of the task, representing latent objectives a behavior tries to accom-
plish. Effective reward learning holds utility even after environment
dynamics change [9]. Recently, researchers have made strides to dis-
entangle reward functions from the environment’s dynamics [13].
Despite progress, IRL still suffers from fundamental shortcom-
ings [22]. The first drawback is known as reward ambiguity, which
is defined as a problem where there exists an infinite number of
possible reward functions that could explain an expert’s demon-
stration. The second major drawback is caused by limitations in
reasoning about heterogeneous demonstrations. Experts typically
adopt heuristics (i.e., “mental shortcuts") to solve challenging opti-
mization problems, but these highly-refined strategies can present
a heterogeneity in behavior across task demonstrators that prior
methods fail to effectively reason about. Previous work in IRL has
tried to address heterogeneity [32], but only focused on simplified
examples which do not typify the complexity of the real world.
To overcome these limitations, we propose Multi-Style Reward
Distillation (MSRD, see Figure 1), a novel IRL technique for learning
to tease out task and strategy rewards from heterogeneous demon-
stration. In MSRD, we model the demonstrated reward function as a
arXiv:2001.00503v3  [cs.LG]  23 Nov 2020

Figure 1: Illustration of Multi-Style Reward Distillation (MSRD). 𝑅0 represents task reward, e𝑅𝑖represents strategy-only reward,
and 𝑅𝑖represents strategy-combined reward (see Section 4.1 for explanation). Task reward is shared across different strategies,
while strategy-only reward is specific to each strategy.
combination of the task goal and the demonstrator’s strategic pref-
erences. For example, while tennis players seek to win (i.e., the task
reward), players exhibit various strategies based on their skills vis-
à-vis those of the opponent (e.g., serve-and-volley, counter-punch,
etc). We argue that human experts have specific strategic prefer-
ences, especially in complex tasks where it is intractable for humans
to compute the global optimum [22]. In these cases, humans use
various heuristics, which results in different types of demonstra-
tions. Unlike prior work in IRL where demonstrators are assumed
to optimize a single task reward (i.e., homogeneity), we take on a
more human-aware approach by optimizing a combination of the
task reward and an intrinsic strategy (i.e., affording heterogeneity).
Our method assumes that expert demonstrators prioritize task
completion over conforming to a specific strategy. Under this as-
sumption, heterogeneous demonstrations provide more informa-
tion to help us tease out the latent task reward versus having only a
demonstration of a single strategy. This approach allows us to better
model the task reward function by distilling shared components of
each demonstrators’ trajectories. The task reward recovered from
our approach is thus robust and has less ambiguity.
Our contribution in this paper is three-fold:
(1) We propose a novel IRL framework where we jointly learn
task reward and strategic rewards to gain a better estimation
of the task reward as well as an estimation for separate
strategy reward component for each strategy.
(2) We show our algorithm’s success on two virtual robot control
tasks and one real-world physical robot table tennis task.
Nota bene: we are one of few cases that successfully applies
IRL on a robotic continuous control problem.
(3) Our results show that MSRD’s learned task reward function
achieves high correlation with the ground-truth task reward
and that a policy learned from the specific strategy reward
recovers the strategic preference.
In addition to MSRD, we also develop a method that helps generate
heterogeneous policies of different strategies in simulated environ-
ments. This technique is leveraged by our virtual experiments to
synthesize heterogeneous task strategies.
2
RELATED WORK
IRL is an LfD approach that aims to infer a demonstrator’s objective
(i.e., reward function) given a set of performed trajectories. The
problem is typically formulated within a Markov Decision Process
(MDP) framework. IRL is known to be an ill-posed problem as there
are infinitely many reward functions that could explain expert
demonstration as optimal including degenerated cases (e.g., R = 0
[30]). Two primary methods exist in the IRL literature that aim
to solve this ambiguity: maximum margin approaches [1, 36] and
probabilistic approaches [35, 49, 50]. Maximum margin approaches
try to find a reward function that explains an expert’s trajectory
not only as being optimal, but also as being better than all other
trajectories by a margin. Probabilistic approaches (e.g. Bayesian
IRL [35], Maximum-Entropy IRL [50], and Maximum Causal En-
tropy IRL [49]) assume trajectories with higher rewards have an
exponentially higher probability of being generated and apply a
maximum likelihood framework to solve for such a reward function.
Advantages of this framework include its tolerance of non-optimal
demonstrations and ease of applying gradient-based optimization.
Maximum-entropy based IRL methods are thus suitable for deep
neural network models to find the reward function [46], obviating
the need for feature engineering. Despite the advantages of a maxi-
mum entropy IRL (ME-IRL) framework, perfect information about
the system dynamics and the ability to calculate the exact state
feature counts are required. Guided Cost Learning (GCL [12]) and
its successor, Adversarial Inverse Reinforcement Learning (AIRL
[13]) have been proposed to tackle ME-IRL problems. AIRL poses
the reward learning problem in an adversarial setting, where the

reward function tries to assign a high reward to expert demon-
strations while assigning a low reward to generated trajectories.
Meanwhile, the policy is optimized over the learned reward func-
tion to maximize its expected reward.
Alternatively, preference learning is another well-explored re-
search area that aims to learn individuals’ proclivities. In robotics,
preference learning typically involves learning a human’s prefer-
ence and adapting a robot’s behavior to better collaborate with
human-beings [16, 32]. There are several methods that could in-
fer preference information without asking the human to explicitly
provide preference information [14, 15]. For example, Schafer et al.
[39] utilizes collaborative filtering for a recommender system and
Xu et al. [47] formulates a meta-IRL problem that could learn a
prior over preferences. A more recent direction of preference learn-
ing lies in the multi-task setting. Dimitrakakis and Rothkopf [10]
models reward-policy pairs (𝑅𝑖, 𝜋𝑖) drawn from an unknown prior.
Choi and eung Kim [7] integrates Dirichlet process mixture model
into Bayesian IRL as a task prior. Repeated inverse reinforcement
learning (RIRL) [2] formalizes the setting in which a user is ob-
served performing different tasks. The goal of RIRL is to infer a
task-independent preference. However, one of the biggest limita-
tions of RIRL is the method assumes full knowledge of each task’s
reward function and the relative weights between task rewards
and preference rewards, which is unrealistic in most real-world
applications. Observational Repeated IRL (ORIRL) relaxes the as-
sumption by introducing a learnable relative weight yet still as-
sumes perfect knowledge of the task reward Woodworth et al. [45]
. Furthermore, both RIRL and ORIRL work is carried out in discrete
finite state-action space, which is a significant simplification of real-
world, continuous, state-action space. While preference learning in
a multi-task setting tries to learn shared preferences across tasks,
we propose to learn a shared task reward from observing different
strategies for the same task.
Learning from heterogeneous demonstrations poses a significant
challenge in LfD. The typical approach is to assume homogeneity
over demonstrators; however, [32] found that commercial line pi-
lots exhibit significant heterogeneity in performing a well-posed
task (e.g., executing a pre-specified flight plan) as to make it more
practical to learn from a single trajectory and disregard the remain-
ing data. We are motivated by such settings to develop a method
that might still be capable of generating a robust task specification
while also leveraging all available data to help mitigate the curse of
dimensionality.
Few have addressed multiple-reward-function learning. One
such approach by Nikolaidis et al. [31] clusters different kinds
of behaviors and applies inverse reinforcement learning on each
cluster. Another approach, Option GAN [19], learns a division in
demonstration state space and a separate reward function and pol-
icy for each subspace. However, neither considers the relationship
between the learned reward functions. In contrast, our work poses
a common task reward function in each of the reward functions,
together with a separate strategy reward function for each strategy,
which enables us to tease out task reward and strategy rewards.
Another line of work that tries to model heterogeneous expert
data lies in imitation learning. Generative Adversarial Imitation
Learning (GAIL) [21] is a popular imitation learning algorithm in
which a discriminator tries to distinguish between expert trajecto-
ries and generated trajectories, while a generator tries to deceive
the discriminator. Some extensions to GAIL utilize a latent variable
to model multi-modal (multi-strategy) demonstration data [18, 26].
Despite the good performance of imitation learning algorithms in
some contexts, such methods are severely sensitive to a change of
environments (e.g., a small disturbance could result in total failure
of intended task). By contrast, the reward function is more robust
to a change of dynamics in the environment, as the function repre-
sents the intention of the behavior. In this work, we separate the
task reward and the strategy reward, thereby better extracting a
transferable signal describing the demonstrators’ latent intent.
In contrast, our approach proposes a novel problem setup that
considers multi-strategy demonstrations for a single task. We pro-
pose a distillation-regularization structure between the task reward
and strategy rewards, shown in Figure 1, which aims to distill com-
mon task rewards and separate strategy preferences. Our demon-
stration of MSRD for robot table tennis was inspired by Peters et al.
[33], who proposed robot table tennis as a challenging task for
robot learning. In a series of papers, these researchers designed so-
phisticated models, features [27], and rewards [29] to train versatile
policies for robot skill learning [24, 28].
3
PRELIMINARIES
3.1
Markov Decision Process
An MDP, 𝑀, is a 6-tuple (𝑆,𝐴, 𝑅,𝑇,𝛾, 𝜌0), where 𝑆and 𝐴are the
state and action spaces, respectively. 𝛾∈(0, 1) is the temporal dis-
count factor. 𝑅(𝑠,𝑎) represents the reward after executing action 𝑎
in state𝑠. In some cases, 𝑅(𝑠,𝑎) could be simplified as 𝑅(𝑠).𝑇(𝑠,𝑎,𝑠′)
is the transition probability to 𝑠′ from state 𝑠after taking action 𝑎.
𝜌0(𝑠) is the initial state distribution. The standard goal of reinforce-
ment learning is to find the optimal policy 𝜋∗that maximizes the
discounted future reward, 𝐽(𝜋) = E𝜏∼𝜋
Í𝑇
𝑖=0 𝛾𝑡𝑅(𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡)
, where
𝜏= (𝑠0,𝑎0, · · · ,𝑠𝑇,𝑎𝑇) denotes a sequence of states and actions
induced by the policy and dynamics. We instead consider a more
general maximum entropy objective introduced by Ziebart [49],
which augments the standard objective with an entropy bonus
to favor stochastic policies and to encourage exploration during
optimization, 𝐽(𝜋) = E𝜏∼𝜋
Í𝑇
𝑖=0 𝛾𝑡𝑅(𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡) + 𝛼𝐻(𝜋(·|𝑠𝑡))

.
3.2
Inverse Reinforcement Learning
IRL considers an MDP sans reward function (𝑀\𝑅) with the goal
being to infer reward function 𝑅(𝑠,𝑎) given a set of demonstrated
trajectories D = {𝜏1,𝜏2, · · · ,𝜏𝑁}. A typical assumption for IRL is
that demonstrated trajectories are optimal, or at least near-optimal.
In the maximum entropy IRL (Max-Ent IRL) framework, inference
of the reward function is turned to a maximum likelihood optimiza-
tion problem by assigning occurrence probability of a trajectory
proportional to the exponential of discounted cumulative reward,
𝑝𝜃(𝜏) ∝𝑒
Í𝑇
𝑡=0 𝛾𝑡𝑟𝜃(𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡). Therefore, Max-Ent IRL aims to find the
reward function under which the demonstrated trajectories have
the highest likelihood, as shown in Equation 1.
max
𝜃
E𝜏∼D [log𝑝𝜃(𝜏)]
(1)

AIRL [13] casts the optimization in a generative adversarial frame-
work, learning a discriminator, 𝐷, to distinguishes between experts
and a deceiving generator, 𝜋, that learns to imitate the expert. This
framework follows Max-Ent IRL’s assumption that trajectory like-
lihood is proportional to the exponential of rewards. 𝐷is defined
in Equation 2, where 𝑓𝜃(𝜏) is the learnable reward function and 𝜋
is the current policy. 𝐷is updated by minimizing its cross entropy
loss to distinguish expert trajectories from generator policy rollouts
(Equation 3). 𝜋is trained to maximize the pseudo-reward function
given by 𝑓(𝑠,𝑎).
𝐷𝜃(𝑠,𝑎) =
exp(𝑓𝜃(𝑠,𝑎))
exp(𝑓𝜃(𝑠,𝑎)) + 𝜋(𝑎|𝑠)
(2)
𝐿𝐷= −E𝜏∼D,(𝑠,𝑎)∼𝜏[ log 𝐷(𝑠,𝑎)]
−E𝜏∼𝜋,(𝑠,𝑎)∼𝜏[1 −log 𝐷(𝑠,𝑎)]
(3)
3.3
Neural Network Distillation
Neural network distillation applies supervised regression to train
a student network to produce the same output distribution as a
trained teacher network. The method was first proposed by Hinton
et al. [20] and has been applied in RL mainly for performing policy
distillation [8, 38, 42]. Particularly, Teh et al. [42] proposes that
instead of distilling each policy 𝜋𝑖to a general policy 𝜋0, we could
gain a faster convergence with a two-column architecture by defin-
ing 𝜋𝑖= 𝜋0 + e𝜋𝑖. Accordingly, 𝜋𝑖only needs to learn a near-zero
difference between a common policy and the task-specific policy.
4
METHOD
4.1
Problem Setup
We consider a setup in which there is only one task (one MDP
𝑀= (𝑆,𝐴, 𝑅(0),𝑇,𝛾, 𝜌0)), but the demonstrations are generated by
employing varying strategies. Different strategies may come from
different experts who have personalized strategical preferences or
one expert that has mastered several. Therefore, despite heterogene-
ity within demonstrations, all trajectories in the dataset should still
be near-optimal in terms of task reward 𝑅(0). We denote each strat-
egy’s demonstration dataset as D (𝑖) = {𝜏(𝑖)
1 ,𝜏(𝑖)
2 , · · · ,𝜏(𝑖)
𝑀}, where
𝑖∈{1, 2, · · · , 𝑁} is strategy index, 𝑀is the number of demonstra-
tion trajectories for one strategy, and 𝑁is the number of strategies.
Our first objective is to infer a shared task reward function 𝑅(0)
despite there being different strategies in the demonstration dataset.
The second objective is to infer the strategy-only reward g
𝑅(𝑖). Com-
bining strategy-only reward with the task reward function will
result in a strategy-combined reward 𝑅(𝑖), which should induce the
observed expert strategical behaviors.
4.2
Task and Strategy Reward
We first propose to model the strategy-combined reward function
that is optimized by a demonstrator to be a linear combination of
the task and the strategy-only reward as given by Equation 4.
𝑅(𝑖) (·) = 𝑅(0) (·) + 𝛼𝑖g
𝑅(𝑖) (·)
(4)
Despite the simplicity, we argue Equation 4 makes a reasonable
assumption. Several previous IRL works also apply linear, if not
more constraining, assumptions to combine reward functions: Amin
et al. [2] create a combined reward by adding a task reward with
a cross-task shared preference, while we add shared task reward
with each strategy reward; Woodworth et al. [45] propose a similar
formulation, except their task reward is known and they try to
learn task-independent preference in a multi-task setting. In the
RL literature, there is also substantial work combining rewards
linearly (e.g., adding intrinsic reward, such as curiosity or entropy
to the original task reward for the sake of exploration). In fact,
many engineered reward functions are also a linear combination
of several reward components (e.g., for OpenAI Gym [4] MuJoCo
[43] hopper environment, its reward function is defined as a linear
combination of forward speed, living bonus, and action penalty).
Additionally, assuming a linear combination could also provide
interpretability (see Figure 4). Our approach is unique in that it
shares the task reward while having the flexibility on each strategy
reward, which we argue is more realistic while allowing us to apply
joint inference of the task reward and strategy reward.
4.3
Reward Network Distillation
To infer the shared task reward function between different strate-
gies, we propose utilizing network distillation to distill common
knowledge from each separately learned strategy-combined reward
𝑅(𝑖) to the task reward function 𝑅(0). We also want to regularize
𝑅(𝑖) to be close to 𝑅(0), since we have the prior knowledge that
despite heterogeneous strategic preferences, all experts should still
be prioritizing optimizing the task reward 𝑅(0) to achieve at least
near-optimal performance. Previous distillation methods mainly fo-
cus on distilling classification results, and therefore KL-divergence
between teacher and student outputs could be a good choice for
regularization. However, reward functions are real-valued func-
tions and therefore probabilistic distance metrics do not fit. Thus,
we propose to regularize the expected L2-norm of the difference
between the reward functions, as shown in Equation 5, in which
𝜋(𝑖) is the optimal policy under reward function 𝑅(𝑖)
𝜃𝑖.
𝐿reg = E(𝑠,𝑎)∼𝜋(𝑖)

𝑅(𝑖)
𝜃𝑖(𝑠,𝑎) −𝑅(0)
𝜃0 (𝑠,𝑎)

2

(5)
Note that we are using an index both on 𝜃and 𝑅to denote that
each strategy-combined reward 𝑅(𝑖) has its own reward parameters,
and that these are approximated by separate neural networks with
parameters 𝜃𝑖for each strategy and 𝜃0 for the task reward. There
is no parameter sharing between strategy and task reward.
Due to the computational cost of optimizing 𝜋(𝑖) using RL, we
seek to avoid fully optimizing it inside the IRL loop. Therefore, we
apply an iterative reward function and policy training schedule,
similar to AIRL. Through such way, we could learn reward function
and policy simultaneously. Combining AIRL’s objective (Equation
3) with our distillation objective, we maximize 𝐿𝐷in Equation 6.
𝐿𝐷=
𝑁
∑︁
𝑖=1

E(𝑠,𝑎)∼𝜏(𝑖)
𝑗
∼D (𝑖) log 𝐷𝜃𝑖(𝑠,𝑎)
+ E(𝑠,𝑎)∼𝜋(𝑖) log(1 −𝐷𝜃𝑖(𝑠,𝑎))
−E(𝑠,𝑎)

𝑅(𝑖)
𝜃𝑖(𝑠,𝑎) −𝑅(0)
𝜃0 (𝑠,𝑎)

2
i
(6)

𝐷is dependent on 𝜃𝑖via Equation 2 (𝑅(𝑖)
𝜃𝑖corresponds to 𝑓𝜃). Each
𝜋(𝑖) optimizes1 𝑅(𝑖)
𝜃𝑖. Yet, while Equation 6 should be able to distill
the shared reward into 𝑅(0)
𝜃0 , the distillation is inefficient as 𝑅(0)
𝜃0 will
work as a strong regularization for 𝑅(𝑖)
𝜃𝑖before successful distillation.
Instead, our structure in Equation 4 allows for a two-column re-
parameterization, speeding up knowledge transfer and making the
learning process easier [42]. Combining Equation 4 and Equation 6,
we arrive at Equation 7.
𝐿𝐷=
𝑁
∑︁
𝑖=1

E(𝑠,𝑎)∼𝜏(𝑖)
𝑗
∼D (𝑖) log 𝐷𝜃𝑖,𝜃0 (𝑠,𝑎)
+ E(𝑠,𝑎)∼𝜋(𝑖) log  1 −𝐷𝜃𝑖,𝜃0 (𝑠,𝑎)
−𝛼𝑖E(𝑠,𝑎)


g
𝑅(𝑖)
𝜃𝑖(𝑠,𝑎)

2

(7)
The key difference between Equation 7 and Equation 6 is that 𝐷
depends on both 𝑅(0)
𝜃0 and g
𝑅(𝑖)
𝜃𝑖instead of separate 𝑅(𝑖)
𝜃𝑖. Thus, 𝑅(0)
𝜃0
directly updates from the discriminator’s loss rather than waiting
for knowledge to be learned by a strategy-combined reward and
subsequently distilled into a task reward. Further, the last term of
Equation 7 reduces to a simple L2-regularization on strategy-only
reward’s output, weighted by 𝛼𝑖. This formulation provides us with
a new view to interpret the relative weights of the strategy-only
reward 𝛼𝑖: the larger 𝛼𝑖is, the more the strategy-only reward will
influence the strategy-combined reward. Therefore, we will have
higher regularization to account for possible overwhelming of the
task reward function. Comparing Equation 7 and 3, we could inter-
pret MSRD in another view: optimizing 𝜃𝑖only via IRL objective
results in a combination of task and strategy reward, and adding
regularization on strategy reward will encourage to encode only
necessary information in 𝜃𝑖and share more knowledge in 𝜃0.
4.4
Multi-Style Reward Distillation
We summarize our algorithm in Algorithm 1. In the algorithm we
first collect the heterogeneous-strategy expert dataset and initialize
network parameters as well as relative weights. For each training
epoch, we will iterate over all strategies (line 5). For each strategy,
we first collect 𝐾trajectories generated by its corresponding pol-
icy 𝜋(𝑖) (line 6). We also sample expert trajectories for strategy 𝑖
from the dataset (line 7). We then train the Discriminator (reward
function) with loss given by Equation 7 and data 𝜏gen
𝑗
and 𝜏exp
𝑗
(line 8). After training the reward function, we could assign pseudo-
reward to trajectories we generate with reward function 𝑅(𝑖)
𝜃𝑖(line
9). Finally, we update the policy according to the trajectory gener-
ated and pseudo-reward signal (line 10). In practice, we could also
postpone the gradient update for 𝑅(0) at the end of one sweep of
strategies to stabilize the learning of the task reward.
5
EXPERIMENT SETUP
We tested MSRD on both virtual and real-world environments. Here,
we describe our experiments, showing results in Section 6.
1We choose Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) [13]
Algorithm 1 Multi-Strategy Reward Distillation
1: Obtain heterogeneous-strategy expert dataset D (𝑖)
=
{𝜏(𝑖)
1 , · · · ,𝜏(𝑖)
𝑀} ∀𝑖∈{1, · · · , 𝑁}
2: Initialize 𝑅(0), 𝑅(𝑖), 𝜋(𝑖)
∀𝑖∈{1, 2, · · · , 𝑁}
3: Determine relative weights 𝛼𝑖
∀𝑖∈{1, 2, · · · , 𝑁}
4: while not converged do
5:
for i = 1 to 𝑁do
6:
Collect 𝐾(𝐾≤𝑀) trajectories 𝜏gen
𝑗
by executing 𝜋(𝑖)
7:
Sample 𝐾trajectories 𝜏exp
𝑗
from D (𝑖)
8:
Train 𝜃𝑖and 𝜃0 with Equation 7, 𝜏gen
𝑗
and 𝜏exp
𝑗
9:
Assign reward for all transitions in 𝜏gen
𝑗
: 𝑟(𝑠,𝑎)
=
𝑅(𝑖)
𝜃𝑖(𝑠,𝑎)
10:
Update policy 𝜋𝑖using trajectories 𝜏gen
𝑗
via TRPO with
entropy bonus to encourage exploration
11:
end for
12: end while
13: return 𝑅(0), 𝑅(𝑖), 𝜋(𝑖)
5.1
Virtual Experiments
We first tested MSRD on two simulated environments: a simpler
inverted pendulum control task and a more difficult hopper locomo-
tion task (see Figure 6 and supplementary materials for illustration).
The goal of the inverted pendulum task is to balance a pendulum
on a cart by moving the cart left/right, making it a single degree of
freedom (DoF) problem, based on a 2D observation. The reward for
inverted pendulum is defined as the negative absolute value of the
pendulum angle from upright position. The objective of hopper is to
control 3-DoF joints to move forward based on its 11-dimensional
observation. The reward for hopper is defined as the speed at which
it moves forward. We used the OpenAI Gym [4] MuJoCo [43] imple-
mentation for both environments but made the following changes
to fit our application: 1) remove termination judgements to gain
flexibility in behaviors; 2) add timeout constraint of 1,000 steps.
5.1.1
Heterogeneous Demonstration Collection. Our algorithm can
utilize heterogeneous-strategy demonstrations. Therefore, we first
need to generate a variety of demonstrations to emulate heteroge-
neous strategies that humans will apply in solving problems for
our virtual experiments. Typical RL algorithms can only generate
single-modal policy for each task in attempt to maximize the task
reward. Some previous work has tried to generate diverse behaviors
[11, 48]. Among them, Diversity is All You Need (DIAYN) trains
a discriminator to distinguish different behaviors and trains poli-
cies utilizing the discriminator’s output as a pseudo-reward. The
pseudo-reward is shown in Equation 8, where 𝑧is the strategy
index, 𝑞is the posterior decoding 𝑧from 𝑠, and 𝑝(𝑧) is the prior
distribution. However, DIAYN only discovers different behaviors
without task specification, so we augment DIAYN to incorporate
task reward by the linear form of Equation 4.
𝑟𝑧(𝑠,𝑎) = log𝑞𝜙(𝑧|𝑠) −log𝑝(𝑧),
(8)
We also propose a method to encourage different strategies tak-
ing different actions in the same state via a diversity reward in
which 𝑘is the strategy index and 𝜋𝑘is the policy for strategy 𝑘

Figure 2: Correlation between ground-truth and estimated task reward, normal-
ized for each strategy to [0, 1], for inverted pendulum (left) and hopper (right)
environments. Reward is invariant to shift/scale. 𝑟is correlation coefficient.
Figure 3: Correlation between ground-
truth vs. estimated strategy reward by
MSRD and AIRL on Inverted Pendulum.
(Equation 9). Equation 9 encourages the KL-divergence between
different strategy’s policies to be large. Linearly combining KL-
encouraged diversity reward with the task reward, we can train
strategies that optimize both the task goal and the diversity goal.
𝑟𝑘
KL(𝑠) =
𝑁
∑︁
𝑖=1
𝐾𝐿(𝜋𝑘(·|𝑠)||𝜋𝑖(·|𝑠)),
(9)
We trained both “DIAYN + Extrinsic Reward" and "KL-Encouraged
+ Extrinsic Reward" policies to collect heterogeneous trajectories
that applied different strategies to solve the task. From all the strate-
gies generated, we chose 20 strategies for inverted pendulum and
the two most significant strategies for hopper. Generally, different
strategies in inverted pendulum encourage the cart to stay at dif-
ferent angles, but some strategies maintain dynamic balance by
periodically moving the cart left and right. Two different strategies
in hopper are "Hop" and "Crawl" as illustrated in Figure 6. More
details are available in the supplementary materials.
5.2
Real-World Experiments
For our second environment, we tested MSRD on its capability to
learn various table tennis strokes from expert human demonstration.
Participants were asked to kinetically teach a robot arm to hit an
incoming ping pong ball using three different stroke strategies:
push, slice, and top spin (see supplementary videos for illustration),
from both a forehand and backhand position. Detailed environment
setup could be found in supplementary.
5.2.1
Experiment Design and Subjects. We adopt a within-subjects
design for demonstration collection, requiring subjects finish all six
combinations of positions and strategies. We pseudo-randomized
the order of forehand and backhand, as well as the order of three
strategies. We recruited 10 subjects from a population of college
graduate students. Subjects were compensated.
5.2.2
Experiment Procedure. When the participants arrived, they
read and signed a consent form detailing the purpose, duration,
and study procedure. For each trial, we began by showing a video
tutorial on how to move the robot arm to hit the incoming ball
with a specific strategy. After the tutorial, we allowed participant
to practice with the automatic ping pong feeder. Once the subject
felt ready, we began the recording process. Saved trajectories were
those in which the participant was able to successfully return the
ball to the opponent’s side and the movement of striking closely
resembled the strategy assigned. We collected three recordings
for each conditions, position (forehand/backhand), and strategy
combination. We record at each timestep of the trajectory the robot
joint angles, angle rates and the ball position.
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In this section, we report and analyze MSRD’s results on three
environments and benchmark against AIRL to elucidate MSRD’s
advantage on recovering both the latent task reward (the essential
goal of the demonstrators) and the means by which the task is
accomplished (i.e. the strategy). We explore two hypotheses:
H1: The task reward learned by MSRD has a higher correlation with
the true task reward than AIRL.
H2: Strategy-only reward learned by MSRD has a higher correlation
with true strategic preferences than AIRL.
We assessed both hypotheses quantitatively and qualitatively
for the simulation environments only as the ground-truth reward
functions are available. In the physical robot experiment, users are
instructed to execute the task instead of optimizing an objective
function, meaning that we do not have access to the underlying
task reward or strategy-only rewards. Therefore, H1 and H2 were
assessed qualitatively in the physical robot experiment. We did not
compare MSRD method with more traditional IRL methods (such as
Max-Margin IRL, Feature-Matching IRL, Max-Ent IRL, etc.) because
they rely on sophisticated feature designs. We leverage end-to-end
neural network architectures to avoid manual feature extraction.
Furthermore, we wanted to provide a fair comparison between
methods; given MSRD leverages AIRL, the most appropriate choice
is thus AIRL. In future work, we propose considering integrated
other IRL methods into MSRD. In future work, our method could be
combined with any existing strategy inference method (e.g., [31])
to make it applicable to cases where strategy labels are unavailable.

Figure 4: Task/Strategy Reward Functions of Inverted Pen-
dulum vs Pendulum Angle and Corresponding Behaviors.
6.1
Simulated Environments
To test H1, we constructed a dataset of trajectories that have vari-
ous task performances utilizing noise injection [5]. We note that
this dataset was also generated with various-strategy policies to
be representative of the entire trajectory space. We then evaluated
the reward function learned by AIRL and MSRD on the trajecto-
ries, comparing estimated vs. ground-truth rewards. We show a
correlation of estimated rewards and ground-truth task rewards
in Fig.2. The task reward function learned through MSRD has a
higher correlation with the ground-truth reward function (0.998 and
0.943) versus AIRL (0.51 and 0.89) for each domain, respectively).
AIRL’s reward function overfits to some strategies and mixes the
task reward with that strategy-only reward, making its estimation
unreliable for other strategies’ trajectories.
To test H2, we calculated the correlations of MSRD’s strategy-
only rewards with the true strategic preferences and compared that
with the correlation of AIRL’s rewards when AIRL is trained on each
individual strategy. In simulated domains, true strategic preferences
are available as the pseudo-reward in Equation 8 and 9. Correlations
of both methods for all strategy rewards in inverted pendulum
are shown in Figure 3. A paired t-test shows that MSRD achieves
a statistically significantly higher correlation (M = 0.779, SD =
0.239) for the strategy rewards versus AIRL (M = 0.635, SD = 0.324)
trained separately for each strategy, 𝑡(19) = 1.813, 𝑝= 0.0428 (one-
tailed). A Shapiro-Wilk test showed the residuals were normally
distributed (𝑝= 0.877). For the hopper domain, MSRD achieved
0.85 and 0.93 correlation coefficient for the hop and crawl strategy,
compared with AIRL’s 0.80 and 0.82 respectively. We omit a t-test
here due to the limited number of strategies. We could test the
discrimination of strategy rewards by evaluating each strategy’s
reward function on each strategy’s trajectory; we expect to observe
that the strategy-only reward function of each strategy gives its
corresponding trajectory the highest reward. We show in Figure
5 that this expectation holds. Out of 20 strategy-only rewards, 16
receive highest rewards in corresponding trajectories. A Binomial
test shows we are significantly better than chance (𝑝< .001).
We are unable to examine the reward landscape in the inverted
pendulum environment as it is four dimensional. Thus, we choose
to fix three dimensions (cart position, cart velocity and pendulum
angular velocity) to zero and investigate the reward change within
the one remaining dimension (pendulum angle). The relationship
Figure 5: Evaluation of strategy rewards on strategy trajec-
tories (Inverted Pendulum); rows normalized to [0, 1].
between rewards and pendulum angles in task and strategy reward
functions are illustrated in Figure 4, in which the task reward func-
tion reaches its peak when the angle of the pendulum is near zero.
This precisely recovers the task reward. For strategy-only reward
functions, strategy 13 encourages the pendulum to lean left (demon-
stration behavior shown in bottom-left of Figure 4), while strategy
4 encourages the policy to tilt the pendulum right (demonstration
behavior shown in bottom-right). Therefore, strategy-only rewards
learned by MSRD captures specific preferences within demonstra-
tions. Figure 4 also shows the magnitude of the task reward is larger
than the strategy reward, which affirms our expectation that an
emphasis is being put towards accomplishing the task.
In the hopper environment, it is harder to visualize the reward
landscape due to a high-dimensional observation space and a lack of
interpretability of states. Therefore, instead of visualizing a reward
curve, we evaluate the estimated strategy-only reward on trajec-
tories from both strategies to provide evidence for H2. Figure 6
shows that when given a hopping trajectory, the hop strategy-only
reward function gives higher reward for that behavior than crawl
strategy-only reward function. Similarly, in the crawl trajectory
case (Figure 6), the crawling strategy-only reward gives a higher
value than the hop strategy-only reward. Therefore, the strategy-
only reward function recovered by MSRD gives a higher reward to
the corresponding behavior than the other strategy-only reward
Figure 6: Hop and crawl strategy reward on Hop (top) and
Crawl (bottom) trajectories. Blue and orange numbers are
learned Hop and Crawl strategy rewards, respectively.

function, thus providing encouragement to the policy towards the
intended behavior (H2).
These results across our simulated environments show our algo-
rithms’ success in both task reward recovery and strategy reward
decomposition. This capability is a novel contribution to the field
of LfD in that we are able to tease out strategies from the underly-
ing task and effectively learn policies that can reproduce both the
strategy and a well-performed policy for the underlying task.
6.2
Physical Environment
We utilize four deep neural networks (DNNs) consisting of three
fully connected layers (32 nodes on each hidden-layer) to repre-
sent task, push, slice and topspin rewards. The ball states alongside
robot arm joints serve as our inputs. The label of different types
of demonstration (forehand-push, backhand-slice, etc.) is available
to our algorithm. Figure 7 shows four frames of the learned tra-
jectories for our defined strategies. The change in angle and the
upward/downward motion of the paddle throughout the policy
trajectory are key factors in the display of different strategies (as
these induce spin). Push is associated with a small change in angle
as it is not attempting to add any spin onto the ball. Slice places a
backspin on the ball, and thus the angle of the paddle will quickly
tilt up as shown in Figure 7. Conversely, topspin places a topspin
on the ball; to do so, the associated trajectory has a quick upward
motion. Figure 8 provides quantitative evidence that the strategy-
only reward should be maximal given a demonstration utilizing the
corresponding strategy. After just 30 minutes of training on each
strategy, the robot was able to learn to strike 83% of the fed balls.
The robot learned to perform all strategies, and the robot’s best
strategy, topspin, resulted in 90% of balls returned successfully.
To further verify that our task reward was learning the correct
behavior, the task reward function was used to evaluate each of
the demonstrated trajectories (three trajectories for each of the
three strategies). In the case of the original demonstrations (i.e.,
where the ball was struck and landed in bounds), the average and
standard deviation of the task reward across demonstrations and
Figure 7: Different strategies learned in robot table tennis
task. Top to bottom: Push, Slice, and Topspin.
strategies was 1.476 ± 0.051. We then virtually manipulated the
trajectories to indicate that the ball was unsuccessfully returned,
which achieved an average and standard deviation for the task
reward of only 1.284 ± 0.042. A Friedman Test shows this result is
statistically significant (𝜒2(1, 9) = 9, 𝑝< 0.05), providing support
that our task reward is learning to identify successful returns, as
unsuccessful trajectories should be associated with lower reward
when compared to successful. A video of the robot returning an
incoming ball can be found in our supplementary materials. In this
real-world robot control task, we see that MSRD can successfully
recover all three strategies’ behaviors using human data.
7
FUTURE WORK
Our approach to teasing out demonstrator-specific rewards from
a common, task reward might be able to tease out sub-optimality.
Researchers have discussed models for human sub-optimality, e.g.,
𝜖-greedy approaches [5, 15]. However, there is an argument to be
made for sub-optimality being reflected via satisficing heuristics [23,
41] or a person-specific augmentation of a task reward [44], which
is analogous to MSRD’s model. In future work, we aim to explore
models of human decision-making towards being able to recover a
demonstrator’s latent objective from sub-optimal demonstration.
We also plan to utilize different inference methods to allow for
unlabelled demonstrations (i.e., to infer the strategy label).
8
CONCLUSION
We explored a new problem of apprenticeship via IRL when demon-
strators provide heterogeneous, strategy-based demonstrations
seeking to maximize a latent task reward. By explicitly modeling
the task and strategy reward separately, and jointly learning both,
our algorithm is able to recover more robust task rewards, discover
unique strategy rewards, and imitate strategy-specific behaviors.
