Large-Scale Reasoning with OWL
Michael Ruster
University of Koblenz-Landau, Campus Koblenz
1
Introduction
In recent years, the Semantic Web has grown in size and importance. More
and more knowledge is stored in machine-readable formats like RDFS or OWL.
For many applications, knowledge extraction and reasoning is one of the core
requirements. Through reasoning, knowledge can be logically derived that is not
explicitly present in the data. Due to the complexity and amount of knowledge
on the Semantic Web, this can easily become a diﬃcult task. The bottlenecks
are the time used for processing a query as well as the memory needed while
reasoning.
This paper outlines common approaches for eﬃcient reasoning on large-scale
data. It therefore presents techniques implemented in reasoners, which are able
to process billions (109) of triples. The paper focuses on OWL because it is
widely used as a knowledge representation ontology language on the Semantic
Web and because it is rich in features. First of all, a brief introduction to
the Semantic Web is given in Section 2. For this, common properties of it are
highlighted which may inﬂuence the choice of language selection for knowledge
representation. Subsequently, Section 3 will give an overview of OWL and some
of its sublanguages. The choice of sublanguages is shortly explained based on the
requirements of modelling knowledge on the Semantic Web. Section 4 illustrates
two main techniques for large-scale reasoning. Diﬀerences between the approaches
are being highlighted. Furthermore, for both techniques, one example reasoner is
presented together with some optimisation strategies they implement. Finally,
Section 5 summarises this paper.
2
Semantic Web and Language Features
This section focuses on the Semantic Web and some of its most important
properties. Thereby, it introduces the various important terms which are used
throughout this paper. Furthermore, this section describes two diﬀerent logics
that can be of use for modelling Semantic Web data.
The Semantic Web’s purpose is to extend the World Wide Web by encoding
its information in machine-parseable ways [3]. As a result, it should be possible
for machines to easily extract a Web page’s “meaning” [31]. The Semantic Web
is built using various technologies like ontologies to achieve this. Ontologies are
conceptual models, encoding a set of terms and relationships between them [3].
This enables the organisation and exchange of information as well as reasoning
arXiv:1602.04473v1  [cs.AI]  14 Feb 2016

2
on it. Formal descriptions of ontologies are given through ontology languages.
Ontology languages are using logics to express knowledge. OWL is built around
description logics to which an overview is given in Section 4. Its statements
can be expressed through a subject-predicate-object structure which are called
triples. All statements that describe the taxonomy of the domain by expressing
terminological knowledge are called the TBox of the ontology [2]. Likewise, all
statements describing assertions about instances like their properties and relations
to other instances are called the ABox [2].
Semantic Web data may originate from many diverse ﬁelds such as biology,
medicine [31] or journalism like the New York Times1. Hence, the knowledge to
be represented is heterogeneous and may require diﬀerent statement capabilities
of its ontology language. A richer amount of features may also mean a higher
complexity while reasoning [cf. 22]. Nevertheless, depending on the domain to
model, more features might be needed. For example, generally, every statement is
either true or false. But modelling uncertainty or imprecision is then not possible
e.g. in classical description logic, a statement cannot express that a paper is
“almost” ﬁnished. A solution for this is to introduce a ﬁner range of truth values.
This can be done e.g. with fuzzy logic by assigning such an additional truth value
in the range of [0, 1] to each triple [46].
Similarly, reasoning over incomplete and conﬂicting knowledge can be prob-
lematic for instance when trying to calculate a transitive closure over multiple
triples. A common example expresses that birds can ﬂy and that penguins are
birds. But penguins form an exception regarding the capability of ﬂight while
most birds are actually able to ﬂy. Defeasible logic [27] allows expressing sentences
like “generally, birds can ﬂy” while also modelling that penguins cannot although
they are birds [cf. 24]. This logic introduces three main elements [27]:
Strict rules model knowledge that is true in all cases like “swallows are birds”.
Defeasible rules express that something “typically” holds like “birds can ﬂy”.
They can be defeated by other defeasible or strict rules. Rules can be assigned
priorities to determine which rule may defeat another one [27, 11].
Undercutting defeaters formulate possible exceptions to defeasible rules with-
out them being expressive enough to allow any concrete inference. For example,
“an injured bird might not be able to ﬂy” would not allow an inference that
all injured birds are unable to ﬂy. Instead, it highlights that there might be
exceptions which would make an inference impossible.
Fuzzy logic and defeasible logic may seem similar at ﬁrst but are indeed
diﬀerent. As Covington [7] notes, fuzzy logic allows reasoning with a certain level
of uncertainty or imprecision. Whereas defeasible logic ignores these degrees of
truths and instead expresses that some rules may be overridden by others.
Both embody interesting concepts for the Semantic Web. Fuzzy logic can be
used to express various level of trust in certain sources. For example, an article
by a renowned newspaper will often be more trustworthy than one by a rather
unknown personal blogger. Defeasible logic helps modelling conﬂicting knowledge
1 http://data.nytimes.com/ — last accessed 25 March 2015, 11:00

3. OWL AND ITS SUBLANGUAGES
3
in a diﬀerent way. In the example before, the information by the blogger can be
defeated by the one published by the newspaper. It remains unclear how much
more credible the newspaper is compared to the blogger. Yet, the information from
the newspaper article can be seen as truth instead of only information closer to
the actual truth. This allows modelling of incomplete knowledge with knowledge
capturing typical states and being defeated by more speciﬁc rules. Hence, when
knowledge changes would appear that are expressed through defeasible rules,
these defeasible rules could immediately be added without entailing further
processing [11].
It depends on the ontology developers whether they see a need for these logics
to describe their data. In some contexts, it can be useful. However, it always
adds complexity to the reasoning process. In the next section, sublanguages of
OWL are discussed to illustrate possible choices in expressiveness that are already
provided by OWL without any further extensions.
3
OWL and its Sublanguages
This section gives a quick introduction to OWL and its sublanguages in terms
of their features. The purpose of this section is to illustrate that the choice of
an ontology language is an important decision for reasoning on big data. For
this purpose, reasoning complexities of most languages are given. Their most
important properties are presented and thus it should be understood, why some
languages are commonly used for this type of reasoning.
The Web Ontology Language (short: OWL) is a speciﬁcation by the W3C with
the purpose of representing knowledge in machine-parsable ways. In the OWL 1
Web Ontology Language Guide [33], the W3C explains that OWL 1 can be divided
into its three sublanguages OWL 1 Full, OWL 1 Lite and OWL 1 DL. These
sublanguages themselves can be further divided and diﬀer in their expressiveness
with OWL 1 Full being the feature-richest. It can be seen as an extension of RDF,
which includes meta-modelling capabilities of RDF Schema (short: RDFS) [25].
OWL 1 Lite and OWL 1 DL on the other hand can be understood as extensions
of a subset of RDF [25]. Ontologies created using OWL 1 Lite are subsets of those
built with OWL 1 DL which themselves are subsets of OWL 1 Full ontologies.
Detailed diﬀerences can be taken from the OWL 1 semantics speciﬁcation [29].
With rising amount of features, the complexity of reasoning increases as
well: Reasoning in OWL 1 Lite is complete for ExpTime, in OWL 1 DL for
NexpTime and OWL 1 Full is even undecidable [17]. The revision of OWL 1,
called OWL 2, even extends the feature set of the sublanguages, resulting e.g.
in a reasoning complexity of 2NexpTime for OWL 2 DL [13]. Thus, especially
when reasoning on billions of triples, it is important to decide on using the
least complex sublanguage that oﬀers all needed features for the given modelling
purpose.
Commonly used for modelling knowledge while keeping reasoning feasible
are sublanguages of OWL 2 DL, also referred to as proﬁles. These proﬁles are
characterised by further restricting the feature set and hence making reasoning

3. OWL AND ITS SUBLANGUAGES
4
more feasible [18, 22]. Hereby, these ontology languages also become simpler to
implement, extend and easier to understand [22]. The W3C distinguishes three
OWL 2 proﬁles, namely OWL 2 QL, OWL 2 RL and OWL 2 EL [26]. These
proﬁles have a reduced reasoning complexity of as low as PTime for OWL 2 RL [cf.
26, 6]. One of the restrictions that all the proﬁles share is that for axioms which
deﬁne subclass inclusion, they disallow unions of classes. Otherwise, reasoning on
these ontology languages would become NP-hard already. Similarly, all proﬁles
forbid the use of negations and universal quantiﬁers on the left-hand side. Their
concrete restrictions are explained in the OWL 2 proﬁle speciﬁcation [26] and
are outside of this paper’s scope. However, Kr¨otzsch [22] summarises their most
important characteristics as follows:
OWL 2 QL was designed as a query language to ease information retrieval
from ontologies as a database. Hence, queries may extract matching data together
with facts inferred from it in LSpace [26]. This sublanguage’s design enables
query rewriting, where the query is rewritten e.g. into an SQL query that can be
directly executed on an SQL database [4]. The technique of query rewriting is
discussed in more detail in Section 4.2 with an approach being presented where
the query is split up into related rules that eventually may return instances.
OWL 2 RL is often applied to contexts where the TBox is notably smaller
than the ABox, which is common for the Semantic Web. It was developed as
a scalable solution and allows querying on big datasets while retaining most of
OWL 2 DL’s expressiveness [26].
OWL 2 EL is likewise aimed at scenarios with big ABoxes [26]. Thus, it is
used e.g. for biomedical ontologies like Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine
Clinical Terms2 (short: SNOMED CT), which gathers information about human
diseases. It is the most restricted proﬁle and therefore the least expressive.
Besides the OWL 2 proﬁles, OWL pD* (also known as OWL Horst) is also
often used for reasoning on huge amounts of data. It is an extension of RDFS
combined with a subset of OWL 1 [18]. As a result, it becomes more expressive
than RDFS while remaining less computationally complex than OWL 1 Full [40].
Reasoning in OWL pD* has a complexity of NP and P for some special cases [18].
Urbani et al. [40] describe it as “a de facto standard for scalable OWL rea-
soning” [40, p.216]. The development of OWL 2 RL was partly inﬂuenced by
OWL pD* [26]. Thus, both are frequently used for large-scale reasoning [e.g.
4, 15].
Regardless of the revision of OWL, it can be said that OWL Lite is not
expressive enough for modelling most knowledge on the Semantic Web. OWL DL
and OWL Full however are not tractable for reasoning on huge datasets. Therefore,
restricted sublanguages are selected for knowledge modelling and reasoning
on the Semantic Web. OWL pD* and OWL 2 RL are the languages most
commonly applied to this task, often using a materialisation strategy presented
later in Section 4.1. Nevertheless, other proﬁles such as OWL 2 QL are also
used in some reasoners following a query rewriting strategy as further explained
in Section 4.2.
2 http://www.ihtsdo.org/ — last accessed 06 March 2015, 16:30

4. APPROACHES FOR LARGE-SCALE OWL REASONING
5
4
Approaches for Large-Scale OWL Reasoning
First of all, this section gives an overview of description logics, focussing on one
concrete language as an example. The description logics syntax and semantic will
be used when subsequently presenting the two inference methods forward chaining
and backward chaining. The later sections go into detail about implementations
of these methods. Section 4.3 will furthermore give an overview of a selection of
OWL and/or Semantic Web reasoners.
Description logics are a ﬁrst-order logic subset and allow the modelling of
knowledge [2]. They are the foundation of OWL and other ontologies. A common
example of description logics is the Attributive Language with Complements
(short: ALC) [30] It consists of concepts, individuals and roles. A concept can
e.g. be a Human or Building. Individuals can be seen as elements of concepts e.g.
Peter or EiﬀelTower. A function—also called an interpretation—associates the
individuals with concepts, so that for example Peter : Human expresses that the
individual Peter satisﬁes the Human concept. Examples for roles are hasChild or
builtBy.
To link these elements with each other, ALC introduces connectives. One
such connective is the concept inclusion “⊑”, which allows expressing that one
concept is more general than the other. For example Woman ⊑Human may
model that the gender neutral concept of a human includes women. Like in set
theory, concepts can also be uniﬁed so that e.g. Woman ⊔Man ⊑Human. The
intersection of concepts indicated by “⊓” is included analogously. There is also
a top concept “⊤” which is the most universal concept and thus subsumes all
others. Likewise, the bottom concept “⊥” models the concept of nothingness.
An example, using the negation connective “¬”, would be Woman ⊓¬Woman
⊑⊥. Existential and universal quantiﬁers—“∃” and “∀” respectively— allow
expressing knowledge including roles. For example, “a building is built only by
humans or no one” can be modelled as Building ⊑∀builtBy.Human. Similarly,
modelling a parent as someone who has had a child can be expressed with Parent
⊑∃hasChild.⊤. The given introduction to ALC and description logics in general
is incomplete and the interested reader may consult Schmidt-Schauß and Smolka
[30] and Baader [2] respectively.
Forward and backward chaining diﬀer in the “direction” of reasoning. Reason-
ing is used to derive implicit knowledge from ontologies by applying terminological
knowledge to the explicitly modelled data [2]. Forward chaining is data-driven
meaning that reasoning will start from existing data and infer new knowledge
as long as it is possible [32]. Given are two example class subsumption rules in
Equation 1 and 2.
X ⊑P
(1)
Z ⊔P ⊑Y
(2)
A forward chaining approach searches for rules with matching antecedents and
then assumes true consequents. Equation 3 shows how example data may express

4. APPROACHES FOR LARGE-SCALE OWL REASONING
6
a being of class Z and X. Next, it can be matched against the antecedents of
the example rules and hence reasoned to being of class Y .
a : Z ⊔a : X
(1)
=⇒a : Z ⊔a : P
(2)
=⇒a : Y
(3)
Backward chaining on the other hand is goal-driven [32]. It divides a goal
into smaller subgoals and tries to resolve those. By matching rules for true
consequents and then assuming true antecedents, backward chaining reasons
for data matching the initial goal. Likewise, Equation 4 illustrates a backward
chaining application assuming a being of class Y .
a : Y
(2)
=⇒a : Z ⊔a : P
(1)
=⇒a : Z ⊔a : X
(4)
The following sections explain how the approaches can be used for Semantic
Web reasoning and what advantages they have over the other. Section 4.1 presents
a common way to use forward chaining for this task by also presenting a typical
programming model and an overview of an implemented reasoner. Subsequently,
Section 4.2 discusses the application of backward chaining to reasoning on billions
of triples. Analogously, the main properties and approaches of an implementation
are shown.
4.1
Materialisation
Materialisation is a forward chaining approach [21]. The idea behind is to compute
all inferences prior to reasoning and storing them for later querying [32]. In this
section, after discussing the most important advantages and disadvantages to
this technique, a common programming model called MapReduce is explained.
Furthermore, a reasoner using MapReduce is presented.
Computing all inferences ﬁrst once, allows fast query answering as it is
comparable to lookups in a database. On the other hand, the initial materialisation
process is time and memory consuming. As an example, owl:sameAs is one of
the most commonly found axioms according to Hogan et al. [14]. It is used to
express equivalent individuals. If a reasoner would be na¨ıvely implemented, a full
closure would be in O(n2). On a corpus containing 33, 052 equivalent individuals,
Hogan et al. [16] prospected 1, 092, 434, 704 triples and an additional two billion
for those individuals being included in other statements. Another downside is
that materialisation must be done anew every time the data is updated. Due to
the nature of the Semantic Web, data may change frequently and hence regular
updates are necessary to ensure recent results.
MapReduce MapReduce is a programming model developed by Dean and
Ghemawat [8] for Google Inc. with the goal to process big amounts of data
eﬃciently. It tries to achieve this by allowing distributed and parallel data
processing and thus reducing the load on single machines/cores. The most
frequently used implementation is Apache Hadoop3. MapReduce can also be
3 https://hadoop.apache.org/ — last accessed March 08 2015, 17:30

4. APPROACHES FOR LARGE-SCALE OWL REASONING
7
used for reasoning on Semantic Web data [cf. 36, 42] for which it then becomes a
forward chaining approach. The process is split into three consecutive steps as
described by Dean and Ghemawat [8]:
1. Map is the ﬁrst phase and describes the act of pre-processing input data
as a list of key-value pairs. The result of every processed key-value pair is
immediately emitted. Thus, this process may be parallelised and can hence
speed up data processing. Its method signature can be given as:
Map (k1, v1) →list (k2, v2)
The diﬀerent indices express potentially diﬀerent datatypes.
2. Shuﬄe collects all results of the ﬁrst phase and groups them by their key.
Hence, the datatypes remain the same and a method signature can be given
as:
Shuffle (list (k2, v2)) →list (k2, list (v2))
3. Reduce is the phase in which the values with the same key are being
processed. Values are being merged together and returned as a smaller result
set. To avoid having to load the complete data into memory, the reduce phase
is only given an iterator over the values. The list of returned values is of the
same datatype as the intermediate values returned by the mapping phase.
Its signature can be given as:
Reduce (k2, list (v2)) →list (v2)
However, the commonly used implementation Apache Hadoop is more liberal
concerning the domain of return values, by having the following method
signature [1]:
Reduce (k2, list (v2)) →list (k3, v3)
Similar to the map phase, the reduce phase is generally executable in parallel.
Fig. 1.
An
example
MapReduce
process
for
the
rule
s rdf : type x, x rdfs : subClassOf y ⇒s rdf : type y. The ﬁgure was taken from
[42] and modiﬁed to explicitly include the shuﬄe phase.
Figure 1 illustrates a MapReduce application on an ontological rule. In this
example, the two triples of the rule’s antecedent share the common variable x.
Hence, it is selected as key for the map phase. After this pre-processing, the
shuﬄing groups all results by key. The reduce phase then produces the output
drawn from the intermediate results matched against the consequent. At this

4. APPROACHES FOR LARGE-SCALE OWL REASONING
8
point, the full reasoning process may not already be ﬁnished. The reason for this
is that the inferred knowledge matches part of the rule’s antecedent anew.
MapReduce applied to reasoning is not a trivial task which needs only one
run as illustrated by the rule in Figure 1. Instead, there are multiple diﬃculties
when trying to implement this approach in a way that is relatively light on space
and time consumption. A few of these are presented in the next section together
with an example MapReduce algorithm.
WebPIE as an Example Implementation of MapReduce Urbani et al. [41]
employ MapReduce in their reasoner Web-scale Inference Engine (short: WebPIE)
for reasoning on OWL pD* rules. The authors discuss the shown problem as a
ﬁxed-point iteration, expressing that the MapReduce process must be repeated
until no more new triples are returned. This results in an additional problem
as duplicates may be generated by having to apply some rules multiple times.
Besides trying to generate as few duplicates as possible throughout the reduce
phase, an additional MapReduce step is added that solely matches duplicates
and removes them [39]. In the map phase, the step iterates over all triples and
returns these triples as key, which removes duplicates in the succeeding shuﬄe
phase. Then, in the reduce phase, triples are only emitted if they were inferred
to distinguish them from the original input triples.
In general, Urbani et al. [42] try to execute as few MapReduce steps as possible.
Yet, the processing of some rules together with others is either not possible or
would have a heavy impact on performance. Thus, the authors implement various
MapReduce steps which focus on certain rules.
One, which will be discussed as an example, is the algorithm shown in
Listing 1.1. It calculates subclass relations and is separated into a map and
a reduce method as shown in Line 1 and Line 10 respectively. The algorithm
operates on triples having either rdf:type or rdfs:subClassOf as predicate.
Depending on their predicate, the map phase uses diﬀerent ﬂags as keys—in
this case either 0 or 1—together with the triple’s subject. The value associated
with the key is the input triple’s object. Considering an example input triple x
rdfs:subClassOf
y, then the output’s key ﬂag will be 1, its subject x and the
value y.
The reduce method ﬁrst removes all duplicates within the values. For the
sake of simplicity, these values will be referred to as classes. In Lines 14 and 15
all TBox triples matching the classes as a subject are loaded into memory. These
correspond to all the classes’ superclasses. Continuing the earlier example, having
a triple y rdfs:subClassOf
z in the TBox results in z being added to the
list of superclasses.
The reduce method distinguishes the input values based on their formerly
associated predicate in the original triple as indicated by the key’s ﬂag. In both
cases, the method iterates over all superclasses. It checks that the currently
processed superclass is not already contained in the set of classes to prevent
duplicates. Whenever this is ensured, the method returns a new triple associated
with a key. As the key is irrelevant in this scenario, the pseudocode reduce method

4. APPROACHES FOR LARGE-SCALE OWL REASONING
9
returns null. The triple models that the original input’s subject is either of the
same type as a matching superclass or also a subclass of that superclass. Thus,
inferred triples will be returned that respect the class hierarchy. In the formerly
given example, this would be x rdfs:subClassOf
z.
1
map( key ,
value ) :
2
// key :
source
of
the
t r i p l e
( i r r e l e v a n t )
3
//
value :
t r i p l e
4
i f
( value . predicate = ” rdf : type ” ) :
5
key . f l a g = 0
6
i f
( value . predicate = ” r d f s : subClassOf ” ) :
7
key . f l a g = 1
8
key . subject = value . subject
9
emit( key ,
value . object )
10
reduce( key ,
i t e r a t o r
values ) :
11
// key :
f l a g + t r i p l e . s u b j e c t
12
//
i t e r a t o r :
l i s t
of
c l a s s e s
13
values = values . unique //
f i l t e r
d u p l i c a t e
values
14
for
( c l a s s
in
values ) :
15
s u p e r c l a s s e s . add ( subclass schema . getSuperclasses ( c l a s s ) )
16
switch ( key . f l a g ) :
17
case
0:
// we ’ re
doing
rdf : type
18
for
( s u p e r c l a s s
in
s u p e r c l a s s e s ) :
19
i f
! values . contains ( s u p e r c l a s s ) :
20
emit( null , new Triple ( key . subject ,
” rdf : type ” , ←-
,→s u p e r c l a s s ) )
21
case
1:
// we ’ re
doing
r d f s : subClassOf
22
for
( s u p e r c l a s s
in
s u p e r c l a s s e s ) :
23
i f
! values . contains ( s u p e r c l a s s ) :
24
emit( null , new Triple ( key . subject , ←-
,→” r d f s : subClassOf ” ,
s u p e r c l a s s ) )
Listing 1.1. The algorithm to do RDFS subclass reasoning initially presented by
Urbani et al. [42]. This listing features a corrected and simpliﬁed version including
changes from Urbani [39].
Urbani et al. [41] present approaches for tackling the diﬃculties they faced
throughout building WebPIE. However, their solutions are mostly tightly coupled
with the ruleset of OWL pD*. Nevertheless, they also propose two more generic
optimisation strategies.
As the TBoxes are commonly a lot smaller than the ABoxes when reasoning
with data from the Semantic Web, the TBoxes can often times be fully loaded
into memory. This was also done in the algorithm shown in Listing 1.1. The
resulting advantage is that then the triples of instances can be streamed and
thus directly processed. But, Urbani et al. [41] note that this is not possible for

4. APPROACHES FOR LARGE-SCALE OWL REASONING
10
rules which require joins between multiple instance triples in their antecedent.
Equation 5 shows such a rule from the OWL pD* ruleset.
v owl : sameAs w, w owl : sameAs u ⇒v owl : sameAs u
(5)
There, for both triples in the antecedent, matching instances in the ABox must
be looked up each. Again, the authors propose a solution concretely ﬁt to the
aﬀected OWL pD* rules.
However, they also describe a common technique for reducing the overhead
created by rules considering the owl:sameAs axiom as in Equation 5. The input
is modiﬁed so that synonymous instances are replaced by a unique identiﬁer
representing an entire equivalence class each [e.g. 40, 5]. As a result, the required
space and computation time are both reduced drastically [23].
Although having only highlighted a few bottlenecks, it should have become
clear that applying MapReduce to reasoning on billions of triples is a complex task.
Albeit there being some reoccurring problems shared by most OWL sublanguages,
many optimisation approaches are tailored to concrete rules. Therefore, there is
a lack of eﬃcient universal solutions.
4.2
Backward Chaining
With backward chaining, reasoning is done at runtime, once the query is posed.
Hence, no prior computation is needed.
Backward chaining has two advantages over materialisation as described by
Urbani et al. [44]. First, there is no need for precomputation due to the runtime
reasoning. Neither is there generally a need for computing a full closure because
any reasoning solely needs to be done as far as it is required to answer the query.
As one result, an application exclusively using backward chaining may instantly
be usable without prior time- and space-consuming computation.
Second, the results to a query consider recent data modiﬁcations. That is,
when changes happen to the data such as deletions or additions, they are instantly
retrievable through the reasoning done by query rewriting. Furthermore, this
means that after changes have been applied to the data, no computationally and
memory-intense recomputation has to be done.
However, backward chaining also faces a great disadvantage compared with
materialisation. As reasoning must be done with every new query, answering these
is often time-consuming. Whereas for materialisation query matching instances
may directly be returned from the fully reasoned knowledge base.
Query Rewriting When using backward chaining for reasoning on ontologies,
some form of query rewriting is used. The concept of query rewriting is to
reformulate the query into a query that respects the ontology’s terminological
axioms and retrieves the matching instances [19]. There are various options
concerning how a query can be transformed such as logical rewriting [12] or
even concrete SQL query rewriting [4]. Both are actively used in the context of
ontology-based data access (short: OBDA).

4. APPROACHES FOR LARGE-SCALE OWL REASONING
11
OBDA describes the idea of storing ABoxes in traditional databases like
relational database management systems while allowing the use of ontologic
constraints [12]. Here, OWL 2 QL is often the preferred language as it was
designed implicitly with OBDA as intended purpose [26, 20]. With OBDA, data
access is oﬀered through the ontology as an intermediate layer so that the queries
are independent from the actual data storage [45]. This allows a uniﬁed semantical
access to diﬀerent data sources. Therefore, scalable, OBDA-enabled reasoning
may become of special interest for Semantic Web reasoning due to its data being
highly diverse.
Despite the existing potential, there are yet only few reasoners using query
rewriting while scaling up to billions of triples. There is especially a lack of
reasoners that focus on implementing the concept of OBDA and pertain this
scalability. Thus, the subsequent section presents a reasoner that is not build
around OBDA but instead uses an illustrative query rewriting approach while
supporting reasoning on billions of triples.
QueryPIE There is no prevalently used programming model for query rewriting
like there is MapReduce for materialisation. Urbani et al. [44] do query rewriting
for OWL pD* by building a reasoning tree with the query being its root and the
matching data its leaves. In backward chaining fashion, the query—an input triple
pattern—is matched against rule consequents and their antecedents will then be
used as new query triples. Figure 2 depicts a reasoning tree built from an example
query ?S rdf:type Person. The branches containing rules are connected by
Fig. 2. An example of a reasoning tree [44] with the rule names being replaced to match
this paper’s equation numbers.

4. APPROACHES FOR LARGE-SCALE OWL REASONING
12
logical ORs whereas the triples are connected with ANDs. This way, all instances
from leaves may be returned that match the rule of their parent node. However,
it is not necessary for instance triples to match the rules of other branch nodes.
Thus all matching triples may be returned, disregarding through which rules
they can be inferred. In the given example, the consequents of Equations 6 and 7
match the input query.
s rdf : type x, x rdfs : subClassOf y ⇒s rdf : type y
(6)
s p o, p rdfs : subPropertyOf q ⇒s q o
(7)
Their antecedents are bound accordingly, substituting all variables where possible.
In the antecedent s p o of Equation 7 for example, o is bound to Person. This
allows to apply Equation 8 so that all variables from its antecedents are bound
and reasoning can be continued on these.
p rdf : type owl : SymmetricProperty, v p u ⇒u p v
(8)
The tree building ﬁnishes when each branch has been built. A branch is built
as deep as there are yet rules applicable or matching instances can be retrieved
from the knowledge base. This process may consume a lot of time and also space.
Thus, Urbani et al. [44] propose two optimisation strategies:
Precomputation of frequently appearing branches.
Tree-pruning describes the early discovery of branches which will not return
any results and hence stopping to further follow them.
When implementing precomputation, its eﬀectiveness is deﬁned by how regular
the selected branches appear. Urbani et al. [44] focus their optimisation on what
they call terminological triple patterns. They deﬁne them as triple patterns whose
object or predicate is a term from the RDFS or OWL vocabulary that they
operate on. An example is given in Equation 9.
?X rdfs : subPropertyOf rdf : type
(9)
Due to the commonly smaller TBox in Semantic Web data, there are few such
terminological triple patterns. Yet, they aﬀect many queries. As using forward
chaining for precomputing would require the calculation of a full closure, backward
chaining is applied on the selected terminological triple patterns. For this, a tree
is built bottom up by iterative backward chaining as illustrated in more detail in
[44].
The advantage of exclusively reasoning at runtime, is lost when using precom-
putation. However, it is still a much faster process than full materialisation. It
especially remains fast enough to allow for frequent updates as typically found in
Semantic Web data. However, this approach can hence no longer be classiﬁed as
pure query rewriting but is actually a hybrid approach [43].

4. APPROACHES FOR LARGE-SCALE OWL REASONING
13
1
reason ( pattern ) :
2
// Get
r u l e s
where
the
query
pattern
i s
more
s p e c i f i c ←-
,→than
the
rul e ’ s
consequent :
3
Rules
applicableRules = ruleSet . a p p l i c a b l e ( pattern )
4
Results
r e s u l t s = {}
5
for
( rule
in
applicableRules ) :
6
antecedents = ru l e . instantiateAntecedents ( pattern )
7
// Perform
reasoning
to
f e t c h
a l l
antecedents :
8
for
( antecedent
in
antecedents ) :
9
i f
( antecedent !=
t e r m i n o l o g i c a l )
10
// Recursive
c a l l
to
the
reasoner :
11
antecedents . add ( reason ( antecedent ) )
12
antecedents . add ( KnowledgeBase . read ( antecedent ) )
13
// Apply
the
rule
using
the
antecedents
t r i p l e s :
14
r e s u l t s += ru le . applyRule ( antecedents )
15
return
r e s u l t s
Listing 1.2. The reasoner which operates on the precomputed terminological triple
patterns as given by Urbani et al. [44] with small modiﬁcations to match this paper’s
pseudocode style.
Listing 1.2 shows the algorithm in pseudocode used by Urbani et al. [44] to
reason after precomputing has been completed. Hence, they call it the termi-
nological independent reasoner. In the ﬁrst step, all rules are retrieved whose
consequent is more general than the query pattern. This corresponds to the
OR-levels of the reasoning tree. While iterating over all rules, each rule’s variables
are subsequently bound to any matches from the query pattern as shown in Line 6.
In the second loop all antecedents of a rule are processed which corresponds to the
AND-levels of the reasoning tree. For this, the terminological independent reasoner
is recursively called to further construct the branch. Due to precomputing, this
step is only needed if the currently processed antecedent is not terminological
as checked in Line 9. Next, a lookup in the knowledge base is done which also
includes the already computed terminological triple patterns. After every branch
of a rule have been computed, the rule is applied with all the previously computed
antecedents. In the end, all applied rules will be returned, meaning that all of
their variables are bound to match the query pattern.
As a second optimisation strategy, tree-pruning is used. It is built upon the
formerly precomputed terminological triple patterns. Whilst backward chaining,
rules, whose antecedent matches such terminological triple patterns, are prioritised.
If these patterns do not return any instances, the rule will not be applied as
they are more speciﬁc than the patterns. The processing of branches that are
known not to return any results, will therefore be stopped early. Thus, a lot of
unnecessary reasoning can be prevented.
In the next section, a selection of reasoners using forward and/or backward
chaining is presented. However, all of the reasoners using backward chaining
approaches either do not scale well or only partially support an OWL sublanguage.

4. APPROACHES FOR LARGE-SCALE OWL REASONING
14
QueryPIE is likely to be the ﬁrst reasoner scaling to billions of triples while
reasoning at runtime [43].
4.3
Other Reasoners
Besides WebPIE and QueryPIE, there are several other reasoners using forward
and/or backward chaining. This section gives an overview to a selection of
available reasoners.
OWLIM [21] is a semantic repository allowing the storage of and reasoning
on knowledge bases by employing full materialisation. Bishop and Bojanov [4]
state that OWLIM is capable to work on various rulesets including OWL pD*
and OWL 2 QL as well as OWL 2 RL. OWLIM is divided into the free-for-use
SwiftOWLIM and the commercial BigOWLIM [5]. Bishop et al. [5] state that
SwiftOWLIM was developed for in-memory reasoning with smaller datasets.
According to the authors, BigOWLIM on the other hand was developed for
reasoning on billions of triples. For this, various optimisations were needed of
which one is a special treatment of the owl:sameAs axiom. BigOWLIM uses
a canonical representation for each equivalence class [5] similar to WebPIE’s
approach. Furthermore, it employs a backward chaining approach on data deletion
to prevent a new full materialisation [5]. According to Bishop et al. [5], its use
allows BigOWLIM to be applicable to frequently updated data as is typical for
data from the Semantic Web.
Another, yet non-commercial, reasoner supporting multiple proﬁles is TrOWL
[38]. It is an interface for multiple reasoners such as Quill or Pellet. Besides
the support of OWL 2 QL and OWL 2 EL there is also partial support for
tractable reasoning with OWL 2 DL [28]. Using reasoners like Pellet allows full
OWL 2 DL reasoning support but reasoning is then no longer in polynomial
time [9]. Reasoning of OWL 2 QL is done by using backward chaining, namely
query rewriting [38]. OWL 2 EL on the other hand is reasoned in a forward
chaining manner [28].
Tachmazidis et al. [36] presented a reasoner which employs Apache Hadoop
for materialisation of knowledge that uses rulesets implementing defeasible logic.
Their motivation for developing a reasoner on defeasible logic was to create
inconsistency-tolerant reasoning that was able to deal with data of poor quality.
Although the reasoner does not operate on OWL but on RDF data, this concept
may have a high relevance for the Semantic Web as data from diﬀerent sources are
likely to be of diﬀerent quality. Making use of parallelisation through MapReduce,
Tachmazidis et al. [35] were able to build a reasoner scaling to billions of triples.
Stoilos et al. [34] developed a reasoner for an extension of OWL pD* that
supports fuzzy logic. This allows expressing vagueness as already described
in Section 2. Their work also uses the MapReduce implementation of Apache
Hadoop. The authors followed the optimisation strategies of WebPIE and adapted
them whenever necessary to support fuzzy logic. As a result, Stoilos et al. [34]
claim to have created a fuzzy reasoner with a performance comparable to WebPIE.

5. CONCLUSION
15
Virtuoso Universal Server4 is a Web server and triple store. It is furthermore
an OWL reasoner which allows backward as well as forward chaining [32, 37]. But,
its support is restricted to a subset of OWL 2 RL [43]. Moreover, except for an
RDF reasoner implementation [10], there do not seem to be any implementations
targeting Web-scale triples.
Apache Jena5 is a framework written in Java to support building Semantic
Web applications. Its included OWL reasoner supports forward and backward
chaining as well as a hybrid between the two [32]. However, throughout the
research for this paper, no implementation using the Jena reasoner could be
found which would scale to allow reasoning on billions of triples.
Another reasoner is F-OWL [47] which primarily uses backward chaining.
The authors call their speed-up strategy tabling. Their approach is to store the
results of already reasoned triples and look them up whenever possible. As a
result, the ﬁrst queries are processed slowly but the system becomes increasingly
faster on average for subsequent queries. However, it only supports OWL Full
while neither being complete nor decidable. According to its website6, F-OWL
has not been updated since 2003. Additionally, according to its authors [47] it
does not scale and is thus unsuitable for reasoning on billions of triples.
5
Conclusion
The grand challenge of large-scale reasoning is to eﬀectively use and reduce
the time and space consumption. Essentially, the approaches do not diﬀer from
regular reasoning methods. Yet, the performance optimisation is crucial.
Additionally, the choice of ontology language may have heavy impact on
the complexity of reasoning. OWL pD* and OWL 2 RL are commonly used for
forward chaining approaches whereas OWL 2 QL is mainly used in backward
chaining reasoners. Furthermore, when reasoning on the Semantic Web, extensions
of the languages can be of interest. For example, using defeasible logic may allow
reasoning with data of poor quality from diﬀerent sources. Likewise, OBDA may
be a suitable technology for working and reasoning on Semantic Web data.
Reasoning on big knowledge bases modelled in OWL is still rarely done
using backward chaining. Instead, materialisation is the most common approach.
However, materialisation alone cannot ﬁt the Semantic Web’s quickly changing
nature. Thus, future research should consider large-scale reasoning using a hybrid
approach of backward and forward chaining. Moreover, a requirement analysis
of features needed for properly modelling and reasoning on Semantic Web data
could be helpful. Due to the diversity of data, a prior separation by topics would
probably be beneﬁcial.
4 http://virtuoso.openlinksw.com/ — last accessed 18 March, 22:00
5 https://jena.apache.org/index.html — last accessed 18 March, 08:30
6 http://fowl.sourceforge.net/ — last accessed 17 March 2015, 22:00
