arXiv:1203.3887v4  [stat.ML]  22 Apr 2013
The Annals of Statistics
2013, Vol. 41, No. 2, 401–435
DOI: 10.1214/12-AOS1070
c
⃝Institute of Mathematical Statistics, 2013
LEARNING LOOPY GRAPHICAL MODELS WITH LATENT
VARIABLES: EFFICIENT METHODS AND GUARANTEES
By Animashree Anandkumar1 and Ragupathyraj Valluvan2
University of California, Irvine
The problem of structure estimation in graphical models with la-
tent variables is considered. We characterize conditions for tractable
graph estimation and develop eﬃcient methods with provable guar-
antees. We consider models where the underlying Markov graph is
locally tree-like, and the model is in the regime of correlation de-
cay. For the special case of the Ising model, the number of sam-
ples n required for structural consistency of our method scales as
n = Ω(θ−δη(η+1)−2
min
log p), where p is the number of variables, θmin
is the minimum edge potential, δ is the depth (i.e., distance from
a hidden node to the nearest observed nodes), and η is a parameter
which depends on the bounds on node and edge potentials in the Ising
model. Necessary conditions for structural consistency under any al-
gorithm are derived and our method nearly matches the lower bound
on sample requirements. Further, the proposed method is practical
to implement and provides ﬂexibility to control the number of latent
variables and the cycle lengths in the output graph.
1. Introduction.
Learning latent variable models from observed samples
involves mainly two tasks: discovering relationships between the observed
and hidden variables, and estimating the strength of such relationships. One
of the simplest latent variable models is the so-called latent class model or
n¨aive Bayes model, where the observed variables are conditionally indepen-
dent given the state of the latent factor. An extension of these models are
latent tree models with many hidden variables forming a tree hierarchy.
Latent tree models have been eﬀective in modeling data in a variety of do-
mains, such as the evolutionary process which gave rise to the present-day
species in bio-informatics (popularly known as phylogenetics) [21, 43], for
Received March 2012; revised October 2012.
1Supported in part by NSF Award CCF-1219234, AFOSR Award FA9550-10-1-0310
and ARO Award W911NF-12-1-0404.
2Supported by the ONR Award N00014-08-1-1015.
AMS 2000 subject classiﬁcations. Primary 62H12; secondary 05C12.
Key words and phrases. Graphical model selection, latent variables, quartet methods.
This is an electronic reprint of the original article published by the
Institute of Mathematical Statistics in The Annals of Statistics,
2013, Vol. 41, No. 2, 401–435. This reprint diﬀers from the original in pagination
and typographic detail.
1

2
A. ANANDKUMAR AND R. VALLUVAN
ﬁnancial and topic modeling [17] and for modeling contextual information
for object recognition in computer vision [16]. Prior works on learning latent
tree models (e.g., [17, 23, 35]), demonstrate that latent tree models can be
learned eﬃciently in high dimensions. In other words, the number of sam-
ples required for consistent learning is much smaller than the number of
variables at hand. Moreover, inference in latent tree models is computation-
ally tractable by means of simple algorithms such as belief propagation.
Despite all the above advantages, the assumption of a tree structure may
be too restrictive. For instance, in an analysis of the relationships between
topics (encoded as latent variables) and words (corresponding to observed
variables), a latent tree model posits that the words are generated from a
single topic, while, in reality there are common words across topics. Loopy
graphical models are able to capture such relationships, while retaining many
advantages of the latent tree models.
Relaxing the tree assumption leads to nontrivial challenges: in general,
learning these models is NP-hard [8, 28], even when there are no latent
variables, and developing methods for learning such fully observed models is
itself an area of active research (e.g., [3, 27, 40]). In this paper, we consider
structure estimation in latent graphical models Markov on locally tree-like
graphs, meaning that local neighborhoods in the graph do not contain cycles.
Learning such graphs has many nontrivial challenges: are there parameters
regimes where these models can be learned consistently and eﬃciently? If so,
are there practical learning algorithms? Are learning guarantees for loopy
models comparable to those for latent trees? How does learning depend on
various graph attributes such as node degrees, girth of the graph and so on?
We provide answers to these questions in this paper.
1.1. Our approach and contributions.
We consider learning latent graph-
ical Markov models on locally tree-like graphs in the regime of correlation
decay. In this regime, there are no long-range correlations, and the local
statistics converge to a tree limit. The implication of correlation decay is
immediately clear: we can employ the available latent tree methods to learn
“local” subgraphs consistently, as long as they do not contain any cycles.
However, a nontrivial challenge remains: how does one merge these esti-
mated local subgraphs (i.e., latent trees) to obtain an overall graph estimate?
Speciﬁcally, merging involves matching latent nodes across diﬀerent latent
tree estimates, and it is not clear if this can be performed in an eﬃcient
manner.
We employ a diﬀerent philosophy for building locally tree-like graphs with
latent variables. We decouple the process of introducing cycles and latent
variables in the output model. We initialize a loopy graph consisting of only
the observed variables, and then iteratively add latent variables to local

LEARNING LOOPY GRAPHICAL MODELS WITH LATENT VARIABLES
3
neighborhoods of the graph. We establish correctness of our method under
a set of natural conditions.
We provide precise conditions for structural consistency of LocalCLGrouping
under the probably approximately correct (PAC) model of learning ([29],
page 7), for general discrete models. We simplify these conditions for the
Ising model, where each node is a binary random variable, to obtain better
intuitions. We establish that for structural consistency, the number of sam-
ples is required to scale as n = Ω(θ−δη(η+1)−2
min
log p), where p is the number
of observed variables, θmin is the minimum edge potential, δ is the depth
(i.e., graph distance from a hidden node to the nearest observed nodes) and
η is a parameter which depends on the minimum and maximum node and
edge potentials of the Ising model (η = 1 for homogeneous models). When
there are no hidden variables (δ = 1), the sample complexity is strengthened
to n = Ω(θ−2
min log p), which matches with the best known sample complexity
for learning fully-observed Ising models [3, 27].
We also establish necessary conditions for any (deterministic) algorithm
to recover the graph structure and establish that n = Ω(∆minρ−1 log p) sam-
ples are necessary for structural consistency, where ∆min is the minimum
degree and ρ is the fraction of observed nodes. This is comparable to the
requirement of the proposed method under uniform node sampling (i.e.,
selecting the observed nodes uniformly), given by n = Ω(∆2
maxρ−2(log p)3),
where ∆max is the maximum degree in the graph. Thus, our method is com-
petitive with respect to the lower bound on learning.
Our proposed method has a number of attractive features for practical
implementation: the method is amenable to parallelization which makes it
eﬃcient on large datasets. The method provides ﬂexibility to control the
length of cycles and the number of latent variables introduced in the output
model. The method can incorporate penalty scores such as the Bayesian
information criterion (BIC) [42] to trade-oﬀmodel complexity and ﬁdelity.
Moreover, by controlling the cycle lengths in the output model, we can ob-
tain models with good inference accuracy under simple algorithms such as
loopy belief propagation (LBP). Preliminary experiments on the newsgroup
dataset suggests that the method can discover intuitive relationships eﬃ-
ciently, and also compares well with the popular latent Dirichlet allocation
(LDA) [7] in terms of topic coherence and perplexity.
1.2. Related work.
The classical latent class models (LCM) consists of
multivariate distributions with a single latent variable and the observed
variables are conditionally independent under each state of the latent vari-
able [32]. Hierarchical latent class (HLC) models [15, 47, 48] generalize
these models by allowing multiple latent variables. However, the proposed
learning algorithms are based on greedy local search in a high-dimensional

4
A. ANANDKUMAR AND R. VALLUVAN
space, which is computationally expensive. Moreover, the algorithms do not
have theoretical guarantees. Similar shortcomings also hold for expectation-
maximization (EM) based approaches [22, 30]. Learning latent trees has
been studied extensively before, mainly in the context of phylogenetics. See
[21, 43] for a thorough overview. Eﬃcient algorithms with provable perfor-
mance guarantees are available (e.g., [1, 17, 19, 23]). Our proposed method
in this paper is inspired by [17].
Works on high-dimensional graphical model selection are more recent.
The approaches can be mainly classiﬁed into two groups: local approaches
[3, 9, 27, 37] and those based on convex optimization [14, 33, 40, 41]. There is
a general agreement that the success of these methods is related to the pres-
ence of correlation decay in the model [3, 6]. This work makes the connection
explicit: it relates the extent of correlation decay (i.e., the convergence rate
to the tree limit) with the learning eﬃciency for latent models on large girth
graphs. An analogous study of the eﬀect of correlation decay for learning
fully observed models is presented in [3].
This paper is the ﬁrst work to provide provable guarantees for learn-
ing discrete latent models on loopy graphs in high dimensions (which can
also be easily be extended to Gaussian models; see remarks following Theo-
rem 2). Chandrasekharan et al. [13] consider learning latent Gaussian graph-
ical models using a convex relaxation method. However, the method cannot
be easily extended to discrete models. Moreover, the “incoherence” con-
ditions required for the success of convex methods are hard to interpret
and verify in general. In contrast, our conditions for success are transpar-
ent and based on the presence of correlation decay in the model. Bresler
et al. [9] considers graphical model selection with hidden variables, but pro-
poses learning Markov graph of marginal distribution (upon marginalizing
the hidden variables) and then replacing the cliques in the estimated graphs
with hidden variables. Sample complexity results are not provided, and the
method performs poorly in high dimensions, since it aims to estimate dense
graphs.
2. System model.
2.1. Graphical models.
A graphical model is a family of multivariate dis-
tributions which are Markov in accordance to a particular undirected graph
G = (W,E) [31], page 32. For any distribution belonging to the model class,
a random variable Xi taking value in a set X is associated with each node
i ∈W in the graph. We consider discrete graphical models where X is a
ﬁnite set. The set of edges E captures the set of conditional independence
relations among the random variables. We say that a set of random variables

LEARNING LOOPY GRAPHICAL MODELS WITH LATENT VARIABLES
5
XW := {Xi,i ∈W} with probability mass function (p.m.f.) P is Markov on
the graph G if it factorizes according to the cliques of G,
P(x) = exp
X
c∈C
θc(xc) −A(θ)

∀x ∈X m,
(1)
where C is the set of cliques of G, m := |W| is the number of variables,
and xc is the set of conﬁgurations corresponding to clique c. The quantity
A(θ) is known as the log-partition function and serves to normalize the
probability distribution. The functions θc are known as potential functions
and correspond to the canonical parameters of the exponential family.
A special case is the Ising model, which is the class of pairwise distri-
butions over binary variables {−1,+1}m with probability mass function
(p.m.f.) of the form
P(x) = exp
X
e∈E
θi,jxixj +
X
i∈V
φixi −A(θ)

∀x ∈{−1,1}m.
(2)
We specialize some of our results to the class of Ising models.
We consider a multivariate distribution belonging to the class of latent
graphical models in which a subset of nodes is latent or hidden. Let H ⊂W
denote the hidden nodes and V = W \H denote the observed nodes. Our goal
is to discover the presence of hidden variables XH and learn the unknown
graph structure G(W), given n i.i.d. samples from observed variables XV .
Let p := |V | denote the number of observed nodes and m := |W| denote the
total number of nodes.
2.2. Tractable graph families: Girth-constrained graphs.
In general, struc-
ture estimation of graphical models is NP-hard [8, 28]. We now characterize
a tractable class of models for which we can provide guarantees on graph
estimation.
We consider the family of graphs with a bound on the girth, which is the
length of the shortest cycle in the graph. There are many graph constructions
which lead to a bound on girth. For example, the bipartite Ramanujan graph
([18], page 107) and the random Cayley graphs [25] have bounds on the
girth. Recently, eﬃcient algorithms have been proposed to generate large
girth graphs eﬃciently [5].
Although girth-constrained graphs are locally tree-like, in general, their
global structure makes them hard instances for learning. Speciﬁcally, girth-
constrained graphs have a large tree-width: it is known that a graph with av-
erage degree at least ∆avg and girth at least g has a tree width as Ω(
1
g+1(∆avg−
1)⌊(g−1)/2⌋) [12]. Thus learning is nontrivial for graphical Markov models on
girth-constrained graphs, even when there are no latent variables due to
their large tree width [28].

6
A. ANANDKUMAR AND R. VALLUVAN
2.3. Local convergence to a tree limit.
This work establishes tractable
learning when the graphical model converges locally to a tree limit. A suf-
ﬁcient condition for the existence of such limits is the regime of correlation
decay,3 which refers to the property that there are no long-range correla-
tions in the model [26, 34, 46]. This regime is also known as the uniqueness
regime since under such an assumption, the marginal distribution at a node
is asymptotically independent of the conﬁguration of a growing boundary.
We tailor the deﬁnition of correlation decay to node neighborhoods and
provide the deﬁnition below. Given a graph G = (W,E) and a distribution
PXW |G Markov on it, and any subset A ⊂W, let PXA|G denote the marginal
distribution of variables in A. For some subgraph F ⊂G, let PXA|F denote
the marginal distribution on A obtained by setting the potentials of edges in
G\F to zero. Thus, PXA|F is Markov on graph F. Let N[i;G] := N(i;G)∪i
denote the closed neighborhood of node i in G. For any two sets A1,A2 ⊂W,
let dist(A1,A2) := mini∈A1,j∈A2 dist(i,j) denote the minimum graph dis-
tance.4 Let Bl(i) denote the set of nodes within graph distance l from node
i and ∂Bl(i) denote the boundary nodes, that is, exactly at distance l from
node i. Let Fl(i;G) := G(Bl(i)) denote the induced subgraph on Bl(i). For
any distributions P,Q, let ∥P −Q∥1 denote the ℓ1 norm.
Definition 1 (Correlation decay).
A distribution PXW |G Markov on
graph G = (W,E) is said to exhibit correlation decay with a nonincreasing
rate function ζ(·) > 0 if for all l ∈N,
∥PXA|G −PXA|Fl(i;G)∥1 ≤ζ(dist(A,∂Bl(i)))
∀i ∈W,A ⊂Bl(i).
(3)
In words, the total variation distance5 between the marginal distribution
of a set A of a distribution Markov on G and the corresponding distribution
Markov on subgraph Fl(i;G) decays as a function of the graph distance to
the boundary. This implies that for a class of functions ζ(·), the eﬀect of
graph conﬁguration beyond l hops from any node i has a decaying eﬀect on
the local marginal distributions.
For the class of Ising models in (2), the regime of correlation decay can
be explicitly characterized, in terms of the maximum edge potential and the
maximum degree of the graph, and this is studied in Section 4.2.
3Technically, correlation decay can be deﬁned in multiple ways ([34], page 520), and
the notion we use is the uniqueness or the weak spatial mixing condition.
4We distinguish between the terms graph distance and information distances. The for-
mer refers to the number of edges on the shortest path connecting the two nodes on the
(unweighted) graph, while the latter refers to the quantity in (8).
5Recall that the total variation distance between two probability distributions P,Q on
the same alphabet is given by 1
2∥P −Q∥1.

LEARNING LOOPY GRAPHICAL MODELS WITH LATENT VARIABLES
7
3. Background on latent tree models.
We ﬁrst recap the results for la-
tent tree models which will subsequently extended to more general latent
graphical models. It is well known that tree-structured Markov distributions
on a tree T = (W,E) have a special form of factorization given by
P(xW ) =
Y
i∈W
PXi(xi)
Y
(i,j)∈T
PXi,j(xi,xj)
PXi(xi)PXj(xj).
(4)
Comparing with general distributions, we note that tree distributions are
directly parameterized in terms of pairwise marginal distributions on the
edges. Similarly, a Markov distribution can be described on a rooted directed
tree
→
T with root r ∈W, where the edges of
→
T are directed away from the
root. Let Pa(i) denote the (unique) parent of node i ̸= r and PXi|XPa(i) denote
the corresponding conditional distribution. The Markov distribution is given
by
P(xW ) = PXr(xr)
Y
i∈W,i̸=r
PXi|XPa(i)(xi|xPa(i)).
(5)
A Markov model is said to be nonsingular [36, 45] if (a) for all e ∈
→
T , the
conditional distributions satisfy 0 < |det(PXi|XPa(i))| < 1, and (b) for all i ∈
V , PXi(x) > 0 for all x ∈X . A nonsingular Markov model on an undirected
tree T and its directed counterpart
→
T are equivalent [36, 45]. Note that
nonsingularity is equivalent to positivity (i.e., bounded potential functions)
for Markov tree models. In particular, Ising models on trees with bounded
node and edge potentials are nonsingular. This is because under positivity,
there is positive probability for any global conﬁguration of node states which
implies that the conditional probability at a node given any of its neighbors
cannot be degenerate.
Latent tree models or phylogenetic tree models are tree-structured graph-
ical models in which a subset of nodes are hidden or latent. Our goal in this
paper is to leverage on the techniques developed for learning latent tree
models to analyze a more general class of latent graphical models.
3.1. Learning latent tree models.
Learning the structure of latent tree
models is an extensively studied topic. A majority of structure learning
methods (known as distance based methods) rely on the presence of an
additive tree metric. The additive tree metric can be obtained by considering
the pairwise marginal distributions of a tree structured joint distribution. For
instance, Mossel [35] considers the following metric for discrete distributions
satisfying the nonsingular condition
d(i,j) := −log|det(PXi,j)|
∀i,j ∈W.
(6)

8
A. ANANDKUMAR AND R. VALLUVAN
Fig. 1.
Quartet Q(ab|uv). See (7).
By nonsingularity assumption, we have that |det(PXi,j)| > 0 for all i,j ∈W.
The distance metric further simpliﬁes for some special distributions, for
example, for symmetric Ising models, it is given by the negative logarithm
of the correlation between the node pair under consideration [43].
3.1.1. Quartet-based methods.
A popular class of learning methods are
based on the construction of quartets or splits (e.g., [10, 23, 35]), and various
procedures to merge the inferred quartets. A quartet is a structure over four
observed nodes, as shown in Figure 1. We now recap the classical quartet
test operating on any additive tree metric. The path structure refers to the
conﬁguration of paths between the given nodes.
Definition 2 (Quartet or four-point condition on trees).
Given an ad-
ditive metric on a tree [d(i,j)]i,j∈V , the tuple of four nodes a,b,u,v ∈V has
the structure in Figure 1 if and only if
d(a,b) + d(u,v) < min(d(a,u) + d(b,v),d(b,u) + d(a,v)),
(7)
and the structure in Figure 1 is denoted by Q(ab|uv).
It is well known that the set of all quartets uniquely characterize a latent
tree. In [23], it was shown that a subset of quartets, termed as representative
quartets, suﬃces to uniquely characterize a latent tree. The set of represen-
tative quartets consists of one quartet for each edge in the latent tree with
shortest (graph) distances between the observed nodes.
3.1.2. Recursive grouping.
We recap the recursive grouping RG(bdn(V ),
Λ,τ) method proposed in [17] (and its reﬁnement in [1]). The method is
based on a robust quartet test Quartet(bdn,Λ) given in Algorithm 1. If the
conﬁdence bound is not met, a ⊥result is declared. In the ﬁrst iteration of
RG in Algorithm 2, the algorithm searches for node pairs which occur on the
same side of all the quartets, output by the quartet test Quartet(bdn,Λ) and
declares them as siblings and introduces hidden variables. In later iterations
of RG, sibling relationships between hidden variables are inferred through
quartets involving their children. Finally, weak edges are merged and a tree

LEARNING LOOPY GRAPHICAL MODELS WITH LATENT VARIABLES
9
Algorithm 1 Quartet(bdn(V ),Λ) test using distance estimates bdn(V ) :=
{bd(i,j)}i,j∈V and conﬁdence bound Λ.
Input:
Distance
estimates
between
the
observed
nodes
bdn(V ) :=
{bd(i,j)}i,j∈V and conﬁdence bound Λ. Denote (·)+ := max(·,0).
Initialize set of quartets Q(V ) ←∅.
for {i,j,i′,j′} ∈V do
if (e−bd(i,j) −Λ)+(e−bd(i′,j′) −Λ)+ > (e−bd(i,j′) + Λ)+(e−bd(i,j) + Λ)+ then
Declare Quartet: Q(V ) ←Q(ij|i′j′).
end if
if No quartet declared for {i,j,i′,j′} then
⊥i,j,i′,j′ (Declare null).
end if
end for
(and more generally a forest) is output. We later use a modiﬁed version
of recursive grouping method as a routine in our algorithm for estimating
locally tree-like graphs. In the end, the neighboring nodes (at least one of
which is hidden) are merged based on the threshold τ. See Section 4 for
details.
3.1.3. Chow–Liu grouping.
An alternative method, known as Chow–Liu
grouping (CLGrouping), was proposed in [17]. Although the theoretical re-
sults for CLGrouping are similar to earlier results (e.g., [23]), experiments
on both synthetic and real data sets revealed signiﬁcant improvement over
earlier methods in terms of likelihood scores and number of hidden variables
added.
The CLGrouping method always maintains a candidate tree structure and
progressively adds more hidden nodes in local neighborhoods. The initial
tree structure is the minimum spanning tree (MST) over the observed nodes
with respect to the tree metric. The method then considers neighborhood
sets on the MST and constructs local subtrees (using quartet based method
or any other tree reconstruction algorithm). This local reconstruction prop-
erty of CLGrouping makes it especially attractive for reconstructing girth-
constrained graphs.
4. Method and guarantees for structure estimation.
4.1. Overview of algorithm.
We now describe our algorithm, which we
term as LocalCLGrouping, for structure estimation of latent graphical Markov
models on graphs with long cycles. The algorithm leverages on the Chow–
Liu grouping algorithm developed for latent tree models [17], described in
the previous section. The main intuition for learning a girth-constrained

10
A. ANANDKUMAR AND R. VALLUVAN
Algorithm 2 RG(bdn(V ),Λ,τ) test using distance estimates
bdn(V ) :=
{bd(i,j)}i,j∈V , conﬁdence bound Λ and threshold τ for merging nodes.
Input:
Distance
estimates
between
the
observed
nodes
bdn(V ) :=
{bd(i,j)}i,j∈V , conﬁdence bound Λ and threshold τ. Let C(a) denote the
children of node a.
Initialize A ←V , C(i) ←{i} for all i ∈V and Q(V ) ←Quartet(bdn(A),Λ).
while A ̸= ∅do
if ∃i,j ∈A s.t. for each a ∈C(i) and b ∈C(j), c,d /∈C(i) ∪C(j),
{ac|bd,ad|bc} /∈Q(V ), that is, a,b are on same side of all such quar-
tets in Q(V ). then
Declare i,j as siblings and introduce hidden node h as parent and
C(h) ←C(i) ∪C(j).
Remove i,j from A and add h to A.
else
Sibling relationships cannot be further inferred. Break.
end if
end while
Form forest bT based on sibling and child/parent relationships.
Compute distances between any two hidden nodes as average distance
between their observed children.
Merge edges in bT of length less than τ and output bT .
graph is based on reconstructing “local” parts of the graph which are acyclic
and piecing them together. However, this approach has many challenges.
First, it is not clear if the local acyclic pieces can be learned eﬃciently since
it requires the presence of an additive tree metric. This is addressed by
considering models satisfying correlation decay (see Section 2.3). A second
and a more diﬃcult challenge involves merging the reconstructed local latent
trees with provable guarantees due to the introduction of unlabeled latent
nodes in diﬀerent pieces. We circumvent this challenge by leveraging on the
Chow–Liu grouping algorithm [17] and merging the diﬀerent pieces before
introducing the latent nodes.
The algorithm is described in Algorithm 3. Let bdn(i,j) denote the esti-
mated distance between nodes i and j according to (6) using the empirical
distribution bP n
Xi,j computed using n samples, that is,
bdn(i,j) := −log|det( bP n
Xi,j)|
∀i,j ∈V.
(8)
The set of distance estimates bdn(V ) := {bdn(i,j):i,j ∈V } are input to the
algorithm along with a parameter r. Recall that Br(i; bdn(V )) := {j : bdn(i,j) ≤r}.

LEARNING LOOPY GRAPHICAL MODELS WITH LATENT VARIABLES
11
Algorithm 3 LocalCLGrouping(bdn(V ),Λ,τ,r) for graph estimation using dis-
tance estimates bdn(V ) := {bd(i,j)}i,j∈V , conﬁdence bound Λ, threshold τ and
distance parameter r.
Input:
Distance
estimates
between
the
observed
nodes
bdn(V ) :=
{bd(i,j)}i,j∈V , conﬁdence bound Λ, threshold τ and bound r on distances
used for local reconstruction. Let Br(v; bdn) := {u: bdn(u,v) ≤r} and let
MST(A; bdn) denote the minimum spanning tree over A ⊂V based on
edge weights bdn(A). Given a graph G, let Leaf(G) denote the set of nodes
with unit degree. Let N[i;G] denote the closed neighborhood of node i
in graph G. RG(bdn(A),Λ,τ) represents the recursive grouping method
for building latent trees (see Section 3.1) over the set of nodes A using
distance estimates bdn(A) with conﬁdence bound Λ and threshold τ for
merging nodes.
for v ∈V do
Tv ←MST(Br(v); bdn).
end for
Initialize bG, bG0 ←S
v Tv.
for v ∈V \ Leaf( bG0) do
A ←N[v; bG].
S ←RG(bdn(A),Λ,τ).
bG(A) ←S (Replace subgraph over A with S in bG)
end for
Output bG.
For each observed node i ∈V , the set of nodes Br(i; bdn(V )) is considered,
and the minimum spanning tree is constructed. The graph estimate bG is
initialized by taking the union of all the local minimum spanning trees. The
latent nodes are now iteratively added by considering local neighborhoods
of bG and using any latent tree algorithm for reconstruction (e.g., [17, 35]).
Note that the running time is polynomial (in the number of nodes) as long as
polynomial time algorithms are employed for local latent tree reconstruction.
The proposed method is eﬃcient for practical implementation due to the
“divide and conquer” feature, that is, the local, latent tree-building opera-
tions can be parallelized to obtain speedups. For real datasets, a trade-oﬀ
between model complexity and ﬁdelity is typically enforced by optimizing
scores such as the Bayesian information criterion (BIC) [42]. Such criteria
can be easily enforced through a greedy local search in each iteration of
our method, and this limits the number of hidden variables added by our
method. In our experiments in Section 6, we found that this method is quick
to implement on real and synthetic datasets.

12
A. ANANDKUMAR AND R. VALLUVAN
We subsequently establish the correctness of the proposed method under
a set of natural conditions. We require that the parameter r, which deter-
mines the set Br(i;d) for each node i, needs to be chosen as a function of
the depth δ (i.e., distance from a hidden node to its closest observed nodes)
and girth g of the graph. In practice, the parameter r provides ﬂexibility in
tuning the length of cycles added to the graph estimate. When r is large
enough, we obtain a latent tree, while for small r, the graph estimate can
contain many short cycles (and potentially many components). In experi-
ments, we evaluate the performance of our method for diﬀerent values of r.
The tuning of parameters Λ and τ has been previously discussed in the con-
text of learning latent trees (e.g., [17], page 1796), and we leverage on those
results here. For more details, see Section 6.
4.1.1. Simple example with a single cycle.
To demonstrate the steps of
the above proposed method, consider the simple case of a single cycle of
length g, where all the nodes on the cycle are hidden, and each hidden node
has two observed leaves, as shown in Figure 2(a). When the cycle length g is
suﬃciently large, information distances on local neighborhoods are approx-
imately additive, as depicted in Figure 2(b). Moreover, in Figure 2(b), let
“*” denote the observed node closest to each hidden node (termed as its sur-
rogate), in terms of information distance. The minimum spanning tree over
Fig. 2.
Various steps of LocalCLGrouping method on a simple cycle, where observed
variables are shaded. See Section 4.1.1.

LEARNING LOOPY GRAPHICAL MODELS WITH LATENT VARIABLES
13
the set of four nodes, which are zoomed in, corresponds to a chain shown in
Figure 2(c). Similarly, if in diﬀerent local neighborhoods of observed nodes
(based on a threshold on information distances), the surrogate relationships
are similar (i.e., every hidden node has one of its children as its surrogate),
then the local MSTs are simple chains, and their merging gives rise to graph
G in Figure 2(d). Now if a local neighborhood is selected on the merged
graph G, as shown in Figure 2(e), then we can discover the local latent tree
structure based on information distances as shown in Figure 2(f), since they
are approximately additive. Similarly, when diﬀerent neighborhoods on G
are selected, local latent trees are discovered, and distances between nearby
hidden nodes are computed. This way we recover the latent cycle graph in
Figure 2(a) in the end.
4.2. Results for Ising models.
We ﬁrst limit ourselves to providing asymp-
totic guarantees for the Ising model in (2), and then extend the results to
nonasymptotic guarantees in general discrete distributions.
4.2.1. Conditions for recovery in Ising models.
We present a set of nat-
ural conditions on the graph structure and model parameters under which
our proposed method succeeds in structure estimation.
(A1) Minimum degree of latent nodes: We require that all latent nodes
have degree at least three.
(A2) Distance bounds: Assume bounds on the edge potentials θ := {θi,j}
of the Ising model
θmin ≤|θi,j| ≤θmax
∀(i,j) ∈G.
(9)
Similarly assume bounded node potentials. We now deﬁne certain quan-
tities which depend on the edge potential bounds. Given a distribution
belonging to the class of Ising models P with edge potentials θ = {θi,j}
and node potentials φ = {φi}, consider its attractive counterpart ¯P with
edge potentials ¯θ := {|θi,j|} and node potentials ¯φ := {|φi|}. Let φ′
max :=
maxi∈V atanh(¯E(Xi)), where ¯E is the expectation with respect to the dis-
tribution ¯P. Let P(X1,2;{θ,φ1,φ2}) denote a distribution belonging to the
class of Ising models on two nodes {1,2} with edge potential θ and node
potentials {φ1,φ2}. Our learning guarantees depend on dmin and dmax sat-
isfying
dmin ≥−log|detP(X1,2;{θmax,φ′
max,φ′
max})|,
(10)
dmax ≤−log|detP(X1,2;{θmin,0,0})|,
(11)
η := dmax
dmin
.
(12)

14
A. ANANDKUMAR AND R. VALLUVAN
(A3) Correlation decay: We assume correlation decay in the Ising model
and require that
α := ∆max tanhθmax < 1,
αg/2
θη(η+1)+2
min
= o(1),
(13)
where ∆max is the maximum node degree, g is the girth, θmin,θmax are the
minimum and maximum (absolute) edge potentials in the model and o(1) is
with respect to m, the number of nodes in the graph.6
(A4) Girth vs. depth: The depth δ characterizes how close the latent
nodes are to observed nodes on graph G: for each hidden node h ∈H, ﬁnd a
set of four observed nodes which form the shortest quartet with h as one of
the middle nodes, and consider the largest graph distance in that quartet.
The depth δ is the worst-case distance over all hidden nodes. We require the
following trade-oﬀbetween the girth g and the depth δ,
g
4 −δη(η + 1) = ω(1).
(14)
Further, the parameter r in our algorithm is chosen as
r > δ(η + 1)dmax + ε
for some ε > 0,
g
4dmin −r = ω(1).
(15)
(A1) is a natural assumption on the minimum degree of the hidden nodes
for identiﬁability and has been imposed before for latent tree models [17].
Note that the latent nodes of degree two or lower can be marginalized to
obtain an equivalent representation of the observed statistics.
(A2) relates certain distance bounds to bounds on edge potentials. Intu-
itively, dmin and dmax are bounds on information distances given by the local
tree approximation of the loopy model, and its precise deﬁnition is given in
(18). Note that e−dmax = Ω(θmin) and e−dmin = O(θmax).
(A3) uses bounds on the edge potentials to impose correlation decay on
the model. It is natural that the sample requirement of any graph estimation
algorithm depends on the “weakest” edge characterized by the minimum
edge potential θmin. Further, the maximum edge potential θmax characterizes
the presence/absence of long-range correlations in the model. Moreover, (A3)
prescribes that the extent of correlation decay be strong enough (i.e., a small
α and a large enough girth g) compared to the weakest edge in the model.
Conditions similar to (A3) have been imposed before for graphical model
selection in the regime of correlation decay when there are no hidden vari-
ables [3]. For instance, in [3], an upper bound is imposed on the edge poten-
tials to limit the eﬀect of long paths on local conditional independence tests.
6Unless otherwise noted, the notation O(·),o(·),Ω(·),ω(·) are with respect to m, the
number of nodes in the graph.

LEARNING LOOPY GRAPHICAL MODELS WITH LATENT VARIABLES
15
A lower bound on edge potentials is needed for edges to pass the conditional
independence test.
(A4) provides the trade-oﬀbetween the girth g and the depth δ. Intu-
itively, the depth needs to be smaller than the girth to avoid encountering
cycles during the process of graph reconstruction. Recall that the parameter
r in our algorithm determines the neighborhood over which local MSTs are
built in the ﬁrst step. It is chosen such that it is roughly larger than the
depth δ in order for all the hidden nodes to be discovered. The upper bound
on r ensures that the distortion from an additive metric is not too large.
The parameters for latent tree learning routines (such as conﬁdence bounds
for quartet tests) are chosen appropriately depending on dmin and dmax. See
Section 4.3.
4.2.2. Guarantees for Ising models.
We now establish that the proposed
method correctly estimates the graph structure of an Ising model in high
dimensions. Recall that δ is the depth (distance from a hidden node to its
closest observed nodes), θmin is the minimum (absolute) edge potential and
η = dmax
dmin is the ratio of distance bounds.
Theorem 1 (Structural consistency for Ising models).
Under (A1)–
(A4), the probability that LocalCLGrouping is structurally consistent tends
to one, when the number of samples scales as
n = Ω(θ−δη(η+1)−2
min
log p).
(16)
Proof.
See the supplementary material [4].
□
Remarks.
(1) For learning Ising models on locally tree-like graphs, the sample com-
plexity is dependent both on the minimum edge potential θmin and on the
depth δ. Our method is eﬃcient in high dimensions since the sample require-
ment is only logarithmic in the number of nodes p.
(2) Dependence on maximum degree: For the correlation decay to hold
(A3), we require θmin ≤θmax = Θ(1/∆max). This implies that the sample
complexity is at least n = Ω(∆δη(η+1)+2
max
log p).
(3) Comparison with fully observed models: In the special case when
all the nodes are observed (δ = 1) and the graph is locally tree-like, we
strengthen the results for our method and establish that the sample complex-
ity for graph estimation is n = Ω(θ−2
min log p). This matches the best known
sample complexity for learning fully observed Ising models [3, 27]. The
sample complexity result holds for a modiﬁed version of LocalCLGrouping:
threshold r is applied to the information distances at each node and local

16
A. ANANDKUMAR AND R. VALLUVAN
MSTs are formed as before. The threshold r can be chosen as r = dmax + ε,
for some ε > 0. The graph estimate is obtained as the union of local MSTs
and local latent tree routines are not implemented in this case. We prove
an improved sample complexity in this special case which matches the best
known bounds.
(4) Comparison with learning latent trees: Our method is an extension of
latent tree methods for learning locally tree-like graphs. The sample com-
plexity of our method matches the sample requirements for learning general
latent tree models [17, 23, 35]. Thus, we establish that learning locally tree-
like graphs is akin to learning latent trees in the regime of correlation decay.
4.3. Extension to general discrete models.
We now extend the results
to general discrete models and provide nonasymptotic sample requirement
guarantees for success of our proposed method.
Local tree approximation. We ﬁrst deﬁne the notion of a local tree met-
ric dtree(V ) computed by limiting the model to acyclic neighborhood sub-
graphs between the respective node pairs. Given a graph G = (W,E), let
tree(i,j;G) := G(Bl(i) ∪Bl(j)), for l = ⌊g/2⌋−1, denote the induced sub-
graph on Bl(i)∪Bl(j), where g is the girth of the graph. Recall that Bl(i;G)
denotes the set of nodes within graph distance l from i in G. When l < g/2−1
no cycles are encountered, and thus the induced subgraph tree(i,j;G) is
acyclic. Recall that PXi,j|G denotes the pairwise marginal distribution be-
tween i and j induced by the distribution P(xW ) Markov on graph G. Let
PXi,j| tree(i,j) denote the pairwise marginal distribution between i and j in-
duced by considering only the subgraph tree(i,j;G) ⊂G. Denote
d(i,j;tree) := −log|detPXi,j| tree(i,j)|,
(17)
d(i,j;G) := −log|detPXi,j|G|.
Denote dtree(V ) := {d(i,j;tree):i,j ∈V } and d(V ) := {d(i,j;G):i,j ∈V }.
Note that for loopy graphs in general, d(i,j;G) is diﬀerent from d(i,j;tree).
The learner has access only to the empirical versions bd(V ) of the dis-
tances d(V ), and thus the learner cannot estimate dtree(V ). However, we
use dtree(V ) to characterize the performance of our algorithm, and we list
the relevant assumptions below.
4.3.1. Conditions on the model parameters.
(B1) Minimum degree: The minimum degree of any hidden node in the
graph is three.
(B2) Bounds on local tree metric: Given a distribution PXW |G Markov on
graph G, the pairwise marginal distribution PXi,j| tree(i,j) between any two
neighbors (i,j) ∈G are nonsingular and the distances
d(i,j;tree) := −log|detPXi,j| tree(i,j)|

LEARNING LOOPY GRAPHICAL MODELS WITH LATENT VARIABLES
17
satisfy
0 < dmin ≤d(i,j;tree) ≤dmax < ∞
∀(i,j) ∈G,
η := dmax
dmin
(18)
for suitable parameters dmin and dmax.
(B3) Regime of correlation decay: The pairwise statistics of the distribu-
tion converge locally to a tree limit according to Deﬁnition 1 with function
ζ(·) in (3) satisfying
0 ≤ζ
g
2 −
r
dmin
−1

<
υ
|X|2 ,
(19)
where g is the girth, r is the distance bound parameter in LocalCLGrouping,
|X| is the dimension of each variable, dmin,dmax are the distance bounds in
(18) and
υ := min

dmin,0.5e−r(edmin −1),e−0.5dmax(r/dmin+2),
(20)
g
4dmin −r,r −dmaxδ(η + 1)

.
(B4) Conﬁdence bound for quartet test: The conﬁdence bound in
Quartet(bd,Λ) routine in Algorithm 1 is chosen as
Λ = exp

−dmax
2

r
dmin
+ 2

.
(21)
(B5) Threshold for merging nodes: The threshold τ in RG(bd,Λ,τ) routine
in Algorithm 2 is chosen as
τ = dmin
2
−|X|2ζ
g
2 −1

> 0,
(22)
where |X| is the dimension of the variable at each node, and ζ(·) is the
correlation decay function according to (3).
(B1) is a natural assumption on the minimum degree of the hidden nodes
for identiﬁability, which is also needed for latent trees. Assumption (B2)
states that every edge has bounded distances under local tree approxima-
tions. Recall that in the special case of Ising models, this can be expressed via
bounds on edge potentials. Assumption (B3) on correlation decay imposes
a constraint on the rate function ζ(·), in terms of the girth of the graph g,
the distance threshold r used by the proposed method, the distance bounds
dmin and dmax and depth δ. (B3) implies that we require that the depth δ
satisﬁes
g
4dmin > δ(η + 1)dmax.
(23)
Similarly, (B3) imposes constraints on the parameter r used by the proposed
algorithm for building local minimum spanning trees in the ﬁrst step. (B3)

18
A. ANANDKUMAR AND R. VALLUVAN
implies that r needs to be chosen as
δ(η + 1)dmax < r < g
4dmin −r.
(24)
Intuitively, the above constraint implies that r is relatively small compared
to the girth of the graph and large enough for every hidden node to be
discovered. This enables the proposed algorithm to correct reconstruct latent
trees locally.
The conﬁdence bound constraint in (B4) is based on the concentration
bounds for the empirical distances. The threshold for merging nodes in (B5)
ensures that spurious hidden nodes are not added. These conditions are
inherited from latent tree algorithms.
4.4. Guarantees for the proposed method.
We now establish that the
LocalCLGrouping algorithm is structurally consistent under the above con-
ditions.
Theorem 2 (Structural consistency of LocalCLGrouping).
Under as-
sumptions (B1)–(B5), the LocalCLGrouping algorithm is structurally con-
sistent with probability at least 1 −κ, for any κ > 0, when the sample size n
satisﬁes
n >
2|X|2
(υ −|X|2ζ(g/2 −r/dmin −1))2

4log p + |X|log 2 −log κ
7

,
(25)
where υ is given by (20).
Remarks.
(1) We provide PAC guarantees for reconstructing latent graphical mod-
els on girth-constrained graphs. The conditions for success imposed on the
girth of the graph are relatively mild. We require that the girth be roughly
larger than the depth and that the correlation decay function ζ(·) be suﬃ-
ciently strong (B3). Thus, learning girth-constrained graphs is akin to learn-
ing latent tree models (in terms of sample and computational complexities)
under a wide range of conditions.
(2) One notable additional condition required for learning girth-con-
strained graphs in contrast to latent trees is the requirement of correlation
decay (B3). However, we note that this is only a suﬃcient condition, and
not necessary for learnability. For instance, the result in [20] establishes that
the pairwise statistics converge locally to a tree limit for all attractive Ising
models with strictly positive node potentials, but without any additional
constraints on the parameters. Our results and analysis hold in such scenar-
ios since we only require local convergence to a tree metric.
(3) The results above are applicable for discrete models but can be ex-
tended to Gaussian models using the notion of walk-summability in place of
correlation decay according to (3) (see [2]) and the negative logarithm of the

LEARNING LOOPY GRAPHICAL MODELS WITH LATENT VARIABLES
19
correlation coeﬃcient as the distance metric; see [17]. The results can also
be extended to more general linear models such as multivariate Gaussian
models, Gaussian mixtures and so on, along the lines of [1].
Proof of Theorem 2.
The detailed proof is given in the supplemen-
tary material [4]. It consists of the following main steps:
(1) We ﬁrst prove correctness of LocalCLGrouping under the tree limit
[i.e., distances dtree(V ) := {d(i,j;tree)}i,j∈V ] and then show sample-based
consistency. The latter is based on concentration bounds, along the lines
of analysis for latent tree models [23, 35], with an additional distortion
introduced due to the presence of a loopy graph.
(2) We now brieﬂy describe the proof establishing the correctness of
LocalCLGrouping algorithm under dtree in girth-constrained graphs. Intu-
itively, the distances d(i,j;tree) correspond to a tree metric when the graph
distance dist(i,j) < g/2 −1, where g is the girth. Since LocalCLGrouping in-
fers latent trees only locally, it avoids running into cycles and thus correctly
reconstructs the local latent trees. The initialization step in LocalCLGrouping
corresponds to the correct merge of this local latent trees under the as-
sumptions on parameter r in (24), and the correctness of LocalCLGrouping
is established.
□
4.4.1. Guarantees under uniform sampling.
We have so far given guar-
antees for graph reconstruction, given an arbitrary set of observed nodes in
the graph. We now specialize the results to the case when there is a uniform
sampling of nodes and provide learning guarantees. This analysis provides
intuitions on the relationship between the fraction of sampled nodes and the
resulting learning performance.
Consider an ensemble of graphs on m nodes with girth at least g and
minimum degree ∆min ≥3 and maximum degree ∆max. Let ρ := p
m denote
the uniform sampling probability for selecting observed nodes. We have the
following result on the depth δ. Deﬁne a constant ε0 > 0 as
ε0 = −log(4m∆max(1 −ρ)(∆min−1)g/2)
log m
.
(26)
Lemma 1 (Depth under uniform sampling).
Given uniform sampling
probability of ρ, for any ε ≤max(0,ε0),
δ <
1
log(∆min −1)

log
log(4m1+ε∆max)
|log(1 −ρ)|

w.p. ≥1 −m−ε.
(27)
Proof.
The proof is by straightforward arguments on binomial random
variables and the union bound. See the supplementary material [4].
□

20
A. ANANDKUMAR AND R. VALLUVAN
Remarks.
(1) Assuming that the girth satisﬁes g > 2δ(1+ dmax/dmin) w.h.p., when
the sampling probability and the degrees are both constant, then
ρ = Θ(1),
∆min,∆max = O(1) ⇒δ = O(log log m) ⇒n = Ω(poly(log m)),
w.h.p.,
where poly(log m) refers to a polylogarithmic dependence in m. On the other
hand, with vanishing sampling probability, for β ∈[0,1), we have
ρ = Θ(mβ−1),
∆min,∆max = O(1) ⇒δ = O(log m) ⇒n = Ω(poly(m)),
w.h.p.
(2) Recall that for Ising models, the best-case sample complexity of
LocalCLGrouping for structural consistency [when η = 1 and θmin = θmax =
Θ(1/∆max)] scales as
n = Ω(∆2(δ+1)
max
log p).
Thus, under uniform sampling, the sample complexity required for consis-
tency scales as
n = Ω

∆2
max

log p
|log(1 −ρ)|
4log ∆max/log(∆min−1)
log p

.
For the special case when the graph is regular (∆min = ∆max), this reduces
to
n = Ω(∆2
maxρ−2(log p)3).
(28)
5. Necessary conditions for graph estimation.
We have so far provided
suﬃcient conditions for recovering latent graphical Markov models on girth-
constrained graphs. We now provide necessary conditions on the number of
samples required by any algorithm to reconstruct the graph. Let bGn :(X |V |)n →
Gm denote any deterministic graph estimator using n i.i.d. samples from
node set V , and Gm is the set of all possible graphs on m nodes.
We ﬁrst deﬁne the notion of the graph edit distance based on inexact
graph matching [11]. Let G, bG be two graphs with common labeled node
set V and unlabeled node sets U and bU. Without loss of generality, let
|U| ≥|bU| and add |U| −|bU| number of isolated nodes to bG. Let AG,A b
G be
the resulting adjacency matrices. Then the edit distance between G, bG is
deﬁned as
dist( bG,G;V ) := min
π ∥A b
G −π(AG)∥1,
where π is any permutation on the unlabeled nodes while keeping the labeled
node set V ﬁxed.

LEARNING LOOPY GRAPHICAL MODELS WITH LATENT VARIABLES
21
In other words, the edit distance is the minimum number of entries that
are diﬀerent in A b
G and in any permutation of AG over the unlabeled nodes.
In our context, the labeled nodes correspond to the observed nodes V while
the unlabeled nodes correspond to latent nodes H. We now provide necessary
conditions for graph reconstruction up to certain edit distance.
Theorem 3 (Necessary condition).
For any deterministic estimator bGm :
(X mβ)n 7→Gm based on n i.i.d. samples from mβ observed nodes β ∈[0,1]
of a latent graphical Markov model on graph Gm on m nodes with girth g,
minimum degree ∆min and maximum degree ∆max, for all ε > 0, we have
P[dist( bGm,Gm;V ) > εm] ≥1 −
|X|nmβm(2ε+1)m3εm
m0.5∆minm(m −g∆g
max)0.5∆minm ,
(29)
under any sampling process used to choose the observed nodes.
Proof.
The proof is based on counting arguments. See the supplemen-
tary material [4] for details.
□
Remarks.
(1) The above result states that roughly
n = Ω(∆minm1−β log m) = Ω
∆min
ρ
log p

(30)
samples are required for structural consistency. Thus, when β = 1 (constant
fraction of observed nodes), logarithmic number of samples are necessary
while when β < 1 (vanishing fraction of observed nodes), polynomial number
of samples are necessary for reconstruction. From (28), recall that for Ising
models, under uniform sampling of observed nodes, the best-case sample
complexity of LocalCLGrouping [for homogeneous models on regular graphs
with degree ∆and θmin = θmax = Θ(1/∆)] scales as
n = Ω(∆2ρ−2(log p)3),
and thus nearly matches the lower bound on sample complexity in (30).
6. Experiments.
In this section we present experimental results on real
and synthetic data. We evaluate performance in terms of perplexity, pre-
dictive perplexity and topic coherence, used frequently in topic modeling.
In addition, we also study trade-oﬀbetween model complexity and data ﬁt-
ting through the Bayesian information criterion (BIC) [42]. Experiments are
conducted using the 20-newsgroup data set, monthly stock returns from the
S&P 100 companies and synthetic data. The datasets, software code and
results are available at http://newport.eecs.uci.edu/anandkumar.
6.1. Experimental setup.
Synthetic data. We generate samples from an
Ising model Markov on a cycle (see Figure 2) with a ﬁxed depth δ = 1,

22
A. ANANDKUMAR AND R. VALLUVAN
a ﬁxed latent node degree ∆= 4 and diﬀerent girths g = 10,20,30,... ,100.
The node potentials are kept at zero, while the edge potentials are chosen
randomly in the range [0.05,0.2]. This ensures that the model remains in the
regime of correlation decay since the critical potential θ∗= atanh(∆−1) =
0.2554 > 0.2.
Newsgroup data. We employ latent graphical models for topic modeling,
that is, modeling the relationships between various words co-occurring in
documents. Each hidden variable in the model can be thought of as repre-
senting a topic, and topics and words in a document are drawn jointly from
the graphical model. For a latent tree graphical model, topics and words are
constrained to form a tree, while loopy models relax this assumption. We
consider n = 16,242 binary samples of p = 100 keywords selected from the 20
newsgroup data. Each binary sample indicates the appearance of the given
words in each posting. These samples are divided in to two equal groups,
training and test sets for learning and testing purposes.
S&P data. We also employ latent graphical models for ﬁnancial modeling
and in particular, for estimating the dependencies between the stock trends
of diﬀerent companies. The data set consists of monthly stock returns of p =
84 companies7 listed in S&P 100 index from 1990 to 2007. Experiments with
this dataset allows us to demonstrate the performance of our algorithm on
data using a Gaussian graphical model. The Gaussian model is a simplifying
assumption but reveals interesting relationships between the companies. We
note that more sophisticated kernel models can indeed be used in place of
the Gaussian approximation, for example, [44].
This allows us to trade-oﬀmodel complexity and data ﬁtting. In addition,
we obtain better generalization by avoiding overﬁtting. Note that our pro-
posed method only deals with structure estimation and we use expectation
maximization (EM) for parameter estimation. For the newsgroup data we
compare the proposed method with the LDA model.8
Implementation. The above method is implemented in MATLAB. We used
the modules for LBP, made available with UGM9 package. The LDA models
are learned using the lda package.10
Threshold selection r for our method. Recall that the parameter r in our
method controls the size of neighborhoods over which the local MSTs are
constructed in the ﬁrst step of our method. We earlier presented ranges of r,
where recovery of the loopy structure is theoretically guaranteed (w.h.p.).
However, in practice, this range is unknown, since the model parameters
7The 16 companies added after 1990 are dropped from the list of 100 companies listed
in S&P 100 stock index for this analysis.
8Typically, LDA models the counts of diﬀerent words in documents. Here, since we have
binary data, we consider a binary LDA model where the observed variables are binary.
9These codes can be downloaded from UGM.html UGM.html.
10http://chasen.org/~daiti-m/dist/lda/.

LEARNING LOOPY GRAPHICAL MODELS WITH LATENT VARIABLES
23
are unknown to the learner, and also since there is no ground truth with
respect to real datasets. Here, we present intuitive criterion for selecting the
threshold based on the BIC score. We choose the range for threshold r as
rmax :=
max
(i,j)∈V ×V d(i,j),
rmin := max
j∈V min
i∈V d(i,j),
(31)
thereby disallowing disconnected components in the output graph. Note that
if we choose r ≥rmax, then the output is a latent tree. In our experiments,
we choose one value above rmax to ﬁnd a reference tree model and compare
it with other outcomes. For the 20 newsgroup dataset, we ﬁnd that rmin =
2.3678 and rmax = 12.2692. Therefore, we choose r ∈{3,5,7,9,11,13} for
our experiments on newsgroup data. For the monthly stock returns data,
rmin = 1.0337 and rmax = 8.1172, and we choose r from 1.1 to 8.2. The
tuning of parameters Λ and τ has been previously discussed in the context
of learning latent trees (e.g., [17], page 1796), and we leverage on those
results here.
Performance evaluation. We evaluate performance based on the test per-
plexity [38] given by
Perp-LL := exp
"
−1
np
n
X
k=1
log P(xtest(k))
#
,
(32)
where n is the number of test samples and p is the number of observed
variables (i.e., words). Thus the perplexity is monotonically decreasing in
the test likelihood and a lower perplexity indicates a better generalization
performance. Along the lines of (32), we also evaluate the predictive per-
plexity [7]
Pred-Perp-LL := exp
"
−1
np
n
X
k=1
log P(xtest
pred(k)|xtest
obs (k)),
#
(33)
where a subset of word occurrences xtest
obs is observed in test data, and the
performance of predicting the rest of words is evaluated. In our experiments,
we randomly select half the words in test samples.
We also consider regularized versions of perplexity that capture trade-oﬀ
between model complexity and likelihood, given by
Perp-BIC := exp

−1
np BIC(xtest)

,
(34)
where the BIC score [42] is deﬁned as
BIC(xtest) :=
n
X
k=1
log P(xtest(k)) −0.5(df)log n,
(35)
where df is the degrees of freedom in the model. For a graphical model, we set
dfGM := m + |E|, where m is the total number of variables (both observed
and hidden), and |E| is the number of edges in the model. For the LDA

24
A. ANANDKUMAR AND R. VALLUVAN
model, we set dfLDA := (p(m −p) −1), where p is the number of observed
variables (i.e., words) and m −p is the number of hidden variables (i.e.,
topics). This is because a LDA model is parameterized by a p × (m −p)
topic probability matrix and a (m −p)-length Dirichlet prior. Thus, the
BIC perplexity in (34) is monotonically decreasing in the BIC score, and a
lower BIC perplexity indicates better trade-oﬀbetween model complexity
and data ﬁtting. However, the likelihood and BIC score in (32) and (34)
are not tractable for exact evaluation in general graphical models since they
involve the partition function. We employ loopy belief propagation (LBP)
to evaluate them.11 Note that it is exact on a tree model and approximate
for loopy models. Along the lines of predictive perplexity in (33), we also
consider its regularized version
Pred-Perp-BIC := exp

−1
np BIC(xtest
pred|xtest
obs )

,
(36)
where the conditional BIC score is given by
BIC(xtest
pred|xtest
obs ) :=
n
X
k=1
log P(xtest
pred(k)|xtest
obs (k)) −0.5(df)log n.
(37)
In addition, we also evaluate topic coherence, frequently considered in
topic modeling. It is based on the average pointwise mutual information
(PMI) score
PMI :=
1
45|H|
X
h∈H
X
i,j∈A(h)
i<j
PMI(Xi;Xj),
(38)
PMI(Xi;Xj) := log
P(Xi = 1,Xj = 1)
P(Xi = 1)P(Xj = 1),
where the set A(h) represents the “top-10” words associated with topic
h ∈H. The number of such word pairs for each topic is ( 10
2 ) = 45, and is used
for normalization. In [39], it is found that the PMI scores are a good measure
of human evaluated topic coherence when it is computed using an external
corpus. It is also observed that using a related external corpus gives a high
PMI. Hence, in our experiments, we choose a corpus containing news articles
from the NYT articles bag-of-words dataset. This dataset has a vocabulary
of 102,660 words from 300,000 separate articles [24]. For LDA models, the
11The likelihood is evaluated using P(xV ) = P (xV ∪H)
P (xH |xV ), where P(xH|xV ) and P(xV ∪H)
are computed using LBP, which is exact for trees. The above expression holds for any
conﬁguration of hidden variables xH, however we use the most likely hidden state to
avoid numerical issues.

LEARNING LOOPY GRAPHICAL MODELS WITH LATENT VARIABLES
25
Fig. 3.
Results for synthetic data with girth g = 10 using the proposed method.
top 10 words for each topic are selected based on the topic probability vector.
For latent graphical models, we use the criterion of information distances on
the learned model to select the 10 nearest words for each topic.
6.2. Experimental results.
Results for synthetic data. We observe that our method outputs graphs
with a similar number of latent variables as the ground truth when r is
chosen close to the bound rmax, deﬁned in (31). On the other hand, lower
values of r lead to more cycles and hidden variables in the output graph. The
normalized BIC scores (normalized with respect to n and p) of the loopy
graphs improve with the number of samples n, as shown in Figure 3(b).
This is expected since the data becomes less noisy with more samples. Fig-
ure 3(b) shows an overall improvement in the normalized BIC score with
increasing number of samples n for diﬀerent thresholds r. Figure 3(b) shows
the variation of normalized BIC scores for graphs learned using thresholds
r = 4 to 9 with girth g = 10. We observe that the normalized BIC score
decreases for the lowest threshold (r = 4), where the output graph shows a
signiﬁcant increase in latent nodes and edges, resulting in overﬁtting, and
higher thresholds have better BIC. However, once the threshold results in a
tree model, the BIC degrades since the cycles are no longer present.
Graph structure for newsgroup data. We employ our method to learn the
graph structures under diﬀerent thresholds r ∈{3,5,7,9,11,13} on news-
group data, which controls the length of cycles. At r = 13 as shown in
Figure 4, we obtain a latent tree, and for r ∈{3,5,7,9}, we obtain loopy
models. The ﬁrst long cycle appears at r = 9 shown in Figure 5. At r = 7,
we ﬁnd a combination of short and long cycles. We ﬁnd that models with
cycles are more eﬀective in discovering intuitive relationships. For instance,

26
A. ANANDKUMAR AND R. VALLUVAN
Fig. 4.
Tree Graph Learned using r = 13 with RegLocalCLGrouping on 20 newsgroup data.

LEARNING LOOPY GRAPHICAL MODELS WITH LATENT VARIABLES
27
Fig. 5.
Loopy Graph Learned using r = 9 with RegLocalCLGrouping on 20 newsgroup data.

28
A. ANANDKUMAR AND R. VALLUVAN
Table 1
Comparison of proposed method under diﬀerent thresholds (r) with LDA under diﬀerent
number of topics (i.e., number of hidden variables) on 20 newsgroup data. For deﬁnition
of perplexity and predictive perplexity based on test likelihood and BIC scores, and PMI,
see (32), (33), (34), (36) and (38)
Method
r
Hidden Edges
PMI
Perp-LL Perp-BIC Pred-Perp-LL Pred-Perp-BIC
Proposed
3
55
265
0.2638
1.1533
1.1560
1.0695
1.0720
Proposed
5
39
293
0.4875
1.1567
1.1594
1.0424
1.0448
Proposed
7
32
183
0.4313
1.1498
1.1518
1.0664
1.0682
Proposed
9
24
129
0.6037
1.1543
1.1560
1.0780
1.0795
Proposed
11
26
125
0.4585
1.1555
1.1571
1.0787
1.0802
Proposed
13
24
123
0.4289
1.1560
1.1576
1.0788
1.0803
LDA
NA
10
NA
0.2921
1.1480
1.1544
1.1623
1.1656
LDA
NA
20
NA
0.1919
1.1348
1.1474
1.1572
1.1638
LDA
NA
30
NA
0.1653
1.1421
1.1612
1.1616
1.1715
LDA
NA
40
NA
0.1470
1.1494
1.1752
1.1634
1.1767
in the latent tree (r = 13), the link between “computer” and “software” is
missing due to the tree constraint, but is discovered when r ≤9. Moreover,
we see that common words across diﬀerent topics tend to connect the local
subgraphs. For instance, the word “program” is used in the context of both
space program and computer programs. Similarly, the word “earth” is used
both in the context of religion and space exploration.
Perplexity and topic coherence for newsgroup data. In Table 1, we present
results under our method and under LDA modeling on newsgroup data.
For the LDA model, we vary the number of hidden variables (i.e., topics)
as {10,20,30,40}. In contrast, our method is designed to optimize for the
number of hidden variables, and does not need this input. We note that
our method is competitive in terms of both predictive perplexity and topic
coherence. We ﬁnd that the topic coherence (i.e., PMI) for our method
is optimal at r = 9, where the graph has a single long cycle and a few
short cycles. Intuitively, this model is able to discover more relationships
between words, which the latent tree (r = 13) is unable to do so. On the other
hand, for r < 9, topic coherence is degraded which suggests that adding too
many cycles is counterproductive. However, the model at r = 5 performs
better in terms of predictive perplexity indicating that it is able to use
evidence from more observed words for prediction on test data. Moreover,
all of our latent graphical models outperform the LDA models in terms of
predictive perplexity. The top 10 topic words for selected topics are given
for our method at (r = 9) and for the LDA model (with 10 topics) are given
in Tables 2 and 3.
Graph structure for stock market data. The outcome of applying the pro-
posed algorithm to stock market data is presented in Table 4. We observe

LEARNING LOOPY GRAPHICAL MODELS WITH LATENT VARIABLES
29
Table 2
Top 10 topic words from selected topics in loopy graphical model
with threshold r = 9, the topic number corresponds to the labels
of hidden variables in the loopy graph shown in Figure 5
Topic 16
Topic 18
Topic 12
Topic 1
Topic 8
lunar
disk
card
god
software
moon
drive
video
jesus
pc
orbit
dos
windows
bible
computer
solar
memory
driver
christian
system
mission
windows
graphics
religion
dos
satellite
pc
dos
earth
windows
earth
software
version
question
disk
shuttle
scsi
ftp
fact
science
mars
computer
pc
jews
drive
space
system
disk
evidence
university
that the number of edges and hidden variables remain fairly constant over a
large range of thresholds. Speciﬁcally for r ∈[5.9,6.7] ∪[6.8,7.7], we obtain
the same graph structure (for r > rmax, we obtain a tree). Another general
trend observed is the improvement of the BIC score as the threshold de-
creases up till a certain point. The graphs learned using r = 5,7.7 and 8.2
are shown in Figures 6, 7 and 8. Interesting connections between companies
emerge. The latent tree structure in Figure 8 captures many key relation-
ships. In particular, the S&P index node has a high degree since it captures
the overall trend of various companies. Companies in similar sectors and
divisions are grouped together. For instance, retail stores such as “Target,”
“Walmart,” “CVS” and “Home Depot” are grouped together. However, ad-
ditional relationships emerge as the threshold is decreased and cycles are
Table 3
Top 10 topic words corresponding to selected topics from the LDA model with 10 topics
Topic 4
Topic 8
Topic 7
Topic 6
Topic 5
Space
windows
card
god
drive
nasa
ﬁles
graphics
world
states
insurance
dos
video
fact
research
earth
format
driver
christian
disk
moon
ftp
windows
jesus
university
orbit
program
computer
religion
mac
mission
software
pc
bible
scsi
launch
win
version
evidence
computer
gun
version
software
human
system
shuttle
pc
system
question
power

30
A. ANANDKUMAR AND R. VALLUVAN
Table 4
Comparison of proposed method under diﬀerent thresholds (r) on Stock data
using the proposed method. For deﬁnition of perplexity based on test likelihood
and BIC scores; see (32) and (34)
r
Hidden
Edges
Perp-LL
Perp-BIC
2.7
35
154
1.9498
2.0296
3.9
39
139
2.0200
2.0993
4.9
35
129
2.0210
2.0960
5
36
131
2.0169
2.0927
6.7
26
111
2.0344
2.1016
7.7
26
111
2.0353
2.1025
8.2
26
110
2.0405
2.1076
added. We observe that the ﬁrst cycle that is added connects the various
oil companies which suggests strong interdependencies and inﬂuence on the
S&P 100 index. In addition, more cycles emerge when the threshold is de-
creased further. For instance, in Figure 6, we ﬁnd a cycle connecting aviation
company “Boeing” with “Honeywell” which is in the aviation industry, but
also additionally is in the chemical industry and connects to companies such
as “Dow Chemicals.” Thus as in newsgroup data, we ﬁnd that companies in
multiple categories lead to cycles in the underlying graph.
Edge density vs. threshold r. We now study the edge density (i.e., num-
ber of edges) in the initialization step of our method as a function of the
threshold r for both newsgroup and stock data. Recall that the initialization
step involves building a loopy graph on observed variables (and no hidden
variables). The edge density in this step is indicative of the number of cy-
cles added to the ultimate latent model. We observe that the graphs become
denser as r is reduced from rmax. However, when r is very small, the number
of edges decreases since the nodes have sparser neighborhoods. This trend is
seen in both Figures 9(a) and 9(b) which show the variation for newsgroup
and stock data. For the newsgroup data, the graph density peaks at r = 5,
which also achieves the highest predictive perplexity; see Table 1. Thus, we
see a direct relationship between the edge density and the corresponding
predictive perplexity in the learned model. Intuitively, this is because as the
number of edges increases, prediction at any node involves more evidence.
However, as the threshold r is reduced further, graphs become less denser,
and there is also a corresponding degradation in the predictive perplexity.
The above experiments conﬁrm the eﬀectiveness of our approach for dis-
covering hidden topics and are in line with the theoretical guarantees estab-
lished earlier in the paper. Our analysis reveals that a large class of loopy
graphical models with latent variables can be learned eﬃciently in diﬀerent
domains.

LEARNING LOOPY GRAPHICAL MODELS WITH LATENT VARIABLES
31
Fig. 6.
Loopy Graph Learned using r = 5 with LocalCLGrouping on S&P 100 monthly stock return data.

32
A. ANANDKUMAR AND R. VALLUVAN
Fig. 7.
Loopy Graph Learned using r = 7.7 with LocalCLGrouping on S&P 100 monthly stock return data.

LEARNING LOOPY GRAPHICAL MODELS WITH LATENT VARIABLES
33
Fig. 8.
Tree Graph Learned using r = 8.2 with LocalCLGrouping on S&P 100 monthly stock return data.

34
A. ANANDKUMAR AND R. VALLUVAN
Fig. 9.
Variation of edge density of graphs at the initialization stage of LocalCLGrouping
vs. threshold r.
7. Conclusion.
In this paper, we considered latent graphical models Mar-
kov on girth-constrained graphs and proposed a novel approach for structure
estimation. We established the correctness of the method when the model
is in the regime of correlation decay and also derived PAC learning guaran-
tees. We compared these guarantees with other methods for graphical model
selection, where there are no latent variables. Our ﬁndings reveal that la-
tent variables do not add much complexity to the learning process in certain
models and regimes, even when the number of hidden variables is large.
These ﬁndings push the realm of tractable latent models for learning.
Acknowledgments.
The authors thank E. Mossel (Berkeley) for detailed
discussions in the beginning regarding problem formulation, modeling and
algorithmic approaches and Padhraic Smyth (UCI) and David Newman
(UCI) for evaluation measures for topic models. The authors also thank
the editor Tony Cai (Wharton) and anonymous reviewers whose comments
substantially improved the paper. An abridged version of this work appears
in the Proceedings of NIPS 2012.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary material to “Learning loopy graphical models with latent
variables: Eﬃcient methods and guarantees” (DOI: 10.1214/12-AOS1070SUPP;
.pdf). Proofs of various theorems.
