arXiv:1204.0479v1  [cs.AI]  2 Apr 2012
A collaborative ant colony metaheuristic for
distributed multi-level lot-sizing
Tobias Buera∗
Jörg Hombergerb
Hermann Gehringc
aChair of Logistics, University of Bremen, 28334 Bremen, Germany
bFaculty of Geomatics, Computer Science and Mathematics, Stuttgart University of Applied
Sciences, 70174 Stuttgart, Germany
cDepartment of Information Systems, University of Hagen, 58084 Hagen, Germany
Abstract
The paper presents an ant colony optimization metaheuristic for collaborative planning. Collabora-
tive planning is used to coordinate individual plans of self-interested decision makers with private
information in order to increase the overall beneﬁt of the coalition.
The method consists of a
new search graph based on encoded solutions. Distributed and private information is integrated
via voting mechanisms and via a simple but eﬀective collaborative local search procedure. The
approach is applied to a distributed variant of the multi-level lot-sizing problem and evaluated by
means of 352 benchmark instances from the literature. The proposed approach clearly outperforms
existing approaches on the sets of medium and large sized instances. While the best method in
the literature so far achieves an average deviation from the best known non-distributed solutions
of 46 percent for the set of the largest instances, for example, the presented approach reduces the
average deviation to only 5 percent.
Keywords: Group decisions and negotiations; metaheuristics; collaborative planning; ant colony
optimization; lot sizing
1
Introduction and literature review
A coalition of decision makers with private information that requires collaborative production planning
is considered.
Each of the decision makers, hereafter referred to as agents, is selﬁsh and seeks to
implement his or her local optimal production plan to minimize his or her local costs. However, the
agents could improve their situation by coordinating their individual production plans. The cost savings
due to a better global production plan could be allocated to the agents in order to overcompensate
them for deviating from their local optimal production plans. From a more general point of view, the
problem of ﬁnding an appropriate allocation of cooperative gains is dealt with by cooperative game
theory. The special situation of joint planning of selﬁsh agents in case of private information considered
here is the subject of collaborative operations planning (Dudek and Stadtler, 2005).
The state of the art in collaborative planning is discussed by Frayret (2009) and by Stadtler
(2009). Overviews of automated negotiation approaches relevant to collaborative planning are given
by Lomuscio et al. (2003) and Ströbel and Weinhardt (2003). Applications of collaborative planning
to supply chains are discussed by Ertogral and Wu (2000), and Fink (2004, 2006), for example.
The proposed collaborative planning approach is applied to a distributed variant of the well-known
multi level uncapacitated lot sizing problem (MLULSP) introduced by Yelle (1979). The distributed

1

MLULSP (DMLUSLSP) was presented by Homberger (2010) and assumes several local and selﬁsh
agents with private information instead of a single agent with full information. The DMLULSP cov-
ers some important features of real world problems. There are several ﬁnal products, a multi level
production structure, and a trade-oﬀbetween inventory and setup costs. Coordination is diﬃcult,
because there are agents with private information and conﬂicting objectives. Finally, the problem is
computationally challenging, as it is NP-hard for general product structures (Arkin et al., 1989). As
to computational experiments, a variety of benchmark instances is available in the literature which
allow for comparative test including other approaches.
Lot Sizing Problems are of high relevance in modern supply chains (Voßand Woodruﬀ, 2006).
Surveys of the rich literature on lot sizing problems are given for example by Drexl and Kimms
(1997), Jans and Degraeve (2007), or Winands et al. (2011). Integration of lot sizing with cooperative
game theory is discussed by Drechsel and Kimms (2010, 2011).
Metaheuristic solution approaches
for the non-distributed MLULSP are amongst others presented by Dellaert and Jeunet (2000, 2003),
Pitakaso et al. (2007), Homberger (2008), Xiao et al. (2011), and Xiao et al. (2012).
The literature discusses at least two distributed lot sizing variants. The one studied by Lee and Kumara
(2007b,a) is based on auctions and has been tested on small size instances. For the other, the distributed
MLULSP, several metaheuristic approaches that integrate concepts from group decision making are
known in the literature: a simulated annealing approach (SA, Homberger, 2010), an approach based
on an evolutionary strategy (ES, Homberger, 2011) and one based on ant colony optimization (ACO,
Homberger and Gehring, 2010, 2011). These approaches diﬀer by the used metaheuristic principle,
the applied negotiation or voting mechanisms, and the relevant objective functions (minimizing total
global cost or maximizing fairness). ES is especially useful for maximizing fairness. SA and ACO
strive to minimize total global cost. In terms of solution quality, ACO outperforms SA on medium
sized instances (40 and 50 items with 12 and 24 periods) but not on small or large instances (500 items,
and 36 or 52 periods). Furthermore, ACO is signiﬁcantly slower than SA on small, medium, and large
instances.
The aim of this paper is to present a new collaborative ant colony metaheuristic (CACM) for solving
the DMLULSP under global total cost minimization. Compared to Homberger and Gehring (2011) and
the other mentioned approaches, the proposed CACM incorporates the following new conceptual and
methodical ideas:
1. Encoded solutions are represented by a new and simpliﬁed search graph.
Let m denote the
number of items to produce and let n denote the number of periods. The search graph proposed
by Homberger and Gehring (2009) and used in Homberger and Gehring (2011) requires m(n+1)
nodes and 1
2mn(n + 1) directed edges while the new search graph uses 2mn + 1 nodes but only
4mn −2 edges. The new search graph facilitates learning of pheromone values and therefore
makes it easier to discover promising paths which lead to high quality solutions.
2. Individual preferences of the agents – which are private – are aggregated by a voting mechanism
and by a new collaborative local search procedure. Usually, to be able to reach a (near) optimal
solution fast, an ant colony metaheuristic requires heuristic information on the problem, for
example, the costs of the agents. However, this operational information is sensitive and therefore
private. The new approach exploits this information indirectly, which enables to guide the search
via heuristic information and, nevertheless, keeps operational information private.
3. The new approach does without rank based voting mechanisms. This reduces computational ef-
fort and increases robustness, that is, there are less opportunities for undesired strategic behavior
of the agents.
As it is shown below, the incorporation of these concepts has a high positive impact on the solution
quality of the resulting approach.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 the considered distributed multi-level lot
sizing problem (DMLULSP) is characterized. Section 3 describes the developed collaborative ant colony
2

Table 1: Notation for the DMLULSP.
Problem parameters
M
a suﬃciently large number
m
number of items
n
number of production periods
I
set of items, I = {1, . . . , m}
T
set of possible production periods, T = {1, . . ., n}
si
setup costs per period for item i ∈I
hi
inventory holding costs per period and per unit of item i ∈I
ti
lead time required to assemble, manufacture, or purchase item i ∈I
rij
number of items i required to produce one unit of item j with i, j ∈I, i ̸= j
Γ+(i) ⊂I
set of all direct successors of item i ∈I
Γ−(i) ⊂I
set of all direct predecessors of item i ∈I
dit
exogenous demand (unit of quantity) for item i ∈{j ∈I|Γ+(j) = ∅} in
period t ∈T
Decision variables
dit
endogenous demand (unit of quantity) of item i ∈{j ∈I|Γ+(j) ̸= ∅} in
period t ∈T
lit
inventory (unit of quantity) of item i ∈I at the end of period t ∈T
xit
lot size (unit of quantity) of item i ∈I in period t ∈T
yit
binary setup decision, yit = 1 if item i ∈I is produced in period t ∈T and
yit = 0 otherwise
metaheuristic for solving the DMLULSP. Subject to Section 3 is the evaluation of the new approach
by means of a computational study with 352 benchmark instances. Finally, concluding remarks are
given in Section 5.
2
A distributed multi-level uncapacitated lot-sizing problem
2.1
Classical centralized problem formulation
The distributed lot-sizing model studied in this paper extends the well-known multi-level uncapacitated
lot sizing problem (MLULSP, cf. Yelle 1979, Steinberg and Napier 1980, Dellaert and Jeunet 2000).
Therefore, the MLULSP is presented ﬁrst using the notation given in Table 1. The MLULSP assumes
a single decision maker who is aware of all information required for planning, especially, the setup costs
and inventory holding costs per item and period. A formal description of the MLULSP is given by the
formulas (1) to (8).
min f nd(y)
=
X
i∈I
X
t∈T
(si · yit + hi · lit)
(1)
s. t.
lit = li,t−1 + xit −dit ,
∀i ∈I, ∀t ∈T,
(2)
li,0 = 0 ,
∀i ∈I,
(3)
lit ≥0 ,
∀i ∈I, ∀t ∈T \ {0},
(4)
dit =
X
j∈Γ+(i)
rij · xj,t+ti ,
∀i ∈{j ∈I | Γ+(j) ̸= ∅}, t ∈T,
(5)
xit −M · yit ≤0 ,
∀i ∈I, ∀t ∈T,
(6)
xit ≥0 ,
∀i ∈I, ∀t ∈T,
(7)
yit ∈{0, 1} ,
∀i ∈I, ∀t ∈T.
(8)
3

lev
el
0
lev
el
1
lev
el
2
lev
el
3
lev
el
4
lev
el
5
agen
t a2
(pro
du ing
items
21-40)
agen
t a1
(pro
du ing
items
1-20)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
Figure 1: Example of a product structure and a partition of the items to two agents (cf. Homberger,
2010).
The goal of the MLULSP is to minimize the total costs f nd of a single, central decision maker.
These are expressed by the objective function (1) which sums up the setup costs and the stockholding
costs for all items i ∈I over all periods t ∈T. The inventory balance is guaranteed by (2). For all
items, the inventory of the ﬁrst period t = 0 is zero (3) and for remaining periods non-negative (4).
For each period, the demands dit for the level zero items i ∈I with Γ+(i) = ∅are given. The demands
for the remaining items are determined by (5). These constraints ensure that the production of item j
in period t + ti triggers a corresponding demand dit for all i ∈Γ−(j), that is a demand for each item i
that is preceding item j in the bill of materials. Without loss of generality, ri,j = 1 is assumed in (5).
The lot size xit is non-negative (7). If xit > 0, that is, item i is produced in period t, then yit = 1,
otherwise yit = 0. This is enforced by the constraints (6) and (8).
Arkin et al. (1989) have shown that the MLULSP is NP-hard for general multi-level product struc-
tures, i. e., for product structures, where each item can have multiple successors and predecessors like
in Figure 1 (Salomon and Kuik, 1993). Figure 1 shows an example for a graphical representation of
a product structure with m = 40 which follows the literature (Bookbinder and Koch, 1990).
The
production dependencies between items are indicated by arrows. Furthermore, items are classiﬁed by
decreasing production level from top to bottom. Each end product i ∈I with Γ+(i) = ∅is located at
the highest level which is level 0. Each common part is located at the lowest level at which it is used
anywhere in the product structure (Dellaert and Jeunet, 2000). The allocation of items to a group of
agents also shown in Figure 1 is described next.
2.2
Extension to a distributed group decision problem formulation
Following Homberger (2010), the MLULSP is now extended to a distributed group decision problem
which is called distributed multi-level uncapacitated lot-sizing problem (DMLUSLSP). Instead of a
single decision maker or agent who is responsible to produce all items I, the responsibility is jointly
assigned to a group of agents A. Each agent a ∈A is responsible to produce the set of items Ia with
S
a∈A Ia = I and T
a∈A Ia = ∅. For instance, an agent might represent a proﬁt center or an independent
company and the agents might interact in a supply chain.
All agents are autonomous and self-interested. Therefore, the individual objective function fa of
agent a ∈A is to minimize his or her total local costs for producing the items Ia, that is,
4

min fa(y) =
X
i∈Ia
X
t∈T
(si · yit + hi · lit).
(9)
Furthermore, for all agents a ∈A and for all items i ∈Ia, the DMLULSP assumes asymmetric
information regarding the cost parameters si and hi. These cost parameters are private information.
That is, at the initiation of planning they are only known to agent a and during planning agent a
does not want to reveal these to other agents. If this information would be common knowledge, price
negotiations between agents might be negatively aﬀected. On the other hand, symmetric information
is assumed regarding the bill of materials. This assumption can be justiﬁed by some kind of common
industry knowledge or joint development of products (e.g. collaborative engineering).
The DMLUSLSP consists of the constraints (2) to (8) and the objective function (10) which mini-
mizes the total global costs
min f(y) =
X
a∈A
fa.
(10)
In comparable scenarios, the total global costs are also considered of interest by Fink (2004), Zimmer
(2004), Jung et al. (2005), and Dudek and Stadtler (2005, 2007). In the following, the function (10)
is simply referred to as total cost function or central cost function, the function (9) is also denoted
as individual or local cost function of agent a ∈A. Usually, the minimization of the individual cost
functions conﬂicts with the objective of minimizing the total costs. In order to resolve these conﬂicts
and support the agents in agreeing on a joint production plan in order to produce all items I, the
solution approach proposed in the following section uses collaborative local search and diﬀerent voting
mechanisms.
3
A collaborative planning metaheuristic based on ant colony opti-
mization
3.1
Overview
A metaheuristic solution approach based on ant colony optimization (ACO) is presented that espe-
cially takes into account the distributed nature of the DMLULSP. The distributed solution approach
is denoted as collaborative ant colony metaheuristic (CACM); an overview is given by Alg. 1. The
metaheuristic CACM works on an encoded representation of a DMLULSP solution which is described
in Sect. 3.2. Components of an encoded solution are represented by a search graph G which is traversed
by artiﬁcial ants in order to construct encoded solutions. Sect. 3.3 introduces the search graph G and
Sect. 3.4 presents the stochastic ant construction procedure. Each constructed solution is improved by
a collaborative local search heuristic (cf. Sect. 3.5). Both, the used graph structure and the local search
heuristic incorporate new concepts compared to the ant metaheuristic of Homberger and Gehring
(2011).
After a set B of encoded solutions has been constructed, the agents negotiate about the
acceptance of a solution in B by casting votes according to one of several voting rules described in
Sect. 3.6. Finally, the pheromone information related to the arcs of the search graph are updated
according to the present accepted solution e∗(Sect. 3.7). That is, in the next iteration of CACM ants
use a diﬀerent probability distribution in order to construct a new encoded solution.
CACM requires several input parameters. The problem data include the number of items m ∈N,
the number of periods n ∈N, and the set A of agents. The termination of CACM is controlled by the
number of generated solutions s ∈N. The ballot size b ∈N, b ⇔|B|, speciﬁes the number of solutions
which can be negotiated by the agents A in a single election. The remaining parameters inﬂuence the
update of the pheromone information on the arcs of the search graph G. The minimum and maximum
5

Algorithm 1: Collaborative Ant Colony Metaheuristic
Input: no. of items m, no. of periods n, set A of agents, no. of generated solutions s, ballot
size b, min and max pheromone values τ min and τ max, evaporation rate ρ,
intensiﬁcation rate σ
Output: jointly accepted encoded solution e∗
initialize search graph G and pheromone values τ
// Section 3.3
e∗
it ←0,
i = 1, . . . , m; t = 1, . . . , n
for s ←1 to s do
B ←{}
for b ←1 to b do
e ←constructEncodedAntSolution(G, τ)
// Section 3.4
e ←collaborativeLocalSearch(e, A)
// distributed, Section 3.5
B ←B ∪{e}
s ←s + 1 + m(n −1)
end
e∗←voting(B, A)
// distributed, Section 3.6
τ ←updatePheromoneValues(e∗, τ, τ min, τ max, ρ, σ)
// Section 3.7
end
return e∗
pheromone values are deﬁned by τ min, τ max ∈N. The pheromone evaporation rate and the pheromone
intensiﬁcation are given by ρ and σ with 0 ≤ρ, σ ≤1.
The solution approach CACM can deal with asymmetric information distributed among the agents.
CACM is executed by a neutral mediator. In order to construct encoded solutions, the mediator has to
be aware of the items I to produce and of the possible production periods T. The agents do not have
to reveal private information like costs or free production capacities, neither to the mediator nor to
other agents. To control the search process in order to ﬁnd a jointly accepted solution e∗, the mediator
has to interact with the agents in both steps marked as distributed in Alg. 1. CACM outputs a jointly
accepted solution e∗.
3.2
Representation of a solution
3.2.1
Solution encoding
For the MLULSP, the decision variables xit represent the lot size of item i produced in period t. The
binary decision variables yit represent the setup decisions which indicate wether item i is produced in
period t at all. Because of the structure of the MLULSP, it is possible to determine the optimal lot
sizes xit, if the optimal setup decisions yit are known (Dellaert and Jeunet, 2000).
Therefore, the proposed CACM focuses its search eﬀort to approximate the set of optimal setup
decisions. However, CACM does not operate on the yit directly, but indirectly on an encoded repre-
sentation of the setup decisions. For each binary setup decision variable yit, there is an encoded binary
setup decision variable eit following the suggestion of Homberger (2008). Both variables are related as
follows:
(eit = 0) ⇔(yit = 0),
(11)
(eit = 1) ⇒(yit = 0 ∨yit = 1).
(12)
Accordingly, the variables eit = 1 indicate a possible, but not mandatory, production of item i ∈I
in period t ∈T. Another ACO approach that also uses encoded decision variables is suggested by
Fink (2007), for example. Whether a possible production takes place if eit = 1, can be deduced by the
following decoding rule.
6

b
b
b
b
b
b
v
v1
1,1
v1
1,2
v1
1,3
v1
2,1
v1
2,2
v1
2,3 = v1
m,n
v0
1,1
v0
1,2
v0
1,3
v0
2,1
v0
2,2
v0
2,3 = v0
m,n
Figure 2: Example of a search graph for two items and three periods.
3.2.2
Solution decoding
An encoded solution e ∈{0, 1}m×n is transformed to a DMLULSP solution in a two steps procedure.
The product level of an item i determines the order in which demand dit, lot size xit, and inventory lit
are calculated. The procedures starts with the lowest level items (ﬁnal products) and advances with
items of increasing product level. That is, the demands for the ﬁnal products (level 0) are determined
ﬁrst, the demands for level 1 items are calculated next, and so on (cf. Homberger (2008))
Hence, the items are considered in the sequence of their non-decreasing product level. If item i is a
ﬁnal product (level 1), then dit is given for all 1 ≤j ≤T. For each non-ﬁnal product i the demand can
be calculated according to equation (5) using to the demands of all successors of i indicated by Γ(i).
All dkj, k ∈Γ(i) have already been calculated, because of the used calculation sequence. By means
of the second decoding step, the setup decisions, lot sizes, and stored quantities are calculated. One
should note, that with the used encoding and decoding rules, each encoded solution with a ei1 = 1 for
i = 1, . . . , N represents a feasible decoded solution in any case.
3.3
Deﬁnition of a search graph
3.3.1
Search graph
The ACO principle is guided by the image of an ant that constructs a feasible solution by traversing a
graph which consists of solution components speciﬁc to the problem. A solution is represented by the
path chosen by the ant. In order to enable such an artiﬁcial ant to construct an encoded solution for
the DMLULSP, a directed graph G = (V, E) with a set V of nodes and a set E of directed edges is used
(see Figure 2). The node set V consists of three disjunct subsets, i. e., V = {v}∪V 1 ∪V 0. The starting
point of an ant is the initial node v. For each of the two possible values of an encoded decision variable
eij there exists a node. The encoded decision to produce item i in period j (eij = 1) is represented by
node v1
ij ∈V 1. The encoded decision eij = 0 is represented by node v0
ij ∈V 0. Therefore, V 1 ∩V 0 = ∅
and |V 1| = |V 0|. The nodes in V 1 are called black nodes, the nodes in V 0 are called white nodes.
The set of directed edges E is deﬁned as follows. The initial node v is associated with two directed
edges (v, v1
1,1) and (v, v0
1,1). Furthermore, each node v ∈V \ {v1
m,n, v0
m,n} acts as the origin of exactly
two directed edges. From a black node two edges originate, one points to another black node and one
points to a white node; analogously, from a white node one edge points to a black node and one edge
points to another white node. More precisely, let a, b ∈{0, 1}, a ̸= b and va ∈V a, vb ∈V b. The pair
of edges originating from va
ij is deﬁned as (va
ij, va
i,j+1) and (va
ij, vb
i,j+1), provided that j < n. Else, if
j = n, then the pair of edges is deﬁned as (va
ij, va
i+1,1) and (va
ij, vb
i+1,1).
To ease presentation, two subsets of directed edges E1 and E0 are introduced. E1 contains those
edges that point to a black node and E0 contains those edges that point to a white node.
E = E1 ∪E0 with E1 ∩E0 = ∅,
(13)
E1 := {(i, j) ∈E|i ∈V ∧j ∈V 1},
(14)
E0 := {(i, j) ∈E|i ∈V ∧j ∈V 0}.
(15)
7

An encoded solution to the DMLULSP is represented by all nodes v ∈V 1∪V 0 on any path through
G that starts at node v and ends either at node v1
m,n or at node v0
m,n.
3.3.2
Initialization of pheromone trail
The sequence of directed edges traversed by an ant depends on the pheromone value τ(i,j) placed on
each edge (i, j) ∈E. Higher pheromone values τ(i,j) on an edge (i, j) increase the probability that
an ant traverses edge (i, j). Homberger and Gehring (2009) proposed an ACO approach for a (non-
distributed) MLULSP on a diﬀerent search graph and successfully pursued the idea to initially construct
each possible solution with equal probability (’balanced path’). In contrast to that idea, the goal of
this approach is to initially construct unbalanced paths that predominantly consist of black nodes.
Following the max-min ant system proposed by (Stützle and Hoos, 2000), a minimum and a maximum
pheromone value for each edge (i, j) ∈E are deﬁned as τ min and τ max. The initial pheromone value
τ(i,j) for each edge (i, j) ∈E0 is set to 1, and the initial pheromone value for (i, j) ∈E1 is set to
τ max −1.
3.4
Construction of a solution
3.4.1
Component selection probability
In order to construct an encoded solution e, the graph G is traversed by an ant along the directed
edges. The traversal of G starts at the initial node v. Until the ant arrives at node v1
m,n or v0
m,n, the
ant decides randomly at each node v ∈V \ {v1
N,T , v0
N,T } which of the two possible edges (v, i) ∈E1
and (v, j) ∈E0 to choose. The random decision depends on the pheromone intensity τ(i,j) of an edge
(i, j) ∈E. The probability to choose edge (i, j) is
p(i,j) = τ(i,j)
τ max with τ(i,j) + τ(i,k) = τ max and (i, j) ∈E1 ∧(i, k) ∈E0 .
(16)
Hence, an according production for the ﬁrst period of demand is planned and the calculation of a
feasible solution is guaranteed (Dellaert and Jeunet, 2000).
3.4.2
Heuristic information
Typically, ACO approaches from the literature additionally bias the selection probability of a compo-
nent (here, an edge (i, j) ∈E) via heuristic information. In the present case, however, the DMLULSP
is a distributed problem with asymmetric information which is solved by a mediator. Because the
mediator is neutral, he or she cannot take into account heuristic information that would depend on an
individual agent and therefore privilege (or penalize) this agent. For this reason, equation (16) does
without local heuristic information.
3.5
Collaborative local search heuristic
An encoded solution e constructed by an ant is improved by a collaborative local search heuristic (CLS,
cf. Alg. 2). In this heuristic, a move is only executed, if each agent a ∈A agrees. A move is deﬁned
as a bit shift, that is, for all i ∈I and all t ∈T, t > 1, the value of eit is shifted from zero to one or
one to zero, respectively. Each shift leads to new solution e′. The solution e′ is submitted to all agents
a ∈A. If and only if e′ has lower local costs fa(e′) compared to fa(e) for each agent a ∈A, the next
move is executed on e′ and so on.
In CACM (cf. Alg. 1), the counter of generated solutions s is increased by 1+m(n−1), as there are
m(n −1) possible moves and each move applied to a generated ant solutions leads to a new solution.
Furthermore, the ﬁnal solution e generated by CLS is in CACM again submitted to all agents. This
time, the agents compare e to the jointly accepted solution e∗and decide via voting, if e should become
the new jointly accepted solution e∗.
8

Algorithm 2: Collaborative local search
Input: encoded solution e, set of agents A
Output: possibly modiﬁed encoded solution e
foreach t ←2, . . . , n do
foreach i ←1, . . . , m do
e′ ←e
e′
it ←¬eit
// bit shift
s ←s + 1
veto ←false
foreach a ∈A do
// complete approval voting
if fa(e′) > fa(e) then veto ←true
// each agent a can veto e
end
if veto = false then e ←e′
end
end
return e
3.6
Distributed decision making by means of voting
3.6.1
Complete approval voting
In approval voting each agent can vote for as many candidate solutions in B as he or she wants
and the solution with the most approvals wins (Brams and Fishburn, 1978).
For the problem at
hand, a modiﬁed and restricted version of approval voting is used which is denoted by the term
complete approval voting. An encoded candidate solution e is only accepted as winner, if all agents
a ∈A approve e. Therefore, by accepting e, no agent increases his or her current local costs C∗
a, i. e.,
Ca(e) ≤C∗
a, ∀a ∈A. For complete approval voting, the ballot size is restricted to b = 1. Although
this voting rule is quite simple, it has not been used in the previous approaches of Homberger (2010,
2011) and Homberger and Gehring (2011).
3.6.2
Adapted Borda maximin voting rule
Each agent a ∈A ranks the candidate solutions e ∈B according to his or her preferences. A ranking
of e ∈B by agent a is given by ea
p ≻ea
p−1 ≻. . . ≻ea
1 where candidate solution ea
p is preferred most
by agent a and receives p points. Solution ea
p−1 is ranked second and receives p −1 points, candidate
solution ea
1 is preferred least and receives 1 point. Given all rankings by all agents a ∈A, the Borda
maximin rule selects that candidate solution e′ which maximizes the lowest number of points assigned
by an agent to a candidate solution.
Finally, the solution e′ identiﬁed by Borda voting is compared to the jointly accepted solution e∗by
means of complete approval voting. The winning solution becomes the new jointly accepted solution
e∗.
3.6.3
Rawls or minimax voting rule
The minimax voting rule, introduced by Rawls (1971), minimizes the maximum local cost of an agent.
In contrast to the voting rules Borda maximin and complete approval, the Rawls voting rule requires
the agents to reveal their local cost to the mediator. For each encoded candidate solution e ∈B each
agent a ∈A submits his or her local costs Ca(e) to the mediator,
e′ = min
e∈B max
a∈A {Ca(e)}.
(17)
9

Finally, the solution e′ identiﬁed by Rawls voting is compared to the jointly accepted solution e∗by
means of complete approval voting. The winning solution becomes the new jointly accepted solution
e∗.
3.7
Pheromone update
As the search advances, the pheromone information on each arc is continuously updated. First, the
pheromone τ(i,j) of an edge (i, j) ∈E evaporates by the evaporation rate ρ. Second, τ(i,j) is increased
again by στ max, if and only if edge (i, j) is part of the path chosen by an ant (that implies e∗
(i,j) = 1).
Furthermore, equation (18) takes into account the smallest and largest possible pheromone values τ min
and τ max, respectively.
τ(i,t) ←
(
min{(1 −ρ) · τ(i,j) + σ · τ max; τ max}
if e∗
(i,j) = 1,
max{(1 −ρ) · τ(i,j); τ min}
else.
(18)
In contrast to common approaches in the literature, the pheromone update rule (18) does not
consider the value of the objective function of a solution. In the distributed planning problem at hand,
the agents do not reveal their individual costs to the mediator (cf. Section 2) who controls the search
process and updates the pheromone values. Therefore, the pheromone update depends largely on the
encoded solution jointly accepted by the agents.
4
Evaluation
4.1
Setup of computational study
4.1.1
Goals
The metaheuristic CACM is evalauted by means of a computational benchmark study. Three goals are
pursued. First, the impact of the three voting rules from Sect. 3.6 is studied. Second, the eﬀect of the
new collaborative local search heuristic CLS from Sect. 3.5 is tested. Third, the performance of CACM
is compared to results from the literature, that is, to the best known solutions for the non-distributed
MLULSP and other heuristics for the distributed MLULSP.
4.1.2
Instances
All in all, 528 benchmark instances are used in this study1. Veral and LaForge (1985), Coleman and McKnew
(1991), and Dellaert and Jeunet (2000) introduced 176 instances for the non-distributed MLULSP. In
these instances, a single agent (|A| = 1) is responsible to produce all items and the instances are di-
vided into three groups of small, medium, and large instances denoted as s1, m1, and l1 (cf. Table 2).
Based on these MLULSP instances, Homberger (2010) introduced 176 instances were the items are
jointly produced by two agents (|A| = 2) and 176 instances were the items are jointly produced by ﬁve
agents (|A| = 5). Accordingly, these 352 DMLULSP instances are divided in six groups denoted as s2,
s5, m2, m5, l2, and l5 (cf. Table 2). In instance group s5, each agent produces the same number of
items, while in the remaining groups (s2, m2, m5, l2, and l5) this is not the case.
4.1.3
Measure of solution quality
In the following, the objective function value f(y) (10) of the DMLULSP is considered in the context of
the non-distributed MLULSP which is an approach suggested by Dudek and Stadtler (2005, 2007). For
a given instance, the computed solution y for the distributed MLULSP is compared to the best-known
solution ybk for the non-distributed MLULSP and the percentage gap G(y) is calculated as
1Instances are available at http://www.dmlulsp.com.
10

Table 2: Characteristics of used benchmark instances
class
group
|A|
m
n
no. of instances
s
s1
1
5
12
96
s2
2
5
12
96
s5
5
5
12
96
m
m1
1
40, 50
12, 24
40
m2
2
40, 50
12, 24
40
m5
5
40, 50
12, 24
40
l
l1
1
500
36, 52
40
l2
2
500
36, 52
40
l5
5
500
36, 52
40
Table 3: Parameter during evaluation of metaheuristic CACM
class s
class m
class l
τ min
1
1
1
τ max
100
1,000
1,500
ρ
5%
5%
5%
σ
5%
5%
5%
s
50,000
200,000
400,000
G(y) = f(y) −f nd(ybk)
f nd(ybk)
100.
(19)
The best-known values f nd(ybk) have been gathered from Dellaert and Jeunet (2000), Pitakaso et al.
(2007), Homberger (2008, 2010), and Xiao et al. (2011). For the instances in s1, the optimal solutions
are known.
4.1.4
Implementation and hardware
CACM was implemented in JAVA (JDK 1.6). The computational experiments were executed on a
Linux personal computer with Intel Core 2 Duo processor 1.83 GHz. To compare the heuristics in
Sect. 4.4, all experiments were executed on this computer.
4.1.5
Parameters
By means of a preliminary study, the parameters of CACM shown in Table 3 have been determined.
For all instances, the pheromone evaporation rate ρ, the pheromone intensiﬁcation factor σ, and the
minimum pheromone value τ min per edge are constant. Then again, the number of generated solutions
s and the maximum pheromone value τ max per edge grow with increasing instance size. The ballot
size b is evaluated together with the voting rules in the next section.
4.2
Eﬀect of voting rules and ballot size
The eﬀects of the Borda and Rawls voting rules on the performance of CACM are studied by means
of the benchmark instances from groups s2 and s5. Both voting rules are applied using ballot sizes b
of 1, 10, 20, and 100. The results are given in Table 4.
11

Table 4: Eﬀect of Borda and Rawls voting
Agents
Ballot size b
G
Borda
Rawls
|A| = 2
1
2.21
2.21
10
2.14
2.13
20
2.40
2.31
100
2.46
2.55
|A| = 5
1
8.31
8.31
10
8.78
8.98
20
8.62
9.21
100
9.22
9.41
Table 5: Eﬀect of collaborative local search.
Heuristic
G
s1
s2
s5
CLS
3.93
5.29
9.53
CACMex
1.65
4.96
9.15
CACM
0.07
2.21
8.31
The conﬁguration of Borda voting and Rawls voting with a ballot size of b = 1 results in equivalent
voting procedures and, therefore, leads to identical results (see Table 4). Especially in case of scenarios
with ﬁve agents, the results for the Borda voting rule are slightly better than the results for the Rawls
voting rule. However, in the ﬁve agents scenario, both voting rules lead to the best results for ballot
sizes of only one. For the two agent scenario, ballot sizes of one lead to the second best results. All in
all, both voting rules seem to result in higher total costs compared to the degenerated case (b = 1).
Therefore, the parameter ballot size b is set to one, that is, the function ’voting(B, A)’ in Alg. 1 is in
fact deactivated. The only voting mechanism applied is complete approval voting which is used during
collaborative local search. A positive side eﬀect of doing without Rawls and Borda voting is that no
local cost information have to be revealed (Rawls) and the opportunity of strategic bidding, which is
intrinsic in ranked based voting, is reduced (Borda).
4.3
Eﬀect of collaborative local search
In this test, the eﬀect of CLS is studied. The CACM approach including collaborative local search
(CLS, cf. Sect. 3.5) is compared with CACM excluding CLS. The latter is denoted as CACMex. As
described previously, only complete approval voting is used. Furthermore, CLS is used as stand-alone
heuristic which follows Alg. 1 without the ’constructEncodedSolution’ procedure. The initial encoded
solution e is set to the unit matrix.
The three variants are compared by means of the instances from groups s1, s2, and s5.
The
instances of s1 correspond to the non-distributed MLULSP for which optimal solutions are known.
Consequently, Table 5 depicts the average gap G with respect to the optimal MLULSP solution.
CACM solves 80 of 96 instances to optimality. For the remaining 16 instances, the average optimal-
ity gap is only 0.07 percent although CACM does not use heuristic information speciﬁc to the MLULSP
to control the search process. Furthermore, CACM outperforms the stand-alone CLS and CACMex
both in the non-distributed (s1) and distributed (s2, s5) scenario. Obviously, the combination of CLS
and CACMex increases the overall performance. Finally, Figure 3 shows exemplarily for an instance,
that the heuristic CACM converges faster than the heuristic CACMex.
12

0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
1,2
1,4
1,6
1,8
2
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
generated solutions  
gap in percent 
CACMex 
CACM 
Figure 3: Convergency of CACM and CACMex.
Table 6: Comparison of diﬀerent heuristics by means of average percentage gap G from best-known
non-distributed solutions.
Class s
Class m
Class l
ES
SA
ACO
CACM
ES
SA
ACO
CACM
ES
SA
ACO
CACM
|A| = 2
5.92
1.78
2.66
2.21
18.65
7.95
2.77
1.84
55.07
16.84
13.30
5.43
|A| = 5
18.66
3.18
7.63
8.31
55.38
16.55
8.18
7.74
95.93
46.38
23.79
5.17
4.4
Comparison with heuristics from the literature
CACM is compared to three approaches designed for the DMLUSLP denoted here as SA, ES, and ACO
which are based on the metaheuristics simulated annealing, evolutionary strategy, and ant colony opti-
mization, respectively. SA was introduced by (Homberger, 2010), ES is presented in Homberger (2011),
and ACO is discussed in (Homberger and Gehring, 2010, 2011). Some of these previous computational
experiments were repeated or broadened to take into account additional instances (see Section 4.1.4).
Table 6 shows the average gap G over 176 instances with two agents (classes s2,m2,l2) as well as over
176 instances with ﬁve agents (classes s5, m5, l5). The detailed results for medium and large instances
are given in Tables 7, 8, 9, and 10 in the appendix. Due to long runtimes Homberger and Gehring
(2010, 2011) compared their approach only by means of the medium sized instances of groups m2 and
m5.
The presented CACM approach signiﬁcantly improves the best known solutions for the medium
and large instances (see Table 6). For example, CACM reduces the average gap G of the large instances
with ﬁve agents (group l5) from 46 percent to only about 5 percent. In detail, CACM improves twenty-
nine out of forty m2 instances, twenty out of forty m5 instances, thirty-six out of forty l2 instances,
and forty out of forty l5 instances (see appendix, Tables 7, 8, 9, and 10). With respect to the classes
of small instances s2 and s5, CACM is the second best procedure.
13

5
Conclusions
A collaborative solution approach based on the metaheuristic ant colony optimization was presented.
It is used to coordinate joint production planning of a coalition of self-interested decision makers
with asymmetric information. The search process is executed by a mediator who is not aware of the
agents local costs.
Furthermore, the agents do not have to reveal private cost information during
search. Nevertheless, to control the search process, the mediator tries to elicit preferences by means of
voting and a new collaborative local search procedure. The results are used to update the pheromone
information which guide the solution construction process. Solutions are constructed by means of a new
graph structure based on encoded solutions which is less complicated and therefore easier to search.
The new approach CACM is evaluated by means of 356 benchmark instances from the literature and
outperforms all existing distributed planning approaches on the sets of medium and large instances.
For future research, it appears interesting to study collaborative lot sizing problems with a non-
disjunct assignment of items to agents. This would increase potential planning conﬂicts between the
agents and opens up interesting challenges for developing collaborative planning metaheuristics.
