Task Allocation in Robotic Swarms: Explicit
Communication Based Approaches
Aryo Jamshidpey1 and Mohsen Afsharchi2
1 Institute for Advanced Studies in Basic Sciences

2 Department of Computer Science, University of Zanjan

Abstract. In this paper we study multi robot cooperative task alloca-
tion issue in a situation where a swarm of robots is deployed in a conﬁned
unknown environment where the number of colored spots which repre-
sent tasks and the ratios of them are unknown. The robots should cover
this spots as far as possible to do cleaning and sampling actions desir-
ably. It means that they should discover the spots cooperatively and
spread proportional to the spots area and avoid from remaining idle. We
proposed 4 self-organized distributed methods which are called hybrid
methods for coping with this scenario. In two diﬀerent experiments the
performance of the methods is analyzed. We compared them with each
other and investigated their scalability and robustness in term of single
point of failure.
1
Introduction
Swarm robotics is a branch of robotic science which is inspired by social in-
sects and other nature colonies that show complex behavior although they have
simple members. Deﬁning the roles of robots in society is one of the most im-
portant problems for simulating such behaviors. The action of assigning tasks
to agents for performing is called task allocation. Tasks are dependent to global
mission. If robots perform their tasks eﬀectively this mission is performed ef-
fectively too. From a control architectural perspective Burger [3] distinguishes
between Heteronomous, Autonomous and Hybrid methods in task allocation. In
this paper, we introduce a practical scenario for the issue of task allocation in
swarm robotics and 4 hybrid methods for solving it in unknown environments
which, the number, locations and ratios of tasks are unknown to robots.
Market-based mechanism is one of the main approaches that tackle the task
allocation problem. TraderBots is one of the works in this subject that is pre-
sented by Dias [6]. In TraderBots the robots bid on tasks on the basis of cost and
it is given to a bidder with lowest cost. A comprehensive study of market-based
multi-robot coordination can be found in [7]. Most solutions in self-organized task
allocation is threshold-based that are inspired by models initially proposed to de-
scribe the behavior of insect societies [1]. In this case we can mention Krieger and
arXiv:1503.00237v1  [cs.MA]  1 Mar 2015

2
Aryo Jamshidpey and Mohsen Afsharchi
Billeter work [9] which beneﬁts from a simple threshold-based model for task allo-
cation in a foraging scenario.Labella et al. [10] and Lui et al. [11,12] proposed two
probabilistic task allocation approaches which use adaptive thresholds.Brutschy
et al. in[2] presented a task allocation strategy in which robots specialize to per-
form tasks in the environment in a self-organized. Jones and Mataric [8] intro-
duced an adaptive distributed autonomous task allocation method for identical
robots. In this work a task allocation is called desirable in which the ratio of
robots that doing the same kind of task equal with the ratio of that task in the
environment. Dahl et al. [4] proposed a method that controls the group dynamics
of task allocation. In this work each robot can choose between two separated for-
aging cycles. Nouyan et al [13] presented autonomous rule-based task allocation
method in which robots attempting to identify and transfer a food to the nest
by using a set of rules and forming a chain in a self-organized way. Dasgupta [5]
presented a communication-based method for task allocation. Each task needs
multiple robots to be done. Robots can only partially complete tasks and one
after the other contribute to progressing them. Our proposed practical scenario
like Dasgupta’s one is about unknown environments. The discussion part is ded-
icated for comparing these scenarios and their solutions and also stating their
diﬀerences.
2
Problem Deﬁnition
This scenario involves a colony of identical robots with limited energy levels that
are rechargeable and an environment full of obstacles and colored spots which
represent types of tasks.The individuals are unaware of the size of the population
and the distribution of other robots.At any moment, each robot is able to do
only one of the forage for green or forage for black subtasks.Depending on the
area of the spots, the number of robots to do cleaning and sampling actions in
them varies. Obviously it is not necessary to ﬁll the whole capacity of spots with
robots. Even a robot is able to do cleaning and sampling actions on its own but
it takes much time and less desirable.In abstract the scenario can be deﬁned
in terms of ﬁnding more colored spots with minimal energy waste. One of the
causes of this waste is unnecessary robot turns in the environment.Also there
are some other reasons for energy waste such as maximum spreading of robots
in diﬀerent spots proportional to their area, avoiding robots from collision with
obstacles and ﬁnally preventing active robots from remaining idle.
3
Methods
In all proposed methods the robots are initially in random places. In each method
the energy level of each robot is divided into three parts. First part is for foraging.
Second part is to do cleaning and sampling actions and the third part is dedicated
for returning to the charging station, either nest or any other speciﬁed location.
All methods are organized based on transferring messages and all messages have
the same structure. Each message may have several rows that each of them

Task Allocation in Robotic Swarms
3
presents a distinct spots information. Information of each spot consists of 10
features which are as follows: A row is occupied or not, that is shown by 1 or
0 similarly. X, Y and Z coordinate of the current position of the robot in the
desired environment, which is calculated via GPS. The total capacity of the
existing spots (Number of robots required to do cleaning and sampling actions
in spots, which vary depending on the area of the discovered spot). The current
number of robots deployed in the desired spot. The number of robots needed
to complete the spot capacity. The number of hops (In order to estimate the
number of robots that have been informed of the discovered spot and to identify
the spots which expose to saturation and starvation). Time elapsed from the
beginning of the running of the code and ﬁnally color of the discovered spot
which are conventionally denoted by numbers (for example in our simple scenario
black and green are denoted by 0 and 1 respectively).
Message updating procedure is the same in all of proposed methods. Every
robot has a message that contains information about the spots, called private
message. This message is empty at ﬁrst and then updated via occurrence of two
diﬀerent events. First when a robot ﬁnds a non-observed spot for the ﬁrst time,
and second when it receives a message from one of its neighbors:
1.when a robot explores a non-seen spot for the ﬁrst time, it starts to calculate
the center of spot and also its area, computes its capacity based on the area and
calculate other features of message based on a pre-deﬁned rule. It should be
considered that if a robot entered a spot under the guidance of another robot,
it would subtract the number of required robot ﬁeld by one, add one unit to the
number of existing robots ﬁeld and then set the current time as the row time
ﬁeld.
2. In this situation two diﬀerent tasks may exist for the receiver to do, one
is to add non existing rows to its message. The order of the updated message
is the same as sender’s one and in every new row, hop count will be increased
by one. The other task is to replace existing rows according to the time ﬁeld. If
the row associated with a speciﬁc spot that exists in both private and received
messages has greater time ﬁeld in the received message, then it will be replaced
in the private message.
3.1
Static communication based method
This method is a hybrid method combining the autonomous and distributed
methods [3]. At the beginning, one of the two subtasks of exploring for green
or black spot is assigned to each robot which is called worker statically (With a
probability of 0.5). Static means that the assigned task will not change unless
the robot runs out of its searching energy.Each robot moves in the environment
by random walk and prevents collision with other robots, obstacles and walls
by the help of its distance computing sensors. Each robot updates its private
message periodically and ﬂoods it to every other robot in the coverage area of
its radio frequency transmitter. By this process, messages will propagate among
the robots (either deployed or searcher robots). If a robot could not ﬁnd a match
(a spot with the same color of its associated subtask color) before running out

4
Aryo Jamshidpey and Mohsen Afsharchi
its searching energy, it would go to one of the spots in its private message. By
having this policy, our goals for preventing idle robots existence, maximum spot
coverage and also preventing spot starvation will be guaranteed in a desirable
level.
The use of desirable word is due to the energy limitation and also the heuristic
sense of the scenario. Therefore we proposed a method for trap prevention by
partitioning robot energy and then searching the environment for the best spot
while some amount of energy exists and also the robot reaches the best possible
spot (the ﬁrst seen spot by a robot is not necessarily the best spot for it, so it
will search for a suitable spot until it runs out of searching energy). At the end
the robot reaches the decision step that is as follow:
Appropriate spot selection decision making. One of the advantages of the
proposed method is the way it decides to walk to the most appropriate spot.
As the searching energy of one robot reaches its threshold, the robot starts the
decision making step. At this time the robot should sort its private message
based on three ﬁelds; color, hop count and its current distance from the spots.
At ﬁrst this sort is done based on color ﬁeld, so that spots with the same color
as the robot current state will be placed at the top. Now the sorted list has two
parts, one for the same colors as the subtask color and another for opposite colors
to it. Then these lists are sorted based on the hop ﬁeld. Each sorted list then will
be categorized according to sets of 5 hops (number of hops per category should
be set based on the spots area and count in the environment). The reason for
using this parameter is to prevent spot starvation and saturation. When a robot
ﬁnds out that the hop count of a spot is large, it estimates that at most one less
than the hop count robots are aware and can reach the spot before it. Hence the
robot considers the spot may get saturated. Robots prefer to go to spots with
low hop number to prevent starvation. In the third step the sorted list based on
color and hop count will be further sorted based on Euclidean distance. So in
each hop category, spots are sorted based on their distance from the robot.
If a robot in its decision step observes a spot with the same color of its
assigned color while transferring to its appropriate spot, it will explore the spots
features. If the spot is suitable for the robot and if saturation will not occur,
current spot will be accepted by the robot and necessary updates will be done. It
is possible that before a robot reaches to its highest priority spot, the capacity of
that becomes full. In this case the robot will be aware of this occurrence by the
messages received from other deployed robots in that spot. It will leave the spot
and will begin to make another decision from its private list. We can consider
an integer threshold in such cases. Robots will try to make decision until the
threshold. If a robot cannot ﬁnd a suitable spot in its decision step before the
threshold, it will return to home or the nearest charge station to be recharged
and then starts to search again. The state diagram of the robots controller while
using this method is shown in ﬁgure 1.

Task Allocation in Robotic Swarms
5
Fig. 1. Method1 and Method 2 (by considering the dark green state which is shown
by dashed border) state diagram.
3.2
Dynamic communication based method
This method (ﬁgure 1) is similar to the ﬁrst method in a way that it supports
dynamic task allocation in such a way that the robot will change its target color
probabilistically after a time step. For example consider that a robot has 4 spots
in its private list after 100 iterations containing 1 black and 3 green. Then the
robot will set its target color to black by probability
and also will set it to
green by probability . This is why we expect this method to be better than
the previous one, because in this method the searching time for each robot to
ﬁnd the appropriate spot may be decreased. if the robots are not distributed
uniformly in the environment at the beginning, it is possible that some spots
are not discovered after a small time steps (100 time steps). This is due to their
large distances from the initial places of the robots and also attitude changing
mechanism of the robots.
3.3
Decentralized Chapar Method
In this method we have some radio turrets called Chapar stations which are used
for radio communications and also we assume two groups of robots; workers (as
deﬁned in the previously explained methods) and Chapars that transfer messages
between workers and Chapar stations. ”Chapar Khaneh” or ”Chapar-Khaneh” is
a term in Persian, meaning the ”house of courier” as ”Chapar” means ”courier”,
referring to the postal service used during the Achaemenid era [14]. Here we
used Chapar station instead of Chapar-khaneh.
High speed robots with simple structure are considered as Chapars. Chapars
ﬂood their updated private message that is modiﬁed by some workers to the area
of their radio frequency coverage. Once a Chapar realizes a new row in its private
message (showing that a new spot has been discovered) it quickly goes to the
nearest Chapar station and sends its private message to it and also updates the

6
Aryo Jamshidpey and Mohsen Afsharchi
Fig. 2. Left: Method 4 State Diagram, Right: Method 3 State dDiagram.
message based on the content of the messages sent by the Chapar stations. In
addition each Chapar goes to the nearest Chapar station periodically (e.g. each
100 time steps) to update its private message and access to the most recently
information about the status of the spots.
Chapar stations are also in the coverage of each other and so they replicate
messages to keep the whole system up to date. In the simplest variation of this
model, there could be only one Chapar station whit limited coverage area. To
achieve high performance with the lowest cost, this method needs to coordinate
Chapar stations in a manner that their communication radiuses cover each other
sequentially. Although this method has a higher message transfer speed with
respect to the ﬁrst and second methods, but it needs radio frequency transmitters
with higher coverage area and also in large environments it needs more Chapar
stations. Nevertheless, this method can perform ﬁne even if Chapar stations
are not in the coverage area of each other. In this situation the messages may
not be similar in all Chapar stations but we can assume the environment as
some sub-environments each with a single Chapar station that can transform
messages with high speed. In a timely manner the information of one area may
be transferred to another area by Chapars. The state diagram of the Chapars
controller while using this method is shown in ﬁgure 2.
3.4
Centralized Chapar Method
This method (ﬁgure 2) is similar to the decentralized one in which there is
only one Chapar station that covers the entire environment. In this, method
Chapars have a single task to transfer messages from robots to the Chapar
station and they do it once they realize a new row in their private messages.
When the Chapar station receives a message that is not similar to its private
message, it updates the private message and sends it to all robots. To prevent
the Chapar station from single point of failure, in addition to message updating
by Chapars, they should transfer message in the environment quickly. In spite
of the centralized method, each Chapars only goes to the Chapar station when

Task Allocation in Robotic Swarms
7
it encounters a new spot in its private message. It should be reminded that the
robots used in the third and fourth methods, have the same behavior as the
robots that were used for one of the ﬁrst or second method (optionally) and as
explained before, their behavior are the same as one of them.
4
Simulations
We have used e-puck robots in simulations which are extended by color detection
Infrared sensors, positioning module, compass and limited-range radio waves
emitter and receiver. Since the purpose of this article is to involve a wide range of
robots and the use of simpler hardware, we considered them without any camera.
In this way the methods can show their power in using of blind robots. All
experiments have been implemented in a 3m x 3m square environment enclosed
with walls by using of Webots as robotic simulation software. In two general
experiments, performance of the four proposed methods is evaluated individually
before and after energy consumption and in both of them 10 robots which are
called workers with IDs from 1 to 10 are used. Initially foraging mode of the
robots with IDs from 1 to 5 is adjusted to green and the robots with IDs from
6 to 10 is adjusted to black.
Further more, the speed of each method is determined by its foraging(searching)
energy threshold, hence setting the threshold is very important. It should not be
so low that the robot does not have enough time for foraging and also it should
not be so high that robots use their whole energy without any success or much
of it which in this case its performance will be reduced when it deploys in a
spot. Some factors such as area of environment, ratios of tasks, density of tasks
and the number of robots can help us to determine an appropriate value for this
parameter. In all of our experiments, the energy threshold level is considered as
250 iterates of each robots control code.
For simplicity, the details of cleaning and sampling operations are ignored,
the colored spots are considered as 30cm x 30cm squares and ﬁnally the length
of each robots communication radius is considered larger than the diameter of
each colored square. In both experiments, for each 300 square centimeters of
each spot one worker is suﬃcient for covering it desirably, which means that all
spots are covered desirably with 3 workers. Indeed as mentioned previously, with
less number of workers spot covering is also possible, but with lower speed.
4.1
First experiment: performance evaluation of proposed methods
before the threshold energy
Since the third and fourth methods use the worker robot which its controller is
that of the ﬁrst or second method, it is not necessary to compare the performance
of all methods before foraging energy consumption (before the threshold).So we
have compared only the performance of the ﬁrst and second methods before the
threshold. For this purpose four environments covered by green and black spots
and also containing obstacles are considered. The ﬁrst environment has 3 green

8
Aryo Jamshidpey and Mohsen Afsharchi
Fig. 3. Right: Average number of successful robots before the threshold. Left:Average
number of discovered spots.
spots and 3 black ones, the second has 4 green spots and 2 black ones, the third
includes 5 green spots and 1 black ones and ﬁnally the fourth contains only 6
green spots. In each of the four areas, both the ﬁrst and second methods are
tested 10 times separately. The average number of successful robots before the
energy threshold for the ﬁst and second methods is shown in ﬁgure 3 (right).
It can be seen that, except for the ﬁrst environment in which the average
number of successful robots before the threshold are equal for both methods,
in other environments, the average number of successful robots in the second
method is higher than the ﬁrst one. This disparity grows by moving from the
ﬁrst environment to the fourth and its reason is the changing attitude mechanism
which is used by second method’s robots during their foraging operation. As
a result this leads to increasing in the number of robots which their attitude
changes when the number of green spots rise and the number of black ones
falls respectively. Subsequently this process will result in forming approximate
stability in the number of successful robots before the threshold. As it is shown
in ﬁgure 3 (right), we can conclude that in unknown environments where the
number of colored spots (black and green in our example) and the ratios of them
are unknown, the second method is more successful than the ﬁrst one in terms
of the robots’ attempts in ﬁnding spots by themselves before energy threshold.
In the next step the average number of green spots that have been found by
workers(by both the ﬁrst and the second methods) before the threshold is shown
in ﬁgure 3 (left). In this ﬁgure the obtained curve from the second method is
steeper than the ﬁrst methods one. Its primary reason is increasing the number
of green spots and decreasing the black ones which results in increasing the
probability of ﬁnding new green spots in both methods. But the reason that the
second methods curve is more steeper, is increasing of the number of workers
which search for green spots during the search time. As mentioned before this
is because of changing the robots attitudes during foraging operations. Figure 3
(left) shows that in unknown environments where the number of colored spots
(black and green in our example) and their ratios are unknown, the second

Task Allocation in Robotic Swarms
9
method is more successful than the ﬁrst one in spot ﬁnding before the energy
threshold.
Figure 4 (right) shows the average number of robots deployed in the green
spots before the end of the foraging energy in both the ﬁrst and second methods.
It can be observed that the steepness of the second methods curve is ascending
linear but the steepness of the ﬁrst methods curve is sub linear. In the ﬁrst
method the maximum number of robots in green spots is 5 because only 5
robots have green initial foraging modes and there is no any changing attitude
mechanism before threshold. But in the second method there is changing attitude
mechanism and so the maximum number of robots in green spots might be 10
and this means the whole colony. We can conclude that in unknown environments
where the number of colored spots (black and green in our example) and the
ratios of them are unknown, adaptability has a signiﬁcant positive impact on
the performance of robots. As it can be observed, the second method is more
successful than the ﬁrst one in the average number of robots which have deployed
in the green spots before the threshold. To sum up, from the above results in
unknown environments with the features which are mentioned above, the second
method is more eﬃcient than the ﬁrst one before the energy threshold.
4.2
Second experiment: performance evaluation of proposed
methods after the threshold energy
We use an environment consisting of 3 green spots and 3 black ones for evaluat-
ing the performance of the methods after foraging energy consumption. In this
area, all proposed methods are separately tested 10 times with random initial
distribution of robots. In the third and fourth methods, in addition to 10 workers,
another 3 Chapar robots that are faster than the workers are used too. It should
be mentioned about Chapar station that the third method is equipped with 3
Chapar stations which their communication radius cover each other sequentially
and the fourth method is equipped with one of them, which is omniscient. Figure
4 (left) shows the results of the second experiment in abstract. The absorption
percentage is the percentage of successfulness of ﬁnding spots by robots after
the threshold by applying the decision making mechanism.
As expected, the fourth method has the highest absorption percentage which
means 100%. This is due to the use of global message transferring system. The
third method is in second place with 87.09% and after it the ﬁrst and the second
methods with approximate absorption 76% are both in third place. It should be
reminded that both of the ﬁrst and second methods have the same communi-
cation mechanism. Higher speed in communicating will lead to making a better
task selection based on their colors, distances and number of hops by unsuccess-
ful workers. It results in a better robot distribution that reduces saturation and
starvation as far as possible. It also causes more unsuccessful robots attract to
the spots.

10
Aryo Jamshidpey and Mohsen Afsharchi
5
Discussion
Most studies in swarm robotic deﬁne their own test scenario, which is then
used to build a concrete swarm robotic system capable of solving the problem.
This leads to a huge amount of diﬀerently designed global missions and as a
result to many diﬀerent solutions which are hard to compare[3]. Thus in most of
the proposed methods in this area, researchers have only introduced their own
methods and refrained from comparing with other methods. Our scenario also
possesses diﬀerent features, goals and ﬁnally distinct global foraging mission
compared to previous scenarios in task allocation ﬁeld. Accordingly applying
current approaches in our scenario and consequently comparing them with each
other is so diﬃcult and in most of the times is impossible, except for changing the
scenario which in turn leads to changing both the problem and the solutions. As
pointed out before, Dasgupta‘s method is practical for unknown environments
with this diﬀerence that its global mission is diﬀerent from what have been
proposed here. However our proposed methods have distinct advantageous over
Dasgupta’s.
The proposed methods have the least waste time for robots as apposed to
that of Dasgupta in which, robots might be idle in environment for a long time.
These methods have been designed for the energy constrained scenario compared
to Dasgupta’s. Consequently the priority of discovering new spots is higher than
accomplishing a task and then continuing unlimited foraging. Further more in
contrast with Dasgupta’s method(which robots may be in idle mode for a long
time) our methods are close to optimal in the sense of idle mode.
On the other hand, our approaches are very practical for scenarios which
detecting a task should be done in a limited time. However in Dasgupta’s ap-
proach, since after detecting a task other neighbor robots quit foraging and wait
for accomplishing the task sequentially, the probability of identifying other tasks
in a limited time will decrease. Moreover the proposed methods in this paper are
practical for blind robots while Dasgupta’s method is practical for robots with
cameras which ignoring use of them obviously reduces cost in swarm robotics.
Also there is no more need to apply sophisticated techniques of machine vision
in order to determine starvation (which may have some errors).
5.1
Scalability and Robustness in term of single point of failure
In this section, we will analyze the scalability and robustness of the proposed
methods with respect to their eﬃciency. If by adding or removing robots the
performance of a method drops oﬀ, we will call it unscalable. Accordingly, both
the ﬁrst and second methods are scalable because both are distributed, au-
tonomous and based on the local communication. So Adding or removing robots
will maintain their eﬀectiveness. The decentralized Chapar method also has scal-
ability property. This is due to using of the limited range Chapar station, the
worker robots and the Chapar robots that are distributed and behave locally.
But the centralized Chapar method, due to using of omniscient Chapar station
with respect to its expected eﬃciency does not have scalability property.

Task Allocation in Robotic Swarms
11
Fig. 4. Left:Results for the second experiment.Right:Average number of robots de-
ployed in green spots.
With respect to robustness, the ﬁrst and second methods are completely
robust against single point of failure because they behave in a distributed and
autonomous manner. If a robot fails outside a spot, others will consider it as an
obstacle. If it fails inside a spot and before announcing the center of it, there is
no problem because it looks like the situation in which the spot is not discovered
yet. But if it fails after the center announcement, it causes only decreasing in
speed of the operations in the spot, because they can be carried out by other
active robots on the spot yet.
The third method is less robust. The strength of the method for worker
robots is such as the ﬁrst and second methods. In the case of Chapar robots
failures, there will be not any problem because in the worst case the speed of
communication will be reduced and other robots largely compensate this loss.
But about Chapar station as we have mentioned previously in describing the
method to beneﬁt the high-speed informing relative to the cost, it is necessary
that their communication radius cover each other sequentially. Thus, if one of
Chapar stations fails, the connection between two parts of the environment will
be lost. Of course this problem can be solved by putting more than two Cha-
par stations in their each other communication ranges, but in this way costs
will increase. It can be said that this method is robust against single point of
failure. But this robustness is less than the ﬁrst two methods (with respect to
maintaining the eﬃciency of the method). Centralized Chapar method has the
lowest robustness than the previous three methods because this method is only
have a wide range Chapar station. So if this Chapar station fails for any reason,
the eﬃciency of the method will be reduced so much.
6
Conclusions
In this paper a new practical scenario in swarm robotics is presented which is
about task allocation in unknown environments. Here we consider that there

12
Aryo Jamshidpey and Mohsen Afsharchi
is limited source of energy for each Robot. It is pointed out that energy man-
agement in the form of a 3 level structure is essential and four self-organized
threshold-based methods are proposed for solving the scenario.
Moreover, in two general experiments, the performance of them is analyzed.
From the results of simulations we can conclude that the second method is
more eﬃcient in comparison to the ﬁrst one before the threshold and so the
performance of the third and the fourth methods will increase by applying it
as their worker robot’s algorithm. However, since the methods are using similar
communication mechanisms, they have almost the same performance after the
threshold.
As a result, from performance point of view, the fourth method has the
highest performance, followed by the third method which in turn, has higher
rank than the two others. The second method also is better than the ﬁrst one
in this criteria. On the other hand, from scalability and robustness perspective,
both ﬁrst and second methods have higher rank than the two others and further
more the third method has higher rank than the fourth.
