arXiv:1001.0820v1  [cs.AI]  6 Jan 2010
1
Abstract Answer Set Solvers with Backjumping
and Learning
(long version)
YULIYA LIERLER
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
1 University Station C0500
Taylor Hall 2.124
Austin, USA

Abstract
Nieuwenhuis, Oliveras, and Tinelli (2006) showed how to describe enhancements of the
Davis-Putnam-Logemann-Loveland algorithm using transition systems, instead of pseu-
docode. We design a similar framework for several algorithms that generate answer sets
for logic programs: smodels, smodelscc, asp-sat with Learning (cmodels), and a newly
designed and implemented algorithm sup. This approach to describing answer set solvers
makes it easier to prove their correctness, to compare them, and to design new systems.
KEYWORDS: answer set programming, inference, learning
1 Introduction
Answer Set Programming (ASP) is a methodology commonly used for solving com-
binatorial search problems (Lifschitz 2008). In the development of ASP solvers,
computational ideas behind SAT solvers (Gomes et al. 2008) play an important
role. Inﬂuence of SAT solvers development on ASP systems is twofold. On the one
hand, such ASP solvers as assat1 and cmodels2 follow the so called SAT-based
approach where a SAT solver is invoked for search, possibly multiple times. On
the other hand, “native” ASP solvers that implement search procedures speciﬁcally
suited for logic programs often adopt computational techniques from SAT solvers.
For instance, dlv3 implements backjumping (Ricca et al. 2006), and smodelscc4 (Ward and Schlipf 2004)
extends the answer set solver smodels5 by introducing restarts, conﬂict-driven
1 http://assat.cs.ust.hk/ .
2 http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/tag/cmodels .
3 http://www.dbai.tuwien.ac.at/proj/dlv/ .
4 http://www.nku.edu/∼wardj1/Research/smodels cc.html .
5 http://www.tcs.hut.fi/Software/smodels/ .

2
Y. Lierler
backjumping, learning, and forgetting – techniques widely used in SAT solvers.
The ASP solver sup6 (Lierler 2008) implements these features also.
In this paper our main goal is to show how the “abstract” approach to describ-
ing SAT solvers proposed in (Nieuwenhuis et al. 2006) can be extended to ASP
solvers that use these sophisticated features. Usually computation procedures are
described in terms of pseudocode. In (Nieuwenhuis et al. 2006), the authors pro-
posed an alternative approach to describing dpll-like procedures. They introduced
an abstract framework that captures what ”states of computation” are, and what
transitions between states are allowed. In this way, it deﬁnes a directed graph such
that every execution of the dpll procedure corresponds to a path in this graph.
Some edges may correspond to unit propagation steps, some to branching, some to
backtracking. This allows the authors to model a dpll-like algorithm by a mathe-
matically simple and elegant object, graph, rather than a collection of pseudocode
statements. In (Lierler 2008), we extended this framework for describing such ASP
algorithms as smodels, asp-sat with Backtracking, and sup without Learning. In
this paper, we expand our previous work on abstract answer set solvers to cover
such features as backjumping and learning (and also forgetting and restart). We
start by introducing an abstract framework that captures a general mechanism of
these sophisticated features in ASP solvers. For instance, this framework provides
the transition underlying the process of learning a clause, but it does not suggest
which clause shall be learned. Similarly, it provides a general description of back-
jumping but it does not supply the means for computing a “backjump clause”
necessary for an answer set solver to perform backjumping. We then enhance this
abstract framework to capture enough information about a state of computation
for deriving a backjump clause.
Usually, dpll-like procedures implement conﬂict-driven backjumping and learn-
ing where a particular learning schema such as, for instance, Decision or Firs-
tUIP (Mitchell 2005) is applied for computing a special kind of a backjump clause.
There are two common methods for describing a backjump clause construction.
One employs the implication graph (Marques-Silva and Sakallah 1996) and the
other employs resolution (Mitchell 2005). Ward and Schlipf (2004) extended the
notion of an implication graph to the smodels algorithm. They then deﬁned an
algorithm for computing FirstUIP backjump clauses utilized by smodelscc to im-
plement conﬂict-driven backjumping and learning. In this paper we introduce the
algorithms BackjumpClause and BackjumpClauseFirstUIP based on resolution and
the enhanced abstract framework that compute Decision and FirstUIP7 backjump
clauses respectively.
In (Lierler 2008), we introduced the basic algorithm underlining the system sup
but neglected some of its features: conﬂict-driven backjumping, learning, forgetting,
and restarts. Here we account for these techniques and use an abstract framework
designed in this paper for describing system sup. We emphasize that the work
on this abstract framework helped us to develop ASP solver sup, to incorporate
6 http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/tag/sup .
7 The names of the backjump clauses follow (Mitchell 2005).

Abstract Answer Set Solvers with Backjumping and Learning
(long version) 3
learning into its algorithm, and to prove its correctness. We analyzed performance
of sup against such answer set solvers as cmodels, smodels, smodelscc, and
clasp8. Overall, sup performs well against these rival systems.
We start the paper with Section 2 that reviews the abstract DPLL framework
introduced in (Nieuwenhuis et al. 2006) and some logic programming concepts. In
Section 3, we deﬁne a graph representing the application of the algorithm for ﬁnding
supporting models of a logic program. This paves the way to deﬁning a graph rep-
resenting the application of the smodels algorithm to a program in Section 4. Sec-
tion 4.2 elaborates on the relationship between previously deﬁned abstract frame-
works. Section 5 extends the abstract DPLL framework by introducing an addi-
tional inference rule so that the generate and test algorithm of the SAT-based ASP
system cmodels may be characterized by this graph. In Section 6, we review the
abstract framework that describes DPLL enhanced by backjumping and learning.
In Section 7, we deﬁne a general abstract framework for describing ASP algorithms
that implement such phenomena as backjumping and learning. In Section 7.2 we
describe the algorithms of systems smodelscc and sup by means of this framework.
In Section 8 we extend the abstract generate and test framework to accommodate
backjumping and learning, and in Section 8.2 we use these ﬁndings to describe the
cmodels algorithm. Section 9 extends the framework to capture additional infor-
mation about a computation state of a solver, states the correctness results, and
describes how the frameworks are related to each other. Section 10 provides the
proofs for these results. In Section 10.3 and 11 we introduce the algorithms based
on the extended framework for computing a backjump clause that are important in
implementing conﬂict-driven backjumping and learning. In Section 12 we introduce
the concept of an extended graph for the generate and test abstract framework and
state the correctness results. Section 13 provides the proofs for these results. At last,
in Section 14 we provide the experimental analysis that compares performance of
sup with other answer set solvers.
2 Review: Abstract DPLL and Logic Programs
2.1 Abstract Classical DPLL
For a set σ of atoms, a record M relative to σ is a list of literals over σ where
(i) some literals in M are annotated by ∆that marks them as decision literals,
(ii) M contains no repetitions.
The concatenation of two such lists is denoted by juxtaposition. Frequently, we
consider a record as a set of literals, ignoring both the annotations and the or-
der between its elements. A literal l is unassigned by a record if neither l nor its
complement l belongs to it.
8 http://www.cs.uni-potsdam.de/clasp/ .

4
Y. Lierler
Unit Propagate:
M =⇒M l if
 C ∨l ∈F and
C ⊆M
Decide:
M =⇒M l ∆if
 M is consistent and
l is unassigned by M
Fail:
M =⇒FailState if
 M is inconsistent and
M contains no decision literals
Backtrack:
P l ∆Q =⇒P l if
 P l ∆Q is inconsistent, and
Q contains no decision literals
Fig. 1. The transition rules of the graph dpF.
A state relative to σ is either a distinguished state FailState or a record relative
to σ. For instance, the states relative to a singleton set {a} of atoms are
FailState,
∅,
a, ¬a,
a∆,
¬a∆, a¬a,
a∆¬a,
a¬a∆,
a∆¬a∆, ¬aa,
¬a∆a,
¬aa∆,
¬a∆a∆,
where by ∅we denote the empty list.
If C is a disjunction (conjunction) of literals then by C we understand the con-
junction (disjunction) of the complements of the literals occurring in C. We will
sometimes identify C with the multi-set of its elements.
For any CNF formula F (a ﬁnite set of clauses), we will deﬁne its DPLL graph
dpF. The nodes of dpF are the states relative to the set of atoms occurring in F.
We use the terms “state” and “node” interchangeably. Recall that a node is called
terminal in a graph if there is no edge leaving this node in the graph. If a state is
consistent and complete then it represents a truth assignment for F.
The set of edges of dpF is described by a set of “transition rules.” Each transition
rule is an expression M =⇒M ′ followed by a condition, where M and M ′ are nodes
of dpF. Whenever the condition is satisﬁed, the graph contains an edge from node M
to M ′. Generally, an edge in the graph may be justiﬁed by several transition rules.
Figure 1 presents four transition rules that characterize the edges of dpF.
This graph can be used for deciding the satisﬁability of a formula F simply
by constructing an arbitrary path leading from node ∅until a terminal node M
is reached. The following proposition shows that this process always terminates,
that F is unsatisﬁable if M is FailState, and that M is a model of F otherwise.
Proposition 1
For any CNF formula F,
(a) graph dpF is ﬁnite and acyclic,

Abstract Answer Set Solvers with Backjumping and Learning
(long version) 5
(b) any terminal state of dpF other than FailState is a model of F,
(c) FailState is reachable from ∅in dpF if and only if F is unsatisﬁable.
For instance, let F be the set consisting of the clauses
a ∨b
¬a ∨c.
Here is a path in dpF:
∅
=⇒(Decide)
a∆
=⇒(Unit Propagate)
a∆c
=⇒(Decide)
a∆cb∆
(1)
The name of the transition rule after each =⇒shows which rule justiﬁes the presence
of this edge in the graph. Since the state a∆cb∆is terminal, Proposition 1(b)
asserts that {a, c, b} is a model of F. Here is another path in dpF from ∅to the
same terminal node:
∅
=⇒(Decide)
a∆
=⇒(Decide)
a∆¬c∆
=⇒(Unit Propagate)
a∆¬c∆c
=⇒(Backtrack)
a∆c
=⇒(Decide)
a∆cb∆
(2)
Path (1) corresponds to an execution of dpll in the sense of (Davis et al. 1962);
path (2) does not, because it applies Decide to a∆even though Unit Propagate
could be applied in this state.
Note that the graph dpF is a modiﬁcation of the classical DPLL graph deﬁned
in (Nieuwenhuis et al. 2006, Section 2.3). It is diﬀerent in three ways. First, its
states are pairs M ||F for all CNF formulas F. For the purposes of this section,
it is not necessary to include F. Second, the description of the classical DPLL
graph involves a “PureLiteral” transition rule. We dropped this rule because it
does not correspond to any of the propagation rules used in answer set solvers
whose algorithms we will model in this paper. Third, in the deﬁnition of that
graph, each M is required to be consistent. In case of DPLL, due to the simple
structure of a clause, it is possible to characterize the applicability of Backtrack in
a simple manner: when some of the clauses become inconsistent with the current
partial assignment, Backtrack is applicable. In ASP, it is not easy to describe the
applicability of Backtrack if only consistent states are taken into account.
We
introduced inconsistent states in the graph dpF to facilitate our work on extending
this graph to model algorithms of answer set solvers.
In the rest of this section we give a proof of Proposition 1.
Lemma 1
For any CNF formula F and any state l1 . . . ln reachable from ∅in dpF, every
model X of F satisﬁes li if it satisﬁes all decision literals l ∆
j
with j ≤i.

6
Y. Lierler
Proof
By induction on the path from ∅to l1 . . . ln. The property of X that we need to
prove trivially holds in the initial state ∅, and we will prove that all transition rules
of dpF preserve it.
Take a model X of F, and consider an edge M =⇒M ′ where M is a list l1 . . . lk
such that X satisﬁes li if it satisﬁes all decision literals l ∆
j
with j ≤i.
It is clear that the rule justifying the transition from M to M ′ is diﬀerent from
Fail. For each of the other three rules, M ′ is obtained from a preﬁx of M by append-
ing a list of literals containing at most one decision literal. Due to the inductive
hypothesis, it is suﬃcient to show that if X satisﬁes all decision literals in M ′
then X satisﬁes all M ′.
Unit Propagate: M ′ is M l. By the inductive hypothesis, for every literal in M
the property in question holds. We need to show that X |= l. From the deﬁnition of
Unit Propagate, for some clause C ∨l ∈F, C ⊆M . Consequently, M |= ¬C. From
the inductive hypothesis and the assumption that X satisﬁes all decision literals
in M ′ and hence in M , it follows that X |= M . Since X is a model of F, we conclude
that X |= l.
Decide: M ′ is M l ∆. Obvious.
Backtrack: M has the form P l ∆Q where Q contains no decision literals. M ′
is P l. By the inductive hypothesis, it trivially follows that for every literal in P
the property in question holds. We need to show that X |= l. Assume that X |=l.
Since Q does not contain decision literals, and the assumption that X satisﬁes all
decision literals in M ′ and hence in P, X satisﬁes all decision literals in P l ∆Q, that
is M . By the inductive hypothesis, it follows that X satisﬁes M . This is impossible
because M is inconsistent.
ıProof of Proposition 1
(a) The ﬁniteness of dpF is obvious. For any list N of literals by |N | we denote the
length of N . Any state M other than FailState has the form M0l ∆
1 M1 . . . l ∆
p Mp,
where l ∆
1 . . . l ∆
p
are all decision literals of M ; we deﬁne α(M ) as the sequence of
nonnegative integers |M0|, |M1|, . . . , |Mp|, and α(FailState) = ∞. By the deﬁnition
of the transition rules deﬁning the edges of dpF, if there is an edge from a state M
to M ′ in dpF then α(M ) < α(M ′), where < is understood as the lexicographical
order. It follows that if a state M ′ is reachable from M then α(M ) < α(M ′).
Consequently the graph is acyclic.
(b) Consider any terminal state M other than FailState. From the fact that Decide
is not applicable, we conclude that M has no unassigned literals. Since neither
Backtrack nor Fail is applicable, M is consistent. Consequently M is an assignment.
It follows that for any clause C ∨l ∈F if C ̸⊆M then C ∩M ̸= ∅. Furthermore,
since Unit Propagate is not applicable, we conclude that if C ⊆M then l ∈M .
Consequently, M |= C ∨l. Hence M is a model of F.
(c) Left-to-right: Since FailState is reachable from ∅, there is an inconsistent state M
without decision literals that is reachable from ∅. By Lemma 1, any model of F
satisﬁes M . Since M is inconsistent we conclude that F has no models.

Abstract Answer Set Solvers with Backjumping and Learning
(long version) 7
Right-to-left: From (a) it follows that there is a path from ∅to some terminal
state. By (b), this state cannot be diﬀerent from FailState, because F is unsatisﬁ-
able.
2.2 Logic Programs
We consider programs consisting of ﬁnitely many rules of the form
a ←b1, . . . , bl, not bl+1, . . . , not bm
(3)
where a is an atom or symbol ⊥, and each bi (1 ≤i ≤m) is an atom. We will
identify the body of (3) with the conjunction
b1 ∧. . . ∧bl ∧¬bl+1 ∧. . . ¬ ∧bm
(4)
and also with the set of its conjunctive terms. If the head a of a rule (3) is an atom
then we will identify (3) with the clause
a ∨¬b1 ∨. . . ∨¬bl ∨bl+1 ∨. . . ∨bm.
(5)
If a is ⊥then we call rule (3) a constraint and identify (3) with the clause
¬b1 ∨. . . ∨¬bl ∨bl+1 ∨. . . ∨bm.
(6)
We will often omit the symbol ⊥when referring to a constraint.
We will use two abbreviated forms for a rule (3): The ﬁrst is
a ←B
where B stands for b1, . . . , bl, not bl+1, . . . , not bm. The second abbreviation is
a ←D, F
(7)
where D stands for the positive part of the body b1, . . . , bl, and F stands for the
negative part of the body not bl+1, . . . , not bm.
The reduct ΠX of a program Π with respect to a set X of atoms is obtained
from Π by
• removing each rule (7) such that F ∩X ̸= ∅, and
• replacing each remaining rule (7) by a ←D.
A set X of atoms is an answer set for a program Π if X is minimal (with respect to
set inclusion) among the sets of atoms that satisfy the reduct ΠX (Gelfond and Lifschitz 1988).
For example, let Π be the program
a ←not b
b ←not a
c ←a
d ←d.
(8)
Consider set {a, c}. Reduct Π{a,c} is
a ←
c ←a
d ←d.
(9)

8
Y. Lierler
Set {a, c} satisﬁes the reduct and is minimal, hence {a, c} is an answer set of Π.
Consider set {a, c, d}. The reduct Π{a,c,d} is (9). Set {a, c, d} satisﬁes the reduct
but is not minimal and hence it is not an answer set of Π.
By Bodies(Π, a) we denote the set of the bodies of all rules of Π with head a.
For any set M of literals, by M + we denote the set of positive literals from M . For
any consistent and complete set M of literals (that is, an assignment), if M + is an
answer set for a program Π, then M is a model of Π. Moreover, in this case M is
a supported model of Π, in the sense that for every atom a ∈M , M |= B for some
B ∈Bodies(Π, a).
A set U of atoms occurring in a program Π is said to be unfounded (Van Gelder et al. 1991)
on a consistent set M of literals w.r.t. Π if for every a ∈U and every B ∈
Bodies(Π, a), B ∩M ̸= ∅or U ∩B+ ̸= ∅. There is a tight relation between un-
founded sets and answer sets: For any model M of a program Π, M + is an answer
set for Π if and only if M contains no non-empty subsets unfounded on M w.r.t. Π
(Corollary 2 from (Sacc´a and Zaniolo 1990)9).
For instance, let Π be program (8) and let M be a consistent set {a, ¬b, c, d} of
literals. We already demonstrated that M + = {a, c, d} is not an answer set of Π.
Accordingly, its subset {d} is unfounded on {a, ¬b, c, d} w.r.t. Π, because the only
rule in Π with d in the head
d ←d
is such that U ∩B+ = {d} ∩{d} ̸= ∅.
We say that a program Π entails a formula F when for any consistent and com-
plete set M of literals, if M + is an answer set for Π, then M |= F. For instance,
any program Π entails each rule occurring in Π.
3 Generating Supported Models
In Section 4 we will deﬁne, for an arbitrary program Π, a graph smΠ representing
the application of the smodels algorithm to Π; the terminal nodes of smΠ are
answer sets of Π. As a step in this direction, we describe here a simpler graph
atleastΠ.
3.1 Graph atleastΠ
The terminal nodes of atleastΠ are supported models of Π. The transition rules
deﬁning atleastΠ are closely related to procedure Atleast (Simons 2000, Sec-
tions 4.1), which is one of the core procedures of the smodels algorithm.
The nodes of atleastΠ are the states relative to the set of atoms occurring in Π.
The edges of the graph atleastΠ are described by the transition rules Decide, Fail,
Backtrack introduced in Section 2.1 and the additional transition rules10 presented
9 The Corollary 2 from (Sacc´a and Zaniolo 1990) refers to ”assumption sets” rather than un-
founded sets. But as the authors noted, in the context of this corollary the two concepts are
equivalent.
10 The names of some of these rules follow (Ward 2004).

Abstract Answer Set Solvers with Backjumping and Learning
(long version) 9
Unit Propagate LP:
M =⇒M a if
 a ←B ∈Π and
B ⊆M
All Rules Cancelled:
M =⇒M ¬a if B ∩M ̸= ∅for all B ∈Bodies(Π, a)
Backchain True:
M =⇒M l if







a ←B ∈Π,
a ∈M ,
B′ ∩M ̸= ∅for all B′ ∈Bodies(Π, a) \ {B} ,
l ∈B
Backchain False:
M =⇒M l if



a ←l, B ∈Π,
¬a ∈M or a = ⊥,
B ⊆M
Fig. 2. The additional transition rules of the graph atleastΠ.
in Figure 2. Note that each of the rules Unit Propagate LP and Backchain False
is similar to Unit Propagate: the former corresponds to Unit Propagate on C ∨l
where l is the head of the rule, and the latter corresponds to Unit Propagate on
C ∨l where l is an element of the body of the rule.
This graph can be used for deciding whether program Π has a supported model
by constructing a path from ∅to a terminal node:
Proposition 2
For any program Π,
(a) graph atleastΠ is ﬁnite and acyclic,
(b) any terminal state of atleastΠ other than FailState is a supported model
of Π,
(c) FailState is reachable from ∅in atleastΠ if and only if Π has no supported
models.
For instance, let Π be program (8). Here is a path in atleastΠ:
∅
=⇒(Decide)
a∆
=⇒(Unit Propagate LP)
a∆c
=⇒(All Rules Cancelled)
a∆c¬b
=⇒(Decide)
a∆c¬bd∆
(10)
Since the state a∆c¬bd∆is terminal, Proposition 2(b) asserts that {a, c, ¬b, d} is
a supported model of Π.
The assertion of Proposition 2 will remain true if we drop the transition rules
Backchain True and Backchain False from the deﬁnition of atleastΠ.
In the rest of this section we give a proof of Proposition 2.

10
Y. Lierler
Lemma 2
For any program Π and any state l1 . . . ln reachable from ∅in atleastΠ, every
supported model X for Π satisﬁes li if it satisﬁes all decision literals l ∆
j
with j ≤i.
Proof
By induction on the path from ∅to l1 . . . ln. Similar to the proof of Lemma 1. We
will show that the property in question is preserved when the transition from M
to M ′ is justiﬁed by any of the four new rules.
Take a supported model X for Π, and consider an edge M =⇒M ′ where M is a
list l1 . . . lk such that X satisﬁes li if it satisﬁes all decision literals l ∆
j
with j ≤i.
Assume that X satisﬁes all decision literals in M ′.
Unit Propagate LP: M ′ is M a. By the inductive hypothesis, for every literal in M
the property in question holds. We need to show that X |= a. By the deﬁnition of
Unit Propagate LP, B ⊆M for some rule a ←B. Consequently, M |= B. From the
inductive hypothesis and the assumption that X satisﬁes all decision literals in M ′
and hence in M , it follows that X |= M . Since X is a model of Π we conclude
that X |= a.
All Rules Cancelled: M ′ is M ¬a and B ∩M ̸= ∅for every B ∈Bodies(Π, a).
Consequently, M |= ¬B for every B ∈Bodies(Π, a). By the inductive hypothesis,
for every literal in M the property in question holds. We need to show that X |= ¬a.
By contradiction. Assume that X |= a. From the inductive hypothesis and the
assumption that X satisﬁes all decision literals in M ′ and hence in M , it follows
that X |= M . Since M |= ¬B for every B ∈Bodies(Π, a), it follows that X |= ¬B.
We conclude that X is not a supported model of Π.
Backchain True: M ′ is M l. By the inductive hypothesis, for every literal in M
the property in question holds. We need to show that X |= l. By contradiction.
Assume X |= l. Consider the rule a ←B corresponding to this application of
Backchain True. Since l ∈B, X |= ¬B. By the deﬁnition of Backchain True,
B′ ∩M ̸= ∅for every B′ in Bodies(Π, a) \ B. Consequently, M |= ¬B′ for every B′
in Bodies(Π, a) \ B. From the inductive hypothesis and the assumption that X
satisﬁes all decision literals in M ′ and hence in M , it follows that X |= M . We
conclude that X |= ¬B′ for every B′ in Bodies(Π, a)\B. Hence X is not supported
by Π.
Backchain False: M ′ is M l. By the inductive hypothesis, for every literal in M the
property in question holds. We need to show that X |= l. By contradiction. Assume
that X |= l. By the deﬁnition of Backchain False there exists a rule a ←l, B in Π
such that ¬a ∈M and B ⊆M . Consequently, M |= ¬a and M |= B. From the
inductive hypothesis and the assumption that X satisﬁes all decision literals in M ′
and hence in M , it follows that X |= M . We conclude that X |= ¬a and X |= B.
From the fact that X |= l, it follows that X does not satisfy the rule a ←l, B, so
that it is not a model of Π.
ıProof of Proposition 2
Parts (a) and (c) are proved as in the proof of Proposition 1, using Lemma 2.
(b) Let M be a terminal state so that none of the rules are applicable. From the

Abstract Answer Set Solvers with Backjumping and Learning
(long version) 11
fact that Decide is not applicable, we conclude that M assigns all literals. Since
neither Backtrack nor Fail is applicable, M is consistent. Consequently, M is an
assignment. Since Unit Propagate LP is not applicable, it follows that for every
rule a ←B ∈Π, if B ⊆M then a ∈M . Consequently, if M |= B then M |= a.
We conclude that M is a model of Π. We will now show that M is a supported
model of Π. By contradiction. Suppose that M is not a supported model. Then,
there is an atom a ∈M such that M ̸|= B for every B ∈Bodies(Π, a). Since M
is consistent, B ∩M ̸= ∅for every B ∈Bodies(Π, a). Consequently, All Rules
Cancelled is applicable. This contradicts the assumption that M is terminal.
The fact that the assertion of Proposition 2 remains true if we drop the transition
rules Backchain True and Backchain False from the deﬁnition of atleastΠ follows
from the proof of Proposition 2 (b) that does not refer to those rules.
3.2 Relation between dpF and atleastΠ
It is well known that the supported models of a program can be characterized as
models of program’s completion in the sense of (Clark 1978). It turns out that the
graph atleastΠ is identical to the graph dpF, where F is the (clausiﬁed) comple-
tion of Π. To make this claim precise, we ﬁrst review the notion of completion.
For any program Π, its completion consists of Π and the formulas that can be
written as
¬a ∨
_
B∈Bodies(Π,a)
B
(11)
for every atom a in Π. ıCNF −Comp(Π) is the completion converted to CNF us-
ing straightforward equivalent transformations. In other words, ıCNF −Comp(Π)
consists of clauses of two kinds:
1. the rules a ←B of the program written as clauses
a ∨B,
(12)
2. formulas (11) converted to CNF using the distributivity of disjunction over
conjunction11.
Proposition 3
For any program Π, the graphs atleastΠ and dpCNF-Comp(Π) are equal.
For instance, let Π be the program
a ←b, not c
b.
(13)
Its completion is
(a ↔b ∧¬c) ∧b ∧¬c,
(14)
11
It is essential that repetitions are not removed in the process of clausiﬁcation. For instance,
ıCNF −Comp(a ←not a) is the formula (a ∨a) ∧(¬a ∨¬a).

12
Y. Lierler
and ıCNF −Comp(Π) is
(a ∨¬b ∨c) ∧(¬a ∨b) ∧(¬a ∨¬c) ∧b ∧¬c.
(15)
Proposition 3 asserts that atleastΠ coincides with dpCNF-Comp(Π).
From Proposition 3, it follows that applying the Atleast algorithm to a program
essentially amounts to applying dpll to its completion.
In the rest of this section we give a proof of Proposition 3.
It is easy to see that the states of the graphs atleastΠ and dpCNF-Comp(Π)
coincide. We will now show that the edges of atleastΠ and dpCNF-Comp(Π) coincide
also.
It is clear that there is an edge M =⇒M ′ in atleastΠ justiﬁed by the rule
Decide if and only if there is an edge M =⇒M ′ in dpCNF-Comp(Π) justiﬁed by
Decide. The same holds for the transition rules Fail and Backtrack.
We will now show that if there is an edge from a state M to a state M ′ in the
graph dpCNF-Comp(Π) justiﬁed by the transition rule Unit Propagate then there is
an edge from M to M ′ in atleastΠ. Consider a clause C ∨l ∈ıCNF −Comp(Π)
such that C ⊆M . We will consider two cases, depending on whether C ∨l comes
from (12) or from the CNF of (11).
Case 1. C ∨l is a ∨B corresponding to a rule a ←B.
Case 1.1. l is a. Then there is an edge from M to M ′ in atleastΠ justiﬁed by
the transition rule Unit Propagate LP.
Case 1.2. l is an element of B. Then B has the form l, D and C is a ∨D. From
C ⊆M we conclude that D ⊆M and ¬a ∈M . There is an edge from M to M ′ in
the graph atleastΠ justiﬁed by the following instance of Backchain False:
M =⇒M l if



a ←l, D ∈Π,
¬a ∈M ,
D ⊆M .
Case 2. C ∨l has the form ¬a ∨D, where D is one of the clauses of the CNF of
_
B∈Bodies(Π,a)
B.
Then D has the form
_
B∈Bodies(Π,a)
f (B)
where f is a function that maps every B ∈Bodies(Π, a) to an element of B.
Case 2.1. l is ¬a. Then C is D, so that D ⊆M . Consequently f (B) ∈B ∩D ⊆
B ∩M , so that B ∩M ̸= ∅for every B ∈Bodies(Π, a). There is an edge from M
to M ′ in atleastΠ justiﬁed by All Rules Cancelled.
Case 2.2. l is an element of D. From the construction of D, it follows that l =
f (B) ∈B for some rule a ←B. Then C is
¬a ∨
_
B ′∈Bodies(Π,a)\B
f (B′).
From C ⊆M we conclude that a ∈M and that f (B′) ∈M for every B′ ∈

Abstract Answer Set Solvers with Backjumping and Learning
(long version) 13
Bodies(Π, a)\B. Since f (B′) is a conjunctive term of B′, it follows that B′∩M ̸= ∅.
Then there is an edge from M to M ′ in atleastΠ justiﬁed by Backchain True.
We will now show that if there is an edge from a state M to a state M ′ in
the graph atleastΠ justiﬁed by one of the transition rules Unit Propagate LP,
All Rules Cancelled, Backchain True, and Backchain False then there is an edge
from M to M ′ in dpCNF-Comp(Π).
Case 1. The edge is justiﬁed by Unit Propagate LP. Then there is a rule a ←B ∈Π
where B ⊆M , and M ′ is M a. By the construction of ıCNF −Comp(Π), a ∨B ∈
ıCNF −Comp(Π). There is an edge from M to M ′ in dpCNF-Comp(Π) justiﬁed by
the following instance of Unit Propagate:
M =⇒M a if
 B ∨a ∈ıCNF −Comp(Π) and
B ⊆M .
Case 2. The edge is justiﬁed by All Rules Cancelled. By the deﬁnition of All
Rules Cancelled, there is an atom a such that for all B ∈Bodies(Π, a), B ∩M ̸= ∅;
and M ′ is M ¬a. Consequently, M contains the complement of some literal in B.
Denote one of such literals by f (B), so that f (B) ∈M . From the construction of
ıCNF −Comp(Π),
¬a ∨
_
B∈Bodies(Π,a)
f (B)
belongs to ıCNF −Comp(Π). By the choice of f ,
_
B∈Bodies(Π,a)
f (B) ⊆M .
There is an edge from M to M ′ in dpCNF-Comp(Π) justiﬁed by the following instance
of Unit Propagate:
M =⇒M ¬a if













_
B∈Bodies(Π,a)
f (B) ∨¬a ∈ıCNF −Comp(Π),
_
B∈Bodies(Π,a)
f (B) ⊆M .
Case 3. The edge is justiﬁed by Backchain True. By the deﬁnition of Backchain
True, there is a rule a ←B ∈Π and a literal l ∈B such that a ∈M ; for all
B′ ∈Bodies(Π, a) \ B, B′ ∩M ̸= ∅; and M ′ is M l. Let f (B′) be an element of B′
such that f (B′) ∈M . From the construction of ıCNF −Comp(Π),
¬a ∨l ∨
_
B ′∈Bodies(Π,a)\B
f (B′)
belongs to ıCNF −Comp(Π). By the choice of f ,
_
B ′∈Bodies(Π,a)\B
f (B′) ⊆M .
There is an edge from M to M ′ in dpCNF-Comp(Π) justiﬁed by the following instance

14
Y. Lierler
of Unit Propagate:
M =⇒M l if













¬a ∨l ∨
_
B ′∈Bodies(Π,a)\B
f (B′) ∈ıCNF −Comp(Π),
(¬a ∨
_
B ′∈Bodies(Π,a)\B
f (B′)) ⊆M .
Case 4. The edge is justiﬁed by Backchain False. By the deﬁnition of Backchain
False, there is a rule a ←l, B ∈Π such that ¬a ∈M , B ⊆M , and M ′ is M l.
By the construction of ıCNF −Comp(Π), a ∨B ∨l ∈ıCNF −Comp(Π). There
is an edge from M to M ′ in dpCNF-Comp(Π) justiﬁed by the following instance of
Unit Propagate:
M =⇒M l if
(
a ∨B ∨l ∈ıCNF −Comp(Π) and
a ∨B ⊆M .
4 Answer Set Solver Smodels
4.1 Abstract Smodels
We now describe the graph smΠ that represents the application of the smodels
algorithm to program Π. smΠ is a graph whose nodes are the same as the nodes
of the graph atleastΠ. The edges of smΠ are described by the transition rules of
atleastΠ and the additional transition rule:
Unfounded:
M
=⇒M ¬a if
 M is consistent, and
a ∈U for a set U unfounded on M w.r.t. Π.
This transition rule of smΠ is closely related to procedure Atmost (Simons 2000,
Sections 4.2), which together with the procedure Atleast forms the core of the
smodels algorithm.
The graph smΠ can be used for deciding whether program Π has an answer set
by constructing a path from ∅to a terminal node:
Proposition 4
For any program Π,
(a) graph smΠ is ﬁnite and acyclic,
(b) for any terminal state M of smΠ other than FailState, M + is an answer set
of Π,
(c) FailState is reachable from ∅in smΠ if and only if Π has no answer sets.
To illustrate the diﬀerence between smΠ and atleastΠ, assume again that Π is
program (8). Path (10) in the graph atleastΠ is also a path in smΠ. But state
a∆c¬bd∆, which is terminal in atleastΠ, is not terminal in smΠ. This is not

Abstract Answer Set Solvers with Backjumping and Learning
(long version) 15
surprising, since {a, c, ¬b, d}+ = {a, c, d} is not an answer set of Π. To get to a
state that is terminal in smΠ, we need two more steps:
...
a∆c¬bd∆
=⇒(Unfounded, U = {d})
a∆c¬bd∆¬d
=⇒(Backtrack)
a∆c¬b¬d
(16)
Proposition 4(b) asserts that {a, c} is an answer set of Π.
The assertion of Proposition 4 will remain true if we drop the transition rules All
Rules Cancelled, Backchain True, and Backchain False from the deﬁnition of smΠ.
In the rest of this section we give a proof of Proposition 4.
We say that a model M of a program Π is unfounded-free if no non-empty subset
of M is an unfounded set on M w.r.t. Π.
Lemma 3 (Corollary 2 from (Sacc´a and Zaniolo 1990))
For any model M of a program Π, M + is an answer set for Π if and only if M is
unfounded-free.
Lemma 4
For any unfounded set U on a consistent set M of literals w.r.t. a program Π, and
any assignment X , if X |= M and X ∩U ̸= ∅, then X + is not an answer set for Π.
Proof
Assume that X + is an answer set for Π. Then X is a model of Π. By Lemma 3,
it follows that X is unfounded-free. Hence any non-empty subset of X including
X ∩U is not unfounded on X . This means that for some rule a ←B in Π such
that a ∈X ∩U , B ∩X = ∅and X ∩U ∩B+ = ∅. From X |= M (M ⊆X ) and
B ∩X = ∅we conclude that B ∩M = ∅. Since B ∩X = ∅and X is an assignment,
B ⊆X . It follows that B+ ⊆X . Consequently U ∩B+ = X ∩U ∩B+ = ∅. This
contradicts the assumption that U is an unfounded set on M .
Lemma 5
For any program Π, any state l1 . . . ln reachable from ∅in smΠ, and any assign-
ment X , if X + is an answer set for Π then X satisﬁes li if it satisﬁes all decision
literals l ∆
j
with j ≤i.
Proof
By induction on the path from ∅to l1 . . . ln. Recall that for any assignment X , if X +
is an answer set for Π, then X is a supported model of Π, and that the transition
system smΠ extends atleastΠ only by the transition rule Unfounded. Given our
proof of Lemma 2, we only need to demonstrate that application of Unfounded
preserves the property.
Consider a transition M =⇒M ′ justiﬁed by Unfounded, where M is a sequence
l1 . . . lk. M ′ is M ¬a, such that a ∈U , where U is an unfounded set on M w.r.t Π.
Take any assignment X such that X + is an answer set for Π and X satisﬁes all

16
Y. Lierler
decision literals l ∆
j with j ≤k. By the inductive hypothesis, X |= M . Then X |= ¬a.
Indeed, otherwise a would be a common element of X and U , and X ∩U would
be non-empty, which contradicts Lemma 4.
ıProof of Proposition 4
Parts (a) and (c) are proved as in the proof of Proposition 1, using Lemma 5.
(b) As in the proof of Proposition 2(b) we conclude that M is a model of Π. Assume
that M + is not an answer set. Then, by Lemma 3, there is a non-empty unfounded
set U on M w.r.t. Π such that U ⊆M . It follows that Unfounded is applicable
(with an arbitrary a ∈U ). This contradicts the assumption that M is terminal.
The fact that the assertion of Proposition 4 remains true if we drop the transition
rules All Rules Cancelled, Backchain True, and Backchain False from the deﬁnition
of smΠ follows from the proof of Proposition 4 (b) that does not refer to those rules.
4.2 Smodels Algorithm
We can view a path in the graph smΠ as a description of a process of search
for an answer set for a program Π by applying inference rules. Therefore, we can
characterize the algorithm of an answer set solver that utilizes the inference rules of
smΠ by describing a strategy for choosing a path in smΠ. A strategy can be based,
in particular, on assigning priorities to some or all inference rules of smΠ, so that
a solver will never apply a transition rule in a state if a rule with higher priority is
applicable to the same state.
We use this method to describe the smodels algorithm. System smodels assigns
priorities to the inference rules of smΠ as follows:
Backtrack, Fail ≫
Unit Propagate LP, All Rules Cancelled, Backchain True, Backchain False ≫
Unfounded ≫
Decide.
For example, let Π be program (8). The smodels algorithm may follow a path
∅
=⇒(Decide)
a∆
=⇒(Unit Propagate LP)
a∆c
=⇒(All Rules Cancelled)
a∆c¬b
=⇒(Unfounded)
a∆c¬b¬d
in the graph smΠ, whereas it may never follow path (10), because Unfounded has
a higher priority than Decide.
4.3 Tight Programs
We will now review the deﬁnitions of a positive dependency graph and a tight
program. The positive dependency graph of a program Π is the directed graph G
such that

Abstract Answer Set Solvers with Backjumping and Learning
(long version) 17
• the nodes of G are the atoms occurring in Π, and
• G contains the edges from a to bi (1 ≤i ≤l) for each rule
a ←b1, . . . , bl, not bl+1, . . . , not bm
in Π where a is an atom.
A program is tight if its positive dependency graph is acyclic. For instance, pro-
gram (8) is not tight since its positive dependency graph has a cycle due to the rule
d ←d. On the other hand, the program constructed from (8) by removing this rule
is tight.
Recall that for any program Π and any assignment M , if M + is an answer set of Π
then M is a supported model of Π. For the case of tight programs, the converse
holds also: M + is an answer set for Π if and only if M is a supported model
of Π (Fages 1994) or, in other words, is a model of the completion of Π.
It turns out that for tight programs the graph smΠ is “almost identical” to the
graph dpF, where F is the clausiﬁed completion of Π. To make this claim precise,
we need the following terminology.
We say that an edge M =⇒M ′ in the graph smΠ is singular if
• the only transition rule justifying this edge is Unfounded, and
• some edge M =⇒M ′′ can be justiﬁed by a transition rule other than Un-
founded or Decide.
For instance, let Π be the program
a ←b
b ←c.
The edge
a∆b∆¬c∆
=⇒(Unfounded, U = {a, b})
a∆b∆¬c∆¬a
in the graph smΠ is singular, because the edge
a∆b∆¬c∆
=⇒(All Rules Cancelled)
a∆b∆¬c∆¬b
belongs to smΠ also.
With respect to the actual smodels algorithm (Simons 2000), singular edges of
the graph smΠ are inessential: in view of priorities for choosing a path in smΠ de-
scribed in Section 4.2 smodels never follows a singular edge. Indeed, the transition
rule Unfounded has the lower priority than any other transition rule but Decide.
By sm−
Π we denote the graph obtained from smΠ by removing all singular edges.
Proposition 5
For any tight program Π, the graph sm−
Π is equal to each of the graphs atleastΠ
and dpCNF-Comp(Π).
For instance, let Π be the program (13). This program is tight, its completion is (14),
and ıCNF −Comp(Π) is formula (15). Proposition 5 asserts that, sm−
Π coincides
with dpCNF-Comp(Π) and with atleastΠ.

18
Y. Lierler
From Proposition 5, it follows that applying the smodels algorithm to a tight
program essentially amounts to applying dpll to its completion. A similar relation-
ship, in terms of pseudocode representations of smodels and dpll, is established
in (Giunchiglia and Maratea 2005).
In the rest of this section we give a proof of Proposition 5.
Lemma 6
For any tight program Π and any non-empty unfounded set U on a consistent set
M of literals w.r.t. Π there is an atom a ∈U such that for every B ∈Bodies(Π, a),
B ∩M ̸= ∅.
Proof
By contradiction. Assume that, for every a ∈U there exists B ∈Bodies(Π, a) such
that B ∩M = ∅. By the deﬁnition of an unfounded set it follows that for every atom
a ∈U there is B ∈Bodies(Π, a) such that U ∩B+ ̸= ∅. Consequently the subgraph
of the positive dependency graph of Π induced by U has no terminal nodes. Then,
the program Π is not tight.
ıProof of Proposition 5
In view of Proposition 3, it is suﬃcient to prove that sm−
Π equals atleastΠ; or,
in other words, that every edge of smΠ justiﬁed by the rule Unfounded only is
singular. Consider such an edge M =⇒M ′. We need to show that some transi-
tion rule other than Unfounded or Decide is applicable to M . By the deﬁnition of
Unfounded, M is consistent and there exists a non-empty set U unfounded on M
w.r.t. Π. By Lemma 6, it follows that there is an atom a ∈U such that for every
B ∈Bodies(Π, a), B ∩M ̸= ∅. Therefore, the transition rule All Rules Cancelled is
applicable to M .
5 Generate and Test
In this section, we present a modiﬁcation of the graph dpF (Section 2.1) that
includes testing “partial” assignments of F found by dpll.
Let F be a CNF formula, and let G be a formula formed from atoms occur-
ring in F. The terminal nodes of the graph gtF,G deﬁned below are models of
formula F ∧G.
This modiﬁcation of the graph dpF is of interest, for example, in connection
with the fact that answer sets of a program Π can be characterized as models of
its completion extended by so called loop formulas of Π (Lin and Zhao 2002). If
ıCNF −Comp(Π), as above, is the completion converted to CNF, and LF(Π) is
the conjunction of all loop formulas of Π, then for any assignment M , M + is an
answer set of Π iﬀM is a model of ıCNF −Comp(Π)∧LF(Π). Hence, the terminal
nodes of the graph gtCNF-Comp(Π),LF(Π) will correspond to answer sets of Π.
The nodes of the graph gtF,G are the same as the nodes of the graph dpF. The
edges of gtF,G are described by the transition rules of dpF and the additional

Abstract Answer Set Solvers with Backjumping and Learning
(long version) 19
transition rule:
Test:
M =⇒M l if



M is consistent,
G |= M ,
l ∈M
It is easy to see that the graph dpF is a subgraph of gtF,G. The latter graph
can be used for deciding whether a formula F ∧G has a model by constructing a
path from ∅to a terminal node:
Proposition 6
For any CNF formula F and a formula G formed from atoms occurring in F,
(a) graph gtF,G is ﬁnite and acyclic,
(b) any terminal state of gtF,G other than FailState is a model of F ∧G,
(c) FailState is reachable from ∅in gtF,G if and only if F ∧G is unsatisﬁable.
Note that to verify the applicability of the new transition rule Test we need a pro-
cedure for testing whether G entails a clause, but there is no need to explicitly write
out G. This is important because LF(Π) can be very long (Lin and Zhao 2002).
For instance, let Π be the nontight program
d ←d.
Its completion is
d ↔d,
and ıCNF −Comp(Π) is
(d ∨¬d).
This program has one loop formula
d →⊥.
Proposition 6 asserts that a terminal state ¬d of gtCNF-Comp(Π),d→⊥is a model of
ıCNF −Comp(Π)∧LF(Π). It follows that {¬d}+ = ∅is an answer set of Π. To com-
pare with the graph dpCNF-Comp(Π): state d is a terminal state in dpCNF-Comp(Π)
whereas d is not a terminal state in gtCNF-Comp(Π),d→⊥because the transition rule
Test is applicable to this state.
asp-sat with Backtracking (Giunchiglia et al. 2006) is a procedure that com-
putes models of the completion of the given program using dpll, and tests them
until an answer set is found. The application of this procedure to a program Π
can be viewed as constructing a path from ∅to a terminal node in the graph
gtCNF-Comp(Π),LF(Π) by adopting a strategy that Test is applied to a state M only
when M is an assignment.
In the rest of this section we give a proof of Proposition 6.
Lemma 7
For any CNF formula F, a formula G formed from atoms occurring in F, and a
path from ∅to a state l1 . . . ln in gtF,G, any model X of F ∧G satisﬁes li if it
satisﬁes all decision literals l ∆
j
with j ≤i.

20
Y. Lierler
Proof
By induction on the path from ∅to l1 . . . ln. Similar to the proof of Lemma 1. We
will show that the property in question is preserved by the transition rule Test.
Take a model X of F ∧G and consider an edge M =⇒M ′ where M is a list
l1 . . . lk such that X satisﬁes li if it satisﬁes all decision literals l ∆
j
with j ≤i.
Assume that X satisﬁes all decision literals from M . By the inductive hypothesis,
X |= M . We will show that the rule justifying the transition from M to M ′ is
diﬀerent from Test. By contradiction. M ′ is M l. By the deﬁnition of Test, G |= M .
Since X is a model of F ∧G it follows that X |= M . This contradicts the fact that
X |= M .
ıProof of Proposition 6
Part (a) and part (c) Right-to-left are proved as in the proof of Proposition 1.
(b) Let M be any terminal state other than FailState. As in the proof of Proposi-
tion 1(b) it follows that M is a model of F. The transition rule Test is not applicable.
Hence G ̸|= M . In other words M is a model of G. We conclude that M is a model
of F ∧G
(c) Left-to-right: Since FailState is reachable from ∅, there is a state M without
decision literals such that M is reachable from ∅and the transition rule Fail is
applicable in M . Then, M is inconsistent. By Lemma 7, any model of F ∧G
satisﬁes M . Since M is inconsistent we conclude F ∧G is unsatisﬁable.
6 Review: Abstract DPLL with Learning
Most modern SAT solvers implement such sophisticated techniques as backjumping
and learning:
Backjumping: Chronological Backtracking (used in classical dpll) can be
seen as a prototype of Backjumping. Unlike Backtracking that undoes only the
previously made decision, Backjumping is generally able to backtrack further
in the search tree by undoing several decisions at once.
Learning: Most modern SAT solvers implement so called conﬂict-driven
backjumping and learning: whenever backjumping is performed they add
(learn) a “backjump clause” to the clause database of a solver. Learning back-
jump clauses prevents a solver from reaching “similar“ inconsistent states.
In this section we will extend the graph dpF to capture the ideas behind back-
jumping and learning. The new graph will be closely related to the DPLL System
with Learning graph introduced in (Nieuwenhuis et al. 2006, Section 2.4).
We ﬁrst note that the graph dpF is not adequate to capture such technique as
learning since it is incapable to reﬂect a change in a state of computation related
to newly learned clauses. We start by redeﬁning a state so that it incorporates
information about changes performed on a clause database.
For a CNF formula F, an augmented state relative to F is either a distinguished
state FailState or a pair M ||Γ where M is a record relative to the set of atoms
occurring in F, and Γ is a (multi-)set of clauses over atoms of F that are entailed
by F.

Abstract Answer Set Solvers with Backjumping and Learning
(long version) 21
Unit Propagate λ:
M ||Γ =⇒M l||Γ if
 C ∨l ∈F ∪Γ and
C ⊆M
Backjump:
P l ∆Q||Γ =⇒P l ′||Γ if
 P l ∆Q is inconsistent and
F |= l ′ ∨P
Learn:
M ||Γ =⇒M ||C, Γ if
 every atom in C occurs in F and
F |= C
Fig. 3. The additional transition rules of the graph dplF.
We now deﬁne a graph dplF for any CNF formula F. Its nodes are the augmented
states relative to F. The transition rules Decide and Fail of dpF are extended to
dplF as follows: M ||Γ =⇒M ′||Γ (M ||Γ =⇒FailState) is an edge in dplF justiﬁed
by Decide (Fail) if and only if M =⇒M ′ (M =⇒FailState) is an edge in dpF
justiﬁed by Decide (Fail). Figure 3 presents the other transition rules of dplF. We
refer to the transition rules Unit Propagate λ, Backjump, Decide, and Fail of the
graph dplF as Basic. We say that a node in the graph is semi-terminal if no rule
other than Learn is applicable to it.
We will omit the word “augmented” before “state” when this is clear from a
context.
The graph dplF can be used for deciding the satisﬁability of a formula F simply
by constructing an arbitrary path from node ∅||∅to a semi-terminal node:
Proposition 7
For any CNF formula F,
(a) every path in dplF contains only ﬁnitely many edges justiﬁed by Basic tran-
sition rules,
(b) for any semi-terminal state M ||Γ of dplF reachable from ∅||∅, M is a model
of F,
(c) FailState is reachable from ∅||∅in dplF if and only if F is unsatisﬁable.
On the one hand, Proposition 7 (a) asserts that if we construct a path from ∅||∅so
that Basic transition rules periodically appear in it then some semi-terminal state
will be eventually reached. On the other hand, Proposition 7 (b) and (c) assert
that as soon as a semi-terminal state is reached the problem of deciding whether
formula F is satisﬁable is solved. The proof of this proposition is similar to the
proof of Theorem 2.12 from (Nieuwenhuis et al. 2006).
For instance, let F be the formula
a ∨b
¬a ∨c.

22
Y. Lierler
Here is a path in dplF:
∅||∅
=⇒(Learn)
∅||b ∨c
=⇒(Decide)
¬b∆||b ∨c
=⇒(Unit Propagate λ)
¬b∆c||b ∨c
=⇒(Unit Propagate λ)
¬b∆ca||b ∨c
(17)
Since the state ¬b∆ca is semi-terminal, Proposition 7 (b) asserts that {¬b, c, a} is
a model of F.
Recall that the transition rule Backtrack of the graph dpF – a prototype of Back-
jump – is applicable in any inconsistent state with a decision literal in dpF. The
transition rule Backjump, on the other hand, is applicable in any inconsistent state
with a decision literal that is reachable from ∅||∅(the proof of this statement is
similar to the proof of Lemma 2.8 from (Nieuwenhuis et al. 2006)). The application
of Backjump where l ∆is the last decision literal and l ′ is l can be seen as an appli-
cation of Backtrack. This fact shows that Backjump is essentially a generalization of
Backtrack. The subgraph of dpF induced by the nodes reachable from ∅is basically
a subgraph of dplF.
7 Answer Set Solver with Learning
In this section we will extend the graph smΠ to capture backjumping and learning.
As a result we will be able to model the algorithms of systems smodelscc and sup.
7.1 Graph smlΠ
An (augmented) state relative to a program Π is either a distinguished state Fail-
State or a pair of the form M ||Γ where M is a record relative to the set of atoms
occurring in Π, and Γ is a (multi-)set of constraints formed from atoms occurring
in Π that are entailed by Π.
For any program Π, we will deﬁne a graph smlΠ. Its nodes are the augmented
states relative to Π. The transition rules Unit Propagate LP, All Rules Cancelled,
Backchain True, Unfounded, Decide and Fail of smΠ are extended to smlΠ as
follows: M ||Γ =⇒M ′||Γ (M ||Γ =⇒FailState) is an edge in smlΠ justiﬁed by a
transition rule T if and only if M =⇒M ′ (M =⇒FailState) is an edge in smΠ
justiﬁed by T. Figure 4 presents the other transition rules of smlΠ.
We refer to the transition rules Unit Propagate LP, All Rules Cancelled, Backchain
True, Backchain False λ, Unfounded, Backjump LP, Decide, and Fail of the graph
smlΠ as Basic. We say that a node in the graph is semi-terminal if no rule other
than Learn LP is applicable to it.
The graph smlΠ can be used for deciding whether a program Π has an answer
set by constructing a path from ∅||∅to a semi-terminal node:
Proposition 8
For any program Π,

Abstract Answer Set Solvers with Backjumping and Learning
(long version) 23
Backchain False λ:
M ||Γ =⇒M l||Γ if



a ←l, B ∈Π ∪Γ,
¬a ∈M or a = ⊥,
B ⊆M
Backjump LP:
P l ∆Q||Γ =⇒P l ′||Γ if
 P l ∆Q is inconsistent and
Π entails l ′ ∨P
Learn LP:
M ||Γ =⇒M || ←B, Γ if Π entails B
Fig. 4. The additional transition rules of the graph smlΠ.
(a) every path in smlΠ contains only ﬁnitely many edges labeled by Basic tran-
sition rules,
(b) for any semi-terminal state M ||Γ of smlΠ reachable from ∅||∅, M + is an
answer set of Π,
(c) FailState is reachable from ∅||∅in smlΠ if and only if Π has no answer sets.
Thus if we construct a path from ∅||∅so that Basic transition rules periodically
appear in it then some semi-terminal state will be eventually reached; as soon as a
semi-terminal state is reached the problem of ﬁnding an answer set is solved.
For instance, let Π be program (8). Here is a path in smlΠ with every edge
annotated by the name of a transition rule that justiﬁes the presence of this edge
in the graph :
∅||∅
=⇒(Decide)
a∆||∅
=⇒(Unit Propagate LP)
a∆c||∅
=⇒(All Rules Cancelled)
a∆c¬b||∅
=⇒(Decide)
a∆c¬bd∆||∅
=⇒(Unfounded)
a∆c¬bd∆¬d||∅
=⇒(Backjump LP)
a∆c¬b¬d||∅
=⇒(Learn LP)
a∆c¬b¬d||¬a ∨¬c ∨b ∨¬d
(18)
Since the state a∆c¬b¬d is semi-terminal, Proposition 8 (b) asserts that
{a, c, ¬b, ¬d}+ = {a, c}
is an answer set for Π.
Proof of Proposition 8 is in Section 10.
As in case of the graphs dpF and dplF, Backjump LP is applicable in any
inconsistent state with a decision literal that is reachable from ∅||∅(Proposition 11
from Section 9), and is essentially a generalization of the transition rule Backtrack
of the graph smΠ.
Modern SAT solvers often implement such sophisticated techniques as restart
and forgetting in addition to backjumping and learning:

24
Y. Lierler
Restart: A solver restarts the dpll procedure whenever the search is not
making “enough” progress. The idea is that upon a restart a solver will explore
a new part of the search space using the clauses that have been learned.
Forgetting: This technique is usually implemented in relation with conﬂict-
driven backjumping and learning. When a solver “notes” that earlier learned
clauses are not helpful anymore it removes (forgets) them from the clause
database. Forgetting allows a solver to avoid a possible exponential space
blow-up introduced by learning.
We may extend the graph smlΠ with the following transition rules that capture
the ideas behind these technique:
Restart:
M ||Γ =⇒∅||Γ
Forget LP:
M || ←B, Γ =⇒M ||Γ.
The transition rules Restart and Forget LP are similar to the analogous rules
in (Nieuwenhuis et al. 2006) for extending dpll procedure with restart and for-
getting techniques. It is easy to prove a result similar to Proposition 8 for the
graph smlΠ with Restart and Forget LP (for such graph a state is semi-terminal if
no rule other than Learn LP, Restart, Forget LP is applicable to it.)
7.2 Smodelscc and Sup Algorithms
In Section 4.2 we demonstrated a method for specifying the algorithm of an answer
set solver by means of the graph smΠ. In particular, we described the smodels al-
gorithm by assigning priorities to transition rules of smΠ. In this section we use this
method to describe the smodelscc (Ward and Schlipf 2004) and sup (Lierler 2008)
algorithms by means of smlΠ.
System smodelscc enhances the smodels algorithm with conﬂict-driven back-
jumping and learning. Its strategy for choosing a path in the graph smlΠ is similar
to that of smodels. System smodelscc assigns priorities to inference rules of smlΠ
as follows:
Backjump LP, Fail ≫
Unit Propagate LP, All Rules Cancelled, Backchain True, Backchain False λ ≫
Unfounded ≫
Decide.
Also, smodelscc always applies the transition rule Learn LP in a non-semi-
terminal state reached by an application of Backjump LP, because it implements
conﬂict-driven backjumping and learning.12 In Section 11 we discuss details on
which clause is being learned during the application of Learn LP.
12 System smodelscc (sup) also implements restarts and forgetting that may be modeled by the
transition rules Restart and Forget LP. An application of these transition rules in smlΠ relies
on particular heuristics implemented by the solver.

Abstract Answer Set Solvers with Backjumping and Learning
(long version) 25
In (Lierler 2008), we introduced the simpliﬁed sup algorithm that relies on back-
tracking rather than conﬂict-driven backjumping and learning that are actually
implemented in the system. We now present the sup algorithm that takes these
sophisticated techniques into account.
System sup assigns priorities to inference rules of smlΠ as follows:
Backjump LP, Fail ≫
Unit Propagate LP, All Rules Cancelled, Backchain True, Backchain False λ ≫
Decide ≫
Unfounded.
Similarly to smodelscc, sup always applies the transition rule Learn LP in a
non-semi-terminal state reached by an application of Backjump LP.
For example, let Π be program (8). Path (18) corresponds to an execution of
system sup, but does not correspond to any execution of smodelscc because for
the latter Unfounded is a rule of higher priority than Decide. Here is another path
in smlΠ from ∅||∅to the same semi-terminal node:
∅||∅
=⇒(Decide)
a∆||∅
=⇒(Unit Propagate LP)
a∆c||∅
=⇒(All Rules Cancelled)
a∆c¬b||∅
=⇒(Unfounded)
a∆c¬b¬d||∅
(19)
Path (19) corresponds to an execution of system smodelscc, but does not corre-
spond to any execution of system sup because for the latter Decide is a rule of
higher priority than Unfounded.
The strategy of sup of assigning the transition rule Unfounded the lowest priority
may be reasonable for many problems. For instance, it is easy to see that transi-
tion rule Unfounded is redundant for tight programs. The sup algorithm is similar
to SAT-based answer set solvers such as assat (Lin and Zhao 2004) and cmod-
els (Giunchiglia et al. 2006) (see Section 8.2) in the fact that it will ﬁrst compute
a supported model of a program and only then will test whether this model is
indeed an answer set, i.e., whether Unfounded is applicable in this state.
8 Generate and Test with Learning
In this section we model backjumping and learning for the generate and test pro-
cedure by deﬁning a graph gtlF,G that extends gtF,G (Section 5) in a similar
manner as dplF (Section 6) extends dpF.
8.1 Graph gtlF,G
An (augmented) state relative to a CNF formula F and a formula G formed from
atoms occurring in F is either a distinguished state FailState or a pair of the
form M ||Γ, where M is a record (Section 2.1) relative to the set of atoms occurring
in F, and Γ is a (multi-)set of clauses formed from atoms occurring in F that are
entailed by F ∧G.

26
Y. Lierler
The nodes of the graph gtlF,G are the augmented states relative to a CNF
formula F and a formula G formed from atoms occurring in F. The edges of gtlF,G
are described by the transition rules Unit Propagate λ, Decide, Fail of dplF, the
transition rules
Backjump GT :
P l ∆Q||Γ =⇒P l ′||Γ if
 P l ∆Q is inconsistent and
F ∧G |= l ′ ∨P
Learn GT:
M ||Γ =⇒M ||C, Γ if
 every atom in C occurs in F and
F ∧G |= C
and the transition rule Test of gtF,G that is extended to gtlF,G as follows:
M ||Γ =⇒M ′||Γ is an edge in gtlF,G justiﬁed by Test if and only if M =⇒M ′ is
an edge in gtF,G justiﬁed by Test.
We refer to the transition rules Unit Propagate λ, Test, Decide, Fail, Back-
jump GT of the graph gtlF,G as Basic. We say that a node in the graph is
semi-terminal if no rule other than Learn GT is applicable to it.
The graph gtlF,G can be used for deciding whether a formula F ∧G has a model
by constructing a path from ∅||∅to a terminal node:
Proposition 9
For any CNF formula F and a formula G formed from atoms occurring in F,
(a) every path in gtlF,G contains only ﬁnitely many edges labeled by Basic
transition rules,
(b) for any semi-terminal state M ||Γ of gtlF,G reachable from ∅||∅, M is a model
of F ∧G,
(c) FailState is reachable from ∅||∅in gtlF,G if and only if F ∧G is unsatisﬁable.
As in case of the graph dplF, the transition rule Backjump GT is applicable in
any inconsistent state with a decision literal that is reachable from ∅||∅. We call
such states backjump states.
Proposition 10
For any CNF formula F and a formula G formed from atoms occurring in F, the
transition rule Backjump GT is applicable in any backjump state in gtlF,G.
Proofs of Propositions 9 and 10 are given in Section 13.
8.2 Cmodels Algorithm
System cmodels implements an algorithm called asp-sat with Learning (Giunchiglia et al. 2006)
that extends asp-sat with Backtracking by backjumping and learning.
The application of cmodels to a program Π can be viewed as constructing a
path from ∅||∅to a terminal node in the graph gtlF,G, where
• F is the completion of Π converted to conjunctive normal form, and
• G is LF(Π).

Abstract Answer Set Solvers with Backjumping and Learning
(long version) 27
In Sections 4.2 we demonstrated a method for specifying the algorithm of an
answer set solver by means of the graph smΠ. We use this method to describe the
cmodels algorithm using the graph gtlF,G. System cmodels assigns priorities
to the inference rules of gtlF,G as follows:
Backjump GT, Fail ≫
Unit Propagate λ ≫
Decide ≫
Test.
Also, cmodels always applies the transition rule Learn GT in a non-semi-
terminal state reached by an application of Backjump GT.
The priorities imposed on the rules by cmodels guarantee that the transition
rule Test is applied to a model of F ∪Γ (clausiﬁed completion F extended by learned
clauses Γ). This allows cmodels to proceed with its search in case if a found model
is not an answer set. Furthermore, the cmodels strategy guarantees that in a state
reached by an application of Test, ﬁrst Backjump GT will be applied and then in the
resulting state Learn GT will be applied. The clause learned due to this application
of Learn GT is derived by means of loop formulas (see (Giunchiglia et al. 2006)).
In this sense cmodels uses loop formulas to guide its search.
Systems sag (Lin et al. 2006) and clasp (Gebser et al. 2007) are answer set
solvers that are enhancements of cmodels. First, they compute and clausify pro-
gram’s completion and then use unit propagate on resulting propositional formula
as an inference mechanism. Second, they guide their search by means of loop for-
mulas. Third, they implement conﬂict-driven backjumping and learning. Also, sag
uses SAT solvers for search. The systems diﬀer from cmodels in the following:
• they maintain the data structure representing an input logic program through
out the whole computation,
• in addition to implementing inference rules of the graph gtlF,G they also
implement the inference rule Unfounded of smΠ. A hybrid graph combining
the inference rule Unfounded of smΠ and the inference rules of gtlF,G may
be used to describe the sag and clasp algorithms.
System sag assigns the same priorities to the inference rules of the hybrid graph
as cmodels. Also, sag at random decides whether to apply the inference rule
Unfounded in a state.
On the other hand, system clasp assigns priorities to the inference rules of the
hybrid graph as follows:
Backjump GT, Fail ≫
Unit Propagate λ, Unfounded ≫
Decide.
Like cmodels, both sag and clasp always apply the transition rule Learn GT
in a non-semi-terminal state reached by an application of Backjump GT.

28
Y. Lierler
9 Backjumping and Extended Graph
Recall the transition rule Backjump LP of smlΠ
Backjump LP:
P l ∆Q||Γ =⇒P l ′||Γ if
 P l ∆Q is inconsistent and
Π entails l ′ ∨P.
A state in the graph smlΠ is a backjump state if it is inconsistent, contains a
decision literal, and is reachable from ∅||∅. Note that it may be not clear a priori
whether Backjump LP is applicable to a backjump state and if so to which state the
edge due to the application of Backjump LP leads. These questions are important
if we want to base an algorithm on this framework. It turns out that Backjump LP
is always applicable to a backjump state:
Proposition 11
For a program Π, the transition rule Backjump LP is applicable to any backjump
state in smlΠ.
Proposition 11 guarantees that a backjump state in smlΠ is never semi-terminal. In
the end of this section we show how Proposition 11 can be derived from the results
proved later in this paper. Next question to answer is how to continue choosing
a path in the graph after reaching a backjump state. To answer this question we
introduce the notions of reason and extended graph.
For a program Π, we say that a clause l ∨C is a reason for l to be in a list of
literals P l Q w.r.t Π if Π entails l ∨C and C ⊆P. We can equivalently restate
the second condition of Backjump LP “Π entails l ′ ∨P” as “there exists a reason
for l ′ to be in P l ′ w.r.t. Π” (note that l ′ ∨P is a reason for l ′ to be in P l ′). We
call a reason for l ′ to be in P l ′ a backjump clause. Note that Proposition 11 asserts
that a backjump clause always exists for a backjump state. It is clear that we may
continue choosing a path in the graph after reaching a backjump state if we know
how to compute a backjump clause for this state. We now deﬁne a graph sml↑
Π
that shares many properties of smlΠ but allows us to give a simpler procedure for
computing a backjump clause.
An extended record M relative to a program Π is a list of literals over the set of
atoms occurring in Π where
(i) each literal l in M is annotated either by ∆or by a reason for l to be in M
w.r.t. Π,
(ii) M contains no repetitions,
(iii) for any inconsistent preﬁx of M its last literal is annotated by a reason.
For instance, let Π be the program
a ←not b
c.
The list of literals
b∆a∆¬b¬b∨¬a

Abstract Answer Set Solvers with Backjumping and Learning
(long version) 29
is an extended record relative to Π. On the other hand, the lists of literals
a∆¬a∆
a∆¬b¬b∨¬a b∆
b∆a∆¬b¬b∨¬a c∆
are not extended records.
An extended state relative to a program Π is either a distinguished state FailState
or a pair of the form M ||Γ where M is an extended record relative to Π, and Γ
is the same as in the deﬁnition of an augmented state (i.e., Γ is a (multi-)set of
constraints formed from atoms occurring in Π that are entailed by Π.) It is easy to
see that for any extended state S relative to a program Π, the result of removing
annotations from all nondecision literals of S is a state of smlΠ: we will denote this
state by S ↓.
For instance, consider program a ←not b. All pairs
FailState
∅||∅
a∆¬b¬b∨¬a||∅
¬a∆bb∨a||∅
are among valid extended states relative to this program. The corresponding states S ↓
are
FailState
∅||∅
a∆¬b||∅
¬a∆b||∅.
We now deﬁne a graph sml↑
Π for any program Π. Its nodes are the extended
states relative to Π. The transition rules of smlΠ are extended to sml↑
Π as follows:
S1 =⇒S2 is an edge in sml↑
Π justiﬁed by a transition rule T if and only if S ↓
1 =⇒S ↓
2
is an edge in smlΠ justiﬁed by T.
We will omit the word “extended” before “record” and “state” when this is clear
from a context.
The following lemma formally states the relationship between nodes of the graphs
smlΠ and sml↑
Π:
Lemma 8
For any program Π, if S ′ is a state reachable from ∅||∅in the graph smlΠ then
there is a state S in the graph sml↑
Π such that S ↓= S ′.
The deﬁnitions of Basic transition rules and semi-terminal states in sml↑
Π are
similar to their deﬁnitions for smlΠ.
Proposition 8↑
For any program Π,
(a) every path in sml↑
Π contains only ﬁnitely many edges labeled by Basic tran-
sition rules,
(b) for any semi-terminal state M ||Γ of sml↑
Π, M + is an answer set of Π,
(c) sml↑
Π contains an edge leading to FailState if and only if Π has no answer
sets.
Note that Proposition 8↑(b), unlike Proposition 8 (b), is not limited to semi-
terminal states that are reachable from ∅||∅. As in the case of the graph smlΠ,
sml↑
Π can be used for deciding whether a program Π has an answer set. Further-
more, the new graph provides the means for computing a backjump clause that
permits practical application of the transition rule Backjump LP: Sections 10.3

30
Y. Lierler
and 11 describe the BackjumpClause (Algorithm 1) and BackjumpClauseFirstUIP
(Algorithm 2) procedures that compute Decision and FirstUIP backjump clauses
respectively.
We say that a state in the graph sml↑
Π is a backjump state if its record is incon-
sistent and contains a decision literal. Unlike the deﬁnition of a backjump state in
smlΠ, this deﬁnition does not require a backjump state to be reachable from ∅||∅
in sml↑
Π. As in case of the graph smlΠ, any backjump state in sml↑
Π is not semi-
terminal:
Proposition 11↑
For a program Π, the transition rule Backjump LP is applicable to any backjump
state in sml↑
Π.
Proposition 8 (b), (c) and Proposition 11 easily follow from Lemma 8 and Propo-
sition 8↑(b), (c) and Proposition 11↑respectively. Proof of Proposition 8 (a) is
similar to the proof of Proposition 8↑(a).
Next section will present the proofs for Proposition 8↑, Lemma 8, and Proposi-
tion 11↑. It is interesting to note that the proofs of Lemma 8 and Proposition 11↑
implicitly provide the means for choosing a path in the graph sml↑
Π:
• given a state M ||Γ and a transition rule Unit Propagate LP, All Rules Can-
celled, Backchain True, Backchain False λ, or Unfounded applicable to M ||Γ,
the proof of Lemma 8 describes a clause that may be used to construct a
record M ′ so that there is an edge M ||Γ =⇒M ′||Γ due to this transition
rule,
• given a backjump state M ||Γ, the proof of Proposition 11↑describes a back-
jump clause that can be used to construct a record M ′ so that there is an
edge M ||Γ =⇒M ′||Γ due to Backjump LP.
Furthermore, the construction of the proof of Proposition 11↑paves the way for
procedure BackjumpClause presented in Algorithm 1.
10 Proofs of Proposition 8↑, Lemma 8, Proposition 11↑
10.1 Proof of Proposition 8↑
Lemma 9
For any program Π, an extended record M relative to Π, and every assignment X
such that X + is an answer set for Π, if X satisﬁes all decision literals in M then
X |= M .
Proof
By induction on the length of M . The property trivially holds for ∅. We assume that
the property holds for any state with n elements. Consider any state M with n + 1
elements. Let X be an assignment such that X + is an answer set for Π and X
satisﬁes all decision literals in M . We will now show that X |= M .
Case 1. M has the form P l ∆. By the inductive hypothesis, X |= P. Since X
satisﬁes all decision literals in M , X |= l.

Abstract Answer Set Solvers with Backjumping and Learning
(long version) 31
Case 2. M has the form P l l∨C. By the inductive hypothesis, X |= P. By the
deﬁnition of a reason, (i) Π entails l ∨C and (ii) C ⊆P. From (ii) it follows that
P |= ¬C. Consequently, X |= ¬C. From (i) it follows that for any assignment X
such that X + is an answer set, X |= l ∨C. Consequently, X |= l.
The proof of Proposition 8↑assumes the correctness of Proposition 11↑that we
demonstrate in Section 10.3.
Proposition 8↑
For any program Π,
(a) every path in sml↑
Π contains only ﬁnitely many edges labeled by Basic tran-
sition rules,
(b) for any semi-terminal state M ||Γ of sml↑
Π, M + is an answer set of Π,
(c) sml↑
Π contains an edge leading to FailState if and only if Π has no answer
sets.
Proof
(a) For any list N of literals by |N | we denote the length of N . Any state M ||Γ
has the form M0l ∆
1 M1 . . . l ∆
p Mp||Γ, where l ∆
1 . . . l ∆
p
are all decision literals of M ;
we deﬁne α(M ||Γ) as the sequence of nonnegative integers |M0|, |M1|, . . . , |Mp|, and
α(FailState) = ∞. For any states S and S ′ of sml↑
Π, we understand α(S) < α(S ′)
as the lexicographical order. We ﬁrst note that for any state M ||Γ, value of α is
based only on the ﬁrst component M of the state. Second, there is a ﬁnite number
of distinct values of α due to the fact that there is a ﬁnite number of distinct M s
over Π. We conclude that there is a ﬁnite number of distinct values of α for the
states of sml↑
Π, even though the number of distinct states in sml↑
Π is inﬁnite.
By the deﬁnition of the transition rules of sml↑
Π, if there is an edge from M ||Γ
to M ′||Γ′ in sml↑
Π formed by any Basic transition rule then α(M ||Γ) < α(M ′||Γ′).
Then, due to the fact that there is a ﬁnite number of distinct values of α, it follows
that there is only a ﬁnite number of edges due to the application of Basic rules
possible in any path.
(b) Let M ||Γ be a semi-terminal state so that none of the Basic rules are applicable.
From the fact that Decide is not applicable, we conclude that M assigns all literals.
Furthermore, M is consistent. Indeed, assume that M is inconsistent. Then, since
Fail is not applicable, M contains a decision literal. Consequently, M ||Γ is a back-
jump state. By Proposition 11↑, the transition rule Backjump LP is applicable
in M ||Γ. This contradicts our assumption that M ||Γ is semi-terminal.
Also, M is a model of Π: since Unit Propagate LP is not applicable in M ||Γ, it
follows that for every rule a ←B ∈Π, if B ⊆M then a ∈M .
Assume that M + is not an answer set. Then, by Lemma 3, there is a non-empty
unfounded set U on M w.r.t. Π such that U ⊆M . It follows that Unfounded is
applicable (with an arbitrary a ∈U ) in M ||Γ. This contradicts the assumption
that M ||Γ is semi-terminal.
(c) Left-to-right: There is a state M ||Γ in sml↑
Π such that there is an edge be-
tween M ||Γ and FailState. By the deﬁnition of sml↑
Π, this edge is due to the transi-
tion rule Fail. Consequently, state M ||Γ is such that M is inconsistent and contains

32
Y. Lierler
no decision literals. By Lemma 9, for every assignment X such that X + is an an-
swer set for Π, X satisﬁes M . Since M is inconsistent we conclude that Π has no
answer sets.
Right-to-left: Consider the process of constructing a path consisting only of edges
due to Basic transition rules. By (a), it follows that this path will eventually reach
a semi-terminal state. By (b), this semi-terminal state cannot be diﬀerent from
FailState, because Π has no answer sets. We conclude that there is an edge leading
to FailState.
10.2 Proof of Lemma 8
The proof uses the notion of loop formula (Lin and Zhao 2004).
Given a set A of atoms by Bodies(Π, A) we denote the set that consists of the
elements of Bodies(Π, a) for all a in A. Let Π be a program. For any set Y of atoms,
the external support formula (Lee 2005) for Y is
_
B∈Bodies(Π,Y ),B +∩Y =∅
B.
(20)
We will denote the external support formula by ESΠ,Y . For any set Y of atoms,
the loop formula for Y is the implication
_
a∈Y
a →ESΠ,Y .
We can rewrite this formula as the disjunction
^
a∈Y
¬a ∨ESΠ,Y .
(21)
From the Main Theorem in (Lee 2005) we conclude:
Lemma on Loop Formulas
For any program Π, Π entails loop formulas (21) for all sets Y of atoms that occur
in Π.
For a state S in the graph sml↑
Π, we say that S ↓in smlΠ is the image of S.
Lemma 8
For any program Π, if S ′ is a state reachable from ∅||∅in the graph smlΠ then
there is a state S in the graph sml↑
Π such that S ↓= S ′.
Proof
Since the property trivially holds for the initial state ∅||∅, we only need to prove
that all transition rules of smlΠ preserve it.
Consider an edge M ||Γ =⇒M ′||Γ′ in the graph smlΠ such that there is a state
M1||Γ in the graph sml↑
Π satisfying the condition (M1||Γ)↓= M ||Γ. We need to
show that there is a state in the graph sml↑
Π such that M ′||Γ′ is its image in smlΠ.
Consider several cases that correspond to a transition rule leading from M ||Γ to
M ′||Γ′:

Abstract Answer Set Solvers with Backjumping and Learning
(long version) 33
Unit Propagate LP:
M ||Γ =⇒M a||Γ if
 a ←B ∈Π and
B ⊆M .
M ′||Γ′ is M a||Γ. It is suﬃcient to prove that M1aa∨B||Γ is a state of sml↑
Π. It is
enough to show that a clause a ∨B is a reason for a to be in M a. By applicability
conditions of Unit Propagate LP, B ⊆M . Since Π entails its rule a ←B, Π entails
a ∨B.
All Rules Cancelled:
M ||Γ =⇒M ¬a||Γ if B ∩M ̸= ∅for all B ∈Bodies(Π, a).
M ′||Γ′ is M ¬a||Γ. Consider any B ∈Bodies(Π, a). Since B ∩M ̸= ∅, B contains a
literal from M : call it f (B). It is suﬃcient to show that
¬a ∨
_
B∈Bodies(Π,a)
f (B)
(22)
is a reason for ¬a to be in M ¬a.
First, by the choice of f (B), f (B) ∈M ; consequently,
_
B∈Bodies(Π,a)
f (B) ⊆M .
Second, since f (B) ∈B, the loop formula ¬a ∨ESΠ,{a} entails (22). By Lemma
on Loop Formulas, it follows that Π entails (22).
Backchain True:
M ||Γ =⇒M l||Γ if







a ←B ∈Π,
a ∈M ,
B′ ∩M ̸= ∅for all B′ ∈Bodies(Π, a) \ {B},
l ∈B.
M ′||Γ′ is M l||Γ. Consider any B′ ∈Bodies(Π, a)\B. Since B
′ ∩M ̸= ∅, B′ contains
a literal from M : call it f (B′). A clause
l ∨¬a ∨
_
B ′∈Bodies(Π,a)\B
f (B′) ·
(23)
is a reason for l to be in M l. The proof of this statement is similar to the case of
All Rules Cancelled.
Backchain False λ:
M ||Γ =⇒M l||Γ if



a ←l, B ∈Π ∪Γ,
¬a ∈M or a = ⊥,
B ⊆M .
M ′||Γ′ is M l||Γ. A clause l ∨B ∨a is a reason for l to be in M l. The proof of this
statement is similar to the case of Unit Propagate LP.
Unfounded:
M ||Γ =⇒M ¬a||Γ if
 M is consistent and
a ∈U for a set U unfounded on M w.r.t. Π.

34
Y. Lierler
M ′||Γ′ is M ¬a||Γ. Consider any B ∈Bodies(Π, U ) such that U ∩B+ = ∅. By the
deﬁnition of an unfounded set, it follows that B ∩M ̸= ∅. Consequently, B contains
a literal from M : call it f (B). The clause
¬a ∨
_
Bodies(Π,U ),B +∩U =∅
f (B)
(24)
is a reason for ¬a to be in M ¬a. The proof of this statement is similar to the case
of All Rules Cancelled.
Backjump LP, Decide, Fail, and Learn LP: obvious.
The process of turning a state of smlΠ reachable from ∅||∅into a corresponding
state of sml↑
Π can be illustrated by the following example: Consider a program Π
a ←not b
b ←not a, not c
c ←not f
←k, d
k ←l, not b
←m, not l, not b
m ←not k, not l
(25)
and a path in smlΠ
∅||∅=⇒(Decide)
a∆||∅=⇒(All Rules Cancelled)
a∆¬b||∅=⇒(Decide)
a∆¬bc∆||∅=⇒(Backchain True)
a∆¬bc∆¬f ||∅=⇒(Decide)
a∆¬bc∆¬f d∆||∅=⇒(Backchain False λ)
a∆¬bc∆¬f d∆¬k||∅=⇒(Backchain False λ)
a∆¬bc∆¬f d∆¬k ¬l||∅=⇒(Backchain False λ)
a∆¬bc∆¬f d∆¬k ¬l ¬m||∅=⇒(Unit Propagate LP)
a∆¬bc∆¬f d∆¬k ¬l ¬mm||∅
(26)
The construction in the proof of Lemma 8 applied to the nodes in this path gives
following states of sml↑
Π:
∅||∅
a∆||∅
a∆¬b¬b∨¬a||∅
a∆¬b¬b∨¬a c∆||∅
a∆¬b¬b∨¬a c∆¬f ¬f ∨¬c||∅
a∆¬b¬b∨¬a c∆¬f ¬f ∨¬cd∆||∅
a∆¬b¬b∨¬a c∆¬f ¬f ∨¬cd∆¬k ¬k∨¬d||∅
a∆¬b¬b∨¬a c∆¬f ¬f ∨¬cd∆¬k ¬k∨¬d ¬l ¬l∨b∨k||∅
a∆¬b¬b∨¬a c∆¬f ¬f ∨¬cd∆¬k ¬k∨¬d ¬l ¬l∨b∨k ¬m¬m∨l∨b||∅
a∆¬b¬b∨¬a c∆¬f ¬f ∨¬cd∆¬k ¬k∨¬d ¬l ¬l∨b∨k ¬m¬m∨l∨bmm∨k∨l||∅
(27)
It is clear that these nodes form a path in sml↑
Π with every edge justiﬁed by the
same transition rule as the corresponding edge in path (26) in smlΠ.

Abstract Answer Set Solvers with Backjumping and Learning
(long version) 35
10.3 Proof of Proposition 11↑
In this section Π is an arbitrary and ﬁxed logic program.
For a record M , by lcp(M ) we denote its largest consistent preﬁx. We say that a
clause C is conﬂicting on a list M of literals if Π entails C, and C ⊆lcp(M ). For
example, let M be the ﬁrst component of the last state in (27):
a∆¬b¬b∨¬a c∆¬f ¬f ∨¬cd∆¬k ¬k∨¬d ¬l ¬l∨b∨k ¬m¬m∨l∨bmm∨k∨l.
(28)
Then, lcp(M ) is obtained by dropping the last element mm∨k∨l of M . It is clear
that the reason m ∨k ∨l for m to be in M is a conﬂicting clause on M .
Lemma 10
The literal that immediately follows lcp(M ) in an inconsistent record M , has the
form l C where C is a conﬂicting clause on M .
Proof
By the requirement (iii) of the deﬁnition of an extended record, the literal that
immediately follows lcp(M ) may not be annotated by ∆. Consequently, the literal
has the form l C. We now show that C is a conﬂicting clause on M . Since C is a
reason for l to be in lcp(M )l C , it immediately follows that Π entails C, C can be
written as l∨C ′, and C ′ ⊆lcp(M ). Since l immediately follows the largest consistent
preﬁx of M , l ∈lcp(M ). Consequently, C ⊆lcp(M ). We conclude that C is indeed
a conﬂicting clause on M .
For any inconsistent record l1 · · · ln and any conﬂicting clause C on this record,
by βl1···ln (C) we denote the set of numbers i such that li ∈C . (It is clear that
every element from C equals to one of the literals in l1 · · · ln.) The relation I < J
between subsets I , J of {1 · · · n} is understood here as the lexicographical order
between I and J sorted in descending order. For instance, {2 6 7} < {6 7 8}
because {7 6 2} < {8 7 6} in lexicographical order.
Recall that the resolution rule can be applied to clauses C ∨l and C ′ ∨¬l and
produces the clause C ∨C ′, called the resolvent of C ∨l and C ′ ∨¬l on l.
Lemma 11
Let M be a record and let l B be a nondecision literal from lcp(M ). If clause D is
the resolvent of B and a clause C conﬂicting on M then
(i) D is a clause conﬂicting on M ,
(ii) βM(D) < βM(C).
For instance, let M be (28), let reason ¬m ∨l ∨b for ¬m in lcp(M ) be B, and let
conﬂicting clause m ∨k ∨l on M be C. Then D, the result of resolving B together
with C, is clause k ∨l ∨b. Lemma 11 asserts that k ∨l ∨b is a conﬂicting clause
on M and that βM(D) < βM(C). Indeed, βM(D) = {2 6 7} and βM(C) = {6 7 8}.

36
Y. Lierler
Proof
(i) Clause D is a resolvent of B and C on some literal l ′. Then, for some literal
l ′ ∈B, l ′ ∈C. The clause C can be written as l ′ ∨C ′.
In order to demonstrate that D is a conﬂicting clause we need to show that
D ⊆lcp(M ) and Π entails D.
Since B is a reason for l to be in lcp(M ), Π entails B and B has the form l ∨B′
where B′ ⊆lcp(M ). Since C is a conﬂicting clause on M , C ⊆lcp(M ) and Π
entails C. From the fact that lcp(M ) is consistent, it follows that there is no literal
in B′ such that its complement occurs in C. Consequently, l ′ ̸∈B′ so that l ′ is l
and D is B′ ∨C ′. We conclude that D ⊆lcp(M ). From the fact that Π entails B, Π
entails C, and the construction of D, it follows that Π entails D.
(ii) From the proof of (i) it follows that D is a resolvent of B and C on l
where B has the form l ∨B′. Since B is a reason for l to be in lcp(M ), every
literal in B′ precedes l in lcp(M ). Since D is derived by replacing l in C with B′,
βM(D) < βM(B).
Let record M be l1 · · · li · · · ln, the decision level of a literal li is the number of
decision literals in l1 · · · li: we denote it by decM (li). We will also use this notation
to denote the decision level of a set of literals: For a set P ⊆M of literals, decM (P)
is the decision level of the literal in P that occurs latest in M . For record M and a
decision level j by M j we denote the preﬁx of M that consists of the literals in M
that belong to decision level less than j and by M j] we denote the preﬁx of M that
consists of the literals in M that belong to decision level less than or equal to j.
For instance, let M be record (28) then decM (¬k) = 3, decM (¬b c ¬k) = 3, M 3 is
a∆¬b¬b∨¬a c∆¬f ¬f ∨¬c, and M 3] is M itself.
Lemma 12
For an inconsistent record M and a conﬂicting clause l ∨C on M , if decM (l) >
decM(c) for all c ∈C then lcp(M )decM (C)]l l∨C is a record.
Proof
We need to show that (i) l ̸∈lcp(M )dec(C)] and (ii) l ∨C is a reason for l to be
in lcp(M )dec(C )]l, i.e, Π entails l ∨C and C ⊆lcp(M )dec(C)].
Since l ∨C is conﬂicting on M , l ∨C ⊆lcp(M ). From the consistency of
lcp(M ) and the fact that l ∈lcp(M ), it follows that l ̸∈lcp(M ). Consequently,
l ̸∈lcp(M )dec(C)].
Since l ∨C is conﬂicting on M , Π entails l ∨C and l ∨C ⊆lcp(M ). Consequently,
C ⊆lcp(M ). From the deﬁnition of decM (C ), it follows that decM (C) is the decision
level of the literal in C that occurs latest in lcp(M ). By the deﬁnition of a decision
level, C ⊆lcp(M )decM (C)].
Proposition 11↑
For a program Π, the transition rule Backjump LP is applicable to any backjump
state in sml↑
Π.

Abstract Answer Set Solvers with Backjumping and Learning
(long version) 37
Proof
Let M ||Γ be a backjump state in sml↑
Π. Let R be the list of reasons that are assigned
to the nondecision literals in lcp(M ).
Consider the process of building a sequence C1, C2, . . . of clauses so that
• C1 is the reason of the member of M that immediately follows lcp(M ), and
• Cj (j > 1) is a resolvent of Cj−1 and some clause in R
while derivation of new clauses is possible. From Lemma 11 (i) and the choice of C1
and R, it follows that any clause in C1, C2 . . . is conﬂicting. By Lemma 11 (ii)
we conclude that βM(Cj ) < βM(Cj−1) (j > 1). It is clear that this process will
terminate after deriving some clause Cm, since the number of conﬂicting clauses
on M is ﬁnite. It is clear that clause Cm cannot be resolved against any clause in R.
Case 1. Cm is the empty clause. Since M ||Γ is a backjump state, M contains a
decision literal l ∆. By part (iii) of the deﬁnition of a record, l belongs to lcp(M ).
Consequently, M can be represented in the form lcp(M )decM (l)l ∆Q.
By the choice of C1, C1 is a reason and must consist of at least one literal.
Consequently, m > 1. Clause Cm is derived from clauses Cm−1 and some clause
in R. Since Cm is empty, Cm−1 is a unit clause l ′. We will show that
lcp(M )decM (l)l ∆Q||Γ =⇒lcp(M )decM (l)l ′l′||Γ
is an application of Backjump LP. It is suﬃcient to demonstrate that lcp(M )decM (l)l ′l′
is a record. Since lcp(M )decM (l)l ∆Q is a record, we only need to show that l ′ ̸∈
lcp(M )decM (l) and clause l ′ is a reason for l ′ to be in lcp(M )decM (l)l ′. Recall that
Cm−1, i.e., l ′, is a conﬂicting clause. Consequently, Π entails l ′ and l ′ ∈lcp(M ).
Since lcp(M ) is consistent, l ′ ̸∈lcp(M ) so that l ′ ̸∈lcp(M )decM (l). On the other
hand, from the fact that Π entails l ′ it immediately follows that clause l ′ is a reason
for l ′ to be in lcp(M )decM (l)l ′.
Case 2. Cm is not empty. Since Cm is a conﬂicting clause on M , the complement
of any literal in Cm belongs to lcp(M ). Furthermore, every such complement is a
decision literal in lcp(M ). Indeed, if this complement is l
l∨B ∈lcp(M ) then l ∨B
is one of the clauses Bi, and it can be resolved against Cm.
By the deﬁnition of a decision level, there is at most one decision literal that
belongs to any decision level. It follows that Cm can be written as l ∨C ′
m so
that decM (l) > decM (c) for any c ∈C ′
m. Consequently, M can be written as
lcp(M )decM (l)l
∆Q. Note that
lcp(M )decM (l)l
∆Q||Γ =⇒lcp(M )decM (C ′m)]l Cm||Γ
is an application of Backjump LP. Indeed, by Lemma 12 lcp(M )decM (C
′
m)]l Cm is a
record.
Algorithm 1 presents procedure BackjumpClause that computes a backjump
clause for any backjump state in the graph sml↑
Π. The algorithm follows from the
construction of the proof of Proposition 11↑. It is based on the iterative application
of the resolution rule on reasons of the smallest inconsistent preﬁx of a state. The

38
Y. Lierler
BackjumpClause (M ||Γ);
Arguments
: M ||Γ is a backjump state in sml↑
Π
Return Value : C is a backjump clause
begin
C ←the reason of the member of M that immediately follows lcp(M );
N ←the list of the nondecision literals in lcp(M );
R ←the list of the reasons that are assigned to the literals in N ;
while C ∩N ̸= ∅do
l ←a literal in C ∩N ;
B ←the clause in R that contains l;
C ′ ←the resolvent of C and B on l;
if C ′ = ∅then
return C
C ←C ′
return C ;
Algorithm 1: A procedure for generating a backjump clause.
proof of Proposition 11↑allows to conclude the termination of BackjumpClause and
asserts that a clause returned by the procedure is a backjump clause on a backjump
state.
For instance, let Π be (25). Consider an execution of BackjumpClause on Π and
backjump state (28). The table below gives the values of lcp(M ), C, N , and R
during the execution of the BackjumpClause algorithm. By Ci we denote a value
of C before the i-th iteration of the while loop.
lcp(M )
a∆¬b¬b∨¬a c∆¬f ¬f ∨¬cd∆¬k ¬k∨¬d ¬l ¬l∨b∨k ¬m¬m∨l∨b
C1
m ∨k ∨l
N
¬b¬b∨¬a ¬f ¬f ∨¬c ¬k ¬k∨¬d ¬l ¬l∨b∨k ¬m¬m∨l∨b
R
¬b ∨¬a, ¬f ∨¬c, ¬k ∨¬d, ¬l ∨b ∨k, ¬m ∨l ∨b
C2
k ∨l ∨b is the resolvent of C1 and ¬m ∨l ∨b
C3
k ∨b is the resolvent of C2 and ¬l ∨b ∨k
C4
¬d ∨b is the resolvent of C3 and ¬k ∨¬d
C5
¬d ∨¬a is the resolvent of C4 and ¬b ∨¬a
(29)
The algorithm will terminate with the clause ¬d ∨¬a. Proof of Proposition 11↑
asserts that (i) this clause is a backjump clause such that d and a are decision
literals in M and (ii) the transition
a∆¬b¬b∨¬a c∆¬f ¬f ∨¬cd∆¬k ¬k∨¬d¬l ¬l∨b∨k¬m¬m∨l∨bmm∨k∨l||∅=⇒
a∆¬b¬b∨¬a ¬d¬d∨¬a||∅
(30)
in sml↑Π is an application of Backjump LP. Indeed, by Lemma 12 lcp(M )decM (¬a)]¬d¬d∨¬a,
in other words a∆¬b¬b∨¬a ¬d¬d∨¬a, is a record.
Note that a backjump clause may be derived in other ways than captured by
BackjumpClause algorithm: the transition rule Backjump LP is applicable with
an arbitrary backjump clause. Usually, dpll-like procedures implement conﬂict-
driven backjumping and learning where a particular learning schema such as, for

Abstract Answer Set Solvers with Backjumping and Learning
(long version) 39
instance, Decision or FirstUIP (Mitchell 2005) is applied for computing a special
kind of a backjump clause. It turns out that the BackjumpClause algorithm captures
the Decision learning schema for ASP. Typically, SAT solvers impose an order for
resolving the literals during the process of Decision backjump clause derivation. We
can impose similar order by replacing the line
l ←a literal in C ∩N
in the algorithm BackjumpClause with
l ←a literal in C ∩N that occurs latest in lcp(M ).
In fact, the sample application of BackjumpClause algorithm described in (29)
follows this ordering.
This section introduced BackjumpClause algorithm that derives a Decision back-
jump clause for an arbitrary backjump state. In the next section we will introduce
an algorithm that will compute an ASP counterpart of FirstUIP backjump clause.
11 FirstUIP Conﬂict-Driven Backjumping and Learning
Conﬂict-driven backjumping and learning proved to be a highly successful tech-
nique in modern SAT solving. Furthermore, in (Zhang et al. 2001) the authors
investigated the performance of various learning schemes and established exper-
imentally that FirstUIP clause is the most useful single clause to learn. Success of
conﬂict-driven learning led to the implementation of its ASP counterpart in systems
smodelscc, clasp, and sup. There are two common methods for describing a back-
jump clause construction in the SAT literature. The ﬁrst one employes the implica-
tion graph (Marques-Silva and Sakallah 1996) and the second one employes resolu-
tion (Mitchell 2005). Ward and Schlipf (Ward and Schlipf 2004) extended the deﬁ-
nition of an implication graph to the smodels algorithm and implemented FirstUIP
learning schema in answer set solver smodelscc. In the previous section we used
sml↑
Π formalism and resolution to describe the BackjumpClause algorithm for com-
puting an ASP counterpart of a Decision backjump clause. In (Gebser et al. 2007)
the authors used the concepts from constraint processing to implement FirstUIP
learning schema in answer set solver clasp.
This section presents the BackjumpClauseFirstUIP algorithm for computing an
ASP counterpart of a FirstUIP backjump clause by means of sml↑
Π formalism and
resolution. The BackjumpClauseFirstUIP algorithm is employed by the system sup
in its implementation of conﬂict-driven backjumping and learning.
The Algorithm 2 presents procedure BackjumpClauseFirstUIP that computes a
FirstUIP backjump clause for any backjump state in the graph sml↑
Π.
We now state the correctness of the algorithm BackjumpClauseFirstUIP. We
start by showing its termination. By C1 we will denote the initial value assigned to
clause C. From Lemma 11 (i) and the choice of C1 we conclude that at any point of
computation clause C is conﬂicting on M . By Lemma 11 (ii), the value of βM(C)
decreases with each new assignment of clause C in the while loop. It follows that
the while loop will terminate since the number of conﬂicting clauses C on M such

40
Y. Lierler
BackjumpClauseFirstUIP (M ||Γ);
Arguments
: M ||Γ is a backjump state in sml↑
Π
Return Value : C is a backjump clause
begin
C ←the reason of the member of M that immediately follows lcp(M );
l ←the literal in C that occurs latest in lcp(M );
P ←the sublist of lcp(M ) that consists of the literals that belong to the decision
level dec(l);
R ←the list of the reasons that are assigned to the literals in P;
while |C ∩P| > 1 do
l ←the literal in C that occurs latest in P;
B ←the clause in R that contains l;
C ←the resolvent of C and B on l;
return C ;
Algorithm 2: A procedure for generating a FirstUIP backjump clause.
that |C ∩P| > 1 is ﬁnite. By Cm we will denote the clause C with which the
while loop terminates. In other words BackjumpClauseFirstUIP returns Cm. We
now show that Cm is indeed a backjump clause. We already concluded that Cm
is a conﬂicting clause on M . Furthermore, from the termination condition of the
while loop |Cm ∩P| ≤1. From the choice of C1 and P it follows that |Cm ∩P| = 1.
Consequently, Cm can be written as l ∨C ′
m where l is in singleton Cm ∩P. By
Lemma 11 (ii), β(Cm) ≤β(C1). From the deﬁnition of β and the choice of P it
follows that decM (l) > decM (c) for all c ∈C ′
m. By Lemma 12, lcp(M )decM (C ′m)]l Cm
is a record. In other words, transition
M ||Γ =⇒lcp(M )decM (C ′m)]l Cm||Γ
is an application of Backjump LP. Consequently, Cm is a backjump clause.
For instance, let Π be (25). Consider an execution of BackjumpClauseFirstUIP
on Π and a backjump state (28). The table below gives the values of lcp(M ), C, P,
and R during the execution of BackjumpClauseFirstUIP. By Ci we denote a value
of C before the i-th iteration of the while loop.
lcp(M )
a∆¬b¬b∨¬a c∆¬f ¬f ∨¬cd∆¬k ¬k∨¬d ¬l ¬l∨b∨k ¬m¬m∨l∨b
C1
m ∨k ∨l
P
d∆¬k ¬k∨¬d ¬l ¬l∨b∨k ¬m¬m∨l∨b
R
¬k ∨¬d, ¬l ∨b ∨k, ¬m ∨l ∨b
C2
k ∨l ∨b is the resolvent of C1 and ¬m ∨l ∨b
C3
k ∨b is the resolvent of C2 and ¬l ∨b ∨k.
The BackjumpClauseFirstUIP algorithm will terminate with the clause k ∨b. The
proof of the correctness of BackjumpClauseFirstUIP asserts that k ∨b is a backjump
clause and the transition
a∆¬b¬b∨¬a c∆¬f ¬f ∨¬cd∆¬k ¬k∨¬d¬l ¬l∨b∨k¬m¬m∨l∨bmm∨k∨l =⇒
a∆¬b¬b∨¬a k k∨b||∅
(31)

Abstract Answer Set Solvers with Backjumping and Learning
(long version) 41
in sml↑Π is an application of Backjump LP.
12 Extended Graph: Generate and Test
In this section we introduce an extended graph gtl↑
F,G for the generate and test
abstract framework gtlF,G similar as in Section 9 we introduced sml↑
Π for smlΠ.
For a formula H , we say that a clause l ∨C is a reason for l to be in a list P l Q
of literals w.r.t. H if H |= l ∨C and C ⊆P.
An (extended) record M relative to a formula H is a list of literals over the set
of atoms occurring in H where
(i) each literal l in M is annotated either by ∆or by a reason for l to be in M
w.r.t. H ,
(ii) M contains no repetitions,
(iii) for any inconsistent preﬁx of M its last literal is annotated by a reason.
An (extended) state relative to a CNF formula F, and a formula G formed from
atoms occurring in F is either a distinguished state FailState or a pair of the
form M ||Γ, where M is an extended record relative to F ∧G, and Γ is the same
as in the deﬁnition of an augmented state (i.e., Γ is a (multi-)set of clauses formed
from atoms occurring in F that are entailed by F ∧G.) For any extended state S
relative to F and G, the result of removing annotations from all nondecision literals
of S is a state of gtlF,G: we will denote this state by S ↓.
For a CNF formula F and a formula G formed from atoms occurring in F, we
will deﬁne a graph gtl↑
F,G. The set of the nodes of gtl↑
F,G consists of the extended
states relative to F and G. The transition rules of gtlF,G are extended to gtl↑
F,G
as follows: S1 =⇒S2 is an edge in gtl↑
F,G justiﬁed by a transition rule T if and
only if S ↓
1 =⇒S ↓
2 is an edge in gtlF,G justiﬁed by T.
The lemma below formally states the relationship between nodes of the graphs
gtlF,G and gtl↑
F,G:
Lemma 13
For any CNF formula F and a formula G formed from atoms occurring in F, if S ′
is a state reachable from ∅||∅in the graph gtlF,G then there is a state S in the
graph gtl↑
F,G such that S ↓= S ′.
The deﬁnitions of Basic transition rules and semi-terminal states in gtl↑
F,G are
similar to their deﬁnitions for gtlF,G .
Proposition 9↑
For any CNF formula F and a formula G formed from atoms occurring in F,
(a) every path in gtl↑
F,G contains only ﬁnitely many edges labeled by Basic
transition rules,
(b) for any semi-terminal state M ||Γ of gtl↑
F,G, M is a model of F ∧G,
(c) gtl↑
F,G contains an edge leading to FailState if and only if F ∧G is unsatis-
ﬁable.

42
Y. Lierler
We say that a state in the graph gtl↑
F,G is a backjump state if its record is
inconsistent and contains a decision literal. As in case of the graph gtlF,G, any
backjump state in gtl↑
F,G is not semi-terminal:
Proposition 10↑
For any CNF formula F and a formula G formed from atoms occurring in F, the
transition rule Backjump GT is applicable in any backjump state in gtl↑
F,G.
Proposition 9 (b), (c) and Proposition 10 easily follow from Lemma 13 and Propo-
sition 9↑(b), (c) and Proposition 10↑respectively. Proof of Proposition 9 (a) is
similar to the proof of Proposition 9↑(a).
13 Proofs of Proposition 9↑, Lemma 13, Proposition 10↑
13.1 Proof of Proposition 9↑
Lemma 14
For any CNF formula F, a formula G formed from atoms occurring in F, an ex-
tended record M relative to F ∧G, and any model X of F ∧G, if X satisﬁes all
decision literals in M then X |= M .
Proof
By induction on the length of M . The property trivially holds for ∅. We assume that
the property holds for any state with n elements. Consider any state M with n + 1
elements. Let X be a model of F ∧G such that X satisﬁes all decision literals in M .
Case 1. M has the form P l ∆. By the inductive hypothesis, X |= P. Since X
satisﬁes all decision literals in M , X |= l ∆.
Case 2. M has the form P l l∨C. By the inductive hypothesis, X |= P. By the
deﬁnition of a reason (i) F ∧G entails l ∨C and (ii) C ⊆P. From (ii) it follows
that P |= ¬C. Consequently, X |= ¬C. From (i) it follows that X |= l ∨C. We
conclude that X |= l.
The proof of Proposition 9↑assumes the correctness of Proposition 10↑that we
demonstrate in Section 13.3.
ıProof of Proposition 9↑
Parts (a) and (c) are proved as in the proof of Proposition 8↑, using Lemma 14.
(b) Let M ||Γ be a semi-terminal state so that none of the Basic rules are applicable.
From the fact that Decide is not applicable, we conclude that M assigns all literals.
Furthermore, M is consistent. Indeed, assume that M is inconsistent. Then, since
Fail is not applicable, M contains a decision literal. Consequently, M ||Γ is a back-
jump state. By Proposition 10↑, the transition rule Backjump GT is applicable in
M ||Γ. This contradicts our assumption that M ||Γ is semi-terminal.
Also, M is a model of F: since Unit Propagate λ is not applicable, it follows that
for every clause C ∨l ∈F ∪Γ if C ⊆M then l ∈M . Consequently, M |= C ∨l.
Furthermore, M is a model of G: since Test is not applicable, then G ̸|= M . We
conclude that M |= G. Consequently, M is a model of F ∧G.

Abstract Answer Set Solvers with Backjumping and Learning
(long version) 43
13.2 Proof of Lemma 13
For a state S in the graph gtl↑
F,G, we say that S ↓in gtlF,G is the image of S.
Lemma 13
For any CNF formula F and a formula G formed from atoms occurring in F, if S ′
is a state reachable from ∅||∅in the graph gtlF,G then there is a state S in the
graph gtl↑
F,G such that S ↓= S ′.
Proof
Since the property trivially holds for the initial state ∅||∅, we only need to prove
that all transition rules of gtlF,G preserve it.
Consider an edge M ||Γ =⇒M ′||Γ′ in the graph gtlF,G such that there is a
state M1||Γ in the graph gtl↑
F,G satisfying the condition (M1||Γ)↓= M ||Γ. We
need to show that there is a state in the graph gtl↑
F,G such that M ′||Γ′ is its
image in gtlF,G. Consider several cases that correspond to a transition rule leading
from M ||Γ to M ′||Γ′:
Unit Propagate λ:
M ||Γ =⇒M l||Γ if
 C ∨l ∈F ∪Γ and
C ⊆M .
M ′||Γ′ is M l||Γ. It is suﬃcient to prove that M1l C∨l||Γ is a state of gtl↑
F,G. It is
enough to show that a clause C ∨l is a reason for l to be in M l w.r.t. F ∧G, i.e,
F ∧G |= C ∨l and C ⊆M . By applicability conditions of Unit Propagate λ, C ⊆M .
By the deﬁnition of a state F ∧G entails Γ. Since C ∨l ∈F ∩Γ, F ∧G |= C ∨l.
Test:
M ||Γ =⇒M l||Γ if



M is consistent,
G |= M ,
l ∈M .
M ′||Γ′ is M l||Γ. It is suﬃcient to prove that M1l
M||Γ is a state of gtl↑
F,G. M has
the form l ∨C. It is enough to show that a clause l ∨C is a reason for l to be in
M l w.r.t. F ∧G. It is trivial that C ⊆M . By applicability condition of the rule,
G |= l ∨C.
Backjump GT, Decide, Fail, and Learn GT: obvious.
13.3 Proof of Proposition 10↑
For a state M l C||Γ, we say that a reason C is a backjump clause if there is a
transition Backjump GT leading to M l C||Γ in gtlF,G.
In this section F is an arbitrary and ﬁxed CNF formula and G is an arbitrary
and ﬁxed formula formed from atoms occurring in F.
For a record M , by lcp(M ) we denote its largest consistent preﬁx. We say that a
clause C is conﬂicting on a list M of literals if F ∧G entails C, and C ⊆lcp(M ).
Lemmas 10, 11, 12 hold for the case of extended record relative to a formula. The
proofs of the lemmas have to be modiﬁed only by replacing Π with F ∧G.
Proposition 10↑is proved as Proposition 11↑.

44
Y. Lierler
Algorithms BackjumpClause and BackjumpClauseFirstUIP are applicable to the
backjump states of the graph gtl↑
F,G.
14 Experiments with Sup
Here we present experimental analysis that compares performance of the system
sup versus cmodels, clasp, smodels, and smodelscc. We start by describing the
implementation details of sup.
The implementation of sup utilizes
• the interface of SAT-solver minisat (v1.12b) that supports non-clausal con-
straints described in (Een and S¨orensson 2003) in order to introduce addi-
tional inference possibilities, but unit propagation. In particular, sup im-
plements Backchain True and All Rules Cancelled by means of non-clausal
constraints and it uses the unit propagate of minisat to capture Unit Propa-
gate LP and Backchain False.
• parts of cmodels code that eliminate weight and choice rules; perform model
veriﬁcation; and compute loop formulas. In particular, sup uses the latter two
parts of cmodels code to capture Unfounded.
In the experiments we used the following versions of the systems: sup v. 0.1,
sup v. 0.2, cmodels v. 3.77 using minisat v. 1.12b, clasp v. 1.0.5, smodels v. 2.32,
smodelscc v. 1.08 (implemented on top of smodels v. 2.26). System sup (v. 0.1
and v. 0.2) extends the implementation of minisat v. 1.12b. Therefore, we compare
sup performance against cmodels that uses minisat 1.12b for its inference. Sys-
tem sup v. 0.1 stands for a version of sup that implements Unit Propagate LP, All
Rules Cancelled, and Backchain False λ propagation rules, and does not implement
Backchain True. System sup v 0.2, on the other hand, also implements Backchain
True.
All considered solvers use preprocessor lparse (see Footnote 5) to ground the
problems so that the systems are run on identical ground instances. Grounding time
is not accounted for in solving time. All times are reported in seconds. Symbol tout
stands for the fact that a system did not terminate with a solution after 10 minutes.
Sup 0.1, Sup, Cm, Cl, Smcc, and Sm stand for sup v. 0.1, sup v. 0.2, cmodels,
clasp, smodelscc, and smodels respectively. The symbol −t abbreviates the ﬂag
−temp that allows sup to forget learnt clauses due to loop formulas (by default sup
adds these clauses into permanent clause database). The symbol −a abbreviates
the ﬂag −atomreason that forces cmodels, like sup, to add only a clause implied
by some loop formula and unsatisﬁed by a current model rather than the complete
loop formula unsatisﬁed by the model. By default, cmodels adds a complete loop
formula unsatisﬁed by the model. All experiments were run on Intel(R) Pentium(R)
D CPU 3.00GHz, 2 cpu cores, cache size 1024 KB, running Linux.
Table 1 presents the experiments run on tight programs. Recall that for tight
programs (i) the transition rule Unfounded of sup is never used for inference and
(ii) the transition rule Test of cmodels is never used for inference.

Abstract Answer Set Solvers with Backjumping and Learning
(long version) 45
Instance Sup 0.1 Sup
Cm
Cl
Smcc
Sm
Towers of Hanoi: http://asparagus.cs.uni-potsdam.de
towers-hanoi.35 6 43.68
92.96
74.03
23.86
115.83 62.19
towers-hanoi.36 6 183.05
70.71
117.56 38.98
112.44 86.01
towers-hanoi.37 6 35.71
30.75
290.65 34.25
84.75
120.53
towers-hanoi.38 6 243.41
233.82 37.03
70.94
99.87
168.88
towers-hanoi.39 6 96.59
tout
tout
123.40 384.24 237.90
towers-hanoi.40 6 tout
113.15 30.21
114.39 124.73 329.08
towers-hanoi.41 6 123.00
69.51
103.61 169.43 168.74 466.15
towers-hanoi.42 6 tout
389.88 91.28
182.10 tout
tout
towers-hanoi.43 6 tout
42.40
353.74 228.37 204.89 tout
towers-hanoi.44 6 501.80
438.78 498.89 tout
tout
tout
Pigeon Holes with 10 holes: pgh#pigeons
pgh7 0.18
0.22
0.14
0.10
20.98
1.67
pgh8 0.75
1.10
0.68
1.00
tout
8.87
pgh9 7.60
9.30
4.03
5.73
tout
47.31
Queens Normal Encoding: q.lp.#queens
q.lp.18 0.14
0.14
0.14
0.08
155.62 7.84
q.lp.22 0.28
0.27
0.30
0.14
tout
tout
q.lp.24 0.35
0.35
0.38
0.20
tout
tout
q.lp.30 0.70
0.71
0.75
0.44
tout
tout
Queens Cardinality Constraint Encoding: q.lp2.#queens
q.lp2.18 0.06
0.05
0.06
0.04
147.88 2.24
q.lp2.22 0.11
0.10
0.12
0.08
tout
191.76
q.lp2.24 0.15
0.14
0.17
0.11
tout
267.27
q.lp2.30 0.30
0.28
0.32
0.21
tout
tout
TOAST: http://asparagus.cs.uni-potsdam.de
sequence3-ss3-Plain 138.08
49.69
78.45
10.51
444.41 tout
sequence4-ss2-Plain 14.86
14.68
24.50
9.56
99.85
71.42
sequence4-ss3-Plain 408.99
468.25 tout
294.27 tout
tout
sequence3-ss2 8.11
9.00
8.34
5.75
79.23
46.07
sequence3-ss3 137.37
49.84
78.45
10.39
444.16 tout
sequence4-ss2 16.13
16.88
13.38
8.96
102.98 74.85
sequence4-ss3 103.33
207.21 16.74
233.09 tout
tout
Vertex Cover vcx.# minimum size vertex cover:
http://www.cs.engr.uky.edu/ai/benchmarks.html
vc1.53 8.30
3.23
19.81
tout
tout
218.59
vc2.50 11.55
6.76
13.32
94.43
tout
11.73
vc3.55 0.65
4.09
64.44
512.56 tout
10.59
vc4.54 6.49
10.19
23.05
tout
tout
tout
Table 1: Experiments: Tight problems.
Table 2 presents the experiments run on nontight programs:

46
Y. Lierler
Instance Sup
Sup -t Cm
Cm -a Cl
Smcc
Sm
Deterministic Automaton: http://www.fmi.uni-stuttgart.de/szs/
research/projects/synthesis/benchmarks030923.html
mutex3Morin 15.30
15.25
15.68
15.68
15.45
306.30 153.60
mutex4IDFD 0.80
0.74
0.66
0.64
0.80
35.53
13.46
phi3Morin 0.96
0.95
0.62
0.72
0.37
2.50
2.80
phi4IDFD 12.11
14.85
0.39
2.98
0.02
0.31
0.16
phi4Morin tout
448.82 105.54 tout
95.50
tout
tout
phi5IDFD tout
tout
67.14
tout
138.56 tout
tout
Bounded Model Checking:
http://www.tcs.hut.fi/∼kepa/experiments/boundsmodels/
dp10.i.O2.b12 30.88
3.51
10.14
22.29
0.20
tout
63.11
dp10.s.O2.b9 0.54
0.42
0.78
0.68
0.14
26.18
13.04
dp12.i.O2.b14 254.79 88.18
188.89 272.55 7.17
tout
tout
dp12.s.O2.b10 5.89
2.01
0.76
2.05
0.72
tout
337.28
dp6.i.O2.b8 0.20
0.20
0.18
0.16
0.02
0.93
0.32
dp8.i.O2.b10 0.98
0.77
1.53
2.60
0.03
12.97
4.12
dp8.s.O2.b8 0.12
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.02
2.58
1.18
Hamiltonian Cycle: http://www.cs.engr.uky.edu/ai/benchmarks.html
hc 1S tout
2.82
tout
tout
tout
tout
tout
hc 2S 0.29
5.37
13.50
8.60
0.38
153.44 tout
hc 3S 1.28
8.15
5.94
3.10
tout
tout
tout
hc 4S 7.08
2.81
tout
0.94
2.18
14.92
tout
Table 2: Experiments: Nontight problems.
Overall the results demonstrated by sup place the system in the class of highly
eﬃcient answer set solvers.
15 Related Work
Simons (2000) and Ward (2004) described the smodels and smodelscc algorithms,
respectively, by means of pseudocode and demonstrated their correctness. In this
paper we designed an abstract framework that was used as an alternative method
for describing these algorithms and demonstrating their correctness.
Gebser and Schaub (2006) provided a deductive system for describing inferences
involved in computing answer sets by tableaux methods. The abstract framework
presented here can be viewed as a deductive system also, but of a very diﬀerent
kind. First, it accounts for phenomena such as backjumping and learning (and also
forgetting and restart) whereas the Gebser-Schaub system does not. Second, we
describe backtracking by an inference rule, and the Gebser-Schaub system does
not. Accordingly, the derivations considered in this paper describe search process,
and derivations in the Gebser-Schaub system do not. Also, the abstract framework

Abstract Answer Set Solvers with Backjumping and Learning
(long version) 47
discussed here does not have any inference rule similar to Cut; this is why its
derivations are paths, rather than trees.
16 Conclusions
In this paper we showed how to model advanced algorithms for computing answer
sets of a program by means of simple mathematical objects, graphs. We extended
the abstract frameworks proposed in (Lierler 2008) for describing native and SAT-
based ASP algorithms to capture such sophisticated features as backjumping and
learning. We characterized the algorithms of systems smodelscc, sup, and cmod-
els that implement these features. We note that the work on this abstract frame-
work suggested the implementation of answer set solver sup and the experimental
analysis presented here demonstrates that sup is a competitive representative in
the family of answer set solvers. The abstract framework simpliﬁes the analysis of
the correctness of algorithms and allows us to study the relationship between vari-
ous algorithms by analyzing the diﬀerences in strategies of choosing a path in the
graph. For example, the description of the smodelscc and sup algorithms in this
framework reﬂects their diﬀerences in a simple manner via distinct assignments of
priorities to edges of the graph that characterize these systems. Also we used this
framework to describe two algorithms for computing Decision and FirstUIP back-
jump clauses for the implementation of conﬂict-driven backjumping and learning.
This formalism provided the transparent means for specifying these algorithms.
We believe that the development of this abstract framework powerful enough to
describe advanced features of answer set solvers in a simple manner will promote
the use of these sophisticated features in more solvers. This work helped us design
the new solver sup, and we hope that in the future it will suggest designs of other
systems for computing answer sets.
