Joint Reasoning for Multi-Faceted Commonsense Knowledge
Yohan Chalier
T´el´ecom ParisTech

Simon Razniewski
Max Planck Institute for Informatics

Gerhard Weikum
Max Planck Institute for Informatics

ABSTRACT
Commonsense knowledge (CSK) supports a variety of AI appli-
cations, from visual understanding to chatbots. Prior works on
acquiring CSK, such as ConceptNet, have compiled statements that
associate concepts, like everyday objects or activities, with prop-
erties that hold for most or some instances of the concept. Each
concept is treated in isolation from other concepts, and the only
quantitative measure (or ranking) of properties is a conﬁdence score
that the statement is valid.
Tis paper aims to overcome these limitations by introducing
a multi-faceted model of CSK statements and methods for joint
reasoning over sets of inter-related statements. Our model captures
four diﬀerent dimensions of CSK statements: plausibility, typicality,
remarkability and salience, with scoring and ranking along each
dimension. For example, hyenas drinking water is typical but not
salient, whereas hyenas eating carcasses is salient. For reasoning
and ranking, we develop a method with sof constraints, to couple
the inference over concepts that are related in in a taxonomic hi-
erarchy. Te reasoning is cast into an integer linear programming
(ILP), and we leverage the theory of reduction costs of a relaxed LP
to compute informative rankings. Tis methodology is applied to
several large CSK collections. Our evaluation shows that we can
consolidate these inputs into much cleaner and more expressive
knowledge. Results are available at htps://dice.mpi-inf.mpg.de.
1
INTRODUCTION
Motivation and problem. Commonsense knowledge (CSK) is
a potentially important asset towards building versatile AI appli-
cations, such as visual understanding for describing images (e.g.,
[2, 19, 36]) or conversational agents like chatbots (e.g., [31, 48, 49]).
In delineation from encyclopedic knowledge on entities like Trump,
Paris, or FC Liverpool, CSK refers to properties, traits and relations
of everyday concepts, such as elephants, coﬀee mugs or school
buses. For example, when seeing scenes of an elephant juggling
a few coﬀee mugs with its trunk, or with school kids pushing an
elephant into a bus, an AI agent with CSK should realize the ab-
surdity of these scenes and should generate funny comments for
image description or in a conversation.
Encyclopedic knowledge bases (KBs) received much atention,
with projects such as DBpedia [3], Wikidata [45], Yago [39] or
NELL [8] and large knowledge graphs at Amazon, Baidu, Google,
Microsof etc. supporting entity-centric search and other services
[25]. In contrast, approaches to acquire CSK have been few and
limited. Projects like ConceptNet [37], WebChild [42], TupleKB [?
] and Qasimodo [32] have compiled millions of concept: prop-
erty (or subject-predicate-object) statements, but still suﬀer from
sparsity and noise. For instance, ConceptNet has only a single non-
taxonomic/non-lexical statement about hyenas, namely, hyenas:
laugh a lot 1, and WebChild lists overly general and contradictory
properties such as small, large, demonic and fair for hyenas2. Te
reason for these shortcomings is that such mundane properties that
are obvious to every human are rarely expressed explicitly in text or
speech, and visual content would require CSK ﬁrst to extract these
properties. Terefore, machine-learning methods for encyclopedic
knowledge acquisition do not work robustly for CSK.
Another limitation of existing CSK collections is that they or-
ganize statements in a ﬂat, one-dimensional manner, and solely
rank by conﬁdence scores. Tere is no information about whether a
property holds for all or for some of the instances of a concept, and
there is no awareness of which properties are typical and which
ones are salient from a human perspective. For example, the state-
ment that hyenas drink milk (as all mammals when they are cubs)
is valid, but it is not typical. Hyenas eating meat is typical, but it is
not salient in the sense that humans would spontaneously name
this as a key characteristic of hyenas. In contrast, hyenas eating
carcasses is remarkable as it sets hyenas apart from other African
predators (like lions or leopards), and many humans would list
this as a salient property. Prior works on CSK missed out on these
reﬁned and expressive dimensions.
Te problem addressed in this work is to overcome these limi-
tations and advance CSK collections to a more expressive stage of
multi-faceted knowledge.
Approach and contribution. Tis paper presents Dice (Diverse
Commonsense Knowledge), a reasoning-based method for deriving
reﬁned and expressive commonsense knowledge from existing CSK
collections. Dice is based on two novel ideas:
• To capture the reﬁned semantics of CSK statements, we intro-
duce four facets of concept properties:
• Plausibility indicates whether a statement makes sense at
all (like the established but overloaded notion of conﬁdence
scores).
• Typicality indicates whether a property holds for most in-
stances of a concept (e.g., not only for cubs).
• Remarkability expresses that a property stands out by dis-
tinguishing the concept from closely related concepts (like
siblings in a taxonomy).
• Saliency reﬂects that a property is characteristic for the con-
cept, in the sense that most humans would spontaneously
list it in association with the concept.
• We identify inter-related concepts by their neighborhoods in a
concept hierarchy or via word-level embeddings, and devised a
set of weighted sof constraints that allows us to jointly reason
over the four dimensions for sets of candidate statements. We
cast this approach into an integer linear program (ILP), and
harness the theory of reduced cost (aka. opportunity cost) [5]
1htp://conceptnet.io/c/en/hyena
2htps://gate.d5.mpi-inf.mpg.de/webchild2/?x=hyena%23n%231
arXiv:2001.04170v2  [cs.CL]  4 May 2020

for LP relaxations in order to compute quantitative rankings
for each of the four facets.
As an example, consider the concepts lions, leopards, cheetahs
and hyenas. Te ﬁrst three are coupled by being taxonomic siblings
under their hypernym big cats, and the last one is highly related
by being another predator in the African savannah with high relat-
edness in word-level embedding spaces (e.g., word2vec or Glove).
Our constraint system includes logical clauses such as
Plausible(s1,p) ∧Related(s1,s2) ∧¬Plausible(s2,p) ∧. . .
⇒Remarkable(s1,p)
where . . . refers to enumerating all siblings of s1, or highly related
concepts. Te constraint itself is weighted by the degree of related-
ness; so it is a sof constraint that does allow exceptions. Tis way
we can infer that remarkable (and also salient) statements include
lions: live in prides, leopards: climb trees, cheetahs: run fast and
hyenas: eat carcasses.
Te paper’s salient contributions are:
• We introduce a multi-faceted model for CSK statements, com-
prising the dimensions of plausibility, typicality, remarkability
and saliency.
• We model the coupling of these dimensions by a sof constraint
system, and devise eﬀective and scalable techniques for joint
reasoning over noisy candidate statements,
• Experiments, with inputs from large CSK collections, Concept-
Net, TupleKB and Qasimodo, and with human judgements,
show that Dice achieves high precision for its multi-faceted
output. Te resulting commonsense knowledge bases contain
more than 1.6m statements about 74k concepts, and will be
made publicly available.
2
RELATED WORK
Manually compiled CSK.
In 1985, Douglas Lenat started the
Cyc [20] project, with the goal of compiling a comprehensive
machine-readable collection of human knowledge into logical as-
sertions. Te project comprised both encyclopedic and common-
sense knowledge. Te parallel WordNet project [23] organized
word senses into lexical relations like synonymy, antonymy, and
hypernymy/hyponymy (i.e., subsumption). Te later can serve
as a taxonomic backbone for CSK, but there are also more recent
alternatives such as WebIsALOD [16] derived from Web contents.
ConceptNet extended the Cyc and WordNet approaches by col-
lecting CSK triples from crowdworkers, for about 20 high-level
properties [37]. It is the state of the art for CSK. Te most popular
knowledge base today, Wikidata [45], contains both encyclopedic
knowledge about notable entities and some CSK cast into RDF
triples. However, the focus is on individual entities, and CSK is
very sparse. Most recently, ATOMIC [33] is another crowdsourcing
project compiling knowledge about human activities; relative to
ConceptNet it is more reﬁned but fairly sparse.
Web-extracted CSK. Although handcrafed CSK collections have
reached impressive sizes, the reliance on human inputs limits their
scale and scope. Automatic information extraction (IE) from Web
contents can potentially achieve much higher coverage. Compared
to general IE, extracting CSK is still an underexplored ﬁeld. Te We-
bChild project [42, 43] extracted more than 10 million statements
of plausible object properties from books and image tags. However,
its rationale was to capture each and every property that holds for
some instances of a concept; consequently, it has a massive tail
of noisy, puzzling or invalid statements. TupleKB [? ] from the
AI2 Lab’s Mosaic project is a more focused approach to automatic
CSK acquisition. It contains ca. 280k statements, speciﬁcally for
8th-grade elementary science to support work on a multiple-choice
school exam challenge [34]. It builds on similar sources as We-
bChild, but prioritizes precision over recall by various cleaning
steps incl. a supervised scoring model. Qasimodo [32] is a recent
CSK collection, built by extraction from QA forums and web query
logs, with about 4.6 million statements. Although it combines mul-
tiple cues into a regression-based corroboration model for ranking
and aims to identify salient statements, the model merely learns
a single-dimensional notion of conﬁdence. Common to all these
projects is that their quantitative assessment of CSK statements is
focused on a single dimension of conﬁdence or plausibility. Tere
is no awareness of other facets like typicality, remarkability and
saliency.
Latent representations. Latent models have had great impact on
natural language processing, with word embeddings like word2vec
[22], GloVe [28] and BERT [11] capturing signals from huge text cor-
pora. Tese embeddings implicitly contain some kind of CSK by the
relatedness of word-level or phrase-level vectors or more advanced
representation. For example, the typical habitats for camels can be
predicted to be deserts, based on the latent representations. Embed-
dings have been leveraged for tasks like commonsense question
answering [41] and knowledge base completion (e.g., [6]). However,
the latent nature of these models makes it diﬃcult to interpret what
speciﬁc knowledge is at work and explain this to the human user.
Moreover, they typically involve a complete end-to-end training
cycle for each and every use case. Explicit CSK collections are much
beter interpretable and more easily re-usable for new applications.
Joint reasoning.
Consolidating statements from automatic IE
is an important part of KB construction, and several frameworks
have been pursued for encyclopedic knowledge, including proba-
bilistic graphical models of diﬀerent kinds (e.g., [8, 12, 29, 35, 46],
constraint-based reasoning (e.g., [38, 40]), and more. All these
methods solve optimization problems to accept or reject uncertain
candidate statements with speciﬁed or learned constraints so as
maximize a combination of statistical evidence and satisfaction of
sof constraints.
Knowledge representation. Current CSKBs merely use a single
score that represents the frequency of or conﬁdence in a binary-
relation statement. Beyond binary relations, epistemic logics would
be able to express reﬁned modalities such as possibly and neces-
sarily. Temporal logics can model whether statements are valid
always, eventually or sometimes [26], and spatial data models can
capture location information about entities and events [1]. Te need
to contextualize binary relations has been noted in encyclopedic
KBs. Yago introduced the notion of SPOTLX tuples to capture time,
location and textual dimensions [18, 47], DBpedia used reiﬁcation
to store provenance information [15], and Wikidata comes with
a range of temporal, spatial, and other contextual qualiﬁers [27].
For CSKBs this level of reﬁnement has not been considered yet. In
KG embeddings, Chen et al. studied models for retaining graded
2

Term
Meaning
CSK statement
pair (s,p) of subjects (concept) and property
p (textual phrase)
CSK dimensions
plausibility,
typicality,
remarkability,
saliency
Sof constraints
Relationships between dimensions of a
statement and/or taxonomically related con-
cepts
Taxonomy
Noisy is-a organization of subject concepts
Clause
A grounding, i.e., concrete instantiation of
a rule
ωr ,ωs,ωe
Parameters for weighing clauses
Cues
Input signals for estimating prior scores
Prior scores
Initial estimates of dimension values for a
statement (i.e., before reasoning), denoted
as π,τ, ρ,σ and computed from cues via re-
gression
Table 1: Important notation.
truth values, termed conﬁdence, instead of binary truth values, in
inputs and outputs of embedding models [10]. However, this is
limited to a single dimension, and does not capture the diﬀerent
facets addressed in this paper.
3
MULTI-FACETED CSK MODEL
We consider simple CSK statements of the form (s,p), where s is
a concept and p is a property of this concept. To be in line with
established terminology, we refer tos as the subject of the statement.
Typically, s is a crisp noun, such as hyenas, while p can take any
multi-word verb or noun phrase, such as laugh a lot or (are) African
predators.
Unlike prior works, we do not adopt the usual subject-predicate-
object triple model. We do not distinguish between predicates and
objects for two reasons:
(i) Te split between predicate and object is ofen arbitrary. For
example, for lions : live in prides, we could either consider live or
live in as predicate and the rest as object, or we could view live in
prides as a predicate without any object.
(ii) Unlike encyclopedic KBs where a common set of predicates can
be standardized (e.g., date of birth, country of citizenship, award
received), CSK is so diverse that it is virtually impossible to agree on
predicate names. For example, we may want to capture both prey
on antelopes and hunt and kill antelopes, which are highly related
but not quite the same. Projects like ConceptNet and WebChild
have organized CSK with a ﬁxed set of pre-speciﬁed predicates, but
these are merely around 20, and, when discounting taxonomic (e.g.,
type of) and lexical (e.g., synonyms, related terms) relations, boil
down to a few basic predicates: used for, capable of, location and
part of (plus a generic kind of has property).
We summarize important notation in Table 1.
3.1
CSK Dimensions
We organize concept-property pairs along four dimensions: plausi-
bility [24, 42], typicality [37], remarkability (information theory)
and saliency [32]. Tese are meta-properties; so each (s,p) pair
can have any of these labels and multiple labels are possible. For
each statement and dimension label, we compute a score and can
thus rank statements for a concept by their plausibility, typicality,
remarkability or saliency.
• Plausibility: Is the property valid at least for some instances of
the concept, for at least some spatial, temporal or socio-cultural
contexts? For example, lions drink milk at some time in their
lives, and some lions atack humans.
• Typicality: Does the property hold for most (or ideally all) in-
stances of the concept, for most contexts? For example, most
lions eat meat, regardless of whether they live in Africa or in a
zoo.
• Remarkability: What are speciﬁc properties of a concept that
sets the concept apart from highly related concepts, like tax-
onomic generalizations (hypernyms in a concept hierarchy)?
For example, lions live in prides but not other big cats do this,
and hyenas eat carcasses but hardly any other African predator
does this.
• Saliency: When humans are asked about a concept, such as
lions, bicycles or rap songs, would a property be listed among
the concept’s most notable traits, by most people? For example,
lions hunt in packs, bicycles have two wheels, rap songs have
interesting lyrics and beat (but no real melody).
Examples.
Reﬁning CSK by the four dimensions is useful for
various application areas, including language understanding for
chatbots, as illustrated by the following examples:
(1) Plausibility helps to avoid blunders by detecting absurd
statements, or to trigger irony. For example, a user uter-
ance such as “When too many people shot selﬁes with him,
the lion king in the zoo told them to go home” should lead
to a funny reply by the chatbot (as lions do not speak).
(2) Typicality helps a chatbot to infer missing context. For
example, when the human talks about “a documentary
which showed the feeding frenzy of a pack of hyenas”, the
chatbot could ask “what kind of carcass did they feed on?”
(3) Remarkability can be an important signal when the chatbot
needs to infer which concept the human is talking about.
For example, a user uterance “In the zoo, the kids where
fascinated by a spoted dog that was laughing at them”
could lead to chatbot response like “So they like the hyenas.
Did you see an entire pack?”
(4) Saliency enables the chatbot to infer important properties
when a certain concept is the topic of a conversation. For
example, when talking about lions in the zoo, the bot could
proactively ask “Did you hear the lion roar?”, or “How
many lionesses were in the lion king’s harem?”
4
JOINT REASONING
Overview. For reasoning over sets of CSK statements, we start
with a CSK collection, like ConceptNet, TupleKB or Qasimodo.
Tese are in triple form with crisp subjects but potentially noisy
3

phrases as predicates and objects. We interpret each subject as
a concept and concatenate the predicate and object into a prop-
erty. Inter-related subsets of statements are identiﬁed by locating
concepts in a large taxonomy and grouping siblings and their hy-
pernymy parents together. Tese groups may overlap. For this
purpose we use the WebIsALOD taxonomy [16], as it has very good
coverage of concepts and captures everyday vocabulary.
Based on the taxonomy, we also generate additional candidate
statements for sub- or super-concepts, as we assume that many
properties are inherited between parent and child. We use rule-
based templates for this expansion of the CSK collection (e.g., as
lions are predators, big cats and also tigers, leopards etc. are preda-
tors as well). Tis mitigates the sparseness in the observation space.
Note that, without the reasoning, this would be a high-risk step as
it includes many invalid statements (e.g., lions live in prides, but
big cats in general do not). Reasoning will prune out most of the
invalid candidates, though.
For joint reasoning over the statements for the concepts of a
group, we interpret the rule-based templates as sof constraints,
with appropriate weights.
For seting weights in a meaningful way, we leverage prior scores
that the initial CSK statements come with (e.g., conﬁdence scores
from ConceptNet), and additional statistics from large corpora,
most notably word-level embeddings like word2vec.
In this section, we develop the logical representation and the joint
reasoning method, assuming that we have weights for statements
and for the grounded instantiations of the constraints. Subsequently,
Section 5 presents techniques for obtaining statistical priors for
seting the weights.
4.1
Coupling of CSK Dimensions
Let S denote the set of subjects and P the properties. Te inter-
dependencies between the four CSK dimensions are expressed by
the following logical constraints.
Concept-dimension dependencies: ∀(s,p) ∈S × P
Typical(s,p) ⇒Plausible(s,p)
(1)
Salient(s,p) ⇒Plausible(s,p)
(2)
Typical(s,p) ∧Remarkable(s,p) ⇒Salient(s,p)
(3)
Tese clauses capture the intuition behind the four facets.
Parent-child dependencies: ∀(s1,p) ∈S × P, ∀s2 ∈children(s1)
Plausible(s1,p) ⇒Plausible(s2,p)
(4)
Typical(s1,p) ⇒Typical(s2,p)
(5)
Typical(s2,p) ⇒Plausible(s1,p)
(6)
Remarkable(s1,p) ⇒¬Remarkable(s2,p)
(7)
Typical(s1,p) ⇒¬Remarkable(s2,p)
(8)
¬Plausible(s1,p) ∧Plausible(s2,p) ⇒Remarkable(s2,p)
(9)
(∀s2 ∈children(s1) Typical(s2,p)) ⇒Typical(s1,p)
(10)
Tese dependencies state how properties are inherited between
a parent concept and its children in a taxonomic hierarchy. For
example, if a property is typical for the parent and thus for all its
children, it is not remarkable for any child as it does not set any
child apart from its siblings.
Sibling dependencies: ∀(s1,p) ∈S × P, ∀s2 ∈siblings(s1)
Remarkable(s1,p) ⇒¬Remarkable(s2,p)
(11)
Typical(s1,p) ⇒¬Remarkable(s2,p)
(12)
¬Plausible(s1,p) ∧Plausible(s2,p) ⇒Remarkable(s2,p)
(13)
Tese dependencies state how properties of concepts under the
same parent relate to each other. For example, a property being
plausible for only one in a set of siblings makes this property re-
markable for the one concept.
4.2
Grounding of Dependencies
Te speciﬁed ﬁrst-order constraints need to be grounded with
the candidate statements in a CSK collection, yielding a set of
logical clauses (i.e., disjunctions of positive or negated atomic
statements). To avoid producing a huge amount of clauses, we
restrict the grounding to existing subject-property pairs and the
high-conﬁdence (¿0.4) relationships of the WebIsALOD taxonomy
(avoiding its noisy long tail).
Expansion to similar properties. Following this speciﬁcation,
the clauses would apply only for the same property of inter-related
concepts, for example, eats meat for lions, leopards, hyenas etc.
However, the CSK candidates may express the same or very similar
properties in diﬀerent ways: lions: eat meat, leopards: are carnivores,
hyenas: eat carcasses etc. Ten the grounded formulas would never
trigger any inference, as the p values are diﬀerent. We solve this
issue by considering the similarity of diﬀerent p values based on
word-level embeddings (see Section 5). For each property pair
(p1,p2) ∈P2, grounded clauses are generated if sim(p1,p2) exceeds
a threshold t.
We consider such highly related property pairs also for each
concept alone, so that we can deduce additional CSK statements by
generating the following clauses: ∀s ∈S, ∀(p,q) ∈P2,
sim(p,q) ≥t ⇒(Plausible(s,p) ⇔Plausible(s,q)) ,
(14a)
(Typical(s,p) ⇔Typical(s,q)) ,
(14b)
(Remarkable(s,p) ⇔Remarkable(s,q)) ,
(14c)
(Salient(s,p) ⇔Salient(s,q))
(14d)
Tis expansion of the reasoning machinery allows us to deal with
the noise and sparsity in the pre-existing CSK collections.
Weighting clauses. Each of the atomic statements Plausible(s,p),
Typical(s,p), Remarkable(s,p) and Salient(s,p) has a prior weight
based on the conﬁdence score from the underlying collection of CSK
candidates (see Sec. 5). Tese priors are denoted π(s,p),τ(s,p), ρ(s,p),
and σ(s,p).
Each grounded clause c has three diﬀerent weights:
(1) ωr , the weight of the logical dependency from which the
clause is generated, a hyper-parameter for tuning the rela-
tive inﬂuence of diﬀerent kinds of dependencies.
(2) ωs, the similarity weight, sim(p1,p2) for clauses resulting
from similarity expansion, or 1.0 if concerning only a single
property.
(3) ωe, the evidence weight, computed by combining the sta-
tistical priors for the individual atoms of the clause, using
basic probability calculations for logical operators: 1 −u
4

for negation and u + v −uv for disjunction with weights
u,v for the atoms in a clause.
Te ﬁnal weight of a clause c is computed as:
ωc = ωrωsωe
Table 2 shows a few illustrative examples.
4.3
Integer Linear Program
Notations.
For reasoning over the validity of candidate state-
ments, for each of the four facets, we view every candidate state-
ment Facet(s,p) as a variable v ∈V, and its prior (either τ, π, ρ or
σ, see Section 5) is denoted as ωv. Every grounded clause c ∈C,
normalized into a disjunctive formula, can be split into variables
with positive polarity, c+, and variables with negative polarity, c−.
By viewing all v as Boolean variables, we can now interpret
the reasoning task as a weighted maximum satisﬁability (Max-Sat)
problem: ﬁnd a truth-value assignment to the variables v ∈V
such that the sum of weights of satisﬁed clauses is maximized. Tis
is a classical NP-hard problem, but the literature oﬀers a wealth
of approximation algorithms (see, e.g., [21]). Alternatively and
preferably for our approach, we can re-cast the Max-Sat problem
into a problem for integer linear programming (ILP) [44] where the
variables v become 0-1 decision variables. Although ILP is more
general and potentially more expensive than Max-Sat, there are
highly optimized and excellently engineered methods available in
sofware libraries like Gurobi [14]. Moreover, we are ultimately
interested not just in computing accepted variables (set to 1) versus
rejected ones (set to 0), but want to obtain an informative ranking
of the candidate statements. To this end, we can relax an ILP into
a fractional LP (linear program), based on principled foundations
[44], as discussed below. Terefore, we adopt an ILP approach, with
the following objective function and constraints:
max
Õ
v ∈V
ωvv +
Õ
c ∈C
ωcc
(15)
under the constraints:
∀c ∈C ∀v ∈c+ c −v ≥0
(16a)
∀c ∈C ∀w ∈c−c + w −1 ≥0
(16b)
∀c ∈C
Õ
v ∈c+
v +
Õ
w ∈c−
(1 −w) −c ≥0
(16c)
∀v ∈V v ∈[0, 1]
(16d)
∀c ∈C c ∈[0, 1]
(16e)
Each clause c is represented as a triple of ILP constraints, where
Boolean operations ¬ and ∨are encoded via inequalities.
4.4
Ranking of CSK Statements
Te ILP returns 0-1 values for the decision variables; so we can only
accept or reject a candidate statement. Relaxing the ILP into an
ordinary linear program (LP) drops the integrality constraints on
the decision variables, and would then return fractional values for
the variables. Solving an LP is typically faster than solving an ILP.
Te fractional values returned by the LP are not easily inter-
pretable. We could employ the method of randomized rounding
[30]: for fractional value x ∈[0, 1] we toss a coin that shows 1 with
probability x and 0 with probability 1 −x. Tis has been proven to
be a constant-factor approximation (i.e., near-optimal solution) on
expectation.
However, we are actually interested in using the relaxed LP
to compute principled and informative rankings for the candidate
statements. To this end, we leverage the theory of reduced costs, aka.
opportunity costs [5]. For an LP of the form minimize cT x subject
to Ax ≤b and x ≥b with coeﬃcient vectors c,b and coeﬃcient
matrix A, the reduced cost of variable xi that is zero in the optimal
solution is the amount by which the coeﬃcient ci needs to be
reduced in order to yield an optimal solution with xi > 0. Tis can
be computed for all x as c −ATy. For maximization problems, the
reduced cost is an increase of c. Modern optimization tools like
Gurobi directly yield these measures of sensitivity as part of their
LP solving.
We use the reduced costs of thexi variables as a principled way of
ranking them; lowest cost ranking highest (as their weights would
have to be changed most to make them positive in the optimal
solution).
As all variables with reduced cost zero would have the same rank,
we use the actual variable values (as a cue for the corresponding
statement or dependency being satisﬁed) as a tie-breaker.
4.5
Scalability
LP solvers are not straightforward to scale to cope with large
amounts of input data. For reasoning over all candidate statements
in one shot, we would have to solve an LP with millions of variables.
We devised and utilized the following technique to overcome this
botleneck in our experiments.
Te key idea is to consider only limited-size neighborhoods in
the taxonomic hierarchy in order to partition the input data. In
our implementation, to reason about the facets for a candidate
statement (s,p), we identify the parents and siblings of s in the
taxonomy and then compile all candidate statements and grounded
clauses where at least one of these concepts appears. Tis typically
yields subsets of size in the hundreds or few thousands. Each of
these forms a partition, and we generate and solve an LP for each
partition separately. Tis way, we can run the LP solver on many
partitions independently in parallel. Te partitions overlap, but each
(s,p) is associated with a primary partition with the statement’s
speciﬁc neighborhood.
5
PRIOR STATISTICS
So far, we assumed that prior scores – π(s,p),τ(s,p), ρ(s,p),σ(s,p)
– are given, in order to compute weights for the ILP or LP. Tis
section explains how we obtain these priors. In a nutshell, we
obtain basic scores from the underlying CSK collections and their
combination with embedding-based similarity, and from textual
entailment and relatedness in the taxonomy (Subsection 5.1). We
then deﬁne aggregation functions to combine these various cues
(Subsection 5.2).
5

Rule
Clause
ωr
ωs
ωe
ωc
1
Plausible(car, hit wall) ∨¬ Typical(car, hit wall)
0.48
1
0.60
0.29
14a
Plausible(bicycle, be at city) ∨¬ Plausible(bicycle, be at town)
0.85
0.86
1
0.73
14a
Plausible(bicycle, be at town) ∨¬ Plausible(bicycle, be at city)
0.85
0.86
1
0.73
8
¬ Remarkable (bicycle, transport person and thing) ∨¬ Typical(car, move person)
0.51
0.78
0.96
0.38
Table 2: Examples of grounded clauses with their weights (based on ConceptNet).
5.1
Basic Scores
Basic statements like (s,p) are taken from existing CSK collections,
which ofen provide conﬁdence scores based on observation frequen-
cies or human assessment (of crowdsourced statements or sam-
ples). We combine these conﬁdence measures, denoted score(s,p)
with embedding-based similarity between two properties, sim(p,q).
Each property p is tokenized into a bag-of-words {w1, . . . ,wn} and
encoded as the idf-weighted centroid of the embedding vectors ®
wi
obtained from a pre-trained word2vec model3: ®p = Ín
i=1 idf(wi) ®wi.
Te similarity between two properties is the cosine between the
vectors mapped into [0, 1]: sim(p,q) = 1
2

⟨®p, ®q⟩
∥®p∥∥®q∥+ 1

.
Conﬁdence scores and similarities are then combined and nor-
malized into a quasi-probability:
P[s,p] = 1
Z
Õ
q∈P
sim(p,q)≥t
score(s,q) × sim(q,p)
where Z is a normalization factor and t is a threshold (set to 0.75 in
our implementation). Te intuition for this measure is that it reﬂects
the probability of (s,p) being observed in the digital world, where
evidence is accumulated over diﬀerent phrases for inter-related
properties such as eat meat, are carnivores, are predators, prey on
antelopes etc.
We can now derive additional measures that serve as building
blocks for the ﬁnal priors:
• the marginals P[s] for subjects and P[p] for properties,
• the conditional probabilities of observing p given s, or the
reverse; P[p | s] can be thought of as the necessity of the
property p for the subject s, while P[s | p] can be thought
of as a suﬃciency measure,
• the probability that the observation of s implies the obser-
vation of p, which can be expressed as:
P[s ⇒p]
=
1 −P[s] + P[s,p]
Beyond aggregated frequency scores, priors rely on two more
components, scores from textual entailment models and taxonomy-
based information gain.
Textual entailment:
A variant of P[s ⇒p] is to tap into corpora and learned models for
textual entailment: does a sentence such as “Simba is a lion” entail a
sentence “Simba lives in a pride”? We leverage the atention model
from the AllenNLP project [13] learned from the SNLI corpus [7]
and other annotated text collections. Tis gives us scores for two
3htps://code.google.com/archive/p/word2vec/GoogleNews-vectors-
negative300.bin.gz
measures: does s entail p, entail(s →p), and does p contradict s,
con(s,p).
Taxonomy-based information gain:
For each (s,p) we deﬁne a neighborhood of concepts, N(s), by the
parents and siblings of s, and consider all statements for s versus
all statements for N(s) −{s} as a potential cue for remarkability.
For each property p and concept set S, the entropy of p is H(p|S) =
1
XS logXS + XS −1
XS
log
XS
XS −1 where XS = |{q | ∃s ∈S : (s,q)}|.
Instead of merely count-based entropy, we could also incorporate
relative weights of diﬀerent properties, but the as a basic cue, the
simple measure is suﬃcient. Ten, the information gain of (s,p) is
IG(s,p) = H(p | {s}) −H(p | S −{s}).
5.2
Score Aggregation
All the basic scores – P[s,p], P[s | p], P[p | s], P[s ⇒p], entail(s →
p), con(s,p) and IG(s,p) – are fed into regression models that learn
an aggregate score for each of the four facets: plausibility, typicality,
remarkability and saliency. Te regression parameters (i.e., weights
for the diﬀerent basic scores) are learned from small set of facet-
annotated CSK statements, separately, for each of the four facets.
We denote the aggregated scores, serving as priors for the reasoning
step, as π(s,p), τ(s,p), ρ(s,p) and σ(s,p).
6
EXPERIMENTS
We evaluate three aspects of the Dice framework: (i) accuracy in
ranking statements along the four CSK facets, (ii) run-time and
scalability, (iii) the ability to enrich CSK collections with newly
inferred statements. Te main hypothesis under test is how well
Dice can rank statements for each of the four CSK facets. We
evaluate this by obtaining crowdsourced judgements for a pool of
sample statements.
6.1
Setup
Datasets. We use three CSK collections for evaluating the added
value that Dice provides: (i) ConceptNet, a crowdsourced, some-
times wordy collection of general-world CSK. (ii) Tuple-KB, a CSK
collection extracted from web sources with focus on the science
domain, with comparably short and canonicalized SPO triples. (iii)
Qasimodo, a web-extracted general-world CSK collection with
focus on saliency. Statistics on these datasets are shown in Table 3.
To construct taxonomies for each of these collections, we uti-
lized the WebIsALOD dataset [17], a web-extracted noisy set of
ranked subsumption pairs (e.g., tiger isA big cat - 0.88, tiger
isA carnivore - 0.83). We prune out long-tail noise by seting a
threshold of 0.4 for the conﬁdence scores that WebIsALOD comes
6

CSK collection
#subjects
#statements
Qasimodo
13,387
1,219,526
ConceptNet
45,603
223,013
TupleKB
28,078
282,594
Table 3: Input CSK collections.
CSK collection
#nodes
#parents/node
#siblings/node
Qasimodo
11148
15.33
3627.8
ConceptNet
41451
1.15
63.7
TupleKB
26100
2.14
105.1
Music-manual
8
1.68
3.4
Table 4: Taxonomy statistics.
with. To evaluate the inﬂuence of taxonomy quality, we also hand-
crafed a small high-quality taxonomy for the music domain, with
10 concepts and 9 subsumption pairs, such as rapper being a sub-
class of singer. Table 4 gives statistics on the taxonomies per CSK
collection. Diﬀerences between #nodes in Table 4 and #subjects in
Table 3 are caused by merging nodes on hypernymy paths without
branches (#children=1).
Annotation. To obtain labelled data for hyper-parameter tuning
and as ground-truth for evaluation, we conducted a crowdsourcing
project using Amazon Mechanical Turk. For saliency, typicality
and remarkability, we sampled 200 subjects each with 2 proper-
ties from each of the CSK collections, and asked annotators for
pairwise preference with regard to each of the three facets, using
a 5-point Likert scale. Tat is, we show two statements for the
same subject, and the annotator could slide on the scale between
1 and 5 to indicate the more salient/typical/remarkable statement.
For the plausibility dimension, we sampled 200 subjects each with
two properties, and asked annotators to assess the plausibility of
individual statements on a 5-point scale. Ten we paired up two
statements for the same subject as a post-hoc preference pair. Te
rationale for this procedure is to avoid biasing the annotator in
judging plausibility by showing two statements at once, whereas it
is natural to compare pairs on the other three dimensions.
In total, we had 4 × 4 × 200 = 3200 tasks, each given to 3 annota-
tors. Te ﬁnal scores for each statement and facet were the aver-
ages of the three numerical judgments. Regarding inter-annotator
agreement, we observed a reasonably low standard deviation of
0.81/0.92/0.98/0.92 (over the scale from 1 to 5) for the dimensions
plausibility/typicality/remarkability/saliency on ConceptNet, with
similar values on the other CSK collections. Aggregate label distri-
butions are shown in Fig. 1. When removing indeterminate samples,
with avg. score between 2.5 and 3.5, and interpreting annotator
scores as binary preferences, inter-annotator agreement was fair to
moderate, with Fleiss’ Kappa values of 0.31, 0.30, 0.25 and 0.48 for
plausibility, typicality, remarkability and saliency, respectively.
Evaluation Metrics. In the actual evaluation, we used withheld
pairwise annotations for statements along the dimensions plausi-
bility, typicality, remarkability and saliency as ground truth, and
compared, for each system score, for how many of these pairs its
Figure 1: Aggregate label distribution.
scores implicated the same ordering, i.e., measured the precision in
pairwise preference (ppref) [9].
Hyper-parameter tuning. Te 800 labeled statements per CSK
collection were split into 70% for hyper-parameter optimization and
30% for evaluation. We performed two hyper-parameter optimiza-
tion steps. In step 1, we learned the weights for aggregating the
basic scores by a regression model based on interpreting pairwise
data as single labels (i.e., the preferred property is labelled as 1, the
other one as 0). In step 2, we used Bayesian optimization to tune
the weights of the constraints. As exhaustive search was not possi-
ble, we used the Tree-structured Parzen Estimator (TPE) algorithm
from the Hyperopt [4] library. We used the 0-1 loss function on the
ordering of the pairs as metric, and explored the search space in
two ways:
(1) discrete exploration space {0, 0.1, 0.5, 1}, followed by
(2) continuous exploration space of radius 0.2 centered on the
value selected in the previous step.
For ConceptNet, constraints were assigned an average weight of
0.404, with the highest weights for: (14) Similarity constraints
(weight 0.85), (6) Plausibility inference (weight 0.66) and (13) Sib-
ling implausibility implying remarkability (weight 0.60). All con-
straints were assigned non-negligible positive weights; so they are
all important for joint inference.
6.2
Results
Qality of rankings. Table 5 shows the main result of our ex-
periments: the precision in pairwise preference (ppref) scores [9],
that is, the fraction of pairs where Dice or a baseline produced the
same ordering as the crowdsourced ground-truth. As baseline, we
rank all statements by the conﬁdence scores from the original CSK
collections, which implies that the ranking is identical for all four
dimensions. As the table shows, Dice consistently outperforms
7

Dimension
Random
ConceptNet
TupleKB
Qasimodo
Music-manual
Baseline [37]
Dice
Baseline [? ]
Dice
Baseline [32]
Dice
Baseline [37]
Dice
Plausible
0.5
0.52
0.62
0.53
0.57
0.57
0.59
0.21
0.67
Typical
0.5
0.39
0.65
0.37
0.59
0.52
0.64
0.54
0.70
Remarkable
0.5
0.52
0.69
0.50
0.54
0.56
0.56
0.49
0.74
Salient
0.5
0.54
0.65
0.59
0.61
0.53
0.63
0.51
0.65
Avg.
0.5
0.50
0.66
0.50
0.58
0.54
0.61
0.52
0.69
Table 5: Precision of pairwise preference (ppref) of Dice versus original CSK collections. Signiﬁcant gains over baselines
(α = 0.05) are boldfaced.
Priors
only
Constraints
only
Both
Plausible
0.54
0.51
0.62
Typical
0.53
0.42
0.65
Remarkable
0.65
0.57
0.69
Salient
0.56
0.52
0.65
Avg.
0.58
0.51
0.66
Table 6: Ablation study using ConceptNet as input.
Ranking
Existing
New statements
dimension
statements
25%
50%
100%
Plausible
3.44
3.54
3.43
3.41
Typical
3.27
3.31
3.26
Table 7: Plausibility of top-ranked newly inferred state-
ments with ConceptNet as input.
Subject
Novel properties
sculpture
be at art museum, be silver or gold in color
athlete
requires be good sport, be happy when they win
saddle
be used to ride horse, be set on table
Table 8: Examples of new statements inferred by Dice with
ConceptNet as input.
the baselines by a large margin of 7 to 18 percentage points. It is
also notable that scores in the original ConceptNet and TupleKB
are negatively correlated with typicality (values lower than 0.5),
pointing out a substantial fraction of valid but not exactly typical
properties in these pre-existing CSK collections.
Ablation study.
To study the impact of statistical priors and
constraint-based reasoning, we compare two variants of Dice: (i)
using only priors without the reasoning stage, and (ii) using only the
constraint-based reasoning with all priors set to 0.5. Te resulting
ppref scores are shown in Table 6. In isolation, priors and reasoning
perform 8 and 15 percentage points worse than the combined Dice
method. Tis clearly demonstrates the importance of both stages
and the synergistic beneﬁt from their interplay.
Enrichment potential. All CSK collections are limited in their
coverage of long-tail concepts. By exploiting the taxonomic and
embedding-based relatedness between diﬀerent concepts, we can
generate candidate statements that were not observed before (e.g.,
because online contents rarely talk about generalized concepts like
big cats, and mostly mention only properties of lions, leopards,
tigers etc.). As mentioned in Section 4.2, simple templates can be
used to generate candidates. Tese are fed into Dice reasoning
together with the statements that are actually contained in the
existing CSK collections.
To evaluate the quality of the Dice output for such “unobserved”
statements, we randomly sampled 10 ConceptNet subjects, and
grounded the reasoning framework for these subjects for all prop-
erties observed in their taxonomic neighbourhood (i.e., parents and
siblings). We then asked annotators to assess the plausibility of 100
sampled statements.
To compute the quality of Dice scores, we consider the top-
ranked statements by predicted plausibility and by typicality, where
we vary the recall level: number of statements from the ranking in
relation to the number of statements that ConceptNet contains for
the sampled subjects. Te results are shown in Table 7 for recall
25%, 50% and 100%, that is up to doubling the size of ConceptNet
for the given subjects. As one can see, Dice can expand the pre-
existing CSK by 25% without losing in quality, and even up to 100%
expansion the decrease in quality is negligible. Table 8 presents
anecdotal statements absent in ConceptNet.
Run-Time. All experiments were run on a cluster with 40 cores
and 500 GB memory. Hyper-parameter optimization took 10-14
hours for each of the three CSK inputs. Computing the four-dimen-
sional scores for all statements took about 3 hours, 3 hours and 24
hours for ConceptNet, TupleKB and Qasimodo, respectively.
Te computationally most expensive steps are the semantic sim-
ilarity computation and the LP solving. For semantic similarity
computation, a big handicap is the verbosity and hence diversity
of the phrases for properties (e.g., “live in the savannah”, “roam in
the savannah”, “are seen in the African savannah”, “can be found
in Africa’s grasslands” etc.). We observed on average 1.55 state-
ments per distinct property for ConceptNet, and 1.77 for Qasi-
modo. Terefore, building the input matrix for the LP is very time-
consuming. For LP solving, the Gurobi algorithm has polynomial
run-time in the number of variables. However, we do have a huge
number of variables. Empirically, we need to cope with about
#constraints × #statements1.2 variables.
8

Subject
Property
Baseline
Dice
CN-score
plausible
typical
remarkable
salient
snake
be at shed
0.46
0.29
0.71
0.29
0.18
snake
be at pet zoo
0.46
0.15
0.29
0.82
0.48
snake
bite
0.92
0.58
0.13
0.61
0.72
lawyer
study legal precedent
0.46
0.25
0.73
0.37
0.18
lawyer
prove that person be guilty
0.46
0.06
0.47
0.65
0.40
lawyer
present case
0.46
0.69
0.06
0.79
0.75
bicycle
requires coordination
0.67
0.62
0.40
0.36
0.35
bicycle
be used to travel quite long distance
0.46
0.30
0.20
0.77
0.64
bicycle
be power by person
0.67
0.19
0.33
0.66
0.55
Table 9: Anecdotal examples from Dice run on ConceptNet.
Anecdotal examples. Table 9 gives a few anecdotal outputs with
scores returned by Dice. Note that the scores produced do not rep-
resent probabilities, but global ranks (i.e., we percentile-normalized
the scores produced by Dice, as they have no inherent semantics
other than ranks). For instance, be at shed was found to be much
more typical than be at pet zoo for snake, while salience was
the other way around. Note also the low variation in ConceptNet
scores, i.e., in addition to being unidimensional, this low variance
makes any ranking diﬃcult.
7
DISCUSSION
Experimental results. Te experiments showed that Dice can
capture CSK along the four dimensions signiﬁcantly beter than the
single-dimensional baselines. Te ablation study highlighted that a
combination of prior scoring and constraint-based joint reasoning
is highly beneﬁcial (0.66 average ppref vs. 0.58 and 0.51 of each
step in isolation, see Table 6). Among the dimensions, we ﬁnd
that plausibility is the most diﬃcult of the four dimensions (see Ta-
ble 5). Te learning of hyper-parameters shows that all constraints
are useful and contribute to the outcome of Dice, with similar-
ity dependencies and plausibility inference having the strongest
inﬂuence.
Comparing the three CSK collections that we worked with, we
observe that the crowdsourced ConceptNet is a priori cleaner and
hence easier to process than Qasimodo and TupleKB. Also, manu-
ally designed taxonomies gave Dice a performance bost of 0.03-0.11
in ppref over the noisy web extracted WebIsALOD taxonomies.
Task diﬃculty. Scoring commonsense statements by dimensions
beyond conﬁdence has never been atempted before, and a major
challenge is to design appropriate and varied input signals towards
speciﬁc dimensions. Our experiments showed that Dice can ap-
proximate the human-generated ground-truth rankings to a con-
siderable degree (0.58-0.69 average ppref), although a gap remains
(see Table 5). We conjecture that in order to approximate human
judgments even beter, more and ﬁner-grained input signals, for
example about textual contexts of statements, are needed.
Enriched CSK data. Along with this paper, we publish six datasets:
the 3 CSK collections ConceptNet, TupleKB and Qasimodo en-
riched by Dice with score for the four CSK dimensions, and ad-
ditional inferred statements that expand the original CSK data by
about 50%. Te datasets can be downloaded from htps://tinyurl.
com/y6hygoh8.
Web demonstrator. Te results of running Dice on ConceptNet
and Qasimodo are showcased in an interactive web-based demo.
Te interface shows original scores from these CSK collections as
well as the per-dimension scores computed by Dice. Users can
explore the values of individual cues, the priors, the taxonomic
neighborhood of a subject, and the clauses generated by the rule
grounding. Te demo is available online at htps://dice.mpi-inf.mpg.
de, we also show screenshots in Figure 2.
From a landing page (Fig. 2(a)), users can navigate to individual
subjects like band (Fig. 2(b)). On pages for individual subjects,
taxonomic parents and siblings are shown at the top, followed by
commonsense statements from ConceptNet and Qasimodo. For
each statement, its normalized score or percentile in its original
CSK collection, along with scores and percentiles along the four
dimensions as computed by Dice, are shown. Colors from green
to red highlight to which quartile a percentile value belongs. On
inspecting a speciﬁc statement, e.g., band: hold concert (Fig. 2(c)),
one can see related statements used for computing basic scores,
along with the values of the priors and evidence scores. Further
down on the same page (Fig. 2(d)), the corresponding materialized
clauses from the ILP, along with their weight ωc, are shown.
8
CONCLUSION
Tis paper presented Dice, a joint reasoning framework for com-
monsense knowledge (CSK) that incorporates inter-dependencies
between statements by taxonomic relatedness and other cues. Tis
way we can capture more expressive meta-properties of concept-
property statements along the four dimensions of plausibility, typi-
cality, remarkability and saliency. Tis richer knowledge represen-
tation is a major advantage over prior works on CSK collections.
In addition, we have devised techniques to compute informative
rankings for all four dimensions, using the theory of reduced costs
for LP relaxation. We believe that such multi-faceted rankings of
CSK statements are crucial for next-generation AI, particularly to-
wards more versatile and robust conversational bots. Our future
work plans include leveraging this rich CSK for advanced question
answering and human-machine dialogs.
9

(a) Demo landing page.
(b) List of statements for subject band.
(c) Scores and neighbourhood for statement band: hold concert.
(d) Materialized clauses for statement band: hold concert.
Figure 2: Screenshots from the web-based demonstration platform.
10
