1
Natural Language Programming in Medicine: Administering Evidence 
Based Clinical Workflows with Autonomous Agents Powered by 
Generative Large Language Models
Akhil Vaid MD1,2, Joshua Lampert* MD1,2,3, Juhee Lee* MD4, Ashwin Sawant* MD1,5, Donald 
Apakama* MD1,6,7, Ankit Sakhuja* MD1,2,8, Ali Soroush MD1,9, Sarah Bick MD4, Ethan Abbott 
MD1,6, Hernando Gómez MD10, Michael Hadley MD11, Denise Lee MD1,12, Isotta Landi PhD1,2, 
Son Q. Duong MD MS1,13, Nicole Bussola PhD1, Ismail Nabeel MD14, Silke Muehlstedt15, Robert 
Freeman RN1,16, Patricia Kovatch BS17, Brendan Carr MD MS6, Fei Wang PhD18,19, Benjamin S. 
Glicksberg PhD2, Edgar Argulian MD11,20, Stamatios Lerakis MD PhD11,20, Rohan Khera, MD, 
MS21,22,23, David L. Reich MD24, Monica Kraft MD5, Alexander Charney MD PhD1,25, Girish 
Nadkarni MD MPH1,2,26
*Contributed equally
Corresponding author
Akhil Vaid

Affiliations
1.
The Charles Bronfman Institute for Personalized Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA
2.
The Division of Data Driven and Digital Medicine (D3M), Department of Medicine, Icahn 
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA
3.
Helmsley Electrophysiology Center, Mount Sinai Hospital, New York, New York, USA
4.
Division of Genetics and Genomics, Boston Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
5.
Department of Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, 
USA
6.
Department of Emergency Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, New York, USA
7.
Institute for Health Equity Research, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, United States
8.
Department of Critical Care Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, New York, USA
9.
Department of Gastroenterology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
New York, USA
10. Department of Critical Care Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
11. Mount Sinai Heart, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA

2
12. Department of Surgery, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, 
USA
13. Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA
14. Department of Environmental Medicine and Climate Science, Icahn School of Medicine 
at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA
15. Hasso Plattner Institute at Mount Sinai, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, New York, United States
16. Institute for Healthcare Delivery Science (IHDS), Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, New York, United States
17. Department of Scientific Computing, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, New York, USA
18. Department of Population Health Sciences, Weill Cornell Medical College, Cornell 
University, New York, New York, USA
19. Institute of Artificial Intelligence for Digital Health, Weill Cornell Medical College, Cornell 
University, New York, New York, USA
20. Department of Cardiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New 
York, USA
21. Section of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale School of 
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA
22. Section of Health Informatics, Department of Biostatistics, Yale School of Public Health, 
New Haven, Connecticut, USA
23. Center for Outcomes Research and Evaluation, Yale-New Haven Hospital, New Haven, 
Connecticut, USA
24. Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative and Pain Medicine, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, USA
25. Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New 
York, USA
26. Department of Nephrology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New 
York, USA

3
Abstract
Background
Generative Large Language Models (LLMs) have emerged as versatile tools in healthcare, 
demonstrating the ability to regurgitate clinical knowledge and pass medical licensing exams. 
Despite their promise, they have been largely treated as slow, imperfect information retrieval 
tools and face limitations such as data staleness, resource intensity, and manufacturing 
incorrect text – reducing their applicability to dynamic healthcare settings.
Methods
This study explored the functionality of both proprietary and open-source LLMs to act as 
autonomous agents within a simulated tertiary care medical center. Real-world clinical cases 
across multiple specialties were structured into JSON files and presented to agents for solution 
using the resources available to a human physician. Agents were created using LLMs in 
combination with natural language prompts, tools with real-world interactions, and standard 
programming techniques. The technique of Retrieval Augmented Generation was used to 
provide agents with updated context whenever appropriate. Expert clinicians collected and 
evaluated model responses across several performance metrics including correctness of the 
final answer, judicious use of tools, guideline conformity, and resistance to hallucinations.
Findings
Agents showed varied performance across specialties, with proprietary models (e.g., GPT-4) 
generally outperforming open-source models. The use of Retrieval Augmented Generation 
(RAG) improved guideline adherence and contextually relevant responses for the best 
performing model.
Interpretation
LLMs can effectively function as autonomous agents in healthcare by leveraging their 
generative capabilities and integrating with real-world data. The study highlights the potential of 
LLMs to enhance decision-making in clinical settings through tailored prompts and retrieval 
tools. However, the variability in model performance and the necessity for ongoing manual 
evaluation suggest that further refinements in LLM technology and operational protocols are 
needed to optimize their utility in healthcare.

4
Introduction
Generative Large Language Models1 (LLMs) have garnered significant attention due to their 
advanced multi-modal, conversational capabilities. Being able to program new behavior into 
such models using natural language prompting gives them additional flexibility over traditional, 
task-specific machine learning methods. Such flexibility may be harnessed downstream for a 
variety of healthcare-associated tasks such as being conversational assistants2, visual question-
answering3, and document classification4. However, LLM utilization has comes with challenges. 
By themselves, LLMs function as slow, imperfect databases that, when queried directly, may 
produce erroneous or fabricated responses—phenomena commonly referred to as 
"hallucinations."5 Additionally, both the creation and operation of these models are extremely 
resource-intensive6. Another important concern is that the knowledge contained within a model 
may grow stale or may not cover specific situations. While partially mitigating this is possible by 
manual insertion of verified information at time of inference7, or through supervised fine-tuning8, 
either option is slow, time-consuming with difficulties scaling.
For healthcare use cases9, LLMs have been shown to be able to regurgitate clinical 
knowledge10, and pass medical licensing exams11. However, such tests do not capture the 
complex dynamics of real-world healthcare settings. General-purpose models cannot consider 
major differences in institutional preferences or knowledge, individual patient profiles, and 
demographic factors. Furthermore, the structured nature of medical question-answer tasks does 
not reflect the breadth of decision-making freedom that clinicians possess. Consequently, the 
quintessential clinical question of “What is the next best thing to do for this patient?” cannot be 
effectively addressed by traditional question banks used to assess trainee knowledge.
Despite these limitations, LLMs excel in context-based quasi-reasoning due to their capability 
for generating subsequent tokens following provided text. This capability can be leveraged to 
create autonomous agents12 capable of operating within complex environments given an initial 
set of operating instructions. One such application is in the practice of evidence-based medicine 
(EBM)13,14, where adherence to defined protocols can streamline clinical tasks. In EBM, clinical 
encounters typically follow a structured approach that includes interviews, physical 
examinations, differential diagnoses, and the sequential use of lab tests and imaging studies 
before therapeutic recommendations. The sequence of these actions, dictated by both clinician 
experience and patient-specific factors, must also accommodate 15 rapid changes in medical 
guidelines, standards of care, and an ever-expanding body of research.
The conceptualization of LLM based agents16 as tiered entities—comprising the core model and 
an additional layer of natural language that imposes behavioral constraints—presents a 
transformative approach to managing the complexity of modern medical practice. By shifting 
from a paradigm of Natural Language Processing17 to one of Natural Language Programming, 
agents can provide refined, context-aware assistance to clinicians. This paradigm not only 
enhances the utility of LLMs but also signals a broader change in how we implement artificial 
intelligence in critical, information-dense fields like medicine and beyond.
Recent work has explored the abilities of LLMs as agents that can extract patient history in a 
conversational manner18, as well as attend to tasks of fetching information from databases19 by 
acting as a translational layer between natural language and database-specific query 

5
languages. Prior attempts20 at demonstrating the usefulness of agents as autonomous solvers 
of questions pertaining to the practice of medicine have been limited by and to non-expert and 
non-granular (automated) evaluation of simpler models, and limitations in prompting and 
response interpretation.
In this work, we explore the ability of both proprietary and open-source LLMs to function 
autonomously within an agent-based workflow in an environment representative of a tertiary 
care medical center (Figure 1). We equip models with all the tools and effectors that are 
available to a physician, and measure how currently available models function when provided 
with a general-purpose set of instructions to adapt to evolving clinical scenarios. We 
demonstrate the use of techniques such as Retrieval Augmented Generation21 (RAG) that can 
be used to automatically supplement inherent LLM knowledge and agent operation. We 
establish and evaluate the correctness and applicability of agentic responses through manual 
review by expert clinicians. Finally, we discuss how Natural Language Programming has, in 
essence, replaced Natural Language Processing as the dominant paradigm when dealing with 
complex systems that operate through transmission of the written word.
 

6
Methods
Data sources
We utilized real-world clinical cases seen by expert faculty clinicians across multiple specialties, 
namely cardiology, critical care, emergency medicine, genetics, and internal medicine 
(Supplementary Table 1). We selected representative cases for scenarios a physician would 
encounter within their practice. Each of these cases was then structured as a JSON22 
(JavaScript Object Notation) file containing discrete categories of clinically relevant information 
(keys) paired to associated values (Supplementary Figure 1). We chose the JSON format for 
its ability to express the hierarchical organization of complex relationships within clinical cases, 
ease of human readability, and its structured nature that facilitates straightforward machine 
retrieval of values associated with known keys.
Each case also contained links to prevailing diagnostic and treatment guidelines. Guidelines 
were instituted as plain text and divided into two subheadings: initial assessment, and initial 
treatment. Where relevant, available documentation was also supplemented with imitation 
institutional guidelines for certain cases to simulate how a clinician must alter their 
recommendations in special circumstances.
Finally, each file contained a question for the LLM to answer given clinical context. For the 
purposes of this study, this question was always “What is the next best step in management?” 
since an appropriate answer would attend to most of clinical protocol – knowing which 
investigations to order, how to interpret results, generation of a diagnosis, and next best steps 
on top.
Agents
An agent may be envisioned as a combination of four components. One, an underlying LLM. 
Since all generative LLMs operate in much the same manner, the actual model is 
interchangeable. Two, the text presented to the model, or prompt23. Prompts may be further 
divided into system prompts which are prepended to all interactions with a model for the 
purpose of directing the LLM’s manner of behavior; and a user prompt that contains context 
specific instructions and/or data for a model to analyze. Three, tools – combinations of text 
descriptors inserted into the system prompt, coupled to real-world effector functions that allow 
the model to interact with available infrastructure. Four, traditional programming techniques 
such as loops and regular expression-based searches to start, continue, and end the operation 
of an agent when certain set criteria are achieved. (Figure 2)
Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG)
RAG is a technique that enhances the capabilities of LLMs by combining their generative 
capabilities with the information retrieval abilities typical of search engines21. RAG can fetch 
relevant information from a vast dataset or external knowledge base before generating a 
response. This method helps in producing more accurate, informed, and contextually relevant 
outputs, especially when the internal knowledge of a language model might be outdated or 
insufficient. RAG use typically involves setting up an external source of curated information24 

7
that can be queried using either similarity-based metrics, adapters that translate between 
conventional database queries and natural language, or directly with natural language. Our 
implementation of RAG involved tool-based retrieval of case-specific guidelines stored within 
text files which were only shown to the agent if it arrived at the most likely correct diagnosis 
according to the curating clinician. In a separate set of evaluations, we disabled the RAG tool 
and evaluated how the best performing model might function when generating next steps 
without extraneous guidelines available.
Tool creation
We created tools allowing agents to retrieve information from cases using pre-defined keys. 
Models were required to explicitly ask for the results from a tool similar to a clinician ordering an 
investigation within a hospital setting. These tools were dedicated to retrieval of either of the 
patient’s symptoms, signs (physical examination), past medical history, electrocardiogram 
(ECG), results from other machine learning models, laboratory studies, and imaging studies. 
(Figure 1, Table 1). Tools for symptoms and signs worked without any input data, and returned 
long-form patient history, symptomatology, and physical exam findings respectively. In contrast, 
both the lab investigation and imaging study tools required the agent to provide a contextual 
input selected from a list of investigations. For example, “SERUM BILIRUBIN”, or “CHEST X-
RAY”. The full list of available investigations was created by pooling the names of tests across 
all available cases to more closely replicate a real hospital setting. (Supplementary Table 2) 
If an agent asked for a laboratory or imaging study not mentioned in the case, it was instead 
provided with a “Not available” text. Similarly, if there were no specific guidelines associated 
with the case or the agent provided an incorrect diagnosis to the RAG tool, it was provided with 
text stating “No updated guidelines available. Use your best clinical judgment”. Finally, if the 
agent made an error in selecting a tool, it was provided with feedback stating “<selection> is not 
a valid tool. Please try with one of <tool names>”. At this point, the agent was expected to 
modulate its output according to provided instructions in order to better use available tooling. 
Agentic operation
A key differentiator between LLMs and other kinds of machine learning models is that LLM 
behavior is not deterministic even in highly structured scenarios5,25. Thus, prompt engineering26 
refers to the (often subjective) process of formulating and modifying prompts such that the 
downstream LLM generates text according to specification.
We formulated our system prompt as a set of instructions giving the agent an identity (“…as a 
professor of medicine”), and a general set of instructions about how to utilize provided tools. 
(Figure 3, Full prompt detailed in Supplementary Table 3).
These instructions recommended judicious use of available tools in a logical manner. 
Additionally, the system prompt contained instructions to treat the output of a tool as the starting 
point for an observation that would act as an internal monologue and recommend an action that 
would be the next tool in line that it would utilize. The agent was directed to stop using tools and 
provide a final answer once it thought itself confident of it, or when it thought that the tooling 
would no longer provide any useful information. As above, the overall output of the model was 
parsed at each step using a rule-based approach to see if the model had reached the final 

8
answer – and if so, the execution of the process was halted, and the overall chain of responses 
logged for evaluation. This method of iteratively building the overall input to the model is 
described as chain-of-thought27,28 prompting, and it allowed us to establish a context for the 
model to operate off and keep generated text on guardrails. Overall prompt development was 
performed in an iterative manner using ChatGPT-3.5.
Performance evaluation
Another key difference between traditional classification or regression-based machine learning 
and generative modeling is the quantifiability of the outcomes. Well established metrics such as 
Areas Under the Curve, or Mean Square Error allow for precise, automated measurement of 
how well a traditional model might perform. However, evaluation of generative approaches is 
constrained to be subjective – especially within the context of a complex task such as patient 
management. Additionally, generated text must be manually evaluated by clinicians familiar with 
both the patient, as well as the conditions prescribed by the hospital system.
We tested multiple models within the agent framework as an exploration of how the currently 
available crop of LLMs may perform if allowed autonomous operation with the same set of 
operating instructions. Tested models were of both open-source (LLaMA 2-70B, Mixtral 8x7B, 
Meditron 70B) and proprietary (GPT-4, Gemini Pro, and Claude 3 Opus) provenance. Except for 
one open-source model (Meditron 70B) that was trained on medical text, all models were 
trained on general datasets. Each agent was allowed one attempt to generate coherent text 
related to a case. Runs were automatically evaluated to zero in case of deviations from the 
instructions put down as part of the system prompt - including hallucinating the history, not 
querying any tool, and/or jumping directly to a hallucinated final answer. All text was logged and 
manually evaluated by two clinicians of the same specialty in a single-blinded manner, i.e. the 
clinician was unaware of which model’s responses they were looking at.
Responses were evaluated on a ten-point scale for correctness of final answer; judicious use of 
tools; conformity to established clinical guidelines in the final recommendation; and resistance to 
hallucinations. In case an agent was incorrect in its diagnosis, it was automatically marked 0 for 
the remaining tooling and guidelines as well.
Case difficulty and the amount of information needed to make useful decisions may vary 
contingent upon clinician experience and expertise. Therefore, we included a secondary 
appraisal of case difficulty as it would apply to a human physician into the evaluation process. 
Cases were graded for difficulty on a scale of ten as before. All cases are available for review 
within the linked online repository.
Software and Hardware
We utilized the transformers29, PyTorch30, and LangChain libraries to create this framework and 
resulting agents. These libraries were called from within the Python31 programming language 
(3.12.x).
Proprietary models are accessible over the internet through APIs and for these models, 
response generation was done securely in a cloud computing framework. The open-source 

9
models were run at 16-bit precision within the supercomputing cluster at the Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai.

10
Results
Overall Performance
We evaluated agents based on three proprietary and three open-source LLMs across five 
medical specialties: Cardiology, Critical Care, Emergency Medicine, Genetics, and Internal 
Medicine. The evaluation was conducted by two clinicians from each specialty. We focused on 
three key metrics to assess their performance: correctness of the final answer, judicious use of 
tools, and conformity to established guidelines. Additional scoring was done for resistance to 
hallucinations in generated responses, according to case difficulty as reported by evaluating 
clinicians, and for conformity to guidelines with RAG disabled for the best performing agent. 
Scores reported below are averages of all five cases within a specialty and fall within a scale of 
1 to 10.
Comparative Analysis Across Metrics by Specialty
Correctness of the Final Answer: The agents based on GPT-4 and Claude 3 Opus often scored 
similarly and outperformed the agent based on Gemini Pro in correctness across most 
specialties. Both the GPT-4 and Claude agents achieved a perfect score of 10 in Critical Care, 
while the highest score the Gemini Pro-based agent reached in any category was 5·3, also in 
Critical Care. This was largely due to the Gemini Pro agent’s inability to follow instructions as 
provided within the system prompt, leading to abrupt terminations or direct jumps to an incorrect 
final answer. (Figure 4, Table 2)
Judicious Use of Tools: The GPT-4-based agent consistently scored high in judicious use of 
tools, surpassing other agents in Internal Medicine with a score of 8·6 and matching the Claude 
3 Opus-based agent in Critical Care with a score of 8·1. The Claude agent showed strong 
performance in Cardiology and Internal Medicine with scores above 7. The Gemini Pro-based 
agent's performance in tool usage was considerably lower, not exceeding 3·9 in any specialty. 
(Figure 4, Table 2)
Conformity to Guidelines: The GPT-4-based agent typically led with respect to conformity to 
guidelines, scoring highest in Internal Medicine (8·2) and Critical Care (8·9). The Claude-based 
agent also displayed strong adherence, particularly in Cardiology (8·1) and Genetics (8·4). The 
Gemini Pro-based agent's highest conformity score was 3·5 in Cardiology, indicating a 
significant gap compared to the other agents. (Figure 4, Table 2)
Resistance to Hallucinations: Across completed cases, all agents demonstrated excellent 
resistance to hallucinations. Scores were perfect for agents built using all three proprietary 
models according to both evaluating clinicians. (Supplementary Figure 2)
Retrieval Augmented Generation
The agent based on GPT-4 achieved an average performance uplift of 20% across all 
specialties in terms of conformity to guidelines when using RAG. The most substantial change 
(52%) was seen for Internal Medicine cases (5·4 to 7·2). These results suggest that additional 
direction supplied by the presence of question-specific context is sufficient to make generation 
more use-case appropriate. (Figure 5, Table 3)

11
Performance by Difficulty
Of cases judged to be “hard” difficulty by evaluating clinicians, the GPT-4-based agent had 
highest performance across all metrics – exceeding performance even at cases established to 
be of “easy”, or “medium” difficulty. The GPT-4 agent received perfect scores (10·0) for hard 
cases for correctness, around 9 for judicious use of tools, and guideline conformity. The Claude 
and Gemini Pro-based agents came in second and third, respectively. Performance for agents 
based on both these models was seen to be inversely proportional to the difficulty of the case, 
somewhat mimicking the likely performance of a human practitioner. The Gemini Pro-based 
agent had difficulty negotiating the medium and harder difficulty cases, with scores not 
exceeding 4·0 for any metric. (Supplementary Figure 3)
Open-source models
Agents based on tested open-source models performed considerably worse than those based 
on proprietary models. The LLaMA-2 70B-based agent managed to complete cases only in 
Critical Care, scoring a 3·8 in correctness of the final answer, but it failed to address any cases 
successfully in other specialties including Cardiology, Emergency Medicine, Genetics, and 
Internal Medicine, scoring zero across all metrics· The Mixtral 8x7B-based agent also showed 
poor performance, unable to complete any cases in Cardiology and Internal Medicine, and only 
managing marginal scores in Critical Care (2 in correctness), Emergency Medicine (2·9 in 
correctness), and Genetics (3·4 in correctness). The agent built on Meditron 70B, a medical 
fine-tune based on LLaMA-2 70B, did not complete a single case across all specialties, scoring 
zero in all metrics. (Supplementary Table 4, Supplementary Figures 4 and 5).

12
Discussion
In this study, we demonstrate that generative Large Language Models (LLMs), real-world 
effector functions, and parsing of natural language responses can be combined for the creation 
of autonomous agents. We show that knowledge embedded within these models can be utilized 
downstream to make LLMs emulate physician behavior in solving clinical cases across 
disciplines. Additionally, we demonstrated the utility of RAG to make agents more suited 
towards operation in settings requiring a high degree of institutional knowledge or that demand 
application of updating information. We develop and open-source general natural language 
instructions for this functionality and tested the resulting framework against currently available 
proprietary and open-source LLMs. Given the current state of clinical decision support systems, 
agentic operation may represent a more consolidated approach in terms of how to approach the 
patient, as well as a better way to get to the all-important next-best-step of management, 
especially in resource or experience limited settings.
We found that across chosen metrics, the agent based on GPT-4 consistently demonstrated 
high performance, indicating its superior capacity for integrating accuracy, appropriate tool use, 
and strict guideline adherence. The agent created using Claude 3 Opus also performed well but 
was occasionally outmatched by the GPT-4 agent, especially in tool usage and guideline 
adherence. The Gemini Pro-based agent’s lower scores were mostly due to an inability to 
complete provided clinical scenarios. Performance trends persisted across case difficulty. 
Agents based on open-source models performed considerably worse and were only able to 
complete a minimal number of cases.
In the absence of standardized benchmarks, it is important that the capabilities of such agents 
be manually evaluated on real-world data and scenarios. Automated evaluation against 
synthetic data cannot and does not consider the importance of institution specific effects, step-
by-step reasoning that leads the model to an answer, or context-aware and reasonable resource 
utilization. While the more complex models tested were able to achieve consistently good 
performance, systemic biases in automated evaluation protocols, and overtly rigid prompting 
can lead to different conclusions20.
While all Large Language Models (LLMs) are exposed to vast amounts of text, including 
medical textbooks—which theoretically should equip them to handle commonly seen 
pathologies effectively—we observe substantial variations in their capabilities. Traditionally, 
evaluation metrics for these models have emphasized the semantic and grammatical accuracy32 
of generated text, as well as their proficiency in solving multiple-choice questions. However, 
these metrics do not capture the practical effectiveness of LLMs in real-world applications. We 
argue that the steerability of a model, although more subjective, is a more useful indicator of its 
utility in dynamic and complex environments. This is evidenced by the more complex models 
tested within this framework being able to achieve not just excellent diagnostic performance, but 
also being able to generate the basis of future personalized care for each patient. In 
comparison, several models that have equaled or exceeded GPT-4 performance on individual 
benchmarks33,34 (including clinical information retrieval) were found to perform much worse, or 
not be able to respond to complex instructions at all.

13
A cornerstone of this agentic operation is model agnosticism. Our implementation allows for the 
underlying model to be switched out by changing one line of code, thereby allowing near-
instantaneous performance improvements as better, more steerable models become available. 
This applies to both proprietary and open-source solutions. In this context, we stipulate that 
existing open-source modeling efforts may not be considered suitable for autonomous 
operation, but the utilization of proprietary models will always come with concerns of patient 
privacy, cost and difficulty tracking decision making since the underlying LLM may be subject to 
change or update without notice. Conversely, for open-source solutions the problems are initial 
investment into infrastructure, limited amount of context that a model can successfully process, 
and demonstrably worse, unstable performance. 
Properly vetted agents can serve pivotal roles across various scenarios: as triage specialists in 
emergency departments, managing intake and initial assessments, or as first points of contact 
in outpatient settings, collecting preliminary patient histories. In all these cases, this could lead 
to workload reduction, and optimized care. Fully autonomous models also represent other 
advantages. As above, minor prompt engineering enables models to output all differential 
diagnoses at each step of the process, and the reasoning behind them. Such directions may be 
immensely useful for clinical education since they represent step-by-step considerations of the 
next-best-step specific to the patient– something that may be difficult to glean from mainstream 
textbooks. Additionally, clinicians have access to the entire thought-process of the model 
through the “observations” contained within the output. Thus, the manner of operation 
demonstrated is transparent and in keeping with clinical guidelines. In contrast, clinical decision 
support systems must still provide complex saliency maps, or measures of importance that do 
not support any claims of causality35. Further, LLMs operating in this manner may also largely 
circumvent the concerns that issue with the use of predictive models in healthcare settings36.
LLM operation must also be considered in terms of feasibility. The costs of training such models 
ensures that new knowledge cannot be easily injected into such models. This is an especially 
important concern for applications which rely on domain specific knowledge or where such 
knowledge changes often. A relevant example is antibiotic resistance37. Microbial populations 
and susceptibilities change over time and geography. It stands to reason that such knowledge 
cannot be made part of a model, or it will quickly start to issue incorrect recommendations. 
However, institutions already maintain records of antibiotic resistance which LLMs can parse to 
issue very specific recommendations. As we demonstrate, even for the best available model 
(GPT-4), the addition of RAG increased performance at generating text that conformed to the 
best available clinical knowledge (Figure 5, Table 3). Prompt engineering26 shortens the time 
required to program new behaviors with changing circumstances, or when errors are identified. 
For example, an agent may order tests which are either too expensive or considered 
unnecessary. Prompt engineering would allow for remedying situations like these simply by 
telling the model to “only perform absolutely necessary investigations”, or by making the model 
aware of how long results may take. Similar considerations may be applied to clinical guidelines 
as well. We believe the best way to engineer these prompts will vary from facility to facility and 
should be an avenue for future investigation.
Finally, we also show iterative construction of the model prompt reduces hallucinations. By 
utilizing chain-of-thought prompting coupled to stepwise injection of verified information, we 
steer towards a specific direction and discard incorrect assumptions. This is an especially 
pertinent approach over utilizing models as pure question-answering tools since hallucinations 

14
may snowball38. The effectiveness of this approach is demonstrated by the lack of hallucinations 
in the responses of even otherwise poorly performing models. Additionally, models which 
operate purely within chat-interfaces are subject to the possibility of “jailbreaking”39 – wherein 
malicious natural language instructions can override the model’s operating instructions. Agentic 
operation reduces or entirely removes human input for operation, and largely reduces such 
misuse potential-especially useful for information-controlled hospital settings. 
Our work must be considered alongside its limitations. First, curation and translation of cases 
from the electronic healthcare record to JSON files needed human intervention, as well as 
subsequent evaluation of long-form LLM responses. Therefore, we were limited in terms of the 
overall sample size of the study. However, cases were carefully chosen to be representative of 
what a clinician operating within a specialty might expect to encounter. As before, this method of 
evaluation is also important to consider many aspects of agent-based operation that cannot be 
attended to with automated testing. Second, while case data was deposited within machine 
readable JSON files, any extension of this work to an actual clinical setting would involve setting 
up adapters that bridge the infrastructure of the clinical setting with the tools available to the 
agent. Finally, clinical guidelines for certain conditions were especially voluminous, and we were 
restricted to GPT-4 generated summaries of these guidelines to fit them into reasonably sized 
prompts. We attempted to circumvent this limitation by asking models to generate their final 
recommendations using a combination of their own clinical knowledge and provided text; but we 
stipulate the larger models may be able to generate bespoke recommendations to individual 
patients either with more context, or more sophisticated guideline retrieval. Finally, remaining 
limitations issue from the underlying models. As before, the choice between open-source and 
proprietary models brings caveats on either side, and which model to employ as the driver is 
subject to institutional and situation specific concerns. Metrics as shown conform to the LLaMA 
2 class of models and derivatives, while the LLaMA 3 class of models has recently been 
released. These models have generally displayed better performance across a variety of 
synthetic benchmarks and may be utilized within this framework through minimal modifications 
of the source code. 
In conclusion, LLMs are profound tools that have wide-ranging implications in how we 
consider the deployment of AI systems in healthcare. Operationalizing them as agents allows 
them to integrate with the moving parts of a healthcare system – a paradigm change in 
approach that could lead to significant changes in how evidence-based medicine performed by 
providers and experienced by patients.

15
Figures

16
Figure 1. Workflow
The executor LLM relies on human personnel to generate the history of presenting illness, and 
the physical exam findings. Following this, it autonomously chooses which lab investigations or 
imaging studies to order, and how to interpret them. These interpretations form the basis of the 
model’s next step or order. During this process, it may also query the output of existing machine 
learning systems.
Following this, the model queries all available literature on the most likely differential diagnosis it 
is considering. In this figure, blue horizontal lines indicate the degree of importance given by the 
model to any one source of information. This is an important consideration since we want 
institutional knowledge to override general purpose guidelines which may not be entirely 
appropriate for any one patient population. 
Finally, the model issues its recommendations based entirely on the question it is tasked to 
answer. This may be generating the final diagnosis, the management specific to the clinical 
setting it finds itself in, or referral to another facility.

17
Figure 2. Agentic operation
The agentic workflow depicted in the figure outlines a structured interaction process between 
user prompts and an LLM agent-based system. The process initiates with a user prompt 
(represented by the blue terminal icon), which is parsed and formulated into input text 
comprising system prompts and case details. This input is then processed by the LLM 
(symbolized by the central brain icon) that generates text containing model thoughts and 
requests for tool use. Tools are shown in purple boxes as two components – textual descriptions 
and attached effector functions.
Upon generation of text, two possibilities emerge. The first is Process Termination (indicated 
by the red line): If the generated text signifies the end of the process upon rules-based parsing, 
the workflow concludes. The second is Process Continuation (illustrated by the green line): If 
the generated text calls for a tool, it triggers the use of an effector function. This function 
executes real-world actions (depicted by the hand icon), feedback from which are provided as 
text, and fed back as the user prompt, thereby creating a loop that continues until process 
termination.

18
Figure 3. Initial (system) prompt
Preamble text that establishes the framework for the LLM. Overall text may be separated into 4 
parts each with their own function:
(1) Identity: Tells the model who it is and how it’s expected to respond. The model was asked to 
assume the identity of a “professor of medicine” for most of our testing.
(2) Tooling: Provides the model with a general sense of directions regarding when to use tools. 
Actual choice and order of tool use is up to the model. Also establishes a stop condition for 
the model i.e. when it reaches a final answer.
(3) Operation: Establishes “chain-of-thought” prompting structure. The narrative the model uses 
to generate the next word is built up piecemeal through repeated iterations of thoughts, 
actions, and observations in that order until the final answer is reached.
(4) Task: What the model is supposed to provide a solution for - “What is the next best step in 
management”?
Text in curly brackets is replaced by names of tools and the question at runtime. The full prompt 
so generated is available in Supplementary Table 3.

19
Figure 4. Proprietary model performance within framework by specialty
All models (Gemini Pro, Claude 3 Opus, and GPT-4) had Retrieval Augmented Generation 
enabled and were shown guidelines for each case. Number of questions by specialty: 5 each 
(25 total). Each response was evaluated by two clinicians.
 

20
Figure 5. Performance change (by specialty) with and without Retrieval Augmented Generation 
for GPT-4 in the “Conformity to Guidelines” category.

21
Tables
Tool name
Tool description
Notes
Symptom 
tool
Use this tool when you need to know about the patient’s 
symptoms.
The tool may be used only once.
The tool does not accept any input.
Patient’s history of 
presenting illness 
and physical exam. 
Would ordinarily be 
gathered at point of 
contact.
Past medical 
history tool
Use this tool when you need to know about the patient’s past 
medical history.
The tool may be used only once.
The tool does not accept any input.
Sign tool
Use this tool when you need to know about the patient’s physical 
exam.
The tool may be used only once.
The tool does not accept any input.
Lab 
investigation 
tool
Use this tool when you need to know about lab investigations.
The tool is recommended if the diagnosis is inconclusive.
The tool accepts a list of names of lab investigations as a string.
It is very important to only order lab investigations if they are 
relevant.
The tool must be called again with a different lab 
investigation if earlier results are inconclusive, not 
available, or insufficient.
Repeating this tool with a new lab investigation is preferred 
before moving on to imaging studies.
Lab investigations themselves cannot be repeated.
You must specify the exact name of the lab investigation. E.g. 
SERUM ALBUMIN instead of just ALBUMIN.
Lab investigations must only be ordered from the list of available 
investigations provided to you.
Only the following lab investigations are available:
<names of lab investigations>
Names of lab 
investigations are 
pooled from all 
cases.
Multiple labs can be 
ordered at once.
Outputs the absolute 
value of the lab 
investigation 
alongside an 
interpretation in 
parenthesis. E.g. 
SERUM 
CREATININE: 
1.1mg/dL (Elevated)
Imaging 
study tool
Use this tool when you need to know about radiological or 
sonographic studies.
The tool is recommended if the diagnosis is inconclusive.
The tool accepts a list of names of imaging studies as a string.
Only one imaging study can be ordered at a time. Start with the 
most relevant one.
The tool must be called again with a different imaging study 
if earlier results are inconclusive or not available.
Imaging studies must only be ordered from the list of available 
studies.
Only the following imaging studies are available:
<names of imaging studies>
Names of imaging 
studies are pooled 
from all cases.
Only one imaging 
study be ordered at a 
time.
Outputs the 
diagnosis statement 
from the imaging 
study.

22
ECG tool
Use this tool when you need to know about the ECG 
(electrocardiogram).
The tool is recommended regardless of how certain the 
diagnosis is.
The tool does not accept any input.
The ECG is a 
commonly 
performed, low-cost, 
non-invasive 
investigation. 
Therefore, the model 
is encouraged to 
utilize it.
Machine 
learning tool
Use this tool when you need to know about predictions issued by 
machine learning models relevant to this patient.
The tool is recommended to guide further testing.
The tool accepts a list of names of machine learning models 
as a string and returns a probability value. 
Only one machine learning model can be used at a time.
Only the following machine learning models are available:
<names of available outcome specific machine learning models>
The model is only 
made aware of this 
tool in case there are 
relevant machine 
learning models 
available.
Requires 
interpretation of 
probability.
Guidelines 
tool
Use this tool when you need to know about established 
guidelines.
Use this tool when you have a top differential diagnosis and need 
to know if there are any tests that can help you confirm or refute 
the diagnosis.
This tool must not be used more than once.
If the guidelines suggest a test you haven’t ordered yet, you must 
order that test if it is available.
If the guidelines suggest a test that is not available, you must 
add the recommendation to your final answer.
You must not order tests which have already been ordered.
After using this tool, you must proceed to consider available 
treatment guidelines before giving your final answer.
You may not use existing knowledge to recommend a treatment 
unless no treatment guidelines are available.
Your recommendation must be as relevant to the patient’s 
condition as per the treatment guidelines as possible.
This tool must be used to personalize your final answer for 
the patient in front of you.
Do not quote recommendations from guidelines verbatim.
The use of this tool is compulsory before issuing your final 
answer.
The tool accepts your most likely differential diagnosis as a 
string.
Institutional guidelines take precedence over other 
guidelines.
Guidelines are taken 
from reputable 
sources and distilled 
into two 
subheadings: INITIAL 
ASSESSMENT, and 
INITIAL 
TREATMENT.
Guidelines are only 
shown to the model if 
the diagnosis 
provided by the 
model is correct.

23
Table 1. Tools
Tool names and descriptions as they are inserted into the initial prompt for the LLM.
For tools that expect an input, italicized text is replaced by names of investigations that are 
pooled from all available cases at runtime. These investigations represent the degrees-of-
freedom within which the model may act. 
Text in bold represents safety measures to prevent the model from getting stuck in place, or 
specialized directions for the model that direct the model to modify its downstream output.
Lines of text in the description are separated for clarity.

24
Metric
Correctness of final 
answer
Judicious use of 
tools
Conformity to 
guidelines
Gemini Pro
Cardiology
3·3
3
3·5
Critical Care
5·3
3·9
3·4
Emergency Medicine
4
2·6
2·7
Genetics
1·6
0·4
1
Internal Medicine
2·7
1·8
2·2
Claude 3 Opus
Cardiology
8·3
7·5
8·1
Critical Care
10
8·1
8·1
Emergency Medicine
4·4
4·4
4·1
Genetics
9
6·5
8·4
Internal Medicine
7·1
7·5
7·1
GPT-4
Cardiology
8·3
8·2
8·1
Critical Care
10
8·1
8·9
Emergency Medicine
7·5
7·3
6·2
Genetics
8·6
6·1
7·5
Internal Medicine
7·6
8·6
8·2
Table 2. Model performance within framework by specialty
Responses were manually evaluated by two expert clinicians on a scale of 1-10. Presented 
values are averages of all 5 cases in each specialty.

25
Specialty
Score without 
RAG
Score with RAG
Performance uplift
Cardiology
7·2
8·1
13%
Critical Care
7·7
8·9
16%
Emergency Medicine
5·4
6·2
15%
Genetics
6·8
7·5
10%
Internal Medicine
5·4
7·2
52%
Average
20%
Table 3. Performance change for best performing model (GPT-4) with RAG 
Performance improvement in the “Conformity to guidelines” metric with and without Retrieval 
Augmented Generation enabled. Values listed are out of 10.

26
Funding
This work was supported in part through the computational resources and staff expertise 
provided by Scientific Computing at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai and supported 
by the Clinical and Translational Science Awards (CTSA) grant UL1TR004419 from the National 
Center for Advancing Translational Sciences.
Author contributions
The study was conceived and designed by AV; Code was written by AV; Underlying data were 
analyzed and visualized by AV; Cases were collected and evaluated by J.Lampert, J.Lee, 
A.Sawant, DA, A.Sakhuja; Cases were evaluated by SB, EA, HG, MH, GNN; The first draft of 
the manuscript was written by AV; GNN supervised the project and acquired funding. AV and 
GNN had access to and verified the data. All authors had access to the data presented in the 
study, contributed to critical revisions, and approved the final version of the manuscript as well 
as the decision for submission.
Competing Interests
Dr. Nadkarni reports consultancy agreements with AstraZeneca, BioVie, GLG Consulting, 
Pensieve Health, Reata, Renalytix, Siemens Healthineers, and Variant Bio; research funding 
from Goldfinch Bio and Renalytix; honoraria from AstraZeneca, BioVie, Lexicon, Daiichi Sankyo, 
Meanrini Health and Reata; patents or royalties with Renalytix; owns equity and stock options in 
Pensieve Health and Renalytix as a scientific cofounder; owns equity in Verici Dx; has received 
financial compensation as a scientific board member and advisor to Renalytix; serves on the 
advisory board of Neurona Health; and serves in an advisory or leadership role for Pensieve 
Health and Renalytix. Dr. Khera is an Associate Editor of JAMA. He receives support from the 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute of the National Institutes of Health (under award 
K23HL153775) and the Doris Duke Charitable Foundation (under award, 2022060). He also 
receives research support, through Yale, from Bristol-Myers Squibb, Novo Nordisk, and 
BridgeBio. He is a coinventor of U.S. Provisional Patent Applications 63/177,117, 63/428,569, 
63/346,610, 63/484,426, 63/508,315, and 63/606,203. He is a co-founder of Ensight-AI and 
Evidence2Health, health platforms to improve cardiovascular diagnosis and evidence-based 
cardiovascular care. Dr. Lampert reports a consultancy agreement with Viz.ai. All other authors 
have reported that they have no relationships relevant to the contents of this paper to disclose.

27
