XXX-X-XXXX-XXXX-X/XX/$XX.00 ©20XX IEEE 
Performance comparison of an AI-based Adaptive 
Learning System in China 
 
Wei Cui    Zhen Xue    and    Khanh-Phuong Thai 
Yixue Squirrel AI Learning Inc., Shanghai, China 

Abstract—adaptive learning systems stand apart from 
traditional learning systems by offering a personalized learning 
experience to students according to their different knowledge 
states. Adaptive systems collect and analyse students’ behavior 
data, update learner profiles, then accordingly provide timely 
individualized feedback to each student. Such interactions 
between the learning system and students can improve the 
engagement of students and the efficiency of learning. This 
paper evaluates the effectiveness of an adaptive learning 
system, “Yixue Squirrel AI” (or Yixue), on English and math 
learning in middle school.  The effectiveness of the Yixue’s 
math and English learning systems is respectively compared 
against (1) traditional classroom math instruction conducted 
by expert human teachers and (2) BOXFiSH, another adaptive 
learning platform for English language learning. Results 
suggest that students achieved better performance using Yixue 
adaptive learning system than both traditional classroom 
instruction by expert teachers and another adaptive learning 
platform. 
Keywords—Adaptive Learning, Mastery-based Learning, 
Intelligent Tutoring Systems, AI, Diagnostic Assessment, 
effectiveness, Math learning, English language learning 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The widespread availability of computers and network 
connections inside and outside schools has drawn greater 
attention to technology-based learning systems. Studies 
have shown the effectiveness of such systems (e.g., 
VanLehn, 2011) and can promote student engagement (e.g., 
Kuh, 2003). The analysis on 74 studies showed that, 
educational technology intervention produce positive 
impacts (Cheung & Slavin, 2013; Steenbergen-Hu & Cooper, 
2013, 2014). One major subset of such technology-based 
interventions is adaptive learning systems.  
Through machine learning algorithms and data analytics 
techniques, adaptive learning systems stand apart from 
traditional learning systems by dynamically offering 
personalized learning experiences to students according to 
their different knowledge states. The intent is to determine 
what a student really knows and to move the student 
through a sequential path to certain learning goals. Learning 
products with adaptive features, such as Cognitive Tutors®, 
i-Ready®, 
Achieve3000®, 
Knewton®, 
RealizIt®, 
and 
ALEKS®, DreamBox® Learning, collect and analyze learners’ 
behavior data, update learner profiles, and accordingly 
provide timely individualized feedback to each learner. As 
students spend more time in such a system, it can better 
estimate their abilities and can personalize instruction to 
best fit their strengths and weaknesses (e.g., van Seters et 
al., 2012). 
As such adaptive learning systems are becoming more 
prevalent, there is an increased need in evaluating their 
effectiveness at helping students learn. There have been 
few rigorous evaluation studies, but previous findings from 
the United States suggest positive results. An meta-analysis 
on learning data including 1,600 adaptive courses and 4,800 
non-adaptive courses showed that the adaptive courses 
were more effective in improving student performance 
(Bomash & Kish, 2015). Pane, Griffin, McCaffrey, & Karam 
(2014) conducted a large-scale effectiveness study of 
Cognitive Tutor Algebra I, a representative intelligent 
tutoring system, in diverse real-world school contexts and 
found promising positive impact of Cognitive Tutor after 
two years over traditional classroom instruction.  
Even fewer experimental studies on the impact of 
adaptive learning systems have been done in China because 
the development of adaptive learning systems is still in the 
early stage in China, although online education in China has 
developed rapidly in recent years. The 42nd China statistical 
report on internet development in China shows that, by 
June 2018 the number of online education users in China 
had reached 172 million, accounting for 21.4% of total 
Internet users.  
The purpose of this research is to further evaluate the 
impact of one such intelligent adaptive learning system, 
Yixue Squirrel AI (abbreviated as Yixue in this paper) on 
students’ math and English language learning. Yixue’s 
efficacy has been reported previously in 2018 International 
Conference on Computer Supported Education (Li, Cui, Xu, 
Zhu, & Feng, 2018) and 2018 Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence in Education (Feng, Cui, & Wang, 2018). This 
research looks to illustrate the automatic adaptive 
mechanism of Yixue, and confirm earlier findings by 
comparing Yixue against classroom instruction by expert 
teachers (Study 1) and another learning platform (Study 2). 
II. YIXUE INTELLIGENT ADAPTIVE LEARNING SYSTEM 
The Yixue adaptive learning system was launched in 
2016 and presently has over 100,000 users. Figure 1 shows 
the working mechanism of Yixue. Students only interact 
with the contents which are delivered to the students 
through a computer user interface, while the other parts of 
the figure work in the background server, not seen by the 
students.  
The interaction between the learner and the content 
constantly produces learner data with time-stamp. The data, 
together with learner historical information data, are in real 
time sent to learning analytics engine, where the student 

profile or ability on each skill is updated by mining and 
analysis of the learning process.   
As shown in Figure 1, the analysis results are sent to the 
intelligent adaptive learning engine to be diagnosed. In the 
intelligent adaptive learning engine, fine-grained knowledge 
map, 
together 
with 
knowledge 
space 
theory 
and 
information theory, are implemented to precisely diagnose 
the student’s knowledge state with as few questions as 
possible. Accordingly, the engine in real time aims to 
dynamically determine the most optimal learning path so 
that it can deliver appropriate learning content for maximal 
learning effect. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Working mechanism of Yixue 
As shown in Figure 1, results from the learning analytics 
engine are also sent to the dashboard to be graphically 
displayed. Teacher can check the dashboard in real time to 
monitor students’ learning progress, such as the student’s 
answers and their response duration for each question, so 
the teacher can identify individual students who might be 
struggling, what she is struggling with, and provide her with 
corresponding support during class time. Teacher can 
instruct 
the 
student 
face-to-face 
if necessary. 
An 
administrator, such as a schoolmaster can also check the 
dashboard, to review student progress on each lesson and 
to view their score summary. 
When a student starts a lesson in Yixue, she receives a 
diagnostic pretest to evaluate her mastery of the knowledge 
points associated with that lesson’s learning targets. The 
subsequent learning phase focuses on the knowledge points 
she did not “master”. The mastery criteria for our products 
are different from each other. In the math course product 
used in our study, the mastery criterion refers to the ability 
value scores above 0.75 on the knowledge point. In the 
English course product used in our study, the mastery 
criterion is scores above 0.85 on the knowledge point. 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c) 
 
(d) 
Figure 2. Sample personalized learning paths 
 
Yixue aims to mimic an expert personal tutor. It 
evaluates the student’s knowledge state and ability value by 
diagnosing the learning process, and then accordingly 

deliver a personalized learning path with appropriate 
learning materials for the student. 
Figure 2 is an illustration of personalized learning paths. 
Figure 2(a) is a traditional linear learning path, in which blue 
boxes represent different knowledge points, and all 
students are generally expected to learn the knowledge 
points one by one through the path shown by the purple 
lines linking the boxes. In Figure 2(b)(c)(d), the red and 
green boxes linked by red lines represent weak knowledge 
points that should be learned by the student, according to 
the diagnosis in the pre-test. The dark blue boxes are the 
knowledge points skipped because the student has 
demonstrated mastery on those in the pre-test. The green 
boxes represent the knowledge points mastered after this 
session of learning, while the red ones are not yet mastered 
after this session of learning and still need to be learned.  
Unlike traditional learning path, the learning path in Yixue 
for each student is different, focusing on learning weak 
knowledge points and skipping those knowledge points 
already mastered. As shown in Figures 2(b), (c), and (d), 
student Liu has the fewest weak knowledge points to learn 
and student Li has the most weak knowledge points to learn. 
Through this personalized learning path, student Liu would 
save 92% of learning time compared to traditional learning 
path, Sun would save 78% of learning time, and Li would 
save 47%.  
III. RESEARCH AIM 
 
We conducted two studies to compare the effectiveness 
of (1) Yixue math middle school program against business-
as-usual classroom instruction and (2) Yixue English middle 
school program against BOXFiSH online learning product. 
The primary purpose of the studies was to further evaluate 
the impact Yixue has on improving student learning and to 
determine the likely magnitude of those effects, if they exist. 
In earlier studies, Feng et al. (2018) compared Yixue with 
classroom instruction by expert human teachers, and found 
that Yixue on average scored 8.56 points higher than 
instruction by human teachers for grade 8 students with a 
statistically significant difference (F(1, 32) = 3.35, p = 0.08, r2 
= 53.08) and an effect size of g = 0.48，and Yixue scored 
3.41 points higher than  instruction by human teachers for 
grade 9, without a statistically significant difference (F(1, 40) 
= 2.02, p = .16, r2 = 49.38) but a substantial effect size for 
the Yixue intervention, g = 0.32. In another study, Li et al. 
(2018) compared Yixue with Magic Grid, another popular 
online learning platform, and found that students who used 
Yixue on average scored 3.8 points higher on the post-test 
than students who used Magic Grid, after controlling for 
differences in pre-test scores, and the effect was marginally 
significant (F(2, 84) = 104.6, p = .09, r2 = 0.71).  
IV. METHODS 
Experiment 1: Comparison of Yixue and Classroom 
Instruction by Expert Teachers 
Sample.  
Typical middle school students, 13 to 15 years old, were 
sampled from Chengdu. Students were randomly assigned 
into the control group and treatment group using stratified 
block randomization (Trochim, Donnelly, & Arora, 2016, p. 
229). A total of 203 students took part in the experiment, of 
whom 101 students were assigned to the treatment group 
and 102 students were assigned to the control group.  
90 students of the treatment group finished the 
experiment, where Yixue system was used as the 
intervention. 73 students of the control group finished the 
experiment, where they were instructed by expert teachers. 
Students who did not complete the study chose to drop out 
on their own volition. Following the pre-test, students in the 
control group were then split into three sub-groups to 
receive instructions by three teachers. The teachers had 
taught math in local middle or high school for 8 to 18 years.  
Experiment procedure.  
Table 1. Schedule of Experiment 1 
2018-04-29 
13:00-13:05 
Introduction 
13:05-13:10 
Questionnaire 
13:10-14:00 
Pre-test 
14:10-15:00 
Instruction by Yixue/human teachers 
2018-04-30 
13:00-13:50 
Instruction by Yixue/human teachers 
14:00-14:50 
Instruction by Yixue/human teachers 
15:00-15:50 
Instruction by Yixue/human teachers 
2018-05-01 
13:00-13:50 
Instruction by Yixue/human teachers 
14:00-14:50 
Instruction by Yixue/human teachers 
15:00-15:50 
Post-test 
15:50-16:00 
Questionnaire 
 
The study lasted for 3 days during a national vacation. 
The schedule of this study is shown in Table 1, which is the 
same for every student, except the treatment group 
received Yixue and the control group received teacher 
instruction. In the introduction on the first day, students 
received explanation of the experimental procedure. The 
intervals between the activities listed in Table 1 are rest 
breaks. The learning contents covered by both groups 
included the Pythagorean theorem and its application, real 
numbers, triangles, integer expression, properties of a 
triangle, and reflection symmetry. These contents had 
already been instructed during the semester prior to our 
study. Students in the treatment group used Yixue system 
and worked on topics above without assistance from 
teacher. In the control group, teachers taught the topics 
according to local learning standards. Students in the 
control group were not supported by any online learning 
programs. The questionnaires at the beginning and end of 
the study included demographic questions and students’ 
ratings of their learning experience during the study.  
Pre- and post-test data.  
Items in the pre- and post-tests were constructed by an 
experienced teacher in a local school (not part of the 
research team). When developing the tests, the teacher was 
only provided the test topics and the associated learning 
standards. Two independent, experienced subject matter 

experts reviewed the pre- and post-tests to ensure that they 
were comparable in their coverage, overall difficulty, types 
of items, and alignment with the learning standards. The 
experts also checked to make sure that the test items were 
not over-aligned with Yixue learning content. Each test 
composed of 30 multiple-choice, completion, calculation, 
and application items with a total score of 100 points. The 
tests are scored by teachers, then scanned and sent to the 
third-party agency to be reviewed. 
Analysis and results.  
Figure 3 shows the mean gain scores from pre-test to 
post-test from the treatment group and the control group. 
While both treatment and control groups showed 
improvements from pre-test to post-test, those who used 
Yixue showed 4.19 times greater gains that those who 
received traditional classroom instruction (Treatment gain 
M = 9.38, SD = 11.08 vs. Control gain M = 1.81, SD = 10.91, 
Hedges’ g = .68). A one-way analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) 
with pre-test score as a covariate confirmed this result, 
F(1,160) = 16.80, p < .001, partial η2 = .10.  
 
Figure 3. Growth from pre-test to post-test from students in 
the control group (human teachers) and the treatment 
group (Yixue). Error bars represent  1 standard error. 
There was no statistically significant difference between 
treatment and control groups on their prior knowledge at 
pre-test, t(155.13, unequal variance assumed) = 1.49, p 
= .14, Hedges’ g = .25. However, pre-test was also a strong 
predictor of learning gains, F(1,160) = 6.14, p = .014, partial 
η2 = .10, with those who start lower at pre-test tended to 
show higher gains. 
After the experiment, researchers and local teachers 
randomly interviewed 68 students who used Yixue adaptive 
learning system. The interviewees answered questions 
about their satisfaction about Yixue’s learning contents, 
learning experience, ease of use, and effectiveness. Some of 
the interview results are shown in Figure 4. 87% of the 
interviewees had positive judgment of learning math using 
Yixue; 93% of the interviewees rated YiXue as adaptive, with 
78% clearly felt that it was adaptive to himself or herself; of 
the learning contents, 87% of the interviewees thought that 
the contents were tailored to their needs, with 68% clearly 
thought so; of the multi-media contents,  12% of the 
interviewees like all of them, 46% like animation, 30% like 
lecturing video, 9% like the powerpoint, 2% like animation 
and Powerpoint, 2% like none of them. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. interview of Yixue users 
 
Experiment 2: Comparison of Yixue and BOXFiSH 
BOXFiSH® is an intelligent English-learning product with 
a curriculum system of varying difficulty levels for 
kindergarten, K12, TOELF and IELTS, based on fine-sorted 
knowledge points. BOXFiSH programs the learning process 
according to students’ characteristics and aim to maximize 
learning efficiency through the instruction of AI and well-
trained teachers domestic and abroad, transitioning 
students from passive learning to active learning. BOXFiSH 
provides a language environment through high-quality 
pictures, native foreign language, and interesting videos, 
visualizing the implication of knowledge points. It 
manufactured 9694 class hours of K12 curriculum, so that 
the students can re-learn the 12 types of 5402 knowledge 
points in their syllabi through a new and interesting way 
(BOXFiSH, 2018).  BOXFiSH can be used in conjunction with 
K12 school English teaching, assisting teachers in flipped 
classroom. BOXFiSH is usually used together with classroom 
teaching. In this experiment, students in the control group 
studied for 2 class hours in classroom teaching, then 1 class 
hour using BOXFiSH, and so on. 
For personalized learning, BOXFiSH can provide: 
1. 
personalized delivery according to: the grade of 
student, the textbook edition and version the student is 
using, starting difficulty she prefers, time duration she has 
for learning, etc. 
2. 
Intelligent adjustment of instruction in accordance 
with students’ mastering of knowledge points by: 
(1) prioritizing knowledge points of higher difficulty, 
(2) continuing delivering related content until the 
knowledge point is mastered, and 
(3) providing more difficult content after student 
finishes related content of the same difficulty.  

       Sample.  
In the experiment, junior middle school students, 13 to 
15 years old, were sampled from Zhengzhou Erqi District, 
Zhongyuan District, and Jinshui District. The sampling 
method is the same as experiment 1: stratified block 
randomization (Trochim, Donnelly, & Arora, 2016, p. 229). A 
total of 140 students participated in the experiment, of 
whom 70 students were assigned to the treatment group 
and 70 students were assigned to the control group.   
Of all the participating students, 104 completed all 
steps (pre-test, learning, and post-test) of the experiment 
and finished the tests within given time. 46 students are of 
the treatment group who used Yixue, 58 students are of the 
control group who used BOXFiSH. All students who dropped 
out did so that their own volition.  
       Experiment procedure.  
The procedure of experiment 2 was similar to that of 
experiment 1. Experiment 2 lasted two days. On the first 
day of the study, students in both groups took a paper-and-
pencil pre-test on the topics they would review, 
“Grammar,” which had already been instructed during their 
semester prior to this study. The grammar curriculum 
includes 18 topics, such as wh-questions beginning with 
“what”, and the simple present tense. The BOXFiSH 
curriculum 
contained 
200 
multiple-choice questions. 
Students in the treatment group studied the the topics using 
Yixue on computer, and the control group studied with 
teachers and BOXFiSH. Students in the control group could 
ask teachers for help while using BOXFiSH. The learning 
schedule for both groups was identical, including the break 
time between online classes and the number of breaks. On 
the second day, at the end of the learning sessions, a paper-
and-pencil post-test was administered to both groups. 
Students were given 25 minutes to finish the pre and post-
tests.  
Pre- and post-test data.  
 
Items for pre- and post-tests were constructed and 
scored in the same way as in Experiment 1, except that in 
experiment 2, pre- and post-test were both composed of 30 
multiple choice, completion, and translation questions. 
Analysis and results.  
Figure 5 shows the mean gain scores from pre-test to 
post-test from the treatment group and the control group. 
Similar to experiment 1, while both treatment and control 
groups showed overall improvements from pre-test to post-
test, those who used Yixue achieved 4.62 times greater 
gains that those who used BOXFiSH in the same period 
(Yixue gain M = 5.86, SD = 10.81 vs. BOXFiSH gain M = 1.04, 
SD = 8.93). Because participating students came from three 
different school districts, we confirmed this finding using a 
multiple linear regression analysis on the gain score, 
controlling for school location and pre-test, F(3, 100) = 30.90, 
p < .001, r2 = .47. Students in the treatment group had 
statistically greater gains than the control group controlling 
for their pretest score and school location,  = .22, p = .003, 
Hedges’ g = .49. There was no statistically significant 
difference between treatment and control groups on their 
prior knowledge at pre-test, t(101.34, unequal variance 
assumed) = .68, p = .50, Hedges’ g = .13. However, those 
with lower pre-test scores tended to show higher gains at 
post-test,  = -.38, p < .001. School was also a strong 
predictor of learning gains,  = -.42, p < .001. 
 
Figure 5. Gains from pre-test to post-test by students in the 
control group (BOXFiSH) and the treatment group (Yixue). 
Error bars represent  1 standard error. 
 
V. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we introduced the automated adaptivity of 
the Yixue Squirrel AI learning system and its implementation 
model. The two studies in this paper showed that the Yixue 
adaptive learning system produced greater learning gains 
than (1) classroom instruction by expert human teachers for 
math and (2) BOXFiSH, an AI-based adaptive learning 
competitor for English, likely due to Yixue’s fine granularity 
of knowledge points and intelligent adaptivity. 
Because these studies were conducted during just a few 
days, future research will include a longer term study for a 
better evaluation of learning with Yixue over time, and with 
bigger sample size for higher precision.  Future studies will 
also focus on establishing a more detailed user profile using 
additional qualitative data from student questionnaires and 
interviews.  
The number of learning systems is increasing in China 
and around the world. However, there remains little in-
depth investigation of learning results from such systems in 
the US as well as in China. With schools in China starting to 
introduce educational technologies into the classrooms, 
there is broad interest in understanding how to select and 
use such systems, which may also lead to improvement of 
the design of such systems. This paper presents the much-
needed knowledge about adaptive learning in K – 12 
instruction in China and around the world.
