IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE MAGAZINE
1
An Evolutionary Game Model for Understanding
Fraud in Consumption Taxes
Manuel Chica, University of Granada, SPAIN
Juan M. Hern´andez, University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, SPAIN
Casiano Manrique-de-Lara-Pe˜nate, University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, SPAIN
Raymond Chiong, The University of Newcastle, AUSTRALIA
Abstract—This paper presents a computational evolutionary
game model to study and understand fraud dynamics in the
consumption tax system. Players are cooperators if they correctly
declare their value added tax (VAT), and are defectors otherwise.
Each player’s payoff is inﬂuenced by the amount evaded and
the subjective probability of being inspected by tax authorities.
Since transactions between companies must be declared by both
the buyer and seller, a strategy adopted by one inﬂuences
the other’s payoff. We study the model with a well-mixed
population and different scale-free networks. Model parameters
were calibrated using real-world data of VAT declarations by
businesses registered in the Canary Islands region of Spain. We
analyzed several scenarios of audit probabilities for high and
low transactions and their prevalence in the population, as well
as social rewards and penalties to ﬁnd the most efﬁcient policy
to increase the proportion of cooperators. Two major insights
were found. First, increasing the subjective audit probability for
low transactions is more efﬁcient than increasing this probabil-
ity for high transactions. Second, favoring social rewards for
cooperators or alternative penalties for defectors can be effective
policies, but their success depends on the distribution of the audit
probability for low and high transactions.
Index Terms—Evolutionary game theory, Agent-based model-
ing, Tax fraud, VAT, Economic behavior
I. INTRODUCTION
The value added tax (VAT) is the most common consump-
tion tax worldwide. With extensive use since the 1960s, it has
reached signiﬁcant tax revenue capacity. In fact, consumption
taxes demonstrated a similar collection capacity to income
taxes during the 1990-2010 period [1]. All deliveries of goods
and services by companies, professionals, and importers are
subject to VAT. The tax base is the value added (value of pro-
duction minus value of intermediate consumption) generated
at each step of the production and distribution process. The
tax debt is calculated by applying the tax rate to the value of
the goods and services sold, and deducting the VAT attached
to intermediate consumption. Companies and professionals
declare the VAT passed on to the customers, while deducting
the amount borne from purchases from their own suppliers.
The resulting statement can be either positive or negative.
This refunding system potentially allows for signiﬁcant
levels of fraud in terms of undervaluation of sales and overval-
uation of purchases [2]. However, the fact that both buyers and
sellers record each transaction offers some self-enforcement

capability to the VAT system. Das-Gupta and Gang [3] iden-
tiﬁed circumstances where the ability of tax administrators to
match the sales and purchase invoices strengthens this self-
reinforcement capacity. In any case, tracking the relationships
between buyers and sellers is clearly of the utmost importance
to detect and prevent fraud. For this purpose, tax administra-
tion normally requires the declaration of all purchase and sales
transactions between pairs that exceed a certain threshold, with
an explicit declaration of the counterparts.
In this work, we propose a computational intelligence
(CI) model, based on evolutionary game theory [4, 5], to
study the VAT fraud dynamics of buyers and sellers in an
economic system. The goal of the model is to represent a
network of players—either cooperating (correctly declaring
VAT) or defecting (incorrectly declaring VAT)—linked by
their pairwise transactions. Evolutionary game theory has been
applied to models of cooperation such as the well-known
prisoner’s dilemma [6–8], snowdrift games [9, 10], or trust
dilemmas [11, 12]. These game models represent one of
the most prominent CI techniques for representing economic
markets and designing economic policies [13]. The application
of evolutionary game models to study tax fraud and evasion is,
however, very limited [14–17], and non-existent when focusing
on consumption taxes such as VAT.
Our CI model is studied in a structured population where
players are linked by means of a social network of transac-
tions. Here, players are given two possible strategies: being a
cooperator C or being a defector D (i.e., a free rider). The
model considers the amount of tax accrued on transactions not
declared by the free riders, a perceived probability of being
inspected by the tax agency, and the corresponding ﬁne when
tax evasion is detected. Cooperators, who are players correctly
paying their taxes, receive a recognition or social reward;
however, they can also have their transactions inspected, with
a certain probability, when their transaction records do not
match those of their transaction partners in the network.
The combination of CI techniques with agent-based mod-
eling (ABM) [18, 19] offers many opportunities for practi-
tioners [20], and our work is a perfect example. Our model
represents players of the tax system as agents on nodes of a
heterogeneous social network [21]. The social network follows
a power-law distribution, equivalent to the scale-free network
topology used in previous studies for promoting cooperation
in social dilemmas [22]. This social network is weighted,
with weights of the edges representing values of the tax
arXiv:2101.04424v1  [cs.NE]  12 Jan 2021

IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE MAGAZINE
2
debt associated with the transactions between two linked
nodes. These weights make the model a mixed game [23]
where players have different payoff matrices depending on
the volume of their transactions. The players, through a social
evolutionary learning process, can imitate others’ strategies by
using an evolutionary update rule and a mutation operator to
randomly modify their strategy.
We used real-world data from the Canary Islands tax agency
to feed most of the parameters of the model and ﬁt the power-
law distribution of the scale-free social network [24]. After
investigating the general dynamics of the model and effects
of having well-mixed and structured populations on scale-free
networks with different properties, we focused our experiments
on determining policies to promote cooperation and reduce the
number of players who do not correctly pay their consumption
taxes. To achieve this goal, we deﬁned different experimental
scenarios that allow us to understand when the best cooperative
behaviors occur. These scenarios include policies regarding the
shared pressure to increase the perceived probability of being
inspected for high and low transactions and how diversity
in subjective probabilities affects the levels of cooperation
in the population; the impact of modifying the reputational
reward for cooperators; and a sensitivity analysis on different
inspection ﬁnes for defectors or free riders.
In the next section (i.e., Section II), we discuss related work
and the motivation of our study. Details of the CI agent-based
model are then described in Section III. Section IV presents the
analysis of real data from a tax agency and setup of the model.
The results and model’s dynamics are discussed in Section V.
Finally, Section VI summarizes the key contributions.
II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
The neoclassical economic model on tax fraud by Alling-
ham and Sandmo [25] is considered one of the cornerstones
of the economic analysis of tax evasion. They represent how
individual agents decide to evade taxes, while also considering
how the government would eventually punish them. However,
this model is unable to explain low levels of fraud under low
penalty and detection rates. Bordignon [26] was one of the
ﬁrst to describe this problem and the need to explain tax
fraud using explanation other than just selﬁshness. Subsequent
models stress that tax compliance by agents is dependent on
how they perceive unfairness in their relations with not only
the administration, which is the vertical factor, but also the
rest of the agents, which is the horizontal factor [27].
When analyzing the horizontal factor, the tax evasion liter-
ature tries to identify how the compliance level of an agent
affects the compliance level observed by the rest of the
agents. Traxler [28] attempted to model different levels of
tax evasion within and between groups of agents. He was
able to bring issues related to belief management into the
discussion, extending the spectrum of policy instruments to
the scope of changing individual beliefs, besides the economic
incentives. Prichard et al. [1] reﬂected on the main reasons of
the failure of mainstream neoclassical models in their survey.
They identiﬁed two main lines of research that can address the
limitations of the traditional models by including the relevance
of behavioral aspects: experiments and ABM.
Experiments, as Alm [29] stated, are not without problems,
but they overcome the simplicity of theoretical models of
individual choice, since they can incorporate many explanatory
factors suggested by theory. They also favor the combination
of economic theory with other disciplines like psychology,
increasing the realism of explanatory factors of tax fraud [30].
Bonein [31] has identiﬁed different levels of reciprocity
between agents. Under “strong reciprocity”, taxpayers would
tend to evade more (less) if they observe a more (less) dis-
advantageous, inequitable behavior by the remaining agents.
This completely contradicts the predictions by self-interest
models [32], where agents are only motivated by a future
economic beneﬁt. Frey and Torgler [33] found strong empirical
evidence supporting mutual inﬂuence between taxpayers. The
investigations by Blaufus et al. [34] and Calvet and Alm [35]
show other perspectives of horizontal factors, such as tax
privacy, empathy, and sympathy.
Fedeli and Forte [36] studied the bargaining problem be-
tween agents to decide the level of (under) reporting of sales
and purchases along the different steps of the supply chain,
combining sales and income tax. Each pair of agents has
to decide the amount of trade between themselves and the
optimal level of (under) reporting. They concluded that the
best policy to control fraud is to increase the inspection
probability rather than to increase penalties against fraudulent
activities. On the other hand, by acting against one agent,
the tax agency may eliminate the incentives for misreporting
along the entire chain, thus reducing the enforcement costs for
increasing the inspection probability for all agents. Abraham
et al. [37] offered another example of modeling based on a
non-cooperative game-theoretic model and demonstrated that
social norms are more important for explaining behavior in
tax fraud than in situations where agents act independently.
Evolutionary game theory is commonly supported by ABM,
a CI simulation paradigm. These CI models start with the
conviction that, especially in the ﬁeld of sales taxes, fraud
always involves more than one agent. Boadway et al. [38]
presented the payoffs of a group of potential evaders in the
form of a prisoner’s dilemma game. With collaboration, they
could increase their revenues; but if one of the agents decides
not to collaborate, the rest can be negatively affected. Follow-
ing the results of their model, we can say that a fundamental
determinant of tax fraud that requires collaboration between
two agents is the capacity of each agent to collaborate in the
evasion activity. In the above model, the collaboration capacity
depends on the agent’s tolerance of dishonesty.
There are several advantages of using ABM in the analysis
of tax fraud. The ABM approach enables the inclusion of
agents with very different response patterns, which allows
for a dynamic bottom-up structure that may converge in a
global equilibrium that houses an intricate set of individual
realities. On the other hand, the agents included in an ABM
do not maintain static positions and reactions, but can evolve
throughout the simulation, learning from their own situation
and those of the other agents. This interaction between agents
(i.e., social network) is, therefore, one of the fundamental
components of this type of model.
ABM examples in the study of tax fraud can be found in

IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE MAGAZINE
3
the work of Bloomquist [39], which described this method-
ology as relatively recent and highlighted the apparent lack
of acceptance by the mainstream social scientists. Hokamp
et al. [40] also discussed recent advances in the modeling
of tax fraud analysis. The different attitudes of agents may
manifest themselves in individual perceptions of both the risk
of apprehension and the audit probability [41]—-as in the
model presented by Korobow and Axtell [42]. In relation to tax
compliance, their model suggested that the outcome depends
on how strongly agents are inﬂuenced by their neighbor’s
results. If agents do not signiﬁcantly value the potential gains
of evaders, it is possible to achieve general compliance even if
the model realistically incorporates low enforcement measures.
Another example with a similar pattern was provided by
Hashimzade et al. [43]. Combining behavioral economics
and social networks, their model reﬂects how the connection
between agents can form a subjective audit probability, which
clearly exceeds the objective levels that stem from real levels
of ﬁscal auditing activities. The compliance decisions are mod-
eled to include beneﬁts for the agents for following the social
norms of honesty. In a similar fashion, Hashimzade et al. [44]
described their starting point in terms of attitudes, beliefs and
network effects based on two features of empirical analysis
on tax fraud. First, there seems to be strong evidence to
indicate that individual compliance attitude is clearly affected
by social norms. Second, agents do not normally have access
to the real audit probability. Therefore, they end up generating
their own subjective probability of being subject to inspection
and being identiﬁed as an evader. A similar basis was used
by Hashimzade and Myles [45] in their effort to incorporate
predictive analysis and behavioral economics in modeling the
tax compliance decision.
Previous efforts, such as those in the ﬁeld of experimental
analysis, are very relevant and should continue to be so.
Bloomquist [46] presented a good example of how the results
of experimental economics can be exploited in the develop-
ment of ABM. New efforts such as those coming from the
ﬁeld of econophysics should be closely observed in order to
identify possible complementarities [47]. It has already been
mentioned that network tools are an essential part of ABM;
therefore, delving into how the network structure inﬂuences
the results of these models is an important avenue of study.
The ﬁrst step in this direction came from Andrei et al. [48],
who explored the impact of different network structures on the
levels of tax evasion in an agent-based model.
Reality is complex and models seeking to describe it must
be able to reﬂect this complexity. Calibrating the models to
real data is not an easy task when dealing with ABM and tax
fraud. However, linking the main elements of an agent-based
model to real data or observed behavior of the relevant agents
must always be an end to pursue. Given that the data necessary
for this type of analysis is inexorably linked to individual data
protection rights, collaboration between researchers and tax
administration is a must. This is especially the case if we
consider increasing our knowledge of taxpayer compliance
behavior, as indicated by Bloomquist [49].
III. MODEL DESCRIPTION
A. Game Strategies and Payoff Matrix
Players of the game are a ﬁnite set of Z agents (companies)
occupying the nodes of a social network, with edges denoting
economic transactions between them. The network is undi-
rected but weighted: a weight dij means the accrued tax to be
declared and paid in relation with all cumulative transactions
between both players i and j. Under a correct behavior, this
value dij is the consumption tax involved in the transactions
between both companies i and j. We differentiate between
two quantities to be paid, high (dH) and low (dL), based
on high and low transaction values, respectively. Therefore,
dij = {dL, dH}, ∀⟨i, j⟩being an edge of the social network.
In this sense, the game can be called a mixed game [23, 50]
where two players play a different game depending on the type
of transaction, given by parameter dij.
Each player i chooses a strategy s from two possibilities
at every time step (s(i) = {C, D}): being a cooperator or
tax payer (C), or being a defector or tax evader (D). When
being a tax evader, the player does not pay a fraction of the
transaction value dij, saving this cost as a personal beneﬁt
(free rider). We model this fraudulent fraction by parameter
α ∈[0, 1], which also measures the difﬁculty of the social
dilemma. Higher values of α correspond to higher economical
beneﬁts for free riders when declaring transactions.
In order to set the ﬁtness of a player i for a speciﬁc
time step t (f t
i ), the player accumulates all the payoffs wt
ij
from the pairwise interactions over all its direct contacts
in the social network (i.e., neighborhood in the network):
f t
i =
1
⟨k⟩i
P⟨k⟩i
j=1 wt
ij, where ⟨k⟩i is the degree of player i.
The payoff wij of focal agent i with respect to neighbor j is
obtained by considering their strategies in the previous time
step and the speciﬁc payoff matrix played depending on the
type of transaction (either low or high).
Table I shows the payoff matrix deﬁning the mixed game.
Parameter R is the social and reputational reward for a player
when acting in accordance to its tax duties. Γ is the inspection
cost a company should pay when a tax agency examines the
company and its documentation regardless of its own behavior
(i.e., playing strategy). φ is the ﬁne multiplier a company must
pay when the tax agency audits the company and discovers
fraudulent behavior.
Θ() is a linear probability function to deﬁne a player’s
perception of how probable a tax audit is. This probability
is subjective, even if all the players have the same perception
of this probability (we can say there is a “shared collective
perception”), and depends on the taxpayer’s subjective prob-
abilities about being audited, following previous studies such
as that of Hashimzade et al. [43]. The function Θ() depends
on the difference in the amount declared by the players, and
is only applied when the tax agency discovers a transaction
mismatch for a pair of players. The probability function is built
from two values (2αdL and 2αdH), which set the probability
of being inspected for both low and high transactions. For
clarity, we have deﬁned ΘH, ΘL, Θ′
H, and Θ′
L as the values
of the probability function based on its arguments. Table II
shows a summary of all the model parameters.

IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE MAGAZINE
4
C
D
C
R
R −ΘΓ
D
αd −Θ[Γ + φαd]
αd −Θ′[Γ + φαd]
TABLE I: Payoffs for the mixed tax fraud game.
NAME
DESCRIPTION
R
REPUTATIONAL AND SOCIAL REWARD FOR CORRECTLY PAYING TAXES
Γ
INSPECTION COST
d = {dH, dL}
AMOUNT OF TAX DEBT TO BE PAID FOR THE INVOLVED TRANSACTIONS
α ∈[0, 1]
RATIO OF UNPAID TAX DEBT BY DEFECTORS
φ
FINE MULTIPLIER TO BE PAID BY A DEFECTOR UPON INSPECTION
Θ = {ΘH, ΘL}
TAXPAYER’S SUBJECTIVE PROBABILITY OF BEING AUDITED WHEN ONE PLAYER DEFECTS
ΘH = Θ(αdH)
SUBJECTIVE PROBABILITY FOR HIGH TRANSACTIONS WHEN ONE PLAYER DEFECTS
ΘL = Θ(αdL)
SUBJECTIVE PROBABILITY FOR LOW TRANSACTIONS WHEN ONE PLAYER DEFECTS
Θ′ = {Θ′
H, Θ′
L}
TAXPAYER’S SUBJECTIVE PROBABILITY OF BEING AUDITED WHEN BOTH PLAYERS DEFECT
Θ′
H = Θ(2αdH)
SUBJECTIVE PROBABILITY FOR HIGH TRANSACTIONS WHEN BOTH PLAYERS DEFECT
Θ′
L = Θ(2αdL)
SUBJECTIVE PROBABILITY FOR LOW TRANSACTIONS WHEN BOTH PLAYERS DEFECT
.
TABLE II: List of parameters of the tax fraud evolutionary game. Θ(·) is a linear function.
The payoff matrix in Table I includes different two-strategy
games depending on the values of the parameters. These games
determine the decision of every player to either cooperate
or defect, and therefore inﬂuence the ﬁnal outcome of the
evolutionary game. To characterize the included games we
consider a general payoff matrix:
C
D
C
R
S
D
T
P
where S, T, and P represent the expressions of Table I. The
deﬁnition of the payoff matrix in Table I satisﬁes R > S
and T > P, facilitating the level of cooperation in the game.
According to Allen and Nowak [51], a social dilemma occurs
when R > P (mutual cooperation beneﬁts both players) and
at least one of the following conditions is met to favor the
adoption of defection: (D1) : T > R, (D2) : P > S, or
(D3) : T > S. Values of the parameters in Table II determine
which of these conditions are satisﬁed.
Figure 1 shows possible games according to αd and inspec-
tion cost Γ values; and assuming a constant audit probability
Θ(·) = Θ. We see three regions in the ﬁgure depending on the
parameters’ values: there is no social dilemma in two of them
and the third is associated with a classical game. Cooperation
prevails if the non-declared amount αd is below R/(1 −Θφ),
whereas defection is the preferred option if αd is high enough.
A Stag Hunt game appears for intermediate values of αd,
where conditions for cooperation R > P and temptation to
defect (D2 and D3) coexist.
In case of a non-constant audit probability Θ(·), the out-
come is more complicated. The payoff matrix includes two
possible values, Θ(αd) = Θ and Θ(2αd) = Θ′. Figure 2
shows the set of games for different values of Θ and αd,
assuming a ﬁxed Θ′. For large values of αd (above the
horizontal line deﬁned by (r + Θ′Γ)/(1 −Θ′φ) ), there is
no social dilemma as mutual defection is always preferred
Fig. 1. Different games for the payoff matrix in Table I according to parameter
values Γ and αd. The subjective audit probability is a constant function
Θ(·) = Θ. Here, SH is the Stag Hunt game; HG is a Harmony Game,
and DG1 represents a defection game with conditions D1, D2 and D3
.
over mutual cooperation (P
> R). Below the horizontal
line, multiple games arise. In general, cooperation is expected
when αd is low and Θ is high. More speciﬁcally, when the
audit probability is a decreasing function (Θ > Θ′), the most
expected games are those favoring cooperation (coordination
and harmony games). However, when the audit probability
is increasing (Θ < Θ′), there is a signiﬁcant region where
games such as the prisoner’s dilemma or snowdrift prevail
and defection is the expected outcome.
B. Evolutionary Update Rule
The players can change their strategies s(i), ∀i ∈Z dur-
ing the whole discrete-event simulation. These changes in
strategies come from two evolutionary mechanisms. First, a
player i can imitate others in the population (generally, their
direct contacts in the social network). Second, players can
also change their strategies by adopting a strategy at random,
following a random mutation mechanism with probability µ.
The mutation operator does not take into account if the new

IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE MAGAZINE
5
Fig. 2. Different games for the payoff matrix in Table I according to parameter
values Θ and αd. PD is the Prisoner’s Dilemma game; SD is the Snowdrift
game; CG is a coordination game; DG2 represents a defection game with
condition D2 and D3; DG3 is a defection game with condition D2; and (1)
is a game with R > P and D2.
strategy was beneﬁcial in the past in terms of the ﬁtness values
of the players. However, the social imitation update rule is a
social learning process of the players in the game [52]. Social
imitation update rules consider the ﬁtness of direct neighbors
on a network in the previous steps to make their decision,
either in a deterministic or a probabilistic way. In our model,
we use the Fermi function as the social imitation update rule.
This Fermi rule is one of the most well-known imitation
processes [53, 54] and is applied synchronously: for each step
t, a focal agent i compares its ﬁtness value in the previous
step t −1, f t−1
i
, with one of its direct neighbors in the social
network, j, also in t −1: f t−1
j
. Therefore, the Fermi rule
is a stochastic pairwise comparison rule, where players can
also make mistakes during the imitation process (i.e., a player
can imitate a neighbor with a worse ﬁtness). Mathematically,
agent i with strategy X adopts strategy Y of agent j (a
randomly selected direct contact of i) with a probability given
by Equation 1, where β is the intensity of selection parameter,
set to 0.5 in the model.
probt
ij =
1
1 + e−β(f t−1
j
−f t−1
i
) .
(1)
IV. DATA ANALYSIS AND PARAMETERS OF THE MODEL
A. Data Description
Most of the parameters in the model were set using real data.
The real data used for our study includes VAT declarations by
businesses registered in the Canary Islands (Spain) in 2002
about transactions, with persons or ﬁrms, exceeding 3,005.06
euros. The anonymized data was accessible only within the tax
administration under conﬁdentiality agreement of not revealing
any information that could be used to identify either the buyers
or sellers, and under the commitment that the data was not to
be passed on to third parties in any format.
Every taxpayer must independently declare purchases and
sales. Therefore, all transactions between two ﬁrms should be
declared twice—once each by the seller and the buyer. The
original information is split into two ﬁles: one with the total
sales in the economy and the other with total purchases. A
Fig. 3. Degree distribution of the VAT declaration network.
database was built merging both ﬁles and taking the transac-
tions (sales and purchases in 2002) declared by the same ﬁrms
in the two ﬁles into account. Transactions without a coun-
terpart were eliminated, since in some cases (e.g., individual
buyers) a counterpart is not obliged to declare. Transactions
where both counterparts match were also removed. Finally,
the number of ﬁrms in the database is N = 32, 886 including
E = 197, 791 operations.
B. Generation of the Real Social Network of Transactions
In order to examine the structure of VAT declarations,
we set up a network of ﬁrms, where two ﬁrms are linked
when they declare transactions between them. The network
is undirected, since we do not differentiate whether the ﬁrm
acts as a buyer or a seller, although the amount declared by
the seller is included as a link weight. Speciﬁcally, we use
a scale-free network starting with the degree distribution of
the VAT declaration network (Figure 3), which is a long-
tailed distribution. Following the methodology in Clauset et
al. [55], the network ﬁts to a power law k−γ with xmin = 88
and γ = 3.04. According to the taxonomy in Broido and
Clauset [24], the VAT declaration network is a weak scale-
free network, since its power law cannot be rejected and it
includes more than 50 nodes. For the model, we have built a
scale-free network of 10,000 nodes, with the same exponent
γ and xmin.
C. Feeding Transaction Parameters from Data
The values and distribution of the quantities to be paid
{dL, dH} were set from the empirical data. Figure 4 shows
the edge-weight distribution by considering sellers’ declaration
(note that we obtained a similar distribution when we looked
at buyers’ declaration). More than 95% of the transaction
amounts declared are under 1 million euros, whereas 0.01%
are over 100 million euros. On the other hand, according to
ofﬁcial records, the percentage of large ﬁrms (those with more
than 20 employees) in the Canary Islands is about 2% [56].
Therefore, we set the probability of an edge to have a high
transaction to 0.02 (i.e., probdH = 0.02). Additionally, we
obtained a ratio r = 45.7589 between the average values of
the total volume of transactions of small and big ﬁrms (those
transactions below and above quantile 2% in the edge-weight

IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE MAGAZINE
6
Fig. 4. Edge-weight distribution in the real VAT declaration network.
distribution, respectively). We assume that the amount to be
paid is a constant fraction of the transaction value. Therefore,
we set the value dij = {dL, dH}, ∀⟨i, j⟩∈E, to a ﬁxed value
of dL = 10 and dH = rdL = 457.59. Edges’ weights dij are
randomly initialized, characterized by probdH = 0.02. Note
that weights dij do not change over time. They are static and
therefore, the same payoff matrix of the mixed game is used
for every pair of players i and j in this study.
We deﬁne the ratio of divergence in the tax declarations
between seller i and buyer j (αi↔j) as the percentage of VAT
declaration mismatch between the tax declared by seller i and
buyer j. We only take those mismatches beneﬁting the sellers
(this is the case where the seller declares less amount than
the buyer). The ratio is calculated as follows: Given dij as the
amount that ﬁrms i and j need to declare, let αi→j be the
percentage of this amount that seller i does not declare and
αj→i the percentage that buyer j declares in excess. Then, the
ratio of undeclared accrued tax between i and j is:
αi↔j = (1 + αj→i)dij −(1 −αi→j)dij
(1 + αj→i)dij + (1 −αi→j)dij
=
αi→j + αj→i
2 + αj→i −αi→j
, ∀⟨i, j⟩∈E
This ratio is between 0 (when both counterparts declare
exactly the right amount, αi→j = αj→i = 0) and 1 (when
the seller does not declare any amount). Note that when
the fraction of the amount that is incorrectly declared is
constant and identical for any ﬁrm and transaction, we have
αi→j = αj→i = α, with α being the ratio of unpaid quantity
for defectors (Table II). We also have αi↔j = α, ∀⟨i, j⟩∈E.
Then, the assigned values for parameter α in the model would
be calibrated by the αi↔j values in the real data.
Figure 5 represents the cumulative distribution of the ratio
αi↔j in the VAT declaration network. As can be observed, the
ratio of undeclared transactions is almost zero for around 75%
of operations and below 0.5 for 99.06% of them. Given this,
in our simulations, we consider the range of realistic values
for parameter α between 0 and 0.5.
D. Model Setup
We set the model up for 50 Monte-Carlo runs, with
1,000 time-steps in each run, thereby ensuring that all the
Fig. 5. Cumulative distribution of the ratio of undeclared transactions in the
VAT declaration network.
realizations reach a stationary stable state (as we can see
in Section V-A). The simulation results were obtained by
averaging the last 25% of the simulation time-steps in the
independent Monte-Carlo runs. Source code and data ﬁles
are available at http://bitbucket.org/mchserrano/evolutionary-
game-tax-fraud.
We set the remaining parameters—when not explicitly
speciﬁed—as follows: inspection cost Γ = 1 and reputational
reward for cooperators R = 1. Fine value φ was set to
1.5 (50% ﬁne plus the undeclared quantity) as per previous
models [43]. The values used to generate the linear audit
probability function were set to Θ′
H = Θ′
L = 0.5, when the
analysis was not focused on these subjective probabilities (see
Section V-C). The mutation probability of the evolutionary
dynamics was always set to µ = 0.01.
V. ANALYSIS OF THE RESULTS
A. General Dynamics of the Model
We ﬁrst show the dynamics of the model for the base
parameters. The upper plot in Figure 6 shows the evolution of
the model over 1,000 time-steps for different values of α. The
plot also shows the max-min range of the simulations for the
50 Monte-Carlo realizations. The stationary state is quickly
reached and even 500 time-steps are sufﬁcient in this case.
Additionally, the max-min ranges in the plot highlight that
the deviation of the model is low. The lower plot in Figure 6
shows how the model dynamics is independent of the initial
strategy settings of the population. By enabling a player to
randomly change their strategy using the mutation operator,
we also eliminate differences in the outputs in case of extreme
conditions (e.g., the initial frequency of cooperators is either 0
or 1). Therefore, we ﬁxed the initial frequency of cooperators
to 0.5 for the rest of the analysis.
We also analyze the impact of changing the α values and
inspection cost Γ by running a sensitivity analysis. Results
can be observed in the heatmaps of Figure 7. This graph is in
agreement with the set of possible games analyzed in Figure 1.
These results show how the model is sensitive to the values
of α, which smoothly regulates how the population converges
to cooperation or defection and therefore, the difﬁculty of the
game. The impact of inspection cost Γ is less signiﬁcant in the

IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE MAGAZINE
7
Fig. 6. The upper plot shows the cooperators’ evolution for different α values,
from 0.1 to 0.6, with an initial cooperators frequency of 0.5. The lower plot
shows that the initial frequency of strategies in the population is not relevant
for the ﬁnal state of the model.
Fig. 7. Sensitivity analysis on α and Γ. α controls the difﬁculty of the game,
directly affecting the cooperation level. Γ is the inspection cost when a player
is inspected due to mismatch declaration. We see how inspection cost Γ is
only signiﬁcant for α values approximately between 0.2 and 0.6. If α is either
lower or higher, Γ has no impact on the cooperation level.
model dynamics when α has either high or low values. In fact,
when α values are high (or low) and therefore, cooperation
(or defection) is restricted, the consequence of changing Γ
values is minimal. The role of the inspection cost is signiﬁcant
only when the game has an intermediate level of difﬁculty
and, as expected, increasing inspection cost Γ promotes higher
cooperation. This means that relying on the inspection cost to
promote tax compliance is more worthy when the population
has a mixture of cooperators and defectors.
B. Scale-free Networks Analysis
NETWORK
AVERAGE
DEGREE
CC
D
REAL NETWORK FROM DATA
1.9952
0
111
SF (BA WITH m = 2)
3.0090
0.0035
12
SF (BA WITH m = 4)
5.0070
0.0044
9
SF (BA WITH m = 6)
7.0100
0.0065
9
SF (BA WITH m = 8)
9.0220
0.0082
8
ASS. SF (p = 0.5, m = 2)
2.9970
0.0029
20
ASS. SF (p = 1, m = 2)
2.9850
0.0120
283
DISS. SF (p = 0.5, m = 2)
2.9935
0.0016
18
DISS. SF (p = 1, m = 2)
2.9860
0.0002
15
ASS. SF (p = 0.5, m = 8)
9.0040
0.0069
11
ASS. SF (p = 1, m = 8)
9.0460
0.0325
53
DISS. SF (p = 0.5, m = 8)
9.0120
0.0097
8
DISS. SF (p = 1, m = 8)
8.9820
0.0005
19
TABLE III: Main features of the social network topologies
Here we compare the dynamics of different scale-free
networks with respect to a well-mixed population. Apart from
the ﬁtted real scale-free network, we considered four networks
generated by the Barabasi-Albert (BA) algorithm [57] for
different values of parameter m, controlling the average degree
of the networks. Additionally, we used the Xulvi-Brunet-
Sokolov algorithm [58] to obtain assortative and disassortative
scale-free networks. The assortativity property of networks
denotes the preferences of highly connected nodes to be
connected with other highly connected nodes [21]. On the
other hand, the disassortativity property denotes the preference
of highly connected nodes to connect with less connected
nodes. Parameter p of the Xulvi-Brunet-Sokolov algorithm is
used to control the degree of assortativity and disassortativity
of existing scale-free networks. In our case, we applied the
algorithm to the most and least dense networks generated by
the BA algorithm (i.e., m = 2 and m = 8). Thanks to these
network generation algorithms, we employed 12 networks with
diverse clustering coefﬁcient (CC), diameter (D), and density.
Table III lists the features of the networks.
Figure 8 shows the dynamics of the model with the networks
and a well-mixed population. We can see in the upper plot of
Figure 8 that cooperation is non-existent with a well-mixed
population, except when α is lower than or equal to 0.2.
Note that the expected level of coexistence in the well-mixed
population can be analytically derived under some settings
of the tax fraud game. In the upper plot of the ﬁgure, we

IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE MAGAZINE
8
Fig. 8. The upper plot shows the comparison among the well-mixed popula-
tion, a network obtained from real data, and scale-free networks generated by
the BA algorithm for different α values. The lower plot shows the comparison
among different levels of assortativity and disassortativity in the scale-free
networks. Density and assortativity impact the level of cooperation depending
on the α values. A well-mixed population can only achieve cooperation when
the game is trivial (α ≤0.2).
can also see that the trends of the BA scale-free networks
are similar. Networks with lower density (m = 2 and ﬁtted
network from data) are able to better promote cooperation
when α is increasing (the game is harder). When the game is
easy (low α values), higher density is better for achieving total
cooperation because it increases the speed of diffusion through
the network. These results are in line with the well-mixed
population output, which jumps from total defection to total
cooperation when the game is easy. This abrupt shift in the
model results is in agreement with the observation in Figure
1, where we have two extreme cases (defection and harmony
games) as the most prevalent games for the parameter values.
The lower plot of Figure 8 shows the dynamics of the
model with the above assortative and disassortative topologies
and a well-mixed population. As observed with low density
networks, disassortativity favors cooperation when the game
is hard (high values of α). Assortativity plays its role in
promoting cooperation when the game is easy. We see from
Table III that the real network has high diameter values and
the clustering coefﬁcient is 0. Therefore, the dynamics of the
game with this network is equivalent to neither full assortative
nor full disassortative networks (Table III). Instead, the low
density and large diameter of the real network explain the
slow decay of cooperation for large α values.
C. Balancing between the Subjective Audit Probability for
High and Low Transactions
One of the main insights the analysis of real data from
the Canarian tax agency revealed was the distinction between
two types of transaction volumes: high and low. We would
like to ﬁnd the best policy to promote cooperation and correct
tax paying behavior by determining the type of transaction
the tax agency must focus on. In order to understand the
impact of investigating these types of transactions, we use the
evolutionary model to balance the focus on the subjective audit
probability—which can be modulated differently depending on
the transaction volume. Thus, we set different values for Θ′
H
and Θ′
L, which changes the construction of the probability
linear function. We started from base values of Θ′
H = 0.5
and Θ′
L = 0.5 and considered a wide range of pairs for
analysis, from 0 to 1 for both parameters. Figure 9 has
three heatmaps showing the ﬁnal frequency of cooperators
for different subjective audit probabilities. The upper and
middle plots show the results when α is equal to 0.2 and 0.4,
respectively. The lower plot shows the dynamics when the
numbers of high and low transactions are equal (i.e., probdH
is 0.5) and α = 0.4.
The analysis reﬂects important variations when modifying
these subjective probabilities to favor a particular transac-
tion type. We can see how tax fraud is limited when the
subjective probability is higher for low transactions than
high transactions. In fact, differences are not relevant when
Θ′
L > 0.5. However, when Θ′
L decreases, the number of
cooperators declines almost independently of Θ′
H. The number
of cooperators declines and differences are signiﬁcant when
α values differ (e.g., cooperators are the dominant strategy
in the ﬁnal population only when α = 0.05 and the game
is easy). The results change when the probability of high
and low transactions is equal (Figure 9, lower plot). In this
case, there are no major differences in the frequency of
cooperators when Θ′
L and Θ′
H change. These results show that
the signiﬁcant effect of subjective probability on tax fraud, for
low transactions in the upper and middle heatmaps, is mainly
due to the larger number of low transactions in the network.
D. Population Diversity in the Subjective Inspection Proba-
bilities
Next, we analyze how diversity in the individuals of the
population, with respect to their subjective probabilities, af-
fects cooperation. In order to run this, we considered Θ′
H =
Θ′
L = 0.5 as the mean µ of the normal distribution N(µ, σ)
of the subjective probabilities of the whole population, and
we modiﬁed the standard deviation σ of the distribution.
Figure 10 shows the output of seven simulations with different
standard deviation σ values: from 0, corresponding to the
default conﬁguration of the experiments in this work, to 0.4,
where individuals are highly diverse.

IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE MAGAZINE
9
Fig. 9.
The upper and middle heatmaps show sensitivity analysis on Θ′
L
and Θ′
H for α = 0.2 and α = 0.4 (real data scenario where probdH =
0.02). The bottom heatmap shows the sensitivity analysis when probdH is
0.5 and α = 0.4 for comparison. We observe that increasing the inspection
probability for low transactions is preferable in the real world scenario where
probdH = 0.02, but this conclusion does not apply when we have the same
number of low and high transactions in the network (see the lower heatmap).
Figure 10 shows how population diversity is beneﬁcial for
promoting cooperation when the game is hard (high values of
α), but cannot promote cooperation when the game is easy.
Similar trends were observed when changing the density and
other properties of the networks in Section V-B. This diversity
changes the cooperation levels because of the polarization of
the entire population, as observed by Antonioni et al. [59].
Figure 10 also reveals that diversity always induces a shift of
the population to a 50% polarization (gray horizontal line).
Fig. 10.
Analysis of the diversity of subjective probabilities Θ′
L and Θ′
H
when setting individuals of the population by generating a normal distribution
N(µ, σ). We set µ as 0.5 and plot different values of σ.
E. Impact of Rewarding and Penalty Policies
In this ﬁnal section of our model analysis, we focus on
ascertaining if policies to increase the reward for cooperators
are more efﬁcient than those to increase the punishment for
defectors via the ﬁne values. Punishment versus reward has
been studied in different public goods games and common
pool resources [53, 60, 61]. For our analysis, we increased the
values of reward R from 1 to 2 and ﬁnes from 1 (most liberal—
defectors just have to return the unpaid tax) to 2 (the ﬁne is
double of the unpaid quantity). Figure 11 shows the impact
of different reward and ﬁne values on cooperation under a
sensitivity analysis of α and for three different scenarios of
subjective audit probability Θ′
L and Θ′
H.
We ﬁrst observe how the impacts of both reward and ﬁne
policies differ depending on the subjective audit probability.
When high transactions have a higher subjective audit prob-
ability (the third scenario), increasing the reward, R, is more
efﬁcient for promoting cooperation than increasing the ﬁne, φ.
The highest cooperation percentage is obtained with R = 2
while keeping the base ﬁne of 1.5. However, for all the α
values, increasing the ﬁne up to 2 does not generally induce
as many new cooperators as rewarding policies do.
When the subjective audit probability for low transactions
is higher than for high transactions, the output of the model
changes dramatically. If we are in the balanced second scenario
(Θ′
H = 0.5 and Θ′
L = 0.5), penalizing defectors with high
ﬁnes is the most convenient option for promoting cooperation.
In the ﬁrst scenario, rewarding cooperators is almost invariant
for the model dynamics. Therefore, both reward and punish-
ment strategies must be carried out together while balancing
the focus on either high or low transactions or, at least, apply
them depending on the current scenario.
VI. FINAL DISCUSSION
We presented the ﬁrst evolutionary game model for con-
sumption taxes. This model represents cooperators and de-

IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE MAGAZINE
10
Fig. 11. Analysis of the reward R (upper plots) and ﬁne φ (bottom plots) parameters based on a sensitivity analysis on α for three subjective audit probability
scenarios (Θ′
L = 0.8, Θ′
H = 0.2 in the ﬁrst column, Θ′
L = Θ′
H = 0.5 in the second column, and Θ′
L = 0.2, Θ′
H = 0.8 in the third column). We can see
how the impacts of reward and punishment strategies depend on the scenario.
fectors and includes parameters to penalize tax evaders. It
also considers the subjective probability of being inspected by
the tax agency, which can be modulated with the size of the
economic transaction. Players are linked through a scale-free
network. Both the network topology and most of the model’s
parameters are fed with real data from the Canaries tax agency.
The stability and robustness of the model were demonstrated
by simulating the effects of the undeclared quantity (α param-
eter), initial distribution of the population, and convergence
to a steady state. After illustrating the main dynamics, we
evaluated the two main questions for the tax agencies. First,
we explored whether the agencies must focus on high or low
transactions. We found that it is better to increase pressure
on low transactions rather than high transactions. This is
mainly due to the larger number of low transactions in the
network. But the level of this pressure on low transactions
is irrelevant once it is higher than the pressure on high
transactions. This result is in line with previous ﬁndings [36]
which support policies to increase audit probability but extend
them by differentiating the audit probability according to the
transaction size. Our results could encourage tax agencies to
apply appropriate media actions targeting small transactions
rather than high transactions.
Second, our analysis showed that policies for either re-
warding cooperators or punishing defectors must be executed
in conjunction with policies for high and low transactions.
For instance, we observed that, when the perceived inspection
probability is more signiﬁcant for high transactions, rewarding
cooperators is more beneﬁcial than increasing ﬁnes for defec-
tors. This effect was consistent for different difﬁculty levels of
the game (deﬁned through the α parameter). However, when
pressure is more important for low transactions, punishing
defectors prevails as the best strategy. Our ﬁndings recommend
tax agencies to follow a constructive approach to better reward
companies behaving well by publicizing reward actions. These
policies must be run in conjunction with other measures (e.g.,
balancing pressure on either low or high-value transactions).
The presented study has some limitations. The rewarding
versus punishing policies do not take into account possible
costs. A method of evaluating these two options by considering
the costs for the agencies could be valuable. Researchers
can also evaluate the response of temporal changes in the
network topology. For example, one can study how temporal
changes on the type of transaction between players (i.e., dij)
can inﬂuence the game output as the employed payoff matrix
would also change overtime. A more comprehensive study
about diversity in the subjective inspection probabilities of the
individuals can be performed too. Finally, a CI algorithm could
identify the most inﬂuential companies (nodes) to be targeted
with speciﬁc policies such as in Robles et al. [62].

IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE MAGAZINE
11
