A Framework for Optimizing Paper Matching
Laurent Charlin
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
Toronto, ON M5S 3H5

Richard Zemel
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
Toronto, ON M5S 3H5

Craig Boutilier
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
Toronto, ON M5S 3H5

Abstract
At the heart of many scientiﬁc conferences is the
problem of matching submitted papers to suit-
able reviewers. Arriving at a good assignment is
a major and important challenge for any confer-
ence organizer. In this paper we propose a frame-
work to optimize paper-to-reviewer assignments.
Our framework uses suitability scores to measure
pairwise afﬁnity between papers and reviewers.
We show how learning can be used to infer suit-
ability scores from a small set of provided scores,
thereby reducing the burden on reviewers and or-
ganizers. We frame the assignment problem as an
integer program and propose several variations
for the paper-to-reviewer matching domain. We
also explore how learning and matching interact.
Experiments on two conference data sets exam-
ine the performance of several learning methods
as well as the effectiveness of the matching for-
mulations.
1
Introduction
The assignment of papers to reviewers is one of the most
important tasks facing the organizers of scientiﬁc confer-
ences. Assigning submitted papers to their most suitable
reviewers is essential to the success of any conference, in-
deed to the functioning of many scientiﬁc ﬁelds, since it
is reviewer assessments that determine the conference pro-
gram and, to some extent, the shape of a discipline. How-
ever, this is not a simple task: large conferences often re-
ceive well over 1000 submissions that must be assigned to
many hundreds of reviewers in short amount of time. Apart
from ensuring the suitability of assigned reviewers, con-
straints imposed by reviewer load limits, conﬂicts of inter-
est, and other factors push this assignment problem beyond
the reach of a single program chair, and generally prevent
the process from being distributed in a fully satisfactory
way.
Many large conferences in computer science (CS), and es-
pecially artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), allow reviewers to bid
on papers, basically providing their “preferences”—which
we interpret as reﬂecting a reviewer’s suitability to re-
view particular submitted papers—after which a central-
ized matching process takes place to ﬁnd the most suitable
assignment. Preferences collected this way are, unfortu-
nately, inherently noisy for two key reasons: (a) it is difﬁ-
cult for reviewers to offer reasonable assessments of all but
a small fraction of the papers, given the numbers involved;
and (b) reviewers have access to limited information about
each paper (e.g., only title and abstract). The latter fac-
tor fundamentally limits how well a reviewer can judge her
own suitability, while the former means reviewers are, in
some sense, semi-randomly choosing papers on which they
express interest.
One response to this problem is to associate simple features
(keywords being most common) with both papers and re-
viewers, and use some measure of overlap as a reﬂection
of suitability. Unfortunately, this simple method is crude at
best, and relies on a common understanding of this (usually
limited) vocabulary by all reviewers and authors. A more
sophisticated response involves the use of machine learning
techniques to help predict reviewer expertise [1, 16, 6]. By
using speciﬁc features of both reviewers (e.g., previously
written articles, co-authorship relations) and submitted pa-
pers (e.g., words or keywords), we can relieve reviewers
of the burden of bidding. Ideally, a combination using this
information as well as self-declared reviewer expertise (or
bids) can be leveraged to predict reviewer suitability using
collaborative ﬁltering methods [10]. Ultimately, however,
the primary goal is not to accurately predict expertise, but
to ﬁnd a good matching.
In this paper, we propose and test various instantiations of
a ﬂexible framework for optimizing paper matching. We
investigate approaches that use incomplete information in
the form of a limited number of suitability scores: our ba-
sic framework predicts missing scores using learning tech-
niques and then ﬁnds optimal matchings using both ob-
served and predicted scores. Within this framework, we

explore several learning models which leverage (one or
both of) two sources of information—reviewer/paper fea-
tures and self-reported suitability—to predict the unknown
scores: these include regression, collaborative ﬁltering and
language modeling methods. We then describe several de-
sirable properties for paper-to-reviewer assignments. We
frame the assignment problem as an integer program [24],
and explore several variations that reﬂect different desider-
ata, and how these interact with various learning methods.
We test our framework on two data sets collected from a
large AI conference, measuring predictive accuracy with
respect to both reviewer suitability and matching perfor-
mance, exploring several different matching objectives and
how they can be traded off against one another.
Although we focus on reviewer matching, our methods are
applicable to any constrained matching domain where: (a)
user preferences for a set of items can be predicted using
user and/or item features; (b) preferences can be used to
improve matching quality; (c) it is infeasible or undesir-
able for users to express preferences over all items; and
(d) capacity or other constraints limit the min/max num-
ber of users-per-item (or vice versa). Examples include fa-
cility location, school/college admissions, certain forms of
scheduling and time-tabling, and many others.
2
Related Work
Deep bodies of related work exist for each of the two com-
ponents that comprise our framework for reviewer match-
ing: prediction of suitabilities or preferences for unob-
served reviewer-paper (or user-item) pairs; and computing
matchings given (known or predicted) suitabilities. Past
work has either explored the score prediction problem or
different approaches to matching but, to the best of our
knowledge, ours is the ﬁrst that examines suitability predic-
tion relative to different matching objectives, and examines
the interactions between learning and matching.
There has been signiﬁcant research on the use of informa-
tion retrieval and learning techniques to determine suitabil-
ity of reviewers for papers. These include the use of latent
semantic indexing [7] or term frequency, inverse document
frequency (TF-IDF) methods [12, 2] that exploit the con-
tent of abstracts of papers authored by reviewers and those
of submitted papers.
Other have utilized co-authorship
graphs, using the references of a submitted paper as a start-
ing point to generate potential referees [18]. Balog et al.
[1] used language models to determine the suitability of ex-
perts for various topics/tasks, and more recently topic mod-
els have been applied to the problem of modeling expertise
based on authored documents [25], with Mimno and Mc-
Callum [16] applying their topic model to the assessment
of reviewer suitability (we discuss this further below).
While the models above predict suitability using content-
based features of papers and/or reviewers, other methods
exploit elicited suitability scores from reviewers for a sub-
set of papers to make predictions for other papers. This
can be treated as a collaborative ﬁltering (CF) problem.
CF methods leverage known preference information for a
subset of user-item to generate predictions for unobserved
pairs.
Recent CF techniques have performed extremely
well in a variety of domains, especially where available
content features are not especially predictive of preference
(or suitability) [21, 22, 15]. Conry et al. [6] applied an
ensemble CF approach, combining side information about
the papers and reviewers with several CF predictors to esti-
mate reviewer suitabilities, and then used a simple match-
ing program to determine assignments based on these suit-
abilities. This work is closest to ours; however, it does
not explore variants of the matching objective, nor interac-
tions between learning and matching. While CF is typically
framed in terms of preference prediction, recent extensions
instead use CF for optimization w.r.t. a speciﬁc target task.
Weimer et al. [26] use CF data for optimization in a rank-
ing task, while Petterson et al. [17] frame ranking as ﬁnding
the weights that lead to an optimal matching in a bipartite
graph. Our work has a similar motivation, trying to opti-
mize suitability predictions w.r.t. a matching objective.
A second body of work focuses on the matching problem
itself. Benferhat and Lang [3], Goldsmith and Sloan [11],
and Garg et al. [9] discuss various optimization criteria, and
some of the practices used by program chairs and exist-
ing conference management software. Taylor [24] shows
how these criteria can be formulated as an integer program
(IP). Tang et al. [23] propose several extensions to the IP.
This work assumes reviewer suitability for each paper is
known, and deals exclusively with speciﬁc matching cri-
teria. There is a rich literature on more general matching
problems in economics and theoretical CS. Examples in-
clude the well-known stable marriage problem [8]; resi-
dent matching (of residency candidates to hospitals) [19];
and (one-sided) matching in housing markets [13]. In eco-
nomic models, a key focus is on stability of the matches
and minimizing incentives for participants in the matching
market to misreport their preferences. We do not consider
such strategic issues here.
3
Matching Framework and Instantiations
We begin by outlining our basic problem deﬁnition, then
elaborate on several speciﬁc instantiations of the frame-
work we develop. These include the use of various learn-
ing methods for predicting unknown suitabilities, a range
of objectives and constraints on the matching process re-
ﬂecting different desiderata for the reviewing process, and
interactions between the two.
3.1
Problem Deﬁnition
Our approach to the matching problem relies on suitabil-
ity scores, which describe the relevance of a reviewer to a
given paper. The matching procedure uses these scores to

form a set of assignments of items to users. For reasons
discussed above, the suitabilities will not be fully speci-
ﬁed. Since we do not wish to limit the matching process
to reviewer-paper pairs that are known (i.e., have been di-
rectly elicited), these need to be predicted in some fashion.
We formalize the matching problem as follows. Let r ∈
R refer to users or reviewers, p ∈P to items or papers,
and let |R| = N and |P| = M. Every user-item pair
has a suitability score srp. The set of all scores can be
viewed as a suitability matrix S ∈RN×M. Only a subset of
the suitabilities are observed, namely, those collected from
reviewers during an elicitation process. Denote this by So,
and denote the observed scores for a particular reviewer r
and paper p by So
r and So
p, respectively. Su, Su
r , Su
p are the
analogous collections of unobserved scores.
We may have access to additional side information about
individual reviewers and papers which may come in differ-
ent forms. In our setting, side information about submit-
ted papers could include author-speciﬁed keywords, cita-
tions, and word usage in the paper. For reviewers, we may
have stated preferences for keywords, citations, or other de-
scriptions of reviewer expertise. Our data sets also include
an archive, containing a set of papers written by each re-
viewer, providing information about their expertise. This
is represented as a word count vector wr summarizing r’s
own papers. Similarly, we summarize each submitted paper
p as a word count vector wp.
Given this information, our goal is to ﬁnd a “good” match-
ing of papers to reviewers in the presence of incomplete in-
formation about reviewer suitabilities, possibly exploiting
the side information available. The problem can be bro-
ken into two main components: predicting unknown suit-
abilities using some combination of known scores and side
information; and matching papers to reviewers based on
known and predicted suitabilities. Notice that predicting
suitability scores is, however, not a goal in and of itself: it
is subservient to the primary goal of good matching perfor-
mance. Many different factors may be used to deﬁne the
quality of a matching, as we discuss below.
3.2
Learning Methods
We have explored a range of learning methods for predict-
ing suitabilities of reviewers for papers. Here we focus
on three methods, each exploiting the different information
available for prediction: a language model (LM); linear re-
gression (LR); and Bayesian probabilistic matrix factoriza-
tion (BPMF). LM uses the content of submitted papers and
archived papers for prediction, but does not use reviewer
bids; BPMF uses reported suitabilities/bids, but no docu-
ment/archive side information; and LR uses bids and the
content submissions, but not the archive.
Language Model:
Several previous approaches to re-
viewer matching have used simple language models to rep-
resent distributions over words of papers and reviewers
[25, 16]. Our language model (LM) is based on these, and
predicts suitabilities without using stated reviewer prefer-
ences; rather it builds a model in word (feature) space,
assuming that distance in this space correlates with dis-
tance in suitability space. LM constructs a distribution over
words for each reviewer, based on the archive of papers
written by the reviewer wr (the reviewer side information).
The starting point for LM is a multinomial Pr(w|d) over
words w in a document d. The maximum likelihood es-
timate of Pr(w|d) is the number of occurrences of this
word divided by the total number of words in the docu-
ment (Prml(w|d) = |wd|/Td). Using Dirichlet smoothing
to account for the fact that most words do not appear in a
given document, this estimate can be written as:
Pr(w|d) =
Td
Td + µPrml(w|d) +
µ
Td+µ Pr(w)
(1)
where Pr(w) is the probability of the word across all doc-
uments and µ is the smoothing parameter. This distribution
can be formed in various ways from the user side infor-
mation (i.e., the collected papers of a reviewer). We adopt
a variant of an approach [16] in which the word vectors
of reviewer-authored papers are averaged to form a single
document dr per reviewer. LM encodes each submitted pa-
per as a word count vector wp, and predicts suitabilities
srp to be log Pr(wp|dr) = P
w∈wp Pr(w|dr). This lan-
guage model has outperformed sophisticated topic models
in some settings [16].
Regression:
Linear regression (LR) predicts suitabilities
directly using the side information associated with the
items. Each reviewer has a set of parameters θr, which
is applied to item information wp to form an estimate of
srp: ˆsrp = θr · wp. Stated reviewer preferences are used as
training observations, and LR minimizes the mean-squared
error (MSE) w.r.t. observed suitabilities:
CLR(So) =
1
|So|
X
srp∈So
(ˆsrp −srp)2
(2)
Collaborative Filtering:
Given observed suitabilities,
prediction of unobserved suitabilities can be tackled us-
ing collaborative ﬁltering. Probabilistic matrix factoriza-
tion (PMF) [21] is a popular CF method that ﬁnds a low-
rank factorization of the suitability matrix S ≈U T V ,
where S ∈RN×M, U ∈RK×N and V ∈RK×M and
K << min(M, N). The columns Ur of U and Vp of V
represent latent reviewer and paper factors. The full S ma-
trix, including unobserved suitabilities, can be estimated by
taking the product of U and V . Under this model, the con-
ditional distribution over suitabilities is:
Pr(S|U, V, σ2) =
M
Y
r
N
Y
p
N(srp|U T
r Vp, σ2)Irp
where I is an indicator matrix and entry Irp is 1 if it was
observed and 0 otherwise. Assuming zero-mean Gaussian
priors over the parameters U and V :
Pr(U|σ2
U) =
N
Y
r=1
N(Ur|0, σ2
U);
Pr(V |σ2
V ) =
M
Y
p=1
N(Vp|0, σ2
V ),

ﬁnding the MAP solution involves minimizing MSE be-
tween U T V and the known suitabilities.
In a Bayesian version of PMF (BPMF), the parameters U
and V have non-zero mean and full-covariance priors [22].
The predictive distribution cannot be calculated analyti-
cally because the posteriors over U and V are intractable,
but a Markov Chain Monte Carlo sampler can be used to
approximate sufﬁcient statistics. Integrating over the pa-
rameters has been shown to produce performance advan-
tages w.r.t. root mean squared error (RMSE) on the Netﬂix
task [22].
Other Methods:
In addition to the three methods above,
we investigated several other algorithms, including super-
vised and unsupervised topic models [4, 5], conditional
restricted Boltzmann machines (RBMs) [14], and infer-
ence using co-reference graphs. Preliminary experiments
showed that these methods did not match the performance
of those above.
We also tried leveraging the different
sources of information by using combinations of the var-
ious learning models without success. Incorporating each
reviewer’s archive as extra training papers for LR did not
offer any improvement either. Finally, we explored a for-
mulation of the problem in which the training objective ex-
plicitly optimizes matchings J(x) rather than optimizing
RMSE w.r.t. predicted suitabilities. However, experiments
with this approach failed to demonstrate improved match-
ing performance.
3.3
Matching Objectives
We articulate several different criteria that may inﬂuence
the deﬁnition of a “good” matching and explore different
formulations of the optimization problem that can be used
to accommodate these criteria. We also discuss how these
criteria may interact with our learning methods.
Naturally, one would like to assign submitted papers to
their most suitable reviewers; of course, this is almost never
possible since some reviewers will be most suited to far
more papers than others. In general, load balancing is en-
forced by placing an upper limit or maximum on the num-
ber of papers per reviewer. Similarly, we may impose a
minimum to ensure reasonable load equity or load fairness
across reviewers.
However, limiting the paper load in-
creases the probability that certain papers will be assigned
to very unsuitable reviewers. This suggests only making as-
signments involving pairs with score srp above some min-
imum score threshold. This ensures that every paper is re-
viewed by a minimally suitable reviewer, but may sacriﬁce
load equity (indeed, it may sacriﬁce feasibility). One may
also desire suitability fairness across reviewers; that is, re-
viewers should have similar score distributions over their
assigned papers (so on average no reviewer is assigned pa-
pers to which she is signiﬁcantly more ill-suited than any
other). Finally, when multiple reviewers are assigned to pa-
pers, it may be desirable to assign complementary review-
ers to a paper so as to cover the range of topics spanned by
a submission. Related is the desire to ensure each paper is
reviewed by at least one “senior” reviewer with signiﬁcant
expertise.
The intricacies of different conferences prevent us from es-
tablishing an exhaustive list of matching desiderata (see
[3, 11, 9] for further discussion). We now explore matching
mechanisms that will account for several of these criteria:
we frame the matching procedure as an optimization prob-
lem and show how several properties can be formulated as
constraints or modiﬁcations of the objective function.
We formulate the basic matching problem as an IP, where
each paper is assigned to its best-suited reviewers [24]:
maximize Jbasic(x) =
X
r
X
p
srpxrp
(3)
subject to
xrp ∈{0, 1},
∀r, p
(4)
X
r
xrp = Rtarget,
∀p
The binary variable xrp encodes the matching of item p
to user r; a match is an instantiation of these variables.
Rtarget is the desired number of reviewers per paper. Mini-
mum and maximum reviewer load, Pmin and Pmax respec-
tively, can be incorporated as constraints [24]:
X
p
xrp ≥Pmin,
X
p
xrp ≤Pmax, ∀r.
(5)
This IP, including constraints (5), is our basic formulation
(Basic IP). Its solution, the optimal match, maximizes to-
tal reviewer suitability given the constraints. Although IPs
can be computationally difﬁcult, our constraint matrix is
totally unimodular, so the linear program (LP) relaxation
(allowing xrp ∈[0, 1]) does not affect the integrality of the
optimal solution; hence the problem can be solved as an
LP.
Although not mentioned above it is essential for the match-
ing to prevent assignments of reviewers to submitted papers
for which they have conﬂicts of interest (COI). The above
formulation can easily enforce known COI by directly con-
straining the conﬂicting assignments xrp’s to be 0, alterna-
tively, we can set the relevant scores srp’s to −∞.
To capture additional matching desirata, we can modify
the objective or the constraints of this IP. Load balancing
can be controlled by manipulating Pmin and Pmax: a small
range ensures each reviewer is assigned the same number
of papers at the expense of match quality, while a larger
range does the converse. We can instead enforce load eq-
uity by making the tradeoff explicit in the objective with
“soft constraints” on load:
Jbalance(x) =
X
r
X
p
srpxrp +
X
r
λf
  X
p
xrp

−¯x

(6)
where ¯x is the average number of papers per reviewer
(M/N) and f is a penalty function (e.g., f(x) = |x| or
f(x) = x2). The parameter λ controls the tradeoff be-
tween load equity and match quality. The Jbalance objec-
tive (Eq. 6) along with the constraints expressed in Eq. 4
comprise our Balance IP.

The Jbasic objective (Eq. 3) maximizes the overall suit-
ability of the assignments, equating “utility” with suitabil-
ity. However, the utility of a speciﬁc match xrp may not
be linear in suitability srp. For example, utility may be
more “binary”: as long as a paper is assigned to a reviewer
whose suitability is above a certain threshold, then the as-
signment is good, otherwise it is not. This can be realized
by applying some non-linear transformation g to the scores
in the matching objective (e.g., a matched pair with score
srp ∈{2, 3} may be greatly preferred to srp ∈{0, 1}):
Jtfm(x) =
X
r
X
p
g(srp)xrp.
(7)
In this transformed objective Jtfm, if g is a logistic func-
tion then score are softly “binarized.”
Finally, we note that some of these matching objectives can
also be incorporated into the suitability prediction model.
For example, the nonlinear transformation g can be directly
used in the LR training objective (cf. Eq. 2):
CLR-TFM(So) =
1
|So|
X
srp∈So
(ˆsrp −g(srp))2.
(8)
4
Experimental Results
We start by describing the data sets used in our experi-
ments. The rest of the section is divided into three parts.
The ﬁrst considers score predictions with the different
learning models.
The second turns to matching quality
and explores the soft constraints on the number of papers
matched per reviewer. Finally, the third part evaluates a
transformation of the matching objective and shows how
using a transformed learning objective can enhance perfor-
mance on the transformed matching problem.
4.1
Data
Experiments are run using two data sets, N10 and N09,
from the 2010 and 2009 editions, respectively, of the NIPS
conference, one of the leading conferences in machine
learning.1 For both data sets, side information for each re-
viewer comprises a self-selected set of papers taken repre-
sentative of her areas of expertise; these were summarized
as word count vectors wr. Side information about submit-
ted papers consisted of document word counts wp for each
p. The total vocabulary used by submissions (across both
sets) contained over 21,000 words; We used only the top
1000 words for our experiments as ranked using TF-IDF
(|wp| = |wr| = 1000). Reviewer suitability scores ranged
from 0 to 3, with 0 meaning “paper lies outside my exper-
tise;” 1 means “can review if necessary;” 2 means “qual-
iﬁed to review;” and 3 means “very qualiﬁed to review.”
As discussed above, these scores are intended to reﬂect re-
viewer expertise, not desire. We focus on the area chair
1See http://nips.cc.
We are currently investigating
mechanisms by which we can make both data sets available to
the community.
0
1
2
3
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Number of Scores
0
1
2
3
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3x 10
4
Figure 1: Observed scores for N10 (a) and N09 (b).
(or meta-reviewer) assignment problem, where the match-
ing task is to assign a single area chair to each paper. We
use the term reviewer below to refer to such area chairs.
N10 comprises 1250 submitted papers to be assigned to 48
reviewers. Suitabilities on a subset of papers were elicited
from reviewers using a rather involved two-stage process.
This process utilized the language model (LM) to estimate
the suitability of each reviewer for each paper, and then
queried each reviewer on the papers on which his estimated
suitability was maximal.
The output of the ﬁrst round
was ﬁne-tuned using a combination of a hybrid discrimi-
native/generative RBM [14] with replicated softmax input
units [20] trained on the initial scores, and LM, which then
determined the second round of queries. In total, each re-
viewer provided score on an average of 143 queried papers
(excluding one extreme outlier), and each paper received
an average of 3.3 suitability assessments (with a std. dev. of
1.3). The mean suitability score was 1.1376 (std. dev. 1.1);
a histogram of the scores is shown in Figure 1(a). Note
that since the querying process was biased towards asking
about pairs with high predicted suitability, the unobserved
scores are not missing at random, but rather tended toward
pairs with low suitability. We do not distinguish the data
acquired in the two phases of elicitation; both took place
within a short time frame, so we assume suitabilities for
any one reviewer are stable.
N09 comprises 1079 submitted papers and 30 area chairs.
Reviewer scores were not elicited, but instead provided
by the conference program chairs for every reviewer-
submission pair. A histogram of the scores is shown in
Figure 1(b). The mean suitability score was 0.19 (std. dev.
0.57).
4.2
Score Predictions
We ﬁrst analyze performance using the root mean squared
error (RMSE) metric, as is common in collaborative ﬁl-
tering research. We are especially interested in how the
different approaches behave as the size of the training set
increases. An understanding of this dynamic is vital if one
is to strike a balance between the demands of eliciting suit-
ability scores from the user and increased accuracy of pre-
dictions.
For learning, we are given a set of training instances,
Str ≡So. We split this set into a training and validation
set. The trained model predicts all unobserved scores Su.

Since we do not have true suitability values for all unob-
served scores, we distinguish Su as being the union of test
instances Ste (for which we have scores in the data set),
and missing instances Sm. We denote a model’s estimates
of the test instances as ˆSte, and evaluate RMSE over these
test instances (P
rp∈Ste(ˆste
rp −ste
rp)/|Ste|)1/2.
We report results averaged over 5 different splits of the
data in all experiments. In each split, the data is divided
into training, validation and test sets in 60/20/20 propor-
tions. There is no overlap in the test sets across the 5 splits.
When reporting results across splits, we report the mean
and standard error. Training LR is naturally slightly faster
than training BPMF 2, for which we used 330 MCMC sam-
ples including 30 burn-in samples, but both methods are
trained within minutes on both of our data sets.
Fig. 2 shows results for training sets of different sizes,
simulating the effect of additional elicitation.
To facili-
tate comparison, the test set size is ﬁxed across different
training set sizes. We compare LR and BPMF to a base-
line which predicts the mean training score. Recall that
BPMF learns to predict Su by using So only while LR
also utilizes paper features wp. The strong performance
of LR suggests that the information contained in the paper
features is extremely useful in predicting user preferences.
Interestingly, BPMF, a state-of-the-art method in CF, per-
forms worse than LR in all but the extremely small training-
set sizes. Recall that BPMF attempts to exploit similari-
ties across reviewers and across papers. In this case, the
(meta-)reviewers were speciﬁcally chosen by the confer-
ence organizers to span the ﬁeld, providing expertise across
the multitude of topics typically represented at this confer-
ence. We conjecture that, compared to other popular do-
mains for CF (e.g., movie recommendation), there are far
fewer commonalities across users (w.r.t. paper topics); thus
it is difﬁcult for BPMF to attain very good performance.
Furthermore, although there are probably signiﬁcant com-
monalities between papers, each paper receives an average
of fewer than four ratings, which makes it difﬁcult to dis-
cover those commonalities from the preference data alone.
Note that the language model is not included here. LM’s
outputs values represent log-probabilities and thus do not
fall into the [0, 3] score range. A linear mapping of the
predicted suitabilities into the score range did not produce
sensible results.
The behavior of the different learning methods on N09 are
similar to that observed for N10. Since they provide no
additional insight, we do not report results here.
4.3
Match Quality
We now turn our attention to the matching framework. We
ﬁrst elaborate on how we perform the matching. We then
2We use an implementation of BPMF provided by its authors:
http://www.mit.edu/~rsalakhu/BPMF.html
0
20
40
60
80
100
0.94
0.96
0.98
1
1.02
1.04
1.06
1.08
1.1
1.12
Training set size per user
Test RMSE
 
LR
BPMF
Baseline
Figure 2: Performance on RMSE on the N10 data set as the num-
ber of observed suitability scores per user varies.
train/valid.
test
missing
Matching
Str
ˆSte
Sm = τ
Evaluation
Str
Ste
Sm = τ
Table 1: Overview of the matching/evaluation process.
evaluate the performance of the different learning methods
on the matching objective. Finally we introduce soft con-
straints into the matching objective and analyze the trade-
offs they introduce.
Matching Experimental Procedures:
The matching IPs
discussed above assume access to fully known (or pre-
dicted) suitability scores. Since we learn estimates of the
unknown scores, we denote a model’s estimates of the test
instances as ˆSte, and impute a value for all suitability val-
ues that are missing, using a constant imputation of τ ∈R.
Since missing scores are likely to reﬂect, on average, lower
suitability than their observed counterparts, we use τ = 1
in all experiments (recall that N10’s mean was 1.1376 and
N09 has no missing scores).
Given the estimate ˆSte computed by one of our learning
methods, we perform a matching with S = Str ∪ˆSte ∪
(Sm = τ). Note that this permits missing values to be
matched, which is important in the regime of sparse known-
suitability scores. Table 1 summarizes this procedure. For
data set N10 we set Pmin and Pmax to 20 and 30, respec-
tively, while the range is 30–40 for data set N09.
Baseline: We adopt a baseline method that provides an ab-
solute comparison across methods. The baseline has ac-
cess to Str and imputes τ for any element of Ste. To allow
meaningful comparison to other methods, it employs the
same imputation for missing scores, Sm = τ.
A note on LM: Although the output of LM can be directly
used for matching, it does not exploit observed suitabilities
in its usual formulation. However LM can make use of
some of the training data Str by incorporating submitted
papers assessed as “suitable” by some reviewer r into her
word vector wr. Speciﬁcally, we include all papers in wr
for which r offered a score of 3 (only if this score is in Str).
For all methods, once an optimal match x∗is found, we

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
2100
2200
2300
2400
2500
2600
2700
2800
2900
Training set size per user
Matching Objective
 
LR
BPMF
LM
Baseline
Figure 3: Performance on the matching task on the N10 data set.
evaluate it using all observed and unobserved scores, with
the same constant imputation for the missing scores, where
match quality is measured using Jbasic (see Equation 3):
X
r
X
p
x∗
rp(Str ∪Ste ∪Sm = 1)
(9)
Matching Performance using Basic IP:
We now report
on the quality of the matchings that result from using the
predictions of the different methods. Again we consider
dynamic matching performance as the amount of training
data per user increases. Note that the optimal match value
is 3053 for N10 and 2172 for N09, which occurs when
ˆSte = Ste.
Figure 3 shows how matching quality varies as the amount
of training data per user increases. Since training scores are
also observed at matching time (Eq. 9), all methods bene-
ﬁt from having a larger training set. Figure 3 leads to the
following three observations. Firstly, when no observed
data is available, i.e., using only the archive, LM does very
well, with a matching score of 2247 ± 32, nearly identical
to the quality of LR and BPMF with 10 bids per user, and
much better than the match quality of 1262 obtained using
constant scores ((Ste ∪Sm) = τ). Secondly, when very
few scores are available, LR and LM perform best (and do
equally well). As mentioned above, LM is able to exploit
observed suitabilities by adding relevant papers to the user
corpus, but this attenuates the impact of elicited scores: we
see LM is outperformed by all other methods when sufﬁ-
cient data is available. Thirdly, LR outperforms all other
methods as data is added. We also see that as the num-
ber of observed scores increases, unsurprisingly, the gain
in matching performance (value of information) from addi-
tional scores decreases.
It is also interesting to note that a total matching score of
over 2500 implies that, on average, each reviewer is as-
signed papers on which her average preference is greater
than 2 (out of 3). LR reaches this level of performance with
less than 30 observed scores per user, while other methods
0
1
2
3
0
100
200
300
400
500
Baseline
Baseline
Baseline
Baseline
LM
LM
LM
LM
BPMF
BPMF
BPMF
BPMF
LR
LR
LR
LR
Average number of assignments
Figure 4: Assignments for N10 by score value when using 40
training examples per user.
need 30% more data per user to reach the same level of
performance.
Further insight into matching quality on N10 induced by
the different learning methods can be gained by examin-
ing the distribution of scores associated with matched pa-
pers (Figure 4) or under different sizes of the training set
(Figure 5). Figure 4 displays the number of scores of each
value (0–3) that get assigned with a training set size of 40.
Not surprisingly, LR and BPMF assign signiﬁcantly more
2s and 3s combined than all other methods. LM is very
good at picking the top scores which reinforces the fact that
word-level features, from reviewer and submitted papers,
contain useful information for matching reviewers. Similar
results were obtained on N09 and thus LM’s performance is
not only a consequence of the data collection method used
for N10. In addition, Baseline assigns few zeros, since all
missing and test scores are imputed to be τ = 1.
Figure 5 provides another perspective on assignment qual-
ity. Here we plot results for the best performing method,
LR, on both N10 and N09, for 3 different training set sizes.
We ﬁrst note that the extreme imbalance in N09 leads LR
to assign many zeros even with 80 training scores per user.
Overall, both data sets show that as the number of training
scores increases, more 2s and 3s, and fewer 0s and 1s, are
assigned.
Our remaining results deal exclusively with N10 since ex-
perimental results with N09 were similar.
Load Balancing Balance IP:
The experiments above all
constrain the number of papers per reviewer to be within a
speciﬁc range (Pmin–Pmax). There is no good indication
as to how to set these two extrema. Instead we now use the
Balance IP, both for matching and evaluation (see Eq. 9),
setting f to be the absolute value function.
Figure 6 shows the histogram of assigned papers per re-

0
1
2
3
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Avg. number of assignments
0
1
2
3
0
1
2
3
0
1
2
3
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Avg. number of assignments
0
1
2
3
0
1
2
3
Figure 5: Assignments by score value. From Left to Right: 10,
40, 80 (86 examples for N10) training examples per user. Top:
N10. Bottom: N09.
viewer given by the optimal solution to the IP for differ-
ent λ ∈{0, 0.1, 1}. When λ = 0 load equity is ignored,
and almost all reviewers either get assigned the minimum
(Rmin) or the maximum (Rmax) number of papers; within-
reviewer variance (P
p(xrp −¯x)2/M) is extremely high.
When a “soft constraint” on load equity is introduced, as-
signments become more balanced as the λ increases (i.e.,
the balance constraint becomes “harder”). The following
table reports the matching objective versus the variance, av-
eraged across users, for different values of λ with a training
set size of 40 (other training sizes yielded similar results):
λ
0
0.1
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
Jbasic
2625
2615
2600
2573
2569
2569
Variance
4.62
3.28
2.61
0.89
0.37
0.33
Not surprisingly, larger penalties λ for deviating from the
mean reviewer load give rise to greater load balance (lower
load variance) and worse matching performance. Gener-
ally, an appropriate λ will be chosen by the conference
organizers, that nicely trades off performance versus load
balance across reviewers (here, perhaps around λ = 0.5).
4.4
Transformed Matching and Learning
We now consider a non-linear transformation of the scores,
reﬂecting the view that it is much better to assign reviewer-
paper pairs with suitabilities of 2 and 3, than pairs with 0
and 1; as discussed above this can be accomplished by al-
lowing “utility” xrp to be non-linear in suitability score srp.
We adopt the following sigmoid function to effect this non-
linear transformation: σ(s) = 1/(1 + exp(−(s −1.5)β));
here 1.5 is the middle of the scores’ range. We set β = 4.5,
which gives: σ(0) = 0.001; σ(1) = 0.095; σ(2) = 0.90;
σ(3) = 1.0. We ﬁrst show how this transformation impacts
matching performance without learning; then we discuss
how one can incorporate the transformation into the learn-
ing objective itself.
We ﬁrst test how matching using the transformed objec-
tives affects results without using learning to infer missing
scores (consequently, Su = τ), by examining difference
in matching performance when varying the percentage of
observed scores. Figure 7(a) shows the difference when
matching with the transformed objective (Jtfm) versus the
basic objective (Jbasic). In both cases the resulting matches
are evaluated using Jtfm. Although a minor gain is ob-
served when most of the known data is observed, there is,
overall, very little difference in performance when match-
ing with either objective. Recall that the mean number of
scores per paper is less than 4. Hence, when matching us-
ing a small fraction of the data, the matching procedure
has very little ﬂexibility to assign high scoring pairs unless
learning is used to predict unobserved scores.
We can modify the learning objective to take into account
the nonlinearity introduced in the matching objective. We
do this by transforming all labels using the same sigmoidal
transformation as in the matching objective (Eq.8). This
allows learning to better predict the transformed scores by
explicitly training on them Figure 7(b) shows the trans-
formed matching performance of both LR on the non-
transformed data, and LR-TFM, a linear regression model
trained using the transformed learning objective. Not sur-
prisingly, LR-TFM outperforms LR across all training set
sizes, since it is trained for the modiﬁed objective Jtfm.
The difference is especially pronounced with smaller train-
ing sets—when enough data is available, both methods will
naturally assign many 2s and 3s. (We also veriﬁed that LR-
TFM outperforms BPMF trained on the transformed objec-
tive).
5
Conclusion
We have developed a framework for paper-to-reviewer as-
signment in the context of scientiﬁc conferences.
We
showed how by eliciting only a small subset of scores from
reviewers and inferring unobserved scores, using one of
several learning methods, we are able to determine high
quality matchings. Interestingly, in the ﬁeld of collabora-
tive ﬁltering, side-information is often perceived to be use-
ful only in the cold-start condition, where few or no scores
are available. The performance of both LM and LR, which
leverage word-level features from reviewers and submitted
papers, show that this is not the case in our domain. We also
explored the trade-off between matching quality and paper
load balancing, which helps one avoid the need to man-
ually set limits on the reviewer load. Finally we showed
that using the realistic assumption that utility is non-linear
in suitability score, we discover better matches using the
same nonlinear transformation in the learning objective.
Given how matching beneﬁts from an interaction with
learning, we are developing ways to strengthen this interac-
tion by making the learning methods sensitive to the ﬁnal
matching objective. We have obtained good results using
this approach in an active learning setting where the system
chooses which reviewer scores to query. We are also in-
terested in exploring how asking meta-queries, about gen-
eral aspects of papers rather than a single paper, may be

20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30
0
10
20
30
40
50
λ = 0
20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30
λ = 0.1
20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30
λ = 1
Figure 6: Histograms of number of papers matched per reviewer with different values of λ. The leftmost plot shows results with only
hard constraints on reviewer loads (λ = 0); the others also include a soft constraint minimizing load variance.
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
700
750
800
850
900
950
1000
1050
1100
Fraction of known scores
J tfm
 
 
Original Matching
Transformed Matching
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
800
850
900
950
1000
1050
1100
Training set size per user
J tfm
 
 
LR
LR−TFM
Figure 7: Performance on the transformed matching objective on N10. (a) Comparing performance of original (Jbasic) and transformed
(Jtfm) matching objectives, without learning. (b) Comparing performance of original and transformed LR learning using the transformed
matching objective.
exploited to reduce the number of reviewer queries while
maintaining strong matching performance.
Acknowledgements: Special thanks to the NIPS Founda-
tion and to the NIPS 2009 program chairs, Chris Williams
and John Lafferty for their assistance in collecting the
N09 data set. Thanks to the reviewers for helpful sugges-
tions. This research was supported by NSERC and CIFAR.
