Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
A linear framework for region-based image segmentation
and inpainting involving curvature penalization
Thomas Schoenemann1, Fredrik Kahl1, Simon Masnou2 and Daniel
Cremers3
the date of receipt and acceptance should be inserted later
Abstract We present the ﬁrst method to handle cur-
vature regularity in region-based image segmentation
and inpainting that is independent of initialization.
To this end we start from a new formulation of
length-based optimization schemes, based on surface
continuation constraints, and discuss the connections
to existing schemes. The formulation is based on a cell
complex and considers basic regions and boundary ele-
ments. The corresponding optimization problem is cast
as an integer linear program.
We then show how the method can be extended to
include curvature regularity, again cast as an integer lin-
ear program. Here, we are considering pairs of boundary
elements to reﬂect curvature. Moreover, a constraint set
is derived to ensure that the boundary variables indeed
reﬂect the boundary of the regions described by the
region variables.
We show that by solving the linear programming re-
laxation one gets quite close to the global optimum, and
that curvature regularity is indeed much better suited
in the presence of long and thin objects compared to
standard length regularity.
1 Introduction
Regularization is of central importance for many in-
verse problems in computer vision including image seg-
mentation and inpainting [19,9,18,2,29,4]. The intro-
duction of higher-order regularizers in respective en-
ergy minimization approaches is known to give rise to
1Center for Mathematical Sciences, Lund University, Sweden.
2Universit´e de Lyon, Universit´e Lyon 1, CNRS UMR 5208, In-
stitut Camille Jordan, 43 boulevard du 11 novembre 1918, 69622
Villeurbanne Cedex, France.
3Department of Computer Science, TU M¨unchen, Germany.
substantial computational challenges. Some of the most
powerful approaches to image segmentation are based
on region integrals with regularity terms deﬁned on
the region boundaries [3,19,21,5,9,12,16]. While many
such methods make use of length as a regularity term,
only few use curvature regularity. This is in contrast
to psychophysical experiments on contour completion
[15] where curvature was identiﬁed as a vital part of
human perception. Note that curvature regularity is
qualitatively diﬀerent from length regularity. As shorter
boundary curves are preferred in the length case, this
causes the well-known shrinking bias. This is not the
case for curvature, since the total curvature of any
closed, convex curve is equal to 2π.
Length regularization has become an established
paradigm as there exist many powerful algorithms for
computing optimal solutions for such energy function-
als, either using discrete graph-theoretic approaches
based on the min-cut/max-ﬂow duality [14,5] or us-
ing continuous PDE-based approaches using convex re-
laxation and thresholding theorems [20]. Region-based
problems for segmentation using curvature regularity
have typically been optimized using local optimization
methods only (cf. [21,12]). As a consequence, experi-
mental results highly depend on the choice of initializa-
tion. Moreover, these methods do not oﬀer any insights
concerning how close the computed solution is to the
(unknown) global solution.
In this paper, we propose a relaxed version of region-
based segmentation which can be solved optimally. The
key idea is to cast the problem of region-segmentation
with curvature regularity as an integer linear program
(ILP). By solving its LP-relaxation and thresholding
the solution we obtain a solution to the original integer
problem and are able to evaluate a bound on its quality
with respect to the globally optimal solution. In addi-
arXiv:1102.3830v1  [cs.CV]  18 Feb 2011

2
Input with seeds
thresholding scheme
with length regularity
with length and curvature
Fig. 1 With the proposed method, long and thin structures are much better handled than with length-based approaches.
damaged image
with length regularity
with curvature regularity
Fig. 2 Curvature regularity on the level lines improves inpainting.
tion, we show that the method readily extends to the
problem of inpainting.
Figure 1 demonstrates that the proposed method
allows segmenting objects in a way which preserves
perceptually important thin and elongated parts. The
found solution is within 1.3% of the global optimum.
Figure 2 demonstrates the superior performance of cur-
vature regularity over length regularity in a correspond-
ing inpainting experiment.
Existing Work on Curvature Regularity. For contour-
or edge-based segmentation methods researchers have
successfully developed algorithms to optimally impose
curvature regularity using shortest path approaches [1]
or ratio cycle formulations [24] on a graph representing
the product space of image pixels and tangent angles
[22]. In the region-based settings considered, curvature
is usually handled by local evolution methods [8,12,21,
29]. Among the methods that pre-date our conference
publication [25], the only exception we are aware of is
the inpainting approach of Masnou and Morel [18] who
can optimize the L1-norm of the curvature in the ab-
sence of regional data terms using dynamic program-
ming.
In this paper we propose an LP-relaxation approach
to minimize curvature in region-based settings. In con-
trast to [18] it allows imposing arbitrary functions of
curvature and arbitrary data terms. The algorithmic
formulation is based on the concepts of cell complexes
and surface continuation constraints which have been
pioneered by Sullivan [28] and Grady [13] in the context
of 3D-surface completion.
The present paper is based on our preliminary work
in [25], but contains several novelties. Firstly, we show
that the constraint system in [25] needs to be aug-
mented by additional constraints in order to ensure that
the boundary of the region-based segmentation is cor-
rectly estimated. Secondly, we discuss the connections
of our method, when restricted to length regularity,
with standard methods for length regularity and com-
pare experimentally. In addition, the original inpainting
method has improved by incorporating a boundary es-
timation scheme.
There has been a subsequent paper by El-Zehiry and
Grady [11] which optimizes the same model as in our
original paper, but applies quadratic pseudo-Boolean
optimization (QPBO) for obtaining the solution. In the
case of a square grid, QPBO is able to eﬃciently com-
pute a solution with curvature regularization, and with
a subsequent probing stage often the global optimum is
found. However, the discretization artefacts are severe
for a cell complex of squares. Better connectivities can
only be handled approximately.

3
The source code associated to this paper is freely
available
at
http://www.maths.lth.se/matematiklth/personal/
tosch/download.html.
2 Length-based Segmentation Problems
To detail the proposed method for curvature regular-
ity, we ﬁrst introduce a novel method for length-based
segmentation problems. In practice there are more eﬃ-
cient algorithms for this problem [6,20], but in contrast
to them the presented one is easily extended to curva-
ture. A comparison to the known techniques is given at
the end of this section.
Given an image I : Ω→IR, the problem is to seg-
ment it into two regions, foreground and background.
Here “region” means an arbitrary subset of Ω, i.e. there
can be several disconnected components and each one
can have holes. Hence, each point x ∈Ωis to be as-
signed a region u(x) ∈{0, 1} where 0 denotes back-
ground, 1 foreground.
The desired segmentation is deﬁned as the global
optimum of an energy function, consisting of two terms.
The ﬁrst one is called the data term and speciﬁed by a
function g0(x) for points belonging to the background
and a function g1(x) for the foreground. Both functions
will generally depend on the input image I. In addition
there is a regularity term that penalizes the length of
the segmentation boundary by a weighting parameter
ν ≥0. The arising energy minimization problem to be
solved is
min
u:Ω→{0,1}
Z
Ω
g0(x)[1 −u(x)] dx +
Z
Ω
g1(x) u(x) dx
+ ν |C|
,
(1)
where C = ∂{x | ∇u(x) = 0} is the set of points where
u is discontinuous (i.e. “jumps” from 0 to 1) and |C|
denotes its one-dimensional measure. In other words,
C is a set of closed lines (which may include parts of
the boundary of Ω) and |C| denotes the sum of the
length of all lines.
For convenience, we reformulate (1) by splitting the
integrand of the ﬁrst term into a constant term and
one depending on u. Deﬁning g(x) = g1(x) −g0(x) the
resulting functional is
min
u:Ω→{0,1}
Z
Ω
g(x) u(x) dx + ν |C| + const .
(2)
In the following we will ignore the constant except when
evaluating relative gaps between a lower bound and the
energy of some segmentation.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 3 The basic concepts of our method. (a) A cell complex.
(b) The method considers oriented regions and oriented boundary
elements.
2.1 Discretization
In this paper we consider discretized segmentation
problems where instead of optimizing inﬁnitely many
values {u(x) | x ∈Ω} we only consider ﬁnitely many
“basic regions” and jointly assign all points in a basic
region to the same segment. Note that in practice we
will always get a discrete input image I, where the ba-
sic regions are given by pixels. Hence, the data term
by itself will produce such an assignment even for the
continuous problem. This is no longer true when the
regularity term is added, but in practice the discretized
energy function can be designed to account for this phe-
nomenon [6,20].
We require that our set of basic regions – denoted
F – be a cell complex and a partitioning of Ω, i.e. that
(1) no two regions overlap and (2) the union of all basic
regions yields Ω. An example is given in Figure 3 (a).
The presented approach makes use of another essen-
tial part of a cell complex: boundary segments. These
are the line segments that form the borders of the basic
regions. Usually a boundary segment has two neigh-
boring regions, except for segments at the border of Ω
where there is only one. The set of all boundary seg-
ments is denoted E. As will be shown below we need to
consider both possible ways of traversing a boundary
segment. Hence, for each boundary segment we con-
sider two oriented boundary segments, also called line
segments in the following. The set of all these segments
is denoted EO and ℓ(e) will denote the length of a line
segment e.
In essence, the data term will be deﬁned in terms of
the basic regions, the regularity term in terms of bound-
ary segments. To approximate the continuous problem
suﬃciently well, basic regions should generally not cor-
respond to pixels. Instead, as detailed in Figure 4 we
split the pixels into either 4 or 32 basic regions, in-
duced by lines with 8 and 16 diﬀerent directions re-
spectively. In the following we will refer to this as 8-
and 16-connectivity.

4
8-connectivity
16-connectivity
Fig. 4 Splitting a pixel into basic regions using lines with 8 and
16 diﬀerent directions.
2.2 An Integer Linear Program
The presented method casts a discretized version of (1)
as a so-called integer linear program, i.e. minimizing a
linear cost function over integral variables and subject
to linear constraints. There are two sets of variables:
ﬁrstly, for each basic region f ∈F there is a region
variable yf
R ∈{0, 1} with 0 indicating that the region
belongs to the background, 1 to the foreground. The
second set contains a boundary variable ye
B ∈{0, 1}
for every oriented boundary segment e ∈EO. Here we
want yB
e to be 1 only if exactly one of the adjacent basic
regions belongs to the foreground. Now we are already
in a position to express the cost function:
cT
R yR + cT
B yB ,
(3)
where cR contains entries
cf
R =
Z
f
g(x) dx ,
and cB contains entries ce
B = ν ℓ(e). Note that since
in our case basic regions are always subsets of a single
pixel this weight is simply the function g(·) evaluated
at the pixel times the area of the basic region.
Since ν is positive minimizing (3) by itself would
set all boundary variables to 0, so we need constraints.
Indeed, up to a few ambiguities (see next section) the
region boundary is completely speciﬁed by the region
variables and the boundary variables serve to render
the cost function linear. They are forced to describe
the correct boundary by the linear constraint system
that we now describe. In words it can be stated as
Surface Continuation Constraint:
When-
ever a basic region is part of the foreground,
along each of its boundary segments the fore-
ground must either continue with another fore-
ground region or with an appropriately oriented
boundary segment.
Formalizing these constraints (one for each bound-
ary segment) involves the concept of orientations for
both regions and boundary segments. For boundaries
we have already introduced this concept, but it is es-
sential for the constraint system that we (arbitrarily)
deﬁne a “positive” and a “negative” orientation for each
boundary segment.
For a region, an orientation denotes one of the two
possibilities for traversing its boundary line - clockwise
or counter-clockwise. Here it is essential that all regions
have the same orientation.
Now, to formalize the surface continuation con-
straint we deﬁne the notion of positive and negative
incidence of regions f ∈F and line segments l ∈EO
to boundary segments e ∈E. Ultimately the constraint
will then state that the weighted sum of “active” re-
gion incidences must be equal to the weighted sum of
“active” boundary incidences, where active refers to el-
ements where the associated indicator variable is 1.
The incidence of a region f to a boundary segment
e is denoted mf
e (for “match”) and deﬁned as 0 unless
f contains e in its boundary line. Otherwise, mf
e is 1
if according to the orientation of f the segment e is
traversed in its positive orientation, otherwise −1 for
the negative orientation. The incidence of a line l and
a boundary segment e is denoted ml
e and deﬁned as
0 unless l is an orientation of e, otherwise 1 if l is the
positive and −1 if l is the negative orientation of e. The
constraint system can now be stated as
X
f∈F
mf
e yf
R =
X
l∈EO
ml
e yl
B
∀e ∈E
.
(4)
For clarity, let us look at the following example:
l
l2
1
B
A
Here the constraint for the bold edge reads
yA
R −yB
R = yl2
B −yl1
B .
(5)
In the case where yA
R = 1 and yB
R = 0, i.e. region A
is foreground and region B is background, yl2
B will be
forced to 1, whereas yl1
B will be set to 0. If instead B is
foreground and A background, this will force yl1
B to be
1 and yl2
B to be 0. If both A and B belong to the same
component, the constraint leaves some freedom for the
boundary variables: they can now both be 0 or both
be 1. The latter is undesirable, but will not happen as
long as the length weight is strictly positive. However,

5
when we integrate curvature below we will need extra
constraints to prevent this case.
Finally, we summarize the integer linear program to
be solved as:
min
y
cT
R yR + cT
B yB
(6)
s.t.
X
f∈F
mf
e yf
R =
X
l∈EO
ml
e yl
B
∀e ∈E
yf
R ∈{0, 1} ∀f ∈F
yl
B ∈{0, 1} ∀l ∈EO
.
As we will show now this problem can be eﬃciently
solved by computing a graph min-cut.
2.3 Relation to Graph Cuts
Discrete approaches to image segmentation are very
well studied in computer vision and the vast major-
ity uses pixels as their basic regions. However, they do
usually not express (length) regularity in terms of the
boundary segments of these regions - this would imply
a four-connectivity.
Instead, these approaches are based on graphs where
the basic regions correspond to nodes and the length
term is represented in terms of edges that connect pairs
of nodes [6]. We denote the set of nodes P, where each
p ∈P represents the center point of a basic region
f ∈F. Analogous to the above integer program, each
center p of a basic region is associated a binary variable
yp ∈{0, 1} indicating foreground and background. The
smoothness term is modeled by a set of edges N (also
called neighborhood) and for length regularity can be
expressed as:
|C| ≈
1
k(N)
X
(p,q)∈N
1
∥p −q∥(1 −δ(yp, yq))
,
where k(N) is a normalization constant that ensures
that the weights remain comparable when the size of
the neighborhood is enlarged.
Minimizing this energy can be written as a mini-
mum cut problem, which again can be written as
min
yP ∈{0,1}|P| cT
R yP +
X
(p,q)∈N
wp,q |yp −yq| .
It is well-known, e.g. [10], that such absolutes can be
rewritten as linear programs, i.e. this problem can be
equivalently written as
min
yP ,a± cT
R yP +
X
(p,q)∈N
wp,q (a+
p,q + a−
p,q)
s.t.
xp −xq = a+
p,q −a−
p,q ∀(p, q) ∈N
yP ∈{0, 1}|P| ,
a+
p,q, a−
p,q ≥0 ∀(p, q) ∈N .
Standard Graph Cut
Subdivision
Fig. 5 Comparison of standard graph cuts and the novel sub-
division scheme, both run with the same length weight and an
8-connectivity. (Input image shown in Figure 11.)
If we assume that the neighborhood links exactly
all pairs of neighboring basic regions (i.e. those that
share a boundary segment), these are exactly our sur-
face continuation constraints (5). Since graph cuts can
be optimized globally eﬃciently it follows that (6) is
polynomial-time solvable.
In summary, what we have proposed so far is a re-
striction of graph cuts to graphs that are planar when
source and sink are removed. This restriction is crucial
for (our solution of) the problem we really want to solve:
to integrate curvature regularity into the framework.
In contrast to standard applications of graph cuts
our method relies on subdiving pixels. In the case of a
very strong data term a boundary pixel will probably
not be split into a foreground and a background part.
Standard graph cuts might then be the better way to
reﬂect the length regularity term. However, in practice
boundary pixels usually have weak data terms due to
partial overlap. Figure 5 shows the resulting segmenta-
tions of both schemes, where the input image can be
found in Figure 11. Here it can be seen that the novel
scheme gives access to a higher resolution and produces
slightly diﬀerent segmentations. These are actually of
lower energy than for the standard scheme. Hence, if
anything we have gained something with the novel for-
mulation.
2.4 Relation to Sullivan’s Method
Sullivan [27,28] gave a method for ﬁnding a surface of
minimal (weighted) area in 3D-space1 subject to the
constraint that the surface span a given (set of) bound-
ary lines. His method also relies on a cell complex and
can be written as a polynomial-time solvable minimum
cost ﬂow problem. Further, the method allows integrat-
ing volume terms.
1 In fact, he considered general N-D spaces, but this is not
important here.

6
In essence, what we have done so far is a restriction
of this method to 2D and where the set of prescribed
boundary elements is empty (these objects would be
one-dimensional). However, there is one major diﬀer-
ence: in Sullivan’s method all variables are unrestricted,
whereas we have the constraints yf
R ∈{0, 1} and yl
B ∈
{0, 1}. And of course our main goal is to integrate cur-
vature regularity.
3 Handling Curvature Regularity
We now show how the described integer linear program
can be generalized to curvature regularity, i.e. to the
model
min
u:Ω→{0,1}
Z
Ω
g(x) u(x) dx + ν |C|
+λ
Z
C
|κC(x)|pdH1(x)
.
(7)
Here λ > 0 is a curvature weight, κC(x) stands for the
curvature of the line C at a given point x of the line
and p > 0 is an arbitrary exponent (usually p = 2 is
a good choice). The notation dH1(x) signiﬁes that the
integral is over a set of lines and that it is independent
of the parameterization of these lines.
We emphasize that our method allows more general
regularity terms, namely arbitrary positive functions
depending on position, direction and absolute curva-
ture. In particular this allows spatially weighted regu-
larity terms.
3.1 Discretizing the Problem
Again, our solution is based on a cell-complex and the
data term is handled in the exact same way as above.
That is, we again have region indicator variables xf for
all f ∈F. We were able to express the length regu-
larity in terms of (single) boundary segments. For cur-
vature, this is not possible: all boundary segments are
straight lines, hence have curvature 0 everywhere. The
only points where non-zero curvature can occur are the
meeting points of two boundary segments. Hence it is
common to consider pairs of line segments [22,1] to ex-
press curvature regularity. So far, however, this was not
compatible with region terms.
For every pair l1, l2 of adjacent line segments with
compatible orientations we now have an indicator vari-
able yl1,l2
B
∈{0, 1}. Here we follow the convention that
the line segment that is traversed earlier is also listed
ﬁrst in the pair. We get a cost function of the form
cT
R yR + cT
B yB ,
(8)
θ
Fig. 6 The angle θ is the basis for computing the curvature of
the pair of black lines.
where yB now contains all the pairwise variables. We
proceed to describe the entries of the corresponding cost
vector cT
B.
3.2 Computing the Weights
Computing curvature from two adjacent line segments
is based on considering the direction change, measured
by the angle θ in Figure 6.
There are basically two ways to compute the term
|κ|p from this angle: ﬁrstly, we can just take the power p
of the angle (which should be measured in arc length).
The second method is based on the work of Bruckstein
et al. [7], and makes also use of the lengths ℓ(l1) and
ℓ(l2) of the two lines:
min{ℓ(l1), ℓ(l2)}

θ
min{ℓ(l1), ℓ(l2)}
p
.
The original idea of Bruckstein et al. was to take the
longest straight lines pre- and succeeding a direction
change. In our context we can only consider elemen-
tary boundary segments, so we do not have the same
convergence properties. In practice we found that both
weights work ﬁne and Bruckstein et al’s weights signif-
icantly reduce the running time of the employed linear
programming solver.
Denoting either of the two arising weights as wl1,l2,
we get one of two components for the cost entry cl1,l2.
Together with length regularity this entry is
cl1,l2 = wl1,l2 + 1
2
 ℓ(l1) + ℓ(l2)

.
There are however some special cases involving the im-
age border, a point that we neglected in [25]: ﬁrstly, at
the four corners of a rectangular domain Ωwe will want
to set the curvature weight to 0. Note that we still pe-
nalize the angle in which a region boundary meets the
domain boundary ∂Ω.
A second point relates to the length weight: when-
ever one (or two) of the line segments in a pair is part of
the domain border, its length should be set to 0. Oth-
erwise there would be a bias towards associating the
regions at the image border to the background.

7
3.3 An Adequate Constraint System
As before for length regularity, the linear cost func-
tion (8) needs to be minimized subject to suitable con-
straints to closely reﬂect the discretized model function.
In [25] we presented two sets of constraints, with the
aim to ensure that the boundary variables indeed de-
scribe a boundary of the region variables. In this work
we show that two more sets of constraints are needed,
where the second one becomes necessary only when sev-
eral regions meet in a single point. In particular, we will
show that in this case there are several valid boundaries
and that our method searches for the one with least
cost.
Firstly, we adapt the surface continuation con-
straints to the new kind of boundary variables. To this
end, we deﬁne the incidence ml1,l2
e
of a line segment
pair and a boundary segment e ∈E. This value is de-
ﬁned as 0 unless l1 is an orientation of e (note that l2
is irrelevant for this value). Otherwise the value is the
same as the previously deﬁned incidence of l1 and e.
Hence, the surface continuation constraints read
X
f∈F
mf
e yf
R =
X
l1,l2∈EO
ml1,l2
e
yl1,l2
B
∀e ∈E .
(9)
These constraints alone leave a lot of freedom. In par-
ticular, we could choose line pairs without direction
changes everywhere. What is really wanted, though, is
that for every active yl1,l2
b
both l1 and l2 belong to the
region boundary induced by the region variables. This
is ensured by two sets of constraints, where the ﬁrst is
called boundary continuation. In words it can be stated
as
Boundary Continuation Constraint:
If a
pair of line segments l1, l2 is active, there must
be a succeeding pair l2, l3 that is also active. Like-
wise there must be a preceeding active pair l0, l1.
These constraints ensure that the active line pairs actu-
ally deﬁne closed paths. They are identical to the con-
straints arising for the computation of shortest paths
in a graph such as [1] and are stated as
X
l0
yl0,l1
B
=
X
l2
yl1,l2
B
∀l1 ∈EO .
Now we have paths, but we cannot guarantee that all
parts of these paths are actually region boundaries. In-
deed, we invite the reader to check that the conﬁgura-
tion in Figure 7 (a) satisﬁes all constraints introduced
so far. Moreover, for small length weights and squared
curvature the cost of this conﬁguration will be lower
than those of the desired conﬁguration shown in part
(b). To exclude cases such as (a) from the optimization,
we add a new set of constraints:
(a)
(b)
Fig. 7 Without the boundary consistency constraints the con-
ﬁguration in (a) is valid and – for squared curvature and with-
out length penalty– cheaper than the desired one in (b). With
boundary consistency (b) remains feasible, but (a) is excluded,
as desired.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 8 Determining boundaries is ambiguous: (a) A segmenta-
tion where two regions meet in a point. (b) A low-cost boundary
conﬁguration, where diﬀerent pairs are indicated by diﬀerent col-
ors. (c) An equally valid, but more expensive boundary.
Boundary Consistency Constraint: For ev-
ery boundary segment, only one of the two pos-
sible orientations can be active.
To formalize this, we denote by e→and e←the positive
and negative orientation of a boundary segment e. Then
the constraint can be written as
X
l1
yl1,e←
B
+
X
l2
ye→,l2
B
≤1 ∀e ∈E .
Similar
sets
of
constraints
can
be
derived,
e.g.
P
l1 ye←,l1
B
+ P
l2 yl2,e→
B
≤1, but experimentally we
found them to be redundant. Moreover, if e is part of
the domain border ∂Ωthen one of the orientations will
never occur in a desired conﬁguration. We simply dis-
regard the corresponding variables.
With these constraints, there is still one issue left
to take care of, and it aﬀects cases where several re-
gions meet in a point. In this case, as shown in Figure
8, there are several valid boundary conﬁgurations. As
long as only two regions meet, the given constraint sys-
tem ensures that indeed the conﬁguration with lower

8
Fig. 9 If three or more regions meet in a point, self-intersecting
boundaries can deﬁne valid segmentations. If these are undesired,
a fourth constraint set is needed. The diﬀerent colors denote dif-
ferent phases when traversing the line. There is only one line.
cost is selected. However, as soon as there are three or
more regions meeting in a point, this constraint system
will allow conﬁgurations with crossings, as exempliﬁed
in Figure 9. Should we really avoid such conﬁgurations?
There is actually no obvious answer if one has in mind
that, in the theory of continuous plane curves, the set
enclosed by a positively oriented closed curve can be de-
ﬁned as the points of positive index (also called winding
number) [23]. In the example of Figure 9, the index of
each point in a black triangle with respect to the outer
curve deﬁned by the arrows is one, so it makes sense
to consider the curve as a region boundary 2. For the
sake of comparison and completeness, we provide in sec-
tion 6, Figure 13 a couple of experiments done either
with or without crossing prevention. In the former case,
we add a new set of constraints:
Crossing Prevention Constraint:
If two
pairs of line segments cross, only one of them
may be active.
Denoting C the set of crossing line pairs, this con-
straint is easily formalized as
yl1,l2
B
+ yl3,l4
B
≤1
∀(l1, l2, l3, l4) ∈C .
In practice these constraints are ignored in a ﬁrst phase.
Afterwards, the (usually very few) violated constraints
are added in passes and the system is re-solved, until
there are no more violated constraints. In our experi-
ments we never needed more than 9 passes. However,
solving the arising programs can be quite time consum-
ing, even when starting from the previous conﬁguration.
In summary, region-based segmentation with curva-
ture regularity is now expressed as the integer linear
2 the
index
of
a
point
on
a
discrete
grid
with
re-
spect
to
a
discrete
curve
can
also
be
computed,
see
for
instance
the
winding
number
algorithm
at
www.softsurfer.com/Archive/algorithm 0103/algorithm 0103.htm
program
min
yR,yB cT
R yR + cT
B yB
s.t.
X
f∈F
mf
e yf
R =
X
l1,l2∈EO
ml1,l2
e
yl1,l2
B
∀e ∈E
X
l0
yl0,l1
B
=
X
l2
yl1,l2
B
∀l1 ∈EO
X
l1
yl1,e←
B
+
X
l2
ye→,l2
B
≤1
∀e ∈E
yf
R ∈{0, 1} ∀f ∈F, yl1,l2
B
∈{0, 1} ∀l1, l2 ∈EO ,
and the optional constraints
yl1,l2
B
+ yl3,l4
B
≤1
∀(l1, l2, l3, l4) ∈C .
A ﬁrst evaluation of this new scheme was given in
Figure 1 on page 2 which shows that curvature regular-
ity is better suited to ensure connected regions in the
presence of long and thin objects. Note that the found
solutions for curvature are generally not globally opti-
mal. Details on the optimization scheme are given in
Section 5 and more experiments will be given in Sec-
tion 6. First, however, we discuss how to handle the
problem of image inpainting.
4 Inpainting
In image inpainting we are given an image I : Ω→IR
together with a damaged region Ωd ⊂Ω. This damaged
region can have arbitrarily many connected components
and each of these can enclose holes. The task is to ﬁll
the damaged region with values that ﬁt nicely with the
values of I outside the damaged region.
To this end, the above integer linear program is gen-
eralized to give a structured inpainting approach, where
we consider the continuous model [18,17,8]
min
u:Ω→{0,1}
Iu
Z
Il
Z
Cu,t
|κCu,t(x)|p dH1(x) dt
(10)
s.t. u(x) = I(x) ∀x ∈Ω\ Ωd ,
where Il and Iu are the minimal and maximal intensities
of I along the border of the damaged region, Cu,t =
{x | u(x) = t} is the set of level lines for level t of u(·)
and again p > 0 is an exponent for curvature.
For the case of absolute curvature (p = 1) and that
Ωd consists of singly-connected components (i.e. the
components do not enclose holes), an eﬃcient global
optimization scheme was given in [18,17]. We are inter-
ested in the more general problem of arbitrary domains
and exponents p > 0. In particular, p = 2 is usually a
better model.

9
4.1 Discretization
As before for image segmentation, our strategy is to
discretize the model (10) by introducing basic regions
and pairs of boundary segments. However, the regions
are no longer limited to two labels: the intensity uf of
region f ∈F can be anywhere between Il and Iu. We
follow the strategy in [18,17] and consider only integral
values inside this range. The result is a fully discrete
labeling problem.
Naturally, one also needs to change the right-hand-
side values of the inequality constraints. Moreover, for
inpainting we always include the crossing prevention
constraints since by deﬁnition level lines cannot cross.
To make sure that the boundary variables truly
reﬂect level lines, it would be advisable to associate
each basic region multiple variables, reﬂecting level sets.
Then, there would be a binary variable yk
f for every in-
tegral value Il ≤k ≤Iu where a value of 1 reﬂects that
the intensity uf of the basic region is at least equal to
k (i.e. uf ≥k). For k′ > k this would naturally en-
tail the constraints yk′
f
≥yk
f. Moreover, there would
be binary variables yk
l1,l2 that would be forced to be
consistent with the level variables exactly as for binary
segmentation.
This strategy is however not practicable for the do-
main sizes we want to address: the problem is way
too large scale. Instead, we settle for one integral vari-
able yf
R ∈{Il, . . . , Iu} for every region f ∈F, di-
rectly reﬂecting the intensity uf of the face. In ad-
dition, there are boundary variables reﬂecting the in-
tensity diﬀerences between neighboring regions. Inside
the damaged domain they can be restricted to values
yl1,l2
B
∈[0, Iu −Il]. For the ﬁxed part, we only consider
basic regions that border on the damaged region. At
their other borders the respective boundary variables
can take values in {0, . . . , Iu}. In practice it is advis-
able to ﬁrst subtract the constant Il from the entire
image (note that each connected component of Ωd can
be processed independently).
As shown3 in Figure 10 this strategy does generally
not give level lines, but it is a reasonable approximation.
3 Many thanks to Yubin Kuang for providing these images.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 10 Best viewed in color. Estimated boundary variables for
the given intensity proﬁles. Colors denote diﬀerent pairs (not all
pairs are shown) (a) With the proposed approximation we do
not always get level lines. Here the boundary variables may jump
between diﬀerent intensity levels. (b) With level variables one
would get the correct solution, but the computational demands
are too high in practice.
The arising integer linear program is stated as
min
yR,yB cT
ByB
(11)
s.t.
X
f∈F
mf
e yf
R =
X
l1,l2∈EO
ml1,l2
e
yl1,l2
B
∀e ∈E
X
l0
yl0,l1
B
=
X
l2
yl1,l2
B
∀l1 ∈EO
X
l1
yl1,e←
B
+
X
l2
ye→,l2
B
≤Iu
∀e ∈E
yl1,l2
B
+ yl3,l4
B
≤Iu
∀(l1, l2, l3, l4) ∈C
yf
R = If −Il
∀f ⊂Ω\ Ωd
yf
R ∈{0, . . . , Iu −Il}
∀f ⊂Ωd
yl1,l2
B
∈{0, . . . , Iu −Il}
∀l1, l2 ∈EO .
Note that we have one such program for every con-
nected component of Ωd.
4.2 Estimating Incoming Level Lines
A correct estimation of the direction of the level lines
touching from outside the inpainting domain Ωis im-
portant, since the method aims at prolonging them with
no additional curvature, if possible. We follow the sim-
ple and eﬃcient method proposed by Bornemann and
M¨arz in [4] after the work of Weickert [30,31] on the
robust determination of coherence directions in image:
at a point x ∈Ω\ Ωd, the coherence direction is the
normalized eigenvector associated to the minimal eigen-
value of the structure tensor [4]:
J(x) =

Kρ ∗

1Ω\Ωd∇Iσ ⊗∇Iσ

(x)

Kρ ∗1Ω\Ωd

(x)
(12)

10
where 1Ω\Ωd is the characteristic function of Ω\Ωd, Iσ
is deﬁned as
Iσ =
Kσ ∗

1Ω\ΩdI

Kσ ∗1Ω\Ωd
,
(13)
and Kρ, Kσ are Gaussian smoothing kernels with stan-
dard deviations ρ and σ. Experimentally, setting σ =
1.5, ρ = 4 yields a reliable estimation of the incoming
level lines directions along ∂Ωd.
5 Optimization Strategies
In general, solving integer linear programs is an NP-
hard problem [26]. In some cases, where there are lin-
ear inequality constraints Ax ≤b and the matrix A
is totally unimodular one can ﬁnd the global optimum
by solving the linear programming relaxation [26], i.e.
the problem one obtains when dropping all integrality
constraints on the variables. For instance, a constraint
yi ∈{0, 1} will be relaxed to yi ∈[0, 1]. The arising
problem can be solved in (weakly) polynomial time us-
ing interior point methods [32].
Several
of
the
discussed
systems
are
in
fact
polynomial-time solvable, in particular the length-
based problems and the boundary continuation con-
straints by themselves. The integer linear program for
curvature regularity is however not in this class. Still,
experimentally we found that solving the linear pro-
gramming relaxation often gives nearly integral solu-
tions. Moreover, the relaxation value provides a (usu-
ally quite tight) lower bound on the original problem.
We proceed to discuss this strategy in detail.
5.1 Solving the Linear Programming Relaxation
There are two popular ways of solving general linear
programs. Firstly, there is the dual simplex method
[10], based on refactorizing the constraint system. It is
usually the most memory saving method and in prac-
tice superior to the primal simplex method. For some
variants of the simplex method exponential worst-case
run-times have been proved. On practical problems the
method often works very well, and there are competi-
tive and freely available implementations, e.g. the solver
Clp4. We found it quite useful for an 8-connectivity, but
for a 16-connectivity – and very low length weights – we
got acceptable running times only for some of the im-
ages we tried. In other cases the solver was terminated
after several days without having solved the problem.
In the end we chose the length weights high enough to
4 http://www.coin-or.org/projects/Clp.xml
get acceptable running times. The results we get indi-
cate that these settings actually provide a very good
model.
On the other hand, there are interior point methods
which usually perform Newton-iterations on a primal-
dual formulation of the problem. This entails frequent
matrix inversions, solved via the sparse Cholesky de-
composition. We are not aware of a freely available
solver that performs well on large scale problems such
as ours. Hence, we tested several commercial packages
and found Gurobi and FICO Xpress to be well-suited
solvers for our problem. Generally the running times of
commercial interior point solvers are quite predictable.
The downside is the memory consumption: we found
that a little more than twice the memory consumption
of a simplex solver is needed for our problem, where we
tested with an 8- and a 16-connectivity.
For segmentation, the combination of licensing is-
sues and the high memory demands made us use the
simplex method. For inpainting, where the memory de-
mands are lower, the interior point methods proved su-
perior.
5.2 Obtaining and Evaluating Integral Solutions
Solving the linear programming relaxation provides a
fractional solution as well as a lower bound on the orig-
inal integral problem. Since the fractional solutions are
often close to integral, we derive an integral solution by
simply thresholding the region variables. This already
deﬁnes a segmentation, but we would also like to know
its energy, so we have to infer the associated boundary
variables.
We already discussed the complications in case two
or more regions meet in a point (see Section 3.3). Our
method will then select the cheapest allowed boundary
conﬁguration according to the selected constraint set.
In contrast, the recent method of El-Zehiry and Grady
[11] will take the sum of all conﬁgurations here.
Due to these diﬃculties we so far did not imple-
ment a specialized routine to compute the energy of
a segmentation, although this should be possible. In-
stead, we simply re-run the linear programming solver,
this time with all region variables ﬁxed according to the
segmentation. Note that this strategy was also pursued
in [25], so the gaps reported there are w.r.t. the integer
program, not the model itself.
In case crossing prevention was selected we again
add violated constraints in passes. In addition, we ﬁx all
“impossible” boundary variables to 0, where impossible
refers to pairs of line segments where along one of the
line segments the segmentation stays constant. In the

11
vast majority of cases this produced an integral solution
and hence the optimal boundary conﬁguration. In a few
cases we got up to 12 fractional variables. We presently
assume that the computed cost is close enough to the
actual cost.
6 Experiments
In this section we evaluate the proposed scheme for both
image segmentation and inpainting, where in all cases
we consider the intensity range [0, 255]. For image seg-
mentation we also evaluate how close to the global op-
timum we got. The experiments were run on a 3.0 GHz
Core2 Duo machine equipped with 8 GB of memory.
For segmentation we used the dual simplex method in
the solver Clp, for inpainting we used the interior point
method of Gurobi.
6.1 Image Segmentation
For binary image segmentation, we show experiments
for a totally unsupervised problem and an interactive
one where seed nodes are given.
Unsupervised Image Segmentation For unsupervised
image segmentation we use data functions g0, g1 as in
the piecewise constant functional of Mumford and Shah
[19], i.e. where the intensity of an image point is com-
pared to the mean value of a region. This results in the
model:
Z
Ω

I(x) −µ0
2
[1 −u(x)] dx +
Z
Ω

I(x) −µ1
2
u(x) dx
+ ν |C| + λ
Z
C
|κC(x)|2 dH1(x)
.
(14)
We set the mean values µ0, µ1 to the minimal and max-
imal intensity in the given image, respectively.
Figure 11 shows results of our method on images
of size 128 × 128 and 160 × 107, respectively, using an
8-connectivity. Here we provide results for diﬀerent cur-
vature weights and it can be seen that even for very high
weights long and thin structures are preserved. At the
same time, the relative gap increases with the curvature
weight.
These results took roughly 4 hours computing time,
where up to 9 passes were needed. Though we re-used
the existing solution, the ﬁrst passes often took as long
as solving the initial program.
Interactive Image Segmentation Next we turn to the
problem of interactive image segmentation for color im-
ages, where in addition to an image I : Ω→IR3 we are
given a set of foreground and background seed nodes as
speciﬁed by a user. Since our focus is on evaluating the
novel method, we did not reﬁne the seed nodes. Hence,
for each image the seed nodes were speciﬁed only once.
From the given seed nodes, we estimate normalized
histograms of color values, resulting (after smoothing)
in distributions pF (·) and pB(·) that are then used in
the model:
−
Z
Ω
log(pF (I(x)) [1 −u(x)] dx
(15)
−
Z
Ω
log(pB(I(x)) u(x) dx
+ ν |C| + λ
Z
C
|κC(x)|2 dH1(x)
.
(16)
This function is minimized over all u : Ω→[0, 1] that
are consistent with the seed nodes.
For the experiments, we use a 16-connectivity and
ﬁx the ratio of the curvature weight λ over the length
weight ν to 20.0. The presented results were then ob-
tained within half a day and using between 6 and 8 GB
of memory.
Figure 12 compares our results with a simple thresh-
olding scheme and the length based method of Sec-
tion 2. These results clearly show the tendency of
length-based methods to suppress long and thin ob-
jects. With curvature regularity this is remedied.
Eﬀects of the Constraint Sets Above we indicated that
it is debatable whether self-intersecting region bound-
aries should be allowed or not. In Figure 13 both pos-
sibilities are explored. For these images there were sig-
niﬁcant diﬀerences, for others, like the giraﬀe image,
none at all. For the boat the results clearly improve
when forbidding self-intersections, for the other image
they grow slightly worse. In future work we hope to get
closer to the respective global optima to ﬁnd out which
model is actually better.
Lastly, in this work we added the boundary consis-
tency constraints to the original formulation in [25].
The latter formulation did in fact not represent the
model correctly. Still, due to the relaxation adding the
new constraints does not entirely solve the problem.
When comparing the thresholded solutions of both ver-
sions we noticed as many changes to the good as to the
bad. In future work we hope to improve on this.

12
input
λ = 1000, ν = 10
λ = 10000, ν = 10
λ = 100000, ν = 10
within 0.75%.
within 3.6%.
within 4.4%.
input
λ = 1000, ν = 10
λ = 10000, ν = 10
λ = 100000, ν = 10
within 0.6%.
within 2.8%.
within 3.6%.
Fig. 11 Evaluation of the proposed method for unsupervised image segmentation and an 8-connectivity. Shown are segmentations
for diﬀerent curvature weights and how close they are to the lower bound (and hence the global optimum).
with crossing prevention
without crossing prevention
with crossing prevention
without crossing prevention
Fig. 13 Without crossing prevention there is a bias towards
triple points. For the top row signiﬁcantly diﬀerent segmentations
are obtained with and without the constraints. For the bottom
row there are only minor changes.
6.2 Inpainting
We now turn to the problem of inpainting, where we
use interior point solvers. Figures 14 and 15 show that
our method is well-suited for structured inpainting, and
that length regularity generally does not work well.
In this work we have improved upon our work [25]
by previously estimating the direction of incoming level
lines and giving a tighter constraint system. Figure 16
shows that these changes really improve the results.
7 Conclusion
We have presented new theory and methods for length-
and curvature-based regularization, both for image seg-
mentation and inpainting. For curvature (in a region-
based context) we are the ﬁrst to propose a global ap-
proach in the sense that it is independent of initializa-
tion.
The results clearly demonstrate that curvature reg-
ularity outperforms length-regularity in the presence of
long and thin objects. Experimentally we showed that
for segmentation our strategy of solving a linear pro-
gramming relaxation is usually within 5% of the global
optimum. In some cases it even ﬁnds the global opti-
mum.
