Tuning Path Tracking Controllers for
Autonomous Cars Using Reinforcement Learning
Ana Vila¸ca Carrasco1 and Jo˜ao Silva Sequeira1,2
1 Instituto Superior Tecnico, University of Lisbon, Portugal
2 Institute for Systems and Robotics, Portugal

Abstract. This paper proposes an adaptable path tracking control sys-
tem based on Reinforcement Learning (RL) for autonomous cars. A four-
parameter controller shapes the behavior of the vehicle to navigate on
lane changes and roundabouts. The tuning of the tracker uses an educated
Q-Learning algorithm to minimize the lateral and steering trajectory er-
rors.
The CARLA simulation environment was used both for training and
testing. The results show the vehicle is able to adapt its behavior to
the diﬀerent types of reference trajectories, navigating safely with low
tracking errors. The use of a ROS bridge between the CARLA and the
tracker results (i) in a realistic system, and (ii) simpliﬁes the replacement
of the CARLA by a real vehicle.
An argument on the dependability of the overall architecture based on
stability results of non-smooth systems is presented at the end of the
paper.
Keywords: Reinforcement Learning, Autonomous Driving Systems, Q-
Learning, Path Tracking, Non-smooth systems
1
Introduction
Over the last decades, autonomous vehicles have quickly become a popular re-
search subject, and are likely to have a signiﬁcant societal impact, e.g., reducing
accidents and traﬃc congestion, optimizing energy use, and have a more Eco-
friendly impact in the world.
The architecture of an autonomous vehicle is built around the standard
Guidance-Navigation and Control (GNC) structure. The control of the vehi-
cle (sometimes named path tracking) is responsible to follow a reference path
accurately, ensuring the system has a stable and safe behavior, is robust to dis-
turbances and can adapt to diﬀerent environments.
The literature describes multiple path tracking control methods [21,13,18]:
Pure Pursuit and Stanley methods, conventional feedback controllers (ex. Lin-
ear Quadratic Regulators (LQR), Proportional Integral Derivative (PID) con-
trollers), Iterative Learning Control (ILC), and Model Predictive Control (MPC),
arXiv:2301.03363v1  [eess.SY]  9 Jan 2023

2
Ana Carrasco et al.
the most popular being PID controllers and MPC based controllers. Less con-
ventional control structures are also proposed to tackle problems such as non-
linearity, parameter uncertainties and external disturbances, like H∞controllers
and Sliding Mode Controllers (SMC).
Machine Learning (ML) oﬀers many beneﬁts to the ﬁeld of Autonomous
Driving Systems (ADS): self-optimization based on collected data and new envi-
ronments, the ability to specify the desired behavior of the system, and increased
generalization capacity. When designing an intelligent autonomous vehicle, a
popular approach is a Supervised Learning (SL) based end-to-end architecture
with a complex Neural Network (NN) [2]. However, these solutions generally
have great computational complexity during training and end-to-end architec-
tures are associated with the “black-box” problem [10]. Alternatively, combining
model-based controllers with learning algorithms can preserve the properties and
methodologies from traditional controller design and analysis but also provides
robustness and adaptability from the learning component. Moreover, by care-
fully constraining the parameter space explored during the learning phase(s),
one obtains dependable by construction architectures.
Learning techniques have been used in conjunction with MPC to improve
path tracking [3,12]. However, Deep Learning (DL) based control models have
been shown to outperform these more popular methods [11,16]. Despite the
popularity of advanced control techniques, simple and ﬁne-tuned feedback path
tracking controllers can provide good performance for a variety of conditions [18].
A control architecture combining traditional path tracking controllers (pure
pursuit and PID) with Reinforcement Learning modules, was proposed in [4,16,5],
and reported to eﬀectively improve the performance of the traditional controllers.
Using RL algorithms to optimize the parameters of PID controllers has also been
proposed [1,8,17].
The control modules of autonomous vehicles in the literature have been val-
idated in a variety of maneuvers, including lane keeping, lane change, ramp
merging and intersection navigation [7].
The present work describes a path tracking controller using a Reinforcement
Learning (RL) agent to perform oﬄine parameter tuning. The RL agent, using a
discretized tabular variation of the Q-Learning algorithm [19], is trained to ﬁne-
tune the controller’s gains while performing the lane change and roundabout
maneuvers.
Similar maneuvers (or path types) are used in [9] to validate their path track-
ing method. Their work also compares its proposed method to a “conventional”
tracking method that is very similar to the four-parameter controller used in
this work (yet missing the learning component).
A Q-Learning based framework for longitudinal and lateral control was pro-
posed in [20] and experiments showing the system while performing a lane change
maneuver are presented.
The proposed architecture also includes a module that identiﬁes when to per-
form each maneuver and changes the gains appropriately, and a safety watchdog
module that controls the vehicle’s velocity.

Path Tracking Controller Tuning Using Reinforcement Learning
3
2
Implementation
The proposed architecture is presented in Figure 1. The simulator implements a
regular vehicle with multiple sensors attached. The use of the ROS framework to
bridge vehicle and the overall control architecture allows a quick replacement of
the simulator by a real vehicle. The low-level controller drives the vehicle through
a predeﬁned reference path by calculating and imposing values for velocities and
steering angle. The RL agent is trained to ﬁnd the best set of gains for each
maneuver. The maneuvers tested were lane changing (to the right) in a straight
road and circulating in a roundabout.
Low-level 
control action
Low-Level
Controller
RL Agent
Maneuver
information
Sensor
information
Velocity control
High-Level
Supervisor
Simulator
Pose 
estimation
Fig. 1. Full system architecture
The high-level supervisor monitors if the linear velocity is within the imposed
limits and if the vehicle is required to perform one of the maneuvers. If so, it
sends that information to the RL agent, which will then set the gains to the
appropriate ﬁne-tuned values for that maneuver. Those ﬁne-tuned gains, denoted
(Kv, Kl, Ks, Ki), are then sent to the low-level controller to calculate the steering
angle, φ, the linear and angular velocities, v and ws – these three values deﬁne
a low-level control action. If necessary, the value for v is overridden by the high-
level supervisor, to stay within limits. The simulator also communicates directly
with the low-level controller, sending an estimation of the vehicle’s current pose,
based solely on the vehicle’s odometry.
2.1
Low-level Controller
The low-level control module controls the trajectory of the vehicle by adjusting
the values of the steering angle φ, linear velocity, v, and angular velocity, ωs, in
real-time, with the goal of minimizing the error between the reference and the
actual pose of the vehicle. The control laws, which are based in a nonholonomic
vehicle model, are a function of the error between the reference and the actual
pose, in the vehicle frame,be. The error in the world frame, we, is
we = [xref −x, yref −y, θref −θ] ,
(1)

4
Ana Carrasco et al.
where (xref, yref, θref) is the reference pose and (x, y, θ) is the vehicle’s current
pose. The control laws to yield v, ωs and φ, written at discrete time k, are given
by,
vk = Kv
Kv
Kv
bexk,
ωsk = Ks
Ks
Ks
beθk + Kl
Kl
Kl
beyk,
φk = Ki
Ki
Ki φk−1 + Ki
Ki
Ki h ωsk,
(2)
where h is a time step and the be is obtained from we by means of a rotation
matrix of a θ◦rotation around the Z axis. The last equation from (2) is a low-pass
ﬁlter that removes unwanted fast changes in ωs.
The v, ωs and φ are then converted into control actions and sent to the
vehicle. The trajectory controller gains are the linear velocity gain, Kv, the
steering gain, Ks, the linear gain, Kl, and the lowpass ﬁlter gain, Ki (see Figure
2).

-
+
High-Level
Supervisor
check 
RL Agent
Low-Level Controller
Simulator
Fig. 2. Diagram of the low-level controller.
The loop iterates until the destination is reached (i.e., if the current position
is close enough to the last position in the path), a collision is registered or the
simulation time ends.
2.2
Simulator
CARLA [6] is an open-source simulator designed for research on autonomous
driving [5,15,16]. It simulates urban realistic environments (in terms of rendering
and physics). A ROS bridge allows direct communication with the simulated
vehicle, through publishers and subscribers, and also provides a way to customize
the vehicle setup. A “Tesla Model 3” vehicle was chosen, including speedometer,
collision detector, and odometry sensors.
In this project, the simulator runs with a ﬁxed time-step (the time span
between two simulation frames) of 0.01 (simulation) seconds. Figure 3 illustrates,
in a simple way, how the vehicle simulator transforms the linear velocity (v) and

Path Tracking Controller Tuning Using Reinforcement Learning
5
Throttle
Steer
Brake
PID Speed
Controller
Vehicle
PID Acceleration
Controller
Simulator
Fig. 3. Diagram of the vehicle simulator.
steering angle (φ) provided by the low-level controller into messages that control
the throttle, steer and brake values of the vehicle. The current pose of the vehicle
is updated by subscribing to an odometry publisher provided by the simulator.
2.3
High-level Supervisor
The high-level Supervisor works as both an event manager and a safety module
(see Figure 4). It determines if the vehicle needs to perform one of the two
maneuvers based on which zone of the map the vehicle is currently in. It also
enforces a speed limit, overriding, if necessary, the linear velocity value calculated
by the low-level controller.
In the experiments performed, the map was divided into zones, each of which
associated with an event (Figure 11). In the blue zone the vehicle performs a
lane change and in the red zone, it navigates a roundabout. The reference path
is shown as the black line.
Speedometer Data
Odometry data
No
Yes
Map Zone
Locator
High-Level Supervisor 
Simulator
Low-Level
Controller
RL Agent
Fig. 4. Diagram of the high-level supervisor’s internal operations.
2.4
Reinforcement Learning Agent
The RL agent is responsible for tuning the trajectory controller gains using a
variation of the Q-Learning algorithm. In the original Q-Learning, a discretized
Q-Table takes an interval of gains and ﬁnds the values with which the vehicle
presents the best performance. In the variation used in the paper, referred as
educated Q-Learning, this interval of gains is narrowed down to the most chosen

6
Ana Carrasco et al.
values throughout the training. This facilitates the selection of the best gains
by deliberately reducing the action space the algorithm has to explore. Perfor-
mance evaluation is translated in the reward function of the algorithm. The RL
environment is deﬁned as follows:
States: An array with the average of the absolute value of the lateral and
orientation errors, S = [Ey, Eθ]. Each of the error values have low and high
limits, ELOW and EHIGH, and are discretized into 40 units;
Actions: Each action, A = [a0, a1, a2, a3], is represented by an array. There
are 81 diﬀerent actions. The gains are adjusted by the action array through the
following expressions,
Kv = Kv + h0a0,
Kl = Kl + h1a1,
Ks = Ks + h2a2,
Ki = Ki + h3a3.
(3)
The a0, a1, a2 and a3 can take the values 1, 0 or -1. The values h0, h1, h2
and h3 are positive constants that will either be ignored, subtracted or added to
the previous value of the gain.
Terminal condition: Given the diﬃculty reaching state S0 = [0, 0], the
adopted approach was to consider any state that would come closer to S0 to
be the terminal state. As a result, if the current state is closer to S0 than the
closest state recorded so far, then a terminal state was reached. To determine
the distance of a state to the state S0, d(S, S0), the algorithm uses a weighted
euclidean distance. Since the lateral error values, Ey, are generally 10 times
greater than the orientation error values, Eθ, the weight array used was [1, 10]:
d(S, S0) =
q
|Ey|2 + 10 × |Eθ|2
(4)
The sets of gains that produce the terminal states are referred to as the
terminal gains. If, for the last 5 terminal sets of gains, a gain has a constant
value, then that gain’s range is locked into that value for the rest of the training
– this deﬁnes the educated Q-Learning variation presented in this paper.
Reward function: The reward function chosen for this work is deﬁned by
the equation,
R =
1
1 + d(S′, S0) −
1
1 + d(S, S0) ,
(5)
where d(S′, S0) is the distance between the new state S′ and S0 and d(S, S0) is
the distance between the current state S and S0.
This function is based on the one used in [8]. Also, if a collision is registered the
reward is decreased by a deﬁned value.
Training Algorithm: The RL agent was trained to perform two diﬀerent
maneuvers: a lane changing maneuver in a straight road and driving in a round-
about. The algorithm used to train the RL agent is shown by the diagram in
Figure 5. The agent was trained over a certain number of episodes, each of which
is divided by steps. Each step, a current state, Si, is deﬁned based on the last
error average registered. Then, an action is taken and the new gains are deﬁned,
after which a new simulation starts, with the system’s controller guiding the

Path Tracking Controller Tuning Using Reinforcement Learning
7
Reset
environment
New episode
Start
Initialization of
variables
Max number
of episodes
reached?
End training
No
Yes
Define new gain
values (choose 
)
Define state 
 
Update state: 
and reward 
 
Update q-values
Update vehicle pose
and velocity arrays 
New step
Start
 is 
terminal state?
Update 

No
Yes
Start new
simulation
Simulation
time over?
No
Yes
Step Loop
Episode Loop
Fig. 5. Diagram of the training algorithm.
vehicle through the reference path. After the simulation stops, the new state,
Si+1, and the reward, Ri, are updated. With these values, the Q-Table is updated
based on equation (6.8) in [19](p.131). If the new state, Si+1 does not satisfy
the terminal condition, this cycle repeats in a new step. Otherwise, the episode
ends, ε and the new gain range is updated (based on the educated Q-Learning
variation) and a new episode starts.
3
Simulation Results
The values chosen for the parameters, for each of the maneuvers, are shown in
the table below.
The Loop time represents the time of each training step, in simulated sec-
onds. γ is the discount factor used for the Q-Learning equation used. EHIGH/LOW
EHIGH/LOW
EHIGH/LOW
are the state limits (see Section 2.4). Kmax/min
Kmax/min
Kmax/min deﬁne the range of gains explored.
The values [h0, h1, h2, h3]
[h0, h1, h2, h3]
[h0, h1, h2, h3] are the positive constants that deﬁne the action values
(eq. (3)). ε decay and start value refer to the ε-greedy policy [19] used in the
Q-Learning algorithm. φ range is the default steering angle range used during
training. Step limit refers to the maximum number of steps an episode can
have, a condition that prevents unfeasible training times.
Using the algorithm in Figure 5, the agent is trained to ﬁnd the set of gains
that minimize the error while the vehicle performs the two maneuvers. To choose
the best set of gains, multiple training sessions were made, for each of the ma-
neuvers, with diﬀerent α (learning rate) values. Figures 6 and 7 show the sum
of rewards of each episode (learning curve) of these trainings.

8
Ana Carrasco et al.
Table 1. Parameter values for each of the training environments,where n is the number
of episodes.
Variable
Lane Change
Roundabout
Loop time
5
30
γ
0.9
0.9
EHIGH
EHIGH
EHIGH (m)
[3 , 0.4]
[1 , 0.1]
ELOW
ELOW
ELOW (m)
[0 , 0]
[0 , 0]
Kmin(Kv, Kl, Ks, Ki)
Kmin(Kv, Kl, Ks, Ki)
Kmin(Kv, Kl, Ks, Ki)
[0.1, 1, 1, 0.7]
[1, 1, 1, 0.7]
Kmax(Kv, Kl, Ks, Ki)
Kmax(Kv, Kl, Ks, Ki)
Kmax(Kv, Kl, Ks, Ki)
[3, 21, 21, 0.98] [5.8, 21, 21, 0.98]
[h0, h1, h2, h3]
[h0, h1, h2, h3]
[h0, h1, h2, h3]
[0.58, 5, 5, 0.07]
[1.2, 5, 5, 0.07]
φ range (◦)
±30
±30
ε (start)
1
1
ε decay
1/(n/2)
1/(n/2)
Step Limit
130
100
Each training session had 30 episodes for the lane changing maneuver and 20
episodes for the roundabout navigation. The training times of these tests were,
on average, 24 hours and 33 hours, respectively. Both ﬁgures show a convergence
of the learning curves, which implies the success of the algorithm.
To deﬁne the set of gains for each maneuver, we used the set of gains that
was picked more times throughout all the diﬀerent α values: (3, 21, 21, 0.7)
(3, 21, 21, 0.7)
(3, 21, 21, 0.7) for
the lane changing maneuver and (3.4, 21, 1, 0.84)
(3.4, 21, 1, 0.84)
(3.4, 21, 1, 0.84), for the roundabout maneuver.
These are the sets of gains used in the validation tests.
For the validation process, the system performs each of the maneuvers with
the corresponding chosen sets of gains. Then, the average Mean Square Error,
mse, of the trajectory position is calculated as
mse = 1
N
N
X
i=1
be2
xi +b e2
yi
2
,
(6)
where N represents the number of data points registered. This process is repeated
for diﬀerent sets of gains spread through the range of gain values. The goal is
to compare the performance of the chosen sets of gains with the performance of
other sets of gains, while the system performs the maneuvers. Table 2 presents
the average mse for the lane changing and the roundabout maneuver. For each
set of gains, the system performs the maneuver 10 times, and then the highest
average MSE registered is selected.
By default, CARLA does not consider any noise in the odometry sensor.
To analyse the robustness of the system, noisy odometry measurements were
simulated. Position noise is obtained by drawing random samples from a normal
(Gaussian) distribution with a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 0.1 meters.
Orientation noise is obtained by drawing samples from the triangular distribution
over the interval [-0.088, 0.088] rad and centered in 0. The third column in Table
2 shows mse and mseξ, obtained under noisy conditions.

Path Tracking Controller Tuning Using Reinforcement Learning
9
Fig. 6. Lane changing training: Sum of rewards per episode.
Fig. 7. Roundabout training: Sum of rewards per episode.
Figures 8 and 9 show the trajectory, linear and angular velocity of the vehicle,
without noise (blue) and with noise (red), and the reference path in orange, for
the chosen gains. In the trajectory graph, the lengths of the trajectories with and
without noise diﬀer. This is because the duration of each validation test is ﬁxed,
and it takes longer for the system, with noisy odometry measurements, to take
oﬀ. The delay in velocities, shown in the graphs below, corroborate this. For both
maneuvers,these ﬁgures and Table 2 show small lateral errors and mse values.
A qualitative analysis of the values from Table 2 reveal that the gains chosen by
the RL agent present the lowest mse, implying that the chosen gains are in the
neighbourhood of the values that minimize the trajectory error. Furthermore,
comparing mse to mseξ, it is possible to verify the system’s robustness to some
noise in the odometry sensor measurements, in the sense that the chosen gains
continue to produce the lowest mse values.
The system was also tested while navigating in the environment illustrated
in Figure 11, following the reference path deﬁned in red, which included both
maneuvers and a sharp left turn. The chosen gains for the blue and red zones

10
Ana Carrasco et al.
Fig. 8. Lane changing Validation Test: tra-
jectory, linear velocity, v and angular veloc-
ity, ωs.
Fig. 9. Roundabout Validation Test: tra-
jectory - the reference and the trajectory
are superimposed - linear velocity, v and
angular velocity, ωs

Path Tracking Controller Tuning Using Reinforcement Learning
11
Table 2. mse (without noise) and mseξ (with noise) for odometry measurements with
diﬀerent sets of gains, for the lane change and roundabout maneuvers.
Lane Change
Gains
mse
mse
mse mseξ
mseξ
mseξ
(0.1, 1, 6, 0.7)
6.94 8.018
(0.68, 21, 21, 0.77) 2.01
6.02
(1.26, 6, 11, 0.84) 1.628 5.882
(3, 21, 16, 0.7)
1.428 5.591
(3, 21, 21, 0.7)
(3, 21, 21, 0.7)
(3, 21, 21, 0.7)
1.359
1.359
1.359 5.589
5.589
5.589
(3, 21, 21, 0.98)
1.399 5.637
Roundabout Navigation
Gains
mse
mse
mse mseξ
mseξ
mseξ
(2.2, 21, 1, 0.98) 0.245 1.374
(2.2, 16, 21, 0.77) 0.230 1.363
(3.4, 11, 21, 0.84) 0.214 1.388
(3.4, 21, 1, 0.84)
(3.4, 21, 1, 0.84)
(3.4, 21, 1, 0.84) 0.208
0.208
0.208 1.347
1.347
1.347
(3.4, 21, 11, 0.77) 0.216 1.385
(4.6, 6, 1, 0.84)
0.265 1.429
were, respectively, (3, 21, 21, 0.7)
(3, 21, 21, 0.7)
(3, 21, 21, 0.7) and (3.4, 21, 1, 0.84)
(3.4, 21, 1, 0.84)
(3.4, 21, 1, 0.84). For testing purposes, the
speed limit imposed is 4 m/s. The results are presented in Figure 10. It shows
the trajectory performed by the system, without noise (blue) and with noise
(red), and the reference path, in orange, which are, on average, superimposed:
the system successfully follows the reference path, without any major errors or
collisions. Table 3 presents mse and mseξ values for diﬀerent sets of gains, with
Table 3. mse and mseξ for diﬀerent sets of gains, for the full circuit.
Gains
mse
mse
mse mseξ
mseξ
mseξ
(1.84, 1, 1, 0.91), (2.2, 6, 11, 0.7) 1.213 1.32
(3, 21, 21, 0.7)
(3, 21, 21, 0.7)
(3, 21, 21, 0.7),(3.4, 21, 1, 0.84)
(3.4, 21, 1, 0.84)
(3.4, 21, 1, 0.84) 0.181
0.181
0.181 0.363
0.363
0.363
(3, 21, 21, 0.98), (5.8, 16, 11, 0.84) 0.185 0.673
the reference path deﬁned in Figure 11. As with the maneuvers, the results show
that the chosen sets of gains produce the lowest mse out of a wide range of gains,
which suggests the proximity of the chosen gains to the optimal gain values.
4
An argument on dependability
This section aims at sketching a framework to research dependability properties
in the RL enabled autonomous car setting.
The GNC architecture, typical of a wide class of robotics systems, fully ap-
plies to the context of autonomous cars. The Control block accommodates multi-
ple controllers tuned to speciﬁc driving conditions and the Guidance block selects
which of the controllers is used at every instant. Switching between controllers
may be required in several situations, e.g., overtaking maneuvers, or changing
between straight and twisty roads or even changing between smooth and aggres-
sive driving styles, and hence the overall system is of hybrid nature. Often, the
switching mechanism will have the form of a ﬁnite state machine and the overall
Control block can be described as an aﬃne model,
C = D + C1u1 + C2u2 + . . . + Cnun
(7)

12
Ana Carrasco et al.
Fig. 10. Full Circuit test: Trajectory – the ref-
erence and the trajectories are superimposed.
Fig. 11. Organization of the simulation
map in diﬀerent zones.
where D, C1, C2, . . . , Cn can be assumed smooth vector ﬁelds representing each
a controller, and u1, u2, . . . , un stand for the switching control variables which
are 0 whenever their respective controller is not active and D is an aﬃne term
which may represent a controller terms that must be always present (and hence
not subject to any sudden change of structure).
In general, a regular mission, i.e., driving between any two locations, in-
cludes moving along the same lane, changing lanes, moving through crossings
and roundabouts, among other more speciﬁc maneuvers such as parking. As it
is well known from Control theory, switching among stable systems may lead to
instability (see for instance [25] in the framework of switched linear systems).
Let Q1, Q2, . . . , Qn be the accumulated reward trajectories for a set of n con-
trollers trained using RL. For each individual maneuver, the complete trajectory
of the reward obtained can be assumed known from the training process. The
value of an accumulated reward at the ﬁnal of the training is an indicator of the
quality of the policies found ([19], pp 54-55), if the policies are allowed to run
for a time long enough (so that they can reach their goals) and one can assume
them globally exponentially stable.
Using the converse Lyapunov theorem, this also means that there are Lya-
punov functions V1, V2, . . . , Vn, associated with each of the individual sets of con-
troller parameters, which, surely, have derivatives DV1 < 0, DV2 < 0, . . . , DVn <
0. Therefore, one can compose a candidate to Lyapunov function as
V = V1u1 + V2u2 + . . . + Vnun
(8)
where u1, u2, . . . , un as deﬁned above.
This technique has been reported in the literature when the Vi are quadratic
functions and the Ci are polynomial vector ﬁelds (see for instance [24], [23]).
In this paper we aim at a more general approach. The system formed by the
ﬁnite state machine structure used to switch among controllers, composed with
the controllers and the car (assumed to be a regular kinematic structure such as

Path Tracking Controller Tuning Using Reinforcement Learning
13
the well known car-like robot) can be shown to be upper semicontinuous (USC).
Writing (7) in the alternative set-valued map form as, C = ∪n
i=1Ciun, following
the deﬁnition of USC set-valued map (see for instance, Deﬁnition 1 in [22], p. 41,
or [26], pp. 32-33), the overall system is USC as they have closed values and, by
Proposition 2 in [22] this means that the corresponding graphs are closed. and
hence one is in the conditions required by the generalized Lyapunov theorem in
[22], for asymptotic stability,
D+V (x) < −W(x)
(9)
with W a strictly positive monotonic decreasing function and D+V (x) repre-
senting the contingent derivative of V at x, and V lower semi-continuous, and
an equilibrium can be reached.
In general, in the car control context, the switching will occur at arbitrary
instants, though a minimal separation between switching instants can safely be
assumed (as in a realistic situation a car will not switch arbitrarily fast between
behaviours in a repetitive way). Also, the switching will make V to have bounded
discontinuities (at switching instants) and before each discontinuity will have a
monotonic decreasing trend (as each behavior is assumed asymptotically stable)
and hence (8) can be safely assumed to be lower semi-continuous.
The Qi values are known a priori from the training phase and can be mon-
itored while in real conditions and be constantly compared with the training,
this yielding a performance metric that can be used for control purposes, namely
deﬁning thresholds to control the switching (switch only if currently observed Qi
is close enough to the value recorded during training). This ensures that there
exists an envelop function W such that (9) holds.
5
Conclusions
This paper proposes a RL-based path tracking control system for a four-parameter
architecture. The tuning is done by an educated Q-Learning algorithm, that min-
imizes the lateral and steering trajectory errors of the vehicle while performing
lane change and roundabout maneuvering.
The educated Q-Learning variant introduced in the paper uses a reduced
action space during training, allowing for a faster convergence to the ﬁnal set of
gains (though it can lead to sub-optimal solutions).
The trajectories in Figures 8, 9, and 10, as well as the velocity values regis-
tered during these experiments demonstrate that the system does not engage in
unsafe behaviour, like collisions or excessive velocity. It also consistently follows
the reference with small error. The MSE values in Table 2 suggest that the al-
gorithm can eﬃciently tune the gains to values that are in the neighbourhood
of the gain values that minimize the trajectory errors.
Literature on the subject of autonomous driving control is populated with
Neural Network (NN) based controllers in the role of supervisors of the tracking
function (see for instance [27] on NNs to match the car model and subsequent

14
Ana Carrasco et al.
robust control design). For the proposed architecture, the argument on depend-
ability developed in the previous section shows that the overall system has a
stability property (which amounts to safe driving).
Future work includes the (i) reﬁnement of the dependability argument to
account for the stochastic nature of the Qi values, (ii) tests under noisy/uncertain
conditions, and (iii) trials in a real vehicle.
