Butterﬂy detection and classiﬁcation based on
integrated YOLO algorithm
Bohan Liang, Shangxi Wu, Kaiyuan Xu, and Jingyu Hao
Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
Abstract. Insects are abundant species on the earth, and the task of
identiﬁcation and identiﬁcation of insects is complex and arduous. How to
apply artiﬁcial intelligence technology and digital image processing meth-
ods to automatic identiﬁcation of insect species is a hot issue in current
research. In this paper, the problem of automatic detection and classiﬁ-
cation recognition of butterﬂy photographs is studied, and a method of
bio-labeling suitable for butterﬂy classiﬁcation is proposed. On the ba-
sis of YOLO algorithm[1], by synthesizing the results of YOLO models
with diﬀerent training mechanisms, a butterﬂy automatic detection and
classiﬁcation recognition algorithm based on YOLO algorithm is pro-
posed. It greatly improves the generalization ability of Yolo algorithm
and makes it have better ability to solve small sample problems. The
experimental results show that the proposed annotation method and in-
tegrated YOLO algorithm have high accuracy and recognition rate in
butterﬂy automatic detection and recognition.
Keywords: YOLO, butterﬂy detection, butterﬂy classiﬁcation, ensem-
ble learning, target detection
1
Introduction
As one of the important environmental indicators insects, butterﬂy species are
complex and diverse. The identiﬁcation of butterﬂy species is directly related to
the crops eaten by humans and animals. At present, reliable butterﬂy identiﬁca-
tion methods widely used are not eﬀective. Artiﬁcial identiﬁcation of butterﬂy
species is not only a huge workload, but also requires Long-term Experience and
Knowledge Accumulation. How to recognize insect species automatically is one
of the hot topics in the ﬁeld of computer vision.
Automatic recognition of insect species requires recognition and classiﬁcation
of digital images, and the eﬀect of image classiﬁcation is closely related to the
quality of texture feature extraction. In 2004, Gaston et al.[2] introduced the ap-
plication of artiﬁcial intelligence technology and digital image processing method
in digital image recognition. Since then, many experts and scholars have done a
lot of work in this area[3,4]. In recent years, with the development of machine
learning, researchers have proposed many related application algorithms in but-
terﬂy detection and detection. In 2012, Wang et al.[5] used content-based image
retrieval (CBIR) to extract image features of butterﬂies, such as color, shape and
arXiv:2001.00361v2  [cs.CV]  26 Apr 2020

2
Bohan Liang et al.
texture, compared diﬀerent features, feature weights and similarity matching al-
gorithms, and proposed corresponding classiﬁcation methods. In 2014, Kaya Y
et al.[6] applied Local Binary Patterns (LBP)[7] and Grey-Level Co-occurrence
Matrix (GLCM)[8] to extract the texture features of butterﬂy images, then used
single hidden layer neural network to classify, and proposed an automatic but-
terﬂy species recognition method based on extreme learning machine law. In the
same year, Kang S H et al.[9] proposed an eﬀective recognition scheme based on
branch length similarity (BLS) entropy proﬁle using butterﬂy images observed
from diﬀerent angles as training data of neural network. In 2015, based on the
morphological characteristics and texture distribution of butterﬂies, Li Fan[10]
proposed the corresponding feature extraction and classiﬁcation decision-making
methods by using the gray level co-occurrence matrix (GLCM) features of image
blocks and K-Nearest Neighbor classiﬁcation algorithm. In 2016, Zhou A M et
al.[11] proved that the deep learning model is feasible and has strong general-
ization ability in automatic recognition of butterﬂy specimens.
In 2018, Xie Juanying et al.[12] used the method of butterﬂy detection and
species recognition based on Faster-RCNN[13], and expanded the data set by
using butterﬂy photos in natural ecological environment. The algorithm has high
positioning accuracy and recognition accuracy for butterﬂy photos in natural
ecological environment. Traditional butterﬂy recognition algorithms have the
following problems:
1. In natural ecological photos, butterﬂies often appear in the form of small
targets (the area of butterﬂy image is too small), traditional butterﬂy recog-
nition algorithms are often powerless.
2. The amount of data needed for training is huge, but it can not ﬁnd high-
quality annotated public data sets.
3. There are too few pictures of some rare butterﬂies in the natural state to be
used directly as training sets.
YOLO model , proposed by Joe Redmon[1], is a well-known end-to-end learn-
ing model in the ﬁeld of target detection. Compared with the two-step model of
RCNN[13] series, YOLO model can execute much faster and avoid background
errors, but it has poor positioning accuracy and false positive rate (FPR) of
some classiﬁcations of single model is high.
In order to improve the eﬃciency of butterﬂy recognition, this paper will
make full use of the data provided by China Data Mining Competition and
Baidu Encyclopedia, establish a butterﬂy data set containing a large number of
butterﬂy ecological photos, train the model using ecological photos in natural
environment, and based on YOLO V3 algorithm, propose an integration algo-
rithm which can be used to locate and identify butterﬂy ecological photos. The
main structure of the paper is as follows:
1. Data Set, Data Annotation and Data Preprocessing. A butterﬂy dataset with
2342 precisely labeled natural environments is established by self-labeling
with the butterﬂy ecological photos provided in document[14] and the pic-
tures in Baidu and other Internet photo databases. A set of image labeling

Butterﬂy Detection and Classiﬁcation Based on Integrated YOLO Algorithm
3
methods suitable for labeling butterﬂies is sorted out through experiments,
and the labeling methods are generalized.
2. Integrated YOLO algorithm. This algorithm inherits the recognition speed
of YOLO algorithm, optimizes YOLO algorithm, improves the recognition
ability of YOLO algorithm in ﬁne target, and the learning ability and gen-
eralization ability of YOLO algorithm for small sample. It provides a good
idea for subsequent target detection based on atlas.
3. Experiments and analysis. The performance of YOLO algorithm in diﬀer-
ent annotation and processing modes and integrated YOLO algorithm on
butterﬂy test set are presented and analyzed.
4. Summary and Prospect.
2
Data Set, Data Annotation and Data Preprocessing
2.1
Data Set
The butterﬂy data sets used in this paper are all photos of butterﬂies in the
natural ecological environment, hereinafter referred to as ecological photos. One
part is from the data set provided in document[14], the other part is from the
images in search engines such as Baidu and image libraries, including 94 species
and 11 genera of butterﬂies. Fig.1 shows some samples of butterﬂy ecology.
Fig. 1. Butterﬂy Eco-photograph
A total of 5695 pictures were taken from document[14], including two kinds
of photographs of butterﬂies: specimen photograph and ecological photograph.
According to document[12], because the shooting angle and background environ-
ment of specimens diﬀer greatly from the ecological photographs, the training
eﬀect of using only ecological photographs in the training set is obviously bet-
ter than that of using both specimens and ecological photographs together in
butterﬂy detection and classiﬁcation tasks, and the purpose of this study is to

4
Bohan Liang et al.
locate butterﬂies in natural environment and determine the species of butterﬂies,
so only 1048 photos of butterﬂies in natural ecological environment are selected
in this paper.
Most of the butterﬂy samples contained in each photo in the data set are
only one, and the maximum number is not more than 20. Each butterﬂy species
consists of at least four samples with a typical heavy-tailed distribution.
The test set is based on the standard test set provided in document[14], which
contains 678 ecological photos and the rest as training set.
2.2
Data Annotations
Because the posture of butterﬂies in ecological photographs is more complex, and
even there are many butterﬂies overlapping together, and the data sets provided
in document[14] are confused and there is no uniform standard for labeling.
We formulated a set of uniform labeling standards and manually labeled the
positions and species of all butterﬂy samples in all photos according to this
standard.
In the data set provided in document[14], there are two ways to label the area
where butterﬂies are located: one is to use the antennae and legs of butterﬂies
as the border, as shown in Fig.2(a); the other is to use the trunk and wings of
butterﬂies as the border, as shown in Fig.2(b). We use two annotation methods
to unify data sets.
(a) Uses the antennae and legs
of butterﬂies as the border
(b) Uses the antennae and legs
of butterﬂies as the border
Fig. 2. Two diﬀerent methods to annotate a single butterﬂy
Because some butterﬂy species have social attributes, many butterﬂies often
overlap in photos. The data set provided in document[14] uses the method of
labeling multiple butterﬂies in overlapping areas as a single sample, as shown
in Fig.3(a). We have also developed a standard for labeling this situation: each
butterﬂy in the overlapping area is independently labeled and the occluded part
is ignored, as shown in Fig.3(b). By using this method, not only the number
of training samples is increased, but also the recognition eﬀect of the model for
complex scenes is improved.

Butterﬂy Detection and Classiﬁcation Based on Integrated YOLO Algorithm
5
(a) Labels
multiple
butterﬂies
in
overlapping areas as a single sample
(b) Each butterﬂy in the overlapping
area is independently labeled and the
occluded part is ignored
Fig. 3. Two diﬀerent methods to annotate two or more overlapping butterﬂies
2.3
Data Preprocessing
Target detection algorithms based on deep learning often require a large amount
of data as training set. In this paper, we expand the training set by nine transfor-
mation methods, such as rotation, mirror image, blur, contrast rise and fall, and
combine diﬀerent pretreatment methods and their parameters (such as rotation
angle, exposure, etc.) to get the optimal pretreatment method. The results will
be shown in Part 4.
Through the above process, butterﬂy automatic detection and classiﬁcation
in natural ecological environment has been transformed into a multi-objective
detection and classiﬁcation problem. Diﬀerent from common target detection
problems, butterﬂy automatic detection and classiﬁcation problems have three
diﬃculties: 1) There are many classiﬁcations (94 classiﬁcations); 2) The distribu-
tion of samples is not uniform. Some rare species of butterﬂies have signiﬁcantly
fewer samples than other species of butterﬂies; 3) It is necessary to classify dif-
ferent small classes (diﬀerent kinds of butterﬂies) under the same big class (but-
terﬂies), that is, ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation is needed. Therefore, the research of
butterﬂy automatic detection and classiﬁcation in this paper is more diﬃcult.
3
Butterﬂy detection and Recognition Method
3.1
YOLO Model
YOLO model[1] proposed by Joe Redmon is a well-known end-to-end learning
model in the ﬁeld of target detection. Its characteristic is that compared with
the two-step model of RCNN[8] series, the execution speed of YOLO model is
much faster, and it performs well in ﬁne-grained detection. The third generation
model of YOLO, YOLO v3, is chosen in our task.
The structure of the YOLO V3 model is shown in Fig.4. In order to detect
butterﬂies of diﬀerent sizes (diﬀerent proportion of area) in natural photographs,
YOLO V3 uses multi-scale feature maps to detect objects of diﬀerent sizes after
feature extraction network (darknet-53).

6
Bohan Liang et al.
YOLO V3 outputs three feature maps of diﬀerent scales. After 79 layers of
convolution network, the detection results of the ﬁrst scale are obtained through
a three-layer feature extraction network. The feature map used for detection
here is 32 times down-sampling of the input image. Because of the high down-
sampling ratio, the perceptual ﬁeld of the feature map is relatively large, so it is
suitable for detecting objects with large area in the image.
Up-sampling convolution is done from 79 layers back. The eighty-ﬁrst layer
feature map is joined with the sixty-ﬁrst layer feature map. After a three-layer
feature extraction network, a ﬁne-grained feature map of the ninety-ﬁrst layer,
i.e. a 16-fold down-sampling feature map relative to the input image, is obtained.
It has a medium-scale perceptual ﬁeld of view and is suitable for detecting objects
with medium area proportion in image.
Finally, layer 91 feature map is sampled again, and joined with layer 36
feature map. After a three-layer feature extraction network, the feature map
with 8 times lower sampling relative to the input image is obtained. It has the
smallest perception ﬁeld and is suitable for detecting objects with small area
proportion in the image.
Each output contains 3D2 separate 5 + N dimension vectors, where symbol
D represents the edge length of the output feature graph at this scale. Number
3 centers on the number of priori boxes in each grid cell, and symbol N is the
number of classiﬁcations. The ﬁrst four dimensions of each vector represent the
position of the prediction box, the 5th dimension represents the probability of the
target in the candidate box, and the 5 + i dimension represents the probability
that the target in the candidate box belongs to the category i.
YOLO uses mean squares and errors as loss functions. It consists of four
parts: prediction box error (ERRcenter), predicting boundary width and height
Error (ERRwh), classiﬁcation error (ERRclass) and prediction conﬁdence error
(ERRconf) are composed of four parts.
Loss = λcoord(ERRcenter + ERRwh) + ERRclass + ERRconf
(1)
ERRcenter =
D2
X
i=0
n
X
j=0
ιobj
ij [(xi −ˆxi)2 + (yi −ˆyi)2]
(2)
ERRwh =
D2
X
i=0
n
X
j=0
ιobj
ij [(√wi −
p
ˆwi)2 + (
p
hi −
q
ˆhi)2]
(3)
Here, n is the number of prediction frames in a grid cell, (x, y) is the center
coordinate of the prediction frame, and w and h are the width and height of
the prediction frame, respectively. Because the error caused by large prediction
box is obviously larger than that caused by small prediction box, YOLO adopts
the method of predicting square root of width and height instead of directly
predicting width and height. If the jth prediction box in the 1st grid cell is
responsible for the object, then we have ιobj
ij
= 1, conversely, ιobj
ij
= 0.

Butterﬂy Detection and Classiﬁcation Based on Integrated YOLO Algorithm
7
ERRclass =
D2
X
i=0
ιobj
ij
n
X
j=0
[pi(c) −ˆpi(c)]2
(4)
YOLO considers that each grid cell contains only one classiﬁed object. If c
is the correct category, then ˆpi(c) = 1, conversely, ˆpi(c) = 0.
ERRconf =
D2
X
i=0
n
X
j=0
ιobj
ij (ci −ˆci)2 + λnoobj
D2
X
i=0
n
X
j=0
(1 −ιobj
ij )(ci −ˆci)2
(5)
where ci denotes the conﬁdence of objects contained in the prediction box.
If there is an object in the real boundary box, ˆCi is the IoU value of the real
boundary box and the prediction box. Conversely, there are ˆCi = 0.
The parameter λ is used in diﬀerent weighted parts of the loss function
to improve the robustness of the model. In this paper, we have λcoord = 5,
λcoord = 0.5.
Fig. 4. Structure diagram of YOLO V3
3.2
Integrated YOLO algorithm
In order to get more accurate classiﬁcation and detection results and improve the
generalization ability of magic, this paper further processes the results of multiple
YOLO models, and obtains the integrated YOLO algorithm. The pseudo-code
of the algorithm is shown in Algorithm.1.
Its core idea is to use multiple models with better training eﬀect to predict
the pictures separately and cluster the prediction frames. The clustering process
is shown in Fig.5.

8
Bohan Liang et al.
Each positioning box can be described as a four-dimensional vector bi =
(x1i, x2i, y1i, y2i), an integer ci and a real number pi. It represents: in a rectangle
with upper left corner x1i, y1i, lower right corner x2i and y2i, the probability of
having a butterﬂy with the species number ci is pi.
Let each cluster set be S1, S2, ..., Sk. For each Si(i = 1, 2, ..., k), satisfy: for
∀i, j ∈S, ci = cj. Deﬁne the ”summary” of a set as the following:





B(S) =
1
P
i∈S Pi
P
i∈S Pibi
P(S) =
1
|S| maxi∈S Pi
C(S) = ci(i ∈S)
(6)
where, B(S) is the ”aggregate” positioning box of set S, P(S) is the ”ag-
gregate” probability of set S, and C(S) is the ”aggregate” classiﬁcation of set
S. Each time a single predicted bounding box is categorized, the set S with the
highest probability P(S) is selected from all sets with the same classiﬁcation
as the detection box and IoU(B(S), b) ≥0.5. If there is no S that meets the
criteria, place the box in a new set Sk+1
0.971 
0.785 
0.462 
0.971 
YOLO v3 
 
Fig. 5. Structural diagram of integrated YOLO algorithm
4
Experimental results and analysis
4.1
Evaluation Index
In this paper, the intersection over union(IoU) is used as the evaluation index
of butterﬂy positioning task, which is deﬁned as the ratio of the area of two
regions to the area of merging. The optimal ratio is 1, i.e. complete overlap. In
the experiment, IoU = 0.5 is taken as the threshold value, i.e. the prediction

Butterﬂy Detection and Classiﬁcation Based on Integrated YOLO Algorithm
9
Algorithm 1: Merge Boxes
Input: n: number of boxes; b: boxes; c: classes; p: probability;
Output: S: Merged boxes, sorted by P(S);
1: S ←∅
2: k ←0
3: for i = 1, 2, · · · , n do
for j = 1, 2, · · · , k do
if C(Si) = Ci and IoU(bi, b(Sj) > 0.5) then
Insert bi to Sj
if ̸ ∃Sj(j = 0, 1, · · · , k), st.i ∈Sj then
k ←k + 1; Sk ←bi
Sort S by P(Si)
4: return B(Si), P(Si), C(Si)(i = 1, 2, · · · , k);
box and the original tag box are positively positioned with IoU > 0.5, and the
IoU ≤0.5 is positively positioned with error. In this paper, the mean average
precision mean (mAP) is used as the evaluation index of butterﬂy classiﬁcation
task. mAP is derived from precision (pre) and recall (recall). The calculation
formula is as follows.
pre =
TP
TP + FP
(7)
recall =
TP
TP + FN
(8)
where TP(rue-positive number), FP(false-positive number) and FN(false-
negative number) represent the number of positive samples predicted to be pos-
itive, the number of negative samples predicted to be positive and the number
of positive samples predicted to be negative, respectively.
According to diﬀerent conﬁdence levels, we can get several (pre, recall) points,
and draw the pre-recall curve with recall rate as the horizontal coordinate and
precision rate as the longitudinal coordinate. Where, the average precision AP
is the area around the pre-recall curve and the recall axis, which is the integral
of the pre-recall curve, as shown below
AP =
Z 1
0
p(r)dr
(9)
In practical applications, the sum of rectangular areas is generally used to
approximate the integral. In this paper, we use the PASCAL VOC Challenge’s
calculation method after 2010[15], i.e. the recall can be divided into n blocks
[0, 1
n, ..., (n−1)
n
, 1], then the average accuracy (AP) can be expressed as
AP = 1
n
n
X
i=1
maxr∈[ i−1
n , i
n ]p(r)
(10)

10
Bohan Liang et al.
Annotation Method
mAP
the full-scale labeling method
0.734
the non-full-scale labeling method 0.777
Table 1. Under diﬀerent annotations, the best mAP for a single YOLO v3 model on
a butterﬂy test set.
Image Size (px × px) mAP
416 × 416
0.475
608 × 608
0.553
736 × 736
0.447
Table 2. The mAP of the YOLO V3 model in the butterﬂy test set when diﬀerent
sizes of images are used as input.
The mean average precision(mAP) of all classes can be expressed as:
mAP = 1
n
N
X
i=1
AP(n)
(11)
4.2
YOLO V3 model eﬀect experiment
In this paper, two diﬀerent methods of butterﬂy labeling are tested: one is to
use the antennae of butterﬂies as the boundary of the frame, which is called the
full-scale labeling method; the other is to use the trunk and wings of butterﬂies
as the boundary of the frame, which is called the non-full-scale labeling method.
Taking diﬀerent preprocessing methods, the best results of the two annotation
methods are shown in Table 1.
It can be seen that the results obtained by the non-full-scale method are
obviously better than that by the full-scale method. Because the area around
the antennae of butterﬂies is larger in the full-scale method, this can make the
proportion of the area around the antennae of butterﬂies in the labeled area
decrease, thus the inﬂuence of background environment on classiﬁcation can
become larger. The non-full labeling method is more suitable for butterﬂy auto-
matic detection and recognition tasks.
Because the diﬀerent size of the input image in YOLO model will lead to the
diﬀerent number of mesh cells in diﬀerent output scales, we test the performance
of single YOLO V3 model in butterﬂy automatic localization task under diﬀerent
input sizes in this paper.
Using the non-full-scale method, without any other pretreatment, the best
results of the three input sizes are shown in Table 2.
It can be seen that the resolution input using 608px × 608px achieves better
accuracy.

Butterﬂy Detection and Classiﬁcation Based on Integrated YOLO Algorithm
11
Rotations
Saturation
mAP
Null
NULL
0.553
(0◦, 45◦, 90◦, 180◦)
NULL
0.691
(0◦, 45◦, 90◦, 135◦, 180◦, 255◦, 270◦)
NULL
0.681
(0◦, 45◦, 90◦, 180◦)
(1.0,1.5)
0.0691
(0◦, 45◦, 90◦, 180◦)
(1.0,1.2,1.5,1.8)
0.777
(0◦, 45◦, 90◦, 180◦)
(1.0,1.3,1.5,1.7)
0.753
(0◦, 45◦, 90◦, 180◦)
(1.0,1.2,1.3,1.5,1.7,1.8,2.0) 0.723
Table 3. mAP of YOLO v3 model on butterﬂy test set under diﬀerent and processing
modes.
Model
mAP
Faster-RCNN + ZF
0.733
Faster-RCNN + VGG CNN M 1024 0.726
Faster-RCNN + VGG16
0.761
YOLO v3
0.777
Integrated YOLO
0.798
Table 4. mAP results on butterﬂy test sets under diﬀerent models.
we also test the performance of a single YOLO V3 model in butterﬂy auto-
matic positioning and classiﬁcation tasks when diﬀerent pretreatment methods
are used to label 608px × 608px input with the non-full labeling method. Table
3 shows the eﬀects of two parameters that have a greater impact on the results
of classiﬁcation.
It can be seen that the best classiﬁcation results are obtained by rotating the
original images (0◦, 45◦, 90◦, 180◦) and exposing them to 1.0, 1.2, 1.5 and 1.8
times respectively. The value of mAP can be reached to 0.7766. In particular,
the recognition rate of butterﬂies with dark and protective colors is signiﬁcantly
higher than that of the ﬁrst group.
4.3
Integrated Model Eﬀectiveness Experiments
We chose the three best performing models in a single YOLO model (Models 3,
4, 5 in Table 3) for integration. In detection task, 98.35% accuracy is obtained.
In classiﬁcation task, 0.798 mAP is obtained in the classiﬁcation of test sets (94
classes) and 0.850 mAP is obtained in the classiﬁcation of families (11 classes).
Table 4 shows the performance of the integrated Yolo model and the main-
stream target detection models, such as fast-RCNN, YOLO v3 etc., in butterﬂy
automatic detection and classiﬁcation tasks.
The above results show that the data annotation and preprocessing methods
presented in this paper are suitable for butterﬂy automatic detection and clas-
siﬁcation tasks. It also shows that the integrated YOLO algorithm proposed by

12
Bohan Liang et al.
us is very eﬀective and correct for butterﬂy detection and species identiﬁcation
in natural ecological photos.
5
Summary and Prospect
At present, the ﬁeld of target detection is mainly divided into two schools: end-
to-end detection and distributed detection. End-to-end detection is very fast, but
there is a big gap between the accuracy and the distributed detection scheme.
Taking advantage of the fast speed of the end-to-end model and the high similar-
ity between butterﬂy species, we propose an integrated model based on YOLO
with diﬀerent concentrations, which maintains the detection speed of the end-
to-end model and improves the detection accuracy and positioning accuracy.
The essence of the integrated model is to ﬁnd a better solution based on the
optimal solution of a model under various conditions. By this way, the perfor-
mance of the model on a speciﬁc training set can be improved, and the com-
prehensive generalization ability of the model can be improved. In the test set
provided in reference[14], the model achieves 98.35% accuracy in the task of
locating ecological photos, 0.7978 map in the task of locating and identifying
species, and 0.8501 map in the task of locating and identifying subjects.
The fact that butterﬂies have a high similarity among species indicates that
there is a strong relationship among all kinds of butterﬂies in the knowledge
map. For a wider range of target detection tasks, species can be accurately
classiﬁed and located by means of knowledge maps, and their recognition tasks
can be further optimized by means of diﬀerent model capabilities and diﬀerent
recognition focus.
6
Acknowledgement
Thank you here for the organizers of Baidu Encyclopedia Butterﬂy related pages,
collectors of university open biological data sets and collectors of data provided
by China Data Mining Conference. They have provided valuable data for our
experiments.
