LEARNING OPERATORS WITH COUPLED ATTENTION
A PREPRINT
Georgios Kissas ∗1, Jacob Seidman *2, Leonardo Ferreira Guilhoto2,
Victor M. Preciado3, George J. Pappas3, and Paris Perdikaris1
1Department of Mechanical Engineering and Applied Mechanics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104
2Graduate Group in Applied Mathematics and Computational Science , University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
19104
3 Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering , University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104
January 5, 2022
ABSTRACT
Supervised operator learning is an emerging machine learning paradigm with applications to modeling
the evolution of spatio-temporal dynamical systems and approximating general black-box relation-
ships between functional data. We propose a novel operator learning method, LOCA (Learning
Operators with Coupled Attention), motivated from the recent success of the attention mechanism. In
our architecture, the input functions are mapped to a ﬁnite set of features which are then averaged
with attention weights that depend on the output query locations. By coupling these attention weights
together with an integral transform, LOCA is able to explicitly learn correlations in the target output
functions, enabling us to approximate nonlinear operators even when the number of output function
in the training set measurements is very small. Our formulation is accompanied by rigorous approxi-
mation theoretic guarantees on the universal expressiveness of the proposed model. Empirically, we
evaluate the performance of LOCA on several operator learning scenarios involving systems governed
by ordinary and partial differential equations, as well as a black-box climate prediction problem.
Through these scenarios we demonstrate state of the art accuracy, robustness with respect to noisy
input data, and a consistently small spread of errors over testing data sets, even for out-of-distribution
prediction tasks.
Keywords Deep Learning; Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Spaces; Wavelet Scattering Network; Functional data Analysis;
Universal Approximation.
1
Introduction
The great success of modern deep learning lies in its ability to approximate maps between ﬁnite-dimensional vector
spaces, as in computer vision [1], natural language processing [2], precision medicine [3], bio-engineering [4], and other
data driven applications. A particularly successful class of such models are those built with the attention mechanism [5].
For example, the Transformer is an attention-based architecture that has recently produced state of the art performance
in natural language processing [2], computer vision [6, 7], and audio signal analysis [8, 9].
Another active area of research is applying machine learning techniques to approximate operators between spaces of
functions. These methods are particularly attractive for many problems in computational physics and engineering where
the goal is to learn the functional response of a system from a functional input, such as an initial/boundary condition
or forcing term. In the context of learning the response of systems governed by differential equations, these learned
models can function as fast surrogates of traditional numerical solvers.
For example, in climate modelling one might wish to predict the pressure ﬁeld over the earth from measurements of the
surface air temperature ﬁeld. The goal is then to learn an operator, F, between the space of temperature functions to
∗These authors contributed equally.
arXiv:2201.01032v1  [cs.LG]  4 Jan 2022

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 5, 2022
the space of pressure functions (see Figure 1). An initial attempt at solving this problem might be to take a regular
grid of measurements over the earth for the input and output ﬁelds and formulate the problem as a (ﬁnite-dimensional)
image to image regression task. While architectures such as convolutional neural networks may perform well under
this setting, this approach can be somewhat limited. For instance, if we desired the value of the output at a query
location outside of the training grid, an entirely new model would need to be built and tuned from scratch. This is
a consequence of choosing to discretize the regression problem before building a model to solve it. If instead we
formulate the problem and model at the level of the (inﬁnite-dimensional) input and output function spaces, and then
make a choice of discretization, we can obtain methods that are more ﬂexible with respect to the locations of the
point-wise measurements.
Figure 1: An example sketch of operator learning for climate modeling: By solving an operator learning problem, we
can approximate an inﬁnite-dimensional map between two functions of interest, and then predict one function using the
other. For example, by providing the model with an input function, e.g. a surface air temperature ﬁeld, we can predict
an output function, e.g. the corresponding surface air pressure ﬁeld.
Formulating models with functional data is the topic of Functional Data Analysis (FDA) [10, 11], where parametric,
semi-parametric or non-parametric methods operate on functions in inﬁnite-dimensional vector spaces. A useful
class of non-parametric approaches are Operator-Valued Kernel methods. These methods generalize the use of scalar-
valued kernels for learning functions in a Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS) [12] to RKHS’s of operators.
Kernel methods were thoroughly studied in the past [13, 14] and have been successfully applied to nonlinear and
high-dimensional problem settings [15, 16]. Previous work has successfully extended this framework to learning
operators between more general vector spaces as well [17, 18, 19, 20, 21]. This framework is particularly powerful as
the inputs can be continuous or discrete, and the underlying vector spaces are typically only required to be normed and
separable.
A parametric-based approach to operator learning was introduced in Chen et. al. [22] where the authors proposed a
method for learning non-linear operators based on a one-layer feed-forward neural network architecture. Moreover,
the authors presented a universal approximation theorem which ensures that their architecture can approximate any
continuous operator with arbitrary accuracy. Lu et. al. [23] gave an extension of this architecture, called DeepONet,
built with multiple layer feed-forward neural networks, and demonstrated effectiveness in approximating the solution
operators of various differential equations. In follow up work, error estimates were derived for some speciﬁc problem
scenarios [24], and several applications have been pursued [25, 26, 27]. An extension of the DeepONet was proposed by
Wang et. al. [28, 29, 30], where a regularization term is added to the loss function to enforce known physical constraints,
enabling one to predict solutions of parametric differential equations, even in the absence of paired input-output training
data.
Another parametric approach to operator learning is the Graph Neural Operator proposed by Li et. al. [31], motivated
by the solution form of linear partial differential equations (PDEs) and their Greens’ functions. As an extension of this
work, the authors also proposed a Graph Neural Operator architecture where a multi-pole method is used sample the
spatial grid [32] allowing the kernel to learn in a non-local manner. In later published work, this framework has been
extended to the case where the integral kernel is stationary, enabling one to efﬁciently compute the integral operator in
the Fourier domain [33].
2

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 5, 2022
Both the Fourier Neural Operator and the DeepONet methods come with theoretical guarantees of universal approxi-
mation, meaning that under some assumptions these classes of models can approximate any continuous operator to
arbitrary accuracy. Other parametric-based models include a deep learning approach for directly approximating the
Green’s function of differential equations [34], a multi-wavelet approach for learning projections of an integral kernel
operator to approximate the true operator and a random feature approach for learning the solution map of PDEs [35],
but no theoretical guarantees of the approximation power of these approaches are presented.
While some of the previously described operator learning methods can be seen as generalizations of deep learning
architectures such as feed-forward and convolutional neural networks, in this paper we are motivated by the success of
the attention mechanism to propose a new operator learning framework. Speciﬁcally, we draw inspiration from the
Badhanau attention mechanism [5], which ﬁrst constructs a feature representation of the input and then averages these
features with a distribution that depends on the argument of the output function to obtain its value. We will also use the
connection between the attention mechanism and kernel methods [36] to couple these distributions together in what we
call a Kernel-Coupled Attention mechanism. This will allow our framework to explicitly model correlations within the
output functions of the operator. Moreover, we prove that under certain assumptions the model satisﬁes a universal
approximation property.
The main contributions of this work can be summarized in the following points:
• Novel Architecture: We propose an operator learning framework inspired by the attention mechanism,
operator approximation theory, and the Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS) literature. To this end, we
introduce a novel Kernel-Coupled Attention mechanism to explicitly model correlations between the output
functions’ query locations.
• Theoretical Guarantees: We prove that the proposed framework satisﬁes a universal approximation property,
that is, it can approximate any continuous operator with arbitrary accuracy.
• Data Efﬁciency: By modelling correlations between output queries, our model can achieve high performance
when trained with only a small fraction (6-12%) of the total available labeled data compared to competing
methods.
• Robustness: Compared to existing methods, our model demonstrates superior robustness with respect to noise
corruption in the training and testing inputs, as well as randomness in the model initialization. Our model’s
performance is stable in that the errors on the test data set are consistently concentrated around the median
with signiﬁcantly fewer outliers compared to other methods.
• Generalization: On a real data set of Earth surface air temperature and pressure measurements, our model
is able to learn the functional relation between the two ﬁelds with high accuracy and extrapolate beyond the
training data. On synthetic data we demonstrate that our model is able to generalize better than competing
methods over increasingly out-of-distribution examples.
The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we introduce the supervised operator learning problem. In Section
3, we introduce the general form of the model and in following subsections present the construction of its different
components. In Section 4 we prove theoretical results on the approximation power of this class of models. In Section 5
we present the speciﬁc architecture choices made for implementing our method in practice. Section 6 discusses the
similarities and differences of our model with related operator learning approaches. In Section 7, we demonstrate the
performance of the proposed methodology across different benchmarks in comparison to other state-of-the-art methods.
In Section 8, we discuss our main ﬁndings, outline potential drawbacks of the proposed method, and highlight future
directions emerging from this study.
2
Problem Formulation
We now provide a formal deﬁnition of the operator learning problem. Given X ⊂Rdx, Y ⊂Rdy, we will refer to
a point x ∈X as an input location and a point y ∈Y as a query location. Denote by C(X, Rdu) and C(Y, Rds)
the spaces of continuous functions from X →Rdu and Y →Rds, respectively. We will refer to C(X, Rdu) as the
space of input functions and C(Y, Rds) the space of output functions. For example, in Figure 1, if we aim to learn the
correspondence between a temperature ﬁeld over the earth and the corresponding pressure ﬁeld, u ∈C(X, R) would
represent the temperature ﬁeld and s ∈C(Y, R) would be a pressure ﬁeld, where X = Y represents the surface of
the earth. With a data set of of input/output function pairs, we formulate the supervised operator learning problem as
follows.
Problem 1. Given N pairs of input and output functions {uℓ(x), sℓ(y)}N
ℓ=1 generated by some possibly unknown
ground truth operator G : C(X, Rdu) →C(Y, Rds) with uℓ∈C(X, Rdu) and sℓ∈C(Y, Rds), learn an operator
3

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 5, 2022
F : C(X, Rdu) →C(Y, Rds), such that for ℓ= 1, . . . , N,
F(uℓ) = sℓ.
This problem also encompasses scenarios where more structure is known about the input/output functional relation. For
example, u could represent the initial condition to a partial differential equation and s the corresponding solution. In this
case, G would correspond to the true solution operator and F would be an approximate surrogate model. Similarly, u
could represent a forcing term in a dynamical system described by an ordinary differential equation, and s the resulting
integrated trajectory. In these two scenarios there do exist a suite of alternate methods to obtain the solution function s
from the input u, but with an appropriate choice of architecture for F the approximate model can result in signiﬁcant
computational speedups and the ability to efﬁciently compute sensitivities with respect to the inputs using tools like
automatic differentiation.
Note that while the domains X and Y need not be discrete sets, in practice we may only have access to the functions uℓ
and sℓevaluated at ﬁnitely many locations. However, we take the perspective that it is beneﬁcial to formulate the model
with continuously sampled input data, and consider the consequences of discretization at implementation time. As we
shall see, this approach will allow us to construct a model that is able to learn operators over multiple output resolutions
simultaneously.
3
Proposed Model: Learning Operators with Coupled Attention (LOCA)
We will construct our model through the following two steps. Inspired by the attention mechanism [5], we will ﬁrst
deﬁne a class of models where the input functions u are lifted to a feature vector v(u) ∈Rn×ds. Each output location
y ∈Y will deﬁne ds probability distributions ϕ(y) ∈Qds
i=1 ∆n, where ∆n is the the n-simplex. The forward pass of
the model is then computed by averaging the rows of v(u) over the probability distributions ϕ(y).
Next, we augment this model by coupling the probability distributions ϕ(y) across different query points y ∈Y. This
is done by acting on a proposal score function g : Y →Rn×ds with a kernel integral operator. The form of the kernel
determines the similarities between the resulting distributions. We empirically demonstrate that the coupled version of
our model is more accurate compared to the uncoupled version when the number of output function evaluations per
example is small.
3.1
The Attention Mechanism
The attention mechanism was ﬁrst formulated in Bahdanau et. al. [5] for use in language translation. The goal of
their work was to translate an input sentence in a given language {u1, . . . , uTu} to a sentence in another language
{s1, . . . , sTs}. A context vector ci was associated to each index of the output sentence, i ∈{1, . . . , Ts}, and used to
construct a probability distribution of the i-th word in the translated sentence, si. The attention mechanism is a way to
construct these context vectors by averaging over features associated with the input in a way that depends on the output
index i.
More concretely, the input sentence is ﬁrst mapped to a collection of features {v1, . . . , vTu}. Next, depending on
the input sentence and the location/index i in the output (translated) sentence, a discrete probability distribution
{ϕi1, . . . , ϕiTu} is formed over the input indices such that
ϕij ≥0,
Tu
X
j=1
ϕij = 1.
The context vector at index i is then computed as
ci =
Tu
X
j=1
ϕijvj.
If the words in the input sentence are represented by vectors in Rd, and the associated features and context vector are in
Rl, the attention mechanism can be represented by the following diagram.
[Ts] × RTu×d
Rl
∆Tu × RTu×l
Attn
(ϕ,v)
E
4

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 5, 2022
We will apply this attention mechanism to learn operators between function spaces by mapping an input function u
to a ﬁnite set of features v(u) ∈Rn×ds, and taking an average over these features with respect to ds distributions
ϕ(y) ∈Qds
k=1 ∆n that depend on the query location y ∈Y for the output function. That is,
F(u)(y) := Eϕ(y)[v(u)],
where v(u) ∈Rn×ds, ϕ is a function from y ∈Y to ds copies of the n-dimensional simplex ∆n, and E : Qds
k=1 ∆n ×
Rn×ds →Rds is an expectation operator that takes (ϕ, v) 7→P
i ϕi ⊙vi, where ⊙denotes an element-wise product.
This can be represented by the following diagram.
Y × C(X, Rdu)
Rds
Qds
k=1∆n × Rn×ds
F
(ϕ,v)
E
In the next section, we will construct the function ϕ and provide a mechanism for enabling the coupling of its values
across varying query locations y ∈Y. Later on, we will see that this allows the model to perform well even when
trained on small numbers of output function measurements per input function.
3.2
Kernel-Coupled Attention Weights
In order to model correlations among the points of the output function we couple the probability distributions ϕ(y)
across the different query locations y ∈Y. We ﬁrst consider a proposal score function g : Y →Rn×ds. If we were
to compose this function with a map into ds copies of the probability simplex ∆n, such as the softmax function
σ : Rn →∆n applied to the rows of g(y), we would obtain the probability distributions
ϕ(y) = σ(g(y)).
The disadvantage of this formulation is that it solely relies on the form of the function g to capture relations between the
distributions ϕ(y) across different y ∈Y. Instead, we introduce the Kernel-Coupled Attention (KCA) mechanism to
model these relations by integrating the function g against a coupling kernel κ : Y × Y →R. This results in the score
function,
˜g(y) =
Z
Y
κ(y, y′)g(y′) dy′,
(1)
which can be normalized across its rows to form the probability distributions
ϕ(y) = σ
Z
Y
κ(y, y′)g(y′) dy′

.
(2)
The form of the kernel κ will determine how these distributions are coupled across y ∈Y. For example, given a ﬁxed y,
the locations y′ where k(y, y′) is large will enforce similarity between the corresponding score functions ˜g(y) and ˜g(y′).
If k is a local kernel with a small bandwidth then points y and y′ will only be forced to have similar score functions if
they are very close together.
3.3
Formulation of the Coupling Kernel
In this section we construct the coupling kernel κ that will be used to relate the query distributions as in (2). We
ﬁrst lift the points y ∈Y via a nonlinear parameterized mapping qθ : Y →Rl. We then apply a universal kernel
k : Rl × Rl →R [37] over the lifted space, such as the Gaussian RBF kernel,
k(z, z′) = γ exp(−β∥z −z′∥2),
γ, β > 0.
(3)
Finally, we apply a normalization to the output of this kernel on the lifted points to create a similarity measure. The
effect of the normalization is to maintain the relative scale of the proposal score function g. Overall, our kernel is
deﬁned as
κ(y, y′) :=
k(qθ(y), qθ(y′))
R
Y k(qθ(y), qθ(z))dz
1/2 R
Y k(qθ(y′), qθ(z))dz
1/2 .
(4)
By tuning the parameters θ, β and γ in the functions qθ and k, the kernel κ is able to learn the appropriate measures of
similarity between the points in the output function domain Y.
5

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 5, 2022
Figure 2: Schematic illustration of LOCA: The LOCA method builds a feature representation, v(u), of the input
function and averages it with respect to ϕ(y). The transform D is ﬁrst applied to the input function to produce a list of
features, illustrated by disks in this case, and then a fully-connected network is applied to construct v(u). The score
function g is applied to the output query locations yi together with the softmax function to produce the score vector ϕi.
The vi and ϕi vectors are combined to evaluate the solution at each query location by computing Eϕ(y)[v(u)] at the last
step.
3.4
Input Function Feature Encoding
The last architecture choice to be made concerns the functional form of the feature embedding v(u). Here, we construct
the map v as a composition of two mappings. The ﬁrst is a function
D : C(X, Rdu) →Rd,
(5)
that maps an input function u to a ﬁnite-dimensional vector D(u) ∈Rd. After creating the d-dimensional representation
of the input function D(u), we pass this vector through a function f from a class of universal function approximators,
such as fully connected neural networks. The composition of these two operations forms our feature representation of
the input function,
v(u) = f ◦D(u).
(6)
One example for the operator D is the image of the input function under d linear functionals on C(X; Rdu). For
example, D could return the point-wise evaluation of the input function at d ﬁxed points. This would correspond to the
action of d translated δ-functionals. The drawback of such an approach is that the model would not be able to accept
measurements of the input function at any other locations. As a consequence the input resolution could never vary
across forward passes of the model.
Alternatively, if we consider an orthonormal basis for L2(X; Rdu), we could also have D be the projection onto the
ﬁrst d basis vectors. For example, if we use the basis of trigonometric polynomials the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT)
[38] allows for efﬁcient computation of these values and can be performed across varying grid resolutions. We could
also consider the projection onto an orthogonal wavelet basis [39]. In the case of complex valued coefﬁcients for these
6

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 5, 2022
basis functions, the range space dimension of D would be doubled to account for the real and imaginary part of these
measurements.
3.5
Model Summary
Overall, the forward pass of the proposed model is written as follows, see Figure 2 for a visual representation.
F(u)(y) = Eϕ(y)[v(u)] =
n
X
i=1
σ
Z
Y
κ(y, y′)g(y′) dy′

i
⊙vi(u),
(7)
where κ : Y × Y →R is the kernel of equation (1), σ is the softmax function, v the input feature encoder and g is the
proposed score function. Practical aspects related to the parametrization of κ, v and g, as well as the model evaluation
and training will be discussed in section 5.
In the next sections, we will perform analysis on this model. We will show that under certain architecture choices other
models in the literature can be recovered and theoretical guarantees of universal approximation can be proven.
4
Theoretical Guarantees of Universality
In this section we give conditions under which the LOCA model is universal. There exist multiple deﬁnitions of
universality present in the literature, for example see Sriperumbudur et. al. [40]. To be clear, we formally state the
deﬁnition we use below.
Deﬁnition 4.1 (Universality). Given compact sets X ⊂Rdx, Y ⊂Rdy and a compact set U ⊂C(X, Rdu) we say a
class of operators A ∋F : C(X, Rdu) →C(Y, Rds) is universal if it is dense in the space of operators equipped with
the supremum norm. In other words, for any continuous operator G : C(X, Rdu) →C(Y, Rds) and any ϵ > 0, there
exists F ∈A such that
sup
u∈U
sup
y∈Y
∥G(u)(y) −F(u)(y)∥2
Rds < ϵ.
To explore the universality properties of our model we note that if we remove the softmax normalization and the kernel
coupling, the evaluation of the model can be written as
F(u)(y) =
n
X
i=1
gi(y) ⊙vi(u).
The universality of this class of models has been proven in Chen et. al. [22] (when ds = 1) and extended to deep
architectures in Lu et. al. [23]. We will show that our model with the softmax normalization and kernel coupling is
universal by adding these components back one at a time. First, the following theorem shows that the normalization
constraint ϕ(y) ∈Qds
k=1 ∆n does not reduce the approximation power of this class of operators.
Theorem 4.1 (Normalization Preserves Universality). If U ⊂C(X, Rdu) is a compact set of functions and G : U →
C(Y, Rds) is a continuous operator with X and Y compact, then for every ϵ > 0 there exists n ∈N, functionals
vj,k : U →R, for j ∈[n], k ∈[ds], and functions ϕj : Y →Rds with ϕj(y) ∈[0, 1]ds and Pn
j=1 ϕj(y) = 1ds for all
y ∈Y such that
sup
u∈U
sup
y∈Y

G(u)(y) −Eϕ(y)[v(u)]

2
Rds < ϵ.
Proof. The proof is given in Appendix B.
It remains to show that the addition of the kernel coupling step for the functions ϕ also does not reduce the approximation
power of this class of operators. By drawing a connection to the theory of Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Spaces (RKHS),
we are able to state the sufﬁcient conditions for this to be the case. The key insight is that, under appropriate conditions
on the kernel κ, the image of the integral operator in (1) is dense in an RKHS Hκ which itself is dense in C(Y, Rn). This
allows (2) to approximate any continuous function ϕ : Y →Qds
i=1 ∆n and thus maintains the universality guarantee of
Theorem 4.1.
7

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 5, 2022
Proposition 4.1 (Kernel Coupling Preserves Universality). Let κ : Y × Y →R be a positive deﬁnite and symmetric
universal kernel with associated RKHS Hκ and deﬁne the integral operator
Tκ :C(Y, Rn) →C(Y, Rn),
f 7→
Z
Y
κ(y, z)f(z)dz.
If A ⊆C(Y, Rn) is dense, then Tκ(A) ⊂C(Y, Rn) is also dense.
The statement of Proposition 4.1 requires that the kernel κ be symmetric, positive deﬁnite, and universal. We next show
that by construction it will always be symmetric and positive deﬁnite, and under an assumption on the feature map q it
will additionally be universal.
Proposition 4.2 (Universality of the Kernel κ). The kernel deﬁned in (4) is positive deﬁnite and symmetric. Further, if
q is injective, it deﬁnes a universal RKHS.
Proof. The proof is provided in Appendix D.
Lastly, we present a result showing that a particular architecture choice for the input feature encoder v also preserves
universality. We show that if there is uniform convergence of spectral representations of the input, projections onto
these representations can be used to construct a universal class of functionals on C(X, Rdu).
Proposition 4.3 (Spectral Encoding Preserves Universality). Let Ad ⊂C(Rd, Rn) be a set of functions dense in
C(Rd, Rn), and {ei}∞
i=1 a set of basis functions such that for some compact set U ⊆C(X, Rdu), P∞
i=1⟨u, ei⟩L2ei
converges to u uniformly over U. Let Dd : U →Rd denote the projection onto {e1, . . . , ed}. Then for any continuous
functional h : U →Rn, and any ϵ > 0, there exists d and f ∈AN such that
sup
u∈U

h(u) −f ◦Dd(u)

 < ϵ.
Proof. The proof is provided in Appendix E.
For example, if our compact space of input functions U is contained in C1(X, Rdu), and D is a projection onto a ﬁnite
number of Fourier modes, the architecture proposed in equation (6) is expressive enough to approximate any functional
from U →R, including those produced by the universality result stated in Theorem 4.1.
5
Implementation Aspects
To implement our method, it remains to make a choice of discretization for computing the integrals required for
updating the KCA weights ϕ(y), as well as a choice for the input function feature encoding v(u). Here we address
these architecture choices, and provide an overview of the proposed model’s forward evaluation.
5.1
Computation of the Kernel Integrals
To compute the kernel-coupled attention weights ϕ(y), we are required to evaluate integrals over the domain Y in (1)
and (4). Adopting an unbiased Monte-Carlo estimator using P points y1, . . . , yP ∈Y, we can use the approximations
Z
Y
κ(y, y′)g(y′) ≈vol(Y)
P
P
X
i=1
κ(y, yi)g(yi),
for equation (1), and
Z
Y
k(q(y), q(z))dz ≈vol(Y)
P
P
X
i=1
k(q(y), q(yi)),
for use in equation (4). Note that due to the normalization in κ, the vol(Y) term cancels out. In practice, we allow the
query point y to be one of the points y1, . . . , yP used for the Monte-Carlo approximation.
8

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 5, 2022
When the domain Y is low dimensional, as in many physical problems, a Gauss-Legendre quadrature rule with weights
wi can provide an accurate and efﬁcient alternative to Monte Carlo approximation. Using Q Gauss-Legendre nodes and
weights, we can approximate the required integrals as
Z
Y
κ(y, y′)g(y′)dy′ ≈
Q
X
i=1
wiκ(y, y′
i)g(y′
i),
for equation (1) and
Z
Y
k(q(y), q(z))dz ≈
Q
X
i=1
wik(q(y), q(zi)),
for use in equation (4).
If we restrict the kernel κ to be translation invariant, there is another option for computing these integrals. As in Li et.
al. [33], we could take the Fourier transform of both κ and g, perform a point-wise multiplication in the frequency
domain, followed by an inverse Fourier transform. However, while in theory the discrete Fourier transformation could
be performed on arbitrarily spaced grids, the most available and computationally efﬁcient implementations rely on
equally spaced grids. We prefer to retain the ﬂexibility of arbitrary sets of query points y and will therefore not pursue
this alternate approach. In Section 7, we will switch between the Monte-Carlo and quadrature strategies depending on
the problem at hand.
5.2
Positional Encoding of Output Query Locations
We additionally adopt the use of positional encodings, as they have been shown to improve the performance of attention
mechanisms. For encoding the output query locations, we are motivated by the positional encoding in Vaswani et. al.
[2], the harmonic feature expansion in Di et. al. [26], and the work of Wang et. al. [41] for implementing the encoding
to more than one dimensions. The positional encoding for a one dimensional query space is given by
e(yi, 2j + (i −1)H) = cos(2jπyi)
e(yi, 2j + 1 + (i −1)H) = sin(2jπyi),
(8)
where H the number of encoding coefﬁcients, j = 1, ..., H/2, yi the query coordinates in different spatial dimensions
and i = 1, ..., dy. In contrast to Vaswani et. al. [2] we consider the physical position of the elements of the set y as
the position to encode instead of their index position in a given list, as the index position in general does not have a
physically meaningful interpretation.
5.3
Wavelet Scattering Networks as a Spectral Encoder
While projections onto an orthogonal basis allows us to derive a universality guarantee for the architecture, there can
be some computational drawbacks. For example, it is known that the Fourier transform is not always robust to small
deformations of the input [42]. More worrisome is the lack of robustness to noise corrupting the input function. In
real world applications it will often be the case that our inputs are noisy, hence, in practice we are motivated to ﬁnd an
operator D with stronger continuity with respect to these small perturbations.
To address the aforementioned issues, we make use of the scattering transform [43], as an alternate form for the operator
D. The scattering transform maps an input function to a sequence of values by alternating wavelet convolutions and
complex modulus operations [43]. To be precise, given a mother wavelet ψ and a ﬁnite discrete rotation group G, we
denote the wavelet ﬁlter with parameter λ = (r, j) ∈G × Z as
ψλ(u) = 2dxjψ(2jr−1x).
Given a path of parameters p = (λ1, . . . , λm), the scattering transform is deﬁned by the operator
S[p]u = ||||u ⋆ψλ1| ⋆ψλ2| · · · | ⋆ψλm| ⋆φ(x),
(9)
where φ(x) is a low pass ﬁlter. We allow the empty path ∅as a valid argument of S with S[∅]u = u ⋆φ. As shown in
Bruna et. al. [43], this transform is Lipschitz continuous with respect to small deformations, while the modulus of
the Fourier transform is not. This transform can be interpreted as a deep convolutional network with ﬁxed ﬁlters and
has been successfully applied in multiple machine learning contexts [44, 45]. Computationally, the transform returns
functions of the form (9) sampled at points in their domain, which we denote by ˆS[p](u).
9

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 5, 2022
By choosing d paths p1, . . . , pd, we may deﬁne the operator D as
D(u) =

ˆS[p1](u), . . . , ˆS[pd](u)
⊤
.
In practice, the number of paths used is determined by three parameters: J, the maximum scale over which we take a
wavelet transform; L, the number of elements of the ﬁnite rotation group G, and m0, the maximum length of the paths
p. While Proposition 4.3 does not necessarily apply to this form of D, we ﬁnd that empirically this input encoding gives
the best performance.
5.4
Loss Function and Training
The proposed model is trained by minimizing the empirical risk loss over the available training data pairs,
L(θ) = 1
N
N
X
i=1
P
X
ℓ=1
(si(yi
ℓ) −Fθ(ui)(yi
ℓ))2,
(10)
where θ = (θq, θf, θg) denotes all trainable model parameters. This is the simplest choice that can be made for training
the model. Other choices may include weighting the mean square error loss using the L1 norm of the ground truth
output [26, 30], or employing a relative L2 error loss [33]. The minimization is performed via stochastic gradient
descent updates, where the required gradients of the loss with respect to all the trainable model parameters can be
conveniently computed via reverse-mode automatic differentiation.
5.5
Implementation Overview
Algorithm 1 provides an overview of the steps required for implementing the LOCA method. The training data set
is ﬁrst processed by passing the input functions through a wavelet scattering network [43], followed by applying a
positional encoding to the query locations and the quadrature/Monte-Carlo integration points. The forward pass of the
model is evaluated and gradients are computed for use with a stochastic gradient descent optimizer. After training, we
make one-shot predictions for super-resolution grids, and we compute the relative L2 error between the ground truth
output and the prediction.
Algorithm 1 Implementation summary of the LOCA method
Require:
• Input/output function pairs {ui, si}N
i=1.
• Query locations yi for evaluating si.
• Quadrature points zi.
Pre-processing:
• Apply transformation (6) on the input function to get ˆu, the input features.
• Apply positional encoding (8) to query coordinates y, z, to get ˆy, ˆz.
• Choose the network architectures for functions qθq, fθf , and gθg.
• Initialize the trainable parameters θ = (θq, θf, θg), and choose a learning rate η.
Training:
for i = 0 to I do
Randomly select a mini-batch of (ˆu, ˆy, ˆz, s).
Evaluate gθg(qθq(ˆz)).
Compute the Coupling Kernel κ(qθq(ˆy), qθq(ˆz)) (4).
Numerically approximate the KCA (1) and compute ϕ(y).
Evaluate fθf (ˆu), as in Equation (6).
Evaluate the expectation (7) and get s∗, the model prediction.
Evaluate the training loss (10) and compute its gradients ∇θL(θi).
Update the trainable parameters via stochastic gradient descent: θi+1 ←θi −η∇θL(θi).
end for
6
Connections to Existing Operator Learning Methods
In this section, we provide some insight on the connections between our method and similar operator learning methods.
10

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 5, 2022
6.1
DeepONets
Note that if we identify our input feature map, v(u), with the DeepONet’s branch network, and the location dependent
probability distribution, ϕ(y), with the DeepONet’s trunk network, then the last step of both models is computed the
same way. We can recover the DeepONet architecture from our model under three changes to the architecture in the
forward evaluation. First, we would remove the normalization step in the construction of ϕ. Next, we remove the KCA
mechanism that is applied to the candidate score function g (equivalently we may ﬁx the kernel κ to be δ-distributions
along the diagonal). Finally, in the construction of the input feature map v(u), instead of the scattering transform we
would act on the input with a collection of δ distributions at the ﬁxed sensor locations. These differences between
DeepONets and LOCA result in increased performance of our model, as we will see in Section 7.
6.2
Neural Operators
The connection between Neural Operators and DeepONets has been presented in Kovachki et. al. [46], where it is
shown that a particular choice of neural operator architecture produces a DeepONet with an arbitrary trunk network and
a branch network of a certain form. In particular, a Neural Operator layer has the form,
v(ℓ+1)(z) = σ

W (ℓ)v(ℓ)(z) +
Z
Z
k(ℓ)(s, z)v(ℓ)(s)ds

,
(11)
where here σ is a point-wise nonlinearity. It is shown in Kovachki et. al. [46] that this architecture can be made to
resemble a DeepONet under the following choices. First, set W (ℓ) = 0. Next, lift the input data to n tiled copies of
itself and choose a kernel k that is separable in s and z. If the output of the layer is then projected back to the original
dimension by summing the coordinates, the architecture resembles a DeepONet.
The correspondence between our model and DeepONets described above allows us to transitively connect our model
to Neural Operators as well. We additionally note that the scattering transform component of our architecture can be
viewed as a collection of multiple-layer Neural Operators with ﬁxed weights. Returning to (11), when W (ℓ) = 0 for all
ℓ, the forward pass of the architecture is a sequence of integral transforms interleaved with point-wise nonlinearities.
Setting σ to be the complex modulus function and k(ℓ) to be a wavelet ﬁlter ψλℓwe may write
v(ℓ+1) = |vℓ∗ψλ|.
When we compose L of these layers together, we recover (9) up to the application of the ﬁnal low pass ﬁlter (again a
linear convolution)
v(L) = ||||u ∗ψλ1| ∗ψλ2| · · · | ∗ψλL|.
Thus, we may interpret the scattering transform as samples from a collection of Neural Operators with ﬁxed weights.
This connection between the scattering transform and convolutional neural architectures with ﬁxed weights was noticed
during the original formulation of the wavelet scattering transform by Bruna et. al. [43], and thus also extends to Neural
Operators via the correspondence between Neural Operators and (ﬁnite-dimensional) convolutional neural networks
[46].
A key difference between our model and Neural Operators is how the kernel integral transform is applied. In the Neural
Operator, it is applied directly to the input and the output functions of the internal layers, while in LOCA the kernel acts
only on a score function of the output domain Y, as in (1).
6.3
Other Attention-Based Architectures
Here we compare our method with two other recently proposed attention-based operator learning architectures. The
ﬁrst is the Galerkin/Fourier Transformer [47]. This method operates on a ﬁxed input and output grid, and most similarly
represents the original sequence-to-sequence Transformer architecture [2] with different choices of normalization. As
in the original sequence-to-sequence architecture, the attention weights are applied across the indices (sensor locations)
of the input sequence. By contrast, in our model the attention mechanism is applied to a ﬁnite-dimensional feature
representation of the input that is not indexed by the input function domain. Additionally, our attention weights are
themselves coupled over the domain Y via the KCA mechanism (2) as opposed to being deﬁned over the input function
domain in an uncoupled manner.
A continuous attention mechanism for operator learning was also proposed as a special case of Neural Operators in
Kovachki et. al. [46]. There, it was noted that if the kernel in the Neural Operator was (up to a linear transformation) of
11

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 5, 2022
the form
k(v(x), v(y)) =
Z
exp
⟨Av(s), Bv(y)⟩
√m

ds
−1
exp
⟨Av(x), Bv(y)⟩
√m

,
with A, B ∈Rm×n, then the corresponding Neural Operator layer can be interpreted as the continuous generalization
of a transformer block. Further, upon discretization of the integral this recovers exactly the sequence-to-sequence
discrete Transformer model.
The main difference of this kind of continuous transformer with our approach is again how the attention mechanism is
applied to the inputs. The Neural Operator Transformer is similar to the Galerkin/Fourier Transformer in the sense
that the attention mechanism is applied over the points of the input function itself, whereas our model ﬁrst creates a
different ﬁnite dimensional feature representation of the input function which the attention is applied to. We note that
our model does make use of attention weights deﬁned over a continuous domain, but it is the domain of the output
functions Y as opposed to X. The coupling of the attention weights as a function of the output query in (2) with the
kernel in (4) can be interpreted as a kind of un-normalized continuous self-attention mechanism where we view the
query space Y as its own input space to generate the attention weights ϕ(y).
7
Experimental Results
In this section we provide a comprehensive collection of experimental comparisons designed to assess the performance
of the proposed LOCA model against two state of the art operator learning methods, the Fourier Neural Operator (FNO)
[33] and the DeepONet (DON) [23]. We will show that our method requires less labeled data than competing methods,
is robust against noisy data and randomness in the model initialization, has a smaller spread of errors over testing
data sets, and is able to successfully generalize in out-of-distribution testing scenarios. Evidence is provided for the
following numerical experiments, see Figure 3 for a visual description.
• Antiderivative: Learning the antiderivative operator given multi-scale source terms.
• Darcy Flow: Learning the solution operator of the Darcy partial differential equation, which models the
pressure of a ﬂuid ﬂowing through a porous medium with random permeability.
• Mechanical MNIST: Learning the mapping between the initial and ﬁnal displacement of heterogeneous block
materials undergoing equibiaxial extension.
• Shallow Water Equations: Learning the solution operator for a partial differential equation describing the
ﬂow below a pressure surface in a ﬂuid with reﬂecting boundary conditions.
• Climate modeling: Learning the mapping from the air temperature ﬁeld over the Earth’s surface to the surface
air pressure ﬁeld, given sparse measurements.
For all experiments the training data sets will take the following form. For each of the N input/output function pairs,
(ui, si), we will consider m discrete measurements of each input function at ﬁxed locations, (ui(xi
1), . . . , ui(xi
m)), and
M available discrete measurements of each output function (si(yi
1), . . . , si(yi
M)), with the query locations {yi
ℓ}M
ℓ=1
potentially varying over the data set. Out of the M available measurement points {yi
ℓ}M
ℓ=1 for each output function si,
we consider the effect of taking only P of these points for each input/output pair. For example, if we use 10% of labeled
data, we set P = ⌊M/10⌋and build a training data set where each example is of the form ({ui(xi
j)}m
j=1, {si(yℓ)}P
ℓ=1).
We round the percentages to the nearest integer or half-integer for clarity. We present details on the input and output
data construction, as well as on the different problem formulations in Section F.5 of the Appendix.
In each scenario the errors are computed between both the models output and ground truth at full resolution. Throughout
all benchmarks, we employ Gaussian Error Linear unit activation functions (GELU) [48], and initialize all networks us-
ing the Glorot normal scheme [49]. All networks are trained via mini-batch stochastic gradient descent using the Adam
optimizer with default settings [50]. The detailed hyper-parameter settings, the associated number of parameters for all
examples, the computational cost, and other training details are provided in Appendix F.2. All code and data accompany-
ing this manuscript will be made publicly available at https://github.com/PredictiveIntelligenceLab/LOCA.
7.1
Data Efﬁciency
In this section we investigate the performance of our model when the number of labeled output function points is small.
In many applications labeled output function data can be scarce or costly to obtain. Therefore, it is desirable that an
operator learning model is able to be successfully trained even without a large number of output function measurements.
We investigate this property in the Darcy ﬂow experiment by gradually increasing the percentage of labeled output
12

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 5, 2022
Figure 3: A schematic visualization of the operator learning benchmarks considered in this work. Shown are the
input/output function and a description of their physical meaning, as well as the operator that we learn for each example.
In the Mechanical MNIST example, for visual clarity we do not present the map that the model is actually learning,
which is the displacement in the vertical and the horizontal directions, but the position of each pixel under a speciﬁed
displacement. See Appendix Section F.5 for more details on the data set generation.
function measurements used per input function example. Next, we compare the performance of all models for the
Shallow Water benchmark in the small data regime. Lastly, we demonstrate that the proposed KCA weights provide
additional training stability speciﬁcally in the small data regime. One important aspect of learning in the small data
regime is the presence of outliers in the error statistics, which quantify the worst-case-scenario predictions. In each
benchmark we present the following error statistics across the testing data set: the error spread around the median, and
outliers outside the third quantile.
Figure 4 shows the effect of varying the percentage of labeled output points used per training example in the Darcy ﬂow
prediction example. The box plot shows the distribution of errors over the test data set for each model. We see that
the proposed LOCA model is able to achieve low prediction errors even with 1.5% of the available output function
measurements per example. It also has a consistently smaller spread of errors with fewer outliers across the test data set
in all scenarios. Moreover, when our model has access to 6% of the available output function measurements it achieves
lower errors against both the DON and FNO trained with any percentage (up to 100%) of the total available labeled
data.
Figure 5 shows the spread of errors across the test data set for the Shallow Water benchmark when the LOCA model is
trained on 2.5% of the available labeled data per input-output function pair. We observe that our model outperforms
DON and FNO in predicting the wave height, ρ, and provides similar errors to the FNO for the two velocity components,
v1 and v2. Despite the fact that the two methods perform in a similar manner for the median error, LOCA consistently
provides a much smaller standard deviation of errors across the test data set, as well as far fewer outliers.
We hypothesize that the ability of our model to successfully learn from fewer output function measurements stems from
the KCA mechanism used in constructing ϕ(y). By coupling the values of the output function in this way, the model
is able to learn the global behavior of the output functions with fewer example points. To demonstrate this, we use a
13

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 5, 2022
Figure 4: (Data Efﬁciency) Relative L2 error boxplots for the solution of Darcy ﬂow: We present the error statistics for
the case of the Darcy ﬂow in the form of boxplots for the case where we train on [1.5, ..., 100]% of the available output
function measurements per example. We observe that our model presents fast convergence to a smaller median error
than the other methods and the error spread is more concentrated around the median with fewer outliers.
Model
Test Error Metric
Mean
Standard deviation
Minimum
Maximum
LOCA without KCA
0.463
0.184
0.406
3.023
LOCA with KCA
0.017
0.004
0.008
0.041
Table 1: (Data Efﬁciency) Performance of LOCA with and without KCA: We present the mean, the standard deviation,
the minimum and the maximum relative L2 errors for the Darcy equation with and without KCA when using 1.5% of
available output function measurements per training example. We see that the presence of KCA in the model guarantees
stability in the training and results in small testing error.
low percentage of output function measurements, and train the LOCA model with and without the KCA step. Table 1
shows the result for the case where we use the KCA weights, and the case where we do not. We consider 1.5% of the
available labeled data and lower the amount of samples from N = 1, 000 to N = 200. When KCA is removed, the
training becomes unstable and results in a high testing error. With the KCA step for ϕ included, we see that the model
still performs well in this small data regime.
7.2
Robustness
Operator learning can be a powerful tool for cases where we have access to clean simulation data for training, but wish
to deploy the model on noisy experimental data. Alternatively, we may have access to noisy data for training and want
to make predictions on noisy data as well. We will quantify the ability of our model to handle noise in the data by
measuring the percentage increase in mean error clean to noisy data scenarios. For all experiments in this section, we
consider 7% of the available labeled data.
We use the Mechanical MNIST benchmark to investigate the robustness of our model with respect to noise in the
training and testing data. We consider three scenarios: one where the training and the testing data sets are clean, one
where the training data set is clean, but the output data set is corrupted Gaussian noise sampled from N(0, .15I), and
14

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 5, 2022
Figure 5: (Data Efﬁciency) Relative L2 error boxplots for the solution of the Shallow Water equations: We present
the errors for each different predicted quantity of the Shallow Water equations. On the left, we present the ρ quantity
which is the height of the water, and v1 and v2 which are the two components of the ﬂuid velocity vector. We observe
that LOCA achieves higher accuracy, and presents fewer outliers and more concentrated error spread compared its
competitors.
one where both the input and the output data sets are corrupted by Gaussian noise sampled from N(0, .15I). In Figure
6 we present the distribution of errors across the test data set for each noise scenario. We observe that for the case
where both the training and the testing data are clean, the FNO achieves the best performance. In the scenario where the
training data set is clean but the testing data set is noisy, we observe a percentage increase to the approximation error of
all methods.
For the Clean to Noisy scenario the approximation error of the FNO method is increased by 1, 930% and 2, 238% for
the displacement in the horizontal and vertical directions, respectively. For the DON method, the percentage increase is
112% and 96% for the displacement in the horizontal and vertical directions (labeled as v1 and v2), respectively. For the
LOCA method the percentage increase is 80% and 85% for the displacement in the horizontal and vertical directions,
respectively. For the Noisy to Noisy scenario the approximation error of the FNO method is increased by 280% and
347% for the displacement in the horizontal and vertical directions, respectively. For the DON method, the percentage
increase is 128% and 120%, and for LOCA is only 26% and 25% for each displacement component, respectively. We
present the mean prediction error for each scenario and the corresponding percentage error increase in Table 2.
We observe that even though the FNO is very accurate for the case where both training and test data sets are clean, a
random perturbation of the test data set can cause a huge decrease in accuracy. On the other hand, even though the
DON method presents similar accuracy as our model in the clean to clean case, the standard deviation of the error is
greater and its robustness to noise is inferior. LOCA is clearly superior in the case where the testing data are corrupted
with Gaussian noise. We again emphasise that the metric in which we assess the performance is not which method has
the lowest relative prediction error, but which method presents the smallest percentage increase in the error when noise
exists in testing (and training in the case of Noisy to Noisy) data compared to the case where there exist no noise.
Next, we examine the variability of the models’ performance with respect to the random initialization of the network
parameters. We consider the Mechanical MNIST benchmark where the input data is clean but the output data contain
noise. We train each model 10 times with different random seeds for initialization and record the maximum error in
each case. In Figure 7 we present the distribution of maximum prediction errors under different random seeds for the
displacement in horizontal and vertical directions, respectively. We observe that LOCA displays a smaller spread of
error for the case of displacement in the horizontal direction, v1, and similar performance to the FNO for the case of
displacement in the vertical direction, v2.
15

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 5, 2022
Figure 6: (Robustness) Relative L2 error boxplots for the Mechanical MNIST benchmark with noisy data: The left
ﬁgure gives the distribution of errors for the displacement in the horizontal axis, v1, and the right ﬁgure gives the
displacement in the vertical axis v2. For all cases we consider 7% of the whole training data set as labeled data used
during training.
Noise scenario and error
Model
FNO
DON
LOCA
Clean to Clean (CC)
[0.004, 0.003]
[0.028, 0.029]
[0.026, 0.026]
Clean to Noisy (CN)
[0.088, 0.087]
[0.061, 0.057]
[0.047, 0.049]
Noisy to Noisy (NN)
[0.016, 0.016]
[0.065, 0.064]
[0.032, 0.033]
Percentage error increase from CC to CN
[1,930 %, 2,238 %]
[112%, 96%]
[80%, 85%]
Percentage error increase from CC to NN
[280 %, 347%]
[128%,120%]
[26%, 25%]
Table 2: (Robustness) Mechanical MNIST prediction error with noisy data: The ﬁrst three rows present the mean
relative L2 errors of the vertical and horizontal displacements [Error(v1), Error(v2)]. The last two rows show the
percentage increase in mean error from the noiseless case to the scenarios where the testing input data is corrupted by
noise and to the scenario that both the training and testing input data sets are corrupted by noise. For each case we
consider 7% of the total data set as labeled data for training. We observe that our method shows the least percentage
increase for each noise scenario.
16

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 5, 2022
Figure 7: (Robustness) Maximum relative L2 error boxplots for Mechanical MNIST with over random model initializa-
tions: The left and right subplots show the distribution of maximum errors over the testing data set for the horizontal
and vertical displacements, respectively. We consider 7% of the available output function measurments for training and
run the model for 10 different random initializations. We observe that our method shows better performance than the
other methods for both parameters v1 and v2.
7.3
Generalization
The ultimate goal of data-driven methods is to perform well outside of the data set they are trained on. This ability
to generalize is essential for these models to be practically useful. In this section we investigate the ability of our
model to generalize in three scenarios. We ﬁrst consider an extrapolation problem where we predict the daily Earth
surface air pressure from the daily surface air temperature. Our training data set consists of temperature and pressure
measurements from 2000 to 2005 and our testing data set consists of measurements from 2005 to 2010. In Figure 8, we
present the results for the extrapolation problem when considering 4% of the available pressure measurements each
day for training. We observe that our method achieves the lowest error rates while also maintaining a small spread of
these errors across the testing data set. While the DON method achieves a competitive performance with respect to the
median error, the error spread is larger than both LOCA and FNO with many outliers.
Next, we examine the performance of our model under a distribution shift of the testing data. The goal of the experiment
is to learn the antiderivatve operator where the training and testing data sets are sampled from a Gaussian process. We
ﬁx the length-scale of the testing distribution at 0.1 and examine the effect of training over 9 different data sets with
length-scales ranging from 0.1 to 0.9. In Figure 9, we present the error on the testing data set after being trained on
each different training data set. The error for each testing input is averaged over 10 random network initializations. We
observe that while the LOCA and FNO methods present a similar error for the ﬁrst two cases, the FNO error is rapidly
increasing. On the other hand, the DON method while presenting a larger error at ﬁrst, eventually performs better than
the FNO as the training length-scale increases. We ﬁnd that LOCA outperforms its competitors for all cases.
Lastly, we examine the performance of the three models when the training and testing data set both contain a wide
range of scale and frequency behaviors. We consider this set-up as a toy model for a multi-task learning scenario and
we want to explore the generalization capabilities of our model for this case. We construct a training and testing data set
by sampling inputs from a Gaussian process where the length-scale and amplitude are chosen over ranges of 2 and
4 orders of magnitude, respectively. In Figure 10, we present samples from the input distribution, the corresponding
output functions, and the distribution of errors on the testing data set. We observe that our method is more accurate and
17

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 5, 2022
Figure 8: (Generalization) Relative L2 error boxplots for the climate modeling experiment: We present the errors for
the temperature prediction task on the testing data set. We consider 4% of the whole data set as labeled data used for
training. We observe that our method performs better than the other methods both with respect to the median error and
the error spread.
the error spread is smaller than DON and Fourier Neural Operators. While the FNO method shows a median that is
close to the LOCA model, there exist many outliers that reach very high error values.
8
Discussion
This work proposes a novel operator learning framework with approximation theoretic guarantees. Drawing inspiration
from the Bahdanau attention mechanism [5], the model is constructed by averaging a feature embedding of an input
function over probability distributions that depend on the corresponding output function’s query locations.
A key novelty of our approach is the coupling of these probability distributions through a variation of the classic
attention mechanism called Kernel-Coupled Attention (KCA). Instead of normalizing a single proposal score function
g deﬁned over the query domain Y, the KCA mechanism couples the score function across point in Y by integrating
against a similarity kernel. Thus, the KCA mechanism is able to model correlations between different query scores
explicitly instead of relying on the score function g to learn these relations alone. We hypothesize, and support with
experiments, that this property allows the model to learn very efﬁciently using a small fraction of labeled data. In order
to have a feature encoder that is robust to small deformations and noise in the input, we employ a multi-resolution
feature extraction method based on the wavelet scattering transform of Bruna et. al. [43]. We empirically show that this
is indeed a property of our model. Our experiments additionally show that the model is able to generalize across varying
distributions of functional inputs, and is able to extrapolate on a functional regression task with global climate data.
A potential drawback of the proposed method is the computational cost needed for numerically approximating the
integrals in the KCA mechanism. When using Monte-Carlo with P query points there is a complexity of O(P 2).
Instead if a quadrature approach is taken with P queries and Q nodes there is a complexity of O(PQ + Q2). The
relative efﬁciency of these two approaches in general will depend on the number of quadrature points necessary for
18

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 5, 2022
Figure 9: (Generalization) Antiderivative relative L2 error boxplots for out-of distribution testing sets: We show the
performance of all models when trained on increasingly out of distribution data sets from the testing set. We use all
available output function measurements for training.
a good approximation, and thus on the dimension of the query domain. In general, integrals over high dimensional
domains will become increasingly costly to compute.
Therefore, an immediate future research direction is to use further approximations to allow the kernel integral computa-
tions to scale to larger numbers of points and dimensions. A ﬁrst approach is to parallelize this integral computation by
partitioning the domain into pieces and summing the integral contributions from each piece. To lower the the computa-
tional complexity of the kernel computations between the query and integration points we can also use approximations
of the kernel matrix. For example, in the seminal paper of Rahimi and Recht [51] the authors propose an approximation
of the kernel using a random feature strategy. More recently, in the context of transformer architectures, a number of
approximations have been proposed to reduce the complexity of such computations to be linear in the number of kernel
points O(N). A non-exhaustive list of references include Linformers [52], Performers [53], Nyströformers [54] and
Fast Transformers [55].
Another potential extension of our framework is to take the output of our model as the input function of another
LOCA module and thus make a layered version of the architecture. While in our experiments we did not see that this
modiﬁcation signiﬁcantly increased the performance of the model, it is possible that other variants of this modular
architecture could give performance improvements. Lastly, recall that the output of our model corresponds to the
context vector generated in the Bahdanau attention. In the align and translate model of Bahdanau et. al. [5] this context
vector is used to construct a distribution over possible values at the output location. By using the output of our model
as a context vector in a similar architecture, we can create a probabilistic model for the potential values of the output
function, therefore providing a way to quantify the uncertainty associated with the predictions of our model.
A main application of operator learning methods is for PDEs, where they are used as surrogates for traditional numerical
solvers. Since the forward pass of an operator learning model is signiﬁcantly faster than classical numerical methods,
the solution of a PDE under many different initial conditions can be expediently obtained. This can be a key enabler in
design and optimal control problems, where many inputs must be tested in pursuit of identifying an optimal system
19

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 5, 2022
Figure 10: (Generalization) Antiderivative relative L2 error boxplots given input functions with multiple lenghtscales
and amplitudes: We present samples of the input and output functions from the testing data set in the top left and right
ﬁgures, respectively, as well as the test error boxplots for each method, bottom ﬁgure.
conﬁguration. A key advantage of operator learning techniques in this context is that they also allow the quick
evaluation of sensitivities with respect to inputs (via automatic differentiation), thus enabling the use of gradient-based
optimization. Conventional methods for computing sensitivities typically rely on solving an associated adjoint system
with a numerical solver. In contrast, a well-trained operator learning architecture can compute these sensitivities at a
fraction of the time. Therefore, we expect that successful application of operator learning methods to predict the output
of physical systems from control inputs can have a signiﬁcant impact in the design of optimal inputs and controls. Some
preliminary work in this direction has been explored in Wang et. al. [56].
9
