Order Embeddings from Merged Ontologies using Sketching
Kenneth L. Clarkson
IBM Research

Sanjana Sahayaraj
IBM Research

Abstract
We give a simple, low resource method to produce order embeddings from ontologies.
Such embeddings map words to vectors so that order relations on the words, such as hyper-
nymy/hyponymy, are represented in a direct way. Our method uses sketching techniques,
in particular countsketch, for dimensionality reduction. We also study methods to merge on-
tologies, in particular those in medical domains, so that order relations are preserved. We
give computational results for medical ontologies and for wordnet, showing that our merging
techniques are effective and our embedding yields an accurate representation in both generic
and specialised domains.
1
Introduction
While the NLP literature has recently seen one groundbreaking technique after another in fea-
ture representation and embedding, there is still work that to be done in imparting knowl-
edge into embeddings, beyond the use of contextual information; moreover, most of the tech-
niques require huge computing time and power, while training from scratch. The medical ﬁeld
is an area where feature representations that are interpretable, and that need limited comput-
ing resources to design, can beneﬁt the adoption and acceptance of these systems in practice.
Through the OrderSketch algorithm presented in this paper, we aim to provide a step towards
a knowledge-rich feature representation technique that is based directly on ontologies and is
also computation-resource friendly. The paper is organized as follows: First we present related
work on other knowledge representation and order detection techniques. Next we introduce
our algorithm OrderSketch, which is simple and yet also effective in capturing knowledge and
order information from ontologies. We apply our embedding algorithm to WordNet, and to an
augmented medical ontology called SnoMeSHNet that we introduce. After presenting our cur-
rent constructions and experiments, we discuss future experiments and goals for this work, in
progress.
2
Related Work
There has been previous work in representing hierarchical information found in data sources.
(Luu et al., 2016) predicts hypernym term given a hyponym and context through concatenation
of one hot vector embedding of the hypernym, hyponym, offset vectors of context words and
arXiv:2101.02158v1  [cs.CL]  6 Jan 2021

dynamic weighting of a neural network based on context.
There has been work on using a
neural network and scoring mechanism to detect hypernymy relations and differentiate from
other relations through distributional similarity in (Nguyen et al., 2017). (Chang et al., 2017)
presents an approach to a reversed form of order embedding, where an unsupervised embedding
method is used to learn embeddings such that the embedding of a hypernym is larger than that
of it’s hyponym in every dimension. There have also been approaches such as, (Vulic and Mrksic,
2017), which is a post-processing mechanism to transform vector space and align vectors to reﬂect
hypernymy presence and directionality, where ontology knowledge representations like ours can
be utilized.
When it comes to specialty domains such as medicine, (Perotte et al., 2014) shows that hierar-
chical representation of ICD codes has more information. (Lu et al., 2019) shows how hierarchical
information in ICD9 codes can be incorporated in hyperbolic embeddings and used to reconstruct
input to effectively process EHR data.
2.1
Order embeddings
In the settings of ontologies, especially, it may be that the most effective embedding does not
represent synonomy, but other relations between words, such as lexical entailment. (Vendrov
et al., 2015) produce maps g : Tokens →Rn such that for tokens X and Y, Y entails X ⇐⇒g(X) <
g(Y), where the inequality means coordinatewise dominance, that is, every coordinate of g(X) is
at most the corresponding coordinate of g(Y). This can be called a conical embedding: if any
point in Rn is a potential concept, the cone
c(X)
def= {y ∈Rn | g(X) < y}
corresponds to the set of concepts that entail X. This can also be expressed in terms of subsets:
Y entails Z ⇐⇒c(Y) ⊂c(X).
Such embeddings extend beyond lexical entailment; for example, Vendrov et al. (2015) map
captions and images to Rn, such that a caption is appropriate for an image if its embedding
is coordinatewise dominated by the embedding of the image. Such an embedding could also
capture entailment among captions: if caption X is appropriate to every image caption Y is, then
the embedding of X should be coordinatewise dominated by that of Y.
Lexical and caption entailment are partial orders that are transitive: if X is-a Y and Y is-a Z,
then X is-a Z, and such embeddings under coordinatewise dominance capture this transitivity.
Other ontological relations are also transitive, such as part-of and causes, so embeddings that
represent this structural property are of particular interest.
Note that the use of the transitive property of lexical entailment is a simple species of reason-
ing (indeed, lexical entailment is a special case of NLP entailment), and so exploiting transitivity
has the potential to both enable better learning, and improve reasoning.

3
Order embedding algorithm
3.1
Conceptual description
We give a construction for building an approximate embedding for terms with a partial order
relation, such as might be given in an ontology. That is, suppose (U, ⪯) is a partially ordered set.
Our approach, conceptually, is for all x ∈U:
1. Construct the upper set Wikipedia contributors (2019) of x, that is, ↑{x}
def= {y | x ⪯y};
2. Construct the characteristic vector vec(x) ∈{0, 1}U of the upper set of x, that is,
vec(x)y
def=

1
y ∈↑{x};
0
otherwise.
3. Construct the sketch vector sk(vec(x)) ∈Rd, for a target dimension d, built so that for
x, y ∈U,
sk(vec(x)) · sk(vec(y)) ≈vec(x) · vec(y).
Our motivation for considering the upper sets ↑{x} is that they represent the partial order via the
subset relation, that is,
x ⪯y ⇐⇒↑{x} ⊇↑{y}
⇐⇒|↑{x} ∩↑{y}| = |↑{y}|.
Since the characteristic vectors vec(x) have the property that vec(x) · vec(y) = |↑{x} ∩↑{y}|, we have
that
x ⪯y ⇐⇒vec(x) · vec(y) = vec(y) · vec(y),
so the vec(x) give a direct representation of (U, ⪯) via their dot products. However, they are
vectors in |U| dimensions, which is typically too big to be useful, so in the third step above, we
apply a sketching operation, described next, that maps the vec(x) to lower-dimensional vectors,
while approximately preserving dot products.
3.2
Sketching
There are a variety of sketching methods, but the one we have investigated the most is countsketch
Charikar et al. (2002); here we need two hash functions
h1 : U →[d]
h2 : U →{−1, +1},
where [d]
def= {1, 2, . . . d}. In the ideal setting, h1 and h2 are uniformly random, over [d] and {−1, +1}
respectively. Given vector v ∈{0, 1}U, its sketch in Rd, via countsketch, has coordinates
skc(v)i
def=
X
y:h1(y)=i
vyh2(y),
that is, the sum of the bit ﬂips h2(y), over the y ∈U such that vy = 1 and y hashes (using h1) to i.

3.3
More concrete description
Short-cutting the conceptual discussion, our embedding can be described as follows: given x ∈U,
OrderSketch(x) is the vector with
OrderSketch(x)i
def=
X
x⪯y
h1(y)=i
h2(y), for i ∈[d].
(1)
If h1 and h2 are indeed random, then one can show that for v, w ∈RU, skc(v) · skc(w) is an
unbiased estimator of v · w, that is,
E[skc(v) · skc(w)] = v · w.
In particular, if v and w are very sparse, so that there are no collisions in their sketches, that is,
h1(y) ̸= h1(y′) for any y, y′ with vy = vy′ = 1 or wy = wy′ = 1, then skc(v) · skc(w) = v · w. More
generally, the sparser v and w are, the more accurate the sketch-based estimate of the dot product
will be.
The role of the bit-ﬂip hash function h2 is to reduce the effect of collisions, by averaging out
their effects, but with enough sparsity, h2 is not needed.
Other possible sketching methods involve simhash Charikar (2002) and minhash Broder
(1997), for which the application to dot-product estimation is less direct, and processing is more
complex and expensive, but which may well be more effective in sketching vectors that are not
sparse. Our preliminary experiments suggested that simhash is not competitive with countsketch
for the cases we considered.
4
OrderSketch applied to WordNet
We apply our order embedding technique to WordNet Miller (1998), mainly to the hypernym
relation. Here the relation is between speciﬁc word meanings, where a word meaning is rep-
resented in WordNet as a synset. Our hashes h1 and h2 are implemented as Python’s native
hash applied to the synsets and to synset names, respectively. The upper sets ↑{x} are, for
each synset, the set of all synsets that hypernyms of it (including transitively), and each lemma
name, considered as a union of synsets, is represented as the union of their upper sets.
We obtain representations OrderSketch(x) of synsets and lemma names, using countsketch.
When synset y is a hypernym of lemma name x, |↑{x} ∩↑{y}| = |↑{y}|, by construction, and so we
expect
Rx,y
def= OrderSketch(x) · OrderSketch(y)
OrderSketch(y) · OrderSketch(y)
to be close to one. If x and y are not related, we expect Rx,y ≈0.
To test our representation, we consider Rx,y in these two situations, where we consider for
the positive case all synsets y, and all lemma names x in WordNet that have one sense (synset)
that is a hyponym of y. Our proxy for the negative, unrelated case, is choosing for each synset
y a number of lemma names x at random, and computing Rx,y.

Figure 1:
ROC of hypernymy classiﬁcation
based on OrderSketch; the area under the curve
is 0.9733.
We used this scheme with embedding di-
mension d = 100, and 20 random x per synset
in the negative case.
The average deviation
from Rx,y = 1 in the positive case was 6%, and
from zero in the negative case was 9%. By con-
sidering a decision rule Rx,y ⩾T for different
T, we obtain a range of true and false classi-
ﬁcations, with ROC curve shown in Figure 1.
We also explored AUROC, the area under the
ROC, as a function of d; see Figure 1 in the
Appendix, and further results in Section A.3
there. A similar experiment for part-of, that
is, the part-meronym relation, yielded a classi-
ﬁer with 0.985 AUROC, and AUROC 0.986 for
the substance-meronym relation.
5
OrderSketch applied to SnoMeSHNet
Before beginning with applying the embedding algorithm to medical ontologies just as with
Wordnet, we needed to perform an intermediate step of organizing the ontology elements as
synsets and lemmas, during which we formed SnoMeSH, in which we composed related ele-
ments across SNOMEDCT and MeSH (Rogers, 1963) The ordering information in SnoMeSH is
based on the is-a relationship in SNOMEDCT, as it aligns more with how hypernymy is rep-
resented in Wordnet, although there are more ordering relations such as part-of to exploit as
well.
It can also be noted that the provision of synonymous concepts from one ontology as the
lemmas of a synset, corresponding to matching a concept of another ontology, enables contex-
tual information to be captured along with ordering information. While this is explicit during
construction of the SnoMeSH dataset, such synonymy amidst hypernymy can also be present in
synsets of Wordnet for our embedding algorithm to capture. One more point to notice is that
unlike Wordnet, where a single lemma can have multiple senses, here in SnoMeSH we assume
there is only one medical sense, although there is potential in future to explore the granularity
of sense even within medical usage.
We obtain representations OrderSketch(x) of synsets and lemma names of SnoMeSHNet,
using countsketch. We use 500,000 synsets, out of which 100,000 have more than one lemma,
and produced an embedding of dimension d = 500. The area under the ROC curve for this is
0.9723. Further results are given in Section A.4 in the Appendix.
5.1
Additional ﬁndings from SnoMeSH
While building an order embedding using the SnoMeSH dataset, we discovered loops in the
is-a relationship in SNOMEDCT, which we currently handle by detecting strongly connected
components and merging them into single synsets, also altering the concerned synset’s hyper-
nyms and hyponyms. This also presents an opportunity to involve a human-in-the-loop domain

expert, to verify these bad links and directly ﬁx shortcomings in ontologies. In addition to the
ordering information provided through SNOMEDCT, ordering information can also be derived
from MeSH through applied heuristics: when a MeSH concept has synonyms, and the synonyms
are not given as synonyms of each other, then the initial MeSH concept can be regarded as the
hypernym of each of these synonyms, with all the hypernymy chains being of depth 1. Due to
the low depth, we preferred not to use it for our experiments, but is still worth noting.
6
Execution times
The experiments were run on a personal Macbook pro with 16GB memory and processor 2.7 GHz
Quad-Core Intel Core i7 with no graphics processor engaged. The following observations were
made: There was an average 103.2% increase in end-to-end execution time for a doubling up of
dataset size (number of synsets with hypernymy relations) to be processed, while embedding
dimension was kept the same. There was an average of 47.3% increase in end-to-end execution
time for a doubling up of embedding dimension, with size of synsets maintained. A dataset of
500,000 synsets with 100,000 of them having more than one lemma, and an embedding dimen-
sion of 300, takes an end-to-end execution time of 901.898 seconds, that is, about 15 minutes. See
also Section A.5.
7
Future experiments
We have shown that embeddings that embody ordering knowledge from ontolgies are readily
built; we plan to use these embeddings standalone or in combination with contextual embed-
dings on real-world applications and benchmarks such as BLESS dataset. In addition to widely
used benchmarks for this category of embedding technique, we also plan to test the usefulness of
our embedding on specialty real-world applications with sufﬁcient vocabulary overlap, such as
on medical applications, including disease code detection on MIMIC NOTEEVENTS, and other
textual data with sufﬁcient vocabulary overlap with SNOMEDCT and MeSH concepts. In ad-
dition to using our technique for feature representation, we also plan to use our embedding
algorithm to detect cycles in ontologies when the ontology is intended to be hierarchical but is
not (as with SNOMEDCT for example), infer relationships within it (as in MeSH) and across (as
in SnoMeSH) ontologies. We plan to do this more automatically, rather than involving apply-
ing heuristics as we do currently, and use these veriﬁed and established relationships to suggest
completion to properties of entities within and across ontologies.
Given the quick execution time and ability to run on any conﬁguration of even personal
systems, we hope to have our embedding algorithm deployed where domain experts, such as
doctors in the case of medical ontology embedding, can add or edit their local version of the
ontology, and then retrain and obtain new embeddings for text processing nearly instantaneously.
We would also like to develop prototype systems to drive this line of usage.

8
Conclusion
In this work, we presented a low-carbon-footprint method to capture ordering knowledge from
ontologies of any given domain from partial orders, speciﬁcally is-a relationships, and amend-
ing this knowledge using synonymy for synsets or lemmas. Along with this, we provided some
insights into what the graphical representation of the embeddings tell us regarding our current
experiments, and the scope for future work.
