Quantum Capsule Networks
Zidu Liu,1, ∗Pei-Xin Shen,1, 3, ∗Weikang Li,1 L.-M. Duan,1, † and Dong-Ling Deng1, 2, ‡
1Center for Quantum Information, IIIS, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, P. R. China
2Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute, 41th Floor, AI Tower, No. 701 Yunjin Road, Xuhui District, Shanghai 200232, China
3International Research Centre MagTop, Institute of Physics,
Polish Academy of Sciences, Aleja Lotnikow 32/46, PL-02668 Warsaw, Poland
(Dated: December 6, 2022)
Capsule networks, which incorporate the paradigms of connectionism and symbolism, have brought fresh
insights into artiﬁcial intelligence. The capsule, as the building block of capsule networks, is a group of neu-
rons represented by a vector to encode different features of an entity. The information is extracted hierarchi-
cally through capsule layers via routing algorithms. Here, we introduce a quantum capsule network (dubbed
QCapsNet) together with an efﬁcient quantum dynamic routing algorithm. To benchmark the performance of
the QCapsNet, we carry out extensive numerical simulations on the classiﬁcation of handwritten digits and
symmetry-protected topological phases, and show that the QCapsNet can achieve an enhanced accuracy and
outperform conventional quantum classiﬁers evidently. We further unpack the output capsule state and ﬁnd
that a particular subspace may correspond to a human-understandable feature of the input data, which indicates
the potential explainability of such networks. Our work reveals an intriguing prospect of quantum capsule net-
works in quantum machine learning, which may provide a valuable guide towards explainable quantum artiﬁcial
intelligence.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Connectionism and symbolism are two complementary approaches towards artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) [1]. Inspired by biolog-
ical brains, connectionism aims to model the intelligence as an emergent phenomenon by connecting a large number of neurons.
The most popular paradigm of this approach lies on artiﬁcial neural networks. With the recent rise of deep learning [2–5],
connectionism has attracted great attentions and become one of the most promising ways to realize general AI. Noteworthy ex-
amples [4] include feed-forward neural networks, recursive neural networks, recurrent neural networks, and convolutional neural
networks (CNNs). Connectionism AI requires less prior knowledge, which is beneﬁcial for scaling up and broader applications.
Yet, connectionism AI typically treats the machine learning model as a black box, which makes it challenging for human to
explain the rational behind the model’s decisions. In comparison, symbolic AI is based on the logic, deduction, and higher-
level symbolic representations [6, 7]. It enables one to trace back how the decision is made, and seek for the interpretability
of machine learning models. However, such models generally require more sophisticated prior knowledge, which hinders the
widespread application of symbolic AI.
Recently, a new paradigm that incorporates both symbolism and connectionism has become an encouraging trend for AI.
Many attempts have been made [8–11], among which the capsule network (CapsNet) [11–15], as a variant of the traditional
neural network, has become a cutting-edge research area. In analogy to a group of neurons constituting a speciﬁc functional
area of the human brain, the basic unit of CapsNets—capsule—is a set of neurons that used to detect a speciﬁc entity. Such
a capsule is represented by a vector, rather than a scalar in traditional neural networks. In this fashion, a capsule is able to
represent different features of an entity, such as pose, hue, texture, deformation, etc. Furthermore, the norm of the capsule
indicates the likelihood that an entity being captured. During the feed-forward process, the information can be transferred layer
by layer via the routing-by-agreement mechanism [12]: the capsule in the higher-level layer is predicated upon its geometric
relationship (e.g., dot product in the Euclidean space) with the lower-level one. Unlike the max-pooling method throwing away
information about the precise position of entities in CNNs, this routing mechanism used in CapsNets can preserve the geometric
relationships amongst entities. With such geometric information encoded inside the capsule, CapsNets generally have more
intrinsic explainability than CNNs [16, 17].
Quantum computing is based on the computation model following the principles of quantum theory, and is able to harness
the features from the quantum world such as superposition and entanglement. The basic memory units of quantum computing
are quantum bits, which is also referred to as qubits. In general, for a classical register consisting of n bits, the state can be
described by a length-2n vector with 1 for one entry and 0 for all the other entries. For a quantum register consisting of n qubits,
quantum mechanics allows a quantum state to be described by a 2n-dimensional complex vector, which is crucially different
from a single non-zero entry in the classical case and usually called the quantum superposition. With the development and
∗These authors contributed equally to this work.

arXiv:2201.01778v3  [quant-ph]  5 Dec 2022

2
Quantum
dynamic
routing
Capsule
layers
Previous
layers
Capsule
layers
Input
data
FIG. 1. General framework of quantum capsule networks (QCapsNets). The input data is ﬁrst preprocessed in the previous layers to extract
some preliminary features. Within QCapsNets, there are multiple capsules in each layer. Each capsule contains a group of interacting qubits,
which forms a sub-quantum neural network (sub-QNN). The output states of the sub-QNN are represented by quantum states living in the
Hilbert space, which encode features of the entities. Different capsules can represent different entities, such as ears, eyes and mouth of the
panda. The information is processed layer by layer via a quantum dynamic routing algorithm. During the routing procedure, the probability
that the lower-level capsule are assigned to the higher-level one will be updated with their geometric agreements. As such, higher-level
capsules can not only recognize the active entities in the lower layer, but also preserve their geometric relationships. The magnitude of the
output capsule indicates the classiﬁcation probability. This Giant Panda image has been obtained by the author(s) from the Wikimedia website,
where it is stated to have been released into the public domain. It is included within this article on that basis.
ﬂourishing of quantum computing architecture [18–24], the interplay between quantum physics and AI has attracted a wide
range of interests [25–28]. Along this line, many heuristic quantum machine learning models have been proposed, including the
quantum decision tree classiﬁers [29, 30], quantum support vector machines [31], quantum Boltzmann machines [32], quantum
generative models [33–36], quantum convolutional neural networks [37–41], and perception-based quantum neural networks
[42], etc. Some of these works show potential quantum advantages over their classical counterparts, which have boosted the
development of quantum AI [26]. Although some recent efforts have been initiated to interpret behavior of AI in quantum optical
experiments [43], a generally explainable quantum AI is still in its infancy.
Here, inspired by the innovative design of classical CapsNets and the exciting progress in quantum machine learning, we
propose a quantum capsule network (QCapsNet), where interacting qubits are encapsulated into a capsule as the building block
of the architecture. For the feed-forward process between the two adjacent layers, we propose an efﬁcient quantum dynamic
routing algorithm based on the quantum random access memory. We benchmark our model through the classiﬁcation tasks
of both the quantum and classical data, and show that the capsule architecture can increase the accuracy for the quantum
classiﬁers. In addition, the combination of symbolism and connectionism prevents the QCapsNet from being fully a black-box
model. Indeed, in our QCapsNet, a certain subspace of the capsule encodes explainable feature of the input data. We exam
it by tweaking the active output capsule, and show that the one can visualize the variation of a speciﬁc explainable feature
and semantically interpret the model’s output. Our results not only demonstrate an enhanced performance of the QCapsNet in
classiﬁcation tasks, but also reveal its potential explainability, which may pave a way to explore explainable quantum AI. For
future applications, QCapsNet may utilized to handle the tasks of learning from classical and quantum data in an explainable
way, such as assisting the medical diagnosis, recognizing quantum phase transitions [44], etc.
II.
GENERAL FRAMEWORK
A.
Classical capsule networks
To begin with, we ﬁrst brieﬂy recap the essential idea of the CapsNet. In computer graphics, a set of instantiation parameters
is an abstract representation of an entity that is fed into a rendering program so as to generate an image [45]. Here, the entity

3
refers to a segment of an object. For example, nose and mouth are two entities on the face. The motivation behind introducing a
capsule is to encapsulate the instantiation parameters as a vector, and thus predict the presence of a speciﬁc entity. In this respect,
the norm of the capsule vector represents the likelihood that an entity being detected, whereas the components of the capsule
vector encode its corresponding features (instantiation parameters), such as pose, deformation, hue, etc. From this perspective,
the classical CapsNet is intuitively a neural network that attempts to perform inverse graphics.
The preprocessing layers of the classical CapsNets (e.g., the convolutional layer) ﬁrst extract some basic features of the input
data, and then encapsulate these features into several capsules to represent different entities. Given the i-th capsule vector
vl
i in the l-th layer, the prediction vector ul+1
j|i of the j-th capsule in the (l + 1)-th layer is calculated by ul+1
j|i
= Wijvl
i,
where Wij is a weight matrix to be trained by the gradient descent algorithm. After taking into account routing coefﬁcients
rij and a nonlinear normalization function squash [Eq. (A4)], the j-th capsule vector in the (l + 1)-th layer is calculated by
vl+1
j
= squash(P
i rijul+1
j|i ). The routing-by-agreement algorithm is executed by dynamically updating the routing coefﬁcients
rij with the geometric agreement (such as dot product) ul+1
j|i · vl+1
j
. Here, rij reﬂects the probability that the lower-level
capsule is assigned to the higher-level one. After a few iterations, lower-level capsules with strong agreements will dominate the
contribution to the vl+1
j
capsule. The classiﬁcation result can be deduced from the norm of the output capsule vector (activation
probability). We present the explicit expression of the squash function and the routing details in Appendix A . By virtue of this
algorithm, CapsNets can not only extract information from lower-level capsules, but also preserve their geometric relationships
[12]. As a result, CapsNets can address the so-called Picasso problem in image recognition, e.g., an image with an upside-down
position of nose and mouth will not be recognized as a human face in CapsNets. In contrast, CNNs will still classify such an
image as a human face, as the max-pooling method generally neglects the spatial relationship between entities [15].
B.
Quantum capsule networks
We now extend the classical CapsNets to the quantum domain and introduce a QCapsNet model. The general framework of
a QCapsNet is illustrated in Fig. 1. For readers unfamiliar with the capsule architecture, we present comparisons among the
quantum capsule networks, classical capsule networks, and classical neural networks in Table. I. A summary of mathematical
notations is also given in Table. II. This network consists of three crucial ingredients, i.e., the preprocessing layers, the capsule
layers, and the quantum dynamic routing process. The model’s input is ﬁrst fed into the preprocessing layers to extract some
preliminary features. These features are encapsulated into several quantum states and then sent to the capsule layers. Inside each
capsule, there are a group of interacting qubits building up a sub-quantum neural network (sub-QNN). As such, given the i-th
quantum capsule state χl
i in the l-th layer as the input, the parameterized sub-QNN can be regarded as a quantum channel Eij
that generates a prediction quantum state ρl+1
j|i = Eij(χl
i) for the j-th capsule in the (l + 1)-th layer. In order to obtain the j-th
quantum capsule state in the (l + 1)-th layer, χl+1
j
= P
i qijρl+1
j|i , we propose a quantum dynamic routing algorithm. Here, qij
is the routing probability and dynamically updated with the geometric relationship (distance measure) between ρl+1
j|i and χl+1
j
.
As we will show below, such a quantum dynamic routing algorithm is able to evaluate the distance measure of quantum states.
The classiﬁcation results can be read out by measuring the activation probability of capsules in the last layer.
There are several ways to measure the distance of quantum states [46], including the trace distance, ﬁdelity, and the quantum
Wasserstein distance [47, 48]. Here, we utilize the k-th moment overlap between the two mixed quantum states
Ω(ρ, χ) ≡Tr(ρkχk) ,
(1)
as a geometric measurement tool, where k denotes the power of the matrix multiplication. The moment order k serves as a
hyperparameter in controlling the convergence of the iteration: the larger k we choose, the quicker convergence we obtain.
During the quantum dynamic routing process, the overlap between the prediction state and the capsule state Ω(ρl+1
j|i , χl+1
j
)
serves as a quantum geometric agreement. Furthermore, the activation probability of each capsule can be accessed through the
k-th purity of the state:
P(χ) ≡Ω(χ, χ) = Tr(χ2k) .
(2)
As the number of qubits increases, the minimum of the purity will exponentially decay to zero. In addition, since the prediction
quantum state ρl+1
j|i = Eij(χl
i) heavily relies on the quantum process Eij inside each capsule, the speciﬁc structure of sub-QNNs
can have an enormous impact on the performance of QCapsNets. We will investigate several QCapsNets with different capsule
architectures in the following paragraphs.

4
C.
Quantum dynamic routing
We now introduce a quantum dynamic routing process among all the M prediction states {ρl+1
j|i }M
i=1 and the j-th capsule state
χl+1
j
in (l + 1)-th layer, which contains the following two major subroutines.
(i) Measuring the geometric relationship in parallel. In order to leverage the quantum parallelism, we ﬁrst encode the set
of prediction states {ρl+1
j|i }M
i=1 into the bus registers of two qRAM (quantum random access memory) states [49–52], namely,
the input qRAM state σin
j
= 1/M PM
i=1 |i⟩⟨i| ⊗(ρl+1
j|i )⊗k and the output qRAM state σout
j
= PM
i=1 qij |i⟩⟨i| ⊗(ρl+1
j|i )⊗k.
The routing coefﬁcients qij of σout
j
and χl+1
j
are uniformly initialized at 1/M and then dynamically reﬁned by geometric
relationships. Owing to the qRAM structure, we can compute all the k-moment overlaps {Ω(ρl+1
j|i , χl+1
j
)}M
i=1 in parallel by use
of a SWAP test between σin
j and χl+1
j
[53]. Through tracing out the bus register, these geometric relationships can be efﬁciently
encoded into the address register as a diagonal quantum density matrix ωj = PM
i=1 ωij |i⟩⟨i| with
ωij =
1 + Ω(ρl+1
j|i , χl+1
j
)
A
,
A =
M
X
i=1
h
1 + Ω(ρl+1
j|i , χl+1
j
)
i
,
(3)
(ii) Assigning the routing coefﬁcients. With such an overlap state ωj at hand, we can utilize techniques of density matrix
exponentiation [54] and Hamiltonian simulation [55] to generate the following unitary operator,
Uj = exp
 
−i t
A
M
X
i=1
Ω(ρl+1
j|i , χl+1
j
) |i⟩⟨i| ⊗1 ⊗X
!
,
(4)
where 1 is the identity operator in the bus register, the Pauli-X gate acts on the ancilla qubit, and A is a normalization factor
deﬁned in Eq. (3). Next, we apply Uj to the state σin
j ⊗|0⟩⟨0| and project the above ancilla qubit to the |1⟩⟨1| subspace via
post-selection [56]. As a consequence, all these M geometric relationships can be assigned into the routing coefﬁcients of the
output qRAM state σout
j
as
qij ←
|Ω(ρl+1
j|i , χl+1
j
)|2
PM
i=1 |Ω(ρl+1
j|i , χl+1
j
)|2 .
(5)
Subsequently, the new capsule state χl+1
j
can be obtained by tracing out the index qubits of the output qRAM state Trindex(σout
j
) =
PM
i=1 qij(ρl+1
j|i )⊗k. Such a top-down feedback increases the routing coefﬁcient qij for the prediction state ρl+1
j|i that has a large
overlap with the new capsule state χl+1
j
. Repeating the above quantum routing procedure for a few iterations (usually three in
our numerical experiments), the routing coefﬁcients qij generally converge. The explicit implementation and technical details
of the algorithm are presented in the Appendix B.
III.
NUMERICAL EXPERIMENTS
A.
Performance benchmarking
To benchmark the performance of QCapsNets, we carry out some numerical experiments about the classiﬁcation of both clas-
sical (e.g., handwritten digit images) and quantum (e.g., topological states) data. Note that in QCapsNets, we can furnish their
capsules with various sub-QNNs Eij. Different families of sub-QNNs may bear distinct entangling capabilities and represen-
tation power. Thereby in the following numerical experiments, we propose two kinds of QCapsNets with different sub-QNNs,
and then benchmark their performance by the classiﬁcation accuracy. The ﬁrst sub-QNN is the parameterized quantum circuit
(PQC), which has been widely used as a standard ansatz for quantum classiﬁers [57–63]. The second one is the deep quantum
feed-forward neural network (DQFNN), which has been proposed to solve the supervised learning problem [42] and the dynam-
ics of quantum open system [64]. Inside DQFNN, each node represents a qubit, and their connections are given by parameterized
unitary gates. The explicit structures of these two sub-QNNs are shown in the Appendix D. For brevity, we name QCapsNets
equipped with the above two sub-QNNs as PQC-Caps and DQFNN-Caps, respectively. In addition, we use the conventional
parameterized quantum circuit (without any capsule architecture) as a baseline for comparison. We focus on the two-category
classiﬁcation problem, and thus supply the last layer of QCapsNets with two capsules, whose explicit structures are discussed in
the Appendix C.

5
𝜶
𝑷𝒄
Epochs
10!
10"#
10"$
10"%
0
10
20
30
(c)
Inaccuracy
(b)
(a)
Inaccuracy
Number of parameters
Number of parameters
FIG. 2. Numerical results of QCapsNets for classiﬁcations of handwritten-digit images and symmetry-protected topological states. (a)-(b)
show the inaccuracy of the MNIST training and test datasets after the convergence, respectively, as a function of the number of parameters.
For concrete comparisons, we equip the QCapsNets with two different sub-QNNs inside the capsule, namely the parameterized quantum cir-
cuit (PQC) [see the structure in Fig. 8(a)], and the deep quantum feed-forward neural network (DQFNN) [where the structure is represented
in Fig. 8(b)]. Their corresponding QCapsNets are dubbed PQC-Caps and DQFNN-Caps, respectively. The baseline for comparison is a
parameterized quantum circuit without any capsule architecture [see the PQC structure in Fig. 8(a)]. Each point refers to the averaged conver-
gence results of three replicated trials, and the error bar indicates one standard deviation. (c) shows the training inaccuracy of QCapsNets for
symmetry-protected topological states with respect to the training epochs. Here we use the DQFNN-Caps structure. The training data contains
20000 states, which are generated by uniformly sampling the model’s parameter α from 0 to 2. We ﬁnd that after 40 epochs, the inaccuracy
of the training dataset can be less than 10−2. The activation probabilities Pc of two output capsules are plotted in the inset by varying α from
0.8 to 1.2. The ◦dot indicates a right classiﬁcation result while the × dot refers to a wrong one. This result shows that our trained QCapsNet
can locate the quantum phase transition point near α = 1.
Classical
CNN
Tomography
Classical
Feed-forward
Loss 1
Loss 2
Primary
capsules
Digit
capsules
Quantum
dynamic 
routing
…
Encoder
Decoder
Quantum Layers
(a)
Ground Truth:
Prediction:
Ground Truth:
Prediction:
(b)
FIG. 3. Reconstruction of handwritten-digit images with QCapsNets. (a) The architecture of the reconstruction networks. We use a classical
CNN to extract some preliminary features of the input image, and then encode its output into nine primary capsules in the quantum layers.
Through quantum dynamic routing process, the essential features of input images are encoded into two digit capsules. Each capsule in
the quantum layers is composed of four qubits. We select the capsule with the largest activation probability [Eq. (2)] for quantum state
tomography, and feed its classical representation to the classical feed-forward network to reconstruct the input image. The loss function of this
model includes two parts. The ﬁrst part requires the measurement results of the digit capsules, and the second part evaluates the reconstruction
error of the decoder networks. (b) The reconstruction results with QCapsNets. Here, we present images with two different labels, i.e., “3” and
“6”. For comparison, we show the input (ground truth) data in the ﬁrst row and the reconstruction result (prediction) in the second row.
We ﬁrst apply QCapsNets to the classiﬁcation of handwritten digit images in the MNIST dataset [65], which has been widely
considered to be a good “toy model” for various machine learning paradigms. In Fig. 2(a)-(b), we plot the scaling of inaccuracy as
a function of the number of parameters in QCapsNets for the training and test dataset, respectively. As the number of parameters
increases, the averaged inaccuracy of both QCapsNets is reduced to less than 2 × 10−2, which surpasses the performance of the
baseline. Therefore, given the same number of parameters, owing to the capsule architecture and the quantum dynamic routing
mechanism, QCapsNets can extract the information more effectively and may possess an enhanced representation power than
the conventional parameterized quantum circuits [see the speciﬁc structure of the parameterized quantum circuit in Fig. 8(a)].
In addition to classical data, QCapsNets also apply to quantum input data. To this end, we further use the QCapsNet as a
quantum classiﬁer for the symmetry-protected topological (SPT) states. Speciﬁcally, we consider the following cluster-Ising

6
𝑥
Thickness
(a)
𝑧
Stretch
(b)
𝑧
𝑧
𝑧
𝑧
Rotation
(c)
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
𝜃
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
𝜃
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
𝜃
FIG. 4.
Variations of handwritten-digit images with different perturbations on the active digit capsule. (a) We apply a x-axis rotation
U = e−iθX1 on the ﬁrst qubit in the active digit capsule, which shows a variation of the thickness in the reconstruction images. (b) We apply
a z-axis rotation U = e−iθZ4 on the last qubit in the active digit capsule, which indicates a stretch behavior in the reconstruction images. (c)
We apply a global z-axis rotation U = e−iθZ1Z2Z3Z4 on the active digit capsule. The reconstruction images are rotated in different angles,
along with a slight deformation. The perturbation parameter θ is tweaked from −0.2 to 0.2 by intervals of 0.06.
model, whose Hamiltonian reads [66]:
H(α) = −
n
X
j=1
Xj−1ZjXj+1 + α
n
X
j=1
YjYj+1,
(6)
where the Pauli matrices Xj, Yj, Zj act on the j-th spin and n is the total number of spins. The parameter α indicates the strength
of the nearest coupling. This model is exactly solvable and exhibits a well-understood quantum phase transition point at α = 1.
There is an antiferromagnetic phase for α > 1, while a Z2 ×Z2 SPT phase for α < 1 (characterized by a non-local string order).
The training data is a set of ground states of Hamiltonian H(α), which is generated by uniformly sampling α from 0 to 2 under
the periodic boundary condition. In this example, the capsule structure of our QCapsNet is ﬁxed to be DQFNN.
As shown in Fig. 2(c), the inaccuracy of the training dataset can drop below 10−2 within 40 epochs. After training, we
generate 80 ground states as the test dataset, with α ranging from 0.8 to 1.2. In the inset, we feed the trained QCapsNets with
the test dataset, and plot the activation probability Pc of two output capsules as a function of α. In the regime far from the
critical point, as the magnitudes of Pc signiﬁcantly depart away, our QCapsNet can precisely distinguish two different phases. In
addition, the phase transition point can be inferred from the intersection of Pc. Although there are some tiny ﬂuctuations near the
quantum phase transition point due to ﬁnite-size effects, the critical point estimated by the QCapsNet is 1.01, i.e., only a small
deviation from the exact value. The loss function and the explicit activation probability of capsules are given in the Appendix C.
B.
Visualize the capsule subspace
We have demonstrated the enhanced performance of QCapsNets in the classiﬁcation tasks. Yet, if one would like to further uti-
lize QCapsNets for making critical decisions (e.g., self-driving cars and medical diagnostics) [67], it is of crucial importance to
understand, trust, and explain the rational behind the model’s decisions. In the ﬁeld of computer vision and machine learning, ex-
plainability aims to investigate how the parameters of neural networks affect the classiﬁcation results in a human-understandable
way. For instance, the heatmap (class activation mapping) enables us to visualize which feature dominates the ﬁnal prediction in
CNNs [68]. Likewise, we would like to explore the potential explainability of QCapsNets through the following reconstruction
scheme. We remark that our goal is to investigate whether QCapsNets could extract some explainable information from the
input data. Hence, we adopt a classical-quantum hybrid architecture to alleviate the limitation of classically simulating quantum
neural networks.
In Fig. 3(a), we attach the QCapsNet to a classical encoder (CNN) and a classical decoder (feed-forward network), and use
the whole network to reconstruct the input image from the MNIST dataset. The ﬁrst two procedures are similar to the ones in
the classiﬁcation task. Some basic features of the image are ﬁrst extracted by the classical encoder, and then encapsulated into
nine primary capsules in the quantum layers. Through quantum dynamic routing process, high-level features are encoded into
two digit capsules. We pick up the capsule state with the largest activation probability, and feed it into the classical feedforward
network to reconstruct the input image. In order to obtain a classical representation of the chosen capsule state χ, we perform
quantum state tomography by measuring the observables under the Pauli basis, i.e. Tr(χσx,y,z,I), respectively.
To guide the
active capsule to capture more intrinsic features, we use a composite loss function which takes into account both the classiﬁcation
and reconstruction loss (see the Appendix C for their explicit expressions). After training, the reconstruction results are plotted
in Fig. 3(b), where the ﬁrst row shows the input images (ground truth) and the second row exhibits the reconstruction images

7
(prediction). These reconstruction results are considerably robust while preserving their representative details. We note in
passing that such a classical-quantum hybrid architecture shown in Fig. 3(a) is just for a proof-of-principle demonstration of
the potential explainability. In the future, we could replace the classical neural network with a quantum generative model, and
design an end-to-end quantum reconstruction model to reduce the cost of quantum state tomography.
In the above simulation, we ﬁnd that the most active capsule contains sufﬁcient information to reconstruct the original image.
Hence, the entire Hilbert space of such a quantum capsule state may learn a plenty of variants of the images. As shown
in Refs. [12, 16], adding perturbations into the capsule is one of useful tools to reveal the potential explainability for each
subspace. After the reconstruction process, we can feed a perturbed capsule state to the trained decoder network, and analyze
how the perturbation affects the reconstruction result. As shown in Fig. 4, we test three different types of perturbations on the
digit capsule, with the perturbation parameter θ ranging from −0.2 to 0.2. These perturbations are applied on the digit capsules
before we measure them under the Pauli basis. The ﬁrst type of perturbation we consider is the x-axis rotation U = e−iθX1
on the ﬁrst qubit. In Fig. 4(a), as the perturbation parameter θ gets larger, the strokes of both digits “3” and “6” become
thicker. In Fig. 4(b), we apply a z-axis rotation U = e−iθZ4 on the last qubit. Through tuning the perturbation parameter, both
digits have been squeezed to various degrees. In the Fig. 4(c), we apply a global z-axis rotation U = e−iθZ1Z2Z3Z4 on the
whole active capsule. By tweaking the perturbation parameter, both digits are rotated at different angles, together with a tiny
deformation. These perturbation results indicate that a particular subspace of the digit capsule state could almost represent a
speciﬁc explainable feature of the handwritten images.
IV.
CONCLUSION
We have introduced a QCapsNet model equipped with an efﬁcient quantum dynamic routing algorithm, where the overlaps
between two capsule states can be obtained in parallel. Through the classiﬁcation tasks for both the classical handwritten digits
and symmetry-protected topological states, we found that QCapsNets achieve an enhanced accuracy among quantum classiﬁers
we considered. By virtue of the geometric relationships, QCapsNets can capture the essential features of the input data, and then
encapsulate them into the output capsule. Accordingly, such capsule contains sufﬁcient instantiation parameters to reconstruct
the original data. In particular, one speciﬁc subspace of the output capsule could correspond to a human-understandable feature
of the input data.
Many interesting and important questions remain unexplored and deserve further investigation. First, it would be great inter-
esting to consider different experimental scheme to quantify the geometric relationships between capsules states. Indeed, there
are several works show that such a quantity can be measured with cross-platform veriﬁcation [69, 70], which do not require
a quantum communication and much suitable for the noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) devices [71]. Second, a quan-
tum neural networks may suffer by the barren plateaus problem [72–86], where the gradient of parameters may vanish in any
direction. A good choice of the initial guess of the parameters should be important for the maintain the trainability of QCap-
sNets. Third, the scalability and performance of QCapsNets may be further improved by other quantum routing algorithms.
For instance, a quantum extension of the expectation-maximization routing algorithm [13, 87, 88] might be a good candidate
along this line. In addition, quantum adversarial machine learning has attracted considerable attention recently [61, 89]. It
has been shown that, compared to CNNs, CapsNets are relatively resilient against the adversarial attacks [13]. This inspires a
natural question concerning whether QCapsNets are also more robust to adversarial perturbations than other traditional quantum
classiﬁers.
Furthermore, we may exploit quantum neural tangent kernels to understand the training dynamics of QCapsNets
[90]. Recently, we notice a remarkable paper proposing a dequantized version of the SWAP test [91]. We may try to design
some efﬁcient quantum-inspired algorithms for CapsNets. Finally, such a grouped architecture may shed light on implementing
QCapsNets in a collection of distributed quantum computers that are routed via the quantum internet [92].
V.
