An Intelligent System For Effective Forest Fire 
Detection Using Spatial Data  
K.Angayarkkani  
Senior lecturer 
Department of ComputerApplications 
D.G. Vaishnav College, Arumbakkam, Chennai 
. 
Dr.N.Radhakrishnan 
Geocare Research Foundation 
#23/30, First main Road, 
Pammal, Chennai - 600 075, India 
.
 
 
Abstract— The explosive growth of spatial data and extensive 
utilization of spatial databases emphasize the necessity for the 
automated discovery of spatial knowledge. In modern times, 
spatial data mining has emerged as an area of voluminous 
research. Forest fires are a chief environmental concern, causing 
economical and ecological damage while endangering human 
lives across the world. The fast or early detection of forest fires is 
a vital element for controlling such phenomenon. The application 
of remote sensing is at present a significant method for forest 
fires monitoring, particularly in vast and remote areas. Different 
methods have been presented by researchers for forest fire 
detection. The motivation behind this research is to obtain 
beneficial information from images in the forest spatial data and 
use the same in the determination of regions at the risk of fires by 
utilizing Image Processing and Artificial Intelligence techniques. 
This paper presents an intelligent system to detect the presence of 
forest fires in the forest spatial data using Artificial Neural 
Networks. The digital images in the forest spatial data are 
converted from RGB to XYZ color space and then segmented by 
employing anisotropic diffusion to identify the fire regions. 
Subsequently, Radial Basis Function Neural Network is 
employed in the design of the intelligent system, which is trained 
with the color space values of the segmented fire regions. 
Extensive experimental assessments on publicly available spatial 
data illustrated the efficiency of the proposed system in 
effectively detecting forest fires.  
Keywords- Data Mining, Remote Sensing, Spatial data, Forest 
Fire Detection, Color Space, Segmentation, Anisotropic diffusion, 
Radial Basis Function Neural Network (RBFNN). 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The rapid progress in scientific data collection has led to 
enormous and ever-increasing quantity of data making it 
unfeasible to be manually interpreted. Therefore, the 
development of novel techniques and tools in assist for 
humans, aiding in the transformation of data into useful 
knowledge, has been the heart of the comparatively new and 
interdisciplinary 
research area called 
the 
“Knowledge 
Discovery in Databases (KDD)” [3]. Data mining is the vital 
step in KDD, which facilitates the discovery of buried but 
valuable knowledge from enormous databases. Data Mining is 
formally defined as “The non-trivial extraction of inherent, 
new, and potentially valuable information from databases” 
[5].Data 
mining 
combines 
machine 
learning, 
pattern 
recognition, statistics, databases, and visualization techniques 
into a single unit so as to enhance efficient information 
extraction from large databases [6]. Data mining techniques 
profit a number of fields like marketing, manufacturing, 
process control, fraud detection and network management. 
Other than this, a huge variety of data sets like market basket 
data, web data, DNA data, text data, and spatial data [7] have 
benefited as well.  
The progress in scientific data collection has resulted in 
huge and continuously rising amount of spatial data [1]. Thus 
the need, for automated discovery of spatial knowledge from 
massive amount of spatial data, arises. The process of 
identifying previously hidden but valuable information from 
vast spatial databases is known as spatial data mining. It is 
comparatively tedious to extract patterns of value and interest 
from the spatial databases owing to the complexity of spatial 
data types, spatial relationships, and spatial autocorrelation 
than that of the conventional numeric and categorical data [2]. 
Spatial data mining technologies facilitate the comprehension 
of spatial data, discovery of relationships among spatial and 
non-spatial variables, determination of the spatial distribution 
patterns of a specific phenomenon further supporting the 
envisagement of the pattern trends. The elemental parts of 
spatial data mining are spatial statistics and data mining.  
Spatial data mining techniques involves visual interpretation 
and analysis, spatial and attribute query and selection, 
characterization, generalization and classification, detection of 
spatial and non spatial association rules, clustering analysis and 
spatial regression in addition to a wide variety of other fields 
[8]. 
Spatial data mining and relational data mining vary from 
one another because of the fact that in the former the attributes 
of the neighbors of some object of interest need to be taken into 
consideration as well, since they have a prominent influence on 
the object [9]. Some distinguishing characteristics of spatial 
data that forbid the usage of regular data mining algorithms 
include: (i) rich data types (e.g., extended spatial objects) (ii) 
inherent spatial relationships between the variables, (iii) other 
factors that influence the observations and (iv) spatial 
autocorrelation among the characteristics [2]. The extraction of 
patterns of interest and rules from the spatial data sets like the 
remotely sensed imagery and related ground data significantly 
benefits the application areas like precision agriculture, 
community planning, resource discovery and more[10]. Spatial 
(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security, 
Vol. 7, No. 1, 2010 
202
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

data mining is comprehensively employed in change detection, 
modeling deforestation, disaster analysis, forest fire detection 
and other related fields. Our research focuses on the detection 
of forest fires from the spatial data analogous to forest regions.  
A.  Forest Fires 
For a long time, fires have been a source of trouble. Fires 
have notable influence over the ecological and economic 
utilities of the forest, being a prime constituent in a great 
number of forest ecosystems [11]. Past has witnessed multiple 
instances of forest and wild land fires. Fires play a remarkable 
role in determining landscape structure, pattern and eventually 
the species composition of ecosystems. The integral part of the 
ecological role of the forest fires [13] is formed by the 
controlling factors like the plant community development, soil 
nutrient availability and biological diversity. Fires are 
considered as a significant environmental issue because they 
cause prominent economical and ecological damage despite 
endangering the human lives [12]. Due to the forest fires, 
several hundred million hectares (ha) of forest and other 
vegetation are destroyed every year [14].  
Occasionally, forest fires have forced the evacuation of 
susceptible communities in addition to heavy damages 
amounting to millions of dollars. As per the forest Survey of 
India 19.27% or 63.3 million ha of the Indian land has been 
classified as forest area, of which 38 million ha alone are 
hoarded with resources in great quantity (crown density above 
40%).Thus the country’s forests face a huge threat. 
Degradation caused by forest fires [15] jeopardizes the Indian 
forests. Fires caused huge damage in the year 2007 affecting 
huge territories in addition to the prominent number of human 
casualties [16]. Forest fires remains to be a potential threat to 
ecological systems, infrastructure and human lives. The 
practical and effective option to minimize the damage caused 
by the forest fire is to detect the fires at their early stages and 
reacting fast to prevent the spread of the fire. Hereafter, hefty 
efforts have been taken to ease the early detection of forest 
fires, usually being carried out with the help of human 
surveillance. Forest fire, Drought, Flood and many other 
phenomena especially the ones with large spatial extent are 
some of the spatial phenomena which contain predictable 
spatial patterns that are evident through remote sensing 
Images/products.  
B. Our Contributions 
In our earlier work [45], we have presented an efficient 
forest fire detection system using Fuzzy logic. The primary 
intention of this research is to extract valuable information 
from spatial data and employ them for locating the regions 
vulnerable to forest fire with the aid of Image Processing and 
Artificial Intelligence techniques. This paper presents an 
intelligent system that is capable of detecting forest fires. The 
presented intelligent system utilizes the images in the spatial 
data that corresponds to forest regions, obtained from remote 
sensing. The Radial Basis Function Neural Network is 
employed in the design of the presented intelligent system. The 
images in the forest spatial data with the presence of fires are 
utilized in training the neural network. Initially, the digital 
images in the forest spatial data are converted from RGB to 
XYZ  color space. Then, the segmentation of the image in 
XYZ  color space is carried out with the aid of the renowned 
anisotropic diffusion approach. The XYZ  color space values 
of the regions with fires, resulting from the segmentation, are 
fed as input to training the radial basis function neural network. 
For a given XYZ  color space value of a pixel, the trained 
radial basis function neural network will identify whether that 
pixel corresponds to fire region or not. The presented 
intelligent system effectively detects forest fire, which is very 
well illustrated by the experimental evaluation on the publicly 
available spatial data. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II 
presents a brief review of some recent researches existing in the 
literature related to forest fire detection. A concise description 
of the concepts utilized in the presented intelligent system is 
given in Section III. The proposed intelligent system for 
effective forest fire detection is presented in Section IV. The 
experimental results are given in Section V. The conclusions 
are summed up in Section VI. 
II. REVIEW OF RELATED RESEARCHES 
The proposed research has been motivated by several 
earlier researches in the literature related to forest fire detection 
using spatial data and artificial intelligence techniques. A 
concise description of some of the recent researches is given in 
this section. 
Armando et al. [17] have studied on the automatic 
recognition of smoke signatures in lidar signals attained from 
very small-scale experimental forest fires using neural-network 
algorithms. A scheme of multi-sensorial integrated systems for 
early detection of forest fires has been presented by Ollero et 
al. [18]. The system presented by the authors uses infrared 
images, visual images, and data from sensors, maps and 
models. To facilitate the minimization of perception errors and 
the improvement in reliability of the detection process, it is 
necessary for the integration of sensors, territory knowledge 
and expertise, according to their study.  
An improved fire detection algorithm which provides 
increased sensitivity to smaller, cooler fires as well as a 
significantly lower false alarm rate has been presented by Louis 
Giglio et al. [19].  The Theoretical simulation and high-
resolution Advanced Space borne Thermal Emission and 
Reflection Radiometer (ASTER) scenes are employed to 
establish the performance of their algorithm. Seng Chuan Tay 
et al. [20] have presented an approach to reduce the false 
alarms in the hotspots of forest fire regions which uses 
geographical coordinates of hot spots in forest fire regions for 
detection of likely fire points. The authors employ clustering 
and Hough transformation to determine regular patterns in the 
derived hotspots and classify them as false alarms on the 
assumption that fires generally do not spread in regular patterns 
such as straight lines. In this work demonstrate the application 
of spatial data mining for the reduction of false alarm from the 
set of hot spots is derived from NOAA images. 
A graph based forest fire detection algorithm based on 
spatial outlier detection methods has been presented by Young 
Gi Byun et al. [21]. By using the spatial statistics the authors 
have achieved spatial variation in their algorithm. This 
(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security, 
Vol. 7, No. 1, 2010 
203
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

algorithm illustrates higher user and producer accuracies, when 
compared with the MODIS fire product provided by the NASA 
MODIS science team. The ordinary scatter plot algorithm was 
proved to be inefficient by the authors because it is insensitive 
to small fires, while Moran’s scatter plot was also weak 
because of the numerical criterion’s absence for spatial 
variation which requires a more and less high commission 
error. 
An approach to predict forest fires in Slovenia using 
different data mining techniques has been presented by Daniela 
Stojanova et al. [22]. The authors have employed the predictive 
models based on the data from a GIS (Geographical 
Information System) and the weather prediction model - Aladin 
and MODIS satellite data. The work examined three different 
datasets: one for the Kras region, one for Primorska region and 
one for continental Slovenia. The researchers demonstrated that 
Bagging and boosting of decision trees offers the best results in 
terms of accuracy for all three datasets. Yasar Guneri Sahin 
[23] has proposed a mobile biological sensor system for prior 
detection of forest fires which utilizes animals as mobile 
biological sensors. This system is based on the existing animals 
tracking systems used for the zoological studies. The work 
illustrates that the combination of these fields may lead to 
instantaneous development of animal tracking as well as forest 
fire detection. A number of serious forest fires were detected 
by the system in the earliest, which reduced their effect and 
therefore contributes to the reduction of the speed of global 
warming. 
A fully automated method of forest fire detection from TIR 
satellite images on the basis of random field theory has been 
presented by Florent Lafarge et al. [24]. The results of the 
system rely only on the confidence coefficient. The obtained 
values for the both detection rate and false alarm rate were 
convincing. The estimation of fire propagation direction 
presents interesting information associated to the evolution of 
the fires. In Movaghati et al. [25], the capability of agents to be 
applied in processing of remote sensing imagery has been 
studied. An agent based approach for forest fire detection has 
been presented in this paper. The tests used in MODIS version 
4 contextual fire detection algorithms were used by the agents 
to determine agent behavioral responses. The performance of 
their algorithm was compared against that of MODIS version 4 
contextual 
fire 
detection 
algorithm 
and 
ground-based 
measurements. The results portray a good agreement between 
the algorithms and field data. 
In our earlier work [45], we have presented an efficient 
system to detect forest fires using spatial data collected from 
forest. Image Processing and Artificial Intelligence techniques 
were utilized in the design of the presented system. Anisotropic 
diffusion and fuzzy logic are employed for segmentation and 
fire detection processes respectively. The images are converted 
to YCbCr color space and segmentation is performed. The Cr 
value of YCbCr color space of fire pixels is utilized in the 
formation of fuzzy sets and fuzzy rules are derived from the 
formed fuzzy sets. The publicly available spatial data has been 
employed in the evaluation process. The fuzzy rules derived 
using the presented system, have successfully detected the 
forest fires in the spatial data. 
III. DESCRIPTION OF CONCEPTS UTILIZED IN THE 
PRESENTED INTELLIGENT SYSTEM 
The concepts utilized in the presented intelligent system for 
effective forest fire detection such as color space, anisotropic 
diffusion segmentation and artificial neural networks are 
detailed in this section. 
A.  Color Space Conversion 
A color space is defined as a means by which the 
specification, creation and visualization of colors is performed. 
A computer screen produces colors based on the varied 
combinations of red, green and blue phosphor emission 
required to form a color. Typically color is represented by three 
coordinates or parameters [26]. The location of the color in the 
color space is exemplified by these parameters. Color space 
conversion is defined as the transformation and description of a 
color from one source to another. Normally, color space 
conversion is performed while converting an image that is 
represented in one color space to another color space, with the 
objective of making the translated image appear as similar as 
possible to the original. The commonly used color spaces are 
RGB, CIE XYZ , CIE YUV, CIE L*a*b*, YCbCr and HSV. In 
the proposed intelligent system, the images in RGB color space 
are converted to XYZ color space. 
1)   Cie Xyz Color Space: CIE XYZ  color space [27] is one 
of the first mathematically defined color spaces created by the 
International Commission on Illumination in 1931. Any color 
can be generated as a mixture of three other colors or 
“Tristimuli” and commonly RGB for CRT based systems (TV, 
computer) or XYZ  (fundamental measurements). The XYZ  
color space is defined such that all visible colors can be 
represented using only positive values, and, the Y value is 
luminance. As a result, the colors of the XYZ  primaries 
themselves are invisible [28]. The chromaticity diagram is 
extremely non-linear, in that a vector of unit magnitude 
denoting the difference between two chromaticities is not 
uniformly visible. A 3x3 matrix transform is used to transform 
the RGB values in a particular set of primaries to and from 
CIE XYZ . These transformations involve tristimulus values 
which are a set of three linear-light components that conform 
to the CIE color-matching functions. CIE XYZ  is a special set 
of tristimulus values. The equations to convert RGB into 
XYZ color space are as follows: 










∗










=










B
G
R
Z
Y
X
950227
.0
119193
.0
019334
.0
72169
.0
715160
.0
212671
.0
180423
.0
357580
.0
412453
.0
                 (1) 
B. Anisotropic Diffusion Segmentation  
Image segmentation is defined as a low-level image 
processing task meant for partitioning an image into identical 
regions [29]. The segmentation results can be used to identify 
the regions of interest and objects in the scene that is very 
beneficial to the subsequent image analysis. Because of the fact 
that the inherent multi-features not only possess non linear 
relation independently but also encompass inter-feature 
(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security, 
Vol. 7, No. 1, 2010 
204
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

dependency between R, G, and B, color image segmentation is 
more monotonous when compared to the grey image 
segmentation. In our system, we have employed an anisotropic 
diffusion approach for the segmentation of images in the spatial 
data. The segmentation is carried out on the XYZ  color space 
converted image. 
 Literature offers numerous models of linear and nonlinear 
diffusion for achieving image smoothing and segmentation. 
Nonlinear anisotropic diffusion has been one of the commonly 
used approaches by researchers [30], [31] in their works. The 
anisotropic diffusion enhances the response of edge detection 
algorithms by a series of operations namely: smoothing the 
image interiors to emphasize boundaries for segmentation, 
eliminating the spurious detail and eradicating noise from 
images efficiently [34]. The relaxation processes that 
implement anisotropic diffusion tends to leave out the low 
frequency objects that are complex to be dispersed without 
over-processing the image. 
Anisotropic diffusion in image processing discretizes the 
family of continuous partial differential equations, which 
incorporate both the physical processes of diffusion and the 
Laplacian. Provided that there are no sinks or sources that exist 
[32], the following equation formulates the abovementioned 
process (for any dimension): 
))
,
( 
 )
,
( 
( 
)
,
( 
 
t
x
u
t
x
c
div
t
x
u
t
∇
=
∂
∂
                      (2) 
Diffusion strength is controlled by
)
,
(
t
x
c
. Vector x  
represents the spatial coordinate(s).The ordering parameter is 
the variablet . The function 
)
,
(
t
x
u
 is considered as image 
intensity 
)
,
(
t
x
I
 [33]. 
C. Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) 
Artificial Neural Networks are a branch of the artificial 
intelligence, developed to reproduce human reason and 
intelligence. ANN possesses the abilities to recognize patterns, 
manage data and learn like the brain [35]. The weights and the 
input-output function (transfer function) that is specified for the 
units are used to characterize the behavior of an ANN [37]. The 
most significant pros in using artificial neural networks are 
solving 
the 
very 
complex 
problems 
of 
conventional 
technologies, not formulating an algorithmic solution or using 
the very complex solution [35]. In the presented intelligent 
system, Radial Basis Function Neural Network is employed 
and is detailed below. 
1) Radial Basis Function Neural Network (RBFNN): In the 
late 80’s, a variant of artificial neural network emerged by the 
name, Radial Basis Functions. Nevertheless, their roots are 
well-established in much older pattern recognition techniques 
for instance potential functions, clustering, functional 
approximation, spline interpolation and mixture models [39]. 
Radial Basis Function Neural Network (RBFNN) is based on 
supervised learning. RBF networks were autonomously 
proposed by many researchers [40], [41], [42], [43], [44] and 
are a popular variant to the MultiLayer Perceptron MLP. RBF 
networks are also excellent at modeling non-linear data and 
can be trained in one stage rather than using an iterative 
process as in MLP and also learn the given application 
speedily.  The RBF network has a feed forward structure 
consisting of a single hidden layer of J  locally tuned units, 
which are fully interconnected to an output layer of L  linear 
units. All hidden units concurrently receive the n -
dimensional real valued input vector X  (Figure. 1). The 
prime difference from that of MLP is the absence of hidden-
layer weights. The hidden-unit outputs are not computed using 
the weighted-sum mechanism/sigmoid activation; rather each 
hidden-unit output 
j
Z  is obtained by closeness of the input 
X  to an n -dimensional parameter vector 
j
µ  associated with 
the 
th
j
 hidden unit [4]. The response characteristics of the 
th
j
 hidden unit 
)
,......,
2,1
(
J
j =
 is assumed as, 








−
=
2
j
j
j
X
K
Z
σ
µ
                                   (3) 
Where K  is a strictly positive radially symmetric function 
(kernel) with a unique maximum at its ‘centre’ 
j
µ  and which 
drops off rapidly to zero away from the centre. The parameter 
j
σ  is the width of the receptive field in the input space from 
unit j . This implies that 
j
Z  has an appreciable value only 
when the distance 
j
X
µ
−
 is smaller than the width
j
σ . 
Given an input vector X , the output of the RBF network is the 
L -dimensional activity vectorY , whose 
th
l
 component 
)
,....,
2,1
(
L
l =
is given by [36], 
∑
=
=
J
j
j
lj
l
X
Z
w
X
Y
1
)
(
)
(
                        (4) 
For
1
=
l
, mapping of (3) is similar to a polynomial 
threshold gate. However, in the RBF network, a choice is made 
to use radially symmetric kernels as ‘hidden units’. 
 
Figure1. Radial Basis Function Neural Network (RBFNN) 
(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security, 
Vol. 7, No. 1, 2010 
205
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

RBF networks are best suited for approximating continuous 
or piecewise continuous real-valued mapping
L
n
R
R
f
→
:
, 
where n is sufficiently small. These approximation problems 
include classification problems as a special case. From (3) and 
(4), the RBF network can be viewed as approximating a desired 
function 
)
(X
f
by superposition of non-orthogonal, bell-
shaped basis functions. The degree of accuracy of these RBF 
networks can be controlled by three parameters: the number of 
basis functions used, their location and their width [38].  
IV. INTELLIGENT SYSTEM FOR EFFECTIVE FOREST FIRE 
DETECTION 
The proposed intelligent system for effective detection of 
forest fires is presented in this section. The spatial data 
collected from forest regions are utilized by the presented 
intelligent system. With the aid of the images in the spatial 
data, forest fire detection is performed. The Radial Basis 
Function Neural Network is employed in the design of the 
presented intelligent system. The images in the forest spatial 
data with the presence of fires are employed in training the 
radial basis function neural network. Initially, the images with 
the presence of fires are converted from RGB to XYZ  color 
space. The color space conversion from RGB to XYZ is carried 
out with the help of (1). Figure 2 shows the image in RGB 
color space and its corresponding XYZ color space converted 
image.  
    
 
               (a)                                                                 (b)                             
Figure 2.  a) Image in RGB color space, b) XYZ color space converted image 
Afterwards, the XYZ  color space converted image is 
segmented using anisotropic diffusion segmentation, which 
locates the regions of fire. The result of anisotropic diffusion 
segmentation is depicted in Figure 3. 
 
 
Figure 3. Anisotropic Diffusion Segmented image 
The regions of fire obtained using the segmentation is 
utilized in training the radial basis function neural network. The 
radial basis function neural network is trained with the XYZ  
color space values of the pixels that belong to fire regions. 
With the help of the trained neural network, we can effectively 
detect the presence of forest fires in an image. The presence of 
forest fire in an image is detected using the following steps. 
Initially the image is converted from RGB to XYZ  color 
space. Then, the color space converted image is segmented 
using anisotropic diffusion segmentation. Subsequently, the 
XYZ  color space values of pixels in the segmented regions 
are fed as input to the trained neural network for detecting the 
presence of fires. The designed intelligent system will aid the 
people in surveillance to detect forest fires and to take 
appropriate actions. 
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
This section presents the results obtained from the 
experimentation on the presented intelligent system. The 
proposed intelligent system is implemented in MATLAB 
(Matlab 7.4). The publicly available forest spatial data with the 
presence of fires are employed in training the radial basis 
function neural network. Consequently, forest spatial data with 
and without the presence of fires are fed as input to the 
proposed system for evaluation. The presence of fires is 
detected effectively by the presented intelligent system with the 
aid of the trained neural network. The intermediate results of 
the presented system are depicted in Figure 4. From the results 
we can conclude that the presented intelligent system can be 
used for effectively detecting forest fires in the spatial data 
using artificial intelligence techniques.  
 
  
 
                              (a)                                                      (b)                                   
   
 
                               (c)                                                    (d)                                 
Figure. 4 Intermediate results of the presented intelligent system a) Input 
Image, b) XYZ color space converted image, c) Output of Anisotropic 
Diffusion Segmentation, d) Fire detected Image  
VI. CONCLUSION 
Forest fires cause noteworthy environmental demolition 
while menacing human lives. In the last two decades, a 
significant effort was made to develop automatic detection 
tools that could aid the Fire Management Systems (FMS). The 
three chief trends used for the detection of forest fires are: the 
use of satellite data, infrared/smoke scanners and local sensors 
(e.g. meteorological). In this paper, we have presented an 
intelligent system for effective forest fire detection using 
spatial data. The proposed system made use of image 
processing and artificial intelligence techniques. The images in 
the spatial data, obtained from remote sensing, have been 
(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security, 
Vol. 7, No. 1, 2010 
206
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

utilized by the presented system for the detection of forest fires. 
The color space conversion, anisotropic diffusion segmentation 
and Radial Basis Function Neural Networks have been 
employed in the presented intelligent system. The experimental 
results have demonstrated the effectiveness of the proposed 
intelligent system in detecting forest fires using spatial data.
