See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/283451452
Numerical Atrribute Extraction from Clinical
Texts
RESEARCH · NOVEMBER 2015
DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.1.4763.3365
READS
12
1 AUTHOR:
Sunil Mandhan
Hitachi, Ltd.
2 PUBLICATIONS   0 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Available from: Sunil Mandhan
Retrieved on: 31 January 2016

Extraction and Association of Numerical Attributes and 
Values from Electronic Health Records  
1Sarath P R, 1Sunil Mandhan, and 2Yoshiki Niwa 
1Research and Development Centre, Hitachi India Pvt. Ltd., Bangalore, India 

2Hitachi Ltd., Central Research Laboratory, Japan  

Abstract. This paper describes about information extraction system, which is 
an extension of the system developed by team Hitachi for "Disease/Disorder 
Template filling” task organized by ShARe/CLEF eHealth Evolution Lab 2014. 
In this extension module we focus on extraction of numerical attributes and 
values from discharge summary records and associating correct relation be-
tween attributes and values. We solve the problem in two steps. First step is ex-
traction of numerical attributes and values, which is developed as a Named En-
tity Recognition (NER) model using Stanford NLP libraries. Second step is cor-
rectly associating the attributes to values, which is developed as a relation ex-
traction module in Apache cTAKES framework. We integrated Stanford NER 
model as cTAKES pipeline component and used in relation extraction module. 
Conditional Random Field (CRF) algorithm is used for NER and Support Vec-
tor Machines (SVM) for relation extraction. For attribute value relation extrac-
tion, we observe 95 % accuracy using NER alone and combined accuracy of 87 
% with NER and SVM. 
Keywords: NLP, NER, relation extraction, information extraction, crf, svm 
1 
Introduction 
Healthcare providers are increasingly adopting Electronic Health Record (EHR) sys-
tems to improve the quality of care.  Nowadays EHR data and systems are accessible 
to patients (patient portals) and non-expert clinical professionals. Clinical information 
inside EHR systems are various and mainly are in the form of unstructured text (e.g. 
Discharge Summary). It is difficult for non-expert end users to interpret the docu-
ments which contain many medical abbreviations and jargons [8]. Extracting fre-
quently required information from unstructured clinical text and representing in a 
structured manner will give quick and timely access to patient’s health related data to 
end users. For example information about patient’s body vital signs, blood compo-
nents, drugs etc. are used in day to day operations to understand the progress and 
treatment of patient. Most of such information is in numerical form. In this paper we 
describe about the experiment, developed system and results of numerical attributes 
and related values extraction from discharge summary records. 

1.1 
Problem Description 
Attributes are originated from physical examinations and medical tests required for 
disease diagnosis as well as treatment procedures. For example, blood pressure and 
heart rate are the common and important numerical measurements required for diag-
nosis of almost all the diseases. Table 1 shows some important numerical attributes 
which are prominent in clinical diagnosis and found in discharge summaries [8]. 
Table 1. Types and examples of numerical attributes 
Class 
Examples of attributes 
Vital Signs 
Blood pressure, temperature, pulse, heart rate, 
respiratory rate, oxygen saturation  
Blood Components 
WBC, RBC, hematocrit, platelets count, glucose, 
urea, nitrogen, sodium, potassium, anion gap 
Drug Attributes 
Dosage, quantity, frequency, periodic interval 
Example Sentence. “Her vital signs the following day, she had heart rate of 66, blood 
pressure 120/63, respiratory rate 14, 100% on 5 liters nasal cannula O2 saturation.” 
Manual Annotation. “Her vital signs the following day, she had <attribute-1>heart 
rate<attribute-1> of <value-1>66<value-1>, <attribute-2>blood pressure</attribute-
2> <value-2>120/63</value-2>, <attribute-3>respiratory rate</attribute-3> <value-
3>14</value-3>, <value-4>100%</value-4> on 5 liters nasal cannula <attribute-4>O2 
saturation</attribute-4>.” 
2 
Related Work 
There are many references available for extracting different types of information from 
clinical documents. Identifying medications, tests, procedures [2], symptoms, protein 
names [3], enzyme interactions and protein structures [4] are some examples.  
Other kinds of information extraction include summarization of medical documents to 
a tabular format by identifying the events, time and negativity [9].  
I2B2 [5] and CLEF [6] are the notable workshops which are engaged in organizing 
NLP research challenges in medical domain. The CLEF paper [1] has used SVM for 
relation extraction for detecting relationship between disease and different properties 
of disease like body location, severity, etc. SVM was used in case where more than 
one body locations were present to establish the relationship which body location is 
associated to the disease. 
To the best of our knowledge, we could not find any related work where numerical 
attributes and values extraction from clinical documents is designed and evaluated as 
a relation extraction problem using a combination of supervised machine learning 
techniques. In this paper, we attempt to solve this problem and explain the different 
algorithms with input features and relevant data pre-processing.            

3 
System Architecture 
We solve the problem in two steps. First step is extraction of numerical attributes and 
values, which is developed as a Named Entity Recognition model using Stanford NLP 
libraries. Second step is correctly associating those attributes to values, which is de-
veloped as a relation extraction module in Apache cTAKES framework. We integrat-
ed Stanford NER model as a cTAKES pipeline component and used in relation ex-
tractor. Figure 1 describes the architecture of the developed system. Section 3.1 de-
scribes about algorithm and approaches in attributes and values extraction. Section 3.2 
describes about relation extraction module.  
 
 
Fig. 1. System Architecture 
3.1 
 Attributes and Values Extraction 
We trained a model for Attribute and Value extraction from discharge summaries 
using Stanford NER library. Stanford NER provides a general implementation of 
arbitrary order linear chain Conditional Random Field (CRF) sequence models [10]. It 
can be trained for any task.    
 
3.1.1 
Tokenization: We observed the default Stanford Tokenizer (Penn Treebank 
Tokenizer) splits certain attribute words in discharge summary in an undesired man-
ner as explained with an example below. 
  
Word 
 
Required Tokenization 
Output of Stanford Tokenization 
 
WBC-12.8*# 
WBC, - , 12.08, *, # 
WBC-12, .8, *, # 
 
To avoid this issue we applied a regular expression based preprocessing before input 
data for Tokenization. We replaced the hyphens in certain types of attributes with 
white space as it is harmless to do so. Following regular expression is used for pre-
processing. 
 
Regular expression: ([a-z A-Z]|O3|O2|B12)(-)([0-9])  
 

After preprocessing, we get the following tokenization 
 
Word 
 
Required Tokenization 
Output of Stanford Tokenization 
 
WBC 12.8*# 
WBC, 12.08, *, # 
WBC,12.8, *, # 
 
Modification to the regular expression or new implementation of tokenizer is applica-
ble as and when more issues are detected in tokenization. 
 
3.1.2 
Model Training: From the tokens and our manually annotated discharge 
summaries, we programmatically prepared training data for Stanford CRF Classifier.  
We used the following features from Stanford NER Feature Factory [11] for training 
the CRF model. 
1. Word 
2. Position (word index in sentence) 
3. Word shape feature 
4. Ngrams from word 
5. Disjunctions of words 
3.2 
Relation Extraction 
SVM algorithm is used for establishing the relationship between attribute and value. 
SVM is a distance based method and has proved to be effective for relation extraction 
[1]. The basic idea of using SVM on relationships is to map a relation into a feature 
space and find the maximum margin hyper plane to separate two classes (related and 
not related). 
 
3.2.1 
Model Training: We trained SVM model for relation association using 
manually annotated discharge summaries. Following features are used. 
1. Part of speech 
2. Punctuation 
3. Phrase chunking (Noun phrase, Verb phrase, etc.) 
4. Attribute presence feature: This feature is used to check if there is any other attrib-
ute present between an attribute and value pair for which relationship is being pre-
dicted. Example: 1+ right DP pulse, 2+ left PT pulse In this example, “right DP 
pulse” attribute is present between 1+ (value) and “left PT pulse” (attribute). 
5. Distance feature: This feature captures the distance (number of tokens) between an 
attribute and value pair. Example: Lactate elevated at 6. In this example, distance 
between Lactate (attribute) and 6 (value) is 2. 

4 
Results 
This work being an extension of the previously developed system for CLEF eHealth 
2014 task, we use the same data which was served as training corpus for CLEF 
eHealth 2014 task 2. In this work we have experimented only discharge summary 
records from the available data. We split the total available 136 records into 100 and 
36 for training and test purpose respectively. 
4.1 
Evaluation Criteria 
The matching between detected values and true values in actual data are done in a 
strict manner. These detected values and true values are actually sequences of charac-
ters (i.e. string) in a text. Thus, in the strict evaluation, detected and true values are 
compared literally. 
For example, the true representation for attribute in actual data is “blood pressure”; 
an identified attribute by the system should be identical to it, i.e. “blood pressure” in 
order to be marked as true. Other outputs including matches in substrings like “blood” 
or “pressure” will be marked as false. 
4.2 
Evaluation results 
We share the evaluation results of two runs with different features in Table 2. In Run 
1 we have used all the features described in section 3.1.2 and first three features de-
scribed in section 3.2.1. In Run 2 we have used all the features described in sections 
3.1.2 and 3.2.1.  
Table 2. - Strict evaluation of CRF and SVM 
CRF 
SVM 
Accuracy 
Type 
Run1 
Value 
Run2 
Value 
Accuracy 
Type 
Run1 
Value 
Run2 
Value 
Recall
0.93 
0.93 
Recall 
0.75 
0.83 
Precision
0.97 
0.97 
Precision 
0.92 
0.93 
F-score
0.95 
0.95 
F-score 
0.83 
0.87 
4.3 
Discussion 
The most important finding during this research is that tokenization and feature engi-
neering is very important in NLP based systems.  
Another important finding was the distribution of positive and negative training 
samples. Training data needs to be explicitly checked for the distribution. During the 
relation extraction testing, accuracy was very low and was not improving. It was 
found during debugging of the SVM tool that the training data was extremely biased 

towards negative data samples. This biasing made the SVM classifier classifying 
every test data sample to negative category. After the distribution was corrected and 
biasing was tuned, results were improved drastically. 
5 
Conclusion 
This report describes the approach, algorithms, and tools used in building the numeri-
cal attribute and values extraction. CRF algorithm was evaluated and suggested for 
extracting the attribute and values; it gave 0.95 in F-score. SVM algorithm was evalu-
ated and suggested for relation extraction between an attribute and value, and it gave 
F-score of 0.87. Though the F-score signifies good accuracy figures, still there is 
scope of further improvement by designing new features, cross validation, and en-
sembles of methods (e.g., bagging and AdaBoost). This work can be extended to the 
problem of non-numerical attribute and value extraction (e.g. dosage mentions such as 
‘small dose’, ‘sliding scale’, etc. and frequency information like ‘two weeks’ etc.). 
6
