Read Beyond the Lines: Understanding the Implied
Textual Meaning via A Skim and Intensive Reading
Model
Guoxiu He1

Zhe Gao

Zhuoren Jiang

Yangyang Kang

Changlong Sun

Xiaozhong Liu2

Wei Lu2

Abstract
The nonliteral interpretation of a text is hard to be understood by machine mod-
els due to its high context-sensitivity and heavy usage of ﬁgurative language.
In this study, inspired by human reading comprehension, we propose a novel,
simple, and eﬀective deep neural framework, called Skim and Intensive Reading
Model (SIRM), for ﬁguring out implied textual meaning. The proposed SIRM
consists of two main components, namely the skim reading component and in-
1Work done as an intern at Alibaba Group.
2Corresponding authors.
Preprint submitted to Elsevier
January 17, 2020
arXiv:2001.00572v2  [cs.CL]  16 Jan 2020

tensive reading component.
N-gram features are quickly extracted from the
skim reading component, which is a combination of several convolutional neu-
ral networks, as skim (entire) information.
An intensive reading component
enables a hierarchical investigation for both local (sentence) and global (para-
graph) representation, which encapsulates the current embedding and the con-
textual information with a dense connection. More speciﬁcally, the contextual
information includes the near-neighbor information and the skim information
mentioned above. Finally, besides the normal training loss function, we employ
an adversarial loss function as a penalty over the skim reading component to
eliminate noisy information arisen from special ﬁgurative words in the training
data. To verify the eﬀectiveness, robustness, and eﬃciency of the proposed ar-
chitecture, we conduct extensive comparative experiments on several sarcasm
benchmarks and an industrial spam dataset with metaphors. Experimental re-
sults indicate that (1) the proposed model, which beneﬁts from context modeling
and consideration of ﬁgurative language, outperforms existing state-of-the-art
solutions, with comparable parameter scale and training speed; (2) the SIRM
yields superior robustness in terms of parameter size sensitivity; (3) compared
with ablation and addition variants of the SIRM, the ﬁnal framework is eﬃcient
enough.
Keywords:
Implied Textual Meaning, Semantic Representation, Text
Classiﬁcation, Deep Neural Networks
2010 MSC: 00-01, 99-00
1. Introduction
Language does not always express its literal meaning, e.g., sarcasm and
metaphor. People often use words that deviate from their conventionally ac-
cepted deﬁnitions in order to convey complicated and implied meanings [1]. A
typical example is shown in Figure 1.
Compared with standard (literal) text usage, the non-literal text can be
associated with two typical linguistic phenomena:
2

I refuse to go bungee jumping, 
I came into this world with a broken rope, 
I'm not leaving because of another one.
Xmbilical
cord
UHDO
RQH
Figure 1: This is a typical case, which is a sentence expresses non-literal meaning.
• From syntax and semantic viewpoint, the non-literal text is highly context-
sensitive. People can perceive the implied meaning of text through un-
natural language usage in context. For instance, as Figure 1 shows, ‘rope’
has two diﬀerent meanings: literal meaning for ‘bungee jumping’ and im-
plied meaning (‘umbilical cord’) for ‘came into this world’. People can tell
the diﬀerence after digesting the whole sentence.
• From a lexicon viewpoint, the non-literal text is often created by pre-
senting words that are equated, compared, or associated with normally
unrelated or ﬁgurative meanings. These words express diﬀerent or
even opposite meanings, which could change the word distribution under
a semantic topic or sentiment polarity and then hinder the training of
machine models. In addition, some of these words frequently appearing in
the training set will mislead the machine model in the inference process.
For instance, no matter how many times ‘rope’ refers to ‘umbilical cord’
in the training set, we can not assert that it conveys the same meaning in
a new coming text.
Existing text representation studies, which mainly rely on content embed-
dings [2] based deep neural networks [3] such as Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs), Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), and Attention Mechanisms,
are not totally suitable for aforementioned problems. RNNs, such as Long Short
Term Memory (LSTM) [4], Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) [5], and Simple Re-
current Unit (SRU) [6] draw on the idea of the language model [7]. However,
3

RNNs, including bidirectional ones, could neglect the long-term dependency, as
demonstrated in [8, 9, 10], since the current term directly depends on the previ-
ous term as opposed to the entire information. Although attention mechanisms
[11] over RNNs provide an important potential to aggregate all hidden states,
they focus more on the local part of a text. CNNs [12] can characterize local spa-
tial features and then assemble these features by deeper layers which are expert
in extracting phrase-level features. Self-attention mechanism [13] characterizes
the dependency on one term with others in the input sequence and then encodes
the mutual relationship to capture the contextual information. Unfortunately,
all standard text representation models have not eﬀectively utilized the contex-
tual representation as input directly when encoding the current term, which is
necessary to understand the implied meaning. There are also several tailored
models for sarcasm detection [1], which concentrate more on word incongruity
in the text.
1.1. Research Objectives
Hence, the study aims to cope with the following drawbacks which can be
summarized as follows:
• Existing text representation models don’t speciﬁcally design a mechanism
to eﬀectively use context/global information when understanding the im-
plied meaning of the input text.
• Meanwhile, all existing models neglect the potential bad eﬀect of the ﬁg-
urative words which can be frequently appearing in the training set of
implied texts.
• Existing methods do not take into account both model complexity and
model performance at the time of design, which can be very important in
practical applications.
To this end, we try to design a simple and eﬀective model to interpret the
implied meaning by overcoming the challenges mentioned above. From a hu-
man reading comprehension viewpoint, to understand a diﬃcult text, a human
4

may ﬁrstly skim it quickly to estimate the entire information of the target text.
Then, in order to consume the content, he/she can read the text word by word
and sentence by sentence with respect to the entire information. Inspired by
the above procedure, in this study, we propose a novel deep neural network,
namely Skim and Intensive Reading Model (SIRM), to address the implied tex-
tual meaning identifying problem. Furthermore, a human can skip some noisy
or unimportant ﬁgurative phrases seen before to quickly consume the main idea
of the target text. An adversarial loss is used in SIRM to achieve the same
eﬀect. To the best of our knowledge, SIRM is the ﬁrst model trying to simulate
such human reading procedure for understanding and identifying the non-literal
text.
Furthermore, taking eﬃciency into consideration, we design the details of the
proposed SIRM under the Occam’s Razor: ‘More things should not be used than
are necessary’. In other words, under the premise of optimal task performance,
we will remove unnecessary components and use the simplest architecture.
1.2. Contributions
Brieﬂy, given the above research objectives, our main contributions of this
work can be summarized as follows:
• The challenges of understanding the implied textual meaning is well in-
vestigated in this research, which can be summarized as follows: context-
sensitive and usage of ﬁgurative meaning. To the best of our knowledge,
these challenges have not been thoroughly studied.
• We propose the SIRM to understand implied textual meaning where the
intensive reading component, which enables a hierarchical investigation for
sentence and paragraph representation, depends on the global information
extracted by the skim reading component. The cooperation of the skim
reading component and the intensive reading component in the SIRM
achieves a positive impact on comprehending nonliteral interpretation by
modeling the global contextual information directly.
5

• We introduce an adversarial loss as a penalty over the skim reading compo-
nent to cut down noise due to special ﬁgurative words during the training
procedure.
• We conduct extensive comparative experiments to show the eﬀectiveness,
robustness, and eﬃciency of the SIRM. Compared with the existing al-
ternative models, the SIRM achieves superior performance on F1 score
and accuracy with a comparable parameter size and training speed. In
addition, the SIRM outperforms all other models according to model ro-
bustness. And the ablation and addition tests show that the ﬁnal SIRM
is eﬃcient enough.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Some related works are
summarized in Section 2 and the details of the proposed SIRM are introduced
in Section 3. Section 4 presents the experimental settings which is followed by
results and analyses in Section 5. Our concluding remarks in Section 6.
2. Related Work
This work is related to deep neural networks and semantic representation
for text understanding.
Recently, a large number of CNNs and RNNs with potential beneﬁts have
attracted many researchers’ attention. Existing eﬀorts mainly focus on the ap-
plication of LSTM [4, 14, 15], GRU [5, 16], SRU [6], and CNNs [12, 17, 18] based
on word embeddings [2, 19] drawing on the idea of either language model [7, 20]
or spatial parameter sharing.
And all these models have demonstrated im-
pressive results in NLP applications. Many previous works have shown that
the performance of deep neural networks can be improved by attention mech-
anism [21, 22]. In addition, self-attention mechanism with position embedding
characterizes the mutual relationship between one and others as dependency to
capture the semantic encoding information [13]. There are some other works
that combine RNN and CNN for text classiﬁcation [23, 24] or use hierarchical
6

structure for language modeling [25, 11]. Besides hybrid neural networks, graph
based models [26, 27] and human behavior enhanced models [28] are widely
employed to capture textural semantics.
Recently, sarcasm detection, one of the implied semantic recognitions, is
widely studied by linguistic researchers [29, 30, 31, 32, 33]. [34] proves that it
is important to consider several valuable expressive forms to capture the senti-
ment orientation of the messages. And external sentiment analysis resources are
beneﬁt for sarcasm detection [35]. Furthermore, [1] realizes a neural network
to represent a sentence by comparing word-to-word embeddings which achieves
the state-of-the-art performance. More speciﬁcally, an intra-attention mecha-
nism allows their model to search for conﬂict sentiments as well as maintain
compositional information.
However, all these approaches mentioned above don’t speciﬁcally make good
use of the contextual representation as a direct input when understanding the
implied meaning and they never worry about the possible noise such as special
ﬁgurative phrases in the training data.
3. Skim and Intensive Reading Model
In this section, we propose a novel deep neural network inspired by read-
ing comprehension procedure of people, namely Skim and Intensive Reading
Model (SIRM), to address the essential issues for understanding texts with im-
plied meanings. The architecture of the model is depicted in Figure 2.
3.1. Overview
People always consume a diﬃcult text word by word and sentence by sen-
tence with respect to the global information extracted by reading quickly. Be-
sides the input layer and the embedding layer, the SIRM consists of two main
parts which are the skim reading component (SRC) associated with an adver-
sarial loss and the intensive reading component (IRC) simulate the procedure
of human reading comprehension. And for eﬃciency concern, the model is de-
signed under the Occam’s razor, which means we use the simplest and minimal
7

Input
Embedding
IRC
SRC
Output
Adv. 
Ouput
Word / Position Embedding
Global Representation
Hierarchical Investigation
Dependency
Concat
Gradient Reverse
Figure 2: This is the architecture of the proposed SIRM, mainly including a skim reading
component, an intensive reading component, and an adversarial loss. Each part of the SIRM
is designed under the Occam’s razor.
component to realize each part of the SIRM. More speciﬁcally, the SRC is a set
of shallow CNNs to enable global feature extraction, while the IRC is a hier-
archical framework to enhance the contextual information, from sentence level
to paragraph level. Finally, over the output layer, a common cross entropy and
an adversarial loss are utilized to represent the cost function of the end-to-end
deep neural network.
3.2. Input
Each example of this task is represented as a set (p, y), where input p =
[s1, · · · , sm] is a paragraph with m sentences, si = [wi,1, · · · , wi,n] is i−th sen-
tence in paragraph p with n words, and y ∈Y where Y = {0, 1} is the label
representing the category of p. We can represent the task as estimating the con-
ditional probability Pr(y|p) based on the training set, and identifying whether
a testing example belongs to the target class by y′ = argmaxy∈Y Pr(y|p).
8

3.3. Word Embedding
The goal of word embedding layer is to represent j−th word wi,j in sentence
si with a de dimensional dense vector xij ∈Rde. Given an input paragraph p,
it will be represented as P = [S1, · · · , Sm] ∈Rm×n×de, where each represen-
tation of sentence is a matrix Si = [xi,1, · · · , xi,n] ∈Rn×de consisting of word
embedding vectors of i−th sentence.
3.4. Position Embedding
Position information can be potentially important for text understanding.
In the SIRM, two types of position information are encoded, word position in
a sentence, and sentence position in a paragraph. By leveraging the position
encoding method from [13], word/sentence positions are captured via sine and
cosine functions of diﬀerent frequencies to the input embeddings. Furthermore,
the positional encodings have the same dimension as the corresponding embed-
ding matrix, so that the results can be easily aggregated. The mathematical
formulas are shown as follows:
Upos,2i = sin(pos/100002i/de) ,
Upos,2i+1 = cos(pos/100002i/de) ,
(1)
where pos is the position and i denotes the dimension. Moreover, for any ﬁxed
oﬀset k, Upos+k can be represented as a sinusoidal function of Upos.
After that, we add corresponding position embedding matrix U1:n to each
sentence embedding matrix Si:
S′
i = Si + U1:n = [x′
i,1, x′
i,2, · · · , x′
i,n] .
(2)
3.5. Skim Reading Component (SRC)
Since each word and sentence with implied textual meaning can be highly
dependent on the contextual information, the proposed model needs to charac-
terize the dynamic entire information with a quick manner like a human shown
in Figure 3.
9

w1
w2
w3
x’1
x’2
x’3
h=1
c1
g
Input
Embedding
wmn
x’mn


h=2
c1
h=3
c1
h=1
cmm
h=2
cmm
h=3
cmm
h=1
h=2
h=3
avg pooling
avg pooling
avg pooling
concat
Skim Information
ˆc
ˆc
ˆc
Figure 3: The SRC characterizes the entire information via convolutional neural networks
with diﬀerent kernel/window size.
A tailored CNN employs three key functions, e.g., sparse interaction, param-
eter sharing, and equivariant representation [24], which can encode the partial
spatial information. Hence, in the SRC, we use CNN layers with diﬀerent win-
dow sizes in order to extract features like n-gram. Given a paragraph embedding
ˆP ∈Rm·n×de reshaped from P , the global feature is extracted as follows:
g = SRC( ˆP ) .
(3)
More speciﬁcally, dc convolution ﬁlters are applied to a window of h words
to produce a corresponding local feature. For example, a feature ci ∈Rdc is
generated from a window of words ˆPi:i+h−1:
ci = ReLU(Wc ∗ˆPi:i+h−1 + bc) ,
(4)
where ∗denotes the convolutional operation and the feature map from ﬁlter
with the same shape is represented as C = [c1, c2, · · · , cm·n−h+1].
We then apply an average-over-time pooling operation over the feature map
10

and obtain the feature as follows:
ˆc =
1
m · n −h + 1
m·n−h+1
X
i
ci .
(5)
In this part, we utilize ﬁlters with c kinds of window size to extract more
accurate relevant information by taking the consecutive words (e.g., n-gram)
into account, and then concatenate all ˆc from these ﬁlters to get the global
semantic feature mentioned above which is represented as g, where g ∈Rc·dc.
3.6. Intensive Reading Component (IRC)
Inspired by the human reading comprehension procedure, the IRC employs
a hierarchical framework to characterize and explore the implied semantic in-
formation from sentence level to paragraph level. In other words, the sentence
encoding outcomes will be used as the input of the paragraph-level part. The
structure of IRC is shown in Figure 4.
wi,j-1
wi,j
wi,j+1
x’i,j-1
x’i,j
x’i,j+1
ui,j
+
g
oi,j
Concat
Near-Neighbor Information
MLP
Skim Information
Input
Embedding
Aggregation Information
Figure 4: The IRC encodes the current embedding, the near-neighbor information, and the
skim information with a dense connection.
For sentence-level part (IRCS), given i−th sentence embedding S′
i from
embedding layer with position embedding and the global information g from
11

the SRC, the sentence encoding information is extracted as a vector shown
below:
oi = IRCS(S′
i, g) ,
(6)
and the paragraph embedding information is represented as a matrix: O =
[o1, o2, · · · , om].
Before paragraph-level model (IRCP ), a corresponding position embedding
matrix U is added to O:
O′ = O + U1:m .
(7)
Then, the paragraph is encoded as a vector shown below:
oP = IRCP (O′, g) .
(8)
Note that both IRCS and IRCP share the same structure, but the trainable
parameter values are quite diﬀerent. The detailed component descriptions can
be found as follows.
3.6.1. Near-Neighbor Information Encoder
For people, in order to understand the implied meaning of the current
word/sentence, besides the entire information of the whole paragraph, the near-
neighbor information around the word/sentence, in a size 2·k+1 word/sentence
window, also plays an important role in characterizing the contextual informa-
tion of the target word/sentence.
Hence, we pad both k words/sentences at the head and tail for input sentence
embedding S′
i or paragraph embedding O′, respectively. Taking the sentence-
level part as an example, dns ﬁlters, with window size 2 · k + 1, are applied to
produce the near-neighbor information. So, the near-neighbor information of
j−th word in i−th sentence is represented as a vector uij ∈Rdns:
ui,j = f(Wns ∗S′
i,j−k:j+k + bns) .
(9)
Finally, the near-neighbor information of all words in i−th sentence is en-
coded as a matrix: Ui = [ui,1, ui,2, · · · , ui,n]. The near-neighbor information is
an important part of contextual information for the current word.
12

3.6.2. Dense Connection
To comprehensively understand implied semantics of a given text, the main
eﬀort of this work is to take advantage of the contextual information as a guid-
ance and dependency to each word/sentence like people always do. Hence, in-
spired by [36], the most direct idea is to concatenate the entire information (the
skim information), the near-neighbor information, and the pure word/sentence
embedding, and then feed them into a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP), also named
dense connection layer, to realize an aggregate encoding. Taking the sentence-
level part as an example, the aggregate encoding is achieved as below:
ti,j = [g ⊕ui,j ⊕x′
i,j] ,
oi,j = relu(Wls · ti,j + bls) ,
(10)
where ⊕is the concatenation operation.
Eventually, i−th sentence from sentence-level model is encoded as oi ∈Rdas:
oi = 1
n
n
X
j
oi,j .
(11)
For paragraph-level IRC, the outputs from the near-neighbor information
encoder and the aggregate encoder are represented as UP ∈Rm×dnp and oP ∈
Rdap, respectively.
Note that, a gate mechanism [5] could replace the dense connection and an
attention mechanism [11] could replace the last average pooling. The results of
comparison are shown in Figure 6.
3.7. Output
Undertaking the paragraph encoding g and oP from the SRC and IRC re-
spectively, a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) is applied to generate the output y′:
y′ = σ(Wo · (oP ⊕g) + bo) .
(12)
Here, the output y′ is the probability of the target category.
13

3.8. Model Training with Adversarial Learning
In the SIRM, the skim information g is extracted from a set of shallow CNNs.
Because this feature is similar to n-gram instead of deep semantic representation,
it can be polluted by the noisy information such like special phrases highly
related to the training data, e.g., some special ﬁgurative phrases.
Hence, the proposed model should be able to penalize the features strongly
associated with the training data, while the general features should be boosted
for the IRC optimization.
In this study, we implement this idea by utilizing an adversarial learning
mechanism when training the model. For more theoretical details, refer to [37,
38, 39, 40]. Speciﬁcally, we add a MLP over the SRC shown as follows:
y′′ = softmax(Wg · g + bg) .
(13)
Since the n-gram based global feature tends to be overﬁtting during training
procedure, we expect g to have a bit low performance when directly connecting
to the output.
In a word, the ﬁnal loss needs to minimize the normal loss and maximize
the adversarial learning based loss, which is represented as:
ζ(y, y′, y′′) = minζ(y, y′) + maxλ · ζadv(y, y′′) ,
(14)
where both ζ and ζadv are the negative log likelihood and λ is an adjustment fac-
tor which is far less than 1. In addition, ζadv is named as adversarial loss (Adv)
in this paper.
The SIRM is an end-to-end deep neural network, which can be trained by
using stochastic gradient descent (SGD) methods, such as Adam [41]. More
implementation details will be given in the experiments section. In addition, all
W and b mentioned above are weight matrix and bias respectively.
4. Experiments
In this section, we conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the proposed
SIRM against baseline models and several variants of SIRM. As a byproduct
14

of this study, we release the codes and the hyper-parameter settings to beneﬁt
other researchers.
4.1. Datasets
In order to validate the performance of the proposed SIRM and make it
comparable with alternative baseline models, we conduct our experiments on
three publicly available benchmark datasets about sarcasm detection and one
real-world industrial spam detection dataset with metaphor.
Details for all
datasets are summarized in Table 1 and described as below:
Table 1: Statistics for all datasets: l is the length of text and +/- is the proportion of positive
and negative samples.
Name
Train Size
Test Size
Total Size
Max l
Min l
Avg l
+/-
Tweets/ghosh
50,736
3,680
54,416
56
6
17
1/1
Reddit/movies
13,535
1,504
15,039
129
6
13
1/1
IAC/v1
1,483
371
1,854
1,045
6
57
1/1
Industry/spam
20,609
6,871
27,480
3,447
149
393
1/3
• Sarcasm Benchmark Datasets: Followed by previous works, we use Tweets/ghosh1
collected by [32, 42] from Tweets, Reddit/movies2 collected by [43] from
Reddit, and IAC/v13 collected from Internet Argument Corpus (IAC)
by [44] in this study.
• Industrial Dataset: We also evaluate the performance of the proposed
SIRM on a Chinese online novel collection about spam detection with
metaphor. The spam novels are ﬁrstly complained/reported by readers,
e.g., parents of children/teenagers, and then conﬁrmed by auditors. Note
that the authors of these novels may purposely avoid using the explicit
and sensitive words instead of ﬁgurative words because of the censorship.
1https://github.com/AniSkywalker/SarcasmDetection
2http://nlp.cs.princeton.edu/SARC/0.0/
3https://nlds.soe.ucsc.edu/sarcasm1
15

4.2. Baselines
We employ the following baseline models (also see Table 3) for compari-
son, including word embedding [2] based shallow neural networks, deep learning
based models, and recent state-of-the-art models:
NBOW [45]: is a simple model based on word embeddings with average
pooling.
CNN [46]: is a simple CNN model with average pooling using diﬀerent
kernels. There are 7 kinds of ﬁlters whose widths are from 1 to 7 and each has
100 diﬀerent ones.
LSTM [4]: is a vanilla Long Short-Term Memory Network.
We set the
LSTM dimension to 100.
Atten-LSTM [11]: is a LSTM applying an attention mechanism.
The
dimension is set to 100.
GRNN [47]:
employs a gated pooling method and a standard pooling
method to extract content features and contextual features respectively from
a gated recurrent neural network. This model has been demonstrated improve-
ment compared to feature engineering based traditional models for sarcasm
detection.
SIARN and MIARN [1]: capture incongruities between words with an
intra-attention mechanism.
A single-dimension intra-attention and a multi-
dimension one are employed by SIARN and MIARN respectively. Both of them
are the state-of-the-art models for sarcasm detection. We use the default set-
tings by the authors.
Self-Atten [13]: is the state-of-the-art model from Google to encode deep
semantic information using self-attention mechanism4.
For the feasibility of
training because of the large scale parameters, we set all dimensions as 64 just
like ours and other hyper-parameters are same as given settings.
4https://github.com/tensorflow/models/tree/master/official
16

4.3. Evaluation Metrics
We choose to report parameter size (Param) and running time (Time) for
evaluating the eﬃciency of the proposed SIRM. More speciﬁcally, the unit of the
parameter size is thousand, and the whole running time of the NBOW is selected
as the unit of Time. For eﬀectiveness, we select Macro-Averaged F1 score (M
F1) to show the performance for the label-balanced datasets and employ F1
score (F1) for label-unbalanced dataset. In addition, we report accuracy (Acc)
for all of datasets.
4.4. Experiment Settings
For experiment fairness, we exploit the same data preprocessing as [1]. For
the SIRM, the number of convolution ﬁlters dc in the SRC is 16 and the window
size h is from 1 to 4. The near-neighbor size k is 1. The dimension d of all
other layers are all set to 64. The adjustment factor λ for adversarial loss is
1 × 10−6. In addition, the learning rate is 1 × 10−3 and the batch size is 64.
For Chinese novel dataset, we use JIEBA5 for tokenization. Furthermore, the
statistical signiﬁcance is conducted via the t-test with p-value< 10−3.
5. Results and Analysis
In this section, we give detailed experimental results and analysis to show
insights into our model.
5.1. Performance Comparison
The parameter size, the running time, and the performance of the SIRM
compared with baseline models are shown in Table 2 and Table 3.
NBOW realizes a decent performance for all datasets, especially for Red-
dit/movies. More importantly, NBOW has the lowest parameter size and achieves
the least time cost. That means the NBOW can be a good choice in the vast
majority of cases, also demonstrated by [45, 48].
5https://github.com/fxsjy/jieba
17

Table 2: Experimental results of eﬃciency comparison.
Model
Param
Time
NBOW
10.3
1
CNN
30.3
2
LSTM
60.6
18
Atten-LSTM
71.0
22
GRNN
131.0
33
SIARN
100.9
150
MIARN
102.3
180
Self-Atten
254.9
17
SIRM
63.7
2
Table 3: Experimental results of performance comparison.
Tweets/gosh
Reddit/movies
IAC/v1
Industry/spam
Model
M F1
Acc
M F1
Acc
M F1
Acc
F1
Acc
NBOW
72.42
69.37
68.50
68.18
61.32
59.61
84.96
92.25
CNN
74.84
74.54
65.50
65.03
60.98
58.40
85.46
92.42
LSTM
75.08
75.16
67.71
66.74
44.73
53.84
82.16
90.86
Atten-LSTM
75.15
73.73
65.20
63.84
61.80
60.46
83.74
91.40
GRNN
79.43
79.24
64.59
63.19
52.45
54.78
86.30
93.04
SIARN
78.84
79.59
67.50
68.17
60.86
61.33
77.73
92.91
MIARN
72.71
72.31
63.44
62.12
55.74
58.95
86.14
92.25
Self-Atten
76.01
75.19
66.29
65.47
61.32
60.12
86.99
93.48
SIRM
82.54∗
82.38∗
70.01∗
69.94∗
63.01∗
62.13∗
88.18∗
93.94∗
Unfortunately, the standard text representation models, such as CNN, LSTM,
Atten-LSTM, and GRNN, don’t outperform NBOW signiﬁcantly. And they can
not even achieve a stable performance across all datasets because of the lack of
the training data. For example, the GRNN performs well on Tweets/gosh and
Industry/spam, but works worse on Reddit/movies and IAC/v1. The state-of-
18

the-art models SIARN, MIARN, and Self-Atten don’t perform well as expected
in this work intuitively. With more parameters and running time cost, these
models may be even worse than NBOW. Moreover, RNN based models take
more time than other models.
The proposed SIRM signiﬁcantly outperforms all the baseline models accord-
ing to accuracy and F1 score. It is clear that the proposed SIRM, along with
SRC, IRC, and Adv, can be more stable on all datasets which have the diverse
data sizes and text lengths, with architecture specially designed to simulate
human’s reading comprehension process. Furthermore, other recent advanced
models do not perform well due to the indiﬀerence of contextual information
(for the word/sentence) and the bad impact of ﬁgurative expression. For ex-
ample, SIRM makes it to identify [Tweets/ghosh: sarcasm] ‘Do you know what
I love? Apartment construction at 7 a.m. 3 mornings in a row!’, but SIARN
and Self-Atten fail to do so. The reason may be that words in the last two sen-
tences look irrelevant or not explicitly contradictory to the ﬁrst sentence, which
will mislead the two models. But, the SIRM can capture the real meaning by
reading each word/sentence with the global knowledge.
It’s worth mentioning that the parameter size and running time cost of the
SIRM is comparable with all baselines. That is because we haven’t used any
recurrent unit which means the SIRM can be totally parallel during training
and testing.
5.2. Parameter Size Sensitivity
As shown in Figure 5, parameter size sensitivity of the proposed SIRM
against other baseline models is investigated based on Tweets/gosh. It is ob-
vious that the proposed SIRM outperforms all representative baseline models,
especially the tailored and state-of-the-art model for sarcasm detection, SIARN,
according to macro F1 score and accuracy with all alternative parameter sizes.
In contrast, Self-Atten achieves a lower score even than NBOW at the low-
est dimension setting while the NBOW reaches the most stable performance
among all alternative dimension settings. All these evidences demonstrate the
19

Figure 5: Results of comparison for parameter size sensitivity: x-axis is main dimension of
the model.
robustness and superiority of the proposed SIRM.
5.3. Ablation and Addition of SIRM
For eﬃciency purpose, we design each part of the SIRM with respect to
Occam’s razor. Hence, we investigate the impact for complexity of the SIRM
shown in Figure 6. By removing each part, such as IRC, SRC, and Adv, there
is a decrease compared with the SIRM. That is because each part of the SIRM
plays a diﬀerent, necessary, and important role for implied semantic meaning
understanding across diﬀerent datasets. Meanwhile, we ﬁnd that using a more
sophisticated component to replace the simple one is not advisable. Gate and
attention mechanisms don’t make performance increase. In particular, the more
complex the model, the more space it will take.
20

Figure 6: The performance of ablation and addition for the SIRM: - denotes the ablation and
+ denotes the addition.
6. Conclusion
In this study, we propose a novel model, SIRM, for understanding and iden-
tifying the implied textual meaning with a quick manner. In SIRM, the SRC is
designed to capture the dynamic global information, while the IRC is employed
to characterize the ﬁne semantics via a hierarchical framework by taking the
contextual information into consideration with the dense connection. In ad-
dition, the adversarial loss is applied over the SRC to eliminate the potential
noise. We conduct extensive experiments on several sarcasm benchmarks and
an industrial spam dataset with metaphor. The results indicate that the pro-
posed model practically outperforms all alternatives, in the light of performance,
robustness, and eﬃciency.
21

7. Acknowledgments
This work is supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China
(71473183, 61876003) and Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Univer-
sities (18lgpy62).
