Augmentation Scheme for Dealing with Imbalanced
Network Trafﬁc Classiﬁcation Using Deep Learning
Ramin Hasibi∗, Matin Shokri†, and Mehdi Dehghan Takht Fooladi∗
∗Department of Computer Engineering and Information Technology
Amirkabir University of Technology

†Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
K. N. Toosi University of Technology

Abstract—One of the most important tasks in network man-
agement is identifying different types of trafﬁc ﬂows. As a result,
a type of management service, called Network Trafﬁc Classiﬁer
(NTC), has been introduced. One type of NTCs that has gained
huge attention in recent years applies deep learning on packets in
order to classify ﬂows. Internet is an imbalanced environment i.e.,
some classes of applications are a lot more populated than others
e.g., HTTP. Additionally, one of the challenges in deep learning
methods is that they do not perform well in imbalanced environ-
ments in terms of evaluation metrics such as precision, recall,
and F1 measure. In order to solve this problem, we recommend
the use of augmentation methods to balance the dataset. In this
paper, we propose a novel data augmentation approach based
on the use of Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) networks for
generating trafﬁc ﬂow patterns and Kernel Density Estimation
(KDE) for replicating the numerical features of each class. First,
we use the LSTM network in order to learn and generate the
sequence of packets in a ﬂow for classes with less population.
Then, we complete the features of the sequence with generating
random values based on the distribution of a certain feature,
which will be estimated using KDE. Finally, we compare the
training of a Convolutional Recurrent Neural Network (CRNN)
in large-scale imbalanced, sampled, and augmented datasets. The
contribution of our augmentation scheme is then evaluated on all
of the datasets through measurements of precision, recall, and F1
measure for every class of application. The results demonstrate
that our scheme is well suited for network trafﬁc ﬂow datasets
and improves the performance of deep learning algorithms when
it comes to above-mentioned metrics.
Index
Terms—Augmentation,
Deep
Learning,
Imbalanced
Data, Kernel Density Estimation, Large Scale Data, Long Short
Term Memory Networks, Network Management, Trafﬁc Classi-
ﬁcation.
I. INTRODUCTION
With the ever-increasing amount of trafﬁc that goes through
the network, network management has become a difﬁcult task.
One of the most important tasks in network management
is identifying the types of trafﬁc that are passing through
the network. Classifying the applications is a fairly simple
task with high evaluation metrics. Additionally, NTCs have
been able to take care of this matter efﬁciently. Two major
purposes of NTCs are detecting anomalies in the network
and classiﬁcation of applications for Quality of Service (QOS)
purposes [1], [2]. There have been several types of NTCs that
use different methods for handling the task at hand, however,
each one has its own drawbacks. These methods are generally
divided into three categories as follows
• Port-based: This approach is not efﬁcient since some
applications do not use a speciﬁc port e.g., Bittorrent.
Moreover, if the port is changed, this method is no longer
reliable [1].
• Deep Packet Inspection (DPI): These applications use
the patterns in the payloads of packets for classiﬁcation.
They generally have three major drawbacks. The ﬁrst one
is that they need to be updated with new patterns in the
payloads of emerging applications [1]. In addition, they
are not able to identify all of the ﬂows. Furthermore, if we
do not have access to the payload of packets for privacy
reasons, their accuracy is very much affected.
• Machine Learning based: The ﬂaws of the two above
methods has gained attention to the third type of classi-
ﬁers, which use machine learning and speciﬁcally deep
learning algorithms. This type of algorithms usually work
with the features in the header of the packets, but some
of them may also take into account the information in
the payloads [1], [3]. Although they are still limited,
they have shown great potential in terms of evaluation
metrics and will be a great substitution in the future for
the aforementioned methods.
Most of the traces that are gathered from real Internet
trafﬁc are imbalanced i.e., some types of application ﬂows are
generally more populated than others e.g., HTTP [4]–[7]. This
matter is a lot bolder when it comes to large-scale trafﬁc and
will cause some serious problems in the way of algorithms’
F1 measure.
Augmentation is an approach in machine learning that
addresses the issue of small amount of data for training. This
approach usually tries to increase the training data in a way
that can be still classiﬁed in the same category. Augmentation
is a popular method used especially in image classiﬁcation
[8] and can be done through methods like cropping, zooming,
rotating, and ﬁlliping vertically or horizontally. Another way
of achieving augmentation is through generating artiﬁcial data
for a class.
In order to address the challenges of machine learning
arXiv:1901.00204v1  [cs.NI]  1 Jan 2019

algorithms in imbalanced network datasets, we introduce a
novel augmentation method to improve the accuracy of deep
learning algorithms on real-world trafﬁc traces by using KDE
and LSTM.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In
section II we review the related works in the area of NTCs. In
section III we describe our augmentation scheme. The dataset
and deep learning model that was used in order to classify the
trafﬁc traces are mentioned in sections IV and V, respectively.
Finally, the evaluation of our method is demonstrated in
section VI.
II. RELATED WORKS
Due to the high variety in the classes, datasets, and perfor-
mance metrics that are used in this area, having a comparison
between the works in this subject is a difﬁcult task [1]. Con-
sidering this, there are several well-known pieces of research
that are done up to this point.
There are several works that have applied deep learning
architectures or neural networks in order to solve the classi-
ﬁcation problem. In [1] Lopez-Martin et al. have presented a
deep Convolutional Recurrent Neural Network architecture in
order to classify network ﬂows and have found the best setting
in that environment in terms of hyper-parameters and feature
set. Nevertheless, they have not taken any measures to handle
the imbalance problem of their dataset. Additionally, the scale
of their dataset is approximately ﬁfth of the one that we are
using.
In [9] Rahul et al. have also proposed using Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) in order to classify network trafﬁc
but only consider three classes of applications in their work
on a limited amount of data.
In [3] a comparison between CNN and Stacked Auto-
Encoders in order to classify not only types of trafﬁc but
also applications in the network in a standard VPN/none-VPN
dataset in packet level has been given. The scheme that was
used, unlike ours, relies on the features from both header
and payload of packets which may not be available in some
privacy-preserving datasets.
Finally, in [10] Auld et al. have deploy a Bayesian neu-
ral network in the form of a multi-layer perception and
accordingly classify their dataset. In this work, the lowest
performance metrics are from the classes with the lowest
number of data.
Some works in this area have attempted to battle the imbal-
anced property through different measures. In [11] Rotsos et
al. have introduced a method through Probabilistic Graphical
Models for semi-supervised learning in a Naive Bayes model.
For their learning, they have assumed a Dirichlet distribution
prior for the classes with high α value. This is based on the
assumption that some classes have a higher probability than
others.
In addition, in [5], an augmentation method has been pro-
posed by using an Auxiliary Classiﬁer Generative Adversarial
Network (AC-GAN), although only two classes of network is
considered: SSH and none-SSH. Furthermore, their method is
Table I: Features of each ﬂow
Feature
Type
Source port
Numerical
Destination port
Inter-arrival time
Payload length
Direction of packet
Sequential
TCP window size
only evaluated on traditional machine learning algorithms like
Support Vector Machines, Random Forest, and Naive Bayes.
Also [6] has presented a new feature extraction method using
a divide and conquer approach for an imbalanced dataset in
the network.
As an instance of LSTM used for generating sequential
data, [12] has introduced a method to generate data using
LSTM and evaluated the method to show that it can capture
the temporal features in the dataset. LSTM has also been
used as an augmentation tool in works such as [13] and
[14] for generating handwriting and human movement data,
respectively, and has proven to be efﬁcient in both cases.
III. AUGMENTATION SCHEME FOR GENERATING TIME
SERIES NETWORK DATA
In this section, we describe our contribution of augmentation
scheme for generating new data in network trafﬁc traces.
Every ﬂow in the network has the same 5-tuple attributes:
• Source IP address.
• Destination IP address.
• Source port number.
• Destination port number.
• Link layer protocol e.g., TCP and UDP.
Every application in the internet creates a ﬂow of packets
between communicating peers [15].
In order to represent ﬂows in our work, we have to choose
a set of features for each one that can capture the nature of a
ﬂow. According to [1], the appropriate set of features that will
give acceptable results for classifying ﬂows are mentioned in
Table I. These features are gathered for the ﬁrst 20 packets
of each ﬂow, which are more than enough for capturing the
temporal and spatial features of a ﬂow.
As shown in Table I, we can put the features in two
categories: sequential and numerical. Each group has its own
way of augmentation which are described in the following.
A. Generating sequential features
In this section, we demonstrate our approach to generating
sequential features.
As mentioned earlier, trafﬁc ﬂow comprises the sequence of
packets that are transmitted between a source and a destination.
Some applications are uni-directional i.e., the packets are only
transmitted in one direction e.g., uploading a data. However,
in some type of applications, packets go in both directions
such as when a client is communicating with the server and
gets a response for its request. Whether a packet is sent from

source or destination depends on the sequence of packets that
have already been sent up to this point in the ﬂow. Therefore,
we can conclude that the sequence of directions of packets
in a speciﬁc application is of time-series nature and can be
generated through means of sequence generation like in [13],
[14]. TCP window size is another feature of the ﬂow that is
dependent on the previous values in the ﬂow. Generally, this
value is an indicator of the conditions of the connection and
processing speed of data in the ﬂow [16]. Thus, its amount at
each step of the ﬂow is affected by previous steps’ values.
One of the most common ways to generate a sequence
is using Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), which try to
learn the patterns in time-series data e.g., speech, music, text,
etc [17]. In our work, we use one type of RNNs called
LSTM networks [18]. Each LSTM block tries to learn the
probability distribution in a step of a sequence whilst taking
into consideration the information from previous steps.
In order to train the network, we gathered the patterns of
packet directions in a ﬂow for up to 20 packets in a class of
ﬂow application. We encode every direction by 1 or 0 with
the former being from source to destination and the latter is
the other way around. At the end of each sequence, we put
a unique character as an indicator of the ending of the ﬂow.
Then every sequence is shifted by one character to the right
and is used as labels in order to train each step of generation
in LSTM.
In the generation phase, ﬁrst, we choose a direction based
on the distribution of that direction in the dataset for the ﬁrst
time step and give that as input to the LSTM. Afterwards,
we use the output of each step as probability distribution
of each character (1, 0, or ending character) and generate a
new direction. Then, we feed that output direction to LSTM
in order to generate next step probabilities. The maximum
number of steps are 19 in order to generate the pattern of
ﬂow up to 20 packets (ﬁrst packet is always from source to
destination). Let xt and ht denote the direction of the packet
in the dataset and the generated direction by the LSTM at
time step t, respectively. Therefore, the generation process is
demonstrated in Fig. 1.
In order to generate window size values, we use the same
scheme, although the characters in this case are the values of
window sizes in our dataset instead of 0 and 1.
B. Generating numerical features
In this section, we describe our method of generating
numerical features of a ﬂow.
As shown in Table I, we consider four numerical features
for each packet of the ﬂow. In order to generate new samples
from these features, ﬁrst, we need to learn their probability
distribution. Since these features are not sequential, we can
use conventional probability density distribution estimation
methods. One of these methods is KDE that is in the category
of kernel methods.
KDE, also known as the Parzen–Rosenblatt window, is one
of the most famous methods used to estimate the probability
density function of a dataset. KDE, as a non-parametric density
Fig. 1. Generating 19 time steps of packet sequence with LSTM
estimator, does not have any assumptions about the density
function as opposed to the parametric family of algorithms.
This method will learn the shape of the density from the
data automatically. This ﬂexibility that arises from its non-
parametric nature, makes KDE a very popular method for data
drawn from a complicated distribution.
Let X = {x1, x2, ..., xn} denote the set of independent
and identically distributed random samples from a group of
features e.g., inter-arrival time and K(x) : IRd 7→IR denote
the probability distribution function (PDF) of the kernel of our
choosing. Then we can estimate the PDF of X by
ˆp =
1
nhd
n
X
i=1
K(x −xi
h
),
(1)
where ˆp is the estimated PDF of X and h > 0 is the bandwidth
of the kernel that is used to control the smoothing degree of
the kernel [19], [20].
The common examples of K(x) is Gaussian distribution with
µ = 0 and σ = 1 as expressed by
K(x) =
1
√
2π e−(x)2/2,
(2)
which is also used for our scheme.
In order to prevent bias-variance problem in ﬁxed h cases,
we used the bandwidth selection method represented in [21].
According to [21] if a Gaussian kernel is used, it can be shown
that the optimal value of h is h∗=

4ˆσ5
3n
 1
5 .
IV. DATASET
In this section, we describe our dataset and its labeling
method.
For this paper, we used real traces of trafﬁc from the
campus of Amirkabir University of Technology that includes
more than 70 gigabytes of packets from UDP and TCP link
layer protocols. Next, we label ﬂows using nDPI, which is
an open source DPI tool released by ntop for classifying the
ﬂows based on applications [22]. The reason for our choice

Table II: Classes of applications
Class
Number of Flows
HTTP
58774
DNS
126960
NTP
4633
BitTorrent
6146
HTTP Download
16326
SSL No Cert
10603
Steam
4460
RDP
1425
SSL
341846
SSH
9746
Facebook
2772
Twitter
2198
Google
96072
WindowsUpdate
2343
Telegram
186256
Instagram
6683
Microsoft
18196
PlayStore
5304
YouTube
3747
Fig. 2. the percentage of different classes of applications in our
dataset.
of labeling tool is that according to [23], nDPI is the most
accurate open-source DPI tool among available DPI tools.
Nineteen classes of trafﬁc from more than 50 gigabytes of
packets were chosen which include 904490 ﬂows. 85 percent
of these ﬂows were chosen for training and the rest are used
for test dataset. The classes of applications are the ones with
the most number of instances in the dataset and can be seen
in Table II.
As shown in Table II, there are different classes of appli-
cations in our dataset and the names of our labels are chosen
based on the labels given by nDPI. The percentage of each
class is shown in Fig. 2.
As demonstrated by the bar chart, the imbalance feature of
the dataset is clear. The most populated class of appliaction
Algorithm 1 Augmentation process
Input set C of classes with low population
Output set ˆC of generated ﬂows
1: for each c ∈C do
2:
pd ←pattern of directions in c
3:
ptcp ←pattern of TCP windows in c
4:
Train LSTMs for each pattern in p and ptcp
5:
ˆpd ←generated direction patterns from LSTM
6:
ˆptcp ←generated TCP window patterns from LSTM
7:
ˆp ←ˆpd ∪ˆptcp
8:
NF ←sets of Numerical features in c
9:
for each set nf ∈NF do
10:
PDF(nf) ≈KDE(nf)
11:
rs ←generated random samples from PDF(nf)
12:
end for
13:
gen flows ←new data from rs and ˆp based on [1]
14:
ˆC ←ˆC ∪gen flows
15: end for
is SSL with more than 37 percent of the population and the
least populated class is RDP with less than 0.16 percent. Fur-
thermore, more than 83 percent of the whole dataset consists
of only 4 classes. Additionally, 10 classes have less than 1
percent, which are the less populated classes and therefore,
some of them are expected to be susceptible to low evaluation
metrics.
V. CLASSIFICATION SCHEME
In this section we explain the classiﬁcation scheme that was
used to test our augmentation.
The classiﬁcation process mainly consists of two stages:
• Augmentation phase.
• Training phase.
A. Augmentation
In the augmentation phase, we generate new data from
classes that have less population in the dataset. First, we train
and use LSTM to generate the pattern of directions and TCP
windows sizes in the ﬂow. After that, we estimate the PDFs of
every single numerical feature using KDE. Then, according to
these PDFs, we generate points in every feature domain. These
points are our generated features for the packets. Finally, we
generate up to 20 packets per ﬂow and put these features in an
array of size 6*20 (6 features from 20 packets). If the number
of packets in the generated sequence is less than 20, the rest
of the array is appended with 0. These arrays will comprise
the generated dataset.
The pseudo-code for the augmentation process is given in
Algorithm 1.
B. Training
Next, we train a Convolutional Recurrent Neural Network
on the augmented dataset. In order to do this, we choose
the architecture that was suggested in [1]. This architecture
includes two Convolution layers, the sizes of which are 32*4*2

and 64*4*2, respectively. Each of these layers is followed by
a Batch Normalization (BN) layer. After that, the output of the
last BN is put in time-series format and is fed into an LSTM
layer of 100 hidden units. At the end of the architecture, there
are two Fully-Connected (FC) layers, each with 100 and 108
hidden nodes and dropout rates of 0.2 and 0.4, respectively.
These are followed by a soft-max layer with 19 outputs, each
corresponding to 19 classes of trafﬁc. The activation function
of every layer in this architecture, except for the soft-max
layer, is Relu function.
VI. EVALUATION
In this section, we present the evaluation results of the
model on three different datasets.
In order to fully discover the advantages of our method,
three sets of datasets are prepared:
• Actual data: The exact dataset from section IV.
• Sampled data: Dataset of section IV over-sampled using
[24].
• Augmented data: Dataset of section IV augmented using
our method.
The method of sampling in [24] is a simple yet effective
approach to handle the problem of imbalanced classiﬁcation
and is widely used in many works such as in [3].
Classes NTP, Facebook, twitter, WindowsUpdate, Insta-
gram, PlayStore, and YouTube are chosen for augmentation
and over-sampling because the CRNN network gets the worst
results in these classes. Furthermore, these are the classes that
have low number of samples in the dataset.
The evaluation metrics that are chosen to measure the
performance of our approach are those that are mostly used
for imbalanced datasets and give an appropriate analysis of
the methods that are employed. These metrics are precision,
recall, accuracy, and F1 measure, whose formulas are given
in the following.
Precision =
TP
TP + FP,
(3)
Recall =
TP
TP + FN,
(4)
Accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN.
(5)
The TP, FP, TN, and FN in above formulas depict true
positive, false positive, true negative, and false negative values,
respectively.
F1 = 2 ∗Precision × Recall
Precision + Recall.
(6)
The F1 measure shows the overall performance of algorithm
on both precision and recall.
In Fig. 3 the precision metric for all three datasets is
given. Although in some classes with less instances that have
been augmented like Playstore and Instagram, there has been
a slight decrease in precision, others have mostly had an
Fig. 3. Precision measure comparison of per class in the dataset
Fig. 4. Recall measure comparison of per class in the dataset
improvement in this matter. In some cases, the sampled dataset
performed better than our method such as BitTorrent and
Google, but due to the lack of generalization, we can see that
in a class like Playstore, which is sampled in large scales, this
method has a huge decrease in the results. Furthermore, the
number of classes that are improved by our augmentation is
more than those that performed better in sampled dataset.
Fig. 4 depicts the recall of each class in three separate
datasets. In every augmented class, there is a clear upgrade
in recall measure. This is due the fact that the number of
FN predictions are less for these classes compared to the
normal dataset. This might have some negative effect on the

Fig. 5. F1 measure comparison of per class in the dataset
Fig. 6. Comparison of Total Precision, Recall, and F1 measure
resulted from both methods
over-populated class of DNS, but for others this metric is
improved. Due to higher generality in our augmentation, it is
obvious that the amount of increase in recall in our approach is
higher than sampling in augmented classes in every instance.
Moreover, sampling has caused a decrease in recall in 12
classes compared to actual dataset.
Fig. 5 illustrates the F1 measure in all the classes of the
dataset. This ﬁgure veriﬁes the fact that overall performance
of our method is better than sampling in each and every one
of the classes.
Fig. 6 shows the overall measures on the whole datasets. As
Fig. 7. Confusion matrix resulted from the actual dataset
Fig. 8. Confusion matrix resulted from the augmented dataset
shown in this ﬁgure, although sampling improved the recall,
it has also a slight decrease in precision due to the lack of
generalization. However, the overall performance as shown by
the increase, albeit a small one, on the F1 is better than the
actual dataset. On the other hand in our method, in all three
metrics, there is a noticeable improvement which is more than
any that is caused by sampling method.
Fig. 7 and Fig. 8 illustrate the confusion matrices of actual
and augmented datasets, respectively. As shown in Fig. 7
classes of HTTP, DNS, and SSL, which have high number
of instances in the dataset, have noticeable negative effect
on majority of classes’ prediction. Fig. 8 shows that our

method is able to improve this matter and lessen the number of
false predictions. Additionally, the number of true positives in
HTTP and SSL is increased. Although DNS predictions have
less true positives, the number of false negatives is diminished.
Moreover, the overall accuracy in our method is increased by
6.56 percent.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed an augmentation method for
imbalanced network trafﬁc classiﬁcation on real trafﬁc traces
based on LSTM and KDE. In order to compare the per-
formance of our scheme, we considered two sampled and
augmented datasets. The results that are obtained from CRNN
show that our approach gets better results in overall measures
of precision, recall, and F1.
