Non-Parametric Learning of
Lifted Restricted Boltzmann Machines
Navdeep Kaura,∗, Gautam Kunapulia, Sriraam Natarajana
aThe University of Texas at Dallas
Abstract
We consider the problem of discriminatively learning restricted Boltzmann ma-
chines in the presence of relational data. Unlike previous approaches that em-
ploy a rule learner (for structure learning) and a weight learner (for parameter
learning) sequentially, we develop a gradient-boosted approach that performs
both simultaneously. Our approach learns a set of weak relational regression
trees, whose paths from root to leaf are conjunctive clauses and represent the
structure, and whose leaf values represent the parameters. When the learned
relational regression trees are transformed into a lifted RBM, its hidden nodes
are precisely the conjunctive clauses derived from the relational regression trees.
This leads to a more interpretable and explainable model. Our empirical evalu-
ations clearly demonstrate this aspect, while displaying no loss in eﬀectiveness
of the learned models.
Keywords:
Restricted Boltzmann Machines, Learning Lifted Models,
Functional Gradient Boosting
1. Introduction
Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBMs,
[1]) have emerged as one of the
most popular probabilistic learning methods. Coupled with advances in theory
of learning RBMs: contrastive divergence (CD,
[2]), persistent CD [3], and
parallel tempering [4] to name a few, their applicability has been extended to
∗Corresponding author

Preprint submitted to Journal of Approximate Reasoning
January 29, 2020
arXiv:2001.10070v1  [cs.LG]  9 Jan 2020

a variety of tasks [5]. While successful, most of these models have been typi-
cally used with a ﬂat feature representation (vectors, matrices, tensors) and not
necessarily in the context of relational data. In problems where data is rela-
tional, these approaches typically ﬂatten the data by either propositionalizing
them or constructing embeddings that allowed them to employ standard RBMs.
This results in the loss of “natural” interpretability that is inherent to relational
representations, as well as a possible decline in performance due to imperfect
propositionalization/embedding.
Consequently, there has been recent interest in developing neural models that
directly operate on relational data. Speciﬁcally, signiﬁcant research has been
conducted on developing graph convolutional neural networks [6] that model
graph data (a restricted form of relational data). Most traditional truly rela-
tional/logical learning methods [7, 8] are capable of learning with data of sig-
niﬁcantly greater complexity, including hypergraphs. Such representations have
also been recently adapted to learning neural models [9, 10, 11]. One recent
approach in this direction is Lifted RBMs [12], where relational random walks
were learned over data (eﬀectively, randomized compound relational features)
and then employed as input layer to an RBM.
While reasonably successful, this method still propositionalized relational
features by constructing two forms of data aggregates: counts and existentials.
Motivated by this limitation, we propose a full, lifted RBM (LRBM), where the
inherent representation is relational. Additionally, the LRBM can be learned
without signiﬁcant feature engineering, that is, a key component of our approach
is discovering the structure of lifted RBMs. We propose a gradient-boosting
approach for learning both the structure and parameters of LRBMs
simultaneously. The resulting hidden nodes are newly discovered features,
represented as conjunctions of logical predicates.
These hidden layers are learned using the machinery of functional-gradient
boosting [13] on relational data. The idea is to learn a sequence of relational
regression trees (RRTs) and then transform them to an LRBM by identifying
appropriate transformations. There are a few salient features of our approach:
2

(1) in addition to being well-studied and widely used [14, 15, 16, 17], RRTs
can be parallelized and adapted easily to new, real-world domains; (2) our ap-
proach can handle hybrid data easily, which is an issue for many logical learners;
(3) perhaps most important, our approach is explainable, unlike other neural
models. This is due to the fact that the hidden layers of the LRBM are sim-
ple conjunctions (paths in a tree), and can be easily interpreted as opposed to
complex embeddings1. Finally, (4) due to the nature of our learning method,
we learn sparser LRBMs compared to employing random walks.
We make a few key contributions in this work: (1) as far as we are aware,
this is the ﬁrst principled approach to learning truly lifted RBMs from relational
data; (2) our representation ensures that the resulting RBM is interpretable and
explainable (due to the hidden layer being simple conjunctions of logical predi-
cates). We present (3) a gradient-boosting algorithm for simultaneously learning
the structure and parameters of LRBMs as well as (4) a transformation pro-
cess to construct a sparse LRBM from an ensemble of relational regression trees
produced by gradient boosting.
Finally, (5) our empirical evaluation clearly
demonstrates three aspects: eﬃcacy, eﬃciency and explainability of our ap-
proach compared to the state-of-the-art on several data sets.
2. Background and Related Work
Scalars are denoted in lower-case (y, w), vectors in bold face (y, w), and
matrices in upper case (Y , W). u⊺v denotes the dot product between u and v.
Restricted Boltzmann Machines. RBMs are stochastic neural networks consist-
ing of a hidden layer of neurons that model the probability distribution of a
visible layer of neurons. Speciﬁcally, discriminative RBMs [18] (Figure 1) have
1Embedding approaches transform data from the input space to a feature space. A familiar
example of this is Principal Components Analysis, which transforms input features to com-
pound features via linear combination; the new features are no longer naturally interpretable.
This is also the case with deep learning, which diminish interpretability by chaining increas-
ingly complex feature combinations across successive layers (for example, autoencoders).
3

Figure 1: A discriminative RBMs has a dense set of connections between the visible and
hidden layers. This ﬁgure illustrates a discriminative RBM for a binary classiﬁcation problem,
though this model can naturally handle multi-class problems by adding additional output
nodes (corresponding to the one-hot vectorization of the label).
a Bernoulli input layer (also known as the visible layer, v), a Bernoulli hidden
layer (h) and a softmax output layer (y). The joint conﬁguration (y, v, h) of
the model has the following energy:
E(y, v, h) = −h⊺Wv −b⊺v −c⊺h −d⊺y −h⊺Uy,
(1)
where W are the weights between the visible and hidden layer, U are the
weights between the hidden and the output layer, and b, c, d are the biases in
the visible, hidden and output layers respectively. Given a (multi-class) label
y = ℓ, ℓ∈{1, . . . , C}, the output is a one-hot vector y = (Ic=ℓ)C
c=1. With a
slight abuse of notation, we denote the multi-class label of a training example
as y, with its corresponding vectorization in bold as y. The joint probability
distribution of the RBM can be written as: P(y, v, h) = 1
Z e−E(y,v,h), where Z
is normalization constant. While computing P(y, v, h) is generally intractable,
the conditional, P(y | v), can be computed exactly:
p(y | v) =
exp

dy + P
j ζ(cj + Ujy + P
k Wjkvk)

X
y∗∈{1,2,..C}
exp

dy∗+ P
j ζ(cj + Ujy∗+ P
k Wjkvk)
,
(2)
4

where ζ(a) = log(1 + ea), the softplus function.
Our goal is to extend this
formulation to relational domains and learn the resulting Lifted Restricted
Boltzmann Machines (LRBMs) using functional gradient boosting.
Functional Gradient Boosting. Functional gradient boosting (FGB), introduced
by Friedman [13] in 2001, has recently emerged as a state-of-the-art ensemble
method. Functional gradient boosting aims to learn a model f(·) by optimizing
a loss function L[f] by emulating gradient descent. At iteration m, however, in-
stead of explicitly computing the gradient ∂L[fm−1](xi, yi), FGB approximates
the gradient using a weak regression tree2, ∆m.
For a probabilistic model, the loss function is replaced by a (log-)likelihood
function (L[ψ]), which is described in terms of a potential function ψ(·), which
FGB aims to learn. FGB begins with an initial potential ψ0; intuitively, ψ0
represents the prior of the probability distribution of target atom. This initial
potential can be any function: a constant, a prior probability distribution or any
function that incorporates background knowledge available prior to learning.
At iteration m, FGB approximates the true gradient by a functional gradient
∆m. That is, gradient boosting will attempt to identify an approximate gradient
∆m that corrects the errors of the current potential, ψm−1. This ensures that
the new potential ψm = ψm−1 + ∆m continues to improve. Like most boosting
algorithms, FGB learns ∆m as a weak regression tree, and ensembles several
such weak trees to learn a ﬁnal potential function (see Figure 2). Thus, the
ﬁnal model is a sum of regression trees ψm = ψ0 + ∆1 + . . . + ∆m (Figure 2).
In relational models, regression trees are replaced by relational regression
trees (RRTs, [19]). This allows us to learn relational conditional models such
as Relational Dependency Networks [16], Relational Logistic Regression [20],
relational policies [14], discriminative training of undirected models [15] and
2A weak base estimator is any model that is “simple” and underﬁts (hence, weak). From
a machine-learning standpoint, such weak learners are high bias, low variance and easy to
learn. Shallow decision trees are an exceptionally popular choice for weak base estimators for
ensemble learning, owing to their algorithmic eﬃciency and interpretability.
5

Figure 2: Functional Gradient Boosting, where the loss function is mean squared error.
even temporal models [21]. Inspired by these methods, we propose to learn the
hidden layer of an LRBM using gradient boosting.
Relational Neural Models. Relational Embeddings [22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27] have
gained popularity recently. A common theme among current approaches is to
learn a vector representation, that is, an embedding for each relation and each
entity present in the knowledge base. Most of these approaches also assume
binary relations, which is a rather restrictive assumption that cannot capture
the richness of real-world relational domains. Further, they need a large number
of embeddings for training, especially the deep-learning-based approaches. Fi-
nally, and possibly most concerning: many embedding approaches cannot easily
generalize to new data, and the entire set of embeddings has to be relearned
with new data, or for every new task.
Approaches closest to our proposed work are relational neural networks
[10, 11, 28, 29, 30]; these approaches also represent the structure of a neural
network as ﬁrst-order clauses as we do. The key diﬀerence however, is that
6

in all these models, clauses have already been obtained either from an expert
or an independent ILP system. That is to say, domain rules that make up its
structure and the resulting neural network architectures are manually speciﬁed,
and these approaches typically only perform parameter learning.
Recently, relational neural networks have been proposed for vision tasks
[31, 32, 33].
While promising, these networks have ﬁxed, manually-speciﬁed
structures and the nature of the relations captured between objects is also not
interpretable or explainable. In contrast, our model learns the structure and
parameters of neural network simultaneously. One common theme among all
these models is that they learn latent features of relational data in their hidden
layers, but our model, being still in its nascent stage, cannot do so yet.
A few approaches for learning neural network on graphs exist. Graph convo-
lutional networks [34] enable graph data to be trained directly on convolutional
networks. Another set of popular approaches [35] train a recurrent neural net-
work on each node of the graph by accepting the input from neighboring nodes
until a ﬁxed point is reached. The work of Scarcelli et al. [35] extends this by
learning embeddings for entities and relations in the relational graph.
Recently, Pham et al. [9] proposed a neural network architecture where con-
nections in the diﬀerent nodes of network are encoded according to given graph
structure. RBMs have also been considered in the context of relational data.
For instance, two tensor based models [36, 37] proposed to lift RBMs by in-
corporating a four-order tensor into their architecture that captures interaction
between quartet consisting of two objects, relation existing between them and
hidden layer. Finally, our recent approach [12] learns relational random walks
and uses the counts of the groundings as observed layer of an RBM.
3. Boosting of Lifted RBMs
Recall that our goal is to learn a truly lifted RBM. Consequently, both
the hidden and observed layers of the RBM should be lifted (parameterized
as against propositional RBMs). This is to say that, the observed layers are the
7

predicates (logical relations describing interactions) in the domain, while the
hidden layer consists of conjunctions of predicates (logical rules) learned from
data. Instead of a complete network, connections exist only between predicates
and hidden nodes that are present in the conjunction. We illustrate RBM lifting
with the following example.
Example. Consider a movie domain that contains the entity types (variables)
Person(P), Movie(M) and Genre(G). Predicates in this domain describe rela-
tionships between the various entities, such as DirectedBy(M, P), ActedIn(P, M),
InGenre(M, G) and entity resolution predicates such as SamePerson(P1, P2) and
SameGenre(G1, G2). These predicates are the atomic domain features, fi. The
task is to predict the nature of the collaboration between two persons P1 and P2;
this task can be represented via the target predicate:
Collaborated(P1, P2) =















0,
P1, P2 never collaborated,
1,
P1 worked under P2,
2,
P2 worked under P1,
3,
P1, P2 collaborated at the same level.
To perform this 4-class classiﬁcation task, we can construct more complex lifted
features through conjunctions of the atomic domain features. For example, con-
sider the following lifted feature, h1:





DirectedBy(M1, P1) ∧InGenre(M1, G1) ∧
ActedIn(P2, M2) ∧InGenre(M2, G2) ∧
¬ SameGenre(G1, G2)




⇒( Collab(P1, P2) = 0 ). (h1)
This lifted feature is a compound domain rule (essentially a typical conjunction
in logic models) made up of several atomic domain features that describes one
possible classiﬁcation condition of the target predicate. Speciﬁcally, the lifted
feature h1 expresses the situation where two persons P1 and P2 are unlikely to
have collaborated if they work in diﬀerent genres. Every such compound domain
rule becomes lifted feature with a corresponding hidden node. In this example,
8

Figure 3: An example of a lifted RBM. The atomic predicates each have a corresponding
node in the visible layer (fi).
Atomic predicates can be used to create richer features as
conjunctions, which are represented as hidden nodes (hj); the connections between the visible
and hidden layers are sparse and only exist when the predicate corresponding to fi appears
in the compound feature hj. The output layer is a one-hot vectorization of a multi-class label
y, and has one node for each class yk. The connections between the hidden and output layers
are dense and allow all features to contribute to reasoning over all the classes.
we introduce two others:
DirBy(M1, P1) ∧ActedIn(P3, M1) ∧SamePer(P3, P2) ⇒( Collab(P1, P2) = 1 ) ,
(h2)
ActedIn(P1, M) ∧ActedIn(P2, M) ⇒( Collab(P1, P2) = 3 ).
(h3)
The key intuition is that these rules, or lifted features, capture the latent
structure of the domain and are a critical component of lifting RBMs.
The
layers of the lifted RBM are as follows (Figure 3):
• Visible layer, atomic domain predicates: We create a visible node
vi for each lifted atomic domain predicate fi. Thus, we can express any
possible structure that can be enumerated as conjunction of these atomic
features. In Figure 3, the visible layer consists of the ﬁve atomic predicates
introduced above, f1, . . . , f5.
9

• Hidden layer, compound domain rule: Each of the compound features
can be represented as a node in the hidden layer, hi. In this manner, the
lifted RBM is able to construct and use complex structural rules to reason
over the domain. This is similar to classical neural networks, propositional
RBMs and deep learning, where the hidden layer neurons represent rich
and complex feature combinations.
The key diﬀerence from existing architectures is that the connections be-
tween the visible and hidden layers are not dense; rather, they are ex-
tremely sparse and depend only on the atomic predicates that appear in the
corresponding lifted compound features. In Figure 3, the hidden node h1 is
connected to the atomic predicate nodes f1, f2, f3 and f5, while the hidden
node h3 is connected to only the atomic predicate node f2. This allows the
lifted RBM to represent the domain structure in a compact manner. Fur-
thermore, such “compression” can enable acceleration of weight learning
as unnecessary edges are not introduced into the structure.
• Output layer, one-hot vectorization: As mentioned above, the lifted
RBM formulation can easily handle multi-class classiﬁcation. In this ex-
ample, the target predicate can take 4 values as it corresponds to a 4-
class classiﬁcation problem. This can be modelled with four output nodes
y1, . . . , y4 through one-hot vectorization of the labels. Note that the con-
nections between the hidden and output layers are dense.
This is to
ensure that all features can contribute to the classiﬁcation of all the labels.
Furthermore, this enables the lifted RBM to reason with uncertainty. For
example, consider the compound domain feature h1, which describes a con-
dition for two persons to have never collaborated. By ensuring that the
hidden-to-output connections are dense, we allow for the contribution of
this rule to the ﬁnal prediction to be soft rather than hard. This is similar
to how Markov logic networks learn diﬀerent rule weights to quantify the
relative importance of the domain rules/lifted features. In a similar man-
ner, the lifted RBM allows for reasoning under uncertainty by learning
10

the network weights to reﬂect the relative signiﬁcance of various features
to diﬀerent labels.
Our task now is to learn such lifted RBMs. Speciﬁcally, we propose to learn
the structure (compound features as hidden nodes) as well as the parameters
(weights on all the edges and biases within the nodes). This is a key novelty as
our approach uses gradient boosting to learn sparser LRBMs, unlike the fully
connected propositional ones. To learn an LRBM, we need to (1) formulate
the (lifted) potential deﬁnitions, (2) derive the functional gradients, (3) trans-
form the gradients to explainable hidden units of the RBM, and (4) learn the
parameters of the RBM. We now present each of these steps in detail.
3.1. Functional Gradient Boosting of Lifted RBMs
The conditional equation (2) which is the basis of an RBM, is formulated
for propositional data, where each feature of a training example xi is modeled
as a node in the input layer v. We now extend this deﬁnition of the RBM to
handle logical predicates (i.e., parameterized relations).
Note that these lifted features (conjunctions) can be obtained in several dif-
ferent ways: (i) as with many existing work on neuro-symbolic reasoning, these
could be provided by a domain expert, or (ii) can be learned from data simi-
lar to the research inside Inductive Logic Programming [38] or, (iii) performing
random walks in the domain that result in rule structures [12], to name a few.
Any rule induction technique could be employed in this context. In this work,
we adapt a gradient-boosting technique. Given such lifted features (or rules)
fk(x) on training examples x, we can rewrite equation (2) as
p(y | x) =
exp

dy + P
j ζ(cj + Ujy + P
k Wjkfk(x))

X
y∗∈{1,2,..C}
exp

dy∗+ P
j ζ(cj + Ujy∗+ P
k Wjkfk(x))
.
(3)
Contrast this expression to the propositional discriminative RBM (equation 2),
which models p(y | v). The key diﬀerence is that the propositional features
P
k Wjkvk are replaced with lifted features P
k Wjkfk(x); while features in a
11

propositional data set are just the data columns/attributes, the features in a
relational data set are typically represented in predicate logic (as shown in
the example above) and are rich and expressive conjunctions of objects, their
attributes and relations between them.
We now introduce some additional functional notation to simplify (equation
3). Without loss of generality, we restrict our discussion to the case of binary
targets (with labels ℓ∈{0, 1}) and note that this exposition can easily be
extended to the case of multiple classes. For each label ℓ, we deﬁne functional
E(xi | c, W, dℓ, Uℓ) := dℓ+
X
j
ζ
 
cj + Ujℓ+
X
k
Wjkfk(xi)
!
.
This functional represents the “energy” of the combination (xi, yi = ℓ). For
binary classiﬁcation, (equation 3) is further simpliﬁed to
p(yi = 1 | xi) =
eE(xi|c,W,d1,U1)
eE(xi|c,W,d0,U0) + eE(xi|c,W,d1,U1) .
(4)
This reformulation is critical for the extension of the discriminative RBM frame-
work to relational domains as it allows us to rewrite the probability p(yi = 1 | xi)
in terms of a functional that represents the potential and OF(xi), the observed
features of the training example xi. One of our goals is to learn lifted features
from the set of all possible features.
In simpler terms, if x is the set of all
predicates in the domain and x is the current target, then the goal is to identify
the set of features OF(x) s.t, P(x | x) = P(x | OF(x)). In Markov network
terminology, this refers to the Markov blanket of the corresponding variable. In
a discriminative MLN framework, OF(x) is the set of weighted clauses in which
the predicate x appears. We can now deﬁne the probability in (equation 4) as
pψ (yi = 1 | OF(xi)) =
eψ(yi=1|OF(xi))
1 + eψ(yi=1|OF(xi)) ,
where
(5)
ψ(yi = 1 | OF(xi)) = E(xi | c, W, d1, U1) −E(xi | c, W, d0, U0).
(6)
Note that OF(xi) does not include all the features in the domain, but only the
speciﬁc features that are present in the hidden layer. An example of this can be
observed in Figure 3. This LRBM consists of three lifted features ⟨h1, h2, h3⟩
12

that correspond to the three rules mentioned earlier. We can thus explicitly
write the potential function for a lifted RBM (equation 6) in functional form as
ψ(yi = 1 | OF(xi)) = d +
X
j
log
1 + exp (cj + Uj1 + P
k Wjkfk(xi))
1 + exp (cj + Uj0 + P
k Wjkfk(xi))

, (7)
Figure 4: Weights in a lifted RBM.
where d = d1 −d0.
This poten-
tial functional is parameterized by
θ = {d, c, W, U0, U1}, consisting of
(see Figure 4) edge weights and bi-
ases. The edge weights to be learned
are Wjk (between visible node corre-
sponding to feature fk(xi) and hidden
node hj) and Ujℓ(between hidden
node hj and output node yℓ).
The
biases to be learned are cj on the hid-
den nodes and dℓon the output nodes.
However, instead of learning two biases d1 and d0, we can learn a single bias
d = d1 −d0 as the functional ψ only depends on the diﬀerence (see equation
7). Given this functional form, we can now derive a functional gradient that
maximizes the overall log-likelihood of the data
L({xi, yi}n
i=1 | ψ) = log
n
Y
i=1
pψ (yi = 1 | OF(xi)) =
n
X
i=1
log pψ (yi = 1 | OF(xi)) .
The (pointwise) functional gradient of L({xi, yi}n
i=1 | ψ) with respect to ψ(yi =
1 | OF(xi)) can be computed as follows,
∂log pψ(yi = 1 | OF(xi))
∂ψ(yi = 1 | OF(xi))
= I(yi = 1) −P(yi = 1 | OF(xi)) := ∆i,
where I(yi = 1) is an indicator function. The pointwise functional gradient has
an elegant interpretation. For a positive example (I(yi = 1) = 1), the functional
gradient ∆i aims to improve the model such that 1 −P(yi = 1) is as small as
possible, in eﬀect pushing P(yi = 1) →1. For a negative example, (I(yi = 1) =
0), the functional gradient ∆i aims to improve the model such that 0−P(yi = 1)
13

is as small as possible, in eﬀect pushing P(yi = 1) →0. Thus, the gradient of
each training example xi is simply the adjustment required for the probabilities
to match the true observed labels yi. The functional gradient derived here has a
similar form to the functional gradients in other relational tasks such as boosting
relational dependency networks [16] Markov logic networks [15] and relational
policies [14] to specify a few.
3.2. Representation of Functional Gradients for LRBMs
Our goal now is to approximate the true functional gradient by ﬁtting a
regression function ˆψ(x) that minimizes the squared error over the pointwise
gradients of all the individual training examples:
ˆψ(x) = arg min
ψ
n
X
i=1
(ψ(xi | OF(xi)) −∆i)2.
(8)
We consider learning the representation of ˆψ as a sum of relational regression
trees. The key advantage is that a relational tree can be easily interpreted and
explained. To learn a tree to model the functional gradients, we need to change
the typical tree learner. Speciﬁcally, the splitting criteria of the tree at each
node is modiﬁed; to identify the next literal to add to the tree, r(x), we greedily
search for the literal that minimizes the squared error (equation 8).
For a tree-based representation, we employ a relational regression-tree (RRT)
learner [19] to learn a function to approximately ﬁt the gradients on each ex-
ample. If we learn an RRT to ﬁt ψ(xi | OF(xi)) in equation (7), each path from
the root to a leaf can be viewed as a clause, and the leaf nodes correspond to an
RBM that evaluates to the weight of the clause for that training example. Fig-
ure 5 shows an RRT when learning a lifted RBM via gradient boosting for some
target predicate t(x). The node q(x) can be any subtree that has been learned
thusfar, and a new predicate r(x) has been identiﬁed as a viable candidate for
splitting. On splitting, we obtain two new compound features as evidenced by
two distinct paths from root to the two new leaf nodes. These clauses (paths)
along with their corresponding leaf nodes identify a new structural component
14

Figure 5: A general relational regression tree for lifted RBMs when learning a target pred-
icate t(x).
Each path from root to leaf is a compound feature (also a logical clause
Clauser) that enters the RBM as a hidden node hr.
The leaf node contains the weights
θr = {dr, cr, W r, Ur
0 , Ur
1 } of all edges introduced into the lifted RBM when this hidden
node/discovered feature is introduced into the RBM structure.
of the RBM, along with corresponding parameters
(Clause1)
θ1 : q(x) ∧r(x) ⇒t(x),
(Clause2)
θ2 : q(x) ∧¬r(x) ⇒t(x).
Note that the clause q(·) and the predicate r(·) are expressed generally, and
their arguments are denoted broadly as x. In practice, q(·) and r(·) can be of
diﬀerent arities and take any possible entity types in the domain.
3.3. Learning Relational Regression Trees
Let us assume that we have learned a relational regression tree till q(x) in
Figure 5.
Now assume that, we are adding a literal r(x) to the tree at the
left-most node of the subtree q(x).
Let the feature corresponding to the left branch (Clause1) be f1(x) =
I(q(x) ∧r(x)), that is, feature f1(x) = 1 for all training examples x that end
up at the leaf θ1 and zero otherwise. Similarly, let the feature corresponding to
the right branch (Clause2) be f2(x) = I(q(x) ∧¬r(x)). The potential function
15

ψ(yi = 1 | OF(xi)) can be written using (equation 7) as:
ψ(yi = 1 | OF(xi)) =
Y
k=1,2
"
dk + log
 
1 + exp
 ck + U k
1 + W kfk(xi)

1 + exp
 ck + U k
0 + W kfk(xi)

!#fk(xi)
.
(9)
In this expression, when a training example xi satisﬁes Clause1, it reaches leaf
node θ1 and consequently, we have f1(xi) = 1 and f2(xi) = 0. When a training
example xi satisﬁes Clause2, the converse is true and we have f1(xi) = 0 and
f2(xi) = 1. Thus, only one term is active in the expression above and delivers
the potential corresponding to whether the training example xi is classiﬁed to
the left leaf θ1 or the right leaf θ2. We can now substitute this expression for
the potential in equation (9) into the loss function (8).
The loss function is used in two ways to grow the RRTs:
1. First, we identify the next literal to add to the tree, r(x), by greedily
searching for the atomic domain predicate that minimizes the squared
error. This is similar to the splitting criterion used in other lifted gradient
boosting models such as MLN-boosting [15].
2. Next, after splitting, we learn parameters for the newly introduced leaf
nodes. That is, for each split of the tree at r(x), we learn θ1 = [d1, c1, W 1,
U 1
0 , U 1
1 ] for the left subtree and θ2 = [d2, c2, W 2, U 2
0 , U 2
1 ] for the right
subtree. We perform parameter learning via coordinate descent [39].
3.4. LRBM-Boost Algorithm:
We now describe LRBM-Boost algorithm (Algorithm 1) to learn structure
and parameters of LRBM. The algorithm takes instantiated ground facts (Data)
and training examples of target T as input and learns N regression trees that
ﬁts the example gradients to set of trees. The algorithm starts by considering
prior potential value ψ0 in F0, and in order to learn a new tree, it ﬁrst generates
the regression examples, S=[(xi,yi), ∆i], in (line 4) where regression value ∆i
(I-P) is computed by performing inference of previously learned trees. These
regression examples S serve as input to FitRegressionTree function (line 5)
16

Algorithm 1 LRBM-Boost: Relational FGB for Lifted RBMs
1: function LRBM-Boost(Data, T, N)
2:
F0 = ψ0
▷set prior of potential function
3:
for 1 ≤n ≤N do
4:
S := GenerateExamples(Fn−1, Data, T)
▷examples for next tree
5:
Fn := FitRegressionTree(S, L, T)
▷learn regression tree
6:
Fn = Fn + Fn−1
▷add new tree to existing set
7:
end for
8:
P(yi = 1 | OF(xi)) ∝exp(ψ(yi = 1| OF(xi)))
9: end function
10: function FitRegressionTree(S, L, T)
11:
Tree := CreateTree(T(X))
▷create empty Tree
12:
Beam := {Root(Tree)}
13:
while (i ≤L) do
▷till max clauses L is reached
14:
N := CurrentNodeToExpand(Beam)
15:
C := GeneratePotentialChildren(N)
16:
for each c in C do
▷greedily search best child
17:
[ SL, ∆L ] := ExampleSatisfaction(N ∧c, S)
▷left subtree
18:
Θc
L := CoordinateDescent([SL, ∆L])
▷learn LRBM params
19:
[ SR, ∆R ] := ExampleSatisfaction(N ∧¬c, S)
▷right subtree
20:
Θc
R := CoordinateDescent([SR, ∆R])
▷learn LRBM params
21:
scorec := ComputeSSE(Θc
L, Θc
R, ∆L, ∆R)
▷using eq.(8)
22:
end for
23:
ˆc := argmin
c
(scorec)
24:
AddChild(Tree, N, ˆc)
25:
Insert(Beam, ˆc.left, ˆc.left.score)
26:
Insert(Beam, ˆc.right, ˆc.right.score)
27:
end while
28:
return Tree
29: end function
17

along with the maximum number of leaves (L) in the tree. The next tree Fn is
then added to set of existing tree (line 6). The ﬁnal probability of LRBM can
be computed by performing inference on all N trees in order to obtain ψ.
FitRegressionTree function (line 10) generates a relational regression
tree with L leaf nodes. It starts with an empty tree and greedily adds one node
at a time to the tree. In order to add next node to the tree, it ﬁrst considers
the current node N to expand as the one that has the best score in the beam
(line 14). The potential children C of this node N (line 15) are constructed by
greedily considering and scoring clauses where the parameters are learned using
coordinate descent. Once the ˆc is determined, it is added as the leaf to the tree
and the process is repeated.
4. Experimental Section
We aim to answer the following questions in our experiments:
Q1 How does LRBM-Boost3 compare to other relational neural models?
Q2 How does LRBM-Boost compare to other relational functional gradient
boosting models?
Q3 Is an ensemble of weak relational regression trees more eﬀective than a
single strong relational regression tree for constructing Lifted RBMs?
Q4 Can we generate an interpretable lifted RBM from the ensemble of weak
relational regression trees learned by LRBM-Boost?
4.1. Experimental setup
To answer these questions, we employ seven standard SRL data sets:
UW-CSE [40] contains information about ﬁve university domains and the
goal is to predict whether a student is AdvisedBy a professor.
3 https://github.com/navdeepkjohal/LRBM-Boost
18

IMDB [41] is a data set from movies domain that contains information
about actors, directors and movies. The goal is to predict whether an actor
WorkedUnder a director.
CORA [42] is a standard data set for citation matching that contains eight
predicates about details of papers, their venues, and the authors. The aim is to
predict whether two venues represent the SameVenue.
SPORTS is a data set garnered by crawling facts from NELL [43] containing
details about sports teams and their players. We aim to predict whether a team
plays a particular sport (i.e. TeamPlaysSport) in this domain.
MUTAGENESIS [44] is data set that consists of information about molecules,
their constituent atoms and their properties. The aim with this data set is to
predict whether an atom is constituent in a molecule (i.e. MoleculeContainsAtom).
YEAST2 [45] contains facts about papers published between 1950 and 2012
about the yeast organism Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The target is whether a
paper Cites another paper. Since this data is temporal, a recursive rule could
potentially use the data from the future to predict the past.
This requires
restricting the data provided to the learning system from exposing any future
data when predicting at the current time-step.
WEBKB [41] contains information about webpages of students, professors,
courses etc.
from four universities.
We aim to predict whether a person is
CourseTA of a given course.
For all data sets, we generate positive and negative examples in 1 : 2 ratio,
perform 5-fold cross validation for every method being compared, and report
AUC-ROC and AUC-PR on the resulting folds respectively.
For all baseline methods, we use default settings provided by their respective
authors. For our model, we learn 20 RRTs, each with a maximum number of 4
leaf nodes. The learning rate of online coordinate descent was 0.05.
4.2. Comparison of LRBM-Boost to other relational neural models
To answer Q1, we compare our model to two recent relational neural models.
The ﬁrst baseline is Relational RBM (RRBM-C) [12]; this approach uses relational
19

Figure 6: Comparing LRNN, RRBM-C, MLN-Boost and LRBM-Boost on AUC-ROC.
random walks to generate relational features that describe the structure of the
domain. In fact, it propositionalizes and aggregates counts on these relational
random walks as features to describe each training example. It should be noted
that a key limitation of RRBM-C is that it can only handle binary predicates; our
approach LRBM-Boost on the other hand, can handle any arity.
The second baseline is Lifted Relational Neural Networks (LRNN) [11]. LRNN
mainly focuses on parameter optimization; the structure of the network is identi-
ﬁed using a clause learner: PROGOL [46]. PROGOL generated four, eight, six, three,
ten, ﬁve rules for Cora, Imdb, Mutagenesis, Sports, Uw-Cse and WebKB
respectively. As LRNN cannot handle the temporal restrictions of Yeast2, we
do not evaluate LRNN on it.
Figures 6 and 7 present the results of this comparison on AUC-ROC and
AUC-PR. LRBM-Boost is signiﬁcantly better than LRNN for Mutagenesis and
Cora on both AUC-ROC and AUC-PR. Further, it also achieves better AUC-
ROC and AUC-PR than LRNN on Sports and Uw-Cse data set. Compared to
RRBM-C, LRBM-Boost performs better for Sports and WebKB on both AUC-
ROC and AUC-PR. Also, our proposed model performs better on Yeast2 on
20

Figure 7: Comparing LRNN, RRBM-C, MLN-Boost and LRBM-Boost on AUC-PR.
AUC-ROC. Q1 can be now be answered aﬃrmatively: LRBM-Boost either per-
forms comparably to or outperforms state-of-the-art relational neural networks.
4.3. Comparison of LRBM-Boost to other relational gradient-boosting models
Since LRBM-Boost is a relational neural network as well as a relational boost-
ing model, we next compare it to two state-of-the-art relational functional
gradient-boosting baselines: MLN-Boost [15] and RDN-Boost [7]. Figures 6 and
7 compare LRBM-Boost to MLN-Boost. LRBM-Boost performs better than MLN-
Boost for Cora and WebKB on AUC-ROC metric. Further, it performs better
than MLN-Boost for Imdb, Uw-Cse, Sports and WebKB on AUC-PR. For all
the other data sets, both the models have comparable performance.
We compare LRBM-Boost to RDN-Boost in a separate experiment, owing to
a key diﬀerence in experimental setting. We do not convert the arity of predi-
cates to binary; rather, we compare RDN-Boost and LRBM-Boost by maintaining
the original arity of all the predicates. The results of this experiment on four
domains are reported in Table 1. LRBM-Boost outperforms RDN-Boost in across
the board, and substantially so on larger domains such as Cora. These compar-
isons allow us to answer Q2 aﬃrmatively: LRBM-Boost performs comparably or
21

Table 1: Comparison of LRBM-Boost and RDN-Boost.
Data Set
Target
Measure
LRBM-Boost
RDN-Boost
Uw−Cse
advisedBy
AUC-ROC
0.9719
0.9731
AUC-PR
0.9158
0.9049
Imdb
workedUnder
AUC-ROC
0.9610
0.9499
AUC-PR
0.8789
0.8537
Cora
SameVenue
AUC-ROC
0.9469
0.8985
AUC-PR
0.9207
0.8451
WebKB
courseTA
AUC-ROC
0.6142
0.6057
AUC-PR
0.4553
0.4490
outperforms state-of-the-art SRL boosting baselines.
4.4. Eﬀectiveness of boosting relational ensembles
To understand the importance of boosting trees to construct an LRBM,
we compared the performance of the ensemble of relational trees learned by
LRBM-Boost to a single relational tree, similar to trees produced by the TILDE
tree learner [19, 47]. For the latter, we learn a large lifted tree (of depth 10),
construct an RBM with the hidden layer being every path from root to leaf of
this tree and refer to it as LRBM-NoBoost.
Table 2 compares the performance of an ensemble (ﬁrst row) vs. a single
large tree (last row). LRBM-Boost is statistically superior on Sports, Yeast2
and Cora on both AUC-ROC and AUC-PR and is comparable on others. This
asserts the eﬃcacy of learning ensembles of relational trees by LRBM-Boost
rather than learning a single tree, thus aﬃrmatively answering Q3.
4.5. Interpretability of LRBM-Boost
While Q1–Q3 can be answered quantitatively, Q4 requires a qualitative
analysis.
It should be noted that boosted relational models (here, boosted
22

Table 2: Comparison of (a) an ensemble of trees learned by LRBM-Boost, (b) an explainable
Lifted RBM constructed from the ensemble of trees learned by LRBM-Boost and (c) learning a
single, large, relational probability tree (LRBM-NoBoost).
Model
AUC
Sports
IMDB
UW-CSE
Yeast2
Cora
WebKB
Ensemble
LRBM
ROC
0.78±0.03
0.95±0.05
0.98±0.02
0.77±0.02
0.86±0.14
0.63±0.05
PR
0.64±0.03
0.86±0.11
0.94±0.06
0.64±0.03
0.82±0.21
0.46±0.08
Explainable
LRBM
ROC
0.75±0.01
0.95±0.05
0.95±0.04
0.65±0.05
0.80±0.19
0.61±0.13
PR
0.57±0.01
0.85±0.14
0.89±0.06
0.53±0.06
0.70±0.29
0.46±0.10
NoBoost
LRBM
ROC
0.75±0.03
0.95±0.05
0.98±0.02
0.64±0.12
0.75±0.21
0.66±0.09
PR
0.61±0.01
0.86±0.11
0.94±0.05
0.50±0.14
0.61±0.30
0.48±0.07
LRBMs) learn and represent the underlying relational model as a sum of rela-
tional trees. When performing inference, this ensemble of trees is not converted
to a large SRL model as it is far more eﬃcient to aggregate the predictions of
the individual relational trees in the ensemble.
For LRBM-Boost, however, it is possible to convert the ensemble-of-trees
representation into a single LRBM. This step is typically performed to endow
the model with interpretability, explainability or for relationship discovery. For
LRBM-Boost, this procedure is not exact, and the resulting single large LRBM
is almost, but not exactly, equivalent to the ensemble of trees representation.
The procedure itself is fairly straightforward:
• learn a single RRT from the set of boosted RRTs [48] that make up the
LRBM, that is, we empirically learn a single RRT by overﬁtting it to the
predictions of the weak RRTs (Figure 8).
• transform this single RRT to a lifted RBM (Figure 9); each path from
root to leaf is a conjunction of relational features and enters the LRBM as
a hidden node, with connections to all the output nodes and to the input
nodes corresponding to the predicates that appear in that path.
23

Figure 8: An example of a combined lifted tree learned from ensemble of trees. To construct
this tree, we compute the regression value of each training example by traversing through all
the boosted trees. Now a single large tree is overﬁt to this (modiﬁed) training set to generate
a single tree.
Figure 9: Lifted RBM obtained from the combined tree in Figure 8. Each path along the tree
in that ﬁgure represents the corresponding hidden node of LRBM.
This construction leads to sparsity as it allows for only one hidden node
to be activated for each example. Of course, using clauses instead of trees as
with boosting MLNs [15], could relax this sparsity as needed. For our current
domains, this restriction does not signiﬁcantly aﬀect the performance as seen in
Table 2 showing the quantitative results of comparing the explainable LRBM
with the original ensemble LRBM. There is no noticeable loss in performance
24

Figure 10:
Ensemble of trees learned during training of LRBM-Boost.
The ensemble of
trees is generated in Sports domain where predicate P, T, Z represent plays(sports, team),
teamplaysagainstteam(team, team) and athleteplaysforteam(athlete, team) respectively and
target R represents teamplayssport(team, sports).
Figure 11: Demonstration of the conversion of two lifted trees in Figure 10 to LRBM. We
create one hidden node for each path in each regression tree.
as the AUC values decrease marginally, if at all.
A simpler approach to constructing an explainable LRBM to skip aggregat-
ing the RRTs into a large tree and directly map every path in every tree to a
hidden node in the LRBM. For instance, if the ensemble learned 20 balanced
trees with 4 paths in each of them, the resulting LRBM has 80 lifted features.
An example transformation is shown in Figure 11 from two trees in Figure 10.
Note that corresponding LRBM has 8 hidden features which are conjunctions
of the original trees. While in principle it results in an interpretable LRBM,
this can result in a large number of hidden units and thus pruning strategies
need to be employed, a direction that we will explore in the near future. In
summary, it can be said that our LRBM is eﬀective and explainable allowing
25

when compared to the state-of-the-art approaches in several tasks.
5. Conclusion
We presented the ﬁrst learning algorithm for learning the structure of a lifted
RBM from data. Motivated by the success of gradient-boosting, our method
learns a set of RRTs using boosting and then transforms them to a lifted RBM.
The advantage of this approach is that it leads to learning a fully lifted model
that is not propositionalized using any standard approaches. We also demon-
strated how to induce a single explainable RBM from the ensemble of trees.
Experiments on several data sets demonstrated the eﬃcacy and eﬀectiveness
along with the explainability of the proposed approach. Combining the diﬀer-
ent trees in an analytical fashion is an interesting future direction. Enhancing
the ability of the model to handle incomplete information is essential to adapt
to real problems. Learning other distributions to learn truly hybrid models can
lead to several adaptations on real data. Scaling to very large data sets (in the
lines of relational embeddings) remains an exciting research direction.
6. Acknowledgement
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of AFOSR award FA9550-
18-1-0462.
Any opinions, ﬁndings, and conclusion or recommendations ex-
pressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect
the view of the AFOSR or the United States government.
