International Journal of Automation and  Computing 
04(1),  January 2007, 100-106 
DOI:  10.1007/s10453-004-5872-7 
 
 
The Motif Tracking Algorithm 
 
William  Wilson, Phil  Birkin and Uwe Aickelin 

 
 
 
Abstract: 
The  search for patterns or motifs in data represents a problem area  of key interest to finance and economic researchers. 
In  this  paper we introduce  the Motif  Tracking Algorithm,  a novel  immune  inspired pattern identification  tool  that is able  to 
identify unknown motifs of a non  specified  length which repeat within time series  data. The  power  of the algorithm comes  from the 
fact that it uses a small  number of parameters with minimal assumptions regarding the data being  examined or the underlying motifs.  
Our interest lies in applying the algorithm to financial time series  data to identify unknown patterns that exist.  The  algorithm is 
tested using  three separate data sets. Particular suitability to financial data is shown  by applying it to oil price  data. In all cases  the 
algorithm identifies the presence of a  motif  population  in  a  fast  and  efficient  manner due  to the utilisation  of an  intuitive  symbolic 
representation.   The  resulting  population  of motifs  is shown  to have  considerable potential  value  for  other  applications  such  as  
forecasting  and  algorithm seeding. 
 
Keywords: 
Motif detection, repeating patterns, time series  analysis, artificial immune systems, immune memory. 
 
 
1 
Introduction 
 
 
The  investigation  and  analysis  of time  series  data is a 
popular and  well studied area  of research.  Common  goals 
of time series analysis  include  the desire  to identify known 
patterns in a time series, to predict future trends given his- 
torical information and the ability to classify data into sim- 
ilar  clusters.   Historically,  statistical  techniques  have  been 
applied to this problem  domain. However,  in recent years, 
the use of heuristic algorithms have seen significant growth 
in  this field.   Neural  networks[1, 2]   genetic  programming[3] 
and  genetic algorithms[4]  are all examples  of methods that 
have  been so far applied  to time series evaluation and  pre- 
diction. 
The  use of immune  inspired  (IS)  techniques in this field 
has remained fairly limited[5] .  However,  IS algorithms have 
been  used  with  success  in  other  fields,  such  as  pattern 
recognition[6] ,  optimisation[7] ,  and  data  mining[8] .   In  this 
paper we introduce the Motif  Tracking Algorithm (MTA), 
a  novel  IS approach to identify  repeating patterns  in  time 
series data that takes advantage of the associative learning  
properties exhibited by the natural immune  system. 
Considerable  research  has  already  been  performed  on 
identifying  patterns that are  seen to  repeat in time  series, 
as highlighted by Keogh[9] .  Such repeating patterns are de- 
fined as motifs.  Traditional time series techniques are only 
able to search  for known motifs.  They  are defined as known 
motifs as they relate to patterns that are similar  to a query 
pattern of interest.  Prior  knowledge  of what to look for is 
assumed. In contrast little research has been performed on 
looking for unknown  motifs in time series.  A distinguishing 
feature of the MTA  is that it can  search  for unknown mo- 
tifs in the time  series  without  prior  knowledge  of what to 
search  for.  The  MTA  searches  in a fast and  efficient man- 
ner, enabling  it to handle  large data sets, and the flexibility 
incorporated in its generic  approach allows the MTA  to be 
applied  across a diverse  range  of problems[10] . 
The  MTA  takes inspiration from the behaviour noted  in 
the human  immune  system  and  in  particular  the immune 
memory  theory of Eric Bell[11] .  His theory indicates the ex- 
istence and evolution of two separately identifiable memory 
populations, which are ideally  suited to recognise  long and 
short term patterns prevalent in time series data. We pro- 
vide  a discussion  of some  of the related work  in Section 2 
and in Section 3 we discuss the immune memory  theory and 
introduce other  immune mechanisms which form part of our 
algorithm.  Section 4 provides  a definition of the key compo- 
nents used in the MTA  and  this then leads on to a detailed 
explanation of the MTA  in  Section 5.   Section  6 presents 
the results of the MTA  from testing on three separate data 
sets,  one of which  relates to an  oil data set.   Future work 
associated  with the MTA  is discussed  in  Section 7 before 
we conclude  in Section 8. 
 
2 
Related work 
 
The  search  for patterns in data is relevant to a  diverse 
range  of fields including  biology,  business, finance  and  sta- 
tistics.    In  each  field  a  wide  variety  of  techniques  have 
been  developed   to  search  for  patterns. 
Algorithms  by 
Guan[12]  and  Benson[13]   address   DNA  pattern  matching, 
using  lookup  table techniques that exhaustively search  the 
dataset to find recurring  patterns.  These  approaches con- 
trast to the MTA because they make assumptions about the 
patterns sought, including  the start locations of the pattern 
and  the pattern length.  A more  flexible  approach  is  seen 
in  the TEIRESIAS algorithm[14] ,  another  algorithm able 
to identify patterns in  biological  sequences.    TEIRESIAS 
finds patterns of an arbitrary length  by isolating individual 
building  blocks  that comprise  the subsets  of the pattern, 
these are then combined  into larger  patterns. The method- 
ology of building  up motifs  by finding  and combining  their 
component parts is at the heart of the MTA. 
Most  current  research on  finding  patterns  involves  the 
examination of a  time  series  given  some  query  pattern of 
interest.  Investigations  using  a piecewise  linear  segmenta- 
tion scheme[15]  and  discrete Fourier transforms[16]  provide 
examples  of mechanisms to search  a time series for a partic- 
ular  motif  of interest.  Work  by  Singh[17]  searches  for  pat- 
terns  in financial  time  series  as a means  to  forecast  future 

2 
 
 
price  movements.   It takes a  sequence  of the most  recent 
data from  the series  and  looks  for  re-occurrences of this 
pattern in the historical  data.   An  underlying assumption 
in  all  these  approaches  is  that the pattern to be  found  is 
known  in  advance.   The  matching task  is therefore  much 
simpler  as the algorithm  just has  to find  re-occurrences of 
that particular pattern. The  MTA makes no such assump- 
tions and  aims  to find all  unknown motifs  it can  from  the 
data set. 
The  search  for  unknown motifs  is  at the heart  of  the 
work conducted by Keogh  et al[18, 19, 20,  9] .  Given  the em- 
phasis  on  unknown patterns  Keogh  states “to the best of 
our knowledge,  the problem  of finding repeated patterns in 
time series has not  been addressed (or even formulated) in 
the literature”[9] .  Keogh’s probabilistic algorithm[18] , used 
as a comparison to the MTA  in Section 6.2, extracts subse- 
quences  from the time series using the Symbolic  Aggregate  
Approximation (SAX)  technique.  It then hashes  the sub- 
sequences  into buckets.  Buckets with multiple entries rep- 
resent potential motif  candidates. The  sections of the time 
series corresponding to these subsequences are examined to 
identify genuine motifs. 
Keogh’s Viztree algorithm[19]  uses the SAX technique to 
generate a set of symbol strings corresponding to sequences 
from the time series.  These  symbol  strings are filtered into 
a suffix tree,  where  branches  correspond to the symbol  al- 
ternative.   The  suffix  tree  provides  a visual  illustration  of 
the motifs present as the frequency  of a motif  is shown  by 
the width of the tree branch. 
The probabilistic and  Viztree algorithms are fast and  ef- 
fective  but they  assume  prior  knowledge  of  the size of the 
motif  to be  found.   Motifs  longer  and potentially shorter 
than this pre defined length would remain  undetected.  One 
could  argue  that  these  algorithms  could  be  re-run  multi- 
ple times  using  varying  motif  lengths, however  this  would 
reduce  their efficiency.  The  MTA  takes a more generic ap- 
proach  evolving a population of trackers that is able to de- 
tect motifs of an arbitrary length by making  fewer assump-  
tions about the data set and the potential motifs. 
 
3 
Long  and short  term memory 
 
The flexible learning  approach of the human immune sys- 
tem is attractive as an inspiration, but without an adequate 
memory   mechanism knowledge  gained  from  the learning 
process  would  be lost.   Memory  represents a key factor in 
the success of the immune  system.  A difficulty arises in im- 
plementing  a  computational  immune  memory  mechanism 
however,  because  very  little is known  about the  biological 
mechanisms underpinning  memory  development[21] .   The- 
ories  such  as  antigen  persistence  and  long  lived  memory  
cells[22] ,  idiotypic networks[23] ,  and  homeostatic  turnover 
of  memory  cells[24]    have  all  attempted to explain  the  de- 
velopment and  maintenance of immune memory.   However, 
all  have  been  contested.   In  contrast  the attraction of the 
immune  memory  theory  proposed  by  Eric  Bell  is that it 
provides  a simple,  clear and  logical explanation of memory 
cell  development.   This  theory  highlights  the evolution  of 
two  separate memory  pools,  ‘memory  primed’  and  ‘mem- 
ory revertant’[11] . 
The human  immune system represents a successful recog- 
nition tool. It must be able to quickly  identify such things 
as bacteria  or viruses  present  in the system  so that it can 
react accordingly and  retain knowledge of those encounters 
for future reference.  The presence of such a bacterial threat 
causes  naive  immune  cells to become  activated.  This  acti- 
vation causes a rapid increase  in cell numbers, termed pro- 
liferation.  The  rapidly expanding population of activated 
cells forms the short lived memory  primed  pool.  The  pur- 
pose of this growing pool is to increase  the repertoire of the 
population. New  cells created undergo  mutation  in  order 
to diversify  from their parents.  The cell population evolves 
in order  to match potential  variations in the bacteria that 
stimulated their parents. A form of pattern matching is be- 
ing anticipated by the system.  The  activated cells circulate 
throughout the system and eliminate any bacteria that they 
interact with. 
The high death rate of memory  primed  cells means most 
will die during  circulation, however a small minority do sur- 
vive and  return to reach  a memory revertant state. These 
cells reduce their excessive activation levels, becoming  more 
stable,  thereby  lengthening  their  lifespan.    These  unique 
cells are able to produce  clones naturally to sustain knowl- 
edge of a bacterial experience  over the long term.  These two 
distinct memory  pools and the transfer mechanism between 
them, represent a key difference to other  memory  theories. 
This  methodology provides the inspiration for memory  de- 
velopment in our algorithm. 
Through this approach one can  see the immune  system 
represents  an  ideal  mechanism to address  motif  matching 
problems.  It evolves  a  population  of  solution  candidates 
to match part of a  motif,  it  then mutates  the successful 
population members so  that improved motif  solutions  can 
be found. 
In  our  novel  algorithm the equivalent of the short  term 
memory pool is generated using a derivative of the popular 
clonal  selection algorithm[7] , which proliferates all success- 
fully  matched candidates.    The short  term  memory  pool 
evolves through a process of directed proliferation and  mu- 
tation, regulated through a process of controlled cell death. 
This  rapidly expanding population provides  a search mech- 
anism  that is able  to investigate all  solution  alternatives 
quickly and effectively.  Successful candidates from the short 
term memory  pool transfer to the long term memory  pool. 
This  long term  memory  pool is then  used  to permanently 
store records  of the solutions found. 
Having  briefly introduced the inspiration for the MTA  a 
number  of key terms  and  definitions  used  within the algo- 
rithm are defined  in the following section. 
 
4 
Motif   detection: terms   and defini- 
tions 
 
Whilst immunology  provides  the inspiration for the the- 
ory  behind  the MTA,  the work  of Keogh  et  al.[20, 9]   is 
the inspiration for the initial  implementation  of the MTA.  
In particular, Keogh’s SAX technique for representing a 
time series was a contributing factor in the success of the 
MTA. Many  of  the following  definitions  used  by  the 
MTA  are adapted from the work of Keogh[18]  as 
summarised below. Definition  1.  Time  series.  A time  
series  T  = t1 ,...,tm 
is a time ordered  set of m real or integer valued variables. 

 
3 
 
In order  to identify patterns in T  in a fast and  efficient 
manner we break  T  up into subsequences. 
Definition  2.   Subsequence.   “Given  a time  series  T  of 
length  m, a subsequence C  of T  consists of a  sampling  of 
length  n ≤ m of contiguous positions from T.”[18] 
Subsequences are  extracted  from  T  using  a sliding  win- 
dow technique. 
Definition  3.  Sliding window.  Given  a time series T  of 
length  m, and  a subsequence C  of length  n, a symbol  ma- 
trix S of all possible subsequences can be built by sliding a 
window of size n across T, one point at a time, placing  each 
subsequence into  S. After  all  sliding  windows  are  assessed 
S will contain (m - n + 1 ) subsequences. 
Program 1 . MTA  Pseudo  Code 
 
Initiate  MTA   (s,  r, a) 
Convert  Time  series  T to  symbolic  representation 
Generate  Symbol  Matrix  S 
Initialise  Tracker  population  to  size  a 
While  ( Tracker  population  > 0  ) 
{ 
Generate  symbol  stage  matrix  from  S 
Match  trackers  to  symbol  stage  matrix 
Eliminate  unmatched  trackers 
Examine  T to  confirm  genuine  motif  status 
Eliminate  unsuccessful  trackers 
Identify  and  store  motifs  found 
Proliferate  matched  trackers 
Mutate  matched  trackers 
Each  subsequence generated could  represent  a  potential 
match to any  of the other  subsequences within  S.  If  two 
subsequences match, we have  found  a pattern  in the time 
series that is repeated. This  pattern is defined  as a motif. 
Definition 4.  Motif.  A subsequence from T  that is seen 
to repeat at least once throughout T  is defined as a motif. 
The re-occurrence of the subsequence need not be exact for 
it to be considered as a motif. 
The  relationship between  two  subsequences C1   and  C2 
is assessed  using  a  match threshold  r.  We  use  the most 
common  distance measure  (Euclidean distance) to examine 
the match between two  subsequences C1     and  C2 ,  ED(C1 
, 
C2 ).   If ED(C1 ,  C2 )  ≤ r the subsequences C1     and  C2     
are 
deemed  to match and  thus are saved  as a motif. 
The motifs prevalent in a time series are detected by the 
MTA  through the evolution of a population of trackers. 
Definition 5.  Tracker. A tracker represents a signature 
for a motif  sequence  that is seen  to  repeat.   It has  within 
it a sequence  of 1 to w  symbols that are used  to represent 
a dimensionally  reduced  equivalent  of a subsequence. The 
subsequences generated from the time series are converted 
into a  discrete symbol  string using  an  intuitive  technique 
described in Section 5.1.  The trackers are then used as a fast 
and  efficient tool to identify which  of these symbol  strings 
represent a  recurring motif.    The  trackers also  include  a 
match  count variable to indicate the level  of stimulation 
received  during  the matching process. 
 
5 
The Motif Tracking Algorithm 
 
The  pseudo  code for the MTA  is detailed in Program 1. 
Each  of the significant operations in the MTA  is described 
in the subsequent sections.  The parameters required in the 
MTA  include  the length  of a symbol s, the match threshold 
r, and  the alphabet size a. 
 
5.1  Convert   Time Series T  to  symbolic 
representation 
In common  with the majority of other techniques[20] , in 
order  for the MTA  to more  easily identify motifs  it is nec- 
essary  to pre-process the  time  series.   This  pre-processing 
comes in three stages, differencing,  normalisation, and sym- 
bolisation. 
Differencing. The  approach used in the MTA  is not  to 
study the actual data values  from T  at each point in time 
but to look at the movement between  each  point  in time. 
By taking the first order differential of the time series T, the 
MTA can identify patterns that occur in sections of the time 
} 
Memory motif  streamlining 
 
 
 
 
series that have different amplitudes. Differencing  the time 
series  T  eliminates discrepancies caused  by  the  amplitude 
of the actual data points and  hence  aids  comparability  of 
the various  subsequences. 
Normalisation.  The  differenced  time series  T  is  nor- 
malised  with  a  mean  of 0 and  a  standard  deviation of 1. 
Keogh highlights the fact that “it is well understood that it 
is meaningless to compare time series with different offsets 
and  amplitudes”[20] .  Normalising T  in this way eliminates 
these issues and  allows comparisons across  T. 
Symbolisation.  We use the Keogh’s SAX technique[20] 
to discretise the time series under  consideration.  SAX rep- 
resents a powerful  compression tool that uses a discrete, fi- 
nite symbol set to generate a dimensionally reduced  version 
of a time series consisting of symbol  strings.  The  ability to 
compare  time  series  subsequences as  simple  strings,  com- 
bined  with the dimensionally reduced  set of data to inves- 
tigate, contribute to a fast and  effective search mechanism. 
This  representation is simple and intuitive and  research by 
Keogh et al.  has shown it to rival more sophisticated reduc- 
tion methods such  as  Fourier transforms  and  wavelets[20] . 
Here  we  describe  Keogh’s  SAX  approach, as  it has  been 
applied  to the MTA. 
In the first stage of the SAX method the user is required 
to specify the symbol  alphabet size a used to represent the 
time series T. For  example,  if we use the English  alphabet 
as our symbol set and a=3, the alphabet for the MTA would 
be [a,b,c]. 
Motifs  in  T  consist  of subsequences of lengths  from  1 
to n.  A subsequence will be represented by a symbol  string 
containing w symbols.  By specifying the length  of a symbol 
s,  we can  reduce  the  subsequence from  size  n  to size  w, 
where w=n/s. 
This  simplification is achieved  by a Piecewise Aggregate  
Approximation (PAA)[9] .   The  n  consecutive  data points 
representing the motif are divided  into w equal sized frames 
where   w = n/s.  The mean  value  of the data within each 
frame  is calculated and  represents the PAA  of that frame. 
The motif  now consists of a sequence  of w averages  corre- 
sponding  to each frame.  These  averages  are converted into 
the symbol alphabet as part of the second stage of the SAX. 
During  the second  stage, the MTA  calculates the  break 
points it will apply  to the averages  to determine the symbol 

4 
 
 
applicable for that average.   Given  an  alphabet  size  a  the 
MTA  requires  a-1  breakpoints to classify the averages  cor- 
rectly. Since T  has been normalised we know T  will follow 
a Gaussian distribution[20] .  Given a symbol alphabet of size 
a  we can use the Gaussian distribution to identify a  equal 
sized areas under  the curve.  The  boundary points for each 
equal sized area  will then map  directly to the break  points 
applied   to each  frame  average  to establish which  symbol 
corresponds to that average. 
For  example  given  a  = 3,  we split  the area  under  the 
N(0,1)  Gaussian distribution curve  into three equally  sized 
parts.  One third of the distribution lies below z=-0.43, one 
third lies between  z=-0.43  and  z=0.43  and  the final third 
exists above 0.43.  We use the two breakpoints of -0.43 and 
0.43 to classify our PAA values for each frame into symbols. 
PAA  values less than -0.43 would correspond to the symbol 
a, those between -0.43 and 0.43 would represent symbol  b, 
and  those  above  0.43  c.   In  this way  each  symbol  has  an 
equi-probable chance  of occurring. 
 
 
 
Figure  1:  Generation of the SAX representation of a  time 
series using  PAA[18] .  The  X axis is time, the Y axis is the 
differenced,  normalised time series value 
 
This  process  is illustrated in  Fig.   1,  as  taken  from[18] , 
where  we  have  a  subsequence of length  128,  a  = 3  and 
s = 16.   Using  the averages  generated by  the PAA,  SAX 
represents the subsequence by the symbol string cbccbaab. 
The  motif  has  been  reduced   in  dimension from  128  data 
points 
to 
just 
8 
whilst 
still 
maintaining 
the  
characteristics of the original  data. 
The  string  of symbols  representing  a subsequence  is de- 
fined as a word. The  MTA  examines  the time series T  us- 
ing such words and not the original  data points to speed up 
the search  process.  Symbol  string comparisons can be per- 
formed  efficiently to filter out bad  motif  candidates, ensur- 
ing the  computationally expensive  Euclidean distance cal- 
culation is only  performed on those  motif  candidates  that 
are potentially genuine. 
 
5.2  Generating  symbol matrix  S 
 
Thus  far  we have  differenced  and  normalised the  time 
series T  and established the alphabet of symbols to be used 
to represent  T.  The  next  step  is to  identify all the actual 
individual symbols  that occur across  T. 
The  MTA  begins  by considering subsequences of  length  
s.  A sliding  window  of length  s is used  on  the  normalised 
time series to establish the PAA value for that subsequence. 
A symbol  is allocated to that subsequence and  entered into 
the symbol  matrix S  as a  word.   Given  there will be  (m- 
s+1) sliding windows  across  T  the matrix S will comprise 
a list of (m-s+1) words containing just one symbol. 
The  MTA  uses  the SAX  approach to generate  the  ma- 
trix of words,  but this represents only the first stage of the 
MTA’s  operation. The  SAX technique is only used to pre- 
process the data set.  Having  generated this symbol  matrix 
the novelty  of  the MTA  comes  from  the way  in  which  it 
takes  the  information from  the symbol  matrix and  intu- 
itively presents it to the tracker population for  matching. 
The  way in which  the tracker population evolves based  on 
the results of the matching process is also key to the MTA’s 
success. 
The  matrix S  provides  a  vital  resource  to the  MTA  as 
it is used to build  the data that is presented to the tracker 
population.  Each  generation, a  selection  of words  from  S, 
corresponding to the  length  of the motif  under  investiga- 
tion,  are  extracted  in  an  intuitive  manner and  presented 
to the tracker population during  the matching process.  Be- 
fore describing this matching process we now expand on the 
concept of a tracker. 
 
5.3  Initialise  tracker population  to size  a 
 
The  trackers are the primary tool used to identify motif 
candidates in  the time series.    A  tracker  comprises  a  se- 
quence  of 1 to w  symbols.    The  symbol  string  contained 
within  the tracker  represents  a  sequence  of symbols  that 
are  seen  to  repeat throughout T.  The  level of stimulation 
of a tracker is indicated by the match count variable which 
is set to zero on initialisation. 
Tracker initialisation and evolution is deterministic in na- 
ture to avoid  proliferation of ineffective motif  candidates. 
Given  the user  defined  alphabet  size a,  the initial  tracker 
population is constructed  of size a  to contain  one of each 
of the viable  alphabet symbols.  Each  tracker is unique,  to 
avoid  unnecessary duplication of solution candidates and 
wasted search  time. 
Trackers  are  created  of  a  length   of  one  symbol,   but 
must evolve each generation to match motifs represented by 
longer  symbol  strings.  The  trackers are matched to motifs 
via  the words  extracted  from  the symbol  matrix.  Track-  
ers that match a word are stimulated by incrementing their 
match counts by one; trackers that attain a match count ≥ 
2 indicate repeated words  from  T  and  become  candidates 
for proliferation. Given  a motif and  a tracker that matches 
part of that motif,  proliferation enables  the  tracker to ex- 
tend its length  by one symbol  each generation until it their 
lengths  are equal,  in order  for it to attempt a match to the 
whole motif. 
 
5.4  Generate symbol stage matrix from S 
 
Initially the tracker population contains trackers that are 
one  symbol  long.   The  symbol  matrix  S  contains a  time 
ordered  list of all symbols  present in the time series T. We 
could now match the trackers to the words in S to identify 
potential motif candidates. 
However, S contains a considerable amount of redundant 
information.  Keogh  defines such redundant data as trivial 
matches.  Given  a time  series  T,  containing  a subsequence 
C beginning  at p and a matching subsequence M beginning  
at q, M is considered a trivial match  to C  if either p = q or 
there does not exist a subsequence M’ beginning  at q’  such 
that ED(C,M’ )>r, and  either q<q’<p  or p<q’<q [18] . 

 
5 
 
Trivial  matches are sequences  that are located in consec- 
utive locations within S and so match each other.  Such triv- 
ial matches should  be eliminated  from  the search  to avoid 
processing  of unnecessary  information.  Given  the similar- 
ity of neighbouring  sliding  windows  we  only  wish  to ex- 
amine  data  from  those  windows  that generate non  trivial 
sequences. 
A stage matrix is created from S each generation and  its 
primary purpose  is to eliminate such  trivial  matches.  The 
MTA  considers  each  symbol  in  S  and  only  transfers  it to 
the stage  matrix if that symbol  differs  from  the previous  
symbol  entered. 
The risk of trivial match elimination is that if the symbol 
set size a  used to represent the time series is too small,  we 
will get excessive elimination of consecutive sequences  that 
are  not  trivial.   Non  trivially  matching sequences  may  be 
represented by the same symbol,  given the limited set avail- 
able, leading  to inappropriate eliminations taking place.  To 
prevent this occurring  the maximum number  of consecutive 
trivial match eliminations must be less than s. In this way a 
subsequence can eliminate as trivial all subsequences gener- 
ated from sliding windows that start in locations contained 
within  that  subsequence but no others.  This  prevents  ex- 
cessive symbol  amalgamation and  the loss of data. 
For  example,  if the symbol  size was s = 3 and  the sym- 
bol matrix contained the words [c,c,c,c,d] full trivial match 
elimination would generate the stage matrix [c,d]. Restrict- 
ing the trivial match elimination to s = 3, only the second 
and third words are removed  as trivial to leave [c,c,d]. This 
is important as the first and  fourth words may  indicate se- 
quences that are a true match for each other  and correspond 
to a motif. 
This  reduction  does  not  mean  a  loss in  data  quality  if 
done  carefully.    The  start location of each  subsequence is 
stored  within  the word  corresponding  to the subsequence 
so that the range  of trivial  matches can  be  recalled.    For 
example,  if two consecutive words  within the stage matrix 
were (a, 100) and  (c, 106), the first entry corresponding 
to the subsequence symbol  string  and  the second  to  the 
location, the MTA  could identify the subsequences starting 
from 101 to 105 as all having the symbol  a.  Trivial match 
elimination in this  case  ensures  that the five subsequences 
from points 100 to 105 are not compared against each other  
as they reflect potential trivial matches. 
The  stage matrix is then presented to the tracker popu- 
lation for matching. 
 
5.5  Match  trackers  to  the  symbol stage 
matrix 
 
During  an iteration each tracker in the tracker population 
is taken in turn and compared to each word within the stage 
matrix.  Matching is assessed by extracting and  comparing 
the symbol strings from the tracker and the word.  We define 
a match to occur if the comparison function returns a value 
of 0, indicating a perfect match exists between those symbol 
strings. 
Each  time  the tracker  is found  to match a word  in  the 
stage  matrix the tracker  is stimulated  by  incrementing  its 
match counter  by  one.   Trackers  with  a match count  ≥ 2 
indicate words  that have  reoccurred throughout  the  time 
series, allowing the MTA  to narrow  the search  to these po- 
tential motif  candidates. 
 
5.6  Eliminate  unmatched  trackers 
 
During  this  step  the MTA  eliminates all  trackers  that 
have  a  match count  of zero  or  one  as  they  do  not  satisfy 
the definition of a motif per Section 4.  They  correspond to 
symbol  combinations that either only occurred  once in the 
time  series  or that did  not  occur  at all.  Match counts for 
each tracker are then reset for the next matching stage. 
For example,  suppose a = 3, so the initial tracker popula-  
tion is [a,b,c], and  the stage matrix consisted of the words 
[a,a,b,b,a,b].  After symbol matching the only trackers to 
be  stimulated  will be  a  and  b.  The  trackers  identify  the 
sequences  in the time series that are seen to repeat. c rep- 
resented a potentially viable motif component but it was not 
observed  in the symbol  matrix. The  tracker corresponding 
to c  receives  no  stimulation  and  will  be  eliminated as  re- 
dundant.   Knowledge  of  possible motif  candidates from  T 
is therefore maintained and  carried  forward  by the tracker 
population. Eliminating non repeating trackers ensures  the 
MTA  is only  focused  on  investigating  viable  motif  candi- 
dates. 
 
5.7  Examine T to confirm genuine motif 
status 
 
For  each surviving  tracker the MTA  then scans through 
the stage  matrix looking  for  two  subsequences X  and  Y 
whose  symbol  strings  correspond to the current  tracker. 
However,  even  if  X  and  Y  have  the same  symbol  strings 
they  may  not  represent  a true match when  looking  at the 
time series data underlying those subsequences. 
In order  to confirm whether the two subsequences X  and 
Y  correspond to genuine  motifs  in  T  we  need to apply  a 
distance measure  on the first order differential of the time 
series associated with those subsequences and compare  it to 
the match threshold  r. The  MTA  uses Euclidean distance 
to measure  the  relationship between  two  motif  candidates 
ED(X,Y). 
To ensure  the subsequences are a close match across the 
whole of their length, and represent genuine motifs, the sub- 
sequences X and Y were separated into w subsets, x1..w  and 
y1..w .  Here w = the number of symbols in the word, so each 
subset corresponds to a symbol  from the word representing 
that subsequence. 
For simplicity we define these subsets as the symbol sub- 
sets  of a subsequence, each  of which  has  the  length  equal 
to the symbol  size s.  The  Euclidean distance calculation is 
then applied  on each  of these  symbol  subsets  in turn.  As 
soon as the ED(x1..w ,y1..w )  returns a value  > r the subse- 
quences  X  and Y  are  rejected as a potential motif  candi- 
date.  This  creates a strict match criteria. 
If the Euclidean distance  of all  symbol  subsets  relating 
to X  and  Y  are  ≤ r a motif  has  been  found.  A memory  
motif  is created to store the symbol  string associated with 
X  and  Y, in addition the start locations of X  and  Y  from 
T  are  also saved.   The  match count  of the  current  tracker 
is then incremented  by  one.   The  MTA  then continues  to 
search  for  other  words  from  the stage  matrix which  have 
the same  symbol  string  as that tracker  to identify  further 

6 
 
 
occurrences of that motif. 
Having  identified all occurrences associated with the cur- 
rently found motif,  the MTA  recommences its search  of the 
stage matrix from subsequence X  to identify the next sub- 
sequence  Z  to match the  current  tracker.  Once  found  the 
MTA follows a similar search mechanism as described above 
to identify all possible  matches to Z. 
Setting a correct value  for r is essential to the operation 
of the MTA.  A static r would  be  unsuitable  for the MTA 
because during  each generation the trackers and words from 
the symbol matrix that are matched are lengthened by one 
symbol.  It is inappropriate to compare  matches over longer 
sequences  with  the a  static Euclidean  distance  threshold. 
The value of r has to dynamically adjust to be proportional 
to the length  of the motif under  consideration to avoid  the 
premature dismissal of longer,  still valid  motifs. 
To resolve this issue a distance threshold D is established 
per time point, based  on a percentage of the standard devi- 
ation of the first order  differential of T. Given  the user de- 
fined symbol  length  s, the MTA  calculates a match thresh- 
old  r = D.s.   This  ensures  a  dynamic and  flexible  match 
threshold is established that is applicable across alternative 
time series. 
 
5.8  Eliminate  unsuccessful trackers 
 
During  step 2 of the tracker matching process,  trackers 
that identified  genuine  motifs  in  T  had  their  stimulation 
factors  incremented.   The  MTA  once  again  eliminates all 
unstimulated trackers to  allow  the MTA  to narrow  down 
motif  solutions  quickly  and  avoid  processing  unnecessary 
search candidates. 
 
5.9  Identify  and store  motifs found 
 
The  motifs  identified  during  stage  5.7 are  stored  in the 
memory  pool for review.  Comparisons are made  to ensure 
duplications are removed.  This memory  pool represents the 
compressed representation of the time series, containing all 
the re-occurring patterns present. 
 
5.10  Proliferate  matched  trackers 
 
After all  elimination steps the tracker population  con- 
sists of symbols  with underlying time series  subsequences 
that are  seen  to repeat throughout  the  time  series.   They 
therefore correspond to parts of, or the whole of, the motifs 
we wish  to find.   During  early  iterations  of the MTA  the 
length  of the trackers will be less than the complete motifs 
they  have  to find,  since trackers  are  initialised  to a  length 
of one  symbol.   In  order  for the trackers to  lengthen and 
therefore capture more of the motif the MTA  lengthens the 
surviving  trackers in a controlled manner through directed 
proliferation and  mutation. 
At the end of the first generation the surviving trackers, 
each consisting of a single symbol,  represent all the symbols 
that are applicable to the motifs  in T. The  full motifs  in T 
can only consist of combinations of these symbols.  As such, 
at the end of generation one, the surviving  tracker popula-  
tion is stored as the mutation template for the MTA.  If we 
are to undertake proliferation and  mutation of the trackers 
it makes sense that all mutations should  only involve sym- 
bols  from  the mutation  template  and  not  the  full symbol 
alphabet, as any other  mutations would lead to unsuccess-  
ful motif  candidates. 
The  MTA  takes each surviving  tracker in turn and pro- 
liferates it to generate a number  of clones equal to the size 
of the mutation template.   These  clones  adopt  the same 
symbol  string as their parent. 
 
5.11  Mutate matched  trackers 
 
The  clones generated from each parent are taken in turn 
and extended by adding  a symbol taken consecutively from 
the mutation template.  Once  the clones are  mutated they 
are  added   back  into  the  tracker  pool.    This  results  in  a 
unique   population  of  trackers  with  maximal coverage  of 
all potential  motif  solutions and  no  duplication.  This  de- 
terministic proliferation and  mutation of the tracker  pool 
[a,c,d] is illustrated in Fig.  2. 
 
 
 
Figure 2: A visual illustration of the proliferation and muta- 
tion process applied  to the tracker population [a, c, d]. Mut 
= the mutation template and  Tr = the tracker population. 
 
Post proliferation and  mutation,  the tracker  pool  is fed 
back into the MTA  ready  for the next generation. The  sur- 
viving  trackers now  include  symbol  strings of length  two, 
as well as one.  In the second  generation a new stage sym- 
bol matrix must be formulated to present to these evolved 
trackers, consisting of motif  candidates of two symbols.  In 
this way  the MTA  builds  up  the representation of a  motif 
one symbol  at a time each generation to eventually map  to 
the full motif. 
Given  the symbol  length  s we can generate a word con- 
sisting  of two  consecutive  symbols  by  taking  the symbol 
from  matrix S  at position  i  and  adding  to it the symbol 
from  position  i+s.  Repeating this  across  S  the MTA  ob- 
tains a new stage matrix in generation 2, each entry of which 
contains a word of two symbols,  covering  a subsequence of 
length  2s. 
Selection from  the symbol  matrix S  into the new  stage 
matrix is performed with trivial match  elimination as de- 
scribed  in Section 5.4 to reduce the set of alternative solu- 
tion  candidates.  Given  the  symbol  strings  are  now longer 
and   more  specific  trivial  match  elimination will  remove 
fewer  subsequences.   However,  invalid  subsequences from 
amongst these alternatives are being  quickly dismissed via 
the symbol  string  matching  mechanism as  trackers evolve 
to map  to the longer motif  candidates. The  MTA  is there- 
fore elegantly  narrowing down  its  search  path as  it hunts 

 
7 
 
for genuine motifs. 
The  MTA  continues to prepare and  present new  stage 
matrix data to the evolving  tracker population  generation 
after  generation until  all trackers  are  finally  eliminated as 
non  matching.   Once  the  tracker  population size  falls  to 
zero the MTA  stops.  Any further extension to the current 
tracker  population will not  improve  their fit to any  of 
the underlying motifs  in T. 
 
5.12  Memory motif streamlining 
 
The  final stage of the MTA  analyses  the memory  motif 
population and eliminates those motifs that are found to be 
completely  encapsulated within  other  motifs.   In  addition 
similar  motifs  are  combined  if  upon  investigation they are 
found  to separately  represent  parts of the same  repeating 
pattern.  The  MTA  streamlines  the memory  pool  to gen- 
erate a list of individual motifs  for T, with no duplication. 
Each  memory  motif consists of the symbol  string epitomis- 
ing the general  characteristics of the motif, the motif length  
and  the location of each occurrence of the motif. 
 
6 
Results 
 
Having  introduced the MTA  we now move provide some 
initial results which examine  the ability of the MTA to iden- 
tify motifs. 
 
6.1  Finding motifs embedded in a random 
walk 
 
To ensure the MTA works as intended two randomly gen- 
erated motifs  A and  B were embedded into a random walk 
data set of length  400.   Motif  A  consists  of a sequence  
of length  40 embedded at  time  points  47 and  160.   Motif  
B consists of a sequence  of length  40 embedded in T  at 
time points  100 and  230.  A and  B were chosen  such  that 
they are  realistic  enough  for  validation.  Fig.   3  
illustrates  the time series T  generated and the embedded 
motifs A and B. 
 
 
 
Figure  3: Finding the known  motifs  A and  B embedded in 
a random walk time series 
 
In this simple test scenario  a = 6, s = 10, and r = 0.5 per 
time point.  These  parameters were established as suitable 
after numerous   runs  of the  MTA.  Sensitivity  analysis  on 
these parameter settings is investigated in Section 6.3. 
The  MTA  analysed T  in 14 seconds  and  found evidence 
of two  motifs.    The  first  motif,  represented  by  the word 
dcdd, was found  located at points  47 and  160 and  was of 
length  41.  This  motif  exceeded  the 40 day length  that was 
originally  embedded because  the  data  from  points  87 and 
200, found immediately after the embedded motif, was also 
very  similar.   The  length  of the motif  found  was therefore 
appropriately extended by one day to include this matching 
data.  The  second  motif,  dccc,  was found  located at days 
100  and  230  and  was  of length  40.   Both  embedded mo- 
tifs were found  successfully  while no other  motifs  from the 
non embedded sections of the random walk were identified. 
This simple test indicates the MTA is capable  of identifying 
motifs present in a time series. 
 
6.2  Finding unknown motifs in real world 
data 
 
The   previous   example   shows   the  MTA   can   uncover 
motifs  in a small random walk data set, but the aim of the 
MTA  is to find motifs  in larger  real world time series.  The 
dataset selected  for  investigation  in  this  scenario   is  the 
steamgen  data  set.   This  data was  generated using  fuzzy 
models[25] applied  to the model of a steam generator at the 
Abbott Power  Plant in Champaign[26]  and is available from 
http://homes.esat.kuleuven.be/∼tokka/daisydata.html. 
The data output from the models consists of four measured 
variables: 
drum   pressure,  excess   oxygen   levels,   water 
levels  and  steam  flow.    The  steamgen  data  set  consists 
of  every   tenth  observation taken   from  the  steam  flow 
output  information,  starting  with  the  first  observation. 
This  specific  selection  criterion  was  used  by  Keogh  and 
has  been  followed  here  for  the purposes   of  comparison. 
The steamgen  data set  contains  960 items  with  significant 
amplitude variation, a subset of 400 of which is illustrated 
in Fig.  4. 
 
 
 
Figure  4:  A subset  of 400 data items  from  the  steamgen 
data set, provided as a visual context for the motif detection 
problem. The X axis refers to Time, whilst the Y axis refers 
to steam flow. 
 
From  an  initial  scan  by  eye  of  the data it is  unclear 
whether any  significant motifs  exist,  representing  an  ideal 
challenge  for  the MTA.  The  three  parameters  s,  a  and  r 
need  to be determined  for the MTA.  We  will examine  the 
sensitivity of the MTA  to changes  in these parameters, but 
for now we set s = 10, a  = 6 and  r = 0.5. 
Using  these parameters, the MTA  identifies 104  motifs 
of varying  lengths  between ten and  60.  Some of the motifs 
of length  ten are seen to repeat up to 15 times throughout 

8 
 
 
the data, others  of length  20 are noted  to repeat up to four 
times.  However  one significant  motif  of  length  60, seen to 
occur  twice  in  the data,  dominates the motif  pool.   The 
subsequences comprising this motif,  starting at location 75 
and  883,  are  remarkable in their  similarity  as can  seen  in 
Fig.  5. 
 
 
 
Figure  5:  The  plot  of a motif  found  in the steamgen  data 
by  the MTA.  It consists  of the subsequences  starting at 
locations 75 and  883, both  of length  60.  The  X axis refers 
to the motif  length, whilst the Y axis refers to steam flow. 
 
This  result implies  that the MTA  can identify unknown 
motifs  in this real world data. One could ask however  how 
do  we know  we have  captured  all  of  this  motif ?  In  order 
to provide  some grounding for the MTA,  we compared the 
MTA  result  to that  of the probabilistic motif  search  algo- 
rithm used  by Keogh  et al.[18] .  Keogh  was kind  enough  to 
provide  a  teaching  version  of his  algorithm  which  we ap- 
plied  to the steamgen data, using  parameters  established 
by Keogh for this data set. Running the probabilistic algo- 
rithm, specifying  a search  for motifs of length  80, results in 
an  obvious  motif  being  found.   The  motif  discovered  con- 
sisted  of sequences starting at points 66 and  874, covering 
a length  of 80.  This  motif  is illustrated in Fig.  6. 
 
 
 
Figure  6:  The  plot  of a motif  found  in the steamgen  data 
by  Keoghs  probabilistic  algorithm.   It consists  of the sub- 
sequences  starting at locations 66 and  874, both  of length 
80.  The  X axis refers to the motif length, whilst the Y axis 
refers to steam flow. 
 
Comparing Figures  5 and 6 it appears that the MTA has 
only detected a subset of the motif found by the probabilis- 
tic algorithm, missing  off the first and last ten data points 
of the longer  motif.   The  Euclidean distances  for  the  first 
and  last  ten days  of the 80 day  motif  are  5.48  and  11.17 
respectively.  We  know  the MTA  applies  a  Euclidean dis- 
tance  threshold  across  subsets  of the motif  corresponding 
to each  symbol,  to ensure  any  variation in  the sequences 
under comparison is evenly distributed. 
Remembering s  = 10, and  r = 0.5 per  unit, we  have  a 
match threshold for each ten unit period of 5.0.  The Euclid- 
ean  distances of 5.48 and  11.17 both  exceeded  this  match 
threshold.  Therefore the MTA considered these regions dur- 
ing  its  investigation  but  dismissed  them  as not  matching. 
Comparing  Figures  5  and  6  this  is  clearly  evident.    The 
MTA is more stringent in its definition of a match and  has 
identified the same motif as the probabilistic algorithm but 
only that part that represents the closer match. 
Establishing  that the MTA  can  find unknown  motifs  in 
a  real  world  data set, and  having  those  motifs  confirmed 
through comparison to an alternative motif  detection algo- 
rithm provides  a  good  grounding for the MTA.  A further 
important consideration however is to test the sensitivity of 
the MTA  to changes  in the parameters s, r and  a. 
 
6.3  The MTA and parameter  sensitivity 
 
Using  the steamgen dataset the MTA  was run  multiple 
times with variations of the parameters s, r  and a to exam- 
ine the impact on the final motif population, and the ability 
of the MTA  to retain knowledge  of the motif shown in Fig. 
5.  We  define  this  motif  M1 .  Values  of s  = 10, a  =  6  and 
r = 0.5 per unit were set as base line defaults for each ex- 
periment. After each experiment the following information 
was recorded  in Table  1. 
 
C1  The  number  of motifs. 
 
C2  The  number  of repetitions of all motifs. 
C3  The  average  motif  length. 
C4  The  standard deviation of the motif length. 
C5  The  percentage of T  covered  by all motifs. 
C6  The  average  euclidean distance of all motifs. 
C7  The  MTA execution time in milliseconds. 
C8  The  length  of the version  of motif  M1  found  . 
 
Given this information we can determine a measure of the 
quality of the motifs, MQ, found with the following formula. 
 
M Q = (C 2 ∗ C 3)/C 6 
(1) 
MQ provides  a measure  of the size and fitness of the motif 
population that is found.  A large MQ  value is beneficial  as 
it indicates the MTA finds more occurrences of longer motifs 
that are a closer match to each other. 
In addition  we can  attain a measure  of the  efficiency of 
the algorithm,  ME,  in  terms  of  execution  time,  from  the 
formula 
 
M E = (C 5/C 7) 
(2) 
 
ME  provides  a measure  of the performance of the MTA, 
it assesses how long the algorithm takes to find additional 

 
9 
 
motifs  that are  of value.   ME  highlights  the trade  off  that 
exists  between  the size of the motif  population found  and 
the execution time of the MTA, so we can ensure  the solu- 
tion is reached efficiently.  A rise in ME  implies it takes less 
time  to  find  the same  motif  coverage  of T.  The  results  of 
the parameter testing are listed in Table  1. 
 
Table 1 Sensitivity analysis  of the MTA  to changes in pa- 
rameters s, r and  a. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.3.1 Changes to symbol  size  s 
Given the default values of a = 6, r = 0.5, s was examined 
for the values  5, 10, 15, and  20. 
With low s values the MTA finds a large number  of short 
motifs, which occur very frequently, all of which have a good 
general  fit.  However the MTA  is unable to find long motifs. 
The  average  motif  length  is 5.5  days  when  s=5, and  only 
15  days  of motif  M1     could  be  found.    With low s  values 
the MTA  execution  time is significantly longer,  reaching  a 
maximum of 1,113 seconds  (C7). 
Increasing s raised  the average  Euclidean distance of the 
motif solutions (C6).  This is to be expected given the match 
threshold (r.s ) is proportional to s.  The  longer the symbol 
size, the higher  is the match threshold, leading  to solutions 
with  a higher  Euclidean distance  being  found.   Effectively 
the MTA is more lenient regarding the acceptance of motif 
candidates. 
Fewer motifs are found as s rises, but those found consti- 
tute longer motifs.  The  average  motif  length rises from 5.5 
to 27 days  (C3),  with a standard deviation rising  from 1.8 
to 13 days  (C4).   This  indicates much  more  variety  in the 
length  of motifs  found.   The  loss in  the number  of motifs 
detected occurs  because  some shorter motifs  are combined 
into  larger  motifs,  whilst  other  are  simply  missed  by the 
MTA.  The  loss of motifs  is shown  by  the  slight  fall in the 
motif  coverage  percentage (C5)  as s  rose. 
In contrast, the execution time of the MTA significantly 
improves  as s increases  (C7),  leading  to an improvement in 
the efficiency measure  ME. 
Once s rises above ten the full length  of 60 days for the 
motif M1   is found, further increases  to s offer little improve-  
ment or loss in the detection of this motif. 
In  summary,  low  s  values  result  in  excessive  numbers 
of short motifs  being found  and  long motifs being omitted. 
The short motifs are then either combined into longer motifs 
or  are  lost  as  s  rises.   Excessively  high  s  values  improve  
execution time but leaves the MTA  unable  to find some of 
the shorter motifs.  A rise in s over ten offers no real benefit 
in the detection of the specific motif  M1 . 
6.3.2 Changes to the match  threshold  r 
Given  the default values  for a  = 6, s = 10, r was exam- 
ined for values  0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7 and  0.8. 
Low r values  (0.3)  provide  an  excessively  strict  match 
condition,  resulting  in only  23 motifs  being  found.   These 
23 motifs represent high quality matches but they cover only 
36.8% (C5)  of T. A data point identified as belonging to a 
motif is flagged.  The percentage coverage is then calculated 
as  the number  of data  points  flagged  over  the total time 
series  size.   Given  so few motifs  are  found  the execution 
time  for  the MTA  is minimal, taking only  20 seconds  to 
complete. 
High  r values  (0.8)  result in an  over-generous  matching 
condition which extends the MTA’s execution time to over 
720  seconds,  reducing  the efficiency measure  ME  to  0.14. 
A large  number  of less well fitting  motifs  are  now  found, 
which  cover  100% of T,  indicating the  match condition  is 
too lenient. 
A  rise  in  r has  less of an  impact on  the average  motif 
length  as that seen with s.  Average  motif lengths only rose 
from  10 days  to 15 days  as r rose  from  0.3 to 0.8.  Once  
r reaches  0.5 the MTA  is able to identify all 60 days of 
motif M1    and  any further increases  in r do not  improve  on 
this. 
Once r rises to 0.7 a new motif M2    is found of length  
63, consisting  of subsequences from  points  118  and  774.  
This 
new motif is illustrated in Fig.  7. One can immediately see 
the subsequences in M2    are a poorer fit to each other  than 
those of M1 , as seen in Fig.  5.  This is confirmed  by the fact 
that M2    has a 39% higher Euclidean distance than M1 . 
 
 
 
Figure  7: Motif M2   found in the steamgen data set, consist- 
ing  of subsequences of length  80 starting at  locations 118 
and  774.  The  X axis refers to the motif length, whilst the 
Y axis refers to steam flow. 
 
From this analysis  we conclude  that increasing r  causes a 
significant deterioration in the efficiency of the MTA  as the 
overgenerous match threshold entails comparisons be made 
across  a  larger  number   of  poorer  motif  candidates.   The 
result  is a poorly  fitting  motif  pool.   However,  excessively 
low r  values  exclude  the detection  of most  motifs.    An  r 

10 
 
 
value  in between  these  extremes  is desirable, such  as  r = 
0.5, where motifs, such as M1 , are detected without loss and 
any further increases  offer no improvement to the solution. 
6.3.3 Changes to the alphabet  size  a 
Given  the default  values  for s = 10, r = 0.5,  a  was ex- 
amined  for values  4, 6, 8, and  10. 
From  Table  1 it can  be  seen  that changing  a  has  little 
impact  on  the average  Euclidean distance  (C6), the aver- 
age motif  length  (C3),  the standard deviation of the motif 
length  (C4),  or the  percentage  of T  covered  by  the motif 
population (C5). 
Increasing a from 4 to 10 triggers an increase  in the num- 
ber of motifs  detected from 106 to 119, and  the number  of 
motif  repeats from  438 to 615, this  in  turn  causes  a 116% 
rise  in  execution  time,  leading  to a  fall  in  the efficiency 
measure  ME  to 0.45. 
More motifs  are found  as a  rises because  of a decline  in 
the number  of words  eliminated during trivial match elim- 
ination. With small a  values  T  is represented by a smaller 
alphabet set.  There  is less  variety  in  the symbol  
alterna- tives  used  to  represent  the motif  subsequences, 
leading  to greater trivial match elimination. But as a rises 
the symbol set increases,  resulting in fewer potential trivial 
matches in S. Looking  at the size of the symbol  stage 
matrix in gen- eration one  after trivial match  elimination 
we see when  s 
= 4,  the stage  matrix is reduced  from  960 data  items  to 
176 through trivial match elimination, alternatively if  s = 
10 the data set is reduced  to only  299.  The  larger  degree 
of trivial match elimination causes  the MTA to miss some 
motifs. 
Unlike  changes  in  s  or  r, changes  to a  have  less  of an 
impact  on the detection  of motif  M1 .  The  MTA  is always 
able  to identify  a  length  for M1     of  at least  40,  
regardless of a.   Looking  at the graph  of  M1     in  Fig.   5 
one  can  see the first 40 time periods indicate the closest 
match for the subsequences comprising M1 .  Changing s 
never effects the detection  of this  closely fitting  region,  it  
only  changes  the detection  of the less well fitting  region  
in  the rest  of the motif. 
From   all   this   information  one   can   hypothesize   that 
changing  a  only  has  a  limited  impact  on  the  quality  and 
quantity  of the motif  population,  however  further  analysis  
of a still needs to be performed to ensure  the alphabet size 
chosen does not significantly influence the MTA’s accuracy. 
The  analysis  of parameter  sensitivity  shows  that while 
the MTA  remains  relatively insensitive to changes  in a, it is 
sensitive to changes  in both  r and s. This is understandable 
given s and  r have  a direct effect on the matching criteria 
applied  to subsequences when testing to see if they form a 
motif.  As both parameters influence the match threshold, a 
rise or fall in either would result in a respective relaxing  or 
tightening  of the matching criteria.  The  choice  of s  and  r 
will therefore be influenced  by the data set under  examina- 
tion.  However  the advantage of the MTA,  when compared 
to other  algorithms, is that this dependency is just limited 
to setting  the  parameters  s and  r. In future  work we pro- 
pose  to  normalise the subsequences used  in the Euclidean 
distance calculations so the sensitivity of r to different data 
sets could  be reduced. This  leaves the user  only having  to 
select an appropriate value for s, making  the algorithm flex- 
ible across  different  problem  domains.  Sensitivity  analysis 
of the MTA  parameters in other  problem  domains has also 
been investigated[10] . 
It would  have  been  beneficial  to compare  the  statistics 
generated from the MTA to the equivalent of Keogh’s prob- 
abilistic model.  However this was difficult given the output 
format generated by  Keogh’s algorithm.  The  probabilistic 
algorithm generates a collision matrix of all motifs in a sig- 
nificantly quicker  time frame  than the MTA.  This provides 
a  nice  visual  representation of the motifs  found  but it is 
difficult to compile  a comprehensive list of the exact num- 
ber of motifs,  their affinity and their frequency. In addition 
the motif  length  has to be specified in advance by the user 
making  the probabilistic search  very specific.  However  one 
can  gain  comfort  from  the fact  that the significant  motifs 
found  by  the MTA  were  also  found  by  Keoghs  algorithm 
and  vice versa. 
 
6.4  Motifs in oil  data 
 
The  previous  sections  indicate that the MTA  is  able  to 
identify  unknown motifs  in small  data sets  and  real  world 
data. 
Of particular interest to us is the application of the MTA 
to a  financial  time  series.   Stock  market  data  is a  popu- 
lar  selection for many  pattern matching  algorithms, given 
the financial  rewards  of successfully forecasting future price 
movements  based  on  historical  information.   One  of the 
most  important  stock market commodities is that of oil, 
given its influence  on the rest of the market.  For  this rea- 
son  we have  chosen  to apply  the MTA  to the daily  West 
Texas  Intermediate (WTI) crude  oil  price,  a  popular in- 
dicator of general  oil prices.    This  data  spans  the period 
covering  January 1986 to January  1990 and  contains 1020 
items, as plotted in Fig.  8 below. 
 
 
 
Figure  8: The daily WTI  crude oil spot price Jan ’86 to Jan 
’90 measured in dollars  per barrel 
 
 
From  an  initial  scan  by  eye  of Fig.    8,  one  could  hy- 
pothesize   that the oil  data has  characteristics  similar  to 
that of  a  random walk.    As  a  stock  market  commodity 
this  is unsurprising  as ‘it  is well known  that random walk 
data can perfectly model stock market data in terms of all 
statistical  properties,  including   variance,  autocorrelation, 
stationarity’[27] .  One could argue therefore that it would be 
difficult to extract any meaningful motifs  from such data. 

 
11 
 
The  MTA  was initialised  using  the parameters  a  =  8, s 
= 5 and  r = 0.08.  Section 6.3 indicated the MTA was rel- 
atively insensitive to a  so a high  alphabet size of 8 should 
avoid  the issue  of excessive  trivial  match elimination and 
provide a good representation for the time series.  The  data 
was evaluated in symbols of length  5 to provide  a detailed 
examination of the data and  ensure  the subsequences com- 
prising  the motifs were of a good match for each other.  The 
match threshold of 0.08 corresponds to 15% of the standard 
deviation of the first order differential of the oil data time 
series.  The determination of 15% was carried  forward  from 
the  sensitivity  analysis  performed in Section  6.3 which  re- 
sulted in realistic results for the steamgen data set and this 
oil data set. 
Using  these  parameters  the MTA  was  able  to  identify 
250  motifs,   three lasting 20  days,  seven  lasting 15  days, 
59  lasting  ten days,  with  the remainder lasting  five  days. 
The  ten day  motifs  were  seen  to repeat up  to  six  times 
throughout the time series, whilst some five day motifs were 
seen to occur 25 times across the data set.  The motifs found 
covered  83.42 percent of the whole data set and  it took the 
MTA  683 seconds to identify them. 
Two examples  of the motifs  found by the MTA  are illus- 
trated in Figures  9 and  10. 
 
 
 
Figure  9: Motif Ma   of length  15, consisting of three subse- 
quences  found  in the WTI  oil dataset 
 
The  first motif,  represented by the word eee, was found 
to be 15 days  long and  re-occurred three times in the time 
series, starting at days 329, 349 and 436.  The nominal  price 
change  in dollars  per barrel  for the subsequence at day 329 
is plotted against the average of the other  two occurrences 
in Fig.  9. An immediate similarity is evident between these 
subsequences.  This is confirmed  by Euclidean distances be- 
tween  the  subsequence 329 and  those  of 349 and  436 that 
both  lie below 0.5 representing a close match. 
The second motif, represented by the word ed, was found 
to be ten days long and re-occurred six times throughout the 
data, at days 214, 225, 359, 591, 720 and 919.  Fig.  10 plots 
the subsequence starting at  day  214  against  the average 
of the other  five  occurrences.   The  Euclidean distance of 
each subsequence compared to 214 range  from 0.34 to 0.46 
indicating a close match once again. 
From this simple analysis  it is clear that motifs do exist in 
the WTI  oil data set, and  these can be found by the MTA. 
Having found these repeating patterns there is the potential 
to use  the motif  population  as  an  additional  resource  to 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  10:  Motif  Mb     of  length  10 days,  consisting  of 
six subsequences found  in the WTI  oil dataset 
 
 
 
support  other  forecasting  tools  to predict  future  oil  price 
movements. 
 
6.5  The MTA and potential  applications 
 
The MTA  represents a novel, abstract algorithm to iden- 
tify unknowns motifs in a time series dataset in an intuitive 
and  efficient manner.  The  population of  motifs  generated 
by the MTA  is a potentially very useful resource  that other  
algorithms could easily take advantage of. 
Clustering  and   wavelet  algorithms  are  usually  seeded 
with random data upon  initialisation.  An  alternative ap- 
proach  would  be  to seed  these  algorithms  with  the motif 
population generated by  the MTA.  The  motifs  represent 
known  patterns that re-occur  in the data set therefore giv- 
ing the algorithms a head  start in their analysis. 
The  motif  generation process  also  represents a  unique 
compression mechanism.  The  original  time  series  is com- 
pressed  to a reduced  set representing the recurrent patterns 
in the data.  This  reduced  set  may  be sufficient to provide  
a simple  visual  summary of the full data set. 
Technical  analysts   working   in   the  stock   market  use 
known and  accepted patterns when analysing stock market 
performance.  Such  patterns  include  the ‘head  and  shoul- 
ders’  and  ‘cup  and  handle’  patterns.  The  MTA  could  be 
applied  to such stock market data and the motifs generated 
compared to these well established patterns. This analysis 
may be able to highlight other  patterns that may also be of 
interest alongside  those that are generally  accepted. 
A  key  potential  application  of  the MTA  would  be  to 
act as a support  tool  for forecasting.  Executing  the MTA 
on  historical  data would  generate a  population of motifs. 
When  live data is received  this information could represent 
a partial motif.  Using principles from natural language  one 
could  compare  the partial motif  against the motif  popula- 
tion and  hypothesise the future direction or  value  for the 
partial motif.   For  example,  suppose  we  took  the oil data 
set described in Section 6.4 and assumed  the last five days 
of live data translated to the word  e.  Review  of all motifs 
containing the symbol e could provide  an indication of what 
symbol  is  likely  to reoccur  next.   The  MTA  found  77 mo- 
tifs corresponding to the word e, these led on to 17 motifs 
consisting of ed, 15 of ee,  2 of ef  and  1 of  ec.  One could 

12 
 
 
therefore  hypothesize that the next  five days  to  come  are 
likely to follow a pattern characterised by the symbols  d or 
e. 
 
7 Future work 
 
A  number  of applications are  listed  in  Section  6.5  and 
these  could  be  incorporated into  the MTA  as  part of our 
future work.  The  results presented in Section 6 are highly 
encouraging given the MTA is still in a relatively early stage 
of development.  A number  of modifications have been pro- 
posed  and  will be investigated  as part of our  future  work. 
Having  examined three  separate data sets  in this  paper  it 
is important to extend our analysis  to evaluate the perfor- 
mance  of the MTA  across a wide range  of diverse data sets. 
In this way we can  ensure the technique used  is successful 
and  independence  from  the data set  is maximised.  Sensi- 
tivity  analysis should  be  extended across  these data sets. 
Performance measures need to be established for the MTA 
so that the algorithm can  be  benchmarked  against  other  
alternative approaches. 
The  incorporation of wild cards  as an additional symbol 
in the available alphabet would be of interest as this mech- 
anism may enable us to identify relationships between some 
of the motifs found.  For example,  consider we have a 10 day 
motif  M  found  to occur on days  50 and  100, and  a 20 day 
motif  N  was seen to occur on days  70 and  120.  With a 10 
day  wildcard  ‘* ’ one would  immediately see there  is a  re- 
lationship between motifs  M  and  N  as we could effectively 
combine  them into one motif  ‘M*N ’. 
In its current form the MTA  makes no distinction of mo- 
tif type during  its search  for motifs,  it simply lists all those 
it finds.  However users may only be interested in particular 
motif  structures, for  example  financial  analysts are  likely 
to be interested in  significantly fluctuating motifs  and  not 
stable, flat motifs.  It would be of value to incorporate some 
concept of ‘interestingness’ from the user so that the MTA 
focuses  its  search  on  only  this  subset,  reducing execution 
time and  providing more  meaningful solutions.   Classify- 
ing motifs  as ‘interesting’ has been applied  with success by 
Keogh[28] . 
Alternative  matching techniques  other   than  Euclidean 
distance  should  also  be  investigated.    Research  by  some 
authors  has  found  that  Euclidean  distance  performs   well 
against  other  distance  metrics  on  a  wide  variety  of data 
sets[27] ,  however  it is  important  for  alternative  distance 
measures to be  considered in  the MTA  to ensure  its  ap- 
proach  is valid  and  appropriate to the data. 
 
8 
Conclusions 
 
The  search  for  patterns or  motifs  in  data  represents a 
generic  problem  area  that is of great interest to a huge va- 
riety of researchers. By extracting motifs that exist in data 
we gain some understanding as to the nature and character- 
istics of that data, so that we can benefit from that knowl- 
edge.  The  motifs provide  an obvious mechanism to cluster, 
classify  and  summarise the data, in  addition  they  can  be 
used  to predict  future  information, placing  great value  on 
these patterns. 
Given  the importance of finding  motifs, considerable re- 
search  has  been  performed in  identifying known  patterns 
in  time  series  data.   In  contrast  little  research has  been 
performed  on looking for unknown  motifs  of an unspecified  
length  that exist  in  time  series.   The  MTA  takes  up  this 
challenge  using a novel immune inspired  approach to evolve 
a population of trackers that seek out and match the motifs 
present  in  a  time  series.   A key  advantage  of  the MTA  is 
that it uses a minimal  number  of parameters with minimal  
assumptions  about  the  data  examined or  the underlying 
motifs  when compared to alternatives approaches. 
The  MTA  was  evaluated using  three  data sets,  one  of 
which included  oil price data, and in all cases the algorithm 
was able to identify the presence  of a motif population. The 
unique  search  process  of the  MTA  was  aided  through  the 
utilisation  of a  simple  and  intuitive symbolic  representa- 
tion. Some of the motifs  found  were of considerable length 
or repeated  with  significant  frequency  to be of interest  to 
a user of those time series.  At present the MTA  makes no 
distinction  of ‘interesting’  motifs,  it finds  and  presents all 
available motifs,  but this could easily be addressed as part 
of our future work.  In this work we highlight that fact that 
the MTA  shows  potential  as  a  tool  used  for seeding  other  
algorithms with its motif population to enhance  their effec- 
tiveness, in  addition  the motif  population could  provide  a 
valuable resource  to aid  in the forecasting of future  infor- 
mation. The  MTA  is still at an early  stage of development 
but the initial results presented in this paper  are encourag- 
ing.  We propose  future work to improve  and  enhance  this 
algorithm but even in its current form we believe that the 
MTA  offers a  valuable contribution  to an  area  of research 
that at present has received  surprisingly little attention. 
 
Acknowledgement 
 
The authors would like to thank Eamonn Keogh from the 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Univer- 
sity of California Riverside   for  providing a  teaching  ver- 
sion of his probabilistic motif determination algorithm, the 
steamgen dataset, and  his advice  and  feedback.
