1 
 
A comparison of different methods of identifying 
publications related to the United Nations 
Sustainable Development Goals: Case Study of 
SDG 13 – Climate Action 
 
Philip J. Purnell 
1Centre for Science and Technology Studies, 
Leiden University,  
P.O. Box 905, 2300 AX Leiden, The Netherlands 
2United Arab Emirates University, Al Ain, UAE 
Tel: +971 50 552 9356 

ORCID: 0000-0003-3146-2737 
 
Abstract  
As sustainability becomes an increasing priority throughout global society, academic and 
research institutions are assessed on their contribution to relevant research publications. This 
study compares four methods of identifying research publications related to United Nations 
Sustainable Development Goal 13 – climate action. The four methods, Elsevier, STRINGS, 
SIRIS, and Dimensions have each developed search strings with the help of subject matter 
experts which are then enhanced through distinct methods to produce a final set of publications. 
Our analysis showed that the methods produced comparable quantities of publications but with 

2 
 
little overlap between them. We visualised some difference in topic focus between the methods 
and drew links with the search strategies used. Differences between publications retrieved are 
likely to come from subjective interpretation of the goals, keyword selection, operationalising 
search strategies, AI enhancements, and selection of bibliographic database. Each of the 
elements warrants deeper investigation to understand their role in identifying SDG-related 
research. Before choosing any method to assess the research contribution to SDGs, end users 
of SDG data should carefully consider their interpretation of the goal and determine which of 
the available methods produces the closest dataset. Meanwhile data providers might customise 
their methods for varying interpretations of the SDGs. 
Keywords 
Sustainable development goal – Climate action – bibliometrics – artificial intelligence – 
machine learning  
1. Introduction 
1.1. UN Sustainable Development Goals 
The United Nations described a set of sustainable development goals (SDGs) within its 2030 
sustainable development agenda. These goals were launched on 1st January 2016 and will be 
in place until 2030. The agenda includes 17 SDGs that are associated with 169 targets and 
progress is to be measured using 232 indicators (United Nations, 2017). The goals urge 
political, scientific, economic, and societal change to address global challenges and ensure 
sustainable development of the planet and all its inhabitants. To achieve these goals, all sectors 
of society are expected to participate including higher education institutions and research 
centres.  

3 
 
Table 1. United Nations SDG 13 goals and targets 
SDG 
13 
Short name 
Climate action 
Long name 
Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts 
Targets 
13.1 Strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity to climate-related 
hazards and natural disasters in all countries 
13.2 Integrate climate change measures into national policies, strategies 
and planning 
13.3 Improve education, awareness-raising and human and institutional 
capacity on climate change mitigation, adaptation, impact reduction and 
early warning 
13.A Implement the commitment undertaken by developed-country 
parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
to a goal of mobilizing jointly $100 billion annually by 2020 from all 
sources to address the needs of developing countries in the context of 
meaningful mitigation actions and transparency on implementation and 
fully operationalize the Green Climate Fund through its capitalization as 
soon as possible 
13.B Promote mechanisms for raising capacity for effective climate 
change-related planning and management in least developed countries 

4 
 
and small island developing States, including focusing on women, youth 
and local and marginalized communities 
Source: United Nations resolution A/RES/71/313 
One key step in assessing progress of the academic community against the SDGs is to identify 
the relevant research outputs. These are usually articles published in scholarly journals and 
books, or presentations at conferences. Research publications are indexed in large databases 
which can be searched using strings of keywords. If the search terms match words in the article 
title or abstract, then that article is included in the search results. In this paper, we compare 
different methods of identifying research publications related to SDGs. Our focus is on SDG 
13: Climate action, whose goals and targets are shown in Table 1. We chose SDG 13 because 
it affects the entire global population and environment and is strongly dependent on scholarly 
research.  
As research into the SDGs develops, the number of efforts to create search strings grows, each 
different from the others. Current methods of which we are aware are summarised in Table 2.  
Table 2. Current methods of defining SDG-related research 
Group 
Data source 
Method 
Elsevier 2020 
Scopus 
Boolean search strings 
Elsevier 2021 
Scopus 
ML-enhanced 
Bergen 
Web of Science 
Boolean search strings 
Aurora (Elsevier 2019) 
Scopus 
Boolean search strings 

5 
 
Clarivate ISI 
Web of Science 
Citation enhanced 
STRINGS 
Web of Science 
Citation clustering-enhanced 
SIRIS Academic 
Various 
ML-enhanced 
Digital Science 
Dimensions 
ML-enhanced 
1.2. Study aims 
This study aims to quantify the different datasets produced by following four methods and shed 
light on the underlying causes of those differences. Each of the methods selected for this study 
has made some attempt to enhance their datasets through algorithms. These were done in 
different ways and sometimes at different stages of the process. Although the machine learning 
element was not scrutinised in this paper, it is worth highlighting the differences because they 
are likely to influence the resulting datasets. The following methods were chosen for the study 
because they cover all SDGs, and we have access to the search terms used and resulting 
publications: 
• Elsevier (2021) – used to calculate part of the 2021 Impact Rankings (Times Higher 
Education, 2020) 
• STRINGS – Steering Research and Innovation for Global Goals (Confraria, Noyons, 
& Ciarli, 2021) 
• SIRIS Academic – a European consulting firm (SIRIS Academic, 2020) 
• Dimensions – developed by Digital Science (Wastl, Hook, Fane, Draux, & Porter, 
2020) 

6 
 
It is important to point out that we did not attempt to evaluate the accuracy of the methods or 
to pick a winner. We deliberately chose not to develop our own method because of the 
multitude of questions raised when defining a ground truth (Gläser, Glänzel, & Scharnhorst, 
2017). Our intention was to shed light on the discrepancies produced when applying different 
perspectives to the same question.  
We did not use other published methods because (e.g.): 
• Bergen: We could not run the complex search in our version of Scopus and there were 
too many records to export from the Scopus database  
• Aurora: The method was not fully developed for global analysis 
• Clarivate ISI: The publications are not assigned to individual SDGs 
Specifically, we analyse the search strings (inputs) used by each method, and sub-classify them 
into general terms, policy-related terms, and technical terms. The use of subject matter experts 
will surely influence the type of search terms used and consequently determine the set of 
research publications identified as related to SDG 13.  
We then compare the size of the resulting sets of publications identified by each of the four 
methods. We perform quantitative comparison of the overlap and surplus of each of the 
methods. We then discuss the influence of the type of keywords used in the search strings in 
determining the final dataset.  
Finally, we compare the articles identified by the different methods (outputs) using VOSviewer 
maps. These maps help visualise the nuances of each of the methods and show the links with 
the corresponding search strategies.  
Research questions: 

7 
 
1. To what extent do different search strategies produce different sets of SDG13-related 
publications? 
2. What is the impact of including different types of search terms in the search strings? 
3. What is the impact of using larger, more inclusive data sources over smaller, more 
selective ones? 
1.3. Assessing university impact 
This study is important because universities are increasingly asked to demonstrate their 
‘impact’ on society in areas such as sustainability, so there is an increasing need to expand the 
definition of university performance to encompass the area of societal impact. University 
contribution towards the SDGs is therefore both welcomed and expected by their stakeholders 
and society in general. This expectation is accompanied by efforts to measure progress against 
the SDGs using performance indicators appropriate for universities.  
Academic publications are frequently used in research evaluation and universities are routinely 
assessed on their article output for internal performance review and international 
benchmarking. Research articles related to the SDG goals and targets are therefore an 
appropriate unit upon which to base such assessments. Indeed, there is now a global ranking 
of universities based on their progress against the SDGs, about a quarter of which is based on 
their research publications related to the SDGs (Times Higher Education, 2021b). The first two 
editions of this ranking assessed universities on their Scopus-indexed publications retrieved 
via a series of search strings. The 2021 edition further extended the publication datasets through 
a process of machine learning.  
Research publications are typically analysed using large international multidisciplinary 
databases comprised of scholarly research papers. Bibliographic databases such as Scopus, 

8 
 
Web of Science, and Dimensions include journal articles, conference proceedings, and research 
published in books. However, they each have their own selection and coverage policy that 
results in differences between the publications included. Therefore, the choice of bibliographic 
database will determine the resulting dataset depending on the selection and coverage policy 
of the database. Running the same search in different databases will yield different results.  
1.4. Search strategies 
Even using the same data source does not make SDG-related publication datasets  comparable, 
indeed it has been shown (Armitage, Lorenz, & Mikki, 2020a) that differences in search 
strategies make a big difference in outcomes. For SDG 13: Climate action, only about one-
third of articles were found by two different approaches.  
In bibliographic searching, the search strategy is of key importance in determining the final set 
of publications. The search for SDG-related research is in its infancy and we aim to advance 
current understanding of the relationship between different search strategies and the resulting 
publication datasets. The UN described the goals, targets and indicators using specific terms, 
and the UN and other bodies have published related documents and reports also using subject-
specific language. As these reports were written by people with close subject knowledge, they 
can be used as sources of search terms in a bibliographic database. Subject matter experts can 
then refine the searches to improve their recall and precision.  
In terms of information retrieval, recall is the number of relevant publications retrieved as a 
share of all the relevant publications. To maximise recall, one would make the search strategy 
as broad as possible and not be concerned with the prospect of finding false positives among 
the results. Meanwhile, precision is the number of relevant publications retrieved as a share of 
all retrieved publications. To maximise precision, the search strategy should be as narrow as 

9 
 
possible to exclude any irrelevant publications. The trick in identifying SDG-related research 
is for the search strings to be both effective at recall while remaining precise.  
In order to assess recall, it is first necessary to define a precise, yet representative, set of 
reference publications. The way a method operationalises its interpretation of the SDGs, 
through a reference dataset used to measure recall, will largely influence the results and overlap 
with other methods.  
2. Literature review 
2.1. Current methods of defining SDG research 
One of the earliest insights into sustainability science was developed by the publisher Elsevier 
in collaboration with SciDev.Net (Elsevier & SciDev.Net, 2015). This was the first in a series 
of reports that aimed to describe the research landscape in areas related to the SDGs. In order 
to identify research papers related to the SDGs, Elsevier worked with field experts to design 
sets of Boolean queries that were applied to the Scopus Advanced search (Jayabalasingham, 
Boverhof, Agnew & Klein, 2019). The keywords were related to research themes linked to the 
six Essential Elements (Dignity, People, Prosperity, Planet, Justice, and Partnership) described 
by the United Nations (2014). The 17 SDGs are grouped around these six Essential Elements. 
The experts identified key phrases from the titles and abstracts of relevant reports and those 
keywords were then used to search for scholarly articles indexed in the Scopus database. The 
advantage of this method was its ability to retrieve papers that use specific terms related to 
various aspects of one or more of the SDGs, without having to explicitly use the term 
‘sustainable development goal’.  

10 
 
A team of library and information specialists from the University of Bergen in Norway set out 
to discover the degree to which the design of the search strings affected the resulting set of 
publications (Armitage et al., 2020a). They developed a set of complex Boolean search strings 
(Armitage, Lorenz, & Mikki, 2020b) for selected SDGs and queried them in Web of Science 
Advanced Topic Search. They then translated the 2019 Elsevier Boolean queries 
(Jayabalasingham et al., 2019) into Web of Science search strings and compared the results 
with their own ‘Bergen’ set. Comparison showed only a quarter of records were returned by 
both the 2019 Elsevier and the Bergen search strings with large quantities of publications not 
retrieved when using one or the other set of terms. The authors concluded that even mildly 
modifying the search strings used for specific SDGs will significantly change the resulting set 
of academic papers found. The Bergen group also addressed the question about what 
constitutes SDG-related research by creating two sets of search terms for each SDG; those 
relevant to the topic of e.g., clean water and sanitation, known as the Bergen Topic Approach 
(BTA), and papers on efforts to actually combat the challenges described by the SDGs, known 
as the Bergen Action Approach (BAA). The topic approach retrieved larger datasets than the 
action related searches, although the degree of overlap of these two approaches with the 
Elsevier dataset varied by SDG. 
The SDG targets can be vague, weak, or non-essential (International Science Council, 2015) 
which makes it unclear which words or phrases in a target should be used in a search. Even 
search strings using the same initial terms will produce different results depending on how they 
are refined. The Bergen group reported that their queries tended to use more combinations of 
terms requiring each to be included in a paper for it to be returned in the results. For example, 
the Bergen group required the term ‘climate change’ to be combined with other terms found in 
the SDG 13 targets such as ‘adaptation’ or ‘mitigation’, whereas the 2019 Elsevier search 

11 
 
would return results due to the simple appearance of the term ‘climate change’. On the other 
hand, the 2019 Elsevier strategy refined its final dataset by excluding any papers that contain 
the term ‘drug’ or ‘geomorphology’. Such papers relate to medicine and changes in earth layers 
related to prehistoric climate changes rather than those related to modern day climate action 
(Jayabalasingham et al., 2019). Both these methods aim to refine the dataset but will obviously 
lead to differences in results.  
Since the comparison with the Bergen method, the complexity of Elsevier’s search strategy has 
increased considerably. The breadth of Boolean queries has expanded to capture a wider range 
of related concepts such as carbon capture/mitigation, CO2 in combination with global 
warming, or environmental impacts. The sole appearance of the term ‘climate change’ is no 
longer sufficient to retrieve publications. Similarly, the exclusion criteria in the 2021 method 
have been refined to over 30 specific terms, replacing the two in the 2019 method. Elsevier has 
published a full description of their methods along with the search strategies (Rivest et al., 
2021). 
Science-Metrix, now part of Elsevier, has described how analysts who are familiar with the 
SDG targets have defined sets of seed keywords for each SDG (Provençal, Campbell, & 
Khayat, 2021; Rivest et al., 2021). In this scenario, the preference for precision over recall is 
emphasised meaning that the dataset is expected to contain publications with high relevance to 
the SDG targets, even at the expense of missing some.  
Several of the methods including Bergen, SIRIS and Dimensions aimed to capture phrases used 
in context rather than only in their exact form by using proximity searches, so that ‘climate 
impact’~3 would also capture phrases such as ‘climate change impact’ and ‘changing climate 
and its impact on health’. Again, these methods used different levels of proximity and on 

12 
 
different search terms so the effect would of course compound differences in the publications 
retrieved.  
Other groups have also developed Boolean search queries to describe bodies of SDG-related 
research. For example Jetten, Veldhuizen, Siebert, Ommen Kloeke, & Darroch (2019) aimed 
to discover the extent to which Wageningen University’s work to improve food security 
through innovative technologies influenced media and policy documents. Similarly, Körfgen 
et al. (2018) developed a detailed keyword catalogue which found nearly a fifth of Austrian 
universities’ research output was related to the SDGs. An attempt to assess Spanish public 
universities’ contribution to the SDGs (Blasco, Brusca, & Labrador, 2021) used a composite 
indicator that included the Times Higher Education Impact rankings which is in turn partially 
based on Elsevier’s 2021 keyword search string. 
The Aurora Network of universities created an initial classification model to enable them to 
identify which research publications were related to each SDG and whether these influenced 
government policy (Vanderfeesten & Otten, 2017). They began with a strict version that was 
limited to keywords found in UN policy documents that described the goals, targets, and 
indicators. A number of subsequent versions of these search terms gradually added more 
keywords including synonyms, new terms from updated UN documents, keyword 
combinations, and terms retrieved though survey data (Vanderfeesten, Spielberg, & Gunes, 
2020), Elsevier (Jayabalasingham et al., 2019; Rivest et al., 2021), and SIRIS Academic 
(Duran-Silva, Fuster, Massucci, & Quinquillà, 2019). The Aurora bibliometric tool queries the 
Scopus database and has been used by the Association of Dutch Universities (VSNU) to create 
a sustainability impact dashboard (Association of Dutch Universities, 2019).  

13 
 
Clarivate has used a technique known as bibliographic coupling to approach the problem 
(Nakamura, Pendlebury, Schnell, & Szomszor, 2019). The Clarivate method identifies any 
paper in Web of Science that has used the term ‘sustainable development goal’ in the title, 
abstract, or keywords and defines them as ‘core’ papers. They then add to these any paper that 
has cited one or more core papers. The citing papers plus the core papers makes up the SDG-
related dataset. 
The Science Policy & Research Unit at Sussex University and the United Nations Development 
Programme are leading a collaboration of several research centres known as STRINGS – 
Steering Research and Innovation for Global Goals. This collaboration has taken a novel 
approach in order to discover whether SDG research priorities in certain countries match those 
in which the related socio-economic challenges are greatest. They selected seed terms from a 
broad range of policy, technical, and scientific reports along with web forums and official UN 
documents using a combination of algorithms and expert opinion (Confraria et al., 2021) in an 
attempt to capture terms used by a broad section of society.  They also compared their search 
strings with those used by Bergen and SIRIS Academic to remove false negatives from their 
results (Rafols, Noyons, Confraria, & Ciarli, 2021). The resulting combinations of terms 
associated with each SDG were then searched in Web of Science and used to identify clusters 
of SDG-related publications. If a certain proportion of publications were retrieved from one 
cluster, then the whole cluster was added to the dataset. If the threshold was not reached, the 
cluster was not added. These clusters group publications that are related by citation links and 
this offers a way to identify not only SDG-related publications that use specific search terms 
but also SDG-related publications that do not use these search terms but that have citation links 
to publications that do use the search terms. 

14 
 
SIRIS Academic, a European consulting firm has looked through a broader set of document 
types including R&D projects hosted on the Community Research and Development 
Information Service (CORDIS) (SIRIS Academic, 2020). This repository comprises primary 
results from European Union funded Framework Programme projects ranging from FP1 to 
Horizon 2020 (European Commission, 2020). 
Digital Science has developed an approach that queries the Dimensions database. The results 
were analysed by country and the proportion of national output calculated for each of the SDGs. 
A similar proportion in each SDG was considered a well-rounded footprint, while diverse 
emphasis was considered a skewed profile. Digital Science has also attempted to establish the 
extent of international collaboration for each SDG and to map the SDGs onto established 
scientific fields. The Dimensions SDG data have been used in a study by the Nature Index of 
leading science cities (Nature, 2021). 
2.2. Algorithmic enhancements 
An emerging trend is to employ machine learning to enrich datasets of SDG-related 
publications. In this model, manually selected keywords are used to identify a set of seed papers 
from a bibliographic data source. An AI algorithm then learns from these seed papers to 
recognise other relevant publications.  
In 2021, the Elsevier team enriched its 2020 dataset through machine learning adding 
approximately 10% to its dataset by improving recall. They used the title, keywords, key 
descriptor terms, journal subject area, and abstract from around 1 million publications related 
to SDGs to create a computer algorithm that elicited records relevant to each of the SDGs 
through a machine learning model (Rivest et al., 2021). Times Higher Education used these 
results in the calculation of the 2021 Impact Rankings (Times Higher Education, 2020).   

15 
 
SIRIS has created a controlled vocabulary for each SDG defining its ‘semantic breadth’ 
through a manual process of reading reports and identifying seed keywords (SIRIS Academic, 
2020). As a second step, they have used deep learning to train a neural network model to find 
synonyms with the seed keywords and create an ontology. The ontology is then matched with 
terms logically linked with the seed keywords in the CORDIS repository. A final quality check 
comprised human revision of results generated by the automated method for relevance to the 
original definition of the SDGs. 
Digital Science’s machine learning approach (Wastl et al., 2020) involved generating 17 
training sets and using natural language processing to create an SDG classification scheme 
searchable in Dimensions (Wastl et al., 2020).  
2.3. Bibliographic data sources  
Since the 1970s, Web of Science and its components have been routinely used for evaluating 
journal impact (e.g., Garfield, 1972), university benchmarking (e.g., van Raan, 1999),  national 
research impact assessment (Adams, 1998), the contribution of individual researchers (Hirsch, 
2005) and the development of advanced bibliometric indicators (e.g., Waltman, van Eck, van 
Leeuwen, Visser, & van Raan, 2011).  
Elsevier launched Scopus, its global abstract and citation database of research papers from 
scholarly books, scientific conferences, and academic journals in 2004. Scopus has gradually 
become a key data source used for bibliometric studies of research output (Archambault, 
Campbell, Gingras, & Lariviere, 2009; Baas, Schotten, Plume, Côté, & Karimi, 2020; Schotten, 
Aisati, Meester, Steiginga, & Ross, 2017). Recently, Digital Science’s Dimensions has also 
become an interesting data source for bibliometric studies (Herzog, Hook, & Konkiel, 2020; 
Hook, Porter, & Herzog, 2018; Thelwall, 2018). 

16 
 
Each of these databases is built in a different way and has its unique selection criteria, indexing 
process, and therefore content. Web of Science is traditionally the most selective (Clarivate, 
2020) and aims to concentrate on the highest impact academic journals. Scopus has broader 
coverage than Web of Science (Huang et al., 2020; Schotten et al., 2017), and Dimensions is 
the broadest of the three (Harzing, 2019; Visser, van Eck, & Waltman, 2021). Therefore, 
searching the same terms will produce a different result depending on which data source is 
searched. 
3. Data sources and methods 
3.1. Creating the datasets 
We created four datasets of SDG 13-related research using the methods described by the 
distinct research groups as follows. In each case, we used all document types and limited 
records to the five-year time window 2015-19 
• Elsevier – We used the Elsevier 2021 method which is the result of a two-step process.  
First, Scopus records were extracted using the search string defined as SDG 13 in the 
fourth update (Rivest et al., 2021). The resulting set of articles were then fed into an 
algorithm described by Rivest et al. (2021) that uses machine learning methods to 
enhance the original list.  
• STRINGS – We used the search terms elicited through the methods described by 
Confraria et al. (2021) to query the titles, abstracts, and keywords of publications in 
Web of Science. The resulting publications were searched in approximately 4,000 
clusters based on an article-level citation clustering described by Waltman & van Eck 
(2012). If a minimum 15% of any cluster contained our SDG13 related publications, 

17 
 
then all publications in that cluster were included in our dataset. If the 15% threshold 
was not reached, then none of the publications in the cluster were included.  
• SIRIS – We used the search strategy that combines keywords as described in the visual  
essay by SIRIS Academic (2020) to query the titles, abstracts, and keywords of 
publications in Web of Science.  
• Dimensions – We used the SDG methods including the machine learning enhancements 
described by Wastl et al. (2020)  
We ran the queries described above against versions of Web of Science and Dimensions housed 
in the database system of the Centre for Science and Technology Studies (CWTS) at Leiden 
University.  
Our version of Web of Science includes the following five indexes: Science Citation Index – 
Expanded, Social Sciences Citation Index, Arts & Humanities Citation Index, and both editions 
of the Conference Proceedings Citation Index). Neither the Book Citation Index nor the 
Emerging Sources Citation Index were used because we do not have access to them.  
Elsevier’s International Centre for the Study of Research (ICSR) Lab kindly made the 2021 
dataset available for the purpose of this study, which we used in combination with the CWTS 
version of Scopus. 
3.2. Search term classification 
We collected the search terms used by each of the methods and organised them into three 
groups using our own general knowledge of the field. We classified the search terms for each 
method according to the following criteria: 

18 
 
• General: Terms used in society, e.g., “temperature rise”. The general public would use 
these terms. 
• Policy: Terms that require knowledge of policy contents, e.g., “emissions trading”. 
They do not include mere mention of policy, e.g., “Kyoto protocol” which would count 
as a general term. 
• Technical: Terms that are technical in nature, so subject matter experts would use them. 
They either refer to a technology, e.g. "thermal energy storage", or require technical 
knowledge, e.g. "radiative forcing". Standard technologies, e.g. "solar panel", do not 
count – these would be considered general terms. 
3.3. DOI analysis 
First, we calculated the total number of publications for the five-year period 2015 to 2019 from 
each of the four datasets related to SDG 13. We then determined which of these records had a 
DOI. We subsequently used the DOI as the unique identifier when comparing the datasets. This 
means only records with DOIs were included in the comparisons. 
3.4. Pairwise coverage comparisons 
We performed pair-wise comparisons to examine the overlap between the four datasets. So, 
each dataset was compared with the other three, thereby making a total of six pairwise 
comparisons. 
Because the four methods use different data sources, some of the surplus is due to differences 
in coverage between those data sources. For example, STRINGS uses Web of Science while 
Elsevier uses Scopus. Therefore, we sub-divided each surplus into two portions. One portion 
of the surplus was due to differences between the search strategies described by each of the 

19 
 
methods, while the other portion was due to coverage differences between the data sources. 
We termed these ‘surplus (method)’ and ‘surplus (coverage)’ respectively. 
3.5. Visualisation of the outputs 
For each pairwise comparison, we then presented the results in the form of VOSviewer term 
maps. These maps visualise terms found in the titles and abstracts of the articles in two datasets 
and show the terms in different shades of colour depending on the frequency with which they 
occur in each dataset. Each term needed to appear a minimum of 70 times in publications 
retrieved from a pairwise combined set of search terms. The term maps offer an easy way to 
see which topics are over- or underrepresented in one dataset compared to the other. 
4. Results 
4.1. Publications with a DOI 
Table 3 shows the total number of records identified by each of the four methods, and those 
that are associated with a DOI. 
Table 3. SDG 13 records and DOIs for each selected method (2015-19)  
Method 
SDG13 Publications 
Publications with 
DOI 
Share of publications 
with DOI 
Elsevier 2021 
214,369 
195,734 
91.3% 
STRINGS 
166,528 
156,010 
83.7% 
SIRIS 
177,154 
164,800 
93.0% 

20 
 
Dimensions 
205,190 
203,447 
99.2% 
The number of publications related to SDG 13 was relatively similar for each of the four 
methods chosen for the study. The largest set of records was found through the Elsevier 2021 
method, although only about 5% larger than the Dimensions dataset. The SIRIS and especially 
STRINGS datasets were smaller, although the STRINGS dataset was still over three-quarters 
the size of the Elsevier 2021 total.  
Each method had DOIs for at least 91% of its SDG 13 related publications. That meant we had 
a comparable set of publications associated with DOIs from the four methods for comparative 
study. 
4.2. Comparison based on classification of search terms 
The Elsevier 2021 method used an expansive list of keywords covering a range of topics related 
to climate change such as greenhouse gas emissions, and global warming. The list also 
extended into terms describing actions taken to address the problem such as policies and laws, 
but also addressed developments of resilient foods and agricultural methods. The term "legum* 
breed*" AND ("climate" or "drought" or "flood") is one of many technical terms related to 
food and agriculture in the context of climate action. These highly specific terms are designed 
to maximise recall while maintaining a high level of precision. There is also a considerable set 
of exclusion terms that use the AND NOT command, e.g., "Prehistoric Climate" and "blood". 
These are intended to exclude publications captured by the initial search terms, but that are not 
related to the current challenges surrounding climate action. The exclusions therefore improve 
precision of the dataset. 

21 
 
STRINGS used a lot of broad, simple terms, for example, “climate change”. STRINGS but not 
SIRIS used the term “carbon economy”, while SIRIS instead used more specific terms not 
employed by STRINGS, e.g., “carbon accounting”, “carbon audit”, “carbon credit”, “carbon 
dividend”, “carbon fee”, and “carbon finance”. STRINGS extracted search terms from lay 
documents including web forums and grey literature as well as policy documents and scientific 
publications to capture terms used by a broad section of society.  The STRINGS surpluses due 
to method were all higher than those of other methods. We speculate that is the effect of the 
enhancement step that is based on the grouping of Web of Science into 4,000 clusters of 
publications related by citation links even in the absence of explicit use of keywords. The 
enhancement makes a decision about whether to include or exclude each of the Web of Science 
4,000 topic clusters in the final dataset. If the cluster is selected, then all publications in that 
cluster are added. As the threshold for inclusion was set at 15%, it means that all publications 
in any cluster in which 15% of the records contain the seed keywords are included. However, 
the 15% inclusion threshold makes it possible that up to 85% of the records in a selected cluster 
did not in fact contain the keywords. This record 10.1080/09540091.2017.1279126 is 
exclusively retrieved by the STRINGS method, although it contains none of the STRINGS 
keywords. The explanation must be inclusion in a topic cluster selected because of the 
existence of other publications bearing the search terms. The citation-based grouping seems to 
have been more inclusive than the other methods in the study and emphasise recall over 
precision. Conversely, any topic cluster in which fewer than 15% records contain the seed 
keywords is excluded along with all its publications, even those that did contain the keywords. 
An example is 10.1371/journal.pone.0137275 which contains the term ‘climate change’ in its 
abstract. This term is included in the STRINGS seed keywords but the publication is not 
included in the final dataset. It must therefore have been excluded from STRINGS due to 

22 
 
existence in a topic cluster mainly populated with less relevant papers. Therefore, even where 
the different methods used the same keywords, this enhancement step has produced 
discrepancies compared with the other methods.  
Overall SIRIS used more than twice as many search terms as STRINGS, many of them 
technical. There were 54 ‘technical’ search terms compared with only four in STRINGS. For 
example, “ocean acidification” and “radiative forcing” found thousands of records in SIRIS 
that did not appear in STRINGS. Sometimes SIRIS was restrictive, for example requiring the 
term “climate change” to be combined with others, i.e., "climate change" and ("policies" OR 
"education" OR "impact" OR "reduction" OR "warning" OR "planning" OR "strategy" OR 
"mitigation"). Conversely, the simple mention of “greenhouse gas” qualified publications for 
inclusion in SIRIS, while STRINGS required the same term to be combined with another term 
like “emission”, “reduction”, or “changing climate”. The technical terms used by SIRIS 
contributed to large numbers of publications in the SIRIS surpluses against all the other 
methods.  
Dimensions used only 45 search terms, most of them general. However, these were searched 
against a larger database. The Dimensions method also employed the proximity search in 
almost all the search terms so that phrases that included certain words in close proximity would 
be found. For instance, ‘Climate related hazards’~3 will also find articles that contain ‘hazards 
related to climate change’ in their titles or abstracts. The advantage is that publications that 
include phrases used in the context of climate action could be returned rather than only finding 
an exact phrase. 
The number of search terms used by each method is shown by type in Table 4. The Elsevier 
2021 method used mainly general and technical terms plus about 14% policy related terms. 

23 
 
The STRINGS method used a high proportion of general terms, but the remainder were almost 
all policy related with very few technical terms. The SIRIS method was far more specific with 
about a quarter of the search terms policy related and a quarter technical in nature. 
Table 4. Search term classification 
Method 
General 
Policy 
Technical 
Total 
Elsevier 2021 
210 (46%) 
62 (14%) 
186 (41%) 
458 
STRINGS 
70 (71%) 
24 (24%) 
4 (4%) 
98 
SIRIS 
119 (52%) 
55 (24%) 
54 (24%) 
228 
Dimensions 
34 (76%) 
9 (20%) 
2 (4%) 
45 
The full list of terms along with their classification is available in Zenodo.  
4.3. Comparison based on overlap of publications 
In each pairwise comparison the set of overlapping records is shown in the central portion of 
the Venn diagram. Only publications with a DOI are used in order to make these comparisons. 
The records found in one dataset but not the other can be termed surplus. In the sample diagram 
(Figure 1), the two portions to the left are each included in dataset A, but not in dataset B and 
therefore comprise the dataset A surplus. As the methods use different bibliographic databases 
(Table 2), the surplus can be sub-divided into the portion of the surplus due to the differences 
in method, and the portion due to differences in coverage. 
The reader may consider these comparisons as a Venn diagram flattened into a stacked 
horizontal bar as shown in Figure 1.  

24 
 
 
Figure 1. Key to overlap and surplus 
Figure 2 shows pair-wise coverage comparisons of SDG 13 related publications between the 
four different methods. Each bar is labelled with the two datasets compared. The number of 
records in each portion of the pairwise comparison is shown in Table 5.  
The first comparison shows that 56,043 publications were found by both Elsevier 2021 and 
STRINGS, and these are represented by the central portion of the bar. Immediately to the left 
of the overlap are 79,613 records found in the Elsevier 2021 dataset, but not STRINGS because 
of the difference between the two SDG 13 search strategies (surplus due to method). The far-
left portion of the bar represents a further 36,544 records in the Elsevier 2021 dataset, but not 
Overlap
Surplus 
(method)
Surplus (coverage)
Surplus 
(method)
Surplus (coverage)
A
B
Surplus

25 
 
in the STRINGS set because these records are not found in Web of Science (surplus due to 
coverage).  
Likewise, the other end of the bar shows 2,949 STRINGS publications that were not found 
through the Elsevier 2021 method because they are not indexed in Scopus. The remaining 
97,018 STRINGS publications were not found in the Elsevier 2021 dataset due to differences 
between the two search strategies. 
 
Figure 2. Number of overlapping and surplus publications between methods 
The largest overlap (29.2%) was between the Elsevier 2021 and SIRIS methods (Table 5), 
while the lowest (13.4%) was between Dimensions and STRINGS. Overlap means that both 
methods in the comparison retrieved the same publications. The range of agreement is 
surprisingly low, indeed no two methods compared show a high degree of overlap.  
Surplus due to method ranged from 22.2% to 41.6%. These are publications that were found 
by one method but not the other, where the discrepancy was attributed to the method of 
identifying the publications. The high level of surplus due to method demonstrates the large 
disagreements between all four methods.  
Elsevier
Elsevier
Elsevier
STRINGS
Dimensions
Dimensions
Scale = 50,000
Surplus (coverage)
Surplus (method)
Overlap
Surplus (method)
Surplus (coverage)
STRINGS
STRINGS
SIRIS
SIRIS
SIRIS
Dimensions

26 
 
The surplus due to database coverage was very low (maximum 1%) for both methods that used 
Web of Science (STRINGS and SIRIS), confirming the selective coverage of Web of Science. 
Conversely, Dimensions showed in one case (vs. SIRIS) that almost a quarter (24.6%) of the 
combined records in the pair were in its surplus due coverage. These are publications found by 
one method but not the other where the discrepancy is attributable to the coverage of the data 
source. There was no surplus due to coverage for the STRINGS vs SIRIS comparison because 
both used the Web of Science database.  
Table 5. Number and share of overlapping and surplus publications    
Method A 
Surplus 
(coverage) 
Surplus 
(method) 
Overlap 
Surplus 
(method) 
Surplus 
(coverage) 
Method B 
Elsevier 
44,764 
102,702 
48,269 
104,792 
2,949 
STRINGS 
14.8% 
33.8% 
15.9% 
34.5% 
1.0% 
Elsevier 
44,764 
69,502 
81,469 
80,421 
2,910 
SIRIS 
16.0% 
24.9% 
29.2% 
28.8% 
1.0% 
Elsevier 
7,103 
104,613 
84,019 
82,587 
36,831 
Dimensions 
2.3% 
33.2% 
26.7% 
26.2% 
11.7% 
STRINGS 
0 
102,564 
53,446 
111,354 
0 
SIRIS 
0.0% 
38.4% 
20.0% 
41.6% 
0.0% 
Dimensions 
76,389 
84,629 
42,429 
112,522 
1,059 
STRINGS 
24.1% 
26.7% 
13.4% 
35.5% 
0.3% 

27 
 
Dimensions 
76,389 
68,933 
58,125 
105,494 
1,181 
SIRIS 
24.6% 
22.2% 
18.7% 
34.0% 
0.4% 
Sample DOIs for each group are available via a link in Zenodo. 
4.4. Comparison based on topical focus of publications 
Analysis of the resulting publications visualised through VOSviewer showed terms extracted 
from the titles and abstracts of publications and grouped by co-occurrences in publications. 
Each comparison shows two maps. The first map allows us to assign broad descriptive phrases 
like ‘energy problem’ to clusters of papers with the most relevant and frequently occurring 
terms represented by different colours. In Figure 3, the first map groups terms into three 
distinct, colour coded fields related to energy problem (green), CO2 problem (blue), and 
climate change (red).  
The second map shows for each term which of the two methods of identifying SDG 13 related 
research captured more publications that use the term. Each bubble represents a term, and the 
colour of the bubble reflects the score of the term. Terms that occurred more frequently in the 
publications identified by the first method have a negative score and appear over a blue bubble, 
while terms that occurred more frequently in publications identified by the second method have 
a positive score and appear over red bubbles. Terms that appear over the faded colour bubbles 
occurred evenly in publications identified by both methods. In Figure 5, the second map shows 
us that the terms related to the CO2 problem tend to occur more frequently in the Elsevier 
dataset. Meanwhile, the terms related to the energy problem appeared more frequently in the 
Dimensions dataset. 

28 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Elsevier vs STRINGS - Click to navigate interactive live map 

29 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Elsevier vs SIRIS Click to navigate interactive live map 

30 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Elsevier vs Dimensions Click to navigate interactive live map 

31 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. STRINGS vs SIRIS - Click to navigate interactive live map 

32 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Dimensions vs STRINGS - Click to navigate interactive live map  

33 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Dimensions vs SIRIS - Click to navigate interactive map  
 
 

34 
 
The four methods studied have all identified SDG 13-related publications but each with a 
discernible topical emphasis. Each map presents the terms most frequently found in a combined 
set of publications for the methods compared. The terms may appear in publications identified 
by both methods, but the colour indicates which method identified them more frequently.  
The first three VOSviewer maps show terms expressed in research publications identified by 
the Elsevier method compared with the other three methods. In these maps, there is no clearly 
discernible pattern. In the comparison with STRINGS, the Elsevier method has perhaps 
identified papers that more frequently use terms related to the environment and climate. This 
might be due to the inclusion of large numbers of related search terms in the Elsevier seed 
keywords. Alternatively, Elsevier’s machine learning enhancement might have trained the 
search engine to identify these publications, or perhaps Scopus has indexed more papers in this 
field than the other databases.  
In the three comparisons with STRINGS, patterns are easier to see. The colouring of terms 
related to climate change indicated they occurred more frequently in the publications identified 
by STRINGS than the other methods, although this distinction was less clear in the comparison 
with Elsevier. STRINGS used broader, more encompassing search terms, e.g. ‘climate change’, 
than the other methods. This broad search strategy might have contributed to recall of a larger 
set of publications that contained related terms. STRINGS then introduced more publications 
to its dataset by adding all papers in clusters related by citation links. We did not quantify these 
additions, but entire clusters of publications were added if 15% or more records in the cluster 
contained the keywords. We assume this approach added many publications on climate change 
and contributed to their prominence in the maps. As STRINGS uses Web of Science as its data 
source, it is also possible that database indexes publications on climate change more frequently 

35 
 
than Scopus or Dimensions. If that were the case, it would at least partially explain the 
prominence of the records in the STRINGS comparisons. However, SIRIS also used Web of 
Science and in the pairwise comparison, STRINGS clearly found climate change publications 
more frequently. 
The SIRIS method appears to have retrieved publications more focused on the technical nature 
of carbon emissions. SIRIS used a relatively large number of keywords, and they were highly 
technical in their nature. SIRIS avoided broad terms like ‘carbon emissions’ but instead used 
32 more specific terms containing the word ‘carbon’ such as ‘orbiting carbon observatory’ and 
‘personal carbon trading’. Construction of SIRIS search terms was supported by natural 
language processing and we speculate that has resulted in the more frequent inclusion of 
publications with technical terms as seen in the maps. Again, database coverage would provide 
an alternative explanation if Web of Science indexed more technical publications than the other 
databases. However, the comparison with STRINGS, which also used Web of Science, showed 
SIRIS to find more technical publications, making database coverage a less likely explanation. 
Dimensions demonstrated some prominence in publications with terms related to energy and 
policy. Dimensions searches the term ‘renewable energy’ which retrieves a large quantity of 
publications, whereas the other methods require that term to be used in combination. An 
explanation might partially lie in the interpretation of the subject matter experts of the term 
‘climate action’. Experts might differ in their emphasis with some focusing on the ‘action’ part 
while others may see the term more synonymous with climate change in general. If the experts 
used in the Dimensions method wanted to focus on the action, then it would make sense to 
choose terms containing verbs such as ‘reduce emissions’ and ‘limit global temperature rise’. 
This point of view might also lead experts to select the names of agreements and forums among 

36 
 
its search terms as places where action is discussed. Elsevier took a conscious decision not to 
include ‘renewable energy’ as a stand-alone search term for SDG 13 publications to reduce 
overlap with SDG 7 (Affordable and clean energy). Dimensions is the broadest of the three 
data sources used and its larger journal coverage might also have contributed to its large 
surpluses against the other methods.  
5. Discussion 
In this study we compared the publication sets retrieved by four different methods of 
identifying research related to SDG 13: Climate action. Each method begins by selecting 
relevant keywords from the SDG goal and its related targets. These keywords are then 
combined to create a query that is searched on a bibliographic database. Each method then 
enhanced its results in different ways. The resulting set of publications from the four methods 
overlapped very little, given that they all started with the same task.  
Overlap is defined as publications that were retrieved by two methods directly compared with 
each other. Any publications found by one method but not the other are discrepancies. The fact 
that each method comprises multiple stages means that we cannot easily determine the source 
of any discrepancy. The method in effect becomes a black box. Our inputs are the keywords 
and the resulting publication set the output. Discrepancies between the publication sets may be 
the result of any stage of the methods compared. Those designing methods of identifying SDG 
related research should be encouraged to open the black box by publishing each element of 
their method so end users can choose from a more informed perspective, see Table 6.  
 

37 
 
Table 6 – Elements of the black box 
Element 
Description 
Seed keyword selection 
Description of source documents and how 
keywords were selected 
Use of experts 
Type of expertise, time invested, and 
instructions given 
Operationalisation of search strategies 
List of concatenated search terms 
Reference sets used to assess recall 
Description of reference sets and how they 
were constructed 
Random sampling of the reference sets 
Sample publications from the reference sets 
Source database selection 
Database, edition, and any additional 
parameters used 
Enhancement techniques 
Detailed description of methods used to 
enhance the dataset  
Random sampling of retrieved publications 
Samples of publications retrieved before and 
after enhancement 
To begin with, the set of seed keywords selected by the four methods were very different with 
up to a ten-fold difference in the number and type of keywords used. This level of difference 
is of primary interest and raises questions around interpretation of the goal. Each method used 
experts or analysts with familiarity of the topic to select the keywords so why were they so 

38 
 
different? The manual element of building the search strings is crucial because human decision 
controls which terms are included and how they are combined. People with deep knowledge of 
the field will be likely to produce terms of a more technical nature. These terms will increase 
recall while minimising less relevant publications found by broader terms. However, none of 
the methods provide the identity of the experts, say how they were selected, how much time 
they spent, the precise instructions they were given, or how they resolved differences in expert 
opinion.  
This missing information is key because experts might differ in their precise field of expertise. 
Some will be more knowledgeable about technical details of the problems surrounding SDGs 
and select more technical terms. Others might be more familiar with the details of the climate 
agreements and choose more policy related terms. Even experts with similar levels of 
knowledge will have their own views as to what is relevant and what is not. For instance, is 
research on nuclear energy relevant or not in the context of SDG 13? What about medicine’s 
role in mitigating the effects of climate change on health? Each expert will have their own 
views on these and other questions, and the choices they make is a likely source of divergence 
in publication retrieval. 
Similarly, the combination of keywords is of great importance and construction of the search 
queries varied between the four methods. Each method used a combination of broad, collective 
search terms that increase recall, and highly technical terms designed to maximise precision. 
Broad terms are good for recall but raise the prospect of contaminating the final dataset with 
less relevant papers. Elsevier 2021 and SIRIS used many more terms than the other methods. 
They included highly specific, technical terms that found publications in more concentrated 

39 
 
fields. Search strategies that use many narrow, specific terms might produce precise datasets, 
but require many more such terms to build up a corpus of publications.  
The creation of thematic datasets undoubtedly involves an element of subjectivity due to the 
human dimension. For topics as complex as the SDGs, this is even more challenging due to the 
diverse nature of subject matter experts. Their expertise will always be different making it 
difficult for them to reach reliable consensus on what research is relevant and what is not. 
Under such circumstances, operationalising a specific definition or interpretation of SDG 13 
in the form of a reference dataset is critical. This reference set of publications can be used to 
test the recall, i.e., what share of the reference set is retrieved by the implemented search 
queries? The query can be systematically expanded until a certain minimum threshold of recall 
is reached. The query should be tweaked during this process to keep precision above a defined 
cut-off point. Such reference sets can be made up of specialist journals, specialised research 
groups, or publication clusters highly relevant to the target literature. Both the selection of the 
reference set and the recall rate will influence the outcome and overlap with other methods. 
Even if difference methods started with the same interpretation of an SDG, they would still 
produce different results because of discrepancies between their operationalisation processes. 
Unfortunately, we know too little about how each method operationalised their searches 
limiting our ability to compare them. This requires further investigation to reveal the causes of 
the low level of overlap between the methods reported in this study as well as to guide future 
work on the development of such datasets. 
The four methods used three different databases between them. Web of Science is the most 
selective of the three and aims to capture scholarly literature from high impact sources. 
Meanwhile Scopus has become more inclusive, and Dimensions searches an even larger corpus 

40 
 
of literature. That STRINGS and SIRIS had relatively small coverage surpluses against the 
other methods confirmed expectations as Web of Science indexes fewer publications than the 
other databases. Conversely, Dimensions found tens of thousands of additional publications 
because they are not indexed in Scopus or Web of Science. This is expected because we know 
that Dimensions covers many publications not indexed in Scopus or Web of Science (Visser et 
al., 2021).  
The databases have different coverage policies and the publications indexed therefore vary. So 
even running the same search query on different databases will produce different datasets 
depending on the emphasis of coverage. Consequently, differences in topic emphasis identified 
in this study might easily be due to the choice of data source rather than nuances of the search 
queries. It should be noted that the SIRIS approach was designed to be database agnostic. We 
applied the SIRIS search strategy to the Web of Science but would expect different results if 
the same strategy were applied to other bibliographic databases. One method of isolating the 
impact of database is to run the keyword searches of one method across different databases. 
The Bergen Group (Armitage et al., 2020a) made an attempt at this by translating Elsevier’s 
2019 keyword search strings into Web of Science syntax. However, this requires great skill, is 
not always possible, and might raise questions over differences in understanding between the 
original author and the translator – a common problem in language translation (van Nes, Abma, 
Jonsson, & Deeg, 2010). In our study, we isolated the impact of data source by separating the 
surplus into that caused by data source and the remaining portion that we could attribute the 
rest of the method.   
Finally, all the methods enhanced their datasets but each in a different way. Elsevier 2021 and 
Dimensions used experts in multiple rounds of relevance checking and then used machine 

41 
 
learning algorithms to increase recall. STRINGS added or removed publications depending on 
whether they were in a relevant topic cluster of publications. SIRIS employed natural language 
processing at an early stage to produce a long and specific list of technical keywords. The effect 
of these enhancements could be assessed in a series of controlled studies that only assess the 
effect of the enhancement. For example, Elsevier has documented (Rivest et al., 2021) a 
comparison between its pre- and post-enhancement datasets and some details behind the 
machine learning algorithms. We could potentially use the enhancement technique of one of 
the methods and apply it to the keywords of each method in the comparison. At this stage, we 
do not have access to all the details of all the enhancement methods and therefore did not 
attempt analysis of the enhancements or their impacts.  
We have established that great differences between datasets exist but what do they mean? The 
differences described above will necessarily compound one another to produce the datasets and 
it is perhaps not surprising that they overlap so little. Publications found by one method but not 
another might be intentional. Each of the methods involves human decision based on 
interpretation of the intended outcome, selection of relevant keywords, and construction of the 
search strings. There may be legitimate differences between the understanding and aims of one 
group of experts and another. To properly identify the source of the differences between 
datasets, we need to analyse each stage of the identifications methods in isolation to better 
understand their contribution to the overall differences. In the present study, the comparison 
between STRINGS and SIRIS eliminates the effect of the database because they both used 
Web of Science. 
As the study of identifying SDG research intensifies, the methods used will come under greater 
scrutiny. Any groups designing such methods should therefore fully and publicly document 

42 
 
their approach step by step. It is important for readers to know details of the search strategy 
such as which keywords were used, who selected them, and how they were combined into 
search strings. Database selection is also important because it will determine which records are 
available for retrieval and impact the size of the final dataset. Any enhancements should be 
described in full, and algorithms deposited in a public repository. The more details provided, 
the easier the method will be to justify. This is an area of growing interest and peers will be 
pleased to help improve on methods. 
During the course of this study, many questions were raised that could be the subject of follow 
up studies. The four methods compared were complex and to fully understand their differences 
would require a systematic controlled comparison at each step. Other limitations to the study 
should also be considered. 
This study focused entirely on one SDG and any conclusions drawn can only be interpreted in 
that context. As we did not gain a good understanding of the reasons for the discrepancies 
between methods, we cannot predict whether they would be similar if we used a different SDG 
in the case study. Broader studies could look at multiple SDGs to detect any patterns.  
We chose the DOI as the unique identifier to compare overlapping coverage between data 
sources because of the extent of its use in academic publishing. Most records in the SDG 
datasets have a DOI. However, a small fraction of records was not included in the comparisons 
because they did not have a DOI.  
There is also a small share of publications with discrepancy in the publication year between 
different bibliographic databases. Both Scopus and Web of Science assign the publication year 
of an article as the official date of publication of the journal issue. Dimensions assigns the 
publication year based on the date the article was first available – usually the online version 

43 
 
(Digital Science, 2021). Consequently, our datasets may exclude a small number of 
publications from Elsevier, STRINGS, and SIRIS from the latter part of the time window while 
including the same records in Dimensions. Likewise, some records at the beginning of the time 
window may be included in Elsevier, STRINGS, and SIRIS, but excluded from Dimensions. 
However, the overall effect of discrepancies in publication year is likely to be small. 
6. Conclusions  
Each of the four methods compared has attempted to identify research related to climate action 
and produced largely different results. Their search strategies were created using human 
judgement and ranged from broad and simple to technical and focused. Between the four 
methods, three different bibliographic databases were used, each with their own unique 
coverage. Finally, in some cases, machine learning and other artificial intelligence techniques 
were applied to enrich the final publication datasets.  
These findings support those by earlier work by Armitage et al. (2020a) and build further by 
comparing four methods and visualising their outputs in the context of their search strategies. 
This study also shows the relative contribution of search strategy and data source to the 
different publication datasets produced. 
Using broader data sources to apply the search strategies increases the number of documents 
returned simply because of the larger coverage. Dimensions comprises more documents than 
either Scopus or Web of Science and might offer benefits to some methods, especially those 
aiming to find relevant literature beyond the constraints of highly selective journal literature. 
The STRINGS method makes a deliberate attempt to find search terms from grey literature and 

44 
 
web forums. It might therefore be logical to apply these search terms against the broadest 
possible data source, i.e., Dimensions.  
The search strategy, use of subject matter experts, and data source vary between the four 
methods. Each method therefore produces a different set of publications related to SDG 13. 
The fact that we have several different answers to the same questions produces a major 
implication. The overlap in publications found by these different methods is too low to be 
adopted by policy makers without careful method selection. The choice of method will 
potentially define the resulting dataset more than any other factor. Any comparison between 
research entities should use the same method of identifying publications. As more studies on 
research into climate change appear in the literature, readers should avoid the temptation to 
draw hasty conclusions. Published assessments of SDG-related research should state the 
method used along with other variables such as the time period and data source. The method 
used is an important influencer of the number and type of resulting publications.
