Reinforcement Quantum Annealing: A
Quantum-Assisted Learning Automata Approach
Ramin Ayanzadeh1,*, Milton Halem1, and Tim Finin1
1Department of Computer Science and Electrical Engineering, University of Maryland, Baltimore County, Baltimore,
MD 21250, United States

ABSTRACT
We introduce the reinforcement quantum annealing (RQA) scheme in which an intelligent agent interacts with a quantum
annealer that plays the stochastic environment role of learning automata and tries to iteratively ﬁnd better Ising Hamiltonians
for the given problem of interest. As a proof-of-concept, we propose a novel approach for reducing the NP-complete problem of
Boolean satisﬁability (SAT) to minimizing Ising Hamiltonians and show how to apply the RQA for increasing the probability of
ﬁnding the global optimum. Our experimental results on two different benchmark SAT problems (namely factoring pseudo-prime
numbers and random SAT with phase transitions), using a D-Wave 2000Q quantum processor, demonstrated that RQA ﬁnds
notably better solutions with fewer samples, compared to state-of-the-art techniques in the realm of quantum annealing.
Introduction
Quantum artiﬁcial intelligence and quantum machine learning are emerging ﬁelds that leverage quantum information processing
to address a certain types of problems, which are intractable in the realm of classical computing1–3. There are several models
for the physical realization of quantum computers4. Among the quantum computing models, adiabatic quantum computers are
currently more readily available at user sites due to recent advancements in commercializing programmable quantum annealers
by D-Wave Systems5.
Quantum annealing is a meta-heuristic that uses Quantum-mechanical ﬂuctuations to address discrete optimization problems
(i.e., combinatorial optimization problems), which are intractable in the realm of classical computing6–9. Quantum annealers
are a type of adiabatic quantum computer that provides a hardware implementation for minimizing Hamiltonians whose ground
states represent optimum solutions of the original problems of interest. The D-Wave quantum annealer is a programmable (and
commercialized) Ising processing unit (IPU) that can minimize the transverse Ising Hamiltonian or its equivalent quadratic
unconstrained binary optimization (QUBO) form5. More precisely, the D-Wave quantum annealer receives coefﬁcients of an
Ising Hamiltonian (here h and J) as an executable quantum machine instruction (QMI) and returns the vector z that minimizes
the following energy function:
EIsing(z) =
N
∑
i=1
hizi +
N
∑
i=1
N
∑
j=i+1
Ji jzizj,
(1)
where N denotes the number of quantum bits (qubits) and zi ∈{−1,+1}. To solve a problem on a D-Wave quantum annealer,
one needs to deﬁne an Ising Hamiltonian, shown in Eq. (1), whose ground state represents a solution for the original problem
of interest10.
The current generation of the D-Wave quantum annealer (the Chimera architecture) includes more than 2,000 qubits and
about 6,000 couplers, while the next generation (the Pegasus topology of the Advantage) will include more than 5,000 qubits
and about 40,000 couplers11. Recent studies have revealed the potential of quantum annealers (namely the D-Wave quantum
processors) to address certain classes of real-world problems that are intractable in the realm of classical computing12—including,
but not limited to, planning13, scheduling14,15, discrete optimization problems16, constraint satisfaction problems17, Boolean
satisﬁability18,19, matrix factorization20, cryptography21, fault detection and system diagnosis22, compressive sensing23, control
of automated vehicles24 and protein folding25. In addition, by sampling from high-dimensional probability distributions,
one can use the D-Wave quantum annealers for many applications in artiﬁcial intelligence, machine learning and signal
processing12,26,27.
Beside all aforementioned applications, the D-Wave quantum annealer architecture has limitations that not only restrict
the process of mapping problems into an executable QMI (namely the sparse connectivity) but also lower the quality of
results. Reducing a problem to an Ising Hamiltonian that represents the solution of the problem in its ground state does not
arXiv:2001.00234v1  [quant-ph]  1 Jan 2020

guarantee that executing the corresponding QMI on a D-Wave quantum processing unit (QPU) will attain the optimum solution.
For a given QMI, the D-Wave QPU draws samples from a problem-dependent pseudo-Boltzmann distribution at cryogenic
temperatures12. The energy value of samples from the D-Wave QPU follow a Gaussian distribution. Thus, when we increase
the number of reads/samples, we expect that the average parameter in the corresponding Gaussian distribution to approach the
ground state energy of the corresponding Ising Hamiltonian—i.e., the probability of ﬁnding the global minimum approaches
one. There are several drawbacks, nevertheless, that prevent quantum annealers from attaining a global minimum—including,
but not limited to, conﬁned anneal time, coefﬁcients’ range and precision limitations, noise, and decoherence.
From a quantum computing perspective, an adiabatic quantum computer needs to minimize a non-stoquastic Hamiltonian
in order to be universal (which would make them equivalent to gate models); nevertheless, the D-Wave QPU minimizes an
Ising Hamiltonian which is stoquastic9,28. Since coupling every qubit to every other qubit in a quantum annealer is impractical,
the D-Wave QPU has a sparse structure/architecture. Hence, we entangle multiple qubits to represent virtual qubits with
higher connectivity. Chaining physical qubits substantially reduces the capacity of QPUs—e.g., 2,048 qubits in the Chimera
architecture is equivalent to a clique of size 64. It is possible to implicitly leverage the capacity of the current D-Wave QPUs29,
albeit executing multiple QMIs. In addition, virtual qubits are vulnerable to breaking—the longer the chains, the higher the
probability they break during the annealing process. Although we can remediate broken chains by applying postprocessing
methods on classical computers (e.g., voting among the physical qubits on a chain), some chains break because they represent a
state with lower energy.
The required anneal time in a quantum annealer to keep the process adiabatic has a reverse exponential relation to the energy
gap between the ground state (global minimum) and the ﬁrst excited state (a state right above the global minimum)9. In the
current generation of the D-Wave QPU, hi ∈[−2,+2] and Jij ∈[−1,+1]. Thus, one needs to scale the resulting Ising model, Eq.
(1), by dividing all coefﬁcients with a large-enough positive number to satisfy the QPU hardware constraints. However, scaling
the Ising model reduces the energy gap between the ground and the ﬁrst excited states. As a result, the required annealing time
can quickly exceed the maximum possible anneal time on a physical quantum annealer (for example 2,000 micro-seconds on
the D-Wave QPUs) and makes the process diabatic, which exponentially reduces the probability of getting to the ground state9.
The current generation of the D-Wave QPUs use 8–9 bits for representing coefﬁcients in Eq. (1). Hence, the D-Wave QPU
truncates coefﬁcients of a QMI prior to putting qubits in their superposition, which can result in the Ising model having a
different ground state—compared to the original QMI. Consequently, the D-Wave QPU may solve a different problem whose
result is either infeasible or less accurate than the original problem of interest30,31. Applying preprocessing techniques32
and classical postprocessing heuristics33 can remarkably enhance the performance of the D-Wave QPU; however, from a
problem-solving viewpoint, the D-Wave quantum annealer cannot guarantee achieving a global optimum.
In this study, we view quantum annealers from two different perspectives simultaneously: (i) a meta-heuristic for solving
discrete optimization problems that can ﬁnd very high-quality solutions in near-constant time; and (ii) a physical process that
naturally draws samples from a problem-dependent Boltzmann distribution in cryogenic temperatures. Unlike most current
research in Quantum artiﬁcial intelligence that applies quantum computing models to hard AI problems, in this paper, we
explore how we might apply AI techniques to improve quantum information processing. This paper presents the Reinforcement
Quantum Annealing (RQA) scheme that leverages the idea of learning automata34 to iteratively improve the quality of results,
attained by the quantum annealers, and implicitly address the aforementioned issues. In this scheme, the agent maps the
problem to an executable QMI and interacts with a quantum annealer that plays the role of a stochastic environment in learning
automata. As a proof-of-concept, we ﬁrst introduce a novel approach for reducing Boolean satisﬁability (SAT) instances35
to minimizing Ising Hamiltonians and then demonstrate that adopting the proposed RQA scheme results in notably better
solutions.
Method
Assume that the given problem Π that we aim to solve on a quantum annealer contains a ﬁnite set of constraints (components),
denoted by πi for i ∈{1,2,...,M}, over the same variables as follows:
Π := {πi,π2,...,πM},
(2)
where M indicates the number of constraints and our ultimate objective is to ﬁnd a solution that addresses all constraints. Let
Hi be an Ising Hamiltonian whoes ground state represents a solution for πi and HΠ be the corresponding Ising Hamiltonian
of Π that all are acting on same spins (variables). In addition, let EHΠ
0
be the ground state energy of HΠ and EHi
0 be ground
state energy of corresponding Hi. If there exists z that puts Hi (∀i,i ∈{1,2,...,M}) in their ground states (i.e., satisﬁes all
constraints in Π), then z also puts HΠ in its ground state36—in other words,
EHΠ
0
= EH1
0 +EH2
0 +···+EHM
0
.
(3)
2/12

Hence, we can represent HΠ as follows:
HΠ = H1 +H2 +···+HM.
(4)
This setting appears in a vast range of problem formulations—including, but not limited to SAT19, constraint satisfaction
problems37,38, planning and scheduling13–15, fault detection and diagnosis17,22, and compressive sensing23,39—speciﬁcally
when we adopt the idea of penalty methods to reduce problems of interest to minimizing Ising Hamiltonians.
Theorem 1. For any problem in class NP, there are inﬁnite different Ising models whose ground states are all identical to the
solution of the original problem.
Proof. According to Cook—Levin theorem, we can reduce any NP problem to minimizing an Ising Hamiltonian (which is
also in the class NP) in polynomial-time40. Multiplying all coefﬁcients of the Ising model by a positive non-zero real number
results in a new Ising model whose ground state will be identical to the original Ising model. Since the number of positive real
numbers are inﬁnite, we can generate inﬁnite different Ising models whose ground states represent the solution for the original
problem of interest.
According to Theorem 1, there are inﬁnite different Ising Hamiltonians whose ground states all represent the solution of the
original problem of interest—nevertheless owing to the range and precision limitations on the D-Wave QPUs, we have ﬁnite
different Ising models for a problem. In theory, these different Ising models are equivalent to each other—i.e., an adiabatic
annealing process always attains the ground state which is identical for all corresponding Ising models of a problem. In
practice, however, each of these (theoretically) equivalent Ising models are analogous to a pseudo-Boltzman distribution whose
parameters are different. Consequently, when we minimize the corresponding QMIs with a physical quantum annealer (like the
D-Wave QPU), the probability of ﬁnding the global minimum for different Ising Hamiltonians of a given problem varies from
zero to one. As an example, an annealing process on a D-Wave QPU may become diabatic because the required anneal time
exceeds the maximum possible anneal time (2,000 micro-seconds), which can substantially reduce the probability of ﬁnding the
global minimum. Note that for a given Ising Hamiltonian, we cannot estimate the probability of ﬁnding the ground state prior
to executing the corresponding QMI.
We introduce a novel scheme, called reinforcement quantum annealing (RQA), in which an intelligent agent interacts with
a quantum annealer as a stochastic environment and tries to iteratively ﬁnd better Ising Hamiltonians that sampling from their
ground state(s), by quantum annealers, results in a better distribution—i.e., the probability of ﬁnding the global optimum is
increased over the time. To this end, we extend Eq. (4) as follows:
eHΠ = eH1 + eH2 +···+ eHM,
(5)
such that:
eHi = χ (Hi,ρi),
(6)
where ρi ∈R denotes the impact (or inﬂuence) factor of πi (or Hi) and χ is a function that maps the input Hamiltonian to a
different Hamiltonian which satisﬁes:
• any z that puts Hi in its ground state also puts eHi in its ground state, and vice versa;
• if ρ1
i < ρ2
i then χ
 Hi,ρ1
i

≥χ
 Hi,ρ2
i

.
Learning automata (LA)34 are adaptive decision-making models (i.e., type of reinforcement learning41) that try to maximize
the accumulative reward when they are interacting with stochastic environments. In a similar manner to reinforcement learning,
LA use Markov-decision-processes for representing the automaton-environment structure34,41,42. In a learning automaton, the
agent has a set of r actions (denoted by α = {α1,α2,...,αr}) and each action has a corresponding probability (denoted by pi
and ∑pi = 1). In each episode, the agent takes (applies) the action αi (according to p), and (correspondingly) the stochastic
environment returns its feedback β that speciﬁes the performance evaluation of the action αi. The agent uses this feedback
to learn from the environment and aims to take optimal actions over the time. For β ∈[0,1] —so-called S-Type learning
automata—in episode t, if the agent takes the action αi and receives the feedback βt, we can update p as follows:
pt+1
j
=
(
pt
j −θ2 (1−βt) pt
j +θ1βt  1−pj

,
i = j;
pt
j +θ2 (1−βt)
  1
r−1 −pt
i

−θ1βt pj,
i ̸= j,
(7)
where β = 0 represents the lowest action performance and β = 1 represents the highest action performance, θ1,θ2 ∈[0,1] are
learning factors, and i, j ∈{1,2,...,r}34.
3/12

We extend learning automata to allow the agent to take multiple actions in each episode. Let ˆαt ⊂α denotes the set (list) of
actions that the agents takes in episode t. We can extend the Eq. (7) as follows:
pt+1
j
=
(
pt
j −θ2 (1−βt) pt
j +θ1βt  1−pj

,
αj ∈ˆαt;
pt
j −θ2 (1−βt)
  1
r−ˆr −ˆpt
ˆα

−θ1βt
r−ˆr
 ˆr −ˆpt
ˆα

,
α j /∈ˆαt,
(8)
where ˆr = | ˆαt| and,
ˆpt
ˆα = ∑pi,
for αi ∈ˆαt.
Finally, we leverage multi-task learning automata—let ρi = pi and M = r—to propose the RQA scheme. RQA is an iterative
process that we can start it with a uniform distribution of inﬂuence factors—i.e., ρ = { 1
M}M. In each iteration, the agent applies
Eq. (5) and submits the corresponding QMI to a quantum annealer. After performing the necessary post-processing methods
(like remediating broken-chains and applying post-quantum error correction heuristics), the agent estimates β according to the
number of satisﬁed constraints (πi) and employs Eq. (8) to update the inﬂuence factor ρ.
Proof of Concept: Solving SAT Instances
For a given Boolean formula f (x1,x2,...,xn), the problem of Boolean satisﬁability (SAT) determines whether a constant
replacement of values (“True” or “False”) for all Boolean variables can interpret f as “True”35. From a complexity perspective,
SAT is NP-complete, and we can reduce all problems of class NP to SAT in polynomial-time40. The Boolean formula f is in
conjunctive normal form (CNF) if it is a conjunction (“AND”) of clauses (i.e., f(x) = C1 ∧C2 ∧···∧CM), where each clause is
a disjunction (“OR”) of literals (a Boolean variable or its negation)—Ci = li ∨lj ···∨lk. The maximum satisﬁability problem
(MAX-SAT) is an NP-hard extension of the SAT problem that aims to maximize the number of satisfying clauses35,43.
First, we adopt the idea of penalty methods to propose a novel heuristic that maps the problem of SAT to a QMI that is
executable by the D-Wave quantum processors. In other words, we aim to ﬁnd coefﬁcients of Eq. (1) such that the ground
state of the resulting Ising Hamiltonian represents the satisfying solution of the original SAT instance. In this formulation, zi
represents the Boolean variable xi, and we interpret -1 and +1 as “False” and “True”, respectively. For a clause with k literals,
there are 2k different possibilities among which, we can distinguish the only state that makes the clause to be false—called
infeasible state. Hence, we represent each clause of the given SAT instance with two inequalities as:
Di ≤Einfeasible,
(9)
and,
Di ≥∑Efeasible,
(10)
where Di ∈R is the boundary variable corresponding to the clause Ci, AND Efeasible and Einfeasible represent the contribution of
the feasible and infeasible states in the ultimate energy function, respectively. For Ci = x1 ∨¬x4 ∨x9, as an example, Eq. (9)
reduces to:
Di ≤−h1 +h4 −h9 −J1,4 +J1,9 −J4,9,
and we can represent Eq. (10) as follows:
Di ≥−h1 −h4 −h9 +J1,4 +J1,9 +J4,9
−h1 −h4 +h9 +J1,4 −J1,9 −J4,9
−h1 +h4 +h9 −J1,4 −J1,9 +J4,9
+h1 −h4 −h9 −J1,4 −J1,9 +J4,9
+h1 −h4 +h9 −J1,4 +J1,9 −J4,9
+h1 +h4 −h9 +J1,4 −J1,9 −J4,9
+h1 +h4 +h9 +J1,4 +J1,9 +J4,9.
A clause with k literals includes 2k −1 different feasible states so the size of Eq. (10) grows exponentially with k.
Theorem 2. Sum of the energy values for all possible states in every Ising model is zero.
4/12

Proof. Let Z denotes the set of all possible states in Eq. (1). Because spins in the Ising model (here zI) take their values from
{−1,+1}, Z is a closed set under the complement operation (i.e., z,−z ∈Z), and |Z| = 2N. Accordingly, sum of the energy
values for all possible states in the Ising model is:
∑
z∈Z
EIsing(z) = ∑
z∈Z
 
N
∑
i=1
hizi +
N
∑
i=1
N
∑
j=i+1
Ji jzizj
!
=
N
∑
i=1
2N
2 hi + 2N
2 (−hi)

+
N
∑
i=1
N
∑
j=i+1
2N
2 Jij + 2N
2 (−Jij)

= 0.
According to Theorem 2, we can rewrite Eq. (10) as follows:
Di ≥−Einfeasible,
that obeys:
0 ≤Di.
(11)
Note that clauses in CNF representation are connected with “AND” operator. Hence, after representing each clause of the
SAT with two inequalities, Eq. (9) and (11), we aggregate the resulting sub-systems of inequalities to form a larger system
of inequalities. After representing the given SAT instance with M clauses with a system of 2M inequalities, we represent the
D-Wave hardware restrictions through embedding:
−2 ≤hi ≤+2,
(12)
and,
−1 ≤Jij ≤+1,
(13)
where i, j ∈{1,2,...,N} and i < j. Finally, we solve the following objective function:
max
h,J,D
M
∑
i=1
Di,
(14)
to obtain coefﬁcients of the Ising Hamiltonian, shown in Eq. (1), that is executable by a D-Wave QPU. Note that inequalities(9),
(11), (12) and (13) are linear. Thus, the objective function in Eq. (14) is tractable by linear programming and convex
optimization techniques. Considering that biases and couplers on a D-Wave QPU are bounded, Eq. (12) and (13), problem (14)
will always converge.
To adopt the proposed RQA scheme for addressing the NP-complete problem of SAT, we rewrite the inequality (11) as
follows:
ρi ≤Di,
(15)
where ρi denotes the inﬂuence factor of the clause Ci. Here, we deﬁne ρ as:
ρi = 1
M −pi,
(16)
where pi is the corresponding probability of constraint πi (here the clause Ci) in Eq. (8). Note that when pi = 1
M , the inequalities
(11) and (15) are identical.
The architecture of the proposed agent contains the following components:
• Φt—set of unsatisﬁed clauses in episode t;
• ρt—tuple of M inﬂuence factors in episode t;
• QMIt—action of the agent in episode t, the Ising Hamiltonian for solving the given SAT instance (according to Φt and
ρt);
• z—perception of the agent from the stochastic environment, resulting sample(s) from executing the QMIt on a quantum
annealer.
5/12

For a given Boolean formula in CNF, the agent initializes its internal state as:
Φ0 = /0,
p0 = { 1
M }M.
In each episode, the agent forms a system of inequalities with Eq. (9) and (15), and embeds Eq. (12) and (13). Afterward, the
agent solves problem (14), and submits the resulting Ising Hamiltonian (QMIt) to a D-Wave QPU. The environment (here the
D-Wave QPU) draws sample(s) from the corresponding pseudo-Boltzmann distribution, and returns the resulting sample(s).
The episode ends with updating the internal state of the agent as follows:
Φt = set of unsatisﬁed clauses with zt,
βt = 1−|Φt|
M ,
and (ﬁnally) updating probabilities with (8). In RQA, the action of the agent in episode t depends on ρt−1; therefore, Markov
property holds here44.
Results
In this section, we aim to evaluate the performance of RQA scheme on solving benchmark SAT instances, and compare it with
recent software and hardware enhancements to the quantum annealers. In this study, we used Z3 (from Microsoft Research) as
a framework for symbolic computing implementations in Python45 and we executed each QMI on the D-Wave 2000Q quantum
annealer (with lower noise), located at Burnaby, British Columbia.
For every SAT instance, we used inequalities (9), (15), (12) and (13) to represent the given SAT instance as a system of
inequalities. Afterward, we solved problem (14) for reducing the SAT to an executable QMI on a D-Wave quantum processor.
Note that solving problem (14) will result in an Ising Hamiltonian which is not necessarily compatible with the D-Wave
hardware graph (Chimera topology for the current generation). Therefore, we applied the minor-embedding heuristic46 for
embedding the problem to the physical lattice of qubits on a D-Wave QPU. To avoid the impact of chaining physical qubits in
our evaluations, we employed ﬁxed embeddings of cliques in all instances.
Recent studies have revealed that using spin-reversal transforms (a.k.a. gauge transforms)—i.e., ﬂipping the qubits randomly
without altering the ground state of the original Ising Hamiltonian—can reduce analog errors of the quantum annealers32. Thus,
as a preprocessing technique, we applied spin-reversal transforms prior to submitting the QMIs to the physical QPU. We also
put a delay between measurements to reduce the sample-to-sample correlation, albeit longer run-time.
To remediate possible broken chains in the resulting raw samples from the D-Wave QPU, we performed voting among
the physical qubits of chains. After disembedding samples (i.e., representing variables in the original problem domain), we
applied the multi-qubit correction (MQC) heuristic33 which has demonstrated a signiﬁcant ability to improve the probability of
ﬁnding the global minimum, attained by the D-Wave QPU. Finally, we performed a local search heuristic, so-called single-qubit
correction (SQC), to construct the ﬁnal solution of the given SAT33.
Experiment A: Factoring Pseudo-Prime Numbers
In number theory, the problem of integer factoring refers to decomposing a composite integer number into the product of
smaller integers, and prime factorization restricts these factors to prime numbers. Although there are debates on the class (or
complexity) of this problem, there is no known efﬁcient (non-quantum) algorithm for factoring numbers in polynomial-time47.
In this study, we use the problem of prime factorization as a benchmark to evaluate the performance of RQA. It is worth
noting that our research objective in this paper is not to set a new record for quantum factorized integers, which for the current
generation of the D-Wave quantum annealers is 1,005,97321. Indeed, since the security of the modern public-key cryptography
systems (like RSA) mainly relies on the difﬁculty of factoring very large pseudo-prime numbers21,48, we relied on the difﬁculty
of prime factorization problem for generating benchmark SAT instances. Let f(x1,x2)be a Boolean function as follows:
q = f(x1,x2) = x1 ×x2,
(17)
where x1 ∈{0,1}n1 and x2 ∈{0,1}n2 are integer-valued numbers in binary representation (here, x1,x2 ≥2), and the multiply
operator is in binary base—each element of the vector q is a Boolean function of x1 and x2. Assume that ˆq is a pseudo-prime
integer number in binary base (i.e., ˆq has two prime factors. We can map the problem of factoring ˆq to SAT as follows
g = fSAT (q, ˆq) =
n^
i=1
¬(qi ⊕ˆqi),
(18)
6/12

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
100
500
1000
5000
10000
Average Number of Unsatisfied Clauses
Number of Samples
QA
SMQC
RQA
min
max
Figure 1. Experiment results for solving 136 satisﬁable SAT instances for factoring pseudo-prime numbers with quantum
annealing (QA), quantum annealing with classical post-processing (SMQC) and reinforcement quantum annealing (RQA).
where n = n1 +n2 denotes the length of q. We can look at the process of generating SAT instances from a reverse-engineering
viewpoint. To this end, we generated pseudo-prime numbers via multiplying two prime numbers, and represented them in
binary base (denoted by ˆq). For each instance, we then used the Eq. (18) to map the factorization of ˆq to a satisﬁable Boolean
formula. Since g is a Boolean expression of x, we applied the Tseitin transformation49 to represent g in CNF. We also performed
pre-processing techniques, namely "ctx-solver-simplify", "recover-01", "propagate-values" and “reduce-args” tactics from Z350.
Note that applying the Tseitin transformation can increase the size of g linearly, due to deﬁning auxiliary variables. Since
the capacity of the current D-Wave 2000Q quantum processors is limited to a complete graph of size 63, we eliminated SAT
instances (in CNF) with more than 63 Boolean variables which resulted in 136 satisﬁable SAT instances.
Figure 1 illustrates results—minimum (circles), maximum (triangles), average and variance of number of unsatisﬁed
clauses—for solving these 136 satisﬁable SAT instances, and compares the performance of the proposed RQA scheme with
quantum annealing (QA) and quantum annealing with multiple post-quantum processes (SMQC). To enhance the standard
quantum annealing technique, we used two spin-reversal-transforms32, as well as the delay between measurements to reduce the
inter-sample correlation. In the second method (SMQC), we ﬁrst used the multi-qubit correction (MQC) method33, in problem
variable level—which is the state-of-the-art technique in the realm of post-quantum correction for quantum annealers—and
then applied a local search to maximize the quality of results, attained by the SMQC arrangement.
To update inﬂuence factors of clauses in RQA, Eq. (8), we used θ1 = 0.1 and θ2 = 0. Learning automata generally require
a notable number of episodes to converge to an optimal (or sub-optimal) policies. In this experiment, nevertheless, the agent
terminates the process after at most T = 10 episodes (due to QPU time limitations) or ﬁnding a solution that satisﬁes all clauses.
Hence, we formed a hall-of-fame—a set of ﬁnal solutions from all episodes—and applied MQC (followed by SQC) on them to
obtain the ultimate solution of RQA. Our empirical observations showed that this technique can implicitly address the limited
number of allowed episodes in RQA. Note that RQA utilizes at most same number of samples as QA and SMQC.
Experiment B: Uniform Random 3-SAT with Phase Transitions
Sampling from the phase transition region of uniform Random 3-SAT is a common practice for generating benchmark SAT
(and MAX-SAT) problems51–54. In this experiment, as our second study case, we used the satisﬁable benchmark test-set of
uniform random 3-SAT with phase transitions55. Considering the capacity of the current generation of the D-Wave quantum
annealers—we can embed a clique of size at most 63 on chimera architecture—we employed the test-set with 50 Boolean
variables.
Figure 2 demonstrates results—minimum (circles), maximum (triangles), average and variance of number of unsatisﬁed
clauses—for solving the ﬁrst 100 instances from the benchmark test-set, and (similar to the previous experiment) compares the
performance of the proposed RQA scheme with quantum annealing (QA) and quantum annealing with multiple post-quantum
processes (SMQC). The setting for this experiment was identical to the previous experiment, except the number of instances
(136 vs. 100) and the number of variables (variant vs. 50).
7/12

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
100
500
1000
5000
10000
Average Number of Unsatisfied Clauses
Number of Samples
QA
SMQC
RQA
min
max
Figure 2. Experiment results for solving 100 satisﬁable uniform random 3-SAT instances with phase transitions using
quantum annealing (QA), quantum annealing with classical post-processing (SMQC) and reinforcement quantum annealing
(RQA).
Experiment C: Run-Time Evaluation
In this experiment, we aim to evaluate the average run-time of RQA scheme and compare it with QA and SMQC approaches.
We implemented all experiments in Python 3.7.4, and executed them on a 64-bit Windows 10 based system with 32 GB RAM
and Intel Xeon processor at 3.00 GHz. Figure 3 shows the average run-time of solving 100 SAT instances for QA, SMQC and
RQA methods on a D-Wave 2000Q quantum processor. Note that, in this experiment, we did not include the computation time
for ﬁnding the embedding of the QMI on a working graph—we used the pre-deﬁned embeddings of cliques for the chimera
architecture. For all instances, we used two spin-reversal transforms and we also enabled the inter-sample delay between
samples’ reads.
Discussion
In this study, we introduced a novel scheme—called reinforcement quantum annealing (RQA)—that leverages reinforcement
learning (more speciﬁcally learning automata) to ENHANCE the quality of results, attained by the quantum annealers.
Ramezanpour (2018) has proposed to improve the simulated quantum annealing algorithm by adding reinforcement to the
standard quantum annealing algorithm56. Simulated quantum annealing is an iterative algorithm (similar to simulated annealing)
that is implemented and run on classical computers. On the other hand, quantum annealers are physical, single-instruction,
quantum processing units where the entire annealing process is atomic. Thus, we cannot modify or adjust the annealing process
after starting the annealing (i.e., putting quantum bits on their superposition). in RQA, similar to the standard reinforcement
learning scheme, iterations emulate the interactions between an agent and its environment. Ramezanpour’s method, however,
has an adaptive optimization scheme in which iterations simulate one quantum annealing process on a classical computer and is
not applicable to physical quantum annealers.
As a proof-of-concept, we proposed a novel method for reducing SAT to minimizing Ising Hamiltonians and then
demonstrated that applying the proposed RQA scheme (on a D-Wave quantum annealer) results in notably better solutions. It is
worth highlighting that, however, the proposed approach (i.e., hybridization of reinforcement learning and quantum annealing)
is applicable to a vast range of classic AI problems like constraint satisfaction, planning, and scheduling.
We applied the proposed RQA scheme on two different SAT problem sets, and compared its performance with quantum
annealing (QA) and quantum annealing with post-quantum error corrections (so-called SMQC) which is the state-of-the-art in
the realm of quantum annealing33,57,58. The ﬁrst problem set includes 136 satisﬁable SAT instances which represent factoring
pseudo-prime numbers that have at most 63 Boolean variables, in CNF representation. Besides the length of the given composite
numbers, the difﬁculty of integer factoring also depends on the properties of integer numbers. The hardest instances of this
problem are factoring pseudo-prime numbers (product of two prime numbers) whose factors have the same size (in binary
base). SAT instances in experiment A are not the hardest cases of prime-factoring— restricting the SAT instances in experiment
A to a composite of the same size prime factors resulted in only 8 problems. It is worth noting that our main objective in this
experiment was not to address the prime factorization nor to use quantum annealers for solving SAT or MAX-SAT problems.
8/12

0
20
40
60
80
100
100
500
1000
5000
10000
Average Run Time (sec)
Number of Samples
QA
SMQC
RQA
Figure 3. Average run-time for solving 100 SAT instances with quantum annealing (QA), quantum annealing with classical
post-processing (SMQC) and reinforcement quantum annealing (RQA) approaches on a D-Wave 2000Q quantum processing
unit.
Figure 1 illustrates results—minimum, maximum, average and variance of a number of unsatisﬁed clauses—of solving
these 136 satisﬁable SAT instances for 100, 500, 1,000, 5,000 and 10,000 samples. In RQA, increasing the number of samples
from 100 to 10,000 reduces the average number of unsatisﬁed clauses from 1.57 to 1.40. Similarly, in QA and SMQC, the
average number of unsatisﬁed clauses is reduced from 9.41 and 3.55 to 6.85 and 3.17, respectively. Although increasing the
number of samples in all three methods reduces the average number of unsatisﬁed clauses, RQA with 100 samples outperforms
both QA and SMQC approaches in all arrangements (even with 10,000 samples). It is worth highlighting that QA was not able
to satisfy all clauses of any of these 136 SAT instances, even when we requested for 10,000 samples, while both SMQC and
RQA methods were able to ﬁnd a satisfying solution for at least one of the instances in all cases. From a robustness viewpoint,
increasing the number of samples from 100 to 10,000 lowers the variance and range (the difference between maximum and
minimum) of QA, SMQC and RQA from 4.28, 2.60 and 0.86 to 3.21, 1.73 and 0.70, respectively. Therefore, RQA demonstrated
signiﬁcantly better robustness (i.e., higher reproducibility rate), compared to both QA and SMQC approaches.
In the second study case, shown in Fig. 2, we used the ﬁrst 100 SAT instances of the satisﬁable benchmark test-set of
uniform random 3-SAT with phase transitions55. Similar to the Fig. 1, Fig. 2 demonstrates that RQA with 100 samples
outperforms both QA and SMQC approaches in all settings. More speciﬁcally, increasing the number of samples from 100 to
10,000 in QA, SMQC and RQA decreases the average number of unsatisﬁed clauses from 8.02, 1.65 and 0.79 to 6.39, 1.28 and
0.68, respectively. Also, the variances are reduced from 6.52, 0.53 and 0.31 to 4.43, 0.42 and 0.20, respectively. Note that the
minimum number of unsatisﬁed clauses in RQA for all settings is zero while SMQC needed at least 5,000 samples to satisfy all
clauses of at least one SAT instance.
Problem-solving with a D-Wave quantum processor, in practice, requires some preprocesses (e.g., embedding and gauge
transforms) and post-processes (like error correction and broken-chain remediation) that extends the total run-time from
20–2000 microseconds (pure annealing time) to some seconds and even minutes. Run-time in many pre/post-processing
techniques mainly depends on the number of samples. It is a common practice in applying quantum annealers to request a few
thousand (at most 10,000 per QMI) samples to increase the probability of ﬁnding the global minimum. Figure 3 demonstrates
that increasing the number of samples increases the total run-time of RQA at a signiﬁcantly lower rate (compared to QA and
more speciﬁcally SMQC)—since a request of 10 times fewer samples in each iteration of RQA yet has less pre/post-processing
overhead. As an illustration, 100 samples (10 samples in each iteration of RQA), increases the total run-time 7.6x and 6.8x
more than QA and SMQC, respectively. However, increasing the number of samples to 10,000, (1,000 samples in each iteration
of RQA) only increases the total run time by 4.4x and 1.7x, compared to QA and SMQC, respectively.
