arXiv:1503.01299v1  [cs.AI]  4 Mar 2015
Telling cause from eﬀect in deterministic linear dynamical
systems
Naji Shajarisales a, Dominik Janzing a, Bernhard Sch¨olkopf a and Michel Besserve a,b
a MPI for Intellingent Systems, T¨ubingen, Germany
b MPI for Biological Cybernetics, T¨ubingen, Germany

Abstract
Inferring a cause from its eﬀect using observed time series data is a major challenge in natural
and social sciences. Assuming the eﬀect is generated by the cause trough a linear system,
we propose a new approach based on the hypothesis that nature chooses the “cause” and the
“mechanism that generates the eﬀect from the cause” independent of each other. We therefore
postulate that the power spectrum of the time series being the cause is uncorrelated with the
square of the transfer function of the linear ﬁlter generating the eﬀect. While most causal
discovery methods for time series mainly rely on the noise, our method relies on asymmetries of
the power spectral density properties that can be exploited even in the context of deterministic
systems. We describe mathematical assumptions in a deterministic model under which the
causal direction is identiﬁable with this approach. We also discuss the method’s performance
under the additive noise model and its relationship to Granger causality. Experiments show
encouraging results on synthetic as well as real-world data. Overall, this suggests that the
postulate of Independence of Cause and Mechanism is a promising principle for causal inference
on empirical time series.
1
Introduction
A major challenge in the study of complex natural systems is to infer the causal relationships
between elementary characteristics of these systems. This provides key information to understand
the underlying mechanisms at play and possibly allows to intervene on them to inﬂuence the overall
behavior of the system. While causal knowledge is traditionally built by performing experiments,
boiling down to modifying a carefully selected parameter of the system and analyzing the resulting
changes, many natural systems do not allow such interventions without tremendous cost or com-
plexity. For example, it is very diﬃcult to inﬂuence the activity of a speciﬁc brain region without
inﬂuencing other properties of the neural system [15]. Causal inference methods have been de-
veloped to avoid such intervention and infer the causal relationships from observational data only
1

[23, 18]. To be able to build such knowledge without interventions, these approaches have to rely
on key assumptions pertaining to the mechanisms generating the observed data.
The framework of causality in [23, 18] has originally addressed this question by modelling
observations as i.i.d. random variables. However, observed data from complex natural system are
often not i.i.d. and time dependent information reﬂects key aspects of those systems. Most causal
inference methods for time series, including the most widely used Granger causality [8], assume
the data is generated from a stochastic model through a structural equation linking past values to
future ones through an i.i.d. additive noise term, the “innovation of the process” [8, 19]. While
these methods can successfully estimate the causal relationships when empirical data is generated
according to the model assumptions, the results can be misleading when the model is misspeciﬁed.
In particular, this is the case when unknown time lags are introduced in the measured time series.
In this paper, we introduce a new approach to inferring causal directions in time series, the
Spectral Independence Criterion (SIC). The idea behind SIC, as well as several new approaches
to causal inference [7, 11, 10, 26], is to rely on the ‘philosophical’ principle that the cause and
the mechanism that generates the cause from the eﬀect are chosen independently by Nature.
Thus, these two objects should not contain any information about each other [12, 14, 21]. Here,
we refer to this abstract principle as the postulate of Independence of Cause and Mechanism
(ICM). The above mentioned methods relying on ICM refer to diﬀerent domains and rely on
quite diﬀerent formalizations of the concept of “independence”. SIC formalizes the ICM postulate
in the context where both cause and eﬀect are stationary time series and the cause generates
the eﬀect trough a linear time invariant ﬁlter. The SIC postulate assumes that the frequency
spectrum of the cause does not correlate with the transfer function of the ﬁlter. This assumption
is justiﬁed by its connection to the Trace Method [10] and by a generative model of the system.
Under this postulate, we prove that SIC can tell the causal direction of the system from its anti-
causal counterpart. Moreover, we elaborate on the connection between this novel framework and
linear Granger causality, showing they are exploiting fundamentally diﬀerent information from the
observed data. In addition, superiority to Granger causality is shown analytically in the context of
time series measurements perturbed by an unknown time lag. We perform extensive experimental
comparisons, both on simulated and real datasets.
In particular, we show that our approach
outperforms Granger causality to estimate the direction of causation between to structures of rat
hippocampus using Local Field Potential (LFP) recordings.
Overall, the proposed method oﬀers a new approach to causal inference for time series data with
identiﬁability results, and shows unprecedented robustness to measurement delays. The promising
empirical results suggest the SIC postulate is a reasonable assumption for empirical data, and that
it should be further exploited to develop novel causal inference techniques.
2

2
Spectral Independence Criterion (SIC)
2.1
Notations and model description
We refer to a sequence of real or complex numbers a = {at, t ∈Z} as a deterministic time series.
Its discrete Fourier transform is deﬁned by
ba(ν) =
X
t∈Z
at exp(−i2πνt), ν ∈[−1/2, 1/2] =: I
The energy of the deterministic time series is the squared l2 norm: ∥a∥2
2 = P
t |at|2. For ease of
notation we will also use the Z-transform of a
ea(z) =
X
t∈Z
atz−t, z ∈C
such that ba(ν) = ea(exp(i2πν)).
We assume that the causal mechanism is given by a (deterministic) Linear Time Invariant (LTI)
ﬁlter. That is, the causal mechanism is formalized by the convolution
y = {yt} = {
X
τ∈Z
xt−τhτ } = x ∗h,
(1)
where h denotes the impulse response, x the input time series and y the output. We will assume
that the ﬁlter satisﬁes the Bounded Input Bounded Output (BIBO) stability property [20], which
boils down to the condition ∥h∥1 < +∞. Under this assumption, the Fourier transform bh is well
deﬁned and we call it the transfer function of the system.
We assume that the input time series x is a sample drawn from a stochastic process, {Xt, t ∈Z}.
For a given index t, Xt represents the random variable at index t. We use {Xt} or simply X to
represent the complete stochastic process. We use Xt:s to indicate the random vector corresponding
to the restriction of the time series to the integer interval [t .. s]. We use Xt:s to indicate the random
vector corresponding to the restriction of the time series to the integer interval [t .. s]. Assuming
X is a zero mean stationary process (in this paper, stationary will always stand for weakly or
wide-sense stationary [5]), we will denote by Cxx(τ) = E[XtXt+τ] the autocovariance function of
the process and assume it is absolutely summable. Then, we can deﬁne its Power Spectral Density
(PSD) Sxx = d
Cxx. Under these assumptions, the power of the process P(X) = E(|Xt|2) is ﬁnite
and P(X) =
R 1/2
−1/2 Sxx(ν)dν, such that Sxx belongs to L1. Moreover, we recall the following basic
properties for our model:
Proposition 1. Assume the weakly stationary input X is ﬁltered by the BIBO linear system of
impulse response h to provide the output Y. Then ∥h∥2
2 < +∞, bh ∈L∞and Y is weakly stationary
with summable autocovariance such that
Syy(ν) = |bh(ν)|2Sxx(ν), ν ∈I
(2)
Proof. Results from elementary properties of the Fourier transform and Proposition 3.1.2.
in
[5].
3

If such a linear ﬁltering relationship exists for X as input and Y as output, but not in the
opposite way, we can use this information to infer that X is causing Y and not the other way
round. If there are such impulse responses exist for both directions, say hX→Y and hY→X, their
Fourier transforms are related by
bhX→Y =
1
bhY→X
,
and we have to resort to a more reﬁned criterion for the causal inference. We will assume this
situation in the remaining of the paper.
2.2
Deﬁnition of SIC
Assume we are given the two processes X := {Xt, t ∈Z} and Y := {Yt, t ∈Z}. Moreover, we
assume that exactly one of the following two alternatives is true: (1) X causes Y or (2) Y causes
X. We assume that there are no unobserved common causes of X and Y. Our causal inference
problem thus reduces to a binary decision. In the spirit of ICM, we assume that in case (1), X and
h should not contain information about each other and our Spectral Indpendance Criterion (SIC)
assumes that the input power does not correlate with the amplifying factor, that is,
⟨Sxx|bh|2⟩= ⟨Sxx⟩⟨|bh|2⟩,
(3)
where ⟨f⟩=
R
I f(ν)dν denotes the average over the unit frequency interval I. Note that the left
hand side of (eq. (3)) is the average intensity of the output signal {Yt, t ∈Z} over all frequencies.
Hence, SIC states that the average output intensity is the same as amplifying all frequencies by
the average amplifying factor. To motivate why we call (eq. (3)) an independence condition we
note that the diﬀerence between the left and the right hand side can be written as a covariance:
⟨Sxx · |bh|2⟩−⟨Sxx⟩⟨|bh|2⟩= Cov

Sxx, |bh|2
.
were we consider Sxx and |bh|2 as functions of the random variable ν uniformly distributed on I.
As a consequence statistical independence between those random variables implies that (eq. (3))
is satisﬁed.
Note that the criterion (eq. (3)) can be rephrased in terms of the power spectra of X and Y
alone using (eq. (2)), which are closer to observable quantities than bh:
Postulate 1 (Spectral Independence Criterion). If Y is generated from X by a linear deterministic
translation invariant system then we have:
⟨Syy⟩= ⟨Sxx⟩⟨Syy/Sxx⟩.
(4)
2.3
Quantifying violation of SIC
This motivates us to deﬁne a measure of dependence between the input PSD on one hand and
transfer function of the mechanism on the other hand. To asses to what degree such a relation
4

holds we introduce a scale invariant expression ρX→Y, that we call the spectral dependency ratio
(SDR) from X to Y:
ρX→Y :=
⟨Syy⟩
⟨Sxx⟩⟨Syy/Sxx⟩
(5)
Here, the value 1 means independence, which becomes more obvious by rewriting (eq. (5)) as
ρX→Y =
Cov[Sxx, |bh|2]
⟨Sxx⟩⟨Syy/Sxx⟩+ 1 .
Finally, we note that ρX→Y can be written in terms of total power and energy:
ρX→Y =
P(Y)
P(X)||h||2
2
We then deﬁne ρY→X by exchanging the roles of X and Y:
ρY→X :=
⟨Sxx⟩
⟨Syy⟩⟨Sxx/Syy⟩
(6)
2.4
Identiﬁability results
In order to identify the true causal direction from SIC, it is necessary to show that ρX→Y and
ρY→X take characteristic values that are informative about this inference problem. The following
ﬁrst result shows explicitly how dependence measures in both directions are related:
Proposition 2. (Forward-backward inequality) For a given linear ﬁlter with input PSD Sxx,
output PSD Syy and a non-constant modulus transfer function bh we have
ρX→Y.ρY→X < 1 .
(7)
Moreover, if ∃α > 0, ∀ν ∈I, |bh(ν)|2 ≤(2 −α)∥h∥2
2 ,
then
ρX→Y.ρY→X ≤

1 + α
Z
I
 
|bh(ν)|2 −∥h∥2
2
∥h∥2
2
!2
dν


−1
< 1 .
(8)
Proof of this proposition is given in supplementary material. Note that ∥h∥2
2 corresponds to
the mean value of the transfer function due to Parseval’s theorem. According to equation eq. (8),
the less constant |bh|2 is, the more the product of the independence measures will be inferior to 1.
Assuming the SIC postulate is satisﬁed in the forward direction such that ρX→Y = 1, it follows
naturally that ρY→X < 1. The two causal directions can thus be distinguished well whenever the
transfer function deviates signiﬁcantly from its mean value such that ρX→YρY→X is bounded away
from 1. We then infer the causal direction to be the one with the largest ρ value.
To further support that SDR values can be used empirically for causal inference, we need
the SIC postulate to be approximately satisﬁed (see (eq. (4))) in systems generated according
5

to the ICM principle. We now describe a model where h is generated by some random process,
independently of X. To this end, assume we start with a Finite Impulse Response (FIR) h, that
is, hτ = 0 for all τ ≥m, for some m. Then h is given by m real numbers b1, . . . , bm such that
hi = bi
i = 0, . . . , m −1 .
We then apply an orthogonal transformation U, randomly drawn from the orthogonal group O(m)
according to the ‘uniform distribution’ on O(m), that is, the Haar measure.
In this way, we
generate a new impulse response function
h′
i := (Ub)i
i = 0, . . . , m −1 .
(9)
Since orthogonal transformations preserve the Euclidean norm by deﬁnition, they preserve the
energy of the ﬁlter. Our procedure thus chooses a random ﬁlter among the set of ﬁlters having the
same support of length m and the same energy. We now show that for large m the resulting ﬁlter
will approximately satisfy SIC with high probability:
Theorem 1. (concentration of measure for FIR ﬁlters) For some ﬁxed Sxx, let ρU
X→Y be the
dependence measure obtained for h′ in (eq. (9)). If U is chosen from the Haar measure on O(m),
then for any given ε
|ρU
X→Y −1| ≤
2ε
P(X) max
ν
Sxx(ν) .
with probability δ := 1 −exp(κ(m −1)ε2) where κ is a positive global constant independent of m,
ε, X and Y.
Proof of this theorem is provided in supplementary material. This result provides a justiﬁcation
for using SIC provided that the dimension of the vector of ﬁlter coeﬃcients m is large enough. The
relevance of m will be investigated in practice in the experimental section.
2.5
Relation to the Trace Condition
We now describe the relation between SIC and a causal inference tool called Trace Method [10].
Let X and Y be n-dimensional variables, related by the linear structural equation
Y = AX + E ,
where A is an m × n structure matrix and E is a n-dimensional noise variable independent of
X. [10] postulate the following independence condition between the covariance matrix of input
distribution ΣX and A:
Postulate 2 (Trace Condition).
τm(AΣXAT ) = τn(ΣX)τn(AT A) ,
(10)
approximately, where τn(B) denotes the renormalized trace tr(B)/n.
6

The postulate can be justiﬁed by random matrix theory with large m when A and ΣX are
independently chosen according to priors satisfying appropriate symmetry assumptions [10]. In
the association between SIC and trace method we only consider square matrices and therefore
m = n.
To quantify the violation of (eq. (10)) we introduce the following quantity:
Defnition 1 (Tracial Dependency Ratio (TDR)). The tracial dependency ratio is given by
rX→Y :=
τn(AΣXAT )
τn(ΣX)τn(AT A) .
(11)
We thus can see that the tracial ratio plays a role analog to our spectral dependency ratio ρ
in the ﬁnite dimensional case. We can actually show that SIC can be viewed as a limit case of the
Trace Condition by deﬁning the following truncated system.
Defnition 2. To any given inﬁnite dimensional linear system X 7→Y = h ∗X, the truncated
system of order N is deﬁned by zeroing the input and the output values for integers k such that
−N ≤k < N:
X′
N = X−N:N−1 7→Y′
N = (h ∗X′
N)−N:N−1,
Note that in this deﬁnition for each N, the vectors Y′
−N:N−1 are inherently diﬀerent. The
mapping deﬁned in this way is linear and can be written as Y′ = HX′ with [H]ij = hi−j, such
that the trace method can be applied to it. We then have the following result showing that SIC
can be obtained from the Trace Condition as an appropriate limit:
Theorem 2. Let rX′
N →Y′
N represent the tracial ratio for the truncated systems of order N for a
given linear system with SDR ρX→Y. Then
lim
N→∞rX′
N→Y′
N = ρX→Y
The proof, together with two necessary lemmas is available in supplementary material.
3
SIC for vector autoregressive models
SIC and Granger causality rely on completely diﬀerent assumptions but both apply to linear time
series models. In this section, we study the classical Vector Autoregressive (VAR) model used in
Granger causality from the SIC perspective to better understand the relation.
3.1
VAR model
We assume the observed time series are generated by a VAR model such that x Granger causes y.
Xt
=
X
k
akXt−k + ǫt
(12)
Yt
=
X
k
bkYt−k +
X
k
ckXt−k + ξt
(13)
7

Both noise terms ǫ and ξ in this expression are i.i.d normal noises.
3.2
Applying SIC to VAR models
We want to rewrite this expression such that Y is obtained from X by a deterministic linear time
invariant ﬁlter. We observe that the VAR model can be cast as linear time invariant ﬁlter if we
neglect the additive noise ξ. Indeed, then the mechanism is the following ARX (AutoRegressive
with eXogenous input) model [13].
Yt =
X
k
bkYt−k +
X
k
ckXt−k
(14)
Using basic properties of the Z-transform, we can derive the following analytic expressions of the
input PSD Sxx:
Sxx(ν) = |bn(ν)|2 = |en(exp(2πiν))|2 ,
with
en(z) =
1
1 −P
k akz−k .
Moreover, the transfer function corresponding to the mechanism in equation eq. (14) is
em(z) =
P
k ckz−k
1 −P
k bkz−k
As a consequence, testing SIC on the VAR model in the forward direction amounts (when neglecting
the ﬁltered noise ξ), to test independence between
|bh(ν)|2 = | em(exp(2πiν))|2
(15)
and
Sxx(ν) = |˜n(exp(2πiν)|2 ,
(16)
which are parametrized by the coeﬃcients {bk, ck} and {ak} respectively. We conjecture that a
concentration of measure result similar to Theorem 1 holds stating that independent choice of the
coeﬃcients from an appropriate symmetric distribution typically yields small correlations between
(eq. (15)) and (eq. (16)). This will be tested empirically in the Experiments section. Additionally,
the robustness of our approach to noise in the VAR model will be addressed extensively in a longer
version of this manuscript.
3.3
Comparison of SIC and Granger causality
The bivariate VAR model above is the typical model where Granger causality works. To recall
the idea of the latter, note that it infers that there is an inﬂuence from X to Y whenever pre-
dicting Y from its past is improved by accounting for the past of X. Rephrasing this in terms of
conditional independences, X is inferred to cause Y whenever Yt is not conditionally independent
8

of Xt−1, Xt−2, . . . , given Yt−1, Yt−2, . . . . Within the context of the above linear model, knowing
Xt−1, Xt−2, . . . reduces the variance of Yt, given Yt−1, Yt−2, . . . because then the noise νt is the only
remaining source of uncertainty. Without knowing Xt−1, Xt−2, . . . , we have additional uncertainty
due to the contribution of ǫt−1, ǫt−2, . . . .
SIC, on the other hand, does not rely on detecting whether X helps in improving the prediction
of Y. As demonstrated above, SIC applied to a bivariate VAR model boils down to quantifying
independence between two linear ﬁlters deﬁned by set of coeﬃcients, the ﬁlter generating the
input with transfer function bn and the ﬁlter of the mechanism with transfer function bm. This
is a completely diﬀerent concept. One can easily imagine that the coeﬃcients {bk, ck} and {ak}
can be hand-designed such that the functions (eq. (15)) and (eq. (16)) are correlated. This would
spoil SIC, but leave Granger unaﬀected. On the other hand, the following subsection describes a
scenario where Granger fails but SIC still works.
3.4
Sensitivity to Time Lag
Consider two time series {Xt} and {Yt} where {Xt} is a white noise and
∀t ∈Z,
Yt = cYt−1 + Xt−1,
for a given c. It can be easily seen that this type of input and output can be simulated using an
IIR ﬁlter with (a1, a2) = (1, c) and b1 = 1 in (eq. (17)) and the rest of the coeﬃcients are zero
(please refer to the deﬁnition of coeﬃcients in section section 4.1). The inﬁnite DAG for this causal
structure can be seen in ﬁg. 1.
· · ·
Yt−1
Yt
Yt+1
Yt+2
· · ·
· · ·
Xt−1
Xt
Xt+1
Xt+2
· · ·
c
c
c
c
c
Figure 1: The original causal structure with instantaneous causal eﬀect
Now if there would be a measurement delay of length k for Y, the observed values will be a
new time series, say ˜Y, where ˜Yt = Yt−k. Although the ground truth is X →˜Y independent
of k, Granger causality only infers the correct causal structure if k ≤0 (where there is a lag in
measurement of X, but not Y). However SIC always infers the correct direction (except when
c = 0 and the time structure is spoiled). This is because the PSD of the white noise X is constant
and depends only on the total power, i.e,
Sxx(ν) = Var(Xt) = P{X} ,
for all ν ∈[−1/2, 1/2]. and obviously, this constant remains the same for the lagged time series.
Thus, SIC correctly identiﬁes the causal structure (except when c = 0 in which case the dependence
to time is completely spoiled).
9

4
Experiments
In this section we study our causal inference algorithm using synthetic experiments and apply it
to several real world data sets.
4.1
Synthetic Data: ARMA ﬁlters and processes
We designed synthetic experiments to assess the validity of the SIC approach. The data generating
process is as follows. The LTI system S modeling the mechanism is chosen among the family of
ARMA(FO,BO) ﬁlters with parameters (a, b) deﬁned by input-output diﬀerence equation:
yn = 1
a0
(
F O
X
i=0
bixn−i +
BO
X
j=1
ajyn−j).
(17)
For these ﬁlters FO is known as the feedforward order and BO is the feedback order. ai’s and
bi’s are known as feedback and feedforward coeﬃcients respectively. Note that when FO(S) = 0,
the system is called and autoregressive ﬁlter. Alternatively, BO(S) = 0 corresponds to the family
of Finite Impulse Response (FIR) or Moving Average ﬁlters. Whenever BO(S) ̸= 0, the ﬁlter
has Inﬁnite Impulse Response (IIR). The input of the causal model will be chosen among the
family of ARMA(FO,BO) processes, which are generated by ﬁltering an i.i.d noise input with an
ARMA(FO,BO) ﬁlter. We thus chose two ﬁlters S and S′, with parameters (a, b) and (a′, b′)
respectively. To simulate a cause eﬀect pair X,Y, we generated the cause X by applying S to a
normally distributed i.i.d noise. Then, we generated Y by applying S′ to X. The feedforward and
feedback orders of both systems S and S′ were chosen identical in all experiments.
In each trial all the elements of vectors a, a′, b and b′ except the ﬁrst ones (i.e. a0, b0, a′
0, b′
0
which were ﬁxed to one) were sampled from an isotropic multidimensional Gaussian distribution
with variance 0.01. Coeﬃcients are sampled using rejection sampling such that only BIBO-stable
ﬁlters are kept.
We simulated sequences of length 10000. The PSD of X and Y were estimated using Welch’s
method [24]. We repeated this experiment 1000 times. Figure ﬁg. 2 shows an example of the
distribution of ρX→Y and ρY→X and of their diﬀerence using FO(S) = BO(S) = FO(S′) =
BO(S′) = 5.
The SDR for the correct direction of is concentrated around one, while in the wrong direction
the estimator stays less inferior to one for most of its probability mass (in this example %97.3).
This results in a positive diﬀerence between SDR for most of the probability mass. Accordingly,
our inference algorithm based on the sign of this diﬀerence algorithm 1 will select the correct
direction in most of the cases.
Based on this inference algorithm, we test the eﬀect of the ﬁlter orders on the performance of
the method, where we evaluate the performance of each setting of FO(S′) and BO(S′) over 1000
trials. We varied the orders between 2 and 21 and compared the performance of the cases FO(S′) =
BO(S′), FO(S′) = 0 and BO(S′) = 0. Considering that the experiments are independent and
10

Figure 2: Top plot: Histogram for the estimators of ρX→Y and ρY →X. Bottom plot: Histogram
of the estimated diﬀerence ρX→Y −ρY →X
based on the assumption that our method is successful with probability p where p has a binomial
distribution, we calculated conﬁdence intervals using Wilson’s score interval [25] where α = 0.05
(and therefore zα/2 = 1.96). The performance increases rapidly with ﬁlter order, as can be seen
in the plots of ﬁg. 3. Moreover, the feedforward ﬁlter coeﬃcients seem the most beneﬁcial to the
approach, since their absence leads to the worst performance ( ﬁg. 3 red line).
4.2
Real World Examples
We tried our method over several examples of real data where the ground truth about the causal
structure of the data is known a priori and the data is labeled in a way that the ground truth is
X →Y. In the ﬁrst two examples we plotted the diﬀerence of SDR in both directions as a function
of the window length used in Welch method which can be seen in
ﬁg. 4.
4.2.1
Gas Furnace [4]
This dataset consists in 296 time points, with X the gas rate consumed by a gas furnace and Y
the produced rate of CO2.
ﬁg. 4 shows ρX→Y −ρY→X against the window length, which was
ranging from 50 to 150 points. As illustrated, the diﬀerence is always positive and our method
is able to correctly infer the right causal direction independent of window length. TiMiNO and
Granger causality correctly identiﬁed the ground truth in this case as well [19].
11

Algorithm 1 SIC Inference
1: procedure SIC Inference(X,Y)
2:
Sxx ←spectrum of X
3:
Syy ←spectrum of Y
4:
Calculate ρX→Y and ρY→X using (eq. (5))
5:
Inference Step:
6:
if ρX→Y > ρY→X then
7:
return X →Y
8:
else
9:
return Y →X
0
5
10
15
20
Order
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
% −Success
FO(S) = BO(S) = FO(S′) = BO(S′)
FO(S) = FO(S′) = 0
BO(S) = BO(S′) = 0
Figure 3: SIC performance against ﬁlter order for synthetic experiments for diﬀerent types of ﬁlters
(see text).
4.2.2
Old Faithful Geyser [2]
N = 298 : X contains the duration of an eruption and Y is the time interval to the next eruption
of the Old Faithful geyser. Figure ﬁg. 4 represents the diﬀerence in SDRs as a function of win-
12

dow length with the same conﬁguration as the gas furnace experiment. Again the correct causal
direction is inferred by our method independently from the window length as illustrated in ﬁg. 4.
In this case TiMiNO correctly identiﬁes the cause from eﬀect but neither linear nor non-linear
Granger causality infer the correct causal direction [19].
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Window size
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
ρX→Y −ρY→X
Old Faithful
Gas Furnace
Figure 4: Diﬀerence between the estimators of SDRs in both directions against window length of
the Welch periodogram.
4.2.3
LFP recordings of the Rat Hippocampus
It is known that contrary to neocortex where connectivity between areas is bidirectional, monosy-
naptic connections between several regions of the hippocampus are mostly unidirectional [1]. An
important example of such connectivity is between the CA3 and CA1 subﬁelds [1]. Despite this
anatomical fact, a study of causality based on Local Field Potential (LFP) recordings of CA1
and CA3 of the hippocampus of the rat during sleep reports that Granger causality infers strong
bidirectional relations between the two areas [3]. [3] explains the possible reasons of such result
as feedback loops involving cortex and medial septum, and diﬀuse connections going from CA1 to
CA3.
To do a comparison with Granger causality, we applied our framework to recordings from those
regions using a publicly available dataset1 [16, 17]. LFP’s were recorded using a 8 shank probe
having 64 channels downsampled to 1252Hz. Shanks were attributed by experimentalists to the
CA1 and CA3 areas (leaving 32 channels for each area). For more information on the details of
gathered data please refer to [17]. We used the data for rat “vvp01” during a period of sleep and
a period of active behaviour in a linear environment. We applied linear Granger causality using
1http://crcns.org/data-sets/hc
13

an implementation from the statsmodel Python library2. We considered a forced decision scheme
for Granger causality (to make it comparable to our method), were we select the correct Granger
causal direction as the one having the lowest p-value for the null hypothesis of absence of causal
inﬂuence. Following the usual methodology of causality analysis [3, 6] we divided the duration of
ten minutes into 300 intervals of two seconds (N = 2504) to reduce the eﬀect of nonstationarity in
data analysis, and performed SIC causal inference on each interval for each electrode pair. We took
two diﬀerent approaches to report assess the performance of methods: one, based on a majority
vote over all 300 intervals for each channel pair, and two, by assessing the average performance
based on individual time intervals. The results are plotted as histograms in
ﬁg. 5 and they show
that SIC clearly outperforms Granger causality on this dataset. The conﬁdence intervals are once
again based on Wilson score but obviously this time the in dependancy assumption between the
trials is not well justiﬁed, specially for pooling all the results.
Figure 5: Average performance of the linear Granger causality and SIC methods for deciding
CA3→CA1 ground truth direction against the opposite. For both the linear and sleep sessions the
performance is signiﬁcantly above the chance level for SIC. ∗indicates the use of a majority voting
scheme.
2Statsmodels: Statistical library for Python. More details on null hypothesis for Granger causality can be found
on the website.
14

4.2.4
Characterizing the Echo
The echo eﬀect of a room over a sound generated in the room can be well estimated by a convolution
of the real signal with a function known as room impulse response function. In this experiment we
used an open source database of room Impulse Response Function (IRF) available at the Open AIR
library3. We chose the IRFs for Elevden Hall, Elevden, Suﬀolk, England and Hamilton Mausoleum,
Hamilton, Scotland. We convolved these signals with 30±5 seconds segments of two classical music
pieces: the ﬁrst movement of Vivaldi’s Winter Concerto consisting of 9190656 data points, and
the Lacrimosa of Mozart’s Requiem, consisting of 8842752 points, both ‘.wav’ ﬁles with the rate of
44100Hz. Regardless of the segment the SDR in forward direction is considerably larger than the
SDR in the backward direction as can be seen in ﬁg. 6. In another experiment we used a computer
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Audio segment
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
ρX→Y −ρY→X
Lacrimosa movement
Cloackroom −Lord
Cloackroom −Visitors
MarbleHall
SmokingRoom
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Audio segment
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
ρX→Y −ρY→X
Winter movement
Figure 6: The plots represent the value ρXt→Yt −ρYt→Xt for 4 diﬀerent environments as a function
of diﬀerent music segments. The method correctly infers the causal direction in all the cases.
to play the musical pieces above in an academic Lecture Hall (labelled as “Hall” in plots) and in
an oﬃce room (labelled as “Room” in plots) and recorded the echoed version in the environment.
In a series of diﬀerent tests, we split the data into 9, 17, 33, 65, 129 pieces, and we ignored the last
piece so that all the pieces would have an equal length. In each test we averaged the performance
of our causal inference method over all the segments and plotted this performance against the size
of the window length in Welch method. The window size was varied between 500 and half of the
length of the music segment length (which is dependent on the number of segments). The results
can be found in ﬁg. 7 and show a very good performance of the approach for large window lengths
.
3Open AIR: Open source library for acoustic IRFs.
15

102
103
104
105
106
Window Length
50
60
70
80
90
100
Performance %
Lacrimosa, Room
8
16
32
64
128
102
103
104
105
106
Window Length
50
60
70
80
90
100
Performance %
Winter, Room
102
103
104
105
106
Window Length
50
60
70
80
90
100
Performance %
Lacrimosa, Hall
102
103
104
105
106
Window Length
50
60
70
80
90
100
Performance %
Winter, Hall
Figure 7: The performance of the method over real echoed audio signals recorded simultaneously
by playing the piece in two diﬀerent closed environments that have their own acoustic structure.
5
Conclusion
We have introduced a causal discovery method for time series based on the SIC postulate, assuming
a LTI relationship for a given pair of time series X and Y, such that either X →Y or Y →X.
Theoretical justiﬁcations are provided for this postulate to lead to identiﬁability. Interestingly, the
method provides and extension of the recently proposed Trace Method approach to the time series
setting. Encouraging experimental results have been also presented on real world and synthetic
data. Specially this method proved to be more eﬀective than linear Granger causality on LFP
recordings from CA1 and CA3 hippocampal areas of rat’s brain, assuming a ground truth causal
direction from CA3 to CA1 based on anatomy. We suggest that this method can provide a new
16

perspective for causal inference in time series based on assumptions fundamentally diﬀerent from
Granger causality. We will address the existence of confounders, establish a statistical signiﬁcance
test (for example using a procedure inspired by [26]), and extend this method to multivariate time
series in future work.
