DADAgger: Disagreement-Augmented Dataset
Aggregation
Akash Haridas

Karim Hamadeh

Samarendra Chandan Bindu Dash

Abstract: DAGGER is an imitation algorithm that aggregates its original datasets
by querying the expert on all samples encountered during training. In order to
reduce the number of samples queried, we propose a modiﬁcation to DAGGER,
known as DADAGGER, which only queries the expert for state-action pairs that
are out of distribution (OOD). OOD states are identiﬁed by measuring the variance
of the action predictions of an ensemble of models on each state, which we sim-
ulate using dropout. Testing on the Car Racing and Half Cheetah environments
achieves comparable performance to DAGGER but with reduced expert queries,
and better performance than a random sampling baseline. We also show that our
algorithm may be used to build efﬁcient, well-balanced training datasets by run-
ning with no initial data and only querying the expert to resolve uncertainty.
Keywords: Imitation Learning, Ensemble
1
Problem Description
The DAGGER algorithm [1] addresses the covariate shift encountered in behavioural cloning by
querying the expert again on all the states that the agent encounters during a test run, then aggregat-
ing these new samples with the existing dataset.
However, querying the expert can be costly in some situations. A drawback of DAGGER is that it
queries the expert at all collected observations without considering which actions are most valuable
towards training a good policy. The DRIL algorithm [2] handles the issue of covariance shift by
adding a regularizer term to the optimisation of the policy, implicitly favouring policies that choose
to enter states which minimise the variance of an ensemble of policies for these states. The rationale
is that the variance should be low for states that are in-distribution, so this should motivate the learner
policy to stay within this distribution, assuming it is sufﬁcient to achieve proper performance. A
drawback of this method is that it may not be able to learn from incomplete datasets, and cannot
explore further.
We therefore design an algorithm that does not needlessly query the expert, while also selectively
querying it to learn about states which genuinely have not been encountered. This combines the
ﬂexibility and exploration of DAGGER, while taking advantage of the ability of an ensemble to
identify out-of-distribution states as done in Brantley et al. [2].
2
Related Work
Prior work in this area mainly consists of estimating uncertainty in the predictions of deep neural
networks, as well as improving the sample efﬁciency of the DAGGER algorithm.
Blundell et al. [3] learn a probability distribution on the weights of a neural network, which al-
lows the network to make more reasonable predictions about unseen data. Gal and Ghahramani [4]
estimate model uncertainty from the dropout layers in deep neural networks. A common way to
estimate model uncertainty is with an ensemble of learners: the uncertainty is said to be high when
the predictions of the ensemble have high variance. Wen et al. [5] reduces the computational cost of
ensembles by sharing some weights across the networks. Brantley et al. [2] includes the ensemble
variance in an additional loss term which implicitly trains the imitation policy to avoid states for
which it has not seen demonstrations.
arXiv:2301.01348v1  [cs.LG]  3 Jan 2023

Several works have attempted to improve the sampling efﬁciency of the DAGGER imitation learning
algorithm. Kim and Pineau [6] propose a query metric that determines how close an encountered
state is from the distribution of data gathered so far, and query the expert only if this metric is above
some threshold. They use Maximum Mean Discrepancy as the metric, which was originally used to
determine whether two sets of data are from different probability distributions. Zhang and Cho [7]
achieve a similar goal by employing a separate network, called the safety policy, to predict whether
the current policy being trained is likely to make an error, and subsequently use this information to
determine which visited states need to be included in the next DAGGER iteration. Similarly, Laskey
et al. [8] uses a Support Vector Machine classiﬁer to determine the risk level of a particular state.
Menda et al. [9] uses ensembling to estimate model uncertainty to build a probabilistic variant of
DAGGER, where they use the model’s uncertainty over its predicted actions to determine when to
query the expert. They use this to enforce model safety, rather than to select when to augment the
dataset in training as in our work.
3
Methodology
We propose a new algorithm called DADAGGER (Disagreement-Augmented Dataset Aggregation
algorithm), which is based on DAGGER, and borrows from [2] the principle that out-of-distribution
states induce higher disagreement among an ensemble of policies. We use this to modify DAGGER
to only query the expert on states with high disagreement (a particular percentage of visited states),
in an attempt to gain maximal information and resolve the most uncertainty in a smaller number of
queries. This improves on DAGGER by reducing the number of expert calls, while still being able
to handle incomplete datasets unlike the entirely ofﬂine DRIL. Importantly, this method does not
query the expert to determine when the learner has encountered a state that it cannot handle, but
rather relies entirely on the disagreement of an ensemble of learners.
Disagreement can be deﬁned here as the variance of the output, if the outputs admit a distance
between themselves, which is keeping with the implementation in [2] or possibly the entropy, if dis-
crete and non-transitive. Since training an ensemble of neural networks is prohibitively expensive,
in order to efﬁciently obtain the variance we instead use dropout layers to approximate uncertainty
of our estimators. By passing the same input M times through a single network with dropout en-
abled after every layer, we obtain a Gaussian Process sampling theoretically different networks [10].
DADAGGER is formally stated below. Tunable hyperparameters include the percentage of states to
save, denoted by α, according to their variance, and M, the number of policies present in our en-
semble. Since we are using dropout to simulate the ensemble, the choice of M does not signiﬁcantly
increase training time, as only one network has its weights updated. The network is called M times
in order to determine the uncertainty associated with a particular action. Smaller values of α query a
smaller number of samples, but in turn make convergence more difﬁcult due to less augmentation of
the dataset. Note that during evaluation of the policy (i.e at test time), we sample the network once
to predict actions, rather than obtain and ensemble mean, to ensure a fair comparison to DAGGER.
Figure 1 shows a simpliﬁed schematic of different models agreeing over an area of the number line
R centered on the origin (representing the in-distribution states), but disagreeing in areas beyond it
(the out-of-distribution that is not being explicitly learned).
Algorithm 1 DADAgger Algorithm with Ensemble
Initialise D ←∅
Initialise ˆπ1,1, ˆπ1,2..ˆπ1,M
for i = 1 to i = n do
Sample T-step trajectories using ˆπi,1
Compute Variance of ˆπi,1(s), ˆπi,2(s)..ˆπi,M(s) for all visited s.
Keep the α percent with the highest variance.
Get dataset Di = {s, π∗(s)} for all ﬁltered s.
Aggregate datasets D ←Di ∪D
Train classiﬁers ˆπi+1,1, ˆπi+1,2..ˆπi+1,M on D
end for
return best ˆπi,1 on validation
2

Figure 1: Simpliﬁed diagram of different functions agreeing over an area of R and disagreeing
beyond.
Algorithm 2 DADAgger Algorithm with Dropout
Initialise D ←∅
Initialise ˆπ1 with dropout layers
for i = 1 to i = n do
Sample T-step trajectories using ˆπi
Generate ˆyi,j = ˆπ‘i,j(s) where ˆπ‘i,j is a variation of ˆπi for which a subset of neurons are
turned off randomly using the dropout layer.
Compute Variance of ˆyi,1, ˆyi,2, ..., ˆyi,M for all visited s.
Keep the α percent with the highest variance.
Get dataset Di = {s, π∗(s)} for all ﬁltered s.
Aggregate datasets D ←Di ∪D
Train classiﬁers ˆπi+1 on D
end for
return best ˆπi on validation
4
Experiments
4.1
Baselines and Parameter Tuning
We implement our method on the Car Racing environment available through OpenAI Gym [11]. For
the policy network we use a CNN with dropout layers in the fully-connected section, that takes in
an image of the current state and predicts a steering action.
Our ﬁrst experiment consists of varying the hyper-parameters M and α in order to gauge their effect
on the convergence of DADAGGER. Note that there are no “optimal parameters”. Increasing M
and α should hypothetically reduce the number of iterations required to reach convergence (to be
veriﬁed in testing), however these increases come at the cost of training time for more models in the
ensemble and more expert queries. We compare the performance and convergence properties of our
algorithm to DAGGER (obtained by setting both α and M to 1), as well as to an agent which queries
the expert at observed states selected at random (obtained by setting M to 1 for varying α) to test
whether the quality of sampling plays a role in achieving convergence. We run the algorithm for 10
iterations with 5 different random seeds, and measure the proportion of runs that converged. We also
measure the distribution of actions accumulated in the dataset, to obtain a quantitative assessment of
the efﬁciency of the algorithm in exploring the action space. Reported standard deviation is that of
a p = 0.5 binomial estimator, which is guaranteed to be an upper-bound of error.
4.2
Half Cheetah
After implementing our algorithm on a simple environment, we test it on the Half Cheetah MuJoCo
[12] environment. Compared to Racer, Half Cheetah involves more complex dynamics, and a higher
dimensional and continuous-valued action space. The observation is a state vector rather than an
image, therefore we swap out the CNN for an MLP (with dropout layers), keeping the rest of the
3

algorithm the same. We repeat each of the values of M and α used in the previous experiment, and
measure the Reward obtained by each policy at the end of each DADAGGER iteration. We compare
the performance and convergence properties with base DAGGER, as well as an agent querying the
expert at observed states selected at random.
4.3
Dataset Construction
Our ﬁnal experiment exploits the efﬁciency of our choice of expert queries to construct a compact,
and representative dataset that allows rapid, one-shot training. Instead of using an initial training
dataset as in previous experiments, we run DADAGGER with an empty initial dataset, and conse-
quently create the dataset over several iterations, querying the expert only to resolve uncertainty.
Our hypothesis is that the ﬁnal dataset upon convergence will be fairly small, due to the inclusion
of only points which the models disagree on at different stages of training. We use α = 0.1, as
well as 50 iterations, which is the time we found needed to obtain a proper convergence using this
technique. We then measure the distribution of actions in our ﬁnal dataset and compare it to the
dataset produced by DAGGER and DADAGGER when supplied with an initial dataset.
5
Results and Discussion
5.1
Baselines and Parameter Tuning
The results are shown in Table 1. For α = 0.4, all trained models converge in all runs, including
random querying. We hypothesise that this is due to the relatively small difference between consec-
utive frames, which means skipping a frame, on average, will not be overly detrimental to training.
With a lower α of 0.2, our algorithm, regardless of the choice of M, maintains 100% convergence,
while random querying only succeeds 40% of the time. Our algorithm thus outperforms the random
baseline on this metric (p < 0.003). Finally, on the lowest setting of α, random sampling fails to
converge entirely, while our algorithm only sometimes converges. This convergence often happens
in the 9th or 10th iteration, so it is entirely possible that convergence could follow in the cases where
it did not terminate, however we are restricting testing to 10 iterations to control across all methods.
Note that the difference between M = 25 and M = 10 is not statistically signiﬁcant.
To verify the mechanism by which our improvement is obtained, we obtain the histogram of saved
actions in different settings in Figure 3 . DAGGER is seen to heavily sample straight-line actions
(close to the middle). Our algorithms are seen to substantially increase the proportion of sampled
turning actions with respect to the size of the dataset, but also use less sampling overall. Interestingly,
the starting dataset is more balanced than any of the ones resulting from DAGGER / DADAGGER
iterations, yet fails to converge, meaning the quality of a dataset is not entirely determined by how
balanced it is.
5.2
Half Cheetah
Figure 2 shows that all variants of DADAGGER converge to a similar performance as base DAGGER
on Half Cheetah, which demonstrates that our uncertainty measurement and sampling technique is
also capable of handling a multi-dimensional and continuous action space. It achieves this with as
little as 10% of queries to the expert (α = 0.1) as base DAGGER, again suggesting that it samples
only the most important datapoints to learn a policy and resolve uncertainty. Interestingly, neither of
the methods (incl. base DAGGER) matched the expert’s performance, possibly due to the increased
complexity of the environment.
5.3
Dataset Construction
Convergence is obtained at roughly iteration 50 (hence our decision to stop). We are more interested
in examining the nature of the constructed dataset over the performance of the policy. The ﬁnal
dataset consists of 746 samples, which is markedly less than even the initial dataset we were using
for DAGGER and DADAGGER, which contained 1139 samples. It is thus far smaller than datasets
generated by the previous experiments, regardless of the choice of α. This is notable because a
policy trained on this dataset is able to converge with 0 augmentation (ie, 1 DAGGER iteration, or
in one-shot), indicating a high quality of samples. We once again look to the histogram (Figure 3e),
4

0
5
10
15
20
25
30
DADAgger iteration
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
Mean return
M=1, alpha=1.0
M=10, alpha=0.1
M=10, alpha=0.2
M=10, alpha=0.4
M=25, alpha=0.1
M=25, alpha=0.2
M=25, alpha=0.4
Expert return
Figure 2: All variants of DADAGGER converge to a similar performance as base DAGGER (M = 1
and α = 1) on the Half Cheetah environment, with signiﬁcantly less queries to the expert. However,
none of the methods achieve a performance comparable to the expert
M / α
0.1
0.2
0.4
10
0 ± 20
100 ± 20
100 ± 20
25
60 ± 20
100 ± 20
100 ± 20
Random
40 ± 20
40 ± 20
100 ± 20
Table 1: Percentage of trials that led to a successful lap on the Car Racing environment.
and ﬁnd it to be the most balanced of all datasets, especially with respect to extreme sharp turns
which were relatively undersampled even in DADAGGER experiments. DADAGGER thus acts as a
way to create small and efﬁcient datasets for one-shot training.
6
Limitations and Conclusion
While DADAGGER is able to improve on the sampling efﬁciency of DAGGER, a few weaknesses
arise. Primarily, the agent is still required to engage in the environment as many times as DAGGER,
meaning there is no improvement on the number of episodes required to converge, should that be
expensive. This is particularly true in the case where the dataset was initialised to zero, as many
more episodes were required to achieve convergence. Another weakness we occasionally observed
in our tests was high conﬁdence predictions for wrong outcomes, which could lead to skipping
essential sampling and repeating the same error. It is therefore absolutely essential for our algorithm
to function, that a certain degree of independence exist between predictors. Any bias will create
agreement in out-of-distribution states that may lead to the algorithm getting stuck in a cycle of not
sampling, failing because of that error, and not sampling the requisite states again. Indeed, 30 of
50 iterations in the dataset construction experiment were failures of relatively similar form, which
could hint at the existence of this problem in sparse datasets.
In conclusion, this paper introduces DADAGGER, a novel method to increase querying efﬁciency
for the DAGGER algorithm without compromising convergence. Our method matches DAGGER
performance on both the Car Racing and Half Cheetah environments. Furthermore, our technique is
efﬁcient in its execution due to the use of dropout, and could also ﬁnd use as a dataset generator due
to its selectivity. Further avenues of exploration involve exploration of alternate methods to assess
uncertainty that could allow the use of an absolute metric rather than the fraction α, and would not
require several network evaluations for each action. Another uncovered area is treating the sample
space without regard to the action, and attempting to devise a measure of how out-of-distribution a
particular sample is that is completely independent of the predictor which generates the action.
5

0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
Expert steering command
0
100
200
300
400
500
(a) Starting dataset
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Expert steering command
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
(b) Dataset after a DAGGER run
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Expert steering command
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
(c) Ours: Dataset after a DADAGGER run
with M = 10, α = 0.4
(d) Ours: Dataset after a DADAGGER run
with M = 10, α = 0.1
(e) Ours: Efﬁcient dataset after a DADAG-
GER run starting with an empty intial
dataset.
Figure 3: Comparison of sampling distributions on the Car Racing environment. While the initial
dataset mostly contains straight-line examples, DAGGER samples at least some points at turns. Our
algorithm DADagger overall samples far fewer examples by being less wasteful with sampling at
straight lines (notice the difference in scale in the y-axes). Starting DADAGGER with a null initial
datset produces the most balanced of all datasets, especially with respect to extreme sharp turns
which are relatively undersampled in other experiments.
Contributions
KH was responsible for the algorithm design and Experiment 3. Experiment 1 was split among
all members. AH and SCBD conducted Experiment 2. SCBD and AH jointly wrote/adapted and
optimized most of the code used to perform all experiments.
