MedSumm: A Multimodal Approach to
Summarizing Code-Mixed Hindi-English Clinical
Queries
Akash Ghosh1, Arkadeep Acharya1, Prince Jha1, Aniket Gaudgaul1, Rajdeep
Majumdar1, Sriparna Saha1, Aman Chadha2,3⋆, Raghav Jain1, Setu Sinha4, and
Shivani Agarwal4
1 Department of Computer Science And Engineering,Indian Institute of Technology
Patna
2 Stanford University
3 Amazon GenAI
4 Indira Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences
Abstract. In the healthcare domain, summarizing medical questions
posed by patients is critical for improving doctor-patient interactions and
medical decision-making. Although medical data has grown in complexity
and quantity, the current body of research in this domain has primarily
concentrated on text-based methods, overlooking the integration of visual
cues. Also prior works in the area of medical question summarisation
have been limited to the English language. This work introduces the task
of multimodal medical question summarization for codemixed input in a
low-resource setting. To address this gap, we introduce the Multimodal
Medical Codemixed Question Summarization (MMCQS) dataset, which
combines Hindi-English codemixed medical queries with visual aids. This
integration enriches the representation of a patient’s medical condition,
providing a more comprehensive perspective. We also propose a framework
named MedSumm that leverages the power of LLMs and VLMs for this
task. By utilizing our MMCQS dataset, we demonstrate the value of
integrating visual information from images to improve the creation of
medically detailed summaries. This multimodal strategy not only improves
healthcare decision-making but also promotes a deeper comprehension
of patient queries, paving the way for future exploration in personalized
and responsive medical care. Our dataset, code, and pre-trained models
will be made publicly available. https://github.com/ArkadeepAcharya/
MedSumm-ECIR2024
Keywords: Mutimodal Summarization, LLM, VLM, Codemixing, Clini-
cal Queries.
1
Introduction
Disclaimer: The paper includes explicit medical imagery, necessary for an
in-depth understanding of the subject matter.
⋆Work does not relate to position at Amazon.
arXiv:2401.01596v1  [cs.AI]  3 Jan 2024

2
A. Ghosh et al.
Recent surveys conducted by World Health Organsisation (WHO) reveals
a drastic uneven doctor to population ratio, estimating a deficit of 12 million
healthcare workers by 2030. This augmented with advancements in information
and communication technologies (ICTs) has experienced surge in telehealth
[23]. The COVID-19 pandemic has further accelerated the utilization of the
internet for healthcare services, marking a remarkable surge in the past two
decades and establishing a new norm in healthcare. In this context, one of the
biggest challenges that doctors face is to quickly comprehend and understand
the patient’s query. To solve this problem, a medical question summarizer has
emerged as a vital tool to distill information from consumer health questions,
ensuring the provision of accurate and timely responses. Despite previous research
efforts, the unexplored opportunity of combining textual information with visual
data, such as images, has been largely ignored. Visual aids play a crucial role
in medical question summarization (MQS) for several reasons. A considerable
segment of the population isn’t well-versed in medical terminology, making
it difficult to precisely convey symptoms. Additionally, certain symptoms are
inherently challenging to express using only text. Patients can sometimes get
mixed up when it comes to similar symptoms, like trying to tell the difference
between skin dryness and a skin rash. Using a combination of text and images in
medical question summaries can improve accuracy and efficiency, giving a holistic
picture of the patient’s current medical status. This strategy acknowledges the
intricate nature of patient inquiries, where visuals like symptom photos or medical
reports can offer vital insights. By prioritizing image integration, researchers
and healthcare professionals can address the changing demands of contemporary
healthcare communication. By improving doctor-patient communication and
understanding through multimodal summarization of health questions, this work
has the potential to increase access to quality healthcare and promote health
equity which is one of the SDG proposed by UNESCO 5.
Large Language Models (LLMs) [17] and Vision Language Models (VLMs)
[33] have showcased impressive capabilities in generating human-like text and
multimedia content. This capability has led to their application in the medical
field, primarily for specialized tasks such as summarizing chest X-rays [26]
and generating COVID-19 CT reports [21]. However, their use in summarizing
medical questions that involve both text and images is a relatively unexplored
area. Utilizing the zero-shot and few-shot learning abilities of these models [11]
can be advantageous, particularly for tasks like multimodal medical question
summarization, which often suffer from a lack of sufficient data.
Nonetheless, there are certain limitations to consider when employing LLMs
and VLMs in this context. Generic LLMs and VLMs may not possess specialized
knowledge in medical domains, potentially leading to summaries that lack im-
portant details such as symptoms, diagnostic tests, and medical intricacies. On
the visual side, although VLMs have excelled in typical visual-linguistic tasks,
medical imaging presents unique challenges. Models like SkinGPT4 [37], which
fine-tune on skin disease images and clinical notes based on MiniGPT4 [38],
5 https://en.unesco.org/sustainabledevelopmentgoals

MedSumm
3
remain highly domain-specific. Medical images are inherently intricate, requiring
a deep understanding of medical terminology and visual conventions, often neces-
sitating input from expert medical professionals for accurate interpretation. This
complexity, coupled with potential gaps in contextual comprehension, can result
in models generating summaries that may be misleading or irrelevant.
Also in the 21st century where more than half of the population of the globe is
multilingual, people generally switch between languages in conversation6. Though
nowadays a lot of work is going on in this exciting area of codemixing, in the
clinical domain there is a dearth of good datasets. This motivated us to study
our proposed task in a codemixed context.We present a curated dataset tailored
to this endeavor, MMCQS containing Hindi-English codemixed medical queries
with their corresponding English summaries.This is the first dataset of its kind
to validate this task. The dataset encompasses 3,015 medical questions along
with their corresponding visual cues. Our approach is embedded within our novel
architecture known as MedSumm, a vision-language framework for medical
question summarization task. This comprehensive framework operates using two
primary inputs: the codemixed patient question and its associated visual cue. The
methodology comprises four distinct components. They are employing pre-trained
large language models to generate textual embeddings, utilizing vision encoders
like ViT [12] to encode visual information, harnessing QLoRA [9], a low-rank
adapter technique for efficient fine-tuning and employing a precise inference
process to generate the corresponding symptom name and the synopsis. This
careful, step-by-step structuring of MedSumm allows it to bridge the divide
between general-purpose models and the niche requirements of medical question
summarization, effectively integrating textual and visual data to create precise
and context-aware medical summaries.A pipeline showing the application of
MedSumm has be shown in figure 3. Our contributions can be summarized as
follows:
– A novel task of Multimodal Medical Question Summarization for
generating medically nuanced summaries.
– A novel dataset, MMCQS Dataset, to further research in this area.
– A novel framework, MedSumm that employs a combination of pre-trained
language models, state-of-the-art vision encoders, and efficient fine-tuning
methodologies like QLoRA [9] to seamlessly integrate visual and textual
information for the final summary generation of multimodal clinical questions.
– A novel metric MMFCM to quantify how well the model captures the
multimodal information in the generated summary.
2
Related Works
The following work has been relevant to following two research areas namely
Medical Question Summarization and Multimodal Summarization.
Medical Question Summarization: In 2019, the field of Medical Question
Summarization (MQS) emerged with the introduction of the MeQSum dataset,
6 https://www.britishcouncil.org/voices-magazine/few-myths-about-speakers-multiple-languages

4
A. Ghosh et al.
specifically designed for this purpose by Abacha et al. [1]. Initial MQS research uti-
lized basic seq2seq models and pointer generator networks to generate summaries.
In 2021, a competition centered around generating summaries in the medical
domain was organized, as outlined in Abacha et al.’s [2] overview. Contestants
leveraged various pre-trained models, including PEGASUS [34], ProphetNet [25],
and BART [19]. Some innovative techniques, such as multi-task learning, were
employed, using BART to jointly optimize question summarization and entail-
ment tasks [22]. Another approach involved the use of reinforcement learning
with question-aware semantic rewards, derived from two subtasks: question focus
recognition (QFR) and question type identification (QTR) [31].
Multimodal Summarization: In order to ensure accurate diagnosis and
guidance from medical professionals, it is crucial for us to communicate our medi-
cal symptoms effectively and efficiently. One way to enhance this communication
is by supplementing textual descriptions with visual cues. Previous research has
demonstrated the benefits of incorporating multimodal information in various
medical tasks. For instance, Tiwari et al. [27] highlighted how multimodal in-
formation improves the performance of Disease Diagnosis Virtual Assistants.
Delbrouck et al. [8] showed that integrating images leads to better summariza-
tion of radiology reports, while Gupta et al. [14] illustrated the advantages of
incorporating videos in medical question-answering tasks.Kumar et al.[18] shows
how multimodal information can help in summarizing news articles. The most
recent work in this domain is done by Ghosh et al.[13] where they incorporated
CLIP with LLMs to generate the final multimodal summaries. To the best of
our knowledge, our work represents the first attempt to address the task of
question summarization in the medical domain, particularly within a codemixed
multimodal context.
3
MMCQS Dataset
3.1
Data Collection
Prior to this work, there was no multimodal codemixed question summarization
dataset available in the healthcare domain with textual questions and corre-
sponding medical images. We used the HealthCareMagic Dataset, derived from
MedDialog data, with 226,395 samples, after removing 523 duplicates. We were
led by medical doctors who were also the co-authors of the paper, identified 18
medical symptoms that are hard to convey through text, and divided into four
groups: ENT, EYE, LIMB, and SKIN. The entire categorization is shown in Fig-
ure -1. We selected symptoms and obtained images using the Bing Image Search
API7, which were verified by medical students. Our dataset features instances
mentioning body parts in questions and summaries. We used FlashText8 for term
matching and Textblob49 to correct misspellings, resulting in a final dataset of
3,015 samples for multimodal summarization.
7 https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/bing/apis/bing-image-search-api
8 https://pypi.org/project/flashtext/1.0/
9 https://textblob.readthedocs.io/en/dev/

MedSumm
5
E.N.T
EYE
EYE
LIMB
SKIN
LIP 
SWELLING
MOUTH 
ULCER
SWOLLEN 
TONSIL
SWOLLEN 
EYE
EYE 
REDNESS
ITCHY 
EYELID 
EDEMA
FOOT 
SWELLING
KNEE 
SWELLING
HAND 
LUMPS
NECK 
SWELLING
SKIN 
RASH
SKIN 
IRRITATION
SKIN 
GROWTH
DRY SCALP
CYANOSIS
EYE 
INFLAMATION
SKIN 
DRYNESS
MMCQSD
1046
281
195
193
171
170
159
148
115
115
96
81
79
63
47
26
15
15
Figure 1: Broad categorization of medical disorders in the MMCQS Dataset
(MMCQSD). The number of data points corresponding to each category has been
provided under each category in the above figure.
3.2
Data Annotation
We randomly selected 100 samples from the dataset and provided them to the
medical experts, who are co-authors of this paper. They developed annotation
guidelines for the annotation training process, divided into three categories:
(A) Incorporation of Visual Cues, (B) Updating Golden Summaries, and (C)
Hindi-English Codemixed Conversion.
A. Incorporation of Visual Cues: The methodology involved medical
experts annotating samples with visual cues. For instance, when a patient’s
description hints at a medical issue near their tonsils, the expert adds relevant
statements and visual images to clarify the condition, such as adding Please see
what happened to my tonsils in the image below. This process integrates
visual medical signs into the textual medical question
B. Updating the Golden Summaries:
The medical experts recognized a misalignment between conventional golden
summaries and multimodal queries, leading them to update the summaries. They
revised the questions, incorporated visual information, and adapted the golden
summaries for the 100 samples. These 100 samples are used for annotation
guidelines for the annotators.
C. Hindi-English Codemixed Annotation: For this task, around 100
samples were annotated by medical experts. We conducted experiments using
GPT-3.5 with few-shot prompting techniques on annotated samples due to its
strong performance in generating codemixed text [32]. The goal was to generate
a Hinglish (Hindi + English mixed) version of the English text. The generated
Hinglish text had a code-mixing index [7] of 30.5, indicating a good mix of Hindi
and English words. The specific prompt used is presented below. 80 samples
were tested, with annotators rating code-mixing out of 5. After verification with
the golden test examples, we get an average score of 3.2 out of 5 indicating
the codemixed data is of reasonable quality. An instance of the Hindi-English

6
A. Ghosh et al.
Codemixed annotated data along with their corresponding English query and
updated golder summaries has been shown in figure 2
Prompt used for codemixed text generation
You are a linguistic expert whose task is to convert the
English
passages
into
corresponding
Hinglish
codemixed
ones.〈Labelled Examples〉: English: {text} Hinglish: {text} .
Given the English passage: {text}, convert it into the corre-
sponding Hinglish passage shown in the 〈Labelled Examples〉.
3.3
Annotation Training and Validation
To ensure high-quality annotation aligned with ethical guidelines, we engaged
three postgraduate medical students proficient in Hindi and English. They received
guidance and conducted sessions with medical experts to clarify task-related
doubts. Breaks were provided every 45 minutes during the approximately 4-month,
90-training session annotation process10.
In the validation phase, the dataset was divided into three parts, and annota-
tors assessed fluency, adequacy, informativeness, and persuasiveness, maintaining
inter-annotator agreement using the Cohen-Kappa coefficient. Annotators re-
viewed and discussed inaccuracies in each other’s sets, leading to improved quality
scores from the initial (fluency = 3.5, adequacy = 3.01, informativeness = 2.85,
persuasiveness = 2.25) to the final phase (fluency = 4.8, adequacy = 4.7, in-
formativeness = 4.1, persuasiveness = 4.45). The annotators achieved a kappa
coefficient of 0.75, indicating annotation consistency.
4
Methodology
4.1
Problem Formulation
Each data point comprises a patient’s textual inquiry, denoted as Q, along with an
accompanying image, represented as I, illustrating the medical issue or concern
the patient is seeking assistance within their text. The ultimate objective is to
generate a natural language sequence Y represented as:
Y = {S, T}
(1)
where S represents the succinct summary that incorporates insights from both
the textual and visual modalities and T represents a brief note about the med-
ical condition associated with the visual cue. Figure 4 shows a diagrammatic
representation of our proposed architecture MedSumm. MedSumm has 3 main
stages namely: (i) Question and Visual Symptom Representation, (ii)
Adaptation Methods, and (iii) Inference .
10 The medical students were compensated through gift vouchers and honorarium
amount in lines with https://www.minimum-wage.org/international/india.

MedSumm
7
Figure 2: Sample instance of the MMCQS Dataset with the corresponding English
query and updated golden summary (target summary).
MERA BETA 34 SAAL KA HAI,AUR USE HIGH FEVER 
AUR SUJ GAYE TONSILS HAIN.Please doctor dekhiye 
vartaman condition ko. USKA ENERGY BAHUT KAM 
HAI, AUR THODI BHUKH BHI KAM HAI. USE KAI BAAR 
ANTIBIOTICS KARWAYE GAYE,LEKIN FEVER FIR SE AA 
JATA HAI. YEH LAGBHAG 1 MAHINE SE CHAL RAHA HAI 
AUR DR USKO AUR ANTIBIOTICS NAHI DETE, UNHONE 
BATAYA HAI KI USKE TONSILS PAR WHITE STONES HAI.
What could be the cause of 
persistent high fever, swollen 
tonsils, low energy, decreased 
appetite, and white stones on 
tonsils?The image here shows a 
medical condition related to 
swollen_tonsils. The tonsils are red 
and swollen.
MedSumm
PATIENT
PATIENT QUERY WITH THE 
CORRESPONDING IMAGE
SUMMARIZED QUERY
DOCTOR
Figure 3: Pipeline demonstrating the application of MedSumm for the summa-
rization of multimodal patient queries in a code-mixed environment, aimed at
facilitating expedited comprehension of patient queries for doctors and healthcare
professionals.

8
A. Ghosh et al.
4.2
Textual and Visual Representation
We’ve utilized two distinct categories of data to represent a patient-clinician
interaction: the patient’s question in textual form and visual elements that the
patient shared alongside the query.
Question Representation: In this context, each patient’s query is presented
as a text passage in which they explain their medical concerns to the doctor to
receive relevant feedback. Recent advancements in language models, particularly
decoder-based ones like LLaMA [28], GPT-3[5], have demonstrated superior
performance in encoding textual presentations compared to encoder-based mod-
els like BERT[10]. This technique involves employing Large Language Models
(LLMs) for next-word prediction, from which we generate sentence embeddings
by extracting the hidden vectors corresponding to the final word. Various LLMs,
such as Vicuna [36] Llama2 [29], FLAN-T5 [6], Mistral-7B [16] and Zephyr-7B
[30] , are utilized for this purpose. During this process, the text is tokenized into
smaller units, and each token is ultimately transformed into a 4096-dimensional
embedding. It is noteworthy that pre-trained models of these LLMs are employed
in this task.
Visual Representation: We employ Vision-transformers ViT[12], for this
task. These models take raw images as input and transform them into embeddings
of size 768. Furthermore, we integrate a linear projection mechanism using a fully
connected layer to map these 768-dimensional visual embeddings into a shared
textual embedding space. This unified vision-language embedding is then fed
into the decoder of the language model. Notably, only the linear projection layer
is trainable in this process. This linear projection layer not only helps to extract
meaningful information from the vision encoder but also helps in multimodal
information fusion, thus producing richer information embeddings that can be
effectively learned and finetuned.
4.3
Adaptation Methods
One of the biggest challenges of LLM-based techniques is fine-tuning them to
domain-specific tasks as they are mostly bounded by resource constraints. There
are several techniques that have been developed to overcome this problem namely
prompt tunning,in-context learning, and low-rank adaptation techniques like
LoRA [15] and QLoRA [9]. For this work, we are going with the latest and
most parameter-efficient technique which is QLORA. QLoRA is a more memory-
efficient version of LoRA providing 4-bit quantization to enable fine-tuning of
larger LLMs using the same hardware constraints.
4.4
Inference
The inference module is an LLM that receives the attended multi-modal fusion
representation vector, which combines the patient’s textual query with visual
cues. This module generates the corresponding symptom name and summary
using a next-token prediction approach. In this method, the language model
calculates probabilities for all tokens in its vocabulary, and these probabilities
are used to predict the next predicted token. We use the following LLMs namely

MedSumm
9
Llama-2, Mistral-7B, Vicuna , FLAN-T5 and Zephyr-7B for the final summary
generation
VIT EMBEDDING
LLM EMBEDDING
Mujhe aaj dental work hua hai toh meri 
neeche ki lip abhi bhi puri tarah se numb hai 
(4 ghante ho gaye hai). Diner khaa raha tha 
aur maine poori tarah se neeche ki lip pe 
dabaya, wo purple ho rahi hai. Kya problem 
hai aur mujhe kya karna chahiye jab mujhe 
kuch feel hi nahi ho raha hai aur thoda sa 
bleed ho raha hai.Doctor sahab,please 
affected area ke image ko dekhiye.
768x4096
DIMENSION
CONCATENATED IMAGE-
TEXT EMBEDDING
SUMMARIZED 
QUERY IN ENGLISH
IMAGE RESIZED AND CENTER 
CROPPED TO 224X224 PIXEL
CODE-MIXED QUERY
LANGUAGE MODEL DECODER 
WITH Q-LORA ADAPTER
Q-LORA ADAPTER
LINEAR 
PROJECTION
: TRAIN

: FROZEN 
Figure 4: Model structure of MedSumm showing the different stages of our
proposed architecture. The frozen and trainable layers have also been indicated.
5
Experiments and Results
To study the task of summarization of complex code-mixed medical queries we
perform a meticulous fine-tuning and evaluation of both uni-modal and our
multimodal model MedSumm on our MMCQS dataset. We have allocated 80%
of the dataset for training, 5% for validation, and 15% for testing our fine-tuned
models. We have leveraged the most recent and popular open source LLMs like
Vicuna[36] Llama2 [29], FLAN-T5 [6], Mistral-7B [16] and Zephyr-7B [30] in both
unimodal and multimodal (MedLLMSumm) setup.We utilized ROUGUE [20],
BLEU [24], BERT score [35], METEOR [4] as automatic evaluation metrics11.
For the purpose of human evaluation, we collaborate with a medical expert and a
few medical postgraduate students. We have identified four distinct and medically
nuanced metrics for this evaluation: clinical evaluation score, factual recall [3],
hallucination rate [3], and our MMFCM metric.
Automatic Evaluation: The automatic evaluation results in Table 1 reveal
that MedSumm consistently outperforms all other LLMs across all defined
metrics. This demonstrates the significant advantage of incorporating visual
cues for generating more nuanced summaries. In unimodal settings, Mistral
outperforms the rest, while Zephyr, as the most recent LLM, demonstrates
balanced performance in both unimodal and multimodal scenarios. In the multi-
modal setting, LLAMA-2 takes the lead, closely followed by Vicuna in terms of
performance.FLAN-T5’s performance was the weakest across all metrics. This
11 To maintain uniformity in the results post-processing like removing extra spaces,
repeated sentences are performed.

10
A. Ghosh et al.
led us to the conclusion that decoder-only architectures perform better than
encoder-decoder models like FLAN T5.
Model
ROUGE
BLEU
BERTScore METEOR
R1
R2
RL
B1
B2
B3
B4
LLAMA-2
Unimodal(only texual query) 39.92 19.57
33.9
28.9
18.05 11.76
9.97
0.74
34.81
MedSumm
46.75 25.59 38.41 32.50 22.55 17.56 14.88
0.80
35.74
Mistral
Unimodal(only texual query) 37.58 17.14 29.01 23.67 14.46
9.42
6.15
0.77
41.68
MedSumm
42.54 23.81 34.85 27.21 19.04 14.89 12.22
0.76
36.00
Vicuna
Unimodal(only textual query) 38.64 21.55
32.9
24.12 15.88 11.09
9.13
0.75
32.25
MedSumm
45.09 26.11 37.05 27.58 19.98 16.44 14.33
0.80
32.10
FLAN-T5
Unimodal(only textual query) 36.3
17.22 29.81
22.1
12.14
8.51
6.15
0.67
28.25
MedSumm
41.5 23.02 33.96 26.2 18.04 14.12 11.8
0.74
35.09
Zephyr
Unimodal(only textual query) 36.67 17.54 30.12 22.93 14.01
8.97
5.80
0.70
35.32
MedSumm
44.55 25.37 34.97 27.05 19.48 15.84 13.63
0.77
33.37
Table 1: Performance of various MedSumm models and corresponding unimodal
baselines, evaluated using automatic metrics with different LLMs.
Human Evaluation: Existing automatic evaluation metrics can provide
a misleading assessment of summary quality in the medical domain, where a
single incorrect detail or omission of vital information can be perilous. A team
of medical students, led by a doctor, conducted a human evaluation using a
random 10% of the dataset to rate summaries from uni-modal and multi-modal
models. Evaluation metrics include: (1) Clinical Evaluation Score for relevance,
consistency, fluency, and coherence (rated 1 to 5), (2) Multi-modal Fact Capturing
Metric (MMFCM) assessing the incorporation of medical facts and disorder
identification, and (3) Medical Fact-Based Metrics, which employ Factual Recall
and Omission Recall to measure the capture of medical facts compared to gold
standard summaries. See Algorithm 1 for the detailed algorithm. Table 2 provides
a comparison of both the uni-modal models and multi-modal models, underscoring
the advantage of multimodal models over unimodal models for our task. This
claim is also seconded by the improvement in the Factual Recall, Hallucination
Rate, and our proposed MMFCM metrices.
6
Qualitative Analysis
We conducted a thorough qualitative analysis of the summaries generated by
different models in both unimodal and multimodal setting. We also performed
some case studies; one such instance is shown in figure 5. The analysis led to
the following conclusion : (a) All models perform better in multimodal setting

MedSumm
11
Models
Clinical-EvalScore Factual Recall Hallucination Rate MMFCM Score
LLAMA-2(U)
3.1
0.34
0.35
NA
LLAMA-2(M)
3.52
0.35
0.32
0.42
Mistral-7B(U)
3.41
0.36
0.29
NA
Mistral-7B(M)
3.43
0.36
0.3
0.41
Vicuna-7B(U)
3.32
0.33
0.33
NA
Vicuna-7B(M)
3.45
0.34
0.36
0.41
FLAN-T5(U)
2.8
0.28
0.31
NA
FLAN-T5(M)
3.1
0.31
0.33
0.34
Zephyr 7B β(U)
3.48
0.38
0.26
NA
Zephyr 7B β(M)
3.54
0.36
0.29
0.44
Annotated Summary
4.1
0.88
0
0.87
Table 2: Human evaluation scores of various unimodal and multimodal models
across different metrics.
CODE-MIXED QUESTION: Hello doctor,Do hafte se mujhe unbearable itching hai. Mujhe iske saath 
ek rash bhi tha jo plaque rash ka jaisa dikhta tha lekin ab wo fade ho gaya hai. Please doctor, dekhiye 
is vartaman condition ko. Mujhe super itching skin hai jo itch karne par bumps ban jata hai lekin 
thode time baad fade ho jata hai. Ye itching mujhe paagal kar rahi hai. Maine do doctors se mila hai 
aur unhe pata nahi kya ho raha hai, sirf ye pata hai ki ye contagious nahi hai kyunki mere husband 
aur bachhe ise nahi hai.
ENGLISH QUESTION: Hello doctor,For two weeks, I have been unbearably itchy. I had a rash to go 
along with it that looked more like little plaque rashes but those have faded now.Please doctor see 
the current condition below  I am left with super itchy skin that bumps up when I itch but fades 
away after a while. The itching is driving me insane. I have seen two doctors and they have no clue 
what is going on, just that it is not contagious because my husband and kids do not have it.
MODEL
UNIMODAL
(USING ONLY TEXT QUERY)
MedSumm
(IMAGE + TEXT QUERY)
LLAMA-2
MISTRAL-7B
VICUNA-7B
FLAN-T5
ZEPHYR-7B-
BETA
Describe the symptoms of a 
super itching rash on the 
skin, with a rash on the 
, 
and a bump on the 
.
shins
shin
70-year-old male with unbearable itching, rash, and skin irritation. No contagion. The image 
shows the condition of skin rash. Round and swollen spots on the skin, red in color and 
multiple in the affected area. Little swelling and dryness on the skin.
40-year-old female
Condition : Eczema
 with unbearable 
itching, rash, and bumps on skin. No 
contagiousness. 
2 weeks of unbearable itching with a previous plaque rash, now fading, causing bumps and 
driving the patient mad. The image shows the condition of skin rash. Round and swollen spots 
on the skin, red in color and multiple in the affected area. Cluster of such spots. Little swelling 
and dryness on the spots. Possible skin irritation or allergy causing the rash.  The image 
shows the condition of skin rash. Round and swollen spots on the skin, red in color and 
multiple in the affected area. Cluster of such spots. 
48-year-old female
folliculitis or a boil
The affected area needs to be cleaned with soap and 
water and kept dry
 with unbearable itching, rash, and bumps on skin. The image shows the 
condition of skin rash. Round and swollen spots on the skin, red in color and multiple in the 
affected area. Round and swollen spots on the skin, red in color and multiple in the affected 
area. Condition- It could be a 
. The exact diagnosis can be made only by a 
doctor after a physical examination. 
. 
2 weeks of unbearable itching, rash that resembled plaque rash, bumps that fade, and driving 
me crazy. What could be the cause?The image shows the condition of skin rash. Round and 
swollen spots on the skin, red in color and multiple in the affected area. Condition- skin rash
Skin rash on the 
, red in color and multiple circular swelling on the skin.
The circular swelling on the skin is red in color and swollen.
leg's skin
 What could be the cause of 
unbearable itching, a plaque rash, 
and a skin condition that causes 
bumps and fades away? 
10 days of unbearable itching 
with a fading plaque rash, 
bumps that fade, and no 
contagion. 
TARGET SUMMARY: What could be causing the patient's unbearably itchy skin with plaque-like 
rashes that fade and are not contagious?The image shows the condition of skin rash. Round and 
swollen spots on the skin, red in color and multiple in the affected area.
What could be the cause 
of unbearable itching, a 
plaque rash, and skin 
bumps that fade away?
IMAGE
What could be the cause of the itching and redness on the skin? The image shows the 
condition of skin rash. The skin is red and swollen with little or no rash.
Figure 5: Samples summaries generated by the LLMs in unimodal and multimodal
setting. The hallucinated phrases has been shown in red.

12
A. Ghosh et al.
Algorithm 1 MMFCM Method
Require: Fm = { factm,1 , factm,2 . . . factm,n−1 , factm,n }
\\Relevant Medical facts from golden summary of query ’m’.
Sfm = { Summfactm,1 , . . . , Summfactm,n }
\\Relevant Medical facts from the generated summary of query ’m’.
#CorrectFactsm = |Fm ∩Sfm|
if (Correct Medical Disorder phrase ∈{Fm ∩Sfm}) then
#CorrectFactsm+ = 2
else if (Partially correct disorder phrase ∈{Fm ∩Sfm}) then
#CorrectFactsm+ = 1
else if (Incorrect disorder phrase ∈{Fm ∩Sfm}) then
#CorrectFactsm+ = −1
else
#CorrectFactsm+ = 0
end if
return MMFCM = tanh(#CorrectFactsm/|Fm|)
and is better at capturing the important visual information conveyed through
the images and predicting the exact disorder phrase. (b) It was also observed
that models like LLAMA-2 and Vicuna shows a tendency of hallucination (see
figure 5) and sometimes generated facts which was completely out of context. The
summaries generated by Mistral and Zephyr were more cohesive and showed lesser
hallucinations. (c) FlanT5 showed the weakest results which made us conclude that
decoder only LLMs perform better than LLMs with encoder-decoder architecture
for our task.
7
Risk Analysis
We must acknowledge several limitations in our approach. Initially, we confined
our task to 18 symptoms conducive to image sharing. Therefore, introducing an
image outside this scope may lead to the model generating potentially erroneous
information in the summary. While our multimodal model shows promise, it is
prudent to engage a medical expert for the ultimate verification, particularly in
high-stakes scenarios. Our AI model serves as a tool, not a substitute for medical
professionals.
8
Conclusion and Future Work
In this study, we delve into the impact of incorporating multi-modal cues, par-
ticularly visual information, on question summarization within the realm of
healthcare. We present the MMCQS dataset the first of its kind dataset, compris-
ing 3015 multimodal medical queries in Hindi-English codemixed language with
golden summaries in English that merge visual and textual data. This novel col-
lection fosters new assessment techniques in healthcare question summarization.

MedSumm
13
We also propose a model MedSumm, that incorporates the power of both LLM
and Vision encoders to generate the final summary. In our future endeavors, we
aspire to develop a Vision-Language model capable of extracting the intensity and
duration details of symptoms and integrating them into the patient query’s final
summary generation. Furthermore, our expansion plans encompass incorporating
medical videos and speeches data and addressing scenarios involving other low
resources languages in Indian context.
9
Ethical Considerations
In healthcare summarization, we prioritize ethical considerations, including safety,
privacy, and bias. We took extensive measures with the MMCQS dataset, collab-
orating with medical professionals, obtaining IRB approval, and adhering to legal
and ethical guidelines during data handling, image integration, and summary
annotation. The dataset is based on the HealthcareMagic Dataset, and medical
experts supervised the task. Identity protection was ensured for user privacy.
10
