arXiv:2001.11384v1  [cs.CL]  20 Jan 2020
UNSUPERVISED SENTIMENT ANALYSIS FOR CODE-
MIXED DATA
Siddharth Yadav, Tanmoy Chakraborty
IIIT-Delhi, India

ABSTRACT
Linguistic code-mixing or code-switching is the practice of alternating between
two or more languages. Mostly observed in multilingual societies, its occurrence
is increasing and therefore its importance. A major part of sentiment analysis re-
search has been monolingual and best of the monolingual methods perform poorly
on code-mixed text. In this work, we introduce methods that use different kinds of
multilingual and crosslingual embeddings to efﬁciently transfer knowledge from
monolingual text to code-mixed text for sentiment analysis of code-mixed text.
Our methods can handle code-mixed text in a zero-shot way quite well. Our meth-
ods beat state-of-the-art on English Spanish code-mixed sentiment analysis by an
absolute 3% F1 score. We are able to achieve a F1 score of 0.58 (without parallel
corpus) and of 0.62 (with parallel corpus) on the same benchmark in a zero-shot
way as compared to 0.68 F1 score in supervised settings. Our code is publicly
available1
1
INTRODUCTION
Code-mixing or code-switching is the practice of alternating between two or more languages in a
conversation. Mostly observed in multilingual societies like Europe and India, it is often associated
with informal or casual conversation/speech like in social media or chats or in-person talks. Its
occurrence is increasing rapidly and hence its importance. In fact, code-mixing is the default mode
of communication in many places like some part of India and Mexico (PAR, 2016). Often, bilingual
and multilingual people talk in a code-mixed language because it puts less cognitive load on their
brain. People can use words or phrases from either languages, whichever comes ﬁrst to their mind.
In other words, it’s more constrictive to think in a monolingual way. Most of the NLP system in
today’s world are monolingual. Choudhury et al. (2007) shows language used on these social media
platforms, from where we get most of the code-mixed text, differs from the standard language that
is found in more formal texts like books. Monolingual NLP methods perform poorly on code-mixed
data.
Therefore, it is crucial to build technology for code-mixed text. Building this technology comes
with its own challenges as described in C¸ etino˘glu et al. (2016). Summarising it, analysis of code-
mixed text is hard due to lack of code-mixed text corpus and datasets, large amount of unseen
constructions caused by combining lexicon and syntax of two or more language, and large number
of possible combinations of code mixed languages Constructing one dataset requires lot of manual
labour and construction of datasets for each code-mixed pair seems infeasible. Hence, it will be
more beneﬁcial to build technology that doesn’t require code-mixed dataset and is able to transfer
knowledge from related monolingual datasets to code-mixed domain efﬁciently. In other words, it
would be beneﬁcial if our technology is unsupervised.
In this work, we introduce methods that use different kinds of multilingual and crosslingual embed-
dings to efﬁciently transfer knowledge from monolingual text to code-mixed text for sentiment anal-
ysis of code-mixed text. We make our methods independent of any kind supervised signals between
two languages by not using any kind of Machine Translation or Language Identiﬁcation systems,
as these systems perform poorly on low-resource language pair due to lack of proper datasets. Our
1https://github.com/sedflix/unsacmt
1

goal in this work to ﬁnd out embedding spaces and training techniques that assist efﬁcient knowledge
transfer from monolingual text to code-mixed text.
Crosslingual/multilingual embeddings are an obvious starting point for our goal. There is a subtle
difference between crosslingual and multilingual embeddings. In crosslingual world, we are aware
of the language of the given data point. Therefore, we can choose an appropriate model or a part
of the model corresponding to that language. In multilingual, we not aware of the language of
the given data point. Therefore, multilingual models are totally language agnostic. Regardless the
difference, crosslingual and multilingual embeddings implies a shared vector space among all the in-
volved languages. There promise is that once a model is trained for any one language, the model can
do predictions on any other language. When using crosslingual embeddings, the languages of data
points should be known beforehand. Conneau et al. (2017) has shown that crosslingual embeddings
can be made in a totally unsupervised way, i.e. they only require monolingual embeddings of the re-
spective languages and making monolingual embeddings only require monolingual corpus which is
easily available for even low resource languages, and these embeddings perform at par to supervised
crosslingual embeddings. This helps our goal of being independent of any kind supervised signals
between two languages.
As sentence level crosslingual embeddings can’t handle two different languages in a single sentence
or document, only word/subword/character level crosslingual embeddings can be used for code-
mixed text. All kinds of multilingual embeddings are much better suited for analysing code-mixed
text because they don’t require language tags and we are not aware of the language tag of each word
in code-mixed text. We can merge vocabulary(and embeddings) of word/subword level crosslin-
gual embeddings to create a shared vocabulary resulting in a the new embedding that can handle
occurrence of different languages in a single data point without the need of language tags. Just by
using these crosslingual/multilingual embeddings in vanilla classiﬁers, we can train the classiﬁer on
available monolingual datasets and do predictions on code-mixed text. This gives a way to analysis
code-mixed text in a zero-shot way. When used in supervised settings, the downstream LSTM layers
can capture semantic structure speciﬁc to code-mixed text over those embeddings.
It is important to note that crosslingual and multilingual embeddings are trained on monolingual sen-
tences. Code-mixed text has it own large set of syntactic structures and semantic association which
are not captured in monolingual sentences. Therefore, crosslingual and multilingual embeddings
are not ideal for learning code-mixed text analysis. Embedding for code-mixed text should utilised
code-mixed text to capture the ﬁne syntactic and semantic features of code-mixed text (Pratapa et al.,
2018b).
2
RELATED WORK
Vilares et al. (2015) was the ﬁrst work to introduce sentiment analysis on English-Spanish
code-mixed data.
Pratapa et al. (2018b) focuses on embeddings for improving the down-
stream tasks on English-Spanish code-mixed data. They show that using pretrained embeddings
learned from code-mixed data perform better than bilingual embeddings, like Bilingual correla-
tion based embeddings(BiCCA) (Faruqui & Dyer, 2014), Bilingual compositional model(BiCVM)
(Hermann & Blunsom, 2014) and Bilingual Skip-gram (BiSkip) (Luong et al., 2015). They propose
a new approach of training skip-grams on synthetic code-mixed text generated approach mentioned
by (Pratapa et al., 2018a) which requires large parallel corpus. Samanta et al. (2019) augments
monolingual datasets using Machine Translation systems and their own code-mixed generative mod-
els to assist code-mixed classiﬁcation. Genta Indra Winata proposed Multilingual Meta-Embeddings
(Winata et al., 2019b) and Hierarchical Meta-Embeddings (Winata et al., 2019a) which combine dif-
ferent kinds of pretrained monolingual embeddings at word, subword, and character-level into a
single language-agnostic lexical representation without using any speciﬁc language identiﬁers.
There have been some interesting work in proposing new models for sentiment analysis English-
Hindi code-mixed text. Sharma et al. (2015) proposes an approach based on lexicon lookup for
text normalization. Avvaru et al. (2017) used a lexicon lookup approach to perform domain speciﬁc
sentiment analysis. Joshi et al. (2016) uses sub-words with CNN-LSTMs to capture sentiment at
morpheme level. Choudhary et al. (2018) uses Siamese networks to map code-mixed and standard
language text to a common sentiment space. Lal et al. (2019) proposes use of Dual Encoder Network
2

along with a Feature Network, which has handcrafted features for sentiment analysis of English
Hindi code mix text.
3
EMBEDDINGS
In past few years, there has been a signiﬁcant amount of work in bilingual, crosslingual and multilin-
gual representation of text as they help us in building models for low resource languages. Ruder et al.
(2019) presents a detailed analysis of cross-lingual word embedding models and discusses how lots
of them optimize for the same objective function, and that different models are often equivalent. We
choose the followings embeddings to work on our code-mixed task.
3.1
MAPPING BASED MODEL
In this approach, we ﬁrst independently learn monolingual word representations, L1 and L2, from
large monolingual corpus and then learn a transformation matrix W to map representation from one
language to the representation of the other language. The projection matrix transforms vector space
of embedding of one language, L1 to that of the other language, L2. The projection matrix can be
learnt in both supervised and unsupervised settings. Conneau et al. (2017) shows that the mapping
learnt in an unsupervised settings can perform better to those learnt in supervised settings.
We have used MUSE2 to obtain this mapping. This tool returns a word-aligned embedding space for
each language, L
′
1 and L
′
2, such that similar words in either language have similar representation.
We merge two different embedding space by taking an average of word vectors of common words
and simply appending the others. As a result, we get a single embedding space, L, and vocabulary
for both the languages.
The monolingual embeddings for English and Spanish used in our experiments were obtained from
Grave et al. (2018). MUSE provides both supervised and unsupervised variant.
3.1.1
MUSE-USUP
It uses adversarial learning to learn the transformation matrix followed by reﬁnement using Pro-
crustes algorithm. Hence, this approach is independent of any kind supervised signals between two
languages.
3.1.2
MUSE-SUP
It uses bilingual dictionary to learn a mapping from the source to the target space using Procrustes
alignment. Its requirement of a bilingual dictionary makes it supervised approach.
3.2
PSEUDO-MULTI-LINGUAL MODEL
In this approach, we obtain word/subword representation by training word embedding model, like
fastText or Glove, on single corpus containing text from both the languages, usually formed by
concatenation of monolingual corpus. This leads to formation of a shared vocabulary and all words
vectors are in a common vector space. Words/Subwords from the two languages may or maybe not
be aligned. The word embedding models chosen by us are subword based. Subwords allow us to
guess the meaning of out-of-vocabulary words, which helps us to handle the large vocabulary and
large amount unseen constructions caused by combining lexicon and syntax of two languages. Since
most of the code-mixed text belongs to the category of texting language, there is a huge variations of
spelling and misspelling. Subwords allow us to get proper word vectors for even misspelled words.
3.2.1
MULTIBPEMD
Heinzerling & Strube (2018) released MultiBPEmd, a shared subword vocabulary and multilingual
embeddings in 275 languages. It was formed by concatenating articles from all 256 languages on
Wikipedia, learning a Byte Pair Encoding(Sennrich et al., 2015) subword segmentation model using
2https://github.com/facebookresearch/MUSE
3

SentencePiece(Kudo & Richardson, 2018), and using GloVe(Pennington et al., 2014) to train sub-
word embeddings. We use MultiBPEmd version with vocabulary size of 1,000,000 and dimensions
of 300.
3.2.2
CUSTOM-FASTTEXT
fastText(Bojanowski et al., 2016) is popular method for learning word embeddings. We choose it
because it can create word vector for words absent from the trained embedding space, by summing
up the character n-grams vectors. Therefore, it offer us advantages similar to that of subwords. We
trained fastText on custom corpus generated by concatenating 70 millions English, 70 millions Span-
ish and 20 millions code-mixed tweets mined by us from twitter. Our embedding has vocabulary
size of 1,343,436 and dimensions of 100.
3.3
SENTENCE LEVEL MULTILINGUAL AUTOENCODER MODEL
Due to large amount of research done in Machine Translation, a huge amount of sentence-aligned
parallel data is available for popular language pairs. Using this data and machine translation models,
we can learn cross-lingual sentence-level representation.
3.3.1
LASER
LASER(Artetxe & Schwenk, 2019) stands for Language-Agnostic SEntence Representations. It of-
fers a shared multilingual sentence-level representation for 93 different languages. LASER consists
of common language-agnostic Bidirectional LSTM encoder which provides the sentence embed-
ding. The sentences embedding is then decoded by language-speciﬁc decoder. It’s trained on 223
millions parallel sentences obtained by combining the OpenSubtitles2018, United Nations, Europarl,
Tatoeba. Global Voices, and Tanzil corpus. LASER has a BPE vocabulary size of 50,000 and builds
sentence representation of dimensions of 1024.
4
DATASET
We have used a combination of monolingual and code-mixed data for our training and testing of our
sentiment analysis model. All of our experiments use a combination of ﬁve different datasets listed
below.
• SemEval 2017: We use 20,632 English tweets from dataset provided by SemEval-2017
Task 4:Sentiment Analysis in Twitter (Rosenthal et al., 2017).
• Sentistrength: 4,241 English labelled tweets have been provided by Sentistrength3.
• TASS-2017: We use 7,217 labelled Spanish tweets from Cer´on-Guzm´an (2017).
• TASS-2014: We use 3,202 labelled Spanish tweets from Villena-Romn et al. (2015).
• Code-mixed Dataset: Vilares et al. (2016) provides 2,449 train and 613 test instances of
code-mixed tweets.
All of the instances have three labels: neutral, positive, and negative. Tweets have been prepos-
sessed and tokenized using a version of TweetMotif(O’Connor et al., 2010) before going through
embedding speciﬁc prepossessing.
5
TRAINING CURRICULUM
Choudhury et al. (2017) shows that mixing monolingual and code-mixed data randomly doesn’t
generate the best result for code-mixed models. Rather, ﬁrst training the models with monolingual
training instances and then training the resulting network on code-switched data is a better curricu-
lum. Hence, we ﬁrst train our models using instances from English and Spanish datasets combined
and then, if required, we train the resulting model using instances from code-mixed dataset. The
3http://sentistrength.wlv.ac.uk/
4

latter step is only used to get supervised results. This training curriculum is efﬁcient for knowledge
transfer from monolingual text to code-mixed text.
6
MODELS
In this work, we perform sentiment analysis of code-mixed text. Our choice of this tasks is moti-
vated by the availability of annotated code-mixed and monolingual dataset. Our task is to classify a
code-mixed sentences as positive, negative, or neutral. As our goal is to demonstrate effectiveness of
embeddings, we use simple classiﬁer for our task. Models using sentence embedding have a single
layer dense neural network. Models using word/subword embedding have a single layer Bidirec-
tional LSTM with 50 units. The LSTM layer has a dropout and recurrent dropout of 0.3. All of our
model have an output layer of size of three and use Softmax. We use ADAM (Kingma & Ba, 2014)
optimiser with learning rate of 0.001 and momentum of 0.9. We use a batch size of 32. We use early
stopping with the patience of 10. We use the model with best validation score at the current step to
initialise the next step.
7
RESULTS
Table 1 reports the result of our experiments using embeddings in Section 3, and models in Sec-
tion 6, trained and tested using datasets in Section 4 as per training curriculum in Section 5. We
beat the previous state-of-the-art on the task of English-Spanish code-mixed sentiment analysis by
an absolute 3.11% using our custom-fastText embeddings. Custom-fastText embeddings gives us
the best totally-unsupervised performance with 0.58 F1-score. This shows training on actual code-
mixed corpus, and using subwords helps in developing better embeddings because just concatenated
monolingual or parallel corpus fail to capture the ﬁne syntactic and semantic features of code-mixed
text. LASER produces a remarkable zero-shot F1-score of 0.62, and performs at par with the previ-
ous state-of-the-art. This shows that training on translation tasks, with common encoder, and using
parallel corpus indeed helps.
8
CONCLUSIONS
Today, code-mixing is a rapidly evolving way of expression in multilingual populations on social
media and in-person conversation. Even the best monolingual sentiment analysis techniques perform
poorly on code-mixed text because due to involvement of a new language and unseen structures in
Model
Embeddings
Learning Type
F1-score
Previous Work
LSTM
-
Supervised
54.40
LSTM
Bilingual Skip-gram4
Supervised
61.50
GirNet5
-
Supervised
63.40
LSTM
Synthetic CM based6
Supervised
64.60
Our Work
LSTM
MUSE-USUP
Supervised
55.40
LSTM
MUSE-SUP
Supervised
56.61
LSTM
MultiBPEmb
Supervised
64.00
NN
LASER
Supervised
64.44
LSTM
FastText
Supervised
67.71
LSTM
MUSE-SUP
Partially supervised
53.53
NN
LASER
Partially supervised
61.72
LSTM
MUSE-USUP
Unsupervised
51.99
LSTM
MultiBPEmb
Unsupervised
54.59
LSTM
FastText
Unsupervised
58.40
Table 1: F1-score of the competing models on code-mixed sentiment analysis task.
5

a single sentence. Here, we have shown that usage of off-the-shelf crosslingual and multilingual
embeddings is an effective way to improve the performance of sentiment analysis techniques on
code-mixed text. Since, crosslingual, in particular multilingual, research is progressing rapidly to-
day, we can hope to see similar performance increase in code-mixed analysis domain. We believe
that the future of code-mixed data analysis will lie in zero-shot approaches, where we efﬁciently
transfer knowledge from monolingual datasets to code-mixed datasets using embeddings and mod-
els that can handle code-switching without much loss in performance.
