Downstream Task-Oriented Generative
Model Selections on Synthetic Data Training
for Fraud Detection Models
Yinan Cheng∗, Chi-Hua Wang †,
Vamsi K. Potluru ‡, Tucker Balch §, Guang Cheng¶
January 3, 2024
Abstract
Devising procedures for downstream task-oriented generative model selections is an
unresolved problem of practical importance. Existing studies focused on the utility of
a single family of generative models. They provided limited insights on how synthetic
data practitioners select the best family generative models for synthetic training tasks
given a specific combination of machine learning model class and performance metric.
In this paper, we approach the downstream task-oriented generative model selections
problem in the case of training fraud detection models and investigate the best prac-
tice given different combinations of model interpretability and model performance con-
straints. Our investigation supports that, while both Neural Network(NN)-based and
Bayesian Network(BN)-based generative models are both good to complete synthetic
training task under loose model interpretability constrain, the BN-based generative
models is better than NN-based when synthetic training fraud detection model under
strict model interpretability constrain. Our results provides practical guidance for ma-
chine learning practitioner who is interested in replacing their training dataset from
real to synthetic, and shed lights on more general downstream task-oriented generative
model selection problems.
Key Words: Generative Model Selections, Synthetic Training Datasets, Fraud Detection,
Accuracy-Interpretability Tradeoff, Data-centric Machine Learning, Train on Real Test on
Synthetic.

‡J.P. Morgan AI Research
§J.P. Morgan AI Research

1
arXiv:2401.00974v1  [cs.LG]  1 Jan 2024

1
Introduction
Synthetic Data is receiving increasing attention from both academics and industry [24].
Such attention is due to synthetic data’s potential to accelerate innovation and support
decision-making without violating modern privacy regulations (e.g. GDPR [1] or CCPA).
The potential for acceleration and support of the modern machine learning lifecycle is lucra-
tive and hence invites both machine learning researchers and practitioners investigation on
the benefits and limitations of using synthetic datasets [41, 16]. In particular, what is the
prize and price on machine learning model training process if we replace from
real training dataset with a synthetic training dataset?
Indeed, the prize is individual-level privacy protection, and the price is performance
degradation. Although the current community does not reach an agreement on how effective
the synthetic data approach [40], existing studies [22] observe performance degradations
from replacing real with the synthetic training datasets. In practice, there are three family
of generative models to synthesize training dataset: Machine Learning-based [17, 10, 15],
Neural network-based [32, 44] and Bayesian network-based [46, 19, 3] generative models.
Due to the predicament of striking a balance between accuracy and privacy leakage for
Machine Learning-based generative models [24], in this paper, we focus on Neural network-
based and Bayesian network-based generative models. Given primitive privacy protection by
replacing the real training dataset with the synthetic dataset, the following question guides
our investigation: Which family of synthetic data generative models sufferers least
performance degradation? We define the above key research question as the Generative
Model Selection (GMS) problems. In particular, we investigate the generative model
selection problem in the context of the fraud detection model (FDM) training procedure.
The fraud detection model is an integral part of the modern fraud management process
[42, 2, 37], where the utility-interpretability trade-off is of particular importance to stop
fraudsters to limit fraud impact in financial service operations [31]. The utility is the key
performance metric to measure how effective the trained fraud detection model detecting
potential fraudulent operations. However, FDM with high utility also incurs a high number
of false alerts, leading to potential high human resource cost[31]. In practice, those alerts
reported by FDM are reviewed by fraud experts, demanding model interpretability to make
decisions on free or suspend the potential fraudulent operation.
Consequently, insights
on the impact of synthetic dataset trained FDM, especially around the utility-
interpretability trade-off, are desired and of practical importance. In answering
GMS problems in synthetic dataset trained FDM, this paper aims to solve the following two
questions:
• Utility-oriented GMS: Given a cost-specific metric, which family of generative mod-
els suffers the least degradation?
• Interpretability-oriented GMS: Given a specific interpretability constraint, which
family of generative models suffers the least degradation?
2

1.1
Contributions
In this paper, we adopt a downstream task-oriented approach to the evaluation of generative
models introduced in section 2.1. Instead of assessing the generative data distribution by
looking into the correlation or distance between real and synthetic datasets, we examine
the performance of fraud detection models trained on Neural network-based or Bayesian
Network-based synthetic training data. Our evaluation is from 3 dimensions: data (Synthetic
Data generative models), models (fraud detection models), and metrics (accuracy, AUROC,
recall, precision). Our examination focus on two class of generative model selection problems:
Utility-oriented generative model selections and Interpretability-oriented generative model
selections.
We provide 3 guidance for fraud data scientists and machine learning practitioners inter-
ested in the utility-interpretability behind using synthetic training data to train their fraud
detection models
• We systematically compare different performance metrics for fraud detection models
to give the best advice on different priorities to stop fraudsters.
• We systematically compare different machine learning model candidates for fraud de-
tection models from the layer of interpretability.
• We give guidance to select synthetic data generative models for different model-metric
combinations.
Utility-oriented Generative Model Selections The key question of the Utility-
oriented generative model selection problem is on which generative model should be used to
generate synthetic training data to train fraud detection under given metric. We found the
best choice of the generative model family is metric-dependent. In short, we provide insights
on Utility-oriented GMS.(Section 4.2)
• Accuracy did not show a preference between neural network-based (NN-based) and
Bayesian network-based (BN-based) models.
• AUROC and Recall prefer NN-based generative models.
• F1 score and Precision prefers BN-based generative models.
Interpretability-oriented Generative Model Selections On the other hand, the
interpretability-oriented generative model selection problem asks for the best family of gen-
erative models to generate training data given fraud detection model class. We found that
the Bayesian Network-based method is better for an intrinsic interpretable model class, while
both generative model families are good for the complex model classes. In short, we provide
insights on Interpretability-oriented GMS. (Section 4.3).
• Intrinsic interpretable model class and medium interpretable model class prefers BN-
based generative models.
• Not-Easy interpretable model class shows no preference between NN-based and BN-
based models.
3

1.2
Paper Organization
This paper is structured as follows.
Section 2 gives a comprehensive reviews on related
research communities across synthetic data generative models (Section 2.1), fraud detection
model interpretability (Section 2.2) and fraud detection metric utility (Section 2.3). Section 3
gives experiment details on how to synthesize training dataset (Section 3.1), choices of fraud
detection model class (Section 3.2) and different fraud detection utility metrics (Section
3.3). Section 4 reports result of our evaluation on how generative models has effect on the
imbalance of real training dataset (Section 4.1), and results on Utility-oriented GMS (Section
4.2) and Interpretability-oriented GMS (Section 4.3). Section 5 talks about our conclusion,
new concerns and future direction.
2
Relate Work
2.1
Synthetic Data Generative Models
Neural Network-based generative models. Synthetic Data Vault (SDV) [33] provides
three neural network-based generative models to synthesize data from a single table. Genera-
tive adversarial networks (GANs) are commonly used tools for fraud detection synthetic data
due to their ability to address imbalanced datasets via data augmentation [11, 26, 27]. SDV
provides a GAN-based generative model proposed in [43], namely conditional tabular GAN
(CTGAN). CopulaGAN, another GAN-based model included in SDV, is a variation of the
CTGAN Model which takes advantage of the cumulative distribution function (CDF) based
transformation. Another type of neural network-based generative model is based on varia-
tional autoencoders (VAEs) [25]. SDV also provides a VAE-based generative model, namely,
TVAE [43], to synthesize tabular data. Besides neural network-based generative models,
SDV offers GaussianCopula [29] to model the covariances between features in addition to
the distributions [28].
Bayesian Network-based generative models. DataSynthesizer (DS) [34] has three
modes to invoke modules: random mode, independent attribute mode, and correlated at-
tribute mode. The correlated attribute mode uses the GreedyBayes algorithm to construct
Bayesian networks to model correlated attributes, which helps to retain the correlation among
variables. Another important parameter in DS is epsilon which represents differential privacy
to address data protection and privacy issues. When epsilon approaches 0, the presence or
absence of a single case in the input will be undetectable in the output.
2.2
Fraud Detection Model Interpretability
(i) Intrinsic Interpretable Model class. Logistic Regression [8] provides predictions
based on the estimated probability of an event occurring. A transaction will be predicted
as a fraud if its estimated probability of being a fraud passes some threshold.
Decision
Tree [9] is one of the non-parametric supervised learning models used for classification tasks.
It predicts classes of transactions via decision rules for data features. K-nearest Neighbors
(KNN) [7, 18] is another commonly used non-parametric supervised learning method. Under
4

the assumption that similar points can be found near each other, it uses proximity to make
predictions about the class of a transaction.
(ii) Medium Interpretable Model class. Na¨ıve Bayes [45] is a probabilistic classifier
based on Bayes’ Theorem with the assumption of conditional independence between each
pair of data features. The predicted class of a transaction is with the maximum probability.
Support Vector Machine (SVM) [13] is designed to find the hyperplane in an n-dimensional
space (n is the number of features) that distinctly classifies data points. Random forest [23]
is one of the ensemble learning methods. It is composed of abundant decision trees and
aggregates all predicted classes of decision trees to identify the most popular result as the
prediction.
(iii) Not-Easy Interpretable Model class. The generalized Additive Model (GAM)
[21] is a generalized linear model in which the response is linearly dependent on smooth
functions. The smooth relationships between the response and each feature can be estimated
simultaneously, and the response in test data can be predicted by adding them up. For binary
classification, a logit link is applied to data fitting. Xgboost [12] is a scalable, distributed
gradient boosting system under the Gradient Boosting framework. It provides parallel tree
boosting and improves computational efficiency and model performance. Neural Additive
Model (NAM) [4] focuses on a linear combination of deep neural networks that each has
a single input feature. The model is fitted via training jointly these neural networks and
learning complicated relationships between their inputs and outputs.
2.3
Fraud Detection Metric Utility
Fraud Management Process. Fraud management process [42] has achieved great suc-
cess in financial service industries due to its capability to catch fraudulent transactions [31].
As the fraud detection models flag some transaction to be suspicious, it may cause inter-
pretability and the fraud agent have difficulty telling whether the flag is a false alert or not.
The fraud detection interpretability issues exist in all kinds of financial service applications
including credit or debit cards, payments, and loan approval.
One major reason behind this communication bottleneck in the fraud management pro-
cess is the interpretability of detection. As the fraud data scientist wishes to catch as more
suspicious operations as possible, the fraud detection model itself becomes more difficult
to interpret by using a more complex model class, e.g. neural network-based model. Con-
sequently, the alerted operations become difficult to interpret, and the fraud experts need
to take more time to identify the fraud factor, leading to such a communication bottleneck.
Such a late decision allows the fraudsters to maximize their fraud fain, which greatly impairs
the effectiveness of the model and also results in enormous economical and opportunity loss.
As such, the interpretability in fraud detection model machine learning has become a rising
concern.
In order to trade off the model performance and model interpretability, existing works
are all focused on a model-centric approach. The model-centric approach takes the mindset
of ”accuracy first, interpretability later”. They first compare the performance of different
classes of fraud detection models. Then adopts the model’s nature to gain the model inter-
pretability. In addition to the intrinsic interpretable model class, there are various methods
proposed to do post-doc methods to gain model-specific interpretability. The main drawback
5

of the model-centric approach is the lack of a fair way to compare model interpretability in
the same framework.
Performance Metrics. We evaluate synthetic data training of FDM with metrics for
standard classifier and for imbalanced dataset trained classifier. (i) Metrics for standard
classifier. Accuracy [35] is one of the commonly used metrics in machine learning tasks. It
is useful when all classes are of equal importance, but it can be misleading for an imbalanced
dataset. AUROC [20] describes the model’s ability to discriminate between positive cases
and negative cases. F1 score [38] measures the performance of a model by computing the
harmonic mean of the precision and recall of the model. (ii) Metrics for imbalanced
dataset trained classifier. Recall and precision [35, 6] are two metrics which are more
suitable than accuracy for imbalanced testing datasets.
There is an inverse relationship
between precision and recall usually. Precision-Recall curve [36] shows the tradeoff between
precision and recall for different thresholds. Average precision [39] summarizes such a tradeoff
as the weighted mean of precisions achieved at each threshold, where the weight is the increase
in recall from the prior threshold.
3
Experiment Setup
3.1
Training Data Synthesis
Dataset-Credit Card Fraud Dataset. We conduct the experiment on the Credit Card
Fraud Dataset [14] which is highly imbalanced (0.1727% transactions are frauds).
The
dataset contains 31 variables. The feature ”Amount” is the transaction amount, and the
feature ”Time” represents the seconds elapsed between each transaction and the first trans-
action in the dataset. ”Class” is the response variable and it takes 1 for fraudulent cases and
0 for other cases. Due to confidentiality, the remaining 28 features are principal components
obtained by the means of PCA. In our experiment, we delete the feature ”Time” since it has
nothing to do with ”Class”.
Generating Synthetic Training Dataset.
SDV is applied with GaussianCopula,
CTGAN, CopulaGAN and TVAE, to generate synthetic data. We employ the four generative
models on the original dataset respectively and obtain 4 synthetic datasets. DS is utilized
with the correlated attribute mode. Synthetic datasets are generated with two generative
models. One is with epsilon = 0, and the other is with epsilon = 0.1.
Since the original dataset is highly imbalanced, some synthetic data generative models
cannot yield transactions with class 1 (fraudulent cases). It is found that no fraudulent
transactions are synthesized when using GaussianCopula and CopulaGAN. Therefore, we
leave out the datasets generated by GaussianCopula and CopulaGAN in the following tasks.
3.2
Choice of Fraud Detection Model Class
Synthetic Data Training Procedure. After generating synthetic datasets of the same
size as the original dataset, we randomly split the original dataset into training data (70% of
the original data) and test data (30% of the original data), and randomly select 70% of each
6

synthesized dataset as the synthesized training data. Then we fit fraud detection models to
the training data and each synthesized training data and predict the results on the test data.
Model class by Interpretability. We fit 9 fraud detection models to analyze utility-
interpretability on FDM training tasks. The following list summarizes 9 models class from
high to low interpretability:
• Intrinsic interpretable models: Logistic Regression (LR), Decision Tree (DT) and
K-nearest Neighbors (KNN).
• Medium interpretable models: Na¨ıve Bayes (NB), Support Vector Machines (SVM),
Random Forest (RF).
• Not-easy interpretable models: Generalized Additive Model (GAM), Extreme
Gradient Boosting (XGBoost), Neural Additive Model (NAM).
3.3
Choice of Fraud Detection Utility Metrics
To evaluate the performance of synthesized data on fraud detection, we compute accuracy,
AUROC, recall, precision, and F1 score, and generate the Precision-Recall curve and average
precision (AP) for each machine learning task based on the predicted results.
Basic Performance Metrics for Classifier.
• Accuracy is the ratio of the number of correct predictions to the number of all pre-
dictions. It describes how the model performs across both classes.
• AUROC measures the ability of a classifier to distinguish between the fraudulent class
and the nonfraudulent class.
• F1 score is the harmonic mean between precision and recall. It provides equal impor-
tance to precision and recall.
Performance Metrics for Classifier on Imbalanced Dataset.
• Precision is defined as the ratio of true positives to the sum of true positives and false
positives. It is the number of correctly predicted fraudulent cases divided by the total
number of predicted fraudulent cases for fraud detection.
• Recall is defined as the ratio of true positives to the sum of true positives and false
negatives. It is the number of correctly predicted fraudulent cases divided by the total
number of actual fraudulent cases in the fraud detection scenario.
• Precision-Recall curve shows the tradeoff between precision and recall for different
thresholds. A high area under the curve represents both high recall and high precision.
• Average precision is calculated as the weighted mean of precisions at each threshold,
where the weight is the increase in recall from the prior threshold.
7

Table 1: Percentage of classes
Approach
Class 1 (frauds)
Class 0
Original
0.1727%
99.8273%
CTGAN
59.4919%
40.5081%
TVAE
0.0119%
99.9881%
DS 0
0.1731%
99.8269%
DS 0.1
45.4743%
54.5257%
4
Evaluation
4.1
Comparison of Original to Synthetic Data
(1) Balance. Table 1 shows the degree of imbalance of synthetic training datasets. Datasets
generated by CTGAN and DS with epsilon = 0.1 are balanced (59.4919% and 45.4743%
transactions are frauds respectively). TVAE synthesizes a more imbalanced dataset (0.0119%
transactions are frauds) than the original dataset. When using DS with epsilon = 0, the
synthesized dataset contains 0.1731% fraudulent transactions, which is similar to the original
dataset.
(2) Correlation. Dataset generated by DS with epsilon = 0 maintains the correlation
of each pair of two features. However, datasets synthesized by other generative models do
not retain the correlation between features.
4.2
Results on Utility-oriented GMS
In order to compare the performance of the original data and synthesized data in fraud
detection tasks, we generate line charts to show the results of each metric, for data generated
with different approaches as models’ interpretability increases.
(1) Accuracy. Since the original dataset is highly imbalanced, the accuracy on test data
is very close to 1 for each fraud detection model. In Figure 1, training dataset generated by
TVAE, DS with epsilon 0 and DS with epsilon 0.1 also yield high accuracy. The accuracy
of data synthesized by DS is even higher than the accuracy of the original data for Na¨ıve
Bayes. CTGAN has lower accuracy than other approaches for all fraud detection models.
It is remarkable that accuracy of Na¨ıve Bayes is highly unstable across different
synthetic training datasets, while other fraud detection models are with stable accuracy
except for CTGAN-based training data.
Although DS with epsilon 0.1 has the highest
accuracy for Na¨ıve Bayes, its accuracy for Decision Tree is the second lowest. Compared
with the original data, data synthesized by DS with epsilon 0 has almost the same or higher
accuracy.
Hence, DS with epsilon 0 performs the best in accuracy overall for fraud detection tasks.
Bayesian network-based generative models are selected by accuracy metric due to their better
performance in Figure 1, where both Bayesian network-based generative models outstrip
neural network-based generative models.
8

Figure 1: Results to solve Utility-oriented GMS: Utility Metrics for Fraud Detection Classi-
fiers
(2) AUROC. For AUROC, the original data performs the best for GAM and Decision
Tree. DS with epsilon 0.1 improves the performance for Na¨ıve Bayes, CTGAN and TVAE
improve the results for XGBoost, and only CTGAN increases the value of AUROC for the
other 5 fraud detection models. DS with epsilon 0 produces smaller AUROC than the original
data for all models. Na¨ıve Bayes and Logistic Regression show robustness while
the result of AUROC varies considerably among data generative approaches for
KNN and Decision Tree. Figure 1 indicates that CTGAN is a suitable data generative
technique to synthesize data considering the performance of AUROC, but for Na¨ıve Bayes,
DS with epsilon 0.1 is preferred.
In the fraud detection scenario, Na¨ıve Bayes has better discrimination between fraudu-
lent transactions and nonfraudulent transactions when the training data is generated by DS
with epsilon 0.1. When the training data is synthesized by CTGAN, Logistic Regression,
KNN, SVM, Random Forest, XGBoost and NAM perform better at distinguishing between
fraudulent cases and nonfraudulent cases. Thus, AUROC prefers neural-network based
generative models, especially CTGAN which achieves comparable performance
to the original data.
(3) F1 score. According to Figure 1, only DS with epsilon 0 has higher F1 score than
the original for Na¨ıve Bayes. For other fraud detection models, the original data has the
best performance, especially for SVM for which there is a noticeable difference in F1 score
between the original data and synthesized data. In addition, it is found that F1 scores of
CTGAN are almost 0 for all fraud detection models. Even though F1 scores are relatively
similar for Na¨ıve Bayes, none of the models show robustness for all datasets. Data generated
by DS with epsilon 0 yields the highest F1 score, but it seems doubtful that this approach
is suitable for Na¨ıve Bayes because all F1 scores, including the F1 score of DS with epsilon
0, are very low for Na¨ıve Bayes.
Combining recall and precision, DS with epsilon 0 improves the performance of Na¨ıve
9

Bayes for fraud detection. Other fraud detection models show better performance when they
are trained by the original dataset. In conclusion, F1 score selects Bayesian network-
based generative models since overall DS with epsilon 0 has the best performance
among all generative techniques.
(4) Recall. CTGAN has considerably higher recall than other approaches in Figure 1.
Compared with the original dataset, data generated by TVAE also increases recall scores
for Na¨ıve Bayes and Logistic Regression while DS with epsilon 0 and DS with epsilon 0.1
perform worse than the original for all fraud detection models. Only Na¨ıve Bayes is robust
for recall when leaving out DS with epsilon 0.1. Because of the remarkable performance,
CTGAN is the suitable technique to generate synthetic data when we focus on
recall scores.
All machine learning models yield more correctly predicted frauds over total actual frauds
in the fraud detection tasks when the training data is synthesized by CTGAN. More fraudu-
lent cases are recognized properly when using CTGAN to generate the training data. There-
fore, neural network-based generative models are preferred by recall because CT-
GAN surpasses all of the other methods and even distinctly exceeds the original data.
(5) Precision Compared with the original, TVAE increases the precision score a little
for NAM, and DS with epsilon 0 improves the performance in precision for Na¨ıve Bayes in
Figure 1. Data synthesized by DS with epsilon 0 produces the same precision score to the
original data for SVM. We can see that DS with epsilon 0.1 has worse performance than the
original for all fraud detection models, and all precision scores of CTGAN are close to 0.
Except for Na¨ıve Bayes, all models show differences in precision scores among approaches.
For NAM, TVAE is a suitable method for data generation, and for SVM and Na¨ıve Bayes,
DS with epsilon 0 can synthesize data comparable to the original data when focusing on
precision. There are no synthetic data generative models with comparable precision to the
original dataset for other machine learning models.
For fraud detection, NAM can correctly predict more frauds among all predicted fraud-
ulent cases when the training data is generated by TVAE. Na¨ıve Bayes has more correct
predictions for cases predicted to be fraudulent when the training data is synthesized by DS
with epsilon 0. Other fraud detection models produce a higher ratio of correct predicted
frauds to all fraudulent predictions when it is trained by the original data. Among all data
generative tools, DS with epsilon 0 has the best performance overall and CTGAN performs
the worst, so precision prefers Bayesian network-based generative models.
4.3
Results on Interpretability-oriented GMS
The original dataset yields Precision-Recall curves in the top right corner and the highest
average precision for all machine learning models except for Na¨ıve Bayes according to Figure
2. DS with epsilon 0.1 has the Precision-Recall curve in the top right corner and the highest
average precision for Na¨ıve Bayes, followed by DS with epsilon 0. For Logistic Regression,
TVAE produces the second highest average precision, and the Precision-Recall curve is just
lower than the original. CTGAN and TVAE have Precision-Recall curves just lower than the
original and the same average precision for XGBoost. For the other 6 fraud detection models,
DS with epsilon 0 yields the second highest average precision, and the Precision-Recall curve
is just lower than the original.
10

Figure 2: Results to solve Interpretability-oriented GMS: Precision-Recall curve and Average
Precision
(i) Intrinsic Interpretable Model class. In the first row of Figure 2, there is no notice-
able difference between neural network-based models and Bayesian network-based models in
Precision-Recall curves for Logistic Regression. So, Logistic Regression indicates that neural
network-based and Bayesian network-based generative models have comparable performance.
Decision Tree and KNN suggest Bayesian network-based generative models as better tools
for synthetic data generation.
(ii) Medium Interpretable Model class. In the second row of Figure 2, all medium
interpretable models select Bayesian network-based generative models to syn-
thesize data. Bayesian network-based generative models even have a better performance
than the original for Na¨ıve Bayes. Although Bayesian network-based generative methods
perform better for all medium interpretable machine learning models, the difference is that
Na¨ıve Bayes prefers DS with epsilon 0.1 while SVM and Random Forest prefer DS with
epsilon 0.
(iii) Not-Easy Interpretable Model class. The third row of Figure 2 presents the
parallel performance of Bayesian network-based and neural network-based generative models
for not-easy interpretable fraud detection models. For GAM, TVAE and DS with epsilon
0 show comparable performance. For XGBoost and NAM, CTGAN, TVAE and DS with
epsilon 0 have similar Precision-Recall curves. Curves for DS with epsilon 0.1 are located in
the bottom left corner for all not-easy interpretable models.
11

4.4
Results on Synthetic Augmented Training
By synthetic augmented training, we mean the training Dataset for ML classifier is a mixture
of source real dataset and certain percentage of synthetic data. In particular, we consider
five differen degree of such real-synthetic mixture: syn0.1, syn0.2, syn0.3, syn0.4,
syn0.5. For example, syn0.2 means the training dataset is the mixture of 100% source
real dataset and 20% of synthetic dataset from the synthesizer.
The full empirical results on Synthetic Augmented Training from metric-oriented and
synthesizer-oriented are given at section A. We summarize key insights below. (1) CTGAN-
augmented training datasets improves the AUROC and recall of synthetic trained ML classi-
fier. However, CTGAN-augmented training datasets damages accuracy, F1 score, precision and
precision-recall curve across all synthetic trained ML classifier. (2) TVAE-augmented training
datasets in general do not improve or damage the utility of synthetic trained ML classi-
fier across all 6 performance performance metrics and all 9 ML Classifier. (3) PrivBayes-
augmented training datasets improves the accuracy of synthetic trained ML classifier. How-
ever, PrivBayes-augmented training datasets damages AUROC, F1 score, recall, precision
across all synthetic trained ML classifier.
5
Conclusion
In this paper, we provide a practical evaluation of generative model selections for syn-
thetic training of fraud detection models. Our evaluation framework covers data, models,
and metrics and provides results to answer utility-oriented generative model selections and
interpretability-oriented generative model selections.
One promising future work direction is to develop generative model auditing process for
generative models and their synthetic datasets. Such model auditing process has been ex-
plored in the domain-agnostic and model-agnostic way [5], but more task-oriented studies
on model generative model auditing process are in demand. Indeed, such a generative model
auditing process will generate values for data scientists and machine learning practitioners
in integrating synthetic datasets into their daily workflow and leading a more trustworthy
machine learning lifecycle in the near future.
Disclaimer. This paper was prepared for informational purposes by the Artificial Intel-
ligence Research group of JPMorgan Chase & Co and its affiliates (“J.P. Morgan”), and is
not a product of the Research Department of J.P. Morgan. J.P. Morgan makes no represen-
tation and warranty whatsoever and disclaims all liability, for the completeness, accuracy or
reliability of the information contained herein. This document is not intended as investment
research or investment advice, or a recommendation, offer or solicitation for the purchase
or sale of any security, financial instrument, financial product or service, or to be used in
any way for evaluating the merits of participating in any transaction, and shall not consti-
tute a solicitation under any jurisdiction or to any person, if such solicitation under such
jurisdiction or to such person would be unlawful.
12
