1
Model-Based Machine Learning for
Communications
Nir Shlezinger, Nariman Farsad, Yonina C. Eldar, and Andrea J. Gold-
smith
1.1
Introduction
Traditional communication systems design is dominated by methods that are
based on statistical models. These statistical-model-based algorithms, which we
refer to henceforth as model-based methods, rely on mathematical models that
describe the transmission process, signal propagation, receiver noise, interfer-
ence, and many other components of the system that aﬀect the end-to-end signal
transmission and reception. Such mathematical models use parameters that vary
over time as the channel conditions, the environment, network traﬃc, or network
topology change. Therefore, for optimal operation, many of the algorithms used
in communication systems rely on the underlying mathematical models as well as
the estimation of the model parameters. However, there are cases where this ap-
proach fails, in particular when the mathematical models for one or more of the
system components are highly complex, hard to estimate, poorly understood, do
not well-capture the underlying physics of the system, or do not lend themselves
to computationally-eﬃcient algorithms. In some other cases, although mathe-
matical models are known, accurate parameter estimation may not be possible.
Finally, common hardware limitations, such as the restriction to utilize low-
resolution quantizers or non-linear power ampliﬁers, can signiﬁcantly increase
the complexity of the underlying channel model.
An alternative data-driven approach is based on machine learning (ML). ML
techniques, and in particular, deep learning, have been the focus of extensive
research in recent years due to their empirical success in various applications,
including computer vision and speech processing [1, 2]. The beneﬁts of ML-
driven methods over traditional model-based approaches are threefold: First,
ML methods are independent of the underlying stochastic model, and thus can
operate eﬃciently in scenarios where this model is unknown or its parameters
cannot be accurately estimated. Second, when the underlying model is extremely
complex, ML algorithms have demonstrated the ability to extract and disentangle
the meaningful semantic information from the observed data [3], a task which
is very diﬃcult to carry out using traditional model-based approaches, even
when the model is perfectly known. Finally, the main complexity in utilizing
ML methods is in the training stage, which is typically carried out oﬄine. Once
arXiv:2101.04726v1  [eess.SP]  12 Jan 2021

2
Model-Based Machine Learning for Communications
trained, they tend to implement inference at a lower computational burden and
delay compared to their analytical model-based counterparts [4].
Although ML has been the focus of signiﬁcant research attention over the last
decade, it has yet to signiﬁcantly contribute to practical designs in one of the
most important technologies of the modern era – digital communication. The
fact that ML-based algorithms, which have revolutionized the ﬁelds of computer
vision and natural language processing, do not yet play a fundamental role in
the design of physical layer communication systems, and particularly digital re-
ceivers, may be due to one or more of the following reasons:
1. The large amount of possible outputs impose a major challenge in eﬃciently
applying ML algorithms. In particular, the constellation size of the modulation
and the blocklength of the channel code, combined with the time-varying
nature of communication channels, leads to an exponentially large number of
possible channel outputs that an ML receiver algorithm must be trained on.
2. Traditional deep learning techniques require high computational resources,
while communication devices, such as wearable devices and mobile phones,
are typically limited in hardware and power.
3. To date, conventional communication schemes, which assume a simpliﬁed
channel model with parameters that are dynamically estimated, have been
very successful.
The third reason is likely to become less relevant as the spectrum congestion of
existing cellular standards forces future communication systems to explore new
frequency ranges and share spectrum with other application such as radar [5]. As
these new frequency bands and spectrum sharing techniques become widespread,
the simpliﬁed channel, interference, and noise models used in current commu-
nication receiver techniques may no longer work well. Moreover, the strict cost,
power, and memory constraints imposed on communicating devices lead to the
usage of low-resolution analog-to-digital convertors (ADCs) and power ampliﬁers
with dominant non-linearities [6]. This makes the successful application of model-
based techniques signiﬁcantly more complex. Thus, conventional model-based
approaches may no longer be able to meet the performance and throughput de-
mands of future wireless devices, motivating their combination with data-driven
approaches based on ML such as deep learning. Such techniques must still over-
come the challenges identiﬁed above with respect to the large computational
resources and data sets needed for training.
Despite its unprecedented success, deep learning is subject to several challenges
which limit its applicability in some important communication scenarios. In par-
ticular, deep neural networks (DNNs) consist of highly-parameterized systems
that can represent a broad range of mappings. As such, massive data sets are
typically required to learn a desirable mapping, and the computational burden of
training and utilizing these networks may constitute a major drawback. For ex-
ample, consider the two receivers illustrated in Fig. 1.1, which carry out symbol
detection using model-based algorithms and model-agnostic DNNs, respectively.

1.1 Introduction
3
Figure 1.1 Model-based methods versus deep learning for symbol detection: a) a
receiver uses its knowledge of the underlying statistical channel model, denoted pY |S,
to detect the transmitted symbols for the channel output in a model-based manner; b)
a receiver uses a DNN trained using the data set {st, yt} for recovering the symbols.
The dynamic nature of wireless channels implies that the receivers should track
channel variations in order to reliably detect the transmitted messages over long
periods of time. To do so, the model-based receiver in Fig. 1.1(a) typically esti-
mates the model parameters imposed on the underlying statistics using periodic
pilots. For the same purpose, the DNN-based receiver in Fig. 1.1(b) should pe-
riodically re-train its DNN to track channel variations. The fact that doing so
requires a large data set leads to a signiﬁcant decrease of spectral eﬃciency
and increase in computational complexity associated with this training. Further-
more, DNNs are commonly utilized as black-boxes, and thus do not oﬀer the
interpretability, ﬂexibility, versatility, and reliability of model-based techniques.
The limitations associated with model-based methods and black-box deep
learning systems gave rise to a set of techniques on the interface of traditional
model-based communication and ML, attempting to beneﬁt from the best of
both worlds [7]. Such model-based ML systems can be divided into two main
categories. The ﬁrst of the two utilizes model-based methods as a form of do-
main knowledge in designing a DNN architecture, which is then trained and
used for inference. The most common example of this strategy is the family
of deep unfolded networks [8, 9], which design the layers of a DNN to imitate
the iterations of a model-based optimization algorithm, and has been utilized
in various communication-related tasks [10]. The second strategy, which we call
DNN-aided hybrid algorithms, uses model-based methods with integrated DNNs
for inference by incorporating ML in a manner that makes the system more ro-

4
Model-Based Machine Learning for Communications
bust and model-agnostic. Communication receivers designed using DNN-aided
inference include the data-driven implementations of the Viterbi algorithm [11]
and the BCJR detector [12].
In this chapter we present an introduction to model-based ML for communi-
cation systems. We begin by reviewing existing strategies for combining model-
based algorithms and ML from a high level perspective in Section 1.2, and com-
pare them to the conventional deep learning approach which utilizes established
DNN architectures trained in an end-to-end manner. Then, in Section 1.3 we
focus on symbol detection, which is one of the fundamental tasks of communica-
tion receivers. We show how each strategy, i.e., conventional DNN architectures,
deep unfolding, and DNN-aided hybrid algorithms, can be applied to this prob-
lem. The last two approaches constitute a middle ground between the purely
model-based and the DNN-based receivers illustrated in Fig. 1.1. By focusing
on this speciﬁc task, we highlight the advantages and drawbacks of each strat-
egy, and present guidelines to facilitate the design of future model-based deep
learning systems for communications. We conclude this chapter with a summary
provided in Section 1.4.
1.2
Model-Based Machine Learning
We begin by reviewing the leading approaches for combining ML, and particu-
larly deep learning, with model-based algorithms. The neural networks in this
hybrid-approach are trained in a supervised manner and then used during infer-
ence. Then, in Section 1.3 we focus on symbol detection and provide concrete
examples on how this approach can be used to design data-driven detectors.
In a broad family of problems, a system is required to map an input variable
Y into a prediction of a label variable S. ML systems learn such a mapping
from a training set consisting of nt pairs of inputs and their corresponding la-
bels, denoted {st, yt}nt
t=1. Model-based methods carry out such inference based
on prior knowledge of the statistical model relating Y and S, denoted pY |S.
Model-based ML systems reviewed in this chapter combine model-based meth-
ods with learning techniques, namely, they tune their mapping of the input Y
based on both a labeled training set {st, yt}nt
t=1 as well as some knowledge of
the underlying distribution. Such hybrid data-driven model-aware systems can
typically learn their mappings from smaller training sets compared to purely
model-agnostic DNNs, and commonly operate without full and accurate knowl-
edge of pY |S, upon which model-based methods are based. We next elaborate
on the main strategies of combining ML and model-based techniques, beginning
with extreme cases of DNNs that rely solely on data and purely model-based
inference algorithms.

1.2 Model-Based Machine Learning
5
1.2.1
Conventional Deep Learning
The conventional application of deep learning is to carry out inference using
some standard DNN architecture. This DNN uses the training data to learn
how to map a realization of the input Y = y into a prediction ˆs. Such highly-
parameterized networks can eﬀectively approximate any Borel measurable map-
ping, as it follows from the universal approximation theorem [13, Ch. 6.4.1].
Therefore, by properly tuning their parameters using a suﬃciently large training
set, typically using optimization based on some variant of stochastic gradient
descent (SGD), one should be able to obtain the desirable inference rule.
While standard DNNs structures are highly model-agnostic and are commonly
treated as black-boxes, one can still incorporate some level of domain knowledge
in the selection of the speciﬁc network architecture. For instance, when the input
is known to exhibit temporal correlation, architectures based on recurrent neural
networks (RNNs) or transformers are known to be preferable. Alternatively, in
the presence of spatial patterns, one may prefer to utilize convolutional layers.
An additional method to incorporate domain knowledge into a black-box DNN
is by pre-processing of the input via, e.g., feature extraction.
Conventional deep learning based on established black-box DNNs is data-
driven, i.e, it requires data representing the problem at hand, possibly combined
with a very basic level of domain knowledge to select the speciﬁc architecture.
A major drawback of using such networks, which is particularly relevant in the
context of communication systems, is that learning a large number of parameters
requires a massive data set to train. In dynamic environments, even when a suf-
ﬁciently large data set is available, it is diﬃcult to train a model that performs
optimally over the whole range of the dynamically changing system. Moreover,
online training as the system dynamics change tends to be computationally ex-
pensive because of the large number of parameters.
1.2.2
Model-Based Methods
Model-based algorithms carry out inference based on prior knowledge of the un-
derlying statistics relating the input Y and the label S, i.e., pY |S. A common
family of model-based methods is based on iterative algorithms, which allow us
to infer with provable performance and controllable complexity in an iterative
fashion, as illustrated in Fig. 1.2(a). This generic family of iterative algorithms
consists of some input and output processing stages, with an intermediate it-
erative procedure. The latter can in turn be divided into a model-based com-
putation, namely, a procedure that is determined by pY |S; and a set of generic
mathematical manipulations.
These algorithms vary signiﬁcantly between diﬀerent statistical models. For
instance, for the symbol detection task, model-based methods such as the Viterbi
detector [14] or the BCJR algorithm [15] are valid for ﬁnite-memory channels,
while for multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) detection one may utilize the

6
Model-Based Machine Learning for Communications
Figure 1.2 Illustration of a) model-based iterative algorithm; b) unfolding the
algorithm into a DNN; c) converting the scheme into a DNN-aided method.
family of interference cancellation methods [16]. Each such algorithm may be
speciﬁcally tailored to a given scenario, as opposed to black-box DNNs, in which
the parameterized inference rule is generic, and the unique characteristics of the
scenario at hand are encapsulated in the parameters learned during training.
Model-based techniques do not rely on data to learn their mapping, though
data is often used to estimate unknown model parameters. In practice, accurate
knowledge of the statistical model relating the observations and the desired in-
formation is typically unavailable, and thus applying such techniques commonly
requires imposing some assumptions on the underlying statistics, which in some
cases reﬂects the actual behavior, but often do not. In the presence of inaccurate
knowledge of pY |S due to estimation errors or due to enforcing a model that
does not fully capture the environment, the performance of model-based meth-
ods tends to degrade considerably. This limits the applicability of model-based
algorithms in scenarios where pY |S is unknown, costly to estimate accurately, or
too complex to express analytically.

1.2 Model-Based Machine Learning
7
1.2.3
Model-Based Deep Learning by Deep Unfolding
Deep unfolding [8, 9], also referred to as deep unrolling, is a common strategy to
combine deep learning with model-based algorithms. Here, model-based methods
are utilized as a form of domain knowledge in designing a DNN architecture,
which is trained end-to-end and then used for inference. Unlike the application of
conventional black-box DNNs discussed in Section 1.2.1, deep unfolding utilizes
a unique DNN structure designed speciﬁcally for the task at hand.
The main rationale in deep unfolding is to design the network to imitate the
operation of a model-based iterative optimization algorithm corresponding to the
considered problem. In particular, each iteration of the model-based algorithm
is replaced with a dedicated layer with trainable parameters whose structure
is based on the operations carried out during that iteration. An illustration
of a neural network obtained by unfolding the model-based iterative model of
Fig. 1.2(a) is depicted in Fig. 1.2(b), where a network with T layers is designed to
imitate T iterations of the optimization method. Once the architecture is ﬁxed,
the resulting network is trained in an end-to-end manner as in conventional deep
learning.
Deep unfolded networks, in which the iterations consist of trainable parame-
ters, are typically capable of inferring with a smaller number of layers compared
to the amount of iterations required by the model-based algorithm. Consequently,
even when the model-based algorithm is feasible, processing Y through a trained
unfolded DNN is typically faster than applying the iterative algorithm [4]. Fur-
thermore, converting a model-based algorithm into an unfolded deep network
can also improve its performance. For example, iterative algorithms based on
some relaxed optimization commonly achieve improved accuracy when unfolded
into a DNN, due to the ability to learn to overcome the error induced by re-
laxation in the training stage. The main beneﬁts of deep unfolding over using
end-to-end networks stem from its incorporation of domain knowledge in the net-
work architecture. As such, unfolded networks can achieve improved performance
at reduced complexity, i.e., when operating with less parameters, compared to
conventional end-to-end networks [10]. Nonetheless, deep unfolded networks are
highly parameterized DNNs, which often require large data sets for training,
though usually not as much as the generic DNNs. Furthermore, deep unfolding
typically requires a high level of domain knowledge, such as explicit knowledge
of the statistical model pY |S up to possibly some missing parameters, in order
to formulate the optimization algorithm in a manner that can be unfolded.
1.2.4
Model-Based Deep Learning by DNN-Aided Algorithms
The second strategy for combining model-based methods and deep learning,
which we refer to as DNN-aided hybrid algorithms, aims at integrating ML into
model-based techniques. Such DNN-aided systems mainly utilize conventional
model-based methods for inference, while incorporating DNNs to make the re-

8
Model-Based Machine Learning for Communications
sultant system more robust and model-agnostic. This approach builds upon the
insight that model-based algorithms typically consist of a set of generic manip-
ulations that are determined by the structure of the statistics, e.g., whether it
obeys a Markovian structure. Beside these generic manipulations, there are also
computations that require actual knowledge of pY |S, as illustrated in Fig. 1.2(a).
Consequently, when one has prior knowledge on the structure of the underlying
distribution but not of its actual distribution, ML can be utilized to ﬁll in the
missing components required to carry out the algorithm.
In particular, DNN-aided hybrid algorithms start with a model-based algo-
rithm that is suitable for inference when the statistics of pY |S are available. For
instance, symbol detection over ﬁnite-memory channels can be carried out accu-
rately and with aﬀordable complexity using either the Viterbi algorithm [14] or
the BCJR method [15], assuming pY |S is known. Then, ML-based techniques,
such as dedicated DNNs, are used to estimate only pY |S from data. These ded-
icated DNNs can be trained individually, separately from the inference task, or
in an end-to-end manner along with the overall algorithm that maps Y into an
estimate of S. An illustration of a DNN-aided algorithm obtained by integrating
ML into the iterative methods illustrated in Fig. 1.2(a) is depicted in Fig. 1.2(c).
DNN-aided hybrid algorithms have several advantages: First, they use DNNs
for speciﬁc intermediate tasks, such as computing a conditional probability mea-
sure, which are much simpler compared to end-to-end inference. Consequently,
relatively simple networks that are trainable using small training sets can be
used. Furthermore, once trained the system eﬀectively implements the model-
based algorithm in a data-driven manner without imposing a model on the un-
derlying distribution and estimating its parameters. Concrete examples of DNN-
aided symbol detection algorithms are detailed in Section 1.3.4.
1.3
Deep Symbol Detection
In digital communication systems, the receiver is required to reliably recover the
transmitted symbols from the observed channel output. This task is commonly
referred to as symbol detection. In this section, we present how the strategies
for combining ML and model-based algorithms detailed in the previous section
can be applied for data-driven symbol detection. We ﬁrst formulate the symbol
detection in Section 1.3.1, after which we discuss the applications of data-driven
receivers based on conventional DNN architectures, deep unfolding, and DNN-
aided algorithms, in Sections 1.3.2-1.3.4, respectively. For each strategy we begin
with the main rationale behind this approach, present at least one concrete
example, and discuss its pros and cons. Finally, we numerically compare the
data-driven receivers to their model-based counterparts in Section 1.3.5.

1.3 Deep Symbol Detection
9
Figure 1.3 Symbol detection illustration.
1.3.1
The Symbol Detection Problem
To formulate the symbol detection problem, we let Si ∈SK be the symbol
transmitted at time index i ∈{1, 2, . . . , T} := T . Here, T represents the block-
length and K denotes the number of symbols transmitted at each time instance,
e.g., the number of users transmitting simultaneously in the uplink communica-
tions channel. Each symbol is uniformly distributed over a set of M constellation
points, thus |S| = M. We use Y i ∈YN to denote the channel output at time
index i, where N represents the number of receive antennas. When both N
and K are larger than one, the resulting setup corresponds to MIMO commu-
nications. Symbol detection refers to the recovery of ST := {Si}i∈T from the
observed Y T := {Y i}i∈T . An illustration of the symbol detection problem using
a DNN-aided receiver is depicted in Fig. 1.3.
We focus on ﬁnite-memory stationary causal channels, where each Y i is given
by a stochastic mapping of {Sl}i
l=i−L+1, and L is the memory of the channel,
assumed to be smaller than the blocklength T. The special case in which L = 1 is
referred to as ﬂat or memoryless channel conditions. The conditional probability
density function (PDF) of the channel output given its input thus satisﬁes
pY T |ST
 yT |sT 
=
T
Y
i=1
pY i|{Sl}i
l=i−L+1
 yi|{sl}i
l=i−L+1

,
(1.1)
where the lower-case yi and si represent the realizations of the random variables
Y i and Si, respectively. The fact that the channel is stationary implies that the
conditional PDF pY i|{Sl}i
l=i−L+1 does not depend on the index i.
The symbol detection mapping that minimizes the error rate is the maximum
a-posteriori probability (MAP) rule, given by
ˆsi = arg max
s∈SK
pSi|Y T (s|yT ),
i ∈T .
(1.2)
For the memoryless case L = 1, solving (1.2) reduces to maximizing pS|Y (s|yi)
over s ∈SK. However, when K is large, as is commonly the case in uplink MIMO
systems, solving (1.2) may be computationally infeasible, even when the PDF
pS|Y is perfectly known. The application of deep learning for symbol detection
thus has two main motivations: the ﬁrst is to allow symbol detection to oper-
ate in a model-agnostic manner, i.e., without requiring knowledge of pS|Y , and
the second is to facilitate inference when the computational complexity of (1.2)
renders solving it infeasible.

10
Model-Based Machine Learning for Communications
1.3.2
Symbol Detection via Established Deep Networks
The ﬁrst approach to designing data-driven symbol detectors treats the chan-
nel as a black-box and relies on well-known deep learning architectures used in
computer vision, speech, and language processing for detection. We now describe
how conventional deep neural architectures can be used for symbol detection.
Overview of Design Process
Diﬀerent DNN architectures have shown promising results for detection and es-
timation in applications such as image processing [17, 18, 19], speech recognition
[20, 21, 22], machine translation [23, 24, 25], and bioinformatics [26, 27]. Some of
these neural network architectures can be used to design a symbol detector for
channels with unknown models using supervised learning. This process typically
consists of the following steps:
1. Identify the conventional neural network architectures that are suitable for
the channel under consideration, and use these networks as building blocks
for designing the detection algorithm. For example, RNNs are more suitable
for sequential detection in channels with memory, while convolutional and
fully-connected networks are more suitable for memoryless channels.
2. Next, use channel input-output pairs to train the network. Two approaches
can be used for training: In the ﬁrst approach, a model is trained for each
channel condition (e.g., each SNR). In the second approach, a large training
dataset consisting of various channel conditions is used to train a single neu-
ral network detector for detection over a wide-range of channel conditions.
The training data can be generated by randomizing the transmitted symbols
and generating the corresponding received signal using mathematical models,
simulations, experiments, or ﬁeld measurements.
3. Train the overall resulting network in an end-to-end fashion.
We next demonstrate how this rationale is translated into a concrete data-
driven symbol detector architecture for ﬁnite-memory channels.
Example: SBRNN for Finite-Memory Channels
The sliding bidirectional RNN (SBRNN) is a sequence detection algorithm for
ﬁnite-memory channels proposed in [28]. Generally, sequence detection can be
performed using RNNs [1], which are well established for sequence estimation
in diﬀerent problems such as neural machine translation [23], speech recognition
[2], or bioinformatics [26]. For simplicity, we assume in our description that the
input cardinality K is K = 1. The estimated symbol in this case is given by
ˆsi = arg max
si∈S
PRNN(si|yi),
i ∈T ,
(1.3)
where PRNN is the probability of estimating each symbol based on the DNN
model used. One of the main beneﬁts of this detector is that after training, it
can perform detection on any data stream as it arrives at the receiver. This is

1.3 Deep Symbol Detection
11
because the observations from previous symbols are summarized as the state
of the RNN, which is represented by a vector. Note that the observed signal
during the jth transmission, Y j where j > k, may carry information about the
kth symbol Sk due to the memory of the channel. However, since RNNs are
feed-forward only, during the estimation of ˆSk, the observation signal Y j is not
considered.
One way to overcome this limitation is by using bidirectional RNNs (BRNNs).
In such networks, a sequence of B received signals are fed once in the forward
direction into one RNN cell, and fed once in the backward direction into another
RNN cell [29], for some ﬁxed B representing the BRNN length. The two outputs
are then concatenated and may be passed to more bidirectional layers. A signal
whose blocklength T is larger than the BRNN length B is divided into multiple
distinct subsequences of length B. Ideally, the B must be at least the same size
as the memory length L. However, if this is not known in advance, the BRNN
length can be treated as a hyperparameter to be tuned during training. At time
instance i belonging to the kth subsequence, the estimated symbol for BRNN is
given by
ˆsi = arg max
si∈S
PBRNN(si|yk+B−1
k
),
k −B + 1 ≤i ≤k.
(1.4)
To simplify the notation, we use ˆp(k)
i
to denote the M × 1 matrix whose entries
are the probability mass function (PMF) PBRNN(si|yk+B−1
k
) for each si ∈S.
The BRNN architecture ensures that in the estimation of a symbol, future
signal observations are taken into account. During training, blocks of B consec-
utive transmissions are used for training. Once the network is trained, BRNNs
detect the stream of incoming data in ﬁxed blocks of length B, as shown in the
top portion of Fig. 1.4. The main drawback here is that the symbols at the end
of each block may aﬀect the symbols in the next block, and since each block
is treated independently, this relation is not captured in this scheme. Another
issue is that the block of B symbols must be received before detection can be
performed. The top portion of Figure 1.4 shows this scheme for B = 3.
To overcome these limitations, in the SBRNN proposed in [28], the ﬁrst B
symbols are detected using the BRNN. Then, as each new symbol arrives at the
receiver, the subsequence processed by the BRNN slides ahead by one symbol.
Let the set Ki = {k | k ≤i ∧k + B > i} be the set of all valid starting
positions for a BRNN detector of length B, such that the detector overlaps with
the ith symbol. For example, if B = 3 and i = 4, then k = 1 is not in the set Ki
since the BRNN detector overlaps with symbol positions 1, 2, and 3, and not the
symbol position 4. The estimated PMF corresponding to the ith symbol is given
by the weighted sum of the estimated PMFs for each of the relevant windows:
ˆpi =
X
k∈Ki
αkˆp(k)
i
,
αk ≥0 and
X
αk = 1.
(1.5)
The weighted sum coeﬃcients can be set to αk =
1
|Ki|, as we do in the numerical

12
Model-Based Machine Learning for Communications
!! !" !# !$ !% !& !' !( !)
BRNN
Stream of 
Observed Signals 
…
BRNN
BRNN
BRNN
BRNN
BRNN
Block Detector
Sliding BRNN
Detector
!"!
(!), !"$
(!), !"%
(!)
!"$
($), !"%
($), !"&
($)
!"%
(%), !"&
(%), !"'
(%)
!"! , !"$ , !"%
!"& , !"' , !"(
!") , !"* , !"+
Figure 1.4
The SBRNN detector versus using a BRNN as a block detector.
evaluations in Section 1.3.5. An illustration of the operation of the SBRNN
detector based on (1.5) is depicted in the bottom portion of Fig. 1.4.
Summary
Well-known DNN architectures can be trained in an end-to-end manner to per-
form symbol detection. This approach builds upon the success of existing model-
agnostic DNN structures, resulting in symbol detectors operating without any
knowledge about the underlying channel models. Furthermore, this strategy al-
lows combining some basic level of domain knowledge in the selection of the
architecture as well as the preparation of its input. For example, the SBRNN
detector detailed above identiﬁes the BRNN architecture as one that is capable
of handling temporal correlation in ﬁnite-memory channels, while using a sliding
subsequence to overcome some of the limitations of BRNN architectures when
applied to diﬀerent blocks independently. Also, DNNs can well-capture the non-
linearities that may exist in the channel. For example, the SBRNN was used as
an autoencoder in [30, 31] to achieve state-of-the-art performance over optical
channels, outperforming model-based nonlinear equalizers such as Voltera. Fi-
nally, these networks can also be computationally more eﬃcient than the optimal
maximum-likelihood sequence detector over ﬁnite-memory channels, speciﬁcally
for channels with long memory.
The main drawback in using established deep networks for end-to-end symbol

1.3 Deep Symbol Detection
13
detection is that such architectures typically have a very large number of param-
eters, and thus require massive data sets for training. This renders online training
using pilot sequences impractical. Moreover, when they are trained using data
from a large set of channel conditions, the resulting network will not perform
optimally for each of those channel conditions individually. Furthermore, even
when the data set is extremely large and diverse, it is not likely to capture all ex-
pected channel conditions. Finally, conventional DNN architectures are treated
as black-boxes, and are in general not interpretable, making it diﬃcult to come
up with performance guarantees.
1.3.3
Symbol Detection via Deep Unfolding
Unlike conventional DNNs, which utilize established architectures, in deep un-
folding the network structure is designed following a model-based algorithm. We
next describe how this model-based ML technique can be applied for symbol
detection, and detail a concrete example for ﬂat Gaussian MIMO channels.
Overview of Design Process
Deep unfolding is a method for converting an iterative algorithm into a DNN by
designing each layer of the network to resemble a single iteration. As such, the
rationale in applying deep unfolding consists of the following steps:
1. Identify an iterative optimization algorithm that is useful for the problem
at hand. For instance, recovering the MAP symbol detector for ﬂat MIMO
channels can be tackled using various iterative optimization algorithms, such
as projected gradient descent, unfolded into DetNet [32], as described in the
sequel.
2. Fix a number of iterations in the optimization algorithm.
3. Design the layers to initiate the operation of each iteration in a trainable
fashion, as illustrated in Fig. 1.2.
4. Train the overall resulting network in an end-to-end fashion.
We next demonstrate how this rationale is translated into a concrete data-driven
symbol detector architecture for ﬂat MIMO channels, i.e., (1.1) with L = 1.
Example: DetNet for Flat MIMO Channels
DetNet is a deep learning based symbol detector proposed in [32] for ﬂat Gaussian
MIMO channels. To formulate DetNet, we ﬁrst detail the speciﬁc channel model
for which it is designed, and then show how it is obtained by unfolding the
projected gradient descent method for recovering the MAP estimate.
Flat Gaussian MIMO Channel
As we focus on stationary memoryless channels, we drop the subscript i rep-
resenting the time instance, and write the input-output relationship of a ﬂat

14
Model-Based Machine Learning for Communications
Gaussian MIMO channel as
Y = HS + W ,
(1.6)
where H is a known deterministic N × K channel matrix, and W consists of N
i.i.d Gaussian random variables (RVs). Consider the case in which the symbols
are generated from a binary phase shift keying (BPSK) constellation in a uni-
form i.i.d. manner, i.e., S = {±1}. In this case the MAP rule in (1.2) given an
observation Y = y becomes the minimum distance estimate, given by
ˆs = arg min
s∈{±1}K ∥y −Hs∥2.
(1.7)
Project Gradient Descent Optimization
While directly solving (1.7) involves an exhaustive search over the 2K possible
symbol combinations, it can be tackled with aﬀordable computational complex-
ity using the iterative projected gradient descent algorithm. Let PS(·) denote
the projection into the S operator, which for BPSK constellations is the sign
function. The projected gradient descent iteratively reﬁnes its estimate, which
at iteration index q + 1 is obtained recursively as
ˆsq+1 = PS
 
ˆsq −ηq
∂∥y −Hs∥2
∂s

s=ˆsq
!
= PS
 ˆsq −ηqHT y + ηqHT Hˆsq

,
(1.8)
where ηq denotes the step size at iteration q, and ˆs0 is set to some initial guess.
Unfolded DetNet
DetNet unfolds the projected gradient descent iterations in (1.8) into a DNN,
which learns to carry out this optimization procedure from data. To formulate
DetNet, we ﬁrst ﬁx a number of iterations Q. Next, we design a DNN with Q
layers, where each layer imitates a single iteration of (1.8) in a trainable manner.
In particular, DetNet builds upon the observation that each projected gradi-
ent descent iteration consists of two stages: gradient descent computation, i.e.,
ˆsq −ηqHT y + ηqHT Hˆsq, and projection, namely, applying PS(·). Therefore, each
unfolded iteration is represented as two sub-layers: The ﬁrst sub-layer learns to
compute the gradient descent stage by treating the step-size as a learned param-
eter and applying a conventional fully-connected layer with ReLU activation to
the obtained value. For iteration index q, this results in
zq = ReLU
 W1,q
 ˆsq−1 −δ1,qHT y + δ2,qHT Hˆsq−1

+ b1,q

,
(1.9)
in which {W1,q, b1,q, δ1,q, δ2,q} are learnable parameters. The second sub-layer
learns the projection operator by approximating the sign operation with a soft
sign activation proceeded by a fully-connected layer, leading to
ˆsq = soft sign (W2,qzq + b2,q) .
(1.10)
Here, the learnable parameters are {W2,q, b2,q}. The resulting deep network is

1.3 Deep Symbol Detection
15
Figure 1.5 Deep unfolded symbol detector illustration. Parameters in red fonts are
learned in training, while those in blue fonts are externally provided.
depicted in Fig. 1.5, in which ˆs0 is set to some initial guess, and the output after
Q iterations, denoted ˆsQ, is used as the estimated symbol vector by taking the
sign of each element.
Let θ = {W1,q, W2,q, b1,q, b2,q, δ1,q, δ2,q}Q
q=1 be the trainable parameters of
DetNeta.
To tune θ, the overall network is trained in an end-to-end manner
to minimize the empirical weighted ℓ2 norm loss over its intermediate layers. In
particular, by letting {st, yt}nt
t=1 denote the training set consisting of channel
outputs and their corresponding transmitted symbols, the loss function used for
training DetNet is given by
L(θ) = 1
nt
nt
X
t=1
Q
X
q=1
log(q)∥st −ˆsq(yt; θ)∥2,
(1.11)
where ˆsq(yt; θ) is the output of the qth layer of DetNet with parameters θ and
input yt. This loss measure accounts for the interpretable nature of the unfolded
network, in which the output of each layer is a further reﬁned estimate of S.
Summary
Deep unfolding incorporates model-based domain knowledge to obtain a dedi-
cated DNN design, which follows an iterative optimization algorithm. Compared
to the conventional DNNs discussed in the previous section, unfolded networks
are typically interpretable, and tend to have a smaller number of parameters,
and can thus be trained quicker [10]. Nonetheless, these deep networks are still
highly parameterized, and require a large volume of training data. For instance,
DetNet is trained in [32] using approximately 250 million labeled samples.
One of the key properties of unfolded networks is their reliance on model
knowledge. For example, the unfolded receiver must know that the channel
input-output relationship takes the form (1.6) in order to formulate the pro-
jected gradient iterations (1.8), which in turn are unfolded into DetNet. The
model-awareness of deep unfolding has its advantages and drawbacks. When the
model is accurately known, deep unfolding essentially incorporates it into the
DNN architecture, as opposed to conventional DNNs that must learn this from
a The formulation of DetNet in [32] includes an additional sub-layer in each iteration
intended to further lift its input into higher dimensions and introduce additional trainable
parameters, as well as reweighing of the outputs of subsequent layers. As these operations
do not follow directly from unfolding the projected gradient descent method, they are not
included in the description here.

16
Model-Based Machine Learning for Communications
data. However, this approach does not exploit the model-agnostic nature of deep
learning, and thus may achieve degraded performance when the true channel
conditions deviate from the model assumed in design, e.g., (1.6). In particular, a
key advantage of deep unfolding over the model-based optimization algorithm is
in inference speed. For instance, DetNet requires fewer layers to reliably detect
compared to the number of iterations required for projected gradient descent to
converge.
Another important advantage of unfolded networks is their ability to improve
the accuracy compared to the iterative optimization algorithm from which they
originate. In particular, the set {±1}K over which the optimization problem
(1.7) is formulated is not convex, and thus projected gradient descent is not
guaranteed to recover its solution, regardless of the number of iterations. By
unfolding the application of projected gradient descent for solving (1.7) into a
DNN with trainable parameters, the resulting network is often able to overcome
this diﬃculty and converge to the true solution of the optimization problem when
properly trained, despite the non-convexity. Finally, in the context of receiver
design, most unfolded networks to date, including DetNet as well as OAMP-net
[33] which unfolds the orthogonal approximate message passing optimization
algorithm, require channel state information (CSI). For example, knowledge of
the matrix H is utilized in the architecture depicted in Fig. 1.5. This implies that
additional mechanisms for estimating the channel must be incorporated into the
receiver architecture [34]. Nonetheless, while the aforementioned deep unfolding
based receivers require CSI, unfolded networks can be designed without such
knowledge [9]. For example, one can unfold the optimization algorithm assuming
CSI is available, and then treat H which appears in the unfolded network as part
of its trainable parameters.
1.3.4
Symbol Detection via DNN-Aided Algorithms
DNN-aided hybrid algorithms combine domain knowledge in the form of a model-
based inference algorithm for the problem at hand. This strategy allows the
design of model-based ML systems with varying levels of domain knowledge,
in which deep learning is used to robustify and remove model-dependence of
speciﬁc components of the algorithm. In the following we ﬁrst review the rationale
when designing DNN-aided symbol detectors, after which we detail three concrete
examples arising from diﬀerent symbol detection algorithms.
Overview of Design Process
DNN-aided algorithms aim to carry out model-based inference methods in a
data-driven fashion. These hybrid systems thus utilize deep learning not for the
overall inference task, but for robustifying and relaxing the model-dependence of
established model-based inference algorithms. Consequently, the design of DNN-
aided hybrid systems consists of the following steps:

1.3 Deep Symbol Detection
17
1. First, a proper inference algorithm is chosen. In particular, the domain knowl-
edge is encapsulated in the selection of the algorithm that is learned from data.
For example, the Viterbi algorithm is a natural candidate for symbol detection
over ﬁnite-memory channels when seeking a symbol detector capable of oper-
ating in real-time, or alternatively, the BCJR scheme is the suitable choice for
carrying out MAP inference over such channels. When designing receivers for
ﬂat MIMO channels, interference cancellation methods may be the preferable
algorithmic approach for symbol detection. We show how these methods are
converted into DNN-aided algorithms in the sequel.
2. Once a model-based algorithm is selected, we identify its model-speciﬁc com-
putations, and replace them with dedicated compact DNNs.
3. The resulting DNNs can be either trained individually, or the overall system
can be trained in an end-to-end manner.
Since the implementation of DNN-aided algorithms highly varies with the
selection of the learned model-based method, we next present three concrete
examples in the context of symbol detection: ViterbiNet, which learns to carry
out Viterbi detection [14]; BCJRNet, which implements the BCJR algorithm of
[15] in a data-driven fashion; and DeepSIC, which is based on the soft iterative
interference cancellation methods for MIMO symbol detection [35].
Example: ViterbiNet for Finite-Memory Channels
ViterbiNet proposed in [11] is a data-driven implementation of the Viterbi de-
tection algorithm [14], which is one of the most common workhorses in digi-
tal communications. This DNN-aided symbol detection algorithm is suitable for
ﬁnite-memory channels of the form (1.1), without requiring prior knowledge of
the channel conditional distributions pY i|{Sl}i
l=i−L+1. For simplicity, we assume
in our description that the input cardinality K is K = 1. As a preliminary step to
presenting ViterbiNet, we now brieﬂy review conventional model-based Viterbi
detection.
The Viterbi Algorithm
The Viterbi algorithm recovers the maximum likelihood sequence detector, i.e.,
ˆsT  yT 
:= arg max
sT ∈ST pY T |ST
 yT |sT 
= arg min
sT ∈ST −log pY T |ST
 yT |sT 
.
(1.12)
Using (1.1) the optimization problem (1.12) becomes
ˆsT  yT 
= arg min
sT ∈ST
T
X
i=1
−log pY i|{Sl}i
l=i−L+1
 yi|{sl}i
l=i−L+1

.
(1.13)
To proceed, we deﬁne a state variable ¯Si := [Si−L+1, . . . , Si] ∈SL. Since the
symbols are i.i.d. and uniformly distributed, it follows that p¯Si|¯Si−1(¯si|¯si−1) =

18
Model-Based Machine Learning for Communications
M −1 when ¯si is a shifted version of ¯si−1, i.e., the ﬁrst L −1 entries of ¯si are the
last L −1 entries of ¯si−1, and zero otherwise. We can now write (1.13) as
ˆsT  yT 
= arg min
sT ∈ST
T
X
i=1
−log pY i|¯Si
 yi|{sl}i
l=i−L+1

.
(1.14)
The optimization problem (1.14) can be solved recursively using dynamic pro-
gramming, by iteratively updating a path cost ci(¯s) for each state ¯s ∈SL. The
resulting scheme, known as the Viterbi algorithm, is given below as Algorithm 1,
and illustrated in Fig. 1.6(a).
Algorithm 1: The Viterbi Algorithm [14]
Init: Fix an initial path p0 (s) = ∅and path cost c0(¯s)=0, ¯s ∈SL.
1 for i = 1, 2, . . . , T do
2
For each state ¯s ∈SL, compute previous state with shortest path,
denoted u¯s, via
u¯s =
arg min
¯s′∈SL:p¯
Si|¯
Si−1(¯s|¯s′)>0
 ci−1 (¯s′) −log pY i|¯Si (yi|¯s)

.
(1.15)
3
Update cost and path via
ci (¯s) = ci−1 (u¯s) −log pY i|¯Si (yi|¯s) ,
(1.16)
and pi (¯s) =

pi−1 (u¯s) , u¯s

;
4 end
Output: ˆsT = pT (¯s∗) where ¯s∗= arg min¯s cT (¯s).
The Viterbi algorithm has two major advantages: 1) It solves (1.12) at a com-
putational complexity that is linear in the blocklength T. For comparison, the
computational complexity of solving (1.12) directly grows exponentially with T;
2) The algorithm produces estimates sequentially during run-time. In particular,
while in (1.12) the estimated output ˆsT is computed using the entire received
block yT , Algorithm 1 computes ˆsi once yi+L−1 is received.
ViterbiNet
ViterbiNet proposed in [11] learns to implement the Viterbi algorithm from data
in a model-agnostic manner. Following the rationale of DNN-aided algorithms,
this is achieved by identifying the model-based components of the algorithm,
which for Algorithm 1 boils down to the computation of the log-likelihood func-
tion log pY i|¯Si (yi|¯s). Once this quantity is computed for each ¯s ∈SL, the Viterbi
algorithm only requires knowledge of the memory length L. This requirement is
much easier to satisfy compared to full CSI.
Since the channel is stationary, it holds that the log-likelihood function de-
pends only on the realizations of yi and of ¯s, and not on the time index i.

1.3 Deep Symbol Detection
19
Figure 1.6 An illustration of the operation of the Viterbi algorithm (a) and ViterbiNet
(b). Here, the memory length is L = 2 and the constellation is S = {0, 1}, implying
that the number of states is M L = 4. The values in blue are the negative
log-likelihoods for each state, while the quantities in red represent the updated path
loss ci(·). When multiple paths lead to the same state, as occurs for i = 3, 4, the path
with minimal loss is maintained.
Figure 1.7 Learned likelihood architectures based on (a) classiﬁcation and (b)
conditional density estimation networks.
Therefore, to implement Algorithm 1 in a data-driven fashion, ViterbiNet re-
places the explicit computation of the log-likelihoods with an ML-based system
that learns to evaluate this function from training data. In this case, the input of
the system is the channel output realization yi and the output is an estimate of
log pY i|¯Si (yi|¯s) for each ¯s ∈SL. The rest of the Viterbi algorithm remains in-
tact, and the detector implements Algorithm 1 using the learned log-likelihoods.
The proposed architecture is illustrated in Fig. 1.6(b).
Two candidate architectures are considered for learning to compute the log
likelihood, one based on classiﬁcation networks and one using density estimation
networks.
Learned likelihood using classiﬁcation networks: Since yi is given and may
take continuous values while the desired variables take discrete values, a natural
approach to evaluate pY i|¯Si (yi|¯s) for each ¯s ∈SL is to estimate p¯Si|Y i (¯s|yi)
and then use Bayes rule to obtain
pY i|¯Si (yi|¯s) = p¯Si|Y i (¯s|yi) pY i (yi) M L.
(1.17)

20
Model-Based Machine Learning for Communications
A parametric estimate of p¯Si|Y i (¯s|yi), denoted ˆPθ(¯s|yi), is obtained for each
¯s ∈SL by training classiﬁcation networks with softmax output layers to minimize
the cross entropy loss. Here, for a labeled set {st, yt}nt
t=1, the loss function is
L(θ) = 1
nt
nt
X
t=1
−log ˆPθ([st−L+1, . . . , st]|yt).
(1.18)
In general, the marginal PDF of Y i can be estimated from the training data
using mixture density estimation via, e.g., expectation minimization (EM) [36,
Ch. 2], or any other ﬁnite mixture model ﬁtting method. However, obtaining an
accurate density estimation becomes challenging when Y i is high-dimensional.
Since pY i (yi) does not depend on the variable ¯s, setting pY i (yi) ≡1 does not
aﬀect the decisions in Algorithm 1 due to the arg min arguments, which are in-
variant to scaling the conditional distribution by a term that does not depend
on ¯s. The resulting structure is illustrated in Fig. 1.7(a).
Learned likelihood using conditional density networks: An additional
strategy is to directly estimate the conditional pY i|¯Si (yi|¯s) from data. This
can be achieved using conditional density estimation networks [37, 38] that are
speciﬁcally designed to learn such PDFs, or alternatively, using normalizing ﬂow
networks to learn complex densities [39]. For example, mixture density networks
[37] model the conditional PDF pY i|¯Si (yi|¯s) as a Gaussian mixture, and train
a DNN to estimate its mixing parameters, mean values, and covariances, de-
noted wk,θ(¯s), µk,θ(¯s) and Σk,θ(¯s), respectively, by maximizing the likelihood
ˆPθ (yi|¯s) = P
k wk,θ(¯s)N
 yi|µk,θ(¯s), Σk,θ(¯s)

, as illustrated in Fig. 1.7(b).
Both approaches can be utilized for learning to compute the likelihood in
ViterbiNet. When the channel outputs are high-dimensional, i.e., N is large, di-
rectly learning the conditional density is diﬃcult and likely to be inaccurate.
In such cases, the classiﬁcation-based architecture, which avoids the need to ex-
plicitly learn the density, may be preferable. When the state cardinality M L is
large, conditional density networks are expected to be more reliable. However,
the Viterbi algorithm becomes computationally infeasible when M L grows, re-
gardless of whether it is implemented in a model-based or data-driven fashion,
making ViterbiNet non-suitable for such setups.
Example: BCJRNet for Finite-Memory Channels
Factor graph methods, such as the sum-product algorithm, exploit the factoriza-
tion of a joint distribution to eﬃciently compute a desired quantity [40]. In par-
ticular, the application of the sum-product algorithm for the joint input-output
distribution of ﬁnite-memory channels allows for computing the MAP rule, an
operation whose burden typically grows exponentially with the block size, with
complexity that only grows linearly with T. This instance of the sum-product
algorithm is exactly the BCJR detector proposed [15]. In the following we show
how the BCJR method can be extended into the DNN-aided BCJRNet. As in
our description of ViterbiNet, we again focus on the case of K = 1, and begin
by presenting the model-based BCJR algorithm.

1.3 Deep Symbol Detection
21
The BCJR Algorithm
The BCJR algorithm computes the MAP rule in (1.2) for ﬁnite-memory chan-
nels with complexity that grows linearly with the block size. To formulate this
method, we recall the deﬁnition of ¯Si, and deﬁne the function
f (yi, ¯si, ¯si−1) := pY i|¯Si (yi|¯si) p¯Si|¯Si−1 (¯si|¯si−1)
=
(
1
M pY i|¯Si (yi|¯si)
(¯si)j = (¯si−1)j−1,
∀j ∈{2, . . . , L},
0
otherwise.
(1.19)
Combining (1.19) and (1.1), we obtain a factorizable expression of the joint
distribution pY T ,ST (·), given by
pY T ,ST
 yT , sT 
=
T
Y
i=1
1
M pY i|¯Si (yi|[si−L+1, . . . , si])
=
T
Y
i=1
f (yi, [si−L+1, . . . , si], [si−L, . . . , si−1]) .
(1.20)
The factorizable expression of the joint distribution (1.20) implies that it can be
represented as a factor graph with T function nodes {f (yi, ¯si, ¯si−1)}, in which
{¯si}T −1
i=2 are edges while the remaining variables are half-edgesb.
Using its factor graph representation, one can compute the joint distribution of
ST and Y T by recursive message passing along this factor graph. In particular,
p¯Sk,¯Sk+1,Y T (¯sk, ¯sk+1, yT ) = −→
µ ¯Sk(¯sk)f(yk+1, ¯sk+1, ¯sk)←−
µ ¯Sk+1(¯sk+1),
(1.21)
where the forward path messages satisfy
−→
µ ¯Si(¯si) =
X
¯si−1
f(yi, ¯si, ¯si−1)−→
µ ¯Si−1(¯si−1),
(1.22)
for i = 1, 2, . . . , k. Similarly, the backward messages are
←−
µ ¯Si(¯si) =
X
¯si+1
f(yi+1, ¯si+1, ¯si)←−
µ ¯Si+1(¯si+1),
(1.23)
for i = T −1, T −2, . . . , k + 1. This message passing is illustrated in Fig. 1.8.
The ability to compute the joint distribution in (1.21) via message passing
results in the MAP detector in (1.2), an operation whose burden typically grows
exponentially with the block size, with complexity that only grows linearly with
T. This is achieved by noting that the MAP estimate satisﬁes
ˆsi
 yT 
= arg max
s∈S
X
¯si−1∈SL
−→
µ ¯Si−1(¯si−1)f(yi, [si−L+1, . . . , si], ¯si−1)
× ←−
µ ¯si([si−L+1, . . . , si]),
(1.24)
b Here we use Forney style factor graphs [41], where variables are represented as edges or
half-edges. However, it is also possible to represent variables as variables notes.

22
Model-Based Machine Learning for Communications
Figure 1.8 Message passing over the factor graph of a ﬁnite-memory channel.
for each i ∈T , where the summands can be computed recursively. When the
block size T is large, the messages may tend to zero, and are thus commonly
scaled [42], e.g., ←−
µ ¯Si(¯s) is replaced with γi←−
µ ¯Si(¯s) for some scale factor that does
not depend on ¯s, and thus does not aﬀect the MAP rule. The BCJR algorithm
is summarized as Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2: The BCJR algorithm
Init: Fix an initial forward message −→
µ ¯S0(¯s) = 1 and a ﬁnal backward
message ←−
µ ¯ST (¯s) ≡1.
1 for i = T −1, T −2, . . . , 1 do
2
For each ¯s ∈SL, compute backward message ←−
µ ¯Si(¯s) via (1.23)
3 end
4 for i = 1, 2, . . . , T do
5
For each ¯s ∈SL, compute forward message −→
µ ¯Si(¯s) via (1.22)
6 end
Output: ˆsT = [ˆs1, . . . , ˆsT ]T , each obtained using (1.24)
BCJRNet
BCJRNet is a receiver method that learns to implement MAP detection from la-
beled data. BCJRNet exploits the fact that in order to implement Algorithm 2,
one must be able to specify the factor graph representing the underlying dis-
tribution. In particular, the stationarity assumption implies that the complete
factor graph is encapsulated in the single function f(·) (1.19) regardless of the
block size T. Building upon this insight, BCJRNet utilizes DNNs to learn the
mapping carried out at the function node separately from the inference task. The
resulting learned stationary factor graph is then used to recover {Si} by message
passing, as illustrated in Fig. 1.9. As learning a single function node is expected
to be a simpler task compared to learning the overall inference method for recov-
ering ST from Y T , this approach allows using relatively compact DNNs, which
in turn can be learned from a relatively small set of labeled data. Furthermore,
the learned function node describes the factor graph for diﬀerent values of T.

1.3 Deep Symbol Detection
23
Figure 1.9 An illustration of BCJRNet with a learned stationary factor graph.
When the learned function node is an accurate estimate of the true one, BCJR-
Net eﬀectively implements the MAP detection rule (1.2), and thus approaches
the minimal probability of error.
The function node that encapsulates the factor graph of stationary ﬁnite-
memory channels is given in (1.19). The formulation in (1.19) implies that it can
be estimated by training an ML-based system to evaluate pY i|¯Si(·) from which
the corresponding function node value is obtained via (1.19). Once the factor
graph representing the channel is learned, symbol recovery is carried out using
Algorithm 2. As the mapping of Algorithm 2 is invariant to scaling f(yi, ¯si, ¯si−1)
with some factor that does not depend on the states, it follows that a paramet-
ric estimate of the function f(·), denoted ˆfθ(·), can be obtained using the same
networks utilized for learning the log-likelihood in ViterbiNet. Speciﬁcally, the
learned log-likelihood is used in (1.19) to obtain ˆfθ(·). The resulting receiver,
referred to as BCJRNet, thus implements BCJR detection in a data-driven man-
ner.
BCJRNet vs. ViterbiNet
The same DNN architecture can be applied, once trained, to carry out multiple
inference algorithms in a hybrid model-based/data-driven manner, including the
BCJR scheme (as BCJRNet) as well as the Viterbi algorithm (via ViterbiNet).
Since both BCJRNet and ViterbiNet utilize the same learned models, one can
decide which inference system to apply, i.e., BCJRNet or ViterbiNet, by con-
sidering the diﬀerences in the algorithms from which they are derived, i.e., the
BCJR algorithm and the Viterbi algorithm, respectively. The main advantages
of Algorithm 1 over Algorithm 2, and thus of ViterbiNet over BCJRNet, are
its reduced complexity and real-time operation. In particular, both algorithms
implement recursive computations, involving |S|L evaluations for each sample,
and thus the complexity of both algorithms grows linearly with the block size
T. Nonetheless, the Viterbi scheme computes only a forward recursion and can

24
Model-Based Machine Learning for Communications
thus provide its estimations in real time within a given delay from each incom-
ing observation, while the BCJR scheme implements both forward and backward
recursions, and can thus infer only once the complete block is observed, while
involving twice the computations carried out by the Viterbi detector.
The main advantage of Algorithm 2 over Algorithm 1, i.e., of BCJRNet over
ViterbiNet, stems from the fact that it implements the MAP rule (1.2), which
minimizes the error probability. The Viterbi algorithm is designed to compute
the maximum likelihood sequence detector, i.e.,
ˆsT  yT 
= arg max
sT ∈ST pY T |ST
 yT |sT 
,
(1.25)
which is not equivalent to the symbol-level MAP rule (1.2). To see this, we
focus on the case where the symbols are equiprobable, as in such scenarios the
sequence-wise maximum likelihood rule coincides with the sequence-wise MAP
detector. Here, the decision rule implemented by the Viterbi algorithm (1.25)
can be written as
ˆsT  yT 
= arg max
sT ∈ST pST |Y T
 sT |yT 
.
(1.26)
For a given realization Y T = yT , the function pST |Y T
 sT |yT 
maximized by the
sequence-wise detector in (1.26) is a joint distribution measure. The functions
{pSi|Y T
 si|yT 
}T
i=1, which are the individually maximized by the symbol-wise
MAP rule computed by the BCJR scheme (1.2), are the marginals of the afore-
mentioned joint distribution. Furthermore, given Y T = yT the elements of ST
are statistically dependent in ﬁnite-memory channels. As a a result, the max-
ima of the joint distribution pST |Y T is not necessarily the individual maximas
of each of its marginals, i.e., the elements of the vector ˆsT  yT 
in (1.25) are
not necessarily the symbol-wise MAP estimates {ˆsi
 yT 
}T
i=1 in (1.2). To con-
clude, the Viterbi algorithm does not implement the symbol-wise MAP even in
the presence of equal priors. This explains the diﬀerence in their performance,
since, unlike the BCJR scheme, the Viterbi algorithm does not minimize the
error probability.
Example: DeepSIC for Flat MIMO Channels
DeepSIC proposed in [43] is a DNN-aided hybrid algorithm that is based on the
iterative soft interference cancellation (SIC) method [35] for symbol detection in
ﬂat MIMO channels. However, unlike its model-based counterpart, and alterna-
tive deep MIMO receivers such as DetNet, it is not tailored for linear Gaussian
channels of the form (1.6). The only assumption required is that the channel
is memoryless, i.e., L = 1, and thus we drop the time index subscript in this
example. As in our previous DNN-aided examples, we ﬁrst review iterative SIC,
after which we present its DNN-aided implementation.

1.3 Deep Symbol Detection
25
Figure 1.10 Iterative soft interference cancellation illustration.
Iterative Soft Interference Cancellation
The iterative SIC algorithm proposed in [35] is a MIMO detection method that
combines multi-stage interference cancellation with soft decisions. The detector
operates in an iterative fashion where, in each iteration, an estimate of the con-
ditional PMF of Sk, which is the kth entry of S, given the observed Y = y,
is generated for every symbol k ∈{1, 2, . . . , K} := K using the corresponding
estimates of the interfering symbols {Sl}l̸=k obtained in the previous iteration.
Iteratively repeating this procedure reﬁnes the conditional distribution estimates,
allowing the detector to accurately recover each symbol from the output of the
last iteration. This iterative procedure is illustrated in Fig. 1.10.
To formulate the algorithm, we consider the ﬂat Gaussian MIMO channel
in (1.6). Iterative SIC consists of Q iterations. Each iteration indexed q ∈
{1, 2, . . . , Q} ≜Q generates K distribution vectors ˆp(q)
k
of size M × 1, where
k ∈K. These vectors are computed from the channel output y as well as the
distribution vectors obtained at the previous iteration, {ˆp(q−1)
k
}K
k=1. The entries
of ˆp(q)
k
are estimates of the distribution of Sk for each possible symbol in S,
given the channel output Y = y and assuming that the interfering symbols
{Sl}l̸=k are distributed via {ˆp(q−1)
l
}l̸=k. Every iteration consists of two steps,
carried out in parallel for each user: Interference cancellation and soft decod-
ing. Focusing on the kth user and the qth iteration, the interference cancella-
tion stage ﬁrst computes the expected values and variances of {Sl}l̸=k based on
{ˆp(q−1)
l
}l̸=k. Letting {αj}M
j=1 be the indexed elements of the constellation set S,
the expected values and variances are computed via e(q−1)
l
= P
αj∈S αj
 ˆp(q−1)
l

j,
and v(q−1)
l
= P
αj∈S
 αj −e(q−1)
l
2 ˆp(q−1)
l

j, respectively. The contribution of
the interfering symbols from y is then canceled by replacing them with {e(q−1)
l
}
and subtracting their resulting term. Letting hl be the lth column of H, the
interference canceled channel output is given by
Z(q)
k
= Y −
X
l̸=k
hle(q−1)
l
= hkSk+
X
l̸=k
hl(Sl−e(q−1)
l
)+W .
(1.27)

26
Model-Based Machine Learning for Communications
Substituting the channel output y into (1.27), the realization of the interference
canceled Z(q)
k , denoted z(q)
k , is obtained.
To implement soft decoding, it is assumed that ˜W (q)
k
≜P
l̸=k hl(Sl−e(q−1)
l
)+W
obeys a zero-mean Gaussian distribution, independent of Sk, and that its co-
variance is given by Σ ˜
W (q)
k
= σ2
wIK + P
l̸=k v(q−1)
l
hlhT
l , where σ2
w is the noise
variance. Combining this assumption with (1.27), the conditional distribution
of Z(q)
k
given Sk = αj is multivariate Gaussian with mean value hkαj and co-
variance Σ ˜
W (q)
k . Since Z(q)
k
is given by a bijective transformation of Y , it holds
that pSk|Y (αj|y) = pSk|Z(q)
k (αj|z(q)
k ) for each αj ∈S under the above assump-
tions. Consequently, the conditional distribution of Sk given Y is approximated
from the conditional distribution of Z(q)
k
given Sk via Bayes theorem. Since the
symbols are equiprobable, this estimated conditional distribution is computed as

ˆp(q)
k

j =
exp

−1
2

z(q)
k
−hkαj
T
Σ−1
˜
W (q)
k

z(q)
k
−hkαj

P
αj′∈S
exp

−1
2

z(q)
k
−hkαj′
T
Σ−1
˜
W (q)
k

z(q)
k
−hkαj′
.
(1.28)
After the ﬁnal iteration, the symbols are decoded by taking the symbol that
maximizes the estimated conditional distribution for each user, i.e.,
ˆsk = arg max
j∈{1,...,M}

ˆp(Q)
k

j .
(1.29)
The overall joint detection scheme is summarized as Algorithm 3. The initial
estimates {ˆp(0)
k }K
k=1 can be arbitrarily set. For example, these may be chosen
based on a linear separate estimation of each symbol for y, as proposed in [35].
Algorithm 3: Iterative Soft Interference Cancellation Algorithm [35]
Init: Set q = 1, and generate an initial guess of {ˆp(0)
k }K
k=1.
1 for q = 1, 2, . . . , Q do
2
Compute the expected values {e(q−1)
k
} and variances {vq−1
k
};
3
Interference cancellation: For each k ∈K compute z(q)
k
via (1.27) ;
4
Soft decoding: For each k ∈K, estimate ˆp(q)
k
via (1.28)
5 end
Output: Hard decoded output ˆs, obtained via (1.29)
Iterative SIC has several advantages compared to both joint decoding as well
as separate decoding: In terms of computational complexity, it replaces the joint
exhaustive search over SK, required by the MAP decoder, with a set of compu-
tations carried out separately for each user. Hence, its computational complexity
only grows linearly with the number of users [16], making it feasible with large
values of K. Unlike conventional separate decoding, in which the symbol of each

1.3 Deep Symbol Detection
27
user is recovered individually while treating the interference as noise, the itera-
tive procedure reﬁnes the separate estimates sequentially, and the usage of soft
values mitigates the eﬀect of error propagation. Algorithm 3 is thus capable of
approaching the performance of the MAP detector, which is only feasible for
small values of K.
DeepSIC
Iterative SIC is speciﬁcally designed for linear channels of the form (1.6). In
particular, the interference cancellation in Step 2 of Algorithm 3 requires the
contribution of the interfering symbols to be additive. Furthermore, it requires
accurate CSI. To circumvent these limitations in the model-based approach, the
DNN-aided DeepSIC learns to implement the iterative SIC from data.
Architecture: DeepSIC builds upon the observation that iterative SIC can
be viewed as a set of interconnected basic building blocks, each implementing
the two stages of interference cancellation and soft decoding, i.e., Steps 2-3 of
Algorithm 3. While the high level architecture in Fig. 1.10 is ignorant of the un-
derlying channel model, the basic building blocks are channel-model-dependent.
In particular, interference cancellation requires the contribution of the interfer-
ence to be additive, i.e., a linear model channel as in (1.6), as well as full CSI, in
order to cancel the contribution of the interference. Soft decoding requires com-
plete knowledge of the channel input-output relationship in order to estimate
the conditional probabilities via (1.28).
Although each of these basic building blocks consists of two sequential proce-
dures that are completely channel-model-based, we note that the purpose of these
computations is to carry out a classiﬁcation task. In particular, the kth building
block of the qth iteration, k ∈K, q ∈Q, produces ˆp(q)
k , which is an estimate
of the conditional PMF of Sk given Y = y based on {ˆp(q−1)
l
}l̸=k. Such compu-
tations are naturally implemented by classiﬁcation DNNs, e.g., fully-connected
networks with a softmax output layer. Embedding these ML-based conditional
PMF computations into the iterative SIC block diagram in Fig. 1.10 yields the
overall receiver architecture depicted in Fig. 1.11. The initial estimates {ˆp(0)
k }K
k=1
can be set to represent a uniform distribution, i.e.,
 ˆp(0)
k

j ≡
1
M .
A major advantage of using classiﬁcation DNNs as the basic building blocks in
Fig. 1.11 stems from the fact that such ML-based methods are capable of accu-
rately computing conditional distributions in complex non-linear setups without
requiring a-priori knowledge of the channel model and its parameters. Conse-
quently, when these building blocks are trained to properly implement their
classiﬁcation task, the receiver essentially realizes iterative SIC for arbitrary
channel models in a data-driven fashion.
Training Methods: In order for the DNN-aided receiver structure of Fig. 1.11
to reliably implement joint decoding, its building block classiﬁcation DNNs must
be properly trained. Here, we consider two possible approaches to train the re-
ceiver based on a set of nt pairs of channel inputs and their corresponding out-
puts, denoted {st, yt}nt
t=1: End-to-end training, and sequential training.

28
Model-Based Machine Learning for Communications
Figure 1.11 DeepSIC illustration.
End-to-end training: The ﬁrst approach jointly trains the entire network, i.e.,
all the building block DNNs. Since the output of the deep network is the set
of conditional distributions {ˆp(Q)
k
}K
k=1, where each ˆp(Q)
k
is used to estimate Sk,
we use the sum cross entropy as the training objective. Let θ be the network
parameters, and ˆp(Q)
k
(y, α; θ) be the entry of ˆp(Q)
k
corresponding to Sk = α when
the input to the network parameterizd by θ is y. The sum cross entropy loss is
LSumCE(θ) = 1
nt
nt
X
t=1
K
X
k=1
−log ˆp(Q)
k
 yt, (st)k; θ

.
(1.30)
Training the receiver in Fig. 1.11 in an end-to-end manner based on the loss
(1.30) jointly updates the coeﬃcients of all the K ·Q building block DNNs. For a
large number of users, training so many parameters simultaneously is expected
to require a large labeled set.
Sequential training: To allow the network to be trained with a reduced number
of training samples, we note that the goal of each building block DNN does
not depend on the iteration index: The kth building block of the qth iteration
outputs a soft estimate of Sk for each q ∈Q. Therefore, each building block
DNN can be trained individually, by minimizing the conventional cross entropy
loss. To formulate this objective, let θ(q)
k
represent the parameters of the kth
DNN at iteration q, and write ˆp(q)
k
 y, {ˆp(q−1)
l
}l̸=k, α; θ(q)
k

as the entry of ˆp(q)
k
corresponding to Sk = α when the DNN parameters are θ(q)
k
and its inputs are
y and {ˆp(q−1)
l
}l̸=k. The cross entropy loss is given by
LCE(θ(q)
k ) = 1
nt
nt
X
t=1
−log ˆp(q)
k
 ˜yt, {ˆp(q−1)
t,l
}l̸=k, (˜st)k; θ(q)
k

,
(1.31)
where {ˆp(q−1)
t,l
} represent the estimated probabilities associated with yi com-
puted at the previous iteration. The problem with training each DNN individu-
ally is that the soft estimates {ˆp(q−1)
t,l
} are not provided as part of the training
set. This challenge can be tackled by training the DNNs corresponding to each
layer in a sequential manner, where for each layer the outputs of the trained
previous iterations are used as the soft estimates fed as training samples.

1.3 Deep Symbol Detection
29
Sequential training uses the nt input-output pairs to train each DNN individ-
ually. Compared to the end-to-end training that utilizes the training samples to
learn the complete set of parameters, which can be quite large, sequential train-
ing uses the same data set to learn a signiﬁcantly smaller number of parameters,
reduced by a factor of K · Q, multiple times. Consequently, this approach is ex-
pected to require much fewer training samples, at the cost of a longer learning
procedure for a given training set, due to its sequential operation, and possible
performance degradation as the building blocks are not jointly trained.
Summary
DNN-aided algorithms implement hybrid model-based/data-driven inference by
integrating ML into established model-based methods. As such, it is particu-
larly suitable for digital communications setups, in which a multitude of reliable
model-based algorithms exist, each tailored to a speciﬁc structure. The imple-
mentation of these techniques in a data-driven fashion thus has three main advan-
tages as a model-based ML strategy: First, when properly trained, the resulting
system eﬀectively implements the model-based algorithm from which it origi-
nated, thus beneﬁting from its proven performance and controllable complexity,
while being robust to CSI uncertainty and operable in complex environments,
due to the usage of DNNs. This behavior is numerically illustrated in the simu-
lation study detailed in Section 1.3.5.
Second, the fact that DNN-aided algorithms use ML tools as intermediate
components in the overall end-to-end inference tasks allows the use of relatively
compact networks which can be trained with small training sets. Even when the
overall system consists of a large set of DNNs, as is the case in DeepSIC, their
interpretable operation which follows from the model-based method facilitates
their training with small data sets, e.g., via sequential training techniques.
Finally, DNN-aided algorithms can utilize diﬀerent levels of domain knowl-
edge, depending on what prior information one has on the problem at hand.
For example, BCJRNet requires only prior knowledge that the channel has ﬁ-
nite memory to learn to carry out MAP detection from data. When additional
domain knowledge is available, such as an underlying stationarity or some par-
tial CSI, it can be incorporated into the number and structure of the learned
function nodes, further reducing the number of training data required to tune
the receiver. The resulting ability of DNN-aided symbol detectors to adapt with
small training sets can be exploited to facilitate channel tracking via periodic
re-training using existing pilots and other forms of structures present in digital
communications protocols, as demonstrated in [11, 43].
1.3.5
Numerical Study
In this section, we present a numerical study of the aforementioned symbol detec-
tion mechanisms. We begin with considering ﬁnite-memory channels, for which

30
Model-Based Machine Learning for Communications
we evaluate the data-driven SBRNN receiver, ViterbiNet, and BCJRNet, com-
paring them to the model-based detection methods for such channels. Then we
consider memoryless MIMO channels, where we compare the data-driven DetNet
and DeepSIC to model-based detection.
Finite-Memory Channel
We ﬁrst numerically evaluate the performance of the DNN-aided ViterbiNet and
BCJRNet, and compare this performance to that of the conventional model-
based Viterbi algorithm and BCJR detector, as well as to that of the SBRNN re-
ceiver detailed in Section 1.3.2. Both ViterbiNet and BCJRNet are implemented
using the classiﬁcation architecture in Fig. 1.7(a) with three fully-connected lay-
ers: a 1 × 100 layer followed by a 100 × 50 layer and a 50 × 16(= |M|L) layer,
using intermediate sigmoid and ReLU activation functions, respectively. For the
SBRNN receiver, we use BRNN length of B = 10 with 3 layers of LSTM cell
blocks of size 100, and a dropout rate of 0.1. The networks are trained using
5000 training samples, which is of the same order and even smaller compared to
typical preamble sequences in wireless communication systems.
We consider two ﬁnite-memory channels: An additive white Gaussian noise
(AWGN) channel and a Poisson channel, both with memory length of L = 4. For
the AWGN channel, we let W[i] be a zero-mean unit variance AWGN indepen-
dent of S[i], and let h(γ) ∈RL be the channel vector obeying an exponentially
decaying proﬁle (h)τ ≜e−γ(τ−1) for γ > 0. The input-output relationship is
given by
Y [i] = √ρ ·
L
X
τ=1
(h(γ))τ S[i −τ + 1] + W[i],
(1.32)
where ρ > 0 represents the SNR. The channel input is randomized from a BPSK
constellation, i.e., S = {−1, 1}. For the Poisson channel, the symbols represent
on-oﬀkeying, namely, S = {0, 1}, and the channel output Y [i] is generated via
Y [i]|ST ∼P
 
√ρ ·
L
X
τ=1
(h(γ))τ S[i −τ + 1] + 1
!
,
(1.33)
where P(λ) is the Poisson distribution with parameter λ > 0, and X ∼f(X)
indicates that the random variable X is distributed according to f(X).
For each channel, we numerically compute the symbol error rate (SER) for
diﬀerent values of the SNR parameter ρ. For each SNR ρ, the SER values are
averaged over 20 diﬀerent channel vectors h(γ), obtained by letting γ vary in the
range [0.1, 2]. For comparison, we numerically compute the SER of the Viterbi
and BCJR algorithms. In order to study the resiliency of the data-driven detec-
tors to inaccurate training, we also compute the performance when the receiver
only has access to a noisy estimate of h(γ), and speciﬁcally, to a copy of h(γ)
whose entries are corrupted by i.i.d. zero-mean Gaussian noise with variance σ2
e.
In particular, we use σ2
e = 0.1 for the Gaussian channel (1.32), and σ2
e = 0.08

1.3 Deep Symbol Detection
31
for the Poisson channel (1.33). We consider two cases: Perfect CSI, in which the
channel-model-based detectors have accurate knowledge of h(γ), while the data-
driven receivers are trained using labeled samples generated with the same h(γ)
used for generating the test data; and CSI uncertainty, where the model-based
algorithms are implemented with the log-likelihoods (for Viterbi algorithm) and
function nodes (for BCJR detection) computed using the noisy version of h(γ),
while the training data is generated with the noisy version of h(γ) instead of the
true one. In all cases, the information symbols are uniformly randomized in an
i.i.d. fashion from S, and the test samples are generated from their corresponding
channel with the true channel vector h(γ).
The numerically computed SER values, averaged over 50000 Monte Carlo sim-
ulations, versus ρ ∈[−6, 10] dB for the AWGN channel are depicted in Fig.
1.12, while the corresponding performance versus ρ ∈[10, 30] dB for the Poisson
channel are depicted in Fig. 1.13. Observing Figs. 1.12-1.13, we note that the
performance of the data-driven receivers approaches that of their correspond-
ing CSI-based counterparts. We also observe that the SBRNN receiver, which
was shown in [28] to approach the performance of the CSI-based Viterbi algo-
rithm when suﬃcient training is provided, is outperformed by ViterbiNet and
BCJRNet here due to the small training set size. These results demonstrate that
our DNN-aided detectors, which use compact DNN structures embedded into
model-based algorithms, require signiﬁcantly less training compared to symbol
detectors based on using established DNNs for end-to-end inference.
In the presence of CSI uncertainty, it is observed in Figs. 1.12-1.13 that both
ViterbiNet and BCJRNet signiﬁcantly outperform the model-based algorithms
from which they originate. In particular, when ViterbiNet and BCJRNet are
trained with a variety of diﬀerent channel conditions, they are still capable of
achieving relatively good SER performance under each of the channel conditions
for which they are trained, while the performance of the conventional Viterbi
and BCJR algorithms is signiﬁcantly degraded in the presence of imperfect CSI.
While the SBRNN receiver is shown to be more resilient to inaccurate CSI com-
pared to the Viterbi and BCJR algorithms, it is outperformed by ViterbiNet and
BCJRNet with the same level of uncertainty, and the performance gap is more
notable in the AWGN channel.
Finally, we evaluate the application of ViterbiNet and BCJRNet for practical
channel models. To that aim, we generate 10 realizations from the established
COST2100 model [44], which is a widely used model for current cellular com-
munication channels. In particular, we use the semi-urban 300MHz line-of-sight
conﬁguration evaluated in [45] with a single antenna element. The channel out-
put is corrupted by AWGN, and the symbol detectors operate assuming that the
channel has L = 4 taps. The remaining simulation parameters are the same as
those used in Fig. 1.12. The results, depicted in Fig. 1.14, demonstrate that the
ability of ViterbiNet and BCJRNet to approach their model-based counterparts
with perfect CSI, as well as achieve improved performance in the presence of CSI
uncertainty, holds for practical channel models.

32
Model-Based Machine Learning for Communications
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
SNR [dB]
10-3
10-2
10-1
Symbol error rate
ViterbiNet, perfect CSI
BCJRNet, perfect CSI
SBRNN, perfect CSI
Viterbi, perfect CSI
BCJR, perfect CSI
ViterbiNet, CSI uncertainty
BCJRNet, CSI uncertainty
SBRNN, CSI uncertainty
Viterbi, CSI uncertainty
BCJR, CSI uncertainty
7.8
8
8.2
4
5
6
7
8
9
10-3
Figure 1.12 Symbol error rate of diﬀerent receiver structures for the AWGN channel
with exponentially decaying taps.
10
15
20
25
30
SNR [dB]
10-3
10-2
10-1
Symbol error rate
ViterbiNet, perfect CSI
BCJRNet, perfect CSI
SBRNN, perfect CSI
Viterbi, perfect CSI
BCJR, perfect CSI
ViterbiNet, CSI uncertainty
BCJRNet, CSI uncertainty
SBRNN, CSI uncertainty
Viterbi, CSI uncertainty
BCJR, CSI uncertainty
24
25
26
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
Figure 1.13 Symbol error rate of diﬀerent receiver structures for the Poisson channel.
Memoryless MIMO Channel
Next, we numerically compare DeepSIC and DetNet for symbol detection in
memoryless MIMO channels. In the implementation of the DNN-based building
blocks of DeepSIC, we used a diﬀerent fully-connected network for each training
method: For end-to-end training, where all the building blocks are jointly trained,
we used a compact network consisting of a (N + K −1) × 60 layer followed by
ReLU activation and a 60 × M layer. For sequential training, which sequentially
adapts subsets of the building blocks and can thus tune more parameters using

1.3 Deep Symbol Detection
33
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
SNR [dB]
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
Symbol error rate
ViterbiNet, perfect CSI
BCJRNet, perfect CSI
Viterbi, perfect CSI
BCJR, perfect CSI
ViterbiNet, CSI uncertainty
BCJRNet, CSI uncertainty
Viterbi, CSI uncertainty
BCJR, CSI uncertainty
4
5
6
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
Figure 1.14 Symbol error rate of diﬀerent receiver structures for the AWGN channel
with taps generated from the COST2100 model.
the same training set (or, alternatively, requires a smaller training set) compared
to end-to-end training, we used three fully-connected layers: An (N +K−1)×100
ﬁrst layer, a 100 × 50 second layer, and a 50 × M third layer, with a sigmoid
and a ReLU intermediate activation functions, respectively. In both iterative SIC
as well as DeepSIC, we set the number of iterations to Q = 5. Following [32],
DetNet is implemented with Q = 90 layers with a hidden sub-layer size of 8K.
The data-driven receivers are trained with a relatively small data set of 5000
training samples, and tested over 20000 symbols.
We ﬁrst consider a linear AWGN channel as in (1.6) with a relatively small
K. Recall that iterative SIC as well as DetNet are all designed for such chan-
nels. Consequently, the following study compares the performance of DeepSIC
and DetNet to that of the model-based iterative SIC as well as the MAP rule
(1.2) in a scenario for which all schemes are applicable. The model-based MAP
and iterative SIC detectors, as well as DetNet, all require CSI, and speciﬁcally,
accurate knowledge of the channel matrix H. DeepSIC operates without a-priori
knowledge of the channel model and its parameters, learning the decoding map-
ping from a training set sampled from the considered input-output relationship.
In order to compare the robustness of the detectors to CSI uncertainty, we also
evaluate them when the receiver has access to an estimate of H with entries cor-
rupted by i.i.d. additive Gaussian noise whose variance is given by σ2
e times the
magnitude of the corresponding entry, where σ2
e > 0 is referred to as the error
variance. For DeepSIC, which is model-invariant, we compute the SER under
CSI uncertainty by using a training set whose samples are randomized from a
channel in which the true H is replaced with its noisy version.
We simulate the 6 × 6 linear Gaussian channel, i.e., K = 6 users and N =

34
Model-Based Machine Learning for Communications
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
SNR [dB]
10-5
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
SER
MAP, perfect CSI
MAP, CSI uncertainty
Iterative SIC, perfect CSI
Iterative SIC, CSI uncertainty
Seq. DeepSIC, perfect CSI
Seq. DeepSIC, CSI uncertainty
E2E DeepSIC, perfect CSI
E2E DeepSIC, CSI uncertainty
DetNet, perfect CSI
DetNet, perfect CSI, 100x train
DetNet, CSI uncertainty, 100x train
Figure 1.15 Symbol error rate of diﬀerent receiver structures for the 6 × 6 AWGN
channel.
6 receive antennas. The symbols are randomized from a BPSK constellation,
namely, S = {−1, 1} and M = |S| = 2. The channel matrix H models spatial
exponential decay, and its entries are given by (H)i,k = e−|i−j|, for each i ∈
{1, . . . , N}, k ∈K. For each channel, the SER of the receivers is evaluated for
both perfect CSI, i.e., σ2
e = 0, as well as CSI uncertainty, for which we use
σ2
e = 0.1. The evaluated SER versus the SNR, deﬁned as 1/σ2
w, is depicted in
Fig. 1.15.
Observing Fig. 1.15, we note that the performance of DeepSIC with end-to-
end training approaches that of the model-based iterative SIC algorithm, which
is within a small gap of the MAP performance. This demonstrates the ability
of DeepSIC to implement iterative SIC in a data-driven fashion. The sequential
training method, whose purpose is to allow DeepSIC to train with smaller data
sets compared to end-to-end training, also achieves SER values comparable to
iterative SIC. DetNet, which trains a large number of parameters in an end-to-
end fashion, requires 100 times more training to approach such performance. In
the presence of CSI uncertainty, DeepSIC is observed to substantially outperform
the model-based iterative SIC and MAP receivers, as well as DetNet operating
with a noisy version of H and trained with a hundred times more samples. In
particular, it follows from Fig. 1.15 that a relatively minor error of variance
σ2
e = 0.1 severely deteriorates the performance of the model-based methods,
while DeepSIC is hardly aﬀected by the same level of CSI uncertainty.
Next, we consider a Poisson channel. We use K = 4 and N = 4. Here, the
symbols are randomized from an on-oﬀkeying for which S = {0, 1}. The entries

1.3 Deep Symbol Detection
35
10
15
20
25
30
SNR [dB]
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
SER
MAP, perfect CSI
MAP, CSI uncertainty
Iterative SIC, perfect CSI
Seq. DeepSIC, perfect CSI
Seq. DeepSIC, CSI uncertainty
E2E DeepSIC, perfect CSI
E2E DeepSIC, CSI uncertainty
Figure 1.16 Symbol error rate of diﬀerent receiver structures for the 4 × 4 Poisson
channel.
of the channel output are related to the input via the conditional distribution
(Y [i])j |S[i] ∼P
 
1
p
σ2w
(HS[i])j + 1
!
,
j ∈{1, . . . , N}.
(1.34)
As DetNet is designed for linear Gaussian channels, DeepSIC is the only data-
driven receiver evaluated for this channel.
The achievable SER of DeepSIC versus SNR under both perfect CSI as well
as CSI uncertainty with error variance σ2
e = 0.1 is compared to the MAP and
iterative SIC detectors in Fig. 1.16. Observing Fig. 1.16, we again note that
the performance of DeepSIC is only within a small gap of the MAP perfor-
mance with perfect CSI, and that the data-driven receiver is more robust to CSI
uncertainty compared to the model-based MAP. In particular, DeepSIC with
sequential training, which utilizes a deeper network architecture for each build-
ing block, outperforms here end-to-end training with basic two-layer structures
for the conditional distribution estimation components. We conclude that under
such non-Gaussian channels, more complex DNN models are required to learn to
cancel interference and carry out soft detection accurately. Furthermore, itera-
tive SIC, which is designed for linear Gaussian channels (1.6) where interference
is additive, achieves very poor performance when the channel model is substan-
tially diﬀerent from (1.6). These results demonstrate the ability of DeepSIC to
achieve excellent performance through learning from data for statistical models
where model-based interference cancellation is eﬀectively inapplicable.

36
Model-Based Machine Learning for Communications
1.4
Summary
Deep learning brings forth capabilities that can substantially contribute to future
communications systems in tackling some of their expected challenges. In par-
ticular digital communications systems can signiﬁcantly beneﬁt from properly
harnessing the power of deep learning and its model-agnostic nature. A success-
ful integration of deep learning into communication devices can thus pave the
way to reliable and robust communications in various setups, including environ-
ments where accurate statistical channel models are scarce or costly to obtain.
However, digital communications setups are fundamentally diﬀerent from ap-
plications in which deep learning has been extremely successful to date, such
as computer vision. In particular, digital communication exhibit an extremely
large number of possible outputs, as these outputs grow exponentially with the
modulation order and the block length. They also have channel conditions that
vary dynamically, and require low computation complexity when used on small
battery-powered devices. Consequently, in order to achieve the potential ben-
eﬁts of DNN-aided communications, researchers and system designers must go
beyond the straight-forward application of DNNs designed for computer vision
and natural language processing. A candidate strategy to utilize DNNs while
accounting for the unique characteristics of digital communications setups, as
well as the established knowledge of model-based communication methods accu-
mulated over the last decades, is based on model-based ML, as detailed in this
chapter.
We reviewed two main strategies for combining data-driven deep learning with
model-based methods for digital communications, as well as discussing the need
for such hybrid schemes due to the shortcomings of the extreme cases of purely
data-driven and solely model-based methods. For each strategy, we presented
the main steps in the design of the data-driven systems, and provided concrete
examples, all in the context of the basic communication task of symbol detec-
tion. We ﬁrst discussed how established DNN architectures can be utilized as
symbol detectors, presenting the SBRNN receiver of [28] as an example. Then
we detailed how the framework of deep unfolding, which designs DNNs based
on iterative optimization algorithms, can give rise to hybrid model-based/data-
driven receivers, presenting DetNet of [32] as an example. We identiﬁed that
the main drawback of these aforementioned techniques in the context of digital
communications stems from their usage of highly-parameterized DNNs applied
in an end-to-end fashion, which directly results in the need for massive data
sets for training. Then, we presented DNN-aided algorithms, where DNNs are
integrated into existing model-based algorithms. We identiﬁed the latter as be-
ing extremely suitable for digital communications due to the wide variety of
model-based algorithms designed for such setups, combined with its ability to
incorporate diﬀerent levels of domain knowledge as well as utilize compact DNNs
as intermediate components in the inference process.
The DNN-aided symbol detectors presented as examples here, i.e., ViterbiNet

1.4 Summary
37
[11], BCJRNet [12], and DeepSIC [43], all numerically demonstrated improved
performance over competing strategies when a limited amount of training data is
available. In particular, it is demonstrated that these DNN-aided symbol detec-
tors, which are designed to operate in a hybrid model-based/data-driven fashion,
learn to approach the performance achieved by purely model-based approaches
operating with perfect knowledge of the underlying channel model and its param-
eters. Furthermore, the DNN-aided symbol detectors were shown to be notably
more resilient to CSI uncertainty compared to model-based schemes, carrying
out accurate detection in the presence of inaccurate CSI. Finally, it was demon-
strated that model-based deep learning enables DNN-aided receivers to learn
their mapping from relatively small data sets, making it an attractive approach
to combine with tracking of dynamic channel conditions.
