A DIKW Paradigm to Cognitive Engineering
Amit Kumar Mishra
Electrical Engineering Department
University of Cape Town, South Africa

August 19, 2018
Abstract
Though the word “cognitive” has a wide range of meanings we deﬁne cognitive
engineering as learning from brain to bolster engineering solutions. However, giv-
ing an achievable framework to the process towards this has been a difﬁcult task. In
this work we take the classic data-information-knowledge-wisdom (DIKW) frame-
work to set some achievable goals and sub-goals towards cognitive engineering.
A layered framework like DIKW aligns nicely with the layered structure of pre-
frontal cortex. And breaking the task into sub-tasks based on the layers also makes
it easier to start developmental endeavours towards achieving the ﬁnal goal of a
brain-inspired system. machine learning, cognitive architecture, bio-inspired,
Big-Data
1
Introduction
Brain has intrigued researchers since the beginning of scientiﬁc endeavours. Firstly,
beginning of computers saw the advent of exciting developments which culminated to
the development of the new discipline of artiﬁcial neural networks (ANN). ANNs have
been through several generations of major developments, with the recent phase consist-
ing of spiking neural networks based works [1]. Another parallel ﬁeld of computational
neuroscience has been the bio-inspired cognitive architectures (BICA) [2] a ﬁeld which
got major thrust in development. Cognitive architecture (CA) in general and BICA in
particular also has a long history and the efforts have been devoted towards trying to
emulate the functioning of brain. CAs like SOAR and ACT-R have been under de-
velopment for many decades and have been applied in various studies [3, 4]. A third
direction in cognitive engineering has been the recent developments in communication
and radar which are misleadingly termed cognitive communication [5] and cognitive
radar [6]. It may also be mentioned here that this 2012-2013 has seen multi-billion
dollar investment done separately in the European Union as well as in the USA for the
study and understanding of brain [7–9].
With the starting of few major big-science projects [7–9] to understand human
brain, the focus on cognitive architecture has enhanced. The other innovation that has
1
arXiv:1702.07168v1  [cs.AI]  23 Feb 2017

made phrases like cognitive and AI the buzz-words once more is the success obtained
by deep learning [10]. Another reason creating an intense interest in brain inspired
architecture and hardware is the emergence of big data and the hope that this might
be solved using cognitive architectures [11]. The robotics community is also excited
about the possibilities of cognitive robots [12]. Major research agencies and industry
labs are investing substantial amount of funds to explore this area.
In spite of many very well written documents the author feels the lack of a single
holistic model for cognitive engineering which is:
• intuitive to understand;
• shows action-items on how to implement;
• shows a long term vision and how that is connected to what can be achieved now;
and
• not too abstract while not being restrictive (and thereby leaving scopes for dis-
ruptive innovations and discoveries).
In this work we endeavour to present a model that matches the requirements listed
above. In doing so we chose the data-information-knowledge-wishdom (DIKW) model
of representing human cognition. And build our proposed cognitive architecture layer
by layer. We also present the action blocks that shows how each of the layers can
actually be implemented.
Rest of the report is presented as follows. Section 2 presents our model. Section 3
expands the model with action/execution blocks. We end the report with the Conclu-
sion section.
2
The DIKW Model of Cognition
From the seminal works by Fuster [13] to the success of the current generation of
deep neural networks [14] evidences suggest that the cognitive abilities of human brain
emerge out of a layered architecture of the prefrontal cortex. Having arbitrary layers
will make it untraceable and confusing. Hence, we propose to have a layered architec-
ture inspired by the data-information-knowledge-wishdom (DIKW) framework. The
DIKW has its own set of merits and demerits as a model. For our purpose of cognitive
engineering this appears to be the best available in the open literature.
Figure 1 shows the block level representation of the proposed model. There is
a perception path (the left hand column) that shows the path in which signal from
environment passes on to the higher levels. The action path (the right hand column)
shows the way action signal passes on from the heights level to actuator level. Before
explaining each of the blocks we shall put forward the two major novelties in our
approach.
1. We have an action block associated with each of the signal processing blocks
showing different levels of abstraction.
2

2. We follow robotics phrases to describe many of the blocks, viz. “plan”, “com-
mands” etc. This is to give a physical interpretation of each block. It can be
noted that this is by no means meant to limit the model for cognitive robotics
domain only. With expanded meanings of the phrases the architecture can be
applied to any generic cognitive engineering task.
We shall expound the different blocks of the architecture now. In doing show we
shall approach it from top to bottom, i.e. from more abstract levels to less abstract ones.
• Wisdom Level: Compared to the rest three Wisdom, in DIKW, is the one with
hardly any proper deﬁnition. To take care of this lacuna we deal with this layer
with the abstract phrase “wish” or “desire”. So the information that helps us to
generate desire can be termed as belonging to this layer. In the data column this
can be modelled by different emotions and from which may arise a “wish” to do
something. This wish initiates the complete action column.
• Knowledge Level: Knowledge is also very vaguely deﬁned in the existing lit-
erature. We model knowledge as the ability to link disjoint bits of informations
and labels. It can be pointed out here that this problem of linking disjoint bits of
information is the focus of many recent efforts [15].
The action column equivalent of knowledge (if we use the explanation of knowl-
edge we discussed just now) is “planning”. Planning needs a holistic view of the
situation and the task and hence needs link between all disjoint bits of informa-
tion. It can also be noted that planning as a task is well accepted as that needing
higher cognitive abilities [16].
• Information Level: In spite of many well accepted deﬁnitions of this word the
exact meaning of information changes from domain to domain. The Oxford
Dictionary deﬁnes information as “facts provided about something; what is con-
veyed or represented by a particular arrangement or sequence of things”.
From this generic deﬁnition (and we should not forget that we are developing a
generic architecture which should be modiﬁable to different domains) we can use
“information” to mean labels attached to blocks of data conveying certain mean-
ings. For example, a block of pixels can be converted to a label called “ﬂower”.
The action column equivalent of information is command. For example in robotics
it can be “turn left” or “slow down by 20%”.
• Data Level: This is the ﬁrst level and consists of data as collected from the
environment through sensors.
In the action column this will consist of actuators.
3
Achieving Cognition through the DIKW Model
The model explained in the above section is a complicated one. In this section we shall
expand the block diagram by including processing blocks which will convert the output
from one block to the input of another.
3

Wisdom
Knowledge
Information
Data
Wish
Plan
Commands
Control 
signals
Sensors
Actuators
Environment
Figure 1: The DIKW model of cognitive processing. Note that each layer can be
regarded as a layer in the prefrontal cortex. A layer above another represents more
abstract way of processing.
A limitation of the current work is the fact that some action blocks are abstract
which means we can not implement them using the current stage of technologies. How-
ever the beauty of a modular architecture like the current one is that we can leave the
upper blocks and implement whatever levels we can starting from the lowest level.
Figure 2 gives the block diagram of the implementation oriented architecture with
action blocks shown in yellow.
We shall explain each action block below with reference to their strata in the DIKW
chain.
• D-I Interface: We term this action block as “analysis”. This is one of the exhaus-
tively researched area in the recent past. As we have discussed in the previous
section, extracting information can be understood as attaching labels to the data.
This is the set of algorithms used for pattern classiﬁcation. Hence, this block is
one of the easier-to-implement blocks.
• I-K Interface: As discussed in the previous section, knowledge can be taken as
the steps in which related (and possibly disjoint) labels are linked together. We
call the execution steps that can give this functionality as “synthesis”. This is a
ﬁeld of current research. Automatic ontology extraction [] is a ﬁeld of research
whose algorithms can be borrowed to execute this block. However, ontology
4

Wisdom
Knowledge
Information
Data
Wish
Plan
Commands
Control 
signals
Sensors
Actuators
Environment
Analysis
(Automatic lebel 
generation)
Synthesis
(Automatic Ontology 
generation)
Intuition
(Emotion 
generation)
Figure 2: Just a model is not of much use unless there is plan for implementing the
same. This ﬁgure shows additional action-blocks which can, potentially, transform D
to I, I to K and K to W. It can however be noted that the last transformation of K to W
is a proposal for completion sake. The authors are not aware of any work endeavouring
to extract W from K; even the deﬁnition of wisdom is far from set in stone.
itself is a fairly recent ﬁeld of research and automatic ontology is still in its
infancy.
Still the visions are set clear and we expect the execution of this block to be
feasible in the coming few years.
• K-W Interface: This is the most abstract execution block. We call it the “Intu-
ition” block which generates wisdom from knowledge (or ontology). We foresee
that this block will mostly involve the generation of emotions. However, the ex-
act meaning of emotions and the exact modus-operandi of their generation is still
something that may take a decade to develop. So we can hope that this block can
only be implemented in the coming decade.
Next we add another layer to the architecture where we put execution blocks for the
action column as well. This is shown in Figure 3. We shall explain each action block
below with reference to their strata in the DIKW chain.
• W-K Interface: We call this block planning. This takes desire to the level of
plan-formation stage. Again, being at the top-most layer, the execution of this
5

Wisdom
Knowledge
Information
Data
Wish
Plan
Commands
Control 
signals
Sensors
Actuators
Environment
Analysis
(Automatic lebel 
generation)
Synthesis
(Automatic Ontology 
generation)
Intuition
(Emotion 
generation)
Planning
(Desire to 
plan-formation)
Modus-operandi
(Plan to executable 
steps)
Action
(Command to 
executable sinals 
for the actuators)
Figure 3: The architecture with executable blocks for the action column as well.
block will depend on the detailed understanding of “desire” and “wisdom” and
hence may take almost a decade.
• K-I Interface: We call this block “Modus-operandi” in which the plan is broken
into executable steps. This is something that can be executed with the current
technology. Of course it depends on the domain. For example, in the domain
of path-planning this is a well-studied area (though, by no means, exhausted).
However, in a different domain (e.g. ﬁnancial asset management) this will still
take a while to be executable.
• I-D Interface: This is the last execution block where the commands are broken
into executable signal that can be understood by the actuators. This, again, is an
implementable block with the current technology.
4
Conclusion
In this work, we have presented the model of prefrontal cortex from a DIKW paradigm.
Prefrontal cortex is attributed to cognition in human brain. Hence, we believe that the
implementation of this will create a truly cognitive system.
The merit of the presented architecture is that it is based on DIKW paradigm which
is well understood and hence understanding the architecture is easy. Secondly this
6

approach helped us to break the architecture into distinct blocks. This helps in further
analysis of the architecture and helps in implementing this.
Lastly, we also preset execution blocks which will make the complete architecture
possible to be implemented. It can be marked that almost three of the execution blocks
can not be implemented using the current technology. However the beauty of the ar-
chitecture is the fact that because of the layered nature we can still implement part of
it and experiment. This also helps in setting a road-map for future development which
will help in implementing the architecture fully.
We believe that the proposed architecture will help the researchers in implementing
partially cognitive systems and will also set a trackable road-map for the cognitive
engineers.
