Deep learning the Hurst parameter of linear fractional processes
and assessing its reliability
D´aniel Boros∗
B´alint Csan´ady †
Iv´an Ivkovic ‡
L´or´ant Nagy §
Andr´as Luk´acs ¶
L´aszl´o M´arkus ‖
December 1, 2023
Abstract
This research explores the reliability of deep learning, specifically Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM) networks, for estimating the Hurst parameter in fractional stochastic processes. The
study focuses on three types of processes: fractional Brownian motion (fBm), fractional Ornstein-
Uhlenbeck (fOU) process, and linear fractional stable motions (lfsm). The work involves a fast
generation of extensive datasets for fBm and fOU to train the LSTM network on a large volume of
data in a feasible time. The study analyses the accuracy of the LSTM network’s Hurst parameter
estimation regarding various performance measures like RMSE, MAE, MRE, and quantiles of the
absolute and relative errors. It finds that LSTM outperforms the traditional statistical methods
in the case of fBm and fOU processes; however, it has limited accuracy on lfsm processes. The
research also delves into the implications of training length and valuation sequence length on the
LSTM’s performance. The methodology is applied by estimating the Hurst parameter in Li-ion
battery degradation data and obtaining confidence bounds for the estimation. The study concludes
that while deep learning methods show promise in parameter estimation of fractional processes,
their effectiveness is contingent on the process type and the quality of training data.
∗Department of Probability Theory and Statistics, E¨otv¨os Lor´and University, Budapest, Hungary
†Institute of Mathematics, E¨otv¨os Lor´and University, Budapest, Hungary
‡Alfr´ed R´enyi Institute of Mathematics, Budapest, Hungary
§Alfr´ed R´enyi Institute of Mathematics, Budapest, Hungary
¶Institute of Mathematics, E¨otv¨os Lor´and University, Budapest, Hungary
‖Institute of Mathematics, E¨otv¨os Lor´and University, Budapest, Hungary; Department of Statistics, University of
Connecticut, Connecticut, USA
1
arXiv:2401.01789v1  [stat.ML]  3 Jan 2024

1
Introduction
Fractional processes play a pivotal role in the stochastic modeling of diverse phenomena, including the
wear and tear of machinery and the valuation of financial instruments. A key variable in these models
is the Hurst exponent, which may reflect memory decay, self-similarity, fractal dimension, or all of them
simultaneously, as in fractional Brownian motion.
The model’s accuracy is highly sensitive to the Hurst exponent, highlighting its criticality; even
slight errors in estimating this parameter can cause significant discrepancies in the model’s effectiveness
and predictive capability. Consequently, it is vital to comprehend and precisely quantify the margin of
error associated with this parameter’s estimation. While conventional statistical methods for estimating
this parameter have been thoroughly explored, the potential of deep learning techniques in this area
warrants investigation. Our research focuses on three process types: fractional Brownian motion (fBm),
fractional Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (fOU) process, and fractional L´evy stable motions (fLsm).
Degradation modeling and reliability analysis are fundamental to the Prognostics and Health Man-
agement (PHM) of contemporary complex systems. With advancements in measurement technologies, a
notable long-range dependence (LRD) has been observed in the degradation patterns of various assets,
including turbofan engines, blast furnaces, lithium-ion batteries, and chemical catalysts. This LRD,
also known as long-term memory effect or persistence, indicates that correlations of asset degradation
increments extend over extensive periods. Therefore, future degradation trends are not only influenced
by the current condition of the asset but are also deeply linked to its entire degradation history. The
LRD’s significance extends beyond asset performance degradation, being prevalent in fields like finance,
hydrology, and biology. Consequently, numerous models integrating LRD have been developed for asset
degradation and reliability analysis.
To monitor the long-term memory LRD in degradation patterns effectively, several researchers have
incorporated fBm in asset degradation models. The memory structure of FBM is delineated by the
Hurst parameter H, which lies within the range 0 < H < 1. Specifically, when 0.5 < H < 1 fBm
exhibits LRD, making it increasingly relevant for analyzing LRD-integrated degradation data across
various assets. Examples of its application include Xi et al.’s Xi, Chen, and Zhou, (2017) model that
leverages the LRD for predicting the remaining useful life of turbo engines, Zhang et al.’s Zhang, Zhou,
Chen, and Shang, (2019) integration of multiple degradation modes in an fBm-based model, Si et al.’s
Si, Shao, and Wei, (2020) application in accelerated degradation tests, and Zhang et al.’s Zhang, Mo,
Wang, and Miao, (2020) development of an explicit probability density function (PDF) for remaining
useful life estimation within an LRD-integrated framework. These models exemplify the growing scope
of fBm applications in asset degradation analysis Zhang, Zhou, Chen, and Xi, (2019); Song, Chen,
Cattani, and Zio, (2020); Wang, Song, Zio, Kudreyko, and Zhang, (2020). The fBm solely relies on the
Hurst parameter to characterize the degradation process, which may not sufficiently capture complex
time series data attributes. Nonetheless, practical degradation processes typically exhibit non-Gaussian
traits, whereas the fBm process conforms to Gaussian distributions.
Conversely, L´evy stable motion exhibits non-Gaussian stable distributions and is characterized by
parameters α, β, γ, and δ. This motion, simplifying to Brownian motion when α = 2, is distinguished by
its heavy-tailed nature, with a probability density that diminishes following a power law. The fractional
L´evy stable motion (fLsm), as an extension of L´evy stable motion, encapsulates both non-Gaussian
characteristics and heavy-tailed properties, as well as exhibiting LRD. In this model, positive LRD is
indicated when H > 1
α, suggesting continuity in future trends with the present. Conversely, H < 1
α
denotes the absence of LRD, implying contrasting future trends. When H = 1
α, the process is deemed
independent of past trends. Notably, in the α = 2 case, the fLsm model aligns with the fBm. Thus,
fLsm presents a versatile framework capable of modeling a broad spectrum of stochastic processes,
ranging from heavy-tailed to both Gaussian and non-Gaussian distributions.
In the realm of industrial production, where sensor data is abundantly collected, data-driven
methodologies are increasingly vital for predicting performance degradation in complex mechanical
systems. These methods are broadly categorized into statistical and deep learning-based approaches.
2

Deep learning techniques, including convolutional neural networks (CNN), long short-term memory
(LSTM), deep belief networks (DBN), deep autoencoders (DAE), and transfer learning (TL), have
garnered significant attention in RUL prediction. For instance, Ding et al. Ding, Yang, Cheng, and
Yang, (2021) introduced an RUL prediction method for rolling bearings based on DCNN, enhancing
feature learning capabilities. Qin et al. Qin, Chen, Xiang, and Zhu, (2020) developed a neural network
with a gated dual attention unit for predicting the RUL of rolling element bearings. Yan et al. Yan, Qin,
Xiang, Wang, and Chen, (2020) crafted an ON-LSTM network for gear RUL estimation, integrating
tree structures within LSTM to improve prediction accuracy. Haris et al. Haris, Hasan, and Qin,
(2021) combined DBN with Bayesian optimization for estimating supercapacitor RUL, while Wang
et al. Wang, Peng, Liu, Xu, Liu, and Saeed, (2020) utilized DAE for feature extraction and LSTM
for electric valve RUL prediction. Fan et al. Fan, Nowaczyk, and R¨ognvaldsson, (2020) proposed a
feature-based TL approach to extend RUL prediction models from simpler to more complex domains.
While deep learning approaches have achieved notable successes in predicting the remaining useful
life (RUL) of equipment, these algorithms’ effectiveness is heavily reliant on the quality and volume of
the training data, leading to inefficiencies in model training, particularly with combinatorial network
models. Additionally, the determination of hyper-parameters in these algorithms often involves laborious
cross-validation or heuristic methods, limiting their practical application in industrial settings. A
significant limitation of most deep learning methods is their focus on point-wise RUL predictions, which
struggle to accurately quantify the uncertainty in RUL projections under varying conditions, thereby
inadequately addressing risk assessment in predictions. In contrast, statistical data-driven methods,
which do not depend on extensive degradation data, possess intrinsic strengths in accurately quantifying
the uncertainties associated with RUL predictions, offering a more robust framework for risk assessment.
The primary aim of our research is the swift and accurate estimation or calibration of these fractional
processes in complex models used across various sectors, such as finance and reliability engineering. In
the domain of financial volatility modeling, the Hurst exponent frequently falls below 0.5, leading to
rough paths. Conversely, in reliability engineering, particularly in degradation or remaining useful life
(RUL) analysis, the Hurst exponent often exceeds 0.5, indicating a long memory effect.
We train neural networks using extensive and accurately simulated datasets, ensuring the Hurst
exponent’s variation covers its entire spectrum from 0 to 1. To generate our training samples, we
implement a sophisticated Davies-Harte-type algorithm capable of efficiently producing sample paths
from isonormal processes, encompassing the fBm and fOU processes. For estimating parameters of the
fOU process, we utilize a bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) network, comprising two
layers and enhanced with a normalization layer.
While current deep-learning-based research predominantly concentrates on predicting risks or losses,
the dynamics of risk propagation and methods to impede this spread are comparatively underexplored.
To enhance production safety, product reliability, or financial stability, a blend of targeted risk response
strategies and an ambient, all-encompassing risk prevention framework is essential. In addressing
this, we propose integrating the study of propagation dynamics with deep learning methodologies to
thoroughly model and scrutinize the spread of risks. Keeping this perspective, our goal is to utilize
deep learning to unravel the dynamic parameters of stochastic processes that underlie or stimulate risk
propagation.
In recent years, a number of works utilizing neural networks emerged on the estimation of the Hurst
parameter of fBM. Those applying multilayer perceptions (MLPs) have to cope with the required fixed
input size and hence have one of the following alternatives: either inference can be performed only on a
fixed-length series (Ledesma-Orozco et al,, 2011; Han et al,, 2020), or inference is made on a set of
process-specific statistical measures enabling a fixed size input to the neural networks (Kirichenko et al.
, 2022; Mukherjee et al. , 2023). A more recent signature-based method, described in Bonnier et al.
(2019) Bonnier et al. (2019), is also capable of estimating fBM’s Hurst parameter. In executing that,
the extracted statistical descriptors are processed by an LSTM.
The hybrid application of statistical descriptors and neural networks employed in the mentioned
methods does not bring significant improvement compared to our purely neural network solution while
3

increasing the computational time sometimes unbearably. Another common weakness of the recently
published methods is that they do not address the possible limitations caused by scaled inputs.
A major advancement of our research lies in the creation of a neural network-based methodology,
which markedly surpasses traditional statistical methods in determining the parameters of the fBm and
fOU processes. This method excels in accuracy and speed compared to previous statistical and deep
learning approaches. To achieve it, we need large-scale teaching of the network, and to do that, we
have successfully invented a very fast generation of extensive fBm datasets for training purposes.
2
Teaching the Neural Network
2.1
The Processes
A fractional Brownian motion (fBm) Mandelbrot and Van Ness (1968), denoted as BH(t), is
a Gaussian process initiating from zero and characterized by continuous time, zero mean, and the
autocovariance function
E [BH(t) · BH(s)] = 1
2
 |t|2H + |s|2H −|t −s|2H
.
The fBm is notable for having stationary and dependent increments and is recognized for being a
self-similar process with fractal paths. The Hurst exponent H is its sole parameter. According to
Robert Adler’s seminal work, Brownian motion and Stochastic Differential Equation (SDE) driven
diffusion processes invariably exhibit fractal dimensions (FD) of 1.5. That highlights the inadequacy
of these processes for modeling phenomena with varying FDs, thus underscoring the significance of
fBm. Notably, the FD of fBm paths varies with the Hurst parameter H, so that FD= 2 −H.
A fractional Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (fOU) process is defined Cheridito et al. (2003) by a fractional
stochastic Langevin differential equation
dX(t) = κ(θ −X(t))dt + σdBH(t),
(1)
where the process is driven by an fBm BH(t) with Hurst parameter H ∈(0, 1). Both the drift
parameter κ and the volatility parameter σ are positive real constants. The solution to the fOU
equation is known to exist and is unique, subject to an initial condition. It can be expressed explicitly,
particularly for a 0 initialization and expectation, as follows:
X(t) = −σ
Z t
0
e−κ(t−s)dBH(s).
The fOU process is an isonormal and, therefore, a Gaussian process belonging to the first Wiener-Ito
chaos driven by fBm. It achieves a unique stationary solution when initiated in a stationary state. The
paths of the fOU process inherit their fractal dimension from the driving fBm. The fOU process is
characterized by four parameters: H, κ, θ, and σ. Biagini et al. (2008) Cheridito et al. (2003)Coutin
(2007)
The fBm has different extensions to the α-stable case. One of the most commonly used is the linear
fractional stable motion (lfsm). This process is also called linear fractional Levy motion (lfLm) or
fractional L´evy stable motion (fLsm).
The lfsm Lα
H(t) is defined as the stochastic process given by the integral
Lα
H(t) =
Z ∞
−∞

((t −x)+)H−1/α −((−x)+)H−1/α
dM(x)
4

where 0 < α < 2, is the parameter of stability, 0 < H < 1, H ̸= 1
α is the Hurst exponent and M is an
α-stable random measure on R with Lebesgue control measure. For any z ∈R (z)+ = max(z, 0).
The lfsm is a fractional self-similar stable process with stationary increments (H-sssi), where
H is the Hurst exponent of fractionality ( for more details, see Samorodnitsky and Taqqu (1994)
Samorodnitsky and Taqqu (1994)). The parameter H characterizes the self-similarity property of
lfsm. The marginal distribution of Lα
H(t) is α stable. It follows that P(Lα
H(t) > x) ∝tαHx−α as
x →∞, and that the generalized dispersion defined in the quantile sense satisfies D(Lα
H(t)) ∝tH,
which is similar to the behavior of fBm. If 1/α < H < 1, and α ∈(1, 2), this process may be shown
to present long-range dependence in some extended sense given in Samorodnitsky and Taqqu (1994)
Samorodnitsky and Taqqu (1994). It has to be clearly differentiated from the stable time-changed
Brownian motion described in Huillet Huillet (1999).
Let us recall that the path properties of a linear fractional stable motion strongly depend on the
interplay between the parameters H and α. When H > 1/α, the lfsm paths are H¨older continuous on
compact intervals of any order smaller than H −1/α. If H < 1/α, the lfsm explodes at jump times of
the driving L´evy process; in particular, it has unbounded paths on compact intervals. Clearly, in this
approach, the stable character of the resulting process has been favored, and this model is the natural
extension of the fBm in this respect.
2.2
The neural network structure
There are three kinds of invariances that we might require from the network: shift, scale, and drift
invariance. In order to make an fBm Hurst-estimator that works well in practice, we want to rely on all
three of the above invariances. We can obtain shift invariance by transforming the input sequence to
the sequence of its increments. Differentiating the input also turns drift invariance to shift invariance.
By performing a standardization on the sequence of increments, we can ensure drift and scale invariance.
The standardizing phase can also be considered as an additional layer to the network, applying the
transformation x 7→(x −x)/ˆσ(x) to each sequence of increments x in the batch separately, where
ˆσ(x) is the sample standard deviation over the sequence x, and x is the arithmetic mean over x. Note
that the sample standard deviation is a biased estimator of the true one because of the autocorrelated
samples. The bias, however, is negligible because of the relatively long sample length.
After the layers to ensure invariances, the next layers constitute a sequential regressor. This part of
the network first transforms the input sequence into a higher dimensional sequence, after which each
dimension of the output is averaged out, resulting a vector. Finally, a scalar output is obtained by an
MLP. In the present analysis, we only consider an LSTM network (Hochreiter el al,, 1997). We found
that the specific hyperparameter configuration does not have a significant effect on its performance.
The following are the hyperparameters that we used in the experiments below.
The applied network consists of an unidirectional LSTM with two layers; its input dimension is 1,
and the dimension of its inner representation is 128. In both models, we use an MLP of 3 layers (output
dimensions of 128, 64, and 1), with a PReLU activation function between the first two layers. AdamW
optimization on the MSE loss function was used for training the models (Loshchilov et al, 2017).
2.3
The training procedure
When faced with limited real data, the use of synthetic data generators enables the training of neural
networks on virtually unlimited datasets. In this approach, the loss calculated on new data batches
serves as the validation loss, as each batch consists entirely of new, synthetically generated data. This
method helps prevent overfitting by ensuring the model does not specialize too heavily on the training
data and also highlights the critical importance of the quality of the synthetic data generator.
A large and high-quality simulated sample from both fBm and fOU processes is applied for
effective training of the neural network. We utilized Kroese’s method Kroese and Botev (2013), a
5

variation of the Davies-Harte procedure, to generate fBm and fOU trajectories. The Hurst parameter
for these trajectories is set to be uniformly distributed between 0 and 1.
To ensure the quality of the simulation, we assess Gaussianity, compare the empirical autocovariance
to the theoretical model, and re-estimate the parameters using classical statistical estimators, such as
the R/S, Whittle, variogram, Higuchi, and Peng’s detrended fluctuation analysis. While the original
Davies-Harte method for generation is accessible in existing Python packages, our application of
Kroese’s method necessitates a custom implementation using efficient Python framework tools. Our
implementation strategy preserves the covariance structure, saving it to avoid redundant computations,
thereby significantly enhancing computational speed. As the lfsm process does not belong to the class of
isonormal processes, the generation has to rely on different principles. In this case, we were unsuccessful
in developing a similarly efficient generator; therefore, we cannot train the network on lfsm trajectories.
Instead, we use the package rlfsm in R to generate lfsm sample paths. Simulation of the sample paths
is done via Riemann-sum approximations of its symmetric α-stable stochastic integral representation
while Riemann sums are computed efficiently using the Fast Fourier Transform algorithm. However, it
is much slower, so creating a proper training set is not feasible this way. Therefore, we had to contend
with analyzing the estimation of the Hurst parameter of lfsm processes by the LSTM network trained
on fBm or fOU processes.
Speed is a critical factor in this context, as we employ up to 107 trajectories of the length of 1600
or 6400 for training the network, meaning 16-64 billion data.
The neural network training is carefully designed to accommodate this complex setup. The model
utilizes a learning rate of 0.0001 with the AdamW optimizer, a combination chosen for its precision
in model tuning and effective convergence. For loss functions, both L1Loss (Mean Absolute Error)
and MSE (Mean Squared Error) are employed, crucial in refining the model’s prediction accuracy by
appropriately weighting different types of errors. The training spans various epoch lengths – 25, 50,
and 100 epochs – with each epoch generating 100,000 sequences. This strategy allows the model to
learn at multiple depths and assess the impact of different training durations. Moreover, the batch
sizes are set at 32 for training and 128 for validation, ensuring efficient learning with smaller batches
during training and a broader assessment of data during validation. We execute several trainings with
trajectory lengths of 400, 1600, and 6400 and analyze the obtained estimator.
The overall success of this method depends significantly on the generator’s accuracy and reliability.
If the generator fails to closely approximate the desired distribution, there’s a risk that the model might
learn the generator’s errors, leading to distorted results.
3
Analysis of the Hurst parameter estimation
3.1
Evaluation of the LSTM estimator on fBm and fOU samples
For benchmarking, we choose the estimator obtained by training the network on fBm trajectories
of length 1600 with a training span of 100 epochs. Increasing the number of epochs or the length
of the training series does not result in much decrease in the loss function; hence, the choice. We
choose the mean squared error (MSE) and the mean absolute error (MAE) for the loss function. The
(root)(R)MSE is minimized by the conditional mean, making it most useful when large errors are
particularly undesirable. Given the constraint on the estimated values, large errors are of less concern
in this case. The MAE is a linear score, which means that all the individual differences are weighted
equally in the average. Minimizing MAE will make the fit closer to the median and eventually more
biased.
The trained network is then used to estimate the Hurst parameter of 10000 fBm and fOU trajectories
of length 400, 1600, and 6400, respectively. We evaluate the estimation in terms of the RMSE, the
MAE, and the mean relative errors (MRE). The MAE and the RMSE can be used together to diagnose
the variation in the errors in a set of predictions. The RMSE will always be larger or equal to the MAE;
the greater the difference between them, the greater the variance in the individual errors in the sample.
6

Figure 1: LSTM estimation and its errors. The network is trained on 1600-length fBm samples, and
validated also on 1600-length fBm samples
The Hurst parameter is an exponent; therefore, the absolute or the relative deviation will heavily affect
the modeling accuracy, necessitating their analysis. It is not just the overall variability of the errors
that reflects the loss or risk in the model. Rarely occurring severe errors can be very much intolerable
in some applications. Therefore, beyond the mean error values, we also calculate the 95% quantiles and
the medians of the absolute and relative errors together with the maximum of the absolute error. The
reason is that in real applications, we estimate the Hurst exponent trajectory-wise, and even if the
estimation’s significant inaccuracy occurs only in a small percentage of the observations (i.e., stock
prices, degradation of sensitive machine parts, etc.), it still can cause unbearable loss or risk.
In the first instance, we analyze the evaluation of the estimator on samples of the same length, i.e.,
of 1600, as the training was conducted. The visual representation of the results is displayed in Figure 1.
The upper right panel shows the estimated values versus those set for generating the trajectories. The
overall performance of deep learning seems quite appealing in the graph. While the Hurst exponent
values were chosen uniformly in the generation, the estimated values slightly deviate from that, as seen
in the upper mid-panel histogram. The deviation indicates the presence of a bias at large – close to
one – Hurst parameter values. With a few exceptions, the raw errors seem to follow normal law, as
illustrated by the normal plot in the upper right corner.
Turning to absolute errors, its growth with the true Hurst value, as the lower left plot shows, is
noteworthy. The histogram of the absolute errors in the middle of the lower row shows the skewed
distribution close to that of an absolute value of a Gaussian variable. Remark, however, that two-sided
deviations from the normal law add up, and the skewness of the absolute errors is 1.16, while the
absolute value of a Gaussian variable has a skewness of 1. The maximum absolute error value is almost
0.06, more than four times the raw error’s standard deviation (0.0147). That is regarded as extreme
7

under the Gaussian law. It hints at a heavier-than-normal tail of the error distribution. The lower right
plot exhibits the relative error. Understandably, when the ’true’ generated Hurst value is extremely
low, it induces high relative error even from a small absolute error. For this reason, we cut the graph
and do not display the relative error when the generated Hurst value is lower than 0.02; such low values
are not plausible in real applications anyway. As can be seen, the relative error depends heavily on the
true value of the Hurst parameter. For that reason, together with the overall 95% quantiles, we also
calculate localized values. To a given generated Hurst value H, we take the H −0.1, H + 0.1 interval
around it and calculate the relative error quantiles from generated trajectories with true Hurst value
from that interval. We present these quantiles, calculated in 0.1 steps, by the red line in the lower right
plot.
We may change the loss function in the training from MSE to MAE, pushing the optimization
to the conditional median. Not knowing what feature of the samples LSTM learns, it is difficult to
understand the difference between the two optimizations. However, the difference in errors is really
minuscule: RMSE: 0.014774 vs. 0.014866, MAE: 0.011582 vs. 0.011659 MRE% 3.694370 vs. 3.631601
the first two to the advantage of the MAE, the last one to the MSE. Neither of the loss functions can
be preferred, and the result indicates that well-balanced samples are generated for training.
For comparison, we present a similar analysis with the Higuchi estimator, noting that very similar
results – with alternate asymmetries though – can be obtained by the detrended fluctuation analysis
and the Whittle estimators, and results are significantly worse for the variogram-based estimator, not
to mention the classical R/S estimator. We evaluate the Higuchi estimator on 10000 simulated fBm
trajectories of length 1600 with uniformly distributed random Hurst parameters. The plot of estimated
versus ”true” generated values is shown in the upper left corner of Figure 2. Bias is now observable for
the smallest (close to 0) and the largest (close to 1) values, as the histogram in the middle of the upper
row discloses. According to the normal plot in the upper left corner, the estimator does not have a
normal distribution; it has heavier than normal tails.
The absolute errors slightly exceed that of the LSTM estimator and have heavier tails; this is how
the first lower left corner plot and the histogram next to it show. The relative errors are not much
higher than the ones for the LSTM estimator, though. That can be observed in the lower right plot.
The quantiles are also similar in the low end of the Hurst parameters; however, they grow higher than
that of the LSTM at high Hurst values.
Evaluating on fOU processes the LSTM estimator trained on fBm, we proceed similarly to the fBm
case. The results are also very similar to the fBm case concerning both the LSTM and the Higuchi
estimators. Therefore, we do not present a similar figure and detailed assessment separately; it would
simply repeat what has been presented so far. In the first two blocks of rows in Table 1, we exhibit the
performance indicators of the LSTM network trained on fBm samples of length 1600 and evaluated on
10000 shorter (length 400), equally long, and longer (length 6400) samples of both fBm and fOU. The
accuracy grows significantly by increasing the sample length; the errors almost halve by every means
when quadrupling the sequence length.
We also evaluate the LSTM on fOU processes when trained on 1600-long fOU processes. The
generation of fOU processes is slower than fBm-s; hence, we are forced to contend with shorter epochs
in training, consisting of 10000 trajectories only. The third block of rows in Table 1 reveals that the
network’s performance is almost as good as the one trained on fBm despite the shorter training on
fOU. Compared to the second block of rows, we may notice that the evaluation is slightly better on
shorter (400) samples, but on longer (6400) samples, its performance does not improve as much as
the fBm-trained network. When the training and the evaluating sample lengths are equal, the two
training types perform almost equally well. The higher maximum and quantiles of absolute errors
in the 6400-long evaluation are due to several outliers. We guess that those outliers are the result
of the shorter training. The skewness of the absolute errors is 2.3558, highly different from 1, the
skewness of the absolute value of a normal distribution. It is unprecedentedly high, considering all of
our experiments.
8

Figure 2: Caption
9

Type
Evaluation
RMSE
MAE
MRE%
Absolute Error
Relative Error %
length
max
q95%
q50%
q95%
q50%
LSTM
400
0.0311
0.0241
7.32
0.1482
0.0630
0.0194
24.45
4.66
trained on fBm 1600
1600
0.0149
0.0117
3.63
0.0592
0.0300
0.0094
11.73
2.21
and evaluated on fBm
6400
0.0079
0.0066
2.43
0.0389
0.0165
0.0056
9.80
1.24
LSTM
400
0.0307
0.0238
7.06
0.1279
0.0620
0.0190
22.59
4.56
trained on fBm 1600
1600
0.0156
0.0122
3.69
0.0710
0.0316
0.0097
11.95
2.34
evaluated on fOU
6400
0.0079
0.0062
2.02
0.0293
0.0157
0.0051
6.54
1.20
LSTM
400
0.0295
0.0229
7.02
0.1270
0.0599
0.0184
22.53
4.33
trained on fOU 1600
1600
0.0157
0.0122
3.62
0.0708
0.0321
0.0098
11.51
2.31
evaluated on fOU
6400
0.0107
0.0085
2.28
0.1169
0.0233
0.0063
6.65
1.60
Higuchi Estimator
400
0.0445
0.0342
10.5
0.2507
0.0903
0.0268
33.69
6.57
on fBm samples
1600
0.0246
0.0182
4.93
0.1257
0.0515
0.0136
14.34
3.40
6400
0.0152
0.0104
2.61
0.0895
0.0332
0.0071
7.51
1.84
Table 1: Performance metrics for LSTM and Higuchi Estimator evaluated on fBm and fOU. The LSTM
network was trained on 1600-long fBm samples.
In summary, the LSTM estimator of the Hurst coefficients trained on fBm samples performs better
than the traditional statistical estimators in every aspect. True, the LSTM halves the root mean
squared errors compared to statistical estimators; however, it cuts the MAE to 60-70% and the MRE
to 75-90% only, depending on sequence length. LSTM also performs well on the maxima and the
quantiles of the absolute errors; it almost halves those. However, RMSE and MAE are not sensitive to
which range of the original parameter the errors occur. That points out the relevance of the relative
errors, and in that terms, the performance of LSTM is not that excellent. In particular, when the 95%
quantiles of localized relative errors are considered, in the low range of the Hurst parameter, LSTM,
and the statistical estimators are almost equally bad, nearing or even exceeding 20%. On the high end
of the parameter, nearing one, however, LSTM again significantly outperforms the Higuchi and other
statistical estimators, as the latter’s relative errors start to grow even along the Hurst values.
3.2
Evaluation on Linear Fractional α-Stable Motions
In view of the explicit solution formula of the Langevin equation, the fOU process can be represented
as a time-changed and scaled fBm, so it is not very surprising that the network trained on fBm samples
performs well on fOU samples, too. Therefore, it is quite exciting to overstep this class and analyze the
performance of LSTM on lfsm process samples.
As it has been said before, we cannot train the network on lfsm samples due to the lack of a fast
generator at the moment. This is why we use the network trained on fBm and fOU samples. For the
evaluatory analysis, we chose our benchmark, the LSTM network taught on 1600-long fBm samples in
the span of 100 epochs. The evaluatory samples are generated by the rlfst package of R. We choose
α from the range (1, 2) with the values 1.8, 1.5, and 1.2. With these parameters, the lfsm features
long-range dependence. As Figure 3 demonstrates, the LSTM network cannot properly detect the true
Hurst parameter value, and the higher the index of stability, the more LSTM underestimates it. To the
contrary, the Higuchi method estimates the Hurst exponent correctly, albeit with higher variance than
in the case of fBm or fOU.
Even though the result concerning LSTM is negative, it is still valuable, as it points out the
limitations of the described setup and training when evaluating the fBm-trained network on lfsm
samples.
10

Figure 3: Hurst exponent estimation of lfsm-s of α = 1.8, 1.5, 1.2 by LSTM and Higuch methods and
its errors. The network is trained on 1600-length fBm samples. The evaluation length is also 1600.
3.3
The effects of training cycles and training sequence length
In what follows, we consider the estimation quality depending on the training and evaluation length of
the series. To better understand the sample-length dependence on the quality of learning, we refined
the resolution. While keeping the methodology unchanged, we included further series of lengths 800
and 3200 in the training and 100, 200, 800, and 3200 long series in the evaluation. As it is partially
indicative of the other error types, we restrict the evaluation to the RMSE only. The resulting errors
are displayed in Table 2.
Root MSE losses by evaluation seq. length
training
seq. length
100
200
400
800
1600
3200
6400
400
0.0691
0.0449
0.0307
0.0218
0.0168
0.0140
0.0127
800
0.0693
0.0447
0.0302
0.0210
0.0152
0.0116
0.0094
1600
0.0708
0.0459
0.0311
0.0211
0.0149
0.0106
0.0079
3200
0.0738
0.0472
0.0312
0.0213
0.0149
0.0105
0.0080
6400
0.0748
0.0480
0.0318
0.0217
0.0151
0.0110
0.0083
Table 2: Root MSE losses of LSTM-based models trained on different sequence lengths.
Understandably, the performance is very weak when evaluated on the short series. Generally
speaking, when trained on shorter sequences, the performance of LSTM improves when tested on longer
sequences but is slower than LSTM variants trained on longer sequences. LSTM variants trained
on longer sequences still performed well on shorter sequences but not as well as dedicated variants.
11

Figure 4: The changing of RMSE and MAE losses as training progresses. 25 epoch long training=blue,
50 epoch long training=coral, 100 epoch long training=green
The differences in these cases are marginal, except for the very short series. The LSTM trained on
1600-long samples has the best performance, hardly distinguishable from the LSTM of 3200-long
samples. However, training time is considerably less for the 1600-long, which is why we have chosen
that setup as the reference. Training on 6400-long sequences does not improve the RMSE loss; the
network probably reached its limit of learning, given the current architecture.
We analyzed the 1600-long fBm trajectory training, studying the loss dependence on training length
in terms of the spanned epochs. Figure 4 exhibits the loss changes during two series of 100, 50, and
25-long training, with MSE and MAE loss function choices, respectively. Although MSE is the loss
function in the algorithm, we display the RMSE instead of the MSE in the figure and use it in the
comparisons because of the very small MSE values. The graphs start from the 6th epoch. In the first 5
epochs, the loss is still so high that it would suppress the visibility of the changes in the remaining
training epochs; hence, we omitted to display it. It is remarkable that the losses closely follow each
other in independently started network teachings. Shorter teaching losses simply follow the beginning
part of longer teaching. By the 50th training, the RMSE decreases to 95.1% that of the 25th training,
and by the 100th training, it decreases significantly less, to 98.6% that of the 50th training. At the
75th step, the RMSE is only 0.3% higher than the final RMSE loss. The same concerns the MAE losses
in the respective teachings. The actual MAE loss percentages are: 50th/25th=95.5, 100th/50th=97.5%.
At the 80th step, the MAE is only 0.5% higher than the final MAE loss. So, we may say that when
using 1600-long fBm samples, there is no practical indication to increase the teaching epoch numbers
above the 80th. Nevertheless, we used the 100 epochs in our analysis as the longest (and benchmark)
teaching.
4
An Application to Li-ion Battery Degradation
In our study, we utilized a dataset provided by the NASA Prognostics Center of Excellence (PCoE), which
includes experiments on Li-Ion batteries involving charging and discharging at different temperatures and
recording the impedance as the damage criterion. The dataset is available at https://www.nasa.gov/
intelligent-systems-division/discovery-and-systems-health/pcoe/pcoe-data-set-repository/.
12

Figure 5: Capacity losses caused by structural degradation of Li-ion batteries
We determined the capacity associated with the cycles, applying a 70% threshold as the criterion
for battery degradation. We present the obtained series in Figure 5. Our objective was to estimate the
Hurst parameter of the process, assuming it follows fractional Brownian motion, based on the obtained
data series.
We use the madogram to estimate the fractal dimension D, returning a Hurst exponent estimate by
2 −D, and the Higuchi method for statistical benchmarking. The madogram yielded a value of 0.8558,
while the Higuchi method resulted in 0.6189.
In contrast, among our trained LSTM models, the best results from models trained on fBm samples
were obtained from the 100- and 200-long training length, which estimated Hurst parameter values of
0.9312 and 0.9641, respectively. In subsection 3.3, we concluded that the best estimate can be achieved
when the network is taught on the same length series as the sample, for which to estimate the Hurst
parameter. It may explain why the short training lengths provide the best results in the sense of
being closest to the benchmark. The closest result to the madogram estimation was obtained from a
model trained on a 200-length fractional Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process, with a value of 0.8294, and the
400-length fOU-trained network provided 0.7726 as the estimated Hurst parameter. The advantage
of our approach is that we can also come up with confidence intervals in terms of absolute deviation
and relative error. For the 100-long fBm training, the 95% quantile of the absolute errors is 0.1280,
whereas for the 200-long fBm training, the same 95% quantile is 0.0875. Considering that the Hurst
parameter is less than one, these quantiles produce 95% confidence intervals (0.8032, 1) and (0.8361, 1)
for the two estimations, respectively, both containing the madogram-based estimation. Turning to
the fOU-trained LSTM estimates, the absolute error’s 95% quantile is 0.0854 for the 200-long and
0.0612 for the 400-long training. These quantiles result in the 95% confidence intervals (0.744, 0.9148)
and (0.7114, 0.8338) for the corresponding estimates, respectively. Considering relative errors, the 95%
quantiles are far too large, being around 25%. The exception is the case of the 400-long fOU trained
network when the 95% relative error quantile localized around the 0.8 Hurst value is 8.78%. It results
in a confidence interval of (0.7047, 0.8404). Summarizing, we may say that in all models, Hurst values
between 0.8 and 0.83 belong to the 95% confidence interval.
In Shao and Si Shao and Si, (2023), several results obtained values between 0.8 and 0.9 for the
Hurst parameter estimation using their model, which was defined as dX(t) = µdt + σBH(t), where
X(t) represents the degradation process. This way, they assume a linear trend in the process. When
modeling by fOU, as we did by applying the fOU-trained network, we introduce a trend of exponential
(and random) characters that may play a similar role to the linear one. That may explain why ours
and their estimations of the Hurst parameter are close to each other. Remark for clarity that the fOU
used in the modeling is not stationary.
13

In Liu, Song, and Zio Liu, Song, and Zio, (2023), an lfsm, called by them as fractional L´evy stable
motion, was applied for modeling the degradation of lithium-ion batteries, where the Hurst parameter
estimation yielded values around 0.6, aligning closely with our Higuchi estimation. The α parameter
value in their modeling was consistently around 1.8-1.9. Given that the LSTM estimator does not
perform satisfactorily in the lfsm case, there is no controversy in our and their findings. Note the
well-known fact that when α = 2, the lsfm process reduces to a fractional Brownian motion.
Both articles focused on modeling the degradation of lithium-ion batteries, similar to our study,
providing valuable insights and benchmarks for our analysis.
5
Conclusions
Our research demonstrates that a neural network with a standard architecture, when trained with a
substantial volume of data, significantly outperforms traditional statistical estimators in both accuracy
and speed for estimating process parameters, provided it is trained on appropriate process types.
However, skewness in the data can adversely affect the accuracy of the deep learning estimator,
particularly in scenarios involving rare but significant losses or risks, as highlighted by the error
quantiles. Despite the overall high performance, the relative errors in the estimations can still be
considerable under certain parameter configurations.
The training phase of the neural network may extend to several hours, but the estimation time
remains significantly lower – by one or two orders of magnitude – compared to conventional methods.
In terms of cross-process applicability, the network trained on fractional Brownian motion data also
shows commendable performance when applied to fractional Ornstein-Uhlenbeck processes, but its
effectiveness is reduced for fractional L´evy stable motions.
The methodology is applied to estimating the Hurst parameter in Li-ion battery degradation data.
The obtained confidence bounds conform with the findings of previously published research.
Our results suggest that transforming the evaluation data can lead to impractical slowdowns in the
estimation process, indicating that approaches like signature transform or certain transformer classes
may not be promising alternatives. However, the current introduction of the iTransformerYong Liu,
(2023) offers a promising alternative. The iTransformer inverts the duties of the attention mechanism
and the feed-forward network, focusing on embedding individual time series as variate tokens to capture
multivariate correlations effectively. The iTransformer’s ability to handle multivariate correlations
makes it a highly viable and efficient backbone for time series forecasting, addressing the limitations of
traditional Transformer-based forecasters. Therefore, we intend to exploit its novel capabilities in our
further research.
6
Acknowledgement
The last author gratefully acknowledges partial support from the Fulbright Teaching and Research
Award while starting this research.
