OPTIMISATION OF A CROSSDOCKING DISTRIBUTION CENTRE SIMULATION MODEL 
 
 
Adrian Adewunmi, Uwe Aickelin 
School of Computer Science 
University of Nottingham 
Nottingham 

 
Keywords: 
Crossdocking, 
Simulation 
Optimisation, 
Common Random Numbers 
 
Abstract 
This paper reports on continuing research into the 
modelling 
of 
an 
order picking 
process 
within 
a 
Crossdocking 
distribution 
centre 
using 
Simulation 
Optimisation. The aim of this project is to optimise a 
discrete event simulation model and to understand factors 
that affect finding its optimal performance. Our initial 
investigation revealed that the precision of the selected 
simulation output performance measure and the number of 
replications required for the evaluation of the optimisation 
objective function through simulation influences the ability 
of the optimisation technique. We experimented with 
Common Random Numbers, in order to improve the 
precision of our simulation output performance measure, 
and intended to use the number of replications utilised for 
this purpose as the initial number of replications for the 
optimisation of our Crossdocking distribution centre 
simulation model. Our results demonstrate that we can 
improve the precision of our selected simulation output 
performance measure value using Common Random 
Numbers at various levels of replications. Furthermore, after 
optimising our Crossdocking distribution centre simulation 
model, we are able to achieve optimal performance using 
fewer simulations runs for the simulation model which uses 
Common Random Numbers as compared to the simulation 
model which does not use Common Random Numbers.  
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
On occasions we find complex systems in the real world 
which are too complicated to understand. In such situations 
it is good practice to strip these systems of some of their 
features, to leave us with physical models of the essential 
components that make up such systems. This striping will 
facilitate 
an 
understanding 
of 
the 
system 
under 
consideration and provide an insight into its behaviour. 
Simulation, which mimics the behaviour of real systems, is 
valuable for the purpose of striping such systems with the 
aim of understanding such systems and evaluating their 
performance [Morgan 1984]. These evaluations are usually 
in response to “what if” questions, which seek values for 
certain performance measures. However, solutions to real 
life problems take the form of “how to” questions, which 
seek optimal expected performance subject to some 
constraints [Azadivar 1999]. 
Our attention centres on studying a methodology, which 
focuses on the evaluation of complex systems using discrete 
event simulation, and the use optimization to obtain its 
optimal performance. Preliminary studies indicate that there 
are a number of factors that influence the capability of the 
optimisation technique in attaining optimal performance 
values for the simulation model of our complex system of 
interest. These include the precision of the selected 
simulation output performance measure and the number of 
replications required for the optimisation process. We 
propose to augment our simulation model with a variance 
reduction technique, Common Random Numbers, primarily 
to speed up the process of Simulation Optimisation. The 
potential gains of this extension include an improvement in 
the precision of our selected simulation output performance 
measure, and the possibility of using the number of 
replications utilised for this purpose as the initial number of 
replications for the evaluation of the optimisation objective 
function.  
For simulation models, where the performance of such 
models is measured by its precision, confidence interval half 
width, for the selected output performance measure, it is 
sometimes difficult to achieve a target precision at an 
acceptable computational cost because of the variance 
associated with the simulation output value. This variance 
can be due to the inherent randomness of the complex 
model under study or the technique applied in designing and 
analysing such models [Wilson 1984]. Furthermore, it is 
difficult, to estimate a fixed number of replications over a 
single simulation run, which will achieve a target precision 
for a selected output performance measure. This implies that 
before running the simulation model, one cannot be sure, 
how valid and precise the selected performance measure 
output values will be or to estimate in advance the number 
of replications necessary to yield the desired confidence 
interval half width. Consequently, there is a need to reduce 
the variance associated with the simulation output value in 
order to improve its precision. This can potentially lead to 
an estimate of the initial number of replications for our 
Simulation Optimisation study. 
A variance reduction technique is statistical technique for 
improving the precision of a simulation output performance 

measure without using more simulation, or, alternatively 
achieve a desired precision with less simulation effort 
[Kleijnen 1974]. An example of one of such techniques is 
the Common Random Numbers which entails dedicating a 
different stream of random numbers to each source of model 
randomness [Kelton et al 2007]. Common Random 
Numbers is useful for comparing two or more systems, and 
is commonly used because of its simple and easy to 
implement. We are using Common Random Numbers as a 
technique for variance reduction in order to improve the 
precision of our selected simulation output performance 
measure, where the precision improvement is potentially 
achieved with less replication, and the number of 
replications utilised for this purpose can possibly be used as 
the initial number of replications for the evaluation of the 
optimisation objective function. This should probably lead 
to fewer replications over a fixed number of simulation runs 
being utilised for obtaining the optimal performance of our 
simulation model.  
From a survey of simulation literature the main techniques 
for estimating the number of replications for improving the 
precision of a selected simulation output performance 
measure include the Rule of thumb [Law and McComas 
1990], the Graphical method [Robinson 2004], and the 
Confidence Interval (with specified precision) Method 
[Banks et al. 2005]. For the purpose of our study, we have 
chosen to derive an estimate of the initial number of 
replications needed for the purpose of optimisation, using 
the Confidence Interval (with specified precision) method, 
where such an estimate will be reduced to the minimum 
with the use of a variance reduction technique which should 
adequately deal with the error associated with the estimation 
of the simulation models true mean value. The main benefit 
of using the Confidence Interval (with specified precision) 
Method that is it is based on statistical inference to estimate 
the number of replications required to achieve a target 
precision for the simulation output performance measure.  
Traditionally, warehouses have had the following functions, 
for example, receiving, storage, order picking and shipping. 
However, logistics companies have found storage and order 
picking to be cost intensive and this has lead to a strategy of 
keeping 
zero 
inventories. 
This 
strategy 
called 
is 
Crossdocking and is based on a Just in Time (JIT) 
philosophy which eliminates the storage function in a 
warehouse while maintaining the receiving and shipping 
activity [Gue 2001]. We are using the order picking process 
within a Crossdocking distributions centre as our application 
test bed because it provides a good representative of a 
complex system that is characterised by randomness, which 
can be modelled using discrete event simulation. It also 
provides an opportunity to understand the behaviour of the 
order picking process within a Crossdocking distribution 
centre and identify sources of model randomness.  
 
The Simulation Optimisation experiments are performed 
using Arena® simulation software (Version 11) and 
OptQuest® for Arena® optimisation software (Version 11). 
This paper continues with a background study and details of 
the Common Random Numbers experiments and results. 
This is followed the Simulation Optimisation experiments 
and results, ending with our conclusions and future work. 
 
2. BACKGROUND 
 
Usually at a Crossdocking distribution centre, trucks arrive 
with consignment that is sorted, consolidated, and loaded 
onto outbound trucks destined for customers. The customer 
is usually predetermined before the product arrives and as 
such there is no need for storage. The floor area is divided 
into a break up area and a build up area, where sorting and 
consolidation of consignment takes place, respectively. 
Customer order types can vary as well as the techniques for 
fulfilling them. The two main techniques for fulfilling 
orders are either through manual order picking operatives or 
automated order dispensers or on some occasions by both 
[Napolitano 2000]. A Crossdocking distribution centre 
system can exhibit some unpredictability in its behaviour 
which can influence its overall performance. For example, 
manual order picking operators can have different skill 
levels and familiarity with picking certain types of orders, 
while automated order picking machines failure are 
sometimes random occurrences. These arbitrary events 
amongst others can influence the overall volume of orders 
fulfilled through the Crossdocking distribution centre 
[Adewunmi et al 2008]. In such a situation, it becomes 
important for the achievement of a smooth Crossdocking 
operation, to pay particular attention to the order picking 
process within the Crossdocking distribution system [Li et 
al 2004]. 
For the modelling and analysis of the order picking function 
within the Crossdocking distribution centre, and the 
subsequent determination of its optimal performance, a 
technique is required which can perform such an evaluation 
in spite of the randomness inherent in such a complex 
process. Such a methodology is Simulation Optimization, 
which is a procedure for finding the best input variable 
values from amongst all possibilities without explicitly 
estimating each possibility [Fu 2002].  The major issues to 
address, regarding this methodology are as follows: 
• 
A logical expression does not exist for the 
optimisation 
objective 
function 
and/or 
the 
constraints. 
• 
The 
optimisation 
objective 
function 
and/or 
constraints are stochastic parameters of the 
deterministic decision variables. 
• 
Simulation models are stochastic in nature and 
their output is not deterministic with respect to the 
model parameters. 

However, there are advantages in using Simulation 
Optimization, for example: 
• 
For discrete stochastic systems, the variance of the 
response is controllable by various output analysis 
techniques, i.e. variance reduction techniques. 
• 
The complexity of the system being modelled does 
not significantly affect the performance of the 
optimization process. 
• 
Simulation Optimisation provides the opportunity 
to change the optimisation objective function 
and/or constraints over a number of replications to 
reflect alternative designs for the complex system 
under consideration. 
Using discrete event simulation to evaluate the performance 
for each set of input parameter values of the Crossdocking 
distribution centre involves the use of probabilistic 
distributions as part of the input parameter estimation which 
will result in some variance associated with the output 
performance measure value. The greater the level of 
variance in the output value, the lower the precision the 
simulation output results will contain and by precision we 
are referring to a specified confidence interval and a target 
half width [Law and Kelton 2000].  Thus there is a need to 
apply appropriate statistical techniques to the selected 
simulation output performance measure for there to be a 
satisfactory level of confidence in the conclusions obtained 
through them. These statistical techniques are called 
variance reduction techniques.  
There are a variety of techniques for reducing variance 
associated with an output performance measure, resulting 
from the evaluation of the performance of complex systems 
when using discrete event simulation which include: The 
Common Random Numbers [Kelton et al 2007], Antithetic 
Variates and Control Variates [Nelson 1990], Importance 
Sampling and Stratified Sampling [Glasserman et al 2000], 
and the Sequential Sampling Method [Law and Carson 
1979]. For a background treatment to variance reduction 
techniques, refer to [Kleijnen 1974], [Law and Kelton 
2000]. The variance reduction technique we are considering 
is the Common Random Numbers, which is usually used 
when comparing two or more alternative systems. It also 
entails dedicating a different stream of random numbers, 
different from the default set up in most simulation 
software, to each source of model randomness. It is based 
on the principle that when comparing complex systems, it is 
important to do so using the same experimental conditions 
and any differences in selected performance measures is 
attributable to differences in the simulation models and not 
due to random variation in experimental conditions.  
 
3. COMMON RANDOM NUMBERS  
The Common Random Numbers was tested for its 
efficiency as a method for improving the precision of our 
selected simulation output performance measure. We are 
particularly interested in finding out its performance in 
relation to reducing the half width at a 95% confidence 
interval for our output measure, Total Usage Cost, as well as 
estimating the number of replications over a single run it 
would utilise for this purpose.  
 
3.1 Experiments 
We ran the model under two experimental settings, 
Model 1-1 and Model 1-2. The objective is to compare the 
differences in half width over a number of replication levels 
for our selected simulation output performance measure 
with or without the use of Common Random Numbers. Here 
is a brief description of the two simulation models which 
have been used for experimental purposes: 
a. Model 1-1: The entity arrival rate uses the 
exponential probability distribution, and the manual / 
automated order picking process uses the triangular 
probability distribution. There are two skilled order 
picking operatives and, two unskilled order picking 
operatives at each order picking point. There are two 
automated order picking dispensers, one at each picking 
point. This model uses the default random number 
stream generated by the Arena® simulation software. 
b. Model 1-2: The entity arrival rate uses the 
exponential probability distribution, and the manual / 
automated order picking process uses the triangular 
probability distribution. There are two skilled order 
picking operatives and, two unskilled order picking 
operatives at each order picking point. There are two 
automated order picking dispensers, one at each picking 
point. This model, also implements the Common 
Random Numbers technique, i.e. dedicating a different 
random number stream to sources of model variance, 
different from the default random number stream used 
by the random number generator [Kelton et al 2007]. 
The number of replications used for this experiment range 
between 100 to 5000 and as previously mentioned, Run 1 
(Model 1-1) uses the default random stream while, Runs 2, 
(Model 1-2) uses independent random number stream which 
has been defined by the user. The half width has been set at 
a 95% confidence interval. This means in 95% of repeated 
trials, the average mean value for the selected simulation 
output performance measure value would be reported as 
within ± the half width. 
 
3.2 Results 
From the results shown in Table 5, From the results 
shown in Table 5, the sum of differences value (220.5) for 
the half width of the simulation model, Model 1-2, which 
uses Common Random Numbers, is less than sum of 
differences value (241.8) for the half width for Model 1-1, 
which does not use Common Random Numbers. This 
strengthens our supposition that Common Random Numbers 
is a useful technique for improving the precision of our 

selected simulation output performance measure. We also 
examined the differences in half with between Model 1-1 
and Model 1-2 over the experimental range of replications, 
100 to 5000, and observed that as the number of replications 
increased, the difference in half with reduces at a 
proportional rate, until the half with (38.2) of Model 1-1 is 
slightly smaller than the half width (38.5) of Model 1-2. 
This means that with more replicating, it is possible to 
reverse the gains of half with reduction using Common 
Random Numbers for our selected output performance 
measure, but we cannot determine in advance a reasonable 
amount of replications which will be sufficient to achieve 
our target precision. In our opinion also, 5000 replications is 
not a practical amount of replication for experimentation 
purposes. So a decision has to be made which criteria for 
improving that precision of our selected simulation output 
performance is more important that the other, or 
alternatively we can seek to deal precisely with half width 
reduction which utilises minimal computational effort. We 
have therefore decided to concentrate our efforts on 
experimenting with a combination of variance reduction 
techniques, including Common Random Numbers, which 
have shown a potential to achieve a reduction in half width 
using fewer replications, see [Nelson 1990]. 
 
IDE- 
NTIF- 
IER 
No 
CRN 
Model 
1-1 
CRN 
Model 
1-2 
 
Total 
Usage Cost 
 
 
 
No. of 
REPS 
0.950 
C. I. 
HALF 
WID- 
TH 
0.950 
C. I. 
HALF 
WID- 
TH 
 
Sum of 
Diff.  
REPS 
100 
280 
259 
21 
500 
122 
114 
8 
1000 
86.4 
82.8 
3.6 
2500 
54.2 
53.9 
0.3 
5000 
38.2 
38.5 
-0.3 
Sum of Diff. 
VRT 
241.8 
220.5 
32.6 
Table 5. An analysis of the reduction of half width over a 
range of replications. 
 
4. CROSSDOCKING SIMULATION OPTIMISATION 
The 
following 
illustrates 
the 
optimisation 
of 
the 
Crossdocking distribution centre simulation model, with and 
without the use of the Common Random Numbers. The 
main idea is to experiment with the optimisation of the 
Crossdocking discrete event simulation model with a view 
to determining the efficiency of Common Random Numbers 
as a variance reduction technique and to investigate its 
influence on the computational effort required for the 
Simulation Optimisation process, i.e. the utilised number of 
simulation runs while the number of available of 
replications is fixed.   
 
4.1 Experiments 
Below 
are 
the 
experimental 
settings 
for 
the 
Crossdocking distribution centre Simulation Optimisation 
procedure: 
a. 
Number of fixed simulation runs for optimisation: 
100 
b. Number of replications for optimisation: 3, 4, and 5 
c. 
Number of fixed replications for the simulation 
model:  500 
d. Maximum number of automated dispensers: 4 
e. 
Maximum number of manual operatives: 6  
The 
Crossdocking 
distribution 
centre 
Simulation 
Optimisation problem can be formulated, as follow: 
 
Minimise Total Usage Cost 
 
 
Subject to the following constraints: 
 
 
Automated dispensers ≤ 6 
 
 
Manual operatives ≤ 4 
We chose to accept the default number of simulation runs 
suggested by the OptQuest® for Arena® optimisation 
software, 100. The number of replications for the 
optimisation runs has been varied between 3, 4 and 5.  This 
is based on simulation literature which suggests this 
quantity of replication i.e. the Rule of Thumb Law and 
[McComas 1990]. We have used this as our initial reference 
point, but our interest is in using the number of replications 
for achieving a target precision for a simulation output 
performance measure as the estimated initial number of 
replications for the optimisation procedure. The row in table 
6, best solution simulation runs, indicates the number of 
evaluations of the optimisation objective function through 
simulation required to obtain an optimal solution [April et al 
2003]. Here is a brief description of the two simulation 
models which have been used for experimental purposes: 
a. Model 1-1: The entity arrival rate uses the 
exponential probability distribution, and the manual / 
automated order picking process uses the triangular 
probability distribution. There are two skilled order 
picking operatives and, two unskilled order picking 
operatives at each order picking point. There are two 
automated order picking dispensers, one at each picking 
point. This model uses the default random number 
stream generated by the Arena® simulation software. 
b. Model 1-2: The entity arrival rate uses the 
exponential probability distribution, and the manual / 
automated order picking process uses the triangular 
probability distribution. There are two skilled order 
picking operatives and, two unskilled order picking 
operatives at each order picking point. There are two 
automated order picking dispensers, one at each picking 
point. This model, also implements the Common 
Random Numbers technique, i.e. dedicating a different 
random number stream to sources of model variance, 

different from the default random number stream used 
by the random number generator [Kelton et al 2007]. 
 
4.2 Results 
Table 6 summarises the results of the optimisation 
of the Crossdocking distribution centre simulation model. 
After making 3 optimisation runs i.e. Run 1, Run 2 and Run 
3 of the two simulation models Model 1-1 (No Common 
Random Numbers) and Model 1-2 (With Common Random 
Numbers), the difference in solution quality between the 
two simulation models Run 1, is £2342, Run 2, is (£1515), 
and Run 3, Model 1-1,I s (£563). The difference in Total 
Usage Cost value demonstrates that for our experimental 
settings, the quality of solution is better with the Model 1-1 
as compared with Model 1-2. However, this difference 
progressively reduces which indicated that there is a 
possibility that by increasing the number of replications for 
optimisation, the quality of Model 1-2’s solutions may 
improve and become better that currently achieved with a 
maximum number of 5 replications. Model 1-2 found its 
optimal solution for Run 1 at simulation run 7, Run 2 at 
simulation run 1 and Run 3 at simulation run 15. Model 1-2 
found its optimal solution for Run 1 at simulation run 42, 
Run 2 at simulation run 21 and Run 3 at simulation run 31. 
We also discovered that Model 1-2 with the Common 
Random Numbers achieves an optimal performance value 
using considerably less simulation runs as compared with 
Model 1-1, and sometimes with great order of magnitude. 
This type of difference is important for solving Simulation 
Optimisation problems where the level of complexity with a 
single simulation evaluation of the optimisation objective 
function can be computationally expensive.   
 
IDENTIFIER  
Run 1 
Run 2 
Run 3 
Total Usage Cost 
BEST 
SOLUTION 
£ 
BEST 
SOLUTION 
£ 
BEST 
SOLUTION 
£ 
No CRN 
Model 1-1 
 
151,646 
 
151,951 
 
152,523 
CRN 
Model 1-2 
 
153,988 
 
153,466 
 
153,086 
Difference in  
Best Solution  
 
(2342) 
 
(1515) 
 
(563) 
Best Solution 
Simulation Runs 
No CRN 
Model 1-1 
 
42 
 
21 
 
31 
Best Solution 
Simulation Runs 
CRN 
Model 1-2 
 
7 
 
1 
 
15 
OPTIMISATION 
Simulation Runs 
No. of REPS  
 
100 
3 
 
100 
4 
 
100 
5 
SIMULATION 
No. of REPS 
 
500 
 
500 
 
500 
Table 7. Crossdocking Simulation Optimisation for various 
number of replication levels  
 
5. CONCLUSION 
The aim of this research project is to optimise a 
Crossdocking distribution centre simulation model and to 
understand the factors that affect the location of optimal 
solutions. Initial research reveals that there are a number of 
factors that influence the ability of the optimisation 
technique in finding optimal solutions. These include the 
precision of the selected simulation output performance 
measure and the numbers of replications required for the 
evaluation of the optimisation objective function through 
simulation. Our results demonstrate that we can improve the 
precision of our selected simulation output performance 
measure value using Common Random Numbers but this 
requires a large number of replications over a single 
simulation run. However, after optimising our Crossdocking 
distribution centre simulation model with and without the 
use of Common Random Numbers, we are able to achieve 
comparable results from both models using less simulation 
runs for the simulation model which includes the Common 
Random Numbers. Future work will be to experiment with a 
combination of variance reduction techniques for the 
purpose of dealing with the imprecision in the selected 
simulation output performance measure as well as exploring  
the potential it provides for speed up this process, i.e. 
minimising the initial number of replications required for 
the optimisation of the Crossdocking distribution centre 
simulation model. We will also like to determine using 
rigorous statistical test, an estimate for a recommended 
number of simulation runs for a typical Simulation 
Optimisation process. Furthermore, we will investigate the 
potential of using the number of replications required to 
improve the precision of the simulation output performance 
measure as the initial number of replications required for the 
evaluation of the optimisation objective function through 
simulation.
