Sentiment Analysis for Open Domain Conversational Agent
Mohamad Alissa, Issa Haddad, Jonathan Meyer, Jade Obeid,
Nicolas Wiecek, Sukrit Wongariyakavee
Conversational Agents, Department of Computer Science
Heriot-Watt University
Edinburgh, UK

Abstract
The applicability of common sentiment
analysis models to open domain human
robot interaction is investigated within this
paper. The models are used on a dataset
speciﬁc to user interaction with the Alana
system (a Alexa prize system) in order
to determine which would be more ap-
propriate for the task of identifying sen-
timent when a user interacts with a non-
human driven socialbot.
With the iden-
tiﬁcation of a model, various improve-
ments are attempted and detailed prior to
integration into the Alana system.
The
study showed that a Random Forest Model
with 25 trees trained on the dataset spe-
ciﬁc to user interaction with the Alana sys-
tem combined with the dataset present in
NLTK Vader outperforms other models.
The new system (called ’Rob’) matches
it’s output utterance sentiment with the
user’s utterance sentiment. This method
is expected to improve user experience
because it builds upon the overall senti-
ment detection which makes it seem that
new system sympathises with user feel-
ings.
Furthermore, the results obtained
from the user feedback conﬁrms our ex-
pectation.
1
Introduction
The aim of sentiment analysis is to extract sub-
jective information like opinion and sentiment
from text in natural language to create actionable
knowledge to be used by a decision support system
(Pozzi et al., 2017a). Organisations and individu-
als seek to know the opinions of others to form
better decisions, this can be seen in consumer data
information, the use of focus groups, advert place-
ment in internet sidebars, opinionated documents,
civilian response in crisis situations and the med-
ical ﬁeld (Pozzi et al., 2017a). Sentiment analy-
sis continues to be highly challenging with the re-
search community attempting many sub-problems
that have not been completely solved (Pozzi et al.,
2017b).
With this in mind, it is expected that
scripted conversations between two humans like
what is done in movies, unscripted conversations
between two humans, and human-machine inter-
action systems will contain a varying amount of
sentiment with very different dialogue.
Working with a large dataset in the area of
human-machine interaction systems allows the
evaluation of already existing tools and machine
learning techniques to better optimise develop-
ment within this area.
The model is integrated
into Alana (a 2017 Alexa prize system (Ram et al.,
2017) consisting of an ensemble of bots, combin-
ing rule-based and machine learning systems, and
using a contextual ranking mechanism to choose
system responses) (Papaioannou et al., 2017). In
order to evaluate the improvements to the system
(Rob) a lightweight design is required with mini-
mal interference to the original system (Alana).
2
Related Work
In the original Alana system that acts as the base
that is improved upon, Papaioannou et al. (2017)
used sentiment polarity as weighting for the Linear
Classiﬁer Ranker which ranked Bucket responses.
This allowed the highest-scoring response to be
selected as the output utterance. While the lin-
ear ranker of the system was later replaced with
a neural model at the ﬁnals of the Amazon Alexa
Challenge, improvements to the sentiment polar-
ity could see a marked increase in responses that
would improve user experience.
Singh et al. (2016) explore techniques for opin-
arXiv:2101.00675v2  [cs.AI]  15 Jul 2021

ion extraction from huge amount of unstructured
information with recent papers on sentiment anal-
ysis detailing the techniques used as well as the
dataset used. With over 60k dialogue instances
available in the dataset to be used identifying com-
plexity of techniques and their speed allows better
judgement over the models that should be looked
at.
Sentiment is linked to previous context, Katz
et al. (2015) details a way to retrieve key terms in
the text and analyse the context in which they ap-
pear. The detected terms are used to generate fea-
tures for supervised learning, the advantage of this
approach is incorporation of context that works
well over multiple domains with varying degrees
of noise.
Another approach presented by Appel et al.
(2016) uses a hybrid system that works well at
the sentence level against twitter-like datasets us-
ing sentiment lexicons, NLP essential techniques
and fuzzy sets.
3
System Design, Architecture, and
Components
3.1
Dataset and Annotation
3.1.1
Interactions dataset
In order to train and evaluate the models used in
this work, a dataset of human-machine dialogues
was used. To the best of our knowledge, very few
pre-annotated datasets on this type of interaction
are currently available. As such, and to ensure the
best level of performance, a dataset of transcribed
dialogues was manually annotated. This data orig-
inates from conversations between American citi-
zens and the Alana system in 2017, through the
Alexa voice assistant. The annotation scheme used
consists of two polarities (i.e. positive and nega-
tive), two intensity levels and a neutral sentiment.
The resulting annotation scheme is [’Very posi-
tive’, ’Positive’, ’Neutral’, ’Negative’, ’Very Neg-
ative’], also written as (’++’, ’+’, ’0’,’-’, ’–’). The
annotation is done solely on the user utterances,
without context; a possibility that was explored
but which would result in complex models which
would be capable to handle two or more utterances
at a time. To ensure high inter-annotator agree-
ment, sample utterances where collectively anno-
tated, especially to agree on what is considered to
be of the strongest intensity level. A dataset of
1200 utterances was selected from the main Alana
interactions dataset either randomly or due to the
presence of a ’sentiment-related’ word in the sen-
tence.
Hu and Liu’s opinion lexicon, available
at
https://www.cs.uic.edu/
liub/FBS/sentiment-
analysis.html, was used to identify such sentences.
These 1400 utterances where split into 7 equal size
parts (for each members), with a 10% overlap be-
tween datasets, meaning that every member anno-
tated 200 uniques utterances along with 20 utter-
ances from an other annotator. This overlap was
used to compute the Kappa value (inter-annotator
agreement metric). The annotators has the pos-
sibility to skip utterances they believed were not
of good quality (such as a randomly selected sen-
tence : ”Ah”) or for which they were unsure due
to possible sarcasm or strong context dependency.
If we ignore utterances that were skipped by one
annotator, the overall Kappa value is 0.764, oth-
erwise 1, the Kappa value is equal to 0.6999.
Note that a Kappa value above 0.7 is considered
a reﬂection of a satisfactory inter-annotator agree-
ment. The ﬁnal dataset consists of 1164 annotated
utterances.
3.1.2
Sentiment words dataset
Due to the limited amount of annotated data, we
quickly realised that the trained models would fail
to capture some clearly sentimental sentences such
as ”I am confused”, this is due to the absence of
some words in the annotated dataset. In order to
address this problem, at least partially, a secondary
dataset was used along with the annotated one.
This dataset originates from the Vader lexicon
where a collection of words have a sentiment value
associated with them (ﬂoating value between -4.0
(strongly negative) and +4.0 (strongly positive)).
We chose not to use the full dataset as it con-
sisted of too many training samples (compared to
our annotated dataset). Instead, we selected the
”strongest” sentiment words (absolute sentiment
value greater than 2.5).
The real-valued senti-
ment were discretized using the following scheme
: [’Very negative’ : [-4.0, -3.01], ’Negative’ : [-
3.0, -2.5], Neutral : [], ’Positive’:[2.5, 3.0], ’Very
positive : [3.01, 4.0]]. This ﬁnal dataset there-
fore consists of 600 ”strongly sentiment-related”
words. Note that these samples were only used as
part of the training set and not in the test set since
these do not reﬂect our goal of detecting sentiment
in a complete sentence.
Therefore, a combined dataset consisting of
1Meaning that if an annotator skipped an utterance while
the other didn’t, this will result in a non-agreement.

1164 manually annotated user utterances from
human-machine dialogues along with a dataset
containing 600 sentiment words was used, for a
total of 1764 samples.
3.2
Testing Existing Systems
In order to detect the user’s sentiment precisely,
this paper tested ﬁve different systems.
These
ﬁve systems are Naive Bayes classiﬁer, Stanford
CoreNLP, affective lexicon by Finn (AFINN),
NLTK Vader and Random Forest classiﬁer.
Random Forest classiﬁer:- This system uses
NLTK toolkit with random forest classiﬁer was
written in python script.
This system is down-
loaded from Kaggle’s competition.
Originally,
this system specialised in movie reviews senti-
ment analysis, but this paper uses it for testing
Alana dataset.
The random forest classiﬁer is
trained on 70% of Alana data and test it on the
rest 30%. This system technique is creating a bag
of words by utilising a tokenization process then
creating the feature vectors in order to train the
classiﬁer using these vectors as input.
Affective lexicon by Finn (AFINN):- This
system was written by using JavaScript (NodeJS).
In general, this system is a wordlist-based system.
In other words, This system contains a list of
words. Each of these words has a value between
-5 (negative) and 5 (positive). In order to calculate
the sentiment value of the sentence, AFINN sums
up all sentence’s words values and divide this
result by a number of all words in this sentence.
NLTK Vader (Valence Aware Dictionary and
Sentiment Reasoner):- This system is lexicon
and rule-based system.
The best domain for
this system is the social media domain Gilbert
(2014). In general, this system gives the utterance
a sentiment value between -1 as very negative and
1 as very positive Lin et al. (2018).
Stanford CoreNLP:- Is coded by Java pro-
gramming language, trained on movie reviews
using Recursive Neural Network RNN. Stanford
classiﬁes the sentiment by understanding the
meaning and the order of the words in a given
sentence and handle the negation problem Socher
et al. (2013).
Naive Bayes:- A sentiment classiﬁer based on
the Naive Bayes algorithm. It utilised the Bayes
rule to calculate P(label|features) in terms of
P(label) and P(features|label).
The experiments present that the random forest
has the best accuracy among the other systems
which this paper tested.
This table shows the
results for (– , -, 0, +, ++) annotation categories.
System name
Acc
Alana Dataset use
Random Forest
69.1%
Training on 70%
Testing on 30%
with 25 trees
AFINN
55.4%
Testing on all
NLTK Vader
55.1%
Testing on all
Stanford CoreNLP
53.6%
Training on 70%
Testing on 30%
Naive Bayes
49.8%
Testing on all
Table 1: Systems Tested and Accuracy
Experiment on random forest model:- Once
the random forest has been chosen as best sys-
tem, many improvements have been tried includ-
ing: tuning the random forest hyper-parameters
like increasing the number of the trees from 25 to
2000; training on twitter dataset and test on Alana
dataset; and combining Vader dataset (list of sen-
timent words) with Alana dataset. Table 2 shows
the results.
Task
Accuracy
Trained on 2881 twits,
49.5%
Tested on all Alana dataset
Increasing the number of the trees
70.2%
from 25 to 2000
Combining Vader dataset
(600 sentiments words)
71.1%
with Alana dataset, 25 trees
Table 2: Random Forest Model Experiments
4
Alana Implementation
Sentiment analysis is complex problem to solve,
yet it can have a great impact on communication
ﬂow. Sentiment can be context-dependant, such
as sarcasm , some utterances can have strong vo-
cal cues showing irony or sarcasm and people may
use ”workarounds” to express their feelings in
indirect ways. Feelings are also very complex by
themselves, and no human is capable to perfectly
categorise them, let alone a machine.

4.1
Alana system description
4.1.1
General introduction
The
Alana
system
is
a
chat-bot
cre-
ated/conceived
by
Heriot-Watt
University’s
Natural Language Processing group (Edinburgh,
Scotland).
It participated in Amazon’s Alexa
2017 Challenge and reached the ﬁnals, out of 15
competitors. The goal of this competition is to
present the most capable open-domain dialogue
system. Several iterative improvements have been
thought of in order to enhance the performance of
the system. This paper describes an attempt at im-
proving its sentiment analysis capabilities. In the
following sections, a short technical introduction
of the system followed by the implementation of
our work inside the Alana system.
4.1.2
Technical introduction
Alana is a multi-agent system composed of mul-
tiple concurrently running ”bots”. These ”bots”
are independent agents, built using various tech-
nologies, some of which use machine learning
techniques while other use more scripted methods.
Most ”bots” are specialised in a speciﬁc ﬁeld such
as news retrieval, giving facts or telling jokes.
Figure 1: Showing how Alana System is built, vi-
sualise what are the Bucket feature and have an
overview of all the Chat-Bots
During a conversation, bots are queried after ev-
ery user utterance and the ﬁnal output is deter-
mined by a separate component called ”Bucket”.
This component is responsible for the general sys-
tem orchestration, such as pre-processing input
data, collecting bots output as well as producing
the ﬁnal system output.
4.2
Implementation in Alana system
4.2.1
Attempt of implementation
As a multi-agent system, Alana has a ”bot” which
was -partly- in charge of the conversation around
sentiments. It was discovered later that this bot,
called ”Persona”, wasn’t using any proper senti-
ment analyser, but instead relies on some ﬂexible
AIML utterances that were already hard coded to
create the impression of sentiment detection. So,
the ﬁrst thought was to work around this bot, ﬁrstly
by implementing into it into the Machine Learning
Model and maybe by also improving how it talks
through some added AIML. It was discovered that
a one to one implementation is not necessarily the
best option, and it was preferable to implement
this Sentiment Analyser on different level and in
a ﬂexible and responsive way.
4.2.2
Current implementation
After some further research and some failed tests,
a bucket implementation was settled on. The idea
was to add a general ”preﬁxed” sentimentally po-
larized sentence before the vanilla system sentence
if needed.
Figure 2: (a) Pre-ﬁx the system output with a
generic sentiment ﬁlled sentence.
(b) Prevent
bots with opposite sentiment from being selected.
(c) Detection of user sentiment’s target (Alana vs
other). (d) If output is already sentiment ﬁlled, do
not add pre-ﬁx.
The general Alana system gets the user utter-
ance as an input. This user utterance is also used as
an input for the system being created, and its senti-
ment polarity is analyzed using the previously de-
scribed machine learning algorithm. This creates

a sentiment as an output, which is compared to the
sentiment that the vanilla Alana system may de-
tect. The Machine Learning Model is run on each
bot.
If our output polarity is opposed to one of the
bots polarity, we prevent this bot from being trig-
gered by kicking it; in order to avoid having as a
ﬁnal output a sentence including two opposite sen-
timent such as ”That’s sad, I am so glad for you,
[...]”.
If the output polarity is the same as the vanilla
system output polarity, the system prevents send-
ing an output, and keeps only the vanilla system
one; in order to avoid having as a ﬁnal output
a sentence including two times such as ”I am so
happy, I am so glad for you, [...]”.
Finally, because the Machine Learning Model
was not powerful enough because more annotated
data would lead to better results, some negation
or speciﬁc cases were not properly detected. A
simple solution of switching polarity to the oppo-
site sentiment if negation is in the sentence was
added to the Bucket python ﬁle. Finally a word
like dead/death/die were ﬂagged as negative by the
system, so while asking for information on ”Death
Note” or ”Die Antword” there was an output with
a negative preﬁxed sentiment part before the in-
troduction of the output sentiment. It was chosen
for now to not run the model on the weather bot,
the news bot, and either the wiki bot until a better
solution to this problem could be found.
4.2.3
Alternative implementations
Detection of a strong feeling, either positive or
negative is likely to drive a human-human discus-
sion away from the topic. This means that the re-
sult of the sentiment analyser module should be
able to inﬂuence the output of every bot, or give
precedence to a dedicated bot capable to deal with
this scenario. The ﬁrst case is practically com-
plex given the Alana system; every bot is con-
sidered and has black boxes in the context of our
project, modifying each of them is deemed dif-
ﬁcult. The second way would be a suitable so-
lution but is likely to reduce the coherence the
whole system has; i.e. transitioning from a phase
”handing sentiment” to ”talking about any other
topic”. Moreover, considering the time limitations
of this project, the idea of building an additional
bot could not be considered.
4.2.4
Improvements to the current
implementation
Basically the ﬁrst idea would be to ﬁnd a better
Machine Learning Model or add some better rules
but a lot of systems were tested before choosing
and building the current one.
Obviously, the most important thing to im-
prove, would be to annotate a considerable amount
of data, or improve the annotation scheme and
method. The whole model is based on the data,
and the better the data is, the better the system will
act.
It was also thought to improve our model by
bringing it under a different angle, with a Senti-
ment Analyser that can understand proper senti-
ment and not only their polarity. But then annotate
of the data would need to accordingly change.The
annotation scheme could for example be modiﬁed
to : ”pleased, disgusted, amused, intrigued” or
something similar.
Finally, it was also found that another system
could be worked on to detect sarcasm. It was dis-
covered that on some blogging platforms such as
Reddit, people use ”/s” or ”/S” to ﬂag sarcasm in
their sentence.
Indeed, while sarcasm is some-
thing that can be heard or seen but not read, using
sentences from those platforms may help to work
on a Sarcasm Detector. Nevertheless while ma-
chine learning can be done on some subreddit sen-
tences, the issue at hand is that those are not part
of dialogue utterances and may not be useful for
the Sentiment Analyser. It then would need differ-
entiation of this tool from the currently developed
system with ﬁrst analysis of sarcasm being done
before analysing its sentiments. It is believed that
a Sarcasm Detector could be something really use-
ful for AI in general.
5
Evaluation Method
Regarding the user evaluation of the system, two
different chat-bots were created and uploaded on
Telegram: Susan, which was the current version
of the Alana chat-bot and Rob, which was Susan
equipped with the sentiment prediction model that
was developed for this project. The users were in-
structed to chat with both bots and, afterwards,
complete a survey form using their unique chat
identiﬁcation number.
The users were asked to
provide feedback on whether they felt each chat-
bot was able to understand their feeling. In ad-
dition, users were also asked to provide a rating,

on a scale of 0 to 5, on their general experience
regarding the conversation with each bot.
6
Results
Throughout an evaluation period of 22 days, 26
people conversed with Susan and Rob. Their feed-
back is as follows:
• 23.1% of users feel that Susan was able to
grasp their feeling, whereas
• 61.5% of users feel that Rob was able to
grasp their feeling.
This proves that there exists a signiﬁcant im-
provement in the ability of the system to recognise
sentiment. However, the exact percentage of im-
provement cannot be derived from these numbers.
To answer this question, the user rating states
that the average user score for Susan was 2.34 out
of 5, whereas for Rob it was 2.84. Such differ-
ence might seem unimportant, but a more careful
glance shows a signiﬁcant average of 21.37% in-
crease to the user’s engagement with Rob, com-
pared to Susan.
Despite the small size of the group that con-
versed with the chat-bots and completed the sur-
vey, the existence of an improvement in detecting
sentiment is clear. What is not clearly shown up to
this point is the exact percentage of this improve-
ment. A larger user group would have smoothened
the distribution, providing numbers with higher
conﬁdence.
Another factor that might have inﬂuenced the
evaluation process is the following: In order for
a user to realise whether the system was able to
grasp their feeling, an appropriate response has
to be provided by the system just after the feel-
ing’s expression, as veriﬁcation. In Rob’s case, the
system’s response to the user was very generic, a
decision made previously to simplify the imple-
mentation process and make the sentiment predic-
tor independent from the rest of the system. As
a result, the quality of the responses produced by
the system was not optimal and, therefore, there
have might have been cases where the system
was able to detect a sentiment, but the system’s
response was inappropriate to the sentiment de-
tected. Therefore, the user received the informa-
tion that the system was unable to understand their
emotional state and provided a low rating. Should
the goal here be to increased user engagement and
not to improve sentiment detection, the argument
to be made is that, using the same sentiment pre-
diction model and higher quality system responses
would have yielded even better results and sim-
ulated a more engaging conversational environ-
ment.
7
Conclusion and Future Work
To allow users to interact with a conversation
agent socially or more natural, the agent must be
able to express its feeling and thoughts back to
the user (Breazeal and Scassellati, 1999). How-
ever, as conversational agent such as Alana has
no facial feature, the only output that Alana pro-
vides is a sound (in Alexa system) or a text mes-
sage (in the current implementation). Thus, the
only mean available for Alana to express its un-
derstanding of user utterance by a response that
includes its thoughts and feelings toward user ut-
terance. From the experiment in subsection 3.2,
the Random Forest Model yields the highest ac-
curacy (69.1%) among other models tested. So,
to understand user feelings or emotions toward
the topic of discussion, it was decided to analyse
user’s utterance using a Random Forest Model
(25 trees) trained on the interaction between user
and Alana combined with the dataset from NLTK
Vader.
After the implementation of the Random For-
est Model into Alana system and renaming it to
’Rob’ for testing purposes, an evaluation is run to
compare Alana (a Alexa prize system) with Rob
(our implementation) by letting users try to chat
with ’Rob’ and ’Susan’ (renamed original Alana)
without telling them which is the modiﬁed sys-
tem. From the result of the evaluation, it is no-
ticed that users report that ’Rob’ tends to under-
stand their feelings more than ’Susan’ and they
gave a better overall rating for ’Rob’. It can can

concluded that to improve user experience when
interacting with a conversational agent, the agent
must be able to create a belief that it can under-
stand user’s thoughts and feelings by using sen-
timent analysis to determine user’s thoughts and
feelings.
Future research will be focused on the annota-
tion quantity and quality. From the result in sub-
section 3.2, it is believed that if there is more an-
notated data with greater consistency a better sen-
timent classiﬁer could be trained. Also, investiga-
tion on a sentiment analysis on user’s voice will
be done.
Instead of doing a sentiment analysis
on user’s utterance in a form of text data, it is felt
that the emotions and feelings are incorporated in
user’s voice. In human utterance generation, each
part in a vocal box (larynx) will contract and ex-
pand according to an individuals current emotion
which results in a angry, sad, happy, or a neu-
tral tone (Ying and Xue-Ying, 2018). A sentiment
classiﬁer can be created to detect emotions or feel-
ings from a user’s voice to compare with the result
of the current implementation.
