Refining Pre-Trained Motion Models
Xinglong Sun1, Adam W. Harley1, and Leonidas J. Guibas1
Abstract— Given the difficulty of manually annotating motion
in video, the current best motion estimation methods are trained
with synthetic data, and therefore struggle somewhat due to
a train/test gap. Self-supervised methods hold the promise of
training directly on real video, but typically perform worse.
These include methods trained with warp error (i.e., color
constancy) combined with smoothness terms, and methods
that encourage cycle-consistency in the estimates (i.e., tracking
backwards should yield the opposite trajectory as tracking
forwards). In this work, we take on the challenge of improving
state-of-the-art supervised models with self-supervised training.
We find that when the initialization is supervised weights, most
existing self-supervision techniques actually make performance
worse instead of better, which suggests that the benefit of seeing
the new data is overshadowed by the noise in the training
signal. Focusing on obtaining a “clean” training signal from
real-world unlabelled video, we propose to separate label-
making and training into two distinct stages. In the first
stage, we use the pre-trained model to estimate motion in
a video, and then select the subset of motion estimates which
we can verify with cycle-consistency. This produces a sparse
but accurate pseudo-labelling of the video. In the second stage,
we fine-tune the model to reproduce these outputs, while also
applying augmentations on the input. We complement this
boot-strapping method with simple techniques that densify
and re-balance the pseudo-labels, ensuring that we do not
merely train on “easy” tracks. We show that our method
yields reliable gains over fully-supervised methods in real
videos, for both short-term (flow-based) and long-range (multi-
frame) pixel tracking. Our code can be found here: https:
//github.com/AlexSunNik/refining-motion-code.
I. INTRODUCTION
Given the difficulty of manually annotating motion in video,
the current best motion estimation methods are trained with
synthetic data [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. This synthetic training data is
diverse, but highly unrealistic, forcing the methods to contend
with a sim-to-real gap.
Self-supervised (or “unsupervised”) models hold the
promise of training directly on real video, yet lag behind
their supervised counterparts. State-of-the-art self-supervised
motion methods typically rely on warp error (i.e., color
constancy) combined with smoothness terms [6, 7, 8], and
cycle-consistency (i.e., tracking backwards should yield the
opposite trajectory as tracking forwards) [9, 10, 11, 12]. In
current experimental setups, fully-supervised versions are
typically positioned in a league ahead, reflecting in some
way an unfair advantage. This divide between supervised
and unsupervised methods is purely academic; if synthetic
supervision is available and helpful, it makes sense to use it.
In this work, we improve state-of-the-art supervised models
with self-supervised training in an unabelled test domain.
1Stanford
University,
Computer
Science
Department.
{xs15,

Unlike typical self- or semi-supervised motion estimation
approaches which are trained from scratch, we refine an off-
the-shelf pre-trained model for a given test domain without
requiring any additional data.
We argue that this setup reflects a very practical use-case:
a user notices some errors in the model’s output, and is
willing to invest some GPU cycles into tuning up the results—
provided that the tuning is effective.
In this setup, the most straightforward solution is to directly
optimize standard self-supervision objectives in the unlabelled
data. We find that this reliably makes the pre-trained model
perform even worse, suggesting that the self-supervised
training signals are too imprecise and noisy to provide useful
gradients to an already well-optimized motion model. This
observation is consistent with the fact that self-supervised
models perform worse than supervised ones in general.
In order to obtain a “clean” training signal from real-
world unlabelled video, we propose to separate labeling and
training into two distinct stages. In the first stage, we use
the pre-trained model to estimate motion in a video, and
then select the subset of motion estimates which we can
verify with cycle-consistency. This produces a sparse but
accurate pseudo-labeling of the video. In the second stage,
we fine-tune the model to reproduce these outputs, while also
applying augmentations on the input. We complement this
self-training method with simple techniques that densify and
re-balance the pseudo-labels, ensuring that we do not merely
train on “easy” tracks.
In our experiments, we demonstrate that our method yields
reliable gains over fully-supervised methods in real videos.
Our experiments cover two types of motion models: optical
flow (i.e., RAFT [13]), and long-term point tracking (i.e.,
PIPs [14]). We use standard benchmarks for the analysis:
MPI-Sintel [3] for flow, and CroHD [15], Horse30 [16], and
TAP-Vid-DAVIS [17] for point tracking. Despite starting
from pre-trained state-of-the-art weights, our self-supervision
framework produces consistent improvements in results. We
hope that our technique, and our semi-supervised setup, will
inspire future work into refining pre-trained motion models.
II. RELATED WORK
Learning motion from color and smoothness. Soon
after the introduction of deep-learned flow methods [1], there
has been interest in learning optical flows in self-supervised
manner [6], converting classic flow assumptions [18], color
constancy, and motion smoothness, into supervision objec-
tives. Color constancy implies that when flow is accurate,
corresponding pixels in consecutive frames should have the
same color. By warping images to align with estimated flow,
arXiv:2401.00850v2  [cs.CV]  17 Feb 2024

reducing per-pixel differences can improve flow accuracy,
particularly when computed across multiple scales
[19].
The smoothness assumption helps to resolve ambiguities and
occlusions which can be simply implemented by penalizing
spatial gradients on the output flow. Minute details in this
setup can affect performance greatly [20]. Instead of relying
on color and smoothness, which can be understood as
indirectly encouraging correct motion, we compute pseudo-
labels for unlabelled data, providing direct regression targets.
Bootstrapping with student-teacher setups. Some recent
works stabilize the losses from color-matching by using
student-teacher setups. In this setting, the teacher is a moving
average copy of the student, and the student receives harder
data than the teacher [7, 8, 21]. Our work can also be
considered a student-teacher setup, but the teacher is a
frozen copy of a pre-trained model, and the student is a
trainable version of the same model. Our setup is in line
with knowledge distillation [22], except our pair of models
begins with the same architecture and weights (rather than
the student being a smaller model).
Learning motion from cycle-consistency. Color matching
is known to break down under some conditions (e.g., spec-
ularities and occlusions), so many works focus instead on
learning directly from cycle-consistency [9, 10, 11]. The key
idea is that after tracking a target from a given startpoint to
an estimated endpopint, reversing the video and re-applying
the tracker from the endpoint should lead back to the original
startpoint. This core idea is typically combined with patch-
level affinity matrices, which can be traversed with spatial
transformers [11], region-level motion averages [10], or
random walks [12, 23, 24]. Unlike existing self-supervision
works which initialize weights from ImageNet [25] or
randomly, our method begins with state-of-the-art models
whose architectures and weights are pre-optimized for motion
estimation [13, 14] and attempts to further refine them on a
new test domain. Compared to previous works which directly
leverage cycle consistency as part of training objective [11],
we use it to design a filter to select cycle-consistent motion
estimates for the finetuning.
Semi-supervised motion estimation. Semi-supervised
methods in motion estimation typically exploit a mix of
labeled and unlabelled data, hoping to achieve better perfor-
mance than exclusively using labeled data. Lai et al. [26]
propose to learn a discriminator on warp errors from ground
truth warps to provide feedback on the overall quality of
the warps,replacing the noisy per-pixel color cues. Jeong
et al. [27] add a separate segmentation module to a flow
network, supervise this module with occlusion masks applied
onto unlabelled images, and also ask flows to be consistent
across transformations applied to the input, which is similar to
our goal but requires modified architecture for segmentation.
Training from pseudo labels. The technique of training
on self-generated estimates (i.e., pseudo labels) was first
proposed by Lee et al. [28]. This core idea is often paired with
methods to filter the training targets to “confident” ones, where
confidence may be approximated with the help of ensemble
methods [29, 30]. Our work computes confidence with the
help of domain knowledge: if a trajectory is within some
cycle-consistency margin and color constancy, we consider it
a pseudo-label. Similar to Chen et al. [30], we assume that it
is possible to train on a small number of confident samples
and generalize to other regions of the domain.
III. METHOD
Our method begins with a pre-trained motion estimator and
unlabelled videos from test domain, and attempts to improve
the estimator performance with self-supervision on the input
videos. Our overall framework, illustrated in Fig. 1, consists
of two stages. In the first stage, we generate pseudo-labels,
by running the pre-trained model on the videos and selecting
a subset of model estimates with cycle-consistency-based
filters. In the second stage, we refine the model by fine-
tuning it on those pseudo-labels, challenging it to reproduce
those estimates under augmentations. In this section, we step
through the method: we first describe our motion models,
then discuss pseudo-labeling, and end with refinement.
A. Preliminaries: RAFT and PIPs
Our approach can be applied to any motion model, but
we focus here on two popular methods: RAFT [13] and
PIPs [14]. These are fine-grained general-purpose motion
models, in the sense that they can track arbitrary small
elements (i.e., points on the scene surface, specified by an
(x, y) coordinate in a given frame) in arbitrary videos (i.e., not
restricted to particular domains, though potentially suffering
a generalization gap). We use pre-trained weights publicly
released by the authors, which were produced by training in
synthetic data. In general, any motion model could be used,
but we choose RAFT and PIPs as they represent the state-of-
the-art for optical flow and multi-frame point tracking.
RAFT is a 2-frame dense-motion model. It consumes
two consecutive RGB frames as input, and produces a dense
flow map as output. The flow map is a spatial displacement
map, indicating the frame-2 correspondence for each pixel in
frame-1. Optical flow can be linked across time to form longer-
range correspondences, but these trajectories are sensitive to
occlusions, and slow to compute. RAFT works by iteratively
refining an estimated flow map, using feature correlations
indexed in a local window around the current estimates.
PIPs is an 8-frame sparse-motion model. It consumes a
sequence of 8 consecutive frames as input, along with a list
of target coordinates to track, and it produces an 8-frame
trajectory for each target. These 8-frame trajectories are less
sensitive to occlusions than optical flow, but are typically
sparse since computing these trajectories densely is expensive.
PIPs’ design is inspired by RAFT, and similarly operates by
iteratively refining its estimates, using feature correlations
indexed in a local window around the current estimates.
B. First Stage: Pseudo-label Generation
In the first stage, we generate pseudo-labels, by applying
the pre-trained model to unlabeled videos and collecting a
reliable subset of the motion estimates, where reliability is
estimated with cycle-consistency.

Cycle-consistency leverages the fact that if we track
forwards in time without error, then start at the predicted
endpoint and track backward in time without error, we will
end up at the original startpoint. Errors in tracking typically
break this cycle. We define the cycle consistency similarly
for 2-frame optical flow (RAFT) and 8-frame tracking (PIPs).
2-Frame Cycle-Consistency Filter. For optical flow, we
compute consistency by warping the backward flow map into
alignment with the forward flow map and then measure per-
pixel disagreements with a sum (since opposite flows should
cancel out) [31]. Denoting the forward flow as w and the
aligned backward flow as ˆw, ∀pixel locations i, j, we check:
||wij + ˆwij||2
2 < α(||wij||2
2 + || ˆwij||2
2 + β),
(1)
which linearly scales the tolerance threshold according to the
motion magnitude. Flows that satisfy Eqn. 1 are considered
cycle-consistent.
Following the classical optical flow assumption of color
constancy [18, 6, 20], we also ask for the tracks to be color-
consistent. Denoting the zeroth frame as r and the flow-
aligned first frame as ˆr, we use:
||r −ˆr||2
2 < γ,
(2)
where the image colors are normalized to the range [−0.5, 0.5].
This filter demands that corresponding pixels should have
similar colors. Only tracks that are both color and cycle-
consistent will be kept by the filter.
8-Frame Cycle-Consistency Filter. For 8-frame sparse
motion tracking, we measure the maximum per-timestep
distance between the forward trajectory v and the time-flipped
backward trajectory ˆv:
max
t
||vt −ˆvt||2
2 < τ,
(3)
where a threshold of τ = 1 means that the trajectories may
only drift a maximum of 1 pixel apart. Tracks that satisfy
Eqn. 3 are considered cycle-consistent.
For both 2-frame and 8-frame tracking, the threshold values
(τ, α, and β) depend on meta information such as the spatial
resolution of the video. We measure the effect of these
thresholds in our ablation study, and find that there is a
Goldilocks zone: with thresholds set too small, yielding a
strict filter, there are too few good tracks for the pre-trained
model to finetune; with thresholds set too large, yielding a
loose filter, there are too many noisy tracks which corrupt
the pre-trained weights.
We run the motion model with temporal stride 2 (to reduce
data redundancy), and use our cycle-consistency filters to
select a small subset (approximately 10%) of the resulting
tracks. We use this subset as pseudo-labels for the next stage.
C. Second Stage: Motion Refinement
In the second stage, we try to improve the pre-trained
motion model by fine-tuning it on the batched and augmented
pseudo labels, challenging the model to reproduce those
motion estimates under more difficult settings. It may seem
strange to fine-tune the model using its own estimates, but
there are several reasons this may be helpful. First, the
Loss
Pre-
trained 
motion 
model
Batch, 
aug.
Reﬁnement
Pseudo-labelling 
Unlabelled 
video
Estimated 
tracks
Pseudo- 
labelled data
Pre-
trained 
motion 
model
Cycle- 
based 
ﬁltering
Fig. 1: Refining a pre-trained motion model. We apply a
pre-trained motion model on an unlabelled video, yielding
a dense set of tracks. We filter this down to a sparse set of
cycle-consistent tracks, creating pseudo-labels. We then train
on the pseudo-labelled data using augmentations, to improve
the model.
model is iterative (in the case of both RAFT and PIPs),
and we are fine-tuning all iterations with the model’s final
iteration, making the early iterations more confident to jump
toward the answer. Second, taking gradient steps on these
pseudo-labels may lead the model to “forget” behavior which
is inconsistent with the pseudo-labels, which is a form of
domain adaptation. Third, we apply augmentations while fine-
tuning, which widens the domain where the model should
produce these cycle-consistent outputs. We use the default
augmentations from RAFT and PIPs, which include color
jittering, cropping, resizing, and random occlusions.
If the test domain is a single video, we simply fine-tune on
it directly, as shown in Fig. 1. If the test domain has multiple
videos, we find that the algorithm is robust to either mixing
all video clips together, or fine-tuning in an online fashion,
continuing the optimization for each video in sequence.
An important hyperparameter in our approach is the number
finetuning iterations κ, which controls how long the model is
trained on the pseudo-labels. In the ablation study we measure
the performance at different settings of κ, and find that as κ
goes beyond its optimal value, performance degrades slightly
but does not collapse.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
We present experiments on three widely-used datasets:
CroHD [15], Horse30 [16], Tap-Vid-DAVIS [32, 17], and
MPI-Sintel [3]. We use Sintel to measure performance on
2-frame dense optical flow estimation, and use CroHD and
Tap-Vid-DAVIS to measure performance on 8-frame sparse
motion tracking. We use RAFT [13] for optical flow, and
PIPs [14] for multi-frame tracking. We use the publicly
released checkpoints from the authors. Both models are (pre-
)trained on the synthetic FlyingThings [2] dataset, which
is noticeably unrealistic but produces strong models. In
addition to evaluating the effect of our fine-tuning scheme, we
evaluate alternative optimization objectives and also additional
supervised and self-supervised baselines, contextualizing our
results with existing works.
A. Datasets
In this section we describe each dataset in detail.
CroHD [15]. This dataset focuses on pedestrian head-
tracking in long videos of crowded environments. Ground
truth labels are provided on the train-split of the videos, thus

we perform our self-supervised refinement framework on
pre-trained PIPs [14] on these videos then validate using the
ground truth labels. Videos from CroHD are very similar
to each other, because all demonstrate pedestrians walking
either indoors or outdoors. In this dataset, we fine-tune on
multiple videos, continuing optimization from one video to
the next.
Horse30 [16] is a dataset focused on animal pose
estimation, specifically targeting Thoroughbred horses. It
encompasses 30 varied horses, with 22 body parts labeled
over 8,114 frames by an expert. Since its pose is collected
in video sequences, we could also leverage the labels to
evaluate tracking performance. We focus on multi-frame
tracking scenario and employs PIPs [14] as the baseline
motion model to refine. Moreover, we fine-tune on multiple
videos in this dataset, continuing optimization from one video
to the next.
Tap-Vid-DAVIS [17]. This is a point tracking dataset based
on the DAVIS 2017 validation set [32]. The dataset contains
30 challenging videos featuring different scenes and objects
ranging from people bicycling to horse jumping captured with
different camera motion. Each video is quite short: around
5 seconds on average. Ground truth labels are provided for
approximately 26 points per video. We refine PIPs [14] on
these videos then validate using the sparse ground truth. In
this dataset we fine-tune on each video individually, since
each video is unique.
MPI-Sintel [3]. This dataset consists of 23 animated scenes,
with per-pixel ground truth flow. The videos vary widely in
speed of motion, occlusion ratio, and scene contents. Two
versions of the data are provided (‘clean’ and ‘final’), which
vary in postprocessing effects (e.g., motion blur). In this
data we refine pre-trained RAFT [13], and validate using
the ground truth. In this dataset we fine-tune on each video
individually, since each video is unique.
B. Evaluation Metrics
With three different datasets and tracking tasks, we leverage
the most suitable evaluation metric to gauge the performance
for each task focusing on different aspects.
CroHD [15]. For CroHD, we used five different evaluation
metrics to comprehensively evaluate the model performance.
ATE-Vis and ATE-Occ evaluate the average track error in
pixels each time with an 8-frames video, for targets that stay
fully-visible and ones that undergo occlusion, respectively.
The other three metrics MTE, δ, and Survival Rate, focus
on longer-frame tracking. MTE denotes the median track
error in pixels; δ is an accuracy metric measuring the ratio of
points in our predictions that are within a threshold distance
of ground truth, averaged over thresholds (1, 2, 4, 8, 16).
Survival measures the average time that a track manages
to stay “on target” (within a threshold distance 16) without
falling off the trajectory and switching to other object or
points, measured as a ratio of video length [5].
Horse30 [16] Similar to CroHD, we include Average Track
Error (ATE) and Median Track Error (MTE) for evaluation
purpose.
TABLE I: Evaluation in CroHD. Ours clearly surpasses
baselines in most of the metrics and improves ATE of pre-
trained PIPs[14] by 10%. Existing self-supervision methods
make performance worse.
Method
ATE-Vis. ↓
ATE-Occ. ↓
MTE ↓
δ (%) ↑
Survival (%) ↑
Supervised Out of Domain
RAFT [13]
8.04
13.21
82.76
15.82
62.22
DINO [33]
23.04
25.91
116.80
8.46
37.11
PIPs [14]
4.57
7.71
8.35
50.89
82.37
Supervised Out of Domain + Self-Supervised
PIPs+Color
4.57
7.75
8.36
50.75
82.55
PIPs+Feat.
4.52
7.70
8.37
49.76
82.90
PIPs+Ours
4.02
6.79
7.93
49.88
83.96
Tap-Vid-DAVIS [17]. For Tap-Vid-DAVIS, we use the two
evaluation metrics from the benchmark [17]: delta, measuring
tracking position accuracy (as done in CroHD), and Average
Jaccard (AJ), which is a metric that incorporates both position
accuracy and occlusion accuracy.
MPI-Sintel [3]. For MPI-Sintel, we use the widely-adopted
end-point error metric (EPE), which measures the average ℓ2
error of the flow estimates.
C. Baselines
In our experiments, we consider the following baselines.
DINO [33]. This is a vision transformer (ViT-S [34] with
patch size 8) trained with contrastive self-supervision setup on
ImageNet [25]. We use the authors’ publicly released code for
converting this model into a tracker, which works per-pixel
feature matching, with the help of a memory pool [35].
Tap-Net [17]. This is a recent method designed specifically
for multi-frame point tracking. It estimates pixel correspon-
dences by taking the argmax of frame-by-frame cost maps
computed efficiently using time-shifted convolutions [36].
Self-supervision with color constancy. This has been
previously explored in methods that train from scratch [6, 20,
7, 8], but to our knowledge has not been applied to refine
pre-trained supervised models. We consider this as a baseline
in our work, by fine-tuning RAFT and PIPs with classic color
constancy and edge-aware smoothness objectives.
D. Results
We present results of our method on each dataset. Overall,
our results demonstrate that our method yields reliable gains
over fully-supervised methods, and significantly surpasses
the baselines.
CroHD [15]. We use PIPs [14] pre-trained on FlyingTh-
ings [2] dataset and run CroHD inference during sampling
with a spatial resolution of (768, 1280). The 8-frame cycle
consistency filter (Eqn. 3) and multiple-video fine-tuning
(Sec. III-C) are adopted. We choose 2.5 for the threshold τ
and 3000 for finetuning iterations κ.
Results and comparisons are provided in Table I. We
compare with state-of-the-art methods supervised out-of-
domain [13, 33, 14], and also methods that perform self-
supervised finetuning on a pre-trained model like ours. Our
method clearly surpasses all of the baselines with better scores

TABLE II: Evaluation in Tap-Vid-DAVIS. Ours clearly
surpasses all baselines in both δ and AJ with the proposed
self-supervised finetuning.
Method
δ(%) ↑
AJ↑
Supervised Out of Domain
COTR [37]
51.3
35.4
RAFT [13]
46.3
79.6
PIPs [14]
59.4
42.0
TAP-Net [17]
53.1
38.4
Supervised Out of Domain + Self-Supervised
PIPs+Ours
60.0
42.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Change of δ(%)
cows
dance-twirl
dog
breakdance
car-roundabout
shooting
bike-packing
judo
soapbox
drift-straight
kite-surf
goat
car-shadow
camel
libby
drift-chicane
dogs-jump
horsejump-high
lab-coat
mbike-trick
paragliding-launch
blackswan
motocross-jump
loading
india
pigs
gold-fish
bmx-trees
parkour
scooter-black
Fig. 2: Evaluation in Tap-Vid-DAVIS. Performance change
in δ for each of the video compared with the baseline pre-
trained PIPs model. Positive value denotes improvement (i.e.,
accuracy increasing)
on most of the metrics. Notably, compared with pre-trained
PIPs where our optimization begins, we reduce ATE-Vis and
ATE-Occ from 4.57 and 7.71 to 4.02 and 6.79, improving by
around 10% with our self-supervised refinement procedure.
For baselines, we also try several self-supervised tech-
niques to finetune the pre-trained model as ours, namely
the PIPs+Color and PIPS+Feat shown in Table I. The idea
of them is to use a self-supervised loss measuring the
difference between the color or the image features at each
predicted track position. We could observe that both these two
techniques are not effective, demonstrating even worse scores
on many evaluation metrics than the pre-trained model. This
further implies the effectiveness of our proposed procedure
in finetuning a pre-trained motion model.
Horse30 [16] We use PIPs [14] pre-trained on FlyingTh-
ings [2] dataset and run Horse30 inference during sampling
with a spatial resolution of (256, 448). The 8-frame cycle
consistency filter (Eqn. 3) and multiple-video fine-tuning
(Sec. III-C) are adopted. We choose 3 for the threshold τ
and 6000 for finetuning iterations κ.
Our results on this dataset are shown in Table III. Compared
to the pre-trained PIPs [14], our method demonstrates a
marked improvement in ATE and MTE. Specifically, we
observed a decrease in ATE from 12.31 to 10.81 and in
MTE from 4.40 to 3.97 with our self-supervised motion
refinement technique. For reference, we also include the
−30
−20
−10
0
ambush_7
ambush_4
market_6
market_5
sleeping_1
mountain_1
temple_3
ambush_5
shaman_3
sleeping_2
alley_2
market_2
bamboo_2
alley_1
shaman_2
bandage_1
cave_4
cave_2
bamboo_1
bandage_2
ambush_2
temple_2
ambush_6
Mean over all videos
Clean split
−20
−15
−10
−5
0
market_6
ambush_7
ambush_5
bamboo_2
mountain_1
temple_3
sleeping_1
cave_2
alley_1
sleeping_2
ambush_4
bandage_1
market_2
market_5
alley_2
shaman_3
shaman_2
cave_4
bandage_2
bamboo_1
ambush_6
temple_2
ambush_2
Mean over all videos
Final split
% of Change of EPE
Fig. 3: Evaluation in MPI-Sintel. Percent change in EPE for
each video compared with the pre-trained RAFT [13] model.
Negative value denotes improvement (i.e., error decreasing).
Fig. 4: Comparison of optical flow visualizations on Sintel
produced by the pre-trained RAFT [13] and RAFT with ours,
with difference highlighted in red boxes. Ours refine the flows
by cleaning noisy tracks and completing missing objects.
performance of pre-trained RAFT [13] model, which registers
an ATE of 12.46 and MTE of 4.03. We also include
the PIPs+Color baseline implemented in the same way as
in CroHD to showcase that the traditional motion self-
supervision technique fails on pre-trained model. Concretely,
it achieves an ATE of 12.15 and MTE of 4.40, indicating
that it barely helps to improve model performance. These
results showcase the effectiveness of our method.
TAP-Vid-DAVIS [17]. We use PIPs [14] pre-trained on
FlyingThings [2] dataset and run DAVIS inference during
sampling with a spatial resolution of (288, 512). The 8- frame
cycle consistency filter (Eqn. 3) and single-video finetuning
(Sec. III-C) are adopted. Specifically, we choose 1 for the
threshold τ and 100 for finetuning iterations κ for each video.
For a single-video finetuning setup, we show performance
change on each individual video with the baseline pre-trained
model. To compare with other methods on the same scale,
we also report an average of our performance over all videos.
Results and comparisons are provided in Table II and Fig. 2.
We compare with state-of-the-art methods [37, 13, 14, 17]
supervised out of domain including the latest works like
Tap-Net [17]. We beat all of the baselines with better δ and

TABLE III: Evaluation in Horse30. Ours clearly surpasses
baselines in all of the metrics and improves ATE of pre-
trained PIPs[14] by more than 10%. Existing self-supervision
methods make performance worse.
Method
ATE ↓
MTE ↓
Supervised Out of Domain
RAFT [13]
12.46
4.03
PIPs [14]
12.31
4.63
Supervised Out of Domain + Self-Supervised
PIPs+Color
12.15
4.40
PIPs+Ours
10.81
3.97
TABLE IV: Evaluation in MPI-Sintel. A clear advantage
is observed for our method, improving pre-trained RAFT by
around 10%. Existing self-supervised methods do not help.
Method
EPE↓
Clean
Final
Supervised Out of Domain
FlowNet2 [38]
2.02
3.14
PWC-Net [39]
2.55
3.93
VCN [40]
2.21
3.62
RAFT [13]
1.46
2.72
Self-Supervised
SelFlow [7]
2.88
3.87
UFlow [20]
3.01
4.09
SMURF-test [8]
1.99
2.80
Supervised Out of Domain + Self-Supervised
RAFT+Color
1.48
2.73
RAFT+Col.+Smooth
1.47
2.74
RAFT+Col.+Edge-Sm.
1.51
2.84
RAFT+Ours
1.32
2.46
AJ. Notably, compared with PIPs where we start from, we
improve δ and AJ from 59.4 and 42.0 to 60.0 and 42.5.
Moreover, we also show the performance change in δavg
for each video in Fig. 2. We could observe positive change
through our self-supervised refinement on almost all of the
30 videos except two videos ‘parkour’ and ‘scooter-black’.
Compared with the CroHD results in Table I where we
improve the pre-trained model by 10%, results on Tap-Vid-
DAVIS do not show as much improvement. However, we
note that each Tap-Vid-DAVIS video is only 5 seconds long
on average (not much space to extract pseudo-labels), and
ground truth is only available for a small number of points
(less than 30 per video).
MPI-Sintel. For MPI-Sintel, we use RAFT [13] pre-trained
on FlyingThings datasets and run Sintel inference during
sampling with a spatial resolution of (436, 1024). We use the
2-frame cycle consistency filter (Eqn. 1) augmented by color
consistency (Eqn. 2) and fine-tune on each video individually.
We use the threshold hyperparameters α = 0.005, β = 0.25,
and γ = 0.1. We choose 100 for finetuning iterations κ
for each video. We evaluate performance change on each
individual scene, and also measure the average across videos.
Quantitative comparisons are provided in Table IV and
Fig. 3, and qualitative comparisons are in Fig. 4. We com-
pare with state-of-the-art methods supervised out-of-domain,
self-supervised methods, and self-supervised techniques to
finetune the pre-trained model. We surpass all of the baselines,
with better EPE on both clean and final splits of MPI-Sintel.
Notably, compared with the pre-trained RAFT model, we
reduce the EPE for both clean and final from 1.46 and 2.72
to 1.32 and 2.46, demonstrating around 10% improvement.
Since evaluation variance is quite huge on Sintel, we visualize
the percentage EPE change for each of the videos in Figure 3.
We can clearly observe that our self-supervised refinement
improves the model performance on all of the scenes except
‘ambush_6’ in the clean split. On the other scenes, we observe
obvious and significant improvements, even 30% on scenes
like ‘ambush_7’. We visualize the optical flow results in
Fig. 4, and highlight the noticeably different regions in red
boxes. We observe that our proposed method helps refine
the optical flow output by completing missing objects, and
improving smoothness in large regions.
As baselines to our optimization strategy, we try using color
constancy as a self-supervised loss to finetune the pre-trained
model, optionally combined with a smoothness regularizer or
edge-aware smoothness regularizer. We list these in Table IV
as RAFT+Color, RAFT+Col.+Smooth and RAFT+Col.+Edge-
Sm. In practice, we found that none of these techniques help,
and EPE simply rises as training progresses.
E. Ablation Studies
We conduct two ablation studies to investigate the effect of
the design choices and hyperparameters. First, we study the
effect of the threshold τ and finetuning iterations κ. Results
are shown in Fig. 5. We conduct this study on CroHD. We
collect the best ATE_OCC and ATE_VIS for various τs, and
as an additional variant, randomly sample the tracks to choose
the pseudo-label finetuning set, denoted as ‘No Threshold’
in the figure. We find that random sampling leads to almost
no performance change, while the cycle-consistency-based
filtering leads to improvements, across various values of τ.
We observe that the optimal performance is achieved at τ of
2.5 in this dataset, with a U-shaped curve around this value.
This follows expectations, since a loose filter (with large τ)
includes too many noisy motion estimates, which corrupts
the pre-trained weights; a strict filter (with small τ) contains
too few good estimates to provide useful guidance to the
pre-trained model for the new context.
Fig. 5-(c) and Fig. 5-(d) measure the effect of fine-tuning
iterations κ. The plot illustrates that κ = 3000 achieves the
best performance. Performance degrades slightly with either
smaller or larger κ, which either insufficiently finetunes the
model on the pseudo-label set, or leads to slight overfitting.
Table V measures the effectiveness of different strategies
for choosing pseudo-labels for optical flow. We conduct
this study in Sintel [3]. Both color constancy and cycle
consistency alone are helpful, with cycle consistency slightly
outperforming color constancy. Combining the two filtering
strategies yields the best performance.

<1
<1.5
<2
<2.5
<3
No Threshold
Cycle-consistency Filter Threshold τ
6.8
7.0
7.2
7.4
7.6
Best ATE_Occ
(a)
PIPs
PIPs + Ours
<1
<1.5
<2
<2.5
<3
No Threshold
Cycle-consistency Filter Threshold τ
4.0
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6
Best ATE_Vis
(b)
PIPs
PIPs + Ours
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
Finetuning Iterations κ
6.8
7.0
7.2
7.4
7.6
ATE_Occ
(c)
PIPs + Ours, < 2.5
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
Finetuning Iterations κ
4.0
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
ATE_Vis
(d)
PIPs + Ours, < 2.5
Fig. 5: Ablation study in CroHD. We show ATE_VIS and
ATE_OCC for picking pseudo-labeled tracks with different
threshold τ (a and b) and fine-tuned for different iterations
κ (c and d). All metrics are the smaller the better. Optimal
performance is observed at τ of 2.5 and κ of 3000.
TABLE V: Ablation study in MPI-Sintel-Clean. Results
are evaluated on 8 videos from the Sintel-Clean train split.
Both Cycle Consistency and Color Constancy self-supervised
metrics lead to improvements from the pre-trained RAFT.
Combining both metrics works the best.
Method
Color Constancy
Cycle Consistency
EPE↓
RAFT
n/a
n/a
1.05
RAFT + Ours
✓
✗
0.98
RAFT + Ours
✗
✓
0.99
RAFT + Ours
✓
✓
0.93
V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
In this paper, we present a procedure to improve state-of-
the-art supervised motion models with only self-supervised
fine-tuning. Our procedure is a two-stage method where we
first use a pre-trained motion model to sample and filter cycle-
consistent tracks in the test domain, and then we fine-tune
on these tracks, with added augmentations. We compare
our method with state-of-the-art supervised models, self-
supervised training methods, and self-supervised finetuning
techniques. We find our method improves the pre-trained
model performance, on three different datasets, with two
different tracking models, whereas existing self-supervised
techniques worsen performance. We hope our method will
inspire future work on refining pre-trained motion models.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.
This work was supported by the Toyota Research Institute
under the University 2.0 program, ARL grant W911NF-21-2-
0104, and a Vannevar Bush Faculty Fellowship. The authors
thank Leonid Keselman for suggesting the title.
