Design of a GIS-based Assistant Software Agent for the Incident
Commander to Coordinate Emergency Response Operations
Reza Nourjou1
Michinori Hatayama1
Stephen F. Smith2
Atabak Sadeghi3
Pedro Szekely4
Abstract— Problem: This paper addresses the design of an
intelligent software system for the IC (incident commander) of
a team in order to coordinate actions of agents– ﬁeld units or
robots –in the domain of emergency/crisis response operations.
Objective: This paper proposes GICoordinator. It is a GIS-
based assistant software agent that assists and collaborates
with the human planner in strategic planning and macro tasks
assignment for centralized multi-agent coordination.
Method: Our approach to design GICoordinator was to:
analyze the problem, design a complete data model, design
an architecture of GICoordinator, specify required capabilities
of human and system in coordination problem solving, specify
development tools, and deploy.
Result: The result was an architecture/design of GICoordi-
nator that contains system requirements.
Findings:
GICoordinator
efﬁciently
integrates
geo-
informatics
with
artiﬁce
intelligent
techniques
in
order
to provide a spatial intelligent coordinator system for an
IC to efﬁciently coordinate and control agents by making
macro/strategic decisions. Results deﬁne a framework for
future works to develop this system.
I. INTRODUCTION
The domain of emergency/crisis response is concerned
with reducing number of fatalities in the ﬁrst few days after
disaster (natural or human-made), and USAR (Urban Search
and Rescue) has a signiﬁcant issue in this domain. A disaster
response team, which contains an IC and several agents,
is faced with the problem of carrying out geographically
dispersed tasks under evolving execution circumstances in
a manner that achieves a high-level objective in a minimum
time. Agents need to efﬁciently coordinate their actions with
each other in order to maximize the objective function.
Effective coordination is an essential ingredient for efﬁcient
emergency response management but it is difﬁcult to achieve.
It is important for the IC, who has a big picture of the state
of the world, to coordinate and control agents. His main role
is to make a strategic action plan, allocate tasks to agents,
decide on actions of agents, and schedule activities of agents
in time and space.
To propose an ideal system, some requirements should
be considered as follows. The decision-maker is the IC,
therefore coordination is a centralized approach but execution
of tasks is distributed among agents. Tasks information that
1Informatics Graduate School and DPRI, Kyoto University, Japan

2The
Robotics
Institute,
Carnegie
Mellon
University,
USA

3Geomatics Engineering Dep., Istanbul Technical University, Turkey

4Information Sciences Institute, University of Southern California, USA

forms the IC‘s global perception has the spatial, macro,
dynamic, and temporal characteristic; it means that these data
should be used in related algorithms. Planning, task assign-
ment, and scheduling techniques in multi-agent systems are
used for problem solving. Methods which are applied should
partially constrain agents with macro decisions and permit
agents to adapt their activities and make their own tactical
(micro) decisions according to real situations. Because of the
geographic characteristic of the problem, GIS (geographic in-
formation systems) are required to support human decisions
by providing a set of proper tools for management, analysis,
modeling, and visualization of geographic information and
location-based information. A mixed-initiative system can be
proper system for the IC.
This requires an ideal intelligent software system to as-
sist the IC and collaborate with him in strategic planning
and tasks assignment to agents according to the assessed
requirements.
Although there is much literature [1], [2], [3] in planning,
coordination, task assignment, human-machine collaboration,
problem-solving algorithms, and decision making under un-
certainty, unfortunately, the discussed requirements have not
been thoroughly addressed by the previous works.
Designing an ideal approach is an important phase in
system development. As a result, in order to develop an ideal
system, this paper aims to design GICoordinator. GICoordi-
nator is a GIS-based assistant software agent that assists and
collaborates with the human planner in strategic planning
and macro tasks assignment in the mixed-initiative approach.
This paper summarizes phases that make up this system.
II. SYSTEM DESIGN
This section is dedicated to phases which are important to
design the GICoordinator.
A. Analyze the Problem
First step is to completely analyze and describe the
problem. Essential dimensions that compose this problem
include: the problem domain, the structure of a team, geo-
graphic information, macro tasks, requirements, assumptions,
the goal function, the strategic action plan, and the macro
task schedule [4].
B. Design the Architecture of GICoordinator
The architecture of GICoordinator is designed based on
integration of three key components as Fig. 1 shows. Table
1 deﬁnes the required functionalities of GICoordinator and
human according to the analyzed problem. The following
subsections brieﬂy describe some important capabilities.
arXiv:1401.0282v1  [cs.MA]  1 Jan 2014

TABLE I
SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS: THE DESIRABLE CAPABILITIES OF
GICOORDINATOR AND HUMAN
Component
Functionalities
Human
1- Specify high-level strategies for
coordination of agents
2- Revise and reﬁne strategies
Spatial Database
3- Organize data (geographic, location-based,
and non-geographic) of the problem
4- Integrate the software agent with GIS
5- Support information sharing with agents
and with other information systems, and
support integration of information systems
GIS
6- Support human decisions by providing
tools for geospatial reasoning, geographic
information management and visualization
7- Support the software agent by providing
GIS analysis
8- Interact with human
Software Agent
9- Assign agents (ﬁeld units) to human
high-level strategies in strategic planning
10- Assign geospatial-temporal macro tasks to
agents in centralized scheduling
11- Adapt and revise the strategic decision
12- Adapt and revise the schedule
13- Search for an optimal plan
14- Allocate resources (refuges) to damage
points under human strategies
15- Adjust and reﬁne human strategies
16- Provide an interface to interact with
human
17- Percept and observe the environment via
the spatial database
1) Provide GIS Analysis: GICoordinator provides geo-
technologies and geo-informatics that support human deci-
sions and increase functionality of the software agent. Three
signiﬁcant purposes are of importance: (1) visualization of
information via 3D maps or thematic maps e.g. display spa-
tial distribution of tasks, states of macro tasks, action plans,
and tasks schedule, (2) geospatial reasoning that includes
spatial relationships analysis, network analysis, proximity
analysis, etc, and (3) information management that includes
retrieval, insert, query, update, and manipulate information of
spatial database. It enables the IC to interact with geographic
information, and it supports human decisions by providing a
better situational awareness.
GICoordinator requires necessary information for compu-
tation because it is mainly focus on multi-agent coordination
techniques. Different types of information are provided by
distributed systems. Therefore GICoordinator requires an-
Fig. 1.
The architecture of GICoordinator
other capability to gather, integrate, mine, or fuse data from
distributed databases. This version of GICoordinator does not
include this functionality.
2) Strategic Planning: It is an approach in an organiza-
tional structure to make a strategic plan that states that how
agents can get from the current state of the world through a
sequence of actions to a desired goal state. Strategic planning
in a disaster response team includes (1) specify a response
objective (a high-level strategy) for the team and decompose
it into prioritized sub-goals (threads), (2) make a strategic
decision by assignment of agents to threads, and (3) evaluate
and adapt a strategic decision to new crisis situations [3].
This capability calculates a set of right choices for making
a strategic decision either in execution of the human strategy
or in adaption of current assignments [5]. These choices
are presented for the IC to select the best choice according
to his intuition or to delegate the system to search for the
optimal one. Moreover, the system autonomously releases
right agents from a right thread in a right time during tasks
execution in order to revise the strategic decision.
3) Centralized Scheduling: This capability is required to
dynamically assign spatial-temporal macro tasks to agents
under human strategic decisions in centralized scheduling
in order to minimize the overall time of tasks execution.
Two main results are achieved by running this algorithm:
(1) a feasible schedule and (2) an adaption time. A schedule
is composed of a number of macro decisions that specify:
(1) what task type is going to be done, (2) who (a subset
of agents) are assigned to do this assignment, (3) where
(a macro geographic object) contains a subset of tasks, (4)
when operations start, (5) when operations ﬁnish, (6) how
many tasks are estimated to be done, and (7) what task types
and how many of them are estimated to be revealed in this
location after to ﬁnish this job [6].
4) State-Space Search: This capability calculates an op-
timal strategic plan, a complete schedule, and a overall
minimum time of tasks execution. It evolves assignment of
agents to threads from an initial state to a speciﬁed goal state.
Results state that how and when agents can reach a deﬁned
objective. These results support human decisions and assist
the IC to evaluate the quality of his strategy, reﬁne it, or
deﬁne a better strategy.
5) Resource Allocation: This capability optimally allo-
cates available refuges to rescued people in medical trans-
portation operations according to human strategic decisions.
Results state that which injured persons should be transported
to which refuges in order to optimize an objective function.
6) Adjustment of Human Strategies: It is difﬁcult for an
IC to specify a good strategy and timely revise it during
emergency management. An IC may specify a bad or wrong
high-level strategy that leads to a very big catastrophe with
signiﬁcantly severe consequences. This capability recom-
mends human for adjustment and reﬁnement of his strategy
in real-time.
System should resolve trade-off of resource/role assign-
ments and reﬂect feed back from actual damaged area. This
system requirement should consider them. Machine learning

TABLE II
REQUIREMENT TOOLS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF THE GICOORDINATOR
Component
Tools
Spatial Database
Microsoft Spatial SQL Server,
GeoDatabase, the data model
GIS
ArcGIS, .NET Programming
Software Agent
C#.NET Programming, ArcObjects,
the data model
algorithms can provide proper solution. We will devote a
paper to this functionality.
C. Design the Data Model
It is important to model, formulate, and present data of
the problem completely. The data model presents elements of
this problem, properties, relationships, and interaction among
these elements with regard to problem data modeling. This
data model is important to support development of GICoor-
dinator and implementation of the capabilities designed for
this system [4].
The designed data model only formulates the planning &
scheduling problem which the IC is faced, although spatially
distributed agents can observe, gather, and report many types
of information from their local environment to the incident
center. Uncertainties are presented by proper attributes of
classes of this data model, and they are used by related
algorithms.
This data model formulates and present any USAR op-
erations and similar crisis operations. It, also, formulates a
team of different agents. The size of a team and the size of
disaster scenario are scalable, but it is important to model
any required information in the data model.
D. Development tools
There are many tools and approaches that can be used
to implement and develop a system. In our methodology,
Table 2 shows required tools that were used to develop
GICoordinator. It states that how each component should be
implemented and developed.
We applied the C#.Net programming language for de-
veloping GICoordinator. Algorithms, the structure of the
system, and rules were implemented in the program. All
system requirements, which are deﬁned in Table 1, were im-
plemented by the developer using the speciﬁed development
tools.
There is a key concern in development of GICoordinator.
The designed data model was used to develop his system, and
there are interdependencies among functions of the system.
All functions should be run in an integrated system. Any
change in the data model may cause that the system does
not work.
E. Deploy
GICoordinator is deployed in two ways. First one is
to calculate an feasible strategic plan & schedule, which
partially specify actions of agents, by the human-system
collaboration before execution. Second one is to use this
system for automated and autonomous adaption/reﬁnement
of macro/strategic decisions to new situations during execu-
tion and in real time.
As Fig. 1 shows, the GIS and the software agent have a
connection to the spatial database. In oder to run GICoordi-
nator, the spatial database, whose structure is based on the
designed data model, has to contain essential information of
the initial state of the world. These data can insert or modi-
ﬁed by the human via the user-interface that GICoordinator
provides for human-system interaction [4].
III. RESULTS
The result was an architecture/design of GICoordinator
that contains system requirements.
IV. CONCLUSION
The design of GICoordinator was discussed in this pa-
per. The key insight is (1) support human decisions with
geo-spatial intelligent software system, (2) provide A.I.
techniques for strategic planning, macro tasks assignment,
scheduling, and automated adaption of these decisions in
central multi-agent coordination, (3) involve human in the
loop and enable collaboration between human and system
for decision making. Future works will be to address the
deﬁned capabilities of GICoordinator by several papers.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
R.N. is grateful for the ﬁnancial support of GCOE-HSE
of Kyoto University, which enabled him to be a visiting
scholar at the Information Sciences Institute of University
of Southern California and the Robotics Institute of the
Carnegie Mellon University during Dec. 2011 and Nov. 2012.
