CNN 101: Interactive Visual Learning
for Convolutional Neural Networks
Zijie J. Wang
Georgia Institute of Technology

Nilaksh Das
Georgia Institute of Technology

Robert Turko
Georgia Institute of Technology

Fred Hohman
Georgia Institute of Technology

Omar Shaikh
Georgia Institute of Technology

Minsuk Kahng
Oregon State University

Haekyu Park
Georgia Institute of Technology

Duen Horng (Polo) Chau
Georgia Institute of Technology

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
CHI ’20 Extended Abstracts, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USA.
© 2020 Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6819-3/20/04.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3334480.3382899
Abstract
The success of deep learning solving previously-thought
hard problems has inspired many non-experts to learn and
understand this exciting technology. However, it is often
challenging for learners to take the ﬁrst steps due to the
complexity of deep learning models. We present our on-
going work, CNN 101, an interactive visualization system
for explaining and teaching convolutional neural networks.
Through tightly integrated interactive views, CNN 101 of-
fers both overview and detailed descriptions of how a model
works. Built using modern web technologies, CNN 101 runs
locally in users’ web browsers without requiring special-
ized hardware, broadening the public’s education access to
modern deep learning techniques.
Author Keywords
Interactive visualization; deep learning education; machine
learning education.
CCS Concepts
•Human-centered computing →Visual analytics; •Computing
methodologies →Machine learning;
Introduction
Deep learning has become a driving-force in our daily tech-
nologies. Its continued success and potential in various
hard problems have attracted immense interest from non-
arXiv:2001.02004v3  [cs.HC]  27 Feb 2020

experts to learn this technology. However, it has a steep
learning curve for many beginners.
Since deep learning models are complex, it can be chal-
lenging for non-experts to learn the fundamentals. Inspired
by human’s brain structure, deep neural network models
typically leverage many layers of operations to reach a ﬁnal
computed decision [10]. There are many types of network
layers, each having a different structure and underlying
mathematical operations. Therefore, understanding deep
learning models requires users to keep track of both low-
level mathematical operations and high-level integration of
such operations within the network.
To address this challenge, we are developing CNN 101
(Figure 1): an interactive visualization system that helps
students learn convolutional neural networks (CNN), a foun-
dational deep learning model architecture [10], more easily.
CNN 101 joins the growing body of research that aims to
explain the complex mechanisms of modern machine learn-
ing algorithms with interactive visualization, such as Tensor-
Flow Playground [12] and GAN Lab [7]. For a demo video
of CNN 101, visit https://youtu.be/g082-zitM7s. In this ongoing
work, our primary contributions are:
1. CNN 101, a novel web-based interactive visualization
tool that helps users better understand both CNNs high-
level model structure and low-level mathematical oper-
ations. Advancing on few existing and prior interactive
visualization tools that aim to explain CNN to beginners
[4, 8], CNN 101 integrates a more practical model and
dataset for learners to explore. Conventionally, deploy-
ing deep learning models requires signiﬁcant comput-
ing resources, e.g., servers with powerful hardware.
However, even with a dedicated backend server, it is
challenging to support a large number of concurrent
users. Instead, CNN 101 is developed using modern
web technologies, where all results are directly com-
puted in users’ web browsers. CNN 101 helps broaden
public’s education access to modern deep learning tech-
nologies.
2. Novel interactive visualization design of CNN 101,
which uses overview + detail, interaction, and anima-
tion that simultaneously summarizes complex model
structure, and provides context for users to interpret
detailed mathematical operations. CNN 101 presents
signiﬁcant advancement over existing work by explain-
ing how CNNs work at different abstraction levels while
helping users ﬂuidly transition between such levels to
gain a more comprehensive understanding. Existing
work focused on fewer aspects. For example, Harley
et al. [4] used a 3D interactive node-link diagram to il-
lustrate CNN structure and neuron activations of a pre-
trained model, but the interface did not visually dissect
different neuron’s computation processes. Conversely,
expert-facing deep learning visualization tools focus on
interpreting what CNN models have learned rather than
explaining the underlying operations [5].
We hope our design will inspire research and development
of interactive education tools that help democratize more
artiﬁcial intelligent technologies.
System Design and Implementation
CNN 101 is an interactive system for illustrating how a
trained CNN model classiﬁes an image (Figure 1). It en-
ables users to explore the CNN structure and underlying
operations in a browser. To elucidate the CNN’s complex
process of classifying images, CNN 101 consists of three
views: (1) Overview (Figure 1A) shows the big picture of
the CNN, describing how the input image is connected to
the classiﬁcation likelihood through different layers;

The Overview A visualizes
activation maps of all neu-
rons as heatmaps connected
with edges.
When user clicks a convolu-
tional neuron in A , the view
transitions to the Convolu-
tional Intermediate View
( A : B ).
The Flatten Intermediate
View appears when an
output neuron is selected
instead ( A : C ).
B demonstrates the rela-
tionship between selected
convolutional neuron and its
previous layer.
B transitions to the Detail
View which illustrates the
convolution operation on
selected input neuron
( B : D ).
C explains the ﬂatten layer
between the second last
layer and output layer.
C Flatten
Intermediate View
Detail View
D
Overview
A
B
Convolutional
Intermediate View
Figure 1: The CNN 101 user interface and its tightly coupled, multiple views.

(2) Intermediate View (Figure 1B-C) dissects the relation-
ship between one neuron and its previous layer; (3) Detail
View (Figure 1D) interactively visualizes the inner workings
of different CNN operations. Transitions of these views fol-
low an overview-to-detail order and are animated to help
users assimilate the relationship between different states.
A
B
C
Figure 2: The Detail View explains
the underlying mathematical
operations of a CNN. A shows the
element-wise dot-product occurring
in a convolutional neuron. B
visualizes the Rectiﬁed Linear Unit
(ReLU) operation, whereas C
illustrates how max pooling works.
Users can hover over heatmaps to
display an operation’s input to
output mappings.
Overview. This view is the starting view of CNN 101 (Fig-
ure 1A). It shows activation heatmaps of neurons in all
layers. Neurons in consecutive layers are connected with
edges, and hovering over one neuron highlights its incom-
ing edges. Convolutional and output neurons connect to
all neurons in the previous layer, whereas other neurons
connect to only one neuron from the earlier layer.
We show heatmaps with a symmetric diverging red-to-blue
colormap where zero is encoded as white. For example,
darker red pixels indicate smaller negative values while
darker blue pixels indicate larger positive values. We group
our CNN layers into four units and two modules (Figure 3).
Each unit has at most one convolutional layer. The last two
units (Module 1) are duplicate of the ﬁrst two units (Module
2). Users can change the heatmap colormap scope based
on deﬁned layer groups. This option enables users to com-
pare neuron activations in different levels and contexts.
Intermediate View. CNN 101 has two types of Interme-
diate Views: the Convolutional Intermediate View and the
Flatten Intermediate View. When users click a convolutional
neuron in the Overview, the Convolutional Intermediate
View (Figure 1B) applies a convolution on each input node
of the selected neuron. Then, it displays these intermediate
results as heatmaps. This view also visualizes associated
convolution kernel weights as small heatmaps, which slide
over input and intermediate result heatmaps. This anima-
tion mimics the CNN’s internal sliding window. In addition,
Edges in the Convolutional Intermediate View are animated
as ﬂowing dash-lines, which help signify the order and di-
rection of this intermediate operation.
The Flatten Intermediate View (Figure 1C) explains a ﬂatten
layer, which is often used in a CNN to reshape the second
last layer into a dense layer, so the fully connected output
layer can make classiﬁcation decisions. This view encodes
each ﬂatten layer neuron as a short line, with the same
color as its source element (pixel) in previous layer. Also,
each short line is connected to its source and intermedi-
ate result with edges, whose color further encodes model
weight value. When users hovers over an element in the
source heatmap, its associated short line and edges are
highlighted.
Detail View. This view has three variants designed for
convolutional (Figure 2A), activation (Figure 2B), and pool-
ing layers (Figure 2C), respectively. The Detail View pro-
vides the user with a low-level, interactive analysis of the
mathematical operations occurring at each layer. Users
not only can observe each operation run on an interval dis-
played by a sliding input region, but also directly interact
with Detail View by hovering over pixels to visualize the op-
eration on the selected input region to yield the resulting
output values. By providing a straightforward and interactive
visualization of the input and output of multiple fundamen-
tal CNN operations, the Detail View allows users who are
unfamiliar with CNN mechanisms to understand its mathe-
matical intricacies.
Moreover, with CNN 101’s overview-to-detail transition hi-
erarchy and focus + context layout, users can learn how
each single low-level operation contributes to the high-level
CNN ﬂow. For example, a particular convolution output, ex-
plained in the Detail View, is only an intermediate result. To
compute the output of a convolutional neuron, one needs
to add up all these intermediate results with bias, as de-

scribed in the Overview and the Intermediate View. Advanc-
ing over existing tools, CNN 101’s hierarchical design builds
up user’s mental model to understand this connection.
CNN Model Training. Inspired by the popular deep learn-
ing architecture VGGNet [11] and Stanford’s lecture notes
on CNN [9], we train a Tiny VGG on Tiny ImageNet dataset
[1] for demonstration purpose. Tiny ImageNet has 200 im-
age classes, a training dataset of 100,000 64×64 color im-
ages, and a validation/test dataset of 10,000 images each.
Our model is trained using TensorFlow [2] on images from
10 selected everyday classes (lifeboat, ladybug, pizza, bell
pepper, school bus, koala, espresso, red panda, orange,
and sport car) with batch size and learning rate ﬁne-tuned
using a 5-fold cross-validation scheme; it achieves a 70.8%
top-1 accuracy on the test dataset.
Front-end Visualization. We use TensorFlow.js [13] to
load our trained Tiny VGG and compute forward propa-
gation results directly in user’s browser. We use D3.js [3]
to visualize the network structure and implement interac-
tions and animations. Our implementation is robust, so the
this visualization prototpye can be quickly applied to other
dataset and linear CNN models.
Input
Conv
ReLU
Conv
ReLU
Pool
Output
Conv
ReLU
Conv
ReLU
Pool
Unit 1
Module 1
Module 2
Unit 2
Unit 3
Unit 4
Figure 3: Tiny VGG has the same
3×3 convolution and 2×2 pooling
layers as in VGGNet, but with a
smaller network depth. Since Tiny
VGG layers are grouped into units
and modules, CNN 101 allows
users to control how each unit and
module is colored in the Overview
heatmap.
Preliminary Results: Usage Scenarios
We now present two usage scenarios where CNN 101 as-
sists users to learn CNN process and gain develop learning
intuitions.
Understanding layer relationship through visualiz-
ing intermediate operations. An undergraduate stu-
dent Sally is learning about various types of CNN layers
in her introductory machine learning course. She does
not fully understand how the ﬁnal output layer maps pre-
vious 2D matrices into a class probability number. Sally
starts investigating Tiny VGG with CNN 101 by inspect-
ing layer dimensions. She quickly noticed that the output
layer has dimension 10, while its previous layer has di-
mension 13×13×10. Sally hovers over the output class
sport car and sees its incoming edges from the previous
layer. CNN 101 helps her quickly recognize essential ba-
sic information that there are 10 image classes, 10 neurons
in the max_pool_2 layer, and that each output class con-
nects to 10 previous neurons. Then, Sally clicks on sport
car, causing the Overview to transition to the Flatten In-
termediate View, displaying the ﬂatten layer between the
max_pool_2 layer and the sport car class label (Fig-
ure 1C). By hovering over the heatmap in the max_pool_2
layer, Sally sees the highlighted edges connecting each
matrix element ﬁrst to the ﬂatten layer, and then to the
sport car class label. Through CNN 101’s interactive vi-
sualization, Sally realizes that the illustrations in most deep
learning tutorials have in fact been skipping this important
information in CNN, i.e., that: (1) there is actually a “hidden”
layer that unrolls the output of the max_pool_2 layer into a
1D array, and (2) output layer connects to an intermediate
ﬂatten layer instead of directly to the max_pool_2 layer.
Learning layer operation in multiple abstraction levels.
Harry is a biology researcher who has learned about CNNs
in an online deep learning course. Since he plans to train
a CNN model for his project, he uses CNN 101 to review
the inner workings of different CNN layers. Harry launches
CNN 101 and skims through all layers on the Overview.
He has forgotten what exactly the ReLU layer does upon
reaching it in the interface. However, CNN 101 immediately
helps him notice that all previous heatmap red pixels disap-
pear in ReLU layers (Figure 1A). After selecting other input
images and having the same observation, Harry guesses
that ReLU layers ignore negative values and only propa-
gate positive values. He clicks on a ReLU neruon, which
causes the Overview to transition to the Detail View. See-

ing ReLU’s underlying equation, max (0, x), revealed on
the Detail View (Figure 2B), Harry is very happy that his
hypothesis is validated. By offering both an overview and a
detailed explanation of the ReLU activation function, CNN
101 helps Harry understand how ReLU layer works in differ-
ent abstraction levels.
Ongoing Work and Conclusion
User customization. We are working on extending CN’
101’s interactivity to promote user engagement and to ex-
plain more CNN concepts. Besides choosing an input im-
age from Tiny ImageNet, we plan to support users to up-
load their own images, capture images from webcam, and
free form drawing. These options can enable users to en-
gineer images to test their hypothesis regarding CNN op-
erations during learning [6]. For example, if one user is
confused about how the convolution operation works on
multiple channels, she can create an image that only has
non-zero values in the red channel and feed it into CNN
101. Then she can learn that convolutions are performed
independently on input channels, by observing the inter-
mediate results and activation maps on the ﬁrst convolution
layer.
Currently CNN 101 explains convolution, activation, and
pooling operations at single-neuron-level as well as layer-
level. However, these operations have ﬁxed hyper-parameters.
For example, the convolution process always uses a 3×3
kernel with padding of 0 and stride of 1. We are working to
support users to conﬁgure these settings and observe the
results in real time. Such interactive “hypothesis testing”
and experimentation help users learn other advanced deep
learning architectures more easily.
Planned evaluation. Despite the increasing popularity
of applying interactive visualization to teach deep learn-
ing concepts, little work have been done to evaluate how
effective these tools are [6]. We plan to run a user study
to compare the educational effectiveness of CNN 101 and
that of conventional educational mediums such as (static)
tutorials, textbooks, and YouTube lecture videos. We plan
to recruit undergraduate students who have basic machine
learning background and are new to deep learning. Our
study will have two conditions: CNN 101 v.s. conventional
tools. We will randomly assign students into these condi-
tions, and they will use respective tools to learn how CNN
works. Each participant will complete a pre-test quiz and
a post-test quiz, allowing us to quantify and more deeply
understand the education effectiveness of CNN 101.
Deployment. We are working to deploy and open-source
CNN 101, similar to TensorFlow Playground [12] and GAN
Lab [7], so that it will be easily accessible by learners from
all over the world.
Conclusion. CNN 101 takes steps toward democratiz-
ing deep learning that has been closely impacting people’s
daily lives. Through applying interactive visualizing tech-
niques, CNN 101 provides users with an easier way to learn
deep learning mechanisms and build up neural network
intuitions. We plan to extend CNN 101’s capabilities to sup-
port further user customization and personalized learning;
we will deploy and open-source CNN 101 and also evalu-
ate it in depth to help build design principles for future deep
learning educational tools.
