MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
1
Modeling Associative Reasoning Processes
Claudia Schon1, Ulrich Furbach1, and Marco Ragni2
1 Institute for Computer Science, University of Koblenz, 56070 Koblenz, Germany,

2 Predictive Analytics, Technical University Chemnitz, 09126 Chemnitz, Germany,

arXiv:2201.00716v2  [cs.AI]  7 Jan 2022

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
2
Abstract
The human capability to reason about one domain by using knowledge of other domains
has been researched for more than 50 years, but models that are formally sound and
predict cognitive process are sparse. We propose a formally sound method that models
associative reasoning by adapting logical reasoning mechanisms. In particular it is shown
that the combination with large commensense knowledge within a single reasoning system
demands for an eﬃcient and powerful association technique. This approach is also used for
modelling mind-wandering and the Remote Associates Test (RAT) for testing creativity. In
a general discussion we show implications of the model for a broad variety of cognitive
phenomena including consciousness.

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
3
Modeling Associative Reasoning Processes
Introduction
Associative thinking and reasoning, i.e., the capability to relate one concept with
another by uncontrolled, sometimes subconscious thinking, is ubiquitous in our everyday
life. It is a driving force for scientiﬁc progress, it is relevant for psychoanalysis, and cultural
activities such as art are impossible to think without it (Scheﬀer, 2014). Associative
thinking is a core topic in cognitive psychology and has been systematically researched by
the seminal work of Mednick for about half a century (e.g., S. Mednick, 1962), but only few
and often domain restricted cognitive modeling approaches have been proposed so far
(Benedek et al., 2012; Gawronski & Bodenhausen, 2014; Olteteanu et al., 2019).
Consider a simple associative task taken from fRAT (Blaine R. Worthen, 1971).
Problem 1. Your task for the functional Remote Association Task (fRAT) is to ﬁnd for
three given words such as the following:
Tulip
Daisy
Vase
exactly one word that can be associated with them all in a meaningful way. For this
example above an answer is Flower (there can be other solutions too), because all three
given words can relate to ﬂower.
In contrast to deductive or algebraic reasoning processes with a well-deﬁned domain
and operations, problems such as the one above cannot be solved by applying just a set of
known rules. Such problems require a form of insight, which is a “sudden realization that
appears to be correct” (Webb et al., 2016) and creative thinking (Olteteanu et al., 2019).
Creative processes can diﬀer from individual to individual and there is no straightforward
algorithm known that needs just be applied to solve such problems, and hence developing
computational and cognitive models is diﬃcult. General concepts need to be identiﬁed and
compared and in principle there can be inﬁnitely many of such concepts. As we can see

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
4
from the problem above, semantic processes are relevant. Other instances of such types of
problems can be found in commonsense reasoning. The follwing example is from a
benchmark collection for commonsense problems:
Problem 2. An example taken from the Choice of Plausible Alternatives (COPA)
Challenge (Roemmele et al., 2011):
Assume that the pond froze over for the winter.
What happened as a result?
1. People skated on the pond.
2. People brought boats to the pond.
Another benchmark for commonsense reasoning with examples of this kind is the
Winograd Schema Challenge (Levesque, 2011). All these benchmarks have in common that
it is not diﬃcult for humans to come up with the correct response together with an
explanation. To tackle general problems such as the ones above, an extensive amout of
background knowledge is necessary, from a cognitive modeling perspective. For Problem 2
this includes the knowledge that a frozen pond has a solid surface consisting of ice, that it
is possible to skate on ice and that boats are usually not used on frozen ponds. Since
commonsense reasoning problems cannot be assigned to a speciﬁc domain, it is not possible
to represent all this knowledge manually which is one of the reasons why these problems
currently pose real challenges for artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) (for more information, see
Levesque, 2017). Understanding the human ability to draw meaningful conclusions in
everyday situations is therefore not only relevant for cognitive science, but for AI too.
Understanding how we solve such everyday problems may tell us more about human
cognition than well-deﬁned abstract problems. The general task is to reverse-engineer how
associative reasoning can work on the cognitive level. We will focus here on Marr’s
computational level (Marr, 1982). The reverse-engineering needs to be understandable – in

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
5
the sense of explainable AI. For this reason, we do not aim for a connectionistic or neural
network based approach. We expect from a model for creative thinking to – at least some
extend – whitebox the blackbox processes of associative thinking. This requires to use
symbolic and knowledge rich modeling approaches.
Since AI considers problems related to commonsense reasoning as challenging and
largely unsolved, it is obvious, that there are no simple algorithmic realizations for such
associative processes. Following the basic paradigm of ‘cognition is computation’ and as
long as we do not have computational models for general associative thinking, the gap
between theories for associative thinking and cognitive models persists. To bridge this gap,
in the following we will systematically introduce problems and domains such as
commonsense reasoning and creativity thinking, among others and the current state of art
in modeling. We demonstrate the importance of the need of a uniﬁed computational model
for associative thinking that is (i) formally, as it is grounded in formal logics, (ii) able to
approach concrete and core problems relevant for associative thinking, and (iii) providing
new insights and hypothesis for the ﬁeld.
Beyond answering the core research question – Is it possible to model associative
thinking by combining formally represented background knowledge, statistical methods, and
automatic reasoning systems? there are several more aspects this work will contribute too:
It will provide a framework to analyze the impact of knowledge and inference processes and
how diﬀerent aspects are selected by cognitive processes. This framework is based on
ﬁrst-order predicate logic for the reasoning mechanism and on various up-to date
formalisms for very large knowledge bases. It will provide a testable, prototype
implementation of the approach in Section Associative Reasoning. It will apply the
approach to mind-wandering in Section Mind-wandering and in Section Creativity human
chains of associations as well as creative thinking are adressed. Furthermore the ﬁeld of
conscious and unconscious thinking will be touched in Section General Discussion.

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
6
Associative Thinking and Common Sense Reasoning
Associative reasoning such as Problem 1 above is a part of creative thinking
(S. Mednick, 1962; Olteţeanu & Falomir, 2015), as it requires “to associate multiple remote
items” (Olteţeanu & Falomir, 2015). It “brings mutually remote ideas into contiguity
facilitates creative solving” and believed that “the organization of an individual’s
associations will inﬂuence the probability and speed of attainment of a creative solution
(S. Mednick, 1962)” cited after (Olteţeanu & Falomir, 2015). Connected to ﬁnding an
associative word is abductive reasoning, where the task is to ﬁnd for observation(s) a best
ﬁtting explanation. Consider the following problem:
Problem 3. The following is from the abductive reasoning domain. Example from the
aNLI (Abductive natural language inference) benchmarks (Bhagavatula et al., 2020).
Assume that two temporally successive observations are given:
O1: It was a very hot summer day.
O2: He felt much better.
What is the more plausible hypothesis?
H−: He decided to run in the heat.
H+: He drank a glass of ice cold water.
For you as a human it is not diﬃcult to imagine what could be the reason for O2,
but from a modeling perspective the underlying processes depend on knowledge and mental
models. Formally, for an observation O1 at time t1 and an observation O2 at time t2 with
t2 > t1, the task is to determine the more plausible explanation H+ from the two given
hypotheses H+ and H−. Abductive reasoning, the search for the best explanation and to
have “commonsense” understanding about how the world may work are obviously
connected. Reasoning about plausibility is obviously connected to commonsense reasoning

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
7
and requires some form of a model about the world. What ﬁts this model of the world is
plausible. Another approach uses a core inference system, where the inference rules are
obtained from transcriptions of various reasoning tasks that people have solved (Collins &
Michalski, 1989). Their proposed system has two shortcommings: it has not been
evaluated against a benchmark and the proposed system has been developed before
knowledge became available in large quantities in a formalized manner and therefore does
not address our core research problem – how it is possible to ﬁnd associated knowledge in
large knowledge bases? Consider the following problem:
Problem 4. Example from the SWAG dataset (Zellers et al., 2018).
On stage, a woman takes a seat at the piano. She
a) sits on a bench as her sister plays with the doll.
b) smiles with someone as the music plays.
c) is in the crowd, watching the dancers.
d) nervously sets her ﬁngers on the keys.
This form of reasoning is clearly non-deductive, but these problems are very
everyday-like. At the same time these presented problems are part of cognitive tests and
tasks spanning a variety of analogical and common sense reasoning both from psychology
and AI (Bhagavatula et al., 2020; Blaine R. Worthen, 1971; Roemmele et al., 2011; Zellers
et al., 2018).
Another example are the problems in the Winograd Schema Challenge (Levesque,
2011). These problems consist of one sentence mentioning two parties and a reference to
one of the parties with the help of a pronoun or possessive adjective. The task is to
determine the party this pronoun or possesive adjective refers to. The diﬃculty results
from the construction of these examples: The sentence always contains a special word
where the replacement with an alternate causes the answer to switch. This is an example
of a pair of problems in the Winograd Schema Challenge:

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
8
Problem 5. Examples from the Winograd Schema Challenge (Levesque, 2011):
The town councillors refused to give the angry demonstrators a permit because they
feared violence. Who feared violence?
Answer 0: the town councillors
Answer 1: the angry demonstrators
Using the alternate fear for the special word advocated leads to the following
example:
The town councillors refused to give the angry demonstrators a permit because they
advocated violence. Who advocated violence?
Answer 0: the town councillors
Answer 1: the angry demonstrators
Still other benchmarks aim to test a system’s ability to continue telling a story. The
Story Cloze Test is one of these benchmarks and is based on the ROCStories Corpora
(Mostafazadeh et al., 2017). One ROCStory consists of a ﬁve-sentence story. An associated
associated Story Cloze Test uses the ﬁrst four sentences as a description of a situation and
the task is to determine the next sentence from two alternatives, where the right choice is
the original ﬁfth sentence from the corresponding ROCStory. This is an example problem
from the Story Cloze Test dataset:
Problem 6. Example from the Story Cloze Test dataset (Mostafazadeh et al., 2017).
Given the four sentences below. Is A1 or A2 most likely to be the next sentence.
Karen was assigned a roommate her ﬁrst year of college. Her roommate asked her to
go to a nearby city for a concert. Karen agreed happily. The show was absolutely
exhilarating.
A1: Karen became good friends with her roommate.

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
9
A2: Karen hated her roommate.
Some of the presented problems above might be easier than others for a human
reasoner in contrast to a formal system to deal with. What is common to all problems,
however, is that without any background knowledge, it is almost impossible to solve such
problems. Problems that require knowledge are called knowledge rich problems. But how
do humans solve such problems on a cognitive level?
This is still an open question. Despite a large number and variety of cognitive
models for reasoning about knowledge lean problems such as for deductive reasoning, there
are only few approaches for knowledge rich problems that associative models require.
A way to integrate knowledge by using and adapting a Corpus of Contemporary
American English (COCA) has been done in developing a cognitive model for the fRAT,
the comRAT-C (Olteţeanu & Falomir, 2015). Basically, for each expression in the problem,
it searches the corpus to identify concepts. For this list of putative concepts, that can be
connected to each other a selection is made. A variant of comRAT-c uses the frequency as
an additional selector for the preferred response of participants. comRAT-c is able to solve
64 from the 144 problems. To the best of our knowledge this system has not been applied
to the other types of problems presented above. Symbolical approaches steming from
abductive and deontic reasoning, in other words approaches grounded in logic have been
applied for solving a variant of COPA problems (Furbach et al., 2015). In He and Xiao
(2021), for example, the Winograd Schema Challenge problems are manually represented in
the situation calculus, a variant of ﬁrst-order logic. For each problem, matching knowledge
is manually formalized and added. Then, again manually, it is decided whether abductive
or deductive reasoning is more promising and then reasoning is performed. In contrast, we
aim at modeling the human ability to deal with large amounts of background knowledge.
Therefore, we use pre-existing sources such as ontologies and knowledge graphs as
background knowledge, from which we automatically extract knowledge suitable for a
problem using associative selection. In Maslan et al. (2015), the commonsense reasoning

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
10
benchmarks Triangle Choice of Plausible Challenge (Triangle COPA) are presented
together with a solution approach based on weighted abduction. In these benchmark
problems, situations, similar to the well-known experiments of Heider and Simmel (1944),
are described and the task is to answer questions about these situations. The
abduction-based approach to solve these problems also relies on manually formalizing
suitable background knowledge for each problem and does not consider the human ability
to deal with large amounts of background knowledge.
While recently adverserial approaches (Stali¯unait˙e et al., 2021) have been proposed,
a core point is that models that can explain human plausible reasoning need some form of
symbolic form to understand how these systems reason and use knowledge.
Classical models for human reasoning dealing with large amounts of background
knowledge do not represent this associative character and select background knowledge
only based on syntactic equality of symbols. This completely ignores the meaning of
symbols such as pond in Problem 2 above and the context in which these symbols are used.
However, when modeling human reasoning and associative thinking, it is precisely the
meaning of symbols and the context in which they were used that is of great importance.
This is why, a combination of symbolic and statistical methods by integrating word
similarities into the selection process is necessary. Word similarities allow us to model the
associative nature of human thinking and gain context-speciﬁc background knowledge.
We can summarize that to solve the variety of problems of associative,
commonsense, and abductive reasoning we need models that can (i) handle large amounts
of background knowledge, (ii) select background knowledge in an associative way, (iii)
comprises concepts and meaning, and (iv) is able to reason. In the following, we will
present such a system. Table 1 provides an overview of the benchmarks presented. For the
development of our approach, we have focused on fRAT and COPA. This choice allows us
to cover creativity with the fRAT problems and also to consider the area of causal
commonsense reasoning, which is the topic of the problems in COPA. However, the

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
11
approaches we have developed can be applied to other benchmarks and we have also
conducted preliminary experiments on the Story Cloze tests.
Associative Reasoning
Until now, we talked about various kinds of reasoning, like human, abductive or
commonsense reasoning. Automated reasoning is one of the most traditional disciplines in
Artiﬁcial Intelligence research. At the very beginning it was mainly aiming to prove
mathematical theorems, but nowadays it is used as a major method in many other
disciplines, like software and hardware veriﬁcation, knowledge representation and even in
modeling within cognitive science systems. The latter is a topic tackling commonsense
reasoning benchmarks like the COPA Challenge (Roemmele et al., 2011) with the help of
automated reasoning (Schon et al., 2019). See Problem 2 for an example problem from
COPA. There are numerous other approaches to solve these problems with the help of
statistical methods from machine learning, which oﬀer good results (Devlin et al., 2019;
Radford et al., 2018; Sap et al., 2019). As already mentioned in the introduction, the
problem with these statistical methods is the lack of explanatory power. It is very diﬃcult
in these systems to get an explanation together with the given answer and therefore it is
unclear what was actually learned (Niven & Kao, 2019).
As far as explainability is concerned, logic- or knowledge-based approaches are much
better suited. The core within the system developed by Schon et al. (2019) is a classical
ﬁrst-order logic theorem prover based on a tableau calculus. It will be discussed in this
section for two reasons: Firstly, the prover is manipulating a single proof object, the
tableau, which carries information about the state of the proof attempt at any time. In
this way, it provides detailed information about the inferences performed at a given time.
Secondly, the system is extended by a mechanism which allows to incorporate associative
steps within very large knowledge bases which are connected to the system. The tableau
and the control mechanism for these associations are explained in this section. It is

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
12
important to note, that this ﬁrst-order logical method can serve as a core system for many
variants of reasoning, like abductive or deontic reasoning. In the following subsection we
depict this classical logical proof procedure and in another subsection we show how to take
the meaning of symbols into account for associative steps.
Later, in Section General Discussion we will discuss to which extend this entire
system can be understood as a cognitive model for an information based understanding of
consciousness.
Reasoning: Logical Proof Procedure
The classical ﬁrst-order logic system upon which the proposed commonsense
reasoning system is build is Hyper, an automated theorem prover for ﬁrst-order logic
(Baumgartner et al., 2007).
For this paper it is not necessary to understand the technical details of a reasoning
system like Hyper, it should be enough to explain its functioning by means of an example.
We use the following example to illustrate the system.
Problem 7. Example problem 65 from the COPA challenge:
The family took their dog to the veterinarian.
What was the cause of this?
1. The dog chewed on a bone.
2. The dog injured his paw.
This natural language formulation of the problem is automatically translated into a
logical formulation.
The right part of Figure 1 shows 13 formulae. Most of these formulae correspond to
knowledge represented in ConceptNet (Speer et al., 2017), some result from Problem 7,
after the translation into ﬁrst-order logic. The ﬁrst 5 formulae are facts and the others are
implications, all of them are given in a normal form.

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
13
The left part of Figure 1 is a so called tableau, which is essentially a tree that was
developed by Hyper with the help of inference rules. This tableau is a data structure which
is extended by Hyper during its reasoning process.
The technical aspects of the calculus on how to extend the tree in detail are not
important here. We want to point out, however, that at any stage of the construction of a
tree, a branch represents a (partial) interpretation of the given formulae, which means that
it contains those facts which are assumed to be true. E.g., the right-most branch in our
example corresponds to the (partial) interpretation
{dog(a), bone(b), chew(c), on(c, b), agent(c, a), manducate(c), eat(c),
animal(a), carnivore(a), dog_treat(b), dog_food(b)}.
The left branch of the tableau is closed, since its nodes bone(b) and plant(b) are
contradictory according to formula (11), which states that nothing can be a bone and a
plant. A proof of the entire set of formulae is found if there is a tableau that contains only
closed branches. If no proof can be found, like in the example in Figure 1, the open
branches list literals that can be derived from the set of clauses. The right branch contains
both bone(b) and dog_food(b) meaning that individual b is a bone and also dog_food.
Hyper has been used in many diﬀerent application areas, reaching from commercial
knowledge based systems to intelligent book development (Baumgartner et al., 2004).
Furthermore, Hyper was used as the main reasoning machinery in natural language query
answering (Furbach et al., 2010) and for cognitive reasoning, in particular answering
commonsense questions (Furbach & Schon, 2016).
In all of these applications Hyper very rarely managed to ﬁnd a proof within the
given constraints — in most cases there was a timeout and Hyper’s result was a branch
representing a partial interpretation of the formulae at hand. However, this is not a
disadvantage, because in these cases Hyper can be used to draw inferences from a
statement. Next, we will illustrate how to do this. For the following we use a running
example from the aforementioned COPA benchmarks. As the example in Problem 7 shows,

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
14
these problems are formulated in natural language and require everyday knowledge to be
understood and solved.
In order to draw inferences from a natural language statement with the help of an
automated reasoning system, the problem has to be translated from natural language to a
formal language — in our case this is ﬁrst-order logic. This translation is done in a fully
automated system called KnEWS (Basile et al., 2016), which is based on the Boxer-System
(Curran et al., 2007). As a running example, we consider the following sentence, which is a
part of Problem 7:
The dog chewed on a bone.
The ﬁrst-order logic translation we get using KnEWS is:
∃A(dog(A) ∧∃B, C(on(C, B) ∧bone(B) ∧agent(C, A) ∧chew(C))).
(1)
While reading the above statement and the corresponding formula you certainly
started thinking about a realistic scenario, e.g. about food intake of dogs or about the
composition of meat and bones. We will discuss later how these scenarios may be invoked
by association. Here, it is important to note, that we need knowledge in order to solve a
task related to the statement. Since our commonsense reasoning approach is intended to be
able to handle problems from arbitrary domains, it is not possible to add background
knowledge manually, as this would then have to be manually adjusted for each individual
example. Therefore, our approach aims to model the human ability to deal with large
amounts of background knowledge through associative reasoning. Therefore, we use
existing knowledge bases, where many possible facts and relations about the world are
available. If this knowledge is not restricted to a single domain, if it is general enough to be
used for diﬀerent areas, it gets very large and hence diﬃcult to handle. In Schon et al.
(2019) among other sources ConceptNet (Speer et al., 2017) is used as background
knowledge. ConceptNet is a semantic net structure and is actually multilingual. The
English part contains more than 1.5 million nodes.

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
15
Knowledge in ConceptNet is stored in the form of triples such as (dog, hasA, fur).
Figure 3 shows a small part of the information in ConceptNet connected to the words dog
and car. To allow the ﬁrst-order logic reasoner Hyper to use ConceptNet as background
knowledge, we have translated most of the English part of ConceptNet to ﬁrst-order logic.
The above triple has been translated into the following formula:
∀X(dog(X) →∃Y (hasA(X, Y ) ∧fur(Y )))
(2)
The resulting knowledge base consists of 2,9 million axioms and is therefore far too
large to be completely processed by reasoners. Hence, it is necessary to select parts of this
huge knowledge base which might be relevant for the task at hand. Note, that this
situation is very diﬀerent from a classical automated reasoning problem, where all the
necessary formulae to ﬁnd a proof are given and can be used all together by the reasoning
system, without the necessity to guess parts of it to be loaded into the system.
The left part of Figure 2 illustrates the situation in automated reasoning with large
knowledge bases. The logical representation (Formula (1)) of the natural language sentence
is depicted on the very left together with the knowledge base, ConceptNet, in the middle of
the ﬁgure. The task is to select those parts from the knowledge base which might be
helpful for reasoning about the logical representation.
To this end there are two selection methods sketched: The ﬁrst one uses syntactic
criteria exclusively for the selection (Hoder & Voronkov, 2011). Depending on the symbols
occurring within the logical representation those parts of the knowledge base are selected,
which contain one of these symbols (additionally this selection takes the number of
occurrences of a symbol into account in order to prevent that very frequent symbols like
isA lead to the selection of the whole knowledge base). Furthermore, depending on some
parameters knowledge for other symbols occurring in the selected parts of the knowledge
base can be selected. The second selection method uses additional semantic criteria for
associative selection; it is discussed in the following subsection.

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
16
Associative Selection: Meaning of Symbols
In logical reasoning the symbols and names within a formula have no a priori
meaning. In our example from Figure 1 the predicate name dog could be changed to
something completely diﬀerent, say cat or p, the logical meaning of the entire set of
formulae would be exactly the same, provided the change would be done consistently
within all formulae. And indeed this is a very important property of logical reasoning: the
logical structure of a formula is of interest — all reasoning is done independent of the used
signature (i.e. symbol names). The situation is completely diﬀerent if a human reads the
formula (provided she is not a logician). It is very likely that the symbols dog, chew and
bone trigger a certain scenario in the reader — she reads the formula with the triggered
interpretation1. There are numerous results from cognitive science, which indicate that
such an assignment of meaning to symbols is important for human reasoning. The Wason
selection task (Wason, 1968), as an example, is an experiment where test persons have to
solve a simple problem which basically is a logical implication. Most persons fail if the
question is formulated in an abstract logical way, whereas if they receive the same task, but
formulated with much more everyday context, they perform much better. Another example
is the semantic priming eﬀect: the processing of a stimulus can be inﬂuenced by a
preceding stimulus. The word dog for example can be more eﬃciently processed, if the
preceding word was animal in contrast to something semantically unrelated, like planet.
We use such a semantic similarity as a base for our associative steps aiming at a
selection of formulae from the knowledge base, that may be helpful for the reasoning
process. The semantics of “a word is characterized by the company it keeps” (Firth, 1991)
— which is the basic idea of distributed semantics of language, as it was popularized by
Firth already in the beginning of the 20th century. Recently it became obvious that this
kind of semantics is very useful for statistic based machine learning. Word embeddings
oﬀer an implementation for such semantics. Based on very large corpora of natural
1 whereas in logical reasoning properties of a formulae are proven with respect to all possible interpretations

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
17
language text the words are related to other words which occur in a certain neighborhood.
This results in a multidimensional vector space which relates words that are used together
very frequently close together — this leads to a kind of similarity measure for words. In
our model, diﬀerent word embeddings come to use: The ConceptNet Numberbatch (Speer
et al., 2017) word embedding, pre-trained GloVe word vectors2 and a word embedding
learnt on personal stories from blog entries (Roemmele et al., 2011). ConceptNet
Numberbatch is a word embedding combining and enhancing several pretrained
embeddings with knowledge from ConceptNet.
The semantics of symbols within our formulae is given by a word embedding, which
we can use to ﬁnd semantically similar symbols for the selection process. As a result not
only formulae containing the symbols dog, chew and bone are selected, but also those
containing similar symbols like for example manducate and remasticate. This method is
described and evaluated in detail in Furbach et al. (2019).
Figure 1 depicts an extract of the selected background knowledge for Formula (1) on
the right hand side: Formulae (6) - (13) correspond to selected background knowledge for
the symbols in Formula (1) and exemplary for the symbol manducate which is similar to
chew. Formulae (1) - (5) correspond to the normal form of Formula (1).
Even if much background knowledge is added, this background knowledge will never
be able to represent the complete human background knowledge and will always remain
incomplete. Therefore, automatic theorem provers can only rarely prove statements or
entailements in natural language. For example, it would hardly be possible with an
automatic theorem prover to prove that the statement The dog chewed on a bone implies
the statement The dog is content. This is because the second statement is not a logical
consequence of the ﬁrst one. It is rather the case, that The dog is content is more likely to
be a consequence than the statement The dog is injured. This kind of reasoning is also
2 GloVe word vectors Common Crawl (840B tokens, 2.2M vocab, cased, 300d vectors, 2.03 GB download at
https://nlp.stanford.edu/projects/glove/)

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
18
called cognitive reasoning.
Therefore, we do not aim at the construction of proofs but rather to analyse the
inferences performed by Hyper after a certain amount of reasoning (see the green path in
the right part of Figure 2) together with those parts of the knowledge which is selected by
associations.
As we have seen, one of the main problems in the above depicted commonsense
reasoning task is the selection of appropriate parts of knowledge. Within the knowledge
base we have two diﬀerent kinds of networks or connection layers. One layer is given by the
structure of the knowledge base. E.g. two concepts dog and mammal may be connected by
a relation IsA, or car and engine by the relation HasA, as it is depicted in Figure 3.
In Figure 2 this layer is the dense and colorful network. The second layer is deﬁned
by the word embedding, which relates concepts according to their occurrences within a text
corpus, e.g. dog may be related to betting if the text corpus on which the word embedding
was learnt is about dog races. This second layer corresponds to associative connections
between words, it is depicted by the purple bubbles which show the associations. Paying
attention to these associative links allows us to model the associative nature of human
processing of large amounts of background knowledge in our selection. All in all, we have a
highly complex network consisting of these diﬀerent connections with the logical reasoning
system Hyper using the diﬀerent connection layers. In the following sections, this entire
system is applied to various associative tasks.
Mind-wandering
Mind-wandering in humans takes place when a person is awake, turned away from
the outside world, thinking of nothing concrete, indulging in daydreams. Associative
thinking plays an important role in mind-wandering were thoughts typically move from one
concept to another in an uncontrolled manner. Neuroscientists have shown that in these
states free from external stimuli, the so-called idle or default mode network is active (Otti

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
19
et al., 2012). These mental time-outs provide an opportunity to spontaneously run through
thoughts, produce new perspectives, simulate scenarios that can be helpful for processing
the past or planning actions. When the person’s attention is taken up again by a task, the
energy of the default mode network is lowered so that he or she can concentrate on the
task at hand. A study (Killingsworth & Gilbert, 2010) argues that up to 40% of the time a
human mind is wandering around.
Mind-wandering also has interesting positive eﬀects such as ﬁnding creative
solutions to a problem, which has been shown in Mooneyham and Schooler (2013). In this
section we show that a variant of the approach introduced in this paper can be used to
model the process of mind-wandering. We denote this variant as mind-wandering system.
Overview of the Mind-wandering System
The mind-wandering process is started from an initial formula, such as Formula (1)
from Section Associative Reasoning. In the ﬁrst step, the system performs a associative
selection as described in the previous section to select suitable background knowledge for
this formula. The formula together with the selected background knowledge is transferred
to Hyper, which performs inferences and returns a (possibly partial) interpretation. This
interpretation corresponds to the green path of the tree in the right part of Figure 2 and
contains everything Hyper was able to derive within a given time limit. Since the selected
background knowledge is very broad, the interpretation also contains very broad
information. To ﬁnd a focus, the symbols occurring in the interpretation are clustered
according to their word meaning and a cluster is selected as focus. For the symbols in the
focus, new background knowledge is selected and passed to Hyper again together with the
focus. Hyper again performs inferences. This process can be repeated as many times as
desired. A detailed description of the individual steps of the system follows.

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
20
Background Knowledge and Associative Selection
The associative selection from the knowledge base starts with a set of symbols
called the current context, which consists of the symbols from a starting formula like for
example Formula (1) and similar symbols. Adding the similar symbols from the associative
selection steps ensures that the current context also represents the associative links in the
knowledge base. We use this context as a running example in this section.
Selecting all formulae from the knowledge base in which one of the context symbols
occurs results in a large set of formulae. Using all these formulae would be too unfocused
w.r.t. the considered context, so a ﬁltering step removes all formulae in which other
symbols occurring in the formula are not within a certain range of similarity to the symbols
in the context. To measure similarity, cosine similarity in a word embedding is used. The
interval in which the similarity must fall for a formula to be selected is passed to the
system by two parameters. With the help of these parameters it is possible to control how
far the background knowledge is allowed to move away from the context symbols. With a
suitable interval it is possible to select a formula like (2) which represents knowledge about
dogs and fur while preventing to select a formula like
∀x(poodle(x) →∃y(relatedTo(x, y) ∧dog(y)))
(3)
Currently, the system can use either the ConceptNet Numberbatch (Speer et al., 2017)
word embedding or a word embedding learnt on personal stories from blog entries provided
by Roemmele et al. (2011).
Reasoning
The selected set of formulae together with Formula (1) is passed to the Hyper
reasoner. Hyper is started with a timeout of 30 seconds and calculates during this time a
possibly partial interpretation for the input formulae. This interpretation represents
knowledge that can be inferred from Hyper’s input. In the next step, the system analyses

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
21
Hyper’s output. Since the input formulae are still very broad despite the ﬁlter methods
mentioned above, the (partial) interpretation also contains very broad knowledge inferred
from Hyper’s input. First the mind-wandering system extracts all predicate symbols from
Hyper’s output and removes from this set all symbols from the current context to prevent
the mind-wandering process from getting stuck. Hyper’s model produced for the running
example contains 122 symbols which are thematically widely spread: from ears, skin, ﬂesh,
wolf, calcium, animal, collar and vertebrate to woof and barking, many terms are
represented.
Finding a Focus
To determine a focus in the multitude of these symbols, the mind-wandering system
performs a clustering on these symbols using KMeans and the cosine similarity of a word
embedding as similarity measure. Currently, the number of clusters created corresponds to
the number of symbols in the (partial) interpretation divided by 4. In future work,
diﬀerent values for the number of clusters will be considered. Next, the system orders the
resulting clusters by their cosine similarity to the symbols in the current context and
chooses one of the clusters as the focus.
The choice of the cluster to work with next is related to associative thinking. The
thematic distance between the chosen cluster and the current context of the
mind-wandering chain corresponds to the diﬀerence between concepts that are related to
each other during associative thinking. For the experiments, the cluster in the middle of
the sorted sequence is chosen as the focus in order to allow the mind-wandering process to
move away from the current context. Other choices are possible and can be used to
simulate diﬀerent variants of associative thinking (with very strong or rather weaker
connections between the concepts related to another). In the running example, in the ﬁrst
iteration of the mind-wandering process this led to selecting the cluster consisting of the
symbols animal and animals as the new focus. Figure 4 shows the symbols occurring in

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
22
one of Hyper’s models corresponding to a later step in the mind-wandering process. The
diﬀerent colored polygons represent the clusters formed for these symbols. In the example,
four clusters were created (one for each colored polygon and one for the one-worded cluster
carpet). The cluster consisting of the symbols outside, front and outdoor was selected in
this case. Other choices for the focus cluster are possible and can be selected with the help
of a parameter. After selecting a cluster, the system creates a simple formula from the
symbols in the focus cluster and performs associative selection of background knowledge
suitable for this formula as described above. In this selection, the symbols from the focus
cluster together with similar symbols are used as new context symbols. The described
process is repeated a desired number of times or until the process does not deliver any new
symbols.
Experimental Results
Starting from the symbols in the initial formula, the symbols in the selected focus
clusters represent the result of the mind-wandering process. Starting from Formula (1)
containing the symbols dog, chew and bone the described system provides for example the

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
23
following sequence of sets of focus symbols:
1 : {dog, chew, bone}
2 : {animal, animals}
3 : {gardening}
4 : {garden, horticulture, farming}
5 : {mowing, lawn, yard}
6 : {outside, front, outdoor}
7 : {weather}
8 : {thunder, lightning}
9 : {cloud, sky, clouds}
10 : {water}
This corresponds to a mind-wandering chain which focuses on animals leads to gardening
and ﬁnally addresses weather aspects which leads to water.
It should be noted that the system has many parameters to control this
mind-wandering process. For the experiments, diﬀerent parameter combinations were
automatically tried out and the sequences of focus symbols generated in this way were
manually inspected. Diﬀerent parameter values led to a diﬀerent chain which ﬁnally ends

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
24
at fashion:
1 : {dog, chew, bone}
2 : {furry, tail, fur}
3 : {coats, wool, coat}
4 : {fur}
5 : {animal, pet, hair, coat, pelt, wool}
6 : {sleeves, robe, braided, leather, fur, garment, buttoned, styled, pockets,
strand, woven, cloth, wearable}
7 : {coats, covering, pattern, textile, fastened, worn, wool, coat, material, pelt}
8 : {wearing, robe, suit, shirt}
Figure 5 illustrates this mind-wandering chain. Each color represents one step of the
mind-wandering chain with all its elements.
The presented experiments are only a ﬁrst feasibility study. In addition to that, we
did ﬁrst experiments of the application of mind-wandering in the commonsense reasoning
area where we consider commonsense reasoning benchmarks like the Choice of Plausible
Alternatives Challenge (Roemmele et al., 2011). To solve these benchmarks we start a
mind-wandering process for both answer candidates and to choose the answer where the
result of the mind-wandering process is closer to the sentence The family took their dog to
the veterinarian. The distance between a mind-wandering chain and a sentence could be
measured for example using cosine similarity of the correspondig vectors of a word
embedding. One example for a mind-wandering chain produced by the mind-wandering

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
25
process is:
1 : {dog, injured, paw}
2 : {hurt}
3 : {injured, ouch, bruise, harm, painful, injure, ache}
4 : {twinges, discomfort, dangerous, contusion, hurt, wound}
5 : {incision, stitches, gauze, scar, healing, scab, bandaged, cuts}
6 : {regenerate, tissue, scalpel, crusted, skin, bleed, scratch, fungus, wound}
7 : {disease}
8 : {infection}
Compared to the two mind-wandering chains starting from The dog chewed on a bone.
presented above, this mind-wandering chain is clearly closer to the sentence The family
took their dog to the veterinarian. However, this is only one of the mind-wandering chains
produced by the mind-wandering process. There are other mind-wandering chains that do
not point in the direction of a visit to the veterinarian like the following one:
1 : {dog, injured, paw}
2 : {hurt}
3 : {limb, injure, dislocated, wounded}
4 : {disﬁgure, damage, harm, damaged, maimed, hurt, wound}
5 : {battle, ﬁght}
6 : {boxing, contest, struggle, conﬂict, crusade, oppose, action}
7 : {military}
Therefore, in future work we plan to always generate several mind-wandering chains
for each answer alternative and then select the answer whose mind-wandering chains are on
average closer to the desired sentence.

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
26
Creativity
This section applies our technique of associative selection in large knowledge bases
to modelling creativity tasks. A very common test to measure human creativity is the
Alternate Uses Task (Guilford, 1967): Subjects are asked to ﬁnd as many alternative uses
as possible for certain objects such as a brick in a given time window. It is obvious that for
the solution of such a task knowledge about the object plays a crucial role: the fact that a
brick is heavy, hard, stable and cuboid-shaped represents important background
information. Moreover, associative thinking is used to link this information with the
properties of other objects in order to ﬁnd an alternative use for the brick.
Another possibility to measure creativity constitute the Remote Associates Test
(RAT) (Martin Marko, 2018; S. A. Mednick, 1962) and functionally Remote Associates
Test (fRAT) (Blaine R. Worthen, 1971). In RAT, three words like cottage, swiss and cake
are given and the task is to ﬁnd a fourth word that connects these three words. For this
example, the solution is cheese, since there is cottage cheese, swiss cheese and cheese cake.
fRAT is similar to RAT such that it also presents three words and the task is to ﬁnd a
fourth connecting word. In contrast to RAT, however, a functional relationship between
the three words and the target word has to be found. For example, for the words tulip,
daisy, vase the connecting word ﬂower has to be found. To solve the problems in RAT and
fRAT, a broad knowledge is needed. The solution of the above fRAT task requires the
knowledge that tulips and daisies are ﬂowers. In addition, the subject must have the
knowledge that a vase is a container in which ﬂowers are kept. The diﬃculty in these tasks
is to ﬁnd a connection in the knowledge belonging to the three given words. Humans rely
on associative thinking to ﬁnd this connection.
Therefore, in order to model human creativity in AI systems, these systems must be
able to combine knowledge from diﬀerent domains and have to be able to model associative
thinking. In everyday life, the human ability to connect knowledge even goes so far that
people easily come up with an explanation for seemingly unrelated observations:

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
27
Imagine you see some snow and a carrot next to a sleigh.
The obvious explanation, that the snow and the carrot are the remains of a melted
snowman, requires the combination of knowledge from diﬀerent ﬁelds. For an AI system to
come up with such an explanation, a purely syntactic selection of background knowledge is
not suﬃcient in many cases, because the knowledge selected in this way is not broad
enough. Syntactic selection would probably end up selecting the information that carrots
are vegetables, snow is a type of precipitation and a sleigh is a vehicle. However the
connection between these three words would probably not be selected. This example
illustrates that a component modelling associative thinking is mandatory to enable AI
systems to come up with comparable explanations.
Even if we furthermore select knowledge for words similar to snow, carrot and
sleigh, we might end up missing the connection to a snowman. Table 2 lists for each of the
words snow, carrot and sleigh the most similar words found in the pre-trained GloVe word
vectors6.
Even if we select knowledge for all the similar words listed in Table 2 the
knowledge about snowmen will probably not be selected.
Therefore, it is important that the available information (the three words snow,
carrot and sleigh) is ﬁrst linked to a context and knowledge is selected for this context.
However, determining this context is not trivial. One commonly used way would be to
calculate the mean value for the word vectors of the words of interest (snow, carrot and
sleigh) and then determine the most similar words for this mean value (like done in Abels
et al., 2021). This results in the following 20 words (sorted in descending order according
6 GloVe word vectors Common Crawl (840B tokens, 2.2M vocab, cased, 300d vectors, 2.03 GB download at
https://nlp.stanford.edu/projects/glove/)

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
28
to their distance to the mean value):
pumpkin, snowman, carrots, reindeer, winter, snowy,
sledding, sled, potato, ice, snowﬂakes, potatoes, turnip,
cabbage, apples, autumn, wintry, frosty, bunny, pumpkins
(4)
As we can see, the snowman already appears in second place in this set. Even though this
is an approach to determining context that is often chosen, it is immediately noticeable
that the result contains many unwanted words that are obviously not part of the context.
Among the 20 words listed, 8 are vegetables or fruits. If we determine the distances of the
vegetables and fruits to the three context words (snow, carrot, sleigh) we notice that they
are only close to carrot and the distance to snow and sleigh is quite high. Figure 6
illustrates nicely, that the vegetables and fruits have a high closeness to the mean
determined from the context words, but they have a high variance as far as the closeness to
the individual context words is concerned. Since it is actually desirable that the words
determined are close to the mean and have low variance with respect to proximity to each
context word, we include variance in experiments to determine which words belong to a
context.
In experiments we determined the 100 words which are most similar to our context
words and sorted them by the diﬀerence of the distance to the mean of the context words
and the variance to the individual context words. For the running example with the
context words snow, carrot and sleigh, this results in the following words (sorted in
descending order according to the diﬀerence):
snowman, pumpkin, reindeer, sledding, winter, ice, snowy, snowﬂakes, sled,
bunny, pumpkins, pine, snowﬂake, autumn, frosty, marshmallow, christmas,
snowmen, snowball, carrots
These words only contain three vegetables. The snowman appears at the ﬁrst place
of the word list. Furthermore, new words interesting for the context like snowball, snowﬂake

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
29
and christmas appear in the word list. Compared to the context words presented above,
this second list of words provides a better context for the words snow, carrot and sleigh.
In ﬁrst experiments, we tested the usefulness of word embeddings for solving the
f-RAT benchmarks. As mentioned above, each f-RAT problem consists of three query
words (like discuss, gossip, telephone) together with the answer (in our example talk). For
each of the 48 f-RAT problems considered in Olteteanu et al. (2019), we considered the
query words and determined the 200 words most similar to the mean of the query words in
the GloVe word vectors. We sorted these 200 words in descending order of similarity to the
mean of the three query words. For 28 of the 48 fRAT problems, we were able to ﬁnd the
answer word we were looking for among the ﬁrst 10 similar words. Impressively, the answer
word could even be found among the ﬁrst 3 similar words in 23 of 48 cases. In addition, we
observed that sorting the similar words according to the diﬀerence suggested above
between distance to the mean of the query words and the variance of the similarity to the
individual query words resulted in the answer word appearing higher up in the sorting in
21 of the 48 problems. Only in 7 of the 48 problems did this sorting result in the answer
word appearing further down in the sorting.
Table 3 shows the experimental results for the ﬁrst ﬁve f-RAT problems given in
Olteteanu et al., 2019. We list the 5 words most similar to the mean of the query word as
well as the 5 words which are most similar to the diﬀerence of the mean und the variance.
The answers given in Olteteanu et al. (2019) are given in bold face. It is noticeable that
not only the correct answer but also other similar words listed in the table make sense as
an answer for the query. For example for the query words sensitive, sob and weep, the
correct solution is cry. The word tear, which is second among the candidates for answers
we have determined, also represents a possible solution.
But even in cases where the answer word was not found among the ﬁrst 10 similar
words, we found words which could be a solution as well. For instance, for the query words
arrest, badge and deputy the answer cop was not found among the top 10 words, but the

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
30
ﬁrst two hits oﬃcer and police could be a solution as well.
Altogether these ﬁrst experiments are encouraging and show that the inclusion of
values other than the distance to the mean vector could be useful. In future work, we plan
to investigate this in more detail.
General Discussion
In the previous sections we have discussed mind-wandering and creativity from the
perspective of associative thinking and we discussed our associative reasoning system as a
cognitive model for these phenomena. But mind-wandering and creativity also seem to be
closely related to consciousness. B. J. Baars (2010) argues that mind-wandering is closely
related to conscious life-relevant problem solving and learning. The link between creativity
and consciousness seems very obvious. In the literature, there is even a technique called
“stream of consciousness” that attempts to mimic the character’s thought process (James
Joyce used this technique prominently in Ulysses). In this section we broaden the
discussion by adressing aspects of consciousness in relation to the associative reasoning
system used until now.
Consciousness is a topic in several scientiﬁc disciplines, such as philosophy,
psychology, biology or neuroscience. In this paper, we cannot cover all aspects of
consciousness research, but rather focus on one branch of research that has an obvious
connection to our system: Consciousness from an information-theoretical point of view.
For this discussion we use Chalmers’ seminal paper (Chalmers, 1995) as a starting point.
This paper classiﬁes problems around the notion of consciousness into easy and hard
problems. Easy problems include explanations of certain phenomena, e.g. descriptions of
mental states or the focus of attention or the ability of a system to access its own internal
state. According to Chalmer the really hard problem is that of experience or qualia. This
notion can be circumscribed by something it is like to be, as it is formulated prominently
by Nagel (1974). Chalmers is proposing several research methods aiming at tackling this

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
31
hard problem of consciousness. In articular he is proposing an information theory approach
which was later taken up by Tononi:
Information Integration
Integrated Information Theory of Tononi (2004) avoids the necessity of a
neurobiological correlate of consciousness. It is applicable to arbitrary networks of
information processing units, they need not be neural or biological. Tononi is proposing a
thought experiment: Assume you are facing a blank screen, which is alternatively on and
oﬀand you are instructed to say “light” or “dark” according to the screen’s status. Of
course a simple photodiode can do exactly the same job, beep when the light is on and
silence when it is oﬀ. The diﬀerence between you and the photodiode is the so called
“qualia” — you consciously experience “seeing” light or dark. This is a partially subjective
process, a ﬁrst-person feeling, which we are not able to measure or compare with that of
other persons (a prominent treatment of this topic is in Nagel, 1974). One diﬀerence
between you and the photo diode is that the diode can switch between two diﬀerent states,
on and oﬀ, exclusively whereas your brain enters one of an extremely large number of states
when it recorgnizes the light. But it is not just the diﬀerence in the number of states, it is
also important to take the degree of information integration into account. If we use a
megapixel camera instead of a single photodiode for diﬀerentiating light from dark, this
technical device would also enter one of a very large number of possible states (representing
all possible images it can store). According to Tononi the diﬀerence between you and the
camera, is that the millions of pixels within the camera are not connected to each other.
Your brain, however, handles a huge number of information and it integrates information
from various parts of the brain. (For example it is hard to imagine colours without shapes.)
Tononi (2004) oﬀers a formal deﬁnition of information integration by deﬁning a function Φ,
which measures the capacity of a system to integrate information. To get an idea of this
approach, assume a network of elements which are connected, e.g. a neural network and

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
32
take a subset S from this system. Tononi “wants to measure the information generated
when S enters a particular state out of its repertoire, but only to the extent that such
information can be integrated, i.e. it can result from causal interactions within the system.
To do so, we partition S into A and its complement B . . . We then give maximum entropy
to the outputs of A, i.e. substitute its elements with independent noise sources of
constrained maximum variance. Finally, we determine the entropy of the resulting
responses of B . . . ” (Tononi, 2004). Based on this computation he deﬁnes the eﬀective
information between A and B, which is a measure of the information shared between the
source A and the target B. The above mentioned function Φ is deﬁned with the help of the
notion of eﬀective information. The entire system is then divided into several bipartitions
in order to ﬁnd the ones with the highest Φ-value. These so-called complexes are
responsible for integration of information within the system. Tononi is considering them as
the “subject” of experience, being the locus where information can be integrated. It should
be clear, that the computation of complexes for realistic networks is highly complex and
not really feasible. For some basic graph structures the Φ-values are given in Figure 7.
Based on this understanding of consciousness, one can try to test the theory by
considering several neuroanatomical or neurophysiological factors that are known to
inﬂuence consciousness of humans. Tononi does this in great detail in Tononi (2004),
others are developing new Turing tests for AI systems based on this theory (e.g. Koch and
Tononi, 2008). It is not surprising that Integrated Information Theory is criticized from
various directions. With respect to the notion of information Searle (Searle, 2013) is
arguing that information according to Shannon is observer-dependent, it is ‘only’ a theory
about syntax and encoding of contents, whereas consciousness is ontologically subjective
and observer-independent. Koch and Tononi’s reply (Koch & Tononi, 2013) is that they
use “a non-Shannonian notion of information—integrated information —- which can be
measured as “diﬀerences that make a diﬀerence” to a system from its intrinsic perspective,
not relative to an observer. Such a novel notion of information is necessary for quantifying

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
33
and characterizing consciousness as it is generated by brains and perhaps, one day, by
machines.” It is important to note, that Integrated Information Theory oﬀers a way to
quantify the degree of consciousness of a system. This is exactly why we think that it is
very well suited to investigate and to experiment with aspects of consciousness in artiﬁcial
systems. We will comment later on applying Integrated Information Theory to the
automated reasoning system Hyper in cases where it uses large knowledge bases. We will
argue that those knowledge bases oﬀer mechanisms for its integration and that this is
necessary in order to do automated reasoning.
Refering to the small example with the camera pixels from the beginning of this
section, it should be clear, that Integrated Information Theory is not only about handling
large amounts of information, but also about integrating its parts. In the following
subsection we will depict another approach to consciousness, which can be seen as a special
case of the Integrated Information Theory. It is the Global Workspace Theory developed
by B. J. Baars (1997), which is mainly focusing on the aspect of handling huge amounts of
knowledge.
The Theater of Consciousness
One motivation for Baars Global Workspace Theory (B. J. Baars, 1997) is the
observation that the human brain has a very limited working memory. We can actively
manipulate about seven separate things at the same time in our working memory. This is
an astonishing small number in contrast to the more than 100 billion neurons of the human
brain. Another limitation is that human consciousness is limited to only one single stream
of input. We can listen only to one speaker at a time, we cannot talk to a passenger during
driving in heavy traﬃc and there are many more examples like this. At the same time
there are numerous processes running in parallel but unconsciously. Global Workspace
Theory uses the metaphor of a theater to model how consciousness enables us to handle
the huge amount of knowledge, memories and sensory input the brain is controlling at

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
34
every moment.
Global Workspace Theory assumes a theater consisting of a stage, an attentional
spotlight shining at the stage, actors which represent the contents, an audience and some
people behind the scene. Let’s look at the parts in more detail:
The stage. The working memory consists of verbal and imagined items. Most parts
of the working memory are in the dark, but there are a few active items, usually the
short-term memory.
The spotlight of attention. This bright spotlight helps in guiding and navigating
through the working memory. Humans can shift it at will, by imagining things or events.
The actors are the members of the working memory; they are competing against
each other to gain access to the spotlight of attention.
Context behind the scene. Behind the scenes, the director coordinates the show and
stage designers and make-up artists prepare the next scenes.
The audience. According to Baars, the audience represents the vast collection of
specialized knowledge. It can be considered as a kind of long-term memory and consists of
specialized properties, which are unconscious. Navigation through this part of the
knowledge is done mostly unconsciously. This part of the theater is additionally
responsible for interpretation of certain contents e.g., objects, faces or speech – there are
some unconscious automatisms running in the audience.
It is important to note that this model of consciousness, although it uses a theater
metaphor, is very diﬀerent from a model like the Cartesian theater, as it it discussed and
refused in Dennett and Kinsbourne (1992). A Cartesian theater model would assume that
there is a certain region within the brain, which is the location of consciousness, this would
be a kind of humunculus. In Baars theater, however, the entire brain is the theater and
hence there is no special location, it is the entire integrated structure which is conscious.
This is in very nice accordance with Tononi’s Integrated Information Theory, described
above.

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
35
Baars and colleagues also developed an architecture based on the Global Workspace
Theory, which they call LIDA “a comprehensive, conceptual and computational model
covering a large portion of human cognition” (B. Baars & Franklin, 2009). LIDA consists
of a number of software modules, which implement a cognitive cycle which is derived from
the Global Workspace Theory. Baars gives a detailed justiﬁcation of LIDA by modelling
aspects of human cognition within his model. There are numerous other cognitive
architectures which are used for diﬀerent purposes, an extensive overview can be found in
Kotseruba and Tsotsos (2020).
In the following we will follow a very diﬀerent road — instead of designing a new
architecture based on Global Workspace Theory, we will show that the reasoning system
we have depicted and discussed in this paper can be seen as an instance of Global
Workspace Theory. It is important to note, that the development of this system was driven
by the needs to be used as a reasoner within a commonsense system together with huge
amounts of world knowledge. This system was not developed as a model for consciousness,
but exhibits nevertheless strong similarity with the Global Workspace Theory and the
Integrated Information Theory as we will demonstrate in the following subsection.
Looking through the Global Workspace Theory-Glasses
We demonstrate how Hyper in combination with the associative selection within
large knowledge bases can be interpreted as an architecture that implements the Global
Workspace Theory as introduced in the previous section.
The stage. The working memory corresponds to the branch of the Hyper tree which
is currently expanded. In the right part of Figure 2 this is the green path of the tree — it
contains the context in which the next reasoning step will be performed.
The spotlight of attention. This bright spotlight selects and highlights those parts of
the (green) branch together with the formulae from the problem or the selected parts of the
knowledge base which are used for the next reasoning step.

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
36
The actors. The actors correspond to the application of inference rules on the set of
formulae currently processed by the theorem prover. The result of the actors’ actions
correspond to new formulae derived by an inference step. The spotlight of attention
decides which actor, i.e. inference rule together with the necessary formulae, from the stage
are to be active next.
Context behind the scene. Behind the scenes, the reasoner and its control act as a
director.
Audience. According to Baars, the audience represents the vast collection of
specialized knowledge. It can be considered as a kind of long-term memory, namely the
knowledge base. We depicted several selection mechanisms for ﬁnding the appropriate
parts of the knowledge. The associative selection mechanism uses word similarities from
word embeddings. These word similarities connect diﬀerent parts of the background
knowledge with each other and thus allow to transfer existing knowledge to similar areas.
The selection mechanisms can be seen as the unconscious interpretation skills which Baars
located in the audience. In our case we only deal with declarative knowledge, if we had
procedural knowledge as well, this would be part of the audience too.
Altogether we have a complete Baars’ theater of consciousness consisting of the
reasoner Hyper, together with its control and its background knowledge — we have a
system which can be interpreted as a system with a certain degree of consciousness
according to the ideas presented above. However, it should be noted that “Metaphors must
be used with care. They are always partly wrong, and we should keep an eye out for
occasions when they break down. Yet they often provide the best starting point we can
ﬁnd.” (B. J. Baars, 1997)
Conclusion and Future Work
7 Figure 6 was generated by automatically reducing the 300-dimensional GloVe word vectors to 2d vectors.

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
37
Levesque and other AI researchers consider the task to understand how humans
approach commonsense reasoning and how this can be made available for AI-systems the
real challenge for AI (Levesque, 2017), but it is even more a problem for cognitive
modeling. Only if we understand the interplay between the cognitive processes or can – at
least show - how these processes can contribute to the respective competency, we
understand better an important aspect of our (human) cognitive system. In our analysis,
we have focussed on some parts of associative thinking and reasoning as well as on
commonsense reasoning and demonstrated that the presented approach can solve a variety
of these tasks. For this we connected work from research on associative thinking with work
on formal reasoning. We observed that AI systems in the commonsense reasoning domain
face similar problems as humans in everyday reasoning: Both have to deal with large
amounts of knowledge and have to be able to focus on the part of the knowledge which is
relevant for the task at hand. To accomplish this task, humans rely on associative thinking.
We argue that AI systems can use an instrument similar to associative thinking to deal
with this problem as well.
We depicted an implementation of a mind-wandering process with associative
reasoning. Further work has to be done for ﬁnding a way to determine what knowledge is
interesting enough to be kept within the focus of the system and how the knowledge base
should be modiﬁed according to the results of mind-wandering. Currently, only one path of
the proof tree is considered for the mind-wandering process. In future work we plan to
extend the approach to consider multiple open branches for mind-wandering.
We have given a brief insight into how associative reasoning with large amounts of
knowledge also play an important role in the ﬁeld of creativity. In future work, we will not
only consider selection of background knowledge in the area of creativity, but also
investigate how automated reasoning can be used in this area.
Finally we broadend our view by discussing the associative reasoning system as a
conscious system in the sense of the Integrated Information Theory and the Global

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
38
Workspace Theory. Future work on this topic should relate all these observations to
discussions from the area of theory of mind — one of the great cognitive modeling
challenges.

MODELING ASSOCIATIVE REASONING PROCESSES
39
