WEAKLY-SUPERVISED CONTINUAL LEARNING
FOR CLASS-INCREMENTAL SEGMENTATION
Gaston Lenczner1,2, Adrien Chan-Hon-Tong1, Nicola Luminari2, Bertrand Le Saux3
1ONERA/DTIS, Universit´e Paris-Saclay, FR-91123 Palaiseau, France
2Alteia, FR-31400 Toulouse, France
2ESA/ESRIN Φ-lab, I-00044 Frascati, Italy
ABSTRACT
Transfer learning is a powerful way to adapt existing deep
learning models to new emerging use-cases in remote sensing.
Starting from a neural network already trained for semantic
segmentation, we propose to modify its label space to swiftly
adapt it to new classes under weak supervision. To alleviate
the background shift and the catastrophic forgetting problems
inherent to this form of continual learning, we compare differ-
ent regularization terms and leverage a pseudo-label strategy.
We experimentally show the relevance of our approach on
three public remote sensing datasets. Code is open-source and
released in this repository: https://github.com/alteia-ai/ICSS.
(a) Initial prediction
(b) New class annotations
(c) New prediction
(d) Ground-truth
Fig. 1. Add building in the {background, road} label space
with clicked annotations. Initial prediction (a) leads to new-
class annotations (b) to collect the new prediction (c).

1. INTRODUCTION
Semantic segmentation, or pixel-wise classiﬁcation of an im-
age, is a challenging computer vision task with various re-
mote sensing applications such as land-cover mapping, build-
ing recognition or change detection. Nowadays, deep neural
networks (DNNs) are commonly applied for such purposes.
They are usually trained once on a given training dataset and
then deployed to automatically process potentially large vol-
umes of data.
This approach outcomes frozen algorithms that can lead
to excellent outputs in ideal conditions. However, there are
still many open questions, such as domain adaptation or lim-
ited training data, for which such a static approach is often
not suitable. Another important issue of these algorithms is
their lack of ﬂexibility due to their frozen output space ﬁxed
before training. Many works now use semi-supervised learn-
ing [1] and weakly supervised learning [2] to address limited
training data issues and domain adaptation [3, 4]. Another
promising approach to handle these problems comes with in-
teractive learning [5], where the algorithm learns to adapt to
user inputs. To improve the neural networks plasticity for se-
mantic segmentation, recent works propose customized losses
for class-incremental segmentation.
Even though ﬁne-tuning a deep network on a small set of
samples of new classes seems quite risky due to both catas-
trophic forgetting and lack of convergence threats, we show
in this work that this is possible within the correct framework.
Precisely, we combine weak and class-incremental segmenta-
tion works to propose to increment neural network label space
using sparse clicked annotations, as showed by Figure 1. This
set-up is suited for the interactive learning of new classes
since these annotations are particularly handy for an annota-
tor [2]. Currently, it might be easier to ask an operator to an-
notate training data with the new segmentation classes to fully
retrain the algorithm. Yet, the purpose of the proposed frame-
work is precisely to be able to learn a new class on new data.
This method is therefore suitable for use-cases where initial
training data is unavailable due to privacy concerns or where
accurate predictions are needed quickly on small datasets.
To this purpose, we ﬁrst compare different regularizations
arXiv:2201.01029v2  [cs.CV]  15 Jun 2022

to fully beneﬁt from the sparse annotations.
We also ex-
plore a pseudo-label strategy to alleviate catastrophic forget-
ting. To summarize, the contributions of this paper are: (1) A
framework to increase the label space of a DNN for seman-
tic segmentation with sparse annotations; (2) A pseudo-label
strategy and a comparison of different regularizations for this
weakly supervised ﬁne-tuning; (3) An experimental valida-
tion of the proposed approach on three public remote sensing
datasets.
2. RELATED WORK
2.1. Semi and weak supervision in semantic segmentation
When labels are scarce or ﬂawed, the common training
paradigm is to learn to perform the segmentation task with
the available labels while leveraging unlabeled data to learn
a better inner representation as support. In semantic segmen-
tation, weak labels can take various forms like incomplete
ground-truth maps or bounding boxes.
Recently, different
works in remote sensing explore these different aspects.
In [1], the authors learn from a mix of fully annotated images
and unannotated ones with auxiliary tasks while [3] designs
a custom regularization weighted by the proportion of la-
beled data to address semi-supervised domain adaptation. In
weakly supervised learning, semantic segmentation can be
achieved from bounding-boxes [4], rough polygons [6] or
image-level labels [7]. Closely related to our kind of super-
vision, DISCA [5] and FESTA [2] leverage point annotations
either as user input clicks or partial labels. We here use sim-
ilar point annotations to add a new segmentation class to a
pretrained DNN.
2.2. Class-incremental semantic segmentation
The goal of class incremental learning is to modify the out-
put space of DNNs to add label classes. This problem was
already considered two decades ago [8] and two main pitfalls
are identiﬁed.
First, like in other class-incremental tasks,
it is important to prevent the catastrophic forgetting of the
previously learned knowledge. Second, speciﬁc to seman-
tic segmentation, the background-shift ﬁrst tackled in [9]
has to be dealt with.
Indeed, the new class comes from
the background, which causes a discrepancy with the previ-
ously learned background class. Many methods addressed
these two problems by simply storing previous examples [10]
but more recent works consider this constraint to be too re-
strictive due to limited storage or security reasons. Hence,
we draw inspiration from [11, 12] which design customized
regularization to address the two identiﬁed pitfalls. [11] pro-
poses distillation losses which enforce statistical matches
between the networks. Inspired by few-shot and contrastive
learning, [12] relies on prototypes representing the different
semantic classes to distinguish them.
3. METHODOLOGY
3.1. Scenario, baseline and constraints
A DNN pre-trained for semantic segmentation to detect N −1
classes is applied on a new image I. The goal is to add a
new possible segmentation class and to provide an accurate
segmentation map with respect to these N classes. To this
aim, M annotations are provided to make the network inter-
actively learn the N th segmentation class. In this work, we
follow ﬁndings from [2] and use point annotations as they ap-
pear to be particularly handy for a potential user. In practice,
the last layer of the DNN is modiﬁed to increment its output
space. As we observed that freezing parts of the network low-
ered its accuracy, the entire network is then retrained with a
cross-entropy (CE) loss on the annotated pixels. However,
three problems arise with this simple baseline: (1) Catas-
trophic forgetting since the new provided labels only belong
to the new class; (2) Background shift since the new class
was previously classiﬁed as background. So, the network has
to both learn to detect a new class and to modify the learned
representation of the background class; (3) Poor class rep-
resentation since the network has to learn the new class rep-
resentation from sparse annotations (i.e. highly incomplete
ground-truth).
To address these problems, we notably rely on a pseudo-
label strategy and compare different regularizations added to
the cross-entropy loss.
Following notation from [10], we refer through the rest
of this paper to the previous network with the N −1 class
prediction as the memory network and to the new one as the
updated network. We also refer to the set of semantic classes
except the background as the classes of interest.
3.2. Learning from pseudo-labelling
The prediction of the memory network is used to sample
old classes labels. This ensures that the user does not have
to provide such old-class annotations while preventing the
network from forgetting them. In addition, the interactive
user inputs provide both the new class and the background
labels. These background labels avoid the aforementioned
background-shift issue since background predictions from
the memory network could actually belong to the new class.
To emphasize the N annotations of the new class, only a
maximum of N of the most conﬁdent old-classes pixels are
considered as annotations.
3.3. Regularization
In order to make the most of the sparse annotations, we con-
sider the following regularization schemes.
DISCA. Since the new class was previously part of the
background, the predictions over the other classes of interest
should remain similar. To enforce this property, we follow [5]

Ground-truth
Control prediction
Memory prediction
Baseline prediction
SDR prediction
Fig. 2. Building and road segmentation with 300 building annotations and road pseudo-labels on an example from Vaihingen
compared to ground-truth and control prediction.
and consider adding a cross entropy regularization term over
the pixels which are predicted as belonging to classes of in-
terest by the memory network. This can be seen as an output-
level knowledge distillation loss.
PodNet.
Following PodNet [11], we enforce a statis-
tic match at the encoder level over the channels between the
memory network and the updated one with a L2 intermediate-
level knowledge distillation loss.
SDR. Inspired by few-shots and contrastive learning, we
follow [12] to regularize the DNN latent space. This aims
to reduce forgetting whilst improving the recognition of the
new class. Concretely, we add a prototype-based regulariza-
tion at the encoder level of the DNN. Prototypes are vectors
representative of each segmentation class and are computed
on the ﬂy at each new learning step. This regularization is
composed of three terms: a matching term enforces that the
updated prototypes stay close to the previous ones, a repul-
sive term ensures that the prototypes are far from each other
and an attracting term pushes the pixels to remain close to
their associated prototype.
FESTA. To deal with sparse annotations for segmentation
in remote sensing, [2] introduces an unsupervised loss that ac-
counts for neighbourhood structures both in spatial and fea-
ture domains as it assumes that nearby pixels share labels.
4. EXPERIMENTS
4.1. Experimental set-up
We evaluate our approach on the ISPRS Potsdam & Vaihin-
gen datasets [13] respectively composed of 38 (6000 × 6000
pxls, 5cm res.) and 33 (various sizes, 9cm res.) images and on
SemCity Toulouse [14] composed of 4 images (3504 × 3452
pxls, 50 cm res.).
We pretrain the network for old class
(road1) segmentation using dense ground-truth maps on 30
(Potsdam), 26 (Vaihingen) and 2 (Toulouse) images. We ﬁne-
tune for new class (building1) using 3001 clicked new-class
and background annotations simulated from the ground-
truth on the remaining data.
To compare with a potential
1Except when speciﬁed otherwise.
upper bound, we consider a control network directly pre-
trained on dense {road, building} ground-truth maps (and
not ﬁne-tuned). For simplicity, all experiments are performed
separately within each dataset (i.e. not in domain adaptation).
The considered metric is the Intersection over Union
(IoU) averaged image-wise. Except when we analyze the im-
pact of the number of annotations, we simulate 300 new-class
and background annotations.
For all experiments, we use a LinkNet [15] architecture
trained using Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 10−4
during 10 pseudo-epochs.
Each pseudo-epoch consists in
10 000 256 × 256 labeled samples randomly chosen from
training data. We infer using a 256 × 256 sliding window
with an overlap of 50%. Due to the stochastic nature of the
optimization process and the simulation of the annotations,
all experiments are averaged on 3 runs to obtain statistically
signiﬁcant results.
During ﬁne-tuning, we use an Adam optimizer with a
learning rate of 2 · 10−5. We ﬁne-tune for 30 steps and se-
lect the best performances obtained in the last 15 steps. Each
step consists of 10 back-propagation iterations.
4.2. Approach assessment
Table 1. Comparison of the different regularizations. Contr.
stands for Control and Bas. for Baseline.
Contr.
Bas.
FESTA
DISCA
PodNet
SDR
Pot.
76.4
68.7+- 2.7 66.5+- 8.4 68.2+- 4.1 71.7+- 2.3 72.0+- 0.3
Vai.
84
76.2+- 2.3 75.1+- 3.4 74.8+- 1.8 74.1+- 5.4 79.7+- 1.6
Toul.
74
63.2+- 3.2 62.4+- 1.5 54.0+- 0.9 65.4+- 1.0 67.7+- 0.6
As indicates Table 1, the DNN is able to learn a new class
with clicked annotations. Even without additional regular-
izations, it reaches an IoU over the three classes of 68.7%
on Potsdam, 76.2% on Vaihingen and 63.2% on Toulouse.
Appropriate regularization further improves the performances
up to 4%. Indeed, SDR consistently improves the results on
the three datasets: 3.3% on Potsdam, 3.5% on Vaihingen and
4.5% on Toulouse. Moreover, SDR tends to stabilize the re-

sults compared to the baseline, as testiﬁes the standard devia-
tion measures (e.g. the std on Toulouse is of 0.6 for SDR and
of 3.2 for the baseline). As shows Figure 2, it visually trans-
late into sharper contours, even though the baseline already
produces visually accurate results. However, the other regu-
larizations under-perform in this setting in regards to SDR and
can even lead to worse results than the baseline on Vaihingen
and Toulouse. Hence, the distillation losses and FESTA seem
to be less relevant for this problem than the latent space regu-
larization proposed by SDR.
4.3. Inﬂuence of the number of annotations
Fig. 3. Metric evolution on the three datasets w.r.t. the num-
ber of annotations. Control network performances are in dots.
To better apprehend our approach, we analyze the inﬂu-
ence of the number of annotations over the performances. Ac-
cording to the results of the previous section, we ﬁne-tune the
network using SDR regularization. As we can observe on Fig-
ure 3, less than one hundred annotations leads to sub-optimal
results and the performances then greatly improve with re-
spect to the number of annotations. After 100 annotations for
the two ISPRS datasets and 300 annotations for the SemCity
dataset, the DNN almost catches up with the control network
performances and then stabilizes on a plateau.
5. CONCLUSION
To conclude, we have shown that it is possible to make a
DNN learn on the ﬂy new segmentation classes after the ini-
tial training with point supervision using pseudo-labelling
and relevant regularizations. We have assessed the method
efﬁciency with experiments on three public remote sensing
datasets. Moreover, with a sufﬁcient amount of annotations,
the performances even almost catch up with a DNN trained
on the classes of interest in a fully supervised way.
6. REFERENCES
[1] J. Castillo-Navarro et al., “Semi-Supervised Semantic
Segmentation in Earth Observation: The MiniFrance
suite, dataset analysis and multi-task network study,”
Machine Learning, pp. 1–36, 2021.
[2] Y. Hua et al., “Semantic segmentation of remote sens-
ing images with sparse annotations,” Geoscience and
Remote Sensing Letters, vol. 19, pp. 1–5, 2021.
[3] B. Lucas et al., “A Bayesian-inspired, deep learning-
based, semi-supervised domain adaptation technique for
land cover mapping,”
Machine Learning, pp. 1–33,
2021.
[4] Qi Wang et al., “Weakly supervised adversarial domain
adaptation for semantic segmentation in urban scenes,”
Trans. on Image Processing, vol. 28, no. 9, pp. 4376–
4386, 2019.
[5] G. Lenczner et al., “Interactive learning for semantic
segmentation in earth observation,”
in ECML/PKDD
Workshop, 2020.
[6] R. C. Daudt et al., “Weakly supervised change detection
using guided anisotropic diffusion,” Machine Learning,
pp. 1–27, 2021.
[7] Z. Li et al.,
“On the effectiveness of weakly su-
pervised semantic segmentation for building extraction
from high-resolution remote sensing imagery,” JSTARS,
vol. 14, pp. 3266–3281, 2021.
[8] L. Bruzzone and D. Prieto, “An incremental-learning
neural network for the classiﬁcation of remote-sensing
images,” Pattern Recognition Letters, vol. 20, no. 11-
13, pp. 1241–1248, 1999.
[9] F. Cermelli et al., “Modeling the background for incre-
mental learning in semantic segmentation,” in CVPR,
2020, pp. 9233–9242.
[10] O. Tasar et al., “Incremental learning for semantic seg-
mentation of large-scale remote sensing data,” JSTARS,
vol. 12, no. 9, pp. 3524–3537, 2019.
[11] A. Douillard et al., “PodNet: Pooled outputs distillation
for small-tasks incremental learning,” in ECCV, 2020,
pp. 86–102.
[12] U. Michieli and P. Zanuttigh, “Continual semantic seg-
mentation via repulsion-attraction of sparse and disen-
tangled latent representations,”
in CVPR, 2021, pp.
1114–1124.
[13] F. Rottensteiner et al., “The ISPRS benchmark on urban
object classiﬁcation and 3D building reconstruction,” in
ISPRS Annals, 2012, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 293–298.
[14] R. Roscher et al., “SemCity Toulouse: A benchmark
for building instance segmentation in satellite images,”
ISPRS Annals, vol. 5, pp. 109–116, 2020.
[15] A. Chaurasia and E. Culurciello, “LinkNet: Exploiting
encoder representations for efﬁcient semantic segmen-
tation,” in VCIP, 2017, pp. 1–4.
