World of Computer Science and Information Technology Journal (WCSIT)  
ISSN: 2221-0741 
Vol. 1, No. 1, 5-9, 2011 
5 
 
Hybrid Model for Solving Multi-Objective Problems 
Using Evolutionary Algorithm and Tabu Search 
         
 
           Rjab Hajlaoui                                           Mariem Gzara                                Abdelaziz Dammak           
Department of computer Sciences                Department of computer Sciences      Department of Applied Quantitative Methods 
            Hail University                                            Monastir University                                      Sfax University 
                Hail, KSA                                                 Monastir, Tunisia                                           Sfax, Tunisia 

 
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents a new multi-objective hybrid model that makes cooperation between the strength of research of 
neighborhood methods presented by the tabu search (TS) and the important exploration capacity of evolutionary algorithm. This 
model was implemented and tested in benchmark functions (ZDT1, ZDT2, and ZDT3), using a network of computers. 
 
Keywords- Metaheuristics; hybrid method; intensification; diversification; parallelism; cooperation. 
 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
The 
resolution 
of 
optimization 
problems 
requires 
satisfaction 
of 
several 
contradictory 
objectives. 
The 
optimization of one objective can be at the expense of others. 
In this case, the important number of constraints, the behaviour 
of these objectives’ functions, as well as the landscape of the 
Pareto Front (Convexity, discontinuities, and multi modes) put 
some inherent difficulties to overcome [1]. 
    Mainly, metaheuristics are considered as high-level 
algorithmic strategies that are used to guide other heuristics or 
algorithms in their search for the space to feasible solutions of 
the optimal value (in the single-objective case) and the set of 
optimal values (in the multi-objective case). 
   Using parallel metaheuristics (tabu search method, 
genetic algorithms, simulated annealing, etc.) permits toexploit 
the specific advantages of every approach and to establish a 
new record to find better solutions [2]. 
   In this optic, we propose a new cooperative model that 
directs search in the less explored zones and that visits the 
entire feasible surface. This parallel cooperative model is based 
on three basic components that evolve and cooperate 
simultaneously. These components are: Strength Pareto 
Evolutionary Algorithm (SPEA), Intensificator Tabu Search 
(ITS), and Diversificator Tabu Search (DTS). 
   This paper is divided into four sections. Sections 1 and 2 
simultaneously describe the Evolutionary Algorithm andthe 
Tabu Search. Section 3 presents our cooperative model 
between the elitist Evolutionary Algorithm (SPEA) and the 
Tabu Search for multi-objective optimization.  
Finally, section 4 gives experimental results and discusses 
the performance of our model. 
II. 
STRENGTH PARETO EVOLUTIONARY ALGORITHM 
  Evolutionary algorithms seem particularly suitable to 
solve multi-objective optimization problems because they deal 
simultaneously with a set of possible solutions (the so-called 
population). This allows to find several members of the Pareto 
optimal set in a single ―run‖ of the algorithm, instead of having 
to perform a series of separate runs as in the case of the 
traditional mathematical programming techniques. In addition, 
evolutionary algorithms are less susceptible to the shape or 
continuity of the Pareto front; e.g, they can easily deal with 
discontinuous or concave Pareto fronts. 
   The choice of the SPEA method is not arbitrary. Indeed, 
many comparative studies [3] have been achieved on different 
multi-objective evolutionary algorithms and have shown that 
the SPEA method is clearly superior. This last method 
integrates only one algorithm technique established by the EA 
with new techniques in order to find optimal parallel solutions. 
The SPEA is simultaneously based on concepts of no 
dominance and of elitism. In addition to an initial population of 
size N, the SPEA uses an external population—called 
archive—of size M to maintain the pareto optimal solutions. In 
this method, the passage from one generation to another starts 
with the updating of the archive. All non-dominated individuals 

WCSIT 1 (1), 5 -9, 2011 
6 
are copied in the archive and the dominated individuals already 
present are deleted. If the number of individuals in the archive 
exceeds a given number, a clustering technique is performed to 
reduce the archive. The performance of every individual is then 
updated before doing the selection while using the two groups. 
To finish, one applies the genetic operators of crossing and 
mutation [3]. 
ALGORITHM 1: SPEA ALGORITHM 
 
Step 1: Generate random initial population P and create the empty 
external set of non-dominated individuals P0. 
 
Step 2: Evaluate objective functions for each individual in P. 
 
Step 3: Copy non-dominated members of P to Pa. 
 
Step 4: Remove solutions within Pa which are covered by any 
other member of Pa. 
 
Step 5: If the number of externally kept non-dominated solutions 
exceeds a given size, then use the clustering technique. 
 
Step 6: Calculate the fitness of each individual in P, as well as, in 
Pa. 
 
Step 7: Select individuals from P U Pa, until the mating pool is 
filled. 
 
Step 8: Apply recombination and mutation to members of the 
mating pool in order to create a new population P. 
 
Step 9: If a maximum number of generations is reached, then stop, 
else go to Step 2. 
 
III. 
TABU SEARCH 
Tabu search (TS) is a metaheuristic procedure introduced 
by Glover [4]. It is used for a local search heuristic algorithm to 
explore the space of solutions beyond the simple local 
optimum. It has been applied to a wide range of practical 
optimization applications, producing an accelerated growth of 
Tabu search algorithms in recent years. 
   A tabu list is a set of solutions determined by historical 
information from the last iterations of the algorithm. At each 
iteration, given the current solution x and its corresponding 
neighborhood N(x), the procedure moves to the solution in the 
neighborhood N(x) that mostly improves the objective 
function. However, moves that lead to solutions on the tabu list 
are forbidden or are tabu. If there are no improving moves, TS 
chooses the move which at least changes the objective function 
value. The tabu list avoids returning to the local optimum from 
which the procedure has recently escaped. A basic element of 
the tabu search is the aspiration criterion, which determines 
when a move is admissible despite being on the tabu list. One 
termination criterion for the tabu procedure is a limit in the 
number of consecutive moves for which no improvement 
occurs. 
 
 
 
 
ALGORITHM 2: TABU SEARCH ALGORITHM 
 
Step 1: Choose an initial solution in S (search space). Set i * = i 
and k = 0 
 
Step 2: Apply k = k+1 and generate a subset of solutions in N(i,k) 
so that: 
 
The tabu movements are not chosen  
 
The aspiration criterion a(i,m ) is applied  
 
N(i,k) is the neighborhood of the current solution i at iteration k. 
 
Step 3: Choose the best solution i' among N(i,k), then apply i = 
better i' 
 
Step 4: If f(i) <= f(i *), then apply i * = i 
 
Step 5: Update the list T and aspiration criterion. 
 
Step 6: If a stop condition is reached, then stop. 
 
Otherwise, return to Step 2. 
 
IV. 
COOPERATIVE MODEL: EVOLUTIONARY   ALGORITHM-
TABU SEARCH FOR THE MULTI-OBJECTIVE 
OPTIMIZATION(COMOEATS): 
Our goal is to exploit the advantages of EA and TS to 
achieve a level-headed research that leads to a uniform 
distribution which covers the totality of the pareto optimal 
solutions. This search avoids the premature convergence and 
the omission of promising solutions at the same time. 
   Fig.1. shows two possible distributions where the 
solutions given are limited on a short part of the front and the 
choice of decider is reduced. To overcome this problem, we are 
developing a new hybrid model in order to find an unexplored 
zone to which the search is directed (using Diversificator tabu 
search). After that an intensificator tabu search is applied in 
Fig. 3. 
 
Fig.1. Example of distributions 

WCSIT 1 (1), 5 -9, 2011 
7 
The working of the model is illustrated as follows: 
 
ALGORITHM 3 : COMOEATS ALGORITHM 
 
Step 1: Choose an initial population 
 
Step 2: Execute the SPEA method on time 
 
Step 3: In parallel with SPEA, casting an intensificator tabu search 
with a solution of the front and another diversificator with all 
solutions of the front 
 
Step 4: The improved solutions obtained will be integrated in the 
population archives (population of departure for the next iteration 
of the SPEA) 
 
Step 5: If a stop condition is reached (number of generations), stop. 
Else, return to step 3. 
 
The model that we propose works in three parallel 
components: 
 
The first uses a multi-objective evolutionary 
algorithm (SPEA) that, each time, generates a Pareto 
front increasingly improved. This algorithm performs 
global search and discovers multiple optimal 
solutions. 
 
 
An ITS, receives a non-dominated solution taken at 
random from the Pareto Front generated by the SPEA 
algorithm to be the topic of improvement. For each 
iteration, the neighborhood of the current solution is 
generated by keeping only non-dominated solutions 
that belong to the intensification zone fig 2. There are 
two cases:  
 
*The neighborhood includes a solution dominating S0, 
which, in this case, will be the new solution of departure.  
*There isn’t any solution that dominates S0, and in this case 
a solution from neighborhood will be taken as the one of 
departure. These stages will be reiterated until a maximum 
number of iterations are reached.  
 
Fig.2: Space of research for the intensificator TS 
 
 
The DTS detects a less explored zone of the search 
space and performs a local search in order to discover 
new solutions. 
 
   In the bi-objective case, the DTS detects the two most 
distant and successive points of the pareto front (either SL1 or 
SL2), calculates the middle vector cost of these points (Cm), 
and then marks the best solution belonging to the hatched 
dominant zone Cm , fig.3. 
 
Fig.3: Space of research for the diversificateur TS 
For all individuals generated by the DTS and ITS, a 
mechanism of selection decides that a new improved individual 
must be introduced in the population archives. This last will be 
taken as an initial solution for the SPEA method in the 
following iteration. 
 
 Fig.4: Diagram of basis of the COMOEATS model 
V. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS: 
Our COMOEATS model has been programmed with Visual 
C++, executed on computer network using the MPI library 
(Message Passing Interface). 
   For each 10 iterations (determined by user) of SPEA 
algorithm, the solutions of Pareto front obtained will be 
improved by the Intensificator and Diversificator tabu search. 
Then, new solutions will be integrated in the next population. 
The parameters of the method are illustrated in the 
following table: 
 

WCSIT 1 (1), 5 -9, 2011 
8 
TABLE.1: EXPERIMENTAL PARAMETERS 
 
SPEA 
TS 
-size of the initial population: 100 
-size tabu list: 50 
individuals 
-number of iterations: 
-size  of  the  population  archives: 
200 
100 individuals 
-Tabu life: 50 
- number of generations: 400 
 
- probability of crossover: 0.9 
 
-probability of mutation: 0.01 
 
Binary -coding: 16 bits 
 
 
 
We compare our COMOEATS method to SPEA method 
(experimentations are done on bi-objective test functions: 
ZDT1, ZDT2, and ZDT3). Then, we present and discuss the 
Pareto Front generated by every method for each function [7]. 
The following table presents a set of experimentations 
achieved on benchmarks. We use the following metrics: 
Contribution: It evaluates the proportion of Pareto solution 
brought by each of the two foreheads F1 and F2 [5]. 
Entropy: The entropy uses the notion of nest to evaluate the 
distribution of solutions on the Pareto front. Closer to 1 the 
gotten value is, better is the distribution. 
Spacing: This metric is based on a calculation of the 
distance between solutions. It permits to measure the 
uniformity of the distribution of points of the compromise 
surface in the space of objectives [6]. Used with other 
measures, it gives an interesting indication on the convergence 
of the method used. 
Metric S: This metric uses a reference point while 
calculating the hyper-volume of the multi-dimensional region 
comprised between the Pareto front and the reference point [6]. 
-ZDT1: this problem has a convex POF 
TABLE.2 : METRICS FOR ZDT1 
 
 
COMOEATS 
SPEA 
Contribution 
0 .507042 
0.492958 
Entropie 
0.367399 
0.360803 
Spacing 
0.0256606 
0.0203861 
Métrique S 
0.55787 
0.5524335 
 
   According to this representation, we notice an advantage 
of our model in relation to SPEA at the level of the two metrics 
contribution and entropy. This difference implies a better 
distribution of solutions on the Pareto front. 
   This improvement became clearer in fig.5, where we 
succeeded to visit unexplored zones by SPEA and get various 
solutions. On the other hand, our hybrid model bust a great 
number of solutions that cover all the front, thence the hyper-
volume hand from 0.5524335 to 0.55787. 
 
 
Fig. 5: Distribution of solutions for the two models COMOEATS and 
SPEA (Case of ZDT1). 
 
-ZDT2: this problem has a non-convex POF: 
TABLE.3 : METRICS FOR ZDT2 
 
 
COMOEATS 
SPEA 
Contribution 
0.507092 
0.492958 
Entropie 
0.371775 
0.360803 
Spacing 
0.0276606 
0.0203861 
Métrique S 
0.55689 
0.5524335 
 
 
Fig. 6: Distribution of solutions for the two models COMOEATS and 
SPEA (Case of ZDT2) 
For this type of problems, we notice a remarkable 
improvement particularly at the level of new solutions 
discovered by our model. At the same time, there remain some 
less discovered parts. For this reason, we must use several 
Diversificator tabu searches. 

WCSIT 1 (1), 5 -9, 2011 
9 
 
-ZDT3: this problem has a discontinuous POF: 
 
TABLE.4 : METRICS FOR ZDT3 
 
 
COMOEATS 
SPEA 
Contribution 
0.507042 
0.496454 
Entropie 
0.373243 
0.365199 
Spacing 
0.0116797 
0.0206785 
Métrique S 
0.741164 
0.750998 
 
 
Fig. 7: Distribution of solutions for the two models COMOEATS and 
SPEA (Case of ZDT3) 
 
   For problems having a discontinuous forehead, our 
method proves to be interesting at the level of all metrics. This 
improvement became lucid in Fig.7 which presents a good 
uniformity. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In 
this 
paper, 
we 
presented 
a 
hybrid 
approach 
(COMOEATS) for the resolution of multi-objective problems. 
This approach is based on elitist evolutionary algorithm 
(SPEA), Intensificator Tabu search (ITS), and Diversificator 
tabu search (DTS). A set of experimentations have been 
conducted in benchmark functions known in the literature. The 
achieved results show a clear improvement of our approach 
compared to that using SPEA. The future tasks will be carried 
on the use of several tabu searches, hence the generalization of 
the method with multi-objective problems.
