1
Robust and Scalable Routing with Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement
Learning for MANETs
Saeed Kaviani1, Bo Ryu1, Ejaz Ahmed1, Kevin Larson2, Anh Le1, Alex Yahja1, and Jae H. Kim2
1EpiSys Science, Inc.

2Boeing Research and Technology

Highly dynamic mobile ad-hoc networks (MANETs) are con-
tinuing to serve as one of the most challenging environments to
develop and deploy robust, efﬁcient, and scalable routing proto-
cols. In this paper, we present DeepCQ+ routing which, in a novel
manner, integrates emerging multi-agent deep reinforcement
learning (MADRL) techniques into existing Q-learning-based
routing protocols and their variants, and achieves persistently
higher performance across a wide range of MANET conﬁgura-
tions while training only on a limited range of network parame-
ters and conditions. Quantitatively, DeepCQ+ shows consistently
higher end-to-end throughput with lower overhead compared to
its Q-learning-based counterparts with the overall gain of 10-15%
in its efﬁciency. Qualitatively and more signiﬁcantly, DeepCQ+
maintains remarkably similar performance gains under many
scenarios that it was not trained for in terms of network sizes,
mobility conditions, and trafﬁc dynamics. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the ﬁrst successful demonstration of MADRL
for the MANET routing problem that achieves and maintains a
high degree of scalability and robustness even in the environments
that are outside the trained range of scenarios. This implies that
the proposed hybrid design approach of DeepCQ+ that combines
MADRL and Q-learning signiﬁcantly increases its practicality
and explainability because the real-world MANET environment
will likely vary outside the trained range of MANET scenarios.
I. INTRODUCTION
Routing has been one of the most challenging problems in
communication and computer networks, especially in unco-
ordinated distributed and autonomous wireless networks. In
packet routing protocols, each router selects another node as a
next-hop (i.e. unicasting) as determined by its routing policy.
The level and type of cooperation and coordination between
the nodes in the network often describe what information the
routing decisions are based on. Distributed routing algorithm
can assign a designated communication channel or messaging
architecture to accommodate the cooperation. We concentrate
on the algorithms that only share limited information through
acknowledgment (ACK) packets. This information sharing is
efﬁcient as ACKs are inherently present in the networking
protocols and do not require any extra implementation in the
system.
Our work is focused solely on optimizing next-hop se-
lection and mode (broadcast or unicast) selection, with the
primary goal of achieving low overhead in environments
with highly dynamic networks. Additional performance is
likely available through network coding (NC) methods (such
as those based on packet manipulation and/or designated
coordination channels), but these are outside the scope of
this work, and not considered. [1]–[5]. A common theme in
many of these algorithms is opportunistic routing (OR). OR
has many disadvantages, such as: 1) Over-reliance on costly
broadcast and coordination trafﬁc. Unicast communication is
sufﬁcient in most cases. 2) Broadcast is incompatible with the
directional transmission, and will result in lower data rates and
higher end-to-end delay in wireless channels with beamform-
ing capabilities when compared with unicast transmissions.
3) OR requires designated coordination channels between
the nodes receiving broadcasted packets. For example, in
the ExOR multi-hop opportunistic routing algorithm [2], all
nodes broadcast the packet. Then, each node that receives
the packet sends additional trafﬁc to reach a consensus on
which node will broadcast (forward) that packet next. ExOR’s
designated coordination channel and packet broadcasting add
considerably to the communication overhead. 4) Due to these
coordination steps, these routing protocols are too slow to be
robust and reliable for highly dynamic MANET. Opportunistic
multi-hop routing methods like MORE [3], COPE [4], and
recently [5], all rely on NC (mixing the packets) to extend the
useful context in forwarded trafﬁc. The gains in these methods
are based on packet manipulation and high-cost coordination
messaging rather than simply leveraging context in existing
trafﬁc, such as ACK messages. Nevertheless, our proposed
approach considers routing exclusively from the context of
next-hop selection and offers an optimization framework that
could be extended by NC for additional improvement.
The challenges of routing are compounded when the net-
work is highly dynamic, heterogeneous, and/or contains vari-
able data rates. These challenges are of particular for MANET
in the tactical networking domain. The term ”Tactical net-
work” is used for the wireless network supporting tactical
operations, where reliable wireless networking is required
for critical operations, including those of military, broadcast,
unmanned vehicles, law enforcement, and airborne intelligent
surveillance reconnaissance (ISR). Tactical wireless commu-
nications have latency, reliability, and security requirements
not found in commercial wireless networks and pose many
challenging problems in the routing domain. The nodes in
arXiv:2101.03273v2  [cs.NI]  29 Mar 2021

2
tactical networks are often highly mobile, expressing unpre-
dictable motion and topology due to environmental conditions
such as terrain, interference, and jamming [6]–[8]. These
factors signiﬁcantly increase uncertainty in tactical networks
in hostile environments. As a result of these environments,
many traditional MANET routing protocols are unreliable
and require re-computation of end-to-end routes on every
network change, resulting in a periodic loss in throughput due
to trafﬁc not being sent during routing table computations.
To improve packet delivery and rapid exploration in these
highly dynamic networks, broadcasting (i.e. transmission of
a packet to all neighbors) has become a popular technique
[8]–[12]. Traditional network routing protocols (e.g. DSDV
[9], OSPF [12], OLSR [11], and AODV [10]) are used when
the network is in a stable state. When link outages and
node mobility become too frequent, these algorithms require
alternative strategies to sustain performance. Danilov et al.
[13] discussed the poor performance of these link-state routing
protocols in tactical environments and attempted to reduce loss
during transitions by ﬂooding.
Although it seems that the wireless channel broadcasts all
transmissions (so any node in range could receive the trans-
mitted data packet), packets marked for unicast and broadcast
are treated differently. When broadcasting, all that receive the
packet process it as an intended transmission. On the other
hand, this is not the case for unicast, as nodes not marked
as the destination simply drop the packet. When directional
antennas are available, unicast can use a single beam, where
broadcast requires omnidirectional antennas. Therefore, uni-
cast produces higher received signal power (higher signal-to-
noise-ratio (SNR)) and can deliver packets at a higher data
rate (reduce over the air time, etc.)
To meet the demands of highly dynamic MANET, many
solutions have adapted routing protocols to variations in the
network conditions, e.g. ﬁsh-eye state routing protocol (FSR)
[14] use adaptive link-state update rates, and the adaptive
distance vector (ADV) routing protocol [15] use a threshold-
based adjustment of the routing update rates based on the
network dynamics. While these protocols outperform tradi-
tional routing schemes with lower overhead and topology
information sharing, they are not responsive enough in highly
dynamic MANETs where the routing recalculations happens
at slower paste than link changes.
The seminal work in [16] proposed Q-routing, which uses
a reinforcement learning (RL) module (i.e. Q-Learning [17])
to route packets and minimize delivery time. Each node uses
Q-values based on locally acquired statistics to determine the
next hop. Each Q-value represents the quality of each next-
hop (or route) as an estimation of the delay for each path.
The Q data is shared only via ACK messages, and each node
maintains a table of values for every neighbor and destination
pair. After any transmission, a node may receive an ACK
message containing values to update the Q table. The Q-
routing protocol selects the next hop with the best Q-value. Q-
routing is efﬁcient in static and minimally dynamic networks.
In dynamic networks, Q-values quickly become stale as links
break.
Kumar et al. [18] improved Q-routing for dynamic networks
with the addition of conﬁdence values (i.e. C-values) in their
CQ-routing protocol. C-values are incremented when Q-value
is updated and decremented as it becomes stale; however, CQ-
routing becomes inefﬁcient in highly dynamic networks as it is
based on only uni-casting to a single node. With only unicast
transmissions, network exploration (Q-value updates) is too
slow when the network changes rapidly. The rate at which
information is shared is simply too slow to keep up with highly
dynamic networks.
AR [13] and smart robust routing (SRR) algorithms [19]
have attempted to supplement unicast transmission with broad-
cast to improve robustness in highly dynamic networks. Both
of these algorithms revert to unicast transmission in order
to reduce the overhead of the ﬂooding. Johnston et al [19]
use techniques from the CQ-routing protocol (i.e. C and Q-
values) but extends it by adding broadcast procedure for high
reliability, robustness, and rapid network exploration as needed
in the tactical and highly dynamic MANETs. To simplify the
convention when listed with the other protocols, we will refer
to it as the CQ+ routing protocol. Although CQ+ routing uses a
simple but efﬁcient switching policy to choose between unicast
and broadcast, its decisions depend on a single network param-
eter (best path conﬁdence level). It has a limited perspective of
the entire network and can settle on a locally optimal solution.
CQ+ routing also does not account for the change rate of
network parameters and congestion in forwarding paths. We
build more perspective into trafﬁc and queuing and leverage
this information to further improve performance. Among the
various routing algorithms for MANET networks, Q-routing,
CQ-routing, and CQ+ routing approaches are considered as
benchmarks for this work.
Routing decisions, such as next-hop selection, are opportune
targets of reinforcement learning (RL). The work in this area
was initiated by Boyan’s Q-routing protocol[16]. Following
the Q-routing approach, many other techniques and algorithms
from the RL community have been applied to packet rout-
ing and scheduling [20]–[27]. [20] uses MADRL to design
independent deep routing policies for each agent based on
an off-policy deep Q-learning RL algorithm. Deep Q-learning
approaches are based on value estimation, an estimation of the
expected reward of the actions at certain states. Consequently,
deep Q-learning and value estimation policies scale poorly, as
the expected reward is dependent on many network parameters
and conditions that are not known prior to decisions. Moreover,
in MADRL-based approaches in the literature like [20], train-
ing unique policies for each agent further limits scalability. It is
unclear how policies trained for speciﬁc network sizes perform
when the network is extended or shrunk. A similar deep Q-
learning RL-based approach is used in [21], where it creates
cluster abstractions in the network and accounts for inter-
cluster routing performance. They also assume a feedback
link is available from the source node to the cluster lead
agents. Although it is claimed that their approach is expected
to be scalable to larger networks and dynamics but it is not
clear how this would scale and perform if only trained on
smaller networks and limited network settings. Deep neural
network (DNN)-based routing policies tend to struggle with
high dynamics, as the complexity of multi-agent environment

3
struggles with the rapid rate of change. Optimization of the
policy for one agent is dependent on the policy and actions of
other agents and therefore suffers from non-stationarity. This
is particularly difﬁcult in dynamic networks as many network
parameters and topology are rapidly changing.
To the best of our knowledge, there have not been works on
a scalable and robust routing policy design framework using
MADRL in MANET. To provide robustness and reliability,
we use a similar approach to CQ+ routing, where CQ-routing
is combined with adaptive ﬂooding. In this paper, we use
MADRL and advanced RL algorithms and techniques to train
a robust and reliable routing policy that can be applied to
any network size, trafﬁc, and dynamic. More importantly,
the MADRL-based framework includes techniques and for-
mulations that enable us to train on a limited range of net-
work parameters (e.g. smaller network sizes, single data ﬂow,
small variations in dynamic level, average node velocities,
and network coverage area size) but test and execute the
trained policies on a wider range of conﬁgurations. This is
signiﬁcant as due to the curse of dimensionality training over
large network sizes and wide range of conﬁgurations are not
practical. Our proposed framework and designed policies are
closely related to the CQ+ routing protocol, therefore we refer
to it as deep robust routing for dynamic networks (DeepCQ+
routing).
II. ROBUST ROUTING FRAMEWORK
We consider a robust routing protocol that monitors the
quality and conﬁdence level of the routes (next-hops) via
ACK messages, i.e. CQ-routing protocol [18]. We use this
protocol as it does not add any designated communication
link for coordination between nodes in the network, and it is
robust for dynamic networks with the addition of conﬁdence
level, i.e. C. We speciﬁcally use the extended version of CQ-
routing by addition of adaptive broadcasting to bring more
reliability (higher delivery rates) and rapid network exploration
(for highly dynamic networks), as introduced in [19] and
we refer to it as CQ+ routing. We summarize the CQ+
routing algorithm in Algorithm 1, which shows how it chooses
between broadcast and unicast (and next-hop) adaptively.
A. SRR (CQ+ routing) Protocol
The smart robust routing (SRR) algorithm proposed in
[19] uses the network parameters C and H1 for the routing
decisions primarily introduced in seminal CQ-routing [18].
Each node i has a H-factor, h(i, j, d) (i.e. i ⇝j ⇝d), which
represents an estimate of the least number of hops between
node i and destination d which passes through potential next-
hop j. To monitor the dynamics of the network, each node
i also have a conﬁdence level or C-value, c(i, j, d), that
represents the conﬁdence in likelihood the packet will reach its
destination h(i, j, d). This C-value is increased and corrected
with any packet transmission success (receiving the ACK).
1We have renamed the original Q-factor in CQ-routing to H-factor to
prevent confusion with the Q in the Q-networks and/or Q-learning in the
RL context.
Every packet transmission, the C-value is degraded by a decay
factor.
C- and H-factors are updated through the cack and hack
which are propagated by the acknowledgement (ACK) packets
from the receiving node (e.g. next-hop) to the transmitting
node. These ACK values are computed at the next-hop node
j as
hack = 1 + h(j, ˆk, d)
(1)
cack = c(j, ˆk, d)
(2)
where ˆk is the best path (next-hop) estimate of node j to
destination d and it is found by
ˆk = arg min
k
h(j, d, k) (1 −c(j, k, d))
(3)
In other words, C- and H-values are exponential moving
average of the cack and hack, respectively. If a transmission
fails or there is no ACK to update C- and H-levels, then H-
level cannot be updated. However, we degrade the C-level as
in cack = 0 to reﬂect the path failure. The updates of the C-
and H-levels given by
ht+1(i, j, d) = (1 −α)ht(i, j, d) + αhack,
(4)
ct+1(i, j, d) =
(
(1 −λ)ct(i, j, d)
failure
(1 −λ)ct(i, j, d) + λcack
otherwise
(5)
where 0 ≤α ≤1 is a discount factor for the new observation
with an adaptable value of
α = max (cack, 1 −ct(i, j, d)) .
(6)
λ is the decay factor for the new observation of cack (or 1−λ is
the decay factor for the old observation). If packet is received
at the destination d, then cack, and hack are set to 1, indicating
that we have full conﬁdence that we are 1 hop away from
destination. The SRR algorithm (CQ+ routing) is summarized
in Algorithm 1, where more details are available in [19]. SRR
algorithm includes (i) reception of ACK and consequently
updating C- and H-levels, (ii) reception of non-ACK packets
by checking for duplication, loops, and pushing into the queue,
(iii) transmission of data packets from the queue by routing it
according to the policy in use. We simply refer to this decision
policy as CQ+- routing policy.
1) SRR (CQ+ routing) policy
The SRR policy chooses the next-hop based on the min-
imization of the information uncertainty and the expected
number of hops. This is given by
j⋆= arg min
j
h(i, j, d) (1 −c(i, j, d)) .
(7)
The next-hop j⋆is considered by the CQ+ routing policy if
it unicast the packet to one single node. However, the CQ+
routing policy enables broadcasting to minimize the next-hop
information uncertainty. The uncertainty of the next-hop is
measured by 1 −ci(d, j⋆). Therefore, CQ+ routing decides
to broadcast if the uncertainty about information obtained is
high to explore the network more and make a reliable trans-
mission by ﬂooding the neighbors. The CQ+ routing policy is
probabilistic and it assigns the probability of broadcast as
PBC = ϵ + (1 −c(i, j⋆, d))(1 −ϵ) = 1 −c(i, j⋆, d)˜ϵ
(8)

4
Algorithm 1: SRR (CQ+) algorithm [19]
Receive incoming packet at node i:
if Packet is ACK then
Update c and h from (4) and (5);
else
if packet traversed a loop then
Drop packet, do not return ACK;
end
if packet is already in queue then
Drop packet
Find best next-hop j⋆from (7)
Compute cack and hack from (2) and (1) using j⋆
Return ACK
end
if packet is not duplicate then
Add packet to the queue
else
Do not add packet to the queue
end
end
if Queue is not empty then
Pick up packet from queue
ROUTING DECISION POLICY
PBC ←ϵ + (1 −ϵ)(1 −c(i, j⋆, d))
Choose
(
Broadcast
with probability PBC
Unicast to j⋆
with probability 1 −PBC
if Broadcast then
Forward packet to all
end
if Unicast then
Forward packet to j⋆
end
end
where a small value ϵ is used for the minimum probability of
broadcast (deﬁned for exploration purposes) and correspond-
ingly ˜ϵ = 1 −ϵ is the maximum probability of unicast.
In this paper, we use the CQ+ routing protocol, meaning
that the reception procedure of our algorithm is the same
as described in 1, but our improvements are applied to the
transmission procedure and the CQ+ routing policy. In this
work, we preserve the protocol and concentrate on routing
policy optimization.
III. DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING FOR CQ ROUTING
(DEEPCQ+)
A. Deep Reinforcement Learning Background
Our robust routing problem ﬁts as a decentralized partially-
observable Markov decision process (Dec-POMDP), that is
used for decision-making problems in a team of cooperative
agents [28]. Dec-POMDP tries to model and optimize the
behavior of the agents while considering the environment’s
and other agents’ uncertainties. POMDP is deﬁned by a set of
states S describing the possible conﬁgurations of the agent(s),
a set of actions A, and a set of observations O. The actions
are selected using a stochastic policy πθ : O × A →[0, 1]
(parameterized by θ), which results to the next state deﬁned by
the environment’s state transition function T : S ×A →S. As
a result of this transition, a reward is obtained by an agent(s)
and it is described as a function of the state and action, i.e.
r : S × A →R. Each agent2 receives an observation related
to the state as o : S →O. Below, we give an overview and
brief introduction of the DRL algorithms and techniques used
in this work to design the DeepCQ+ routing policies.
1) Value Optimization and Deep Q-learning
To ﬁnd the optimal policy, Q-Learning3 is a widely used
model-free algorithm that estimates the action-value function
for policy Qπ(s, a). The action-value function (or Q-function)
is the expected maximum sum of (discounted) rewards, per-
ceived at state s when taking action a and it is given by
Qπ(s, a) := E
" T
X
t=0
γtrt
st = s, at = a
#
(9)
where γ is the discount factor and T is the time horizon.
The action-value function can be recursively written (and
calculated) as Qπ(s, a) = Es′[r(s, a) + γEa′∼π[Qπ(s′, a′)]].
The recent deep learning paradigm enables the RL algo-
rithms to approximate the Q-function using a deep neural
network, i.e. Q(s, a) ≈Q(s, a; θ), where θ is the set of
neural network parameters4. A popular method to do this is
is known as deep Q-network (DQN) [29]. DQN learns the
optimal action-value function Q⋆by minimizing the loss:
L(θ)=E(s,a,r,s′)

Q⋆(s, a; θ)−(r+γ max
a′
¯Q⋆(s′, a′))
2
(10)
where ¯Q is a target Q-function with parameters periodically
(or gradually) updated with the most recent parameters θ to
further stabilize the learning. DQN also beneﬁts from a large
experience replay buffer B of experience tuples (s, a, r, s′).
Finally, the optimal (deterministic) policy is described as
π⋆(s) = arg max
a∈A
Q(s, a; θ⋆),
(11)
when the optimal parameters θ⋆are found.
2) Policy Optimizations
Policy gradient methods are another popular choice that is
based on the optimization of the policy directly rather than
estimate the expected return. Let π denote a stochastic policy
which assigns a probability π(at|st) for an action at given
a state st. In the policy optimization methods, the goal is
to optimize the parameters of the policy, θ, to maximize the
expected discounted return objective function,
J(θ) = Es0,a0,s1,...
"
T
X
t=0
γtrt
| {z }
Rτ
#
,
(12)
where the experience sequence (or path) τ is denoted as
{s0, a0, s1, ...} with s0 ∼p0(s0) and at+1 ∼π(at|st),
st+1 ∼T (st+1|st, at). The discounted return for the sequence
2In the Dec-POMDP, these sets are deﬁned for each agent separately
3The name of the Q-routing algorithm is inspired by the Q-learning
algorithm in RL but it only represents the expected number of hops for
different paths as action-value function.
4In the paper, when we want to refer to neural network coefﬁcients or
weights, we have used neural network parameters. Note that we use ”network
parameter” term when refer to the communication network parameters such
as c, h, etc.

5
τ is expressed by Rτ. p0 is the distribution of the initial state
s0.
The action-value function Qπ, and the value function Vπ,
and the advantage function Aπ are deﬁned as
Qπ (st, at) = Est+1,at+1,...
" T
X
l=0
γlrt+l
#
,
(13)
Vπ(st) = Eat,st+1,...
" T
X
l=0
γlrt+l
#
,
(14)
Aπ(s, a) = Qπ(s, a) −Vπ(s),
(15)
where at ∼π(at|st) and st+1 ∼T (st+1|st, at).
A class of popular policy optimization methods, policy gra-
dient (PG), optimizes the policy parameters θ by descending
toward the gradient direction ∇θJ(θ) [30]. Now, from the
gradient estimator of the Vanilla policy gradient algorithm
[31], we know that the gradient expression can be simpliﬁed
as
∇θJ(θ) = Et [∇θ log πθ(at|st)At]
(16)
Let ηθt denote the probability ratio
ηθt = πθ (at|ot)
πθold (at|ot)
(17)
and therefore ηθold = 1. A popular state-of-the-art policy gra-
dient algorithm is called proximal policy optimization (PPO)
[32], [33], which uses the clipped objective function
Lclip(θ) = Et
h
min

ηθt ˆAt, clip(ηθt, 1 −ϵ, 1 + ϵ) ˆAt
i
(18)
as an optimization problem of interest. PPO is indeed a family
of policy optimization methods that uses multiple epochs of
stochastic gradient ascent to perform each policy updates. PPO
inherits the stability and reliability of the trust region methods
[33] but implemented in a much simpler way. We have used
PPO algorithm for the optimization of the routing policy in
the following sections.
3) Centralized Training, Decentralized Execution
In multi-agent reinforcement learning, each agent can have
its policy while sharing the environment with other agents. In
a communication network setup, partial observability and/or
communication constraints necessitate the learning of de-
centralized policies, which relies only on the local action-
observation history of each agent. Decentralized policies also
avoid the exponentially growing joint action-space with the
number of agents, and therefore more practical and faster to
converge in training. Fortunately, decentralized policies can
be learned in a centralized fashion specially in a simulated or
controlled environments. The centralized training has access
to hidden state information of other agents and removes inter-
agent communication constraints. The paradigm of centralized
training with decentralised execution has already attracted
attention in the RL community [28], [34], [35].
Note that while the centralized training is ofﬂine training
in a simulated environment but this is similar to the available
networking and routing protocols as they are designed and
optimized based on the modeled environments and network
simulations. The protocols may be adaptive but the rules
Fig. 1. Multi-agent network routing environment with shared policy param-
eters between agents. The centralized training and decentralized execution
are also shown. Each agent i, uses the shared policy πθ individually to ﬁnd
its own action ai(t) based on its own observations oi(t). The multi-agent
environment operates based on the joint-actions decided and taken individually
and transition to next state st+1 and the rewards are pulled out based on that.
(even the adaptation process) are all designed ofﬂine. More
importantly, the routing path parameters (C and H values)
are regularly updated in real-time (during execution) based
on the length and conﬁdence of potential paths and the
dynamic of the network. Although our DNN-based routing
policy designed based on models and simulations (similar to
any other rule-based human-crafted or machine learning-based
routing policy), the policy decisions are based on online input
features collected through the CQ+ path parameters (C and H)
propagation process through ACK messages and it considers
all dynamics of the environment in real-time.
4) Parameter Sharing
In the context of centralized training but decentralized
execution, a common strategy is to share the policy parameters
between agents that are homogeneous [36]–[38] (parameter
sharing). Note that in the heterogeneous communication net-
works, we can always categorize nodes as homogeneous with
some individual parameters and those can be also given as
input to the policy with shared parameters.
The multi-agent environment for the routing problem and
our proposed framework are also summarized in Fig. 1 where
the centralized training, decentralized execution, and parame-
ter sharing are illustrated.
B. Our proposed DRL Framework and Approach
We consider wireless communication networks with vari-
able sizes (e.g. 5 ≤N ≤50). There can be multiple ﬂows
in the network with variable source/destination pairs. At any
time, a node i where 1 ≤i ≤N in the network may hold
a packet(s) in its queue to be delivered to a destination node
d. Note that node i may or may not be the original source of
that data packet. The network is highly dynamic in which the
nodes are consistently moving at various random velocities
and directions. The dynamic level of each node is denoted
by ¯v represents the average speed of that node. The dynamic
level can be different depending on environment, scenario, and

6
vehicle type of the node. We used reliable MANET mobility
models such as Gauss-Markov model and/or random way-
point for the nodes’ mobility, which is discussed in Section
IV-A2. At each time t, each node i, picks a packet from its data
queue (according to a certain packet scheduling algorithm).
We use a simpliﬁed ﬁrst-in-ﬁrst-out (FIFO) packet scheduling
but the routing decisions and policy design are independent of
this scheduling method. Each node holds a table of network
parameters represented by two matrices of C- and H-levels
discussed in Section II-A. In other words, each node i has two
2-dimensional (N −1)×(N −1) matrices holding Ci and Hi
with entries of c(i, j, d) and h(i, j, d) where 1 ≤j, d ̸= i ≤N
respectively.
Ci = [c(i, j, d)]
for all 1 ≤j ̸= i, d ̸= i ≤N
(19)
Hi = [h(i, j, d)]
for all 1 ≤j ̸= i, d ̸= i ≤N
(20)
Note that the entries are associate to N−1 other nodes j (set of
all possible next-hops) and N −1 possible destination nodes d
(other than i). These matrices are initialized when an episode
is started. Hence, the network parameter matrices Ci and Hi
are often sparse as each node may have a limited number
of neighbors and packet destinations and therefore most of
the entries of these matrices often remain as their initial reset
values.
For the sake of simplicity of notations, the time length of
data packets are considered ﬁxed and it is used as our units of
time. Each realization of the network (also called an episode in
the context of RL) has at least T time-slots (1 packet duration
time). Note that the packet duration time is assumed ﬁxed
but the data rate can still be different. An episode is ended
when the length of the episode exceed a maximum trafﬁc
length, Tmax, and all the nodes have empty data queues. There
is no incoming trafﬁc beyond Tmax and after than we only
wait until all nodes being done with their routing decisions.
The goodput rate is computed as the ratio of the number of
delivered packets to the total incoming packets in the episode.
We exclude duplicate delivery of packets at destination if it
happens.
Each node i has a packet routing policy π which assigns a
routing decision for each packet based on the current state of
the node. Since we use parameter sharing when we perform
training, we consider the same parameterized policy πθ used
at every node (one policy for all). This assumption helps with
the scalability of our framework as the designed policy will
be used for any network sizes and for every node and there
is no need for re-train and re-design of the policy. When the
policy function is deﬁned as a DNN, the parameter vector θ
represents the weights of the neural network.
The main distinction of our work from similar DRL-based
routing algorithms is that our solution is scalable in terms
of (i) communication network size (ii) network dynamics and
mobility levels and topology (iii) different data ﬂows (source
and destination pairs). We train our DNN policy for a single
network size, single data ﬂow (single source and destination
pair), and small range of dynamic levels but the performance
is tested and veriﬁed for variable network sizes, multiple data
ﬂows, and larger range of dynamic levels.
1) Pre-processing of the policy input features
To satisfy the scalability requirement, the proposed DNN
policy needs to have a network architecture to accommodate
variable number of agents. The routing decisions are generally
dependent on the network parameters (i.e. C- and H-values)
of the neighbors. For example, if a subset of agents have zero
C-levels then there is no need to play them in our routing
decisions. Hence, we perform a pre-processing of the network
parameters available (state characteristic) to have ﬁxed number
of inputs fed into our DNN policy. We select the best K
neighbors out of total N −1 possible neighbors in the network
for each node and use their network parameters in the current
state deﬁnition of that speciﬁc node. For the sake of simplicity,
we drop the current node i, and destination d from C- and H-
levels and use the next-hop as index (i.e. ct(i, j) := ct(i, j, d)).
We also order the next-hop indices according to ascending
order of hj(1−cj). Now, in our problem formulation the best
K neighbor C and H values are represented by
ct(i) = [ct(i, i1), ct(i, i2), . . . , ct(i, iK)]
ht(i) = [ht(i, i1), ht(i, i2), . . . , ht(i, iK)]
(21)
where the neighboring nodes i1, ..., iK of i are ordered so that
ht(i, i1)(1 −ct(i, i1)) ≤· · · ≤ht(i, iK)(1 −ct(i, iK)). (22)
Note that we choose a ﬁxed value of K for the range of
network sizes we have considered in this work (5 ≤N ≤30).
A single value of K (e.g. K = 4) is shown to be enough
in terms of scalability. Also, note that we select the best
neighbors (or other nodes) based on the smallest multiplication
of uncertainty and number of hops and it is not arbitrary
K neighbors (or other nodes). For the other nodes that are
not selected either, we do not have any information updated
from them or their conﬁdence level is too low and/or their
expected distance to the destination is very high. Ideally, we
are interested in the smallest value K that training DNN policy
based on it scales well for larger networks and a wider range
of network parameters.
2) State/Observations
Since we use a fully connected neural network (FCNN)
rather than recurrent units, we want to capture the temporal
changes of the selected C and H levels in the input features
(as observations) given to the FCNN policy. Therefore, we
add the change between current observations and previous
observations, and also the previous effective action taken by
the agent to the observations at node i that is fed into the DNN
policy as input features. Including the previous observations
for the input features helps to capture temporal change rate
of network parameters. Alternatively, we can beneﬁt from
recurrent neural network architectures but we have found that
training such networks are typically takes longer. The input
features to the DNN policy at node i are given by
ot(i) = [ct(i), ht(i), ∆ct(i), ∆ht(i), at−1(i), pt−1(i)] , (23)
where ∆ct(i) = ct(i) −ct−1(i), ∆ht(i) = ht(i) −ht−1(i),
and at−1(j) is the previous action of some node j that the
current packet is received from. The last indicator shows if
the current packet is received as a result of another node’s
broadcast or unicast.

7
Routing Protocol
C/Q-values
Broadcast
MADRL
CQ-routing [18]
✓
×
×
SRR (CQ+) [19]
✓
✓
×
DeepCQ+ routing (this work)
✓
✓
✓
TABLE I
COMPARISON OF ROBUST ROUTING PROTOCOLS IN DYNAMIC NETWORKS
C. Reward Deﬁnition for DeepCQ+ routing
1) SRR (CQ+ routing) as a DRL-based Policy
In this section, we reformulate the RL problem so that
its optimal policy results in the same policy as the CQ+
routing policy. This particularly helps in deﬁning a proper
rewarding system for our CQ+ routing policy improvements
and extensions.
First, we consider a stochastic routing policy π(a|st) where
the action’s probabilities are only dictated by the policy. This
is indeed similar to the CQ+ routing routing policy where it
computes a probability of broadcast. We give the following
rewards to the unicast action (a = 0) and the broadcast action
(a = 1) as
rt(st, at) =
(
1 −ct(i, i1)˜ϵ
at = 1(broadcast)
ct(i, i1)˜ϵ
at = 0(unicast)
(Reward 1)
(24)
where ˜ϵ = 1 −ϵ. Note that ct(i, i1) is closely tracks the
success/freshness probability of the path via the next-hop.
Then, in order to maximize the total expected (discounted)
reward as
R = Est∼pπ,at∼π
" T
X
t=0
γtrt
#
=
Est∼pπ,at
" T
X
t=0
γt (π(at = 0|st)ct(i, i1)˜ϵ
+ π(at = 1|st)(1 −ct(i, i1)˜ϵ))
#
(25)
Now, with zero horizon (i.e. T = 0), maximizing the ex-
pected reward given by (25) leads to a policy with probability
of broadcast is
π(st, at = 1) = PBC =
(
1
ct(i, i1)˜ϵ < 1/2
0
ct(i, i1)˜ϵ > 1/2.
(26)
This is indeed the deterministic version of the CQ+ routing
routing policy previously discussed as in (8).
An immediate improvement of the CQ+ routing policy using
DRL can be pursued as maximization of the expected return,
R as in (25) with γ > 0 and some large horizon T, where
the immediate reward rt(st, at) is given by 24. We can use
efﬁcient RL algorithms such as PPO to ﬁnd a DNN policy. We
refer to this DNN-based version of CQ+ routing as DeepCQ+
routing with reward type 1. Note that different reward designs
will give different performance objectives.
The CQ+ routing policy aims to choose the next-hop that
minimizes uncertainties (probability of failure) in dynamic
networks. This is done by accounting for the probability of
failure for the path with the lowest link uncertainties and
number of hops. Although the CQ+ routing policy indirectly
optimizes the network overhead, it is not accounted for directly
in its optimization. We deﬁne the overhead in the routing
of the dynamic networks as the ratio of the total number of
transmissions in the communication network, denoted by NTX,
to the total number of packets delivered, denoted by ND for a
speciﬁc packet data rate and a window of time. The normalized
overhead by the network size, N, is given by
OH = 1
N · NTX
ND
.
(27)
To show the effectiveness of the DRL approach on the CQ+
routing policy optimization, the DeepCQ+ routing objective is
to minimize overhead while keeps the goodput rate ρ at the
same level (or higher) than the goodput rate provided by CQ+
routing, i.e. ρ0 (for the same input data ﬂows and the same
horizon). This can be formulated as
min
θ
NTX
ND
such that ρ ≥ρ0.
(28)
Since the target is the efﬁciency of our routing policy, we can
simply assume ρ = ρ0, and consequently, ND = ρ0T for
some time horizon T (for some speciﬁc input data rate). With
this approach, we maintain the goodput rate while we achieve
lower overhead and it is fair to compare with previous robust
routing policies. Therefore, the optimization problem in (28)
can be simpliﬁed as
min
θ
NTX
such that ND = ρ0T
(29)
From our experiments, using the rewarding system in (24)
gives us the same goodput rate as ρ0 while keeping the
overhead lower than CQ+ routing. Hence, we can consider the
overhead minimization by reformulating our rewarding system
to accommodate (29) as
ri(t) = w11D −w21Z −w3
Nack
N
(Reward 2)
(30)
where 1D is the reward for packet delivery. If a packet
is delivered successfully to the destination and node i has
contributed to that delivery then it will be rewarded. Also,
1Z is a reward (penalty) indicator which is enabled when we
have not received any ACKs from our transmissions. This term
is not directly related to the optimization problem (29) but it
prevents the system to learn unicasting all the packets initially,
which may happen if the initial reward is negative and the
agent wants to end the episode to prevent increased penalties.
The next term in the reward, i.e. Nack/N, is the normalized
number of ACKs received as a result of the action taken and
therefore closely represents the number of copies of a packet
at other nodes. A naive approach can be to penalize for every
transmission directly. However, the cause of transmissions
at each node is not the actions taken at that speciﬁc node,
but it is the transmissions of the packets from other nodes
to that speciﬁc node. Hence, Nack received at each node is
used to estimate the added number of transmissions dictated
to the network as a result of each node’s action. The last
reward component remains intact from the reward type 1 as it
was already outperforming CQ+ routing in terms of overhead
while achieving the same goodput (see Fig. 4 and Fig. 5).

8
The weights of the reward components, (i.e. w1, w2, w3), have
been tuned according to the overhead minimization problem
(29). The proposed DeepCQ+ routing technique with modiﬁed
(extended) reward deﬁnition is referred to as DeepCQ+ routing
with reward type 2. The DeepCQ+ routing algorithms are
summarized in Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2: The proposed DeepCQ+ routing (with
reward type 1 and 2)
Receive incoming packet at node i:
if Packet is ACK then
Update c and h using (4) and (5)
else
if packet traversed a loop then
Drop packet, do not return ACK
end
if packet is already in queue then
Drop packet
Find best next-hop i1 from (7))
Compute cack and hack from (2) and (1) using j⋆
Return ACK
end
if packet is not duplicate then
Add packet to the queue
else
Do not add packet to the queue
end
end
if ACK Packet is not received then
Do not update c and h, (i.e. no packet is received)
end
if Queue is not empty then
Pick up packet from queue of node i (at current time t)
Pre-process best (K = 4) neighbors using (22)
Form the input to the DNN-based routing policy
ot(i) = [ct(i), ht(i), ct−1(i), ht−1(i), at−1(i)]
ROUTING DECISION POLICY
DeepCQ+ routing (reward 1 or 2):
θ = θ⋆
DeepCQ+ routing-rew-1 or -2 Choose
(
Broadcast
with probability πθ(a = 1|ot(i); θ)
Unicast
with probability πθ(a = 0|ot(i); θ)
if Decision is Broadcast then
Forward packet to all
end
if Decision is Unicast then
Forward packet to i1
end
end
IV. EXPERIMENTS AND NUMERICAL RESULTS
A. Environment Modelling and Training Platforms
To model the CQ+ routing environment and for rapid
development of the design, algorithms, and testing, we have
developed a CQ+ routing network simulator and constructed
an RL CQ+ routing environment to train and test our approach
and the CQ+ routing baselines. Our environment platform is
built in Python and it has all CQ+ routing protocol features
including generation of random dynamic networks with data
ﬂows, different number of nodes, and conﬁgurable network
setup parameters (dynamic levels, range, node locations, data
rates, source and destinations, data queues and backlogs,
link quality computation, etc.). The CQ+ routing protocol
contains the tracking, distributing C- and H-values, duplicate
packet checking, etc. It also extracts performance evaluation
information. The environment is interfaced with the Ray,
which is a powerful distributed computing platform for the
machine learning [39] and RLlib library [40] which provides
scalable software primitives for the RL algorithms. A snapshot
of the environment is given in Fig. 2, where the source and
destination are in colored as gray. The color of the nodes
shows the queue length or the congestion level of the nodes.
The color of the links is associated with their quality with
green links represents high quality and low packet error rates.
The thickness of the links shows the trafﬁc level of the link.
The heatmap images of the C- and H-levels are monitored to
show the state of the network visually. The heatmap images
of Ci(d, j) are 2-D vectors as they consider single destination
node (i.e. node d = 25). Each row is associated with the
current node i and each column corresponds to the other nodes
j of each current node i. For example, the C-levels for the
other nodes that are closer to the destination (j ≥20) are
relatively high as there is high conﬁdence of the path going
to the destinations through them.
1) Benchmark Topology
A benchmark topology was considered based on the adap-
tive routing work [13] and the CQ+ routing [19]. In this
topology scenario, there are N (N ≥30) nodes considered
in the network which are randomly located in an area. The
nodes between the source and destination nodes are moving
in random directions with variable speeds. The closer they
are to the source or destination, the slower their speed is,
reﬂecting the heterogeneous tactical network environments.
An example that is considered in the training and testing in
the area of 800 (m) by 300 (m) with the wireless range of
the nodes is 150 (m). The packet error rates drop rapidly
when the distance between nodes exceeds that range. We
assume no interference between transmissions to focus on the
routing layer. Source and destination nodes exhibit a slow
mobility pattern, similar to the nodes in the outermost regions.
The data ﬂow between the source and destination nodes can
have various data rates (e.g. 20 packets per second at up to
1000 bytes each; each ﬂow generates up to 160Kbps payload
trafﬁc). In different experiments, we use different routing
policies starting from the generic CQ+ routing policy [19]. The
same network topology will be used to compare other routing
algorithms such as DeepCQ+ routing with reward types 1 and
2. For both testing and training (to monitor the policy training
progress), we monitor the resulting performance metrics such
as broadcast rate (the percentage of the broadcast actions in
the network), the goodput rate. Goodput is the rate of the
delivery of intended data packets that are successfully received
at the destination. We exclude any duplicate packets from
counting as delivered packets, and in the RL context, we do
not count them towards any sort of reward. More importantly,
we consider the total overhead as a metric that quantiﬁes the
efﬁciency of our decisions and it is the ratio between the total
number of data packets delivered to the total transmissions
that have been made. Other network metrics are also recorded,
such as the average number of hops between source and
destination. Factors such as overhead and the number of hops

9
Fig. 2. An example of our developed CQ+ routing environment (simulator) for a 25-node dynamic network.
are normalized by the size of the network so they apply to
networks of different scales.
2) Mobility Model
In the mobile ad-hoc networks (MANET), there have been
various mobility models proposed and discussed recently and
particularly in their impact on the network routing protocols
[41]–[45]. The MANET mobility models represent the moving
behavior of each mobile node in the MANET. MANET
mobility models are particularly important from our training
and testing perspective. These models need to be realistic for
the dynamic tactical wireless networks, while still need to
have enough randomization to cover corner cases and extreme
scenarios in our training and properly reﬂect the performance
impact of the network dynamics, scheduling, and resource
allocation protocols. The random waypoint mobility model is
often used in the simulation study of MANET, despite some
unrealistic movement behaviors, such as exhibiting sudden
stops and sharp turns [46]. The Gauss-Markov mobility model
[47] has been shown to solve both of these problems [43].
Therefore, we have used this model in our training and testing
process, and implemented in our network simulator platform.
To be complete, we have also tested the trained policies using
the Gauss-Markov model on the networks that follow random
way-point model and observed similar performance and be-
havior. Compared to the random way-point model, the Gauss-
Markov mobility model has improved modeling performance
at higher dynamics (e.g. as fast as fast automobiles) while
it holds the same performance as a random way-point at
human running speeds [43]. For the training of the MANET,
the important factor is the sensitivity of the throughput (or
goodput) and the end-to-end delay to the different levels of
the randomness settings, and the Gauss-Markov model shows
no effect on the accuracy of these metrics [43].
In the Gauss-Markov model, the velocity of mobile node is
assumed to be correlated over time and modeled as a Gauss-
Markov stochastic process. In a two-dimensional simulation
and emulation ﬁeld (as in this study), the value of speed and
direction at the nth time instance is calculated on the basis of
the value of speed and direction at the n −1th time instance
and a random variable using the following equations:
v(n) = µv(n−1) + (1 −µ)¯v +
q
(1 −α2)˜v(n−1)
(31)
φ(n) = µφ(n−1) + (1 −µ)¯φ +
q
(1 −µ2)˜φ(n−1)
(32)
where v(n) and φ(n) are the new speed and direction of the
node at time interval n; 0 ≤µ ≤1 is the tuning parameter for
the randomness (and correlation to previous time instance);
¯v and ¯φ are constants representing the mean value of speed
(i.e. dynamic level) and direction as n →∞; ˜v(n−1) and
˜φ(n−1) are random values from a Gaussian distribution to add
randomness. In a two-dimensional simulation and emulation
ﬁeld (as our study), the Gauss-Markov model gives the next
location based on the current location at time instance n as
x(n) = x(n−1) + s(n) cos(φ(n))
(33)
y(n) = y(n−1) + s(n) sin(φ(n))
(34)
where
 x(n), y(n)
and
 x(n−1), y(n−1)
are the x and y
coordinates of the MANET node’s location at the nth and
(n −1)th time intervals, respectively. The mean angle will
be adjusted when nodes reach the region edges to limit the
movement within the region.
To more accurately reﬂect the benchmark topology used
in the SRR (CQ+ routing) papers (discussed in the previous

10
section), we have divided the environment into 5 groups
symmetrically between the source and destination nodes. The
source and destination regions are at the left and right corners
of the area. The closer the region is to the center, the faster
the nodes move. Also, the regions are overlapping by %10 to
prevent too many network partitions. The central region has
double the speed variance of that of the mid-left and mid-right
regions. The source and destination regions have half the speed
variance compared to the mid-right/left regions. The mobility
of the MANET nodes is simulated and shown in Fig. 3.
Fig. 3. Mobility regions and network topology. The movements of the nodes
are shown for a network of size 30 according to the Gauss-Markov model
Fig. 4. Goodput rate (delivery rate) while training vs. number of steps.
B. Hyperparameter Tuning and Conﬁguration Parameters
In this section, we discuss the hyperparameter tuning pro-
cess and list the parameters that obtained through tuning. We
also itemize the conﬁguration parameters used in the training
process to generate the CQ+ routing environment (see Table
II).
C. Numerical Results
In this section, we discuss the results obtained during
training and test of our DeepCQ+ framework versus CQ+.
During training we use limited range of network settings,
while we test on wider range of parameters as summarized
Fig. 5. Normalized overhead metrics during training vs. number of steps.
Fig. 6. Broadcast rate during training vs. number of steps.
in Table II where we also listed the hyperparameters for the
training of the DeepCQ+ policies. Note that to discuss the
scalability, we also trained over wide range number of nodes
(variable network size and up to 30) to show that training over
wider range does not improve performance much and show
that our MADRL approach is not over-ﬁt. We have collected
the performance metrics during training for over 50 million
steps (over 15000 episodes) and shown in Fig. 4, 6, and 5.
The moving average curves are plotted along with the shaded
variations of the performance metrics across training steps.
The results in Fig. 8 conﬁrms that in general, the DeepCQ+
routing with reward type 2 outperforms the generic (non-DRL
based) CQ+ routing technique. Note that the test is performed
over network sizes of 5 to 30 while the training is only
performed on a single network size (e.g. N = 12 in these
results). Note that one can choose (slightly) different value
for the training network size but the scalability conclusion still
holds.). This is evidence that the DeepCQ+ routing is scalable
for different network sizes and dynamics once. DeepCQ+
performs as good as CQ+ routing, however DeepCQ+ with
reward type 2 have lower overhead and lower broadcast rate.

11
TABLE II
NUMERICAL RESULTS PARAMETERS AND HYPERPARAMETERS USED IN
FIG. 8
Parameters
Value
Network Sizes (Train)
12
Network Sizes (Test)
5-50
Learning Rate
0.00005
Discount Factor γ
0.99
Episode Length
3000 Packet Duration
Region Size Scale (Train)
1
Region Size Scale (Test)
2
Dynamic Level Scale (Train)
1
Dynamic Level Scale (Test)
5
Policy DNN Size
FCNN(16, 16, 8, 8, 4)
Number of Data Flows (Train)
1
Number of Data Flows (Test)
1,2,3, and 4
Note that the end-to-end delay component is not considered
in either of reward types 1 and 2 and we just present it to
show similar behavior with respect to delay. Note that the
main message is the ﬂexibility of our DRL framework to
adjust the reward function (weights of various components
including end-to-end delay) to optimize a policy for a certain
trade space between goodput rate, overhead rate, and end-to-
end delay. This was not available in CQ+ routing as it only
statistically selects broadcast and unicast. The focus of the
results in Fig. 8 is to maintain goodput rate as high as CQ+
but improve the overhead. The normalized overhead is further
divided by the network size to be fair in comparison across
different network sizes and make the ﬁgure more readable. Our
results show that the normalized overhead is at least 15% lower
in DeepCQ+ routing with reward type 2 compared with the
non-DRL-based CQ+ routing while the goodput rate is about
the same. Lower normalized overhead values are indicative of
more efﬁcient policies. Note that this is only an example of
our DRL framework routing policy design to show achieving
the target objective (e.g. minimize normalized overhead while
maintaining goodput rate) and still being scalable (can be
trained for certain network sizes and dynamics but performs
satisfactorily for the rest of network parameters). Note that the
testing and training network settings are different as for every
episode we use random locations, dynamic levels, network
area size, and data ﬂows and that is why there are variations
during training and testing in the Figures.
Our MADRL framework for the network routing policy
design also enables us to train over variable network sizes
and dynamics if it is required. Fig. 9 shows the performance
of DeepCQ+ with reward type 2 trained on 12-node networks
and the same policy trained over variable network sizes 10
to 30. The results show that the training over 12-node net-
works scales perfectly for the entire network size domain and
although it is possible to train over 10 to 30-node networks,
there is not much gain in doing so if any.
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
In this paper, we have demonstrated a successful and prac-
tical hybrid approach of MADRL and CQ+ routing techniques
that is feasible to design a robust, reliable, efﬁcient, and
scalable policy for dynamic wireless communication networks,
including many scenarios that the algorithm was not trained
for. Our MADRL framework, combined with the explainable
CQ+ structure, is specially designed for scalability and enables
us to train and test the routing policies for variable network
sizes, data rates, and mobility dynamics with persistently
high performance across scenarios that were not trained for.
Our DNN-based robust routing policy for dynamic networks,
DeepCQ+ routing, is based on the CQ-routing but also moni-
tors network statistics to improve broadcast/unicast decisions.
It is shown that DeepCQ+ routing is much more efﬁcient than
traditional CQ+ routing techniques, signiﬁcantly decreasing
normalized overhead (number of transmissions per number
of successfully delivered packets). Moreover, the policy is
scalable and uses parameter sharing for all nodes during the
training, which allows it to reuse the same trained policy
for scenarios with various mobility dynamics, data rates, and
network sizes. It is noted that the sharing of parameters for
all the nodes is not required during execution.
In our future works, we plan to expand the action space
of the DeepCQ+ routing to include next-hop selection for
the unicast mode. Other interesting extensions include further
extending DeepCQ+ routing to accommodate heterogeneous
wireless networks where a node may have multiple radio inter-
faces, extending the ACK-based information sharing to include
additional context, and accommodating different performance
metrics such as end-to-end delay minimization, overhead min-
imization, as goodput rate maximization. Another extension
of the hybrid DeepCQ+ routing paradigm is to continue
maintaining scalable and robust routing policies while being
tuned to prioritize and balance network metrics to best meet
the needs of virtually any MANET environment, including
heterogeneous MANETs.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Research reported in this publication was supported in part
by Ofﬁce of the Naval Research under the contract N00014-
19-C-1037. The content is solely the responsibility of the
authors and does not necessarily represent the ofﬁcial views of
the Ofﬁce of Naval Research. The authors would like to thank
Dr. Santanu Das (ONR Program Manager) for his support and
encouragement. Also, we would like to thank the reviewers for
their valuable comments to improve the quality of this paper.
