EventPlus: A Temporal Event Understanding Pipeline
Mingyu Derek Ma1∗Jiao Sun2∗Mu Yang3
Kung-Hsiang Huang2
Nuan Wen2
Shikhar Singh2
Rujun Han2
Nanyun Peng1,2
1 Computer Science Department, University of California, Los Angeles
2 Information Sciences Institute, University of Southern California
3 Texas A&M University

Abstract
We present EventPlus, a temporal event under-
standing pipeline that integrates various state-
of-the-art event understanding components in-
cluding event trigger and type detection, event
argument detection, event duration and tempo-
ral relation extraction. Event information, es-
pecially event temporal knowledge, is a type
of common sense knowledge that helps peo-
ple understand how stories evolve and pro-
vides predictive hints for future events. Event-
Plus as the ﬁrst comprehensive temporal event
understanding pipeline provides a convenient
tool for users to quickly obtain annotations
about events and their temporal information
for any user-provided document. Furthermore,
we show EventPlus can be easily adapted to
other domains (e.g., biomedical domain). We
make EventPlus publicly available to facilitate
event-related information extraction and down-
stream applications.
1
Introduction
Event understanding is intuitive for humans and
important for daily decision making. For exam-
ple, given the raw text shown in Figure 1, a person
can infer lots of information including event trig-
ger and type, event related arguments (e.g., agent,
patient, location), event duration and temporal re-
lations between events based on the linguistic and
common sense knowledge. These understandings
help people comprehend the situation and prepare
for future events. The event and temporal knowl-
edge are helpful for many downstream applications
including question answering (Meng et al., 2017;
Huang et al., 2019), story generation (Peng et al.,
2018; Yao et al., 2019; Goldfarb-Tarrant et al.,
2019, 2020), and forecasting (Wang et al., 2017;
Granroth-Wilding and Clark, 2016; Li et al., 2018).
∗Equal contribution.
Figure 1: Event understanding components. We high-
light events triggers in yellow, and mark the predicted
task-related information in Italic.
Despite the importance, there are relatively few
tools available for users to conduct text-based tem-
poral event understanding. Researchers have been
building natural language processing (NLP) analy-
sis tools for “core NLP” tasks (Gardner et al., 2018;
Manning et al., 2014; Khashabi et al., 2018). How-
ever, systems that target at semantic understanding
of events and their temporal information are still
under-explored. There are individual works for
event extraction, temporal relation detection and
event duration detection, but they are separately
developed and thus cannot provide comprehensive
and coherent temporal event knowledge.
We present EventPlus, the ﬁrst pipeline sys-
tem integrating several high-performance temporal
event information extraction models for compre-
hensive temporal event understanding. Speciﬁcally,
EventPlus contains event extraction (both on de-
ﬁned ontology and for novel event triggers), event
temporal relation prediction, event duration detec-
tion and event-related arguments and named entity
recognition, as shown in Figure 2.1
EventPlus is designed with multi-domain sup-
1The system is publicly accessible at https://
kairos-event.isi.edu.
We also provide an intro-
ductory video at https://pluslabnlp.github.io/
eventplus.
arXiv:2101.04922v2  [cs.CL]  25 Apr 2021

Figure 2: The interface of EventPlus. Users can either choose examples or freely input text which matches with
their selected topic in B. C shows the Name Entity Recognition (NER) results, which serve as argument candidates
for events. When clicking on an event trigger in D, we show the selected event trigger and its corresponding
arguments in C2. We show temporal-related information of all events in E, where nodes represent event triggers
and edges represent their relations; we further indicate the event duration as labels of nodes.
port in mind. Particularly, we present an initial
effort to adapt EventPlus to the biomedical domain.
We summarize the contributions as follows:
• We present the ﬁrst event pipeline system with
comprehensive event understanding capabilities
to extract event triggers and argument, tempo-
ral relations among events and event duration
to provide an event-centric natural language un-
derstanding (NLU) tool to facilitate downstream
applications.
• Each component in EventPlus has comparable
performance to the state-of-the-art, which assures
the quality and efﬁcacy of our system for tempo-
ral event reasoning.
2
Component
In this section, we introduce each component in
our system, as shown in Figure 3. We use a multi-
task learning model for event trigger and temporal
relation extraction (§ 2.1). The model introduced
in § 2.2 extracts semantic-rich events following the
ACE ontology, and the model introduced in § 2.3
predicts the event duration. Note that our system
handles two types of event representations: one rep-
resents an event as the trigger word (Pustejovsky
et al., 2003a) (as the event extraction model in §
2.1), the other represents event as a complex struc-
ture including trigger, type and arguments (Ahn,
2006) (as the event extraction model in § 2.2). The
corpus following the former deﬁnition usually has
a broader coverage while the latter can provide
richer information. Therefore, we develop models
to combine the beneﬁts of both worlds. We also
introduce a speculated and negated events handling
component in § 2.4 to further identify whether an
event happens or not.
2.1
Multi-task Learning of Event Trigger
and Temporal Relation Extraction
The event trigger extraction component takes the
input of raw text and outputs single-token event
triggers. The input to the temporal relation extrac-
tion model is raw text and a list of detected event
triggers. The model will predict temporal relation-
ships between each pair of events. In previous
literature (Han et al., 2019b), multi-task learning
of these two tasks can signiﬁcantly improve per-
formance on both tasks following the intuition that

Figure 3: Overall system design of EventPlus. The raw text is ﬁrst fed into two event extraction components, and
then we pass the event triggers of the merged event list to event duration detection and temporal relation extraction
models. Finally outputs from all models are combined for visualization.
event relation signals can be helpful to distinguish
event triggers and non-event tokens.
The model feeds BERT embedding (Devlin et al.,
2019) of the input text to a shared BiLSTM layer
for encoding task-speciﬁc contextual information.
The output of the BiLSTM is passed to an event
scoring function and a relation scoring function
which are MLP classiﬁers to calculate the probabil-
ity of being an event (for event extraction) or a prob-
ability distribution over all possible relations (for
temporal relation extraction). We train the multi-
task model on MATRES (Ning et al., 2018a) con-
taining temporal relations BEFORE, AFTER, SIMUL-
TANEOUS and VAGUE. Though the model performs
both tasks during training, it can be separately used
for each individual task during inference.
2.2
Event Extraction on ACE Ontology
Although event triggers present the occurrence of
events, they are not sufﬁcient to demonstrate the
semantic-rich information of events. ACE 20052
corpus deﬁnes an event ontology that represents an
event as a structure with triggers and corresponding
event arguments (participants) with speciﬁc roles
(Doddington et al., 2004).3 Our system is trained
with ACE 2005 corpus, thus it is capable of ex-
tracting events with the complex structure. ACE
focuses on events of a particular set of types includ-
ing LIFE, MOVEMENT, TRANSACTION, BUSINESS,
CONFLICT, CONTACT, PERSONNEL and JUSTICE,
where each type has corresponding sub-types. Fol-
lowing prior works (Wadden et al., 2019; Lin et al.,
2020), we keep 7 entity types (person, organiza-
tion, location, geo-political entity, facility, vehicle,
weapon), 33 event sub-types, and 22 argument roles
2https://www.ldc.upenn.edu/
collaborations/past-projects/ace
3The ACE program provides annotated data for ﬁve kinds
of extraction targets: entities, times, values, relations and
events. We only focus on events and entities data in this paper.
that are associated with sub-types.
Similar to Han et al. (2019b), we build our event
extraction component for ACE ontology upon a
multi-task learning framework that consists of trig-
ger detection, argument role detection and entity
detection. These tasks share the same BERT en-
coder, which is ﬁne-tuned during training. The
entity detector predicts the argument candidates for
all events in an input sentence. The trigger detector
labels the input sequence with the event sub-types
at the token level. The argument role detector ﬁnds
the argument sequence4 for each detected trigger
via attention mechanism. For example, for the
sentence in Figure 1, its target trigger sequence
has MOVEMENT:TRANSPORT label at the posi-
tion of “toured” token, and its argument sequence
for this MOVEMENT:TRANSPORT event has B-
ARTIFACT, I-ARTIFACT labels at the position of
“George Pataki” and B-DESTINATION label at the
position of “counties” respectively.
The entire
multi-task learning framework is jointly trained.
During inference, our system detects arguments
solely based on triggers. To make our system bet-
ter leverage information from argument candidates,
we developed the following constraints during de-
coding based on the predicted entities (argument
candidates) and other speciﬁc deﬁnitions in ACE:
• Entity-Argument constraint. The argument role
label for a token can take one of the 22 argu-
ment roles if and only if the token at this position
belongs to a predicted entity.
• Entity-Trigger constraint. The trigger label for
a token can take one of the 33 event sub-types
if and only if the token at this position does not
belong to a predicted entity.
• Valid Trigger-Argument constraint. Based on the
deﬁnitions in ACE05, each event sub-type takes
4Argument sequences are presented using BIO encoding.

certain types of argument roles. We enforce that
given the predicted trigger label, the argument
roles in this sequence can only take those that are
valid for this trigger.
To account for these constraints, we set the prob-
ability of all invalid conﬁgurations to be 0 during
decoding.
2.3
Event Duration Detection
This component classiﬁes event triggers into dura-
tion categories. While many datasets have covered
time expressions which are explicit timestamps for
events (Pustejovsky et al., 2003b; Cassidy et al.,
2014; Reimers et al., 2018; Bethard et al., 2017),
they do not target categorical event duration. To
supplement this, Vashishtha et al. (2019) introduces
the UDS-T dataset, where they provide 11 duration
categories which we adopt for our event pipeline:
INSTANT, SECONDS, MINUTES, HOURS, DAYS,
WEEKS, MONTHS, YEARS, DECADES, CENTURIES
and FOREVER. Pan et al. (2006) also present a
news domain duration annotation dataset contain-
ing 58 articles developed from TimeBank corpus
(we refer as Typical-Duration in the following), it
provides 7 duration categories (a subset of the 11
categories in UDS-T from SECONDS to YEARS).
We developed two models for the event duration
detection task. For a sentence, along with predi-
cate root and span, the models perform duration
classiﬁcation. In the ﬁrst method, we ﬁne-tune a
BERT language model (Devlin et al., 2019) on sin-
gle sentences and take hidden states of event tokens
from the output of the last layer, then feed into a
multi-layer perceptron for classiﬁcation.
The second model is adapted from the UDS-T
baseline model, which is trained under the multi-
task objectives of duration and temporal relation
extraction. The model computes ELMo embed-
dings (Peters et al., 2018) followed by attention
layers to compute the attended representation of the
predicate given sentence. The ﬁnal MLP layers ex-
tract the duration category. Even though this model
can detect temporal relations, it underperforms the
model we described in § 2.1, so we exclude the
temporal relation during inference.
2.4
Negation and Speculation Cue Detection
and Scope Resolution
The event extraction components described above
are designed to extract all possible events, but we
identify events that are indicated by speculation
(e.g., would) or negation (e.g., not) keywords (Kon-
stantinova et al., 2012). Since those events do not
happen, we mark them with special labels. For
example, in the sentence “The United States is not
considering sending troops to Mozambique”, we
identify “send” will not happen.
We adapt the BERT-based negation and specu-
lation cue detection model and the scope resolu-
tion model introduced by Khandelwal and Sawant
(2020). To ﬁne-tune these models, we use the SFU
Review dataset with negation and speculation anno-
tations (Taboada et al., 2006; Taboada and Grieve,
2004; Konstantinova et al., 2012), and we feed
ground truth negation and speculation cues as input
for the scope resolution model. We evaluate the
two models on a separate testing set of the SFU
Review dataset. The cue detection model yields
a 0.92 F1 score, and the scope resolution model
yields a 0.88 F1 score for token-level prediction,
given ground truth cues as input. In EventPlus, we
input cues detected by the cue detection model to
the scope resolution model.
3
System
We design a pipeline system to enable the interac-
tion among components with state-of-the-art per-
formance introduced in § 2 and provide a compre-
hensive output for events and visualize the results.
Figure 3 shows the overall system design.
3.1
Pipeline Design
Event Extraction
EventPlus takes in raw text
and feeds the tokenized text to two event extraction
modules trained on ACE ontology-based datasets
and free-formatted event triggers. The ACE on-
tology extraction modules will produce the output
of event triggers (“toured” is a trigger), event type
(it is a MOVEMENT:TRANSPORT event), argument
and its role (the ARTIFACT is “George Pataki” and
DESTINATION is “counties”) and NER result (“New
York” and “counties” are GEO-POLITICAL ENTITY
and “governer” and “George Pataki” are PERSON).
The trigger-only extraction model will produce all
event triggers (“continues”, “maintain” and “de-
clared” are also event triggers but we do not have
arguments predicted for them). Then trigger-only
events will be merged to ACE-style events list and
create a combined event list from the two models.
For each extracted event, if it is in the negation or
speculation scope predicted by the cue detection
and scope resolution component, then we add a

“speculation or negation” argument to that event.
Duration Detection and Temporal Relation Ex-
traction
The combined events list will be passed
to the event duration detection model to detect du-
ration for each of the extracted events (“tours” will
take DAYS etc.) and passed to temporal relation
extraction component to detect temporal relations
among each pair of events (“toured” is after “de-
clared” etc.). Note that duration and temporal re-
lation extraction are based on the context sentence
besides the event triggers themselves and they are
designed to consider contextualized information
contained in sentences. Therefore “take (a break)”
can take MINUTES in the scenario of “Dr. Porter
is now taking a break and will be able to see you
soon” but take DAYS in the context of “Dr. Porter
is now taking a Christmas break” (Ning, 2019).
Visualization
To keep the resulted temporal
graph clear, we remove predicted VAGUE relations
since that indicates the model cannot conﬁdently
predict temporal relations for those event pairs. Fi-
nally, all model outputs are gathered and pass to
the front-end for visualization.
3.2
Interface Design
Figure 2 shows the interface design of EventPlus.5
We display the NER result with wavy underlines
and highlight event triggers and corresponding ar-
guments with the same color upon clicks. Besides,
we represent the temporal relations among events
in a directed graph using d3 6 if there are any, where
we also indicate each event’s duration in the label
for each event node.
4
Evaluation
Each capability in the pipeline has its own input and
output protocol, and they require various datasets
to learn implicit knowledge independently. In this
section, we describe the performance for each ca-
pability on corresponding labeled datasets.
4.1
Event Trigger Extraction
We report the evaluation about event triggers ex-
traction component on TB-Dense (Cassidy et al.,
2014) and MATRES (Ning et al., 2018a), two
event extraction datasets in the news domain (Han
et al., 2019b).
We show the result in Table 1.
5We have a walk-through instruction available to help ﬁrst-
time end users get familiar with EventPlus. Please see our
video for more information.
6https://d3js.org/
Comparing the performance on TB-Dense with
CAEVO (Chambers et al., 2014), DEER (Han et al.,
2020a) and MATRES performance with Ning et al.
(2018b), the model we use achieves best F1 scores
and yields the state-of-the-art performance.
Corpus
Model
F1
TB-Dense
Chambers et al. (2014)
87.4
Han et al. (2020a)
90.3
Ours
90.8
MATRES
Ning et al. (2018b)
85.2
Ours
87.8
Table 1: Evaluation for event trigger extraction
4.2
Event Extraction on ACE Ontology
We evaluate our event extraction component on the
test set of ACE 2005 dataset using the same data
split as prior works (Lin et al., 2020; Wadden et al.,
2019). We follow the same evaluation criteria:
• Entity: An entity is correct if its span and type
are both correct.
• Trigger: A trigger is correctly identiﬁed (Trig-
I) if its span is correct. It is correctly classiﬁed
(Trig-C) if its type is also correct.
• Argument: An argument is correctly identiﬁed
(Arg-I) if its span and event type are correct. It
is correctly classiﬁed (Arg-C) if its role is also
correct.
In Table 2, we compare the performance of our sys-
tem with the current state-of-the-art method OneIE
(Lin et al., 2020). Our system outperforms OneIE
in terms of entity detection performance. However
our trigger and argument detection performance
is worse than it. We leave the improvements for
triggers and arguments for future work.
Model
Entity Trig-I Trig-C Arg-I Arg-C
OneIE
90.2
78.2
74.7
59.2
56.8
Ours
91.3
75.8
72.5
57.7
55.7
Table 2: Test set performance on ACE 2005 dataset.
Following prior works, we use the same evaluation cri-
teria: *-I represent Trigger or Argument Identiﬁcation.
*-C represent Trigger or Argument Classiﬁcation.
4.3
Event Duration Detection
We evaluate the event duration detection models
on Typical-Duration and newly annotated ACE-
Duration dataset to reﬂect the performance on

generic news domain for which our system is op-
timized. Since UDS-T dataset (Vashishtha et al.,
2019) is imbalanced and has limited samples for
some duration categories, we do not use it as an
evaluation benchmark but we sample 466 high IAA
data points as training resources. We split Typical-
Duration dataset and use 1790 samples for training,
224 for validation and 224 for testing.
To create ACE-Duration, we sample 50 unique
triggers with related sentences from the ACE
dataset, conduct manual annotation with three an-
notators and take the majority vote as the gold dura-
tion category. Given natural ordering among dura-
tion categories, the following metrics are employed:
accuracy over 7 duration categories (Acc), coarse
accuracy (Acc-c, if the prediction falls in categories
whose distance to the ground truth is 1, it is counted
as correct) and Spearman correlation (Corr).
Typical-Duration
ACE-Duration
Model
Acc
Acc-c
Corr
Acc
Acc-c
Corr
UDS-T (U)
0.20
0.54
0.59
0.38
0.68
0.62
UDS-T (T)
0.52
0.79
0.71
0.47
0.67
0.50
UDS-T (T+U)
0.50
0.76
0.68
0.49
0.74
0.66
BERT (T)
0.59
0.81
0.75
0.31
0.67
0.64
BERT (T+U)
0.56
0.81
0.73
0.45
0.79
0.70
Table 3: Event duration detection experimental result.
Typical-Duration results are from testing subset. Nota-
tions in the bracket of model names indicate resources
for training, U: 466 UDS-T high IAA samples, T:
Typical-Duration training set
Experimental results in Table 3 show the BERT
model is better than UDS-T ELMo-based model in
general and data augmentation is especially helpful
to improve performance on ACE-Duration. Due to
the limited size of ACE-Duration, we weight more
on the Typical-Duration dataset and select BERT
(T) as the best conﬁguration. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the state-of-the-art performance
on the event duration detection task.
4.4
Temporal Relation Extraction
We report temporal relation extraction performance
on TB-Dense and MATRES datasets. TB-Dense
consider the duration of events so the labels are
INCLUDES, INCLUDED IN, BEFORE, AFTER, SI-
MULTANEOUS and VAGUE, while MATRES uses
start-point as event temporal anchor and hence its
labels exclude INCLUDES and INCLUDED IN. In
EventPlus, we augment extracted events from mul-
tiple components, so we report temporal relation
extraction result given golden events as relation
candidates to better reﬂect single task performance.
Corpus
Model
F1
TB-Dense
Vashishtha et al. (2019)
56.6
Meng and Rumshisky (2018)
57.0
Ours
64.5
MATRES
Ning et al. (2018b)
65.9
Ning et al. (2018a)
69.0
Ours
75.5
Table 4: Experimental result for temporal relation ex-
traction given golden event extraction result
Table 4 shows the experimental results.7 Our
model in § 2.1 achieves the best result on temporal
relation extraction and is signiﬁcantly better than
(Vashishtha et al., 2019) mentioned in § 2.3.8
5
Extension to Biomedical Domain
With our ﬂexible design, each component of Event-
Plus can be easily extended to other domains with
little modiﬁcation. We explore two approaches to
extend the event extraction capability (§ 2.2) to
the biomedicine domain: 1) multi-domain training
(MDT) with GENIA (Kim et al., 2009), a dataset
containing biomolecular interaction events from
scientiﬁc literature, with shared token embeddings,
which enables the model to predict on both news
and biomedical text; 2) replace the current com-
ponent with an in-domain event extraction com-
ponent SciBERT-FT (Huang et al., 2020) which
is a biomedical event extraction system based on
ﬁne-tuned SciBERT (Beltagy et al., 2019).
Figure 4: Performance comparison of single-domain
training (SDT), multi-domain training (MDT) and
SciBERT-FT on the Dev set of GENIA
7The MATRES experiment result in Table 4 uses 183 doc-
uments for training and 20 for testing developed from the
entire TempEval-3 dataset. Han et al. (2019a) reports higher
F1 score but it uses a subset of MATRES (22 documents for
train, 5 for dev and 9 for test) and has different setting.
8The latest state-of-the-art work (Han et al., 2020a) only
reports end-to-end event extraction and temporal relation ex-
traction result, pure temporal relation extraction result given
ground-truth events are not provided. We are not able to com-
pare with it directly.

While MDT on ACE and GENIA datasets from
different domains improves the performance on
GENIA, it is still lower than SciBERT-FT (Figure
4). Therefore, we decide to pursue the second ex-
tension approach to incorporate SciBERT-FT and
extend EventPlus to the biomedical domain.
6
Related Works
Existing NLP toolkits (Manning et al., 2014;
Khashabi et al., 2018) provide an interface for a set
of useful models. Some tools integrate several mod-
els in a pipeline fashion (Peng et al., 2015; Noji
and Miyao, 2016). The majority of these systems
focus on token-level tasks like tokenization, lemma-
tization, part-of-speech tagging, or sentence-level
tasks like syntactic parsing, semantic role labeling
etc. There are only a few systems that can provide
capabilities of event extraction and temporal infor-
mation detection (Tao et al., 2013; Ning, 2019).
For event extraction, some systems only pro-
vide results within a certain deﬁned ontology such
as AIDA (Li et al., 2019), there are also some
works utilizing data from multiple modalities (Li
et al., 2020a,b). Some works could handle novel
events (Xiang and Wang, 2019; Ahmad et al., 2021;
Han et al., 2020b; Huang and Peng, 2020), but
they are either restricted to a certain domain (Yang
et al., 2018) or lack of performance superiority be-
cause of their lexico-syntactic rule-based algorithm
(Valenzuela-Esc´arcega et al., 2015). For temporal
information detection, Ning et al. (2019) proposes
a neural-based temporal relation extraction system
with knowledge injection. Most related to our work,
Ning et al. (2018b) demonstrates a temporal under-
standing system to extract time expression and im-
plicit temporal relations among detected events, but
this system cannot provide event-related arguments,
entities and event duration information.
These previous works either are not capable of
event understanding or just focus on one perspec-
tive of event-related features. There is no existing
system that incorporates a comprehensive set of
event-centric features, including event extraction
and related arguments and entities, temporal rela-
tions, and event duration.
7
Conclusion and Future Work
We represent EventPlus, a pipeline system that
takes raw texts as inputs and produces a set of
temporal event understanding annotations, includ-
ing event trigger and type, event arguments, event
duration and temporal relations. To the best of our
knowledge, EventPlus is the ﬁrst available system
that provides such a comprehensive set of tempo-
ral event knowledge extraction capabilities with
state-of-the-art components integrated. We believe
EventPlus will provide insights for understanding
narratives and facilitating downstream tasks.
In the future, we plan to further improve Event-
Plus by tightly integrating event duration prediction
and temporal relation extraction modules. We also
plan to improve the performance for triggers and
arguments detection under the ACE ontology and
develop joint training models to optimize all event-
related features in an end-to-end fashion.
