1
Using Deep Learning with Large Aggregated
Datasets for COVID-19 Classiﬁcation from Cough
Esin Darici Haritaoglu, Nicholas Rasmussen, Daniel C. H. Tan, Jennifer Ranjani J., Jaclyn Xiao, Gunvant
Chaudhari, Akanksha Rajput, Praveen Govindan, Christian Canham, Wei Chen, Minami Yamaura, Laura
Gomezjurado, Amil Khanzada, Aaron Broukhim, Mert Pilanci
Abstract—The Covid-19 pandemic has been one of the most
devastating events in recent history, claiming the lives of more
than 5 million people worldwide. Even with the worldwide
distribution of vaccines, there is an apparent need for affordable,
reliable, and accessible screening techniques to serve parts of the
World that do not have access to Western medicine. Artiﬁcial
Intelligence can provide a solution utilizing cough sounds as a
primary screening mode for COVID-19 diagnosis. This paper
presents multiple models that have achieved relatively respectable
performance on the largest evaluation dataset currently presented
in academic literature. Through investigation of a self-supervised
learning model (Area under the ROC curve, AUC = 0.807) and
a convolutional nerual network (CNN) model (AUC = 0.802),
we observe the possibility of model bias with limited datasets.
Moreover, we observe that performance increases with training
data size, showing the need for the worldwide collection of data to
help combat the Covid-19 pandemic with non-traditional means.
Index Terms—COVID-19, Cough, Self-supervised Learning,
Support Vector Machine, Convolutional Neural Networks.
I. INTRODUCTION
To date, COVID-19 has claimed the lives of over 800,000
individuals in the United States and 5 million Worldwide
[1]. The highly infectious nature of COVID-19 has ﬁlled up
hospital beds in record numbers, surpassing hospital capacity
and causing immense strain on healthcare systems Worldwide
Esin Darici Haritaoglu is with Virufy
Nicholas Rasmussen is with the Department of Computer Science, Univer-
sity of South Dakota
Daniel C. H. Tan is with the Department of Computer Science, Stanford
University
Jennifer Ranjani J. is with Virufy
Jaclyn Xiao is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Duke
University
Gunvant Chaudhari is with the School of Medicine, University of California
San Francisco
Akanksha Rajput is with the Data Science Institute, Columbia University
Praveen Govindan is with Virufy
Christian Canham is with Virufy
Wei Chen is with University of California, Riverside
Minami Yamaura is with the Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
Department, University of California Berkeley
Laura Gomezjurado is with Virufy
Amil Khanzada is with the Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
Department and Haas MBA, University of California, Berkeley
Aaron Bourkhim is with the Department of Computer Science and Engi-
neering, University of California, San Diego
Mert Pilanci is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford
University
Esin Darici Haritaoglu and Nicholas Rasmussen have contributed equally
to this work
Mert Pilanci, Ph. D. is supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF),
and the U.S. Army Research Ofﬁce
[2]. While global vaccination efforts are underway, distribution
efforts have been impeded in low and middle-income coun-
tries. Additionally, the emergence of new viral variants like the
Omicron has decreased the effectiveness of current vaccines
in the prevention of COVID-19 spread [3].
One of the main contributors to the spread of COVID-
19 is that a proportion of infected people show mild or
moderate symptoms while infectious [4]. There is a high
demand for frequent, rapid, and affordable testing. To this date,
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) tests
in nasopharyngeal swabs are the gold standard for detecting
COVID-19 in clinical practice due to their high sensitivity
and speciﬁcity [5]. However, despite the reliability of RT-PCR
tests, some issues have arisen during mass application. One
such example is that these tests require costly reagents and
tools that have prevented equal access globally. Furthermore,
administering and processing the test poses a risk of possible
infection, and the test results take hours to days to return.
An alternative is an antigen detection test for COVID-19 such
as the COVID-19 Ag Respi-Strip, a rapid immunochromato-
graphic test for detecting SARS-CoV-2 antigen. This test has
the ability to deliver results in as little as 15 minutes, a factor
that is helpful in hospital diagnosis for the safety of its patients.
However, the antigen test has shown low sensitivity, with
studies showing that its sensitivity was as low as 30.2% [6],
and there is often limited test supply during COVID-19 surges.
To date, a rapid, accessible, and affordable testing method has
not been deployed yet.
Emerging Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) technologies have
shown the ability to create fast, affordable, and accessible so-
lutions. There is increasing evidence that machine learning and
deep learning methods can analyze cough sounds of infected
patients and predict COVID-19 [7]. Multiple research groups
have been gathering sound recordings for COVID-19 patients
of all ages, in various settings, symptomatic and asymptomatic,
and at different periods relative to symptom onset. These allow
the AI algorithms to learn audio characteristics of COVID-
19 illness in patients with various demographic and medical
conditions. A potential, purely digital COVID-19 detection
method would allow for a smartphone-based rapid, equitable
COVID-19 test with minimal infection risk, economic burden,
and supply chain issues - all helpful factors to control COVID-
19 spread. Given the importance, there is an urgent need to
explore and develop machine learning-based digital COVID-
19 tests.
arXiv:2201.01669v3  [eess.AS]  30 Mar 2022

2
II. RELATED WORKS
Studies reveal that cough samples can be used for diag-
nosing respiratory syndromes such as pneumonia, pulmonary
diseases, and asthma [8] [9] [10]. Recently, researchers have
explored the possibility of screening COVID-19 using cough
signals. In [11], the authors have demonstrated that a binary
machine learning classiﬁer is sufﬁcient to identify COVID-19
cough and breath signals from healthy individuals or asthmatic
patients. In [12], a framework for AI speech processing that
pre-screens cough to identify COVID by leveraging acoustic
bio-marker as features. In this study, 96 cough samples are
collected from users with bronchitis and 136 with pertussis in
addition to the COVID positive and healthy cough samples.
Moreover, this study uses three independent, parallel classi-
ﬁers, namely, a deep transfer learning-based multi-class clas-
siﬁer (DTL-MC), a classical machine learning-based multi-
class classiﬁer (CML-MC), and a deep transfer learning-based
binary class classiﬁer (DTL-BC). These three independent
classiﬁers are used due to the insufﬁcient data available for
learning. Lastly, handcrafted features like spectral centroid
(SC), spectral roll-off (SR), zero-crossing rate (ZCR), MFCC,
delta-delta MFCC can be used to train long short-term memory
(LSTM) network models as shown in [13]. Classiﬁcation on
voice samples demonstrated the least accuracy among other
acoustic features like cough and breath.
Mouawad et al. utilize various statistical measures to detect
COVID-19 from cough and the sustained vowel sound ‘ah’
[14]. Best recurrence structures were extracted using vari-
able Markov Oracle as a pre-processing stage. The DiCOVA
challenge was initiated to encourage researchers in COVID-
19 diagnosis using acoustics [15]. Among the two datasets
used in the DiCOVA challenge, one focuses only on cough
sounds, and the other contains a collection of audio recordings,
including counting numbers, phonation of sustained vowels,
and breath. 11 most common symptoms combined with an
established feature set of 384 features, obtained by applying 12
functions on the 16 frame-level descriptors and the respective
delta coefﬁcients, are classiﬁed using support vector machine
(SVM) with a linear kernel in [16]. In the ﬁrst experiment,
feature level fusion is implemented by concatenating the audio
and the symptom features into a single matrix. In the second
experiment, decision level fusion is explored by ﬁnding the
maximum probability among two models trained indepen-
dently, which is reported to yield superior performance.
The evaluation in [17] reveals that among the popular
machine learning approaches like SVM, k-nearest neighbor
(kNN), logistic regression (LR), multi-layer perceptron (MLP),
ResNet50, and LSTM, the ResNet50 generated the highest
AUC (0.976) on the Coswara dataset. In [18], feature extrac-
tion using the traditional and deep learning approaches are
compared through empirical mode decomposition (EMD) and
discrete wavelet transform (DWT), where ReliefF is utilized
as a feature selection technique. It is concluded that high
performance is achieved when DWT features are combined
with traditional ML approaches such as SVM. In [19], ex-
periments are conducted to identify the most informative
acoustic features as a baseline instead of the handcrafted
features or MFCC. It is also demonstrated that features can
be learned from limited data resources using the wavelet
scattering transform.
In [20], cough sounds are detected from the raw audio ﬁles
using YAMNet, and the discriminatory features are identiﬁed
by analyzing the time-frequency representation (TFR) of the
Choi-Williams distribution. Recursive feature elimination is
used to select useful features based on the feature importance
measure. Several models were analyzed, and RF is reported to
have superior performance in differentiating COVID positive
and negative samples.
In table I, we have summarized the models used, their
dataset, and the performance metrics of various state-of-the-art
algorithms for COVID detection from cough samples. From
the literature survey, it is evident that most researchers have
exploited pre-trained models for determining COVID from
cough due to the lack of large datasets.
III. METHODS
In this section of our study, we explain the resource we
acquired along with a description of the steps taken to extract
information from the cough samples before they were handled
by our model development team. Afterward, we explore the
techniques that were used to train each model.
A. Dataset
Multiple publicly available datasets were combined and
utilized
to
ensure
minimal
bias
during
model
train-
ing.
Among the crowdsourced data that were utilized
were COUGHVID [21] and Coswara [22] datasets. As a
publicly-available dataset of global cough audio recordings,
COUGHVID is one of the largest COVID-19 related cough
datasets. COUGHVID includes a total of 20,072 cough record-
ings labeled as positive COVID-19, symptomatic COVID-
19 negative, and asymptomatic COVID-19 negative, along
with other clinical information and metadata [21]. The dataset
contains samples from a wide array of ages, genders, pre-
existing respiratory conditions, and geographic locations - all
of which are useful data to consider when training an unbiased
deep learning model. Similarly, the publicly available Coswara
dataset was crowdsourced from participants around the globe
utilizing a smartphone-based data collection platform [22].
Virufy processed the Coswara dataset and labeled over 2000
coughs resulting in the diverse demographics of samples, with
1839 samples as COVID-19 negative (“healthy”) and 411
samples as COVID-19 positive (“infected”). Furthermore, to
increase the usefulness of AI systems like ours in hospital
settings, we sought to train our model on clinically gathered
datasets. Subsequently, we utilized the IATOS dataset, which
is a publicly available dataset gathered by the city government
of Buenos Aires, Argentina, using WhatsApp chatbots. This
validated dataset includes 2196 positive and 2199 negative
patients in 11 hospital facilities where RT-PCR studies were
carried out on patients suspected of COVID and 14 out-of-
hospital isolation units for patients with conﬁrmed COVID
mild cases [23].

3
Table I
DATASET AND PERFORMANCE OF STATE-OF-THE-ART ALGORITHMS
Reference
Model
No. of Samples
Metric Reported
Dataset
Availability
Covid-19
Positive
Covid-19
Nega-
tive
[11]
PCA reduced handcrafted & VG-
Gish features with binary classiﬁer
141
298
AUC: 80
On-request
[12]
MFCC with one Poisson biomarker
layer and 3 pre-trained ResNet50 in
parallel
2660
2660
Sensitivity: 98.5
Speciﬁcity: 94.2
AUC: 97
Public
[13]
Handcrafted features like SC, SR,
ZCR, MFCC and delta-delta are
classiﬁed using LSTM
60
180
F1-score: 97.9
AUC: 97.4
Accuracy: 97
Private
[14]
MFCC with repetition structure
classiﬁed using XGBoost
32
1895
Accuracy: 97
AUC: 84
Private
[15]
MFCC, Delta and Delta-delta co-
efﬁcients were used as features to
train LR, MLP and Random Forest
(RF) classiﬁers
62
380
LR-AUC: 66.95
MLP-AUC: 68.54
RF-AUC: 70.69
Public
[16]
11 Covid related symptoms with
384 features obtained from the
voice samples are classiﬁed using
SVM and decision-level fusion
326
502
Sensitivity: 68
Speciﬁcity: 82
AUC: 79
Accuracy: 79
Private
[17]
MFCC, MFCC velocity and accel-
eration along with log frame ener-
gies, ZCR and kurtosis are used as
features with ResNet50
110
1105
AUC: 98
Accuracy: 95.33
Speciﬁcity: 98
Sensitivity: 93
Public
[18]
Intrinsic
mode
functions
using
EMD together with DWT features,
ReliefF feature selection and SVM
595
592
Speciﬁcity: 97.3
Accuracy: 98.4
F1-score: 98.6
Public
(Virufy)
[19]
Wavelet scattering features with
Boosting classiﬁer
84
1019
Accuracy:88.52
Sensitivity:87.19
Speciﬁcity: 89.82
Private
[20]
YAMNet with TFR analysis
346
346
Accuracy: 83.67
AUC: 93.56
Sensitivity: 89.58
Speciﬁcity: 71.58
Public
In addition to the aforementioned datasets, we also gathered
and utilized our own crowdsourced and clinical datasets.
Virufy’s crowdsource dataset was collected using our study
app (https://virufy.org/study) which requests users to input
demographic information, such as age, gender, and comor-
bidities, along with their PCR test results. This app is publicly
advertised on our website and as well as through press releases
via Forbes, Yahoo, and various media outlets in South America
and India. Additionally, we took sufﬁcient measures to protect
patient’s privacy with our informed consent forms and privacy
policy (https://virufy.org/privacy policy/). For Virufy’s clinical
dataset, in recognizing that the majority of identiﬁed COVID-
19 positive patients present at clinics for testing, we developed
a protocol for data collection at clinics. After extensive ethical
review and scientiﬁc oversight, we achieved IRB approval for
our data collection method. In this method, patients presenting
for COVID tests are ﬁrst requested to input demographic in-
formation, such as age, gender, and comorbidities, into our app
(https://virufy.org/study). After doing so, they are requested to
wear a surgical or cloth mask and cough intentionally into
the smartphone. Finally, when test results are available, they
are reported in the app and linked to the patient’s cough.
This protocol increases the likelihood that our data quality
is high and clinically valid due to oversight by hospital staff
and the IRB committee. This oversight also helps to establish
acceptance for use in scientiﬁc research and clinical validation
studies. Figure 1 shows the labeled data size for training,
validation, and test sets as well as the unlabeled data size
that is used during unsupervised learning.
B. Audio Preprocessing
To provide readily usable data for model development, the
cough audio data goes through two main stages: standardiza-
tion and preprocessing. Data standardization repackages the
raw data including, the data labels, naming conventions, and
ﬁle types according to Virufy’s internal Common Data Format
(CDF). The preprocessing stage takes the standardized data
to ﬁlter and prepare usable samples by detecting background

4
Figure 1.
The train, validation and test sets along with unlabeled data set
sizes
noise and removing any inadequate data, such as samples with
no coughs detected from it. The initial standardization and
preprocessing scripts were in Colab notebooks and were run
manually and separately tested for each dataset source. To
make this more streamlined, we moved most of the code to
one centralized GitHub repository (https://github.com/virufy).
We automated much of the data processing pipeline and its
corresponding testing, in addition to making improvements to
cough detection and computation time.
1) Standardization: The dataset standardization was origi-
nally performed through individual Colab notebooks by data
source; for example, FluSense data was processed separately
from Coughvid data. Colab notebooks may require someone to
manually run the preprocessing notebook, authenticate access
to AWS S3 to upload the standardized data and check that
the program ﬁnished running. This placed a signiﬁcant burden
on model developers, and the underlying structure made it
difﬁcult to keep track of what changes were made to which
notebook. To provide a uniform, centralized infrastructure for
standardization, we moved many of the notebooks to one
Github repository and wrote Python scripts that automated the
standardization including the authentication and upload. The
repository provided an organized structure that allows us to
make any additional changes transparently.
2) Preprocessing: Given that audio ﬁles from different
datasets can have different numbers of audio channels and
sampling rates, the audio ﬁles are ﬁrst converted to mono and
resampled at a 16 kHz sampling rate. A series of checks are
applied to the standardized audio to remove low-quality audio
ﬁles. The following checks are conducted:
a) Volume Detection: The volume of the audio ﬁle needs
to be sufﬁcient as it would be difﬁcult to extract meaningful
data even if ampliﬁcation is used. The maximum amplitude of
the audio ﬁle is calculated to detect the volume of the audio
ﬁle.
b) Clipping Detection:
Clipping indicates that some
samples in the audio ﬁle are missing as the amplitude of the
samples was truncated. The ratio of clipping in the audio ﬁle
is calculated by analyzing peaks and their ﬂatness.
c) Cough Detection: A pre-trained CNN model based on
ResNet-18 architecture provided in [24] is used to determine
if the audio ﬁle contains a cough. The CNN model outputs a
probability of whether a cough was detected in the audio ﬁle.
d) Cough Segmentation: The regions that contain coughs
in the audio ﬁle are determined through the segmentation
process described in [25]. Unlike the other checks that are
conducted, the cough segmentation algorithm uses audio ﬁles
that are converted to mono and resampled at 44.1 kHz as
inputs. The segmentation algorithm ﬁrst removes background
noise through a combination of low pass and high pass ﬁlters
and resamples the ﬁltered audio with a 4.41 kHz sampling
rate.
e) Background Noise Detection: Loud background noise
can obscure the audio characteristics of the signal in interest.
To evaluate the loudness of the background noise in the audio
ﬁle, the ratio between the max power of cough segments and
non-cough segments is calculated. The cough segments and
non-cough segments are determined in the cough segmentation
check.
The outputs from the aforementioned checks are used as
thresholds to determine low-quality audio ﬁles. Audio ﬁles
that do not meet the thresholds are removed and are not used
in subsequent steps, such as feature extraction, model training,
and inference.
C. Support Vector Machine
One of the effective supervised learning methods in machine
learning is support vector machine (SVM) [26]. The classes
are separated from each other by a hyperplane passing through
the closer elements. SVMs perform well when the data is
linearly separable. However, kernel functions can be used to
non-linearly separate the data when it is not linearly separable.
In our experiments, we have utilized the radial basis function
for the SVM kernel. To map the SVM outputs to probabilities
within the [0, 1] range, the SVM outputs are fed into logistic
regression. Platt Scaling is used to transform the SVM output
to probability values [27].
Short-time fourier transform (STFT) and mel-frequency
cepstral coefﬁcients (MFCC) [28] have been used by several
researchers for classifying the Covid-19 cough or voice sam-
ples [12] [13] [14]. The handcrafted features such as spectral
centroid, spectral roll-off, root mean square, Mel-frequency
cepstral coefﬁcients (MFCC), delta-MFCC, and double delta
MFCC are used for classiﬁcation using the support vector
machine (SVM). Mean, standard deviation, maximum and
minimum of the above-mentioned features are computed wrt
time and are then normalized before being used by the SVM.
1) Spectral Centroid: Spectral centroid (SC) measures the
change in frequency and phase content over time and it
deﬁnes the shape of the magnitude spectrogram of STFT by
determining its center of gravity from the normalized frame
[29].
2) Spectral Roll-off: Spectral roll-off (SR) measures the
skewness of the spectrogram by determining the central fre-
quency of the spectrogram bin at which 25% and 75% of the
magnitude are concentrated [30].
3) Root Mean Square of the Spectrogram: The loudness
of the signal can be determined using the root mean square
(RMS) of the spectrogram. Lower RMS values are a result of
high signal energy in a block of the spectrogram [31].

5
4) Mel-frequency Cepstral Coefﬁcients: The fast Fourier
transform (FFT) bins from the log-amplitude of the magnitude
spectrum are grouped and smoothed according to the Mel-
scale. Finally, discrete cosine transform is applied to de-
correlate the feature vector. It is found that 13 MFCCs are
sufﬁcient to represent speech, voice, or cough samples [32].
MFCCs are given by
C (m) =
N
X
n=1
log Y (n)cos
nπ
M

m −1
2

(1)
when m denotes the index of the MFCC and Y (n) denotes
the output of the n-channel of the ﬁlter bank.
5) ∆and ∆2 MFCC: The ﬁrst-order derivative of MFCC
is given by [33]
D[n] = C[n + r] −C[n −r]
(2)
where r generally takes 2 or 3 as a value. ∆2 MFCC is
obtained by determining the derivative of the subsequent delta
cepstral features.
D. Self-Supervised Learning with Transformers
In our work, we also used the Self Supervised Learning
(SSL) method with the unlabeled data to pre-train the network
and we added labeled data to the pretraining dataset to learn
better representations. In addition, we utilized an auxiliary task
of predicting masked input while reducing the reconstruction
loss. To the best of our knowledge, the work that is closest
to our approach is that of Xue et al. [34]. In contrast, [34]
used masking to prevent overﬁtting and used contrastive loss.
Both approaches employ popular transformer architectures, but
we used the spectrogram image as input to the transformer
network and masked the input spectrogram both in the time
and frequency domain. In contrast, Xue et al. [34] used MFCC
and applied masking in the time domain only. Our work used
the s3prl [35] library for pretraining the upstream network
and training the downstream network. More speciﬁcally, we
have adapted upstream TERA [36] and modiﬁed downstream
Speaker Classiﬁcation parts of the library for our Covid-19
classiﬁcation task from audio samples. We did not employ any
pre-trained network weights. Both upstream and downstream
models are trained from scratch by using the training set
described in Figure 1.
1) Architecture: Our model uses the transformer encoder
architecture to extract representations from cough audio sig-
nals. The transformer encoder network has three layers, each
with a hidden layer size of 768, 12 attention heads, and a
feed-forward network of 3072. Transformer encoder layers
learn representation by masked signal prediction task as shown
in Figure 2. The masked signal prediction task could be
described as follows. The input cough audio is transformed
to a spectrogram image and then randomly masked in fre-
quency and time domain as described in III-D2. This masked
spectrogram image is fed into the transformer encoder layers.
Transformer encoder layers learn representations while the
prediction network following the transformer encoder layers
tries to reconstruct the original spectrogram of the cough au-
dio. The prediction network consists of 2 feed-forward layers
with a hidden size of 768.
The reconstruction loss is back-
propagated through the prediction network and transformer
encoder layers. This process is also called upstream training.
Once upstream training is complete, the prediction network is
removed, the upstream model is frozen, and representations
from the transformer encoder are fed into the downstream
model. The upstream model is based on the TERA [36]
implementation of the s3prl [35] library.
The downstream model consists of three linear
layers
followed by normalization and non-linear activation layers, a
mean pooling layer, and a classiﬁcation layer. The ﬁrst linear
layer converts the hidden size 768 of encoder output to 512.
The following two linear layers both have size 512. Next, the
mean pooling layer calculates the mean of the representation
across the time axis, ending up with a 512-dimensional vector.
Finally, the classiﬁcation layer uses a 512-dimensional vector
to classify cough audio as either COVID or not COVID.
The downstream model training is done by backpropagating
the classiﬁcation error through the downstream model. The
downstream model is adapted and modiﬁed from the Speaker
Classiﬁcation task of the s3prl [35] library.
2) Input:
Virufy
preprocessing
library
detects
cough
boundaries, and cough boundary metadata is given to the
model alongside the input audio. The audio signal is then
converted to cough-only audio by removing the silent parts
in the audio signal. The cough-only audio signal is then
converted into a spectrogram image using librosa [37] Short-
Time Fourier Transform (STFT) function with n freq=2048,
win length=640, and hop length=320 at 16KHz audio sample
rate. The logarithm of the spectrogram is ﬁnally taken. With
these values of STFT function, each 40 ms of the audio
signal is converted into 1025 frequency bins with a shift
of 20 ms along the time axis. The spectrogram time axis
varies depending on the input audio length.
This variation
is handled by ﬁrst padding the audio signal with zeros for
batch processing and then masking the input for later stages
of input processing.
During upstream training, the log spectrogram is masked
both in time and frequency bands before sending it to the
transformer encoder. The amount of mask in the time domain
is set as 0.15, while the maximum amount of masked fre-
quency bands is 0.20. Additionally, 0.10 of time, a Gaussian
noise of mean 0 and variance 0.2 is added to the spectrogram
image.
Masking is not applied to log spectrogram during down-
stream training. The log spectrogram is input to the frozen
upstream model, and the transformer encoder outputs the input
representation. This representation is fed into the downstream
model.
3) Upstream Training: During upstream training, an auxil-
iary task of spectrogram prediction from masked input spec-
trogram is used to learn the representation of the input. This
task enables self-supervised learning using the unlabeled data
in addition to labeled data. As a result, the transformer encoder
can learn better representations for cough audio by using more
data.

6
Figure 2. Upstream Training with Transformers
We trained the upstream model using ≈13K unlabeled and
≈10K labeled cough audio samples (see Figure 1) using a
batch size of 64, with a maximum learning rate of 1.e-4
over 400K steps. The learning rate warms up from zero to
a maximum value over the ﬁrst 28K steps and decays linearly
to zero afterward. We used MSE as a loss function during
reconstruction and the AdamW optimizer [38] to update the
upstream model parameters.
4) Downstream Training: Once upstream model training is
complete, we freeze the upstream model parameters at the end
of the 400K steps and start with downstream model training.
During downstream training, we only use labeled data. We use
the same ≈10K labeled data used during upstream training.
We set batch size as 8, learning rate as 1.e-4, and used
AdamW optimizer. Due to the imbalance in positive and
negative classes, we used an upsampling strategy for positive
classes with a ratio of 5:1. Compared to upstream, downstream
training takes much fewer steps to train. We set the steps
as 6K with an initial 1K step of warming up. After every
300 training steps, we evaluated the network with ≈2600
validation samples. We picked the downstream parameters
that give the maximum AUC. We observed that downstream
training converges after 3-4 epochs.
E. Convolution Neural Network
This model is a continuation of the work presented by
Rasmussen et al (2021) at the Applied Machine Learning
and Data Analytics conference at the end of 2021. This
manuscript is currently in preparation for submission to a peer-
reviewed journal [39].
This model was inspired by modern
convolutional networks with a few key differences. First, there
are no Batch Normalization (BN) layers. Generally, BN is
used in residual networks (ResNets) for object classiﬁcation
and detection from RGB images. We have not found BN
effective when we are working with monochrome sonographs.
The second difference is that this architecture does not use
skip connections. Traditional ResNets use skip connections
due to extreme depth, and skip connections help to alleviate
the vanishing gradient problem. This architecture does not
use skip connections since it is shallow compared to modern
ResNets. Minor modiﬁcations have been made to the model
compared to what will be published in the conference paper.
The differences are how the sonographs have been created
and the extension of the CNN’s repeated layers, along with a
global average pooling layer instead of ﬂattening the features
before being passed to the dense layers.
1) Balancing the Dataset: Before creating the sonographs,
a direct 4:1 ratio of up-sampling of all positives from each
training dataset is performed. This up-sampling allowed the
combination of the datasets to be approximately balanced
regarding the ratio of positives to negatives. After up-sampling
all positives from each dataset, all samples, including the
negatives, were randomly augmented using the library “Au-
diomentations” [40]. The augments that were performed in-
clude shifting the audio time-wise and adding a Gaussian
single-to-noise ratio. The values used for the “Shift” function
were: a min fraction of -.5, a max fraction of .5, and a p-
value of 1. These values ensured that all of the new samples

7
created were shifted randomly time-wise and guaranteed all
of the new samples were augmented. The values used for
the “AddGaussianNoise” function were: a min SNR of .25,
a max SNR of .9, and a p-value of .5. This step increased
the likelihood that approximately half of all the new samples
created had a Gaussian signal-to-noise ratio added to them in
between the speciﬁed interval. These steps created a resulting
training set that had one set of normal negatives, one set of
augmented negatives, four sets of normal positives, and four
sets of augmented positives.
2) Feature Extraction: For the creation of each sonograph
from the samples described above, the library Librosa was
used [41]. Once the audio was loaded with the library, the
audio was condensed using the cough segments that were
extracted by the pre-processing step described in Section 3.1
of this paper. Afterward, regardless of how many seconds
of audio was extracted by the cough segmenter, all samples
were ﬁt into an approximate 4 second window. If there were
less than 4-seconds of audio extracted per sample, zeros were
padded at the end of the audio. If more than 4 seconds were
extracted per sample, the audio was cut off. This previous step
allowed all sonographs created to have a standard size and
prevented the need to resize the sonographs, which dilates it
and negatively affects the data quality. Once all samples were
put into a standardized data array, augmentations described
above were performed and Librosa extracted the MFCC fea-
tures of the audio. Sixty-four MFCCs were used, along with
a hop length of 256 and an n fft window size of 512. These
values were used as opposed to the default values because they
allowed us to “zoom in” on the temporal features of the audio
as opposed to concentrating on the frequency resolution of the
sonograph. The resulting sonograph was a 64 by 256-pixel
MFCC representation of the four-second condensed audio.
3) Architecture: Our study initially passed the input de-
scribed above to a convolution layer with a stride value of
1 by 1, 32 ﬁlters, and a dimension of 7 by 7 to look for
the most general features. Next, this output was passed to
another convolution layer with a stride value of 1 by 1, 64
ﬁlters, and 5 × 5 dimension, to look for slightly less general
features with roughly 32-fold the number of nodes. Afterward,
the previous layer’s output was passed to a 2 by 2 max-pooling
layer with a stride of 2 by 2 to halve the spatial data vertically
and horizontally for the next layer. This layer is followed by
another sequence of convolution and pooling layers. In this
case, the convolution layer consisted of a stride value of 1
by 1, 256 ﬁlters, and the dimension of 3 × 3, and the max-
pooling layer was the same as the previous. These previous
two layers were repeated twice and helped derive more speciﬁc
features from the previous layers. These repeated layers were
followed by a ﬁnal convolution layer with a stride value of
1 by 1, 512 ﬁlters, and dimension of 3 × 3, which helps
ﬁnd only the smallest features from the previous layers with
the largest amount of nodes in the network. The ﬁnal output
of the last convolutional layer was then passed to a Global
Average Pooling layer which condenses the output to the 256-
dimensional dense layer. The output from this dense layer was
routed to the ﬁnal output layer, classifying the image as a
zero or one. All layers use a ReLU activation function and
a dropout rate of 0.2, while the ﬁnal layer uses a sigmoid
activation with no dropout for the ﬁnal output. Table 2 has
been provided below to show the above layout of the proposed
CNN architecture.
4) Training Hyper-parameters: The model was trained with
a learning rate of .0001 for 100 epochs and a batch size
consisting of 16. Model checkpoints were used based on the
best AUC achieved on the validation set to prevent overﬁtting.
A binary cross entropy-based loss function was used along
with the Adamax optimizer. The details of the number of
generated parameters for the different layers are presented in
Table II.
IV. RESULTS
In this section of our study, we provide a comparative
analysis of the models presented in our work. We explain the
validation results, along with the AUC for our test set. Future
work is planned to further modify and improve our models,
along with collecting more data.
A. Validation Results
To compare our deep learning models to a simple baseline
architecture, we used our shallow learning SVM model. SVM
model achieved a speciﬁcity of 0.96, a sensitivity of 0.14, and
an AUC of 0.75. These numbers are heavily skewed toward
speciﬁcity, and could be alleviated by modifying the output
thresholds, however that would most likely come at a cost to
other metrics to improve the sensitivity. The self supervised
learning model achieved much more balanced results with a
speciﬁcity of 0.51, a sensitivity of 0.89, and an AUC of 0.807
on the validation data. Also, the CNN performed comparably
with a speciﬁcity of 0.74, a sensitivity of 0.77, and an AUC
of 0.802. Note that sensitivity, speciﬁcity, and AUC values
are reported at an output threshold of 0.5. Table III has been
provided later in the paper to compare all performance metrics
collected.
B. Different Samples Sizes
To provide analysis on how the amount of data can affect a
model’s performance, we show the self supervised and CNN
model performance with different dataset sizes. To do this,
we have provided the results on the same validation set while
decreasing the number of samples used for training by a factor
of .8, .6, .4, and .2 using random sampling of the dataset.
Although there is only a slight performance degradation, we
can see there is a general downward trend of performance as
the sample sizes decrease, also the performance metrics of the
models are more variable, with some of the metrics skewed
towards speciﬁcity or sensitivity. Table III will compile these
results as well.
C. Test Results
For the test results, we have under reported the performance
metrics of both the self supervised learning and CNN models
to limit any bias in our model for future work. Currently, we

8
Table II
HYPER-PARAMETERS USED IN DIFFERENT LAYERS OF THE PROPOSED CNN.
Layer
Strides
Window Size
Filters
Parameters
Output
Convolution 1
1 × 1
7 × 7
32
1,600
(64x256x32)
Convolution 2
1 × 1
5 × 5
64
51,264
(64x256x64)
Max Pooling
2 × 2
2 × 2
N/A
N/A
(32x128x64)
Convolution 3
1 × 1
3 × 3
256
147,712
(32x128x256)
Max Pooling
2 × 2
2 × 2
N/A
N/A
(16x64x256)
Convolution 4
1 × 1
3 × 3
256
590,080
(16x64x256)
Max Pooling
2 × 2
2 × 2
N/A
N/A
(8x32x256)
Convolution 5
1 × 1
3 × 3
512
590,080
(8x32x256)
Max Pooling
2 × 2
2 × 2
N/A
N/A
(4x16x256)
Convolution 6
1 × 1
3 × 3
512
1,180,160
(4x16x512)
GlobalAveragePool
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
(512)
Dense 1
N/A
N/A
256
131328
(256)
Dense 2
N/A
N/A
1
257
0 or 1
are planning on modifying all the models currently being re-
searched at Virufy, adding more samples to the many datasets
we have already collected, and publishing a new paper with
more complete performance metrics on the enlarged dataset.
As such, we have decided to only report the AUC for the test
data. The self supervised learning model achieved an AUC of
0.791. Also, the CNN performed comparably with an AUC of
0.775. These performance metrics are also tuned to the output
threshold of .5 to delineate positives and negatives and have
been compiled in table III.
Figure 3. ROC-AUC curve of both models on the test data.
V. DISCUSSION
In this study, we compile a dataset of approximately 30,000
high-quality coughs including around 16,000 labeled coughs
and about 3,400 COVID-19 positive coughs from globally
crowdsourced and clinical sources. We also show that the self-
supervised, CNN, and SVM approaches achieve an AUC of
0.807, 0.802, and 0.75 on the validation set respectively, and
that the self-supervised and CNN approaches achieve an AUC
of 0.791 and 0.775 on the test set respectively.
Our best performing network, the SSL approach, had a sen-
sitivity of 0.87 at a speciﬁcity of 0.49. Although the metrics are
lower when compared to the rapid antigen (sensitivity > 80%,
speciﬁcity > 97%; [42]) and the rt-PCR tests, our approach
has the advantage of being easily repeatable. Multiple testing
can increase the accuracy of the results. Furthermore, a cough-
based approach has the advantage of being readily accessible
on mobile phones and requiring less time and cost for results
than any other form of testing.
This effort builds on previous works showing the experi-
mental efﬁcacy of detecting COVID-19 from coughs [7]. One
of the main issues preventing wider adoption of cough-based
COVID tests has been the persistent doubt about bias and gen-
eralizability [43], [44]. Our study advances prior work in the
ﬁeld by applying deep learning techniques to the largest aggre-
gate evaluation dataset of rt-PCR tested, high-quality, COVID-
19 positive coughs paired with COVID-19 negative coughs
collected in similar settings. Furthermore, our datasets includes
crowdsourced coughs (Virufy, COUGHVID, Coswara) and
PCR-veriﬁed clinical ones (Virufy-India, IATOS). By using
datasets from multiple sources, we hope to ameliorate dataset-
inherent bias. Additionally, our results on varying the sample
size show a trend of increasing performance with increasing
sample size, identifying the need to continue collecting coughs
to improve model performance.
In this study, we compare the performance of a self-
supervised learning (SSL) and CNN approach to a baseline
SVM model. As expected, we ﬁnd that the SVM, a simpler
model, is not able to differentiate the cough signals as well
as the SSL and CNN models. We also compare the SSL
approach that takes advantage of unlabeled coughs with the
more traditional fully-supervised CNN approach. There is a
small difference between the models’ AUCs, with the SSL
approach having a 0.016 higher AUC on the test set, however
the SSL model is slightly skewed toward sensitivity. Currently,
it is unclear which model is better. There can be multiple
improvements made to both models with different types of up-
sampling techniques, hyperparameter tuning, output threshold
tuning, and over-ﬁtting prevention techniques. There can also
be improvements to the pre-processing and feature extraction
steps such as separating the cough segments into individual
samples and concatenating them for a ﬁnal prediction on a
single audio ﬁle. Also, the type of data collected by the Virufy
team, and other teams around the world, can affect model
performance. Another possible next step is to experiment
with a fusion model incorporating predictions from the SSL-
transformer, CNN, SVM, and other approaches to improve
prediction performance.

9
Table III
COVID-19 SCREENING PERFORMANCE IN ACCURACY (ACC), AREA UNDER THE CURVE (AUC), SENSITIVITY (SEN) AND SPECIFICITY (SPEC)
Performance
Model
Cough samples
ACC
AUC
SEN
SPEC
SVM
100% Train Vs Validation
0.79
0.75
0.14
0.96
Self Supervised
100% Train Vs Validation
0.59
0.807
0.89
0.51
Self Supervised
80% Train Vs Validation
0.57
0.797
0.89
0.48
Self Supervised
60% Train Vs Validation
0.66
0.791
0.82
0.61
Self Supervised
40% Train Vs Validation
0.52
0.782
0.90
0.42
Self Supervised
20% Train Vs Validation
0.69
0.763
0.75
0.67
Self Supervised
100% Train Vs Test
N/A
0.791
N/A
N/A
CNN
100% Train Vs Validation
0.75
0.802
0.77
0.74
CNN
80% Train Vs Validation
0.73
0.792
0.78
0.71
CNN
60% Train Vs Validation
0.67
0.795
0.82
0.63
CNN
40% Train Vs Validation
0.66
0.789
0.81
0.61
CNN
20% Train Vs Validation
0.73
0.787
0.75
0.72
CNN
All Train Vs Test
N/A
0.775
N/A
N/A
There are several limitations that should be noted. Previous
studies have demonstrated a higher AUC and other metrics
than the ones that we show in our study. However, our study’s
performance is likely closer to the real-world performance of
such a test due to our larger and more diverse training dataset.
Furthermore, most academic papers regarding COVID-19 clas-
siﬁcation with AI suffer from reproducibility issues, along with
the fact that a lot of papers have only a small validation set, and
no test set, which increases the possibility of biased models.
Another limitation is that the labels from our crowdsourced
training data (72.6% of labeled dataset) are unveriﬁed. This
unveriﬁed data has incorporated error into our models and
will affect the performance in real world environments. Future
work should be done to invest resources in collecting more
PCR-veriﬁed coughs. Lastly, the crowdsourced audio data is
prone to noise that may lead to algorithmic prediction bias. We
try to account for this issue by only including high-quality
data from all sources using an internally developed cough
screening tool. Furthermore, our inclusion of multiple data
sources should reduce the effect of background noise speciﬁc
to datasets.
VI. CONCLUSION
This study is a step forward toward an accurate, reliable, and
accessible audio-based COVID-19 diagnostic test, showing ad-
equate performance on a large and diverse dataset. In addition
to improving model performance, future work should focus
on collecting high-volumes of PCR-validated samples and
assessing the model generalizability to new datasets. Decision-
making errors should be closely studied to understand how
prediction performance is affected by audio recording condi-
tions, patient symptoms, and the time point during the course
of COVID-19 infection.
VII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are very grateful to Mary L. Dunne, M.D., Stanford
University Distinguished Career Institute Fellow, for their
kind guidance with respect to the medical implications of
our research, and Rok Sosic, Stanford University Senior AI
Researcher, for his guidance on team structure and academic
collaboration. We appreciate Siddhi Hedge and Shreya Sriram
for their amazing enthusiasm and hard work in facilitating
clinical cough data collection from COVID-19 tested patients.
M. Pilanci is partially supported by the National Science
Foundation, and the U.S. Army Research Ofﬁce. This study
was supported by the Amazon Web Services Diagnostic De-
velopment Initiative.
