Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 33 (2008) 349-402
Submitted 05/08; published 11/08
Learning Partially Observable Deterministic Action Models
Eyal Amir

Computer Science Department
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801, USA
Allen Chang

2020 Latham st., apartment 25
Mountainview, CA 94040, USA
Abstract
We present exact algorithms for identifying deterministic-actions’ effects and preconditions in
dynamic partially observable domains. They apply when one does not know the action model (the
way actions affect the world) of a domain and must learn it from partial observations over time.
Such scenarios are common in real world applications. They are challenging for AI tasks because
traditional domain structures that underly tractability (e.g., conditional independence) fail there
(e.g., world features become correlated). Our work departs from traditional assumptions about
partial observations and action models. In particular, it focuses on problems in which actions are
deterministic of simple logical structure and observation models have all features observed with
some frequency. We yield tractable algorithms for the modiﬁed problem for such domains.
Our algorithms take sequences of partial observations over time as input, and output determin-
istic action models that could have lead to those observations. The algorithms output all or one of
those models (depending on our choice), and are exact in that no model is misclassiﬁed given the
observations. Our algorithms take polynomial time in the number of time steps and state features
for some traditional action classes examined in the AI-planning literature, e.g., STRIPS actions. In
contrast, traditional approaches for HMMs and Reinforcement Learning are inexact and exponen-
tially intractable for such domains. Our experiments verify the theoretical tractability guarantees,
and show that we identify action models exactly. Several applications in planning, autonomous
exploration, and adventure-game playing already use these results. They are also promising for
probabilistic settings, partially observable reinforcement learning, and diagnosis.
1. Introduction
Partially observable domains are common in the real world. They involve situations in which one
cannot observe the entire state of the world. Many examples of such situations are available from
all walks of life, e.g., the physical worlds (we do not observe the position of items in other rooms),
the Internet (we do not observe more than a few web pages at a time), and inter-personal communi-
cations (we do not observe the state of mind of our partners).
Autonomous agents’ actions involve a special kind of partial observability in such domains.
When agents explore a new domain (e.g., one goes into a building or meets a new person), they
have limited knowledge about their action models (actions’ preconditions and effects). These ac-
tion models do not change with time, but they may depend on state features. Such agents can act
intelligently, if they learn how their actions affect the world and use this knowledge to respond to
their goals.
c⃝2008 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

AMIR & CHANG
Learning action models is important when goals change. When an agent acted for a while, it can
use its accumulated knowledge about actions in the domain to make better decisions. Thus, learning
action models differs from Reinforcement Learning. It enables reasoning about actions instead of
expensive trials in the world.
Learning actions’ effects and preconditions is difﬁcult in partially observable domains. The
difﬁculty stems from the absence of useful conditional independence structures in such domains.
Most fully observable domains include such structures, e.g., the Markov property (independence of
the state at time t + 1 from the state at time t −1, given the (observed) state at time t). These are
fundamental to tractable solutions of learning and decision making.
In partially observable domains those structures fail (e.g., the state of the world at time t + 1
depends on the state at time t −1 because we do not observe the state at time t), and complex
approximate approaches are the only feasible path. For these reasons, much work so far has been
limited to fully observable domains (e.g., Wang, 1995; Pasula, Zettlemoyer, & Kaelbling, 2004),
hill-climbing (EM) approaches that have unbounded error in deterministic domains (e.g., Ghahra-
mani, 2001; Boyen, Friedman, & Koller, 1999), and approximate action models (Dawsey, Minsker,
& Amir, 2007; Hill, Minsker, & Amir, 2007; Kuffner. & LaValle, 2000; Thrun, 2003).
This paper examines the application of an old-new structure to learning in partially observable
domains, namely, determinism and logical formulation. It focuses on some such deterministic do-
mains in which tractable learning is feasible, and shows that a traditional assumption about the form
of determinism (the STRIPS assumption, generalized to ADL, Pednault, 1989) leads to tractable
learning and state estimation. Learning in such domains has immediate applications (e.g., explo-
ration by planning, Shahaf, Chang, & Amir, 2006; Chang & Amir, 2006) and it can also serve as
the basis for learning in stochastic domains. Thus, a fundamental advance in the application of
such a structure is important for opening the ﬁeld to new approaches of broader applicability. The
following details the technical aspects of our advance.
The main contribution of this paper is an approach called SLAF (Simultaneous Learning and
Filtering) for exact learning of actions models in partially observable deterministic domains. This
approach determines the set of possible transition relations, given an execution sequence of actions
and partial observations. For example, the input could come from watching another agent act or
from watching the results of our own actions’ execution. The approach is online, and updates a
propositional logical formula called Transition Belief Formula. This formula represents the possible
transition relations and world states at every time step. In this way, it is similar in spirit to Bayesian
learning of HMMs (e.g., Ghahramani, 2001) and Logical Filtering (Amir & Russell, 2003).
The algorithms that we present differ in their range of applicability and their computational
complexity. First, we present a deduction-based algorithm that is applicable to any nondeterministic
learning problem, but that takes time that is worst-case exponential in the number of domain ﬂuents.
Then, we present algorithms that update a logical encoding of all consistent transition relations in
polynomial time per step, but that are limited in applicability to special classes of deterministic
actions.
One set of polynomial-time algorithms that we present applies to action-learning scenarios in
which actions are ADL (Pednault, 1989) (with no conditional effects) and one of the following
holds: (a) the action model already has preconditions known, and we observe action failures (e.g.,
when we perform actions in the domain), or (b) actions execution always succeeds (e.g., when an
expert or tutor performs actions).
350

LEARNING PARTIALLY OBSERVABLE DETERMINISTIC ACTION MODELS
Our algorithms output a transition belief formula that represents the possible transition relations
and states after partial observations of the state and actions. They do so by updating each component
of the formula separately in linear time. Thus, updating the transition belief formula with every
action execution and observation takes linear time in the size of the input formula.
Processing a sequence of T action executions and observations takes time O(T 2 · n) for case
(b). The main reason for this is a linear growth in the representation size of the transition belief
formula: at time t, the iterative process that updates this formula would process a formula that has
size linear in t.
For case (a) processing a sequence of length T takes polynomial time O(T · nk)), only if we
observe every feature in the domain every ≤k steps in expectation, for some ﬁxed k. The reason for
this is that the transition belief formula can be kept in k-CNF (k Conjunctive Normal Form), thus
of size O(nk). (Recall that a propositional formula is in k-CNF, if it is of the form V
i≤m
W
j≤k li,j,
with every li,j a propositional variable or its negation.) Case (b) takes time O(T · n) under the same
assumption.
Another set of polynomial-time algorithms that we present takes linear time in the representation
size. In this case actions are known to be injective, i.e., map states 1:1. There, we can bound
the computation time for T steps with O(T · nk), if we approximate the transition-belief formula
representation with a k-CNF formula.
In contrast, work on learning in Dynamic Bayesian Networks (e.g., Boyen et al., 1999), re-
inforcement learning in POMDPs (e.g., Littman, 1996), and Inductive Logic Programming (ILP)
(e.g., Wang, 1995) either approximate the solution with unbounded error for deterministic domains,
or take time Ω(22n), and are inapplicable in domains larger than 10 features. Our algorithms are
better in this respect, and scale polynomially and practically to domains of 100’s of features and
more. Section 8 provides a comparison with these and other works.
We conduct a set of experiments that verify these theoretical results. These experiments show
that our algorithms are faster and better qualitatively than related approaches. For example, we can
learn some ADL actions’ effects in domains of > 100 features exactly and efﬁciently.
An important distinction must be made between learning action models and traditional creation
of AI-Planning operators. From the perspective of AI Planning, action models are the result of
explicit modeling, taking into account modeling decisions. In contrast, learning action models
is deducing all possible transition relations that are compatible with a set of partially observed
execution trajectories.
In particular, action preconditions are typically used by the knowledge engineer to control the
granularity of the action model so as to leave aside from speciﬁcation unwanted cases. For example,
if driving a truck with insufﬁcient fuel from one site to another might generate unexpected situations
that the modeller does not want to consider, then a simple precondition can be used to avoid con-
sidering that case. The intention in this paper is not to mimic this modeling perspective, but instead
ﬁnd action models that generate sound states when starting from a sound state. Sound state is any
state in which the system can be in practice, namely, ones that our observations of real executions
can reﬂect.
Our technical advance for deterministic domains is important for many applications such as
automatic software interfaces, internet agents, virtual worlds, and games. Other applications, such
as robotics, human-computer interfaces, and program and machine diagnosis can use deterministic
action models as approximations. Finally, understanding the deterministic case better can help us
351

AMIR & CHANG
develop better results for stochastic domains, e.g., using approaches such as those by Boutilier,
Reiter, and Price (2001), Hajishirzi and Amir (2007).
In the following, Section 2 deﬁnes SLAF precisely, Section 3 provides a deduction-based exact
SLAF algorithm, Section 4 presents tractable action-model-update algorithms, Section 5 gives suf-
ﬁcient conditions and algorithms for keeping the action-model representation compact (thus, overall
polynomial time), and Section 7 presents experimental results.
2. Simultaneous Learning and Filtering (SLAF)
Simultaneous Learning and Filtering (SLAF) is the problem of tracking a dynamic system from
a sequence of time steps and partial observations, when we do not have the system’s complete
dynamics initially. A solution for SLAF is a representation of all combinations of action models
that could possibly have given rise to the observations in the input, and a representation of all the
corresponding states in which the system may now be (after the sequence of time steps that were
given in the input occurs).
Computing (the solution for) SLAF can be done in a recursive fashion by dynamic programming
in which we determine SLAF for time step t+1 from our solution of SLAF for time t. In this section
we deﬁne SLAF formally in such a recursive fashion.
Ignoring stochastic information or assumptions, SLAF involves determining the set of possible
ways in which actions can change the world (the possible transition models, deﬁned formally below)
and the set of states the system might be in. Any transition model determines a set of possible states,
so a solution to SLAF is a transition model and its associated possible states.
We deﬁne SLAF with the following formal tools, borrowing intuitions from work on Bayesian
learning of Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) (Ghahramani, 2001) and Logical Filtering (Amir &
Russell, 2003).
Deﬁnition 2.1 A transition system is a tuple ⟨P, S, A, R⟩, where
• P is a ﬁnite set of propositional ﬂuents;
• S ⊆Pow(P) is the set of world states.
• A is a ﬁnite set of actions;
• R ⊆S × A × S is the transition relation (transition model).
Thus, a world state, s ∈S, is a subset of P that contains propositions true in this state (omitted
propositions are false in that state), and R(s, a, s′) means that state s′ is a possible result of action a
in state s. Our goal in this paper is to ﬁnd R, given known P, S, A, and a sequence of actions and
partial observations (logical sentences on any subset of P).
Another, equivalent, representation for S that we will also use in this paper is the following.
A literal is a proposition, p ∈P, or its negation, ¬p. A complete term over P is a conjunction of
literals from P such that every ﬂuent appears exactly once. Every state corresponds to a complete
term of P and vice versa. For that reason, we sometime identify a state s ∈S with this term. E.g.,
for states s1, s2, s1∨s2 is the disjunction of the complete terms corresponding to s1, s2, respectively.
A transition belief state is a set of tuples ⟨s, R⟩where s is a state and R a transition relation.
Let R = Pow(S × A × S) be the set of all possible transition relations on S, A. Let S = S × R.
When we hold a transition belief state ρ ⊆S we consider every tuple ⟨s, R⟩∈ρ possible.
352

LEARNING PARTIALLY OBSERVABLE DETERMINISTIC ACTION MODELS
Figure 1: Locked door with unknown key domain.
Example 2.2 Consider a domain where an agent is in a room with a locked door (see Figure 1).
In its possession are three different keys, and suppose the agent cannot tell from observation only
which key opens the door. The goal of the agent is to unlock the door.
This domain can be represented as follows: let the set of variables deﬁning the state space
be P = {locked} where locked is true if and only if the door is locked. Let the set of states be
S = {s1, s2} where s1 = {locked} (the state in which the door is locked) and s2 = {} (here the
door is unlocked). Let A = {unlock1, unlock2, unlock3} be the three actions wherein the agent
tries unlocking the door using each of the three keys.
Let R1 = {⟨s1, unlock1, s2⟩, ⟨s1, unlock2, s1⟩, ⟨s1, unlock3, s1⟩} represent a transition rela-
tion in which key 1 unlocks the door and the other keys do not. Deﬁne R2 and R3 in a similar
fashion (e.g., with R2 key 2 unlocks the door and keys 1 and 3 do not). A transition belief state
represents the set of possibilities that we consider consistent with our observations so far. Consider
a transition belief state given by ρ = {⟨s1, R1⟩, ⟨s1, R2⟩, ⟨s1, R3⟩}, i.e., the state of the world is
fully known but the action model is only partially known.
We would like the agent to be able to open the door despite not knowing which key opens it. To
do this, the agent will learn the actual action model (i.e., which key opens the door). In general, not
only will learning an action model be useful in achieving an immediate goal, but such knowledge
will be useful as the agent attempts to perform other tasks in the same domain.2
Deﬁnition 2.3 (SLAF Semantics) Let ρ ⊆S be a transition belief state. The SLAF of ρ with
actions and observations ⟨aj, oj⟩1≤j≤t is deﬁned by
1. SLAF[a](ρ) =
{⟨s′, R⟩| ⟨s, a, s′⟩∈R, ⟨s, R⟩∈ρ};
2. SLAF[o](ρ) = {⟨s, R⟩∈ρ | o is true in s};
3. SLAF[⟨aj, oj⟩i≤j≤t](ρ) =
SLAF[⟨aj, oj⟩i+1≤j≤t](SLAF[oi](SLAF[ai](ρ))).
Step 1 is progression with a, and Step 2 ﬁltering with o.
Example 2.4 Consider the domain from Example 2.2. The progression of ρ on the action unlock1
is given by SLAF[unlock1](ρ) = {⟨s2, R1⟩, ⟨s1, R2⟩, ⟨s1, R3⟩}. Likewise, the ﬁltering of ρ on the
observation ¬locked (the door became unlocked) is given by SLAF[¬locked](ρ) = {⟨s2, R1⟩}.2
353

AMIR & CHANG
Example 2.5 A slightly more involved example is the following situation presented in Figure 2.
There, we have two rooms, a light bulb, a switch, an action of ﬂipping the switch, and an observa-
tion, E (we are in the east room). The real states of the world before and after the action, s2, s2′,
respectively (shown in the top part), are not known to us.
West
East
off
off
=⇒
West
East
on
on
s2 = ¬sw ∧¬lit ∧E
sw-on
s2′ = sw ∧lit ∧E
<s1,R1>
<s2,R2>
<s3,R3>
<s2’,R2>
<s1’’,R1>
<s3’,R3>
<s1’,R1>
ρ1
ρ2
Figure 2: Top: Two rooms and ﬂipping the light switch. Bottom: SLAF semantics; progressing
an action (the arrows map state-transition pairs) and then ﬁltering with an observation
(crossing out some pairs).
The bottom of Figure 2 demonstrates how knowledge evolves after performing the action sw-on.
There, ρ1 = {⟨s1, R1⟩, ⟨s2, R2⟩, ⟨s3, R3⟩} for some s1, R1, s3, R3, s2 = {E}, and R2 that in-
cludes ⟨s2, sw-on, s′
2⟩(the identity and full details of R1, R2, R3 are irrelevant here, so we omit
them). ρ2 is the resulting transition belief state after action sw-on and observation E: ρ2 =
SLAF[sw-on, E](ρ1). 2
We assume that observations (and an observation model relating observations to state ﬂuents)
are given to us as logical sentences over ﬂuents after performing an action. They are denoted with
o.
This approach to transition belief states generalizes Version Spaces of action models (e.g.,
Wang, 1995) as follows: If the current state, s, is known, then the version space’s lattice contains
the set of transition relations ρs = {R | ⟨s, R⟩∈ρ}. Thus, from the perspective of version spaces,
SLAF semantics is equivalent to a set of version spaces, one for each state in which we might be.
This semantics also generalizes belief states: If the transition relation, R, is known, then the
belief state (set of possible states) is ρR = {s | ⟨s, R⟩∈ρ} (read ρ restricted to R), and Logical
Filtering (Amir & Russell, 2003) of belief state σ and action a is equal to (thus, we can deﬁne it as)
Filter[a](σ) = (SLAF[a]({⟨s, R⟩| s ∈σ}))R.
Thus, SLAF semantics is equivalent to holding a set of belief states, each conditioned on a transition
relation, similar to saying “if the transition relation is R, then the belief state (set of states) is σR”.
3. Learning by Logical Inference
Learning transition models using Deﬁnition 2.3 directly is intractable – it requires space Ω(22|P|)
in many cases. The reason for that is the explicit representation of the very large set of possible
transition-state pairs. Instead, in this section and the rest of this paper we represent transition be-
lief states more compactly using propositional logic. In many scenarios there is some amount of
structure that can be exploited to make a propositional representation compact.
354

LEARNING PARTIALLY OBSERVABLE DETERMINISTIC ACTION MODELS
A combinatorial argument implies that no encoding is compact for all sets. Nonetheless, we are
motivated by the success of propositional (logical) approaches for logical ﬁltering (Amir & Russell,
2003; Shahaf & Amir, 2007) and logical-database regression (Reiter, 1991, 2001), and observe that
propositional logic represents compactly some natural sets of exponential size.
In this section we re-deﬁne SLAF as an operation on propositional logical formulas with a
propositional formula as output. SLAF’s input is a propositional formula that represents a transition
belief state, and SLAF computes a new transition belief formula from that input and a sequence of
actions and observations.
We want to ﬁnd algorithms for SLAF that manipulate an input formula and produce a correct
output. We use general-purpose logical inference for this task in this section. In later sections we
sidestep expensive general-purpose inference, and make assumptions that lead to tractable algo-
rithms. For the rest of this paper we focus on deterministic transition relations, namely, transition
relations that are partial functions (every action has at most one outcome state for every state).
3.1 Representing Transition Relations in Logic
Our initial algorithm for solving SLAF (to be presented momentarily) does so with a compact
representation of transition belief states. We present this logical encoding of transition belief states
ﬁrst, and deﬁne a deduction-based algorithm in the next section.
We use the following general terminology for propositional logical languages (all the termino-
logical conventions apply with or without subscripts and superscripts). L denotes a vocabulary, i.e.,
a set of propositional variables that we use in the present context. L denotes a language, i.e., a set
of propositional sentences. ϕ, ψ, and other script Greek letters stand for propositional formulas in
the language of the present context. F, G also stand for such formulas, but in a restricted context
(see below). L(ϕ) denotes the vocabulary of ϕ. L(L) denotes the language built from propositions
in L using the standard propositional connectives (¬, ∨, ∧,...). L(ϕ) is a shorthand for L(L(ϕ)).
We represent deterministic transition relations with a propositional vocabulary, LA, whose
propositions are of the form aF
G, for a ∈A, F a literal over P, and G a logical formula. F is
the effect of aF
G, and G is the precondition of aF
G. When proposition aF
G takes the truth value TRUE,
this has the intended meaning that “If G holds in the present state, then F holds in the state that
results from executing a”.
We let F ⊆P ∪{¬p | p ∈P} be the set of all effects, F, that we consider. We let G be the
set of all preconditions, G, that we consider. In the rest of this section and Section 4 we assume
that G represents a single state in S. Recall that we identify a state with a complete term which is
the conjunction of literals that hold in that state. We use this representation of states and write aF
s
instead of aF
G. Later we build on this deﬁnition and consider G’s that are more general formulas.
From our assumption (G ≡S for now, as stated above) we conclude that LA has O(2|P| · 2|P| ·
|A|) propositional variables. We prove fundamental results for this language and a set of axioms,
disregarding the size of the language for a moment. Section 5 focuses on decreasing the language
size for computational efﬁciency.
Our semantics for vocabulary LA lets every interpretation (truth assignment), M, for LA cor-
respond with a transition relation, RM. Every transition relation has at least one (possibly more)
interpretation that corresponds to it, so this correspondence is surjective (onto) but not injective
(1-to-1). Every propositional sentence ϕ ∈L(LA) speciﬁes a set of transition models as follows:
355

AMIR & CHANG
The set of models1 (satisfying interpretations) of ϕ, I[ϕ] = {M interpretation to LA | M |= ϕ},
speciﬁes the corresponding set of transition relations, {RM | M ∈I[ϕ]}.
Informally, assume that propositions aF1
s , ...aFk
s
∈LA take the value TRUE in M, and that all
other propositions with precondition s take the value FALSE. Then, RM (with action a) takes the
state s to a state s′ that satisﬁes V
i≤k Fi, and is identical to s otherwise. If no such s′ exists (e.g.,
Fi = ¬Fj, for some i, j ≤k), then RM takes s to no s′ (thus, a is not executable in s according to
RM).
The following paragraphs show how interpretations over LA correspond to transition relations.
They culminate with a precise deﬁnition of the correspondence between formulas in L(LA ∪P) and
transition belief states ρ ⊆S.
EVERY INTERPRETATION OF LA CORRESPONDS TO A UNIQUE TRANSITION RELATION
Every interpretations of LA deﬁnes a unique transition relation RM as follows. Let M be an inter-
pretation of LA. For every state s ∈S and an action a ∈A we either deﬁne a unique state s′ such
that ⟨s, a, s′⟩∈RM or decide that there is no s′ for which ⟨s, a, s′⟩∈RM.
M gives an interpretation for every proposition aF
s , for F a ﬂuent or its negation. If for any
ﬂuent p ∈P, M[ap
s] = M[a¬p
s ] = TRUE (M[ϕ] is the truth value of ϕ according to interpretation
M), we decide that there is no s′ such that ⟨s, a, s′⟩∈RM. Otherwise, deﬁne
s′ = {p ∈P | M |= ap
s} ∪{p ∈s | M |= ¬a¬p
s }
In the left-hand side of ∪we consider the cases of p ∈P for which M[ap
s] ̸= M[a¬p
s ], and on the
right-hand side of ∪we treat the cases of p ∈P for which M[ap
s] = M[a¬p
s ] = FALSE (this is
called inertia because p keeps its previous value for lack of other speciﬁcations). Put another way,
s′[p] = M[ap
s] ∨(s[p] ∧¬M[a¬p
s ]), if we view s′ as an interpretation of P. RM is well deﬁned, i.e.,
there is only one RM for every M.
EVERY TRANSITION RELATION HAS AT LEAST ONE CORRESPONDING INTERPRETATION OF
LA
It is possible that RM = RM′ for M ̸= M ′. This occurs in two circumstances: (a) cases in which
there is no ⟨s, a, s′⟩∈RM for some s, a and (b) when M[ap
s] = M[a¬p
s ] = FALSE (inertia) and
M′[ap
s] = s[p], M ′[a¬p
s ] = s[¬p] (not inertia).
For an example of the ﬁrst circumstance, let p be a ﬂuent, let M be an interpretation such that
M[ap
s] = M[a¬p
s ] for some G. Deﬁne M ′ an interpretation that is identical to M on all propositions
besides ap
s, a¬p
s
as follows. Deﬁne M ′[ap
s] to have the opposite truth assignment to M[ap
s] (FALSE
instead of TRUE, and TRUE instead of FALSE). Deﬁne M ′[a¬p
s ] = M[a¬p
s ].
Then, RM = RM′ because they map all pairs s, a in the same way. In particular, for state s that
corresponds to G, there is no ⟨s, a, s′⟩∈RM and similarly there is no ⟨s, a, s′⟩∈RM′.
Finally, every transition relation R has at least one interpretation M such that R = RM. To see
this, deﬁne MR for every ⟨s, a, s′⟩∈R the interpretation to ap
s (p any ﬂuent) MR[ap
s] = TRUE iff
p ∈s′. Also, for the same ⟨s, a, s′⟩deﬁne MR[a¬p
s ] = FALSE iff p /∈s′. Finally, for all s, a for
which there is no such s′, deﬁne MR[ap
s] = MR[a¬p
s ] = TRUE. Then, R = RMR.
1. We overload the word model for multiple related meanings. model refers to a satisfying interpretation of a logical
formula. Transition model is deﬁned in Deﬁnition 2.1 to be a transition relation in a transition system. Action model
is deﬁne in the Introduction section to be any well-deﬁned speciﬁcation of actions’ preconditions and effects.
356

LEARNING PARTIALLY OBSERVABLE DETERMINISTIC ACTION MODELS
EVERY TRANSITION RELATION DEFINES A FORMULA OVER LA
Every deterministic transition relation R deﬁnes a logical formula whose set of models all map
to R. There are many such possible formulas, and we deﬁne the most general one (up to logical
equivalence) that does not make use of inertia.
Deﬁne Th(R) as follows.
Th0(R) = {aF
s , ¬a¬F
s
| aF
s ∈LA, ⟨s, a, s′⟩∈R, s′ |= F}
Th1(R) = {ap
s ∨a¬p
s
| p ∈P, s ∈S}
Th2(R) = {W
p∈P(ap
s ∧a¬p
s ) | ¬∃s′, ⟨s, a, s′⟩∈R}
Th(R) = Th0(R) ∪Th1(R) ∪Th2
Th0 addresses ﬂuent changes, Th1 addresses ﬂuent innertia (effectively disallowing innertia in
our deﬁnition), and Th2 addresses conditions in which actions are not executable. Thus, Th(R)
includes as a model M every interpretation that satisﬁes RM = R and that requires no inertia for
its deﬁnition of RM. It represents R in that each of its models M satisﬁes RM = R.
It is illuminating to see how our modeling decisions (above and throughout this section) lead
to the last deﬁnition. On the one hand, we choose to have every interpretation of LA correspond
to a transition relation (we do this to simplify later arguments about logical entailment). Conse-
quently, we associate interpretations M with M[aF
s ] = M[a¬F
s
] = FALSE with transition rela-
tions R(s, a, s′) that keep the value of F ﬁxed between s, s′ (this is inertia for F in a, s). On the
other hand, when we deﬁne Th(R) above, we choose axioms that exclude such models (thus, we
avoid models that include inertia) because it simpliﬁes our later discussion of learning algorithms.
In summary, we consider every interpretation of LA as representing exactly one transition rela-
tion, and we consider the set of axioms deﬁning R as those that deﬁne it directly, i.e., without inertia
(without M[aF
s ] = M[a¬F
s
] = FALSE).
TRANSITION BELIEF STATES CORRESPOND TO FORMULAS OVER LA ∪P
Thus, for every transition belief state ρ we can deﬁne a formula in L(LA ∪P) that corresponds to
it: Th(ρ) = W
⟨s,R⟩∈ρ(s ∧Th(R)). Other formulas exist that would characterize ρ in a similar way,
and they are not all equivalent. This is so because there are stronger formulas ϕ ∈L(LA) such that
ϕ |= Th(R) and Th(R) ̸|= ϕ and every model, M, of ϕ satisﬁes RM = R.
Similarly, for every formula ϕ ∈L(LA ∪P) we deﬁne a transition belief state ρ(ϕ) = {⟨M ↾P
, RM⟩| M |= ϕ, }, i.e., all the state-transition pairs that satisfy ϕ (M ↾P is M restricted to
P, viewed as a complete term over P). We say that formula ϕ is a transition belief formula, if
Th(ρ(ϕ)) ≡ϕ (note: ρ(Th(ρ)) = ρ always holds).
3.2 Transition-Formula Filtering
In this section, we show that computing the transition belief formula for SLAF[a](ϕ) for successful
action a and transition belief formula ϕ is equivalent to a logical consequence ﬁnding operation.
This characterization of SLAF as consequence-ﬁnding permits using consequence ﬁnding as an
algorithm for SLAF, and is important later in this paper for proving the correctness of our more
tractable, specialized algorithms.
Let CnL(ϕ) denote the set of logical consequences of ϕ restricted to vocabulary L. That is,
CnL(ϕ) contains the set of prime implicates of ϕ that contain only propositions from the set L.
357

AMIR & CHANG
Recall that an implicate α of a formula ϕ is a clause entailed by ϕ (ϕ |= α). Recall that a prime im-
plicate α of a formula ϕ is an implicate of ϕ that is not subsumed (entailed) by any other implicates
of ϕ.
Consequence ﬁnding is any process that computes CnL(ϕ) for an input, ϕ. For example, propo-
sitional resolution (Davis & Putnam, 1960; Chang & Lee, 1973) is an efﬁcient consequence ﬁnder
when used properly (Lee, 1967; del Val, 1999) (Marquis, 2000, surveys results about prime impli-
cates and consequence ﬁnding algorithms). Thus, CnL(ϕ) ≡{ψ ∈L(L)| ϕ |= ψ}.
For a set of propositions P, let P′ represent the same set of propositions but with every propo-
sition primed (i.e., each proposition f is annotated to become f ′). Typically, we will use a primed
ﬂuent to denote the value of the unprimed ﬂuent one step into the future after taking an action. Let
ϕ[P′/P] denote the same formula as ϕ, but with all primed ﬂuents replaced by their unprimed coun-
terparts. For example, the formula (a ∨b′)[P′/P] is equal to a ∨b when b ∈P. (See Section 8 for a
discussion and comparison with relevant formal veriﬁcation techniques.)
The following lemma shows the logical equivalence of existential quantiﬁcation of quantiﬁed
boolean formulas and consequence ﬁnding restricted to a vocabulary. Recall that quantiﬁed boolean
formulas (QBF) are propositional formulas with the addition of existential and universal quantiﬁers
over propositions. Informally, the QBF ∃x.ϕ is true for a given interpretation if and only if there
exists some true/false valuation of x that makes ϕ true under the assignment. The lemma will prove
useful for showing the equivalence between SLAF and consequence-ﬁnding.
Lemma 3.1 ∃x.ϕ ≡CnL(ϕ)\{x}(ϕ), for any propositional logic formula ϕ and propositional vari-
able x.
PROOF
See Section B.1. 2
The lemma extends easily to the case of multiple variables:
Corollary 3.2 For any formula ϕ and set of propositional variables X, ∃X.ϕ ≡CnL(ϕ)\X(ϕ).
We present an algorithm for updating transition belief formulas whose output is equivalent to
that of SLAF (when SLAF is applied to the equivalent transition belief state). Our algorithm applies
consequence ﬁnding to the input transition belief formula together with a set of axioms that deﬁne
transitions between time steps. We present this set of axioms ﬁrst.
For a deterministic (possibly conditional) action, a, the action model of a (for time t) is axiom-
atized as
Teff(a) = V
l∈F,G∈G((al
G ∧G) ⇒l′) ∧
V
l∈F(l′ ⇒(W
G∈G(al
G ∧G)))
(1)
The ﬁrst part of (1) says that assuming a executes at time t, and it causes l when G holds, and G
holds at time t, then l holds at time t + 1. The second part says that if l holds after a’s execution,
then it must be that al
G holds and also G holds in the current state. These two parts are very similar
to (in fact, somewhat generalize) effect axioms and explanation closure axioms used in the Situation
Calculus (see McCarthy & Hayes, 1969; Reiter, 2001).
Now, we are ready to describe our zeroth-level algorithm (SLAF0) for SLAF of a transition
belief formula. Let L′ = P′∪LA be the vocabulary that includes only ﬂuents of time t+1 and effect
propositions from LA. Recall (Deﬁnition 2.3) that SLAF has two operations: progression (with an
action) and ﬁltering (with an observation). At time t we apply progression for the given action at
and current transition belief formula, ϕt, and then apply ﬁltering with the current observations:
358

LEARNING PARTIALLY OBSERVABLE DETERMINISTIC ACTION MODELS
ϕt+1 = SLAF0[at, ot](ϕt) = (CnL′(ϕt ∧Teff(at)))[P′/P] ∧ot
(2)
This is identical to Deﬁnition 2.3 (SLAF semantics), with the above replacing 1 and 2.
As stated above, for SLAF0 we can implement CnL′(ϕ) using consequence ﬁnding algorithms
such as resolution and some of its variants (e.g., Simon & del Val, 2001; McIlraith & Amir, 2001;
Lee, 1967; Iwanuma & Inoue, 2002). The following theorem shows that this formula-SLAF algo-
rithm is correct and exact.
Theorem 3.3 (Representation) For ϕ transition belief formula, a action,
SLAF[a]({⟨s, R⟩∈S | ⟨s, R⟩satisﬁes ϕ}) =
{⟨s, R⟩∈S | ⟨s, R⟩satisﬁes SLAF0[a](ϕ)}
PROOF
See Section B.2. 2
This theorem allows us to identify SLAF0 with SLAF, and we do so throughout the rest of the
paper. In particular, we show that polynomial-time algorithms for SLAF in special cases are correct
by showing that their output is logically equivalent to that of SLAF0.
USING THE OUTPUT OF SLAF0
The output of any algorithm for SLAF of a transition belief formula is a logical formula. The way
to use this formula for answering questions about SLAF depends on the query and the form of the
output formula. When we wish to ﬁnd if a transition model and state are possible, we wish to see if
M |= ϕ, for M an interpretation of L = P ∪LA and ϕ the output of SLAF0.
The answer can be found by a simple model-checking algorithm2. For example, to check that
an interpretation satisﬁes a logical formula we assign the truth values of the variables in the inter-
pretation into the formula; computing the truth value of the formula can be done in linear time.
Thus, this type of query from SLAF takes linear time in the size of the output formula from
SLAF because the ﬁnal query is about a propositional interpretation and a propositional formula.
When we wish to ﬁnd if a transition model is possible or if a state is possible, we can do so with
propositional satisﬁability (SAT) solver algorithms (e.g., Moskewicz, Madigan, Zhao, Zhang, &
Malik, 2001). Similarly, when we wish to answer whether all the possible models satisfy a property
we can use a SAT solver.
Example 3.4 Recall Example 2.4 in which we discuss a locked door and three combinations. Let
ϕ0 = locked, and let ϕ1 = SLAF0[unlock2, locked](ϕ0). We wish to ﬁnd if ϕ1 implies that trying
to unlock the door with key 2 fails to open it. This is equivalent to asking if all models consistent
with ϕ1 give the value TRUE to unlock2locked
locked.
We can answer such a query by taking the SLAF0 output formula, ϕ1, and checking if ϕ1 ∧
¬unlock2locked
locked is SAT (has a model). (Follows from the Deduction Theorem for propositional logic:
ϕ |= ψ iff ϕ ∧¬ψ is not SAT.)
One example application of this approach is the goal achievement algorithm of Chang and Amir
(2006). It relies on SAT algorithms to ﬁnd potential plans given partial knowledge encoded as a
transition belief formula.
2. This is not model checking in the sense used in the Formal Veriﬁcation literature. There, the model is a transition
model, and checking is done by updating a formula in OBDD with some transformations
359

AMIR & CHANG
Our zeroth-level algorithm may enable more compact representation, but it does not guarantee
it, nor does it guarantee tractable computation. In fact, no algorithm can maintain compact repre-
sentation or tractable computation in general. Deciding if a clause is true as a result of SLAF is
coNP-hard because the similar decision problem for Logical Filtering is coNP-hard (Eiter & Got-
tlob, 1992; Amir & Russell, 2003) even for deterministic actions. (The input representation for
both problems includes an initial belief state formula in CNF. The input representation for Filtering
includes further a propositional encoding in CNF of the (known) transition relation.)
Also, any representation of transition belief states that uses poly(|P|) propositions grows expo-
nentially (in the number of time steps and |P|) for some starting transition belief states and action
sequences, when actions are allowed to be nondeterministic3. The question of whether such expo-
nential growth must happen with deterministic actions and ﬂat formula representations (e.g., CNF,
DNF, etc.; see Darwiche & Marquis, 2002) is open (logical circuits are known to give a solution
for deterministic actions, when a representation is given in terms of ﬂuents at time 0, Shahaf et al.,
2006).
4. Factored Formula Update
Update of any representation is hard when it must consider the set of interactions between all parts
of the representation. Operations like those used in SLAF0 consider such interactions, manipulate
them, and add many more interactions as a result. When processing can be broken into independent
pieces, computation scales up linearly with the number of pieces (i.e., computation time is the
total of times it takes for each piece separately). So, it is important to ﬁnd decompositions that
enable such independent pieces and computation. Hereforth we examine one type of decomposition,
namely, one that follows logical connectives.
Learning world models is easier when SLAF distributes over logical connectives. A function,
f, distributes over a logical connective, · ∈{∨, ∧, ...}, if f(ϕ · ψ) ≡f(ϕ) · f(ψ). Computation of
SLAF becomes tractable, when it distributes over ∧, ∨. The bottleneck of computation in that case
becomes computing SLAF for each part separately.
In this section we examine conditions that guarantee such distribution, and present a linear-time
algorithm that gives an exact solution in those cases. We will also show that the same algorithm
gives a weaker transition belief formula when such distribution is not possible.
Distribution properties that always hold for SLAF follow from set theoretical considerations and
Theorem 3.3:
Theorem 4.1 For ϕ, ψ transition belief formulas, a action,
SLAF[a](ϕ ∨ψ) ≡SLAF[a](ϕ) ∨SLAF[a](ψ)
|= SLAF[a](ϕ ∧ψ) ⇒SLAF[a](ϕ) ∧SLAF[a](ψ)
PROOF
See Appendix B.3. 2
Stronger distribution properties hold for SLAF whenever they hold for Logical Filtering.
Theorem 4.2 Let ρ1, ρ2 be transition belief states.
SLAF[a](ρ1 ∩ρ2) = SLAF[a](ρ1) ∩SLAF[a](ρ2)
3. This follows from a theorem about ﬁltering by Amir and Russell (2003), even if we provide a proper axiomatization
(note that our axiomatization above is for deterministic actions only).
360

LEARNING PARTIALLY OBSERVABLE DETERMINISTIC ACTION MODELS
iff for every R
Filter[a](ρR
1 ∩ρR
2 ) = Filter[a](ρR
1 ) ∩Filter[a](ρR
2 ).
We conclude the following corollary from Theorems 3.3, 4.2 and theorems by Amir and Russell
(2003).
Corollary 4.3 For ϕ, ψ transition belief formulas, a action, SLAF[a](ϕ ∧ψ) ≡SLAF[a](ϕ) ∧
SLAF[a](ψ) if for every relation R in ρϕ,ρψ one of the following holds:
1. a in R maps states 1:1
2. a in R has no conditional effects, ϕ ∧ψ includes all its prime implicates, and we observe if a
fails
3. The state is known for R: for at most one s, ⟨s, R⟩∈ρϕ ∪ρψ.
Condition 2 combines semantics and syntax. It is particularly useful in the correct computation
of SLAF in later sections. It states when ϕ ∧ψ has a particular syntactic form (namely, together
they include their joint prime implicates), and a is simple enough (but not necessarily 1:1), then
computation of SLAF can be broken into separate SLAF of ϕ and ψ.
Figure 3 presents Procedure Factored-SLAF, which computes SLAF exactly when the condi-
tions of Corollary 4.3 hold. Consequently, Factored-SLAF returns an exact solution whenever our
actions are known to be 1:1. If our actions have no conditional effects and their success/failure is
observed, then a modiﬁed Factored-SLAF can solve this problem exactly too (see Section 5).
PROCEDURE Factored-SLAF(⟨ai, oi⟩0<i≤t,ϕ)
∀i, ai action, oi observation, ϕ transition belief formula.
1. For i from 1 to t do,
(a) Set ϕ ←Step-SLAF(oi,ai,ϕ).
(b) Eliminate subsumed clauses in ϕ.
2. Return ϕ.
PROCEDURE Step-SLAF(o,a,ϕ)
o an observation formula in L(P), a an action, ϕ a transition belief formula.
1. If ϕ is a literal, then return o∧Literal-SLAF(a,ϕ).
2. If ϕ = ϕ1 ∧ϕ2, return Step-SLAF(o,a,ϕ1)∧Step-SLAF(o,a,ϕ2).
3. If ϕ = ϕ1 ∨ϕ2, return Step-SLAF(o,a,ϕ1)∨Step-SLAF(o,a,ϕ2).
PROCEDURE Literal-SLAF(a,ϕ)
a an action, ϕ a proposition in Lt or its negation.
1. Return CnL′(ϕ ∧Teff(a))[P′/P ].
Figure 3: SLAF using distribution over ∧, ∨
If we pre-compute (and cache) the 2n possible responses of Literal-SLAF, then every time step
t in this procedure requires linear time in the representation size of ϕ, our transition belief formula
at that time step. This is a signiﬁcant improvement over the (super exponential) time taken by
a straightforward algorithm, and over the (potentially exponential) time taken by general-purpose
consequence ﬁnding used in our zeroth-level SLAF procedure above.
Theorem 4.4 Step-SLAF(a, o, ϕ) returns a formula ϕ′ such that SLAF[a, o](ϕ) |= ϕ′. If every run
of Literal-SLAF takes time c, then Step-SLAF takes time O(|ϕ|c). (recall that |ϕ| is the syntactic,
representation size of ϕ.) Finally, if we assume one of the assumptions of Corollary 4.3, then
ϕ′ ≡SLAF[a, o](ϕ).
361

AMIR & CHANG
A belief-state formula is a transition belief formula that has no effect propositions, i.e., it in-
cludes only ﬂuent variables and no propositions of the form aF
G. This is identical to the traditional
use of the term belief-state formula, e.g., (Amir & Russell, 2003). We can give a closed-form so-
lution for the SLAF of a belief-state formula (procedure Literal-SLAF in Figure 3). This makes
procedure Literal-SLAF tractable, avoiding general-purpose inference in ﬁltering a single literal,
and also allows us to examine the structure of belief state formulas in more detail.
Theorem 4.5 For belief-state formula ϕ ∈L(P), action a, Ca = V
G∈G,l∈F(al
G ∨a¬l
G ), and
G1, ..., Gm ∈G all the terms in G such that Gi |= ϕ,
SLAF[a](ϕ) ≡
^
l1,...,lm∈F
m
_
i=1
(li ∨a¬li
Gi ) ∧Ca
Here, V
l1,...,lm∈F means a conjunction over all possible (combinations of) selections of m literals
from F.
PROOF
See Appendix B.4. 2
This theorem is signiﬁcant in that it says that we can can write down the result of SLAF in a
prescribed form. While this form is still potentially of exponential size, it boils down to simple
computations. Its proof follows by a straightforward (though a little long) derivation of the possible
prime implicates of SLAF[a](ϕt).
A consequence of Theorem 4.5 is that we can implement Procedure Literal-SLAF using the
equivalence
SLAF[a](l) ≡
½ Theorem 4.5
L(l) ⊆P
l ∧SLAF[a](TRUE)
otherwise
¾
Notice that the computation in Theorem 4.5 for ϕ = l a literal is simple because G1, ..., Gm are
all the complete terms in L(P) that include l. This computation does not require a general-purpose
consequence ﬁnder, and instead we need to answer 2n+1 queries at the initialization phase, namely,
storing in a table the values of SLAF[a](l) for all l = p and l = ¬p for p ∈P and also for
l = TRUE.
In general, m could be as high as 2|P|, the number of complete terms in G, and ﬁnding G1, ..., Gm
may take time exponential in |P|. Still, the simplicity of this computation and formula provide the
basic ingredients needed for efﬁcient computations in the following sections for restricted cases. It
should also give guidelines on future developments of SLAF algorithms.
5. Compact Model Representation
Previous sections presented algorithms that are potentially intractable for long sequences of actions
and observations. For example, in Theorem 4.5, m could be as high as 2|P|, the number of complete
terms in G. Consequently, clauses may have exponential length (in n = |P|) and there may be a
super-exponential number of clauses in this result.
In this section we focus on learning action models efﬁciently in the presence of action precon-
ditions and failures. This is important for agents that have only partial domain knowledge and are
therefore likely to attempt some inexecutable actions.
We restrict our attention to deterministic actions with no conditional effects, and provide an
overall polynomial bound on the growth of our representation, its size after many steps, and the
362

LEARNING PARTIALLY OBSERVABLE DETERMINISTIC ACTION MODELS
time taken to compute the resulting model. This class of actions generalizes STRIPS (Fikes, Hart,
& Nilsson, 1972), so our results apply to a large part of the AI-planning literature.
We give an efﬁcient algorithm for learning both non-conditional deterministic action effects and
preconditions, as well as an efﬁcient algorithm for learning such actions’ effects in the presence of
action failures.
5.1 Actions of Limited Effect
In many domains we can assume that every action a affects at most k ﬂuents, for some small k > 0.
It is also common to assume that our actions are STRIPS, and that they may fail without us knowing,
leaving the world unchanged. Those assumptions together allow us to progress SLAF with a limited
(polynomial factor) growth in the formula size.
We use a language that is similar to the one in Section 3, but which uses only action propositions
al
G with G being a ﬂuent term of size k (instead of a ﬂuent term of size n in G). Semantically,
al
l1∧...∧lk ≡V
lk+1,...,ln al
l1∧...∧ln.
Theorem 5.1 Let ϕ ∈L(P) be a belief-state formula, and a a STRIPS action with ≤k ﬂuents
affected or in the precondition term. Let Gk be the set of all terms of k ﬂuents in L(P) that are
consistent with ϕ. Then,
SLAF[a](ϕ) ≡
^
G1, ..., Gk ∈Gk
G1 ∧... ∧Gk |= ϕ
l1, ..., lk ∈F
k_
i=1
(li ∨a¬li
Gi ) ∧Ca
Here, V... refers to a conjunction over all possible (combinations of) selections of m literals from
F and G1, ..., Gk from Gk such that G1 ∧... ∧Gk |= ϕ.
PROOF
See Section B.5. 2
The main practical difference between this theorem and Theorem 4.5 is the smaller number of
terms that need to be checked for practical computation. The limited language enables and entails
a limited number of terms that are at play here. Speciﬁcally, when a has at most k literals in its
preconditions, we need to check all combinations of k terms G1, ..., Gk ∈Gk, computation that is
bounded by O(exp(k)) iterations.
The proof uses two insights. First, if a has only one case in which change occurs, then every
clause in Theorem 4.5 is subsumed by a clause that is entailed by SLAF[a](ϕt), has at most one
ali
Gi per literal li (i.e., li ̸= lj for i ̸= j) and Gi is a ﬂuent term (has no disjunctions). Second, every
al
G with G term is equivalent to a formula on al
Gi with Gi terms of length k, if a affects only k
ﬂuents.
Thus, we can encode all of the clauses in the conjunction using a subset of the (extended) action
effect propositions, al
G, with G being a term of size k. There are O(nk) such terms, and O(nk+1)
such propositions. Every clause is of length 2k, with the identity of the clause determined by the
ﬁrst half (the set of action effect propositions). Consequently, SLAF[a](ϕt) takes O(nk2+k · k2)
space to represent using O(nk2+k) clauses of length ≤2k.
363

AMIR & CHANG
5.2 Actions of No Conditional Effects: Revised Language
In this section we reformulate the representation that we presented above in Section 3.1.
Let
L0
f = S
a∈A{af, af◦, a¬f, a[f], a[¬f]} for every f ∈P. Let the vocabulary for the formulas repre-
senting transition belief states be deﬁned as L = P ∪L0
f. The intuition behind propositions in this
vocabulary is as follows:
• al – “a causes l” for literal l. Formally, al ≡V
s∈S al
s.
• af◦– “a keeps f”. Formally, af◦≡V
s∈S((s ⇒f) ⇒af
s) ∧((s ⇒¬f) ⇒a¬f
s ).
• a[l] – “a causes FALSE if ¬l”. Formally, a[l] ≡V
s∈S(s ⇒¬l) ⇒(al
s ∧a¬l
s ). (Thus, l is a
precondition for executing a, and it must hold when a executes.)
For each model of a transition belief formula over L, the valuation of the ﬂuents from P deﬁnes a
state. The valuation of the propositions from all L0
f deﬁnes an unconditional deterministic transition
relation as follows: action proposition af (a¬f) is true if and only if action a in the transition
relation causes f (¬f) to hold after a is executed. Action proposition af◦is true if and only if
action a does not affect ﬂuent f. Action proposition a[f] (a[¬f]) is true if and only if f (¬f) is in
the precondition of a. We assume the existence of logical axioms that disallow “inconsistent” or
“impossible” models. These axioms are:
1. af ∨a¬f ∨af◦
2. ¬(af ∧a¬f) ∧¬(a¬f ∧af◦) ∧¬(af ∧af◦)
3. ¬
¡
a[f] ∧a[¬f]¢
for all possible a ∈A and f ∈P. The ﬁrst two axioms state that in every action model, exactly one
of af, a¬f, or af◦must hold (thus, a causes f, its negation, or keeps f unchanged). The last axiom
disallows interpretations where both a[f] and a[¬f] hold. We state these axioms so that we do not
need to represent these constraints explicitly in the transition belief formula itself.
We will use the set theoretic and propositional logic notations for transition belief states inter-
changeably. Note that the vocabulary we have deﬁned is sufﬁcient for describing any unconditional
STRIPS action model, but not any deterministic action model in general.
Example 5.2 Consider the domain from Example 2.2. The transition belief state ϕ can be repre-
sented by the transition belief formula:
locked ∧
((unlock¬locked
1
∧unlocklocked◦
2
∧unlocklocked◦
3
) ∨
(unlocklocked◦
1
∧unlock¬locked
2
∧unlocklocked◦
3
) ∨
(unlocklocked◦
1
∧unlocklocked◦
2
∧unlock¬locked
3
)).
2
We provide an axiomatization that is equivalent to SLAF and is a special case of Teff (1) with
our notation above. We do this over P and P′. Recall that we intend primed ﬂuents to represent the
value of the ﬂuent immediately after action a is taken.
364

LEARNING PARTIALLY OBSERVABLE DETERMINISTIC ACTION MODELS
τeff(a)
≡
^
f∈P
Prea,f ∧Effa,f
Prea,f
≡
^
l∈{f,¬f}
(a[l] ⇒l)
Effa,f
≡
^
l∈{f,¬f}
((al ∨(af◦∧l)) ⇒l′) ∧(l′ ⇒(al ∨(af◦∧l))).
Here Prea,f describes the precondition of action a. It states that if literal l occurs in the precondition
of a then literal l must have held in the state before taking a. The formula Effa,f describes the effects
of action a. It states that the ﬂuents before and after taking the action must be consistent according
to the action model deﬁned by the propositions af, a¬f, and af◦.
Now we can show that the revised axiomatization of action models, τeff, leads to an equivalent
deﬁnition to SLAF within our restricted action models.
Theorem 5.3 For any successful action a, SLAF[a](ϕ) ≡CnL∪P′(ϕ ∧τeff(a))[P′/P].
PROOF
See Appendix B.6. 2
5.3 Always-Successful Non-Conditional Actions
We are now ready to present an algorithm that learns effects for actions that have no conditional
effects. The algorithm allows actions that have preconditions that are not fully known. Still, it
assumes that the ﬁltered actions all executed successfully (without failures), so it cannot effectively
learn those preconditions (e.g., it would know only some more than it knew originally about those
preconditions after seeing a sequence of events). Such a sequence of actions might, for example, be
generated by an expert agent whose execution traces can be observed.
The algorithm maintains transition belief formulas in a special ﬂuent-factored form, deﬁned be-
low. By maintaining formulas in this special form, we will show that certain logical consequence
ﬁnding operations can be performed very efﬁciently. A formula is ﬂuent-factored, if it is the con-
junction of formulas ϕf such that each ϕf concerns only one ﬂuent, f, and action propositions.
Also, for every ﬂuent, f, ϕf is conjunction of a positive element, a negative element, and a
neutral one ϕf ≡(¬f ∨explf) ∧(f ∨expl¬f) ∧Af, with explf, expl¬f, Af formulae over action
propositions af, a¬f, a[f], a[¬f], and af◦(possibly multiple different actions). The intuition here
is that explf and expl¬f are all the possible explanations for f being true and false, respectively.
Also, Af holds knowledge about actions’ effects and preconditions on f, knowledge that does
not depend on f’s current value. Note that any formula in L(Lf) can be represented as a ﬂuent-
factored formula. Nonetheless, a translation sometimes leads to a space blowup, so we maintain our
representation in this form by construction.
The new learning algorithm, AS-STRIPS-SLAF4, is shown in Figure 4. To simplify exposition,
it is described for the case of a single action-observation pair, though it should be obvious how to
apply the algorithm to sequences of actions and observations. Whenever an action is taken, ﬁrst
the subformulas Af, explf, and expl¬f for each ϕf are updated according to steps 1.(a)-(c). Then,
4. AS-STRIPS-SLAF extends AE-STRIPS-SLAF (Amir, 2005) by allowing preconditions for actions
365

AMIR & CHANG
Algorithm AS-STRIPS-SLAF[⟨a, o⟩](ϕ)
Inputs: Successful action a, observation term o, and ﬂuent-factored transition belief formula ϕ =
V
f∈P ϕf.
Returns: Fluent-factored transition belief formula for SLAF[⟨a, o⟩](ϕ)
1. For every f ∈P
(a) Set Af ←(¬a[f] ∨explf) ∧(¬a[¬f] ∨expl¬f) ∧Af
(b) Set explf ←(af ∨(af◦∧¬a[¬f] ∧explf))
(c) Set expl¬f ←(a¬f ∨(af◦∧¬a[f] ∧expl¬f))
(d) If o |= f (f is observed) then seta, ϕf ←(¬f ∨⊤) ∧(f∨⊥) ∧Af ∧explf
(e) If o |= ¬f then set ϕf ←(¬f∨⊥) ∧(f ∨⊤) ∧Af ∧expl¬f [Note: If o ̸|= f and
o ̸|= ¬f, we do nothing beyond the earlier steps.]
2. Simplify ϕ (e.g., eliminate subsumed clauses in ϕ).
3. Return ϕ
a. The term (¬f ∨⊤) is the new explf, and (f∨⊥) is the new expl¬f. They appear here without simpliﬁcation
to conform to Step 1a of the algorithm. This also emphasizes the syntactic nature of the procedure, and that no
implicit logical simpliﬁcation is assumed.
Figure 4: SLAF algorithm for always successful STRIPS actions.
when an observation is received, each ϕf is updated according to the observation according to steps
1.(d)-(e). Step 2 merely indicates that in most implementations, it is likely that some simpliﬁcation
procedure will be used on the formula such as subsumption elimination. However, the use of any
such simpliﬁcation procedure is not strictly necessary in order for the theoretical guarantees of our
algorithm to hold.
For example, if we know nothing about actions that affect f (e.g., when we start our exploration),
then ϕf = (¬f ∨TRUE)∧(f ∨TRUE)∧TRUE. With this representation, SLAF[a](ϕf) is the
conjunction (¬f∨explf)∧(f∨expl¬f)∧Af as computed by step 1 of Procedure AS-STRIPS-SLAF.
A similar formula holds for observations.
The following theorem shows the correctness of the algorithm. It shows that the steps taken
by the algorithm produce a result equivalent to the logical consequence-ﬁnding characterization of
SLAF of Theorem 5.3.
Theorem 5.4 SLAF[⟨a, o⟩](ϕ) ≡AS-STRIPS-SLAF[⟨a, o⟩](ϕ) for any ﬂuent-factored formula ϕ,
successfully executed action a, and observation term o.
PROOF
See Appendix B.7 2
The time and space complexity of procedure AS-STRIPS-SLAF are given in the following
theorem. As a time guarantee, it is shown that the procedure takes linear time in the size of the input
formula. Under the condition that the algorithm receives observations often enough—speciﬁcally
366

LEARNING PARTIALLY OBSERVABLE DETERMINISTIC ACTION MODELS
that every ﬂuent is observed at least once every k calls to the procedure—it is possible to show
that the transition belief formula remains in k-CNF indeﬁnitely (recall that ϕ is in k-CNF for some
ﬁxed k, if ϕ is a conjunction of clauses each of size ≤k). Thus, regardless of the length of action-
observation input sequence, the output of AS-STRIPS-SLAF and the value of ϕ throughout its
computation is in k-CNF. This amounts to a space guarantee on the size of the formula.
Theorem 5.5 The following are true of AS-STRIPS-SLAF:
1. The procedure takes linear time in the size of the input formula for a single action, observation
pair input.
2. If for every ﬂuent and every k steps there is an observation of that ﬂuent in one of those steps,
and the input formula is in k-CNF, them the resulting formula (after an arbitrary number of
steps) is in k-CNF.
3. If the input of AS-STRIPS-SLAF is ﬂuent-factored, then so is its output.
PROOF
See Appendix B.8 2
The following corollary follows immediately from the above.
Corollary 5.6 In order to process T steps of actions and observations, AS-STRIPS-SLAF requires
O (T · |P|) time. Additionally, if every ﬂuent is observed every at most k steps, then the resulting
formula always has size that is O
³
|P| · |A|k´
.
This Corollary holds because Theorem 5.5(2) guarantees a bound on the size of our belief-state
formula at any point in the algorithm.
5.4 Learning Actions Which May Fail
In many partially observable domains, a decision-making agent cannot know beforehand whether
each action it decides to take will fail or succeed. In this section we consider possible action failure,
and assume that the agent knows whether each action it attempts fails or succeeds after trying the
action.
More precisely, we assume that there is an additional ﬂuent OK observed by the agent such
that OK is true if and only if the action succeeded. A failed action, in this case, may be viewed as
an extra “observation” by the agent that the preconditions for the action were not met. That is, an
action failure is equivalent to the observation
¬
^
f∈P
(a[f] ⇒f) ∧(a[¬f] ⇒¬f).
(3)
Action failures make performing the SLAF operation considerably more difﬁcult. In particular,
observations of the form (3) cause interactions between ﬂuents where the value of a particular ﬂuent
might no longer depend on only the action propositions for that ﬂuent, but on the action propositions
for other ﬂuents as well. Transition belief states can no longer be represented by convenient ﬂuent-
factored formulas in such cases, and it becomes more difﬁcult to devise algorithms which give
useful time and space performance guarantees.
367

AMIR & CHANG
Algorithm PRE-STRIPS-SLAF[a, o](ϕ)
Inputs: Action a and observation term o. The transition belief formula ϕ has the following fac-
tored form: ϕ = V
i
W
j ϕi,j, where each ϕi,j is a ﬂuent-factored formula.
Returns: Filtered transition belief formula ϕ
1. If o |= ¬OK:
(a) Set ϕ ←ϕ ∧W
i F(¬li) where li are the literals appearing in a’s precondition, and
F(l) is the ﬂuent-factored formula equivalent to l (i.e., F(l) = ((l ⇒⊤) ∧(¬l ⇒
⊥) ∧⊤) ∧V
f∈P((f ⇒⊤) ∧(¬f ⇒⊤) ∧⊤))
(b) Set ϕi,j ←AS-STRIPS-SLAF[o](ϕi,j) for all ϕi,j
2. Else (o |= OK):
(a) For all ϕi,j
i. Set ϕi,j ←AS-STRIPS-SLAF[P](ϕi,j), where P is the precondition of a
ii. Set ϕi,j ←AS-STRIPS-SLAF[⟨a, o⟩](ϕi,j)
3. Each ϕi,j is factored into Ai,j ∧Bi,j where Bi,j contains all (and only) clauses containing
a ﬂuent from P. For any i such that there exists B such that for all j, Bi,j ≡B, replace
W
j ϕi,j with B ∧W
j Ai,j
4. Simplify each ϕi,j (e.g. remove subsumed clauses)
5. Return ϕ
Figure 5: Algorithm for handling action failures when preconditions are known.
As we shall demonstrate, action failures can be dealt with tractably if we assume that the action
preconditions are known by the agent. That is, the agent must learn the effects of the actions it can
take, but does not need to learn the preconditions of these actions. In particular, this means that for
each action a, the algorithm is given access to a formula (more precisely, logical term) Pa describing
the precondition of action a. Clearly, because the algorithm does not need to learn the preconditions
of its actions, we can restrict the action proposition vocabulary used to describe belief states to the
ones of the forms af, a¬f, and af◦, as we no longer need action propositions of the forms a[f] or
a[¬f].
We present procedure PRE-STRIPS-SLAF5 (Figure 5) that performs SLAF on transition belief
formulas in the presence of action failures for actions of non-conditional effects. It maintains tran-
sition belief formulas as conjunctions of disjunctions of ﬂuent-factored formulas (formulas of the
form ϕ = V
i
W
j ϕi,j where each ϕi,j is ﬂuent factored). Naturally, such formulas are a superset of
all ﬂuent-factored formulas.
5. PRE-STRIPS-SLAF is essentially identical to CNF-SLAF (Shahaf et al., 2006)
368

LEARNING PARTIALLY OBSERVABLE DETERMINISTIC ACTION MODELS
The algorithm operates as follows: When an action executes successfully (and an ensuing ob-
servation is received), each of the component ﬂuent-factored formulas ϕi,j is ﬁltered separately
according to the AS-STRIPS-SLAF procedure on the action-observation pair (Step 2). On the other
hand, when an action fails, a disjunction of ﬂuent-factored formulas is appended to the transition
belief formula (Step 1). Each component of the disjunction corresponds to one of the possible rea-
sons the action failed (i.e., to one of the literals occurring in the action’s precondition). Finally, as
observations are accumulated by the learning algorithm, it collapses disjunctions of ﬂuent-factored
formulas occurring in the belief formula together (Step 3) or simpliﬁes them generally (Step 4),
decreasing the total size of the formula. As with the case of AS-STRIPS-SLAF, these simpliﬁcation
steps are not necessary in order for our time and space guarantees to hold.
The proof of correctness of Algorithm PRE-STRIPS-SLAF relies on our distribution results
from Section 4, Theorem 4.1 and Corollary 4.3.
We proceed to show the correctness of PRE-STRIPS-SLAF. The following theorem shows that
the procedure always returns a ﬁltered transition belief formula that is logically weaker than the
exact result, so it always produces a safe approximation. Additionally, the theorem shows that
under the conditions of Corollary 4.3, the ﬁltered transition belief formula is an exact result.
Theorem 5.7 The following are true:
1. SLAF[a, o](ϕ) |= PRE-STRIPS-SLAF[a, o](ϕ)
2. PRE-STRIPS-SLAF[a, o](ϕ) ≡SLAF[a, o](ϕ) if Corollary 4.3 holds.
PROOF
See Appendix B.9. 2
Now we consider the time and space complexity of the algorithm. The following theorem shows
that (1) the procedure is time efﬁcient, and (2) given frequent enough observations (as in Theorem
5.5), the algorithm is space efﬁcient because the transition belief formula stays indeﬁnitely compact.
Theorem 5.8 The following are true of PRE-STRIPS-SLAF:
1. The procedure takes time linear in the size of the formula for a single action, observation pair
input.
2. If every ﬂuent is observed every at most k steps and the input formula is in m · k-CNF, then
the ﬁltered formula is in m·k-CNF, where m is the maximum number of literals in any action
precondition.
PROOF
See Appendix B.10 2
Therefore, we get the following corollary:
Corollary 5.9 In order to process T steps of actions and observations, PRE-STRIPS-SLAF requires
O (T · |P|) time. If every ﬂuent is observed at least as frequently as every k steps, then the resulting
formula always has size that is O
³
|P| · |A|mk´
.
6. Building on Our Results
In this section we describe brieﬂy how one might extend our approach to include an elaborate
observation model, bias, and parametrized actions.
369

AMIR & CHANG
6.1 Expressive Observation Model
The observation model that we use throughout this paper is very simple: at every state, if a ﬂuent is
observed to have value v, then this is its value in the current state. We can consider an observation
model that is more general.
An observation model, O, is a set of logical sentences that relates propositions in a set Obs with
ﬂuents in P. Obs includes propositions that do not appear in P, and which are independent of the
previous and following state (times t −1 and t + 1) given the ﬂuents at time t.
SLAF with o is the result of conjoining ϕt with CnLt(o∧O), i.e., ﬁnding the prime implicates of
o ∧O and conjoining those with ϕt. We can embed this extension into our SLAF algorithms above,
if we can maintain the same structures that those algorithms use. If O is in k-CNF and at every step
we observe all but (at most) 1 variable, then ﬁnding the prime implicates is easy. Embedding this
into the transition-belief formula is done by conjunction of these prime implicates with the formula,
and removal of subsumed clauses. The resulting formula is still ﬂuent factored, if the input was
ﬂuent factored. Then, the algorithms above remain applicable with the same time complexity, by
replacing ot with the prime implicates of ot ∧Ot.
Using the Model
The algorithms we described above provide an exact solution to SLAF, and
all the tuples ⟨s, R⟩that are in this solution are consistent with our observations. They compute a
solution to SLAF that is represented as a logical formula. We can use a SAT solver (e.g., Moskewicz
et al., 2001) to answer queries over this formula, such as checking if it entails af, for action a and
ﬂuent f. This would show if in all consistent models action a makes f have the value TRUE.
The number of variables in the result formula is always independent of T, and is linear in |P|
for some of our algorithms. Therefore, we can use current SAT solvers to treat domains of 1000
features and more.
Preference and Probabilistic Bias
Many times we have information that leads us to prefer some
possible action models over others. For example, sometimes we can assume that actions change
only few ﬂuents, or we suspect that an action (e.g., open-door) does not affect some features (e.g.,
position) normally. We can represent such bias using a preference model (e.g., McCarthy, 1986;
Ginsberg, 1987) or a probabilistic prior over transition relations (e.g., Robert, Celeux, & Diebolt,
1993).
We can add this bias at the end of our SLAF computation, and get an exact solution if we can
compute the effect of this bias together with a logical formula efﬁciently. Preferential biases were
studied before and ﬁt easily with the result of our algorithms (e.g., we can use implementations of
Doherty, Lukaszewicz, & Szalas, 1997, for inference with such bias).
Also, algorithms for inference with probabilistic bias and logical sentences are now emerging
and can be used here too (Hajishirzi & Amir, 2007). There, the challenge is to not enumerate
tentative models explicitly, a challenge that is overcome with some success in the work of Hajishirzi
and Amir (2007) for the similar task of ﬁltering. We can use such algorithms to apply probabilistic
bias to the resulting logical formula.
For example, given a probabilistic graphical model (e.g., Bayesian Networks) and a set of propo-
sitional logical sentences, we can consider the logical sentences as observations. With this approach,
a logical sentence ϕ gives rise to a characteristic function δϕ(−→x ) which is 1 when −→x satisﬁes ϕ and
0 otherwise. For a conjunction of clauses we get a set of such functions (one per clause). Thus,
inference in the combined probabilistic-logical system is a probabilistic inference. For example,
370

LEARNING PARTIALLY OBSERVABLE DETERMINISTIC ACTION MODELS
one can consider variable elimination (e.g., Dechter, 1999) in which there are additional potential
functions.
Parametrized Actions
In many systems and situations it is natural to use parametrized actions.
These are action schemas whose effect depend on their parameters, but their deﬁnition applies
identically to all instantiations.
For example, move(b, x, y) can be an action which moves b from position x to position y, with
b, x, y as parameters of the action. These are very common in planning systems (e.g., STRIPS,
PDDL, Situation Calculus). A complete treatment of parameterized actions is outside the scope of
this paper, but we give guidelines for a generalization of our current approach for such actions.
Consider a domain with a set of ﬂuent predicates and a universe of named objects. The proposi-
tional ﬂuents that are deﬁned in this domain are all ground instantiations of predicate ﬂuents. SLAF
can work on this set of propositional ﬂuents and instantiated actions in the same manner as for the
rest of this paper. We have action propositions a(−→
X)l
G instantiated for every vector of object names
−→
X.
The different treatment comes in additional axioms that say that ∀−→x , −→y .a(−→x )l
G ⇐⇒a(−→y )l
G.
Inference over a transition belief state with these axioms will be able to join information collected
about different instantiations of those actions. We expect that a more thorough treatment will be
able to provide more efﬁcient algorithms whose time complexity depend on the number of action
schemas instead of the number of instantiated actions.
Several approaches already start to address this problem, including the work of Nance, Vogel,
and Amir (2006) for ﬁltering and the work of Shahaf and Amir (2006) for SLAF.
7. Experimental Evaluation
Previous sections discussed the problem settings that we consider and algorithms for their solu-
tions. They showed that modifying traditional settings for learning in dynamic partially observable
domains is important. Determinism alone does not lead to tractability, but our additional assump-
tions of simple, logical action structure and bounded from 0 frequency of observations for all ﬂuents
do. Speciﬁcally, so far we showed that the time and space for computing SLAF of a length-T time
sequence over n ﬂuents are polynomial in T and n.
This section considers the practical considerations involved in using our SLAF procedures. In
particular, it examines the following questions:
• How much time and space do SLAF computations take in practice?
• How much time is required to extract a model from the logical formula in the result of our
SLAF procedures?
• What is the quality of the learned model (taking an arbitrary consistent model)? How far is it
from the true (generating) model?
• Do the conditions for the algorithms’ correctness hold in practice?
• Can the learned model be used for successful planning and execution? How do the learning
procedures ﬁt with planning and execution?
We implemented our algorithms and ran experiments with AS-STRIPS-SLAF over the follow-
ing domains taken from the 3rd International Planning Competition (IPC): Drivelog, Zenotravel,
Blocksworld, and Depots (details of the domains and the learning results appear in Appendix C).
371

AMIR & CHANG
Each such experiment involves running a chosen algorithm over a sequence of randomly generated
action-observation sequences of 5000 steps. Information was recorded every 200 steps.
The random-sequence generator receives the correct description of the domain, speciﬁed in
PDDL (Ghallab, Howe, Knoblock, McDermott, Ram, Veloso, Weld, & Wilkins, 1998; Fox & Long,
2002) (a plannig-domain description language), the size of the domain, and a starting state. (The
size of the domain is the number of propositional ﬂuents in it. It is set by a speciﬁcation of the
number of objects in the domain and the number and arity of predicates in the domain.) It generates
a valid sequence of actions and observations for this domain and starting state, i.e., a sequence that
is consistent with the input PDDL to that generator but in which actions may fail (action failure is
consistent with the PDDL if the action is attempted in a state in which it canot execute).
For our experiments, we chose to have observations as follows: In every time step we select 10
ﬂuents uniformly at random to observe. We applied no additional restrictions (such as making sure
each ﬂuent was observed every ﬁxed k steps).
Our SLAF algorithm receives only such a sequences of actions and observations, and no domain
information otherwise (e.g., it does not receive the size of the domain, the ﬂuents, the starting state,
or the PDDL). The starting knowledge for the algorithm is the empty knowledge, TRUE.
For each domain we ran the algorithm over different numbers of propositional ﬂuents (19 to 250
ﬂuents). We collected the time and space taken for each SLAF computation and plotted them as a
function of the input-sequence length (dividing by t the total computation time for t steps). The
time and space results are shown in Figures 6, 7, 8, and 9. The graphs are broken into the different
domains and compare the time and space taken for different domain sizes. The time is SLAF-time
without CNF simpliﬁcation (e.g. we do not remove subsumed clauses)
How much time and space do SLAF computations take in practice?
We can answer the ﬁrst
question now. We can observe in these ﬁgures that the time per step remains relatively constant
throughout execution. Consequently, the time taken to perform SLAF of different domains grows
linearly with the number of time steps. Also, we see that the time for SLAF grows with the domain
size, but scales easily for moderate domain sizes (1ms per step of SLAF for domains of 200 ﬂuents).
How much time is required to extract a model from the logical formula in the result of our
SLAF procedures?
Our SLAF procedures return a logical formula for each sequence of actions
and observations. We need to apply further work to extract a candidate (consistent) model from that
formula. This computation is done with a SAT solver for CNF formulas.
What is the quality of the learned model (taking an arbitrary consistent model)? How far is it
from the true (generating) model?
There are sometimes many possible models, and with little
further bias we must consider each of them possible and as likely. We decided to introduce one
such bias, namely, that actions are instances of actions schemas. Thus, the actions are assumed to
have the same effect on their parameters (or objects), given properties of those parameters. Thus,
actions’ effects are assumed independent of the identity of those parameter.
So, with the vanilla implementation, there are propositions which look like
((STACK E G) CAUSES (ON E G))
((STACK E G) CAUSES (ON G E))
((STACK A B) CAUSES (ON A B))
((STACK A A) CAUSES (ON A A))
etc.
372

LEARNING PARTIALLY OBSERVABLE DETERMINISTIC ACTION MODELS
SLAF Time/Step: Blocksworld Domain
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
200
1000
1800
2600
3400
4200
5000
Input Sequence Length
Time (ms)
19 fluents
41 fluents
71 fluents
131 fluents
209 fluents
SLAF Time/Step: Depots Domain
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
200
1000
1800
2600
3400
4200
5000
Input Sequence Length
Time (ms)
58 fluents
94 fluents
138 fluents
190 fluents
250 fluents
Figure 6: SLAF-time without CNF simpliﬁcation for domains Blocksworld and Depots
Instead, we replace ground propositions like those above with schematized propositions:
((STACK ?X ?Y) CAUSES (ON ?X ?Y))
((STACK ?X ?Y) CAUSES (ON ?Y ?X))
((STACK ?X ?Y) CAUSES (ON ?X ?Y))
etc.
Thus, the belief-state formula looks something like:
373

AMIR & CHANG
SLAF Time/Step: Driverlog Domain
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
200
1000
1800
2600
3400
4200
5000
Input Sequence Length
Time (ms)
31 fluents
76 fluents
122 fluents
186 fluents
231 fluents
SLAF Time/Step: Zeno-Travel Domain
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
200
1000
1800
2600
3400
4200
5000
Input Sequence Length
Time (ms)
58 fluents
91 fluents
134 fluents
Figure 7: SLAF-time without CNF simpliﬁcation for domains Driverlog and Zeno-Travel
(AND
(AND
(OR (ON E G)
(OR ((STACK ?X ?Y) CAUSES (NOT (ON ?X ?Y)))
(AND ((STACK ?X ?Y) KEEPS (ON ?X ?Y))
(NOT ((STACK ?X ?Y) NEEDS (ON ?X ?Y))))))
...
374

LEARNING PARTIALLY OBSERVABLE DETERMINISTIC ACTION MODELS
SLAF Space: Blocksworld Domain
K
50K
100K
150K
200K
250K
300K
200
1000
1800
2600
3400
4200
5000
Input Sequence Length
Space (#lisp symbols)
19 fluents
41 fluents
71 fluents
131 fluents
209 fluents
SLAF Space: Depots Domain
K
20K
40K
60K
80K
100K
120K
140K
160K
200
1000
1800
2600
3400
4200
5000
Input Sequence Length
Space (#lisp symbols)
58 fluents
94 fluents
138 fluents
190 fluents
250 fluents
Figure 8: SLAF space for domains Blocksworld and Depots
An example fragment of a model (the complete output is given in Appendix C) that is consistent
with our training data is
Blocksworld domain:
converting to CNF
* 209 fluents
clause count: 235492
* 1000 randomly selected actions
variable count: 187
* 10 fluents observed per step
adding clauses
* "schematized" learning
calling zchaff
375

AMIR & CHANG
SLAF Space: Driverlog Domain
K
50K
100K
150K
200K
250K
200
1000
1800
2600
3400
4200
5000
Input Sequence Length
Space (#lisp symbols)
31 fluents
76 fluents
122 fluents
186 fluents
231 fluents
SLAF Space: Zeno-Travel Domain
K
10K
20K
30K
40K
50K
60K
200
1000
1800
2600
3400
4200
5000
Input Sequence Length
Space (#lisp symbols)
58 fluents
91 fluents
134 fluents
Figure 9: SLAF space for domains Driverlog and Zeno-Travel
* 1:1 precondition heuristics
parsing result
SLAF time: 2.203
Inference time: 42.312
Learned model:
(UNSTACK NEEDS (NOT (CLEAR ?UNDEROB)))
(UNSTACK NEEDS (CLEAR ?OB))
(UNSTACK NEEDS (ARM-EMPTY))
376

LEARNING PARTIALLY OBSERVABLE DETERMINISTIC ACTION MODELS
(UNSTACK NEEDS (NOT (HOLDING ?OB)))
(UNSTACK NEEDS (ON ?OB ?UNDEROB))
(UNSTACK CAUSES (CLEAR ?UNDEROB))
(UNSTACK CAUSES (NOT (CLEAR ?OB)))
(UNSTACK CAUSES (NOT (ARM-EMPTY)))
(UNSTACK CAUSES (HOLDING ?OB))
(UNSTACK CAUSES (NOT (ON ?OB ?UNDEROB)))
(UNSTACK KEEPS (ON-TABLE ?UNDEROB))
(UNSTACK KEEPS (ON-TABLE ?OB))
(UNSTACK KEEPS (HOLDING ?UNDEROB))
(UNSTACK KEEPS (ON ?UNDEROB ?UNDEROB))
(UNSTACK KEEPS (ON ?OB ?OB))
(UNSTACK KEEPS (ON ?UNDEROB ?OB))
...
Sometimes, there are multiple possible schematized propositions that correspond to a ground
action proposition, in which case we disjoin the propositions together when doing the replacement
(i.e., a single ground propositional symbol gets replaced by a disjunction of schema propositions).
This replacement is a simple procedure, but one that is effective in both deriving more informa-
tion for fewer steps and also in speeding up model ﬁnding from the SLAF formula. We implemented
it to run while SLAF runs. One could do this during the SAT-solving portion of the algorithm, with
an equivalent result.
Regarding the latter, we ran into scaling issues with the SAT solver (ZChaff , Moskewicz et al.,
2001; Tang, Yinlei Yu, & Malik, 2004) and the common lisp compiler in large experiments. We got
around these issues by applying the replacement scheme above, thus reducing greatly the number
of variables that the SAT solver handles.
Another issue that we ran into is that the SAT solver tended to choose models with blank pre-
conditions (the sequences that we used in these experiments include no action failure, so ’no pre-
conditions’ is never eliminated by our algorithm). To add some ”bias” to the extracted action model,
we added axioms of the following form:
(or (not (,a causes ,f)) (,a needs (not ,f)))
(or (not (,a causes (not ,f))) (,a needs ,f))
These axioms state that if an action a causes a ﬂuent f to hold, then a requires f to not hold in
the precondition (similarly, there is an analagous axiom for ¬f). Intuitively, these axioms cause
the sat solver to favor 1:1 action models. We got the idea for this heuristic from the work of Wu,
Yang, and Jiang (2007), which uses a somewhat similar set of axioms to bias their results in terms
of learning preconditions. Clearly, these axioms don’t always hold, and in the results, one can see
that the learned preconditions are often inaccurate.
Some other inaccuracies in the learned action models are reasonable. For example, if a ﬂuent
never changes over the course of an action sequence, the algorithm may infer that an arbitrary action
causes that ﬂuent to hold.
Do the conditions for the algorithms’ correctness hold in practice?
In all of those scenarios
that we report here, the conditions that guarantee correctness for our algorithms hold. In our ex-
periments we assumed that the main conditions of the algorithms hold, namely, that actions are
377

AMIR & CHANG
deterministic and of few preconditions. We did not enforce having observations for every ﬂuent
every (ﬁxed) k steps. The latter condition is not necessery for correctness of the algorithm, but is
necessary to guarantee polynomial-time computation. Our experiments verify that this is not neces-
sary in practice, and it indeed be the case that the algorithms can have a polynomial-time guarantee
for our modiﬁed observation
An earlier work of Hlubocky and Amir (2004) has included a modiﬁed version of AS-STRIPS-
SLAF in their architecture and tested it on a suite of adventure-game-like virtual environments that
are generated at random. These include arbitrary numbers of places, objects of various kinds, and
conﬁgurations and settings of those. There, an agent’s task is to exit a house, starting with no
knowledge about the state space, available actions and their effects, or characteristics of objects.
Their experiments show that the agent learns the effects of its actions very efﬁciently. This agent
makes decisions using the learned knowledge, and inference with the resulting representation is fast
(a fraction of a second per SAT problem in domains including more than 30 object, modes, and
locations).
Can the learned model be used for successful planning and execution? How do the learning
procedures ﬁt with planning and execution?
The learned model can be used for planning by
translating it to PDDL. However, that model is not always the correct one for the domain, so the
plan may not be feasible or may not lead to the required goal. In those cases, we can interleave
planning, execution, and learning, as was described in the work of Chang and Amir (2006). There,
one ﬁnds a short plan with a consistent action model, executes that plan, collects observations, and
applies SLAF to those. When plan failure can be detected (e.g., that the goal was not achieved), the
results of Chang and Amir (2006) guarantee that the joint planning-execution-learning procedure
would reach the goal in a bounded amount of time. That bounded time is in fact linear in the length
of the longest plan needed for reaching the goal, and is exponential in the complexity of the action
model that we need to learn.
8. Comparison with Related Work
HMMs (Boyen & Koller, 1999; Boyen et al., 1999; Murphy, 2002; Ghahramani, 2001) can be used
to estimate a stochastic transition model from observations. Initially, we expected to compare our
work with the HMM implementation of Murphy (2002), which uses EM (a hill-climbing approach).
Unfortunately, HMMs require an explicit representation of the state space, and our smallest do-
main (31 features) requires a transition matrix of (231)2 entries. This prevents initializing HMMs
procedures on any current computer.
Structure learning approaches in Dynamic Bayes Nets (DBNs) (e.g., Ghahramani & Jordan,
1997; Friedman, Murphy, & Russell, 1998; Boyen et al., 1999) use EM and additional approxima-
tions (e.g., using factoring, variation, or sampling), and are more tractable. However, they are still
limited to small domains (e.g., 10 features , Ghahramani & Jordan, 1997; Boyen et al., 1999), and
also have unbounded errors in discrete deterministic domains, so are not usable in our settings.
A simple approach for learning transition models was devised in the work of Holmes and
Charles Lee Isbell (2006) for deterministic POMDPs. There, the transition and observation models
are deterministic. This approach is close to ours in that it represents the hidden state and possi-
ble models using a ﬁnite structure, a Looping Prediction Sufﬁx Tree. This structure can be seen
as related to our representation in that both grow models that relate action histories to possible
transition models. In our work here such interactions are realized in the recursive structure of the
378

LEARNING PARTIALLY OBSERVABLE DETERMINISTIC ACTION MODELS
transition-belief formula built by AS-STRIPS-SLAF, e.g.,
(af ∨(af◦∧¬a[¬f] ∧explf))
where explf refers to a similar formula to this that was created in the previous time step.
The main difference that we should draw between our work and that of Holmes and Charles
Lee Isbell (2006) is that the latter refers to states explicitly, whereas our work refers to features.
Consequently, our representation is (provably) more compact and our procedures scale to larger
domains both theoretically and in practice. Furthermore, our procedure provably maintains a refer-
ence to all the possible models when data is insufﬁcient to determine a single model, whereas the
work of Holmes and Charles Lee Isbell (2006) focuses only on the limit case of enough informa-
tion for determining a single consistent model. On the down-side, our procedure does not consider
stochasticity in the belief state, and this remains an area for further development.
A similar relationship holds between our work and that of Littman, Sutton, and Singh (2002).
In that work, a model representation is given with a size linear in the number of states. This model,
predictive state representation (PSR), is based on action/observation histories and predicts behav-
ior based on those histories. That work prefers a low-dimensional vector basis instead a feature-
based representation of states (one of the traditional hallmarks of the Knowledge Representation
approach). There is no necessary correspondence between the basis vectors and some intuitive fea-
tures in the real world necessarily. This enables a representation of the world that is more closely
based on behavior.
Learning PSRs (James & Singh, 2004) is nontrivial because one needs to ﬁnd a good low-
dimensional vector basis (the stage called discovery of tests). That stage of learning PSRs requires
matrices of size Ω(n2), for states spaces of size n.
Our work advances over that line of work in providing correct results in time that is poly-
logarithmic in the number of states. Speciﬁcally, our work learns (deterministic) transition models
in polynomial time in the state features, thus taking time O(poly(log n)).
Reinforcement Learning (RL) approaches (Sutton & Barto, 1998; Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis, 1996)
compute a mapping between world states and preferred actions. They are highly intractable in
partially observable domains (Kaelbling, Littman, & Cassandra, 1998), and approximation (e.g.,
Kearns, Mansour, & Ng, 2000; Meuleau, Peshkin, Kim, & Kaelbling, 1999; Even-Dar, Kakade, &
Mansour, 2005; McCallum, 1995) is practical only for small domains (e.g., 10-20 features) with
small horizon time T.
In contrast to HMMs, DBNs, and RL, our algorithms are exact and tractable in large domains (>
300 features). We take advantages of properties common to discrete domains, such as determinism,
limited effects of actions, and observed failure.
Previous work on learning deterministic action models in the AI-Planning literature assumes
fully observable deterministic domains. These learn parametrized STRIPS actions using, e.g., ver-
sion spaces (Gil, 1994; Wang, 1995), general classiﬁers (Oates & Cohen, 1996), or hill-climbing
ILP (Benson, 1995). Recently, the work of Pasula et al. (2004) gave an algorithm that learns stochas-
tic actions with no conditional effects. The work of Schmill, Oates, and Cohen (2000) approximates
partial observability by assuming that the world is fully observable. We can apply these to partially
observable learning problems (sometimes) by using the space of belief states instead of world states,
but this increases the problem size to exponentially, so this is not practical for our problem.
Finally, recent research on learning action models in partially observable domains includes the
works of Yang, Wu, and Jiang (2005) and of Shahaf and Amir (2006). In the works of Yang et al.
379

AMIR & CHANG
(2005), example plan traces are encoded as a weighted maximum SAT problem, from which a
candidate STRIPS action model is extracted. In general, there may be many possible action models
for any given set of example traces, and therefore the approach is by nature approximate (in contrast
to ours, which always identiﬁes the exact set of possible action models). The work also introduces
additional approximations in the form of heuristic rules meant to rule out unlikely action models.
The work of Shahaf and Amir (2006) presents an approach for solving SLAF using logical-
circuit encodings of transition belief states. This approach performs tractable SLAF for more gen-
eral deterministic models than those that we present in Section 5, but it also requires SAT solvers
for logical circuits. Such SAT solvers are not optimized nowadays in comparison with CNF SAT
solvers, so their overall performance for answering questions from SLAF is lower than ours. Most
importantly, the representation given by Shahaf and Amir (2006) grows (linearly) with the number
of time steps, and this can still hinder long sequences of actions and observations. In comparison,
our transition belief formula has bounded size that is independent of the number of time steps that
we track.
Our encoding language, LA is typical in methods for software and hardware veriﬁcation and
testing. Relevant books and methods (e.g., Clarke, Grumberg, & Peled, 1999) are closely related
to this representation, and results that we achieve here are applicable there and vice versa. The
main distinction we should draw between our work and that done in Formal Methods (e.g., Model
Checking and Bounded Model Checking) is that we are able to conclude size bounds for logical for-
mulas involved in the computation. While OBDDs are used with some success in Model Checking,
and CNF representations are used with some success in Bounded Model Checking, they have little
bounds for the sizes of formulas in theory or in practice. The conditions available in AI applications
are used in the current manuscript to deliver such bounds and yield tractability and scalability results
that are both theoretical and of practical signiﬁcance.
Interestingly, methods that use Linear Temporal Logics (LTL) cannot distinguish between what
can happen and what actually happens (Calvanese, Giacomo, & Vardi, 2002). Thus, they cannot
consider what causes an occurence. Our method is similar in that it does not consider alternate
futures for a state explicitly. However, we use an extended language, namely LA, that makes those
alternatives explicit. This allows us to forego the limitations of LTL and produce the needed result.
9. Conclusions
We presented a framework for learning the effects and preconditions of deterministic actions in
partially observable domains. This approach differs from earlier methods in that it focuses on deter-
mining the exact set of consistent action models (earlier methods do not). We showed that in several
common situations this can be done exactly in time that is polynomial (sometime linear) in the num-
ber of time steps and features. We can add bias and compute an exact solution for large domains
(hundreds of features), in many cases. Furthermore, we show that the number of action-observation
traces that must be seen before convergence is polynomial in the number of features of the domain.
These positive results contrast with the difﬁculty encountered by many approaches to learning of
dynamic models and reinforcement learning in partially observable domains.
The results that we presented are promising for many applications, including reinforcement
learning, agents in virtual domains, and HMMs. Already, this work is being applied to autonomous
agents in adventure games, and exploration is guided by the transition belief state that we compute
380

LEARNING PARTIALLY OBSERVABLE DETERMINISTIC ACTION MODELS
and information gain criteria. In the future we plan to extend these results to stochastic domains,
and domains with continuous features.
