AN UNSUPERVISED NORMALIZATION ALGORITHM FOR NOISY
TEXT: A CASE STUDY FOR INFORMATION RETRIEVAL AND
STANCE DETECTION
A PREPRINT
Anurag Roy1, Shalmoli Ghosh1, Kripabandhu Ghosh2, and Saptarshi Ghosh1
1Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur , Kharagpur , India
2Department of Computer Science and Application , Indian Institute of Science Education and Research Kolkata ,
Mohanpur , India

ABSTRACT
A large fraction of textual data available today contains various types of ‘noise’, such as OCR noise
in digitized documents, noise due to informal writing style of users on microblogging sites, and
so on. To enable tasks such as search/retrieval and classiﬁcation over all the available data, we
need robust algorithms for text normalization, i.e., for cleaning different kinds of noise in the text.
There have been several efforts towards cleaning or normalizing noisy text; however, many of the
existing text normalization methods are supervised, and require language-dependent resources or
large amounts of training data that is difﬁcult to obtain. We propose an unsupervised algorithm
for text normalization that does not need any training data / human intervention. The proposed
algorithm is applicable to text over different languages, and can handle both machine-generated and
human-generated noise. Experiments over several standard datasets show that text normalization
through the proposed algorithm enables better retrieval and stance detection, as compared to that
using several baseline text normalization methods. Implementation of our algorithm can be found at
https://github.com/ranarag/UnsupClean.
Keywords Data cleansing; unsupervised text normalization; morphological variants; retrieval; stance detection;
microblogs; OCR noise
1
Introduction and Motivation
Digitization and the advent of Web 2.0 have resulted in a staggering increase in the amount of online textual data. As
more and more textual data is generated online, or digitized from ofﬂine collections, the presence of noise in the text is a
growing concern. Here noise refers to the incorrect forms of a valid word (of a given language). Such noise can be of two
broad categories [1]: (1) machine-generated, such as those produced by Optical Character Recognition (OCR) systems,
Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) systems, etc. while digitizing content, and (2) human-generated, produced by
the casual writing style of humans, typographical errors, etc. For instance, social media posts (e.g. microblogs) and
SMS contain frequent use of non-standard abbreviations (e.g., ‘meds’ for ‘medicines’, ‘tmrw’ for ‘tomorrow’).
There exist plenty of important resources of textual data containing both the categories of noise. With regard to
machine-generated noise, old documents like legal documents, defense documents, collections produced from large
scale book digitization projects1 etc. are either in scanned version or in hard-copy format. Digitization of these vital
collections involve OCR-ing the scanned versions. The print-quality, font variability, etc. lead to poor performance of
0This work will be appearing in ACM Journal of Data and Information Quality.
1https://archive.org/details/millionbooks
arXiv:2101.03303v1  [cs.IR]  9 Jan 2021

A PREPRINT
the OCR systems which incorporates substantial error in the resulting text documents. Moreover, these noisy documents
can be present in many languages, which also contributes to the challenge, since the OCR systems of many languages
may not be well-developed. The unavailability of error-free versions of these collections makes error modelling
infeasible.
For the second category of noise (user-generated), social networking sites such as Twitter and Weibo have emerged as
effective resources for important real-time information in many situations [2, 3, 4]. Informal writing by users in such
online media generates noise in the form of spelling variations, arbitrary shortening of words, etc. [5].
The presence of various types of noise are known to adversely affect Information Retrieval (IR), Natural Language
Processing (NLP) and Machine Learning (ML) applications such as search/retrieval, classiﬁcation, stance detection,
and so on [6]. Hence, normalization/cleansing of such noisy text has a signiﬁcant role in improving performance of
downstream NLP / IR / ML tasks. The soul of a text normalization technique lies in mapping the different variations
of a word to a single ‘normal’ form, achieving which successfully can lead to remarkable improvement in a lot of
downstream tasks. There have been several works that have attempted text normalization, both in supervised and
unsupervised ways (see Section 2 for a survey). Supervised algorithms require large training data (e.g., parallel corpora
of noisy and clean text) which is expensive to obtain. This leads to a necessity for unsupervised methods, on which we
focus in this paper.
There already exist several unsupervised text normalization approaches. However, most of the existing works have
experimented with only one type of noise. For instance, Ghosh et al. [7] developed a method for correcting OCR errors,
while others [8, 9] addressed variations in tweets. The type of errors in various text collections can be quite different –
usually in tweets the error does not occur at the beginning of a word. However, OCR errors can appear at any location
in a word, which makes noisy text normalization more challenging. So, a robust text normalization system for generic
noise should be adept at handling many random and unseen error patterns. But to our knowledge, no one has attempted
to address different categories of noise at the same time.
In this paper, we propose a novel unsupervised, language-independent algorithm – called UnsupClean – capable of
automatically identifying the noisy variants produced by any of the aforementioned categories of noise, viz. machine-
generated and human-generated.
We perform extensive experiments where we compare the proposed UnsupClean algorithm with four baseline text
normalization algorithms – Aspell, Enelvo [9], and the algorithms developed by Sridhar et al [8] and Ghosh et al. [7].
To compare the performance of the various text normalization algorithms, we focus on two practical downstream
applications – retrieval/search, and stance detection. We judge the performance on a text normalization algorithm by
checking the performance of state-of-the-art retrieval/stance detection models on datasets cleaned by the normalization
algorithm. Experiments are performed over several standard datasets spanning over two languages (English and
Bengali), both containing OCR noise, as well as over microblogs containing human-generated noise. The empirical
evaluation demonstrates the efﬁcacy of our proposed algorithm over the baseline normalization algorithms – while we
produce signiﬁcantly better performance on OCR collections, our performance is competitive with all the baselines over
the microblog collections. To our knowledge, no prior work on text normalization/cleansing have reported such detailed
comparative evaluation as done in this work – over two downstream applications, and over six datasets spanning two
languages and both machine-generated and user-generated noise.
To summarize, the strengths of the proposed text normalization algorithm UnsupClean are as follows: (1) The
algorithm is completely unsupervised, and does not need any training data (parallel corpus), dictionaries, etc. Thus,
the algorithm is suitable for application on resource-poor languages. (2) The algorithm can handle different types of
noise, including both intentional mis-spellings by human users, as well as machine-generated noise such as OCR noise,
and (3) The algorithm is language-independent, and can be readily applied to text in different languages. We make the
implementation of UnsupClean publicly available at https://github.com/ranarag/UnsupClean.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 brieﬂy surveys various types of text normalization/cleaning
algorithms. The proposed text normalization algorithm (UnsupClean) is detailed in Section 3. The baseline text
normalization algorithms with which the performance of UnsupClean is compared, are described in Section 4. Next, to
check the effectiveness of various text normalization algorithms, we focus on two downstream applications over noisy
text – retrieval and stance detection. The experiments related to these two downstream applications are described in
Section 5 and Section 6 respectively. Each of these sections describe the datasets used, the retrieval / stance detection
models used, and the experimental results. Finally, we conclude the study in Section 7.
2

A PREPRINT
2
Related work
Textual content can contain different types of noise [1], and signiﬁcant amount of research has been done on noisy text.
Some prior works attempted to understand the effect of noise present in text data on applications such as classiﬁcation [6].
Also some works have explored the use of artiﬁcially generated noise for cleansing noisy text. For instance, Gadde
et al. [10] proposed methods for artiﬁcially injecting noise in text, through random character deletion, replacement,
phonetic substitution, simulating typing errors, and so on.
Several methods have been developed for the normalization of noisy text, especially microblogs [11, 12, 13]. Based on
the approach taken, text normalization methods can be broadly classiﬁed into two categories:
Supervised text normalization methods: Such approaches rely on a training dataset, which is usually a parallel
corpus of canonical (correct) and noisy strings. For example, in [14], a noisy channel model was employed to perform
text normalization. Incorporation of phonetic information has been shown to help text normalization, e.g., Toutanova et.
al [15] included word pronunciation information in a noisy channel framework. GNU Aspell (http://aspell.net/),
a popular spelling correction tool, also uses phonetic and lexical information to ﬁnd normalized words.
More recently, neural models such as RNN [16] and Encoder-Decoder models [17] have also been used for text
normalization. Some prior works have also modeled the text normalization problem as machine translation from the
noisy text to the clean version [18].
Supervised methods require huge amounts of training data in the form of a parallel corpus, i.e., pairs of noisy and
clean text. Such a parallel corpus is often difﬁcult to get, especially for low-resource languages. Even for resource-rich
languages, creating a training dataset involves a lot of human intervention, thus making it a costly process. Unsupervised
methods try to mitigate some of these problems.
Unsupervised text normalization methods: These methods make use of the contextual and lexical information
available from the corpora to perform normalization, without the need for any training data. For instance, Kolak
et al. [19] applied a noisy channel based pattern recognition approach to perform OCR text correction. Ghosh et
al. [7] used a combination of contextual and syntactic information to ﬁnd the morphological variants of a word. Word
embeddings (e.g., Word2vec [20]) have shown great potential in capturing the contextual information of a word, and
hence word embedding based contextual information has been used in many of the recent works [8, 9]. For instance,
Sridhar [8] used contextual information to ﬁnd a set of candidate variants, which is reﬁned based on a lexical similarity
score.
In this work, we propose an unsupervised text normalization algorithm, and show that it performs competitively with
some of the methods mentioned above [8, 7].
Task-independent vs. Task-speciﬁc text normalization methods: Text normalization methods can also be catego-
rized into two broad categories based on whether a method is meant for a speciﬁc task. Most of the methods stated
above, including spelling correction tools, are task-independent – they aim to correct the misspelled words in a corpus.
On the other hand, some task-speciﬁc text normalization methods have also been proposed. For instance, Satapathy et
al. [21] proposed a method for normalizing tweets speciﬁcally for sentiment analysis. Vinciarelli et al. [6] attempted
normalization of noisy text speciﬁcally for categorization. Again, Ghosh et al. [7] used co-occurrence counts and
edit-distance measures to ﬁnd morphological variants of query words for the task of information retrieval from OCR-ed
documents.
The proposed method is a task-independent one, and the experiments in the paper show that the data cleansing performed
by the proposed method can be helpful for various tasks such as retrieval and stance detection.
3
Proposed Text Normalization Algorithm
This section describes the proposed unsupervised text normalization algorithm, which we call UnsupClean. The
implementation is publicly available at https://github.com/ranarag/UnsupClean. We start this section with an
overview of our proposed algorithm, and then describe every step in detail.
3.1
Overview of our algorithm
We look at text normalization from the perspective of identifying morphological variations of words. To understand this
objective, we ﬁrst need to understand what a morpheme is. According to Morphology (the area of linguistics concerned
3

A PREPRINT
Symbol
Description
Symbol
Description
C
Corpus of documents which needs to be cleaned
L
Lexicon of noisy words
Lc
Lexicon of clean words
wL
Noisy word
wLc
Clean word
ClwLc
cluster of morphological variants of word wLc
CL
set of clusters
BLCS(w1, w2)
Bi-character Longest Common Subsequence between w1
and w2
LCSR(w1, w2)
Longest Common Subsequence Ratio between words w1
and w2
BLCSR(w1, w2)
BLCS Ratio between w1 and w2
α
Threshold used to form cluster of words having BLCSR
ES(w1, w2)
Edit Similarity between words w1 and w2
A(wLc)
cluster of words having lexical similarity with wLc > α
G(w)
Graph of words as nodes and edges weighted with the con-
textual similarity amongst them
β
a threshold used to prune the graph G
γ
threshold used in Ghosh et. al. [7]
n
threshold used in Enelvo [9]
Table 1: Notations used in this paper.
with the internal structure of words), a morpheme is the smallest unit of a word with a meaning.2 Structural variations
to a morpheme or a combination of morphemes are known as morphological variations. There can be various types
of morphological variations, including the plural and possessive forms of nouns, the past tense, past participle and
progressive forms of verbs, and so on. Our approach attempts to identify such (and other) morphological variants of
words (which are combinations of morphemes).
Intuitively, most morphological variations of a word have high string similarity with the canonical form of the word. So
a string similarity based approach can be used to ﬁnd candidate morphological variants of a word. However, string
similarities can be misleading, e.g., the words ‘Kashmiri’ and ‘Kashmira’ have high string similarity, but one is an
adjective (meaning ‘belonging to the state of Kashmir, India’) while the other is the name of an Indian actress. In such
cases, it is useful to check the contextual similarity of the words.
An important question is how to measure contextual similarity between words. One potential way is to check co-
occurrence counts of the words, i.e., how frequently the words appear in the same document (same context). However,
for short-length documents (e.g., microblogs), the co-occurrence counts will mostly be zero (or very low), since two
variants of the same word would usually not occur in the same microblog. An alternative method is to utilize word
embeddings that capture contextual features of a word (e.g., Word2vec [20]). Hence, our algorithm uses a mixture of
string similarity, word co-occurrence counts, and embeddings to ﬁnd the morphological variants of words.
Table 1 lists the notations used in this paper. Our proposed model considers as input a corpus C of noisy documents
(that need to be cleaned). Let L be the set of all distinct words contained in all the documents in C. Let Lc be a lexicon
of words with correct spellings, and let wLc ∈Lc be a correct word. For each word wLc ∈Lc, our model ﬁnds a
set ClwLc of morphological variants of wLc, where every element of ClwLc is a term in L. To ﬁnd the set ClwLc of
morphological variants of wLc, our model employs the following four steps: (1) First, we use structural/lexical similarity
measures to generate a set of candidate morphological variants for wLc. (2) Then we construct a similarity graph of the
morphological variants, based on the similarity between word embeddings and co-occurrence counts of words. (3) We
fragment the graph into clusters of similar morphological variants, using a graph clustering algorithm [22]. This step
forms cluster of words which have both high semantic similarity as well as syntactic similarity with wLc. (4) Lastly, we
choose that cluster of morphological variants as ClwLc, which has the member with the highest structural similarity
with wLc. We then, club Clwj to ClwLc for all wj ∈Clwj belonging to ClwLc . Subsequently, all words in ClwLc are
replaced by wLc. This results in non-overlapping clusters of morphological variants. Finally, all words belonging to a
particular cluster are replaced by the same word.
Figure 1 shows an overview of our proposed algorithm UnsupClean. We explain each of the above steps in the
following subsections.
3.2
Step 1: Generating a set of candidate morphological variants
For a given word wLc (that is considered to be taken from the lexicon of correct words Lc), we ﬁrst construct a set of
morphological variants A(wLc), that would include all possible noisy variants of wLc that occur in the given corpus.
We observed that various noisy variants of words can be broadly classiﬁed into the following categories:
(1) Vowels are often added/deleted from words, especially in social media posts. E.g., ‘cool’ is written as ‘cooool’, and
‘thanks’ is written as ‘thnks’.
(2) Platforms like microblogging sites (e.g., Twitter, Weibo) allow very short posts, with a hard limit on the number of
characters. On such platforms, users shorten words arbitrarily, omitting not only vowels but also many consonants. For
instance, ‘tomorrow’ is shortened as ‘tmrw’, and ‘medicines’ as ‘meds’. Even named entities can be shortened, e.g.,
‘Kathmandu’ as ‘ktm’ [5].
(3) People sometimes misspell words due to the phonetic similarity between the correct word and the misspelled word.
2https://www.cs.bham.ac.uk/~pjh/sem1a5/pt2/pt2_intro_morphology.html
4

A PREPRINT
Figure 1: An overview of the proposed algorithm UnsupClean
For example, the phrase ‘smell like men’s cologne’ can be misspelled as ‘smell like men’s colon’.
(4) Different from the types of user-generated noise described above, there is also machine-generated noise (e.g.,
OCR noise) where spelling errors can occur in any part of the word (including the ﬁrst character), whereas in case of
human-generated variants, the ﬁrst few characters usually match with that of the correct word. Also in case of OCR
noise, there is a high chance of not having the correct word at all in the corpus, while a corpus containing user-generated
errors usually contains both the clean and noisy variants of words.
To capture all these different types of noisy variants, we include in A(wLc), every word that has Bi-character Longest
Common Sub-sequence Ratio (BLCSR) similarity with w greater than a threshold α ∈(0, 1). Formally:
A(wLc) = {wL | BLCSR(wL, wLc) > α}
(1)
where BLCSR is the Bi-character Longest Common Sub-sequence Ratio [23] based string similarity measure between
two strings, and α ∈(0, 1) is a hyper-parameter. BLCSR is LCSR with bi-gram of characters calculated as:
BLCSR(w1, w2) =
BLCS(w1, w2)
maxlength(w1, w2) −1.0
(2)
where BLCS(w1, w2) is the Longest Common Subsequence considering bi-gram of characters. For example, if w1 is
‘ABCD’ and w2 is ‘ACD’ then its BLCS value will be 1. Once A(wLc) is formed, we remove the word wLc itself from
A(wLc).
3.3
Step 2: Constructing a similarity graph of morphological variants
As stated earlier in this section, only string similarity based measure is not sufﬁcient for capturing the morphological
variations of words. Hence, we also consider the contextual similarity between words. We employ two ways of
measuring contextual similarity between words – (i) observing co-occurrence counts. which works better for longer
documents (that are more likely to contain multiple variants of the same word), and (ii) computing similarity between
word embeddings which works better for short documents such as microblogs (since embeddings tend to lose the
context over long windows).
5

A PREPRINT
Let −→
wi be the embedding of the word wi. Speciﬁcally, we obtain the word embeddings using Word2vec [24] over the
given corpus. Word2vec is a neural network based word-embedding generation model [24]. Unlike one-hot vectors
for words, word2vec embeddings capture some contextual information in them – two words having similar word2vec
embeddings have been used in similar context in the corpus on which Word2vec has been trained. For instance,
after training word2vec on the ‘TREC 2005 confusion’ dataset, words like ‘program‘, ‘programs‘, ‘program1‘, and
‘program:s‘ have high cosine similarity amongst their embeddings. Here, a word wi is considered to be used in a similar
context as another word wj if wi frequently appears ‘nearby’ wj, i.e., within a ﬁxed context window size around wj.
Another advantage of word2vec embeddings over one-hot vectors is that the size of these embeddings do not increase
with increase in vocabulary. Two different versions of the Word2vec model exist depending upon how the embeddings
are generated – (1) skip-gram, and (2) Continuous Bag of Words (CBoW). For our algorithm, we used Word2vec
with context window size 3 and skip-gram based approach. We chose skip-gram over CBoW since it generates better
word embeddings in case of infrequent words.3 Also, we kept the context window size 3 so as to ensure good word
embeddings for infrequent noisy words.
We construct a graph G(wLc) with all words from the set A(wLc) as the nodes. We consider an edge between two
nodes (words) wi, wj ∈A(wLc) only if the value of cosine similarity between the embeddings −→
wi and −→
wj is greater
than a threshold β. We calculate the β value by using a weighted average of the cosine similarities between embeddings
of all word-pairs in the set A(wLc), with the BLCSR value between the words as the corresponding weights. That is:
β =
P
wi,wj∈A(wLc) BLCSR(wi, wj) ∗cosineSim(−→
wi, −→
wj)
P
wi,wj∈A(wLc) BLCSR(wi, wj)
(3)
This is done to ﬁnd a threshold which takes both the syntactic similarity and semantic similarity into consideration.
If cosineSim(−→
wi, −→
wj) is greater than β, it means that the word-embedding model is highly conﬁdent of wi being a
morphological variant of wj (and vice versa), and hence we connect the two words with an edge. We weight the edge
between the two words wi, wj with weight Wij deﬁned as:
Wi,j = cosineSim(−→
wi, −→
wj) × Cooccur(wi, wj)
(4)
where Cooccur(wi, wj) is the co-occurrence count of the words wi and wj in the same document (averaged over all
documents in the corpus). We take the product of the two similarities since cosine-similarity of word embeddings
captures similarity of the words in a local context (e.g., in a context window of size 3 words) and co-occurrence count
captures their similarity in a global context (of a whole document).
3.4
Step 3: Fragmenting the graph into clusters of morphological variants
In the graph G(wLc), edges exist only between those nodes (words) which have at least a certain amount of similarity
(cosineSim(−→
wi, −→
wj) > β). Next, we want to identify groups of words which have a high level of similarity among
themselves. To this end, community detection or graph clustering algorithms can be used to identify groups of nodes
that have ‘strong’ links (high-weight edges) among them. There are many graph clustering algorithms in literature [22].
We speciﬁcally use the popular Louvain graph clustering algorithm [25]. This algorithm functions on the principle
of maximizing a modularity score [26] for each cluster/community, where the modularity quantiﬁes the quality of
an assignment of nodes to clusters, by evaluating how much more densely connected the nodes within a cluster are,
compared to how connected they would be in a random network. Thus, it can be expected that all words in a particular
cluster (as identiﬁed by Louvain algorithm) have strong semantic similarity amongst them.
3.5
Step 4: Finding the most suitable cluster for a word
Out of the clusters identiﬁed from G(wLc), we now need to ﬁnd that cluster ClwLc whose members are most likely to
be the morphological variants of the given word wLc. We consider ClwLc to be that cluster which contains the word
with the minimum edit-distance from the word wLc (ties broken arbitrarily).
Thus, for a given word wLc, we identify a set ClwLc of morphological variants. Some examples of Cls identiﬁed by
the proposed algorithm are shown later in Table 6 and Table 7.
4
Baseline text normalization approaches
We compare the performance of our proposed text normalization algorithm with those of several baseline normalization
methods that are described in this section. Since the implementations of these baselines are not publicly available
3See https://code.google.com/archive/p/word2vec/.
6

A PREPRINT
Figure 2: An overview of GNU Aspell
(except Aspell and Enelvo), we implemented the algorithms following the descriptions in the respective papers, with
some modiﬁcations as described below. Code for Enelvo is publicly available but as a normalizer package for Portuguese
Language. Hence we implemented the Enelvo algorithm as well.
4.1
Aspell
Aspell is an open-source spell checking library which uses a combination of Lawren Philips’ metaphone search
algorithm [27] and Ispell’s missed strategy mechanism. Given a (misspelled) word, the algorithm ﬁrst ﬁnds all the
metaphones of the word. It then ﬁnds all the words that are within 1 or 2 edit-distance from any of the metaphones of
the word. Figure 2 shows a ﬂowchart describing the functioning of Aspell.
We used the GNU implementation of Aspell with the Python wrapper available at https://github.com/
WojciechMula/aspell-python. For the RISOT dataset (in Bengali) that we use later in the paper, we used the
Aspell Bengali dictionary available at https://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/aspell/dict/0index.html.
4.2
Sridhar
Unlike a spell-checker like Aspell, the approach by Sridhar [8] uses both contextual information and structural
information for text normalization. Figure 3 gives a schematic ﬂowchart describing the method.
The approach involves a lexicon Lc of correct words (i.e. wLc ∈Lc) such that there exists a word embedding for each
wLc. Noisy versions for each wLc are found from the corpus as:
noisy-version[wLc] = ∀wL∈L,wL /∈Lc max
k
cosineSim(−−→
wLc, −→
wL)
(5)
where wL is a noisy word from the corpus C with lexicon L. For each wLc, k = 25 nearest neighbors are found
and stored in the map noisy-version. Note that only contextual similarity among word embeddings is considered for
identifying noisy versions in this initial step.
Now for a given noisy word wL ∈L, a list of all those wLc is obtained for which noisy-version[wLc] contains wL. The
words wLc in this list are scored, where the score is calculated as:
score(wLc, wL) = LCSR(wL, wLc)
ED(wL, wLc)
(6)
7

A PREPRINT
Figure 3: The overview of the algorithms of both Sridhar [8] and Enelvo [9]. The only difference between the two
algorithms is the way in which the scores are calculated.
where ED(wL, wLc) is the edit-distance between wL and wLc, and LCSR(wL, wLc) is the Longest Common Subse-
quence Ratio [23] calculated as
LCSR(wL, wLc) =
LCS(wL, wLc)
maxlength(wL, wLc)
(7)
where LCS(wL, wLc) is the Longest Common Subsequence Length between the words wL and wLc.
Finally, the wLc with the highest score (as computed above) is considered to be the normalized version of the noisy
word wL. Note that the computation of score considers only the lexical similarity between words. The integration of
contextual similarity with lexical similarity is achieved by ﬁrst selecting the wLc words based on contextual similarity
with wL, and then computing the lexical similarity score.
In the original paper [8], the author created Lc (the lexicon of correct words) by training a word embedding model on
some randomly selected sentences from the corpus which were manually normalized by a professional transcriber.
Since our objective is to not use human resource, we chose pre-trained word-vectors to construct Lc. Speciﬁcally, for
the RISOT dataset (in Bengali), we used pre-trained word2vec word vectors on Bengali Wikipedia data (available
at https://github.com/Kyubyong/wordvectors), and for the English / microblog datasets, we used the pre-
trained Word2Vec word vectors on the English Google News data (available at https://github.com/eyaler/
word2vec-slim).
4.3
Enelvo
This method [9] is inherently similar to that of Sridhar [8]. Figure 3 gives a schematic ﬂowchart describing both these
methods. Enelvo involves a lexicon Lc of correct words (i.e., wLc ∈Lc) with frequency ≥100 in the given corpus.
The noisy versions wL ∈L (the lexicon the given corpus) of the word wLc are then found as:
noisy-version[wLc] = ∀wL∈L,wL /∈Lc max
k
cosineSim(−−→
wLc, −→
wL)
(8)
where wLc is the correct word from the lexicon Lc, and wL is the noisy word from the lexicon L of corpus C. For each
wLc, the top k = 25 most similar noisy words wL ∈L are found and stored in the map noisy-version. This step is
similar to the ﬁrst step in the Sridhar baseline [8], and considers only contextual similarity among word embeddings.
8

A PREPRINT
Next, for a given noisy word wL ∈L a list of all those wLc is chosen for which noisy-version[wLc] contains wL. The
words wLc in this list are then scored.
The score is computed as:
score(wL, wLc) = n × lexical-similarity(wL, wLc) + (1 −n) × cosineSim(−→
wL, −−→
wLc)
(9)
where n ∈(0, 1) is a hyperparameter, and lexical-similarity(wL, wLc) is measured as:
lexical-similarity(wL, wLc) =
( LCSR(wL,wLc)
MED(wL,wLc) ,
if MED(wL, wLc) > 0.
LCSR(wL, wLc),
otherwise.
(10)
Here MED(wL, wLc) = ED(wL, wLc) −DS(wL, wLc) is the modiﬁed edit distance between wL and wLc, where
ED(wL, wLc) is the edit distance and DS(wL, wLc) is the diacritical symmetry between wL and wLc (a feature that is
useful in Portuguese and some non-English languages – see [9] for details). LCSR(wL, wLc) is the Longest Common
Subsequence Ratio, calculated as:
LCSR(wL, wLc) = LCS(wL, wLc) + DS(wL, wLc)
maxlength(wL, wLc)
(11)
where LCS(wL, wLc) is the Longest Common Subsequence of words wL and wLc. Hence, the computation of score
integrates both lexical similarity as well as contextual similarity, which is a point of difference from the Sridhar
baseline [8]. Finally, the wLc with the highest score is chosen as the normalized version of wL.
Thus, the integration of contextual similarity and lexical similarity is achieved in Enelvo as follows – ﬁrst, the top k
noisy words wL are chosen for each clean word wLc using contextual similarity. Then for a given noisy word wL, the
best clean word wLc is selected using a scoring function that is a weighted combination of contextual similarity and
lexical similarity.
For the embeddings, the authors of [9] trained a Word2Vec skip-gram model on a conglomeration of two corpora –
Twitter posts written in Portuguese and a product review corpus containing both noisy and correct texts [28]. Since
our datasets are in English and Bengali, we used pre-trained embeddings for the correct words wLc ∈Lc and trained
word2vec models on the respective noisy corpora for the noisy word embeddings wL ∈L. For the embeddings of wLc
in the RISOT dataset, we used pretrained Word2Vec embeddings of the Bengali Wikipedia dataset (available at https:
//github.com/Kyubyong/wordvectors). Similarly, for the English and microblog datasets, we used pretrained word
embeddings of the Google English News dataset (available at https://github.com/eyaler/word2vec-slim).
4.4
Ghosh
Ghosh et. al [7] employs a ﬁve-step approach to ﬁnd the morphological variants of a word (see Figure 4). The ﬁrst step
called segregation involves removal of words with string similarity ≤α (where α ∈(0, 1]) with the correct word wLc(or
query word), resulting in the formation of A(wLc). The next step is Graph Formation where a graph G = (V, E) is
formed with vertices V as the words in A(wLc) and edges E with weights as the co-occurrence counts between them.
Next step is the Pruning step where the Graph G is pruned. Pruning is carried out only if the maximum edge-weight
(maxew) in G is greater than a threshold γ which is determined by the user. In this step, edges which are less than β %
of maxew are removed from the Graph G resulting in the formation of a graph Gr = (V, E′) where E′ ⊂E.
The next step is called Congregation where the graph Gr is further fragmented into clusters based on their edge-weights.
Two vertices v1 and v2 belong to the same cluster if they satisfy any of the following conditions – (i) v1 is the
strongest neighbour of v2, or (ii) v2 is the strongest neighbour of v1. This results in the formation of a set of k clusters
CL = {Cl1, Cl2, . . . , Clk}. Congregation step is followed by the ﬁnal step called Melding. In this step, a cluster is
chosen from the set of clusters CL to have the morphological variants of the query word wLc. Such a cluster containing
lexically the most similar word to wLc is chosen to be the cluster containing morphological variants of wLc. The lexical
similarity is measured using Edit Similarity (ES), which is an edit-distance based similarity metric, having the formula:
ES(w1, w2) = 1 −
ED(w1, w2)
max(stringLength(w1), stringLength(w2))
(12)
where ED(w1, w2) is the edit-distance between the two words w1 and w2.
Difference of proposed algorithm with baselines: The baseline normalization algorithms discussed in this section are
signiﬁcantly different from the proposed algorithm UnsupClean. Sridhar and Enelvo both use contextual and lexical
similarity, as does UnsupClean; however, the approach for integrating contextual similarity and lexical similarity is
9

A PREPRINT
Figure 4: An overview of the algorithm by Ghosh et. al., derived from the original paper [7]
different in UnsupClean as compared to Sridhar and Enelvo. Additionally, neither Sridhar nor Enelvo are graph-based
methods, whereas UnsupClean relies on forming a similarity graph and then clustering the graph. The Ghosh baseline
is most similar to UnsupClean – both use contextual as well as lexical similarity, and both are graph-based methods.
But importantly, Ghosh measures contextual similarity using only co-occurrence statistics, whereas UnsupClean uses a
combination of co-occurrence statistics and word embeddings. The advantage of using word embeddings will be clear
from our experiments described in the subsequent sections.
In the next two sections, we compare the performance of the proposed UnsupClean text normalization algorithm
with that of the baseline normalization algorithms described in this section. To this end, we consider two downstream
applications – retrieval (Section 5) and stance detection (Section 6).
5
Downstream Application 1: Retrieval
In this section, we evaluate the performance of a text normalization algorithm by observing the performance of a
retrieval (search) system over a noisy corpus that is normalized by the algorithm.
5.1
Datasets for retrieval
For evaluation of various text normalization methods, we experimented with the following three datasets, each having a
different source of noise. The statistics of the datasets are given in Table 2.
(1) RISOT Bengali OCR Data: This dataset was released in the FIRE RISOT track (https://www.isical.ac.
in/~fire/risot/risot2012.html). The text version of 62,825 news articles of a premiere Bengali newspaper
Anandabazar Patrika (2004-2006) was scanned and OCRed to create the collection. The dataset also contains 66 queries,
and their set of relevant documents (gold standard).
(2) TREC 2005 Confusion Track Data: This dataset was created for the TREC Confusion track 2005 [29]. The
dataset consists of the text versions of Federal Register English documents (of the year 1994), which were scanned and
10

A PREPRINT
Dataset
No. of documents
No. of queries
FIRE RISOT Bengali
62,825
66
TREC Confusion 2005
55,600
49
TREC Microblog 2011
16,074,238
50
Table 2: Description of the retrieval datasets used for empirical comparison of the proposed and baseline text
normalization methods.
OCR-ed. We use the 5% version for our experiments, where the approximate character error rate is 5%. Further details
can be found in [29].
(3) TREC 2011 Microblog Track Data: We consider an English tweet collection viz. TREC Microblog track
collection 2011 (https://trec.nist.gov/data/microblog2011.html, containing noise produced by cavalier
human writing style. Unlike the other two datasets, this is a much larger collection (containing over 16 million tweets),
and is also expected to test the scalability of any text normalization method.
Thus, we use three noisy collections having different types of errors (OCR errors, errors due to users’ writing styles)
in two different languages (English and Bengali) to test the efﬁcacy and language independence of various text
normalization methods. For brevity, we refer to the datasets as RISOT, Confusion and Microblog respectively.
5.2
Retrieval Model used
We used the popular Information Retrieval system Indri which is a component of the Lemur Toolkit (https://www.
lemurproject.org/indri/) for the retrieval experiments. Indri is a language-independent retrieval system, that
combines language modeling and inference network approaches [30]. We used the default setting of Indri for all
experiments.
A particular corpus is ﬁrst normalized using a normalization algorithm (either UnsupClean, or one of the baselines
Sridhar, Enelvo, Ghosh, and Aspell), and the normalized corpus is then indexed using Indri. The queries are also
normalized using the same normalization algorithm, and then the retrieval is carried out.
5.3
Parameter settings of normalization algorithms
The proposed algorithm has one hyperparameter α (the similarity threshold for BLCSR). We obtained the best value for
α via grid search in the range [0.5, 1.0] with a step size of 0.01. The best values are α = 0.56 for RISOT, α = 0.9 for
Confusion and α = 0.83 for the Microblog dataset.
Ghosh et al. [7] has three hyper-parameters, namely α, β and γ. We followed the same methodology as stated in
the original paper [7] to set the parameters – we varied the α and β while keeping the γ value equal to 50. We
obtained the best values for α and β via grid search in the range [0.5, 1.0] with a step size of 0.01. The best values are
α = 0.8, β = 0.7 for RISOT, α = 0.9, β = 0.7 for TREC 2011 microblog and α = 0.7, β = 0.8 for the Confusion
dataset.
For both Sridhar [8] and Enelvo [9] have a hyper-parameter K (the number of nearest neighbors to a particular word w,
that are considered as potential variants of w).
Both these works directly specify k = 25 without any tuning. Hence, we adhered to the value k = 25 value provided by
the authors in their papers. Enelvo has another hyper-parameter n that speciﬁes the relative signiﬁcance of contextual
similarity and lexical similarity while computing score; we used n = 0.8, the value used by the authors in the original
paper.
5.4
Evaluation metrics for retrieval
As stated earlier, to evaluate the performance of a text normalization algorithm, we measure the performance of retrieval
on noisy datasets (described in Section 5.1) cleaned using the normalization algorithm. We use some standard metrics
to evaluate the retrieval performance, as follows.

The TREC 2005 Confusion dataset, however, has only one relevant document per query. Hence, it is more common to
report the Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR) metric for this dataset.
11

A PREPRINT
Normalization Algorithm

Raw data (without any cleaning)
50.08%
17.21%
18.50%
Ghosh et al.[7]
54.48%
19.48%
20.98%
Enelvo [9]
49.24%
17.04%
18.37%
Sridhar [8]
47.75%
17.38%
18.76%
Aspell
24.40%
5.43%
5.58%
UnsupClean (Proposed)
58.32%ESA
21.50%ESA
23.00%ESA
Table 3: Retrieval performance on RISOT Bengali OCR dataset, using Indri IR system. Best performances are
in bold font. Superscripts E,S,A indicate the proposed method is statistically signiﬁcantly better than Enelvo,
Sridhar and Aspell respectively.
Normalization Algorithm

Raw data (without any cleaning)
37.63%
16.13%
19.77%
Ghosh et al.[7]
37.62%
15.97%
19.66%
Enelvo [9]
38.79%
15.84%
19.39%
Sridhar [8]
39.79%
16.20%
19.91%
Aspell
23.28%
9.68%
12.44%
UnsupClean (Proposed)
39.23%
16.34%
20.01%
Table 4: Retrieval performance on TREC 2011 microblog dataset, using Indri IR system. Best performances
are in bold font (none of the differences in performance are statistically signiﬁcant).
5.5
Results
Table 3 compares the retrieval performance using different text normalization algorithms (the proposed method and the
baselines) for the RISOT Bengali dataset. Also shown are the retrieval performances over the raw data, i.e., without any
normalization. Similarly, Table 4 shows the results for the TREC 2011 Microblog dataset, while Table 5 shows results
for the TREC 2005 Confusion dataset. The tables also report results of statistical signiﬁcance testing – the symbols A,
E, G, S in the superscripts in the tables indicate that the proposed method is statistically signiﬁcantly better at 95%
conﬁdence interval (p < 0.05) than Aspell, Enelvo, Ghosh et al., and Sridhar respectively.
For the Microblog dataset (see Table 4), the proposed UnsupClean performs competitively with the baselines. Retrieval

For the other two datasets which primarily contain OCR noise (see Table 3 and Table 5), UnsupClean enables much
better retrieval than the baselines. Especially for the RISOT dataset (in Bengali language), the baselines Enelvo, Sridhar
and Aspell perform very poorly. In fact, in most cases, retrieval performance is better over the raw RISOT data, than
after normalization by these three baselines. In contrast, UnsupClean leads to signiﬁcant improvement in retrieval
performance. Hence, the proposed model can generalize to different types of noise as well as different languages, better
than most of the baselines.
5.6
Comparative Analysis
Out of all the text normalization algorithms, retrieval using Aspell performs most poorly. In general, spelling correction
algorithms such as Aspell are unable to segregate words with high string similarity but low semantic similarity
Normalization Algorithm
Mean Reciprocal Rank
Raw data (without any cleaning)
62.93%
Ghosh et al.[7]
63.78%
Enelvo [9]
55.20%
Sridhar [8]
54.36%
Aspell
38.93%
UnsupClean (Proposed)
70.21%ESA
Table 5: Retrieval Performance on TREC 2005 Confusion dataset, using Indri IR system. Best result are in bold
font. Superscripts E,S,A indicate the same as in Table 3.
12

A PREPRINT
Word
UnsupClean
Ghosh
Enelvo
Sridhar
release
release, released, releases
release
release, realease, relea
releasing, released, realease, release, re-
leases, relea
organic
organic, organik, organi
organic
turmeric, organic
organic
msnbc
msnbc
msnbc
cbsnews, tpmdc, msnbc,
foxnews, nbcnews
msnbc, nbcnews, cbsnews, tpmdc, mas-
rawy
Table 6: Resulting clusters of morphological variants of some speciﬁc query-words, on the TREC 2011 microblog
dataset
Word
UnsupClean
Ghosh
Enelvo
Sridhar
program
programt, 44program, programs, pro-
gram1, program programs1, sprogram,
program11,
program, programs
program programs1, program1,
programs, prodects
programs,
program,
programs1
document
document1, documents, documents1,
locument1, locuments, locument, docu-
ment, locuments1
documents,
docu-
ment
document, forepart, locument,
document1, documents
locument,
documents,
document1,
document
Table 7: Resulting clusters of morphological variants of some speciﬁc query-words, on the TREC 2005 Confu-
sion dataset
(‘industrious’ and ‘industrial’), or homonyms (such as ‘living’ and ‘leaving’), etc. Such variants can be identiﬁed by
the proposed algorithm as well as by the other baselines which use context information in identiﬁcation of variants.
In the rest of this section, we report some insights on how the proposed UnsupClean model differs from the other
baselines Sridhar [8], Enelvo [9] and Ghosh et al. [7]. For this analysis, Table 6 and Table 7 show some examples of
morphological variants identiﬁed by these algorithms for the same word.
UnsupClean vs Sridhar/Enelvo: Both Sridhar and Enelvo ﬁrst consider the contextual similarity for identifying a
candidate set of morphological variants (see Eqn. 5 and Eqn. 8 in the descriptions of Sridhar and Enelvo respectively).
They initially ignore the structural/lexical similarity between words, which at times includes incorrect variants into the
candidate set. For instance, the word ‘turmeric’ is identiﬁed as a candidate variant of ‘organic’ by Enelvo, while the
words ‘nbcnews’ and ‘tpmdc’ are identiﬁed by both the methods as candidate variants of ‘msnbc’ (see Table 6), due
to the high contextual similarity between these words. On the other hand, the proposed method considers wj to be a
candidate variant of wi only if their lexical similarity is higher than a threshold; hence, such wrong variants are not
included in A(wi) (on which contextual similarity is later applied).
UnsupClean vs. Ghosh et al.: Ghosh et al. [7] computes the contextual similarity among words using only the
co-occurrence counts of words in the same document. This method works well for long documents having a small
vocabulary, but performs poorly when the vocabulary size is very large or when the document size is very small (in
which case the co-occurrence matrix will be very sparse). Especially, two error variants of the same word rarely co-occur
in the same microblog. Hence, Ghosh et. al [7] performs well on the RISOT dataset, but poorly on the Microblog and
Confusion datasets. On the other hand, the proposed method employs both co-occurrence counts and cosine similarity
of embeddings to capture contextual similarity among words, and hence generalizes better to different types of noise
and documents.
5.7
Ablation Analysis
We conducted an ablation analysis in order to understand the importance of various steps / components in our algorithm.
To this end, we applied UnsupClean on the RISOT dataset in various settings – with all steps, and by removing one
step at a time. Table 8 shows the results of the ablation analysis.
Normalization Algorithm

UnsupClean (with all components)
58.3%
21.5%
23.0%
UnsupClean without β thresholding
57.0
20.3
21.5
UnsupClean without similarity graph of morphological variants
54.9
18.6
19.1
UnsupClean without graph fragmentation
52.6
19.1
20.7
Table 8: Ablation analysis of UnsupClean – how retrieval performance (on RISOT Bengali OCR dataset, using
Indri IR system) varies with removal of various components.
13

A PREPRINT
The β thresholding (see Step 2 in Section 3.3) is done to consider words which have a high contextual similarity only.
This is done to ensure high precision of the retrieved results. As can be seen from Table 8, the removal of such a

cluster increases.
The construction of similarity graph of morphological variants (see Step 2 in Section 3.3) is a crucial step that helps
capture the contextual similarity among words with different morphological structures. Removal of this step will result
in a signiﬁcant drop in both mAP and recall scores compared to UnsupClean.
If the graph fragmenting step (see Step 3 in Section 3.4) is skipped, we miss out on identifying the strongly connected
component of the graph, and thus weakly connected components also get drawn into the ﬁnal cluster, causing a decrease
in both mAP as well as recall scores.
This ablation analysis shows that all the steps of the UnsupClean algorithm are essential, and removing any of the
steps will adversely affect the retrieval performance. Especially, skipping the graph formation step leads to substantial
degradation in both Precision and Recall of retrieval. Also the graph fragmenting step is crucial particularly for Recall.
From the experiments and analyses stated in this section, we can conclude the our proposed algorithm UnsupClean is
very helpful in enhancing retrieval from noisy text. UnsupClean out-performs almost all baselines across different
types of noisy corpus (containing OCR noise, and noise due to cavalier writing style of human users) and across
multiple languages (English and Bengali). Especially for corpus with OCR noise, UnsupClean enables statistically
signiﬁcantly better retrieval than most baselines, while it achieves very competitive performance in case of noisy
microblogs. Additionally, UnsupClean is completely unsupervised, and does not need any manual intervention at any
step, thus making it suitable for use on large corpora in various languages.
6
Downstream Application 2: Stance Detection
Online platforms such as Twitter, Facebook, etc. have become popular forums to discuss about various socio-political
topics and express personal opinions regarding these topics. In this kind of scenario, ‘stance’ refers to the inherent
sentiment express by an opinion towards a particular topic. The topic is referred to as the ‘target’. The ‘stance’ expressed
by a blog/tweet can have three types of sentiment towards a given topic. It can either support (or favor) the target, it can
oppose (or be against) the target, or it can be neutral, i.e., neither support nor oppose the target. The problem of ‘stance
detection’ refers to the process of automatically identifying this stance or sentiment of a post expressed towards a target.
The reader is referred to [31] for a recent survey on stance detection.
Stance detection is frequently carried out on crowdsourced data such as tweets/blogs which are noisy in nature, due
to frequent use of informal language, non-standard abbreviations, and so on. There exist several popular methods for
stance detection from such noisy crowdsourced content. In this section, we check whether using text normalization
algorithms improves the performance of these stance detection models on noisy microblogs.
6.1
Datasets for stance detection
We consider datasets made available by the SEMEVAL 2016 Task 6A challenge [4] which are commonly used datasets
for stance detection, and have been used in a number of prior works. The datasets consist of tweets (microblogs) for
different topics; for each topic, there are three types of tweets – those in favor of (supporting) the topic, those against
(opposing) the topic, and tweets that are neutral to the topic. We consider the following three SemEval datasets:
(i) Atheism (AT): Here the target is ‘atheism’, and the tweets are in favor of, or against the idea of atheism (or neutral).
(ii) Climate change is a real concern (CC): For this dataset the target is ‘Climate change is a real concern’.
(iii) Hillary Clinton (HC): Here the target is ‘Hillary Clinton’, and the tweets are either in support of / against the
politician.
We refer to these datasets as AT, CC and HC respectively for brevity in the rest of the paper.
The datasets are already partitioned into train and test sets, as deﬁned in the SEMEVAL 2016 Task 6A challenge [4].
The numbers of tweets in each dataset is stated in Table 9. We have also provided some examples of tweets in the
datasets in Table 10.
6.2
Stance Detection Models
We consider two stance detection models for the experiments.
14

A PREPRINT
Dataset
# Training Instances
# Test Instances
Favor
Against
Neutral
Favor
Against
Neutral
SemEval-AT
92
304
117
32
160
28
SemEval-CC
212
15
168
123
11
35
SemEval-HC
112
361
166
45
172
78
Table 9: Statistics of standard SEMEVAL 2016 Task 6A datasets for stance detection (divided into training and
test sets).
Tweet text
Label
Tweets from SemEval-AT (Atheism) dataset
Absolutely f**king sick & tired of the religious and their "We’re persecuted" bollocksSo f**king what? Pissoff!
#SemST
FAVOR
All that is needed for God for something to happen is to say "#Be" and it is; for God is capable of all things.
#God created #trinity #SemST
AGAINST
In other related news. Boko Haram has killed over 200 people in the last 48hrs. #SemST
NEUTRAL
Tweets from SemEval-CC (Climate Change is a Real Concern) dataset
We cant deny it, its really happening. #SemST
FAVOR
The Climate Change people are disgusting a**holes. Money transfer scheme for elite. May you rot. #SemST
AGAINST

#SemST
NEUTRAL
Tweets from SemEval-HC (Hillary Clinton) dataset

FAVOR

AGAINST
Lets remember #dickcheney is an unindicted war criminal b4 we start yelling #Benghazi day after day. Will we
ever see justice? #SemST
NEUTRAL
Table 10: Examples of posts from the SemEval datasets. Some characters in abusive words are replaced with *
1. LSTM (Long Short Term Memory): This model was proposed by Hochreiter and Schmidhuber [32] to
speciﬁcally address this issue of learning long-term dependencies. The LSTM maintains a separate memory cell
inside it that updates and exposes its content only when deemed necessary.A number of minor modiﬁcations to
the standard LSTM unit have been made. We deﬁne the LSTM units at each time step t to be a collection of
vectors in Rd : an input gate it, a forget gate ft, an output gate ot, a memory cell ct, and a hidden state ht .
d is the number of the LSTM units. The entries of the gating vectors it, ft and ot are in [0, 1]. The LSTM
transition equations are the following:
it = σ(Wixt + Uiht−1 + Vict−1)
(13)
ft = σ(Wfxt + Ufht−1 + Vfct−1)
(14)
ot = σ(Woxt + Uoht−1 + Voct−1)
(15)
˜ct = σ(Wixt + Uiht−1 + Vict−1)
(16)
ct = ft ⊙ct−1 + it ⊙˜ct
(17)
ht = ot ⊙tanh(ct)
(18)
For detecting stance , a simple strategy is to map the input sequence to a ﬁxed-sized vector using one RNN,
and then to feed the vector to a softmax layer. Given a text sequence, x=[x1, x2,···, xT ], we ﬁrst use a lookup
layer to get the vector representation (embeddings) of each word xi. The output hT can be regarded as the
representation of the whole sequence, which has a fully connected layer followed by a softmax non-linear
layer that predicts the probability distribution over stances (in this case either ‘FAVOR’ or ‘AGAINST’ or
‘NEUTRAL’). The LSTM model has the following hyperparameters whose values are taken as follows:
learning rate of 5 × e−4 and dropout of 0.5.
15

A PREPRINT
2. Target Speciﬁc Attention Neural Network (TAN): This model was introduced by Du et al. [33], one of the
winning entries SemEval 2016 task 6A [4] challenge. The model is based on bidirectional LSTM with an
attention mechanism. A target sequence of length N is represented as [z1, z2, . . . , zN] where znϵRd
′
is the
d
′-dimensional vector of the n-th word in the target sequence. The target-augmented embedding of a word t
for a speciﬁc target z is ez
t = xt ⊙z where ⊙is the vector concatenation operation. The dimension of ez
t is
(d + d
′). An afﬁne transformation maps the (d + d
′)-dimensional target-augmented embedding of each word
to a scalar value as per the following Eqn. 19:
a
′
t = Waez
t + ba
(19)
where Wa and ba are the parameters of the bypass neural network. The attention vector [a
′
1, a
′
2, . . . , a
′
T ]
undergoes a softmax transformation to get the ﬁnal attention signal vector (Eqn. 20):
at = softmax(at) =
ea
′
t
PT
i=1 ea′
i
(20)
After this, the product of attention signal at and ht (which is the corresponding hidden state vector of RNN) is
used to represent the word t in a sequence with attention signal. The representation of the whole sequence can
be obtained by averaging the word representations:
s = 1
T
T
X
t=0
atht
(21)
where s ϵ Rd is the vector representation of the text sequence and it can be used as features for text classiﬁcation:
p = softmax(Wclfs + bclf)
(22)
where p ϵ RC is the vector of predicted probability for stance. Here C is the number of classes of stance labels,
and Wclf and bclf are parameters of the classiﬁcation layer.
The TAN model has two hyperparameters, whose values are taken as follows: learning rate of 5 × e−4 and
dropout of 0.5.
6.3
Parameter settings of normalization algorithms
We set the parameters for various text normalization algorithms in a way similar to what was described in Section 5.3.
For the proposed method, the value of α is set of 0.56. For Ghosh et al. [7], the parameters were set to α =
0.7, β = 0.6, γ = 50 (decided through grid search, as described in Section 5.3). For Sridhar [8] and Enelvo [9], the
hyperparameter K was set to 25 as speciﬁed in the original papers. For Enelvo [9], n was set to 0.8.
6.4
Evaluation Metric for stance detection
To evaluate the performance of different models, we use the same metric as reported by the ofﬁcial SemEval 2016 Task
A [4]. We use the macro-average of the F1-score for ‘favor’ and ‘against’ as the bottom-line evaluation metric.
Favg = Ffavor + Fagainst
2
(23)
where Ffavor and Fagainst are calculated as shown below:
Ffavor = 2PfavorRfavor
Pfavor + Rfavor
(24)
Fagainst = 2PagainstRagainst
Pagainst + Ragainst
(25)
Here Pfavor and Rfavor are the precision and recall of the ‘FAVOR’ class respectively, and Pagainst and Ragainst
respectively are the precision and recall of the ‘AGAINST’ class and are deﬁned as:
Pfavor =
#TPfavor
#TPfavor + #FPfavor
(26)
16

A PREPRINT
Normalization Method
AT
CC
HC
Raw data (without any cleaning)
0.5508
0.3968
0.4396
Enelvo [9]
0.5659
0.4427
0.5336
Sridhar [8]
0.5476
0.4778
0.5318
Ghosh et al. [7].
0.6156
0.4641
0.5216
Aspell
0.5923
0.5250
0.4586
UnsupClean (Proposed)
0.6250
0.5271
0.5405
Table 11: Stance detection results on SemEval datasets by the TAN model [33]. The metric is as explained in
Section 6.4. Highest values marked in boldface.
Normalization Method
AT
CC
HC
Raw data (without any cleaning)
0.5497
0.3760
0.4938
Enelvo [9]
0.6084
0.3911
0.5646
Sridhar [8]
0.5666
0.4558
0.5055
Ghosh et al. [7].
0.6395
0.3884
0.4893
Aspell
0.5902
0.4008
0.5337
UnsupClean (Proposed)
0.6411
0.4882
0.5401
Table 12: Stance classiﬁcation results on SemEval datasets by the LSTM [32] model. The metric is as explained
in Section 6.4. Highest values marked in boldface.
Rfavor =
#TPfavor
#TPfavor + #FNfavor
(27)
Pagainst =
#TPagainst
#TPagainst + #FPagainst
(28)
Ragainst =
#TPagainst
#TPagainst + #FNagainst
(29)
With respect to ‘FAVOR’ class, #TPfavor refers to number of true positives in favor class, i.e., the number of tweets
that are predicted as ‘FAVOR’ by the classiﬁer, and are actually of ‘FAVOR’ class. #FPfavor refers to number of
tweets which are not actually of ‘FAVOR’ class, but that have been predicted as ‘FAVOR’ by the classiﬁer. #FNfavor
refers to number of tweets which are actually of ‘FAVOR’ class but have been wrongly classiﬁed by the classiﬁer.
6.5
Results
The experiments with a particular dataset are as follows. Five instances of the dataset are normalized, one by each of
the ﬁve normalization algorithms (UnsupClean and four baselines). The training set and the test set are normalized
separately. Subsequently, a stance detection model (LSTM or TAN) is used on the normalized versions, and their
performances are measured.
Table 11 shows the performance of the TAN stance detection model [33], on different versions of the datasets normalized
by the different normalization algorithms. Also shown are the values on the raw datasets, i.e., without any cleaning.
From Table 11, it can be seen that all normalization approaches lead to some improvement, as compared to the
performance on the raw data. It is evident that the TAN model performs the best by using our proposed normalization
method, for all three datasets (best metric values highlighted in boldface).
Similarly, Table 12 shows the performance of the LSTM [32] model on different versions of the datasets normalized by
the different normalization algorithms, as well as on the raw dataset. The LSTM model performs the best by using the
proposed normalization method for two datasets (AT and CC), and gives the second-best result for the HC dataset.
We checked the statistical signiﬁcance of the differences in performance with various normalization methods using Mc-
Nemar’s test (https://machinelearningmastery.com/mcnemars-test-for-machine-learning/); however,
the differences in performance are not statistically signiﬁcant.
6.6
Analysis of result of stance detection
Table 13 shows some examples of tweets from the SemEval datasets, where all/most of the baseline normalization
algorithms led to wrong stance detection by the TAN [33] model (for the ﬁrst two examples) and by the LSTM
17

A PREPRINT
Tweets from SemEval Datasets
UnsupClean
(Proposed)
Enelvo [9]
Sridhar [8]
Ghosh
et
al. [7]
Aspell
Jesus response to a religious environ-
ment was to create a royal environment.
It drove people nuts. Still does - thank
God #SemST
jesus,
religious,
create
janus,
Seditious,
create
joss,
regs,
create
jesus,
religious,
creative
jesus,
religious,
create,
replaces
‘#’
by ‘W’

Thank
you so much for supportive #Free-
dom4Cuba RTs!
#WakeUpAmerica
#Cuba #TodosMarchamos #SemST
estadodesats,
thank you,
much your
estadodesats,
thang Lou,
guch onr
estadodesats,
thanks yU,
mce onr
estadodesats,
anything
4your,
much 4your
stardust’s,
thank you,
much for,
replaces
‘#’
by ‘W’

ONE!!!!
Just making a funny!
#SemST
patvpeters,
one,
just making
funny
patvpeters,
obe,
sunt making
Hanno
patvpeters,
ne,
Fst
making
fane
patvpeters,
doesn,
just making
tofunny
parapets
one,
just making
funny,
replaces
‘#’
and ‘’ by ‘W’
#Religions can’t all be right, but they
can all be wrong. #SemST
#religions,
all be right,
but their can
all be wrong
#religious
alt be Light,
Wut theo caf
alt be Frond
#riggs,
Fall be rights,
bte thay Un
Fall be Lrg
#religions
all be right,
but
nothing
can
all
be
wrong
religions
all Be Right
but they Can
all Be wrong,
replaces
‘#’
by ‘W’
Table 13: Examples of posts from the SemEval datasets, for which proposed method led to correct stance
detection but all/most baseline normalization methods led to wrong stance detection (by TAN [33] for ﬁrst two
examples, and by LSTM model [32] for last two examples).
model [32] (for the last two examples), but by using the proposed normalization method, the correct stance was
identiﬁed for each of these tweets.
The ﬁrst and third examples show a situation where the proposed UnsupClean keeps the words present in a tweet
unchanged, but the baseline normalization methods change the words to some non-contextual variants that seem illogical
and lead to wrong stance detection. In the second example the proposed method changes the phrase ‘thank you so much
for’ to ‘thank you so much your’ whereas the modiﬁcations of different words by the other normalization methods

scenario is observed in the fourth example. Thus, the proposed model performs slightly better in understanding which
words to modify (into variants) and which words to leave unchanged.
From the experiments described in this section, it can be concluded that the proposed text normalization algorithm
UnsupClean competes very favorably with the baseline normalization models, for the stance detection task. We
demonstrate the efﬁcacy of UnsupClean with two popular stance detection models. Experiments show that both stance
detection models perform better after text normalization with UnsupClean, as compared to text normalization with the
baseline models.
These results, along with the results of retrieval in the previous Section 5, show that text normalization using
UnsupClean enables superior performance in multiple text processing tasks.
7
Conclusion
We proposed a language-independent, unsupervised algorithm for normalizing/cleansing of noisy text. We conducted
experiments for two downstream applications (Retrieval and Stance detection), over a variety of datasets and types
of noise, including OCR noise over English and Bengali, as well as noise due to informal writing style of humans
in microblogs. The experiments show that the proposed method generalizes well to different types of noise (both
user-generated and machine-generated noise), and performs competitively with several baseline text normalization
algorithms. The main strengths of the proposed method are that (i) it does not need expensive parallel corpus for
training or any human intervention (unlike many existing algorithms), and (ii) it does not need external resources such
as global word embeddings. These features make it any attractive choice for cleaning text in low-resource languages.
The implementation of UnsupClean is publicly available at https://github.com/ranarag/UnsupClean.
18

A PREPRINT
There are several potential future directions of this work. First, the effectiveness of UnsupClean can be checked
on other types of noise, such as noise due to automated speech-to-text conversion systems. Second, the proposed
method can be applied to clean text in low-resource languages that lack external resources and large parallel corpora.
Also, in this paper, we demonstrated the beneﬁts of cleaning text using UnsupClean for the two general tasks of
retrieval (search) and stance detection. The proposed method can also be tried to improve performance in more speciﬁc
versions of these tasks, such as identifying speciﬁc types of microblogs that aid relief operations during post-disaster
operations [34], as well as in other tasks such as summarization of noisy social media text [35, 36]. We plan to explore
these directions in future.
Acknowledgements: The authors thank the anonymous reviewers whose valuable suggestions helped to improve the
paper. The authors also acknowledge Dr. Arnab Bhattacharya of Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur for useful
discussions in the initial stages of the work. The work is partially supported by a project titled “Building Healthcare
Informatics Systems Utilising Web Data” funded by Department of Science & Technology, Government of India.
Finally, the authors gratefully acknowledge the support of NVIDIA Corporation with the donation of the Titan Xp GPU
used for this research.
