REGULARIZING FACE VERIFICATION NETS FOR PAIN INTENSITY REGRESSION
Feng Wang1,4, Xiang Xiang1∗, Chang Liu1,5, Trac D. Tran2, Austin Reiter1, Gregory D. Hager1, Harry Quon3, Jian Cheng4, Alan L. Yuille1
Dept. of {1 Computer Science, 2 Electrical & Computer Engineering, 3Radiation Oncology}
Johns Hopkins University, 3400 N. Charles St, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
4 Dept. of EE, UESTC, 2006 Xiyuan Ave, Chengdu, Sichuan 611731, China
5 Dept. of CS, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
ABSTRACT
Limited labeled data are available for the research of estimat-
ing facial expression intensities. For instance, the ability to
train deep networks for automated pain assessment is lim-
ited by small datasets with labels of patient-reported pain in-
tensities. Fortunately, ﬁne-tuning from a data-extensive pre-
trained domain, such as face veriﬁcation, can alleviate this
problem. In this paper, we propose a network that ﬁne-tunes
a state-of-the-art face veriﬁcation network using a regularized
regression loss and additional data with expression labels. In
this way, the expression intensity regression task can beneﬁt
from the rich feature representations trained on a huge amount
of data for face veriﬁcation. The proposed regularized deep
regressor is applied to estimate the pain expression intensity
and veriﬁed on the widely-used UNBC-McMaster Shoulder-
Pain dataset, achieving the state-of-the-art performance. A
weighted evaluation metric is also proposed to address the
imbalance issue of different pain intensities.
Index Terms— ﬁne-tuning, CNN, regularizer, regression
1. INTRODUCTION
Obtaining accurate patient-reported pain intensities is impor-
tant to effectively manage pain and thus reduce anesthetic
doses and in-hospital deterioration. Traditionally, caregivers
work with patients to manually input the patients’ pain in-
tensity, ranging among a few levels such as mild, moder-
ate, severe and excruciating. Recently, a couple of concepts
have been proposed such as active, automated and objec-
tive pain monitoring over the patient’s stay in hospital, with
roughly the same motivation: ﬁrst to simplify the pain report-
ing process and reduce the strain on manual efforts; second
to standardize the feedback mechanism by ensuring a single
metric that performs all assessments and thus reduces bias.
There indeed exist efforts to assess pain from the observa-
tional or behavioral effect caused by pain such as physiologi-
cal data. ©Medasense has developed medical devices for ob-
jective pain monitoring. Their basic premise is that pain may
cause vital signs such as blood pressure, pulse rate, respiration

Fig. 1. Example testing result of estimated pain intensities
(see the continuous red curve) of one patient in one video
from the Shoulder-Pain dataset [1] which provides per-frame
observer-rated labels (see the blue curve connected from dis-
crete points of (frame, intensity)). Best viewed in color.
rate, SpO2 from EMG, ECG or EEG, alone or in combination
to change and often to increase. Nevertheless, it takes much
more effort to obtain physiological data than videos of faces.
Computer vision and supervised learning have come a
long way in recent years, redeﬁning the state-of-the-art using
deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). However, the
ability to train deep CNNs for pain assessment is limited by
small datasets with labels of patient-reported pain intensities,
i.e., annotated datasets such as EmoPain [2], Shoulder-Pain
[1], BioVid Heat Pain [3]. Particularly, Shoulder-Pain is the
only dataset available for visual analysis with per-frame la-
bels. It contains only 200 videos of 25 patients who suffer
from shoulder pain and repeatedly raise their arms and then
put them down (onset-apex-offset). While all frames are la-
beled with discrete-valued pain intensities (see Fig. 1), the
dataset is small, the label is discrete and most labels are 0.
Although the small dataset problem prevents us from di-
rectly training a deep pain intensity regressor, we show that
arXiv:1702.06925v3  [cs.CV]  1 Jun 2017

ﬁne-tuning from a data-extensive pre-trained domain such as
face veriﬁcation can alleviate this problem. Our solutions are
• ﬁne-tuning a well-trained face veriﬁcation net on additional
data with a regularized regression loss and a hidden full-
connected layer regularized using dropout,
• regularizing the regression loss using a center loss,
• and re-sampling the training data by the population propor-
tion of a certain pain intensity w.r.t. the total population.
While our work is not the ﬁrst attempt of this regulariza-
tion idea [4], to our knowledge we are the ﬁrst to apply it to
the pain expression intensity estimation. Correspondingly, we
propose three solutions to address the four issues mentioned
above. In summary, the contributions of this work include
• addressing limited data with expression intensity labels by
relating two mappings from the same input face space to dif-
ferent output label space where the identity labels are rich,
• pushing the pain assessment performance by a large margin,
• proposing to add center loss regularizer to make the re-
gressed values closer to discrete values,
• and proposing a more sensible evaluation metric to address
the imbalance issue caused by a natural phenomena where
most of the time a patient does not express pain.
2. RELATED WORKS
Two pieces of recent work make progress in estimating pain
intensity visually using the Shoulder-Pain dataset only: Or-
dinal Support Vector Regression (OSVR) [5] and Recurrent
Convolutional Regression (RCR) [6]. Notably, RCR [6] is
trained end-to-end yet achieving sub-optimal performance.
Please see reference therein for other existing works. For fa-
cial expression recognition in general, there is a trade-off be-
tween method simplicity and performance, i.e., image-based
[4, 7] vs. video-based [8, 9, 10, 11] methods. As videos are
sequential signals, appearance-based methods including ours
cannot model the dynamics given by a temporal model [8] or
spatio-temporal models [9, 10, 11].
As regards regularizing deep networks, there exists recent
work that regularize deep face recognition nets for expression
classiﬁcation - FaceNet2ExpNet [4].
During pre-training,
they train convolutional layers of the expression net, regular-
ized by the deep face recognition net. In the reﬁning stage,
they append fully-connected (FC) layers to the pre-trained
convolutional layers and train the whole network jointly.
3. REGULARIZED DEEP REGRESSOR
Our network is based on a state-of-the-art face veriﬁcation
network [12]1 trained using the CASIA-WebFace dataset con-
taning 0.5 million face images with identity labels. As a clas-
siﬁcation network, it employs the Softmax loss regularized
with its proposed center loss. But it is difﬁcult to directly
1Model available at https://github.com/ydwen/caffe-face
Convolutional 
Layers
Fully Connected 
layer
Regression Loss
Center Loss
Aligned 
Face Image
Fig. 2.
Simpliﬁed illustration of the network architecture.
The convolution layers are adapted from a state-of-the-art
face veriﬁcation network [12] while we remove all the fully-
connected (FC) layers in [12] and then add two new FC layers.
To avoid over-ﬁtting the limited data, the number of neurons
in our hidden FC layer is relatively smaller than the previous
layer (50 vs 512), known as Dropout[13] as regularization.
ﬁne-tune the network for pain intensity classiﬁcation due to
limited face images with pain labels. However, it is feasi-
ble to ﬁt the data points (feature, intensity) as a regression
problem. Our ﬁne-tuning network employs a regression loss
regularized with the center loss, as shown in Fig. 2.
First, we modify the face veriﬁcation net’s softmax loss
to be a Mean Square Error (MSE) loss for regression. The
last layer of such a network is a ℓ2 distance layer, which eas-
ily causes gradient exploding due to large magnitudes of the
gradients at initial iterations. Thus, we replace the MSE loss
using a smooth ℓ1 loss with a Huber loss ﬂavor (see Sec. 3.1).
Secondly, as labels are discrete, it is sensible to regularize
the loss to make the regressed values to be more discrete. We
introduce the center loss [12] as a regularizer (see Sec. 3.2).
Thirdly, we propose two weighted evaluation metrics in
Sec.3.3 to address label imbalance which may induce trivial
method. In the following, we elaborate on the three solutions.
3.1. Regression Loss
Similar to conventional regression models, a regression net
minimizes the Mean Square Error (MSE) loss deﬁned as
LRMSE = 1
N (σ(wT x) −˜y)2
(1)
where x is the output vector of the hidden FC layer, w is a
vector of real-valued weights, ˜y is the ground-truth label, and
σ(·) is a sigmoid activation function σ(x) =
5
1+e−x . We use
σ(·) to truncate the output of the second FC layer to be in the
range of pain intensity [0, 5]. Here we omitted the bias term

x
minimize 
distance
projection 
direction
Fig. 3. Illustration of how the loss functions works. Each
point represents a feature vector in the feature space. By a re-
gression loss, we ﬁnd a linear projection to project the feature
vectors to one-dimension values. The calibration of the coor-
dinate axis is not uniform because we use sigmoid activation,
which is not a linear function. Best viewed in color.
for elegance. The gradient exploding problem often happens
due to the relatively large gradient magnitude during initial
iterations. This phenomenon is also described in [14]. To
solve this problem, we follow [14] to apply the smooth ℓ1 loss
which makes the gradient smaller than the case with the MSE
loss when the absolute error |σ(wT x) −˜y| is large. Different
from [14], our regressor outputs a scalar instead of a vector. It
is a compromise between squared and absolute error losses:
LR =
 0.5|σ(wT x) −˜y|2,
if
|σ(wT x) −˜y| < t
|σ(wT x) −˜y| −t + 0.5t2,
otherwise
(2)
where t is the turning point of the absolute error between the
squared error function and the absolute error function. It has a
ﬂavor with the Huber loss. When t = 1, it works similar with
MSE loss since the error is usually below 1. When t = 0, it
is equivalent with the Mean Abosolute Error (MAE) loss.
3.2. Regularization Using Center Loss
Since the pain intensity is labeled as discrete values in the
Shoulder-Pain dataset, it is natural to regularize the network
to make the regressed values to be ‘discrete’ - during train-
ing, to make same-intensity’s regressed values as compact as
possible (see Fig. 3). We use the center loss [12] which mini-
mizes the within-class distance and thus is deﬁned as
LC = ∥x −c˜y∥p
p,
(3)
where c˜y represents the center for class ˜y and is essentially
the mean of features per class. p denotes the norm and is typ-
ically ℓ1 or ℓ2. We observe from expriments that the center
loss shrinks the distances of features that have the same label,
which is illustrated in Fig. 3. To relate it with the literature, it
is a similar idea to the Linear Discriminant Analysis yet with-
out minimizing between-class distances. It also has a ﬂavor
of the k-means clustering yet in a supervised way.
Now, the center loss is added to the regression loss after
the hidden FC layer to induce the loss L = LR + λLC where
λ is a coefﬁcient. Thus, the supervision of the regularizer is
applied to the features. Different from [12], we jointly learn
the centers and minimize within-class distances by gradient
descent, while [12]’s centers are learned by moving average.
3.3. Weighted Evaluation Metrics
Labels in the Shoulder-Pain dataset are highly imbalanced, as
91.35% of the frames are labeled as pain intensity 0. Thus, it
is relatively safe to predict the pain intensity to be zero.
To fairly evaluate the performance, we propose the
weighted version of evaluation metrics, i.e., weighted MAE
(wMAE) and weighted MSE (wMSE) to address the dataset
imbalance issue. For example, the wMAE is simply the mean
of MAE on each pain intensity.
In this way, the MAE is
weighted by the population of each pain intensity.
We apply two techniques to sample the training data to
make our training set more consistent with the new metrics.
First, we eliminate the redundant frames on the sequences fol-
lowing [5]. If the intensity remains the same for more than 5
consecutive frames, we choose the ﬁrst one as the representa-
tive frame. Second, during training, we uniformly sample im-
ages from the 6 classes to feed into the network. In this way,
what the neural network ‘see’ is a totally balanced dataset.
4. EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we present implementations and experiments.
The project page2 has been set up with programs and data.
4.1. Dataset and Training Details
We test our network on the Shoulder-Pain dataset [1] that con-
tains 200 videos of 25 subjects and is widely used for bench-
marking the pain intensity estimation. The dataset comes with
four types of labels. The three annotated online during the
video collection are the sensory scale, affective scale and vi-
sual analog scale ranging from 0 (i.e., no pain) to 15 (i.e.,
severe pain). In addition, observers rated pain intensity (OPI)
ofﬂine from recorded videos ranging from 0 (no pain) to 5
(severe pain). In the same way as previous works [5, 6, 15],
we take the same online label and quantify the original pain
intensity in the range of [0, 15] to be in range [0, 5].
The face veriﬁcation network [12] is trained on CASIA-
WebFace dataset [16], which contains 494,414 training im-
ages from 10,575 identities. To be consistent with face veriﬁ-
cation, we perform the same pre-processing on the images of
Shoulder-Pain dataset. To be speciﬁc, we leverage MTCNN
model [17] to detect faces and facial landmarks. Then the
faces are aligned according to the detected landmarks.
2https://github.com/happynear/PainRegression.

Methods
MAE↓
MSE↓
PCC↑
smooth ℓ1
0.416
1.060
0.524
ℓ1+ ℓ1 center loss
0.389
0.820
0.603
smooth ℓ1 + ℓ1 center loss
0.456
0.804
0.651
smooth ℓ1 + ℓ2 center loss
0.435
0.816
0.625
OSVR-ℓ1 ([5] CVPR’16)
1.025
N/A
0.600
OSVR-ℓ2 ([5] CVPR’16)
0.810
N/A
0.601
RCR ([6] CVPR’16w)
N/A
1.54
0.65
All Zeros (trivial solution)
0.438
1.353
N/A
Table 1. Performance of our regression network and related
works on the Shoulder-Pain dataset for the estimation of pain
intensity (i.e., pain expression intensity). MAE is short for
mean absolute error deviated from the ground-truth labels
over all frames per video. MSE is mean squared error which
measures the curve ﬁtting degree. PCC is Pearson correlation
coefﬁcient which measures the curve trend similarity (↑indi-
cates the larger, the better). The best is highlighted in bold.
The learning rate is set to 0.0001 to avoid huge modiﬁca-
tion on the convolution layers. The network is trained over
5,000 iterations, which is reasonable for the networks to con-
verge observed in a few cross validation folds. We set the
weight of the regression loss to be 1 and the weights of soft-
max loss and center loss to be 1 and 0.01 respectively.
4.2. Evaluation Using Unweighted Metrics
Cross validation is a conventional way to address over-ﬁtting
small dataset. In our case, we run 25-fold cross validation
25 times on the Shoulder-Pain dataset which contains 25 sub-
jects. This setting is exactly the leave-one-subject-out set-
ting in OSVR [5] except that OSVR’s experiments exclude
one subject whose expressions do not have noticeable pain
(namely 24-fold). Each time, the videos of one subject are
reserved for testing. All the other videos are used to train the
deep regression network. The performance is summarized in
Table 1. It can be concluded that our algorithm performs best
or equally best on various evaluation metrics, especially the
combination of smooth ℓ1 loss and ℓ1 center loss. Note that
OSVR [5] uses hand-crafted features concatenated from land-
mark points, Gabor wavelet coefﬁcients and LBP + PCA.
4.3. Evaluation Using Weighted Metrics
In Table 1, we provide the performance of predicting all zeros
as a baseline. Interestingly, on the metrics MAE and MSE,
zero prediction performs much better than several state-of-
the-art algorithms. Now, using the new proposed metrics, the
performance is summarized in Table 2. The performance of
previous work OSVR [5] is no longer below that of predict-
ing all zeros. We can also see from Table 2 that the uniform
class sampling strategy does help a lot on the new evaluation
metrics. Moreover, we have provided the evaluation program
Methods
wMAE↓
wMSE↓
smooth ℓ1
1.596
4.396
ℓ1 + ℓ1 center loss
1.388
3.438
smooth ℓ1 + ℓ1 center loss
1.289
2.880
smooth ℓ1 + ℓ2 center loss
1.324
3.075
ℓ1 + ℓ1 cente loss + sampling
1.039
1.999
smooth ℓ1 + ℓ1 center loss + sampling
0.991
1.720
OSVR-ℓ1 ([5] CVPR’16)
1.309
2.758
OSVR-ℓ2 ([5] CVPR’16)
1.299
2.719
All Zeros (trivial solution)
2.143
7.387
Table 2. Performance of our network when evaluated using
the weighted MAE and weighted MSE. ‘sampling’ means the
uniform class sampling technique is applied. Notably, ℓ1 cen-
ter loss and sampling incrementally boost the performance.
in our project page and encourage future works to report their
performance with the new evaluation metrics.
5. SUMMARY
Given the restriction of labeled data which prevents us from
directly training a deep pain intensity regressor, ﬁne-tuning
from a data-extensive pre-trained domain such as face veriﬁ-
cation can alleviate the problem. In this paper, we regularize
a face veriﬁcation network for pain intensity regression. In
particular, we introduce the Smooth ℓ1 Loss to (continuous-
valued) pain intensity regression as well as introduce the cen-
ter loss as a regularizer to induce concentration on discrete
values. The ﬁne-tuned regularizered network with a regres-
sion layer is tested on the UNBC-McMaster Shoulder-Pain
dataset and achieves state-of-the-art performance on pain in-
tensity estimation. The main problem that motivates this work
is that expertise is needed to label the pain. The take-home
message is that ﬁne-tuning from a data-extensive pre-trained
domain can alleviate small training set problems.
On the other hand, unsupervised learning does not rely
on training data. Indeed, discrete-valued regression is a good
test bed for center-based clustering. Although regularizing a
supervised deep network is intuitive, its performance is rather
empirical. In the future, we need insights about when and why
it may function as transfer learning. Note that no temporal
information is modeled in this paper. As pain is temporal and
subjective, prior knowledge about the stimulus needs to be
incorporated to help quantify individual differences.
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
When performing this work, Xiang Xiang is funded by JHU
CS Dept’s teaching assistantship, Feng Wang & Alan Yuille
are supported by the Ofﬁce of Naval Research (ONR N00014-
15-1-2356), Feng & Jian Chen are supported by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (61671125, 61201271),
and Feng is also funded by China Scholarship Council (CSC).
Xiang is grateful for a fellowship from CSC in previous years.

7. REFERENCES
[1] Patrick Lucey, Jeffrey F Cohn, Kenneth M Prkachin, Pa-
tricia E Solomon, and Iain Matthews,
“Painful data:
The unbc-mcmaster shoulder pain expression archive
database,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Automatic Face & Gesture Recognition,
2011, pp. 57–64.
[2] Min Aung, Sebastian Kaltwang, Bernardino Romera-
Paredes, Brais Martinez, Aneesha Singh, Matteo Cella,
Michel Valstar, Hongying Meng, Andrew Kemp, Aaron
Elkins, et al., “The automatic detection of chronic pain-
related expression: requirements, challenges and a mul-
timodal dataset,” IEEE Transactions on Affective Com-
puting, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 435–451, 2016.
[3] Philipp Werner, Ayoub Al-Hamadi, Robert Niese, Stef-
fen Walter, Sascha Gruss, and Harald C Traue,
“To-
wards pain monitoring: Facial expression, head pose, a
new database, an automatic system and remaining chal-
lenges,” in Proceedings of the British Machine Vision
Conference, 2013.
[4] Hui Ding, Shaohua Kevin Zhou, and Rama Chellappa,
“Facenet2expnet: Regularizing a deep face recognition
net for expression recognition,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE International Conf. on Automatic Face & Gesture
Recognition, 2017.
[5] Rui Zhao, Quan Gan, Shangfei Wang, and Qiang Ji,
“Facial expression intensity estimation using ordinal in-
formation,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2016, pp.
3466–3474.
[6] Jing Zhou, Xiaopeng Hong, Fei Su, and Guoying Zhao,
“Recurrent convolutional neural network regression for
continuous pain intensity estimation in video,” in Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition Workshops, 2016, pp. 84–92.
[7] C Fabian Benitez-Quiroz, Ramprakash Srinivasan, and
Aleix M Martinez, “Emotionet: An accurate, real-time
algorithm for the automatic annotation of a million fa-
cial expressions in the wild,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion, 2016, pp. 5562–5570.
[8] Arnaud Dapogny, Kevin Bailly, and Severine Dubuis-
son, “Pairwise conditional random forests for facial ex-
pression recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Computer Vision, 2015, pp.
3783–3791.
[9] Mengyi Liu, Shiguang Shan, Ruiping Wang, and Xilin
Chen,
“Learning expressionlets on spatio-temporal
manifold for dynamic facial expression recognition,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vi-
sion and Pattern Recognition, 2014, pp. 1749–1756.
[10] Ziheng Wang, Shangfei Wang, and Qiang Ji, “Capturing
complex spatio-temporal relations among facial muscles
for facial expression recognition,”
in Proceedings of
the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2013, pp. 3422–3429.
[11] Yimo Guo, Guoying Zhao, and Matti Pietik¨ainen, “Dy-
namic facial expression recognition using longitudinal
facial expression atlases,”
in Proceedings of the Eu-
ropean Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 631–644.
2012.
[12] Yandong Wen,
Kaipeng Zhang,
Zhifeng Li,
and
Yu Qiao, “A discriminative feature learning approach
for deep face recognition,” in Proceedings of the Euro-
pean Conference on Computer Vision, 2016, pp. 499–
515.
[13] Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey E Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky,
Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
“Dropout:
a simple way to prevent neural networks from overﬁt-
ting.,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 15,
no. 1, pp. 1929–1958, 2014.
[14] Ross Girshick,
“Fast R-CNN,”
in Proceedings of
the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision,
2015, pp. 1440–1448.
[15] Ognjen Rudovic, Vladimir Pavlovic, and Maja Pantic,
“Automatic pain intensity estimation with heteroscedas-
tic conditional ordinal random ﬁelds,” in Proceedings
of the International Symposium on Visual Computing,
2013, pp. 234–243.
[16] Dong Yi, Zhen Lei, Shengcai Liao, and Stan Z Li,
“Learning face representation from scratch,”
arXiv
preprint:1411.7923, 2014.
[17] K. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Z. Li, and Y. Qiao,
“Joint face
detection and alignment using multitask cascaded con-
volutional networks,” IEEE Signal Processing Letters,
vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 1499–1503, 2016.
