arXiv:2201.00286v1  [cs.LG]  2 Jan 2022
Reinforcement Learning for Task Speciﬁcations with Action-Constraints
Arun Raman1, Keerthan Shagrithaya1, Shalabh Bhatnagar1
Abstract— In this paper, we use concepts from supervisory
control theory of discrete event systems to propose a method to
learn optimal control policies for a ﬁnite-state Markov Decision
Process (MDP) in which (only) certain sequences of actions are
deemed unsafe (respectively safe). We assume that the set of
action sequences that are deemed unsafe and/or safe are given
in terms of a ﬁnite-state automaton; and propose a supervisor
that disables a subset of actions at every state of the MDP
so that the constraints on action sequence are satisﬁed. Then
we present a version of the Q-learning algorithm for learning
optimal policies in the presence of non-Markovian action-
sequence and state constraints, where we use the development of
reward machines to handle the state constraints. We illustrate
the method using an example that captures the utility of
automata-based methods for non-Markovian state and action
speciﬁcations for reinforcement learning and show the results
of simulations in this setting.
I. INTRODUCTION
In reinforcement learning (RL) [1], an agent evaluates its
optimal behaviour from experience gained through interac-
tion with the environment which is guided by the rewards that
an action at a given state fetches from it. Safe reinforcement
learning is a paradigm wherein the idea is to not violate
a set of constraints during the process of learning [2]. In
many applications, the constraints may be given in terms of
the sequences of actions. For example, consider an agent,
that can move in the four cardinal directions, traversing in
a grid-like warehouse environment. In this case, the safety
requirement corresponding to one-way trafﬁc can have a
speciﬁcation of not taking two consecutive right turns which
will result in a U-turn. In several scheduling applications,
if scheduling an item is interpreted as an action, then the
constraints on the sequence of actions arise naturally. For
example, in real-time scheduling of home appliances, the
dryer cannot be scheduled before the washer [3], [4]. In this
paper, we are interested in a method for obtaining optimal
control policies for such action-constrained scenarios.
Oftentimes, the system states and constraints are affected
by uncontrollable events. For example, some actuators of a
robot can break down due to faults. The task speciﬁcation
for an agent should be robust to such uncontrollable events.
The subject of uncontrollable events altering the state of the
system is well studied in the theory of supervisory control
of discrete event systems[5], [6]. A Discrete Event System
(DES) is a discrete-state system, where the state changes
*The work of the ﬁrst author was supported by the C. V. Raman
postdoctoral fellowship. The work of the second and third authors was
supported by the J. C. Bose fellowship of the third author.
1 Department of Computer Science and Automation, Indian Insti-
tute of Science,
Bangalore,
India {arunraman, keerthans,

at discrete time instants due to the occurrence of events. If
we associate a (not necessarily unique) label to each event
of the DES, then its behaviour can be described by the
language it generates using the alphabet deﬁned by the set
of labels. In such a setting, the desired behaviour of the DES
is also speciﬁed by a language speciﬁcation. A supervisory
policy enforces a desired language speciﬁcation by disabling
a subset of events known as the controllable events. The
complementary set of events that cannot be disabled by the
supervisor are called uncontrollable events. It is important
to note that the supervisory policy cannot force an event
to occur, it can only disable a controllable event. As such,
a supervisory policy aims for minimum intervention in the
operation of the system— only when a particular event can
lead to the violation of a speciﬁcation. In this paper, we
interpret the uncontrollable events as (uncontrollable) actions
which can then be used to specify an overall action-constraint
for the system by taking the possibilities of uncontrollable
events into account. We limit our analysis to those action-
constraints that can be represented by a ﬁnite automaton.
The environment in the Reinforcement Learning (RL)
paradigm is typically modeled as a Markov Decision Process
(MDP). If all the events of a Disrete Event System (DES)
are controllable, then there are parallels between supervisory
control of a DES and the theory of synthesizing policies
for an MDP. In particular, fundamentally, both cases involve
solving a sequential decision-making problem in which the
state evolution in the model is Markovian in nature. On
the other hand, a key difference between the two is that
the action space of an MDP does not, generally, consider
actions to be uncontrollable. This is because even if such
aspects do exist in the system, they can be absorbed in the
MDP model by introducing a probability distribution for
the next state such that it accounts for the possibility of
occurrence of an uncontrollable action. Such an approach
works because the objective in the MDP setting is to ﬁnd an
optimal policy that minimizes an expected cost. However,
if uncontrollable actions appear in the safety speciﬁcation,
then they cannot be abstracted by a probability distribution
anymore and must appear explicitly in the MDP model. In
such scenarios, the ‘safety’ part of the safe RL paradigm
naturally invites the results from supervisory control theory.
Our main contributions in this paper are the following:
1) To the best of our information, this paper is the ﬁrst
work that bridges the areas of supervisory control theory
(SCT) and reinforcement learning. Such an association
permits us to directly use an important theoretical result
from SCT: to determine if there exists a policy that sat-

isﬁes the action-constraints in the presence of uncontrol-
lable actions; ofﬂine, before training. If there does not
exist such a policy, then there is another important result
in SCT that, informally, evaluates the closest to the
given constraints that a supervisory policy can enforce.
These results are relevant in safe reinforcement learning
for complex systems in which correctly formulating the
constraints is a task in itself.
2) We present a version of Q-learning algorithm to learn
optimal control policies for an underlying ﬁnite-state
MDP in which:
a) a subset of actions might be uncontrollable, and
b) the task speciﬁcation or the safety constraints for
the system is given in terms of sequences of actions
modeled by a ﬁnite state automaton. The constraints
can be given in terms of sequences that are safe
and/or unsafe. This generality simpliﬁes the problem
formulation to some extent.
The adapted Q-learning algorithm also integrates the
work on reward machines[7] that supports reward func-
tion speciﬁcation as a function of state.
3) Experimental results for an illustrative example that
captures the utility of automata-based methods for non-
Markovian state and action speciﬁcations for reinforce-
ment learning are presented.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section
II presents some notations and deﬁnitions that we will be
using in the rest of the paper. It also presents the relevant
results from supervisory control theory. Section III discusses
supervisor synthesis. We will largely be working with ﬁnite
automata in this section and use the development for super-
visor synthesis to propose a version of Q-learning algorithm
[8] that can be used to learn an optimal policy in the presence
of state and action constraints. In Section IV, we present
an example to illustrate the use of automata-based methods
to handle non-Markovian state and action-constraints. We
use the proposed method for action-constraints and reward
machines[7] for the state constraints. We show the results of
the experiments and observe that the Q-learning algorithm
adapted to this setting helps to make the agent learn to
complete the task optimally 100% of the time. We conclude
the paper with Section V.
II. MOTIVATION, NOTATIONS AND DEFINITIONS
In a reinforcement learning problem, the environment is
modeled as a Markov Decision Process M = (S, A, r, p, γ)
where S and A denote the ﬁnite set of states and actions,
respectively, r : S×A×S →R denotes the reward function,
p(st+1|st, at) is the transition probability distribution and
γ ∈(0, 1) is the discount factor. In the paradigm of safe
reinforcement learning, the objective is to learn optimal
policies while satisfying a set of constraints. In this paper,
we consider safety constraints that are given as a set of
sequence of actions of the MDP. Next, we discuss the
example gridworld in Fig. 1 to motivate the development.
Consider a manufacturing facility layout as shown in Fig.
1. When a work piece appears at location i⃝, the robot R1
i
R1
o
R2
B
Fig. 1: A pick-up and delivery grid world
picks it up and delivers it to the buffer zone B. The robot
R2 picks the item from B and delivers it to the processing
facility o . The buffer B can only store one item at a time;
so it has two states Empty(E) and Full(F). The robot state is
determined by the position that it occupies in the grid and by
a binary variable indicating whether it has picked up an item
or not. There are six controllable actions for each robot where
four of them correspond to their movement in the grid and
two correspond to picking and dropping of an item (pi, di),
i ∈{1, 2}. Additionally, we assume that robot R2 can either
be Working(W) or Down(D). There are two uncontrollable
actions {φ, ρ} denoting the fault and rectiﬁcation actions
which take R2 from W to D and vice versa respectively. We
call them uncontrollable because they are caused by external
factors/agents not modeled in this set up. We can also assume
that an uncontrollable action makes an item appear in
i⃝.
The objective is to design an optimal policy to satisfy the
speciﬁcations below:
1) R1 delivers an item to B only if B is in E.
2) R2 picks an item from B only if B is in F (thereby
driving B to E).
3) R1 and R2 deliver a picked item in no more than 5
steps.
The above speciﬁcations ‘look’ okay but are not robust
to uncontrollable actions. To see this, consider a string of
actions σ. Formally, the speciﬁcation in item 3 says that
for a substring p1σd1, it must be that |σ| ≤5 where |σ|
denotes the size of σ, and p1 and d1 denote picking and
dropping of item by R1 respectively. Consider the scenario
in which R1 takes an action p1 when the buffer is full,
with the assumption that it will be emptied by R2 in the
next step. Such an action is consistent with item 1 of the
speciﬁcation. At this point, if the uncontrollable action φ
occurs, then the satisfaction of item 3 of the speciﬁcation
will entirely depend on the occurrence of the uncontrollable
rectiﬁcation action ρ. As such, the speciﬁcations above are
not robust to uncontrollable actions. That is, the occurrence
of an uncontrollable action resulted in the generation of a
string of actions that was not in the speciﬁcation. In what
follows, we discuss developments from supervisory control
theory which facilitate a formal analysis of such aspects.
An automaton is a 5-tuple G = (Q, Σ, δ, q0, Qm)[6]. Here
Q and Σ denote the set of states and (labelled) actions
respectively. The initial state is q0 ∈Q, and Qm ⊆Q is
called the set of marked states. The states can be marked for
different reasons and we discuss more about this later in the
paper. The function δ : Σ × Q →Q is the state transition
function, where for q ∈Q, σ ∈Σ, δ(σ, q) = bq, implies there

is an action labeled σ from state q to state bq. In general,
the state transition function δ may not be deﬁned for all
state-action pairs. The active action function Γ : Q →2Σ,
identiﬁes the set of all actions σ ∈Σ for which δ(σ, q) is
deﬁned.
Let Σ∗denote the set of all ﬁnite strings of elements of
Σ including the empty string ǫ. We write δ∗(ω, q) = bq if
there is a string of actions ω ∈Σ∗from q to state bq, that is
if bq is reachable from q. Given G, the set of all admissible
strings of actions is denoted by L(G) and is referred to as
the language generated by G over the alphabet Σ. Formally,
for the initial state q0:
L(G) = {ω ∈Σ∗: δ∗(ω, q0) is deﬁned}.
(1)
The marked language, Lm(G) ⊆L(G), generated by G is
Lm(G) = {ω ∈Σ∗: δ∗(ω, q0) ∈Qm}.
A string u is a preﬁx of a string v ∈Σ∗if for some w ∈Σ∗,
v = uw. If v is an admissible string in G, then so are all its
preﬁxes. We deﬁne the preﬁx closure of L ⊆Σ∗to be the
language L deﬁned as:
L = {u : uv ∈L for some v ∈Σ∗}.
We can use the above notations to interpret the MDP M as
a language generator: (S, A, Σ, L, r, p, γ) where Σ denotes a
set of labels and L : A →Σ denotes a labelling function that
associates a label to each action. For simplicity, we assume
that each action is uniquely labeled and, with some abuse
of notation, use Σ as a proxy for the set of actions. Then
the function δ : Σ × S →S is the state transition function,
where for q ∈S, σ ∈Σ : δ(σ, q) = bq means that there is an
action a ∈A labeled σ such that p(bq|q, a) > 0. The language
generated can be deﬁned appropriately.
A policy π(a|s) in the context of RL is a probability
distribution over the set of actions a ∈A at a given state
s ∈S. At each time step, t, the agent is in a particular
state, say st. It selects an action at according to π(·|st) and
moves to a next state st+1 with probability p(st+1|st, at). It
also receives a reward r(st+1, at, st) for this transition. The
process then repeats from st+1. The agent’s goal is to ﬁnd
a policy π∗that maximizes the expected discounted future
reward from every state in S. Next we introduce the notion of
supervisory control which trims the set of candidate policies
to only those that do not violate the safety speciﬁcation.
The set of actions (Σ) is partitioned into the set of con-
trollable actions (Σc) and uncontrollable actions (Σu). More
speciﬁcally, Σc (resp. Σu) denotes the set of actions that
can (resp. cannot) be disabled by the supervisor. Formally, a
supervisor S : L(M) →2Σ is a function from the language
generated by M to the power set of Σ. We use S/M to
denote the supervised MDP (SMDP) in which supervisor S
is controlling the MDP M. Note that the supervisor only
disables an action and it does not choose which action
should be taken at any time instant. That (optimal) choice is
determined by π(a|s). The uncontrollable actions are always
enabled by the supervisor.
We are interested in evaluating an optimal policy π∗that
satisﬁes the constraints speciﬁed in terms of a set of sequence
of actions. The ﬁrst question that is of interest to us is if
such a policy exists. We can directly use the controllability
condition from the supervisory control theory literature to
answer this question [5], [6]:
Theorem 1: Let K be a desired language speciﬁcation
over the alphabet Σ denoting the safety constraints for the
MDP M. There is a supervisor S such that L(S/M) = K
if and only if KΣu ∩L(M) ⊆K.
Proof: See Section 3.4.1 of [6].
The above condition states that there is a supervisor that
enforces the desired speciﬁcaiton K if and only if the
occurrence of an uncontrollable action in M from a preﬁx
of K results in a string that is also a preﬁx of K. For
the gridworld example in Fig. 1, the uncontrollable action
φ resulted in a string from which it can generate a string in
which item 3 of the speciﬁcation was not satisﬁed. Therefore,
it violated the controllability condition.
If the condition in Theorem 1 is not satisﬁed, then there
does not exist a supervisor that can enforce the given
speciﬁcation. In such a case, the best that the supervisor
can do is enforce the supremal controllable sublanguage of
K, which is the union of all controllable sublanguages of K
[9]:
K↑=
[
i
{Ki : (Ki ⊆K) ∧(KiΣu ∩L(G) ⊆Ki)}.
Without going into the formal analysis, the supremal con-
trollable sublanguage (the modiﬁed speciﬁcation) for the
gridworld example would involve R1 not picking an item
unless B is empty.
In this paper, we will assume, in different ways, that the
given speciﬁcation can be modeled as a ﬁnite automaton
and that it is controllable. An automaton is represented
by a directed graph (state transition diagram) whose nodes
correspond to the states of the automaton, with an edge from
q to bq labeled σ for each triple (σ, q, bq) such that bq = δ(σ, q).
We use the concept of reward machines to handle the
state constraints[7]. Given a set of propositional symbols P,
a set of (environment) states S, and a set of actions A, a
Reward Machine (RM) is a tuple RPSA = ⟨U, u0, δu, δr⟩
where U is a ﬁnite set of states, u0 ∈U is an initial
state, δu : U × 2P →U is the state-transition function and
δr : U × U →[S × A × S →R] is the reward-transition
function. An MDP with a Reward Machine (MDPRM) is
a tuple T = ⟨S, A, p, γ, P, L, U, u0, δu, δr⟩, where S, A, p,
and γ are deﬁned as in an MDP, P is a set of propositional
symbols, L is a labelling function L : S →2P, and
U, u0, δu, and δr are deﬁned as in an RM. The operation
of an MDPRM is as follows. At every decision epoch of
M, there is a transition in RPSA also. If the current state
of RPSA is u and an action a is taken from s in M, then
δu(a, u) is the next state of RPSA and it outputs a reward
function δr(u, δu(a, u)) which determines the reward in M
when action a is taken from s. The main idea in handling
state constraints using RMs is to associate barrier rewards

with state sequences that violate the desired speciﬁcation.
Reward machines can be used to model any Markovian
reward function. They can also used to express any non-
Markovian reward function as long as the state history S∗on
which the reward depends can be distinguished by different
elements of a ﬁnite set of regular expressions over P.
III. REINFORCEMENT LEARNING WITH
ACTION-CONSTRAINTS
Consider an MDP M = (S, A, Σ, L, r, p, γ). The action-
constraints can be given in terms of the sequence of actions
that are safe to perform or by sequences that are unsafe. We
propose methods for supervisor synthesis for both cases in
this section.
Consider an automaton G′
s = (Q′
s, Σ, δ′
s, q0s, ∅) that is
the model of a sequence of actions that is safe with an
empty marked set of states. We construct an automaton
Gs = (Qs, Σ, δs, q0s, {sa}) from G′
s by appropriately adding
a (marked) state sa to ﬂag the occurrence of an action
violating the speciﬁcation. The formal construction is as
follows:
1) Gs has one additional state: Qs = Q′
s ∪{sa}, Qm =
{sa}.
2) The transition function for Gs is identical to that of
G′
s for the state-action pairs for which δ′
s is deﬁned.
∀s ∈Q′
s, ∀σ ∈Γ(s): δs(σ, s) = δ′
s(σ, s).
3) For the state-action pairs for which δ′
s is not deﬁned,
we have: ∀s ∈Q′
s, ∀σ ∈(Σ −Γ(s)): δs(σ, s) = sa.
4) If Gs reaches sa, it stays there: ∀σ ∈Σ: δs(σ, sa) = sa.
At every decision epoch of M, there is a transition in Gs
also. If the current state of Gs is s and an action a is taken in
M, then δs(a, s) is the next state of Gs. Now, if an action
ω is taken in M for which δ′
s(ω, s) is not deﬁned, then
it means that it violates the safety constraint. If δ′
s(ω, s) is
not deﬁned for ω ∈Σ and s ∈Q′
s, then as per item 3
in the above construction, the state of Gs will transition to
sa. The state sa of Gs indicates that an action constraint
has been violated. A supervisor for this case will simply
disable actions that lead to a transition to the state sa. If
there is an uncontrollable action that can result in a transition
to sa, then it means that the speciﬁcation does not satisfy
the controllability condition of theorem 1 and there does
not exist a policy that can enforce the given speciﬁcation.
Automaton Gs in Fig. 4 is an example in which d2d3p1p2p3
is the sequence of actions that are to be performed when an
uncontrollable action du happens.
Next, we consider the case in which the constraints
are given in terms of the sequence of actions that are
unsafe1. Recall that Lm(G) ⊆L(G) denotes the marked
language generated by an automaton G. We assume that
the set of strings of actions that are unsafe Sun are given
as an automaton H1 = (Q′
h, Σ′
h, δ′
h, q′
0h, Qmh′) for which
Lm(H1) = Sun. We then modify H1 to obtain an automaton
H = (Qh, Σh, δh, q0h, Qmh) as follows:
1One way of handling this situation would be to evaluate the sequence of
actions that are safe and then proceed with the earlier method (we assume
that the set of safe sequences can be represented by an automaton).
1) Qh = Q′
h, Σh = Σ, q0h = q′
0h, Qmh = Q′
mh.
2) ∀q ∈Q′
h, ∀σ ∈Γ′
h(q), δh(σ, q) = δ′
h(σ, q).
3) ∀q ∈Q′
h, ∀σ ∈Σ −Γ′
h(q), δh(σ, q) = q0h.
That is, H can be constructed from H1 by adding additional
outgoing arcs from every state in H1 to the initial state,
corresponding to actions in Σ that do not already appear
as an outgoing arc in H1. This modiﬁcation ensures that
for every action in M, a corresponding transition is deﬁned
in H. The operation of H is the same as that of Gs. At
every decision epoch of M, there is a transition in H. If the
current state of H is s and an action a is taken in M, then
δH(a, s) is the next state of H, where δH is the transition
function of H. For simplicity, we label every q ∈Qmh by sa.
The supervisor will disable every controllable action which
results in a next state that is marked (sa). Suppose M has
generated a string σ that has not resulted in a transition to sa
in H, then it means that σ is a preﬁx of an admissible string.
Following σ, if there is an uncontrollable action that results
in a transition to sa, then it means that the speciﬁcation does
not satisfy the controllability condition. The automaton H in
Fig. 3 shows an automaton which models the speciﬁcation in
which two consecutive lefts or rights ({ll, rr, lrr, rlrll, . . .})
are deemed unsafe.
Remark: We have modeled the sequence of actions that
are unsafe by “marking” some states as unsafe. The marked
states have a completely different interpretation in supervi-
sory control theory (SCT) where they are often associated
with desirable features— like signifying the end of an
execution with the automata “recognizing” the string to be
in its language. In fact, in SCT, if Lm(G) = L(G), then
we say that G is non-blocking, which means that the system
can always reach a target (marked) state from any state in its
reachable set. Deadlock freedom is an instance of the non-
blocking property. We will need some simple modiﬁcations
in the method discussed above if we have to tackle both the
interpretations simultaneously.
Algorithm 1 shows the psuedocode for Supervised Q-
learning for non-Markovian action and state constraints. It
receives as input the automata G′
s and H1 describing the
action constraints, the set of propositional symbols P, the
labelling function L, the discount factor γ, and the reward
machines R over P. The goal is to learn an optimal policy
given the state and action constraints.
The algorithm learns one q-value function per state of the
automata and reward machine. That is, it will learn |Qs| ×
|Qh|×|U| many q-value functions in total, where |·| denotes
the size of the set argument. These q-functions are stored in
eQ, and eqqs,qh,uj ∈eQ corresponds to the q-value function
for states qs ∈Qs and qh ∈Qh of the two automata, and
uj ∈U of the reward machine.
After initializing eQ in step 3, the algorithm has 2 nested
loops: one for the number of episodes that we are running
(step 4), and the other for the length of each episode (step 6).
Step 10 of the algorithm selects an action a under supervision
wherein only those actions that do not result in the next
state sa in either of the two automata are considered for
selection by epsilon-greedy method. Thereafter, the agent

Algorithm 1 Supervised Q-learning for non-Markovian ac-
tion and state constraints
1: Input: G′
s, H1, P, L, γ, R = ⟨U, δu, δr, u0⟩
2: Construct Gs and H from G′
s and H1 respectively
3: eQ ←InitializeQValueFunction()
4: for l = 0 to num episodes do
5:
uj ←u0; qs ←q0s; qh ←q0h; s ←EnvInitialState();
6:
for t = 0 to length episode do
7:
if EnvDeadEnd(s) then
8:
break
9:
end if
10:
a
←GetActionEpsilonGreedy(eqqs,qh,uj, s) such
that (δs(a, qs) ̸= sa) ∧(δh(a, qh) ̸= sa)
11:
s′ ←EnvExecuteAction(s, a)
12:
uk ←δu(uj, L(s′))
13:
r ←δr(uj, uk)
14:
qm ←δs(qs, a); qn ←δh(qh, a)
15:
if EnvDeadEnd(s′) then
16:
eqqs,qh,uj(s, a) = eqqs,qh,uj(s, a) + αr(s, a, s′)
17:
else
18:
eqqs,qh,uj(s, a) = eqqs,qh,uj(s, a) + α [r(s, a, s′)
+ γ maxa′ eqqm,qn,uk(s′, a′) −eqqs,qh,uj(s, a)]
19:
end if
20:
qs ←δs(qs, a); qh ←δh(qh, a)
21:
uj ←δu(uj, L(s′)); s ←s′
22:
end for
23: end for
executes the action (Step 11), evaluates the reward function
through the transition in the reward machine (Steps 12 and
13) and then updates the q-value function (Steps 15-19) using
the standard q-learning rule. Note that the maximization step
is over eqqm,qn,uk since those q-values would be used for the
selection of a′ as Gs, H1 and R would have transitioned.
Action a′ is to be picked so that sa is not reached in Gs and
H1.
IV. ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE
1
S
2
3
Fig. 2: A pick-up and delivery grid world
Setting: Consider the pick-up and delivery grid world in
Fig. 2. The agent starts from the position S, picks up
items labeled 1, 2 and 3, and returns back to S. The agent
unloads the items in a last-in-ﬁrst-out order and the unloading
sequence must be 3 −2 −1. Therefore, the nominal pick-up
of the items is in sequence from 1 to 3. The objective of the
agent is to ﬁnish this process in minimum number of steps.
State and action space: The state of the agent is composed
of its position in the grid, its orientation and an indicator of
the items that the agent has picked up. The position of the
agent in the grid can be denoted by the coordinate of the
respective pixel it occupies, with the bottom-leftmost corner
of the grid denoting the origin. We can use a set of symbols
{↑, ↓, ←, →} to describe its orientation and a 3-bit binary
variable to denote the items that the agent has picked up.
The agent’s movement in the grid is denoted by four actions
l, r, f and b denoting the movement in four directions: left,
right, forward and backward respectively. The actions r and l
change the orientation of the agent by 90 degrees clockwise
and anticlockwise respectively. In addition, they also lead to
a change in position by one pixel forward in the direction
of the new orientation. For example, if l are r are feasible
actions from a position (x, y, ↑),then:
(x, y, ↑)
l−→(x −1, y, ←),
(x, y, ↑)
r−→(x + 1, y, →).
The actions f and b do not change the orientation and
only result in a change of position by one pixel forward
or backward respectively relative to the current orientation
of the agent. If f are b are feasible actions from a position
(x, y, ↑), then we have:
(x, y, ↑)
f−→(x, y + 1, ↑),
(x, y, ↑)
b−→(x, y −1, ↑).
We use d1, d2 and d3 (p1, p2 and p3) for actions denoting
dropping (respectively picking) of the respective items by
the agent. We assume that the agent cannot reliably carry all
three items together because of which it can accidentally drop
an item when it is carrying all three of them. For simplicity,
we assume that it can accidentally drop only item 1. We
model this by associating an uncontrollable action du. The
illustration can easily be extended to account for dropping
of either of the items.
Action Constraints
1) The agent cannot make a U-turn. We interpret it has
two consecutive rights or lefts. That is, the set {ll, rr}
denotes the illegal substrings of the string of actions.
The automaton H, with initial state 0, in Fig. 3 describes
the illegal sequence of actions corresponding to the set
of strings {ll, rr}. For ease of exposition, the actions
di and pi are not shown in H and they can be added
with a self loop around every state.
2) In order for the agent to satisfy the constraint on the un-
loading sequence, if an agent accidentally drops the ﬁrst
item then it must also immediately drop the other two
and pick all three in sequence again. That is, du must
be followed by the string d2d3p1p2p3. Fig. 4 shows the
automaton Gs that constrains the agent to take the action

sequence d2d3p1p2p3 when an uncontrollable action du
happens2.
0
1
2
sa
sa
f, b
l, r, f, b
r
l
r
l
l
r
f, b
f, b
Fig. 3: An automaton H with initial state 0 that accepts
strings equivalent to a U-turn by the agent; for example the
strings {ll, rr, lrfbrr, . . .}.
Fig. 5 shows the reward machine for imposing the
speciﬁcation
of
sequential pickup of
items
in
which
P = {0, 1, S }. The labeling function generates a 3-bit
binary number corresponding to the items that the agent
has picked up. It uses the symbol S to indicate whether
the agent reached location S in the grid. The RM starts
at state u0. It transitions to state u1 if the items are not
picked up in the desired sequence and thereafter obtains
a reward of −20 at every step. The reward for every step
increases from −10 to −8 (from −8 to −6) after the agent
picks up item 1 (respectively, item 2). It further increases
to −1 after the agent picks up all three items. Note that
the RM only handles the sequential pickup initially. The
uncontrollable drop of item 1 after the agent picks all three
items is handled by the automaton Gs. Once all three items
are picked up in sequence, the RM stays at u4 until the
agent reaches S .
Simulation Results The simulation was run for 500,000
iterations, where each iteration consisted of one episode of
a maximum of 60 steps. The hyperparameters were set as
α = 0.1, ǫ = 0.25 and γ = 0.9. Additionally, ǫ was decayed
by 5% after every period of 10,000 iterations. The single-
step reward is deﬁned as in Fig. 5 in accordance to the items
picked and their order. Fig. 6 shows the average score, i.e.,
the average accumulated reward over an episode, as training
progressed. Fig. 7 shows the average percentage of times
when the task was completed. All data shown are averages
over intervals of 10,000 iterations during training. At the end
of training, ǫ achieves a value of 0.019. This ǫ-greedy policy
completes the task around 95% of the time as shown in Fig.
7. Upon inference, i.e., upon setting ǫ = 0 post training, the
agent completes the task optimally 100% of the time.
2For the case when the agent can drop either of the other two items, we
can introduce two more uncontrollable actions du2 and du3 with remedial
strings d1d3p1p2p3 and d1d2p1p2p3 respectively.
sa
sa
w1
w2
w3
w4
w5
w0
du
d2
d3
p1
p2
p3
A\d2
A\d3
A\p1
A\p2
A\p3
A
Fig. 4: An automaton Gs with initial state w0 describing the
sequence of safe actions when an uncontrollable action du
happens.
u0
u1
u2
u3
u4
u5
⟨000, −10⟩
⟨true, −20⟩
⟨100, −8⟩
⟨110, −6⟩
⟨111 ∧(¬ S ), −1⟩
⟨010 ∨001, −20⟩
⟨100, −8⟩
⟨101, −20⟩
⟨110, −6⟩
⟨111, −1⟩
⟨111 ∧S , 0⟩
⟨true, 0⟩
Fig. 5: Reward Machine for pick up and delivery grid world
example.
0
100
200
300
400
500
−1,000
−800
−600
−400
−200
Epoch (x103)
Average Score
Fig. 6: Average score achieved averaged across intervals of
10,000 iterations during training

0
100
200
300
400
500
0
20
40
60
80
100
Epoch (x103)
Average Task Completion %
Fig. 7: Percentage of times task was completed averaged
across intervals of 10,000 iterations during training
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we borrowed concepts from supervisory
control theory of discrete event system to develop a method
to learn optimal control policies for a ﬁnite-state Markov
Decision Process in which (only) certain sequences of actions
are deemed unsafe (respectively safe) while accounting for
the possibility that a subset of actions might be uncontrol-
lable. We assumed that the constraints can be modeled using
a ﬁnite automaton and a natural future direction of research
is to develop such methods for a more general class of
constraints.
