79 
Utility Elicitation as a Classification Problem 
Urszula Chajewska and Lise Getoor 
Computer Science Department 
Stanford University 
Stanford, CA 94305-9010 

Abstract 
We investigate the application of classification tech­
niques to utility elicitation. In a decision problem, two 
sets of parameters must generally be elicited: the prob­
abilities and the utilities. While the prior and condi­
tional probabilities in the model do not change from 
user to user, the utility models do. Thus it is necessary 
to elicit a utility model separately for each new user. 
Elicitation is long and tedious, particularly if the out­
come space is large and not decomposable. There are 
two common approaches to utility function elicitation. 
The first is to base the determination of the user's util­
ity function solely on elicitation of qualitative prefer­
ences. The second makes assumptions about the form 
and decomposability of the utility function. Here we 
take a different approach: we attempt to identify the 
new user's utility function based on classification rel­
ative to a database of previously collected utility func­
tions. We do this by identifying clusters of utility func­
tions that minimize an appropriate distance measure. 
Having identified the clusters, we develop a classifi­
cation scheme that requires many fewer and simpler 
assessments than full utility elicitation and is more ro­
bust than utility elicitation based solely on preferences. 
We have tested our algorithm on a small database of 
utility functions in a prenatal diagnosis domain and the 
results are quite promising. 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
Probabilistic systems, such as Bayesian networks (Pearl 
1988) and influence diagrams (Howard and Matheson 
1984) are a major research focus and have been gaining 
popularity in a number of application domains. Many sys­
tems based on them are now in use. Some of these systems, 
especially those used in medical domains, are designed to 
give advice to large numbers of users. Often these users do 
not agree on their preferences in a given decision context. 
Therefore, in order to recommend appropriate actions, we 
need to elicit a utility function not once, as a part of cre­
ating a model, but many times-once for each user. This 
can be an extremely long and tedious process, particularly 
if the outcome space is large and the utility function is not 
easily decomposable into independent components. 
Utility elicitation has been studied extensively in the area 
Joseph Norman and Yuval Shahar 
Stanford Medical Informatics 
Stanford University School of Medicine 
Stanford, CA 94305-5479 

of decision analysis (DA) (Luce and Raiffa 1957; Keeney 
and Raiffa 1976; Howard 1984a; Howard 1984b ). Recently 
it has started to receive attention in medical informatics 
(Heckerman et al. 1992; Farr and Shachter 1992; Horn­
berger et al. 1995) and artificial intelligence (AI) (Ha and 
Haddawy 1997; Linden et al. 1997; Boutilier et al. 1997). 
Most of the research concentrates on decomposing utility 
functions, taking advantage of various assumptions of in­
dependence between the attributes. Decomposed functions 
are easier to elicit and can allow more efficient reasoning 
procedures. Common approaches restrict attention to addi­
tive models (Hornberger et al. 1995; Linden et al. 1997), 
and partial elicitation of models (Ha and Haddawy 1997). 
In many cases, however, attributes are preferentially depen­
dent and thus assumptions of decomposability are suspect. 
An incorrect assumption of decomposability can adversely 
affect our choice of actions. This problem suggests that we 
should perform full utility elicitation. However, outcome 
spaces can be very large and eliciting full utility functions 
from every user may be infeasible. 
Yet, there is still hope for effective elicitation of users' util­
ity functions. Quite often, there are only a few qualita­
tively different utility functions and we can partition most 
users' utility functions into classes with very similar func­
tions within each group. Having these clusters of utility 
functions defined and knowing their prevalence in the pop­
ulation can guide the process of utility elicitation from a 
new user. 
In our approach, we begin with a database of fully-specified 
utility functions 1. From this database, we cluster the util­
ity functions in such a way that in a given context, there is 
some strategy that is close to optimal according to all the 
functions in that cluster. This strategy is the optimal strat­
egy for some function in the cluster and we identify that 
function with the cluster. Next, we build a decision tree for 
classifying the utility functions according to their clusters. 
1The appreciation of the importance of individual preferences 
is growing in the medical community. Some medical informat­
ics centers are collecting users' preferences for medical decision 
analysis. We have reasons to hope that such studies will become 
common and thus databases of patient utility functions will soon 
be available for many domains. 

80 
Chajewska, Getoor, Norman, and Shahar 
Figure I: A simplified version of PANDA model. 
When we are presented with a new user, we use this deci­
sion tree to find a suitable cluster and the utility function 
that is associated with it. The types of questions posed to 
the user during this elicitation will be easier for them to 
answer than the questions required during full elicitation. 
In addition, the number of questions required to classify a 
new utility function should be significantly fewer than the 
full utility function elicitation would require. 
The domain we focus on is prenatal testing. We are us­
ing a simplified version of the model developed by the 
PANDA project at Stanford Medical Informatics2. PANDA 
is a loose acronym for "prenatal testing decision analy­
sis." PANDA uses knowledge gained from many studies 
and from practicing clinicians to advise patients on which 
prenatal diagnostic tests they should choose during their 
pregnancies. The full model includes data about six major 
diseases which can be diagnosed before birth, along with 
their prevalence and severities. It considers four tests used 
to diagnose these diseases. These tests have different sen­
sitivities, specificities, costs, and health risks. In this paper, 
we use a simpler model, shown in Figure I. Our simplified 
version considers only one disease-Down's syndrome­
and two tests which can diagnose it--chorionic villus sam­
pling (CVS) and amniocentesis (AMNIO). 
In the real world, the decision about the choice of tests is 
rarely easy. The patient's risk for having a child with a 
serious disease depends on the mother's age, child's sex 
and race, and the family history. Some tests are not very 
accurate; others carry a significant risk of inducing miscar­
riages. Both miscarriage (SAB) and elective termination 
of the pregnancy (TAB) can affect the woman's chances of 
conceiving again. 
The outcomes in our models have many attributes: the in­
convenience and expense of fairly invasive testing, the pos­
sibility of test-induced miscarriage, knowledge about the 
2See http://smi-web.stanford.edu/projects/panda!. 
health of the child early in the pregnancy, the possibility 
of future conception, and the actual health of the child. A 
recent study (Kuppermann et al. I997) showed that these 
attributes are highly correlated and the utility of an outcome 
cannot be predicted from the utilities of the individual at­
tributes. For example, consider the attributes "future preg­
nancy" and "miscarriage". While we can generally assume 
that a woman would like to conceive again following a mis­
carriage, and thus the attribute "future pregnancy" will be 
preferred to its negation, we can make no such assumption 
when a miscarriage has not occurred. Our initial analysis of 
the model revealed the considerable influence of the utility 
function (especially the patient's attitude towards the risk 
of having a child with a serious disease and toward a mis­
carriage) on the optimal choice of actions. 
In the following section, we review some concepts from 
utility theory in the context of this example. In Section 3, 
we describe our approach to identifying clusters of util­
ity functions. In Section 4, we show how these clusters 
are used to classify a new user's utility function. In Sec­
tion 5, we present the results of our experiments on a small 
database of utility functions. In Section 6, we review some 
of the related work. Finally, in Section 7, we discuss poten­
tial benefits of our approach and future directions for this 
work. 
2 
REVIEW: UTILITY THEORY 
The principle of maximizing expected utility has long been 
established as the guide to making rational decisions. The 
axioms of utility theory, which are stated in terms of con­
straints on preferences, imply the existence of utility func­
tions (von Neumann and Morgenstern 1947; Savage 1954; 
Luce and Raiffa 1957). Let 0 be a set of possible outcomes 
{at, ... ,on}· The outcomes are also called situations (in 
AI literature) or consequences (in DA literature). For our 
model, the possible outcomes include sequences of events; 

there are 22 outcomes in the simplified version. The set 
of possible strategies, S = { St, ... , sm}, contains all possi­
ble decision sequences (conditional plans), such as: "take 
CVS; if the result is negative, do not take any more tests; 
otherwise, take amniocentesis; if the result is negative, con­
tinue; if not, terminate the pregnancy." The patient's his­
tory, hb is an instantiation of the observable variables in 
the model representing information specific to the patient 
and her pregnancy: patient's age, child's sex and race, fam­
ily history of diabetes, etc. (Since we are only considering 
one disease in our simplified model, namely Down's syn­
drome, we are able to reduce the number of history vari­
ables to only one relevant to this disease: mother's age.) 
The given decision strategy together with the patient's his­
tory induces a probability distribution over the set of out­
comes P(OJH,S) . Given a probability distribution P and 
the user's utility function defined over the outcomes, U(O), 
we can compute the expected utility for the given patient 
and the chosen strategy: 
EU(sJh) = L,P(oJh,s)U(o). 
0 
Von Neumann and Morgenstern (1947) developed an ap­
proach to utility elicitation based on measuring the strength 
of a person's preference for an outcome by the risks he 
or she is willing to take to obtain it. Consider three out­
comes o 1, 02, and 03 and a user with the preference order­
ing 01 >- 02 >- 03. If he or she is offered a choice between 
02 for sure and a gamble in which 01 will be received with 
probability 1t and 03 with probability ( 1 -rt), then, accord­
ing to the theory, there exists a value of 1t for which the user 
will be indifferent. The outcome 02 can then be assigned 
the utility value rtU(ot) + (1 -n)U(o3). 
The utility function was shown by von Neumann and Mor­
genstern (1947) to be uniquely determined up to an increas­
ing linear transformation, i.e., for any utility function U ( 0) 
and constants a and b, such that a > 0, aU ( 0) + b is also 
a utility function encoding the same preferences. The con­
stant a changes the scale of the utility function. The con­
stant b changes its zero point. 
In order to compare two utility functions, we have to make 
sure that they are normalized, i.e., their zero points and 
scales are the same. Usually this is done by finding two 
endpoints of the scale-the best and worst possible out­
comes, OT and o 1_ -and assigning them the values of 1 and 
0 respectively. However, the worst outcome in any given 
set does not necessarily have the same value for every per­
son. Thus it is common practice to include the death of the 
decision maker in the set of outcomes, on the presumption 
that its value is equally abysmal for everyone. 
In this paper, we will assume that the utility functions in our 
database have been normalized. In the PANDA domain, the 
two outcomes chosen for the endpoints are OT, the birth 
of a healthy baby following a healthy pregnancy with full 
knowledge throughout that the baby is not affected by any 
disease, and o 1_, the death of the pregnant woman herself; 
the utility functions take the values in the interval [0, 1]. 
Utility Elicitation as a Classification Problem 
81 
3 
IDENTIFYING CLUSTERS OF 
UTILITY MODELS 
We assume that we have a database of N normalized util­
ity functions over our outcome space 0, where JOJ = 
D. 
Our data points-the utility functions-are repre­
sented as vectors of values, one value for each outcome, 
{u(ot), ... ,u(oo)}. We also assume that the utility func­
tions of our new users will be drawn from the same distri­
bution as those in our database. 
In order to create the utility clusters, we can use any of the 
popular clustering algorithms. The goal is to divide a set 
of data points into non-overlapping groups, or clusters, of 
points, where points in a cluster are "more similar" to one 
another than to points in other clusters. When a dataset is 
clustered, every point is assigned to some cluster, and ev­
ery cluster can be characterized by a single reference point 
which we will call its prototype. 
3.1 
CHARACTERIZING SIMILARITY BETWEEN 
UTILITY FUNCTIONS 
A key component of any clustering algorithm is a notion 
of distance between points. The simplest approach would 
be to treat all utility functions as vectors of values, one 
for each outcome, and use the Euclidean distance between 
them as the distance measure. In essence this approach 
gives each outcome equal weight. It would be a mistake, 
however, to do this. Not all outcomes are equally prob­
able, thus the values attached to different outcomes by a 
utility function contribute differently to the expected utility 
value. For example, the probability of having a miscarriage 
is much smaller than the probability of having a healthy 
child and thus the changes in utilities for these outcomes 
do not affect the value of the expected utility equally. 
How can we resolve this problem? Since we are cluster­
ing the utility functions in the context of a specific decision 
problem, we can take advantage of the information con­
tained in our model. The quantity we want to minimize 
is the difference between the expected utility of a strategy 
we would choose for our user if we elicited her full utility 
function and the expected utility of the strategy we would 
choose for her based on our algorithm. 
To specify it more formally, we begin by defining the ex­
pected utility of a particular strategy s with respect to a par­
ticular utility function u; and a particular history hk: 
EUui(sJhk) = L,P(otJs,hk)u;(ot) 
Of 
where 01 ranges over possible outcomes. We can then look 
at the best strategy for a particular utility function and his­
tory, 
In the following, let Up be the utility function for some pro­
totype p and lets* lh be the best strategy for this prototype. 
Up 
k 

82 
Chajewska, Getoor, Norman, and Shahar 
Eventually, we will be giving advice to new users based 
some cluster's prototype. We would not like the result to 
differ significantly from what users could expect based on 
the full utility elicitation. In order to compute this differ­
ence, we need to consider two possibly different strategies: 
the strategy that we will pick for up, s* lh , and the strategy 
Up k 
that we would pick for the true utility function, ii, sflhk. We 
will evaluate both of these strategies for a particular history 
hk using ii. 
Definition 3.1: The Utility Loss (UL) for a utility function 
ii with respect to a utility function up and a history hk in the 
context of a given decision model M is 
UL(ii, upihk) = EUa(sflhk)- EUa(s:plhk) 
where the expected utility is defined with respect toM. I 
We will use this as the score we wish to minimize. Note 
that this measure is not symmetric: the UL of a utility func­
tion u; with respect to another utility function u j may be 
very different than the UL of Uj with respect to u;. This 
asymmetry matches the intended use of the measure. We 
will use one prototype function to advise many users. 
Based on our measure of the UL, we define the distance 
between two utility functions as follows: 
Definition 3.2: The distance between two utility functions 
u; and u i with respect to a history hk is defined as 
Note that our distance measure is not a metric; while it is 
symmetric, it does not satisfy the triangle inequality. 
We could create clusters based on averaging over histories, 
by minimizing the following distance: 
d(u;,uo) = 'LP(hk) · d(u;,uoihk) 
hk 
This approach may be satisfactory when using the strategy 
that is very good in most cases and does not have serious 
consequences even when we are faced with an unlikely sce­
nario. However, in a medical setting, where it is imperative 
to follow the correct strategy in the case of unlikely situa­
tion, this approach is not appropriate. 
Instead, in our algorithm, we are creating clusters for a par­
ticular history. We can do this in two ways: online and 
offline. In the online version, we start the process when 
we are presented with a new user whose utility function 
we want to classify. At that point, we know the particular 
history hk that we are interested in, and we create the clus­
ters relative to that history. Alternatively, we may do this 
offline, and create clusters for each potential history. The 
choice will depend on the size of the problem, the response 
requirements for the online utility elicitation and the stor­
age availability. Note that in either case, we are able to use 
the entire database to build our clusters because we assume 
Procedure Clustering 
Inputs: 
N number of data points 
k maximum number of classes 
u; utility functions to be clustered; i = l..N 
hk current history 
Outputs: C1 clusters; j = l..k and their prototypes uc1 
For each u, 
Put u; in a separate cluster C; 
Add C; to the list of clusters L 
For each c, and for each c1 
d(C;,Cj) = (UL(u;,uJihk) + UL(u1,u;jhk))f2 
Repeat 
Find clusters C,, Cs that are most similar 
Merge C, with Cs to form a new cluster C, 
Remove C, and Cs from L 
For each C, on L 
d(C,,C;} = ICrldiCrjl!i:d(Cs.C;) 
Add C, to L 
until the number of clusters is less than or equal to k 
For each cluster Cn 
Pick a representative ucn with the lowest score 
Score(u;) = Iu1Ecn UL(uJ,udhk) 
Figure 2: Hierarchical Agglomerative Clustering Algo­
rithm. 
that the utility function is independent of the patient his­
tory. This lack of data fragmentation is one of the benefits 
of this approach. 
3.2 
CLUSTERING THE UTILITY FUNCTIONS 
Clustering algorithms come in two general flavors, parti­
tioning methods (such ask-means) and hierarchical meth­
ods (Willett 1988). In general, hierarchical methods are 
faster than partitioning methods. We are concerned about 
the efficiency of our algorithm, since it may be done in an 
online setting. Therefore, we chose a hierarchical agglom­
erative clustering algorithm. Another benefit of a hierarchi­
cal method is that it allows us to tradeoff explicitly between 
the number of clusters and the similarity score. 
The algorithm starts by putting every data point in a sepa­
rate cluster. Then, it computes the distances between every 
two clusters. It finds the two closest clusters and combines 
them into one. It continues to merge clusters until some 
stopping criterion is met. 
There are several ways to define the distances between clus­
ters containing more than one element. We use one of the 
standard definitions, the group average link method, which 
uses the average values of the pairwise links within the po­
tential new cluster to determine similarity. 
After the clustering, we choose a prototype (cluster repre­
sentative) for every cluster by picking the utility function 
with the lowest score 
Score(u,) = 
L 
UL(u;, ujihk) 
ujEcluster 

4 
CLASSIFYING UTILITY MODELS 
Given that we have found our k clusters, we would like to 
find the cluster to which a new user's utility is most likely 
to belong, and use the prototype utility function for that 
cluster to determine the recommended strategy for our new 
user. Once we have clustered the data, we can label each 
utility function in the database with the cluster to which 
it was assigned in the clustering phase. Thus the task of 
identifying a cluster prototype for the new user is a classi­
fication problem. At this point, we could apply a nearest 
neighbor or case-based approach to find a cluster label for 
the new user. The problem is that we would still need to 
elicit the user's full utility function in order to do the near­
est neighbor calculation, which would defeat the purpose of 
our endeavor. Instead, we consider building a decision tree 
for the labeled database. We construct the tree by choosing 
tests and recursively splitting the database into partitions 
based on the outcomes of the tests. We keep splitting the 
partitions until the labels of the utility functions in each 
partition are largely from the same cluster. These will be 
the leaves of the decision tree. In order to classify a new 
user, we begin at the root of the decision tree, and ask the 
user to answer the test at each node in the decision tree. We 
traverse a path down the tree until we reach a leaf node. We 
then classify the new user's utility function according to the 
labels of the database utility functions that are at that leaf. 
Decision trees are particularly appropriate in this context 
because of the ease of human interpretation. More impor­
tantly, we will see that the questions required of users are 
of a form that are easier to answer than standard gamble 
questions. 
4.1 
BUILDING THE DECISION TREE 
The key components of decision tree induction algorithms 
are: the types of splits considered, the splitting criteria, or 
how the best split is chosen, and stopping or pruning rules. 
We describe each of these in turn. 
There are N utility functions in our database and D fea­
tures in each utility vector. Each of the features is a real 
value between 0.0 and 1.0 that is the normalized utility for 
a particular outcome in the outcome space. There are two 
types of splits we allow in the tree: preference splits and 
feature splits. Feature splits are of the form "Is outcome 
Oi preferred to the standard lottery, [c,oT; (1- c),oj_]?''. 
In decision tree algorithms that allow real valued features, 
this is the standard type of split considered. Preference 
splits are of the form "Is outcome Oi preferred to outcome 
oj?" Preference splits are a special type of linear combi­
nation splits. These linear combination splits are supported 
in some of the more sophisticated decision tree packages, 
such as CART (Breiman et al. 1984); here, by using the 
domain knowledge and looking only at preference splits, 
we need to consider only a small subset of all the possible 
linear combination splits. 
If we were doing full model elicitation, users would need 
Utility Elicitation as a Classification Problem 
83 
to answer questions of the form: "For what value of c is the 
user indifferent between outcome Oi and the standard lot­
tery, [c,oT; (1- c),oj_]?". The questions required for the 
feature splits and preference splits are each easier to an­
swer. Rather than having to specify a value for c, the user 
just has a yes or no question to answer. 
How do we compute the best split? There are many split­
ting rules considered in the literature. Each in some sense 
measures the impurity of a child node in the tree relative to 
its parent. The purity of a node n is a measure of the con­
centration of labels at that node in the tree. A node is pure 
if the labels of all of the examples at that node are the same. 
The impurity reaches its maximum if the distribution of la­
bels is uniform. The most common measure of impurity is 
entropy: 
k 
I(n) =- LPilogpi, 
i=i 
where Pi is an estimate of the probability of having cluster 
label i given that we are at node n in the decision tree. Pi 
is simply the number of examples at node n having cluster 
label i divided by the total number of examples at node n. 
Once we have chosen our measure, we can compute the 
gain in purity for a particular split s. It is the impurity of 
the node n minus the impurity of each of its children, n1 and 
nr, weighted by the estimated probability of being at each 
of the children given the split s: 
Gain= I(n)-P(niJs)I(ni)-P(nrls)I(nr). 
Our tree building algorithm is a greedy algorithm that 
chooses the split that has the greatest Gain at each step. 
Thus we compute, for each preference split and each fea­
ture split, the gain with that split. There are D(D- 1) /2 
preference splits to consider, each of the form Oi >-OJ, for 
each i, 1 :S i < D, and each j > i. For each feature, there 
are at most N feature splits to consider, each of the form 
u(oi) :S c, where i is the feature we are splitting on and c 
is the split point. We need only consider as split points ob­
served values of that feature for some utility function in our 
database. 
We disallow a feature split if the values immediately to the 
left and right of the split are very close. We prefer to find 
"gaps" in the values for the feature. We want the questions 
to be easy for the user to answer. If the split value is too 
close to the user's utility value, the question may be very 
difficult for her to answer and her answer would not be re­
liable. For example, if we split on the utility of the outcome 
"No tests, child with Down's syndrome" at the value 0.975, 
and the user's utility is quite close to that value, she will 
have a hard time answering the question. The appropri­
ate threshold can be determined experimentally. Note that 
such a threshold will introduce a slight bias towards pref­
erence questions. This is quite fortunate, since preference 
questions are much easier for the user to answer. 
There are also many stopping criteria to consider. Here we 
stop when all the utility functions have the same cluster 
label. 

84 
Chajewska, Getoor, Norman, and Shahar 
Strategy 1 
Strategy 2 
Strategy 3 
Strategy 4 
Decisions 
CVS - CVS results- early TAB - AMNIO - AMNIO results- late TAB 
Figure 3: Optimal Strategies 
4.2 
USING THE TREE TO CLASSIFY NEW 
USERS 
Note that in general, for full utility elicitation, there are 101 
lottery questions that must be asked of the form "For what 
value of c is the user indifferent between outcome o; and 
the standard lottery, [ c, OT; ( 1 - c), o l.] ?". In our decision 
tree classification, there will be at most d questions asked, 
where d is the maximum depth of the tree, and each of the 
questions will be a preference question of the form, "Is out­
come o; preferred to outcome Oj?" or, for a feature split a 
question of the form, "Is outcome o; preferred to the stan­
dard lottery, [c, OT; (1 - c),o _1_]?", for fixed c. 
How is this procedure helping us to advise new users? First, 
we collect the history data hk from the user. We then find 
the appropriate clustering for that history, and classify the 
new user's utility function. When a user's utility function 
is determined to belong to a given cluster characterized by 
the prototype p;, we find the best strategy for the patient's 
history hk and the prototype's utility function Up;· Thus we 
find a nearly-optimal strategy for the user with only a small 
number of question. 
Decision trees have many well known advantages. In our 
context, an important advantage is the ease of handling 
both preference splits and feature splits in a single frame­
work. This allows us to seamlessly integrate the two types 
of questions in a well-founded manner based on informa­
tion theoretic principles. Another important advantage is 
the human interpretability of a decision tree; practitioners 
can look at the tree and see if the classifications it provides 
make sense. Finally, as mentioned earlier, the key advan­
tage that we are exploiting for elicitation is that the ques­
tions required of the users are significantly easier for them 
to answer. 
Decision trees also have many disadvantages. All tech­
niques for building decision trees rely on greedy strategies, 
because finding the optimal decision tree is intractable. 
This leads to instability and high variance in the algorithms. 
A small perturbation in the input data can lead to quite dif­
ferent decision trees. Our approach of first clustering the 
data, before building the decision tree for the data, should 
help us overcome this problem. We have not explored this 
issue in depth, but see it an interesting area for further work. 
There are many related data structures such as regression 
trees and KD-trees. It is possible to reformulate our ap­
proach of clustering based on UL and building a classifica­
tion tree from the clusters, into a modification of the appro­
priate regression tree or KD-tree algorithms, where we use 
UL to compute the distances and we consider splits that are 
equivalent to our preference and feature splits. The result­
ing algorithms are equivalent in terms of time and space 
complexity. 
5 
EMPIRICAL RESULTS 
We ran our algorithm with the simplified PANDA model 
and a database of utility functions that were collected by 
Miriam Kuppermann of UCSF/Mount Zion Medical Cen­
ter (1997). There were 70 utility functions in the database. 
Of these, many had missing values. In the experiments re­
ported, we ran on the 55 utility functions with no missing 
values. 
We considered four different patient histories, correspond­
ing to the age of the woman: TEEN, 25YO, 35YO, and 
45YO. We also considered an average history, AVE, as a 
baseline. 

Utility Elicitation as a Classification Problem 
85 
Figure 4: Decision tree for the TEEN history. The numbers at the leaves represent cluster labels and corresponding 
strategies (see Figure 3). 
Figure 5: Decision tree for the 45YO history. The numbers at the leaves represent cluster labels and corresponding 
strategies (see Figure 3). 

86 
Chajewska, Getoor, Norman, and Shahar 
5.1 
PROPERTIES OF THE DOMAIN 
We began by computing for every utility function u j in our 
database the optimal strategy for the current history hk: 
s: ·lhk. We also computed the expected utility of each of 
thse strategies: EUu.(s* ·lh ). Now, for each utility func-
J 
U) k 
tion we compared the expected utility of its best strategy to 
the expected utility of the best strategy for each of the other 
utility functions. This allowed us to compute the UL for all 
pairs of utility functions. 
We next clustered the data using our hierarchical agglom­
erative clustering algorithm. We found that for every age 
group we considered, we could identify four clusters with 
intra-cluster distances of 0. Thus, out of 18 strategies al­
lowed in our model3 only four strategies were found to be 
optimal for some utility function in the database. These 
four strategies are shown in Figure 3. Interestingly, the 
strategies didn't differ across the age groups. There were, 
however, significant differences in the sizes of clusters cor­
responding to these strategies. For some utility functions, 
the same strategy was optimal regardless of history. For 
others, it was different in every age group. These results 
correspond to the intuitions of many practitioners in the 
field of prenatal diagnosis. Since the probability of hav­
ing a child with Down's syndrome increases dramatically 
with the age of the mother, for some women the optimal 
strategy should change with age. On the other hand, if the 
woman's attitude towards the possibility of having a dis­
abled child is extreme (very negative or very positive), one 
strategy might be optimal for her throughout her life. 
It is hard to characterize precisely the group of women for 
which a given strategy is optimal. The utility functions are 
sometimes very diverse even within the same cluster. Intu­
itively, we can think of Strategy 1 as appropriate for women 
with relatively low risk aversion towards the possibility of 
giving birth to a child with Down's syndrome. Strategy 4 
should be used for women very risk averse in this respect. 
Strategy 2 is best for women who are equally afraid of hav­
ing a child with Down's syndrome and aborting a healthy 
fetus. Strategy 3 was found to be appropriate for a woman 
who was also very afraid of aborting a healthy fetus and in 
addition, placed a very high value on knowing early in the 
pregnancy whether the disease was present. These charac­
terizations, however, are very crude approximations. 
After the data were clustered, we ran our decision tree al­
gorithm. The trees generated for different histories were 
very different. Figures 4 and 5 show examples of decision 
trees for two extreme age groups: TEEN and 45YO. As we 
expected, the most important split for the TEEN tree was 
the feature split on deciding not to undergo any diagnos­
tic procedure and having a Down's syndrome child. The 
probability of having a child with this disease is so low 
for this age group that only extreme values for this feature 
can cause the strategy to differ from the one the doctors 
3We restricted the space of possible strategies to eliminate 
nonsensical ones, e.g., involving prenatal tests after termination. 
usually advise their teen patients to pursue: "do nothing," 
i.e., strategy 1. Note that there are three feature splits for 
this feature in the tree, with different split points. On the 
other hand, the decision tree for 45YO demonstrates sen­
sitivity to women's attitudes towards abortion and miscar­
riage. This phenomenon is again understandable, since the 
risk of Down's is the highest for this age group and all of 
the diagnostic tests carry a significant risk of inducing mis­
carriages. 
Note that we need at most 6 (in the TEEN tree) or 5 (in the 
45YO tree) assessments to completely identify the user's 
utility function. The numbers in the leaves of the decision 
tree represent different clusters and corresponding optimal 
strategies (see Figure 3). Recall that a full utility assess­
ment for our model would require the user to assign values 
to 22 outcomes. 
5.2 
PERFORMANCE RESULTS 
We were interested to see how well our algorithm would 
perform at classifying a new user. We measured the error 
of our algorithm by creating clusters and decision trees for 
a subset of the database, the training set, and then evaluated 
the performance of the decision tree on a small test set. We 
measure the error as the UL from using the utility function 
assigned by the decision tree as compared to the true utility 
function. 
Figure 6 shows a sample learning curve for this domain. It 
shows the error as a function of the dataset size. We see 
that surprisingly, even for this small dataset, the results are 
quite promising. We are able to notice a steady decrease 
in error as the training set size increases. The results are 
particularly promising for the TEEN, 25YO and 35YO cat­
egories. The errors for AVE and 45YO are higher. A plau­
sible explanation for the higher error for the 45YO users 
is that the choice of strategy is more sensitive for this age 
group to small changes in the utility function. This sensi­
tivity is caused by the fact that very unlikely outcomes such 
as Down's or miscarriage are more probable for 45 year old 
women than for other age groups. 
Figure 7 shows the error as a function of the number of 
clusters. We see that initially, as cluster size increases, 
we have an improvement in error. Then, as cluster size 
increases further, the error increases. The interesting phe­
nomenon that we notice, is that despite the fact that there 
are only four strategies, it is actually better to create more 
than four clusters. This is because our decision trees are 
built over the space of the utility functions, while our clus­
tering algorithm is geared toward identifying utility func­
tions with similar optimal strategies. This curve also il­
lustrates the classic phenomenon of overfitting-with too 
weak a bias (by allowing a large number of clusters), we 
overfit the data and observe poor performance on the test 
set. Using our algorithm, we can find the appropriate num­
ber of clusters. 
There are several directions in which we would like expand 

K 
K 
0 
...J 
4 
5 
0.12 
0.10 
0.08 
0.06 
0.04 
0.02 
Averagej 
Teen 
·+-·-
25 YO 
G .. 
• 
-- 35 YO 
• 
/ ·---.--
'.,45 YO 
-•- - ·  
-:;(
:;<c,!--_,\, 
0.00 L---'---'---'----'----'--'--_j 
40 
42 
44 
46 
48 
Dataset Size 
50 
52 
54 
Figure 6: Learning curves (average of 10,000 runs). 
our experiments. The most important of these is to test 
on a larger database for a richer model. Data for a larger 
study is currently being collected, and we plan to apply our 
algorithm to this data when it becomes available. 
6 
RELATED WORK 
With recent advances in the power and scope of decision­
theoretic systems, utility elicitation has become a lively and 
expanding area of research. A few projects are particularly 
relevant to this work. Hornberger (1995) applied CART 
classification to utilities for the purpose of simplifying util­
ity assessment. His work assumed linear additive indepen­
dence between utility attributes, and used simulated rather 
than observed utilities as a basis for classification. Horvitz 
and Klein ( 1993) used utility as a basis for categorization in 
the context of decision analysis. They abstract policy and 
outcome spaces using clustering approaches that are sim­
ilar to ours. Farr and Shachter (1992) designed a system 
to assess utilities parsimoniously using simulated decision 
scenarios rather than complete standard-gamble utility as­
sessment. Their approach was geared toward eliciting util­
ities from a single expert user rather than many individual 
end-users. Finally, Jimison (1992) addressed the broader 
task of tailoring general decision models to individual users 
by explicitly representing uncertainties about key utility 
and probability parameters. Her work was geared toward 
explaining clinical decision models and refining them in a 
principled way using expected value of information. 
7 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
We have presented a new approach to utility function elici­
tation based on machine learning techniques. This method 
provides an effective alternative to the current approaches 
to utility elicitation. We neither have to make assumptions 
about the decomposability of the utility function nor are 
we limited to eliciting only preferences; thus our approach 
should suit a wide variety of applications. We have applied 
Utility Elicitation as a Classification Problem 
87 
0.12 
0.10 
0.08 
K 
:s 
...J 
 
0.06 
:S 
0.04 
0.02 
0.00 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
Number of Clusters 
Averagej 
Teen 
-+--· 
25 YO 
G .  
35 YO 
• 
45 YO -•- - ·  
8 
9 
10 
Figure 7: Leave-one-out cross-validation for number of 
clusters. 
this framework to a prenatal testing decision model, and 
found the results quite promising. We found that we could 
in fact identify a small number of prototype utility func­
tions. We also found that we could classify a new user's 
utility function with only a small number of easy-to-answer 
questions, with the introduction of only minimal error due 
to using the prototype utility function rather than the user's 
true utility function. 
The output of our approach, a decision tree, has the advan­
tage of being easily interpretable by practitioners. More 
importantly, it makes the elicitation of user preferences 
much easier. The types of questions the users must answer 
are simpler than standard gamble questions. We hope that 
this will enable individualized utility elicitation for users in 
real clinical settings. 
We plan to continue our research in several directions: 
• We would like to bound the UL for a particular pa­
tient given the cluster we have identified. Every leaf 
in our decision tree corresponds to a convex region in 
the utility space. By looking at the optimal policies 
at the vertices of this region, we can come up with a 
bound on the UL over the entire region. In cases where 
this bound is not tight enough, we may ask additional 
questions until we achieve satisfactory bounds. 
• We would like to explore the possibility of including 
history information in the clustering procedure. Cur­
rently we create separate clusterings for each history, 
using the entire database under the assumption that the 
utility function is independent of the history. This as­
sumption allows us to avoid data segmentation in our 
small database. We would like to explore the conse­
quences of relaxing this assumption. 
• Currently, we do not consider clustering based on the 
similarity of the actions in the policies, we only cluster 
on the basis of UL. We also do not consider abstrac­
tions of the outcome space. It would be quite inter­
esting to consider flexible methods of clustering along 
all three of these dimensions. 

88 
Chajewska, Getoor, Norman, and Shahar 
• While many utility functions are not decomposable 
in general, we may find a decomposition applicable 
to particular clusters. We could also use conditional 
independence between the attributes to speed up the 
classification process. 
• In many cases, there are some obvious constraints that 
all utility functions should obey. For example, in the 
PANDA model, we can assume that a woman seeking 
advice on the choice of diagnostic tests would con­
sider having a healthy baby more desirable than hav­
ing a baby with a severe disability. We would like 
to explore the possibility of using such constraints­
background knowledge-to increase the effectiveness 
of our procedure.
