CausalSim: A Causal Framework for Unbiased Trace-Driven Simulation
Abdullah Alomar∗
MIT

Pouya Hamadanian∗
MIT

Arash Nasr-Esfahany∗
MIT

Anish Agarwal
MIT

Mohammad Alizadeh
MIT

Devavrat Shah
MIT

Abstract
We present CausalSim, a causal framework for unbiased
trace-driven simulation. Current trace-driven simulators
assume that the interventions being simulated (e.g., a new
algorithm) would not affect the validity of the traces. However,
real-world traces are often biased by the choices algorithms
make during trace collection, and hence replaying traces
under an intervention may lead to incorrect results. CausalSim
addresses this challenge by learning a causal model of the
system dynamics and latent factors capturing the underlying
system conditions during trace collection. It learns these
models using an initial randomized control trial (RCT) under a
ﬁxed set of algorithms, and then applies them to remove biases
from trace data when simulating new algorithms.
Key to CausalSim is mapping unbiased trace-driven simu-
lation to a tensor completion problem with extremely sparse
observations. By exploiting a basic distributional invariance
property present in RCT data, CausalSim enables a novel ten-
sor completion method despite the sparsity of observations.
Our extensive evaluation of CausalSim on both real and syn-
thetic datasets, including more than ten months of real data
from the Puffer video streaming system shows it improves
simulation accuracy, reducing errors by 53% and 61% on av-
erage compared to expert-designed and supervised learning
baselines. Moreover, CausalSim provides markedly different
insightsaboutABRalgorithmscomparedtothebiasedbaseline
simulator, which we validate with a real deployment.
1
Introduction
Causa Latet Vis Est Notissima – The cause is hidden, but the
result is known. (Ovid: Metamorphoses IV, 287)
Trace-driven simulation is a widely used method for
evaluating new ideas in systems. In contrast to full-system
simulation (e.g.,NS3 [31]),which requires detailed knowledge
of system characteristics (e.g., topology, trafﬁc patterns,
hardware details, etc.), trace-driven simulation does not
model all components of a system. Instead, it focuses on
simulating one (or a few) components of interest, where we
wish to experiment with an intervention, e.g., a new design,
*Equal contribution
algorithm, or architectural choice. To account for the effect of
the remaining components that are not simulated, we collect
a trace capturing their behavior and replay it while simulating
the component of interest with the proposed intervention.
The key assumption here is that the interventions would
not affect the trace being replayed, which we refer to as the
exogenous trace assumption. If this assumption does not
hold, replaying the trace is invalid and could lead to incorrect
simulation results. This problem has been referred to as bias
in trace-driven (or data-driven) simulation [15,37].
It is difﬁcult to guarantee the exogenous trace assumption
in traces collected from real-world systems. Consider, for
example, trace-driven simulation of adaptive bitrate (ABR)
algorithms [35, 50, 63, 75]. It is common to use network
throughput traces from real video streaming sessions on
Internet paths [38, 75]. However, the throughput achieved
when the player downloads a video chunk is caused by certain
latent properties of the network path (e.g., the underlying
bottleneck capacity, the number and type of competing
ﬂows, etc.), as well as the particular choices made by the
ABR algorithm (the bitrate chosen for each chunk). In other
words, the trace data reﬂects the combined effect of these two
causes and is biased by the ABR algorithms used during trace
collection. To simulate a new algorithm, we need to tease apart
the effect of the two causes, and predict how the trace would
have changed under the decisions of the new algorithm.
We present CausalSim, a causal framework for unbiased
trace-driven simulation. CausalSim relaxes the exogenous
trace assumption by explicitly modeling the fact that
interventions can affect trace data. Using traces collected
from a randomized control trial (RCT) under a ﬁxed set
of algorithms, it infers both the latent factors capturing the
underlying conditions of the system and a causal model of its
dynamics, including the unknown relationship between latents,
algorithm decisions, and observed trace data. To simulate a
new algorithm, CausalSim ﬁrst estimates the latent factors at
every time step of each trace. Then, it uses the estimated latent
factors to predict the alternate evolution of the trace, actions,
and observed variables of the component of interest, under the
same latent conditions that were present when the trace was
collected. This two-step process allows CausalSim to remove
the bias in the trace data when simulating new algorithms.
arXiv:2201.01811v4  [cs.LG]  5 May 2023

CausalSim provides two beneﬁts: (i) it improves the accu-
racy of trace-driven simulation when the intervention could af-
fect (in possibly subtle ways) the trace data; (ii) it enables trace-
driven simulation of systems where deﬁning an exogenous
trace is not possible and therefore standard trace-driven simu-
lation is not applicable. We evaluate both settings in this paper,
by simulating ABR and heterogeneous server load balancing
algorithms as examples for cases (i) and (ii) respectively.
CausalSim requires training data from an RCT. Large
network operators have increasingly invested in RCT infras-
tructure to evaluate new ideas, but due to their low throughput
and risk of disruptions or SLA violations [42], they can afford
to evaluate only a fraction of proposed ideas in RCTs. Causal-
Sim greatly extends the utility of RCT data by learning a model
that can simulate a wide range of algorithms using traces from
a ﬁxed set of algorithms. Periodically or whenever an operator
believes the underlying system characteristics have changed
signiﬁcantly, they can collect fresh data using an RCT (again,
with the same ﬁxed set of algorithms) to retrain CausalSim.
CausalSim’s design begins with the observation that
unbiased trace-driven simulation can be viewed as a matrix (or
tensor) completion problem [9, 14]. Consider a matrix M of
traces (it is a tensor if traces are higher dimensional), with rows
corresponding to possible actions and columns corresponding
to different time steps in the trace data. For each column, the
entry for one action is “revealed”; all other entries are missing.
Our task can be viewed as recovering the missing entries.
A signiﬁcant body of work has shown that it is possible to
recover a matrix from sparse observations under certain as-
sumptions about the matrix and the pattern of missing data.
Roughly speaking, the typical assumptions that make recovery
feasible are thatthe matrixhas lowrank,the entries revealedare
chosen at random, and that enough entries are revealed. Low-
rank structure is prevalent in many real-world problems [69]
and has also been observed in network measurement data [16,
43, 44, 60]. But unfortunately the other two assumptions do
not hold in our problem. As we detail in §4.3, one observed
entry per column is below the information-theoretic bound for
low-rank matrix completion (even for rank r=1). Moreover,
not only are the entries revealed in our problem not random,
they depend on other entries of the matrix, since the actions
are being taken by algorithms based on observed variables.
To overcome these challenges, CausalSim exploits two key
insights. First, it assumes a causal model (§3) where the latent
factors are exogenous and are not affected by the interventions
we want to simulate in the component of interest. This exoge-
nous latent assumption relaxes (and is therefore implied by)
the exogenous trace assumption in standard trace-driven simu-
lation. For example, in ABR, it says that underlying factors like
the bottleneck link speed on a network path are not affected by
a user’s ABR algorithm, whereas ABR decisions can impact
the trace that user observes (i.e., the achieved throughput).
Second, CausalSim uses a basic property of trace data
collected via an RCT. Since the assignment of an algorithm
to a trace is completely random in an RCT, the distribution of
latent factors should be the same for the traces obtained using
different algorithms, i.e., the latent distribution is invariant
to the algorithm. We provide conditions on the RCT data
(e.g., in terms of the number and diversity of algorithms) that
guarantee recoverability of the low-rank matrix using this
invariance property (§4.2), and we operationalize this idea in
a practical learning method that exploits the invariance using
an adversarial neural network training technique (§5).
We evaluate CausalSim on two use cases, ABR and server
loadbalancing,withbothreal-worldandsyntheticdatasets,and
further verify CausalSim’s predictions with a test in the wild on
the Puffer [71] video streaming testbed. Our main ﬁndings are:
1. We use CausalSim to debug and improve an ABR
algorithm, BOLA1 [53,63]. In a ten month experiment on
Puffer [71], BOLA1 exhibited high stalling compared to
BBA [35], with slightly better quality. Using CausalSim,
we tune BOLA1’s parameters via Bayesian Optimization
and deploy our improved version on Puffer. We show that
it improves the stall rate of this well-known algorithm by
2.6×, achieving 0.7× the stall rate of BBA with similar
perceptual quality. The expert-designed baseline simu-
lator that ignores bias predicts the exact opposite: that
the new variant should stall 1.34× the stall rate of BBA.
This case study shows that removing bias is crucial to
draw accurate conclusions from trace-driven simulation.
2. Evaluation of CausalSim on more than ten months of real
data from Puffer shows that CausalSim’s error in stall
rate prediction is bounded to 28%, while expert-designed
and standard supervised learning baselines have errors in
the range of 49–68% and 29–187% respectively. Similar
observations are also made for perceptual quality metrics
and buffer occupancy levels.
3. CausalSim opens up new avenues to apply trace-driven
simulation to systems where the exogenous trace
assumption is invalid. Using a synthetic environment
modeling a heterogeneous server load balancing problem,
we show how CausalSim reduces average simulation
error by 5.1×, a stark improvement compared to a
baseline simulator with a median error of 124.3%.
This work does not raise any ethical issues. Our code is
available at https://github.com/CausalSim/Unbiased-Trace-
Driven-Simulation.
2
Motivation
2.1
Bias in Trace-Driven Simulation
Trace-driven simulation is a widely used technique to design
and evaluate systems. Unlike full-system simulation, it focuses
on simulating one (or a few) components of the system while
capturing the effect of remaining components by replaying
a trace. For example, to simulate new ABR algorithms, it is
common to replay network throughput traces from real Internet

(a) Trace-driven simulation
(b) CausalSim
Figure 1: CausalSim relaxes the exogenous trace assumption
in standard trace-driven simulation.1
paths in a simulator modeling only the video player/server.
As we alluded to earlier, the key assumption here is that the
interventions being simulated would not affect the trace being
replayed; otherwise, replaying the trace would be invalid. We
refer to this as the exogenous trace assumption, and it is central
to standard trace-driven simulation. Figure 1a is a visual
depiction of the exogenous trace assumption. In the ﬁgure, a
represents the intervention we want to simulate; for example,
the actions taken by a new algorithm. o is the observed state
of the component being simulated. u represents the latent state
of the rest of the system, which we do not observe or simulate.
Finally, m is the trace, which captures the behavior of the other
components.2 The existence of each edge represents a causal
effect. For example, the trace m and intervention a both affect
o. Note the absence of the edge from a to m, which implies
that the intervention cannot affect the trace (the exogenous
trace assumption).
The simulator designer must deﬁne the trace carefully to
meet this assumption. But what happens if it does not hold, i.e.,
there exists an edge from a to m (as in Figure 1b)? Ignoring
the violation of exogenous trace assumption leads to biased
simulation outcomes, as we will see next.
2.2
An Example Using Real-world Traces
In this section, we use more than ten months of real-world
data from Puffer [71], a recently deployed system for
experimenting with video streaming protocols, to illustrate
the issue of bias in trace-driven simulation.
Puffer collects data from a continual Randomized Control
Trial (RCT) that tests several Adaptive Bit Rate (ABR)
1In general, a and u can be correlated. For example, they can both depend
on prior latent conditions of the system. In ABR, for instance, recent latent
path conditions are correlated with current path conditions (u), and also affect
the action taken by the ABR algorithm (a). Correlation of a and u, however,
does not imply a causal relationship between them. In particular, our model
assumes exogenous latents, i.e. a does not affect u.
2Variables in Fig. 1a can be multidimensional and vary with time.
algorithms. In the period of interest (July 27, 2020 – June 2,
2021), the tested algorithms include Buffer-Based Algorithm
(BBA) [35], two versions of BOLA-BASIC (henceforth
called BOLA) [63]3, and two versions of an algorithm called
Fugu developed by the Puffer authors. The dataset includes
more than 56 million chunk downloads from more than 230
thousand streaming sessions, totaling 3.5 years of streamed
videos. For each streaming session, it provides logs of the
chosen chunk sizes, available chunk sizes, achieved chunk
download throughputs, and playback buffer levels.4
Consider a typical trace-driven simulation scenario, where
we wish to simulate a new ABR algorithm using traces from
previous video streaming sessions. We deﬁne such a task on
the Puffer data as follows. We let one of the algorithms, say
BBA, be the algorithm that we wish to simulate. We leave
out the data for this algorithm and ask whether it is possible
to predict its performance using the other algorithms’ traces.
In evaluating a new ABR algorithm, we may be interested in
various performance measurements, e.g. buffer occupancy,
rebuffering rate, chosen bitrates, etc. Here, we focus on
predicting the behavior of playback buffer occupancy, which is
one of the key indicators of an ABR algorithm’s behavior [35].
The goal of trace-driven simulation is to predict the
trajectory of the system (e.g., buffer, bitrates, etc.) for one
algorithm in the same underlying conditions that were present
when a trace was collected using a different algorithm. When
simulating algorithm B based on a trace collected using
algorithm A, we will refer to A as the “source” algorithm and
to B as the “target” algorithm.
It is generally not possible to evaluate the accuracy of indi-
vidual simulated trajectories using real-world data, because we
do not have ground truth trajectories for the target algorithm un-
der the same exact network conditions that were present when
running the source algorithm. However, since the Puffer data
was obtained using an RCT, we can evaluate predictions about
distributional properties of the target algorithm, such as the
distribution of the buffer occupancy achieved by the algorithm
over the population of network paths present in the RCT.
To summarize, our task is: predict the distribution of the
buffer occupancy for the users assigned to BBA (the target
algorithm) in the Puffer dataset, using only the data from the
other (source) algorithms.
2.2.1
Simulation via Expert Modeling (ExpertSim)
As our ﬁrst strawman, we build a simple trace-driven simulator
(ExpertSim) using our knowledge of how an ABR system
works. ExpertSim models the playback buffer dynamics for
each step, where a step corresponds to one ABR decision and
3BOLA1 and BOLA2 are variations on BOLA adjusted to target the
SSIM quality metric instead of bitrate [53]. They pursue different objective
functions and use different principles for hyperparameter adjustment.
4We use ‘slow stream’ logs (by Puffer’s deﬁnition, streams with TCP
delivery rates below 6Mbps) available on the Puffer website [1].

0
5
10
15
10
30
50
70
Buffer Occupancy (seconds)
CDF (%)
CausalSim
ExpertSim
SLSim
BBA (target)
BOLA2 (source)
(a)
1
2
3
4
5
10
30
50
70
Observed Throughput (Mbps)
CDF (%)
BBA
BOLA2
(b)
Figure 2: (a) CausalSim is accurate in predicting buffer
level distribution of BBA users, while baseline simulators’
predictions are similar to BOLA2 users. (b) Distribution of
achieved throughput is different in BBA and BOLA2 users.
the download of a single video chunk. Let ˆct be the throughput
achievedinstept (forthetth chunk)ofaparticularvideostream-
ing session using, say, the BOLA2 algorithm. To simulate
BBA for the same user, ExpertSim assumes that the user would
achieve the same throughput ˆct in each step under the BBA al-
gorithm as well. In other words, it assumes that ABR decisions
do not affect the observed network throughput (the exogenous
trace assumption). Under this assumption, ExpertSim models
the evolution of the video playback buffer as follows. Let bt be
the buffer level at the beginning of step t (before the download
of chunk t), rt be the bitrate chosen in step t, and st be the size
of the tth chunk implied by the chosen bitrate. Then the buffer
at the end of step t is derived as: bt+1 =max(0,bt −st/ˆct)+T,
where T is the chunk duration.5 Although simple, the
assumption that throughput is an exogenous property of a
network path is common in modelling ABR protocols. For
example, both FastMPC [75] and FESTIVE [38] assume that
the observed throughput does not depend on the chosen bitrate.
Figure 2a shows the true distribution of buffer level for
BOLA2 and BBA users in the Puffer dataset (the two dashed
lines), as well as the distribution predicted by running BBA
on the traces collected from BOLA2 users using ExpertSim
(solid blue line). The predictions are inaccurate: the buffer
distribution generated by ExpertSim is more similar to the
buffer distribution of BOLA2 users (the source algorithm) than
the buffer distribution of BBA users (the target algorithm).
5The complete buffer dynamic equation is slightly more complex to handle
cases with full buffers. Refer to §C.1 in the appendix for further clariﬁcation.
2.2.2
Simulation via Supervised Learning (SLSim)
Perhaps the simple model of buffer dynamics in ExpertSim
does notaccurately reﬂectthe actualsystem behavior. As a next
attempt,we turn to machine learning and try to learn the system
dynamics from data. Speciﬁcally, we use supervised learning
to train a Neural Network (NN) that models the step-wise
dynamics of the system. This fully connected NN includes 2
hidden layers, each with 128 ReLU activated neurons. For each
timestep t, the NN takes as input the buffer level before down-
loading the tth chunk bt, the achieved throughput ˆct for chunk
t, and the chunk size st (which depends on the birate chosen by
ABR). The NN outputs the download time of thetth chunk, and
the resulting buffer level bt+1. We train the NN to minimize the
prediction error on our dataset. To avoid information leaking,
we exclude the logs for BBA from the training data.
Figure 2a shows the predicted buffer level distribution via
this approach (SLSim) for BBA. As with ExpertSim, we use
the traces collected from BOLA2 users as the source algorithm.
The results are similar to ExpertSim; once again, the predicted
buffer distribution is closer to that of BOLA2 than BBA.
2.2.3
What Went Wrong?
To understand the limitations of ExpertSim and SLSim, we
plot the distribution of achieved per-chunk throughput forusers
assigned to BOLA2 and BBA in Figure 2b. Since algorithm
selection is completely random, we would expect inherent net-
work path properties such as bottleneck link capacity to have
the same distribution for users assigned to different ABR algo-
rithms. However, such an invariance should not be expected for
achieved throughput, because even on the same path different
ABR algorithms could achieve different throughput. For exam-
ple, since congestion control protocols take time to discover
available bandwidth (e.g., in slow start) or converge to their
fair share rate when competing against other ﬂows, an ABR
algorithm that tends to choose lower bitrates (and hence down-
load less data per chunk) may achieve less throughput than an
ABR algorithm that picks higher bitrates [34,64]. We can see
this behavior in the Puffer dataset. The achieved throughput
for BOLA2 and BBA is clearly different in Figure 2b.
This conﬁrms that ABR algorithms cause a bias in the mea-
sured throughput traces, and the exogenous trace property does
not hold. To perform accurate trace-driven simulation, we need
to account for this bias when simulating new ABR algorithms.
2.3
Causal Inference to the Rescue!
If the traces were the underlying network capacity when each
chunk was downloaded (rather than the achieved throughput),
the exogenous trace assumption would hold and our problem
would be simple. First, we would learn the relationship
between network capacity and achieved throughput for
different ABR actions using our data. Then, to simulate BBA
for a given trace, we would start with the network capacity

at each step of the trace and predict the achieved throughput
taking into account the bitrate chosen by BBA in that step.
This would then allow us to predict how the buffer evolves.
This works because unlike achieved throughput, underlying
capacity is an exogenous property of a network path and is
not affected by the ABR actions.
However, underlying network capacity is a latent quantity
— we do not observe it in our traces. The key challenge is
therefore to infer such latent quantities from observational
data. Concretely, in our running example, we wish to estimate
the latent factors like network capacity in each step of a trace,
using observations such as the bitrate, the chunk size, the
achieved throughput, etc.6
Inferring such latent confounders and using them for
counterfactual prediction is the core issue in the ﬁeld of causal
inference [57, 58]. In this paper, we develop CausalSim, a
causalframeworkforunbiasedtrace-driven simulation. Causal-
Sim relaxes the exogenous trace assumption in trace-driven
simulation. It explicitly models the fact that interventions can
affect trace data (the edge from a to m in Figure 1b), and infers
both the latent factors and a causal model of the system dynam-
ics. This allows CausalSim to correct for the bias in trace data
when simulating an intervention. As an illustration, Figure 2a
shows the predicted buffer occupancy distribution when sim-
ulating BBA on the traces of users assigned to BOLA2, using
CausalSim. CausalSim matches the ground-truth distribution
for BBA much more accurately than the alternatives.
3
Model and Problem Statement
3.1
Causal Model
Consider the following discrete-time dynamical model7
corresponding to Figure 1b:
mt =Ftrace(at, ut),
(1)
ot+1 =Fsystem(ot, mt, at).
(2)
Here, t denotes the time index, mt is the trace, at is the
intervention, ut is the latent factor, and ot is the observed state
of the component of interest. The function Ftrace models the
effect of interventions on the trace (which traditional methods
ignore), and Fsystem models the dynamics of the component
of interest. When the intervention changes an algorithm in the
component of interest, at can be viewed as the action taken
by that algorithm at time t.
We assume that interventions do not affect the internal state
of the rest of the system, i.e., that the latent factors are exoge-
nous. This assumption is implicit in the dynamical system
6For simplicity, we only mention network capacity here, but other latent
path conditions like the number of competing ﬂows could also affect achieved
throughput and the same reasoning applies to them.
7This model is similar to a special type of Partially Observable Markovian
Decision Processes (POMDPs) in which the unobserved part of the state is
exogenous [51].
equations, and also visualized in Figure 1b by the absence
of the edge from a to u. Note that this is a strict relaxation
of the exogenous trace assumption in standard trace-driven
simulation. There, the trace itself is assumed to be unaffected
by intervention, which also implies exogenous latent factors.
In our running ABR example, we want to simulate the video
player and server (components of interest) without precisely
modeling the entire network path (the rest of the system). Each
time step t corresponds to the download of a new chunk, and ut
represents latent network conditions during that transmission,
e.g., bottleneck link speed, number of ﬂows sharing the same
network path, type of congestion control used by competing
ﬂows, etc. At each time step, the ABR algorithm chooses a
bitrate at, which together with ut generate mt, the achieved
throughput when downloading a chunk. Typically, latent
network conditions are exogenous factors, beyond the impact
of a particular user’s actions. For instance, the bottleneck link
speed and type of congestion control that competing ﬂows use,
are not affected by the actions of the ABR algorithm.
Note that the achieved throughput depends on the ABR
action as well as the latent network conditions. Equation (1)
captures this relationship and is the source of the bias induced
by the ABR algorithm, which we demonstrated in §2.2.3.
When is the model applicable? The causal model applies in
any trace-driven simulation setting where the trace may be
impacted by interventions. Examples include:
• Job scheduling, where we wish to simulate a workload’s
performance under different types of machines. The trace
is the job performance (e.g., runtime), interventions are
the scheduling decisions, and latent factors are intrinsic
properties of each job (e.g., compute intensity) or latent
aspects of the machines such as collocated interfering
workloads.
• Network simulation, where we wish to simulate how
some aspect of network’s design (e.g., congestion control,
packet scheduling, trafﬁc engineering, etc.) impacts
application performance. The trace is an application’s
trafﬁc pattern, the intervention is the network design,
and latent factors are the internals of the application that
dictate its trafﬁc demand.
In some cases, like our running ABR example, the exoge-
nous trace assumption may not hold exactly but still be
roughly valid.8 Here, CausalSim removes bias and improves
simulation accuracy. But in certain problems, ignoring the
effect of interventions is meaningless. For example, consider
scheduling or load balancing on heterogeneous machines
(e.g., with different hardware capabilities). Given a trace
of job performance on speciﬁc machines, it isn’t possible
to merely replay the trace for new machine assignments. In
8Even in these cases, these subtly biased simulations can produce entirely
incorrect conclusions (§6.2).

such problems, CausalSim enables trace-driven simulation
by explicitly modeling the effect of interventions on the trace.
When is the model invalid? Our causal model relaxes the
exogenous trace assumption but still requires exogenous
latents, i.e. that the latents are unaffected by the intervention.
This won’t hold in all systems. For example, we cannot model
the effect of network routing policies (e.g., BGP) on observed
video streaming throughput in this way, since changing the
path would change the latent network conditions that impact
a video stream. Another example is simulating the effect
of a CPU feature like the branch predictor on instruction
throughput. Here, we can’t model the state of the instruction/-
data caches as an exogenous latent factor, since changing the
branch predictor can change their internal state signiﬁcantly.
Overall, a simulation designer needs to reason about the
causal structure of observed and latent quantities to deﬁne
the appropriate model in the form of Equations (1) and (2).
However, the designer does not need to precisely specify the
meaning of the latents or the dynamics (the functions Ftrace
and Fsystem). CausalSim learns both from observational data.
3.2
Problem Formulation
We are given N trajectories, collected using K speciﬁc
policies.9 Let Hi be the length of trajectory i ∈{1, ... , N}.
For trajectory i, we observe (mi
t,oi
t,ai
t)Hi
t=1. We assume that
trajectories are generated using an RCT, i.e., that each
trajectory is assigned to one of the K policies at random.
Our goal is to estimate the observations under an arbitrary
given intervention (e.g., a new algorithm) for each of the N
trajectories. Let {ui
t}Hi
t=1 be the exogenous latent factors for
trajectory i. Formally, for any given trajectory i and given a
sequence of actions { ˜ai
t}Hi
t=1, starting with observation oi
1 and
under the same sequence of latent factors {ui
t}Hi
t=1, we wish
to estimate the counterfactual observations { ˜oi
t}Hi
t=1 that are
consistent with Equations (1) and (2).
This is a counterfactual estimation problem since it requires
(i) estimating latent {ui
t}Hi
t=1 factors for observed trajectory i
and using them along with the counterfactual actions { ˜ai
t}Hi
t=1
to predict the counterfactual trace { ˜mi
t}Hi
t=1 consistent with
Equation (1), and then (ii) using the counterfactual trace
and actions to predict counterfactual observations { ˜oi
t}Hi
t=1
consistent with Equation (2).
For (ii), learning Fsystem is a supervised learning task
because its inputs, (oi
t, mi
t, ai
t), and output, oi
t+1, are fully
observed. If {ui
t}Hi
t=1 was observed, then (i) would also boil
down to learning Ftrace in a supervised manner. It is the lack
of observability of {ui
t}Hi
t=1 that makes our simulation task
extremely challenging. In short, we are left with (i), the task
of estimating { ˜mi
t}Hi
t=1 and learning Ftrace.
9We use policy and algorithm interchangeably in this paper.
4
CausalSim: Theoretical Insights
This section describes the theory behind CausalSim. We
discuss how to operationalize this theory in a practical learning
algorithm in §5. We begin by casting counterfactual estimation
as a challenging variant of the matrix completion problem [14].
We then formalize conditions that allow us to complete the
matrix using a certain distributional invariance property that
is present in data collected in an RCT.
4.1
Counterfactual Estimation
as Matrix Completion
Recall from §3.2 the task of estimating the counterfactual
trace { ˜mi
t}Hi
t=1 consistent with Equation (1). In this section, we
pose this task as a variant of the classical matrix completion
problem. For simplicity, let action ai
t be one of the ﬁnitely
many options {1,...,A} for some A ≥2. Imagine an A by U
matrix M, where rows correspond to A potential actions, and
columns corresponds to U = ∑N
i=1 Hi latent factors (ui
t for
different choices of i andt) in the dataset. To order the columns,
we may index ui
t as a tuple (i, t) and order these tuples in
lexicographic order. The matrix M is called the potential
outcome matrix in the causal inference literature [61].
At the
tth
step of the
ith
trajectory, we
observe
mi
t = Ftrace(ai
t, ui
t), which is the entry in M in the row
corresponding to ai
t and the column corresponding to ui
t. The
counterfactual quantities of interest, ˜mi
t = Ftrace( ˜ai
t, ui
t) for
˜ai
t ̸= ai
t, are the missing entries in M in the same column. In
summary, we observe one entry per column of the matrix M
and we wish to estimate the missing values in the matrix.
The task of ﬁlling missing values in a matrix based on its
partially observed entries is known as Matrix Completion [19],
a topic that has seen tremendous progress in the past two
decades [18, 20, 47]. However, standard matrix completion
methods do not apply to our problem (see §4.3 for details).
We use a distributional invariance property of data collected
using an RCT to complete the potential outcome matrix M.
The key observation is that, in an RCT, the latent factors for
trajectories collected under each of the policies will have the
same distribution. For example, in Puffer’s RCT, incoming
users are assigned to an ABR algorithm at random. Therefore
each ABR algorithm will “experience” the same distribution
of underlying latent network conditions, which is precisely
why we can compare their performance in the RCT. The same
property helps us recover the matrix M, as we show next.
4.2
Exploiting RCT for Matrix Completion
We use a minimal non-trivial example to give intuition about
how we can exploit an RCT for matrix completion, before
stating our main theoretical result.
Consider a simple example where A = 2 and U = 2n, and
the rank of potential outcome matrix M is equal to 1. Rank 1

implies that M =auT for some a∈R2 and u∈R2n with Mα,β =
aα·uβ.10 Suppose we have K =2 policies,where each policy al-
ways chooses only one ofthe two actions. Furthermore,we con-
sider an RCT setting. That is, the distribution of latent factors
across trajectories assigned to both policies should be the same.
Without loss of generality, we can re-order the columns of
M so that the ﬁrst n columns correspond to the latent factors of
the trajectories assigned to policy 1, and the second n columns
are those assigned to policy 2. Then the observed entries of
matrix M appear as

M1,1
M1,2
...
M1,n
⋆
...
⋆
⋆
⋆
⋆
...
⋆
M2,n+1
...
M2,2n−1
M1,2n

where ⋆represents the missing values.
Let us consider recovering the missing observation M2,1.
For column 1, we know the observation under the ﬁrst action,
i.e. M1,1. Due to rank 1 structure, we have
M2,1
M1,1
= a2u1
a1u1
= a2
a1
.
(3)
Therefore, to ﬁnd M2,1 (and by a similar argument, to ﬁnd all
missing entries of M), we need to estimate the ratio a2
a1 .
Due to the distributional invariance induced by RCT, the
samples u1, ... , un (which correspond to the latent factors
encountered by policy 1) come from the same distribution
as the samples un+1,...,u2n (which correspond to the latent
factors encountered by policy 2), for large enough n. Thus,
their expected value should be equal:
1
n
n
∑
β=1
uβ ≈1
n
2n
∑
β=n+1
uβ
(4)
Equation (4) implies
∑n
β=1M1,β
∑2n
β=n+1M2,β
=
∑n
β=1a1·uβ
∑2n
β=n+1a2·uβ
(5)
≈a1
a2
.
(6)
This provides precisely the quantity of interest in Equation (3)
based on the observed entries, enabling us to complete the
matrix.
Formal Result. This simple illustrative example relied on
a convenient observational pattern (based on policies that
always choose one action) and rank 1 structure. But the idea
can be generalized. If the trace includes D measurements,
Mα,β,γ ∈RA×U×D becomes a tensor rather than a matrix, where
α, β, and γ index the actions, latent factors, and measurements,
respectively. The following theorem provides conditions
where completion is possible for a rank r tensor. For more
details and the proof, refer to Appendix A.
10Note that for readability, we are abusing notation by overloading a and
u to refer to both the action and latent, and their encodings in the factorization.
Theorem 4.1. We can recover all entries of M by only
observing one D−dimensional element in each column (corre-
sponding to one latent and action) if the following is satisﬁed:
1. (Low-Rank Factorization) M is a low-rank tensor
(rank = r), i.e., it admits the following factorization:
Mα,β,γ =∑r
ℓ=1aαℓuβℓzγℓ.
2. (Invertibility) The factorization implies existence of a
linear mapping from latent encoding to trace for each
action. This linear mapping is invertible.
3. (Sufﬁcient measurements) D≥r.
4. (Sufﬁcient, Diverse Policies) The number of policies
K ≥Ar, and the matrix S ∈RAr×K is full-rank where
Sw.D:(w+1).D,x = E[m|action_index = w,policy_index =
x]P(action_index = w|policy_index = x). Linear inde-
pendence of columns of S can be interpreted as diversity
among policies (Appendix A).
4.3
Discussion
Why not standard tensor completion? Tensor completion
methods [26, 41, 48, 78] make several assumptions. First,
the tensor M must be (approximately) low rank, which
CausalSim also requires. Low-rank structure holds in many
real-world problems [69] and has been observed in network
measurements, e.g., in trafﬁc matrices [16, 43, 44, 60] and
network distance (i.e., RTT) [46, 52, 66]. As an example of
how it emerges in the problems we study in this paper, we
use a simple model of congestion control in Appendix C.4 to
provide intuition about low-rank structure in ABR data.
Second, the pattern of missing entries should be random.
If the missing patterns is not random and depends on latent
factors or the entries themselves [8], standard approaches
have difﬁculty recovering the tensor. This assumption does
not hold in trace-driven simulation. Revealed entries are
determined by the actions taken by the policies, which often
use recent observations to make their decisions (e.g., an ABR
policy may use recent throughput measurements). Hence
the revealed/missing entries in a column are not random and
depend on the entries in previous columns.
Third, a sufﬁcient number of entries need to be revealed.
For example, when D = 1 (i.e., when M is a matrix), the in-
formation theoretic lower bound to on the number of revealed
entries needed to recover M is 4Ur −r2 [39, 70]. Thus even
for rank r =1, it requires 4 entries per column, whereas only
one entry per column is revealed in trace-driven simulation.
Since the second and third assumptions do not necessarily
hold in our setup, we cannot use existing tensor completion
methods. However, as we argued in §4.2, exploiting the
additional problem structure imposed by RCT data can make
tensor completion feasible in certain conditions.
Limitations of Theorem 4.1. The proof of Theorem 4.1
(Appendix A) provides an analytical method for recovering
the tensor M that generalizes the procedure described for the
simple example in §4.2. While this provides a theoretical basis

mt
̂ut
̂oi
t+1
at
P(πt| ̂ut)
˜at
Latent 
Factor 
Extractor
+
Policy 
Discriminator
̂oi
t
Figure 3: CausalSim Architecture
for why tensor recovery is possible, the analytical approach
is not practical. First, it relies on M being exactly rank r; if it
is approximately rank r, we have found the calculation to be
brittle. Second, it applies only to discrete action spaces. Third,
it gives sufﬁcient conditions for recovery, but they’re not all
necessary. One reason is that the analytical method uses only
mean invariance, i.e. the fact that the mean of the latent factors
is the same across all policies (as in Eq. (4)), even though RCT
data has the stronger property that the entire distribution of
latents does not depend on the policy. In the next section, we
describe our practical implementation of CausalSim that uses
learning techniques and NNs to overcome these limitations
(at the expense of theoretical guarantees).
5
CausalSim: Algorithm
CausalSim builds upon the insights presented earlier but
replaces the factorized model with a learning algorithm based
on NNs. For ease of notation, we will drop the trajectory index
for all variables in the dataset, e.g. we will refer to the latent
factor ui
t :t ≤Hi,i≤N as ut :t ≤H.
CausalSim architecture. As discussed, CausalSim aims
to extract ut and learn Ftrace and Fsystem from observed
trajectories (ot+1,ot,mt,at) : t < H. Figure 3 summarizes
CausalSim’s algorithmic structure.
To extract latent factors, we use a NN that takes in at and mt,
and computes ˆut (an estimate of ut). To apply invariance on the
extracted latents, i.e. distribution of ut being the same regard-
less of the policy applied to it, we use a NN called the Policy
Discriminator. This NN aims to predict the policy pertaining
to that sample given ˆut, and if invariance is upheld, it will fail to
do so. Unlike the analytical approach, the policy discriminator
can enforce policy invariance on the entire latent distribution,
potentially improving the accuracy of the estimate.
To calculate the counterfactual traces and observations,
we need to learn Ftrace and Fsystem. However, we can simplify
the learning problem by merging these two into one single
combined function. Thus, we use a NN that takes in counter-
Algorithm 1 CausalSim Training
1: initialize parameter vectors γ,θ,ϕ
2: initialize hyper-parameters num_disc_it, κ
3: initialize dataset D←{(oi,mi,ai,πi)}m
i=1 from an RCT
4: for each iteration do
5:
for num_disc_it do
6:
sample minibatch B←{(ol,ml,al,πl)}b
l=1
7:
ul ←Eθ(ml,al) for l ∈{1,...b}
8:
Ldisc ←1
bΣb
l=1

−logWγ(πl|ul)

9:
γ=γ−λγ·∇γLdisc
10:
end for
11:
sample minibatch B←{(ol+1,ol,ml,al,πl)}b
l=1
12:
ul ←Eθ(ml,al) for l ∈{1,...b}
13:
Ldisc ←1
bΣb
l=1

−logWγ(πl|ul)

14:
Lpred ←1
bΣb
l=1
h ol+1−Pϕ(ol,al,ul)
2i
15:
Ltotal ←Lpred−κ·Ldisc
16:
θ=θ−λθ·∇θLtotal
17:
ϕ=ϕ−λϕ·∇ϕLpred
18: end for
Discriminator
Simulation Modules
factual actions ˜at, observation ot and estimated latent ˆut, and
computes counterfactual observation ˜ot+1. Of course, we can
explicitly use separate NNs for Ftrace and Fsystem if we require
access to the simulated trace ( ˜mt) values.
Overall, CausalSim uses three NNs for counterfactual
simulation; Eθ as the latent factor extractor, Wγ as the policy
discriminator and Pϕ as the combination of Ftrace and Fsystem.
Figure 3 depicts the structure. Training these NNs is quick;
on an A100 Nvidia GPU, CausalSim’s time to convergence
on 56M data points (230K streams) was less than 10 minutes,
and each simulation step in inference (on CPU) takes less
than 150µs. A full inference run on the same volume of data
takes less than 6 hours on a single CPU core and less than 20
minutes on 32 cores.
Training procedure. CausalSim’s training procedure alter-
nates between: (i) training the policy discriminator using a
discrimination loss Ldisc; and (ii) training other modules using
an aggregated loss Ltotal. Algorithm 1 provides a detailed
pseudo code of this training procedure.
Training the policy discriminator (Lines 5–10 in Algo-
rithm 1). Distributional invariance means restricting the
distribution of latent factors u to be identical across policies.
To that end, we ﬁrst use Eθ to extract latents ˆut, and then search
for invariance violations via a discriminator NN, a standard
approach in the paradigm of adversarial learning [29, 68].
Speciﬁcally, the policy discriminator aims to predict the policy
πi that took action at from the estimated latent factor ˆut (see
Figure 3). Towards that, we use a cross-entropy loss to train
the policy discriminator:
Ldisc =EB[−logWγ(π| ˆu)],
(7)
where the expectation is over the a sampled minibatch B from

dataset D. We train the policy discriminator to minimize this
loss, by repeating gradient decent num_disc_it times, as the
policy discriminator needs multiple iterations to catch up to
changes in the latent factors.
Training simulation modules (Lines 11–17 in Algo-
rithm 1). In this step, we need to impose consistency with
observations, all while preserving the distributional invariance.
Thus, we compute latent factors ˆut with Eθ and simulate the
next step of the trajectory ˆot+1 with Pϕ. We use an aggregated
loss to enforce consistency and invariance. This loss combines
the negated discriminator loss with a quadratic consistency
loss using a mixing hyper-parameter κ.
Ltotal =EB
h
(ot+1−ˆot+1)2i
−κLdisc,
(8)
where the expectation is over the a sampled minibatch B
from dataset D. Here, we used a quadratic loss function, but
one could use any consistency loss ﬁt to the speciﬁc type of
variable (e.g. Huber loss, Cross entropy, ...).
Note the negative sign of discriminator loss, which means
we train these NNs to maximize discriminator loss i.e., fool
the discriminator to ensure policy invariance. If the extracted
latent factors are policy invariant, the policy discriminator
should do no better at its task than guessing at random.
Counterfactual estimation. To produce counterfactual esti-
mates,as described above,the estimated latents ˆut are extracted
from observed data. Using the extracted latents factors, along
with the learned combined function Pγ, we start with o1 and
predict counterfactual observations ˆot+1, one step at a time.
6
Evaluation
We evaluate CausalSim’s ability to do accurate counterfactual
simulation (§6.1 and §6.3) using trace data from one real-world
and one synthetic dataset. As a rigorous proof of concept,
we debug and improve an ill-performing ABR policy with
CausalSim (§6.2),and verify it through deployment on a public
ABR testing infrastructure. Our baselines are as follows:
1. ExpertSim: Uses the analytical model described in §2.2.1.
2. SLSim: Uses a standard supervised-learning technique to
learn system dynamics from data, as described in §2.2.2.
Finally, we show how CausalSim enables trace-driven
simulation in problems where deﬁning an exogenous trace
is not straightforward and traditional trace-driven simulation
is not applicable (§6.4). Further supporting experiments in the
appendix provide more details about how CausalSim operates
(§B.1, §B.2, §B.3, §B.4, §B.5, §B.7, §C.2, §C.3, §C.4 and
§D.1).
6.1
Simulation Accuracy
We use CausalSim to predict the end performance of ABR
policies, and compare them with ground truth data. We
explore the same two metrics reported by Puffer to evaluate
algorithms; 1) stall rate, which is the fraction of time a user
spent rebuffering, i.e. paused and waiting for a new chunk
to download; 2) average Structural Similarity Index Measure
(SSIM) in decibels, which is a perceptual quality metric. Our
ground truth data comes from public logs of ‘slow streams’ on
Puffer. Whenever a client initiates a video streaming session
in Puffer’s website, a random ABR algorithm is chosen and
assigned to that session. Sessions are logged (buffer levels,
chunk sizes, timestamps, download times, etc) anonymously
and the data is available for public use. Our dataset contains
more than 230K trajectories from an RCT during July 2020
to June 2021, where ﬁve ABR algorithms (BBA, BOLA1,
BOLA2, Fugu-CL, Fugu-2019) were evaluated. Exhaustive
details of the setup and data can be found in §B.8.
6.1.1
Can CausalSim simulate a policy it has not seen?
We choose one of BBA, BOLA1, and BOLA211. as the new
policy that we want to simulate, and call it the target policy.
The remaining four policies are called source policies. Traces
assigned to the four source policies comprise our training
dataset, which we use for training CausalSim and the two base-
lines. The goal is to simulate the outcome of applying the target
policy on trajectories assigned to any of the source policies.
Figure 4a plots the stall rate and SSIM in the simulated
trajectories and ground truth, denoting each target policy with
a different color. Four source policies give us four separate
predictions per target policy and simulator. Each point depicts
the average of these four predictions, and the intervals show
the minimum and maximum among the four. For either metric,
CausalSim is the most faithful to ground truth among all
simulators. For instance, in stall rate, CausalSim’s relative
error spans 2 −28%, while ExpertSim spans 49 −68%
and SLSim spans 29 −187%. CausalSim may not always
predict the correct relative ordering among policies with close
performance. For example, BOLA1 and BOLA2 (shown in
orange and red) have similar performance in both stall rate and
SSIM. CausalSim predicts that these policies are similar but it
infers their relative ordering incorrectly. However, CausalSim
avoids the large errors made by the baseline simulators. In
absolute terms, its predictions are close to the ground truth.
CausalSim also has the most consistent predictions across
different source policies, because it removes the biases of the
source policies. As an example, we investigate all four simula-
tion results for BOLA1 in Figure 4b. SLSim and ExpertSim’s
simulation results are only good when the source algorithm
is BOLA2 (a similar algorithm to BOLA1 performance-wise).
However, their predictions are far off from the ground truth
for the other three source algorithms. CausalSim’s simulation
results, on the other hand, are all close to the ground truth
target. Appendix §B.7 demonstrates the same observation for
other target algorithms, i.e. BBA and BOLA2.
11We exclude Fugu as a test policy since we could not reproduce its logged
actions (see §B.8)

2
4
6
8
10
Time Spent Stalled (%)
15.00
15.25
15.50
15.75
Average SSIM (dB)
Ground Truth
CausalSim
ExpertSim
SLSim
(a)
2
4
6
8
10
Time Spent Stalled (%)
15.00
15.25
15.50
15.75
Average SSIM (dB)
Ground Truth
CausalSim
ExpertSim
SLSim
(b)
Figure 4: (a) In a real-world dataset of live video streaming,
CausalSim is the most faithful, compared to traditional trace-
driven (ExpertSim) or data-driven (SLSim) simulators. Colors
indicate different target ABR algorithms. (b) Predictions
for BOLA1, separated by the source policy. Each point
indicates a different source ABR algorithm. ExpertSim and
SLSim predictions carry over biases of the source data, while
CausalSim mitigates the bias.
6.2
Case Study: CausalSim in the Wild
An accurate simulator allows researchers to debug and
improve protocols without repeated and invasive deployments.
We shall demonstrate this with CausalSim, by improving a
well-known ABR policy, and verifying our ﬁndings with a
real-world deployment on Puffer.
Recall that in the particular RCT we used in §6.1, ﬁve ABR
algorithms (BBA, BOLA1, BOLA2, Fugu-CL, Fugu-2019)
were evaluated. Figure 5 shows the result of this evaluation
for BBA, BOLA1 and BOLA2, across ‘slow streams’.12
Similar to Figure 4a, the X-axis shows the stall rate, and the
Y-axis is the average SSIM. BOLA1 exhibited 82% more
rebuffering compared to BBA. A revised version of BOLA1,
called BOLA2, was deployed alongside it, since the Puffer
12The data for this plot comes directly from Puffer [2,3].
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
Time Spent Stalled (%)
14.5
15.0
15.5
Average SSIM (dB)
BBA (Jul’20-Jun’21)
BOLA1 (Jul’20-Jun’21)
BOLA2 (Jul’20-Jun’21)
BBA (Aug’22-Dec’22)
BOLA1-CausalSim (Aug’22-Dec’22)
Figure 5: In an experiment preceding this work, BOLA1
exhibits high stalling. By deploying a BOLA1 variant in a later
experimentCausalSimimprovedthestallrateby2.6×,with
comparable quality to BBA. User population is ‘slow streams’
and error bars denote 2.5%–97.5% conﬁdence intervals.
team and the authors of BOLA believed the SSIM metric (in
decibels) is incompatible with the protocol [53]. This new
version had 12.8% less rebuffering and slightly higher quality,
but still far too much stalling compared to BBA.
BOLA1 is an ABR policy with two hyperparameters,
similar to BBA, and our hypothesis was that BOLA1 uses
sub-optimal hyperparameters. To investigate this, we used the
logged data pertaining to that plot along with CausalSim to
exhaustively analyze the performance of BOLA1 and BBA for
a range of hyperparameters. Using Bayesian Optimization13,
we explored the parameter space and created a Pareto frontier
curve for each policy. During this process, we evaluated over
150 different algorithms in two days, which is achievable only
in a simulator. Each curve demonstrates the trade-off between
quality and stall rate in that policy. Figure 6 presents the curves,
where the left and right plots show CausalSim and ExpertSim
predictions. For ease of comparison, we highlight where the
original BOLA1 and BBA lie. CausalSim conﬁrms our sus-
picion; the curve for BOLA1 is strictly better than that of BBA.
We can revise the hyperparameters in BOLA1 for an improved
BOLA1 variant, henceforth called ‘BOLA1-CausalSim’. We
chose BOLA1-CausalSim, such that it would have better stall
rate and marginally better SSIM compared to BBA.
Interestingly, ExpertSim predicts the complete opposite.
It predicts that not only will BBA always improve on any
BOLA1 variant in at least one metric, but also that any BOLA1
variant will stall more. This serves as a great opportunity
to test CausalSim’s edge compared to traditional (biased)
trace-driven simulation,which is used in priorwork [38,50,75].
The results of BOLA1-CausalSim’s deployment can be seen
in Figure 5. Considering conﬁdence intervals, it is clear that
it stalls less than BBA; in fact, BBA stalls 43% more than
BOLA1-CausalSim on average. The conﬁdence intervals for
13We use a Gaussian Process prior with a Matern Kernel [54].

2.5
5.0
14.75
15.00
15.25
15.50
CausalSim
BBA Pareto
BOLA1 Pareto
BBA
BOLA1
BOLA1-CausalSim
Better
2.5
5.0
ExpertSim
Time Spent Stalled (%)
Average SSIM (dB)
Figure 6: Pareto frontier curves for BOLA1 and BBA variants.
CausalSim correctly predicts BOLA1’s potential, while
ExpertSim fails to do so.
quality are wide and will need more data to be separable14,
but based on the ongoing trend, BOLA1-CausalSim will have
similar quality compared to BBA.
Our goal was to show CausalSim’s potential, and for that
we targeted one of several plots on Puffer (‘slow streams’).
We could have chosen a different plot to optimize on, but it
would not affect the takeaway. Note that our opportunities
for deployment on Puffer are limited, as other researchers
use Puffer as well; hence we only deployed one BOLA1
variant. Furthermore, we hoped to also compare CausalSim’s
prediction of stall rate and quality with the deployment results,
but the client and network population has clearly changed; as
shown in Figure 5, BBA achieves a different SSIM value for
the two periods of time. Since CausalSim’s predictions are
based on data from the previous RCT, directly comparing the
predicted values to results from the new RCT isn’t meaningful.
However, as our results show, the old RCT data allows us to
compare different schemes. For example, CausalSim predicts
BBA stalls 58% more than BOLA1-CausalSim on network
distribution of the old RCT, which is reasonably close to the
43% observed in the new RCT (ignoring conﬁdence intervals).
6.3
A Closer Look at Simulated Trajectories
For a deep dive in simulator accuracy, we focus on buffer
occupancy level, a key indicator of ABR algorithm behavior.
Ideally, we would like to compare simulated trajectories to
ground truth. But this isn’t possible using real trace data,
since it requires us to have multiple traces of different policies
running under the exact same underlying path conditions. To
overcome this issue, we resort to distributional evaluation.
Puffer data is collected in an RCT setting; hence the character-
istics of network paths assigned to each policy is the same. If
we accurately simulate the target policy on traces assigned to
one of the source policies, the distribution of each variable (e.g.
14Updated plots can be found on the ‘Experimental Results’ page of the
Puffer website [1], under "Current experiment, full contiguous duration, slow
streams only".
0.0
0.3
0.6
0.9
10
30
50
70
90
CausalSim
ExpertSim
SLSim
EMD
CDF (%)
(a)
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7
Harder
EMD
Bitrate MAD (Mbps)
(b)
Figure 7: On average, CausalSim improves the EMD distance
metric compared to ExpertSim and SLSim by 53% and 61%
respectively. (a) Distribution of CausalSim, ExpertSim, and
SLSim EMDs over all possible source/target choices. (b)
Error (EMD) increases for baseline as simulation scenarios
get harder, but CausalSim maintains good accuracy.
buffer level) must be similar in the simulated trajectory and
ground truth trace assigned to the target policy. This motivates
using distributional similarity as our performance metric.
To quantify the similarity of two distributions, we use
the Earth Mover Distance (EMD) [62]. We can calculate
EMD for one-dimensional distributions as EMD(P, Q ) =
R +∞
−∞|P(x) −Q (x)|dx, where P and Q are the Cumulative
Distribution Function (CDF)s of p and q, respectively. A small
EMD between two distributions implies that they are similar.
Figure 7a shows the CDF of the EMD (between actual
and simulated buffer level distributions) for CausalSim and
baselines, over all possible source/target policy pairs. EMD
of CausalSim is smaller than EMD of baselines across almost
all experiments. In terms of the average EMD across all
experiments, CausalSim bests ExpertSim and SLSim by 53%
and 61% respectively. Figure 2a visualized differences in
buffer level distributions for the simulation scenario where
BOLA2 and BBA are source and target policies, respectively.
To observe buffer level distributions for all scenarios, refer to
Figure 9.
In about 30% of cases, SLSim is slightly better than
CausalSim. These cases are “easy” simulation scenarios
where the source and target policies make similar actions
(For more details see §B.3). In these cases, the EMD is low
for both CausalSim and baseline simulators (<0.15), and all
perform well. For instance, Figure 9c (in the Appendix) shows
source, target, and simulated buffer level distribution in an
easy scenario, where BOLA2 and BOLA1 are the target and
source policies respectively. In this example, all simulated
distributions match the target distribution quite well.
Figure 7b shows where CausalSim most shines, i.e. hard
simulation scenarios. The Y-axis is the error (EMD), and the
X-axis is the mean absolute difference (MAD) between actions
taken by the source policy and the target policy, in SLSim simu-
lation. The larger the action difference, the harder the scenario
(§B.3). Aswemovetowardharderscenarios,theerrorincreases

signiﬁcantly for the baselines, while CausalSim is more robust.
6.3.1
Additional experiments
We perform further evaluations of CausalSim in the ABR
environment. Due to space constraints, we summarize these
results here and defer details to the appendix.
A more ﬁne-grained evaluation. In the results above, we
evaluated the performance of CausalSim and baselines using
the distribution of buffer occupancy across the whole popu-
lation. One way to further validate the results is to test whether
they will hold on carefully partitioned sub-populations.
In §B.4, we show that this is indeed the case when the
sub-populations are partitioned according to the Min Round
Trip Time (RTT), a network property that is independent of
the selected ABR algorithm in Puffer.
Hyperparameters tuning. Counterfactual estimation (§3.2)
is inherently an Out of Distribution (OOD) prediction task.
Hence, typical supervised-learning hyper-parameter tuning
methods do not work. In §B.5, we describe and evaluate
CausalSim’s hyper-parameter tuning procedure.
Ground truth evaluation. Real data nevercomes with ground
truth counterfactual labels. As a result, we cannot evaluate
CausalSim’s simulations for each time step in real data, but we
can do this in a reproducible synthetic environment. In §C.2,
we evaluate CausalSim using ground truth counterfactual
labels and show that it still outperforms baselines in the Mean
Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE) metric.15 Specﬁcally,
CausalSim achieves an MAPE of(∼5%),whichis signiﬁcantly
lower than both ExpertSim’s and SLSim’s (∼10%).
6.4
A Second Example: Server Load Balanc-
ing
We now focus on simulating load balancing policies with
heterogeneous servers, where deﬁning an exogenous trace is
not possible and therefore standard trace-driven simulation
is not applicable. This example shows how CausalSim opens
up new avenues in trace-driven simulation.
We use a synthetic environment which consists of N = 8
servers (and a queue for each) with different processing
powers, a load balancer, and a series of jobs that need to be
processed on these servers. Each job has a speciﬁc size which
is unknown to the load balancer. Each server can process jobs
at a speciﬁc rate {ri}N
i=1, which is also unknown to the load
balancer. The load balancer receives jobs and must assign
them to one of N servers. Assuming the kth arriving job has
size Sk and gets assigned to server ak, the job processing time
will be Sk/rak. If this job is not blocked by some other job
being processed, its latency will equal its processing time. If
15Let ˆp = { ˆpi}N
i=1 and p = {pi}N
i=1 denotes the vectors of predicted and
ground truth quantity of interest, respectively. Then, MAPE is deﬁned as
MAPE(p,ˆp)= 100
N ∑N
i=1
| ˆpi−pi|
pi
.
it is blocked, and the jobs ahead of it in the queue take Tk to
be processed, the incurred latency is Sk/rak +Tk.
We generate a collection of 5000 trajectories each with 1000
steps and use 16 policies in the load balancer. For a detailed
explanation of the policies, job size generation process, and
server processing rates, refer to §D.2.
6.4.1
Experiment setup
The aim of this experiment is to evaluate whether we can
simulate new unseen server assignment policies in this
environment, using traces collected with other policies. Recall
that while we observe the processing time of each job, the
actual size of the job is not observed, i.e., it acts as the latent
factor in this problem. For all simulators, we assume access to
Fsystem (the queue model) and focus on the more challenging
task of learning Ftrace and estimating the counterfactual traces
ˆmt
i for i≤5000, and t ≤1000. Algorithmically, this translates
to enforcing consistency for the observed traces (mt), rather
than the observations (ot) (see §5). The trace we collect is
the processing time when using a source server assignment
policy. To simulate a target server assignment policy, we need
to estimate the processing time of a job on servers other than
the one where its processing time was measured (without
knowing either the job size or the server processing rates).
Standard trace-driven simulation assumes an exogenous
trace (job processing time), but this is the same as assuming
servers have equal processing rates. This contradicts the prob-
lem setup, and standard trace-driven simulation (analogous to
ExpertSim in ABR) is not applicable to this problem. Thus, we
compare CausalSim with SLSim simulations. SLSim (realized
by an NN) takes as input the observed processing time and the
target server, and its output is the processing time under the
targeted server. However, the observed and target processing
time are always the same in training data, and hence it is
impossible for SLSim to learn the true dynamics (e.g., the
server’s underlying processing power). CausalSim sidesteps
this problem by explicitly estimating latent factors. For details
regarding the network architecture and training details for
both SLSim and CausalSim, refer to Table 8 in the appendix.
Performance Metric. We compare CausalSim and SLSim
with the underlying ground truth using the MAPE metric.
6.4.2
Can CausalSim Faithfully Simulate New Policies?
As is done in the ABR case studies, we train CausalSim and
SLSim models based on a dataset generated using all policies
except one, which will be the target policy. We use the same
hyper-parameter tuning approaches explained in §B.5 for
CausalSim and §B.6 for SLSim. We carry out this evaluation
on eight target policies. We evaluate the performance for each
pair of source-target policies, as was done in §6.1. In total, we
have 120 different source/target policy pairs.
In Figure 8a and Figure 8b, we show the CDF of the MAPE
of estimating the processing time and the latency, respectively,

0
100
200
300
0
50
100
Processing time MAPE (%)
CDF (%)
CausalSim
SLSim
(a)
0
200
400
0
50
100
Latency MAPE (%)
CDF (%)
CausalSim
SLSim
(b)
Figure 8: Distribution of CausalSim and SLSim MAPEs over
all source target pairs.
using both CausalSim and SLSim. As evident in these two
ﬁgures, CausalSim’s error is signiﬁcantly lower than that of
SLSim for both the processing time and latency. In particular,
the median MAPE when estimating processing time/latency is
24.4%/27.0% for CausalSim and 124.3%/467.8% for SLSim.
For a complementary view, we compare the latent factors
CausalSim extracts to the real latent job sizes and observe how
closely they match, in §D.1 in the appendix.
7
Related-Work
Data-driven simulation. Traditional packet-level simu-
lators [21, 31, 45] tend to sacriﬁce either scalability or
accuracy when simulating large networks. MimicNet [77]
and DeepQueueNet [73] use machine learning to improve
simulation speed of datacenter networks. The aforementioned
approaches are all full-system packet-level simulators,
whereas CausalSim focuses on trace-driven simulation of a
speciﬁc system component and must therefore deal with latent
factors and biases present in trace data.
A very recent work, Veritas [17] (published on arXiv in Aug.
2022), models trace-driven simulation for ABR as a Hidden
Markov Model (HMM) with a known emission process. This
is equivalent to assuming that Ftrace is known in our model (see
Eq. (1)). Veritas uses the Viterbi algorithm to decode the latent
factors, which are then used for counterfactual simulation.
CausalSim solves a more general problem where Ftrace is not
known and must be learned. It therefore requires less knowl-
edge of the system’s latents and underlying dynamics to apply.
On the other hand, CausalSim requires RCT data whereas
Veritas does not. Comparing the ﬁdelity of these approaches
using real-world ABR data would be interesting future work
(Veritas evaluates its method in a network emulator).
Panthon’s calibrated emulators [72] model the end-to-end
behaviour of a network path with a simple model including
a handful of parameters, e.g., bottleneck link rate, constant
propagation delay, etc., which are tuned to ﬁt a collection
of packet traces collected from this path using a variety of
congestion control protocols. iBox [13] extends this approach
by modeling cross-trafﬁc. CausalSim does not assume any
known model for the dynamics of the network. Furthermore,
it has access to only a single trace from each network path.
Policy evaluation. Policy evaluation techniques such as
Inverse Propensity Scoring [33] and Doubly Robust [15] aim
to predict population-level performance statistics for a given in-
tervention. WISE [67] builds a Causal Bayesian Network from
the data that is able to answer interventional (what-if) queries
about the future, but the method requires absence of latent con-
founding variables. Sage [25] uses a Causal Bayesian Network
model with latent factors to diagnose performance issues in
microservice applications. It answers what-if questions about
how interventions like changing the resources allocated to a mi-
croservice impacts the end-to-end application latency. Trace-
driven simulation is distinct from all these methods, in that
it requires counterfactual predictions of how an intervention
would have changed speciﬁc previously-measured trajectories
rather than how it changes population-level statistics.16
8
Concluding Remarks
The exogenous trace assumption is central to traditional trace-
driven simulation. CausalSim relaxes this key assumption,
by modeling the intervention effect on the trace and learning
to replay the trace in an unbiased manner. We showed how
this improves the accuracy of trace-driven simulation using
real-world ABR data, and how CausalSim provides insights
for algorithm improvement that are in contrast with standard
trace-driven simulators’ predictions, which we validated in a
real-world deployment. Furthermore, we showed how this ex-
pands the applicability of trace-driven simulation to problems
wheredeﬁningan exogenoustraceisnotpossiblebyapplyingit
to heterogeneous server load balancing. We believe CausalSim
could be applied to many other system simulation tasks.
CausalSim opens up several interesting paths for future
work. First, evaluating CausalSim in problems with a higher-
dimensional latent factors would be interesting. Second, it is
a natural next step to use CausalSim for more complex policy
optimization methods, e.g., using reinforcement learning. Last,
as discussed in §4.3, our theoretical analysis of CausalSim’s
approach, i.e. exploiting the policy invariance of latent factors
distributions, is not tight, and improving it could potentially
relax the assumptions of our analytical method.
9
Acknowledgement
WethankourshepherdKeithWinstein forin-depthsuggestions,
and ourreviewers forinsightful comments. We thank the Puffer
team,speciﬁcally Emily Marx and Francis Y. Yan forproviding
us with the data we used in §6.1 and the algorithm deployment
in §6.2. This work was supported by NSF grants 1751009

program, and a gift from Intel as part of the MIT Data Systems
and AI Lab (DSAIL). A. Alomar and D. Shah were supported
16Appendix E provides a broader overview of the causal inference literature.

in part by DSO-Singapore project, MIT-IBM project on Causal
representation learning and NSF FODSI project.
