Revisiting Zero-Shot Abstractive Summarization in the Era of Large
Language Models from the Perspective of Position Bias
Anshuman Chhabra, Hadi Askari, Prasant Mohapatra
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Davis

Abstract
We characterize and study zero-shot abstrac-
tive summarization in Large Language Models
(LLMs) by measuring position bias, which we
propose as a general formulation of the more
restrictive lead bias phenomenon studied pre-
viously in the literature. Position bias captures
the tendency of a model unfairly prioritizing
information from certain parts of the input text
over others, leading to undesirable behavior.
Through numerous experiments on four diverse
real-world datasets, we study position bias in
multiple LLM models such as GPT 3.5-Turbo,
Llama-2, and Dolly-v2, as well as state-of-the-
art pretrained encoder-decoder abstractive sum-
marization models such as Pegasus and BART.
Our findings lead to novel insights and discus-
sion on performance and position bias of mod-
els for zero-shot summarization tasks.
1
Introduction
Deep learning based abstractive text summarization
models and Large Language Models (LLMs) have
shown remarkable progress in generating concise
and coherent summaries from input articles that are
comparable to human-written summaries (Zhang
et al., 2023). Building upon this research, we aim
to quantitatively measure summarization perfor-
mance of LLMs (and pretrained encoder-decoder
models for reference) by proposing position bias,
which is a novel and general formulation of the
lead bias phenomenon (Liu and Lapata, 2019).
Position bias refers to the tendency of models
to prioritize information from certain parts of the
source text, potentially overlooking crucial details
in other parts of the input article. While position
bias has been studied previously in the literature as
lead bias, we posit that lead bias is a specific case
of position bias. Most prior works in this domain
aim to propose methods that either incorporate or
alleviate lead bias in models for improved perfor-
mance (Xing et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2021) without
a thorough analysis of the problem itself. It is also
important to note that a formal definition for lead
bias is still currently lacking in related work.
In contrast to lead bias, position bias seeks to de-
cipher if models are over-utilizing sentences from
any section(s) of the input articles, instead of just
the leading segment. Moreover, a model’s output
summary can only be considered positionally bi-
ased if it overwhelmingly uses sentences from sec-
tion(s) of the input that the human-written (or gold)
summaries do not use themselves. For instance, if
gold summaries for a dataset are lead biased and
the model generates lead biased summaries, this is
desirable behavior and cannot constitute position
bias. In this scenario, if the model were to gener-
ate tail biased summaries, it would be regarded as
position bias. An example of a positionally biased
summary is shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1: An example of position bias where gold sum-
mary is tail biased and model summary is lead biased.
We show how position bias can be empirically es-
timated by generating a distributional mapping be-
tween summary sentences and the article sentences
used to generate the summary. Then, position bias
can be measured using a metric such as Wasser-
stein distance (Vaserstein, 1969) between the model
generated summary distribution and the gold sum-
mary distribution. Position bias measurements aug-
mented with traditional metrics such as ROUGE
scores (Lin, 2004) can provide a more holistic eval-
arXiv:2401.01989v3  [cs.CL]  18 Mar 2024

uation of zero-shot summarization models.
In summary, we make the following contribu-
tions in this work:
• We generalize and formalize the notion of lead
bias as position bias in zero-shot abstractive sum-
marization. Lead bias can then be understood as a
specific case of position bias (Section 3.2).
• We show how position bias can be empiri-
cally estimated for a given zero-shot summariza-
tion model and hence, can be employed as a met-
ric for summarization quality alongside traditional
metrics such as ROUGE scores. We conduct ex-
tensive experiments to benchmark LLMs (GPT
3.5-Turbo1, Llama2-13B-chat2, and Dolly-v2-7B
(Conover et al., 2023)) and pretrained encoder-
decoder models (Pegasus (Zhang et al., 2020) and
BART (Lewis et al., 2020)) on 4 diverse datasets:
CNN/DM (See et al., 2017), Reddit TL;DR (Kim
et al., 2018), News Summary (Ahmed et al., 2018),
and XSum (Narayan et al., 2018) (Section 4).
• Using our findings, we compile novel insights
to aid practitioners in selecting the right model for
their zero-shot summarization tasks. (Section 5)
2
Related Works
Related work has studied the more specific phe-
nomenon of lead bias in summarization.
Both
Grenander et al. (2019) and Xing et al. (2021) pro-
pose approaches and architectural changes to mod-
els that can reduce lead bias in extractive summa-
rization, where summary sentences are selected di-
rectly from the source text. In contrast, in our work
we study position bias more generally in abstrac-
tive summarization. Interestingly, Zhu et al. (2021)
seek to leverage lead biased pre-training to improve
performance on news articles, which are known to
be lead biased. Prior work has also analyzed LLMs
for their performance as zero-shot abstractive sum-
marizers (Retkowski, 2023). Goyal et al. (2022)
study GPT-3 specifically in the context of news
summarization and Zhang et al. (2023) benchmark
the summarization performance of multiple LLMs
on the CNN/DM and XSum datasets. Tam et al.
(2023) study the factuality of summaries generated
by LLMs and Shen et al. (2023) use GPT 3.5-Turbo
for evaluating summaries generated by other mod-
els. In vision, model bias has been investigated for
video summarization (Chhabra et al., 2023b). Un-
like our work, none of these have studied position
1https://platform.openai.com/docs/models/gpt-3-5
2https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-2-13b-chat-hf
bias of zero-shot summarization in LLMs.
3
Proposed Approach
3.1
Zero-Shot Abstractive Summarization
A zero-shot abstractive text summarization model
A operates on the dataset tuple D = (X, G) where
X is a set of articles and G are their corresponding
reference gold summaries, generally written by
human annotators. Moreover, each article and its
corresponding gold summary consists of a variable
number of sentences. The model A then takes in as
input the set of articles in the set X and outputs a
summary, i.e., A(X) = S where S is the generated
summary. Traditionally, the model is evaluated
by comparing the generated summaries (S) with
the gold summaries (G) using the ROUGE metric
(Lin, 2004). We use R1/R2/RL to denote average
ROUGE-1, ROUGE-2, and ROUGE-L scores.
3.2
Formulating and Estimating Position Bias
Let an article x ∈X have |x| = Nx number of
sentences. We also obtain the set of generated sum-
maries as S = A(X) where each s ∈S has Ns
number of sentences. Since we consider abstractive
summarization3, let us also assume we have a map-
ping function ϕ that takes in a summary sentence
si ∈s and maps it back to a sentence xj ∈x in
the article that it was primarily derived from. Any
similarity function can be employed as a useful
approximation for such a mapping function ϕ.4
Most works on lead bias implicitly assert that
lead bias exists if for most si ∈s, ϕ(si) maps to
some xj that lies between the first (0, k′] sentence
positions of the article. Here k′ ≪Nx and can be
a dataset specific parameter– for example, for the
Lead-3 (Liu and Lapata, 2019) evaluation metric,
k′ = 3. However, this does not seem to be a
reasonable definition, especially when considering
general position. For example, consider a model
which tends to derive information for generating
summaries by using only the last few sentences
of the article. This tail bias might also constitute
undesirable behavior if the gold summaries are not
tail biased themselves, but will not be accounted
for in the lead bias paradigm. Hence, it is better
to reason about position more generally.
Since articles can be of differing lengths, po-
sition becomes specific to an individual article.
3In extractive summarization, there is an exact one-to-one
mapping between summary and article sentences.
4ROUGE or TF-IDF vector similarities are some examples.

Figure 2: Visualizing positional distributions of gold and model generated summaries for all datasets. The more
"different" these distributions are for a given dataset/model, the more position biased the model is for that dataset.
To overcome this issue, we divide each article x
into K segments of approximately equal length
(refer to Appendix A for how to do this) where
K ≤minx∈X |x|. This results in each article hav-
ing at least one sentence in a segment, and we now
have a uniform way of measuring sentence position
across articles irrespective of their length.
To quantify position bias, we first obtain which
article sentences the summary sentences are de-
rived from using ϕ, for both gold G and generated
A(X) summaries. Then, we can map these article
sentences to article segments to obtain a general
sense of position in the article. We now have a
distributional mapping of summary sentences to ar-
ticle segments. Using Wasserstein distance (Vaser-
stein, 1969) between the G and A(X) positional
distributions we can then measure position bias.
4
Results
For experiments, we consider the CNN/DM, XSum,
News, and Reddit datasets. All datasets are differ-
ent, in terms of domain, inherent position biases,
or article and gold summary length. We choose
only instruction-tuned LLMs as they are more per-
formant at summarization (Retkowski, 2023) and
we cover different model sizes: GPT 3.5-T is large
(175B params), Llama-2 is mid-size (13B params),
and Dolly-v2 is small (7B params). We also con-
sider SOTA pretrained encoder-decoder models
such as Pegasus and BART, although these models
are not performant unless fine-tuned (i.e. many-
shot learning). All experiments are done on the test
set of datasets (more details in Appendix F).
We first visualize the positional distributions gen-
erated using our mapping procedure for the gold
summaries and model generated summaries in Fig-
ure 2 with K = 10. As can be seen, CNN and News
contain lead biased gold summaries and Reddit and
XSum are positionally uniformly distributed. It can
also be seen that the LLMs tend to have low posi-
tion bias on CNN, News, and Reddit datasets. How-
ever, for XSum, which constitutes the extreme sum-
marization setting, LLMs as well as BART/Pegasus
exhibit much more lead bias, which is absent from
the gold summaries. In XSum, the articles are up
to 286 sentences long, and summary lengths are
required to be between 1-2 sentences long. This
is the largest jump from article →summary and
might explain models’ tendency to pick a single
sentence from the leading segments of the article.

Figure 3: Measuring performance (R1 score) and position bias (Wasserstein distance between gold and generated
summaries’ positional distributions). Lower Wasserstein distance values correspond to lower position bias.
Comparing even with Reddit where article lengths
are up to 23 sentences long and summaries are 1-
17 sentences long, it is evident that XSum poses a
unique challenge for summarization models.
Next, in Figure 3, we measure model perfor-
mance using the R1 score between gold and gen-
erated summaries (results for R2, RL are provided
in Appendix B and follow similar trends) and po-
sition bias using Wasserstein distance between the
positional distributions of gold and generated sum-
maries of Figure 2. As is evident, LLMs attain the
highest ROUGE scores on all datasets, and tend to
have very low position bias, with the exception of
XSum. However, even for XSum, LLMs achieve
excellent performance on ROUGE. BART/Pegasus
tend to have low performance and BART is also
heavily position biased across all datasets.
5
Discussion
Insights on Model Performance and Biases.
• GPT 3.5-T consistently attains low position
bias and high performance. Generally, GPT 3.5-T
should be the de-facto choice for users, as can
be seen in Figure 3. It consistently obtains high
ROUGE scores and low position bias values. How-
ever, the paid API and closed-source access might
be unfavorable to some users. For open-source
models, Llama-2 is the better choice compared
to Dolly-v2, and at times obtains ROUGE scores
higher than even GPT 3.5-T (for e.g. on XSum). In
comparison, Dolly-v2 at times has arbitrary and un-
predictable performance, such as its low ROUGE
scores and large position bias on the Reddit dataset,
unlike the other LLMs on the same dataset.
• LLMs might exhibit significant lead bias for
extreme summarization. LLMs exhibit strong lead
bias in the extreme zero-shot summarization case
(Figure 3, XSum). For users who wish to undertake
a similar task (pick 1-2 sentence summaries from
very lengthy articles), LLMs might tend to only
select sentences/information from the beginning
of the article. If this is undesirable, it would be
recommended to instead collect gold summaries
and finetune LLMs/models to counteract this.
• Suitability of encoder-decoder models.
As
zero-shot summarizers, pretrained encoder-decoder
models like BART and Pegasus have high position
bias and low performance. This likely stems from
their need to be finetuned on article-gold summary
tuples to achieve SOTA performance. However, we
would like to caution users to ensure that there is no
positional mismatch between the data they finetune
on and their evaluation set.5 While obvious, not en-
suring this can lead to low ROUGE scores and high
position bias (we demonstrate this in Appendix C).
Choice of Mapping Function ϕ. For experi-
ments in the paper we use TF-IDF vector similari-
ties as ϕ. In our preliminary experiments, we did
not observe significant differences for other choices.
We provide these additional results when the R1
score is used instead and compare with the original
results (Appendix D). Future work can analyze this
choice of ϕ as well as effect of other values of K.
Correlation of Position Bias and ROUGE. An
5For e.g. finetuning on large # of news articles collected
over the internet to then summarize in a different domain.

interesting consequence of our ROUGE and posi-
tion bias results on datasets shows that their corre-
lation is highly data dependent. For e.g., for XSum
Spearman’s correlation shows statistically signif-
icant high positive correlation (≈0.89) between
Wasserstein distances and R2 scores across all mod-
els but for Reddit there is significant negative cor-
relation (≈−0.89). See Appendix E for detailed
results. Hence, ROUGE scores are not enough
to assess position bias. This also makes intuitive
sense as ROUGE simply measures n-gram overlap
and cannot holistically evaluate models (Cohan and
Goharian, 2016). In future work other evaluation
metrics can be studied alongside position bias.
6
Conclusion
We analyze zero-shot abstractive summarization by
LLMs via a novel formulation of position bias. Po-
sition bias measures the tendency of models to gen-
erate summaries which overtly and unfairly utilize
certain portions of input text over others. Through
extensive experiments on the CNN/DM, XSum, Red-
dit, News datasets, as well as various models (GPT
3.5-T, Llama-2, Dolly-v2, Pegasus, BART), we ob-
tain novel insights about model performance and
position bias that contribute to a deeper understand-
ing of the challenges and opportunities in leverag-
ing LLMs for effective abstractive summarization.
Limitations
Our work formulates the concept of position bias in
abstractive summarization and analyzes it in LLMs
(and other reference models) across four diverse
datasets:
CNN/DM, XSum, Reddit, and News
Summary. The main limitation is that position
bias of LLMs needs to be evaluated on many more
datasets, and on other diverse problem settings
beyond the ones considered in our paper. Moreover,
the source domain itself could be challenging
(legal or medical documents) or the LLM might
not have been trained with data from that domain.
In such cases, the LLM might default to using
certain sections of the input articles over others,
resulting in position bias. Another limitation of our
work has been the primary use of English language
datasets, but it is important to benchmark LLM
position bias using summarization datasets from
other languages as well. Additionally, a limitation
of studies on LLMs such as GPT 3.5-Turbo is that
they are constantly being updated and improved,
and some behaviors might change or become
non-existent in future versions (Chen et al., 2023;
Leiter et al., 2024). This necessitates assessing
model performance/biases over time. Finally, as
preceding ML/AI models are usually designed to
be task/domain-specific (e.g. for clustering), issues
of bias, fairness, and robustness (Chhabra et al.,
2024, 2023a, 2022a,b, 2021) specific to these tasks
have been naturally studied in the literature. In
the same manner, despite their general nature,
task-specific robustness/bias needs to be further
explored for LLMs.6 In future work, we seek to
alleviate these limitations.
Ethics Statement
Our work on position biases in LLMs is important
for understanding how these models prioritize infor-
mation, and whether or not they disproportionately
emphasize specific sections of the source text when
generating abstractive summaries in a zero-shot
setting. As LLMs are further integrated in society
and utilized in various application pipelines, it is
crucial to understand their behavior in a transparent
manner. Through this study, we wish to shed light
on this issue and allow practitioners to understand
undersirable model behavior with regards to the
summarization task better. This work also enables
users to understand scenarios in which these mod-
els will generate more reliable outputs, leading to
safer outcomes in practice.
