INTEGRATION OF KNOWLEDGE TO SUPPORT AUTOMATIC OBJECT 
RECONSTRUCTION FROM IMAGES AND 3D DATA 
 
Frank Boochs1, Andreas Marbs1, Helmi Ben Hmida1,2, Hung Truong1,2, Ashish Karmacharya1,2, 
Christophe Cruz2, Adlane Habed2, Christophe Nicolle2, Yvon Voisin2  
 
1  i3mainz, Institute for Spatial Information and 
Surveying Technology University of Applied Sciences 
 Lucy-Hillebrand-Str. 2 55128 Mainz, Germany 
 

mainz.de 
 
2 Laboratoire Le2i, UFR Sciences et Techniques 
Université de Bourgogne 
B.P. 47870, 21078 Dijon Cedex, France 
 

 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Object reconstruction is an important task in many fields 
of application as it allows to generate digital 
representations of our physical world used as base for 
analysis, planning, construction, visualization or other 
aims. A reconstruction itself normally is based on reliable 
data (images, 3D point clouds for example) expressing 
the object in his complete extent. This data then has to be 
compiled and analyzed in order to extract all necessary 
geometrical elements, which represent the object and 
form a digital copy of it. Traditional strategies are largely 
based on manual interaction and interpretation, because 
with 
increasing 
complexity 
of 
objects 
human 
understanding is inevitable to achieve acceptable and 
reliable results. But human interaction is time consuming 
and expensive, why many researches has already been 
invested to use algorithmic support, what allows to speed 
up the process and to reduce manual work load. 
Presently most of such supporting algorithms are data-
driven and concentrate on specific features of the objects, 
being accessible to numerical models. By means of these 
models, which normally will represent geometrical 
(flatness, roughness, for example) or physical features 
(color, texture), the data is classified and analyzed. This 
is successful for objects with low complexity, but gets to 
its limits with increasing complexness of objects. Then 
purely numerical strategies are not able to sufficiently 
model the reality.  
Therefore, the intention of our approach is to take human 
cognitive strategy as an example, and to simulate 
extraction processes based on available human defined 
knowledge for the objects of interest. Such processes will 
introduce a semantic structure for the objects and guide 
the algorithms used to detect and recognize objects, 
which will yield a higher effectiveness. Hence, our 
research proposes an approach using knowledge to guide 
the algorithms in 3D point cloud and image processing. 
 
Index Terms— 3D processing; point cloud; 
Semantic web; knowledge modeling; ontology; mixed 
strategy; 3D scene reconstruction; object identification.  
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
As object reconstruction is an important task for many 
applications considerable effort has already been invested 
to reduce the impact of time consuming manual activities 
and to substitute them by numerical algorithms. Most of 
such algorithmic conceptions are data-driven and 
concentrate on specific features of the objects, being 
accessible to numerical models. By means of these 
models, which normally describe the behavior of 
geometrical (flatness, roughness, for example) or physical 
features (color, texture), the data is classified and 
analyzed.  
One common characteristic of such strategies is to be 
static and not to allow dynamic adjustment to the object 
or to initial processing results. An algorithm will be 
applied to the data and producing better or minor results 
depending on several parameters like image or point 
cloud quality, completeness of object representation, 
position of view points, complexity of object features, use 
of control parameter and so on. Mostly there is no 
feedback to the algorithmic part in order to choose a 
different algorithm or just the same algorithm with 
changed parameters. This interaction is mainly up to the 
user who has to decide by himself, which algorithms to 
apply for which kind of objects and data sets. Often good 
results can only be achieved by iterative processing 
controlled by a human interaction. 
With increasing complexity of the data and the objects 
represented therein, a correct validation of numerically 
modeled features gets again more difficult, why decisions 
based on individual algorithmic features tend to be 
unreliable. This problem only can be solved when further 
supplementary and guiding information is integrated into 
the algorithmic process chain allowing to support the 

process of validation. Such information might be derived 
from the context of the object itself and its behavior with 
respect to the data and/or other objects or from a 
systematic characterization of the parameterization and 
effectiveness of the algorithms to be used. For the 
processing such information gets accessible by rules, 
which will be integrated into the procedure and thus put 
semantic characteristics into the processing chain. 
Conventional programming languages support such 
semantic by logical or numerical conditions. 
But as programming languages used in the context of 
numerical treatments are not dedicated to process 
knowledge their use of conditions is inflexible and makes 
the integration of semantic aspects difficult. Perhaps 
that's why up to now a combined processing of 
knowledge and numerical aspects is not very common 
and cannot be found in practical solutions. 
But this situation may change with new technologies 
coming up in the framework of the semantic web. One of 
those technologies is a language that helps to define 
ontologies; an evolved version of the semantic networks. 
Ontologies represent one of the most famous technology 
for knowledge modeling, where the basic ideas was to 
present information using graphs and logical structure to 
make computers able to understand and process it easily 
and automatically [1].  
With the work presented here, we try to build a bridge 
between 
such 
semantic 
modeling 
and 
numerical 
processing strategies. This avoids actual limits in the use 
of knowledge within numerical strategies. As base for 
such an approach available knowledge will be structured 
and explicitly formulated by linking geometrical objects 
to semantic information, creating rules and finally 
guiding the algorithms used to process the real data. The 
created knowledge will be structured in ontologies 
containing a variety of elements like already existing 
information to the objects as can be taken from other data 
sources 
(digital 
maps, 
geographical 
information 
systems,...) 
or 
information 
about 
the 
objects 
characteristics, the hierarchy of the sub elements, the 
geometrical topology, the characteristics of processing 
algorithms etc.  
During processing, such modeled knowledge provides 
relevant information allowing to guide the analysis and 
the identification process. This will even allow to freely 
choosing between different algorithmic strategies, to 
combine them and to react onto unexpected situations by 
making use of the overall knowledge framework. To 
achieve this, all relevant information about the objects, 
the algorithms and their interrelation has to be modeled 
inside the ontology, including characteristics like 
positions, geometrics information, images textures, 
behavior and parameter of suitable algorithms, for 
example. 
The following paper is structured into section 2 which 
gives a overview to actual existing strategies for 
reconstruction 
processes, 
section 
3 
explains 
the 
framework of a knowledge based approach, section 4 
shows different strategies and level of knowledge for the 
processing, section 5 gives first results for a real example 
and section 6 concludes and shows next steps planned. 
 
2. RECONSTRUCTION STRATEGIES 
 
2.1. Manually supported strategies 
 
In practice, tools used for 3D reconstruction of objects 
are still largely relying on human interaction. The largest 
impact of manual activities can be found in those 
instruments 
and 
software 
packages 
designed 
as 
construction tools with integrated viewer for different 
types of data sets, like images or point clouds. Here the 
user might be supported in his construction activity, but 
object 
interpretation, 
selection 
and 
extraction 
of 
measurements has to be done completely by the user. 
That's why this processing is the most time consuming 
way to come from a data set to extracted objects. 
 
 
Figure 1. Automatic processing compared to the manual one 
 
A first optimization is provided by semi-automatic 
methods. Here, the user initializes the process by some 
manual measurements based on which an algorithm tries 
to extract other elements. Algorithms support certain 
geometrical processing or classifications initiated by the 
human operator. Especially for buildings or other 
regularly shaped objects like man-made facilities several 
numerical simplifications and conditions are possible. For 
example, buildings can be regarded as compositions of a 
few components with simple roof shapes (such as flat 
roofs, gable roofs and hip roofs). Vosselman et al. [2], [3] 
tried to reconstruct a scene based on the detection of 
planar roof faces in the generated point clouds based on 
the 3D Hough transform. The used strategy relies on the 
detection of intersection lines and height jump edges 
between planar faces. Once done, the component 
composition is made manually.  
 
2.2. Automatic strategies 
 
Automatic methods process the data without the need of 
any kind of user intervention and use mainly various 
segmentation techniques to extract features. Pollefeys et 
al. [3] and Hartley et al. [4] show examples for strategies 
based on projective geometry. [3] combines various 
algorithms from computer vision, like projective 
reconstruction, 
auto-calibration 
and 
depth 
map 
estimation. The disparity calculation between point pairs 
makes it possible to get a depth map. The depth map is 
then transformed into a volume model composed of 
voxels. The surface estimation between the outer surface 
voxels and the interior surface voxels makes it possible to 
combine inner and outer object parts. The method 

developed is effective and obtains good results. The 
approach of Hartley et al. [4] proceeds in two steps. First, 
a coarse surface model of the building is carried out. 
Then the coarse model guides the search of details 
(windows and doors) and refines the surface model. The 
reconstruction uses the detection of “vanishing points”, 
line correspondence, and the estimation of points and 
homologous lines. Vanishing points are necessary for the 
detection of planar primitives with the help of the plane-
sweeping method. This method has strong constraints as 
it contains three perpendicular dominant directions.  
Although these methods are already successful, the 
degree of incompleteness or erroneous decisions is too 
high for an integration into practical work. On the other 
hand, in case of practicability they would considerably 
reduce manual work load. 
 
2.3. Strategies with knowledge support 
 
Improvements for automatic processing can be expected 
from new strategies based on semantic networks used to 
guide the reconstruction like the work of Cantzler et al. 
[5] or Scholze et al. [6]. They use certain architectural 
features like orientations of a wall, for example. The 
whole strategy consists of three steps. First architectural 
features are extracted from a triangulated 3D model, then 
constraints are generated out of the scene by matching 
planes against a semantic of the building mock up by a 
backtracking research tree. In this step, the semantic 
network concentrates on the definition of the 3D objects 
and the relationships among them. Constraints such as 
parallel or perpendicular to a wall are exploited. Finally 
constraints found are applied, what then allows to extend 
and update the original model. Scholze et al. [6], extend 
this work into a model based reconstruction of complex 
polyhedral building roofs. The roofs in question are 
modeled as a structured collection of planar polygonal 
faces. The modeling is done into two different layer, one 
focus on geometry, whereas the other is rules by 
semantics. Concerning the geometry layer, the 3D line 
segments are grouped into planes and furthers into faces 
using a Bayesian analysis. In the second layer, the 
preliminary geometric model is subject to a semantic 
interpretation. The knowledge gained in this step is used 
to infer missing parts of the roof model (by invoking the 
geometric layer once more) and to adjust the overall roof 
topology.  This work exemplarily shows the potential of 
semantic 
rules 
taking 
relations 
between 
certain 
characteristics into account. But although the rules used 
here were mainly simple, semantic tools meanwhile offer 
a broad framework to combine geometrical, topological, 
factual or logical aspects. 
 
2.4. Elements of a new strategy 
 
The problem of automatic object reconstruction remains a 
difficult task to realize in spite of many years of research 
[7]. Major problems result from geometry and appearance 
of objects and their complexity and impact on the data 
collected. For example, variations in a viewpoint may 
destroy the adjacency relations inside the data, especially 
when the object surface shows considerable geometrical 
variations. This dissimilarity affects geometrical or 
topological relations inside the data and even gets worse, 
when partial occlusions result in a disappearance of 
object parts. Efficient strategies therefore have to be very 
flexible and in principle need to model almost all factors 
having impact of the representation of an object in a data 
set. That leads to the finding, that at first a semantic 
model of a scene and the objects existing therein is 
required. Such a semantic description should be as close 
to the reality as possible and as necessary to take most 
relevant factors into account, which may have impact on 
later analysis steps. At least this comprises the objects to 
be extracted with their most characteristic features 
(geometry, shape, texture, orientation,...) and relations 
among each other. The decision upon features to be 
modeled should be affected by other important factors in 
an analysis step like characteristics of the data, the 
algorithms present and their important features.  
Such a model might be expressed by a semantic network 
formed out of nodes and connections. The nodes 
represent classes or objects as their instances and the 
links show relationships of various characteristics. Such a 
network then contains the knowledge of that type of 
scene, which has to be processed. This knowledge base 
will act as basis for further extraction activities and has to 
work in cooperation with numerical algorithms. 
Up to this point, the new conception is still in 
concordance to other knowledge related set ups, although 
the degree of modeling goes farther because all relevant 
scene knowledge will be integrated.  But another aspect 
will be considered also allowing to considerably improve 
processing strength. That is to integrate knowledge even 
on the algorithmic side. This means to make use of the 
flexibility of knowledge processing for decisions and 
control purposes inside the algorithmic processing chain. 
Even a propagation of findings from processing results 
into new knowledge for subsequent steps should be 
possible, what would give a completely new degree of 
dynamics and stability into the evaluation process.  
Consequently a further knowledge base has to be 
developed which characterizes algorithms, their relation 
among each other and their relation to the scene 
knowledge. As a result, the processing will no more be 
guided by the numerical treatments and their results but 
by the a complete knowledge base comprising all 
available semantics, including scene knowledge, object 
knowledge, 
algorithmic 
knowledge 
and 
important 
relations among them. This then leads to a conceptual 
view as shown in figure 2. The processing named as 
WiDOP (knowledge based detection of objects in point 
clouds and images - in correspondence to a project of the 
same name) has its roots in the knowledge base which 
then guides individual algorithmic steps. The decision 
upon these algorithmic steps is taken from the knowledge 
base. Results from algorithms are also analyzed by the 
knowledge base and the reasoning engine, then deciding 
upon subsequent steps. Accordingly detected objects and 

their features are populated to the knowledge base, which 
will permanently increase until the work is done. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.WiDOP system overview 
 
As base for such a strategy developments for the semantic 
Web and semantic technologies inside will be used. There 
are languages available allowing to define ontologies, 
which contain available knowledge to a certain scenario 
[1]. This knowledge then has to be structured and 
prepared to guide the algorithmic processing. As input 
sources general expert knowledge may serve, but also 
other resources like GIS data, information to object 
characteristics, to hierarchical structure of scenes, to the 
geometrical 
topology, 
or 
to 
different 
processing 
algorithms etc. Inside the automatic detection process, the 
modeled knowledge will provide all relevant information 
necessary to guide the localization and the identification 
process.  How this can be achieved will be explained in 
the following sections. 
 
3. INTEGRATION OF KNOWLEDGE INTO A 
DETECTION STRATEGY 
 
3.1. Overall strategy  
 
Following to above considerations and with respect to 
technological possibilities, knowledge will be modeled in 
various levels. In principle we have to distinguish 
between object-related knowledge and algorithmic 
knowledge and we therefore have a  
 
• 
Layer of object knowledge  
• 
Layer of algorithmic knowledge  
 
containing the respective semantic information already 
explained before. 
Object knowledge will be classified in three categories: 
geometric, 
topologic 
and 
semantic 
knowledge 
representing a certain scenario [8] Therefore we 
distinguish between: 
 
• 
Scene knowledge  
• 
Geometric knowledge 
• 
Topological knowledge 
 
The layer of scene knowledge contains all relevant object 
elements which might be found within that scene. In case 
of buildings, this might comprise a list like: {Building, 
Wall, Door, Window, Ground,…}. 
Geometrical 
knowledge 
formulates 
geometrical 
characteristics to the physical properties of scene 
elements. In the simplest case, this information might be 
limited to few coordinates expressing a bounding box 
containing the element. But for elements being accessible 
to functional descriptions this will extend the description. 
A wall, for example, has a vertical plane, which needs to 
be described by a plane equation, its values and 
completed by width and height.  
Topological 
knowledge 
represents 
adjacency 
relationships between scene elements. In case of a 
building, for example, a topological relation between a 
wall and the ground floor can be defined, as both have to 
be connected and the wall must be perpendicular to the 
ground.  
Finally the algorithmic layer contains all relevant aspects 
needed to guide the processing itself and expresses 
processing 
sequences, 
data 
exchange 
necessary, 
parameterization of individual algorithms and relations to 
other layers. The integration of 3D processing algorithms 
into the semantic framework is done by means of special 
Built-Ins called “Processing Built-Ins”. They manage the 
interaction between above mentioned layers and will be 
explained later on. 
 
3.2. Use and modeling of knowledge  
 
The framework to express and access knowledge by a 
computer is provided by ontologies and tools to handle 
them in a software environment. An ontology is a formal 
representation of knowledge as a set of concepts within a 
domain, and the relationships between those concepts. It 
is used to reason about the entities within that domain, 
and may be used to describe the domain. In theory, 
conventionally, ontology presents a "formal, explicit 
specification of a shared conceptualization"[8]. An 
ontology provides a shared vocabulary, which can be 
used to model a domain. Well-made ontologies own a 
number of positive aspects like the ability to define a 
precise vocabulary of terms, the ability to inherit and 
extends exiting ones, the ability to declare relationships 
between defined concepts and finally the ability to infer 
new relationships by reasoning on existing ones.  
In the context of 3D processing, formal ontologies have 
already been suggested as a possible solution to 
reconstruct objects from 3D point clouds [5], [6], [7]. 
Through technologies known as Semantic Web, most 
precisely the Ontology Web Language (OWL) [9], 
researcher are able to share and extends knowledge 

through the scientific community. Lots of reasoners exist 
nowadays like Pellet [10], Fact++ [11], and KAON[12]. 
They use rules to perform particular operations on 
knowledge bases like the consistency checking, the 
satisfiability checking and finally the expansion of 
relationships between objects inferred from explicitly 
stated relationships. 
Despite the richness of OWL's set of relational properties, 
it does not cover the full range of expressive possibilities 
for object relationships that we will need, since it is 
useful to declare relationship in term of conditions or 
even rules. These rules are integrated through different 
rule languages to enhance the knowledge existing in an 
ontology. In the last few years, lots of rule languages 
have been emerged. Some of the evolved languages are 
related to the semantic web rule language [13] (SWRL) 
and advanced Jena rules [14]. SWRL is a proposal for 
a Semantic Web rules-language, combining sublanguages 
of the OWL Web Ontology Language (OWL DL and 
Lite) with those of the Rule Markup Language [13]. In 
addition, these languages are open and flexible and allow 
to integrate Built-Ins, which in our case give access to the 
world of geometrical processing. 
A simple example rule would be to assert that the 
combination of the hasParent and hasBrother properties 
implies the hasUncle one. This rule could be written as: 
 
hasParent(?x1,?x2) ^ hasBrother(?x2,?x3) → hasUncle(?x1,?x3)  
  
Where x1, x2 and x3 present individuals from the class 
Person defined in the ontology and hasParent, 
hasBrother and hasUncle presents data properties in the 
same cited structure. As seen in the above example, rules 
are divided in two parts, antecedent and consequent 
separated by the symbol “→”. If all the statements in the 
antecedent clause are determined to be true, then all the 
statements in the consequent clause are applied. In this 
way, new properties like hasUncle in our example can be 
assigned to individuals in the ontology based upon on the 
current state of knowledge base. Add to this standard, 
SWRL language specify also a library for Built-Ins 
functions which can be applied to individuals. It includes 
numerical comparison, simple arithmetic and string 
manipulation.  
 
3.3. Knowledge related to the object 
3.3.1. Scene layer classes 
Figure 3 shows a possible collection of scene elements in 
case of a building. They may be additionally structured in 
a hierarchical order as might be seen convenient for a 
scene. This could lead to relations like: a room is a super 
class of wall and floor, with door as further sub class of 
wall. But also other ordering can be imagined, as a 
structuring with respect to processing aspects. Such a 
structure could separate between different complexity of 
elements. Simply structured elements like walls, ground 
floors or ceiling then would be distinguished from other 
objects in accordance to their impact onto the processing 
strategy. Simple objects for example will inherit simple 
geometries 
(like 
planes, 
for 
example) 
and 
correspondingly only need simple detection strategies, 
whereas complex ones will be composed out of several 
geometrical elements needing adapted and more complex 
processing strategies. They first have to be decomposed 
into their geometric elements, which then have to be 
verified and regrouped based on known topology 
relations between them. Likewise, a table as a complex 
element is composed of a plane representing the table top 
and at least one linear structure, representing a leg. Once 
theses geometries are detected, the topology decides upon 
the correctness of this assumption, as the plane (table top) 
must be connected and perpendicular to the linear 
structure (leg). This is just a first draft since modeling 
depends on the target scene to be detected.  
 
 
Figure 3. Grouping of scene elements in case of a building 
 
Above cited concepts are extended by relations to other 
classes or data. The data property “has_Bounding_Box” 
for example aims to store the placement of the detected 
object in a bounding box defined by its 8 corner points (a 
spatial point is defined by 3 values x, y and z). The object 
property “has_Geometric_Component” aims to specify 
the geometric elements composing the semantic object in 
question.  
 
Figure 4.Object and data properties characterizing the semantic 
objects 
 
To specify its semantic characteristics, a new class are 
created, aiming to characterize a semantic object by a set 
of characteristics like color, size, visibility, texture, 

orientation and its position in the point cloud after 
detection. To do so, new object properties like 
“has_Color”, 
“has_Size”, 
“has_Orientation”, 
“has_Visibility” and “has_Texture” are created linking 
the Semantic_Object class to the “color”, “size”, 
“Orientation”, 
“Visibility” 
and 
“Texture” 
classes 
respectively, cf. Figure 4. 
 
3.3.2. Geometry layer classes 
Each one of the above mentioned object classes have 
relations to the geometry class. This class handles 
features which may have an impact or are useful for 
decisions based on geometrical aspects. It helps to enrich 
scene objects with additional information or provide data 
for the processing strategies. A basic couple of sub-
classes 
labeled 
“Geometric_Component” 
and 
“BoundingBox” are created, cf. Figure 5. 
 
 
Figure 5. The geometry class hierarchy 
 
• 
Geometric_component class:  
The 
Geometric_Component 
class 
contains 
information about the different geometric 
elements composing a semantic object, like 
plane, line, sphere and others. A wall for 
example has a planar geometry; moreover, a 
table consists of planar and linear geometries. 
• 
BoundingBox class: 
The BoundingBox class aims to characterize the 
object localization within the 3D point cloud 
scene. 
 
3.3.3. Topology layer classes 
The purpose of this class is to spatially connect Things 
presented in the scene and in the geometry layer class. At 
semantic view, topological properties describe adjacency 
relations between classes. For example, the property 
isParallelTo allows to characterize two geometric 
concepts by the feature of parallelism. Similarly relations 
like isPerpendicularTo and isConnectedTo will help to 
characterize and exploit certain spatial relations and make 
them accessible to reasoning steps. 
 
3.4. Processing layer classes 
 
All above mentioned layers carry knowledge, which 
describes the objects in their semantic and spatial context. 
This knowledge is the source to reason and decide upon 
findings and results produced by individual 3D-
processing steps. The intrinsic 3D-processing, however, 
is done on a different level, due to several reasons.  
One of these reasons is the need to efficiently and quickly 
process large data sets (images, point clouds) what must 
be realized with accordingly designed programming 
tools. That's why above mentioned framework for 
knowledge management cannot be used. Its structure is 
not designed for that task. Instead, an interface has to be 
implemented giving access to efficient programming 
languages, like C or C++, for example. Fortunately, Java 
provides all necessary structures to build such an 
interface and therefore acts as bridge to combine these 
real different worlds of semantic processing and efficient 
data processing.  
 
 
 
Figure 6. Processing architecture 
 
As shown in the figure 6 above, JAVA has interfaces to 
the semantic world and also to the processing world. As 
consequence, it is possible to start and control activities 
inside the processing environment based on functions 
implemented in the semantic framework.  
In the simplest case, this would allow to define a C or 
C++ function representing a defined sequence of 
processing steps and to start this function as a semantic 
built-in method. In that case the 3D-processing wouldn't 
do more than just return information to be used in a 
further reasoning process on the knowledge level. 
However, this is already useful to exploit the potential of 
knowledge management for the guidance of 3D-
processing.  
However, such a solution of defining individual 
processing sequences and connecting them to an own 
spatial built-in method is of limited flexibility. It would 
need a large number of methods representing a complete 
tool box covering most of the possible processing 
situations. This might result in a certain redundancy 
between processing built-ins for similar objects or for the 
same object to be analyzed under different conditions.  
A higher degree of flexibility and less redundancy could 
be achieved by developing an own processing semantic 
and to exploit this by the reasoning capacity inside the 
knowledge processing. Such a solution would need to 
describe each individual algorithm by features, which are 
characteristic and  important to model its behavior. This 
information then could be treated as key to reason about 
usefulness of a certain algorithm for a specific detection 
situation. The reasoning would have to be based on 
features of the objects in the scene and their importance 
for a processing decision. Thus, the semantic inside the 
processing network has to be attached by relations and 
rules to the scene knowledge.  

Such an extended and more flexible connection between 
scene and processing domain needs extended experience 
with algorithms and their interaction with certain 
characteristics of objects and data. That's why an 
implementation has to wait until the experience needed 
could be collected based on a realization of the built-in 
solution, explained at the beginning. 
 
4. THE IMPACT OF KNOWLEDGE ON THE 
DETECTION STRATEGY 
 
4.1. Use of knowledge in general 
 
The previous chapter gave an idea to detection strategies 
in general, to a possible integration of knowledge into a 
detection process and to concepts of structuring 
knowledge in order to support algorithmic processing. 
The next question to answer is how the overall detection 
strategy might be influenced by knowledge and what this 
means for the design of a practical solution. 
As explained before, knowledge is the key element in this 
solution and it has to guide and control the process of 
detection. It has to be stored and organized in a specific 
way, in order to be accessible for the reasoning process. 
Our proposition has been shown in chapter 3, but other 
structures are also possible. One aspect not considered up 
to now is how knowledge may guide the processing and 
to what extend it might be necessary to distinguish 
different degrees of available knowledge. This will be 
done in the following chapter, explaining two major 
strategies: 
 
• 
use of well defined specific knowledge 
• 
use of generic knowledge 
 
Why this difference? We have to accept, that each 
individual application case has its own framework of 
knowledge. The content of such a framework changes 
with the domain to which an application has to be 
referenced (architecture, industry, civil engineering,....) 
and accordingly knowledge models to be used must be 
different. In addition, the framework will be influenced 
by the amount of knowledge existing in a particular 
application. This may spread a large field, starting from 
extensive and actual data bases with more or less precise 
information up to just some general ideas to objects in 
question and without any direct data on the other end. 
Such large differences in the knowledge base clearly 
must have impact on the guidance of algorithms and on 
the strategies used. In principle, the more knowledge 
existing, the more precisely and directly algorithms can 
be guided, why there are strategically different concepts 
following the degree of quality for the knowledge. Hence 
we distinguish between sparse knowledge cases (generic 
knowledge, cf. Figure 7, left side ) and detailed 
knowledge cases (specific knowledge, cf. Figure 7, right 
side) . 
 
 
4.2. Case of specific knowledge integration 
 
4.2.1. The role of specific knowledge  
What are potential data sources for ‘specific knowledge’ 
and why might it still be necessary to analyze data sets 
and look for objects? 
Data sources are various. This might range from simple 
CAD plans over spatial information systems to object 
oriented data bases supporting data in rich and complex 
formats like IFC [18]. Based on these data sources the 
different levels (scene, geometry, topology) in our 
knowledge model can be expressed as far as possible. In 
an ideal case we therefore might know about the semantic 
of objects (there are walls, floors, ceiling,...), the 
geometry (position, extension, orientation,...), additional 
features (roughness, color, other surface characteristics) 
and topological relations (wall A sits on floor B), what 
would give a really good base for a detection strategy. 
This knowledge then has to be linked to the algorithmic 
knowledge, what finally would allow to start and guide 
the processing part (see 4.2.2.).  
As soon as the degree of completeness and particularity 
of the data sources diminishes, the knowledge gets more 
and more sparse and needs to adapt the strategy. One first 
change arises with lack of knowledge to the geometry of 
objects (see 4.3.). 
But what are reasons to detect objects which are already 
known to a more or less detailed degree? It's necessary 
due the fact, that data sets have a certain age and 
actuality, which in many cases don't match the needs to 
be fulfilled by the data sets.  
Official topographical data sets have an age between 1 
and 20 years and even continuously evolving objects like 
industrial plants may have data sets of similar age. But 
even for younger data sets an analysis could be of interest 
as contained objects may undergo permanent changes.  
One example for such a type of objects is an airport. 
Everybody should already have noticed all the 
construction sites being permanently visible on the 
airports all around the world. Building parts, elements of 
infrastructure are undergoing many changes. Walls are 
disappearing, new walls are showing up, new openings or 
closings inside walls arise or elements of various 
technical infrastructures get modified. Normally those 
changes are not updated into the data bases, why they 
suffer an increasing lack of quality and actuality. An 
airport might seem as a special example, but there are 
many similar scenarios for aged data sets. 
One reason for missing updates of data bases are the costs 
arising. In practice, update measurements are done 
manually and due the amount of time to be invested it 
gets very expensive. That's why an automatic solution 
just looking for existence or disappearance of objects 
noted in a data base already could give a large 
economical progress. 
 
 
  

 
Figure 7. WiDOP activity diagram 
 
 
4.2.2. Processing in case of detailed knowledge 
including object position  
This case represents the ideal situation from the view 
point of existing knowledge. Remaining challenges for 
the guidance of the processing come mainly from the data 
to be analyzed, possible incompleteness, lack of data 
quality, for example and the algorithmic knowledge 
needed to handle such situations.  
Figure 8 presents the adopted strategy in this case using 
point clouds as data source.  
 
 
 
Figure 8. Activity diagram in case of specific knowledge with 
known object position 
 
The first step localizes the target object in the data set (for 
example, a point cloud) based on previously mentioned 
3D_Processing_Built-Ins (see 3.4). It aims to infer 
knowledge and execute one or more 3D processing 
algorithms with extracted knowledge from the ontology. 
Once the localization is done successfully, the object will 
be stored within its coordinates in the ontology. In case of 
a failure, the algorithmic knowledge has to decide upon 
the next step, what could be an enlargement of the 
research area. Such a step would assume, that the reason 
for the failure is due to imprecise geometry data, why the 
process of localization should be re-executed. Finally, the 
object coordinate can be updated in case of a successful 
localization, if not, it will be marked as not found, or 
further rules have to be applied.  
  
4.3. Case of generic knowledge integration 
 
With decreasing knowledge, especially with lack of prior 
information to a position, the processing has to use a 
largely different strategy. In previous cases of an 
available position, this guides a detection process 
spatially and semantically. This is because the position 
guides the process to a specific location in the data set; 
and as the used geometry is bound to a certain object, the 
semantic part is already decided. The remaining task of 
the algorithms is just to decide upon correctness of the 
assumptions provided by the knowledge. 
But without geometry a direct link between an object and 
its corresponding representation in the data does not exist. 
That's why geometry and semantic information are 
undetermined at the beginning. Subsequent algorithmic 
steps then have first to localize something in order to 
solve the geometry question and afterwards to decide 
upon the semantic. These decisions are interdependent 
and have to be taken in a concerted way based on generic 
knowledge. The quality of this knowledge is decisive for 
the effort to invest and the quality and remaining 
uncertainness in the detection process. 
Looking from a procedural perspective, fig. 9 shows a 
corresponding strategy. Here, each iteration is composed 
of four different steps. The first tries to detect basic 
geometrical elements, which may be part of a physical 

object (like planes, lines, for example). At that moment 
geometry information is available, but it is unclear to 
which object the elements found may belong. This has to 
be answered using a different generic logic, as may be 
derived from topology, for example. Thus a next step 
verifies topological relations between detected elements 
and adds other aspects like orientation (vertical element, 
horizontal element,...). Based on results from this 
reasoning a semantic annotation process can be executed 
in order to obtain an initial mapping between elements 
derived from the data and the generic semantic. 
Such a mapping extends the knowledge in the ontology 
from generic to specific one as now real objects have 
been created. However, this specific knowledge might be 
of lower quality or of higher uncertainty than in case of 
precise initial information from external sources. 
Therefore a further step has to be added, allowing to 
improve the quality. One way to achieve an improvement 
is to use the processing chain for specific knowledge and 
to apply those algorithms, which need a closer object 
context but give better results. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Activity diagram in case of generic knowledge  
 
A successful detection then may lead to a subsequent 
refinement process, allowing to identify less prominent 
objects, which are smaller or more complex and therefore 
need more support for an identification. This may even be 
simply based on generic knowledge, providing general 
concepts to objects and their relation among each other. 
As example, it is clear, that a table has to sit on a ground 
floor and that chairs may have close adjacency to other 
chairs or to tables. As consequence, generic knowledge 
may guide the detection process in an iterative way, 
leading from large and significant objects to smaller and 
more complex ones. 
 
 
 
 
 
5. CASE STUDY 
 
In the following chapter we want to describe and explain 
the implementation of our concept based on real data of 
an airport scene (Frankfurt Airport = Fraport), we are 
using in our ongoing development procedure at the 
moment. 
On the knowledge side, an ontology is created, using the 
open-source ontology editor protégé with Web Ontology 
Language (OWL) [9]. Rules will be formulated and 
executed using the Semantic Web Rule Language 
(SWRL) [13] and its built-ins, where the reasoning is 
performed with SWRL Jess tab and Jena. In addition, 
new 3D processing Built-Ins are developed dealing with 
real 3D-point cloud data and image processing tasks. 
These algorithms are separated functions, programmed in 
C++. They are modularly structured allowing to use them 
individually or to be grouped together, depending on the 
purpose of use. The semantic part plays his role as control 
logic for the algorithms, setting parameters as well as 
evaluating the results in order to make further decisions 
(cf.). 
In order to go into detail of this approach, an example of 
the defined Built-Ins will be explained in the following 
paragraphs, then, a rule based model related to the target 
purpose will be mentioned for each type of existent 
knowledge, either specific or generic.  
 
5.1. 3D scene definition  
 
The Fraport scene, which is used as a first exemplary 
dataset for the implementation, is an indoor architecture 
of a waiting room in a boarding area of Frankfurt airport. 
It contains regular walls, floor, chairs, advertisement 
panels, signs etc. The whole scene has been scanned 
using a terrestrial laser scanner, resulting in a large point 
cloud representing the surfaces of the scene objects 
captured from different scanning positions. Based on this 
data and the knowledge defined we will try to give a clear 
understanding of benefits from a knowledge based 3D 
processing, in the following.  
 
5.2. 3D processing Built-Ins: plane detection  
 
As explained previously (cf.3.4), so-called processing 
Built-Ins provide the bridge between semantic and 
processing world. They are defined as part of semantic 
rules and have a counterpart in the processing domain, 
which has to be invoked as the rule is executed. 
3Dswrlb:PlaneDetection Built-In is one example for such 
a processing procedure. It aims to detect planes within 
3D-point clouds based on certain characteristics of the 
target object properties. In this context, we will define the 
PlaneDetection Built-Ins as seen in Figure 10. The 
prototype of the designed Built-Ins is:  
 
3D_swrlb_Processing:Plane_Detection( 
Building 
Element, 
Orientation, 
Texture, Thickness, Height, Position, 
Box) 

 
The first parameter represents the target object if 
available, and the last one represents the created 
bounding box once this geometry element is detected. 
The 
remaining 
parameters 
are 
target 
object 
characteristics, used as input information for the 3D 
processing, in order to choose the correct algorithmic 
strategy and parameterization. At the moment, each 
object detection process will result in a bounding box, 
representing a rough position and orientation of the 
detected object for visualization purposes. For the future 
a parametric object description will be used, for example 
using just a point and a normal vector for the geometric 
object “plane” or start point, end point and height for the 
semantic object “wall”. 
 
 
 
Figure 10. Plane detection Built-Ins execution 
 
In figure 10, the orange boxes represent individual 3D-
processing functions, used for the plane detection. Each 
branch then represents a different processing chain, 
applied in case of horizontal or vertical planes with or 
without known position. Each processing chain uses 
functions appropriate to the knowledge available. In the 
left hand branch, for example, the object position is 
expected to be known with a certain accuracy why 
function 
“BackZProjection” 
may 
use 
known 
2D 
coordinates to pre-segment the 3D points within the point 
cloud and finally create a bounding box. In that step it is 
evaluated if the segmented points belong to a plane or 
not. 
In the central branch we know the target object (“wall”) 
but not the position, why the whole point cloud will first 
be projected to the ground view plane in order to get a 
dense contour at the position of walls(function 
“projection”), then a Hough line detection algorithm will 
detect possible vertical elements with a certain length 
before the “BackZProjection” function will again 
segment 3D points. Finally, based on processing results 
and scene knowledge, it will be decided, which 
candidates belong to a wall and the bounding boxes will 
be created as a processing result. 
In the right hand branch, the ground floor of the waiting 
area will be detected. Here an algorithm is used that will 
shift a thin horizontal search space from bottom to top, 
stopping when a maximum number of 3D points is with 
the search space. The result will be described by a 
bounding box. 
 
5.3. Case of specific knowledge integration 
 
Above mentioned algorithmic processing has semantic 
counterparts integrated into rules. That's why there has to 
be a semantic framework choosing one of the processing 
alternatives. For example, in order to detect walls with 
known position (left hand branch in figure 10) we need 
certain rules that may look like rule demo1 below. For 
this it is necessary, that all objects with specific 
knowledge already exist as individuals in the ontology, 
containing all available information like position, color, 
size or orientation.  
In plain words, rule1 could read like this: “Select all 
individuals of the class ‘wall’ in the ontology which have 
a known position and a height larger than 4 meters and 
execute the adapted plane detection algorithm for this 
case. If successful, store the resulting bounding boxes for 
each wall in the ontology.”  
 
Rule1: 
Wall(?x) ^ has_Position(?x,?pos) 
^ 3D_swrlb_Processing: Plane_Detection 
(?x, Orientation:Vertical, 
texture:Flat, Thickness:Thick, Height: 
>4m, Position:?pos , ?box) ^ 
hasDetectionRes (Wall,True) 
 → hasBoundingBox(?x,?box) ^ 
hasQualification (?box,Semantic) ^ 
hasPosition(?box, ?pos) 
 
Figure 11 shows the result of the wall detection, using 
rule1. 
  
 
Figure 11. Related result to rule1 
 
  
 
To satisfy the case where no specific information related 
to the target object (wall in our case) is given, rule2 is 
designed:  
 

Rule2: 
swrlb_Processing: Plane_Detection 
(?Wall, Orientation: Vertical, 
texture:Flat, Thickness: Thick, 
Height: >4m, Position:any, ?box) → 
hasBoundingBox(?Wall,?box) ^ 
hasQualification (?box,Semantic) ^ 
hasPosition(?Box, xxx) 
 
With this rule, all vertical planes with a height larger than 
4 meters will be detected, using an adapted plane 
detection strategy (central branch in figure 10). After the 
execution of the plane detection Built-Ins with the given 
attributes, the processing will result in a certain number 
of bounding boxes, representing the walls. Once done, the 
rule will be converted to rule3:  
 
Rule3: 
BoundingBox (?Box) ^ hasDetectionRes 
(?Box, 
True) 
→ 
Wall(?box) 
^ 
hasQualification (?Box, Semantic) ^ 
hasPosition(?Box, ?pos)  
 
5.4. Case of generic knowledge integration 
 
In this section we want to show, how knowledge rules are 
designed for reasoning if no specific knowledge is 
available. To do so, different rule steps are necessary.  
First, all vertical planes of certain characteristics will be 
searched in the area of interest, then topological relations 
between elements found are analyzed and are used to 
further qualify an element. Subsequently further rules 
may be applied containing generic aspects expressing 
facts to orientation or size of elements, which then may 
already be sufficient to finally decide upon the semantic 
of an object. 
 
5.4.1. Detect geometry 
swrlb_Processing:Plane_Detection 
(?Geometry, Orientation:Vertical, 
texture:Flat, Thickness:any, Height: 
<4m, Position:any, ?box) → 
hasQualification(?box, “geometric”) 
^hasPosition (?box, xxx) 
 
With this rule all vertical building elements where the 
height is less than 4 meters, are detected and stored in the 
ontology as a geometric element. 
 
5.4.2. From geometric to topologic level 
This step aims to identify existing topologies between the 
detected geometries. To do so, 3D_Processing Built-Ins 
like Perpendicular and Connection are created. Each 
Built-Ins accesses certain 3D functions, programmed in 
C++, which will verify the respective topological 
relations. As a result, relations found between geometric 
elements are propagated into the ontology, serving as an 
improved knowledge base for further processing and 
decision steps. 
Rule4: 
BoundingBox(?box1) ^ 
BoundingBox(?box2) ^ 
swrlb_Processing:Perpendicular (?box1, 
? box2) → isPerpendicularto(?box1, ? 
box2) 
 
Rule5: 
BoundingBox(?box1) ^ 
BoundingBox(?box2) ^ 
swrlb_Processing:Connection(?box1, ? 
box2) → isConnectedto(?box1, ? box2) 
 
5.4.3. From geometric to semantic level 
After geometry and topology detection more rules are 
needed to qualify and annotate the different detected 
geometries based on the information in the knowledge 
base. 
 
In the exemplary rule6, the inference capacity of SWRL 
allows the automatic annotation of a bounding box as a 
building object of the class “panel”, based on the 
assumption, that panels are vertical objects with a height 
smaller than 4 meters. 
 
Rule6: 
hasOrientation (?box, Vertical) ^ 
hasHeight(?box, ?h) ^ swrlb:lessThen 
(?h, 4) → Panel (?box)^ 
hasQualification (?box, Semantic) 
 
5.4.4. From topologic to semantic level 
The example of rule7 shows, how based on the existent 
topology (perpendicular) and in the context of Fraport, a 
logic annotation of the objects wall and ground can be 
made. 
 
Rule7: 
BoundingBox(?box1) ^ hasSize 
(?box1,big)^ hasOrientation 
(?box1,vertical)^BoundingBox(?box2)^  
hasSize(?box2,big) isPerpendicularto 
(?box1, ? box2) → Wall(?box1) ^ 
hasQualification (?Box1, Semantic) ^ 
Ground (?box2) ^ hasQualification 
(?Box2, Semantic) 
 
5.4.5. Semantic qualification of new elements 
 
Rule8: 
BoundingBox(?box1) ^ Ground(?gr) 
isPerpendicularto(?box1, ? ?gr) ^ 
hasHeight (?box1, ?h) ^ 
swrlb:lessthan(2) → Gate_Counter 
(?box1) ^ hasQualification (?Box1, 
Semantic)  
 
In this rule, the gate counter is semantically identified, 
using the knowledge that this object has a certain 
maximum size and a certain relative position and 
orientation (topology) to the previously detected ground 
floor (dark blue in figure 12). 

 
 
 
 
Figure 12. Box identified as a gate counter (light blue) 
 
All these exemplary rules are just to show the principle of 
supporting 3D processing and object detection through 
knowledge. The rules do not present final or optimal 
solutions and have not been extensively tested, yet. 
 
However, from the presented exemplary rules, we can 
summarize the following: Rules can be used to 
o 
support 
the 
selection 
of 
3D 
processing 
algorithms and their parameterization, based on 
scene knowledge and algorithmic knowledge 
o 
populate the ontology based on 3D processing 
results in order to enrich the knowledge base to 
support further processing steps 
o 
semantically annotate geometric objects based 
on logical reasoning 
o 
iteratively utilize an increasing knowledge base 
in order to detect objects, that could not be 
detected initially 
In a nutshell, the rules allow the minimization of the 
“semantic gap” between the user and the real 3D 
processing by means of an understandable language. 
 
 
6. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
 
This paper presents a flexible innovative solution to 
perform object detection in 3D data. The suggested 
solution makes use of available knowledge in a specific 
domain or scene, for example recruited from CAD 
drawings, and on the knowledge to respective 3D 
processing algorithms. This prior knowledge has to be 
modeled in an ontology, representing a basis for decision 
processed during the object detection. Semantic rules are 
used to control the 3D processing chain, to annotate the 
detected elements, to enrich the knowledge base and to 
drive the detection of new objects based on detected ones. 
The presented solution offers a flexible conception for 
different application scenarios, for example, for updating 
existing plans or reconstructing buildings based on 
standard “building knowledge”. 
Future work includes the expansion of the ontology, 
further implementation and testing of the rules, the 
improvement of the existing JAVA prototype application 
and the improvement and adding of 3D algorithms. 
Another important aspect is the study of the quality 
evaluation in order to verify and improve the processing 
results. 
 
7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
This paper presents work performed in the framework of 
research project funded by the German ministry of 
research and education under contract No. 1758X09. The 
authors cordially thank for this funding. 
 
8. REFERENCES 
 
[1] WN. Borst, JM. Akkermans, and JL. Top, "Engineering 
Ontologies," International Journal of Human-Computer 
Studies, vol. 46, pp. 365- 406, 1997. 
[2] G. Vosselman and S. Dijkman, "3D building model 
reconstruction from point clouds and ground plans," 
International Archives of Photogrammetry Remote Sensing 
and Spatial Information Sciences, vol. 34, pp. 37 - 44, 
2001. 
[3] M. Pollefeys, "Automated reconstruction of 3D scenes 
from sequences of images," in Journal of Photogrammetry, 
Remote Sensing and Geoinformation Sciences, vol. 55, 
2000, pp. 251 - 267. 
[4] R. Hartley and A Zisserman, Multiple view geometry in 
computer vision. New York, USA: Cambridge University 
Press, 2003. 
[5] H. Cantzler, R. Fisher, and M. Devy, "Quality 
enhancement of reconstructed 3D models using coplanarity 
and constraints," Pattern Recognition, vol. 2449, no. 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 34-41, 2002. 
[6] S. Scholze, T. Moons, and L Van Gool, "A probabilistic 
approach to building roof reconstruction using semantic 
labelling," in Proceedings of the DAGM Conference, 
Zürich, 2002, pp. 257 - 264. 
[7] W. Grimson, From images to surfaces: A computational 
study of the human early visual system, The MIT Press 
series in artificial intelligence ed. Cambridge, USA: MIT 
Press, 1986. 
[8] T Gruber. (2005) www-ksl.stanford.edu/kst/what-is-an-
ontology.html. 
 [9] Ben Hmida Helmi, Cruz Christophe, Nicolle Christophe, 
Boochs Frank, "Semantic-based Technique for the 
Automation the 3D Reconstruction Process," in SEMAPRO 
2010, The Fourth International Conference on Advances in 
Semantic Processing, Florence, Italy, 2010, pp. 191-198. 
[10] A Marbs, F Boochs, Helmi Ben Hmida, and H Truong, 
"Wissensbasierte Objekterkennung in 3D-Punktwolken 
und Bildern," DGPF-Tagungsband, 3-Ländertagung D-A-
CH Conference Wien, pp. pp. 220-227, 2010. 
[11] H. Q. Truong, H. Ben Hmida, A. Marbs, F. Boochs, 
"Integration Of Knowledge Into The Detection Of Objects 
In Point Clouds," in PCV 2010, Saint-Mandré, France, 
2010, pp. 143-148. 
[12] D L McGuinness and F Van Harmelen, "OWL web 
ontology language overview," W3C recommendation, vol. 
10, 2004. 
[13] E Sirin, B Parsia, B C Grau, A Kalyanpur, and Y Katz, 

"Pellet: A practical owl-dl reasoner," Web Semantics: 
science, services and agents on the World Wide Web, vol. 
5, pp. 51-53, 2007. 
[14] D Tsarkov and I Horrocks, "FaCT++ description logic 
reasoner: System description," Automated Reasoning, pp. 
292-297, 2006. 
[15] B. Motik, U. Sattler U. Hustadt. (2010) KAON2. [Online]. 
http://kaon2.semanticweb.org/ 
[16] I Horrocks et al., "SWRL: A semantic web rule language 
combining OWL and RuleML," W3C Member submission, 
vol. 21, 2004. 
[17] J J Carroll et al., "Jena: implementing the semantic web 
recommendations," 
in 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
13th 
international World Wide Web conference on Alternate 
track papers & posters, 2004, pp. 74-83. 
[18] T. and Fischer, M. and Grobler, F. and Ritzenthaler, J. and 
Yu, K. and Sutherland, S. and Staub, S. and Akinci, B. and 
Akbas, R. and Koo, B. and others Froese, "Industry 
foundation 
classes 
for 
project 
management-a 
trial 
implementation," Electronic Journal of Information 
Technology in Construction, vol. 4, pp. 17--36, 1999. 
[19] N Andreas, "Automatic Model Refinement for 3D 
Reconstruction with Mobile Robots," Fourth International 
Conference on 3-D Digital Imaging and Modeling, 2003. 
3DIM 2003., pp. 394-401, 2005. 
[20] Y Duan, C Cruz, and C Nicolle, "Architectural 
Reconstruction of 3D Building Objects through Semantic 
Knowledge Management," in 11th ACIS International 
Conference on Software Engineering Artificial Intelligence 
Networking and Parallel/Distributed Computing (SNPD), 
2010, pp. 261-266. 
[21] Vosselman G. Pu S., "Automatic extraction of building 
features from terrestrial laser scanning," in International 
Archives of Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial 
Information Sciences, Part 5, 2006. 
[22] O. Grau, Wissensbasierte 3D-Analyse von Gebäudeszenen 
aus mehreren frei gewählten Stereofotos, Dissertation ed., 
Universität Hannover, Ed. Hannover, 2000. 
[23] Y. Furukawa and J. Ponce, "Accurate, Dense and Robust 
Multiview Stereopsis," IEEE Transactions on Pattern 
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. Vol. 32, no. No. 8, 
2010. 
[24] Ch. Cruz and F. Boochs, "Reconstruction of Architectural 
Objects from 3D laser scanner survey," in Publikationen 
der 
deutschen 
Gesellschaft 
für 
Photogrammetrie. 
Fernerkundung und Geoinformation, 2007, pp. 95 - 102. 
[25] E J Whiting, "Geometric, Topological & Semantic 
Analysis of Multi-Building Floor Plan Data," phdthesis 
2006.
