Where Is My Mind (looking at)? Predicting Visual
Attention from Brain Activity
Victor Delvigne
ISIA Lab, Faculty of Engineering
University of Mons
Mons, Belgium
IMT Lille Douai
CRIStAL UMR CNRS 9189
Villeneuve d’Ascq, France

No´e Tits
ISIA Lab
Faculty of Engineering
University of Mons
Mons, Belgium
Luca La Fisca
ISIA Lab
Faculty of Engineering
University of Mons
Mons, Belgium
Nathan Hubens
ISIA Lab
Faculty of Engineering
University of Mons
Mons, Belgium
Antoine Maiorca
ISIA Lab
Faculty of Engineering
University of Mons
Mons, Belgium
Hazem Wannous
IMT Lille Douai
CRIStAL UMR CNRS 9189
Villeneuve d’Ascq, France
Thierry Dutoit
ISIA Lab
Faculty of Engineering
University of Mons
Mons, Belgium
Jean-Philippe Vandeborre
IMT Lille Douai
CRIStAL UMR CNRS 9189
Villeneuve d’Ascq, France
Abstract—Visual attention estimation is an active ﬁeld of
research at the crossroads of different disciplines: computer
vision, artiﬁcial intelligence and medicine. One of the most
common approaches to estimate a saliency map representing
attention is based on the observed images. In this paper, we show
that visual attention can be retrieved from EEG acquisition. The
results are comparable to traditional predictions from observed
images, which is of great interest. For this purpose, a set
of signals has been recorded and different models have been
developed to study the relationship between visual attention
and brain activity. The results are encouraging and comparable
with other approaches estimating attention with other modalities.
The codes and dataset considered in this paper have been
made available at https://ﬁgshare.com/s/3e353bd1c621962888ad
to promote research in the ﬁeld.
Index Terms—component, formatting, style, styling, insert
I. INTRODUCTION
Saliency heatmap estimation is a ﬁeld of research at cutting
edge of technology today. Estimating with precision the region
of the ﬁeld of view where human is focused is a great help
for many computer vision applications. In most of the works
aiming to estimate images that represents the region of interest
in the ﬁeld of view, also called visual saliency map, the
considered modalities are often images and videos [1], [2].
Nowadays, machine learning (ML) and the topics deriving
from it have known a huge increase in interest. More and
more publications and research projects related to novel deep
learning (DL) algorithms in the context of computer vision
or natural language processing (NLP) have been presented in
recent years. Although ML algorithms tend to be used for
those ﬁelds, a growing interest has been noticed in the medical
domain [3]. Moreover, the use of ML algorithms may be an
interesting opportunity to improve diagnosis, help the works
of specialists and to have a better understanding of biomedical
signals.
As of today, the existing works aiming to estimate visual
saliency are based on images. It could be interesting to exploit
the scientiﬁc research proving the relationship between brain
activity and attention mechanism [4] by estimating visual
saliency from biomedical signals. The goal being not to beat
the results provided by image-based methods but to investigate
this novel relationship.
On another hand, the increasing amount of data and their
democratisation have to led to an increase of research projects
in Brain-Computer Interfaces (BCI) which aims to promote
interaction between the human brain and the computer. This
connection can be (non-)invasive and more or less expensive
depending on the considered biomedical signals. Among the
different types of biomedical signals considered in existing
research projects, electroencephalogram (EEG) representing
electrical brain activity, seems to be prone for this type of
applications. The motivations being based on their ease of
use, relatively low cost compared to other techniques while
maintaining a high ﬁdelity for signals acquisition.
In this context, it has been considered to investigate the
relationship between eye-tracking and EEG. For this purpose,
we propose a novel framework aiming to estimate visual
saliency map from electrophysiological recordings. The con-
tribution of this paper can be summarized in 3 points: (1)
an adaptation for raw signals of the existing methods for
EEG’s features representation under images form; (2) a novel
arXiv:2201.03902v1  [cs.CV]  11 Jan 2022

feature extraction method representing EEG signals in lower
subspace; (3) a framework estimating visual saliency map from
electrophysiological signals.
II. RELATED WORK
The related work has been split into three subsections:
(1) Deep learning approaches for EEG processing, presenting
different methods based on DL to process EEG; (2) EEG-
based attention estimation, introducing the research projects
related to attention in the context of EEG; (3) Visual saliency
estimation, showing the existent works aiming to estimate
saliency map from several modalities.
A. Deep learning approaches for EEG processing
As previously mentioned, ML algorithms have known an
increase in interest for some time now. It has also been
the case in the context of biomedical signal processing and
brain imaging researches. More speciﬁcally, in the case of
electroencephalogram signals processing, several deep learn-
ing approaches have been considered for different purposes
[5]. In most of the cases, EEGs are considered as an array
X ∈Rt×elec with t representing the time evolution and elec
the number of considered electrodes. A non-exhaustive list of
works considering DL algorithms with EEG is the following:
• The use of convolutional neural networks (CNN) has
been considered to extract feature from EEG signals.
One of the best known models is EEGNet presented
by Lawhern et al. [6]. This network aims to estimate
motor movements and detect evoked potentials (speciﬁc
pattern in electrophysiological signals seen after stimuli
apparition) through a sequence of convolution ﬁlters
with learnable kernels. These kernels extract the spatial
and/or temporal features from the signal according to the
considered shape (x-axis representing the time evolution
and y-axis the considered channels).
• One of the other methods considered to process EEG is
the use of graph networks. With this approach, the EEG
is considered as a graph (with vertices corresponding to
electrodes and edges being proportional to their distance)
evolving over time. The method based on Regularized
Graph Neural Networks proposed by Zhong et al. [7]
presents the best results for emotion estimation from
EEG.
• Another approach that has already been considered for a
wide range of application in EEG processing is based
on recurrent neural networks (RNN). These kinds of
networks have already proven their ability to extract
the spatial [8] and temporal [9] information from brain
activity signals. In the work of Bashivan et al. [9], they
consider a model composed of a different layer of CNN
and RNN to estimate motor movements from EEG.
• Over the last years, an emerging method have been
considered: the use of a generative adversarial network
(GAN) for EEG processing. GANs have already been
used for generating images representing thougths and/or
dreams [10], [11]. Although this research ﬁeld is still
under development, the authors have high hopes that
one day, it will be possible to visualise our thoughts or
dreams.
In addition to the different DL models used for estimation
and regression from brain activity, it is also possible to con-
sider different feature extraction and representation methods.
In [6], they directly considered the raw signal and let the
models extracting the most signiﬁcant feature. On the other
hand, in [8], [9], they considered well-known feature extraction
methods expressing the spectral [9] and temporal information
[7], [8] from signals. Moreover, in [9] they consider a more
visual representation of EEG feature under a more understand-
able form. In their approach, they consider the position of each
electrode in the 3D frame and create an image within which
the location of pixels and electrodes are correlated and their
value is related to the feature value in the speciﬁc location.
B. EEG-based attention estimation
Liang et al. [12] present an approach to estimate visual
saliency features from EEG. The considered methodology
consists of a joint recording of EEG while watching video
clips. Saliency features representing the degree of attention and
average position of the centre of interest in the video. The pre-
sented results were encouraging for further study and indicate
the existence of a relationship between visual attention and
brain activity. On the other hand, different datasets aiming to
estimate the attention state from biomedical signals have been
published. Cao et al. [13] and Zheng et al. [14] considered
recordings of EEG and eye-tracking signals to estimate the
attention state of a participant during speciﬁc tasks. Zheng et
al. [14] show that it is possible to estimate the attention state
from these joint recordings in many cases.
The lack of in-depth studies aiming to investigate the
relationship between EEG signals and visual saliency has
been a motivation for the creation of a framework aiming to
investigate the relationship between these two modalities.
C. Visual saliency estimation
Visual saliency estimation is a ﬁeld at cutting edge in
computer vision domain. There exist a lot of different models
aiming to estimate visual saliency from different modalities.
In most of the cases, the goal of these models is to estimate
the visual saliency region from images as reported in the
MIT/Tuebingen Saliency Benchmark [15] including all the
existing models. Among the existing works, a certain amount
of the proposed methods was based on the succession of an
encoding (composed of successions of convolution and max-
pooling layers) and decoding (resp. succession of convolution
layer and upsampling layers) networks as in the works of
Kroner et al. [16] and Pan et al. [2] being in the best results
among the SOTA works.
III. PROPOSED METHOD
The goal of our work is to combine the existing DL methods
to study the relationship between electrophysiological signals

Fig. 1. Overview of the proposed framework with the three models consid-
ered: 1) VAE for EEG signals; 2) VAE for saliency map; 3) GAN estimator.
and visual saliency map. The framework is divided into three
models:
• a variational autoencoder (VAE) aiming to represent the
saliency images in a shorter subspace called latent-space.
This VAE will have two roles: re-creating the saliency
images that represents the participant visual attention;
representing the images in a completed and continuous
latent-space [17].
• a VAE aiming to represent the EEG in the latent-space.
As for the previous model, the aim of EEG VAE is
also to minimize the error between the EEG and its
reconstruction and to create a continuous and completed
representation of the signals in the corresponding latent-
space.
• a GAN binding the EEG and map latent-space with
the help of the two VAEs already describe. Besides, a
discriminator is also used to classify the images from
synthetic (i.e. created by our model) vs. real (i.e. real
saliency maps created from eye-tracking recording).
Fig. 1 shows the framework pipeline separated in two steps:
the training of both VAEs and the training of the saliency
generator part. The choice of considering VAE instead of the
conventional deep autoencoder is motivated by the fact that
there is no one-to-one relationship between brain activity and
visual attention (by one-to-one relationship Stephani et al. [18]
mean that one and only one brain activity corresponds to one
and only one map representing attention). This phenomenon,
showing that different brain activation may correspond to a
single task (and vice-versa), has been studying by Stephani
et al. [18]. Moreover, this aspect is enhanced by the fact that
it is difﬁcult to extract information from electrophysiological
signals due to their trend to be prone to noise and artefacts.
The use of VAE instead of conventional AE enables to estimate
the distribution (characterised by mean and standard deviation)
of the latent space and to study the relationship between
their distribution instead of creating a one-to-one relationship
between latent vector.
We separated the proposed methods into four subsections
each of them being a speciﬁc step of our work: (1) Au-
toencoding Saliency Map; (2) Autoencoding EEG Signals; (3)
Translation Network mapping the latent-spaces distributions;
(4) Training Methodology.
A. Autoencoding saliency map
From raw eye-tracker recordings, it is possible to create
a visual saliency map representing the area of attention in an
image of one channel with values between 0 and 1 representing
the degree of visual attention on speciﬁc pixels and their
neighbours. It can also be considered as a probability for a
given pixel to be watched or not.
During the experimentation, eye-tracker has been jointly
recorded with EEG. First, the recordings have been separated
into trials corresponding to a speciﬁc time. Then, the discrete
eye-tracking measurements have been projected on 2D images
(one per trials). After, the eye-tracker accuracy has been taken
into account by considering circles of radius proportional
to the error rate despite discrete points. Finally, Gaussian
ﬁltering has been applied to the images with a kernel size
ratio corresponding to the eye-tracker ﬁeld of view. The images
generation have been inspired by Salvucci et al. [19].
Given the visual saliency images, a VAE has been trained to
represent them in a lower subspace. The considered network
architecture is based on the ResNet proposed by He et al.
[20]. We consider for the encoding part four stacks of ResNet
layer, each composed of three convolutional layers and batch
normalization, each stack except the last being separated
by a max-pooling operation. A similar approach has been
considered for the decoding part with upsampling layer instead
of a max-pooling operation, the padding has been adapted to
ensure that the output size match the input.
The goal of this network is double: (1) recreating an image
as faithful as possible to the original saliency map via a
representation in shorter latent space; (2) creating a continuous
and complete latent-space, and therefore not to favour one
dimension among others.
After some experimental tests, it has been constated that the
VAE tend to slightly overﬁt after a certain amount of epochs.
To reduce this issue and to build a more robust network, a data
augmentation policy has been considered. To keep the physical
behaviour behind visual saliency map, the data augmentation
process had to be well designed. For this reason, we have
considered for each training sample of each batch from the
training set a random horizontal ﬂip with a probability of 0.5
(the stimuli being equally disposed at the right and left part of
the screen as shown in Subsection IV-A) and a random vertical
and horizontal translation between -5 and +5 pixels. This
method helped to generate a wider range of visual saliency
map with a lower error rate between the initial image and its
reconstruction with a better representation of the latent space.
B. Autoencoding EEG signals
EEG can be considered as two-dimension time series,
the ﬁrst corresponding to time evolution and the second to
the considered electrodes. A similar approach than the one
proposed by [9] has been considered. This last consists of
the creation of images representing the features from EEG

Fig. 2. Overview of the architecture composed of the generator + discriminator model. As seen in the ﬁgure, the different key steps are represented from
left to the right: the creation of EEG-Images, encoding of EEG-Images, Distribution mapping to saliency map latent-space, decoding to estimate the saliency
map and discrimination between generated and ground truth saliency map.
according to their spatial location on the participant scalp. The
process to construct the images is the following:
• Separating the total recording in trials leading to an array
of dimension [ntrials × t × nelectrodes].
• For each trial, downsampling the signals after low-pass
ﬁltering to extract the general signal evolution and to
ignore the artefacts contribution. A preprocessing is at
the same time applied to remove the noise and remaining
artefacts.
• From the regular electrode position on the scalp, an
azimuthal projection is applied to represent their location
in a 2D frame.
• The samples composing the trials are taken separately.
These samples are projected in a 2D coordinate frame as
mentioned at the previous step and a bicubic interpolation
is applied to consider a continuous representation of
information. The process is repeated for all the samples
and each projection are concatenated to lead to an image
with a number of channels corresponding to the number
of temporal samples after the signal downsampling.
• The statistical distribution of the images set has also been
normalized around a mean of 0 and a standard deviation
of 1.
This maps representation of EEG allows keeping the spatial
(in the ﬁrst and second dimension) and temporal (between
channels) relationship between samples. For clarirty, the maps
generated from EEG are mentionned as EEG images in the
paper. Moreover, this methodology better suits for CNN than
the array representation of EEG. It enables the consideration
of squared shape kernels unlike the older models considering
unidimensional kernels for feature extraction from EEG [6].
In a similar way to the image VAE, the EEG images have
been passed through a VAE to reduce the EEG dimension and
to represent them in a continuous and completed subspace. For
this purpose, the VAE has been trained with the images-based
EEG.
A similar methodology, than for the saliency map, has been
considered to construct the most robust network as possible.
To that end, a random signal following a gaussian distribution
of zero mean and standard deviation = 0.25 has been added
to EEG images to increase the model stability and to have
a better understanding of the difference between noise and
EEG. In addition, some pixels composing the EEG images
have been supposed to remain equal to zero, these groups of
pixels corresponding to the region of the space where there
are no electrodes. A checking was set up to verify that those
regions of the images remained equal to zero.
C. Generator network mapping the latent-space distributions
From the representation of the saliency map and EEG
in their corresponding shorter subspace, the possibility of
mapping the two distributions has been investigated. For this
purpose, several approaches have been tested, however, for the
paper clarity, only the ones presenting the best results have
been presented.
As explained above, one of the most important barriers in
this paper was to create a model permitting the estimation
of a saliency map from EEG without considering a one-to-
one correspondence between modalities. To solve this issue, a
GAN approach has been considered with a generator aiming
to recreate the image latent representation from EEG latent
representation combined with a discriminator aiming to dis-
tinguish the images generated by the generator (composed of
the combination of the encoding and decoding part of the
VAEs presented in the previous subsection). Also, as it is
the case in several approaches [21], noise following a normal
centred distribution (i.e. mean = 0 and std = 1) has been
concatenated to the latent vector at the centre of the generator.
This concatenation aims to guide the generator for the saliency
map generation.

The overall architecture of the networks aiming to translate
EEG space into image space is represented in Fig. 2. As seen
in this ﬁgure, the generator consists of the concatenation of
the encoding part of EEG VAE and decoding part of Saliency
VAE through a generator composed of fully-connected (FC)
layers. Moreover, as mentioned above a discriminator has also
been placed at the end of the model.
D. Training methodology
As already mentioned, the generator model consists of the
concatenation of two parts of pre-trained models. The training
policy can be considered in several key steps:
The training separately of the two VAE. During this training,
the goal is to reduce a combination of a content loss, aiming
to reduce the reconstruction error, and a regularization loss,
promoting a continuous and completed distribution in the
latent subspaces. The considered content loss for Image VAE
is the binary cross-entropy, the values of the images being
included between 0 and 1. For the EEG VAE, a MSE loss has
been considered for the opposite reason (EEG images taking
values < 0 and > 1). The minimisation policy for the two
models can be formulated as for the heatmap:
Lh(θh) = Lcont + Lreg
= BCE(yt, yp) + 0.5 ∗KLD(µi, log(σi))
(1)
with θh the model parameters of the image VAE, yt the ground
truth saliency map, yp the reconstructed map, µi and σi being
the mean and variance of the estimated latent-space. For the
losses, BCE being the binary cross entropy loss and KLD the
Kullback-Leibler divergence [17]. And for the EEG:
Le(θe) = Lcont + Lreg
= MSE(yt, yp) + 0.5 ∗KLD(µi, log(σi))
(2)
with θh the model parameters of the image VAE, yt the
ground truth EEG, yp the reconstructed EEG, µi and σi
being the mean and variance of the estimated latent-space.
During the training of both VAE, a phase of sampling is
necessary to estimate the current latent projection from its
mean and standard deviation. For this purpose, we use the
reparameterization trick [17], this last considering a random
variable following a Gaussian distribution with mean = 0 and
standard deviation = 1, to solve the backpropagation issue that
the direct sampling cause.
The generator model has then been created by concatenating
the two parts of the VAE and linking them with FC layers.
Moreover, the discriminator has also been added after the
decoding part. After the architecture creation, all the weights
composing the decoder and encoder parts have been ﬁxed (i.e.
no gradient descent has been applied on those parameters).
An exception has been made for the last layers of the encoder
and the ﬁrst layers of the decoder (i.e. model parts directly
connected to the latent-space) to promote the networks ﬁne-
tuning.
During the training of the generator, three losses have been
considered: a content loss to assess the similarity between
the ground truth and the created maps; an adversarial loss
aiming to distinguish the generated vs. the ground truth; a reg-
ularization loss assessing that the latent-space representation
remains continuous and complete. The competition between
the generator and the discriminator helps for the generation
of maps being difﬁcult to differentiate with the ground truth.
The considered metrics for each of these losses were: the BCE
for the content loss and the adversarial loss and KLD for the
regularization loss. The minimisation paradigm to train the
generator can be formulated as:
L(θ) = Lcont + Lreg + Ladv
= BCE(yt, yp) + 0.5 ∗KLD(µi, log(σi))+
BCE(D(yt), 1) + BCE(D(yp), 1)
(3)
with θh the model parameters, yt the ground truth saliency
map, yp the reconstructed map, µi and σi being the mean
and variance of the estimated latent-spaces and D() being the
output of the discriminator.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we ﬁrst present the considered methodology
for the joint acquisition of EEG and eye-tracking signals.
Then, the implementation details of the models will be de-
scribed and ﬁnally, the proposed metrics for our approach
evaluation will be presented in the last subsection.
A. Dataset acquisition
The signals considered in this paper have been acquired on
32 healthy participants during 15 minutes long session, each
participant has made only one session. The signal acquisition
protocol consists of a short video game in virtual reality (VR)
where it is asked to the participant to direct his gaze on stimuli
corresponding to object appearing in a random position of the
ﬁeld of view.
During the proceeding of the tasks, the eye position and
EEG has been synchronously registered. EEG has been
recorded with a 32 electrodes biomedical headset (actiCHamp
from BrainVision) following the 10/20 electrodes disposition
[22]. On another hand, the eye tracker has been registered
with the dedicated device placed into the VR headset (HTC
Vive Pro Eye with an integrated eye-tracker). After the reg-
istration, trials have been extracted from the total recording
by segmenting both signals around the stimuli apparition: we
consider for both physiological signals the beginning of the
segment one second before and the end three seconds after
the stimuli appearance.
This dataset has been record in the context of research
project aiming to investigate the relationship between attention
and brain activity. For this purpose, a pipeline aiming to record
physiological signals in VR has been designed. To promote
results reproducibility and research in this domain, the signals
acquired has been made publicly available.
B. Implementation details
Given the raw EEG considered as an array of dimension
[ntrials ×nchannels ×nsamples] with ntrials = 4000 being the
total number of trials for all the sessions, nchannels = 32

Generator
Network Part
Layer
Int/Out Channels
EEG Encoder
Conv2D-3
401/256
Conv2D-3
256/256
Conv2D-3
256/256
Conv2D-3
256/256
Maxpool-2
256/256
Conv2D-3
256/512
Conv2D-3
512/512
Conv2D-3
512/512
Maxpool-2
512/512
Conv2D-3
512/512
Conv2D-3
512/512
Flattening Layer
Linear
512/256
Linear
256/64
Distrib. FC
Linear
64/64
Sampling Layer
Noise Cat
64/128
Linear
128/256
Linear
256/64
Saliency Decoder
Linear
64/512
UnFlattening Layer
Upsampling-2
512/512
Conv2D-3
512/512
Conv2D-3
512/512
Conv2D-3
512/512
Upsampling-3
512/512
Conv2D-3
512/256
Conv2D-3
256/256
Conv2D-3
256/256
Upsampling-3
256/256
Conv2D-3
256/128
Conv2D-3
128/128
Conv2D-3
128/128
Upsampling-3
128/128
Conv2D-3
128/64
Conv2D-3
64/64
Conv2D-3
64/64
Upsampling-2
64/64
Conv2D-3
64/4
Conv2D-3
4/4
Conv2D-3
4/1
TABLE I
ARCHITECTURE OF THE GENERATOR NETWORK.
being the total number of electrodes of the EEG cap and
nsample = tlength × fsampling = 4 ∗500 = 2000 being
the total number of samples composing the EEG signal. The
signals have been down-sampled with a ratio = 5, and passed
through a low-pass ﬁlter with cut-off frequency = 35Hz. Then
EEG-images have been created from the preprocessed signals
with the methodology explained in section III-B, the result
dimension being [ntrials × ndown × h × w] with ndown = 401
being the amount of samples after down-sampling and h = 32
and w = 32 being the height and width of the corresponding
created image.
Moreover, the saliency map built from the eye-tracking
recording can be considered as an image of one channel with
a height = 45 and width = 81, the ratio between width and
height being deduced from the VR headset resolution should
be equal to 1.8. One visual saliency map has been created for
each trial with a corresponding EEG-Image. Moreover, the
CNN being used to consider squared image, empty borders
have been added at the top and the bottom of the visual
Discriminator
Layer
Int/Out Channels
Conv2D-3
1/3
Conv2D-3
3/32
Conv2D-3
32/32
Conv2D-3
32/32
Maxpool-2
32/32
Conv2D-3
32/64
Conv2D-3
64/64
Conv2D-3
64/64
Maxpool-2
64/64
Conv2D-3
64/128
Conv2D-3
128/128
Conv2D-3
128/128
Maxpool-2
128/128
Conv2D-3
128/256
Conv2D-3
256/256
Conv2D-3
256/256
Flattening Layer
Linear
256/64
Linear
64/1
TABLE II
ARCHITECTURE OF THE DISCRIMINATOR NETWORK.
saliency map.
As explained earlier, the ﬁnal framework is divided into
two models: the generator and the discriminator. As in many
other projects considering GAN, the training policy consist
of competition between these two models. The aim of the
discriminator being to distinguish the generated visual map
among the ground truth and simultaneously to bias the dis-
criminator by generating saliency map as close as possible
to reality. The proposed architecture of the generator and
discriminator is described in Table I and II.
Adam optimizers have been used to train the three models.
A learning rate = 10−5 with momentum = 0 have been
considered to train both VAEs. For the GAN approach we
consider two optimizers one for each part, a learning rate
= 10−7 with a momentum = 10−5 for the generator and
a learning rate = 10−5 with a momentum = 10−8 for the
discriminator. The choice of a very low learning rate for the
generator part has been motivated by the fact that the major
part of the network was already trained and that we tried to not
modify the model ability to extract feature from each modality
(i.e. visual saliency heatmap and EEG images). The saliency
VAE has been trained on 2000 epochs and the EEG VAE on
3000 epochs. The merged model has been trained on 1500
epochs, however, the training was manually stopped if the
convergence point was achieved. All the weights, codes and
signals are freely available on https://bit.ly/3pznZHm.
All the models have been implemented with Pytorch library
and were trained on one 24 GB Nvidia Titan RTX GPU. We
consider a 5-fold cross-validation protocol evaluation on our
dataset.
C. Metrics and evaluation
Noting that the framework training is converging is one
thing but evaluating the model’s accuracy is another. After
steps of hyper-parameters ﬁne-tuning, it has been noted that
the networks were making correct estimation either for training

Modality
Approach
AUC
NSS
CC
EEG
Our method (1)
0.697
1.9869
0.383
Our method (2)
0.574
1.6891
0.251
Images
UNISAL [1]
0.877
2.3689
0.7851
SalGAN [2]
0.8498
1.8620
0.6740
SSR [26]
0.7064
0.9116
0.2999
TABLE III
COMPARISON OF OUR APPROACH RESULTS WITH THE STATE OF THE ART
WORKS FOR SALIENCY MAP ESTIMATION. IN THE UPPER PART OF THE
TABLE OUR APPROACH WITH OUR DATASET IS PRESENTED AND IN THE
LOWER PART DIFFERENT MODELS RESULTS ON MIT300 DATASET [27]
ARE SHOWN. WE PRESENTED IN THIS TABLE THE RESULTS OF TWO
APPROACHES: (1) THE GLOBAL MODEL COMPOSED OF GENERATOR AND
DISCRIMINATOR, (2) MODEL COMPOSED ONLY BY THE GENERATOR.
and testing sets. However, other metrics are required to have
a fair comparison with existing methodology. As explained
in the section II, there are no works that use the considered
modality, i.e. physiological measurement measurements, to
estimate visual saliency map. For this reason, it was difﬁcult to
have a direct comparison with a well-made benchmark listing
all the existing works in the state-of-the-art methods. However,
estimating visual saliency map from images has been a major
ﬁeld of research over the last decade. Various metrics have also
been deﬁned to allow a fair comparison between the proposed
models. Among, the metrics available in the MIT/Tuebingen
Saliency Benchmark the following have been considered:
• The AUC representing the area under the ROC curve.
In the case of visual saliency estimation, the AUC has
been adapted to suit with the problematic by considering
a changing threshold for class estimation from a value
between 0 and 1 (corresponding to saliency value). This
adapted AUC is sometimes also called AUC-Judd [23].
• The Normalized Scanpath Saliency (NSS) is a straight-
forward method to evaluate the model’s ability to predict
the visual attention map. It consists of the measurement
of the distance between the normalized around 0 ground-
truth saliency map and the model estimation [24].
• The binary cross-entropy (BCE) computing the distance
between the prediction and the ground truth value in
binary classiﬁcation. Our problematic may be considered
as a binary classiﬁcation if we consider each pixel as a
probability of being watched or not, this for this reason
that we have also considered this metric.
• The Pearson’s Correlation Coefﬁcient (CC) is a linear
correlation coefﬁcient measuring the correlation between
the ground truth and model estimation distributions [25].
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The proposed approach aiming to estimate visual attention
from EEG has been assessed considering a quantitative and
qualitative evaluation. Moreover, the effect of the discriminator
has been investigated by considering the metrics with and
without this model part.
A. Quantitative analysis
The results for the saliency map estimation is presented in
Table III. As seen in this table, the different metrics presented
in the previous section have been listed. However, the BCE is
not mentioned in this table because it has been used to control
the training, e.g. overﬁtting, training stuck in local minima, etc.
As also seen in Table III, our model presents encourag-
ing results nevertheless it is not beating the state-of-the-art
methods for visual saliency estimation from images. First, it
is important to note that the considered modality is different
from the one considered in this paper. Indeed, one of the main
goals of this paper was to prove the existence of a relationship
between electrophysiological signals and eye-tracking signals.
Our results showing the generation of plausible heatmaps in
several cases demonstrate this relationship. Moreover, it is
interesting to note that our approach based on EEG presents
similar results than older models estimating images, that may
lead to better results in further works and/or with other signals.
B. Effect of the adversarial training
In this subsection, an analysis of the improvements that the
discriminator could bring will be made. For this purpose, two
methodologies have been considered one with and one without
taking into account the discriminator as it has already been
considered in other studies [2].
As mentioned earlier, the goal of the discriminator is
indirectly to force the generator to create images as similar
as possible to the visual saliency map generated with eye-
tracking signals. This phase is achieved through a competitive
training process between the generator and the discriminator.
In the Table III, we note that the adversarial model, i.e.
with the discriminator, present better results for the three
metrics compared to the approach composed only from the
generator. It seems that in addition to promote the generation
of faithful maps, the adversarial could also help to make a
better estimation.
Fig. 3. Example of ground truth and estimated saliency map for the model
trained with our dataset with and without considering the adversarial training.

C. Qualitative analysis
In parallel with the considered metrics considered for model
evaluation, qualitative analysis can be made by visually com-
paring the saliency map estimated by the model and the ground
truth heatmap as seen in Fig. 3.
In addition to the improvements noticed in the metrics, a
qualitative improvement for the generated images has also
been observed with the adversarial training as shown in
Fig. 3. The presence of discriminator helps the model to
predict smoother saliency map and more real as shown in the
second line of the Fig. 3. In addition to this improvement,
this methodology seems also to help for detection of pattern
locations as seen in the ﬁrst line of the ﬁgure where the
location of the centre of attention is closer from reality with
the adversarial training compared to the other.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented a novel approach of visual atten-
tion estimation from electrophysiological recordings through
their latent representation. To estimate the visual saliency
map from EEG signals, we use a feature extraction in lower
subspace and a representation under so-called EGG-images to
feed a deep variational autoencoder model. The performance
of our method has been evaluated on novel dataset acquired
for physiological analysis purpose in VR from 32 participants
during 15 minutes long session and, has been made publicly
available. With the help of the proposed framework, the rela-
tionship between neurophysiological signal and eye-tracking
has been proven. Further works will investigate the possible
improvements that novel ML algorithms could bring.
In addition to demonstrating this relationship, this model
could help for different applications in the ﬁeld of attention
and vigilance estimation, and could also be helpful for other
estimation from EEG, e.g. emotion, motor imagery, etc.
