PROCEEDINGS, CI2012 
 
 
 
PATTERNS OF SOCIAL INFLUENCE  
IN A NETWORK OF SITUATED COGNITIVE AGENTS 
 
Russell C. Thomas and John S. Gero 
 
Krasnow Institute for Advanced Study 
George Mason University 
4400 University Drive, Mail Stop 2A1 
Fairfax, VA, 22030, USA 

 
ABSTRACT 
This paper presents the results of computational 
experiments on the effects of social influence on 
individual and systemic behavior of situated 
cognitive agents in a product-consumer environment. 
Paired experiments were performed with identical 
initial conditions to compare social agents with non-
social agents. Experiment results show that social 
agents are more productive in consuming available 
products, 
both 
in 
terms 
of 
aggregate 
unit 
consumption and aggregate utility. But this comes at 
a cost of individual average utility per unit consumed. 
In 
effect, 
social 
interaction 
achieved 
higher 
productivity by ‘lowering the standards’ of individual 
consumers. While still at an early stage of 
development, such an agent-based model laboratory 
is shown to be an effective research tool to 
investigate rich collective behavior in the context of 
demanding cognitive tasks. 
INTRODUCTION 
This paper investigates phenomenological patterns of 
collective behavior due to social influence among 
agents where agent value systems change in response 
to their experience with artifacts and their social 
interactions with other agents. This is the first phase 
of a larger research project to investigate innovation 
processes and policies across complex ecosystems of 
researchers, innovators, funding organizations, and 
consumers. 
 
In general, systems of innovation can exhibit stability 
without convergence. They are capable of stable 
averages in aggregate activity but without stasis at a 
micro-level. By definition, systems of innovation 
produce a stream of new product types. Agents in the 
system must react and adapt to this stream of novelty, 
and in some sense master it. 
 
The attention is on heuristic search processes when 
there is no clear global maximum in the landscape 
and there is no agent-accessible metric for collective 
utility, and where collective behavior is emergent. To 
emphasize the role of social interactions, agents are 
not endowed with spatial reasoning or spatial 
memory, nor are signaling or overt coordination 
capabilities provided. Search and learning is also 
hampered by local competition between consumers 
and also by a bias toward consuming to avoid 
frustration. These influences tend to cause agents to 
move away from local maxima even if they have 
found them. All together, it can be characterized as a 
‘frustrating search problem’ for agents in that they 
might never be able to master the problem from an 
observer viewpoint. 
 
In this paper, the theoretical lens on collective 
intelligence is situated cognition (Clancey 1997). 
Any cognitive system operates within its own 
worldview 
and 
that 
worldview 
affects 
its 
understanding of its interactions with its environment 
(Clancey 1997; Gero 2008). In essence, what you 
think the world is about affects what it is about for 
you.  
 
A person or group of people is ‘situated’ because 
they have a worldview that is based on their 
experience. Situated cognition involves three ideas: 
situations, constructive memory and interaction. 
Situations are mental constructs that structure and 
hence give meaning to what is observed and 
perceived based on a worldview. Constructive 
memory makes memory a function of the situation 
and the past. Memory is not laid down and fixed at 
the time of the original sensate experience. What is 
remembered is constantly being recreated and 
reframed. 
Interactions 
between 
agents 
trigger 
changes in situations and memories.  

Through the lens of situated cognition, collective 
intelligence is an emergent phenomenon that arises 
from the interplay of situations, constructive 
memory, and social interactions at the level of agents 
and networks of agents. Moreover, we believe that 
situated cognition is at the heart of social processes of 
creativity and inventiveness. This is why it is so 
important in the study of innovation (Gero 2011). 
 
To facilitate this line of research, a computational 
laboratory using agent-based modeling with rich 
agents and rich artifacts is being built. The 
phenomena of interest arise through the dynamic 
social interactions between agents, and between 
agents and artifacts, far from equilibrium. Therefore, 
it is important that the system includes endogenous 
processes for learning (direct and indirect), social 
interactions and network formation, and be capable 
of rich emergent phenomena.  
ARCHITECTURE AND IMPLEMENTATION 
Functional Overview 
There is one type of active agent in the current 
implementation of the system –Consumers – and one 
type of artifact – Products. Consumers are seeking to 
consume Products on a geographic Consumption 
Space with micro-behavior similar to foraging, but 
with social interactions. The Consumption Space is a 
bounded rectangular grid with von Neumann 
neighborhoods. In each clock cycle consumers can 
move to any neighboring point on the grid within the 
boundaries. Only one Consumer can occupy a given 
grid location at a given time. Figure 1 shows a 
visualization of Consumers and Products in the 
Consumption Space. 
 
 
Figure 1: Consumers and Products in Consumption 
Space (magnified).  
 
Decoding Figure 1: Products are red squares. Around 
each Product is a proximity gradient, which is a red-
shaded area. This is an artifice to aide Consumer 
navigation. Consumers are shown as disks, color-
coded according to their current consumption 
expectation: pink = optimistic; blue = pessimistic; 
grey = neutral; green = navigating toward another 
Consumer and not engaged in foraging. Consumers 
engaged in consumption are shown as circles around 
the Product they are consuming. Social ties are 
shown as an overlay network of translucent white 
lines, where the thickness of the line is proportional 
to the strength of the tie. In the upper right, the 
translucent disk over a Consumer indicates that the 
internal state of this Consumer is being monitored for 
diagnostic purposes. 
 
Products have both a surface characteristics and 
functional characteristics. During their search and 
evaluation process, Consumers can only sense and 
perceive a Product’s surface characteristics (its 
“signature”). The functional characteristics are only 
experienced through the process of consumption. 
During consumption, Consumers gain utility based 
on 
the 
functional 
characteristics 
relative 
to 
expectations. Higher than expected evaluations of 
functional characteristics yield positive utility, while 
lower than expected evaluations of functional 
characteristics yield negative utility. The surface 
characteristics of Products are related to their 
functional 
characteristics, 
but 
not 
identical. 
Consumers cannot directly perceive the value of 
products, though they can form expectations from 
past interactions.  
 
The space of possible Product signatures, along with 
the utility of each Product, is called the Value Space. 
The value system for each Consumer centers on a 
single vector that represents the signature of its ideal 
product type. Consumers learn and adapt by adjusting 
this vector through experience and social interaction. 
Therefore, each Consumer’s value system can be 
represented as a point in Value Space, and their 
changing values as paths through Value Space. All 
consumers have the same utility function that doesn’t 
change during a run. 
 
Consumers choose to consume based on their 
perception of a Product’s signature, perception of its 
proximity to their ideal type, and a rough expectation 
of utility. Generally, Consumers choose to consume 
when the Product they encounter is close to their 
ideal type. 
 
In summary, at the task level the Consumer’s 
problem is to find relatively more desirable Products 
to consume by searching the Consumption Space and 
adjusting their ideal product type. If they become 
dissatisfied during this process or if they are not able 
to find products to consume, they interact socially to 
either modify their value system or to move toward 
another agent in the Consumption Space.  

 
Figure 2 Agent architecture 
 
 
At a social level, Consumers create and maintain 
social relationships through physical contact in the 
Consumption Space or through social interactions at 
a distance. However, if a Consumer is close to losing 
social connections, that Consumer interacts socially 
to build new connections through a referral process 
(‘friends of friends’). 
Architecture Overview 
Consumers 
Figure 2 shows a block diagram of the agent 
architecture. Compared to other agent architectures in 
the social network influence literature (Friedkin and 
Johnsen 2011), this agent architecture is rich, in that 
includes both symbolic and sub-symbolic reasoning. 
This was necessary to implement situated cognition, 
which was one the primary research goals. For 
brevity only perception, conception, situation, and 
social interaction functions are described in the 
following paragraphs. 
 
Perception is the collection of functions that enable 
the agent to focus and organize their sensations 
according 
to 
their 
current 
situation, 
their 
expectations, and past experiences. Consumers 
perceive Product signatures using a Self-organizing 
Map (SOM, also known as Kohonen Network). 
SOMs are a type of neural network that are trained 
via unsupervised learning. Essentially they perform a 
mapping from the sensed Product Signature to a 
condensed 2D internal representation of the Products. 
This is functionally equivalent to conceptual spaces, 
as described in Gardenfors (2000). Perception is 
updated every clock cycle, but is only processed 
when new sensations arrive. 
 
Perception of other agents is performed through a 
categorization and comparison procedure, where 
agents with direct social connections are labeled 
‘most similar’, ‘most dissimilar’, ‘most admired’, 
‘least admired’, etc.  
 
Conception is the highest level of reasoning, 
including both tacit and explicit capabilities. Tacit 
conceptual reasoning is focused on deciding whether 
a given product should be considered attractive or 
not. This is implemented using a SOM that 
essentially creates a one-dimensional map of 
products that it has experienced and the value and/or 
utility that is perceived or realized from those 
products. A threshold value is used to trigger a 
decision that the product being inspected is attractive. 
The threshold value is adjusted through experience 
during the course of a run. 
 
!"#$%&
!"#$%&'#(
1. SeeSignature 
2. SeeAgent 
3. […] 
{s1, s2, s3, s4, s5, s6}  
)"*+",&'#(
-'#+",&'#(
.%/0%&'#(
12"+&'#(
3+&'#(
1. Look 
2. Move 
3. Grab 
4. Drop 
'$()*+$,#$%&
32"+4(
1. Seek 
2. Investigate 
3.  Get 
4.  Bypass 
5. […] 
1. Excited/
Bored 
2. Satisfied/
Unsatisfied 
6 X 2  
Self-organizing Map 
1. Attractiveness 
2. Above Threshold 
{v1, v2}  
!*-./0%&
!540%&'#(
{v1, v2}  
8 X 1 Self-organizing Map 
P1 
C1 
CV = values production rules 
CA = action production rules 
CS = social production rules 
CG = goals production rules 
S = situation production rules(
6&/547(
1. Positive 
2. Negative 
P2 = social  
perceptions 
(categories) 
Above/below 
attractiveness 
threshold 

Conception also includes explicit reasoning about 
actions, social interactions and goals. These are 
implemented symbolically as production rules. 
Situation has the function of cognitive orientation and 
focus. We implemented it using production rules that 
test for conditions that would change a Consumer’s 
situation, and then fire actions to change their 
concepts according. Overlapping situations can be 
active at the same time. Situations act as conditions 
on other conception rules so that each conception rule 
fires only when one of its applicable situations is 
active. Situation also activates other reasoning 
functions, as appropriate.  
 
We implemented the following generic situations: 
 
1. Consume-locally  
Local foraging 
2. Interact-socially 
Interact with social 
neighbors.  
3. Bored 
Decide what to change to 
end boredom 
4. Dissatisfied 
Stop current actions, 
reverse expectations, and 
decide what to do instead 
5. Change-location 
Use available 
information to pick a 
target destination 
6. Change-values 
Make incremental 
changes in value system 
and selection criteria 
7. Search-for-a-
friend 
No social network, so 
find a friend 
 
Social interactions are implemented using production 
rules. Generally, social interaction only occurs when 
the Consumer is both not in the act of consumption 
and is also frustrated by its consumption experiences.   
The exception to this occurs when a Consumer’s 
social ties have been reduced to two or fewer and 
their strength has fallen below a threshold value. 
Here, conception rules fire that cause the agent to 
create 
new 
social 
ties. 
This 
is 
necessary 
experimentally in order to sustain social networks 
and avoid disconnections. This was essential to 
maintain the distinction between “social” and “non-
social” runs in the paired experiment design. 
 
The targets of social actions and influences 
interactions are always defined by the perceptual 
categories mentioned earlier. In these experiments, 
Consumers are only influenced by one neighbor at a 
time. They do not poll their local social network or 
perform any reasoning based on the range of values 
of other agents.  
 
The utility function for all agents is the same and is 
fixed. It is a logistic function of the number of edges 
in the Product structure (see below) relative to an 
expected value of 8. Edge counts above 8 yield 
positive utility while counts below yield negative 
utility. 
 
The valuation function is also fixed and identical. It 
is the Euclidean distance between the Consumer’s 
ideal product and the Product signature (6-element 
real valued vectors). 
Products 
Products are constructed as a graph with six vertices. 
During the construction process, edges between the 
vertices are formed at random, creating a single 
connected graph with between 5 and 15 edges. The 
Product’s utility is a function of its topology, while 
its signature (external appearance) is a metric of its 
physical layout. Physical layout is constructed on a 
circle with a relaxation method to equalize the length 
of edges. Distance from the centroid of this layout 
produces a signature in the form of a 6-element 
vector. 
 
This construction process produces a non-obvious 
relationship between the surface characteristics and 
the functional characteristics of Products. Products 
that are very close in surface characteristics (i.e. close 
in Value Space) may have very different utilities. 
This allows for rugged search landscapes, though any 
particular realization of 10 product types may or may 
not be rugged. When we generated a sample of 2000 
product types, the resulting landscape was extremely 
rugged with no global maximum. 
Design Choices 
The following is an explanation of the most salient 
design choices we have made and their effect on 
system behavior and experiment results. 
 
In contrast to other social influence networks 
research (e.g. Friedkin & Johnsen 1999), the 
Consumers are situated in two environments: the task 
environment 
of 
consumption 
and 
the 
social 
environment of agent-to-agent interaction. Thus, the 
social network is endogenous and dynamic and has a 
contextual influence over agent behavior in the task 
environment and their behavior on tasks influences 
their social world. This is a cornerstone in theory of 
situated cognition and, therefore, was a necessary 
choice given the objectives. 
 
The agents are cognitive and adaptive rather than 
rational or even bounded rational. Specifically, the 
agents were not endowed with explicit preference 
ordering or utility maximization processes or 
capabilities. We believe the cognitive-adaptive model 
is more appropriate for innovation studies. 

Deterministic rules for reasoning and acting are used 
whenever possible, especially for activities related to 
Product evaluation and consumption, and also related 
to 
social 
influence 
processes. 
This 
is 
in 
contradistinction with research approaches that use 
probabilistic rules for action decisions and influences. 
This has experimental benefits. The system is already 
endowed with several sources of randomness and 
mixing 
through 
agent 
interactions. 
Adding 
randomness into the agent architecture would have 
made it difficult to determine experimentally the 
cause-effect relationships. The system would have 
become essentially a large stochastic processes 
dominated by the Central Limit Theorem, producing 
statistically homogenous output. 
 
Because the focus is on social influence involving 
value systems, Consumers have rather simple and 
reflexive 
capabilities 
for 
navigating 
in 
the 
Consumption Space. In contrast to insect or animal 
foraging models, the agents do not leave pheromone 
trails and don’t use energy in the consumption 
process. We endowed the Consumption space with a 
proximity gradient for Products, so that moving 
toward or away from Products could be reduced to 
gradient 
ascent/decent. 
These 
choices 
are 
parsimonious because Consumer search in the space 
still resembles foraging, which was the intent. The 
main effect of this choice is that we need to control 
for density in the Consumption space so that it is 
neither too sparse nor too crowded. 
 
EXPERIMENT DESIGN AND METHODS 
To evaluate the effect of social capabilities we ran a 
series of randomized paired simulations – social 
agents vs. non-social agents – and then used 
statistical methods to test hypotheses related to the 
differences in patterns of behavior. This experimental 
method is well suited to the objective of identifying 
significant and theoretically important differences for 
the system under test, given the particular nature of 
the agent architecture and the design choices 
described above. Readers should be cautious about 
assuming that the results apply generally to any 
social network of situated cognitive agents. Context 
matters. 
Initial conditions 
The Consumption Space grid measured 165 X 165, 
and it was populated with 40 Consumers and 50 
Products of 10 types with random uniform spatial 
distribution. All Consumers started with identical 
initial conditions except for their location in 
Consumption Space. Their ideal product signature 
was set to be the average of all product types. To 
initialize the SOMs for perception and conception, 
Consumers were primed by exposing them to each of 
the product types, allowing all of the reasoning 
functions to be performed on each product, followed 
by a learning step in between each evaluation. The 
social network between Consumers was initialized as 
a fully connected small world network, randomly 
generated using the Watts-Strogatz method. 
 
For Products, we generate 10 types with a random 
construction technique, and retained types that were 
at least a minimum distance in their signatures. This 
minimum distance allowed us to maintain sufficient 
product variety and distribution in Value Space. In 
contrast, when we generated products using random 
construction rules with no constraints, the resulting 
distribution in Value Space tended to be clustered in 
one to three regions. While this isn’t a difficultly in 
general, it did make agent cluster analysis difficult. 
By requiring minimum distances in Value Space for 
each product, we could be sure that the distribution of 
product types would allow Consumer clustering but 
not dictate it. 
 
Each Product type was replicated five times to yield 
50 Products. Even though Products are consumed 
during a run, the population of Products and types is 
static. This is accomplished by replacing the 
consumed Product in a new location at a random 
distance from its previous location, with Gaussian 
distribution. 
 
Prior to running these experiments, we ran several 
tests over a range of parameters (number of 
Consumers, 
number 
of 
Products, 
size 
of 
Consumption Space, etc.). We found that the results 
described below were not sensitive to the number of 
Consumers or Products above 15 of each. However, 
the results were sensitive to the density of Consumers 
and Products in Consumption Space. Therefore, we 
chose parameter ratios that resulted in a targeted 
spatial density. 
Experiment design 
The experiment consisted of 30 paired runs (social 
vs. non-social) of 10,000 clock cycles each. Pairs in a 
run were given the same random number generator 
seed, which created identical initial conditions for the 
pair, and also statistical independence between runs. 
Agent behavior and consumption results were 
tabulated every 20 clock cycles. For each period, we 
collected data on consumption and changes in 
Consumer value. We did not analyze Consumer paths 
through Consumption Space or the dynamics of the 
social network. 
 

Test statistics were generally mean value for 
population aggregates or mean value for individuals 
in the population for a given metric. 
Statistical methods 
To evaluate transients and trends in the time series, 
we performed linear regression and examined the 
slope parameter. Histograms and Q-Q plots were 
used to evaluate sample distributions, particularly to 
identify modes and deviations from Normality. 
 
Hypothesis testing was done using the Paired T Test 
when sample distributions appeared Normal and 
Signed Rank Test when sample distributions did not 
appear Normal. In most cases we performed both 
tests. 
 
To quantify the difficulty of the heuristic search 
problem, we used the Fitness Difficulty Correlation 
(FDC) from Jones & Forrest (1995). This metric is 
defined as follows.   
 
Given a set U =
u1,u2 ...,un
{
}  of n individual 
utilities and a corresponding set D =
d1,d2 ,...,dn
{
}
distances to the nearest local or global maximum, the 
correlation coefficient is 
r =
cUD
sU sD
 
where 
cUD = 1
n
fi −f
(
)
i=1
n
∑
di −d
(
)  
is the covariance of U and D, and sU ,sD, f , d are 
the standard deviations and means of U and D, 
respectively. The ideal landscape to search is one 
where utility is perfectly correlated to the inverse of 
distance, which is -1. This would be true for locally 
smooth landscapes. A very rough landscape would 
have FDC of zero. 
RESULTS 
Level of Difficulty 
The following table summarizes the statistics for the 
difficulty of the heuristic search problem in the 30 
experimental runs, using the Fitness Distance 
Correlation metric described above. 
 
FDC mean = -0.23 
FDC standard deviation = 0.08 
 
Because FDC is closer to 0 than -1, the results show 
that the level of difficulty was relatively high and that 
it was similar in all runs. The distribution of 
difficulty values appears to be Normal. 
Aggregate Consumption 
We performed time series analysis of aggregate unit 
consumption for over individual runs for both social 
and non-social agents. The steady state trend is 
essentially flat, which we confirmed with linear 
regression, and the distribution of values is 
approximately Normal. In some runs there was a 
noticeable transient period of roughly 1,000 to 1,500 
clock cycles. Since the experimental runs were 
10,000, this transient did not affect the results 
described below. 
 
Aggregate unit consumption was significantly higher 
for social agents than non-social agents. Figure 3 
shows the smoothed kernel density estimate of the 
distribution of over 30 runs. Both the Paired T Test 
and Signed Rank Test reject the null hypothesis of no 
difference at the 0.1% significance level. 
 
 
Figure 3 Aggregate unit consumption means (kernel 
density estimate of pdf) 
 
The same relationship held for aggregate utility, also 
statistically significant at 0.1% level using the same 
tests. However, the higher level of aggregate utility 
for social agents was due to the higher rate of unit 
consumption. Average utility per unit consumed was 
lower for social agents compared to non-social 
agents. 
Behavior in Value Space 
Another class of time series data is the movement of 
Consumer ideal product signatures (i.e. their 
“values”) in Value Space. While all Consumers’ 
values start at the same location in Value Space, we 
did not observe any cases of single point convergence 
as a steady state, either to global or local maxima in 
the Value Space, or to any other point. We did 
observe temporary clustering at or near the location 
of Products in Value Space, but neither social nor 
non-social Consumers showed any tendency toward 
long-term stability in clustering. 
 
5
10
15
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
!"#$%"&'()*
+"&'()*

There was a statistically significant difference in the 
Value Space area covered by individuals during a 
run. Figure 4 shows the paired differences between 
social 
and 
non-social 
Consumers, 
where 
the 
difference is between mean areas covered by 
individuals in the population. Paired T Test and 
Signed Rank Test both reject the null hypothesis that 
there is no difference in means at the 1% significance 
level. 
 
However, the histogram of paired differences is tri-
modal. Investigation of individual runs indicates that 
this distribution structure is informative and not just 
due to random variation. For an analysis of this and 
possible implications, see the “Discussion” section, 
below. 
 
We also examined path length in Value Space for 
individual agents. Figure 5 shows the smoothed 
kernel density estimate of means. Social Consumers 
had longer paths in Value Space than non-social 
Consumers. Paired T Test and Signed Rank Test both 
reject the null hypothesis that there is no difference at 
0.1% significance level.  
 
a) Paired differences of means (histogram) 
 
 
b) Means 
 
Figure 4 Spatial coverage area in Value Space, 
population means (kernel density estimate 
of histogram) 
 
 
Figure 5 Value Space coverage area means (kernel 
density estimate of histogram) 
 
Combining these two results, the data shows that 
social Consumers adjust their values more than non-
social Consumers and that they adjust them over a 
wider range of values. 
DISCUSSION 
The 
experiment 
results 
confirm 
that 
social 
interactions influence agent value systems in a way 
that 
changes 
their 
individual 
and 
collective 
performance in a frustrating task environment. 
Higher aggregate consumption for social agents is a 
result of moving individual values (ideal product 
signatures) away from favorable positions in Value 
Space. In essence, the social influence ‘lowered the 
standards’ of individuals that then allowed them to 
make more frequent consumption choices. Thus, 
aggregate consumption in units and utility was 
increased at the expense of average utility for 
individual Consumers.  
 
The lack of clustering and lack of selectivity in 
Product consumption choices was surprising. But this 
goes to show that emergent phenomena cannot be 
always 
anticipated 
based 
on 
micro-level 
specifications. This is one of the virtues of 
computational models of social phenomena, and of 
rich agent-based models in particular. Neither social 
nor non-social Consumers were able to collectively 
optimize or converge on local or global maxima in 
Value Space. This result is a consequence of the 
design choices regarding the difficulty of heuristic 
search and also limitations on agent capabilities. 
 
Trendless steady-state aggregate consumption rates 
were achieved in both cases, with approximately 
Normal distribution. Consistent with the design 
goals, Consumers did not reach any static equilibrium 
in terms of 1) values (i.e. their ideal product 
signature), 2) consumption pattern by Product type, 
or 3) social network structure. This indicates that in 
both cases the system was both stable and also far 
from equilibrium. This is important for the future 
research because we are interested in the emergence 
￿0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
1
2
3
4
5
6
￿0.1
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
2
4
6
8
10
!"#$%"&'()*
+"&'()*
50
100
150
0.01
0.02
0.03
!"#$%"&'()*
+"&'()*
2 
6 
4 
8 
10 

of equilibria or stable patterns that result from agent-
agent interactions across agent types, and also agent-
artifact interactions across different levels. 
 
We believe the tri-modal histogram of Value Space 
coverage in Figure 4a merits further investigation. It 
appears that there are underlying relationships 
between the distribution of Products in Value Space 
and the behavior of social Consumers, specifically 
related to the formation of stable subgroups that 
specialize. This is an important result because it 
shows the potential for interesting and informative 
emergent phenomena in this type of computational 
system. 
 
In summary, the experiment results support the 
assertion that social agents endowed with situated 
cognition have meaningful influence over the values 
of other agents and demonstrate forms of collective 
intelligence. 
FUTURE WORK 
The future work will expand the functionality of the 
computational 
laboratory 
for 
the 
purpose 
of 
investigating innovation processes and policies in a 
complex multi-agent and multi-artifact ecosystem. 
The setting will be expanded to include dynamic 
population of Product types, both as exogenous shock 
of innovation and also endogenous production and 
invention processes by a new class of agents: 
Innovators. The functionality of Products will be 
enlarged so that they become capable of carrying and 
processing information, specifically to support 
endogenous modeling of research artifacts (i.e. 
intellectual property and funding proposals). The goal 
is explore innovation processes across a complex 
innovation ecosystem of agent and artifact types. 
When these features are fully developed, the aim is to 
experiment 
with 
innovation 
policies 
and 
to 
understand their collective behavior effects in 
systems of innovation.
