Human-centric Transfer Learning Explanation via Knowledge Graph
[Extended Abstract]
Yuxia Geng1, Jiaoyan Chen2, Ernesto Jim´enez-Ruiz3,4, Huajun Chen1,5
1College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, China
2Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK
3The Alan Turing Institute, London, UK
4Department of Informatics, University of Oslo, Norway
5ZJU-Alibaba Joint Lab on Knowledge Engine, China
Abstract
Transfer learning which aims at utilizing knowledge
learned from one problem (source domain) to solve
another different but related problem (target domain)
has attracted wide research attentions. However, the
current transfer learning methods are mostly uninter-
pretable, especially to people without ML expertise. In
this extended abstract, we brief introduce two knowl-
edge graph (KG) based frameworks towards human un-
derstandable transfer learning explanation. The ﬁrst one
explains the transferability of features learned by Con-
volutional Neural Network (CNN) from one domain to
another through pre-training and ﬁne-tuning, while the
second justiﬁes the model of a target domain predicted
by models from multiple source domains in zero-shot
learning (ZSL). Both methods utilize KG and its reason-
ing capability to provide rich and human understandable
explanations to the transfer procedure.
Introduction
Machine learning (ML) systems such as deep neural net-
works are becoming increasingly complex for more power.
It costs big data and much time for training. Transfer learn-
ing refers to a series of ML methods that aim to utilize sam-
ples, models or model parameters gained while solving one
problem (source domain) to solve another related but differ-
ent problem (target domain) (Pan et al. 2010). It now has
attracted wide research attentions in reusing learned models
in new contexts, dealing with training data shortage, etc.
Transfer learning has shown its effectiveness and efﬁ-
ciency in many applications such as using satellite image
features to predict global poverty (Jean et al. 2016). How-
ever, an arbitrary transfer might decrease the performance in
the target domain, which is called a negative transfer. Some
work analyze the theoretical or empirical principles to guide
the transfer, but do not explain a speciﬁc positive or negative
transfer. Some other work develop methods to transform the
samples or model parameters from source domains towards
a target domain, but they are often black-box models.
On the other hand, ML explanation, including model in-
terpretation and prediction justiﬁcation is now becoming a
more and more urgent requirement, especially in making
critical or safety-sensitive decisions. Among them, human-
centric explanation, which is enriched by human under-
standable common sensne and background knowledge (Bi-
ran and McKeown 2017), is especially important for none
ML experts to optimize a learning system or understand the
prediction. However, there are currently few human-centric
explanation studies for transfer learning problems.
Knowledge graph (KG), which originally refers to a
knowledge base used by Google to enrich its searching re-
sults with different data sources, now often means a wide
range of semantic data including RDF (Resource Descrip-
tion Framework) graph, OWL (Web Ontology Language)
ontology, Linked Data and so on. It’s widely used to model
common sense or background knowledge with the potential
of knowledge representation and reasoning. In this paper,
we introduce our idea and framework that utilize KGs to
support human-centric explanation of transfer learning with
two case studies. The ﬁrst case study is pair-wise feature
transferability explanation. We infer evidences from explicit
ontology axioms (facts) to understand the transferability of
features learned by Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs).
The second case study is zero-shot learning eXplanation (X-
ZSL). We use external knowledge to justify the CNN of a
new class (i.e., class unseen in the training data) predicted
by a Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) with CNNs of
training classes.
Feature Transferability Explanation
We assume features learned by a CNN is transferred from a
source domain Dα to a target domain Dβ, where Dα has a
large training sample set while Dβ has a small training sam-
ple set. A feature transfer from Dα to Dβ, denoted as Fα→β
includes three steps: (i) pre-train a CNN with samples from
Dα, (ii) transfer (reuse) the parameters from the input layer
to a speciﬁc convolutional layer, which corresponds to a spe-
ciﬁc feature, and (iii) ﬁne tune the CNN with samples from
Dβ. The model trained with Fα→β is denoted as Mα→β,
while the model trained with samples in Dβ alone is denoted
as Mβ. Fα→β is deﬁned as a positive transfer if Mα→β
outperforms Mβ on the testing sample set from Dβ, and a
negative transfer otherwise.
We use OWL ontologies (expressive KGs) to model the
background knowledge and data for human-centric expla-
nation. In particular, each domain has an ontology com-
posed of a terminology axiom set T and an assertion ax-
iom set A. T models the background knowledge while

A models the data. Each ontology axiom is equal to
a fact of the domain. Considering a case of ﬂight de-
parture delay forecasting in US, and a domain identi-
ﬁed by the carrier Delta Airline (DL), the original airport
LAX and the target airport ORD, the domain’s terminol-
ogy axioms include concept deﬁnitions e.g., Carrier 
∃hasStockPrice.Float  ListCarrier, relation deﬁni-
tions e.g., hasCarrier ◦hasCarHub  hasDepHub,
etc., while its assertion axioms include individuals e.g.,
LAX, DL and dep (representing a ﬂight departure), indi-
vidual classiﬁcations e.g., Airport(LAX), individual rela-
tions locatedIn(LAX, CA), etc. Such an ontology has the
capability of reasoning , namely inferring underlying axioms
e.g., hasDepHub(dep, LAX), and can be aligned with ex-
ternal KGs for knowledge enrichment.
We use explanatory evidences to interpret the transfer-
ability of features. An explanatory evidence is an ontol-
ogy axiom or a combination of ontology axioms whose co-
existence in the source and target domains is highly corre-
lated with the transferability of a feature. We aim at discov-
ering a set of positive (negative) explanatory evidences that
can explain the positive (negative) transferability of a spe-
ciﬁc transfer (cf. Example 1).
Example 1. (Explanatory Evidence) In the above case of
ﬂight departure delay forecastsing, considering three learn-
ing domains: D(DL,ORD,LAX) for Delta Airlines from ORD
to LAX, D(B6,LAX,JF K) for JetBlue from LAX to JFK
and D(AA,ORD,SF O) for American Airlines from ORD to
SFO, for a speciﬁc CNN feature, let axiom combination
“locatedIn(ori, East)” and “ListCarrier(car)” be an
example of positive explanatory evidence, let axiom combi-
nation “hasOri(dep, ORD)” and “locatedIn(des, CA)”
be an example of negative explanatory evidence, human be-
ings can understand the feature’s transferability as “the
transfer from D(DL,ORD,LAX) to D(AA,ORD,SF O) is posi-
tive as the original airport of both source and target domains
is located in the east part of US and the carrier of both is list
airline company” and “the transfer from D(DL,ORD,LAX)
to D(B6,LAX,JF K) is negative as the original airport of both
source and target domains is ORD and the destination air-
port of both is located in California”.
Framework and Technical Challenges
Figure 1 presents the computation framework for explana-
tory evidences of feature transferability. It mainly includes
two parts: (i) knowledge construction and enrichment, and
(ii) correlative reasoning for evidence inference.
Knowledge construction refers to the modeling of back-
ground knowledge and data of a domain with an ontol-
ogy, while knowledge enrichment refers to align individ-
uals of initial ontology with instances of external KGs
like DBPedia so as to importing more background and
common sense axioms. This part ﬁnally leads to a com-
plete ontology mentioned above. For example, axioms
hasDepHub(dep, LAX) and ListCarrier(DL) depend
on some external knowledge about DL’s stock price and
DL’s relationship with LAX.
In this part, one technical challenge is selecting a part of
indviduals (called root individuals) instead of all the indi-
Domains
Knowledge Bases
Explanatory 
Knowledge
External 
Knowledge Base
1. Ontology 
Modeling and 
Reasoning
Part 1: Knowledge 
Construction and Enrichment
2. Root Individual Section
3. Knowledge matching
Transfer 
Examples
Feature 
Transferability 
Index (FTI)
Evidence Vectors
Explanatory 
Evidences
Part 2: Correlative Reasoning
3. Correlation analysis
4. Evidence searching 
1. FTI measurement
2. Directed entailment  
co-existence
Figure 1: The Computation Framework for Explanatory Ev-
idences for Feature Transferability
viduals to match, in order to keep the completeness of ex-
planatory evidences but reduce the computation and storage.
Our previous work (Chen et al. 2018) presents a solution. It
selects effective and important axioms according to the pre-
diction task, and adopts the individuals involved in such ax-
ioms. Another challenge is ensuring accuracy in matching,
which is under work now.
Correlative reasoning is an algorithm that infers the cor-
relation between a feature’s transferability and a candidate
evidence’s co-existence in source and target domains from
a set of given transfers. An axiom or axiom combination
is selected as a positive (negative) evidence if the correla-
tion coefﬁcient exceeds a positive (negative) threshold and
is signiﬁcant in statistic testing.
In correlative reasoning, one challenge is measuring the
transferability of a feature. We consider the feature’s sep-
ciﬁcity and generality according to (Yosinski et al. 2014).
Another challenge is searching axiom combinations for ex-
planatory evidences. We search from low dimension to high
dimension, and propose an early stop mechanism and fast
extension mechansim for acceleration. More details of cor-
relation reasoning and our solutions to the challenges are
presented in (Chen et al. 2018).
With such human understandable explanations to the
transferability of CNN features, none ML experts can opti-
mize a transfer learning procedure by (i) ﬁnding out when to
transfer (i.e., at which convolutional layer) for given source
and target domains, and (ii) selecting what source domains
to transfer for a given target domain. However, the evalua-
tion of explanatory evidences, such as their generalization
(i.e., performance in applying evidences inferred from one
set of transfers to another set of transfer) and quality, is still
an open problem.
Zero-shot Learning Justiﬁcation
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) is to categorize samples of new
classes (i.e., classes unseen in the training data) by trans-
ferring features from seen classes (i.e., classes of the train-
ing data) without any additional sample annotation effort
(Palatucci et al. 2009). However, the transferring process is
often complex, vague and uninterpretable. According to our
knowledge, there are currently few work that can provide ev-
idences to justify such a process, especially towards people

Felidae
Felinae
subclass
Pantheriinae
Felis
Cat
Serval
Cheetah
Tiger
Lion
subclass
subclass
subclass
subclass
subclasssubclass
subclass
Leopard
subclass
White Tiger
subclass
Manchurian Tiger
subclass
Cat
Cheetah
Serval
ZSL Class
Entity (i.e., ZSL Class)
Properties
Entity(i.e., ZSLClass) Description (e.g., 
anchor text)
Seen
Class
Cat
(Cat, ear_shape,Sharp)
The domestic cat (Felis catus or Felis silvestris
catus, informally Felis domesticus) is a small, 
usually furry, domesticated, carnivorous 
mammal.The cat species is commonly kept as a pet. 
Cheetah
(Cheetah, coat_color,
Golden yellow)
This is a large cat of the subfamily Felinae. It has 
several distinctive features – a slender body, 
spotted pelage, a small rounded head, long thin 
legs and a long spotted tail. 
Unseen 
Class
Serval
(Serval, ear_shape,
Sharp)
(Serval, coat_color,
Golden yellow)
The serval, Leptailurus serval or Caracal serval, 
known in Afrikaans as Tierboskat, "tiger-forest-
cat", is a medium-sized African wild cat. Facial 
features include the round eyes, white whiskers on 
the snout and near the ears, ears as large as those of 
a domestic cat. 
Figure 2: An example of KG-based ZSL, where Serval, a kind of animal with a cat-like face and a cheetah-like body is an
unseen class, while Cat and Cheetah are two of the seen classes. A ZSL algorithm is to automatically generate the classiﬁcation
model for Serval, by transferring features from other seen classes using entity relations (graph structure), entity properties and
descriptions of a KG (e.g., (Wang et al. 2018; Kampffmeyer et al. 2018)). Each class in ZSL is equivalent to an entity in KG.
without ML expertise.
An example of KG-based ZSL classiﬁcation is shown in
Figure 2, where testing samples of an unseen class Serval is
to be classiﬁed. We ﬁrst assume that a ZSL method builds
a model for Serval by transferring the feature knowledge
from a set of seen classes, according to their internally im-
plicit and close relationships in semantics of class (KG en-
tity) name, description, property and hierarchical structure.
The target of our X-ZSL method is to ﬁnd out some evi-
dences to justify why the generated prediction model for the
unseen class Serval is reasonable, with the help of common
sense and background knowledge of these classes. One ex-
ample to justify this model is ”the two seen classes Cat and
Cheetah play an import role in transferring features to Ser-
val, while they share the same ancestors Felinae.” It utilizes
the subClassOf relation between entities in the KG. An-
other justiﬁcation example is “the two seen classes Cat and
Cheetah transfer their local features to the visual features of
Serval, as the ear shape of Serval and Cat are both Sharp,
and Serval has the same Golden yellow coat as Cheetah.”
These evidences are supported by the shared properties of
Sharp and Golden yellow in the KG.
Technical Framework
Our ZSL justiﬁcation framework includes two modules: a
KG-based ZSL classiﬁer and an justiﬁcation generator, as
shown in Figure 3. The classiﬁer learns to predict the model
of unseen classes with a Graph Attention Network (Velick-
ovic et al. 2017). It is able to learn the attentions of the seen
classes, from which we can select impressive ones. The ex-
planation generator extracts convincing justiﬁcations from
the KG according to the impressive seen classes, using class
name to entity matching, SPARQL queries and reasoning.
KG-based ZSL Classiﬁer
We ﬁrst build a hierarchy
structure among all classes via knowledge graph, where each
entity models one class. With the graph input, we use a kind
of Graph Neural Network called Graph Attention Network
(GAT) (Velickovic et al. 2017) to transfer the features from
different unseen classes (entities) to each seen class with
convolutional layers and attention layers. With the transfer,
KG
Graph Conv Layer
Attention Layer
𝛼"
𝛼#𝛼$ 𝛼%
Entity
Matching &
SPARQL 
queries
KG
(e.g. DBPedia)
entities, e.g., dbr:Cat, 
dbr:Cheetah
triples, e.g, (dbr:Cheetah, 
rdfs:subClassOf
dbr:Felinae
Explanation
Explanation Generator
KG-based ZSL Classifier
Attentions & 
Impressive 
Seen Classes
Figure 3: The technical framework for ZSL justiﬁcation. The
KG-based ZSL classiﬁer learns the attention weight of seen
classes (αi) w.r.t. an unseen class. Those with high atten-
tions are selected as justiﬁcation evidences. The explanation
generator utilizes the KG (e.g., DBPedia) to obtain common
sense and background knowledge to enrich the justiﬁcation
evidences so that common people can understand.
we eventually use logistic regression to predict a CNN clas-
siﬁer for an unseen class (i.e., the combination parameters
of pre-trained CNN features).
For each convolutional operation, GAT leverages a self-
attention mechanism to update the features distribution of
entities in the graph, where one entity includes features from
its neighborhoods. So we can assign different weights to dif-
ferent entities in a neighborhoods. We also realize that not all
seen classes contributes equally to the transferring to an un-
seen class. Thus the attention-weighted seen classes in the
transferring process are extracted. Those seen classes with
high attention weights in transferring are called impressive
classes. They are selected as evidences for justiﬁcation.
Current KG-based ZSL methods utilize the graph struc-
ture and class name (Wang et al. 2018; Kampffmeyer et al.

2018), but ignore the semantics from properties. To fully uti-
lize the semantics of a KG, we transform some entity proper-
ties from the KG to so called anonymous entities, which is a
knowledge representation and reasoning technique. Besides
improving the accuracy of ZSL classiﬁer, this will provide
additional justiﬁcation evidences.
Explanation Generator
Some external KGs contains rich
common sense and background knowledge. For example,
DBPedia includes knowledge extracted from Wikipedia,
with 4.58 million entities. We utilize such KGs to enrich the
extracted justiﬁcation evidence so that common people can
understand.
Each class name is matched with an entity of the ex-
ternal KG by lexical index, which is built based on en-
tity descriptions. For example, we can use the lookup ser-
vice provided by DBPedia1. As shown in Figure 3, Cat
and Cheetah are matched the KG entity 
dbr : Cat and

dbr : Cheetah respectively2. The triples composed of en-
tities and their relationships can form a hierarchical struc-
ture among entities that paired with same relations, e.g.

dbr : Cheetah, rdfs:subClassOf, dbr : Felinae is a sin-
gle unit in hierarchical graph in Figure 2. On the other hand,
the rich triples also contain some properties about entities,
such as the Entity Property column in the table of Figure 2.
We then access more entities and triples of the external
KG, that are related to the impressive seen classes (justiﬁca-
tion evidences), using an SQL-like query language for RDF
called SPARQL which can support knowledge reasoning.
With returned entities and triples, we enrich the evidence to
justify the generation of the classiﬁer of each unseen class,
during which some hand-crafted templates may be needed.
The challenge here is to select and evaluate the returned en-
tities for high quality explanation.
Text description of the returned entities from the external
KG can also be used to enrich the explanation. However, the
noise of text description is a challenge to deal with.
Conclusion and Outlook
Transfer learning is playing a more and more important role
in building complex ML systems, but the methods are still
uninterpretable, especially to none ML experts. In this pa-
per, we introduce our KG-based methods to provide human-
understandable evidence for feature transferability explana-
tion and ZSL justiﬁcation. For the former, we infer evi-
dences from axioms of OWL ontologies to explain the trans-
ferability of features learned by a CNN, while for the later,
we use entity relations and properties (RDF triples) to jus-
tify the classiﬁcation model generated for an unseen class.
Different KG techniques, including ontology modeling, se-
mantic reasoning, knowledge matching, semantic query and
so on are incorporated for high quality explanations.
Although the solutions to the two transfer learning prob-
lems are different and there are quite a few challenges to
deal with, two core and common technical problems for
1https://github.com/dbpedia/lookup
2dbr represents http://dbpedia.org/resource, a URI preﬁx of
DBPedia.
human-centric transfer learning explanation in our mind are
knowledge matching and explanation evaluation. Knowl-
edge matching refers to matching ML data (often in tabular
format) with KG e.g., classes in ZSL with entities in DBPe-
dia, or matching one KG with another KG. It signiﬁcantly
impacts the quality of explanations. In the future work, we
will apply a hybrid matching approach combing lexical in-
dex, semantic reasoning and deep learning (cf. our work
ColNet (Chen et al. 2019) and BootOX/LogMap (Jim´enez-
Ruiz et al. 2015)). While for explanation evaluation, we will
feed human knowledge back to the transfer learning system
through the explanation.
