User Modeling Combining Access Logs, 
Page Content and Semantics 
Blaž Fortuna 
Jožef Stefan Institute 
Jamova cesta 39 
1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia 
+386 (1) 477 3528 

Dunja Mladenić 
Jožef Stefan Institute 
Jamova cesta 39 
1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia 
+386 (1) 477 3528 

Marko Grobelnik 
Jožef Stefan Institute 
Jamova cesta 39 
1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia 
+386 (1) 477 3528 

 
ABSTRACT 
The paper proposes an approach to modeling users of large Web 
sites based on combining different data sources: access logs and 
content of the accessed pages are combined with semantic 
information about the Web pages, the users and the accesses of 
the users to the Web site. The proposed approach represents each 
user by a set of features derived from the different data sources, 
where some feature values may be missing for some users. It 
further 
enables 
user 
modeling 
based 
on 
the 
provided 
characteristics of the targeted user subset. The approach is 
evaluated on real-world data where we compare performance of 
the automatic assignment of a user to a predefined user segment 
when different data sources are used to represent the users.   
Categories and Subject Descriptors 
H.3.5 [Programming Languages]: On-line Information Services 
– Web-based services.  
General Terms 
Algorithms, Experimentation. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Large Web sites focused on providing content attract different 
kinds of users depending on the content and their reputation. 
Understanding of user populations can, among others, be used to 
provide better navigation and promotion of web site’s assets and 
can give an important advantage when talking with the 
advertisers. To achieve this, some sites offer more value to the 
users for the price of free registration, where registration usually 
means acquiring additional demographic information about the 
user, such as, age, gender, education etc. They use this 
information to understand which user segments are visiting 
different sections of the web sites (e.g. sports or cooking section). 
However, the sparseness of the registration data can be prohibitive 
in providing deeper insights on the user population when focusing 
on smaller parts, individual articles and the context of a single 
user’s visit (e.g. referring domain or time of the day). 
In this paper we present an approach to building flexible, 
comprehensive and scalable user models which take into account 
three components: access logs, page content and the users’ 
registration information. We refer to this additional information 
on users as semantic information that is available for only a small 
subset of the users. The sites focused on providing content usually 
provide some additional semantic information on the content of 
their Web pages, such as, author of the page content, topic 
category of the page content, named entities that are mentioned on 
a page etc. Access logs in addition to URL of the accessed page 
contain information on the user location, time, device, etc. This 
can be seen as semantic information on the access of the users to 
the web site. 
The presented approach consists of the following steps. Firstly, 
the user segment is defined. Segments can be as broad as “female 
users” to narrower one, such as, “female users older than 30 
years that at least once visited a page from the style section 
category”. The connection of the segment size with the quality of 
the user model is studied in more details in the experimental 
section. Secondly, a training set is assembled by identifying all the 
users from the defined segment, and complementing them with a 
random sample of the remaining users. A feature vector is 
constructed for each user, containing the information of all the 
pages they visited and the contexts in which they were visited. 
Finally, Support Vector Machine (SVM) [1] is used to build a 
linear model of the segment. 
The main contribution of this paper are the first two steps in the 
proposed approach and, evaluation and stress testing on real-
world data of a large web-site with 5 million unique users per day, 
a million of which are registered. Additionally, the paper 
describes how such approach can be implemented in a scalable 
way so it can be used on near real-time stream of access logs by 
users who are not experts in web mining. 
The remaining of the paper is structured as follows. First we give 
an overview of related work, followed by the description of the 
data which goes into the models. Then we describe the proposed 
approach, a summary of the evaluation on a real-world dataset and 
finish with conclusions. 
2. RELATED WORK 
A number of methods for mining the Web have been applied in 
the last two decades including crawling, indexing and modeling 
the data using unsupervised, semi-supervised and supervised 
machine learning methods as well as, using social network 
analysis [13]. There are several areas in the web mining 
community [5] where content and access logs were used to profile 
users. There, the authors mostly focus on the application of 
profiling to recommender systems and e-commerce based on 
query logs. This paper focuses on user modeling for large web 
sites providing content, such as magazines or newspapers, with 
the task of classifying users into pre-defined demographic 
segments. 
Semantic information providing domain knowledge has been used 
in web personalization mainly related to content or items in 
recommendation systems [16]. Incorporating some level of 
semantics in textual content analysis was proposed by several 
researchers (e.g., [17], [18]) showing a number of open 
challenges. In the proposed user modeling we also incorporate 
semantics of textual content including manually assigned 
document keywords, annotation of named entities occurring inside 
the page content and, topic categories assigned to each document 
based on a predefined topic ontology. 

User  modeling and web personalization, in addition to adding 
semantic information to web page content in access logs analysis 
(e.g., [14]) and web search (e.g., [15]), can also consider having 
some background information on the users obtained via 
questionnaires (e.g., [11]) i.e., semantic information on the users. 
In the area of semantic web mining [6] several approaches have 
been proposed to combine higher level annotation data (e.g., 
categories, tags) with the content and access logs as means of 
fighting the sparseness of training data. In addition, usage of 
ontologies to describe user interest [15] and behavior can bring 
semantics in web mining but is expected to require additional 
efforts for constructing appropriate ontologies. As pointed out in 
[12], the future of web mining to large extent depends on the 
development of semantic web. 
Work 
has 
been 
also 
done 
in 
predicting 
demographic 
characteristics of users based on the pages they visited. For 
example, in [2] authors used the content and categories of the 
pages visited by the users to predict their gender and age group. 
They proposed combination of SVM and Latent Semantic 
Indexing [7] to reduce the sparseness in the data. User profiling 
was also prominent topic in ad targeting community with most of 
the work focusing on personalizing display ads process to 
maximize clicks [8][9][10]. In our work we do not directly 
address ad targeting, even though the proposed modeling of user 
segments can be exploited in ad targeting. Our approach differs 
from the related work in combining access logs and page content 
with semantic information from different data sources. Moreover, 
we enable user modeling based on characteristics of the targeted 
user subset, where some data may be missing for some of the 
users.  
3. PROPOSED APPROACH 
The data used in the modeling comes from three main sources: 
access logs, page content and the user registration data. In this 
section we provide details and breakdown of each of these sources 
as implemented in a real-world application of the proposed 
approach for a large international content provider. 
Access logs record the interactions between the user and the web 
site. Basic element of the interaction is a request for a page on the 
web site by specifying its URL. Each interaction is also described 
by its context:  
 Time: the time of the interaction,  
 Location: decoding of the user’s IP using GeoIP service1, 
 Source: referring page with the search terms when the user is 
coming from a search engine, 
 Device: user agent string, specifying the browser, operating 
system and the device. 
Access logs also store the list of cookies deposited on the user’s 
side by the web site. This mechanism is used to uniquely identify 
users over more interactions by storing a unique ID the first time a 
user visits the site. The unique ID is also be used to link the 
registered users to their demographic profile. 
Each interaction revolves around the content contained within the 
requested page. The page and its content can be described using 
low level features (e.g. keywords), annotations (e.g. named 
entities), aggregate features (e.g. topic categories), content 
metadata (e.g. author, publish date) and page metadata (e.g. page 
type). In the case of the studied web site all of the mentioned 
features were available but not all for each page. In the case of 
                                                                
1 http://www.maxmind.com/app/locate_ip 
named entities, manually constructed list was extended with a list 
of automatically extracted named entities [19]. Topic categories, 
manually assigned by authors and/or web site editors, were also 
extended with automatic classification into DMoz [20]. 
Registration data was provided for all registered users. It 
contained, among others, fields describing the age, gender, 
income and the job title. Since the data was collected over the 
web, it is prone to some level of noise. Experiments in Section 5 
provide more details on the robustness of the gathered data. 
4. MODELING AND IMPLEMENTATION 
The first step of the presented approach is the definition of a user 
segment. User segment is a subset of users, web site’s visitors, 
which share a common characteristic. Simple examples of 
standard market segments are breakdown of users by gender or 
age [2]. More complex segmentation can involve income, job or 
industry, interests a combination of these. The context from the 
access logs provides additional segments that are relevant to a 
web site, such as users coming from search engines (e.g. Google, 
Bing) or social networks (e.g. Facebook, Twitter), users also 
reading about traveling, users from particular country or city, etc. 
It is important to keep this step simple enough, to let the domain 
experts with little or no knowledge of web mining to specify and 
define the segments. To achieve this, our implementation stores 
all the visitors in an inverted index where they are searchable by 
their demographics data and visits. This changes the task of 
defining a user segment to a more familiar task of specifying a 
search query. Figure 1 shows the list of fields describing the users 
that are implemented in the system and Figure 2 shows a sample 
query that can be used to define user segment. 
Second step of the presented approach is feature extraction and 
formation of training set from the defined user segment. The 
features describing each user visit are extracted from the fields 
shown in Figure 1. Vector space model [3], standard text 
representation from text mining, is used to represent the data. The 
vector elements coming from each of the fields are normalized so 
they contribute same overall weight to the final norm of the 
vector. This representation is used due to its flexibility and serves 
as a good fit for linear SVM model, due to its capability to handle 
over-fitting and missing elements (each element, e.g. referring 
domain, is just one of many elements in the linear score). 
Training set consists of users considered as data points. Each user 
is either in a positive class, if he/she matches the segment 
definition, or in a negative class otherwise. Each user is described 
by a centroid of all its visits’ feature vectors. Sampling can be 
used at this step to (a) limit the amount of users for which the 
feature vectors need to be prepared and (b) limit the 
overwhelming size of negative class in the case of small user 
segments. Sampling can be necessary due to the scale of traffic on 
larger web sites (10s of millions of users with 100s of millions of 
visits per month in the case of web site used in this paper). Also, 
the cost of training set extraction and model training can at some 
point outweigh the diminishing returns on the increase of 
performance. 
The third and final step is applying linear SVM to the training set. 
Support vector machine is a family of algorithms that has gained a 
wide recognition as one of the state-of-the-art machine learning 
algorithms for tasks such as classification, regression, etc. In the 
basic formulation they try to separate two sets of training 
examples by hyperplane that maximizes the margin (distance 
between the hyperplane and the closest points). In addition one 
usually permits few training examples to be misclassified. 

The trained model can be used in several ways. First and most 
obvious one is to apply the model to the unregistered users. 
However, trained SVM model can be visualized using feature 
selection approach specified in [4]. Keywords or features 
describing the user segments are the ones, whose weights in SVM 
normal vector contribute most when deciding if the centroid of the 
positive class is positive. Figure 3 shows top keywords describing 
the segment defined in Figure 2. This information was found in 
practice to be useful to the web site editors and marketers to better 
understand the behavior of their users (e.g. what does a particular 
segment of users typically read). 
5. EXPERIMENTS 
This section presents a summary of the experimentation 
performed on a real-world dataset obtained by parsing logs of a 
major news publishing web site. To evaluate the proposed 
approach we tested it against several demographic dimensions: 
gender, age and income. For each of these dimensions we tested 
the influence of different feature sets and the frequency of visits 
by users in the training set. Gender demographic dimension had 
two possible classes, male and female, with 250,000 examples. 
Table 1 lists the categories and number of examples other two 
dimensions. 
Table 1 List of categories along Age demographic dimension (left) and 
Income demographic dimension (right). 
Category 
Size 
 
Category 
Size 
21-30 
100,000 
 
0-24k 
50,000 
31-40 
100,000 
 
25k-49k 
50,000 
41-50 
100,000 
 
50k-74k 
50,000 
51-60 
100,000 
 
75k-99k 
50,000 
61-80 
100,000 
 
100k-149k 
50,000 
 
 
 
150k-254k 
50,000 
 
Classification results were measured using two metrics. First was 
Break Even Point (BEP) – a hypothetical point at which precision 
(ratio of positive documents among retrieved ones) and recall 
(ratio of retrieved positive documents among all positive 
documents) are the same. This measure does not depend on the 
threshold parameter returned by classification algorithm. The 
second measure is ROC curve, showing how number of true and 
false positive change as we decrease the threshold. These two 
measures were selected as they capture different aspects of the 
interaction between relevance and reach relative to the threshold 
position. In the case of ROC curve, the y-axis (true positive rate) 
shows the ratio of relevant users captured in the segment and the 
x-axis (false positive rate) shows the ratio of users incorrectly 
assigned to the segment. All presented results were obtained using 
SVM model and 5-fold cross-validation. 
 
Figure 4. BEP for Gender (50% = random) 
 
Figure 5. ROC curve for Male (left) and Female (right). 
 
Figure 6. BEP for Age (20% = random) 
For each demographic dimension two sets of experiments were 
performed. The first set evaluated classification performance of 
different feature sets used to describe a user: 
 Context – features that can be obtained from access logs, such 
as time, location, source and device.  
 Content features: 
o Text Features – keywords extracted from the articles read 
by the user.  
o Named Entities – named entities extracted using 
information extraction techniques [18]  
o All Metadata – metadata assigned to the article by the 
editors; e.g. byline, topics, main keywords, people, 
organization and countries mentioned in the article, date. 
 All Content – combination of text features, named entities and 
metadata features. 
 All Features – combination of all above features. 
Figure 4 shows classification results for Gender demographic 
dimension for different combinations of feature sets. It can be 
seen, that metadata was best performing feature set for both Male 
and Female categories. It is interesting that combining all feature 
sets can actually significantly hurt performance in the case of 
Female class. Figure 5 shows ROC curve for Male and Female 
class for different minimal number of visits required by users. It 
can be see that, as expected, performance increases as the user 
history increases. Overall, it is interesting to see, that just by 
Domain  
Sub-domain  
Page URL  
Page Meta Tags  
Page Title  
Page Content  
Named Entities  
Referring Search Term  
Referring Domain  
Referring URL 
Country ( from IP) 
State (from IP) 
City (from IP) 
Date  
Day of the Week 
Hour of the day  
User Agent  
Income  
Age  
Gender 
Figure 1. Fields which can be combined to specify a user segment. 
Emphasized fields are the ones extracted from the user 
registration data. 
 
Gender = female 
Income ≥ $100,000 
Meta Data = Category Style 
Figure 2. Example query used to specify a user segment. It selects 
all the users registered as female earning more than $100,000 per 
year which at least once visited a page from category Style. 
 
 
Figure 3. Tag cloud describing the segment from Figure 2. 

looking at metadata of articles, one can predict gender with 70% 
BEP. 
Figure 6 shows more interesting results. When predicting an age 
group of the user, it turns out that younger (21-30) or older (61-
80) users are significantly easier to predict compared to the 
middle age groups. Prediction results for the 41-50 category were 
only slightly above random. Named entities turned out to be most 
significant feature set. As expected, performance increases as 
more observations are available for a user. 
Income category is very hard to predict based on what news 
articles people read. Nevertheless, it can be seen that, similar as in 
the case of age groups, the edge case (150-254) is easier to predict 
(~22% BEP) compared to more common categories (~16% BEP). 
Context features turned out to have significant contributions in the 
income classifications with geographic location extracted from IP 
address being the most informative feature. 
6. CONCLUSIONS 
The presented paper focuses on modeling the users with the 
purpose of understanding the demographics coming to various 
parts of a web-site in different contexts. To achieve this only 
content based profiling is not sufficient anymore. The proposed 
approach combines semantically enriched content information 
with context information from access logs such as referring pages, 
time, geographic location and device information.  
Experiments show that different segmentations, such as gender, 
age or income, relay on different feature subsets for classification. 
For example, metadata turned out significant in the case of 
Gender segmentation compared to named entities for age and 
context, or more specifically geographic location, for income 
segmentations. 
The advantages of the presented approach are two-fold. First, the 
proposed methodology allows the domain expert to specify 
complex user segments and through visualization understand the 
behavior of the segment. Second, it allows for building more 
accurate models which can be used to generalize the 
demographics to the users for which there is none available.  
7. REFERENCES 
[1] Cristianini N. & Shawe-Taylor, J., An introduction to support 
vector machines, Cambridge University Press 
[2] Hu, J., Zeng, H., Li, H., Niu, C., and Chen, Z. 2007. 
Demographic prediction based on user's browsing behavior. 
In Proceedings of the 16th international Conference on 
World Wide Web (Banff, Alberta, Canada, May 08 - 12, 
2007). WWW '07. ACM, New York, NY, 151-160.  
[3] Salton, G. Developments in Automatic Text Retrieval. 
Science, Vol 253, 974-979 
[4] Brank J., Grobelnik M., Milic-Frayling N. & Mladenic D. 
Feature selection using support vector machines. Proc. of the 
Third International Conference on Data Mining Methods and 
Databases for Engineering, Finance, and Other Fields, 2002. 
[5] Nasraoui, O., Spiliopoulou, M., Zaïane, O. R., Srivastava, J., 
and Mobasher, B. 2008. WebKDD 2008: 10 years of 
knowledge discovery on the web post-workshop report. 
SIGKDD Explor. Newsl. 10, 2 (Dec. 2008), 78-83. 
[6] B. Berendt, A. Hotho, and G. Stumme, Towards semantic 
web mining. Proceedings of the First International Semantic 
Web Conference, 2002 (Springer, Sardinia, 2002), pp. 264-
278 
[7] Deerwester S., Dumais S., Furnas G., Landuer T. & 
Harshman R. Indexing by Latent Semantic Analysis, J. of the 
American Society of Information Science, vol. 41/6, 391-407 
[8] Ghosh, A., Rubinstein, B. I., Vassilvitskii, S., and Zinkevich, 
M. 2009. Adaptive bidding for display advertising. In 
Proceedings of the 18th international Conference on World 
Wide Web (Madrid, Spain, April 20 - 24, 2009). WWW '09. 
ACM, New York, NY, 251-260. 
[9] Joanna Jaworska, Marcin Sydow. Behavioural Targeting in 
On-Line Advertising: An Empirical Study. Web Information 
Systems Engineering - WISE 2008 
[10] Li, Y., Surendran, A. C., and Shen, D. 2007. Data mining 
and audience intelligence for advertising. SIGKDD Explor. 
Newsl. 9, 2 (Dec. 2007), 96-99. 
[11] Eirinaki, M., Vazirgiannis, M. 2003. Web mining for web 
personalization, ACM Transactions Internet Technology, 3/1, 
pp. 1-27, ACM, New York, NY, USA. 
[12] Berendt, B., Hotho, A., Mladenic, D., Someren, M. van, 
Spiliopoulou, M., Stumme, G. 2004. A  roadmap for web 
mining : from web to semantic web. In Web mining : from 
web  to semantic web, September, 2003 (Lecture notes in 
artificial intelligence, Lecture notes in computer science, vol. 
3209), Berlin; Heidelberg; New York: Springer, pp. 1-22. 
[13] Chakrabarti, S. 2002, Mining the Web: Discovering 
Knowledge from Hypertext Data, Morgan-Kauffman. 
[14] Jorge, A., Alves, M. A., Grobelnik, M., Mladenic, D., Petrak, 
J. 2003. Web site access analysis for a national statistical 
agency. In Data mining and decision support: integration and 
collaboration, The Kluwer international series in engineering 
and computer science, SECS 745, Boston; Dordrecht; 
London: Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 167-176. 
[15] Sieg, A., Mobasher, B., Burke, R. 2007. Ontological User 
Profiles 
for 
Representing 
Context 
in 
Web 
Search. 
Proceedings of the Workshop on Web Personalization and 
Recommender 
Systems. 
At 
the 
ACM 
International 
Conference on Web Intelligence, Silicon Valley, CA, 
November 2007. 
[16] Singh Anand, S., Mobasher, B. 2005. Intelligent Techniques 
for Web Personalization. In Intelligent Techniques for Web 
Personalization, Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence 
(LNAI 3169), Springer, 2005. 
[17] Baxter, D., Klimt, B., Grobelnik, M., Schneider, D. I., 
Witbrock, M. J., Mladenic, D. 2009. Capturing document 
semantics 
for 
ontology 
generation 
and 
document 
summarization. In Semantic knowledge 
management: 
integrating ontology management, knowledge discovery, and 
human language technology. Berlin; Heidelberg: Springer, 
2009, pp. 141-154. 
[18] Rusu, D., Fortuna, B., Grobelnik, M., Mladenic, D. 2009. 
Semantic graphs derived from triplets with application in 
document summarization. Informatica Journal, vol. 33, no. 3, 
pp. 357-362. 
[19]  Stajner, T., Mladenic, D. 2009. Entity Resolution in Texts 
Using Statistical Learning and Ontologies, In Proceedings of 
the fourth Asian Semantic Web Conference ASWC 2009. 
[20] Grobelnik, M., Mladenic, D. 2005. Simple classification into 
large topic ontology of web documents. Journal of 
Computing and Information Technology, 2005, vol. 13, pp. 
279-285
