Graph Decipher: A transparent dual-attention graph neural network to understand the
message-passing mechanism for the node classiﬁcation
Yan Panga, Chao Liua,∗
aDepartment of Electrical Engineering, University of Colorado Denver, CO
Abstract
Graph neural networks can be eﬀectively applied to ﬁnd solutions for many real-world problems across widely diverse ﬁelds. The
success of graph neural networks is linked to the message-passing mechanism on the graph, however the message-aggregating
behavior is still not entirely clear in most algorithms. To improve functionality, we propose a new transparent network called Graph
Decipher to investigate the message-passing mechanism by prioritizing in two main components: the graph structure and node
attributes, at the graph, feature, and global levels on a graph under the node classiﬁcation task. However the computation burden
now becomes the most signiﬁcant issue because the relevance of both graph structure and node attributes are computed on a graph.
In order to solve this issue, only relevant representative node attributes are extracted by graph feature ﬁlters, allowing calculations
to be performed in a category-oriented manner. Experiments on seven datasets show that Graph Decipher achieves state-of-the-art
performance while imposing a substantially lower computation burden under the node classiﬁcation task. Additionally, since our
algorithm has the ability to explore the representative node attributes by category, it is utilized to alleviate the imbalanced node
classiﬁcation problem on multi-class graph datasets.
Keywords: Graph neural network, Message-passing mechanism, Category-oriented, Data Augmentation
1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) oﬀer eﬀective graph-based
techniques applied to solve abundant real-world problems in
diverse ﬁelds, such as social science [1], physical systems [2,
3], protein-protein interaction networks [4], brain neuroscience
[5], knowledge graphs [6], etc. The power of current GNNs
[1, 7, 8, 9, 10] is largely due to their message-passing mech-
anisms. However, the underlying behavior that spontaneously
aggregates messages on the graph structure is obscure.
In order to solve this issue, it is crucial to understand the
strategy of the message-passing mechanism. This mechanism
recursively aggregates information along edges, then updates
these newly incorporated features on the center node. Two pri-
mary components are involved in this procedure: graph struc-
ture and node attributes. Both components need to be clearly
identiﬁed to view the message-passing mechanism on a graph
in node classiﬁcation tasks.
In some research [1, 7, 8], messages were passed along
edges uniformly without accounting for priority of either graph
structure or node attributes. Intuitively, each neighbor node’s
impact was distinctive to the center node in the node classiﬁca-
tion task. Thus, attention-based GNNs [9, 10] were proposed to
further evaluate how the contribution of neighbors to the central
node varies according to the graph characteristics. However, the
contribution of node attributes was still not identiﬁed clearly in
∗Corresponding author

these research. Since the node attributes are updated by aggre-
gating the received features from neighbor nodes, the impact of
the node attributes is also crucial to aﬀect the transmission of
information. Therefore, we hope to ﬁnd a clear understanding
of the roles of both graph structure and node attributes. And
particularly in this work, a transparent GNN, Graph Decipher
(GD), is proposed to account for the impact of these two main
components in the message-passing mechanism on a graph in
the node classiﬁcation tasks.
The proposed GD scrutinizes the message-passing mech-
anism on the graph from three diﬀerent perspectives: graph-
level, feature-level, and global-level. The graph-level focuses
on the distinction of the graph structure in the message-passing
mechanism, meanwhile, the feature-level clariﬁes the contribu-
tion of node attributes under the node classiﬁcation task. As
shown in Figure 1, a single-head of GD contains two parallel
branches: a node attention branch (NAB) for graph structure
at graph-level and a feature attention branch (FAB) for node
attributes at the feature-level. And at the global level, a multi-
head attention scheme is used to repeat the computations mul-
tiple times in parallel, and then combined together to produce a
ﬁnal decision.
The relevance of node attributes or features is ﬁrst con-
sidered at the FAB to gain deeper insights into the message-
passing mechanism.
Graph feature pooling and upsampling
modules are introduced to update the node feature matrix ac-
cording to the node category. In order to estimate the impact
of each node’s internal characteristics under the node classi-
ﬁcation task, a dimension-based self-attention mechanism is
Preprint submitted to Journal of LATEX Templates
January 6, 2022
arXiv:2201.01381v1  [cs.LG]  4 Jan 2022

Figure 1: The overall architecture of a single-head Graph Decipher includes two main attention branches: Feature Attention Branch (FAB) and Node Attention
Branch (NAB). The former branch is dedicated to deep exploiting the importance of node attributes amongst distinct categories of nodes at the feature level, while
the latter branch determines the priority of nodes at the graph level.
proposed, which exploits the attention granted to the node at-
tributes in graph learning.
This innovative procedure yields
signiﬁcant improvements in ﬁnding the respective optimal at-
tributes of each node according to the categories. Moreover,
since only focusing on the optimal attributes instead of all, it
also helps reduce the computational burden. Then at the end
of the FAB, its output is combined with the concurrent NAB
branch that strengthens the contribution of neighbor nodes to
the central node for further calculations. Ultimately, a multi-
head attention scheme that consists of multiple parallel single-
heads outputs the ﬁnal decisions. Experiments show that this
proposed mechanism signiﬁcantly outperforms the other state-
of-the-art work on seven common graph datasets used for node
classiﬁcation tasks: Cora [11], Citeseer [11], PubMed [12],
Amazon Computers [13], Amazon Photo [13], Coauthor CS
[14], and Coauthor Physics [14], which are illustrated in Table
2.
Since GD not only focuses on the graph structure but also
considers the contribution of node attributes to message pass-
ing, it can also perform well on the imbalanced node classiﬁ-
cation tasks. For datasets with inhomogeneous distribution of
node categories, the network prefers the majority classes with
a large amount of data, while samples from a minority of cat-
egories are under-represented, resulting in sub-optimal perfor-
mance. A possible solution is to balance entries in each cat-
egory of the dataset by increasing the number of nodes in the
minorities. To avoid the over-ﬁtting problem, only the dominant
node attributes of each category analyzed by GD are retained,
and the unrepresentative features are randomly dropped or re-
placed during the reproduction process. Experiments show that
this proposed data augmentation method signiﬁcantly improves
the performance on the imbalanced node classiﬁcation tasks.
The contributions in this paper are summarized as follows:
• In order to improve the performance of the GNN model
on node classiﬁcation tasks, a new perspective, that is, to
improve the clarity of the message passing mechanism on
the graph is recommended.
• A transparent GNN, Graph Decipher, is proposed. This
scheme can explain how the graph structure and node
attributes aﬀect the message passing mechanism in the
node classiﬁcation tasks from the three levels of feature,
graph, and global.
• Unlike the common methods that assign the same weight
to each feature of the same node, we designed novel graph
feature pooling and upsampling modules to extract and
pay more attention to the dominant features for optimiz-
ing the message passing mechanism.
• To reduce the computational burden, we analyze node at-
tributes in groups by category, and only the representative
attributes extracted by the graph feature pooling ﬁlter are
utilized in the calculation.
• Since GD has the ability to perform representative anal-
ysis on the features of each node, it can be used to aug-
ment the samples from a minority of categories, thereby
improving the performance on the imbalanced node clas-
siﬁcation tasks.
The structure of this paper is organized as follows: Section
2 presents a review of the latest work on graph neural networks
and multi-class imbalanced graph learning. Section 3 identiﬁes
key terminology and basic concepts used in this paper. Section
4 describes the detailed mathematical process of GD from three
diﬀerent perspectives. The experiment design and results are
discussed in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 presents our conclu-
sion.
2. Related Work
2.1. Graph Neural Networks
The general understanding of the message-passing mecha-
nism of GNNs is that it updates the feature representation of all
nodes by aggregating messages along edges on a graph where
the contribution of graph structure and node attributes is crucial.
Recent researches [15, 16] apply aggregation operations di-
rectly to graphs and aggregate messages with shared weights
from neighbors to each center node. This kind of GNNs only
considers passing messages uniformly from one- or two-hop
neighbors along edges. GraphSAGE [1] aggregates and up-
dates features in a range of the two-hop neighbors to the center
2

Table 1: General Notations
Notations
Description
Notations
Description
G
Graph
A
Adjacency Matrix
E
Edges / Connections
eij
Edge between Node i and j
N
Nodes / Objects
v
Center Node
X
Node Feature Vectors
F
Node Feature Dimension
h
Hidden Representation
l
Neural Network Layer
α
Feature Attention Coeﬃcient
β
Node Attention Coeﬃcient
y
Ground Truth Labels
ˆy
Predicted Labels
θ
Parameters of Graph Model
θ∗
Optimal Parameters of Graph Model
fθ
Prediction of Graph Model
L
Loss Function
l(·,·)
Pair-wise loss function
∥· ∥
l0 norm
node. DGCN [8] considers the ﬁrst- and second-order prox-
imity to aggregate the attributes on the directed graphs. How-
ever, these message aggregators collect information from all
neighbors equally, ignoring the relative importance of diﬀerent
neighbor nodes.
In order to solve the issue as mentioned above, more studies
[10, 17, 18] consider the attention-based architecture to com-
pute the hidden representations of each node in the graph. By
calculating the node attention coeﬃcients from the neighbors
before reaching the center node, GAT [10] implicitly speciﬁes
the relevance of neighbor nodes in the node classiﬁcation task.
GaAN [17] considers the priority of the multi-head attention
with a convolution sub-network. WGCN [19] utilizes weighted
structural features to explore directional structural information
for nodes. However, these GNNs only concentrate at the graph-
level by assigning arbitrary weights to the neighbor nodes. Al-
though the neighbor nodes’ priority is investigated, the rele-
vance of node features is still ignored.
The dimensions of node attributes are supposed to play dif-
ferent roles in the above GNNs under the node classiﬁcation
task. For example, at nodes marked with lower weights, signif-
icant internal attributes will be suppressed to propagate. Con-
versely, nodes with higher attention coeﬃcients may have in-
consequential attributes ampliﬁed and passed along to the cen-
tral node, which causes information interference that limits the
overall accuracy of the network in the node classiﬁcation task.
Our proposed GD exploits deep characteristics of the message-
passing mechanism on both graph structure and node attributes.
The transparent mechanism allows straightforward investiga-
tion of each node’s internal and external impacts in a graph
under the node classiﬁcation task. These transparent nodes can
also be utilized in a wide range of applications, such as social
networks, recommended systems, the internet of things, emo-
tion estimation, etc.
2.2. Graph Data Augmentation
Node classiﬁcation is a primary graph task for a wide range
of applications [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6], as it determines the category of
the central node by comparing neighbors based on the message-
passing mechanism which learns the node attributes in the multi-
class graph dataset. The distribution of multi categories in the
graph dataset is directly tied to the network’s overall perfor-
mance. Many researches [20, 21, 22, 23] have demonstrated
that neural networks are more inclined to learn features from
categories with larger amounts of data, which results in rela-
tively lower accuracy of minor categories. Therefore, it is crit-
ical to augmenting the graph data to achieve a balanced distri-
bution of nodes by category.
Rong et al. [24] designed a DropEdge technology to ran-
domly deletes some edges before each training epoch to pre-
vent messages from being passed from the nodes labeled as
the majority category. Chen [25] proposed to change the con-
nections between nodes by adding edges to nodes of the same
category or disconnecting nodes from diﬀerent categories. Al-
though the data-imbalance problem can be alleviated, this ap-
proach may lead to propagation errors on the modiﬁed graph.
Shi [23] facilitated the partition of the annotated nodes with
a class-conditioned adversarial strategy in the training process.
However, these approaches did not actually increase the number
of nodes of the minorities, and their inconsequential attributes
may increase the diﬃculty of model training.
In this work, we employ GD to augment the samples from
a minority of categories by performing representative analysis
on node attributes to solve the above issues. The dominant and
representative node attributes are ampliﬁed in the minorities,
while the inconsequential ones are suppressed after the data
augmentation. Experiments show that such a method signiﬁ-
cantly improves the performance of the minorities on the im-
balanced node classiﬁcation tasks.
3. Preliminaries
This section illustrates the the terminology and preliminary
knowledge in this paper. To denote various terminologies, we
consider both uppercase and lowercase letters: bold uppercase
letters (e.g., X) represent matrices, while lowercase letters (e.g.,
x) stand for vectors and non-bold lowercase letters (e.g., y) rep-
resent scalars, while Greek letters (e.g.,α) indicate parameters
as shown in the Table 1.
Definition 1. General Graph Concept. In general, a graph,
G, contains two main matrices: adjacency matrix, A, for graph
structure and feature matrix, X, for graph information. The el-
ement of the adjacency matrix indicates the connection (Edge)
of each objects (Nodes).
Each row of feature matrix repre-
sents the feature representation of one node in the graph. Thus,
X ⊆ℜN×F, where N is the number of nodes and F is the node
attribute.
Definition 2. Undirected and Directed Graph. If the ad-
jacency matrix of one graph is symmetric, this kind of graph
3

Figure 2: Node attention branch. (a) The objective of the NAB is to calculate
the relevance of each neighbor to the central node. The diﬀerent edge colors
indicate the priority of these neighbors in the node classiﬁcation task. (b) The
node attention coeﬃcients indicate the signiﬁcance of the neighbors to the cen-
ter node in NAB.
is undirected. The edge e ⊆E is an unordered pair e = (i, j)
between node vi and vj, which means (vi, vj) ≡(vj, vi). Un-
like undirected graph, the adjacency matrix of directed graph
is asymmetric because of edges, (vi, vj) . (v j, vi). The undi-
rected graph is also considered as a directed graph who has
bi-directed edges with opposite directions.
Definition 3. Graph Node Classiﬁcation. Given a graph
with adjacency matrix A and node feature X ⊆ℜN×d, the even-
tual task is to estimate the anonymous label y of the node v ⊆N
by aggregating and updating the messages from its neighbors.
The loss function of the train processing is in Equation 1.
minL( fθ(G)) =
X
i∈VL
l( fθ(X, A)i, yi)
(1)
4. Methods
Figure 1 illustrates the main architecture of a single-head
of GD. In order to investigate the potential of graphs in the
node classiﬁcation task, two parallel attention branches, node
attention branch (NAB) and feature attention branch (FAB), are
explored to track down the message-passing mechanism. Like
GAT, the NAB learns a node attention matrix, NM, which rep-
resents the contribution of the neighbors to the central node at
the graph-level. While an innovative FAB module is utilized
to obtain the feature attention matrix (FM) to emphasize each
node’s attributes at the feature-level. Then, the outputs of NAB
and FAB (NM and FM) are combined to form an integrated at-
tention matrix (IA), which contains both attention information
of the graph structure and node attributes to complete a single
head prediction. The multi-head mechanism is ﬁnally used to
stabilize the learning process of the node classiﬁcation task.
4.1. Graph-Level: Node Attention Branch
An adjacency matrix is usually used in graph-related tasks
to represent the relationship among nodes on the graph. But
it ignores the fact that neighbors may contribute diﬀerently to
the central node. In the message-passing mechanism of the
graph, we hope that messages from important neighbors could
get more attention when they converge to the central node. There-
fore, in this work, a node attention branch is used to calculate
the contribution of neighbors to the central node according to
the characteristics of the graph task, thereby assigning diﬀerent
weights to the message-passing ﬂows, as shown in Figure 2 (a).
Figure 2 (b) illustrates the architecture of the NAB. Similar
to GAT, a node self-attention matrix, βvs, is learned to deter-
mine the relevance between neighbors and the center node, v,
as shown in Equation (3) and (2).
βvs = softmax(evs)
(2)
evs = γ(W · xv, W · xs)
(3)
Where evs represents the importance of neighbor node s to
the center node v. γ indicates the self-attention mechanism, and
W is the weight matrix. xv and xs are the node attributes of the
center node v and neighbor node s.
Once the attention coeﬃcients are calculated, the activation
function σ is applied to get the ﬁnal non-linear node attributes,
as shown in Equation (4).
NAB : xv = σ

X
s⊆Nv
βvsW · xs

(4)
The node attention coeﬃcients, which represent the con-
tributions of neighbors to the center node in NAB. However,
the roles played by the diﬀerent internal attributes of each node
have not been considered. Therefore, a new Feature Attention
Branch (FAB) is added to interact with NAB to update the atten-
tion of nodes and their corresponding attributes. More details
are introduced in section 4.2.
4.2. Feature-Level: Feature Attention Branch
The objective of the node classiﬁcation task is to classify
nodes by their attributes. In this task, traditional GNNs ﬁrst
gather the node attributes from the neighbor nodes surround-
ing the center node. The aggregated attributes are then updated
at this targeted node for category prediction. In both proce-
dures, the node attributes are aggregated and updated uniformly
on all feature dimensions. However, indiscriminate processing
that does not factor in the signiﬁcance of node attributes may
lead to inconsequential node attributes causing redundancy or
restricting the desired attributes in the message-passing proce-
dures. Therefore, it is crucial to evaluate the internal priority
of node attributes based on the signiﬁcance of node attributes,
allowing representative features to be examined more closely
in the message-passing procedure. This strategy improves the
eﬃciency of information transmission and the network’s per-
formance under the node classiﬁcation task.
Ideally, each node’s attributes would be thoroughly exam-
ined. However, this would cause a steep computation burden. In
order to determine the internal priority of attributes and reduce
the number of computations, we propose a category-oriented
4

Figure 3: The objective of the feature attention branch (FAB) is to obtain the internal priority of node features in a category-oriented way. This branch contains two
main modules connected serially: Graph Feature Pooling (GFP) and Graph Feature Upsampling (GFU). The ﬁrst module picks prominent local attributes on each
dimension and reduces the size of the feature maps. The next module calcultes the priority of these highlighted attributes on the updated feature maps. In order to
reduce the computation burden, the FAB process is performed by ﬁnite node categories. The details of GFP and GFU are illustrated in Figure 4 and 5.
self-attention mechanism.
Two modules connected in series
constitute the FAB: Graph Feature Pooling (GFP) and Graph
Feature Upsampling (GFU), as shown in Figure 3. The ﬁrst
module highlights prominent representative attributes and re-
duces the size of feature maps; the second module distinguishes
the priority of these attributes by categories. More details are
introduced in section 4.2.1 and 4.2.2.
4.2.1. Graph Feature Pooling Module
In order to determine the internal priority of attributes in
each node, an intuitive method is to calculate the relevance of
all node attributes. In this case, the computation burden is equal
to O(Xn), where X ⊆ℜn×F is the feature matrix of the whole
graph, and n is the number of the nodes on the graph. This ide-
alized approach can only be applied on the small graph because
the computation burden may be much heavier as the number of
nodes on a graph increases. However, in practice, we often en-
counter larger graphs with substantial nodes and edges in areas
such as social network graphs.
We explore the node attributes using category-oriented fea-
ture attention coeﬃcients to balance the demands of investi-
gation and categorize computations under the node classiﬁca-
tion task. From the graph perspective, nodes will be catego-
rized together if they share similar attributes. When the priority
of internal attributes of nodes is investigated within each cate-
gory, the relevance of each attribute can then be sorted under
the current task. The most signiﬁcant attributes can now be
selected and sent along graph edges, while the less signiﬁcant
attributes are suppressed in the message-passing mechanism.
This priority-based message processing contributes to the per-
formance improvement of GNNs under the node classiﬁcation
task.
Additionally, the number of node categories is ﬁnite and
far lower than the total number of nodes. Since the focus is
given to prioritizing attributes by category instead of individual
nodes, the number of feature attention matrices equals the num-
ber of node categories on the graph. The values of each feature
dimension share the same attention coeﬃcient in each matrix
labeled with the same node category. Because the size of the
concatenated attention matrices by category is equal to the size
of the feature matrix, X, of the whole graph, the computation
can therefore be reduced to O(X) in the learning process.
In the GFP, all nodes must ﬁrst be separated into ﬁnite groups.
Nodes with the same category are assigned into a single group.
According to these newly assigned groups, the original 2D fea-
ture matrix X is also divided into C sub-feature matrices as
shown in Figure 4. The most representative attribute vector
from each matrix is the mean feature vector to indicate the cor-
responding category since nodes in the same group and ma-
trix have comparable attributes. Nodes are sorted in each sub-
feature matrix in Equation 5 based on the similarity between
each node attributes with the mean feature vector.
sim(xi, x) = cos xi
J
x

xi

 · ∥x∥
(5)
xi = 1
mi
mi
X
1
x
(6)
Where xi is the mean feature vector, and mi is the number of
feature vectors of the i-th sub-feature matrix. The symbol x in-
dicates each feature vector of the sub-feature matrix, and the
symbol
J
represents the dot product between two feature vec-
tors.
Since adjacent nodes represent similar attributes in the sorted
sub-feature matrices, the local dominant values must be identi-
ﬁed, as they indicate the most representative attributes by di-
mensions, F. In this procedure, each 2D matrix mi × F is trans-
formed to a corresponding 3D feature map ki × ki × F labeled
with the node category, where F is the depth of the 3D feature
map and also the dimension of 2D feature matrix. Note that the
square root of ci n is not necessary an integer, thus ki is rounded
up to the nearest integer from Equation 7. In other words, the
shape of the original 2D sub-feature matrix mi is increased to a
larger value k2
i in most cases.
ki = ⌈√mi⌉
(7)
The ﬁnal step of GFP is to highlight the local dominant and
representative attributes in the max-pooling operation on each
feature map with the corresponding category. The stride of the
5

Figure 4: The graph feature pooling module (GFP) aims to highlight the local prominent and representative attributes by category. The original 2D feature matrix
is split into C sub-feature matrices by node categories. In each sub-matrix, nodes have comparable attributes and are sorted by similarity to the mean feature vector,
x. Each 2D sub-feature matrix is then transferred to 3D feature maps with the depth of the feature dimension F. A max-pooling layer highlights the prominent
local attributes on each channel (original feature dimension). These local representative attributes are then sent to the graph feature upsampling (GFU) module to
calculate the internal priority of nodes by categories.
operation is equal to the size of the pooling ﬁlter, and the di-
mension of the updated feature maps is given by Equation 8.
dim( feat maps) = (ki
s , ki
s , F)
(8)
The stride, s, determines the number of representative attributes
utilized to calculate the interior priority of nodes in GFU. The
computation burden and performance must be balanced, as large
stride values lower the computation burden while degrading
performance, while lower stride values induce prohibitively enor-
mous computation burdens. This is discussed further in section
5.4.1.
4.2.2. Graph Feature Upsampling Module
Although the local dominant representative node attributes
in each category are highlighted at the end of the GFP, the in-
ternal priority of the representative features is not yet known.
Thus, the objective of the serially connected module, GFU, is
to obtain the internal priority of the locally prominent and repre-
sentative features in distinctive categories, illustrated in Figure
5.
In the GFU, the upsampling operation is performed ﬁrst in
order to recover feature maps from the size ( ki
s , ki
s , F) to (ki, ki, F).
Since the total size of the recovered feature map is extensive,
vacant positions in the matrix are ﬁlled with zeros as they do
not aﬀect the graph semantics in corresponding feature dimen-
sions. Next, a transformation operation is performed in order
to convert each 3D feature map back to a 2D sub-feature ma-
trix X′. Because nodes are assigned by the feature similarity in
the GFP module, they are sorted in their original order in each
sub-feature matrix. Meanwhile, a corresponding mask with the
same matrix shape with a special value (0/1) is also generated to
record the position of the local representative features. A value
of 1 in each mask indicates a local representative attribute at this
position in the corresponding sub-feature matrix. In contrast, a
value of 0 represents the corresponding value at this position
may be unrepresentative in this category.
Since the local representative attributes have already been
determined in each updated feature matrix, they can now be
utilized to ﬁnd the internal priority of nodes by category. In
this step, a learnable self-attention scheme is applied to each
sub-feature matrix in Equation 9.
α j = softmax(xj) =
exp(xj)
P
j⊆f exp(xj)
(9)
where xj indicates the vector of j-th dimension in each sub-
feature matrix.
In Equation 9, current sub-feature matrices are still dense
with diﬀerent semantic values resulting in a heavy computa-
tion burden, even though most of these values are eventually
replaced with zeros after upsampling. Since only the local dom-
inant and representative features are needed, the computational
burden can be reduced by using masks that record the position
of local representative features, allowing the unnecessary zeros
to be ignored in the computation.
The LeayReLU non-linearity is considered as the activation
function. Thus, the Equation 9 can be updated as:
6

Figure 5: The objective of the graph feature upsampling (GFU) module is to obtain the internal priority of the local prominent and representative features from the
GFP by category. After upsampling and transformation, the 3D feature maps are next converted to 2D sub-feature matrices. A softmax function obtains the internal
priority of representative features with the mask with a particular value (0/1) to reduce the computation in each feature matrix. Finally the sub-feature matrices are
merged and then converted back to the updated feature matrix X′.
Algorithm 1: The dimension-based self-attention
mechanism on the feature attention branch
Input : The original 2D feature matrix X
Output: The updated 2D feature matrix X′
1. Split X to n sub-feature matrices // n = C + 1
// for each category
2. for i ←1 to n −1 do
// GFP module
3. Mean feature vector: xi =
1
mi
Pmi
1 x
4. Similarity: sim(xi, x) = cos
xi
J
x
∥xi∥·∥x∥
5. Sort the nodes based on the sim
6. Transform to 3D feature maps
(mi × F) 7→(ki × ki × F) where ki = ⌈√mi⌉
7. Max pooling (ki × ki × F) 7→( ki
s × ki
s × F)
// GFU module
8. Up sampling ( ki
s × ki
s × F) 7→(ki × ki × F)
9. Convert back to 2D sub-feature matrix
(ki × ki × F) 7→(mi × F)
10. Mask to indicate the representative features
11. Feature Attention Coeﬃcient with mask
α j = so ftmax(xj) where j ←(1, F);
end
11. Merge all sub-feature matrices to the matrix X′
Figure 6: Each dense sub-feature matrix is converted to a sparse matrix by ap-
plying a corresponding mask. A value of 1 in each mask indicates a local domi-
nant and representative feature at this position in the corresponding sub-feature
matrix. In order to reduce the computation burden, only these representative
features in the sparse matrix are computed in future operations.
α j =
exp(LeakyReLU(θ, xj))
P
k⊆Ni exp(LeakyReLU(θ, xj))
(10)
Where θ indicates the optimal parameters of the network.
The new non-linear node v’s feature is applied by the acti-
vation function ϕ in Equation 11.
FAB : xv = ϕ

X
j⊆(1,F)
α jWxv

(11)
7

Table 2: Details of graph datasets in our experiments.
Dataset
#Classes
#Features
#Nodes
#Edges
#Train nodes
#Val nodes
#Test nodes
Cora
7
1433
2485
5069
140
500
1000
Citeseer
6
3703
2110
3668
120
500
1000
PubMed
3
500
19717
44324
60
500
1000
Coauthor CS
15
6805
18333
81894
300
500
1000
Amazon Photo
8
745
7487
119043
160
500
1000
Coauthor Physics
5
8415
34493
247962
100
500
1000
Amazon Computers
10
767
13381
245778
200
500
1000
Since all feature attention matrices by categories are adopted,
the feature matrix X′ is generated by merging these updated
matrices with the last sub-feature matrix in their original or-
der, as shown in Figure 5. The strategy of the feature attention
mechanism is summarized in Algorithm 1.
The ﬁnal step is capturing both attention matrices from par-
allel branches on the graph.
The interaction of (NAB) and
(FAB) are combined to form an integrated attention matrix,
(IA), in Equation 12.
h = φ
W · σ

X
s⊆Nv
βvsWxs
· ϕ

X
j⊆(1,F)
αjWxv


(12)
This combined attention matrix contains the attention infor-
mation of the graph structure and the internal attributes of the
nodes needed to complete a single head prediction.
4.3. Global-Level: Multi-head Attention Mechanism
The above sections describe the architecture of a single-
head layer. The multi-head mechanism is ﬁnally used to sta-
bilize the learning process under the node classiﬁcation task,
which is beneﬁcial to GAT. Unlike GAT, the multi-head atten-
tion mechanism assigns distinctive attentions, c, on each head
in Equation 13.
hl+1 = σ(1
ζ
ζX
ζ=1
c · hl)
(13)
Where ζ is the number of multiple heads. Since the features
are concatenated with distinctive head attentions, the average
is calculated to make the ﬁnal node classiﬁcation with the loss
function in cross-entropy.
5. Experiments
5.1. Dataset
We experimentally validate our proposed algorithm on seven
real-world graph datasets, as shown in Table 2, which summa-
rizes the statistics of these seven datasets and the conﬁguration
of the train/val/test splits. The statistics summary of node at-
tribute values in each dataset is shown in Table 4.
Cora and Citeseer [11], PubMed [12]: These three public
datasets are graphs used to describe citation patterns of scien-
tiﬁc publications. The nodes represent publications, while the
edges indicate the citation links among distinctive publications.
For the Cora and Citeseer datasets, dictionaries (feature vectors)
are utilized to explore the most common words that appear in
these publications. Thus, each publication is described by a 0/1
value, which indicates the absence/existence of the correspond-
ing word from the dictionary. While for the publications in the
PubMed dataset, a term frequency-inverse document frequency
(TF/IDF) is used to calculate the separation between them. In
summary, the Cora dataset includes 2708 nodes with 5429 links
in 7 categories, and the dimension of each node feature is 1433.
The Citeseer dataset consists of 3327 nodes with 4732 links in
6 categories, and each node feature has 3703 dimensions. The
PubMed dataset contains 19717 nodes with 44338 links in 3
categories and 500 dimensions per node feature vector.
Amazon Computers and Amazon Photo [13]: These two
datasets represent two diﬀerent Amazon co-purchase graphs.
Each node denotes products in diﬀerent categories, while edges
show two interests in bundle sales. And each dimension of
the node features represents bag-of-words encoded product re-
views. In summary, the Amazon Computers dataset includes
11381 nodes with 245778 links in 10 categories, and the dimen-
sion of each node feature is 767. On the other hand, the Ama-
zon Photo dataset consists of 7487 nodes with 119043 links in
8 categories, and each node feature has 745 dimensions.
Coauthor CS and Coauthor Physics [14]: These two datasets
are co-authorship graphs. Each node represents the authors,
while edges indicate these two nodes co-authored a paper. The
authors are grouped into diﬀerent active ﬁelds or categories.
Node feature vector illustrates the paper’s keywords for each
node, which represents the author’s article. In summary, the
Coauthor CS dataset includes 18333 nodes with 81894 links
in 15 categories, and the dimension of each node feature is
6805. The Coauthor Physics dataset consists of 34493 nodes
with 247962 links in 5 categories, and each node feature has
8415 dimensions.
5.2. Experimental Setup
In order to avoid the gradient from exploding or vanishing
during the learning process, we chose Xavier [26] to initialize
the parameters of GD. The exponential linear unit (ELU) [27]
yields non-linear outputs at the end of both modules, NAB and
FAB. The softmax [28] is used to send the probability distribu-
tion over predicted node categories at the end of GD. Moreover,
during the training process, the dropout approach [29] is intro-
duced to avoid over-ﬁtting, and the dropout rate is set to a range
of 0.3 to 0.7 depending on the dataset. The graph feature pool-
ing size, s, is set as 2, and the number of multi-heads, ζ, is
applied to 8.
8

Table 3: Comparison of the performance (accuracy%) of diﬀerent algorithms for the node classiﬁcation task on diﬀerent datasets.
Method
Cora
Citeseer
PubMed
Coauthor CS
Coauthor Physics
Amazon Computers
Amazon Photo
MLP
55.1
46.5
71.4
88.3
88.9
45.1
69.6
LabelProp
73.9
66.7
72.3
76.7
86.8
75.0
83.9
MoNet
81.7
71.2
78.6
90.8
92.5
83.5
91.2
GCN
81.5
70.3
79.0
91.1
92.8
82.6
91.2
GraphSAGE
79.2
71.6
77.4
91.3
93.0
82.4
91.4
GAT
83.4
72.5
79.0
90.5
92.5
78.0
85.1
GD
88.3
78.9
85.5
95.5
97.3
83.1
89.3
Figure 7: The performance (accuracy%) and parameters of diﬀerent networks on seven datasets under node classiﬁcation task. GS: GraphSAGE; GD-x is the Graph
Decipher with the graph ﬁlter size of x.
Table 4: This table displays the statistic of node attribute values in the above
7 graph datasets. The symbol, 57♮, indicates the PubMed dataset’s 57 special
fractions (feature values).
Dataset
Feature Values
Cora
[0, 1]
Citeseer
[0, 1]
PubMed
[ 0, 57♮]
Coauthor CS
[0 ∼5]
Amazon Photo
[0, 1]
Coauthor Physics
[0 ∼10, 14, 21, 28, 29, 37]
Amazon Computers
[0, 1]
5.3. Performance on Node Classiﬁcation Task
In our experiments, for each dataset, a ﬁxed number of nodes
from each class are selected for training and another 500 and
1000 nodes are utilized for validation and testing, as shown
in Table 2. The accuracy for the node classiﬁcation task of
distinctive algorithms on all seven datasets is illustrated in Ta-
ble 5. It can be observed that the performance of the GNNs
(MoNet [30], GCN, GraphSage, GAT, and ours) surpass the
performance of non-GNN frameworks (MLP and LabelProp
[31]), which beneﬁts from the message-passing mechanism by
considering both node attributes and graph structure on a graph.
The MoNet, GCN and GraphSage GNN’s pass messages
along edges uniformly on the graph. GAT evaluates only the
contribution of direct neighbors to the central node on the graph
structure. The measured performance of GAT is 83.4%, 72.5%,
and 79.0% on the Cora, Citeseer, and PubMed, respectively. It
is superior to uniform GNNs on small graph datasets, but be-
gins to degrade on large datasets with large numbers of node at-
tributes, for example the Amazon Computers and Photos datasets.
This performance decline is due to desired attributes being con-
ﬁned to edges along neighbor nodes which have a lower pri-
ority going to the center node, as all attributes are considered
uniformly.
Because GD eﬀectively biases its attention to representa-
tive node attributes alongside the most relevant neighbor nodes
on the graph structure, it achieves state-of-the-art performance
in 5 out of 7 datasets under the node classiﬁcation task. GD
achieves accuracies of 88.3%, 78.9%, 85.5%, 95.5%, 97.3%
on the Cora, Citeseer, PubMed, Coauthor CS, and Coauthor
Physics datasets, respectively. In the case of the two largest
datasets, Amazon Computer and Amazon Photo, GD lagged
9

Table 5: The comparison of the performance (accuracy%) of diﬀerent algorithms for the node classiﬁcation task on diﬀerent datasets.
Method
Cora
Citeseer
PubMed
Coauthor CS
Coauthor Physics
Amazon Computers
Amazon Photo
MLP
55.1
46.5
71.4
88.3
88.9
45.1
69.6
LabelProp
73.9
66.7
72.3
76.7
86.8
75.0
83.9
MoNet
81.7
71.2
78.6
90.8
92.5
83.5
91.2
GCN
81.5
70.3
79.0
91.1
92.8
82.6
91.2
GraphSAGE
79.2
71.6
77.4
91.3
93.0
82.4
91.4
GAT
83.4
72.5
79.0
90.5
92.5
78.0
85.1
GD
88.3
78.9
85.5
95.5
97.3
83.1
89.3
Figure 8: The performance (accuracy%) and parameters of diﬀerent networks on 7 datasets under the node classiﬁcation task. GS: GraphSAGE; GD-x shows Graph
Decipher with a graph ﬁlter size of x.
behind the frontrunner by only 0.4% and 2.1%, respectively.
These experiments demonstrate the contribution of high prior-
ity components consisting of both node attributes and neighbors
of the graph structure under the node classiﬁcation task.
5.4. Ablation Study
In this section, a comprehensive analysis of our network is
provided. Section 5.4.1 demonstrates the impact of graph fea-
ture pooling size for the network performance and computation,
and section 5.4.2 discusses the eﬀectiveness of multi-heads ar-
chitecture based on the proposed single-head layer.
5.4.1. Filter Size of the Graph Feature Pooling
In GFP, the graph feature ﬁlter’s size is a signiﬁcant param-
eter that aﬀects GD’s performance and computation burden as
it determines the amount of local dominant and representative
features by category in the learning process. The GD’s perfor-
mance as a function of ﬁlter size applied to our seven datasets
is shown in Figure 8. In these tests, the accuracy and number of
parameters are indicators of a network’s performance and com-
putation burden.
As shown in Figure 8, the GD with feature pooling size 2
(GD-2) performs nearly as well as or better than most algo-
rithms tested. The GD-2 algorithm typically imposes a slightly
more signiﬁcant computation burden than competing algorithms,
though the gains in performance are clear. By computing only
representative attributes in the graph feature pooling ﬁlter, the
GD-2 algorithm can perform more eﬃciently. We found the
optimal graph feature pooling size to be 2, eﬀectively balanc-
ing the network’s performance and computation burden. Filter
size of 3 (GD-3) oﬀers much lower computation burdens; how-
ever, this comes at the expense of the network performance,
as shown in each test. These experiments show that the graph
feature pooling module successfully preserves the representa-
tive attributes under the node classiﬁcation task, achieving clear
performance gains with greater network capacity.
5.4.2. Multi-Heads Architecture
This section demonstrates how the addition of heads im-
pacts the overall performance of the network. We evaluated the
performance and complexity of GD on all seven graph datasets
as a function of heads under the node classiﬁcation task, as
10

Table 6: Balance between complexity (MFLOPs) and accuracy of our network with distinctive multi-heads on Cora, Citeseer and PubMed datasets.
Heads
Cora
Heads
Citeseer
Heads
PubMed
Flops(M)
AP
Flops(M)
AP
Flops(M)
AP
2
22.01
85.7
2
27.03
76.6
2
1166.64
83.3
4
36.67
86.3
4
45.01
77.3
4
1945.18
83.9
6
51.33
87.3
6
63.01
77.9
6
2719.16
85.1
8
66.01
88.3
8
81.01
78.9
8
3498.94
85.5
10
80.67
88.5
10
99.05
79.0
10
4277.67
85.7
Table 7: Balance between complexity (MFLOPs) and accuracy of our network with distinctive multi-heads on Coauthor CS, Coauthor Physics, Amazon Computer,
and Amazon Photo datasets.
Heads
Coauthor C
Heads
Coauthor P
Heads
Amazon C
Heads
Amazon P
Flops(M)
AP
Flops(M)
AP
Flops(M)
AP
Flops(M)
AP
2
1008.62
93.7
2
3568.26
94.9
2
537.07
81.3
2
168.21
87.1
4
1681.04
94.5
4
5982.16
95.8
4
895.12
81.9
4
281.36
87.9
6
2353.46
95.0
6
8326.02
96.6
6
1248.17
82.8
6
389.53
89.0
8
3025.87
95.5
8
10709.76
97.3
8
1611.41
83.1
8
526.70
89.2
10
3698.29
95.5
10
13083.77
97.5
10
1969.26
83.2
10
616.88
89.2
shown in 6 and 7. The ﬂoating-point operations per second
(FLOPs) and average precision (AP) are network complexity
and performance indicators. As heads were added, an improve-
ment trend was observed to the point of diminishing returns,
usually when around eight or ten heads are employed. On the
Cora, Citeseer, PubMed, and Coauthor datasets, dual-head per-
formance of GD is 85.7%, 76.6%, 83.3%, 93.7%, 94.9% re-
spectively, while the GAT achieves 83.4%, 72.5%, 79.0%, 90.5%,
and 90.5%. These experiments demonstrate GD’s superior abil-
ity to push the upper limit of an existing network’s performance.
When using four and six parallel heads, the performance trend
continues to improve dramatically. The 8-head conﬁguration
improves over the 6-head conﬁguration by 1.0% and costs 14.08M
FLOPs on the Cora dataset. Beyond an 8-head conﬁguration,
the trend begins to subside, as there is only a marginal 0.2%
gain in performance at 10-heads while costing a substantial
14.66M FLOPs. These results indicate that the 8-head conﬁgu-
ration of GD achieves high performance with an optimally bal-
anced complexity on the Cora, Citeseer, and Coauthor datasets,
and on the PubMed and Amazon datasets, the 6-head conﬁg-
uration of GD is the ideal option considering the trade-oﬀs in
performance and complexity.
5.5. Graph Data Augmentation
In section 2.2, we discuss the signiﬁcance of graph data
augmentation and its inﬂuence on the multi-class imbalanced
dataset. Without data augmentation, most false predictions are
concentrated in minority categories in each graph dataset, which
causes the network’s performance to diminish. Current researches
[20, 21, 22, 23] rely on attempts to balance the distribution of
categories by sampling from a portion of the original datasets or
class-conditioned adversarial graph learning. The primary issue
with these approaches is that regardless of their relevance, all
node features or attributes are considered in the graph learning
process. It means insigniﬁcant node attributes are ampliﬁed and
aﬀect graph learning. We hope to evaluate only the critical node
features or attributes to balance the node category distribution.
Thus, we propose a new method of graph data augmentation
to improve the network’s performance, especially on minority
categories, by utilizing the FAB of the message-passing mech-
anism.
5.5.1. Distribution of Node Categories
This section summaries the distribution of the node cate-
gories of all seven datasets, as illustrated in Table 8.
Cora: 2708 nodes in 7 categories. Cora dataset holds the
second least number of nodes among all seven datasets. The
number of the top node class (#4) is 818, while the smallest
node class (#7) only exists 180. The ratio between the majority
and minority is around 9:2.
Citeseer: 2110 nodes in 6 categories. The Citeseer dataset
includes the least number of nodes among all seven graph datasets.
The number of the top node class (#4) is 701, while the smallest
node class (#1) only exists 249. The ratio of the majority and
minority is around 3:1.
PubMed: 19717 nodes in 3 categories. PubMed dataset
contains the least types of the node category among all seven
graph datasets. The number of the top node class (#3) is 7875,
while the smallest node class (#7) only exists 4103. The ratio
of the majority and minority is around 2:1.
Coauthor CS: 18333 nodes in 15 categories. Coauthor CS
dataset has the most types of the node category among all seven
graph datasets. The number of the top node class (#14) is 4136,
while the smallest node class (#10) only exists 118. The ratio of
the majority and minority is around 35:1. Thus, the distribution
of this graph dataset is the most imbalanced in our experiment.
Coauthor Physics: 34493 nodes in 5 categories. Coauthor
Physics dataset obtains the most nodes among all seven graph
datasets. The number of the top node class (#3) is 17426, while
the smallest node class (#10) only exists 2753. The ratio of the
majority and minority is around 6:1.
Amazon Photo: 7487 nodes in 8 categories. The number
of the top node class (#7) is 1941, while the smallest node class
(#8) only exists 331. The ratio of the majority and minority is
around 6:1.
11

Table 8: Distributions of node categories in diﬀerent graph datasets are illustrated. The symbols § and ⋇represent the ﬁrst 8 and following 7 categories of the
Coauthor CS dataset. The third symbol ⋆indicates the ﬁrst 8 categories in the Amazon Computers dataset, containing another 2 categories with 2156 and 291 nodes
separately.
Dataset
#1
#2
#3
#4
#5
#6
#7
#8
Cora
351
217
418
818
426
298
180
—
Citeseer
249
590
668
701
596
508
—
PubMed
4103
7739
7875
—
—
—
—
—
Coauthor CS §
708
462
2050
429
1394
2193
371
924
Coauthor CS ⋇
775
118
1444
2033
420
4136
876
—
Amazon Photo
369
1686
703
915
882
823
1941
331
Coauthor Physics
5750
5045
17426
2753
3519
—
—
—
Amazon Computers ⋆
436
2142
1414
542
5158
308
487
818
Amazon Computers: 13381 nodes in 10 categories. Ama-
zon Computers dataset involves the second largest number of
node categories among all seven graph datasets. The number of
the top node class (#5) is 5158, while the smallest node class
(#10) only exists 291. The ratio of the majority and minority is
around 18:1.
5.5.2. Data augmentation on two categories: majority and mi-
nority
The multi-class imbalanced phenomenon generally causes
most false predictions in the node category with the smaller
data collection in the inference process. In order to prove our
conjecture, nodes from the major and minor node categories
are extracted to create a new imbalanced train and test datasets
separately.
The Cora and Citeseer datasets are used to test
our retrained network on these new inhomogeneous datasets,
which only contain two node categories. The network achieves
99.7% and 98.9% accuracy on these new imbalanced Cora and
Citeseer datasets. This kind of ‘extraordinary’ performance is
because the node attributes with the major node category are
weighted more heavily in the training process and propagated
extensively on the imbalanced test dataset.
However, if the
retrained network only tests on the minority nodes, the accu-
racy drops to 47.6% and 42.1%, respectively, agreeing with our
prediction. To solve this issue, we reconsidered the utilization
of feature attention of the pre-trained model to gain eﬃciency.
Therefore, we designed a series of experiments to ﬁnd feasi-
ble data augmentation approaches to alleviate the imbalanced
problem.
In these experiments, each graph dataset is split into ten
imbalanced datasets, containing only two node categories, ma-
jority and minority, with diﬀering proportions.
The propor-
tion of majority and minority in the ﬁrst imbalanced dataset
is around 10:1. A straightforward approach for releasing the
imbalanced node classiﬁcation problem is to balance the distri-
bution of nodes in diﬀerent categories by reproducing the mi-
nority nodes and their corresponding attributes eﬃciently. The
simplest method, ORI, is to clone the nodes and node attributes
in the minority directly. However, it may lead to the induced
over-ﬁtting issue because the network ampliﬁes and learns the
inconsequential node features in the learning process. In order
to solve this issue, another innovative approach for node repro-
duction are proposed.
Since GD can explore the priority of node attributes un-
der the node classiﬁcation task, the node attributes are sepa-
rated into two groups: representative features and unrepresen-
tative ones. The former are retained in the reproduction, and
the unrepresentative features are addressed with two diﬀerent
approaches to reproduce the minority: 1. AA: All the inconse-
quential attributes are cleaned, and then the cleaned node infor-
mation is directly cloned. 2. AP: For each reproduction, some
inconsequential attributes are cleared randomly. Thus, the re-
produced data is not the same as the second approach. Finally,
the propagation of majority and minority is followed by 10:1,
10:2, 10:3, 10:4, 10:5, 10:6, 10:7, 10:8, 10:9 and 10:10. The
GD is then retrained on the newly synthesized datasets.
In terms of the inference process, the test dataset now only
includes the minority. The accuracy of the imbalanced syn-
thesized datasets is summarized in Figure 9. The AA results
arrangement is less than 60% in all cases because all the in-
consequential attributes are cleared. This result indicates that
even inconsequential attributes have insigniﬁcant contributions
to the node classiﬁcation tasks. The maximum scores of the
ORI approach increased in all cases. However, the scores of
the ORI approach are only better than AA in one of our seven
cases. While there are performance gains, improvements are
still needed if the minority node information is repetitive. Fur-
thermore, the AP approach’s performance is extended compared
to the ORI approach in every case because the distribution of
the synthesized dataset with AP is diversiﬁed.
Following this discovery, another approach called AN is
used to reproduce the dataset. In this approach, some small
amounts of random noise is introduced to replace some incon-
sequential node attributes. An achieved higher scores than AP
on the following datasets: Cora, Citeseer, Coauthor CS. How-
ever, in the remaining datasets, AP performed better than AN.
The interquartile range (IQR) provides a visual indicator re-
garding the spread of accuracy amongst diﬀerent synthesized
datasets for each case. From Figure 9, the diﬀerences in IQRs
for both AN and AP are tiny for each case, meaning both ap-
proaches can improve predictions on the minority category of
the inhomogeneous dataset. However, it is essential to note that
the artiﬁcial noise introduced does not have any practical use in
real-world applications. Thus, although the network is more ro-
bust, the AN approach cannot be used in certain domains which
require a strong interpretability graph network, such as in med-
ical science.
In addition, the number above the max bar in Figure 9 rep-
12

Figure 9: The performance distributions of four data augmentation operations. The accuracy indicates the eﬀect on performance of diﬀerent approaches on
the minority category. The numbers above the max bar, for example, 10 vs 7, represent the ideal proportion of the majority and minority categories on each
inhomogeneous synthesized dataset. AN: Attention with Noise; Ori: Originally clone the information of minority. AP: Attention with Part Clean; AA: Attention
with All Clean.
resents the proportion of the majority and minority categories
on each imbalanced synthesized dataset. Here the max scores
of each approach are not from the most balanced setting, 10 vs
10, of the synthesized datasets in each case. For example, the
best setting of AP in the Cora synthesized case is 10 (majority
category) vs 6 (minority category). On the other hand, in syn-
thesized Coauthor CS, the best proportion of the majority and
minority categories is 10 vs 8 in both the AN and AP approach.
This is because the synthesized datasets are generated based on
a portion of the minority nodes. Thus, an appropriate number
of generated nodes from the minority category is suﬃcient to
balance the inhomogeneous multi-class issue.
5.5.3. Data augmentation on all node categories
This section is to demonstrate the performance of GD after
data augmentation of all categories under the node classiﬁca-
tion task. We followed the same procedures in section 5.5.2 to
balance the node distribution of all seven datasets: 1. Analyze
all datasets by a pretrained GD; 2. Retain the representative fea-
tures; 3. Reproduce the minorities by AP. After data augmen-
tation, the ratio of each two categories is concentrated to 1:1.5
on each training dataset. Then, our network is retrained on new
imbalanced graph datasets. 10 illustrates the increment of the
network performance with the data augmentation. As a result,
the accuracy of the network is further improved than the perfor-
mance before augmentation on all datasets, which also demon-
strates the improvements delivered by our innovative feature
attention mechanism of GD.
Figure 10: Increment histogram. The y-axis indicates the accuracy of our net-
work under the node classiﬁcation task. The solid bar is the performance of
our network on each original dataset. The shaded area shows the increment of
network performance with the data augmentation approach, AP, on each graph
dataset under the node classiﬁcation task.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, we propose a transparent GNN, Graph De-
cipher, that investigates the message-passing mechanism on a
graph under the node classiﬁcation task. GD improves func-
tionality by showing how the graph structure and node attributes
aﬀect the message-passing mechanism in the node classiﬁca-
tion task from the graph, feature, and global levels. By giving
higher priority to both neighbor nodes on the graph structure
13

and representative features of node attributes, GD eﬃciently
improves performance on the seven graph datasets studied. Mean-
while, the computation burden imposed by GD is acceptable
due to three novel features: i. it explores the node attributes
with category-oriented feature attention coeﬃcients; ii. it inves-
tigates the representative attributes retained by the graph feature
pooling ﬁlter; iii. it calculates the interior priority of node at-
tributes on the sparse matrix generated from the mask. Addi-
tionally, an innovative GD-based graph data augmentation ap-
proach alleviates the imbalanced node classiﬁcation problem on
multi-class graph datasets. We hope that these discoveries will
encourage future research into the possibilities of graph neural
networks in additional real-world applications.
Declaration of competing interest The authors declare that
they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence the work
reported in this paper.
