1
 
 
Objective: Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune, and demyelinating disease that leads to lesions in the central nervous 
system. This disease can be tracked and diagnosed using Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). Up to now a multitude of 
multimodality automatic biomedical approaches is used to segment lesions which are not beneficial for patients in terms of cost, 
time, and usability. The authors of the present paper propose a method employing just one modality (FLAIR image) to segment 
MS lesions accurately.  
Methods: A patch-based Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is designed, inspired by 3D-ResNet and spatial-channel 
attention module, to segment MS lesions. The proposed method consists of three stages: (1) the contrast-limited adaptive 
histogram equalization (CLAHE) is applied to the original images and concatenated to the extracted edges in order to create 4D 
images; (2) the patches of size 80 × 80 × 80 × 2 are randomly selected from the 4D images; and (3) the extracted patches are 
passed into an attention-based CNN which is used to segment the lesions. Finally, the proposed method was compared to 
previous studies of the same dataset. 
Results: The current study evaluates the model, with a test set of ISIB challenge data. Experimental results illustrate that the 
proposed approach significantly surpasses existing methods in terms of Dice similarity and Absolute Volume Difference while 
the proposed method use just one modality (FLAIR) to segment the lesions.  
Conclusions: The authors have introduced an automated approach to segment the lesions which is based on, at most, two 
modalities as an input. The proposed architecture is composed of convolution, deconvolution, and an SCA-VoxRes module as an 
attention module. The results show, the proposed method outperforms well compare to other methods. 
 
Index Terms— Medical Image Processing, Multiple Sclerosis, Convolutional Neural Network, Lesion Segmentation, Deep Learning 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Multiple Sclerosis Lesions Segmentation using 
Attention-Based CNNs in FLAIR Images 
Mehdi SadeghiBakhi, HamidReza Pourreza, Hamidreza Mahyar 
 

I. INTRODUCTION1 
ULTIPLE sclerosis is an autoimmune, chronic, and 
demyelinating disease of axons that causes lesions 
in the brain’s white matter (WM) tissues [1]. Varying 
from patient to patient, the most common symptoms of 
MS are weakness, balance issues, depression, fatigue, or 
visual impairment. As the most prominent visualization 
method for medical imaging nowadays, Magnetic 
Resonance Imaging (MRI) can visualize and diagnose 
this kind of disease [2]. Accurate segmentation of MS 
lesions in MR images is one of the most critical tasks in 
figuring out and describing the progression of the 
disease [3]. To do so, manual and automated 
segmentation methods are commonly employed to 
estimate and segment the total number of lesions and 
total lesion volume. Although manual segmentation is 
considered a desirable standard method [4], it poses 
challenges in the description of 3-dimensional (3D) MRI 
information. This method is found to be time-
consuming, annoying, and prone to intra- and inter-
observer variability. These challenges motivate Deep 
Learning (DL) and Machine Learning (ML) researchers 
to propose and develop a fast and accurate approach for 
the segmentation of MS lesions in MRI [5]. 
 
 Supervised machine learning algorithms are one 
group of automated methods that can acquire 
knowledge from previously labeled training data and 
present high efficiency in MS lesion segmentation [6]. 
Generally, traditional supervised machine learning 
approaches are dependent on hand-crafted or low-level 
features. So far, plenty of supervised techniques for MS 
lesion segmentation have been proposed, such as 
decision random forests [7] [8], ensemble methods [9], 
non-local means [10], k-nearest neighbors, [11] [12] and 
combined 
inference 
from 
patient 
and 
healthy 
populations [13]. Another group of automated methods 
is unsupervised which extracts patterns from unlabeled 
data. Therefore, a great number of unsupervised 
methods have also been introduced, which are based on 
thresholding methods with post-processing to remove 
FP and FN pixels [14] [15] or probabilistic models 
[16][17]. 
 Since 
1988, 
deep 
learning 
methods, 
especially 
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), have significantly 
increased performance in biomedical image analysis [18]. 
They require fewer manual features than standard 
 
Mehdi SadeghiBakhi was in Department of Computer Engineering, 
Faculty of Engineering, Ferdowsi University of Mashhad, Mashhad, Iran 

HamidReza Pourreza is a computer engineering professor in 
Department of Computer Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, Ferdowsi 

HamidReza Mahyar is a professor of W Booth School of Engineering 
Practice and Technology, Faculty of Engineering, McMaster University, 

. 
supervised ML algorithms and can learn by themselves how 
to extract features directly from data during the training 
procedure [19]. Deep learning-based approaches provide 
state-of-the-art results for different problems such as 
computer vision semantic segmentation [20], as well as 
natural language processing [21]. They have also gained 
popularity in studying biomedical problems, such as cell 
classification [22], retinal blood vessel extraction [23], MS 
lesions [24], brain tumors [25], neuronal structures [26], 
and brain tissue segmentation [27]. 
 A great number of CNN-based algorithms for biomedical 
image segmentation have been proposed. These approaches 
can be divided into image-based and patch-based methods. 
Details of these approaches are discussed in the following 
paragraph. 
 Image-based methods, extract features from the whole 
image as global structure information [28] [29] and are 
categorized into 2D-based [28] [30] and 3D-based [29] [31] 
segmentation. 
 In 3D-based methods, features are first extracted from an 
original 3D image by employing CNNs through 3D filters. 
The model then segments each pixel or voxel to the lesion 
or non-lesion. The high chances of overfitting are one of the 
disadvantages of the 3D-based method, which usually fits a 
large number of parameters when the dataset is small. 
Regrettably, this is a common occurrence in biomedical 
applications [29] [31]. 
 In 2D-based methods, the 3D image is first divided into 
2D slices and, then each slice is eventually segmented. 
Finally, to reconstruct the 3D prediction, all 2D predictions 
are concatenated together. When compared to 3D-based 
methods, 2D-based approaches are not as accurate due to 
missing part of the contextual information. However, they 
have fewer parameters for each layer, which can lower the 
risk of overfitting in small datasets [30]. 
 Patch-based methods use two different strategies for 
lesion segmentation. Utilizing a moving window, the first 
strategy creates a local representation for each pixel/voxel. 
Then, a CNN is trained to use all the extracted patches to 
identify the central pixel/voxel of each patch as either a 
lesion or a non-lesion. Considering the repetitive 
computations on the overlapping features of the sliding 
window, it is worth mentioning there is a long training time. 
Faster than the previous strategy, the second approach, 
randomly extracts patches from all over the 3D image. The 
extracted patches are then used to train the CNN-based 
model. Ultimately, the trained model segments each 
pixel/voxel of the patch as either a lesion or a non-lesion 
[32]. 
 The rest of the current paper is organized into five 
sections and a reference section. Section II reviews works 
related to the proposed method. Section III explains the 
dataset used to train and evaluate the proposed method. 
Section IV clarifies the methodology. Section V explains 
the evaluation metrics and compares the results of the test 
dataset against the findings of other methods. Finally, a 
discussion and summary are provided in Section VI. 
M

 
3
A. Motivation 
 For automatic MS lesion segmentation, the present paper 
proposes a new method based on deep learning which 
consists of two 3D convolutional network branches. The 
current study randomly extracts some large 3D patches to 
prevent overfitting due to the small number of data, and the 
lack of global structure information. Then a deep neural 
network is designed inspired by 3D version of ResNet [33], 
which consists of convolution and deconvolution layers, 
channel-based attention, and special-based attention. 
 The designed network can be employed in each path and 
each branch is assigned to a particular MRI modality so that 
the maximum benefits of each modality can be individually 
utilized. As a result, the present study has introduced a 
network that can have at most two different modalities 
(FLAIR and T1) However, for the first time, stunning 
results were achieved with just one modality (FLAR), when 
compared to other methods. In summary, the main 
contributions in this paper are: 
• Introduction of a 3D patch-based method to prevent 
overfitting and a lack of global structure 
information and to combine the two modalities in 
order to take advantage of brain tissue information. 
• Proposal of a deep learning-based approach with 
one modality (FLAIR) to segment the MS lesion 
which, for the first time, due to, the difficulty of 
providing variant modalities in terms of cost and 
time in the clinical situation. 
• Proposal of a deep learning-based approach with 
one modality (FLAIR) to segment the MS lesion 
which, for the first time, due to, the difficulty of 
providing variant modalities in terms of cost and 
time in the clinical situation. 
• Design of a 4D channel-wise and spatial attention 
module inspired by channel-based [34] attention 
and special-based attention [35]. 
B. Related works 
 As already stated, a wide range of methods for MS lesion 
segmentation has been proposed. Recently, convolution 
neural network strategies have reported outstanding 
performance in medical image processing, especially in MS 
lesion segmentation. Hence, this discussion of related 
works is related to CNN-based methods. 
 It should be noted that some approaches are patch-based. 
A useful illustration is a study by, Ghafoorian et al. [36] in 
2015 which proposed a 2D CNN-based model that, 
increases the number of training samples and avoids 
overfitting 
during 
the 
training 
process. 
Similarly, 
Birenbaum et al. introduced multiple 2D patch-based CNNs 
that use in parallel the benefits of the common information 
within longitudinal data [37]. Roy et al. developed a two-
path CNN based on a 2D-patch which employs different 
MRI modalities in each path as an input and finally 
concatenates the output of each path to create the final 
prediction [32]. Afzal et al. proposed a system that includes 
two 2D patch-wise CNNs which accurately segment 
lesions. Their first CNN network creates a lesion map while 
the second enhances efficiency by reducing the number of 
false positives [38]. Shachor et al. introduced a multi-view 
structure based on 2D patches. Each view of the 2D patches 
is passed to the model as an input and the patches output is 
fused to create the final prediction [39]. 
 In addition, there are some approaches to segment lesions 
based on 3D patches. Vaidya and Suthirth presented a 3D 
patch-based CNN for segmenting lesions, after which a 
WM mask is applied to the output prediction to reduce the 
False Positive (FP) rate and attain high performance [40]. 
Valverde et al. [24] proposed a cascaded 3D CNN approach 
whose first model is trained with extracted 3D patches and 
its second model is then used to reduce the FP of the first 
model. In addition, Valverde et al. developed a model to 
analyze the effect of intensity domain adaptation on CNN-
based models [41]. Simon et al. introduced a method based 
on multi-dimensional gated recurrent units and used 3D 
patches to train the model [42]. Salem et al. [43] presented 
a CNN-based model to create synthesis lesions in MR 
images as a way to deal with one of the biggest challenges 
in medical image processing, that is, a small number of 
data. They reported acceptable results even though only one 
image is used as a dataset to train Valverde’s proposed 
model [24]. Hashemi et al. [44] proposed a 3D patch-based 
CNN method which employs the idea of a densely 
connected network. They also introduced a new loss 
function to deal with imbalanced data [44]. 
 Furthermore, some approaches have used the whole 
image as an input. Brosch et al. proposed a whole brain-
based segmentation method utilizing 3D CNN which takes 
advantage of some shortcut connections between layers so 
as to extract the low- and high-level features from the 
shallowest to the deepest layers. By doing so, the model 
learns information and features about the locations and 
structure of MS lesions [29]. Chuan hu et al. proposed an 
attention context U-NET based on 3D images [31]. Aslani 
et al. designed a deep 2D encoder-decoder CNN for the 
segmentation of MS lesions [45]. Another paper of theirs 
introduced, a method based on a 2D CNN for slice-by-slice 
segmentation of lesions in 3D data. Lesions are separately 
segmented on each slice, and then each segmented slice is 
concatenated to create a 3D lesion mask [30]. 
 Although all of the proposed patch-based techniques 
perform well in terms of segmentation, they all lack global 
structural details. Simply put, the segmentation process 
does not take into account the brain’s overall structure or 
the exact location of lesions. In contrast, whole brain-based 
segmentation methods need a large number of data to train 
the model, which is regrettably a commonplace requirement 
in biomedical applications that is difficult to meet. 
II. METHODS AND PROCEDURES 
A.  Material 
 To evaluate and compare the proposed method’s 
performance to that of other state-of-the-art approaches, the 
present paper employs the ISBI2 2015 Longitudinal MS 
Lesion Segmentation Challenge dataset, which is publicly 
 
2 International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging 

available on the challenge website. Further details are 
provided in the upcoming section. 
 
ISBI 2015 Longitudinal MS Lesion Segmentation 
Challenge: 
 The ISBI dataset includes 19 subjects which are divided 
into a test set with 14 subjects and a training set with five 
subjects. For each subject, there are varieties of time-points 
in the range of 4 to 6, for each of which T1w, T2w, PDW, 
and FLAIR image modalities are prepared. The size of each 
image is 182 × 256 × 182 and the voxel resolution is 1 
millimeter. Two different raters (R1 and R2) manually 
segment the images, so the data set has two ground truth 
lesion masks. The ground truth is publicly available for 
training images, but not for test images. However, the 
proposed method’s performance over the test set is 
evaluated by submitting binary masks to the challenge 
website [46]. 
B. Method 
 The process of constructing the model consists of three 
stages: first, the preprocessing data, second, the patch 
extraction from images, and last, lesion prediction using the 
trained model. The following discusses all processes of the 
proposed method in detail. 
 
1) Data Preprocessing 
 The present study utilizes the preprocessed version of the 
images available on the challenge website. Preprocessing 
algorithms that are already applied to images of the dataset 
are skull-stripped by the Brain Extraction Tool (BET) [47] 
and N3 intensity normalization [48] and rigidly registered 
to the MNIICBM152 template [49]. 
 The current work applies more preprocessing algorithms 
to enhance the local contrast of the images and to avoid the 
distorting differences in the ranges of values. Contrast-
Limited Adaptive Histogram Equalization (CLAHE) [50] is 
applied to achieve this objective. Then, the edges extracted 
by the Laplacian detectors are concatenated to enhance the 
image and the 4D data is created. Finally, before passing 
the data into the network, the intensities of each image are 
normalized with a zero mean and unit variance. Figure 1 
presents an illustrated example of one slice of an extracted 
edge and the enhanced image. 
 
2) Patch extraction 
 Extraction of patches from the images begins after data 
preparation. The input of the model is a bunch of patches of 
images. Approximately 60% of the selected patches, which 
are 80 × 80 × 80 × 2 in size, are centralized on the lesion 
voxel. The rest of the patches are centered on the non-lesion 
voxel. Figure 2 depicts some of the extracted patches. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Impact of a preprocessing algorithm on the fourth screening of 
the sixth training sample. From left to right, a slice of the 3D original 
image, the preprocessed version of the image, and the extracted edge by 
the Laplacian filters. 
 
 
Figure 2: Samples of extracted patches from the dataset images. From left 
to right, the first and third patches are centered on the lesion voxel, while 
the others are centered on the non-lesion voxel. 
 
3) Network Architecture 
This section presents the proposed architecture outline. 
Inspired by the spatial attention [35] and channel attention 
[34] strategies, the present study integrates an adapted 
version of these two attentions into 3D ResNet architecture 
in order to capture a better contextual representation of the 
image. 
Subsequently, 
decision-level 
fusion 
[51] 
is 
employed to learn the complementary information 
independently from the different modalities. 
a) 
Base model 
 Inspired by the 3D ResNet, the architecture of a base 
model for MS lesion segmentation is illustrated in Figure 3. 
The model consists of convolutional, deconvolutional, 
batch normalization (BN), and rectified linear unit (ReLU) 
layers, as well as six stacked residual modules (i.e., SCA-
VoxRes modules) with a total of 25 volumetric 
convolutional/deconvolutional layers. As shown in Figure 
4, each SCA-VoxRes module includes two convolutions, 
two BN/ReLU layers, and an SCA module. In this module, 
the transformed feature and input feature are added together 
by the skip connection. With this connection, information 
can be propagated directly to the forward and backward 
passes. In addition, the SCA module includes spatial and 
channel-wise attention which will be explained upcoming 
sections. 
 It should be pointed out that filters and operations are 
implemented in a 3D shape to learn and extract stronger 
volumetric feature representation. Due to their computation 
efficiency and representation capability, the small kernels 
(i.e 3 × 3 × 3) are employed in the convolutional layers. To 
reduce the resolution of the input image and features, three 
convolutional layers are employed with a stride of 2. As a 
result, a large receptive field network is obtained that can 
extract 
more 
contextual 
information 
to 
improve 
discrimination capability. To overcome the internal 
covariance shift in the training process and improve 
network performance, four BN layers are inserted into the 
network. In this network, rectified linear units are used as 
the activation function for nonlinear transformation. Lastly, 
the extracted features in the 3rd, 5th, 9th, and 15th layers 
are deconvolved and concatenated together to use as an 
input of the segmentation step. 
 

 
5
 
Figure 3: Overview of the proposed Base Model (CNN-based architecture 
to extract features for lesion segmentation) as described in Section II. Data 
is presented in an input by 4D patches (The first dimension is the number 
of input channels, and then are the depth, height, and width respectively) 
and the model generates the feature maps which have 224 features for each 
voxel of input patch. Finally, the output of the Base Model is used as input 
to the segmentation layer, which is responsible for the segmentation of 
each voxel to lesion or non-lesion. 
 
 
Figure 4: SCA-VoxRes Module. The input should be in the size of (C, D, 
H, W) where C is the number of channels, D is the depth, H and W are 
heigh and width respectively. 
b) 
Spatial and Channel-wise Attention 
 Diagnosis of the brain’s white matter lesions is very 
challenging due to the presence of similar pixels/voxels in 
brain tissue and the resulting intensity. Furthermore, in 
CNN-based approaches, convolution operators represent a 
local receptive field. Consequently, the features extracted 
from pixels with the same label may somewhat differ and 
these differences cause intra-class inconsistency in addition 
to affecting the accuracy of the model. For this reason, an 
attention module is developed, as illustrated in Figure 5, 
which is based on a combination of spatial and channel-
wise attention for exploring global contextual information. 
 
 Channel-wise Attention: The objective of channel-wise 
attention is to enhance the network feature representation 
capability and emphasize interdependent feature map-
specific semantics by exploiting the interdependencies 
between the channels of the feature maps. The structure of 
channel-wise attention is illustrated in Figure 5. First, the 
channel-wise attention map, 𝑋 ∈ ℝ1×1×1×𝐶, is directly 
calculated by an average pooling and two fully connected 
layers from the original features, 𝐹 ∈ ℝ𝐷×𝐻×𝑊 ×𝐶. Then, the 
channel-wise attention map is multiplied by the input 
feature to scale each channel of the feature map. 
 
 Spatial Attention: The extraction of discriminatory 
representation is essential for the segmentation of WM 
lesions and this can be achieved by capturing long-range 
contextual information. Thus, a spatial attention mechanism 
can encode a global representation with a wider field of 
view into local features. As illustrated in Figure .5, the 
input feature map, 𝐹 ∈ ℝ𝐷×𝐻×𝑊 ×𝐶, is fed into the three one-
by-one convolution layers to generate three new feature 
maps, called 𝐴, 𝐵, 𝐶, while they are the same size, ℝ𝐷×𝐻×𝑊 
×𝐶. Next, 𝐴 and 𝐵 are reshaped to ℝ𝑁×𝐶, where 𝑁 = 𝐷 × 𝐻 × 
𝑊 is the number of voxels. Later, the spatial attention map, 
𝐸 ∈ ℝ𝑁×𝑁, is calculated by the matrix multiplication of 𝐵 
and the transpose of 𝐴, followed by the application of a 
SoftMax function to the result. In the next step, the feature 
map, 𝐶 ∈ ℝ𝐷×𝐻×𝑊 ×𝐶, is reshaped to the ℝ𝑁×𝐶 matrix. Then, 
matrix multiplication is performed between 𝐶∈ ℝ𝑁×𝐶 and 𝐸 
∈ ℝ𝑁×𝑁 and this reshapes the result to ℝ𝐷×𝐻×𝑊×𝐶. Finally, the 
output of spatial attention is calculated by Equation 1. 
 
 
(1)
 
 
where 𝜔 refers to a learnable parameter. The output of 
spatial attention can be obtained from Equation 1 as each 
voxel is a weighted sum of the features. 
 
4) Two-path Architecture 
 In medical image processing applications, datasets 
provide different imaging modalities for robustly analyzing 
various tissue structures. For example, in the ISBI dataset, 
four modalities are available, such as T1w, T2w, PDW, and 
FLAIR. The most significant reason for providing multi-
modality images is because the information of the 
modalities complements each other. Therefore, utilizing the 
basic model, the current study designed a decision-level 
fusion architecture with two individual paths. Figure 6 
presents this architecture. First, two modalities, T1w, and 
FLAIR are individually processed and two different feature 
maps are extracted. Second, the extracted feature maps 
from both paths are concatenated together and then used as 
an input of classification. This strategy allows for 
individual feature learning for each modality before the 
aggregation of the feature maps. 
 
 

 
Figure 5: Spatial Channel Attention (SCA) module based on 4D input. D, 
H, W, C are depth, height, width and channel. As well as N is equal to 𝐷 × 
𝐻 × 𝑊. 
 
 
 
Figure 6: The architecture of the Two-path Network integrates the feature 
maps, which are prepared by the Base Model, and segments them using a 
one-by-one convolution layer. 
 
C. Loss Function 
 One of the remarkable problems in medical image 
processing algorithms is dealing with unbalanced data. 
Since 3D images have fewer lesion voxels than non-lesion 
voxels, an imbalance in data is faced. Therefore, if the used 
loss function is unable to deal with this problem, the model 
converges to the minority class. In other words, samples in 
a class with a small number (minority class) cannot be 
classified accurately by using the model. To handle the 
imbalanced data, the proposed method uses a combination 
of Tversky [44] and Focal [52] loss functions. As illustrated 
in Equation 2, the Tversky loss function allows the 
assignment of different weights to False Negative (FN) and 
False Positive (FP) in order to improve the recall rate. 
 
 
(2)
 
 
 where 𝑝𝑖𝑐 is the probability that pixel 𝑖 is of lesion class 
𝑐, and 
 is the probability that pixel 𝑖 is of non-lesion 
class ̄𝑐, and the same can be said for 𝑔𝑖𝑐 and 
 which are 
related to the grand truth. In addition, hyperparameters, 𝛼 
and 𝛽, can be tuned by assigning a number in the [0, 1] 
range.  
 The Tversky loss function limitation is the low 
convergence speed due to the segmentation of small ROIs. 
This does not contribute significantly to losses. However, to 
overcome this problem, the current work utilizes the Focal 
Tversky loss function, which has a parameter, 𝛾, to control 
the segmentation of small ROIs. Equation 3 defines the 
Focal Tversky Loss. 
 
 
(3)
 
D. Train and Test details 
 At the beginning of the training procedure, the data 
should be split to make the train, test, and validation 
dataset. The ISBI dataset includes two sets of images. 
Consisting of 21 images from five subjects, the first set of 
images with available ground truth is randomly divided into 
validation and training sets. Sixty images are considered as 
a train set and five images as a validation set. In addition, 
the second set of images is used as a test set. 
 One of the main challenges for gradient-based 
optimization methods is choosing an optimal starting point 
for the learning rate. Classical methods employ a fixed 
number for the learning rate in all stages of training, 
however, it is better to adjust the learning rate during the 
training procedure by reducing it according to a predefined 
schedule function. In this paper, exponential decay is used 
as the schedule function. In our experiments, the Adam [53] 
optimizer outperforms performed better than other 
optimizers, such as AdaGrad [54], AdaDelta [55], and 
RMSprop [56]. So, Adam is selected as an optimizer. 
 In order to test the model, the input image is divided into 
80 × 80 × 80 image patches. The model predicts the label 
for each part and, in the end, all predictions are integrated 
as the label of the given image. 
E. Implementation Details 
 The proposed method is implemented in the Python 
programming language with the Pytorch framework. The 
experiments are performed on Google Colaboratory3 with 
12 GB RAM. The two-path network is trained end-to-end 
and, to do so, 4D patches are randomly extracted from the 
4D data as described in Section II. Then, the Focal Tversky 
 
3 colab.research.google.com 

 
7
loss function deals with the imbalanced data problem, as 
explained in Section II, with 𝛼 = 0.7, 𝛽 = 0.3, 𝛾 = 4/3. 
 In addition, to optimize the network parameters and find 
the best model, the current work utilizes validation data and 
saves the model with the best validation data results. The 
model is trained in 100 epochs with the Adam optimizer at 
an initial learning rate of 0.0001. In each epoch, the 
learning rate is reduced by the exponential decay function. 
According to Figure 7, the best performance obtained is at 
epoch 80. The training computation time of 100 epochs is 
approximately 12 hours. 
 
 
Figure 7: The decrease of loss function during the training step on the ISBI 
dataset. Due to overfitting, the best model is selected for the test step based 
on the validation set loss. According to the plot, the best model is at epoch 
80. 
III. EXPERIMENTAL SETUPS AND RESULT 
The ISBI 2015 dataset evaluates the proposed network and 
a direct comparison is made with plenty of state-of-the-art 
approaches. The main reason for choosing this dataset is the 
challenge posed by lesions, in terms of size, shape, and 
location. Therefore, future sections shall discuss evaluation 
criteria and outcomes. 
A. Evaluation Metrics 
Generally, with the usage of the model, the metrics between 
the ground truth and the predicted image measure the 
evaluation metrics of segmentation methods. Hence, the 
following describes the evaluation metrics employed by the 
current 
research. 
With 
the 
assumption 
that 
 
 represents the ground truth created by one of the experts 
and 
 is the output generated by the model, each of the 
evaluation metrics is defined as [46]: 
 
Dice Similarity Coefficient (DSC): Dice is a commonly 
used volume metric for measuring the similarity between 
the ground truth and the output of the model. 
 
 
(4)
 
 
Lesion True Positive Rate (LTPR): With the assumption 
of the list of lesions, 
, as the 18-connected components 
of 
 and a similar definition for
, the lesion-wise ratio 
of true positives, LTPR, is defined as: 
 
 
 
 
(5)
 
Where  
  is the complement of 
. 
 
Lesion False Positive Rate (LFPR): LFPR is the 
lesion-wise ratio of false positives which is given as: 
 
 
 
 
(6)
 
Absolute Volume Difference (AVD): The total 
volume of the absolute difference is divided by the total 
volume of the ground truth. 
 
 
 
 
(7)
 
 Although providing more information (anatomical and 
tissue-based features) for learning-based methods can lead 
to getting effective and accurate learning, the goal of this 
paper is not only to achieve high accuracy but also to 
provide a system with a minimum of modality and at the 
same time high accuracy. Therefore, the number of input 
modalities acts as one of the evaluation metrics, because, as 
the number of input modalities lowers, the method becomes 
more beneficial for patients in terms of cost, time, and 
usability. 
B. Results 
 The proposed method’s efficiency on the ISBI dataset is 
evaluated by a process that is carried out in two stages.  
 In the first stage, the evaluation is with training data, in 
which the ground truth of the images is available. Table 1 
provides the results of the comparison to those of other 
methods. As seen in the table, the current study’s approach 
outperforms other methods in terms of DSC and LTPR. For 
images of high and low lesion loads, Figure 8 compares the 
present paper’s segmentation results to ground truths.  
 
TABLE 1: THE FIRST ISBI DATA RESULTS OF THE PROPOSED MODEL IN 
COMPARISON TO THOSE OF OTHER MODELS. IN THIS EXPERIMENT, THE ISBI 
DATASET INCLUDES IMAGES WITH AVAILABLE GROUND TRUTH. THE MEAN 
VALUES OF DSC, LTPR, AND LFPR FOR DIFFERENT METHODS ARE SHOWN. 
Method 
R1 
R2 
Dice 
LTPR 
LFPR 
Dice 
LTPR 
LFPR 
R1 
   - 
    - 
     - 
0.7320 
0.6550 
0.1740 
R2 
0.7320 
0.8260 
0.3550 
     - 
      - 
      - 
Brosch et al. [29] 
(Trained by R1) 
0.6844 
0.7455 
0.5455 
0.6444 
0.6333 
0.5288 

Brosch et al. [29] 
(Trained by R2) 
0.6833 
0.7833 
0.6455 
0.6588 
0.6933 
0.6199 
Aslani et al.[45] 
(Trained by R1) 
0.6980 
0.7460 
0.4820 
0.6510 
0.6410 
0.4506 
Aslani et al.[45] 
(Trained by R2) 
0.6940 
07840 
0.4970 
0.6640 
0.6950 
0.4420 
Aslani et al.[30] 
(Trained by R1) 
0.7649 
0.6697 
0.1202 
0.6989 
0.5356 
0.1227 
Aslani et al.[30] 
(Trained by R2) 
0.7646 
0.7002 
0.2022 
0.7128 
0.5723 
0.1896 
Proposed-Method 
(One Modality) 
0.7982 
0.8013 
0.3676 
0.7978 
0.7295 
0.2628 
Proposed-Method 
(Two Modalities) 
0.7865 
0.8017 
0.3923 
0.7856 
0.7298 
0.2945 
 
 
 
Figure 8: Output segmentation by the present study on two ISBI training 
dataset subjects (the first row is Subject 2 and the second row is Subject 3) 
compared to the ground truth provided by Rater 1 and Rater 2. From left to 
right, the first column is the original FLAIR image, the second column is 
after the preprocessing method, the third column is the segmentation result 
of the proposed method, and the next two columns are the ground truth 
provided by Rater 1 and Rater 2. 
  
 In the second stage, ground truths are not available in the 
ISBI test set (with 14 subjects) used to evaluate the 
proposed method and the evaluation metrics are calculated 
utilizing the challenge web service. The current work trains 
its model with the training data’s four subjects, one of 
which serves as the validation data. Then, the segmentation 
of the test set is predicted and, finally, the 3D segmentation 
results are submitted to the challenge web service for 
evaluation. Table 2 presents the results of the ISBI test set 
and compares these to those of other published papers. 
Clearly, in some of the evaluation metrics, the present 
study’s results for the two modalities are superior to those 
of other studies. Even in the single modality (the FLAIR 
image), the current paper’s results are satisfactory when 
compared to the findings of other approaches. 
 As mentioned in Section 3, there are two different ground 
truths for each training sample and this difference indicates 
the challenge of accurately labeling lesion areas. In the 
proposed method, the knowledge of both experts is 
employed to train the model. As seen in Table 2, in 
comparison to other studies, the proposed method has a 
high LFPR. However, the visualization of the results shows 
that most FP pixels are in the connected neighborhood of 
TP pixels. In other words, the algorithm is unlikely to 
predict non-lesion pixels as lesions unless these pixels are 
connected to a lesion area, thus producing a slight increase 
in the lesion area. As shown in Figure 9, the created false 
positive pixels are all connected in the vicinity of real 
positive pixels, which slightly expands the area of the 
lesion. 
TABLE 2: THE RESULTS OF THE PROPOSED METHOD ON THE OFFICIAL ISBI 
TEST SET WHEN COMPARED TO THE RESULTS OF OTHER METHODS. THE 
METRICS WITH THE BEST AND SECOND-BEST PERFORMANCES ARE 
INDICATED BY BOLD AND UNDERLINED VALUES, RESPECTIVELY. 
Method 
Modalities 
Dice 
LTPR 
LFPR 
AVD 
Andermatt et al. 
[42 
4 (T1, T2, FLAIR, 
PD) 
0.6298 
0.4871 
0.2013 
0.4045 
Hu et al. [31] 
4 (T1, T2, FLAIR, 
PD) 
0.6345 
0.4787 
0.1299 
0.3949 
Birenbaum et al. 
[37] 
4 (T1, T2, FLAIR, 
PD) 
0.6271 
0.5678 
0.4975 
0.3585 
Hashemi et 
al.[44] 
4 (T1, T2, FLAIR, 
PD) 
0.5841 
0.4558 
0.0866 
0.4972 
Valverde et 
al.[24] 
3 (T1, T2, FLAIR) 
0.6304 
0.3669 
0.1529 
0.3384 
Aslani et al.[30] 
3 (T1, T2, FLAIR) 
0.6114 
0.4103 
0.1393 
0.4537 
Salem et al.[43] 
3(T1, T2, FLAIR) 
0.6305 
0.3670 
0.1529 
0.3585 
Roy et al. [32] 
2 (T1, FLAIR) 
0.5243 
---- 
0.1103 
0.5207 
Valverde et al. 
[41] 
2 (T1, FLAIR) 
0.5774 
0.2967 
0.1885 
0.3848 
Proposed Method 
2 (T1, FLAIR) 
0.6430 
0.4543 
0.3524 
0.3524 
Proposed Method 
1 (FLAIR) 
0.6321 
0.4547 
0.3868 
0.3880 
 
 
Figure 9: Output segmentation of the introduced model in comparison to 
two ground truths. Left to right are the FLAIR image, the results compared 
to the first expert, and the results compared to the second expert. In all 
images, true positives are denoted in white pixels, false positives in red 
pixels, and false negatives in green pixels. 
 
 The boxplots of the DSC, LFPR, LTPR and AVD 
evaluation metrics for different approaches are illustrated in 
Fig 10. The Figure shows our proposed method performs 
well in terms of DSC and AVD compare to other state-of-
the-art methods. As it is obvious, the DSC is in the range of 
[0.3, 0.85] and most of the samples are over 0.6. In 
addition, although the mean of the LFPR is high for the 
proposed method, there are no samples in which the LFPR 
is over 0.7, and most of the samples are located under 0.45. 
 Figure 11 shows the relationship between the ground-
truth and predicted volumes of lesions (each point per 
lesion). In terms of qualitative evaluation, it can be seen 
that most of the methods tend to underestimate lesions as 
many of the points are under the red line especially when 
the size of lesions is increasing. On the contrary, the 
method which is proposed by Roy [32] tends to 
overestimate the lesion sizes. However, with quantitative 
analysis, the proposed method estimated lesion size the 
slope closest to unity (0.76) together with the highest 
Pearson correlation coefficient (0.94). So, it means the 
proposed method provides a stronger global agreement 

 
9
between predicted lesion volumes and ground-truth lesion 
volumes. It is worth mentioning, a better agreement does 
not mean the model has better accuracy. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10: Demonstration of the tested models’ boxplot with all measures 
on the ISBI dataset. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11: Comparing the lesion volumes produced by automatic and 
manual segmentation on the ISBI dataset. Each point is related to a single 
lesion. 
IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS   
The present paper introduces an automated lesion 
segmentation approach that is based on one modality as an 
input which is rare in the state-of-the-art. The proposed 
architecture is an end-to-end 3D patch-wise composed of 
convolution, deconvolution, and an SCA-VoxRes module 
as an attention module. 
 In medical image processing, it is common to overcome 
the limitation of the single modality approach by combining 
different MRI modalities. Holding that patients cannot 
afford the cost of combining modalities in medical image 
segmentation, the current research presents a single 
modality-based architecture that is more accurate and 
robust than other multi-modality methods. 
 Furthermore, patch size is the limitation of patch-based 
CNNs which suffer from a lack of spatial information for 
the lesion. Therefore, the proposed method uses an attention 
module to capture long-range contextual information as a 
way of attaining spatial information. Consequently, the 
patch-based CNNs do not lack data, because many random 
patches can be extracted from 3D data. 

 Although there are several advantages to the proposed 
method the limitation of the proposed method should be 
taken into account. The most important limitation of the 
proposed method is the high range of LFPR which is due to 
the existence of two different grand truths in dataset. In this 
case, when the model is training, it should try to optimize 
the loss function according to the logical-or of two grand 
truths.
