1
Modeling Historical AIS Data For Vessel Path
Prediction: A Comprehensive Treatment
Enmei Tu, Guanghao Zhang, Shangbo Mao, Lily Rachmawati, Guang-Bin Huang, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—The prosperity of artiﬁcial intelligence has aroused
intensive interests in intelligent/autonomous navigation, in which
path prediction is a key functionality for decision supports,
e.g. route planning, collision warning, and trafﬁc regulation.
For maritime intelligence, Automatic Identiﬁcation System (AIS)
plays an important role because it recently has been made
compulsory for large international commercial vessels and is able
to provide nearly real-time information of the vessel. Therefore
AIS data based vessel path prediction is a promising way in future
maritime intelligence. However, real-world AIS data collected
online are just highly irregular trajectory segments (AIS message
sequences) from different types of vessels and geographical
regions, with possibly very low data quality. So even there are
some works studying how to build a path prediction model using
historical AIS data, but still, it is a very challenging problem.
In this paper, we propose a comprehensive framework to model
massive historical AIS trajectory segments for accurate vessel
path prediction. Experimental comparisons with existing popular
methods are made to validate the proposed approach and results
show that our approach could outperform the baseline methods
by a wide margin.
Index Terms—AIS Data, Path Prediction, Ensemble Learning,
Intelligent Navigation
I. INTRODUCTION
W
ITH the rapid globalization and increasing demand for
maritime transportation over the world, maritime safety
has attracted huge attention in both marine and trading sectors
during the past decade. Statistics show that more than 90% of
the world’s trade is transported by sea nowadays1, but mean-
while, a signiﬁcant part of maritime accidents (about 80%)
have been caused by human errors [1, 2]. These accidents
have caused severe people casualties, economic losses, and
environmental crisis. Therefore, the importance of maritime
navigation safety has been raised to an unprecedented level in
the marine industry [3].
Maritime intelligent/autonomous systems can provide po-
tential solutions in the future to improve safety during naviga-
tion and management [4, 5]. For this purpose, Automatic Iden-
tiﬁcation System (AIS) recently has been made compulsory
for international/regional commercial vessels above a certain
tonnage, including cargo, passage, tankers, etc, as well as parts
of civil vessels, including ﬁshing ships, lifeboats, and leisure
Enmei Tu is with School of Electronics, Information and Electrical Engi-
neering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
Guanghao Zhang, Shangbo Mao and Guang-Bin Huang are with School
of Electrical & Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University,
Singapore
Lily Rachmawati is with Computational Engineering Team, Advanced
Technology Centre, Rolls-Royce Singapore Pte Ltd
1UN-Bussiness Action Hub: https://business.un.org/en/entities/13
vessels [6]. Comparing with traditional maritime equipment
such as radar, sonar or closed-circuit television (CCTV), AIS
has many advantages. AIS messages provide rich information
of its host ship in a nearly real-time way. Furthermore, AIS
messages can be transmitted to and received from a very long
distance (20 nautical miles for onboard transceivers and hun-
dreds of nautical miles for satellite receivers [7]). Moreover,
AIS is less likely to be affected by external factors such as
sea conditions and weather conditions. A large amount of AIS
data are collected every day from different vessels at different
locations and the gathered data contain a wealth of information
useful for maritime safety, security, and efﬁciency promotion.
However, as will be elaborated in the following section, AIS
data usually exhibits many defects, such as low data quality,
highly irregular between-message time intervals and poor data
integrity [8, 9]. Plus trajectory diversity (different types of ves-
sel, different geographical contexts and different maneuvering
statues), therefore the problem of utilizing massive historical
AIS data to build an efﬁcient model for better vessel path
prediction is a challenging task and needs more effort.
Recently, there have been several attempts trying to utilize
big historical AIS data to improve vessel path prediction,
but these works have some restrictions or limitations, e.g.
requiring prior knowledge or good data presence. Here we
mention a few representative works. For more details, we
refer readers to [10]. Pallotta et al. [11] propose an interesting
Ornstein-Uhlenbeck Processes based vessel position prediction
algorithm, but it relies on externally extracted contextual
information, i.e. which assumes that a vessel must follow the
route provided by the Trafﬁc Route Extraction for Anomaly
Detection (TREAD) tool. Mazzarella et al. [12] develop an
effective Bayesian vessel prediction approach based on a
Particle Filter, but it requires prior knowledge from marine
trafﬁc analysis. Hexeberg et al. [13] propose a novel recursive
approach which uses the nearby historical AIS messages
around the prediction location to estimate the new position,
but it is only for short-term prediction less than 15 minutes.
Furthermore, the method may be sensitive to decision param-
eters and not suitable for data sparse region (i.e. open sea, at
which even nearby messages could be very far). Another work
presented in [14] may have similar constraints. There are also
some earlier works, such as neural network approaches[15–
17], Kalman Filtering approaches [18–20], Minor Component
Analysis [21], fuzzy logics [22] and kernel density estimation
[23].
In this paper, considering the characteristics of historical
AIS data and vessels’ trajectory segments, we propose a com-
prehensive approach to attack the problem of modeling a large
arXiv:2001.01592v3  [cs.AI]  9 Jan 2022

2
volume of raw AIS data for path prediction. Particularly, our
work consists of three parts. (1) Historical AIS data contain a
considerable amount of motion outliers, which could severely
mislead a prediction algorithm and has to be excluded from
training data. We developed an efﬁcient algorithm which is
able to automatically detect motion outliers. (2) Raw AIS data
lack conciseness and representativeness. We propose a sample
representation method, which constructs concise and uniform
features from raw AIS data to enhance the effectiveness of
data representation and learning. (3) We propose a motion
trend ensemble learning algorithm, which combines a group
of predictive models corresponding to different motion trend
so that the overall predictive capability is much greater. In
addition, we also construct an AIS database containing over
100 GB AIS data collected from hundreds of different types
of vessels and, based on the database, we conduct extensive
experiments to show the performance improvements of our
approach.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section
II gives a brief introduction to the Automatic Identiﬁcation
System and AIS data challenges. Section III presents the
proposed comprehensive approach to learn predictive models
from historical AIS trajectory segments. Section IV reports
experimental results for a comparison of the proposed method
with existing popular approaches, followed by discussions and
conclusions in Section V.
II. AUTOMATIC IDENTIFICATION SYSTEM AND AIS DATA
CHARACTERISTICS
The Automatic Identiﬁcation System (AIS) is a global,
autonomous tracking system which consists of a ship on-board
transceiver, ground/satellite station receivers and vessel trafﬁc
services terminals, as illustrated in Figure 1. The onboard
Very High Frequencies (VHF) transceiver broadcasts automat-
ically its host vessel’s kinematic information (including ship
location, speed, course, heading, rate of turn, destination and
estimated arrival time) as well as static information (including
ship name, ship MMSI ID, message ID, ship type, ship
size, current time) in an AIS message. The between-message
interval is 2 to 10 seconds, depending on the vessel’s speed
while underway, and 3 minutes while the vessel is at anchor.
Meanwhile, each transceiver also receives AIS messages from
other vessels within 20 nautical miles away. The messages
can also be received by an onshore station, a typical coverage
range about 60 nautical miles, or by a satellite, a coverage
range more than 400 nautical miles [24, 25]. These collected
AIS data can be transferred in long distance and stored in large
volume, and have a big value for maritime data mining and
intelligent navigation.
However, modeling massive historical AIS data for intel-
ligent navigation (e.g path prediction, situation awareness)
remains a challenging task. To be more speciﬁc, let us see
Figure 2, which shows a small part of our AIS database of
vessels near the west coast of the USA (more details in Section
IV). In the ﬁgure, each dot represents an AIS message and
each line or curve is an AIS trajectory segments of a vessel.
From the ﬁgure, we can see that historical AIS trajectories at
Fig. 1: Illustration of Automatic Identiﬁcation System (AIS).
least have the following issues. (1) The trajectories have a big
variance in terms of length, shape, location, and orientation.
(2) AIS trajectories frequently have some ”abnormal” ves-
sel motion patterns (e.g. wavering, U-turn, self-intersection)
which could mislead a learning algorithm and thus reduce the
generalization ability. (3) The AIS trajectories have irregular
message frequency, i.e. some trajectories have dense messages
sequences but others may have very sparse message sequences,
with possible missing data and erroneous values. Furthermore,
each AIS trajectory contains both time-varying features (e.g.
position, speed, whose values change with time) and static
features (e.g. vessel size, vessel type, which has a single value
for all the time). These issues, together with the big data
volume, pose a big challenge to existing approaches [10].
Fig. 2: Examples of historical AIS trajectories.
III. A COMPREHENSIVE MODELING APPROACH
As mentioned earlier, our comprehensive modeling ap-
proach contains three core parts: the trajectory outliers detec-

3
tion, sample effective feature representation and motion trend
ensemble learning.
Let us ﬁrst introduce some notations which will be used
in the following contents. Suppose an AIS trajectory set
contains N trajectories {γ(1), γ(2), ..., γ(N)}2, possibly from
different types of vessels and different geographical locations.
The kth AIS message in the nth trajectory is denoted by
γ(n)
k , k = 1...Kn, where Kn is the total number of messages
in the nth trajectory. Note that γ(n)
k
is an AIS message
which contains many data entries, such as latitude γ(n)
k (ξ),
longitude γ(n)
k (η), speed over ground (SOG) γ(n)
k (sog), course
over ground (COG) γ(n)
k (cog), date and time γ(n)
k (τ) (For a
complete list of all AIS message data entries, please see [8]).
We will simply use γ for γ(n)
k
when the meaning is clear in
the context.
A. Trajectory Outliers Detection
AIS trajectories may contain some non-generalizable seg-
ments (trajectory outliers) which may be due to some unusual
vessel movements (such as avoiding barrier or collision, trafﬁc
regulation). If they are not excluded from training data, these
outliers could severely mislead a learning algorithm, hence
harmful to predictive modeling3.
The difﬁculty is that the circumstances of unusual vessel
movements may be different from one to another and thus
the appearance of the trajectory outliers could also be quite
different. Therefore, it is hard to give a concrete detection rule
which could be used to identify various unusual trajectory seg-
ments. However, fortunately, we found that trajectory outliers
are, or can be decomposed into, two basic anomalous motion
patterns: sharp turning and self crossing, illustrated in Figure
3 (we call them type I and type II, respectively). If we could
accurately locate these anomalous motion patterns, we could
detect the trajectory outliers easily.
(a) Type I: sharp turning
(b) Type II: self crossing
Fig. 3: Examples of anomalous motion patterns, indicated by
red dash circles.
For type I, we make use of the mean-value theorem to pro-
pose an improved Ramer-Douglas-Peucker (RDP) algorithm
[26] in Algorithm 1. The input parameters d0, ∆a and ∆θ are
the minimum distance, the slope tolerance between parallel
lines and the threshold for sharp turning, respectively. The
function RDP2 in line 1 ﬁnds control points recursively, as
implemented in lines from 11 to 28. Then lines 5-7 calculate
2An AIS trajectory is a series of AIS messages sorted chronologically.
3It should be mentioned that it is possible to model the motion outliers
specially for anomalous movement prediction, but this is an even more
challenging task and out of the scope of this paper. We may leave it as our
future work.
the angle formed by three neighboring control points (See
Appendix B for function Angle). If the angle is too small,
then the middle control point has a type I anomalous pattern.
In function RDP2, line 11 calculates the slope of the secant
of the trajectory curve. Then function Distance in line 16
computes the distance between point fk(ξ, η) and the line
formed by points f1(ξ, η) and fK(ξ, η). The Slope function
in line 17 computes the average slopes of the front and back
lines at the central point, as implemented Appendix B. In line
18, if the slope difference between ak and a is less than a0 and
the distance between fk and the secant is larger than d0, then
distance dk and the index k are stored. Thereafter, line 23 ﬁnds
the index of the control point which has minimal or maximal
distance and divides the trajectory at these control points. Then
each subtrajectory is inputted to the function RDP2 again to
ﬁnd next level control points recursively.
Algorithm 1: Anomalous Pattern Removal: Type I
Input: AIS trajectory f; parameters ∆a, d0, ∆θ
Output: Anamlous Pattens Set B
1 I = RDP2(f, d0, ∆a);
2 K = Length(f), I = {1, I, K};
3 j = 0, I = Length(I);
4 for i = 2, ..., I −1 do
5
v1 = fIi(ξ, η) −fIi−1(ξ, η);
6
v2 = fIi(ξ, η) −fIi+1(ξ, η);
7
θ = Angle(v1, v2);
8
if θ < ∆θ then
9
j = j + 1;
10
Bj = Ii;
11 Function RDP2(f, d0, ∆a)
12 a = (f1(η) −fK(η))/(f1(ξ) −fK(ξ));
13 j = 0, K = Length(f);
14 D = ∅, I = ∅;
15 for k = 2, 3, ..., K −1 do
16
dk = Distance(fk(ξ, η), f1(ξ, η), fK(ξ, η));
17
ak = Slope(fk−1(ξ, η), fk(ξ, η), fk+1(ξ, η));
18
if |ak −a| < a0 and dk > d0 then
19
j = j + 1;
20
Dj = dk;
21
Jj = k;
22 if D ̸= ∅then
23
i, j = Minmax(D);
24
I1 = RDP2(f1:Ji, d0, ∆a);
25
I2 = RDP2(fJi:Jj, d0, ∆a);
26
I3 = RDP2(fJj:K, d0, ∆a);
27
I = {i, j, I1, I2, I3};
28 return I
The introduction of slope in the improved RDP algorithm
enables us to rapidly ﬁnd both the nearest and farthest control
points at one time. To show the difference, ﬁgure 4 gives
an example. The original RDP algorithm requires 5 recursive
function calls (P3 →P2 →P1 →P5 →P4), while
the new algorithm requires only 3 recursive function calls

4
(P3, P4 →P1, P2 →P5). Therefore, the new algorithm could
reduce recursive function calls signiﬁcantly, hence speed up
the detection process.
(a) Target curve
(b) Original RDP
(c) Improved RDP
Fig. 4: Comparison of the original RDP algorithm and the
improved RDP algorithm. In (b) and (c), the numbers indicate
the sequence of recursive function calls and the dash lines are
the secants of the corresponding recursive curve segment.
For type II anomalous pattern, we need to ﬁnd ﬁrst the
intersection location of two line segments in the trajectory
and then determine if the intersection is anomalous (There
are two intersections in the third ﬁgure of Figure 3, but the
one in the green circle could be a normal change of sailing
course.). We adopt the following algorithm which is widely
used in computer graphics [27]. More speciﬁcally, for two
line segments, say P1P2 and P3P4, we solve the following
equations to ﬁnd α and β:



P ∗= P1 + α(P2 −P1)
P ∗= P3 + β(P4 −P3)
(1)
Two line segments have an intersection if and only if α ∈[0, 1]
and β ∈[0, 1]. The intersection point P ∗can be computed
from either equation. Then we examine the trajectory length
cut by the intersection point (i.e. start from P ∗and end at
P ∗) and mark it as an anomalous pattern if the length is
shorter than a predeﬁned parameter, since a small loop usually
corresponds to an abnormal movement, as shown in Figure 3
(b).
B. Trajectory Sample Representation
Most of the existing works learn on original AIS trajectory
data directly [10], which lack conciseness and effectiveness
because the raw data are redundant and contain both static
and temporal components with an irregular time stamp. Here,
we propose a novel way to transform the original data into
uniform feature vectors, an effective and algorithm-friendly
representation, by three steps described as follows.
The ﬁrst step is to transform the irregular temporal com-
ponent of a trajectory into uniform samples of equal length4.
Here we follow the way described in [28] to make overlapped
training samples from the trajectory, because the method could
make sure that most of the raw data could be translated into
the training data. After this, let S be the sample set and
4Sample could be equal spanning time, equal spanning distance length or
equal message number.
T be the corresponding training target set, in a one-by-one
correspondence. Here each sample si ∈S is a small fragment
of the trajectory and its target, ft ∈T , is an AIS message,
which is τt time (the prediction time) later after the last
message in si.
Comparing to the vastness of the earth surface, the trajec-
tories are very sparse in most water regions except for near
shore port areas. So it could easily result in an overﬁtting
model if a machine learning algorithm is applied simply to the
original GPS positions in the AIS data. To avoid this problem,
our second step of obtaining effective training samples is to
map the GPS positions to a local coordinate system, which is
homeomorphic to the original GPS coordinate space but the
trajectory data distributes much densely, so we could learn a
model in a more efﬁcient way in this new coordinate system.
It is worth mentioning that to guarantee the homeomorphism,
the mapping has to be invertible. Under this condition, the
prediction results given by the model during testing stage
could be mapped back to earth GPS positions. Otherwise, the
mapping is meaningless and the model would be useless.
To this end, we ﬁrst deﬁne the sample direction θ to be
the smallest angle between the tangent line and horizontal
direction, i.e. for a sample s ∈S from the sample set
θ = sign(v) arccos
vT u
∥v∥· ∥u∥
(2)
where vector v = (∆f(ξ), ∆f(η)) is the latitude and longitude
coordinate difference between the ﬁrst two messages in s and
u = (1, 0) is a horizontal unit vector. sign(v) is a sign function,
which gives 1 if v(2) is positive and -1 otherwise. Thereafter
we compute a mapping matrix Γ as
Γ ≜


α
β
αξ0 + βη0
−β
α
αη0 −βξ0
0
0
1


(3)
where α = cos(θ) and β = sin(θ). ξ0 and η0 are the latitude
and longitude, respectively, of the ﬁrst AIS message in s. Note
that since α and β cannot simultaneously be zero for any
value of θ, the matrix Γ is always invertible. Finally, we can
apply Γ to the latitude and longitude coordinates of each AIS
message in s (together with its training target) to map them
from the real geographical coordinates into a local coordinate
system5. In the prediction stage, we need to perform a reverse
operation to map the prediction value back to real geographical
coordinates, i.e. latitude and longitude. Since Γ is invertible,
the only thing needs to do is multiplying Γ−1 to the model
prediction output.
After transformed by Γ, let the new sample be ¯s and
its l AIS messages be ( ¯f1, ¯f2, ..., ¯fl). We make use of both
5We should point out that at a ﬁrst glance, this operation seemingly does
not make much sense, because the mapping just shifts the sample to the
origin point (0, 0) and then rotates it to align to the horizontal direction
rightward. But, in fact, the mapping is a very effective and important operation
to overcome the model overﬁtting issue. It gathers those sparsely distributed
trajectory samples from vast GPS coordinate space and put them into a dense
region in a local space, which is homeomorphic to the earth GPS space.
Meanwhile the mapping keeps the relative spatial relationship (hence the
motion trend to be learned) between the sample and its training target.

5
kinematic and static information in the AIS messages to design
a group of representation features, which are able to reﬂect the
instantaneous motion status (i.e. position, velocity, accelera-
tion) during the short period of the l messages, and meanwhile
overcome the problem of irregular message intervals. The
features are as follows.
• Latitude features. Latitude coordinates of the ﬁrst, middle
and last two AIS messages
¯f1(ξ), ¯f2(ξ), ¯fl/2(ξ), ¯fl/2+1(ξ), ¯fl−1(ξ), ¯fl(ξ)
The reason is that the beginning, middle and end points
are the three most important instantaneous positions that
record the vessels motion dynamics. Besides, the average
of the latitudes in the ﬁrst half sample and the second
half sample, respectively, also reﬂect the vessel’s overall
sailing trend during that period
2
l
l/2
X
k=1
¯fk(ξ),
2
l
l
X
k=l/2+1
¯fk(ξ)
• Longitude features. Similarly, the longitude coordinates
of the ﬁrst, middle and last two AIS messages
¯f1(η), ¯f2(η), ¯fl/2(η), ¯fl/2+1(η), ¯fl−1(η), ¯fl(η)
and the averages of the longitudes of the front half sample
and second half sample
2
l
l/2
X
k=1
¯fk(η),
2
l
l
X
k=l/2+1
¯fk(η)
• Velocity features. At any moment, the motion direction
of a vessel can be decomposed into two components:
latitude and longitude . Since a vessel’s future position
is closely related to the latest motion status, we compute
two instantaneous velocity values and one mean velocity
value along the two directions. So the latitude velocity
features are
∆¯fl−1(ξ)
∆τl−1
, ∆¯fl(ξ)
∆τl
, 1
l
l
X
k=1
∆¯fk(ξ)
∆τk
where ∆¯fk(ξ) is the difference ¯fk(ξ)−¯fk−1(ξ) and ∆τk
is the time interval between the kth AIS message and the
(k −1)th AIS message. Correspondingly, the longitude
velocity features are
∆¯fl−1(η)
∆τl−1
, ∆¯fl(η)
∆τl
, 1
l
l
X
k=1
∆¯fk(η)
∆τk
• Features of speed over ground (SOG), the acceleration
and sailing direction (course over ground, COG) of the
vessel.
1
k
l
X
i=l−k
¯fi (sog), 1
k
l
X
i=l−k
∆¯fi (sog)
∆τi
, 1
k
l
X
i=l−k
¯fi(cog)
where ∆¯fk(sog) is ¯fk(sog) −¯fk−1(sog) . The ﬁrst term
is the average of SOG and the second term is the average
of SOG change rate (acceleration). The third term is the
average of COG. Here only the last k AIS messages are
utilized to deﬁne the features.
• Other static information in AIS messages, including ves-
sel size, type and drought, since they also deliver impor-
tant information of the vessel motion characteristics.
So far, for the sample ¯s, we could construct its a feature
vector, denoted as x, to summarize the instantaneous motion
dynamics of the vessel by concatenating these feature values
together. Comparing with raw AIS data entries, as have been
used in some existing work such as [15, 23, 29], the new
features are more concise, representative and effective. Impor-
tantly, even if the same length and AIS messages frequency
may vary considerably, the feature vector maintains a ﬁxed
length and representativeness.
C. Motion Trend Ensemble Learning
We have computed a feature vector to represent each
sample. Putting all samples’ feature vectors together we
make a training data set denoted by (X, Y), where X =
{x1, x2, ..., xN} is the training samples set and Y
=
{y1, y2, ..., yN} is the corresponding training target set.
Each yi is a pair of transformed latitude and longitude
( ¯ft(ξ), ¯ft(η))i. Figure 5 displays the architecture of the pro-
posed ensemble learning algorithm. As indicated by the circled
numbers in the ﬁgure, the training samples are ﬁrst clustered
into k clusters, say X1, X2, ..., Xk, by an unsupervised learning
algorithm (here we use kmeans for simplicity, but other unsu-
pervised learning algorithms are equally applicable). The main
purpose of this step is to reduce the diversity and imbalance
(hence the modeling difﬁculty) of vessel movements for a
modeling algorithm. The resultant clusters have two usages:
the ﬁrst one is to train a predictive model for each cluster
learning stage (circled 2) and the second one is to perform
model selection and fusion in testing stage (circled 4 & 5).
For the ﬁrst usage, given a pattern cluster Xi ⊂X, the
corresponding training target set Yi could be collected from Y.
Then for each pair of (Xi, Yi), we could build a motion model
by training a supervised learning algorithm, such as neural
networks, least square support vector machine, etc. In our
current implementation, we use the extreme learning machine
(ELM) [30, 31] which is a special type of multilayer neural
networks and is very efﬁcient.
At the testing stage, the clusters X1, X2, ..., Xk are as-
signed to labels 1, 2, ..., k, respectively. All samples in the
same cluster share a cluster label. Given a testing sample x,
the (weighted) k-nearest-neighbor (kNN) algorithm could be
adopted to ﬁnd its closest K neighboring from the labeled
clusters (circled 3). Each nearest-neighbor sample is fed to the
model corresponding to the labeled cluster to get its prediction,
hence the prediction error regarding to original training target
in Y. The ﬁrst r(r ≤k) models with lowest prediction
error and the associated nearest-neighbors (a subset of the K
nearest-neighbor samples) are selected (circled 4). The ﬁnal
prediction result of x can be obtained by the following fusion
scheme
y = (
r
X
i=1
wiˆyi)/
r
X
i=1
wi
(4)

6
Fig. 5: An ensemble learning algorithm. The numbers in the circles indicate learning procedures.
where ˆyi is the prediction result of x given by the ith selected
model and wi = exp
 −e2
i /2σ2 
. ei is the average prediction
error of selected model i on the nearest-neighbors.
The advantages of the proposed ensemble learning are
as follows. First, modeling each pattern cluster separately
can achieve better prediction accuracy, because the diversity
and imbalance, hence the modeling difﬁculty, within each
cluster are signiﬁcantly reduced. Second, training an algorithm
with a smaller cluster usually saves much computation cost,
because the computational complexity of most machine learn-
ing algorithms is polynomial with respect to the number of
training samples. Finally, it is more ﬂexible to model each
motion pattern cluster individually, because each model can be
adjusted without any inﬂuence on other models’ performance.
This is especially important when some new samples are added
or part of samples are removed. In this case, only the related
model needs to be updated. Furthermore, the fusion of multiple
models with similar movements tends to be stabler than a
single one.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In this section, we conduct experiments to compare the pro-
posed approach with several popular path prediction methods
on a real-world dataset, which constitutes AIS messages from
both ground stations and satellite stations.
A. AIS Database and Experimental Dataset
We implemented a web data crawler which continuously
crawling real AIS data from the Internet to build an AIS
database for vessel path prediction and maritime data mining.
The database is about 100GB and is from the international
data provider Marine Cadastre 6, containing AIS messages of
both ground stations and satellite stations.
For our experimental purpose, we only use part of the
database to construct an experimental dataset, because the
whole database is too huge for a learning algorithm running
on a single computer. From the database, 200 trajectories
from 180 different vessels (including cargo, tank, towing &
6http://marinecadastre.gov
tug vessel, ﬁshing boat, lifeboat, etc) are extracted to form
a dataset7 and then the preprocessing algorithm in Appendix
A is applied to remove some apparent issues. Details of the
trajectory extraction process and related information of the
database can be found in [28]. Fig. 6 shows the trajectory
length distribution and message time interval distribution in
the dataset. In each ﬁgure, we display the overall amount
for all abscissa quantity that is out of the range (larger than
the right-most abscissa value) in the last bin (brown color).
From these ﬁgures, we can see the irregular trajectory lengths
and between-message time intervals. Note that the intervals
distribute in a rather broad range, i.e. from minutes to hours
long. Most predictive approaches (for static vector or time
series ) requires either ﬁxed sample length or ﬁxed step size
[32, 33], so it will be very low efﬁciency even infeasible to
training algorithms directly using real-world raw AIS data.
Fig. 6: Trajectory length distribution (left) and message time
interval distribution (right).
B. Single Path Prediction Simulation
To demonstrate why machine learning based path prediction
outperforms straightforward linear projection and velocity cal-
culation, we ﬁrst run an experiment for a single path prediction
to compare the capability of linear projection method, SOG-
COG estimate method and our method. Linear projection
method performs a forward linear interpolation to predict
next time position using the latest three AIS messages. SOG-
COG estimate method computes the next time position by
7Due to copyright concern, the dataset is only available upon request.

7
multiplying SOG with time gap and project it to current
COG direction. While these two methods are most basic
and straightforward, they are very illustrative and intuitive to
show the difference and importance of machine learning based
approaches. Figure 7 displays the simulation results for 30
minutes prediction (The smoother the predicted path is and
the closer the predicted path to the true sailing trajectory, the
better the result is).
Fig. 7: Single path simulation results. From left to right: linear
, SOG-COG and the proposed method. The white line in each
map is the true sailing trajectory and the blue line is the
predicted result.
From these results, we can see that the linear prediction
method is able to output a smooth predicted path, but the
deviation is very big. SOG-COG estimate method could follow
true sailing trajectory more closely, but its results perturb
signiﬁcantly because of the ﬂuctuations in instantaneous speed
and course values. The proposed method is able to give a much
more accurate prediction. The reason is that linear and SOG-
COG methods are based on a vessel’s instantaneous motion
state (current or one time step back) and thus the predicted
future path is also ”short-sight” and inaccurate. In the contrast,
the proposed method learns a group of models using a large
amount of historical AIS trajectories, which contain various
complex motion patterns. As a result, the learned models
remember all types of motion patterns and could predict future
vessel motion trends earlier.
C. Quantitative Comparison Results
In this section, we conduct experiments on the AIS dataset
to compare quantitatively the proposed approach with Gaus-
sian Process Regression (GPR) , Least Square Support Vector
Machine (LS-SVM), Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) and Gaus-
sian Mixture Models (GMM). We choose these algorithms
as the baseline because they are popular for path prediction
and able to achieve state of the art results [15, 29, 34–36]8.
The Original Extreme Learning Machine (ELM) algorithm
8We also run Kalman ﬁltering based prediction algorithms, but their
prediction errors are very large for our tasks. The reason may be that Kalman
ﬁltering is suitable for short-term prediction, usually the next time stamp
within seconds length, but here we make much longer predictions on a low-
quality dataset, from 15 minutes to 1 hour.
(applying directly to raw) is also included as a baseline
algorithm to show the effectiveness of our comprehensive
approach.
We perform multi-step predictions, i.e. four different future
time steps (15, 30, 45 and 60 minutes ahead) to compare the
capability and ﬂexibility of these path methods. Experiments
are run in a 10-fold cross validation way on the dataset and
the ﬁnal prediction error is the average of the 10-fold results.
The prediction error is measured by the geographical distance
(computed by the GeoDistance function in Appendix A)
between the ground truth and the predicted result. The parame-
ters of the baseline algorithms are tuned by cross validation to
produce the lowest errors. The experiments are implemented
with MATLAB 2015a and conducted on a computer with 2.0
GHz dual-core Intel CPU and 16 GB RAM memory.
1) Full dataset experiments: We ﬁrst conduct experiments
on the whole dataset to demonstrate the capability of each
algorithm to learn complex motion patterns from a mixture of
a variety of trajectories. The results are shown in Table I. The
ﬁrst column is the prediction time (unit: minute).
TABLE I: Prediction error on the whole dataset (time unit:
minute; error unit: nautical mile).
Time
ELM
LS-SVM
MLP
GMM
GPR
Ours
15
1.35
1.33
3.13
1.77
2.19
0.53
30
3.49
3.55
5.42
5.09
5.19
1.31
45
5.85
5.90
8.03
9.44
9.89
2.34
60
8.48
8.60
10.92
14.27
15.07
3.57
For longer time prediction, the motion patterns will be more
complex and not necessarily Gaussian distribution. So we
can see that the performance of GMM decays dramatically
for long time path prediction. GPR and MLP also have big
prediction errors. LS-SVM and ELM produce relatively better
results for both short-term 15 minutes prediction and long-
term 60 minutes prediction, because of their strong regression
ability to learn an arbitrary complex continuous function from
a set of samples. In all cases, the proposed method is able to
achieve much lower prediction errors. Beneﬁting from sample
representation and ensemble learning, the proposed approach
is able to utilize a group of different models to exploit
the big amount of historical data to learn complex motion
patterns in a concise feature space. So even the prediction is a
much challenging task that includes different types of vessels’
trajectories, it still can learn and predict different vessels’
motion pattern more accurately.
Table II shows the standard deviation of the prediction
results for each algorithm. The results show that the variance
of the proposed approach is smaller than or comparable with
other algorithms.
2) Side information experiments: One advantage of the
proposed comprehensive approach is that it could make use
of some side information, i.e. the contextual information that
is not directly included in the AIS data. This has rarely been
utilized by previous methods [10]. Such information can be

8
TABLE II: Standard deviation of prediction error on the whole
dataset (time unit: minute; error unit: nautical mile).
Time
ELM
LS-SVM
MLP
GMM
GPR
Ours
15
0.63
1.26
3.66
3.46
2.56
0.25
30
1.25
2.61
4.15
5.41
3.63
1.06
45
2.30
3.86
4.99
7.44
5.20
1.85
60
2.80
5.02
6.25
8.23
7.27
2.87
collected without costing much effort and is helpful to improve
path prediction results. For example, the same type of vessels
with a similar voyage are more likely to have similar motion
characteristics and trajectory patterns. Here we investigate the
inﬂuence of vessel type information and geographical location
information.
TABLE III: Vessel types and trajectories
Towing vessel
Tug vessel
Cargo vessel
Tanker vessel
18
42
92
38
To include static information, the trajectories in the dataset
are divided into groups according to their types and four
types of vessels are used: towing vessels, tug vessels, cargo
vessels, and tanker vessels. Their corresponding number of
trajectories are listed in Table III. For contextual information,
we divide the trajectories into different groups based on their
geographical coordinates and ﬁnally choose 4 groups, each
one containing trajectories in the same geographical region
and generally following a similar trafﬁc route. Then the group
number is added directly to each sample feature vectors
and the prediction algorithms are run in a similar setting as
previous experiments. The experimental results are shown in
Table IV and Table V.
TABLE IV: Mean prediction error of including static infor-
mation (time unit: minute; error unit: nautical mile).
Time
ELM
LS-SVM
MLP
GMM
GPR
Ours
15
1.33
1.31
3.11
1.75
2.18
0.45
30
3.44
3.53
5.39
5.06
5.17
1.03
45
5.84
5.86
7.98
9.45
9.88
2.05
60
8.45
8.56
10.88
14.28
15.08
3.15
Comparing the results with Table I, we can see that while
most of the baseline algorithms have some very slight im-
provements, the prediction error reduction of the proposed
algorithm is much larger. While side information is available,
the collected massive historical trajectories could be clustered
into more homogeneous groups according to the side infor-
mation and within each group, the trajectory variance will
be signiﬁcantly smaller. In this case, the ensemble learning
difﬁculty and complexity is reduced and the prediction perfor-
mance is enhanced. A potential application of including the
TABLE V: Mean prediction error of including contextual
information (time unit: minute; error unit: nautical mile).
Time
ELM
LS-SVM
MLP
GMM
GPR
Ours
15
1.30
1.32
3.10
1.74
2.17
0.37
30
3.45
3.53
5.37
5.07
5.14
0.89
45
5.80
5.89
7.98
9.46
9.88
1.91
60
8.47
8.58
10.89
14.29
15.10
3.10
side information into path prediction is that different trafﬁc
management strategies could be applied to a different type
of vessels or different trafﬁc contexts in large modern port
regions (e.g. Singapore port [37]).
3) Time cost comparison: We also conduct experiments to
compare the time cost of all the algorithms. Each algorithm
runs 5 times on a subset of the dataset (20 trajectories) and
their average time costs are shown in Table VI. From this table,
TABLE VI: Time cost comparison (Unit: Minute)
ELM
LS-SVM
MLP
GMM
GPR
AAEL
3.01
3.61
110.61
29.01
40.95
1.15
we can see that the proposed approach has a much smaller time
cost than others because it is only trained once on the training
data and then makes predictions on testing data requiring no
further model update. MLP and GPR cost much longer time
than others because GPR needs to compute a large matrix
inverse during training and MLP needs to be trained repeatedly
(epoch by epoch) to get converged. It should be mentioned that
the time costs here include both the training and testing phase
on a group of trajectories. In real applications, an algorithm
usually only needs to make a prediction for one sample at
each time stamp, so the time cost of the proposed algorithm
will be much less and thus meet the real-time requirements in
real applications.
V. DISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUSIONS
Traditional path prediction methods generally based on sin-
gle trajectory learning, such as Kalman ﬁltering [18–20, 38],
neural network [15, 29, 39], in which a learning model (e.g.
Kalman Filtering) is built for a target vessel and is updated
periodically when receiving new data. While for the purpose
of vessel collision avoidance, there are some drawbacks of
this type of approaches. (1) The trained model is associated
with the target vessel and thus cannot be used to predict other
vessels’ future position. This will be highly inconvenient if
there are many vessels to be predicted at the same time, such
as Singapore Port which is a world famous busy port and
needs to regulate hundreds of vessels every day. (2) These
methods usually need to be updated continuously in order to
use the latest data to adjust the model to reduce prediction
error. This dynamic update brings extra computational burden
during deployment and may prolong the response time during
navigation. (3) These on-line updating models are individual

9
trajectory associated and thus cannot make use of a large
volume of historical data to learn complex motion patterns
(such as learning a common commuting route from a group of
historical trajectories). (4) The online learning methods require
a considerable amount of past trajectory data from the target
vessel to update a model. This is practically inconvenient for
busy ports, e.g. Singapore Port, because every day there are
hundreds of new vessels arrival and their past sailing data are
quite limited even absent.
Recently, as the availability of AIS data increases, construct-
ing a path prediction model based on a large amount of histori-
cal AIS data becomes a popular topic in the marine intelligence
area. However, previous approaches usually assume that the
historical AIS data have been sorted into a good form and the
path prediction task is restricted to data-rich (port) area. As
described in Section II, in real-world applications both the data
and the task are much more challenging than the assumptions.
In this paper, we proposed a comprehensive framework
for massive real-world historical AIS data learning to pre-
dict various vessels path with different geographical context.
Comparing with existing approaches, the proposed approach
is one-shot learning (train only once and no successive update
required) and is able to make multiple predictions for a
different type of vessels at the same time. The experimen-
tal results have demonstrated its effectiveness for handling
the diversity, divergence, and imbalance in trajectory data.
However, the proposed approach also has some limitations.
One limitation is that it requires a big amount of historical
data to train the models and thus may limit its application
to the scenarios where only very limited data are available.
The big data volume may also require more storage space and
computational power. Another limitation is that it has many
user parameters which need to be manually tuned in order to
obtain good prediction results. Our future work will focus on
further improving the algorithm performance while maximally
reducing the number of user-tunable parameters.
APPENDIX A
A TRAJECTORY PREPROCESSING ALGORITHM
The algorithm attempt to resolve four types of data problems
in raw AIS data: SOG error, COG jump, message absence and
message duplication, since these problems are very common
in raw AIS data and have signiﬁcant negative impact upon
the performance of general machine learning algorithms. In
Algorithm 2, s0 and d0 are two threshold parameters for
abnormal SOG value detection and smax is the possible
speed limit for different types of vessels [40]. The Length
function performs a trivial operation count the number of
messages in the input trajectory. The Initialization function
truncates invalid AIS messages at the front of the trajectory
by repeatedly examining and removing messages with invalid
data entries (i.e. position coordinates are out of range or
speed is not reasonable), as implemented in line 24-30. Lin
5 computes time interval between to messages. The function
GeoDistance in line 10 computes the actual sailing distance
between message k and k −1. We use haversine formula [41]
to compute the earth surface distance, as implemented 31-36.
Algorithm 2: AIS Data Filtering
Input: AIS trajectory f; parameters s0, d0, smax
Output: Filtered trajectory g
1 K = Length(f);
2 f, K = Initialization(f, K, smax);
3 g1 = f1, M = 1;
4 for k = 2, 3, ..., K do
5
∆t = fk(t) −fk−1(t);
6
if ∆t = 0 then
7
continue
8
gM = fk, M = M + 1;
9
∆d = GeoDistance(fk(x, y), fk−1(x, y));
10
if fk(sog) < 0 or fk(sog) > smax then
11
gM(sog) = fk−1(sog);
12
else if |fk(sog) −fk−1(sog)| > s0 then
13
dp = ∆t × fk−1(sog);
14
if |∆d −dp| < d0 then
15
gM(sog) = fk−1(sog);
16
if ∆t > t0 and ∆d > fk−1(sog) then
17
m = ∆d/fk−1(sog);
18
if m ≥3 then
19
gM:M+m−1 = Interpolation(fk−1, fk, m);
20
M = M + m −1;
21 g1:M(cog) = sin(g1:M(cog));
22 Function Initialization(f, K, smax)
23 for k < K do
24
if fk(x) /∈[−90, 90] or fk(y) /∈[−180, 180] or
fk(sog) /∈(0, smax] then
25
delete message fk;
26
continue;
27 K = Length(f);
28 return f, K
29 Function GeoDistance((x1, y1), (x2, y2))
30 R = 3440
//earth radius;
31 hx = sin2( x2−x1
2
);
32 hy = sin2( y2−y1
2
);
33 d = 2R arcsin
p
hx + cos(x1) cos(x2)hy

;
34 return d
35 Function Interpolation(fk, fk−1, m)
36 for i = 1, 2, 3, ..., m do
37
gi = fk−1 + fk−fk−1
m
× i
38 return g

10
Line 12 uses previous valid one if current SOG is invalid.
Line 13-16 mean that if the SOG changes too abruptly but the
actual sailing distance supports previous speed, then current
SOG value will be replace by previous valid one. Line 17-21
mean that if the time interval between the messages is too long
but the vessel is not still, then AIS messages are missing and a
linear interpolation operation will be adopted for all time series
features to ﬁll the path gap, as implemented in the function
Interpolation in line 37-40, assuming that the vessel follows
a constant speed and course during the gap period. Line 22
converts course over ground (COG) to sine function values to
eliminate the big jumps of degree value around 360.
APPENDIX B
FUNCTIONS USED IN ALGORITHM 1
Algorithm 3: Anomalous Pattern Removal: Type I
1 Function Slope((x1, y1), (x2, y2), (x3, y3))
2 a1 = (y2 −y1)/(x2 −x1);
3 a2 = (y3 −y2)/(x3 −x2);
4 a = (a1 + a2)/2;
5 return a
6 Function Angle(v1, v2)
7 a = arccos((vT
1 v2)/(∥v1∥· ∥v2∥)) ∗180/π;
8 return a
