(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,  
Vol. 3, No. 3, 2012 
44 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org 
Development of knowledge Base Expert System for 
Natural treatment of Diabetes disease 
Sanjeev Kumar Jha  
University Department of Mathematics, 
Babasaheb Bhimrao 
Ambedkar Bihar University, Muzaffarpur - 842001 
Bihar (India) 
 
D.K.Singh 
University Department of Mathematics, 
Babasaheb Bhimrao 
Ambedkar Bihar University, Muzaffarpur - 842001 
Bihar (India)
 
Abstract—The development of expert system for treatment of 
Diabetes disease by using natural methods is new information 
technology derived from Artificial Intelligent research using 
ESTA (Expert System Text Animation) System. The proposed 
expert system contains knowledge about various methods of 
natural treatment methods (Massage, Herbal/Proper Nutrition, 
Acupuncture, Gems) for Diabetes diseases of Human Beings. 
The system is developed in the ESTA (Expert System shell for 
Text Animation) which is Visual Prolog 7.3 Application. The 
knowledge for the said system will be acquired from domain 
experts, texts and other related sources.  
Keywords- Expert System; ESTA; Natural treatment; Diabetes. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
This article presents the conceptual framework of natural 
treatment methods available for diabetes. The main goal of this 
research is to integrate all the natural treatment information of 
diabetes in one place. 
Expert System named as Sanjeevani is developed using 
ESTA (Expert System Shell for Text Animation) as knowledge 
based system to describe the various Natural therapy methods 
for treatment of Diabetes disease and various other diseases. 
The main purpose of the present study is in the design and 
development of an expert system which provides the 
information of different types of natural treatment (Massage, 
Acupuncture, Herbal/Proper Nutrition and gems) of Diabetes. 
The system background starts with the collection of 
information of different methods of treatment available for 
Diabetes diseases. The acquired knowledge is represented to 
develop expert System.  
II. 
 DEVELOPMENT OF EXPERT SYSTEM 
We are in the process of development of Sanjeevani Natural 
therapy expert system that is developed in ESTA Application. 
It is designed for assisting in treatment of the Diabetes disease 
and various other diseases which can be cure naturally with 
different 
methods 
(Massage, 
Herbal/Proper 
Nutrition, 
Acupuncture, Gems) and provide treatment solutions. 
The natural therapy consists of a variety of natural body 
therapies, soul therapies and energy therapies for healing, that 
we found helpful for peoples health and wellness and which 
don't cost the earth 
The natural treatment is the process of healing/curing 
diseases through natural, drugless and the most harmless 
process. Human beings are an intrinsic part of the nature. 
Therefore, nothing except nature can facilitate a complete cure 
for human machinery disorders. 
These are the various methods of Natural therapy:-- 
 
Massage 
 
Acupuncture 
 
Herbal/Proper Nutrition 
 
Gems 
Figure 1: Representation of Natural Treatment of Diabetes Diseases 
III. 
DESIGN OF EXPERT SYSTEM 
The Expert System can be created by using ESTA by 
building the knowledge base. 
Expert System -- ESTA + Knowledge Base 
The Quality of Expert System is depends on its knowledge 
base. 
The process of developing knowledge base is:- 
 a) Identifying the input of Problem 
 b) Gaining Knowledge  
 c) Representation of Knowledge 
A. Identifying the Input of Problem 
For developing the expert system first we have to identify 
the problem and its behaviors. 
The Input for our system is regarding identifying the 
different types of natural treatments (Massage, Acupuncture, 
Diabetes Diseases 
Treatment Methods 
1) Natural Care(Herbal / Proper Nutrition) 
2) Acupuncture 
3) Homeopathic 
4) Massage 
5) Gems 
Treatment Solutions Advice 

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,  
Vol. 3, No. 3, 2012 
45 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org 
Herbal/Proper Nutrition and gems) available for Diabetes 
Disease. 
B. Gaining Knowledge 
Gaining Knowledge is very important in developing the 
expert system. The acquired gained knowledge is analyzed and 
processed to give the best solution of the problem. 
The knowledge of different types of Natural treatments 
(Massage, Acupuncture, Herbal/Proper Nutrition and gems) of 
Diabetes has been gained by reading books, browsing Internet 
and also got information from consultation of Physician in their 
respective areas. 
C. Representation of Knowledge 
Representation of knowledge is the last phase of the 
development of knowledge base system. There are various 
approaches for representation of Knowledge into knowledge 
base. 
Each Knowledge base contains rules for a specific domain. 
Thus, for a natural treatment of diabetes expert system the 
knowledge base will contain rules relating certain natural 
treatment methods of diabetes such as Massage, Acupuncture, 
Herbal/Proper Nutrition and gems. 
ESTA has all facilities to write the rules that will make up a 
knowledge base. Further, ESTA has an inference engine which 
can use the rules in the knowledge base to determine which 
advice is to be given to the expert system user or to initiate 
other actions 
Representation in ESTA is the rule based in logical 
paradigm of simple if-then rules in backward or forward 
chaining. We have chosen here the backward chaining for 
knowledge representation with simple if-do pair in place of if-
then rules. Here we have considered two major knowledge 
representations namely Sections and Parameters. The top level 
of representation of knowledge in ESTA is section. It contains 
the logical rules that direct the expert system how to solve 
problem, actions to perform such as giving advice, going to 
other sections, calling to routines etc. The first section in ESTA 
is always named as start section. The advice is given when 
condition(s) in the section is (are) fulfilled. Parameters are used 
as variable and it determines the flow of control among the 
sections in the Knowledge Base. A parameter can be one of the 
four types: Boolean or logical, Text, Number and Category 
parameters. 
We have developed the various Parameters and Sections for 
developing this expert system. 
IV. 
REPRESENTATION OF SANJEEVANI EXPERT SYSTEM 
The Knowledge representation in ESTA is based on the 
items: a) Section b) Parameters c) Title 
A. Representation of Parameters Used in Developing Expert 
System 
In FIGURE 1: Here we have defined the disease parameter 
which is of type category describing the various types of 
disease. 
 
Figure 1. Screen Shots of Parameter Disease 
In FIGURE 2: Here we have defined the diabetesop 
parameter which is of type category describing the various 
types of natural treatment available for diabetes disease. 
 
Figure 2. Screen Prints of Parameter diabetesop  
B. Representation of Sections used in developing expert 
system 
In FIGURE 3:  Here we have a main section start which is 
developed to transferring controls in accordance with the user’s 
response about disease 
 
Figure 3. Screen Print of Start Section 
In FIGURE 4: Here causeofdiabetes Section describes the 
diabetes disease and its symptoms 

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,  
Vol. 3, No. 3, 2012 
46 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org 
 
Figure 4. Screen Print of Causeofdiabetes Section 
In FIGURE 5: Here in the diabetesoption section describes 
the various natural treatment options available for diabetes 
disease. 
 
Figure 5. Screen Print of Section of diabetesoption 
In FIGURE 6: Here in the treatdiabetesnatural section 
describes the Natural Care (Herbal / Proper Nutrition) 
treatment solution of diabetes disease 
 
Figure 6. Screen Print of Section treatdiabetesnatural 
1.1.   Representation of Title 
In FIGURE 7: It describes the Title of Sanjeevani expert 
system.  
 
Figure 7. Screen Print of Title of expert System 
V. 
CONSULTATION OF EXPERT SYSTEM 
In FIGURE 8:  It describes the beginning of Consultation of 
Sanjeevani Expert System. It will ask the users to select the 
disease (Diabetes) for which they want different type of natural 
treatment solution. 
 
Figure 8. Screen Print of ESTA Consult of Diabetes 
In FIGURE 9: It describes the diabetes diseases and its 
symptoms 
 
Figure 9. Screen Print of Diabetes description and Symptoms 
In FIGURE 10: It describes the different types of Natural 
treatment methods available for Diabetes disease. It will ask 
users to select one of the Natural treatment methods for getting 
details treatment advice. 

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,  
Vol. 3, No. 3, 2012 
47 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org 
 
Figure 10. Screen Print of selection of Natural Treatment Method 
In FIGURE 11: It describes the Natural Care (Herbal / 
Proper Nutrition) treatment solution of diabetes disease 
 
Figure 11. Screen Print of Natural Treatment Solution  
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
As the Sanjeevani project shows, applied work in 
developing of expert system describing the various Natural 
therapy methods for treatment of Diabetes disease and various 
other diseases. 
The field of medical artificial intelligence is particularly 
appealing to the physicians and computer scientists working in 
the area.  
The long-term challenges are well recognized-such as the 
need for mechanisms that will assure completeness and shared 
knowledge bases for different natural methods treatment of 
different diseases.  
This Expert System development is one of the steps to get 
the integrated knowledge base system which will help in 
getting information of various natural treatment methods 
available for disease to general users (Patient and Physician)
