A Rule-Based Model for Victim Prediction
Murat Ozera,∗, Nelly Elsayeda, Said Varlioglua, Chengcheng Lia and Niyazi Ekicib
aSchool of Information Technology, University of Cincinnati, Ohio, United States
bLaw Enforcement and Justice Administration, Western Illinois University, Illinois, United States
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Rule-based system
Network graph analysis
Violent victimization
Victim prediction
A B S T R A C T
The present study proposes a novel automated model, called Vulnerability Index for Population at
Risk (VIPAR) scores, to identify rare populations for their future shooting victimizations. Likewise,
the focused deterrence approach identiﬁes vulnerable individuals and oﬀers certain treatments (e.g.,
outreach services) to prevent violence in communities. Our rule-based engine model is the ﬁrst AI-
based model for victim prediction purposes. The model merit is the usage of criminology studies to
construct the rule-based engine to predict victims. This paper aims to compare the list of focused
deterrence strategy with the VIPAR score list regarding their predictive power for the future shooting
victimizations. Drawing on the criminological studies, this study uses age, past criminal history,
and peer inﬂuence as the main predictors of future violence. Network graph analysis is employed
to measure the inﬂuence of peers on the outcome variable. The proposed model also uses logistic
regression analysis to verify the variable selections in the model. Following the analytical process,
the current research creates an automated model (VIPAR scores) to predict vulnerable populations
for their future shooting involvements. Our empirical results show that VIPAR scores predict 25.8%
of future shooting victims and 32.2% of future shooting suspects, whereas the focused deterrence list
predicts 13% of future shooting victims and 9.4% of future shooting suspects. The proposed model
outperforms the intelligence list of focused deterrence policies in predicting the future fatal and non-
fatal shootings. Furthermore, this paper discusses the concerns about the presumption of innocence
right.
1. Introduction
Criminological theories have been studying the covari-
ates of chronic oﬀenders for long years since the early work
of Sheldon and Eleanor Glueck [23]. Subsequent studies
found that age of onset [42, 4, 45, 54, 56, 19, 20, 62] se-
riousness of crime [43] past criminal history [24, 44] and
delinquent peers [37, 49] are the main predictors of future
delinquent behaviors as well as career criminals. Except for
Gottfredson and Hirschi [24], researchers studying criminal
careers suggest that desisting from crime is possible through
enhancing social environments such as family structure and
economic conditions. Therefore, the identiﬁcation of chronic
oﬀenders is a crucial factor in the ability to implement a spe-
ciﬁc type of intervention.
The studies mentioned above also revealed that chronic
oﬀenders account for less than ﬁve percent of the population,
but they commit most of the overall crime [51, 56, 63]. Like-
wise, studies in the city of Cincinnati, Ohio, USA showed
that a population of less than 0.05% involved in the gang ac-
tivity accounted for 75% of all homicides and 50% of the
violent crimes [17]. Therefore, identifying career criminals
have the most potential impact to reduce violent crime through
certain types of interventions such as youth outreach ser-
vices and pulling levers focused deterrence programs [8, 31,
36, 50].
To date, there is no systemic approach to detect chronic
oﬀenders in the population to develop proactive approaches.
Pulling levers strategy is the closest candidate in this realm,

ORCID(s): 0000-0002-7582-1298 (M. Ozer); 0000-0003-0082-1450 (N.
Elsayed); 0000-0003-4013-6386 (S. Varlioglu); 0000-0003-2945-0462 (C. Li);
0000-0001-9565-4821 (N. Ekici)
which echoes well-known ﬁndings of criminological theo-
ries that a small number of individuals, usually socially con-
nected through co-oﬀending networks, commit 48 to 90 per-
cent of violent crimes across the United States [46]. The of-
fenses committed by these individuals are a behavioral byprod-
uct of street norms that address violence as a means of solv-
ing problems and disrespect [31]. More importantly, vio-
lence spreads with the inﬂuence of peers in these co-oﬀending
networks [1, 57, 59, 61]. Therefore, directing resources on
these individuals and group structure through social services
and increased certainty of punishment gives promising re-
sults regarding reducing violence in cities [8, 7, 17]. Please
note that we intensify our eﬀorts to successfully understand
the inﬂuence of co-oﬀending networks on individuals. Crim-
inological theories suggest that oﬀenders and victims are
often linked and routine interaction with oﬀenders signiﬁ-
cantly increases the chance of future victimization [12, 29,
40, 55]. Therefore, identifying co-oﬀending networks is es-
sential to prevent future victimizations. Focused deterrence
policing is an example of this notion because this approach
is based on the identiﬁcation of a co-oﬀending network to
prevent future victimizations.
To implement a focused deterrence approach, law en-
forcement agencies organize intelligence-gathering sessions
to identify criminals and groups who commit most of the vi-
olent crimes in cities. These sessions are usually done twice
a year as it takes a considerable amount of time and is lim-
ited to the knowledge of attended ﬁeld oﬃcers. However,
street violence is incredibly dynamic, requiring almost real-
time updates to capture vibrant street life, such as ongoing
disagreements, disrespect between group members, and the
emergence of new groups of violence. Focused deterrence
Ozer et al., 2020: Preprint to International Journal of Law, Crime and Justice DOI:10.1016/j.ijlcj.2020.100440
Page 1 of 11
arXiv:2001.01391v3  [cs.AI]  7 Mar 2022

A Rule-Based Model for Victim Prediction
Figure 1: The proposed VIPAR model diagram.
strategy, on the other hand, captures one snapshot of the
street life with the intelligence-gathering sessions, but intel-
ligence quickly fades out with the new developments of the
street dynamics. For this reason, the reduction of violence in
the focused deterrence approach is often not self-sustaining
over time [10, 14, 58].
Given this context, we proposed a novel rule-based sys-
tem model that constructed under the criminological the-
ory and oﬀers a big data-based model that instantly cap-
tures street dynamics to evolve the list of chronic oﬀend-
ers who drive the violence in the city. The proposed rule-
based model has a higher future violence prediction accu-
racy compared to the static chronic oﬀender list of focused
deterrence strategies. Hence, violence reduction can be re-
alized at the optimum level. Therefore, the proposed model
seeks an answer to the following questions: (1) to what ex-
tent law enforcement data allow researchers to predict fu-
ture fatal and non-fatal shooting victims and suspects, (2)
whether the proposed model better predicts the future shoot-
ing violence compared to the static list of chronic oﬀenders,
and (3) whether prioritizing individuals for their vulnerabili-
ties to a crime lead to proﬁling concerns (e.g., racial, gender
and place-based). The proposed model diagram is shown
in Figure 1. The next sections of this paper demonstrate a
detailed explanation of the proposed model components fol-
lowed by the empirical results and analysis.
2. Rule-Based System
The rule-based system is an artiﬁcial intelligence tech-
nique to obtain signiﬁcant information based on interpreting
previous knowledge and experiences that have been already
stored and assigned with diﬀerent scores [16, 21]. Usually,
these sets of rules are assigned by a human expert. How-
ever, few systems are based on automatic rule inference de-
sign [21]. One of the most popular rule-based systems is
the expert system, the idea which was developed in the late
1940searly 1950s as a medical diagnostic machine [64]. In
the proposed model, we designed a ruled-based system to
construct a risk score assignment mechanism based on the
criminological theory. Thus, it enhances the overall predic-
tive performance of the proposed model as it focuses only on
the usage of appropriate attributes that have been proven as
signiﬁcant risk factors for the successful prediction of vic-
tims. The constructing of our proposed VIPAR rule-based
system will be discussed in section 6
3. Model Criminological Roots
As previously stated in section 1, criminological theo-
ries stress that age, past criminal history, and peer inﬂuence
are the main predictors of future delinquent behavior. It is
widely accepted in criminology that involvement in crime
diminishes with age [19]. In our proposed model, we used
the criminological theories to construct our rule-based sys-
tem rule sets and scores.
In addition to this, life course theories suggest that indi-
viduals who start committing crime at an early age are more
likely to continue committing a crime in the future [39, 38].
Likewise, past criminal behavior/history is one of the more
robust predictors of future oﬀending according to numerous
studies/theories, including general theory of crime [24, 27,
32, 34, 52]. Finally, the topic of peer inﬂuence attracted
many criminologists for its ability to explain the dispropor-
tionate concentration of crime (e.g., social disorganization
theory) and criminogenic behavior (e.g., diﬀerential associ-
ation theory or social learning theories).
In this context, law enforcement data easily allow re-
searchers to extract age and past criminal history of indi-
viduals. Detecting peer inﬂuence; however, is time and la-
bor intensive for many law enforcement agencies. For this
reason, it is mostly disregarded in the analyses. Study ﬁnd-
ings, on the other hand, reveal that peer inﬂuence signiﬁ-
cantly predicts future violence. In this vein, Conway and
McCord’s [13] longitudinal study showed that oﬀenders who
committed their ﬁrst co-oﬀense with violent delinquent peers
are more likely to commit violent crimes compared to those
who were not exposed to violent oﬀenders. In addition to
the eﬀect of peer inﬂuence on learning processes, Warr [60]
found that structural characteristics of co-oﬀending networks1
inﬂuence individuals’ behavior far beyond their characteris-
tics/traits. Similarly, employing Add Health data, Haynie
[28] demonstrated the network characteristics of individuals
(e.g., occupying a key role in a criminal oﬀending network
or involvement in a dense social network) inﬂuenced the out-
come of individual propensities.
Besides, Haynie’s analyses [28] suggest the relationship
between delinquency and peer association behaves diﬀer-
ently in the context of network characteristics, which funda-
mentally demonstrates the more signiﬁcant impact of peer
1Warr (1996) describes structural characteristics as “delinquent
groups”. Similarly, we term structural characteristics in the study as the
number of violent individuals, the number of shootings, and the number of
ﬁrearm-related incidents in each co-oﬀending group.
Ozer et al., 2020: Preprint to International Journal of Law, Crime and Justice DOI:10.1016/j.ijlcj.2020.100440
Page 2 of 11

A Rule-Based Model for Victim Prediction
inﬂuence over that of individual tendencies.
Recent studies, employing more sophisticated data and
techniques, also found that co-oﬀending networks explain
gunshot victimization better than do: gender, race, or gang
aﬃliation [47]. Papachristos et al. [47] employed police Field
Intelligence Observation records to generate a network2 for
238 known gang members until the second degree of friend-
ship. Then the authors merged this network data with fatal
and non-fatal shootings that occurred in 2008-2009. Further
analysis revealed that closeness to a gunshot victim signiﬁ-
cantly increased the odds of subsequent gunshot victimiza-
tion. Similarly, by studying the arrest data of a co-oﬀending
network, Papachristos, Wilderman, and Roberto [48] found
that co-oﬀending networks dramatically increase the likeli-
hood of gunshot victimization, even more so than individual
demographics or gang aﬃliation. Their study demonstrated
that not only do one’s immediate co-oﬀending friends (di-
rect exposure) increase the chance of victimization but also
the friends of one’s friends (indirect exposure) increase the
likelihood of gunshot victimization. In summary, studies
on co-oﬀending networks strongly emphasize that any vio-
lence prediction has to include peer inﬂuence and as well
as the group structure itself (e.g., violent vs. non-violent
co-oﬀending groups). Therefore, the proposed model com-
prises measurements of co-oﬀending networks during the
estimation/prediction process. This paper explains the com-
ponents of the proposed victim prediction model in detail
and shows the success of the proposed model empirically
compared to state-of-the-art victim prediction models.
4. Datasets
In our empirical study, we employ six diﬀerent datasets
from the city of Cincinnati Police Department in the State
of Ohio, United States. The ﬁrst dataset is reported crimes
(N= 176,660) from January 1, 2010, to December 31, 2014,
which includes variables of the incident such as date, loca-
tion, crime type, and modus operandi. The second dataset
is suspect (N=33,480) and victim (N= 190,590) data of the
reported crimes. This dataset includes suspect and victim
demographics such as name, age, race, gender, and suspect-
victim relationship. The third dataset is the arrest data (N=
122,542) for the same period that includes arrestee’s demo-
graphics (race, sex, and date of birth), the location of arrest,
and crime types. The fourth dataset is the Field Interview
Reports (N=228,796), which includes demographics of in-
dividuals as a result of traﬃc stops or pedestrian stops. The
ﬁfth dataset is the fatal and non-fatal shootings for the pe-
riod of January 1, 2010, to December 31, 2015, that includes
the demographics of shooting victims (N=2,511). The last
dataset is a chronic oﬀender list (N=3,215), which was com-
piled during the various intelligence gathering sessions of
focused deterrence strategy applied in Cincinnati [17]. Cincin-
nati focused deterrence approach is known as the Cincinnati
2Co-oﬀending networks are generated by simply identifying two or
more individuals involved in the same incident such as arrest, ﬁeld inter-
view, or victimization.
Initiative to Reduce Violence (CIRV). For this reason, this
dataset is named as CIRV List that holds chronic oﬀenders
for their possible involvement of future shooting violence.
5. Analytical Process
As mentioned earlier, this paper aims to make a com-
parison between the CIRV List and the proposed model for
predicting shooting violence. Therefore, we split the fatal
and non-fatal shooting data into two diﬀerent waves. Dur-
ing the model development, we used shooting victim data
from January 1, 2010, to December 31, 2014 (N=2,034).
We left aside 2015 fatal and non-fatal shooting victim data
(N=477) to test how CIRV List and the model predict the
future shooting victims. Likewise, we obtained 2015 known
shooting suspects (N=149) to measure the prediction per-
formance between CIRV List and our proposed model.We
obtained known shooting suspect data by linking known sus-
pects and arrestees to the victim data.
Creating the Vulnerability Index: The proposed model
aims to detect rare populations for their vulnerability to fatal
and non-fatal shootings. For this reason, as of this point, the
present study will use the Vulnerability Index for Population
at Risk (VIPAR) scores interchangeably with the model. As
discussed earlier, extracting age and criminal history from
law enforcement data is relatively straightforward. Detect-
ing the inﬂuence of peers in developing violence, however,
needs time-intensive analysis. Therefore, any eﬃcient vio-
lence prediction model should ﬁnd ways to calculate the in-
ﬂuence of co-oﬀending networks automatically. Given this
context, VIPAR rule-based system scores automate this pro-
cess using various data mining steps, as explained below.
For the ﬁrst step, if two or more individuals were ar-
rested, victimized, stopped (for ﬁeld interview), or commit-
ted a crime together, the model assumes that those individu-
als are associated with each other by sharing the same event.
The ﬁrst step is called a ﬁrst-degree co-oﬀending network,
which emphasizes the immediate friendships (in this case,
the co-oﬀending) based on a single event. This ﬁrst-degree
network can be expanded by ﬁnding the friends of friends
of the ﬁrst identiﬁed individuals3 by looking at the diﬀerent
events in which ﬁrst degree friends involved with other indi-
viduals. Finally, the entire co-oﬀending network can be ex-
panded again by ﬁnding friends of friends of friends, which
is called as a third-degree co-oﬀending network. Figure 2 il-
lustrates the ﬁrst-degree co-oﬀending network by assigning
one (1) value to the circles. Likewise, values 2 and 3 repre-
sent the second and third-degree co-oﬀending networks.
Expanding co-oﬀending networks until the third degree
is necessary because criminology research suggests that not
only one’s immediate friends can increase the likelihood of
violent crime involvement but also having a violent friend
within a third-degree co-oﬀending network, signiﬁcantly in-
creases the chance of violent oﬀending [22, 48]. Therefore,
3In the network graph theory, individuals are called nodes, and their
relationships are called edges. The present study will keep the terms simple
and will try to avoid using the jargon of network graph theory.
Ozer et al., 2020: Preprint to International Journal of Law, Crime and Justice DOI:10.1016/j.ijlcj.2020.100440
Page 3 of 11

A Rule-Based Model for Victim Prediction
Table 1
Summary Statistics of Co-oﬀending Network
Source Data
# of Individuals # of Relationships Average Relationships
Arrest/Suspect
10276
14362
1.40
Field Interviews
19958
40657
2.04
Suspect-Victim
39341
56517
1.44
Victim
15490
22425
1.45
Total
15490
133961
1.57
Figure 2: Creating Co-Oﬀending Network
VIPAR scores employ a co-oﬀending network until the third
degree.
By following the above analytical approach, the model
generated a co-oﬀending network, as shown in Table 1. Most
of the relationships come from ﬁeld interviews following
suspect-victim relationships, victim relationships, and arrest/
suspect relationships. For instance, the Cincinnati Police
Department (CPD) stopped 19,958 individuals between 2010
and 2014. These ﬁeld interviews roughly accompanied by
two individuals on average during the traﬃc or pedestrian
stops. Even though the co-oﬀending network seemingly in-
cludes 85,065 individuals, certain individuals repetitively in-
volved in multiple criminal activities such as committing a
crime and being a victim of a crime. For this reason, the
number of unique individuals in the co-oﬀending network is
55,454 when these duplicates were removed. From this per-
spective, the average number of relationships in the network
is 2.42 (133961/ 55454).
6. VIPAR Measures
The proposed VIPAR score model uses 21 variables and
25 diﬀerent weights for constructing the rule-based system
scheme. During the reﬁnement of the model, certain vari-
ables were dropped from the model, such as ego density (i.e.,
number of immediate friends) and closeness to a CIRV List
member at the second-degree co-oﬀending network, due to
their weak or no explanatory power for future crime predic-
tion. As previously stated, the proposed model selects the
appropriate rule from the system by following the proven
thoughts of criminological theories. After the initial selec-
tion of the variables based on their availability in the police
data, I tested them in the logistic regression model to see
whether the selected variables signiﬁcantly explain the like-
lihood of future fatal and non-fatal shootings.
Likewise, each weight of the variable in the model is de-
termined by looking at the magnitude of the relationship in
the logistic regression model. Given this context, we classi-
ﬁed the variables into three categories: personal variables,
positional co-oﬀending variables, and structural co-oﬀending
variables and tested their signiﬁcance in the logistic regres-
sion model.
6.1. Personal Variables
As shown in Table 2, the personal variable category in-
cludes age, CIRV list membership, and past criminal history
variables. Except for age, all other variables are measured in
a dummy format. The percentage of CIRV members in the
overall co-oﬀending network is 11.9 (N=659).
Note that, if a CIRV member is not involved in any crim-
inal activity with others, that person will not be in the co-
oﬀending network. In this context, the current data suggest
that 659 out of 3215 CIRV list members involved in crimes
with accompanies. All the other variables in Table 2 capture
the past criminal history of individuals from the police data.
Table 3 displays the logistic regression result of the fu-
ture fatal and non-fatal shooting victims for the personal vari-
ables of the study. Although the odds-ratio (Exponent B) of
the age variable seems to be small, age is the most inﬂuen-
tial variable in the equation. Note that, age is measured in
decimals to reﬂect the precision in months (e.g., 18.3 years
old). Hence, one unit (0.1) increase in age corresponds to
4.3% less shooting victimization. For example, 18 years old
person is 43% more likely to be victimized compared to 19
years old person. CIRV list members are four times more
likely to be victimized for shooting fatal and non-fatal shoot-
ings compared to non-CIRV members. Past misdemeanor4
crime history increases the chance of future shootings nearly
four times as well compared to individuals having no or less
misdemeanor criminal history.
Finally, recent ﬁrearm crime involvement increases the
likelihood of future shooting victimizations for 182%. Dur-
ing the analysis, we noticed that recent violent victimization
and ﬁrearm-related crimes are moderately correlated (r=0.530).
Even though this correlation is under 0.7, it still shadows the
eﬀect of recent violent victimization for about 28% on the
outcome variable. For this reason, we removed recent vio-
lent victimization from the logistic regression equation but
4This ﬁnding is somehow interesting; however, from our correspond-
ing author year of experience with the police, data suggest that violent in-
dividuals are also violent at home. They commit the majority of domestic
violence, and simple assaults that fall under the misdemeanor crime cate-
gory.
Ozer et al., 2020: Preprint to International Journal of Law, Crime and Justice DOI:10.1016/j.ijlcj.2020.100440
Page 4 of 11

A Rule-Based Model for Victim Prediction
Table 2
Descriptive Statistics of Personal Variables (N=55,454)
Min - Max
Mean - %
Age
13 - 80.9 37.44 – 13.15(sd)
CIRV List Member
0 - 1
11.90%
Recent Violent Crime
0 - 1
4.10%
Recent Misdemeanor Crime (2 or more)
0 - 1
7.40%
Misdemeanor Crime (3 or more)
0 - 1
11.90%
Recent Firearm Involved Incident (arrest or victim)
0 - 1
5.30%
Table 3
Personal Variables Predicting Future Fatal and Non - Fatal Shooting Victims
b
S.E. p-value Exp(B)
Age
-0.043 0.007
0
0.957
CIRV List Member
1.374 0.218
0
3.951
Recent Misdemeanor Crime (2 or more)
0.649 0.178
0
1.913
Misdemeanor Crime (3 or more)
1.465 0.173
0
4.327
Recent Firearm Involved Incident (arrest or victim) 0.597 0.185 0.001
1.817
added it to the model because the model creates an additive
scale for the positional variables of the model, as explained
in Table 4. In this way, the proposed model does not lose
the 28% explanatory power of recent violent victimization
on the outcome variable.
The model assigns diﬀerent weights to diﬀerent ages to
reﬂect the ﬁnding of criminological theories that younger
people commit more crimes. For instance, if a person is 18
years old, the age weight will be 5.2. The value of seven (7)
is a constant value, which dictates that the inﬂuence of age
at 70 years old becomes none/zero for predicting future vi-
olence. We analyzed the fatal and non-fatal shooting victim
data between 2010 and 2017 and noticed that the age for-
mula ﬁts well with the age distribution of the historical data
as displayed in Table 5.
We purposely give higher weights to juveniles because
younger people gradually involve in crimes as they build
their criminal careers. Therefore, bringing those younger
populations to the attention of law enforcement oﬃcials be-
fore they commit a serious crime might save lives by inter-
vening in the problems at the right time.
6.2. Positional Co-oﬀending Variables
As noted above, the proposed model expands the friend-
ship network (i.e., co-oﬀending networks) until the third de-
gree5 to completely capture the direct and indirect impact of
peers in developing violent criminal behavior (in our case,
fatal and non-fatal shootings). In this context, positional co-
oﬀending measures imply the co-oﬀending characteristics of
individuals (e.g., occupying a key role) relative to others in
the co-oﬀending network. As shown in Table 6, there are six
positional variables. The model calculates the network mea-
sures for degree centrality and PageRank values after build-
ing the co-oﬀending network. In a simple deﬁnition, degree
centrality refers to number of immediate friends [6, 18, 26].
5First-degree network: oneś immediate friends; second-degree net-
work: oneś immediate friends of friends; and third-degree network: one’s
Google developed PageRank [3, 53] values to rank web-
sites for their popularity/importance. PageRank uses two
criteria in the calculation: (1) the number of links a page
gets and (2) links from important webpages receive more
weights. PageRank algorithm is calculated using web graph.
For example, the uc.edu web page is considered a node/entity
and any hyperlink to this website is considered as edges.
The rank and popularity of the uc.edu website are calcu-
lated based on the number of links it receives and the num-
ber of important websites that uc.edu is linked to. Given
this context, the current algorithm (VIPAR scores) emulates
the usage of Google PageRank calculation. We ﬁrst calcu-
late the degree centrality to see the popularity of a person.
Then, we calculate the number of diﬀerent events such as
arrest, victimization, and ﬁeld interviews that a person in-
volved in to assess the repeat victim and repeat oﬀending
concepts [33]. Then, similar to the PageRank algorithm, we
give higher weights to those individuals having more con-
nections and more events that connect them to other indi-
viduals in the co-oﬀending network. Since the peer inﬂu-
ence decreases at the second- and third-degree relationships,
we give lesser weights for the events that occur in those de-
grees.6. Eqn 1 illustrates this idea with simple terms. In the
equation, the model gives fewer weights to degree central-
ity measure while giving two times the higher weight to the
number of events. The product of degree centrality and the
number of events is standardized by ten because the high-
est mode of events is generally around 10. We compared
our PageRank values with real PageRank values generated
by NodeXL software7 and noticed that the two values are
immediate friends of friends of friends
6Table 7 below display the results similar to previous research that the
inﬂuence of peers degrades at the second and third degree. Since we could
not ﬁnd any signiﬁcant inﬂuence of third-degree friends on nodes, we did
not include their weight in the VIPAR scores. Given this context, VIPAR
scores assign half weight to the second-degree relationships.
7NodeXL is free software and directly works with Microsoft Ex-
cel as an extension.
More information can be found at this link:
Ozer et al., 2020: Preprint to International Journal of Law, Crime and Justice DOI:10.1016/j.ijlcj.2020.100440
Page 5 of 11

A Rule-Based Model for Victim Prediction
Table 4
Personal variables values in the proposed model
Variable
Weight
Age
7-(Age/10)
CIRV List Member
1
If the person was recently victimized for a violent crime
1
If the person was recently involved in a violent crime
1
If the person involved in any ﬁrearm related crimes
1
If the person recently involved in any ﬁrearm related crimes
1.5
If the person committed more than three misdemeanor crimes
1
If the person recently committed two misdemeanor crimes
1
If the person was victimized for three misdemeanor crimes
1
Table 5
Applying The Age Weights to the Fatal and Non-Fatal Shooting Victims (Jan. 1, 2010 -
Dec. 31, 2017)
Age Groups # of Fatal and Non-Fatal Shooting Victims Min - Max Weights based on The Formula
13 - 17
244
5.3 - 5.7
18 - 24
1222
4.6 - 5.2
25 - 30
753
4 - 4.5
31 - 40
681
3 - 3.9
41 - 50
258
2 - 2.9
51 - 60
112
1 - 1.9
61+
54
0 - 0.9
nearly identical.
network measures = (Degree Centrality∕2) + #퐸푣푒푛푡푠)
10
(1)
Following the calculation of network measures, the model
calculates positional measures of the network, such as hav-
ing a shooting friend in the ﬁrst and second-degree co-oﬀending
network and closeness to a CIRV List member. The model
searches each person’s network (e.g., having a shooting friend
at the ﬁrst-degree co-oﬀending network) to generate the data.
If a person is connected to an individual who has a PageRank
value greater than one, that person is considered to connect
a high PageRank8 individual.
Likewise, the model searches CIRV member friendship
at the ﬁrst and second-degree co-oﬀending network and as-
signs a dummy variable code (1 and 0 represent yes and no,
respectively) based on the found criteria. Finally, the data
https://archive.codeplex.com/?p=nodexl
8If the PageRank value is greater than 1, closeness to a high PageRank
individual at the second degree is equal to one otherwise zero.
include dummy variables by exploring whether a person is
connected a shooting victim or suspect at the ﬁrst and second
degree9.
Given this context, Table 7 displays logistic regression
results of positional variables. The most inﬂuential posi-
tional variable in the logistic regression equation is PageR-
ank values.
Note that the PageRank is a metric variable; therefore,
one unit (0.05) increase in the PageRank value corresponds
to 2.18 times higher future shooting victimizations. Restat-
ing diﬀerently with an illustration, a person having a PageR-
ank value two (2) is 43.6 times more likely to be victimized
compared to a person having a PageRank value one (1).
On the other hand, if a person is connected to a high
PageRank friend at the ﬁrst-degree co-oﬀending network,
that person’s vulnerability for future shooting victimizations
increases for 212%.
9We did not include third-degree positional measures because both re-
search (Fujimoto et al., 2012; Papachristos et al., 2015) and my experience
suggest that third-degree positional measures/variables have no or little in-
ﬂuence on individuals.
Table 6
Personal variables values in the model
Min - Max
Mean - %
PageRank
0.15 - 7.55
0.20 (.272)
Closeness to a high PageRank individual at the ﬁrst degree network
0 - 1
22.96%
Closeness to a CIRV member at the ﬁrst degree network
0 - 1
3.03%
Closeness to a CIRV member at the second degree network
0 - 1
5.55%
Closeness to a person involved in a shooting crime or victimization at the ﬁrst degree
0 - 1
3.93%
Closeness to a person involved in a shooting crime or victimization at the second degree
0 - 1
6.76%
Ozer et al., 2020: Preprint to International Journal of Law, Crime and Justice DOI:10.1016/j.ijlcj.2020.100440
Page 6 of 11

A Rule-Based Model for Victim Prediction
Table 7
Logistic Regression Results of Positional Co-oﬀending Variables
b
S.E.
p-value
Exp (B)
PageRank
0.779
0.108
0.000
2.179
Closeness to a high PageRank individual at the ﬁrst degree network
0.752
0.181
0.000
2.121
Closeness to a CIRV member at the ﬁrst degree network
0.403
0.219
0.066
1.496
Closeness to a CIRV member at the second degree network
0.135
0.239
0.572
1.144
Closeness to a CIRV member at the third degree network
0.339
0.238
0.155
1.403
Closeness to a person involved in a shooting crime or victimization at the ﬁrst degree
0.609
0.224
0.006
1.839
Closeness to a person involved in a shooting crime or victimization at the third degree
0.098
0.241
0.683
1.103
Table 8
Positional Measures of Co-oﬀending Network
Positional Measures
Weight
PageRank value Own Value Closeness to a high PageRank person in ﬁrst-degree network
1
Closeness to a CIRV List member in ﬁrst-degree network
0.5
If a ﬁrst-degree friend is involved in any shootings
1
Likewise, individuals who have a friend involved in a
shooting crime (either suspect or victim) at the ﬁrst degree
co-oﬀending network are 1.8 times more likely to be victim-
ized for future shooting victimizations.
All the other variables, such as having a CIRV member10
friend at the ﬁrst, second, and third-degree co-oﬀending net-
work have insigniﬁcant inﬂuence on the outcome variable.
Based on the logistic regression results, the model uses cer-
tain weights, as shown in Table reftable8.
7. Structural Co-oﬀending Variables
There are a bunch of studies suggesting violent groups
involve in more violence such as in [5, 15, 25, 30, 35]. For
this reason, the proposed model identiﬁes structural group
characteristics such as the number of violent individuals, the
number of shootings, and the number of ﬁrearm-related in-
cidents in each co-oﬀending group. In order to form co-
oﬀending groups, we start with a person and calculate all
connected friends until third-degree friendship. This gives
us the group of related people. Then, we calculate neces-
sary group-based variables such as the number of individu-
als involved in violent crimes, shooting, and ﬁrearm-related
crimes.
We loop through this process for all individuals
to calculate their co-oﬀending group characteristics. After
forming the co-oﬀending groups, we give higher weights to
those individuals if they are nested in violent groups. In this
vein, we converted metric variables into categorical vari-
ables, as shown in Table 9 to see the signiﬁcance level of
each group-level variable. There are four group-level vari-
ables: violent crime, violent victimization, shootings, and
group density.
Moreover, we noticed during the analysis that group-level
violent crimes and violent crime victimizations are moder-
ately correlated (r=.653), which then hinders to see their ac-
tual eﬀects on the outcome variable. For this reason, the
10We purposely included CIRV members for all co-oﬀending degrees
to better understand the inﬂuence of CIRV members in the overall network.
violent victimization variable lost its signiﬁcance level be-
cause of this moderate correlation, as shown in Table 10.
However, we still added this variable into model prediction
because the model creates an additive scale that is not af-
fected by the collinearity.
Table 10 suggests that individuals nested in populated
and shooting dense groups are nearly two times higher vul-
nerability for future shooting victimizations compared to less
populated and less shooting dense groups. Likewise, mem-
bers of violent groups are more likely to be a victim of fu-
ture shootings. Given the ﬁndings of structural variables, the
model incorporates slightly diﬀerent group-level variables,
as seen in Table 11 to fully reﬂect variable variations into
the prediction.
8. Summary of the Measures
The proposed model (VIPAR scores) ﬁrstly calculates
age, group membership status (e.g., CIRV list aﬃliation11),
and past criminal history of individuals. Next, it computes
positional measures (e.g., occupying a key role in the net-
work) and structural measures (e.g., being a member of a
violent group) of individuals in the co-oﬀending network.
Positional measures are generally related to individuals’ po-
sitions in the co-oﬀending network relative to others. For
instance, group12 members receive higher weights, which is
11Being a CIRV list member can also be considered as a personal char-
acteristic (e.g., age) rather than a positional measure.
12According to focused deterrence approach, the vast majority of vio-
lence in any city is committed by a small group of oﬀenders, who are con-
nected socially in groups [31, 50]. These groups do not always adhere to
the traditional hierarchy associated with gangs and are mostly comprised of
loose-knit social networks of individuals that oﬀend together. For this rea-
son, rather than calling gangs, the researcher tends to rename these socially
connected people as group members.
As stated earlier, the City of Cincinnati implemented a focused deter-
rence approach called CIRV. As a result of intelligence gathering sessions,
ﬁeld experts identiﬁed CIRV group members. These individuals and groups
are known for their violence propensities in the city. Therefore, the present
model also uses this export knowledge input and gives higher weights to in-
dividuals close to those groups members (called as CIRV list in this paper).
Ozer et al., 2020: Preprint to International Journal of Law, Crime and Justice DOI:10.1016/j.ijlcj.2020.100440
Page 7 of 11

A Rule-Based Model for Victim Prediction
Table 9
Descriptive Statistics of Structural Variables
Min - Max
Mean - %
Min - Max
Percentage
Whether a group has more than 3 violent crime
0 - 1
10.02%
Whether a group has more than 3 violent victimizations
0 - 1
17.58%
Whether a group has more than 3 shootings
0 - 1
5.46%
Whether a group has more than 20 members
0 - 1
20.12%
Table 10
Logistic Regression Results of Structural Variables
b
S.E.
p-value
Exp (B)
Whether a group has more than 3 violent crime
0.567
0.193
0.003
1.762
Whether a group has more than 3 violent victimizations
0.333
0.212
0.117
1.395
Whether a group has more than 3 shootings
0.792
0.183
0.000
2.207
Whether a group has more than 20 members
0.886
0.204
0.000
2.426
aligned with the ﬁndings of focused deterrence approach.
Likewise, the model calculates the precise PageRank value
of each person and assigns higher weights to high PageRank
individuals. The remaining three positional measures are all
shaped by the positions of individuals in the co-oﬀending
network. For instance, if a person’s13 friend14 involves in a
shooting crime, that person gets weight for having a shoot-
ing friend in the ﬁrst degree co-oﬀending network. Finally,
since the main aim of this model is to identify who is likely to
commit fatal and non-fatal shooting crimes or being a victim
of a shooting crime, the model gives higher weights to those
individuals if their friends are involved in either shootings or
violent crimes.
Structural measures are primarily related to the charac-
teristics of groups in which individuals are nested. For in-
stance, if a person is nested in a violent co-oﬀending group,
that person receives a higher weight. Likewise, the proposed
model gives higher weights to individuals if the number of
fatal and non-fatal shootings and ﬁrearm-related crimes is
high in the group. As a result of the computing process, the
model generated VIPAR scores for 55,454 individuals rang-
ing from 1.05 to 28.45
To summarize, the designed model takes into account
the age of individuals, past criminal history, and peer inﬂu-
13it is called as ego in network graph theory
14it is called as an edge in network graph theory
ence using the principles of network graph theory. Note that
the model does not include any gender, race, and place char-
acteristics for racial proﬁling concerns. In crime prevention
theory, place characteristics (e.g., risky places such as bars)
are good predictors of future crime concentration [11]. Cer-
tain areas, however, predominantly contain a speciﬁc racial
group, therefore, including place-based characteristics may
lead to hidden racial bias in the model. Due to this concern,
the model excludes place-based characteristics.
9. Results
As previously stated, the VIPAR score model employed
the data from July 1, 2010, to December 31, 2014, to rank
individuals for their vulnerability regarding future fatal and
non-fatal shootings. Given this context, the model generated
VIPAR scores for 55,454 individuals. In addition to VIPAR
scores, Cincinnati has CIRV list15 to predict future fatal and
non-fatal shootings. The CIRV list contains 1,379 active key
players and 1,836 non-active members. The second research
question of the study was to ﬁnd out whether VIPAR scores
better predict future shootings than the CIRV list. For this
reason, as Figure 3 displays, the present study employed the
ﬁrst top 1,379 individuals in the VIPAR score list as active
members, and the next 1,876 as non-active members to have
15Note that 2014-2015 CIRV list was used to predict 2015 shootings.
Table 11
Structural Measures of Co-Oﬀending Network
Structural Measures
Weight
Number of violent crime in the co-oﬀending network
>=10= 3; between 5 and 9=2; between 2 and 5=1
Number of violent victimizations in the co-oﬀending network
>=10= 3; between 5 and 9=2; between 2 and 5=1
Number of recent violent victimizations in the co-oﬀending network
>=7=2
Number of recent shootings in the co-oﬀending network
>=1=2
Number of shootings in the co-oﬀending network
>=3=1
If the co-oﬀending group has more than 20 members
1
If the co-oﬀending group has more than 10 shootings
1
If the co-oﬀending group has more than 5 recent shootings
1
Ozer et al., 2020: Preprint to International Journal of Law, Crime and Justice DOI:10.1016/j.ijlcj.2020.100440
Page 8 of 11

A Rule-Based Model for Victim Prediction
Figure 3: CIRV List and VIPAR Score List
an equal number of cases in both samples (VIPAR score list
and CIRV list) for a fair comparison.
Following adjusting the two samples, the study ﬁrst com-
pared the two lists (CIRV and VIPAR) for their prediction
power regarding future fatal and non-fatal shooting suspects.
The proposed model requires to have full names and date of
births’ of future suspects to make a comparison between the
VIPAR scores and the CIRV list. According to 2015 statis-
tics, Cincinnati Police Departments could identify 149 sus-
pects out of 477 fatal and non-fatal shootings by their full
name and date of birth16. Upon identiﬁcation of 2015 sus-
pects, the study matched the VIPAR score list and the CIRV
list with the known 2015 shooting suspects using full names
and date of births. Figure 4 below displays the result of this
matching procedure. Results show that the ﬁrst top 1,379
VIPAR score list predicts 34 out of 149 (22.8%) 2015 shoot-
ing suspects, and the second top 1,836 VIPAR score list pre-
dicts 14 out of 149 (9.4%). The entire VIPAR score list
(N=3,215) predicts 32.2% of known shooting suspects for
the year of 2015. In other words, the VIPAR score model
successfully predicts nearly one-third of the future shooting
suspects. On the other hand, active CIRV List and non-active
CIRV list predict 9.4% of the future known shooting sus-
pects.
The second set of analyses includes the prediction of fu-
ture shooting victims that occurred in 2015. As seen in Fig-
ure 5, the VIPAR score list predicts 123 out of 477 (25.8%)
shooting victims. In other words, VIPAR scores success-
fully predicted every 1 out of 4 shooting victims. On the
other hand, the CIRV list predicted 13% of the future shoot-
ing victims in the city. These primitive comparisons suggest
17.
10. Discussion and Conclusion
There is a growing concern that prioritizing individuals
for their vulnerability scores might violate the presumption
16To see the matched names among samples, full name, and date of birth
ﬁelds are necessary
17The entire VIPAR list was including 55,544 individuals when we con-
ducted the analysis. Therefore, we used top 5.8 percent of the VIPAR list
to evaluate the predictive success of VIPAR list.
Figure 4: Predicting Future Fatal and Non-Fatal Shooting Sus-
pects (N=149)
Figure 5: Predicting Future Fatal and Non-Fatal Shooting Vic-
tims (N=477)
of innocence right of people [2]. The present study fully
shares the same concerns for any computerized intelligence
if the model is not based on scientiﬁc theories and also not
publicly available upon request. Given this context, crimi-
nology is a well-established discipline that has century-old
studies and theories. As a rule of research methodology,
once the variable relationships (e.g., age and crime) are con-
ﬁrmed from one study to another, researchers tend to believe
that the magnitude of the relationship is causal or almost a
causal relationship. As stated at the beginning of this paper,
the criminological studies repeatedly suggest that age, past
criminal history, and peer inﬂuence are the most important
predictors of future delinquent behavior. Therefore, follow-
ing the pure thoughts/science of the criminology ﬁeld during
the development of any crime-related model might mitigate
the current liberty concerns.
Furthermore, variables and methods used in any crime
related model should be public to share the science behind
computerized intelligence. The other balance check method
is that experts should always validate the computer informa-
tion before making any decision for intervention. Finally, the
model should avoid to include any variables (e.g., race, gen-
der, and place-based characteristics) that might lead to pro-
ﬁling. Certain places predominantly contain speciﬁc racial
groups; therefore, even including place-based characteris-
Ozer et al., 2020: Preprint to International Journal of Law, Crime and Justice DOI:10.1016/j.ijlcj.2020.100440
Page 9 of 11

A Rule-Based Model for Victim Prediction
tics might lead to indirect racial proﬁling when developing
a model to predict vulnerable populations.
Given this context, VIPAR scores systematically analyze
the large volume of data with automated codes to predict
future shooting victims and suspects. The model is open
and only uses the proven thoughts of criminological theories.
VIPAR scores aim to identify emerging vulnerable popula-
tions, speciﬁcally juveniles, to take actions on time to save
lives. As an important note, even though VIPAR scores suc-
cessfully identify vulnerable populations, law enforcement
oﬃcials should not solely use it for aggressive style policing
by targeting top-ranked individuals.
Focused deterrence strategies can be a practical imple-
mentation of VIPAR scores. The proposed model partly em-
ploys the CIRV list, which was generated within the princi-
ples of a focused deterrence approach. Findings suggest that
VIPAR scores better predict the future shooing violence than
the CIRV list after adding relevant variables (e.g., age, past
criminal history, peer inﬂuence) from criminological theo-
ries. In this context, VIPAR scores can be a component of
focused deterrence policing, which is known as an eﬀective
way to reduce violence in cities [9, 17, 41].
There are certain limitations to the development of VIPAR
scores. First, the data used in the algorithm is police-reported
incidents; therefore, the algorithm will be limited to those in-
dividuals who have records/contacts with the police. Even
though this is a limitation of the VIPAR scores, it is also a
strength because the algorithm only uses the police contacts
rather than using any source of subjective data (e.g., social
media). The other likely limitation is that as explained in
the VIPAR scores, PageRank values are calculated based on
the number of immediate friends and the number of diﬀer-
ent events. (e.g., arrest, ﬁeld interviews). Readers might ask
that the more targeted police contacts, speciﬁcally through
ﬁeld interviews, the higher the VIPAR scores. This may not
be a concern for VIPAR scores because the number of police
contacts has an ignorable eﬀect in the calculation. The main
components of VIPAR scores are age, violence, and peer in-
ﬂuence. Therefore, frequent police contacts will not increase
a person’s position in the VIPAR score list unless that person
involves in violent crime and has proliﬁc friends at the ﬁrst-
degree relationship. Please note that we developed our based
on criminological theories; therefore, VIPAR scores only
converts the proven thoughts of criminology into digits in or-
der to prioritize proactive eﬀorts of police departments to ef-
fectively save lives. Having said that, VIPAR scores should
be periodically checked by researchers in case of any possi-
ble bias which might substantially aﬀect the overall purpose
of the system.
