arXiv:1501.03302v2  [cs.AI]  15 Jan 2015
Hard to Cheat: A Turing Test based on Answering Questions about Images
Mateusz Malinowski and Mario Fritz
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Saarbr¨ucken, Germany

Abstract
Progress in language and image understanding by ma-
chines has sparkled the interest of the research com-
munity in more open-ended, holistic tasks, and refu-
eled an old AI dream of building intelligent machines.
We discuss a few prominent challenges that character-
ize such holistic tasks and argue for “question answer-
ing about images” as a particular appealing instance of
such a holistic task. In particular, we point out that it
is a version of a Turing Test that is likely to be more
robust to over-interpretations and contrast it with tasks
like grounding and generation of descriptions. Finally,
we discuss tools to measure progress in this ﬁeld.
Introduction
Progress in machine perception and language under-
standing (e.g. (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Liang et al., 2013))
has
inspired
researchers
to
work
on
holistic
tasks
that interlink both modalities together in a complex
chain of perception, representation and inference. Ex-
amples
include:
grounding
(Krishnamurthy and Kollar,
2013), language generation (Karpathy and Fei-Fei, 2014;
Donahue et al.,
2014),
retrieval (Karpathy et al.,
2014;
Malinowski and Fritz, 2014b), and question answering
about images (Malinowski and Fritz, 2014a,c).
Recently, Malinowski and Fritz (2014a) have presented
an approach for question answering about images that
resembles the famous Turing Test (Turing, 1950), while
Malinowski and Fritz (2014c) further discuss some of the
associated challenges and issues. In the following, we elab-
orate on data acquisition, contrast this challenge with other
tasks including grounding, language generation, as well as
highlight properties like robustness to over-interpretation,
which makes it hard to cheat such a test.
Challenges
Architectures working on a holistic task such as question an-
swering based on images need to deal with a large gamut of
challenges. In this section, we have distilled a few prominent
ones that require a joint reasoning over language and visual
inputs. We also argue that holistic architectures can beneﬁt
from a common sense knowledge. Finally, we discuss chal-
lenges in data acquisition and show how the task differs from
other well known tasks.
Vision and language
Scalability: Vision and language
systems ground any internal representation in an external
world that serves as a common reference point for ma-
chines and humans. The human conceptualization divides
these percepts into different instances, categories as well as
spatio-temporal concepts. Architectures that aim at repro-
ducing this space of human concepts need to capture the
same diversity and therefore scale up to thousands of con-
cepts.
Concept ambiguity: As the number of categories grows, the
semantic boundaries become more fuzzy, and hence ambi-
guities and gradual memberships are inherently introduced.
For instance, difference between ’night stand’ and ’cabinet’,
or ’armchair’, ’chair’ and ’sofa’ can be blurry. Such ambi-
guities are challenging in at least two ways. Methods need
to distinguish ﬁne-grained differences between these objects
when appropriate. Objective functions and evaluating met-
rics need to gradually penalize the methods for their mis-
takes.
Ambiguity in reference resolution: The quality of an answer
depends on how ambiguous and latent notions of reference
frames and intentions are understood (Malinowski and Fritz,
2014a). Depending on the cultural bias and the context, we
may use object-centric or observer-centric or world-centric
frames of reference (Levinson, 2003). Moreover, it is no uni-
ﬁed notion what ’with’, ’beneath’, ’over’ mean.
Common sense knowledge
Interestingly, some questions
can be quite reliably answered with access to common sense
knowledge. For instance ”Which object on the table is used
for cutting?” already narrows down the likely options signif-
icantly. Such example suggests that question-answering ar-
chitectures would signiﬁcantly beneﬁt from common sense
knowledge.
An ’object for cutting’ is not directly visual but about the
affordance of the object and therefore a challenging con-
cept to acquire from images only. On the other hand, co-
occurrences in visual data can represent a kind of visual
common sense knowledge of very mundane facts or prob-
abilistic relations that are rarely found in common sense
knowledge bases.
Annotations
We argue that despite the aforementioned
challenges, “question answering about images” has unique

advantages over other tasks in terms of data acqui-
sition and task evaluation. In contrast to grounding
(Krishnamurthy and Kollar, 2013), annotating images with
question and answer pairs does not require a detailed annota-
tions of whole scenes in terms of predicates representing ob-
jects and their relations. The task is also agnostic to the inter-
nal representation of a method. In contrast to language gen-
eration (Karpathy and Fei-Fei, 2014; Donahue et al., 2014),
the output space of a question answering task is more re-
stricted and hence evaluation of different architectures on
the task is easier to formulate. In contrast to typical com-
puter vision tasks like object detection (Everingham et al.,
2010), architectures are judged solely on right answers, not
an internal representation. In contrast to the traditional Tur-
ing Test (Turing, 1950), “answering questions about images”
is less prone to over-interpretations via associating a mean-
ing to machine answers by the human interrogator. Hence,
a method can be forced to answer to the point rather than
“cheating” by giving generic answers or output that is open
to interpretations.
Evaluation of architectures
Measuring progress on holistic tasks require identifying its
goals. For instance a suitable metric for “question answer-
ing about images” should evaluate architectures based on
produced answers but not on intermediate results such as
detections or logical forms. For a Visual Turing Challenge,
we seek a metric that satisﬁes several properties. The most
important are:
Automation: Evaluating answers on such complex tasks as
answering on questions requires a quite deep understand-
ing of natural language, involved concepts and hidden in-
tentions of the questioner. The ideal but impractical metric
would be to manually judge every single answer of every
architecture individually. Therefore, we are seeking an auto-
matic approximation so that we can evaluate different holis-
tic architectures at scale. Malinowski and Fritz (2014a) pro-
posed to restrict the answer space in order to achieve this
goal, while leaving the questions unconstraint.
Social consensus: The complex tasks that we are interested
in are inherently ambiguous. The ambiguities stem from
many factors such as cultural bias, different frame of refer-
ence and ﬁned grained categorization. This implies that mul-
tiple interpretations of a question are possible. To deal with
different interpretations of words, Malinowski and Fritz
(2014a) deﬁne a WUPS scores using lexical databases
(Miller, 1995) with Wu-Palmer similarity (Wu and Palmer,
1994). To deal with different interpretations of a question,
Malinowski and Fritz (2014c) suggest that the quality of an-
swers should be measured according to the social consensus
where the answers are evaluated against multiple ground-
truths. Interestingly, such metric also naturally quantiﬁes so-
cial agreement of the answer, and serve as a practical ap-
proximation of tedious manual evaluation.
Experimental scenarios In many cases, success on chal-
lenging learning problems has been accelerated by use of
external data in the training. We believe that a Visual Tur-
ing challenge should consists of a sub-task with a prohibited
use of auxiliary data to understand how the holistic learn-
ers generalize from limited and challenging data in a more
established setup. On the other hand, we should not limit
ourselves to such artiﬁcial restrictions in building the next
generation of the holistic learners. Therefore open sub-tasks
with a permissible use of additional sources in the training
have to be stated, including: additional vision and language
resources, synthetic data and curated data.
Summary
The goal of this contribution is to sparkle discussions
about challenges and benchmarking architectures on holis-
tic tasks. We also argue that “question answering about
images” is a holistic task that offers multiple advantages
over related tasks. For example, it is likely to be less
prone to “cheating” by over-interpretations than a tradi-
tional Turing Test, the annotation process is tractable by
crowdsourcing question and answer pairs, and the task
does not artiﬁcially force any internal representation on
the methods. Our most recent efforts and results on estab-
lishing a Visual Turing Test can be found on our website:
www.d2.mpi-inf.mpg.de/visual-turing-challenge.
