Suboptimality Bounds for Stochastic Shortest Path Problems
Eric A. Hansen
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering
Mississippi State University
Mississippi State, MS 39762

Abstract
We consider how to use the Bellman residual of
the dynamic programming operator to compute
suboptimality bounds for solutions to stochastic
shortest path problems. Such bounds have been
previously established only in the special case
that “all policies are proper,” in which case the
dynamic programming operator is known to be
a contraction, and have been shown to be easily
computable only in the more limited special case
of discounting. Under the condition that transi-
tion costs are positive, we show that suboptimal-
ity bounds can be easily computed even when not
all policies are proper. In the general case when
there are no restrictions on transition costs, the
analysis is more complex. But we present prelim-
inary results that show such bounds are possible.
1
Introduction
A stochastic shortest path problem is a Markov decision
process (MDP) where the objective is to ﬁnd a minimum-
cost policy that reaches a goal or terminal state with prob-
ability 1 [4, 2]. It is an elegant model for many problems
of planning under uncertainty, especially for goal-oriented
decision-theoretic planning problems where policy execu-
tion terminates once a goal condition is achieved. Standard
solution methods rely on dynamic programming or linear
programming. The model is also used in the development
and analysis of reinforcement learning and heuristic search
algorithms for MDPs [15, 1, 6]. There are extensions of the
stochastic shortest path problem for planning under partial
observability [11], multi-agent planning [12, 8], and risk-
sensitive planning [10].
For the stochastic shortest path problem, the expected total
cost of policy execution is bounded, without discounting.
Thus it is an important alternative to the discounted inﬁnite-
horizon MDP as a model for decision-theoretic planning.
Although use of a discount factor sometimes has an eco-
nomic justiﬁcation, discounting is not well-motivated for
many AI planning problems and has potential drawbacks.
It can skew the relative values of policies and change the
optimal policy. Discounting can also make it impossible
to guarantee that dynamic programming ﬁnds a policy that
reaches a goal state with probability 1. With discounting,
a policy that cycles forever without reaching the goal state
still has ﬁnite total cost, which could be less than the cost
of the best policy that is guaranteed to reach the goal state.
Despite potential drawbacks, the discounted inﬁnite-
horizon model is widely used. One reason for its appeal is
that discounting is a simple way to ensure that algorithms
for solving inﬁnite-horizon MDPs have the desired conver-
gence properties, since the dynamic programming operator
is a contraction operator in this case, with the contraction
rate equal to the discount factor. Although the convergence
of value iteration and policy iteration for stochastic shortest
path problems is well-established, it is not based on a con-
traction property (except in the special case that all policies
are proper). As a result, there is no guarantee that the con-
vergence rate is geometric and suboptimality bounds are
generally not available for solutions found by dynamic pro-
gramming, in contrast to the discounted case.
In this paper, we show that even though the dynamic pro-
gramming operator for stochastic shortest path problems
is not a contraction operator in general, it behaves like
a contraction operator if the dynamic programming algo-
rithm is started with the value function of a proper policy,
which is a policy that achieves the goal state with prob-
ability one. Under the additional condition that transition
costs are positive, we show how to use the Bellman residual
of the dynamic programming operator to compute subop-
timality bounds. In the general case where there are no re-
strictions on action costs, the analysis is more complex. But
we establish some preliminary results that support a general
approach to computing bounds. Our results apply to both
completely observable and partially observable stochastic
shortest path problems.

2
Background
We begin with a review of the stochastic shortest path prob-
lem as formulated by Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis [3, 4, 5] and
extended to the partially observable case by Patek [11].
We also review previous work on computing suboptimal-
ity bounds for solutions found by dynamic programming.
2.1
Stochastic shortest path problem
Like any discrete-time Markov decision process (MDP), a
stochastic shortest path problem includes a set of states, S,
and a set of control actions, U, which we assume are both
ﬁnite; a set of transition probabilities, where pij(u) denotes
the probability that the system moves to state j ∈S after
action u ∈U is taken in state i ∈S; and a set of real-valued
costs, where g(i, u, j) denotes the cost incurred when ac-
tion u taken in state i results in a transition to state j.
The expected cost of taking action u in state i is denoted
g(i, u) = ∑
j∈S pij(u)g(i, u, j).
In addition, a stochastic shortest path problem is charac-
terized by a set of assumptions from which it derives its
special properties. The ﬁrst is the following.
Assumption 1. The state set includes a special target or
terminal state, t ∈S, which is zero-cost and absorbing,
which means that ptt(u) = 1 and g(t, u, t) = 0, ∀u ∈U.
The objective is to ﬁnd a stationary policy, µ : S →U, that
reaches the terminal state while minimizing the total ex-
pected cost. We are especially interested in stationary poli-
cies that reach the terminal state with probability 1 from
any initial state, called proper policies.
Deﬁnition 1 (Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis). A stationary policy
µ is said to be proper if there exists a ﬁnite positive integer
m such that there is a positive probability of reaching the
terminal state after at most m stages when following this
policy, regardless of the initial state, that is,
ρµ = min
i∈S P(xm = t|x0 = i, µ) > 0,
(1)
where xk denotes the state of the process at stage k. A sta-
tionary policy that is not proper is said to be improper.
Following a policy that is proper according to this deﬁni-
tion, a process reaches the terminal state with probability 1,
regardless of the initial state [2].
The value (or cost-to-go) function Jµ of a stationary pol-
icy µ gives the expected total cost of following the policy
starting from an initial state i, deﬁned as
Jµ(i) = lim
N→∞Eµ
[N−1
∑
k=0
g(xk, µ(xk))|x0 = i
]
, ∀i ∈S. (2)
For a proper policy µ, the expected cost is bounded above
for each state, that is, Jµ(i) < ∞, ∀i ∈S.
A stochastic shortest path problem is solved by ﬁnding an
optimal policy µ∗satisfying
J∗(i) = Jµ∗(i) ≤Jµ(i), ∀i ∈S, ∀µ ∈M,
(3)
where J∗denotes the optimal value function. Two addi-
tional assumptions of the stochastic shortest path problem
ensure that an optimal policy exists and that it is proper.
Assumption 2. There exists at least one proper policy.
Assumption 3. For every improper policy µ, the corre-
sponding cost Jµ(i) is inﬁnite for at least one state i.
Assumption 3 is equivalent to the assumption that the ex-
pected cost Jµ(i) of state i under policy µ is inﬁnite if a
process started in state i and following policy µ does not
reach the terminal state with probability 1.
Two special cases of the stochastic shortest path problem
play an important role in the analysis of Bertsekas and Tsit-
siklis [3, 4, 5]. The ﬁrst is the stochastic shortest path prob-
lem when all policies are proper. Analysis of this special
case is easier, although the assumption that all policies are
proper is often unrealistic. Another special case is the dis-
counted inﬁnite-horizon MDP. By a well-known reduction,
any discounted inﬁnite-horizon MDP can be reduced to an
equivalent stochastic shortest path problem in which, for
every state and action pair, there is a probability (1 −β) of
making a transition to the terminal state, where β < 1 is the
discount factor, with the other transition probabilities nor-
malized. For the stochastic shortest path problem created
by this reduction, all policies are proper. As we will see,
the well-known convergence properties and suboptimality
bounds for the discounted inﬁnite-horizon MDP are a spe-
cial case of those for the stochastic shortest path problem.
2.2
Dynamic programming
The stochastic shortest path problem can be solved using
dynamic programming, where the dynamic programming
operator is deﬁned as follows,
TJ(i) = min
u∈U
∑
j∈S
pij(u) (g(i, u, j) + J(j)), ∀i ∈S, (4)
and the related policy evaluation operator Tµ is deﬁned as,
TµJ(i) =
∑
j∈S
pij(µ(i)) (g(i, µ(i), j) + J(j)), ∀i ∈S. (5)
These operators are the key steps in two dynamic program-
ming algorithms: value iteration and policy iteration.
Analysis of the convergence of value and policy iteration
turns on two properties of the dynamic programming and
policy evaluation operators: the monotonicity property and
the contraction property. The monotonicity property is de-
ﬁned as follows: if J ≤J′, then TJ ≤TJ′ and TµJ ≤
TµJ′.1 Both operators satisfy the monotonicity property.
1As shorthand, we let J ≤J′ denote J(i) ≤J′(i), ∀i ∈S.

An operator T, such as the dynamic programming operator,
is said to be a contraction operator if, for all bounded value
functions J and J′,
||TJ −TJ′|| ≤β||J −J′||,
(6)
where β, with 0 ≤β < 1, is the contraction rate and ||.||
is some norm. For discounted inﬁnite-horizon MDPs, it is
well-known that both the dynamic programming operator
T and the policy evaluation operator Tµ are contraction op-
erators, with the contraction rate β equal to the discount
factor. If the state space is ﬁnite, they are contraction opera-
tors in the maximum norm, deﬁned as ||x|| = maxi∈S x(i).
If the state space is continuous, they are contraction opera-
tors in the supremum norm, deﬁned as ||x|| = supi∈S x(i).
For MDPs, the maximum or supremum norm, ||TJ −J||,
is called the Bellman residual.
For the stochastic shortest path problem, there is no dis-
count factor (or equivalently, the discount factor is 1). In
this case, a related concept of contraction operator is use-
ful. An operator T is said to be an m-stage contraction op-
erator if T m, which is the composition of T with itself m
times, is a contraction operator, that is, if there is some β,
with 0 ≤β < 1, and some norm ||.||, such that
||T mJ −T mJ′|| < β||J −J′||,
(7)
for all bounded value functions J and J′. For the stochas-
tic shortest path problem, the dynamic programming oper-
ator is an m-stage contraction operator in the maximum (or
supremum) norm if there is some minimum positive prob-
ability ρm = (1 −β) > 0 that the process reaches the ter-
minal state within m steps, beginning from any state. Bert-
sekas and Tsitsiklis [3, 4, 5] show that the dynamic pro-
gramming operator for stochastic shortest path problems is
an m-stage contraction operator in the special case that all
policies are proper.2 As for the policy evaluation operator,
it is an m-stage contraction if it evaluates a proper policy.
The signiﬁcance of showing that the dynamic program-
ming and policy evaluation operators satisfy the contraction
property, under the condition that all policies are proper,
is that the convergence of both value iteration and policy
iteration follows from Banach’s Fixed-Point Theorem; it
also follows that the convergence rate is geometric. Bert-
sekas and Tsitsiklis consider this special case ﬁrst because
2The minimum probability ρm that the terminal state will be
reached in m stages can be computed by solving a ﬁnite-horizon
MDP with the same transition probabilities as the stochastic short-
est path problem but with a cost of 1 for any transition to the
terminal state, and a cost of 0 for all other transitions. Finding a
policy that minimizes the m-horizon cost corresponds to ﬁnding
a policy that minimizes the probability of reaching the terminal
state within m stages. By Deﬁnition 1, the minimum probability
of reaching the terminal state within m stages is greater than zero,
for some positive integer m, if all policies are proper.
the dynamic programming operator is not a contraction op-
erator in the general case. In the words of Bertsekas and
Tsitsiklis [4], “our assumptions do not imply that the cor-
responding dynamic programming mapping is a contrac-
tion (unlike the situation in discounted problems), unless
all policies are proper.” They give an example to show that
the contraction property does not hold in general. It is a
stochastic shortest path problem with two states: state 1 is
terminal and state 2 is nonterminal. Two actions are pos-
sible in the nonterminal state. One causes a deterministic
transition to the terminal state with a cost of 2; the other
causes a deterministic self-transition with a cost of 1. Thus
there are two stationary policies, one proper and the other
improper. Consider two value functions J and J′ for which
J(1) = J′(1) = 0, J(2) < 1, and J′(2) < 1. Under these
conditions, |TJ(2) −TJ′(2)| = |(J(2) + 1) −(J′(2) +
1)| = |J(2)−J′(2)|, which shows that, in general, T is not
a contraction with respect to any norm.
The principal contribution of Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis to the
theory of stochastic shortest path problems is their proofs
of the convergence of value iteration and policy iteration in
the general case, where the dynamic programming opera-
tor is not a contraction. Given only the assumptions of the
stochastic shortest path problem, they prove the following.
• The optimal value function J∗is the unique solution
of the Bellman equation J∗= TJ∗, and value itera-
tion converges to it, which means that for any initial
value function J, limt→∞T tJ = J∗.
• The value function Jµ of a proper policy µ is the
unique solution of the linear system of equations,
Jµ = TµJµ, and policy evaluation converges to it,
which means limt→∞T t
µJ = Jµ, for any initial J.
• Starting with a proper policy µ0, policy iteration gen-
erates a sequence of policies µ1, µ2, . . ., for which
Jµk+1 ≤Jµk, ∀k, by alternating a policy evaluation
step that computes Jµk, with a policy improvement
step that computes an improved policy µk+1 using the
equation Tµk+1Jµk = TJµk, or equivalently, ∀i ∈S,
µk+1(i)=arg min
u∈U
∑
j∈S
pij(u)
(
g(i,u,j)+Jµk(j)
)
,
(8)
and the sequence converges to an optimal policy.
However, their convergence results are weaker than those
based on the contraction property and Banach’s Fixed-
Point Theorem because they establish pointwise conver-
gence, not uniform convergence. As a result, they provide
no guarantee that the rate of convergence is geometric and
no way to bound the number of iterations until convergence
to an ϵ-optimal policy. They also do not allow easy use of
the Bellman residual to compute suboptimality bounds.

2.3
Suboptimality bounds
We next review how to use the Bellman residual of the dy-
namic programming operator to bound the suboptimality
of solutions found by dynamic programming. For stochas-
tic shortest path problems, Bertsekas [2, pp. 413–414] gives
the following result.
Theorem 1 (Bertsekas). For any stochastic shortest path
problem, any value function J, a greedy policy µ with re-
spect to J, and for all i ∈S, the following bounds hold,
J(i) + cN ∗(i) ≤J∗(i) ≤Jµ(i) ≤J(i) + cNµ(i),
(9)
where c = mini∈S [TJ(i) −J(i)], N ∗(i) is an upper
bound on the expected number of steps needed to reach
the terminal state t beginning from state i and following
an optimal policy, c = maxi∈S [TJ(i) −J(i)], and Nµ(i)
is an upper bound on the expected number of steps needed
to reach t beginning from state i and following policy µ.
Some simpliﬁcations can help bring this result into focus.
Leaving out the inequalities involving Jµ and subtracting
J(i), we have: cN ∗(i) ≤J∗(i) −J(i) ≤cNµ(i). Note
that c ≤0 and c ≥0. Note also that the Bellman residual
is: ||TJ −J|| = max{−c, c}. Thus we have:
|J∗(i) −J(i)| ≤||TJ −J|| · max{N ∗(i), Nµ(i)}. (10)
Since by deﬁnition, ||J∗−J|| = maxi∈S |J∗(i) −J(i)|,
we ﬁnally have:
||J∗−J|| ≤||TJ −J|| · max
i∈S max{N ∗(i), Nµ(i)}. (11)
In addition to this bound on the suboptimality of a value
function J, the inequalities Jµ(i) ≤J(i)+cNµ(i) in Equa-
tion 9 let us bound the suboptimality of a greedy policy µ
with respect to J. It follows that we can compute subop-
timality bounds if we can compute the bounds N ∗(i) and
Nµ(i) on the expected number of stages until termination.
“Unfortunately,” writes Bertsekas [2, pp. 413–414], these
bounds “are easily computed or approximated only in the
presence of special problem structure.”
Bertsekas mentions just one special case in which these
bounds can be easily computed: the discounted inﬁnite-
horizon case. As already pointed out, any discounted
inﬁnite-horizon MDP (with discount factor β) can be re-
duced to an equivalent stochastic shortest path problem in
which, for every state and action pair, there is a probabil-
ity (1 −β) of making a transition to a terminal state, with
the other transition probabilities normalized accordingly. It
follows that the expected number of steps until termination,
from any starting state, is ∑∞
t=0 βt = 1/(1 −β). Letting
N ∗(i) = Nµ(i) = 1/(1 −β), ∀i ∈S, the well-known
bound on the suboptimality of a value function J, which is
||J∗−J|| ≤||TJ −J||/(1 −β), is seen to be a special
case of the suboptimality bound given by Equation 11.
Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis [5, pp. 23–24] describe how to
bound the expected number of stages until termination for
any stochastic shortest path problem for which all poli-
cies are proper, although it requires solving an MDP of
the same size as the original stochastic shortest path prob-
lem. Given a stochastic shortest-path problem, consider a
related inﬁnite-horizon MDP where the transition probabil-
ities are the same but there is a cost of 0 for any transition
to the terminal state and all other transitions incur a cost
of −1. For this MDP, ﬁnding a policy that minimizes the
expected inﬁnite-horizon cost corresponds to ﬁnding a pol-
icy that maximizes the expected number of stages it takes
to reach the terminal state. The values computed by solv-
ing this MDP bound the number of stages until termination
for any policy. Obviously, these bounds are ﬁnite (and the
MDP is well-deﬁned) if and only if all policies are proper.
If a greedy policy µ with respect to value function J is
not proper, then Nµ(i) is not ﬁnite for at least one state i
and the bounds of Equations 10 and 11 are not ﬁnite. We
address the challenge of how to compute bounds when not
all policies are proper beginning in Section 3.
2.4
Partial observability
Patek [11] extends the framework of stochastic shortest
path problems to the partially observable case. A partially
observable MDP (POMDP) includes the same states, ac-
tions, transition probabilities and costs deﬁned earlier, plus
a ﬁnite set of observation symbols, Z, and a set of obser-
vation probabilities, where pz(j, u) denotes the probability
that symbol z ∈Z is observed after action u ∈U results
in a transition to state j ∈S. In addition to the three as-
sumptions of a stochastic shortest path problem given in
Section 2.1, a partially observable stochastic shortest path
problem includes an assumption that ensures that termina-
tion of the process is perfectly recognized.
Assumption 4. The set of observation symbols includes a
special symbol, zt ∈Z, which is unique to transitions to
the terminal state t. That is, pzt(t, u) = 1 and pzt(j, u) =
0, ∀u ∈U, j ∈S.
As is well-known, a POMDP can be solved by dynamic
programming if it is ﬁrst transformed into an equivalent
completely observable MDP over belief states, where a be-
lief state is an |S|-dimensional vector of probabilities main-
tained by Bayesian conditioning. Given the assumptions
of the partially observable stochastic shortest path prob-
lem, Patek [11] shows that value iteration and policy iter-
ation have the same convergence properties established by
Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis [3, 4] in the completely observable
case. His analysis follows the same outline. In the special
case that all policies are proper, he shows that the dynamic
programming operator is an m-stage contraction operator.
In the general case when not all policies are proper, he
proves convergence without using a contraction property.

3
Uniform improvability and proper policies
The convergence proofs for value iteration and policy itera-
tion given by Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis [3, 4] and Patek [11]
for the general case when not all policies are proper are
signiﬁcant because they do not depend on the contraction
property. But without a contraction property, they do not
ensure a geometric rate of convergence or provide a way to
use the Bellman residual to compute suboptimality bounds.
In the rest of the paper, we show a way around this.
First, we establish a condition under which a policy found
by dynamic programming is guaranteed to be proper.
Theorem 2. For any stochastic shortest path problem and
any value function J for which TJ ≤J, a greedy policy µ
with respect to J, deﬁned as
µ(i) = argmin
u∈U
∑
j∈S
pij(u)(g(i, u, j)+J(j)) , ∀i ∈S,
(12)
is a proper policy and Jµ ≤J.
Proof. The key observation is that TJ = TµJ, which
means that application of the dynamic programming op-
erator T can be viewed as the ﬁrst application of the policy
evaluation operator Tµ in evaluating a greedy policy µ with
respect to J. When TJ ≤J, we have TµJ ≤J. By the
monotonicity property, it follows that every successive it-
eration of Tµ monotonically improves the value function,
and thus Jµ = limn→∞T n
µ J ≤TµJ = TJ ≤J. Since Jµ
is bounded above for every state, µ must be proper.
We call a value function J for which TJ ≤J a uniformly
improvable value function, a term used by others [16, 14].
Consider the subspace of uniformly improvable value func-
tions: J = {J|TJ ≤J}. By the monotonicity property,
this subspace is closed under the dynamic programming
operator. It follows that if value iteration is started with
a value function J ∈J , a greedy policy with respect to
this value function, and a greedy policy with respect to any
subsequent value function found after any number of iter-
ations of value iteration, must be proper. We already have
the same guarantee for policy iteration. The convergence
proof for policy iteration given by Bertsekas and Tsitsik-
lis (and by Patek in the partially observable case) requires
the initial policy to be proper; otherwise, the value func-
tion computed by policy evaluation is not bounded. Given
an initial proper policy, it follows from the policy improve-
ment theorem that any policy found after any number of it-
erations of policy iteration must be proper, since the cost of
an improved policy cannot increase for any state. Indeed,
this guarantee holds precisely because the value function
of an initial proper policy µ is uniformly improvable; note
that TJµ = Jµ implies TJµ ≤Jµ. It follows that whether
we use policy iteration or value iteration, we can guarantee
uniform improvability by ﬁnding an initial proper policy.
Different algorithms can be used to ﬁnd an initial proper
policy. Since the better the initial policy and value function,
the sooner policy iteration or value iteration converges, ex-
tra computational effort spent trying to ﬁnd an initial proper
policy that is of high quality could be well-spent. However,
it is not difﬁcult to ﬁnd some initial proper policy.
Theorem 3. For any stochastic shortest path problem, the
uniform random policy is proper.3
Proof. By Assumption 2, there exists some proper policy
µ. By Deﬁnition 1, there is a positive integer m such that
after m stages, there is a probability ρµ > 0 that following
policy µ leads to the terminal state. Since a uniform random
policy selects an action at random based on a uniform prob-
ability distribution, it executes the same action as policy µ
for m consecutive stages with probability (1/|U|)m > 0.
It follows that the probability of reaching the terminal state
within m stages by following the uniform random policy is
greater than or equal to (1/|U|)m · ρµ, which is positive,
and thus the uniform random policy is proper.
When the value function is uniformly improvable, we can
simplify the bounds given in Theorem 1 and Equations 10
and 11. Note that when TJ ≤J, we have c = 0. From
Equation 9, it follows that J∗(i) ≤Jµ(i) ≤J(i), where
µ is a greedy policy with respect to J. Thus µ must be
proper. (This is the same result proved in Theorem 2.) Set-
ting aside the bounds involving Jµ, consider the remain-
ing bounds: J(i) + cN ∗(i) ≤J∗(i) ≤J(i). Subtract-
ing J(i), we have: cN ∗(i) ≤J∗(i) −J(i) ≤0. Thus
|J∗(i) −J(i)| ≤−cN ∗(i). By assumption, TJ ≤J, and
so the Bellman residual is: ||TJ −J|| = −c. Thus we have,
|J∗(i) −J(i)| ≤||TJ −J|| · N ∗(i),
(13)
where N ∗(i), as deﬁned in Theorem 1, is an upper bound
on the expected number of steps needed to reach the termi-
nal state beginning from state i and following an optimal
policy. By deﬁnition, ||J∗−J|| = maxi∈S |J∗(i) −J(i)|,
and so,
||J∗−J|| ≤||TJ −J|| · N ∗,
(14)
where N ∗= maxi∈S N ∗(i) is an upper bound on the ex-
pected number of steps needed to reach the terminal state
from any other state by following an optimal policy. Note
that Equation 13 is a simpliﬁcation of Equation 10 and
Equation 14 is a simpliﬁcation of Equation 11, where both
simplications are possible because the value function J is
uniformly improvable. The condition that J is uniformly
improvable also allows the following simpliﬁcation.
Theorem 4. If value function J is uniformly improvable,
then any bound on its suboptimality is also a bound on the
suboptimality of a greedy policy µ with respect to J.
Proof. Immediate since Jµ(i) ≤J(i) if TJ ≤J(i).
3I am grateful to Bruno Scherrer for the observation expressed
in this theorem and the idea of the proof.

4
Positive transition costs
In this section, we consider a special case of the stochas-
tic shortest path problem where all transition costs incur a
positive cost, except possibly for transitions into the termi-
nal state. By Assumption 1, a transition from the terminal
state to itself has a cost of zero. Because a transition from
a nonterminal state to the terminal state occurs only once,
we do not need to place any restriction on its cost (except,
of course, that it is bounded).
Under this condition on transition costs, we show how
to compute upper bounds, denoted N(i), ∀i ∈S, on the
expected number of stages until termination of any pol-
icy µ for which Jµ ≤J, where J is uniformly improv-
able. We use the notation N(i) instead of N ∗(i) because
these bounds on the expected number of stages until ter-
mination apply to any policy µ for which Jµ ≤J, not
just an optimal policy. Since J∗≤Jµ ≤J, we have
N(i) ≥N ∗(i), ∀i ∈S, and so we can use N(i) in place of
N ∗(i) in Equations 13 and 14 to bound the suboptimality
of solutions found by dynamic programming.
The proof strategy we adopt to establish these bounds is to
show that any policy µ that does not terminate within N(i)
stages on average, beginning from state i, must have an ex-
pected cost Jµ(i) greater than J(i), which contradicts the
assumption that Jµ ≤J. The signiﬁcance of this strategy
is that it does not require all policies to be proper. It simply
requires a uniformly improvable value function J.
Theorem 5. For any stochastic shortest-path problem for
which g(i, u, j) > 0 for all i ∈S, u ∈U, j ∈S\t, and
for any policy µ with value function Jµ ≤J, an upper
bound on the mean number of steps until the terminal state
is reached beginning from any state i is
N(i) = J(i) −a
b
+ 1,
(15)
where a = min{g(i, u, t) : i ∈S, u ∈U} denotes the
minimum cost of any transition into the terminal state and
b = min{g(i, u, j) : i ∈S, u ∈U, j ̸= t} denotes the
minimum cost of any other transition.
Proof. For any policy µ, let nµ(i) denote the expected
number of steps until the terminal state is reached be-
ginning from state i and following policy µ. Because a
is the minimum cost of any transition into the terminal
state and b is the minimum cost of any other transition,
a + b(nµ(i) −1) is the minimum cost of any sequence
of nµ(i) transitions that ends in the terminal state; there-
fore, Jµ(i) ≥a + b(nµ(i) −1). Now if N(i) is not an
upper bound on the expected number of stages until termi-
nation for some state i, there must be some policy µ for
which both nµ(i) > N(i) and Jµ(i) ≤J(i). But since
N(i) = (J(i) −a)/b + 1, then nµ(i) > N(i) implies
that Jµ(i) > J(i), which contradicts the assumption that
Jµ ≤J. It follows that nµ(i) ≤N(i), ∀i ∈S.
Figure 1: Gridworld navigation example [13, 9].
Note that the “+1” in Equation 15 counts the transition into
the terminal state. This approach to computing suboptimal-
ity bounds works best if transition costs are uniform as well
as positive. If transition costs are positive but non-uniform,
the bounds are still valid, but potentially looser. In this case,
the bounds could be improved by considering the minimum
expected transition cost after an action, instead of simply
the minimum transition cost.
Example
For illustration, consider the small gridworld
navigation problem shown in Figure 1. Russell and
Norvig [13] describe a completely observable version of
this gridworld and Parr and Russell [9] describe a partially
observable version. To allow reference to individual states,
we number each cell of the grid from 0 to 10. Figure 1
shows all of the numbers except two; the +1 state is num-
bered 3 and the −1 state is numbered 6. Any action taken
in either the +1 or the −1 state results in a deterministic
transition to a terminal state (which is not shown) and a re-
ward of +1 or −1 respectively. In all other states, any of
the four possible navigation actions (with one correspond-
ing to each direction of the compass) incurs a negative re-
ward of −0.04, which is equivalent to a positive cost. (For
convenience, we keep the reward-maximization framework
used by Russell and Norvig [13] and Parr and Russell [9].
Note that it is easily transformed to the cost-minimization
framework of a stochastic shortest-path problem.) We use
the same transition and observation probabilities given by
Russell and Norvig [13] and Parr and Russell [9]. For this
example, it is not the case that all policies are proper.
One reason for adopting this simple example is that it is the
same example used by Russell and Norvig [13] to illustrate
how to compute suboptimality bounds for solutions found
by dynamic programming for discounted inﬁnite-horizon
MDPs. However, this example is most naturally formalized
in an undiscounted reward-maximization framework that is
equivalent to a stochastic shortest path problem, as noted
by both Russell and Norvig [13] and Parr and Russell [9].
Although this gridworld example is very simple, it helps to
illustrate several aspects of our approach.
We implemented our approach to computing suboptimality
bounds in exact value iteration and policy iteration algo-
rithms for completely observable and partially observable
stochastic shortest path problems. Table 1 shows the results
for the ﬁrst 12 iterations of the algorithms, starting from the

Completely observable
Partially observable
Value iteration
Policy iteration
Value iteration
Policy iteration
J
m
resid.
error
J
m
resid.
error
J
m
resid.
error
J
m
resid.
error
0
-1.603
66.1
-
-
-1.603
66.1
-
-
-1.603
66.1
-
-
-1.603
66.1
-
-
1
-1.570
65.3
0.9567
62.428
-0.885
48.1
0.9567
46.030
-1.603
66.1
0.9567
63.200
-1.033
51.8
0.9567
49.570
2
-1.430
61.7
0.8470
52.302
0.369
16.8
1.0070
16.880
-1.570
65.3
0.8470
55.270
0.332
17.7
0.8828
18.090
3
-1.206
56.1
0.7379
41.433
0.388
16.3
0.0186
0.304
-1.430
61.8
0.7379
45.560
0.350
17.2
0.1073
1.851
4
-0.876
47.9
0.6585
31.551
0.388
16.3
0.0000
0.000
-1.209
56.2
0.6585
37.030
0.363
16.9
0.4136
0.701
5
-0.256
32.4
0.6204
20.102
-0.882
48.1
0.6165
29.630
0.374
16.6
0.0213
0.355
6
0.153
22.2
0.4094
9.075
-0.266
32.7
0.4030
13.160
0.379
16.5
0.0120
0.204
7
0.263
19.4
0.2568
4.991
0.101
23.5
0.2603
6.110
0.383
16.4
0.0049
0.082
8
0.310
18.2
0.1389
2.534
0.249
19.8
0.1407
2.782
0.384
16.4
0.0011
0.019
9
0.333
17.7
0.0726
1.282
0.299
18.5
0.0910
1.686
0.385
16.4
0.0005
0.010
10
0.345
17.4
0.0613
1.066
0.323
17.9
0.0755
1.354
0.385
15.4
0.0002
0.002
11
0.351
17.2
0.0411
0.708
0.338
17.6
0.0560
0.983
0.385
15.4
0.0001
0.001
12
0.358
17.1
0.0259
0.442
0.347
17.3
0.0353
0.612
0.385
15.4
0.0000
0.000
Table 1: Error bounds and related statistics for solutions found by exact value iteration and policy iteration in solving the gridworld
problem in both its completely and partially observable forms. Only results for the ﬁrst 12 iterations are shown. In the completely
observable case, policy iteration converges after 4 iterations. For each iteration, J is the smallest value of any state or belief state, that
is, J = mins∈S J(s) in the completely observable case, and J = infb J(b) in the partially observable case; m = (1 −J)/0.04 + 1 is
an upper bound on the expected number of steps until termination, beginning from any state; resid. is ||TJ −J||, the Bellman residual;
and error = m· resid. is the suboptimality bound. Iteration 0 is for the value function of the uniform random policy.
J(0) N(0)
J(1) N(1)
J(2) N(2)
J(3) N(3)
J(4) N(4)
J(5) N(5)
J(6) N(6)
J(7) N(7)
J(8) N(8)
J(9) N(9)
J(10) N(10)
0
-1.28 58.0
-0.88 48.0
-0.32 34.0
1.00
1.0
-1.52 64.1
-0.92 49.0
-1.00 51.0
-1.60 66.1
-1.52 64.1
-1.28 58.1
-1.22
56.5
1
0.81
5.7
0.87
4.3
0.92 3.1
1.00
1.0
0.76
7.0
0.66
9.5
-1.00 51.0
0.68
9.1
0.39 16.3
0.44 15.0
-0.88
48.1
2
0.81
5.7
0.87
4.3
0.92 3.1
1.00
1.0
0.76
7.0
0.66
9.5
-1.00 51.0
0.71
8.4
0.66
9.6
0.59 11.2
0.37
16.8
3
0.81
5.7
0.87
4.3
0.92 3.1
1.00
1.0
0.76
7.0
0.66
9.5
-1.00 51.0
0.71
8.4
0.66
9.6
0.61 10.7
0.39
16.3
4
0.81
5.7
0.87
4.3
0.92 3.1
1.00
1.0
0.76
7.0
0.66
9.5
-1.00 51.0
0.71
8.4
0.66
9.6
0.61 10.7
0.39
16.3
Table 2: State values J(i) and upper bounds N(i) on the expected number of steps until termination for each state i of the completely
observable gridworld when solved by policy iteration, beginning from the uniform random policy.
value function of the uniform random policy. The bounds
depend not only on the size of the Bellman residual, but on
the upper bound m = maxi∈S N(i) on the expected num-
ber of stages before termination, which in turn depends on
the current value function. In the ﬁrst couple iterations, the
error bounds are loose because the value function is still
rather poor and m is relatively large. As the value function
improves over successive iterations, the bounds improve
due to a reduction in the expected number of stages until
termination, as well as a decrease in the Bellman residual.
The bounds shown in Table 1 are based on Equation 14,
which means that they are independent of the starting state.
But Equation 13 (upon which Equation 14 is based) lets
us compute a separate suboptimality bound for each state.
These bounds are proportional to the expected number of
transitions needed to reach the goal from each state. In
this respect, they are more realistic than the well-known
suboptimality bound for discounted inﬁnite-horizon MDPs,
which is ||J∗−J|| ≤||TJ−J||/(1−β). The latter assumes
that the expected number of transitions until termination is
1/(1 −β), regardless of the starting state and its distance
from the goal. A second well-known disadvantage of the
suboptimality bound for discounted inﬁnite-horizon MDPs
is that it is looser, and converges more slowly, the closer
the discount factor is to 1. Interestingly, there is something
analogous for stochastic shortest path problems. The sub-
optimality bound of Equation 14 is looser, and converges
more slowly, the greater the expected number of transitions
until termination starting from the “farthest” state from the
goal, that is, the greater maxi∈S N(i). An advantage of us-
ing Equation 13 to compute a separate suboptimality bound
for each state is that many or most bounds can be relatively
tight and converge quickly, even if there is some state that
is very far from the goal state with a suboptimality bound
that converges more slowly.
For the gridworld example in its completely observable
form, Table 2 shows the value J(i) and upper bound N(i)
for each state i, for each iteration of policy iteration. The
smaller N(i) is, the tighter the suboptimality bound. Be-
cause the values of states close to the goal tend to converge
faster than the values of states farther from the goal, as il-
lustrated in Table 2, their suboptimality bounds also con-
verge faster. Table 2 does show one anomaly. The upper
bound N(6), which is for the −1 state, is unrealistically
high because it ignores the fact that taking any action in
this state causes an immediate transition to the terminal
state. Taking into account the transition probabilities for
this problem, we could set N(6) equal to 1. Thus we ig-
nore it when computing the bound of Equation 14.
The partially observable version of this problem does not
have a simple solution. After 12 iterations, the number of
vectors used to represent the value function is more than
10, 000! This underscores that, in the partially observable
case, suboptimality bounds are especially useful. The com-
plexity of each iteration of policy or value iteration can
grow exponentially in the number of iterations, and it is
usually not possible to compute an optimal solution.

5
General case
We next consider the general case in which there are no re-
strictions on transition costs and not all policies are proper.
In this case, it is no longer possible to use the minimum cost
of a transition to bound the average number of stages until
termination of a policy µ for which Jµ ≤J, since the min-
imum cost could be zero or negative. The analysis needs
to be more complex. Although we are not yet able to de-
scribe a good approach to computing suboptimality bounds
in the general case, we present some preliminary results in
this direction. First we show that the dynamic programming
operator for stochastic shortest path problems behaves like
an m-stage contraction operator, even in the general case.
We also show that it is possible to compute suboptimal-
ity bounds in the general case, although the bounds we de-
scribe are much too loose to be practical. Finally, we dis-
cuss some implications of these results.
5.1
Contraction property
We begin by showing that the dynamic programming oper-
ator behaves like an m-stage contraction when applied to a
value function J that is uniformly improvable. This result
is related to Theorem 2, which shows that a greedy pol-
icy with respect to a uniformly improvable value function
is a proper policy. For any proper policy, there exists (by
Deﬁnition 1) a ﬁnite positive integer m such that there is
a positive probability of reaching the terminal state after at
most m stages when following this policy, regardless of the
start state. In the special case of positive transition costs,
Theorem 5 shows how to compute such an m; in that case,
m = maxi∈S N(i). We now show how to compute such an
m for the general case in which there are no restrictions on
transition costs.
Consider a ﬁnite-horizon MDP that has the same state set,
action set, transition probabilities and transition costs as the
original stochastic shortest path problem, but where the ob-
jective is to compute the minimum k-stage cost, Jk(i), for
each starting state i, of any policy that does not reach the
terminal state within k stages. In solving this ﬁnite-horizon
MDP, we must partition the state set into two subsets that
need to be treated separately at each stage k. For one set
of states, denoted Tk, termination within k stages is in-
evitable under any policy. For the remaining states, S\Tk,
there is some policy under which the probability of termi-
nation within k stages is zero. It is only for the second set
of states that we solve the ﬁnite-horizon MDP for k stages.
Note that Tk is a proper subset of S for all k, unless all
policies are proper.
Figure 2 gives the pseudocode for an algorithm that solves
this ﬁnite-horizon MDP while distinguishing between these
two sets of states. The horizon is determined dynamically.
1
k := 0
/* k is stage */
2
∀i ∈S : Jk(i) := 0, a(i) := ∅
/* initialization */
3
Tk := {t}
/* termination within k stages is inevitable */
4
while (∃i ∈S\Tk such that Jk(i) ≤J(i))
5
k := k + 1
6
Tk := Tk−1
7
for each ( i ∈S\Tk )
8
a(i) := {u ∈U : ∑
j∈Tk pij(u) = 0}
9
/* a(i) is set of actions that don’t lead to a state in Tk */
10
if (a(i) = ∅) then /* all actions lead to termination */
11
Tk := Tk ∪{i}
12
else /* compute minimal k-stage cost for this state */
13
Jk(i) := minu∈a(i)
∑
j pij(u)(g(i, u, j)+Jk−1(j))
Figure 2: Algorithm for solving ﬁnite-horizon MDP in order to
compute a bound m on the number of stages before termination
with some positive probability of any policy µ for which Jµ ≤J.
It is the smallest stage k for which Jk(i) + a > J(i), ∀i ∈
S\Tk, where a = min{g(i, u, t) : i ∈S, u ∈U} denotes
the minimum cost of any transition to the terminal state and
J is a uniformly improvable value function for the origi-
nal stochastic shortest path problem. We know the horizon
must be ﬁnite because a and J(i) are ﬁnite, and (assuming
there exists a policy under which termination can be de-
layed indeﬁnitely beginning from state i), Jk(i) goes to in-
ﬁnity as k goes to inﬁnity, by Assumption 3. Since Jk(i) is
the minimum cost of any policy that does not reach the ter-
minal state within k stages beginning from state i, Jk(i)+a
is a lower bound on the cost of any policy that reaches
the terminal state in k + 1 stages beginning from state i.
The key observation is that for any policy µ that does not
reach the terminal state within k + 1 stages with proba-
bility greater than zero beginning from state i, we have
Jµ(i) ≥Jk(i) + a > J(i), which contradicts the assump-
tion that Jµ ≤J. Therefore, we can set m equal to one plus
the smallest k for which Jk(i) + a > J(i), ∀i ∈S\Tk, and
we have the following result.
Theorem 6. For any stochastic shortest path problem and
for any initial value function J for which TJ ≤J, the
dynamic programming operator T behaves like an m-stage
contraction operator.
We say that the dynamic programming operator behaves
like an m-stage contraction operator, not that it is one, be-
cause Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis [3, 4] give an example that
shows that the dynamic programming operator for stochas-
tic shortest path problems is not a contraction with respect
to any norm, unless all policies are proper. (The exam-
ple is brieﬂy reviewed in Section 2.2). The distinction be-
tween being an m-stage contraction and behaving like one
is necessary if we adopt the deﬁnition that an operator is
an m-stage contraction if and only if it satisﬁes the condi-
tion expressed by Equation 7 for all bounded value func-
tions [2]. But Theorem 6 only claims that the dynamic pro-
gramming operator satisﬁes the m-stage contraction prop-
erty expressed by Equation 7 for the closed subspace of
uniformly improvable value functions. Thus we could also

say that the dynamic programming operator for stochastic
shortest path problems is an m-stage contraction operator
in the subspace of uniformly improvable value functions,
but not in the space of all bounded value functions.
The question of whether the dynamic programming opera-
tor is, or behaves like, a contraction operator is closely re-
lated to the possibility of bounding the suboptimality of so-
lutions found by dynamic programming. We can use Equa-
tions 13 and 14 to compute suboptimality bounds only if
we can bound the average number of stages until the termi-
nal state is reached, and we can bound the average number
of stages until the terminal state is reached only if there is
some ﬁnite m such that policy execution terminates within
m stages with positive probability. Conversely, the exis-
tence of some ﬁnite m such that policy execution termi-
nates within m stages with positive probability implies that
we can bound the average number of stages until termi-
nation of any policy. But a bound on the number of stages
of policy execution required to reach the terminal state with
positive probability is not also a bound on the average num-
ber of stages it takes to reach the terminal state. The second
bound is at least as great as the ﬁrst, but it is usually greater.
Given that policy execution terminates within m stages
with positive probability, where m is computed as above,
we can describe a simple approach to bounding the aver-
age number of stages it takes to reach the terminal state. Let
pt = min{pit(u) > 0 : i ∈S, u ∈U} denote the smallest
non-zero probability of a transition into the terminal state t
and let pn = min{pij(u) > 0 : i ∈S, j ∈S\t, u ∈U}
denote the smallest non-zero probability of any other tran-
sition. It follows that ρm = pm−1
n
· pt > 0 is a lower bound
on the probability of process termination within m stages.
Thus an upper bound on the expected number of stages un-
til termination is given by m ∑∞
t=0(1 −ρm)t = m/ρm.
If we set N(i) = m/ρm, ∀i ∈S, we can use Equa-
tions 13 and 14 to compute suboptimality bounds. But al-
most surely, these bounds will be much too loose to be of
any practical value. Their derivation does show that it is
possible to use the Bellman residual to compute subop-
timality bounds, however, and future work may lead to a
more sophisticated approach that computes tighter bounds.
5.2
Implications
Regardless of whether Theorem 6 supports a practical ap-
proach to computing suboptimality bounds in the gen-
eral case, it has some important theoretical implications.
Among them, it points to a stronger convergence proof
for policy iteration than the proofs given by Bertsekas and
Tsitsiklis [3, 4] in the completely observable case, and by
Patek [11] in the partially observable case. Because policy
iteration must start with an initial proper policy, the dy-
namic programming operator used in the policy improve-
ment step behaves like an m-stage contraction, and thus
standard contraction theory can be invoked to establish uni-
form convergence. The m-stage contraction behavior also
establishes that policy iteration converges at a geometric
rate. In addition, it establishes that value iteration converges
at a geometric rate when given an initial value function
that is uniformly improvable. By contrast, the convergence
proofs of Bertakas and Tsitsiklis [4] and Patek [11] do not
establish that policy iteration and value iteration converge
at a geometric rate, unless all policies are proper.
The signiﬁcance of ensuring a geometric rate of conver-
gence is that for any ϵ > 0, it is possible to bound the
number of iterations of value (or policy) iteration needed
to ﬁnd an ϵ-optimal policy. In the partially observable case,
this result is especially noteworthy. The problem of ﬁnd-
ing an ϵ-optimal policy for a discounted inﬁnite-horizon
POMDP is well-known to be decidable, by the contrac-
tion property of the dynamic programming operator in the
case of discounting. But for undiscounted inﬁnite-horizon
POMDPs, the problem of ﬁnding an ϵ-optimal policy has
been shown to be undecidable, in general [7]. However, our
results imply that for an important special case of undis-
counted inﬁnite-horizon POMDPs, the partially observable
stochastic shortest path problem, the problem of ﬁnding an
ϵ-optimal policy is decidable.
To help make this result seem more plausible, note that
the undecidability of ϵ-approximation for undiscounted
inﬁnite-horizon POMDPs is proved by reduction from the
problem of maximizing the probability of reaching a goal
state, where there is a reward of 1 for reaching the goal
state, a reward of 0 for not reaching the goal state, and the
goal state cannot be reached with probability 1 [7]. Obvi-
ously, this problem cannot be reduced to a partially observ-
able stochastic shortest path problem. On the other hand,
the optimization problem for discounted inﬁnite-horizon
POMDPs, which is also undecidable [7], can be reduced to
a partially observable stochastic shortest path problem. But
it does not imply the undecidability of ϵ-approximation,
since ϵ-approximation is decidable for discounted inﬁnite-
horizon POMDPs.
Two key assumptions of the stochastic shortest path prob-
lem play a role in making ϵ-approximation decidable in the
partially observable case; (i) a proper policy exists, and
(ii) the expected cost of policy execution beginning from
any state from which the terminal state is not reached with
probability 1 is inﬁnite. Combined with our observation
that Jµ ≤J for any policy µ found by dynamic program-
ming when the initial value function J is uniformly im-
provable, we have been able to establish the m-stage con-
traction behavior of the dynamic programming operator in
the space of uniformly improvable value functions. In turn,
it allows use of the Bellman residual of the dynamic pro-
gramming operator to compute suboptimality bounds.

6
Conclusion
For stochastic shortest path problems, we have shown that
under the condition that the initial value function is uni-
formly improvable, a greedy policy with respect to any
value function found by value iteration is proper. We have
also shown how to bound the expected number of stages be-
fore the terminal state is reached when following a proper
policy found by either value iteration or policy iteration,
which in turn lets us use the Bellman residual of the dy-
namic programming operator to compute suboptimality
bounds. The key formula used to compute suboptimality
bounds is due to Bertsekas [2]. But it has not been clear
how it could be applied to the case where not all policies
are proper. Our contribution is to show that it can be used to
compute suboptimality bounds even when not all policies
are proper, as long as the initial value function is uniformly
improvable.
In the special case of positive transition costs, especially
when the transition costs are uniform or nearly-uniform,
we showed that useful suboptimality bounds can be easily
computed. In the general case in which transition costs can
be zero or negative, we showed that suboptimality bounds
are possible, but without describing a practical approach to
computing bounds that are tight enough to be useful. We
leave this problem for future work.
