Deep Network Guided Proof Search
Sarah Loos1, Geoﬀrey Irving1, Christian Szegedy1, and Cezary Kaliszyk2
1 Google Research

2 University of Innsbruck, Austria

Abstract
Deep learning techniques lie at the heart of several signiﬁcant AI advances in recent years
including object recognition and detection, image captioning, machine translation, speech
recognition and synthesis, and playing the game of Go.
Automated ﬁrst-order theorem provers can aid in the formalization and veriﬁcation
of mathematical theorems and play a crucial role in program analysis, theory reasoning,
security, interpolation, and system veriﬁcation.
Here we suggest deep learning based guidance in the proof search of the theorem prover
E. We train and compare several deep neural network models on the traces of existing ATP
proofs of Mizar statements and use them to select processed clauses during proof search.
We give experimental evidence that with a hybrid, two-phase approach, deep learning
based guidance can signiﬁcantly reduce the average number of proof search steps while
increasing the number of theorems proved.
Using a few proof guidance strategies that leverage deep neural networks, we have found
ﬁrst-order proofs of 7.36% of the ﬁrst-order logic translations of the Mizar Mathematical
Library theorems that did not previously have ATP generated proofs. This increases the
ratio of statements in the corpus with ATP generated proofs from 56% to 59%.
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
In the past twenty years, various large corpora of computer-understandable reasoning knowledge
have been developed (Harrison et al., 2014). Apart from axioms, deﬁnitions, and conjectures,
such corpora include proofs derived in the selected logical foundation with suﬃcient detail to be
machine-checkable. This is either given in the form of premises-conclusion pairs (Sutcliﬀe, 2009)
or as procedures and intermediate steps (Wenzel, 1999). The development of many of these
formal proofs required dozens of person-years, their sizes are measured in tens of thousands of
human-named theorems and the complete proofs contain billions of low-level inference steps.
These formal proof libraries are also interesting for AI-based methods, with tasks such
as concept matching, theory exploration, and structure formation (Autexier & Hutter, 2015).
Furthermore, the AI methods can be augmented by automated reasoning: progress in the
development of eﬃcient ﬁrst-order automated theorem provers (ATPs) (Kovács & Voronkov,
2013) allows applying them not only as tools that redo the formal proofs, but also to ﬁnd
the missing steps (Urban, 2006). Together with proof translations from the richer logics of
the interactive systems to the simpler logics of the ATPs this becomes a commonly used tool
in certain interactive provers (Blanchette et al., 2016). Many signiﬁcant proof developments
covering both mathematics and computer science have been created using such technologies.
Examples include the formal proof of the Kepler conjecture (Hales et al., 2015), or the proof of
correctness of the seL4 operating system kernel (Klein et al., 2010).
arXiv:1701.06972v1  [cs.AI]  24 Jan 2017

Deep Network Guided Proof Search
S. Loos, G. Irving, C. Szegedy, and C. Kaliszyk
Despite the completeness of the employed proof calculi, modern ATPs perform poorly in the
presence of large fact libraries. For this reason AI-based heuristic and learning techniques are
used to preselect lemmas externally (Kühlwein et al., 2012). Even with external selection Alama
et al. (2012) show that ATPs are only able to ﬁnd proofs of up to twenty human steps among
the proofs in the Mizar Mathematical Library (Grabowski et al., 2015), whereas the library
contains a number of proofs with hundreds of steps. In contrast to external lemma selection,
guiding an ATP internally has much better potential as the complete proof state is known.
For the tableaux calculus the Machine Learning Connection Prover (MaLeCoP) (Urban et al.,
2011) shows that using machine learning to choose the next step can reduce the number of
inferences in the proofs on average by a factor of 20. As the most competitive ATPs today are
not based on tableau, but instead rely on the superposition calculus, in this paper we investigate
guiding the state-of-the-art automated prover E (Schulz, 2013)1 using deep neural networks.
Deep convolutional neural networks (LeCun et al., 1998) lie at the heart of several recent AI
breakthroughs in the past few years. Deep convolutional networks have been instrumental in
speech recognition (Hinton et al., 2012a) and natural language processing (Kim, 2014). Object
recognition has reached human level performance on large benchmarks (Krizhevsky et al., 2012;
Szegedy et al., 2015; He et al., 2015) due to the inroads of deep convolutional neural networks.
DeepMind’s AlphaGo (Silver et al., 2016) demonstrated superhuman performance in playing
the game of Go by utilizing deep convolution neural networks that evaluate board positions.
Deep hierarchical convolutional networks have been responsible for vast improvements in speech
and sound generation (van den Oord et al., 2016).
The wide applicability of deep neural architectures suggest their potential usefulness for
guiding the combinatorial search for proofs of mathematical theorems as well.
1.2
Contributions
For the ﬁrst time, we evaluate deep network models as a proof guidance method inside an
automated theorem prover.
We describe the technicalities that need to be addressed for a
successful integration of relatively slow neural network models in a system that relies on very
fast exploration.
Experimental results are given on a large corpus of mathematical statements translated
from the Mizar Mathematical Library (Grabowski et al., 2010) to ﬁrst-order logic (Urban,
2006) which covers signiﬁcant parts of basic mathematics ranging from discrete mathematics
and mathematical logic to calculus and algebra.
Applying deep network models inside the proof search process is challenging due to the
relatively expensive nature of neural network inference. During the time one clause is evaluated
by a neural network (on CPU), several hundreds or thousands of superposition steps may be
performed by the prover. This means that proof guidance via neural networks has to provide
very good quality suggestions to have a positive eﬀect on the proof process. In this paper we
describe two important technical details that were critical for getting improved results with
neural network guidance.
First, interleaving network guidance and hard-coded heuristics is still helpful for improving
the performance over using the neural network alone to pick the next processed clause.
Second, we use a two-phase approach where a network-guided phase is followed by a phase
using only fast heuristics.
Without this second phase, the network-guided approach often
processes only 1% of the clauses of a search with only fast heuristics. While the network-guided
phase is slow, its high quality sets up the rest of the search process at a better starting point.
1Version 1.9.1pre014
2

Deep Network Guided Proof Search
S. Loos, G. Irving, C. Szegedy, and C. Kaliszyk
In essence, if we spend half of the time guiding the search and spend the rest ﬁnishing from
that starting point, we get signiﬁcant improvements over lower-quality clause selection that has
a higher chance of losing its way in the search process and omitting the selection of crucial
clauses that are critical for ﬁnishing the proof.
2
Related Work
Suttner & Ertel (1990) proposed a multilayer-perceptron based proof search guiding algorithm
on top of hand engineered features. Denzinger et al. (1999) surveyed learning and knowledge
base based approaches to guide automated theorem provers. Schulz (2000) proposed a k-NN
based learning methodology with hand-crafted features on a normalized form of the clauses
for the selecting the next clause to be processed. Recently, for higher-order logic, naïve Bayes
and particle swarm based approaches were proposed for the internal guidance of the given-
clause algorithm in Satallax (Färber & Brown, 2016). FEMaLeCoP uses naïve Bayes to guide
its tableaux proof search (Kaliszyk & Urban, 2015b).
For the theorem prover E, a hand-
engineered similarity function with a few learned weights was proposed for better selection of
processed clauses. All these approaches rely on carefully engineered features, whereas our deep
learning method learns end-to-end from the textual representation or the syntax tree of the
proof clauses.
Recently, there have been several attempts to apply deep learning to theorem proving and
reasoning in general. Convolutional neural networks were used successfully for premise selection
in Mizar (Alemi et al., 2016), and we use similar models for proof guidance here. Whalen (2016)
proposed a complete neural network based theorem prover architecture leveraging GRU (Chung
et al., 2015) networks to guide the proof search of a tableau style proof process for the MetaMath
system (Megill, 2007). A fully diﬀerential theorem prover was tested on a few toy problems
by Rocktäschel & Riedel (2016). Entailment analysis via deep learning was proposed by Rock-
täschel et al. (2015).
3
Theorem Proving Preliminaries
3.1
The First-Order Logic Prover E
We target the saturation-based ﬁrst-order logic theorem prover E (Schulz, 2013). E preprocesses
all inputs into clausal normal form (CNF) and conducts the proof search in this form. A ﬁrst-
order formula is in CNF if it is a conjunction of clauses where each clause is a disjunction of
literals, where each literal is a (possibly negated) application of an k-ary predicate symbol to k
terms, and where the terms are recursively either variables or functions applied to terms.
E’s proof search is parametrized by variety of arguments, the most important of which is
the clause selection heuristic which we focus on in this work. In saturation-based theorem
proving two sets of clauses are manipulated: a set of unprocessed clauses initialized to the
clausal form of the problem and an initially empty set of processed clauses. At each step the
heuristic chooses one of the unprocessed clauses, generates all its consequences (adding them
to the set of unprocessed clauses), then moves the clause into the processed clauses set. The
order in which the heuristic processes the clauses greatly impacts how long it will take before
a proof is found. E’s auto mode inspects a problem and selects a clause search heuristic and
other parameters likely to perform well.
The most successful heuristics in E are hybrid heuristics that select the next clause by tar-
geting diﬀerent criteria in a round-robin fashion. For example, a simplistic hybrid heuristic
3

Deep Network Guided Proof Search
S. Loos, G. Irving, C. Szegedy, and C. Kaliszyk
might alternate between selecting clauses in a FIFO ordering and selecting the shortest clause
from the set of unprocessed clauses. These two heuristics in isolation may miss selecting im-
portant clauses, but improve signiﬁcantly when used in combination. The E prover implements
hybrid heuristics by maintaining a separate ranking of all unprocessed clauses for each of the
selection criteria. It then processes the top clause from each ranking, allowing for an arbitrary
interleaving of selection criteria.
In this paper, we demonstrate that, given ﬁxed time and memory limits, we can prove more
statements when we add machine learning based classiﬁcation to the clause selection heuristic.
3.2
Mizar First-Order Problems
The Mizar Mathematical Library (MML) (Grabowski et al., 2015) is a library of formal math-
ematics developed on top of the Mizar system (Bancerek et al., 2015). The MML is today one
of the largest libraries of formalized proofs, covering most basic domains of mathematics and
some computer science proofs. The foundations of Mizar have been translated to ﬁrst-order
logic by Urban (2006) making MML the ﬁrst target for experiments combining machine learning
with automated reasoning. The most extensive evaluation of AI-ATP methods on the library
has been performed by Kaliszyk & Urban (2015a) on MML version 4.181.1147. The set of
57,882 Mizar theorems translated to ﬁrst-order logic has been chronologically ordered together
with about 90,000 other formulas (mostly to express Mizar’s type system).
The ﬁrst-order problems used to guide E prover in this paper are all distinct proofs found
in Kaliszyk & Urban (2015a). This includes both proofs based on the human dependencies that
the ATPs can redo and proofs found by running the ATPs on the predicted dependencies. Of
the 57,882 Mizar theorems in FOL, 32,521 (about 56%) of them have at least one ATP proof
with a total of 91,877 distinct ATP proofs.
We use these 91,877 proofs to train and evaluate our neural networks. We randomly assign
them by conjecture into a training and a validation set using a 90%-10% split. By splitting
the proofs by conjecture, we avoid contamination of our evaluation set. If one conjecture has
multiple proofs, then all of those proofs are assigned to the training set, or all are assigned to
the evaluation set. The training set contains 82,718 unique proofs of 29,325 conjectures. The
remaining 3,196 conjectures and their 9,159 proofs are assigned to the evaluation set. When
we evaluate clause selection heuristics over this evaluation set, we refer to them as the easy
statements, since they have previously been proved by some ATP method. We call the 25,361
conjectures for which no ATP proof has been found the hard statements. These theorems taken
together comprise the 57,882 Mizar theorems in FOL.
4
Deep Networks
Here we describe the data collection, network architectures, and training methodology of our
deep learning models to be incorporated into the proof search procedure of the automated
theorem prover E by Schulz (2013).
We have reused several architectural and training choices that proved successful in the earlier
related premise selection work by Alemi et al. (2016). Our models have two inputs: a negated
conjecture to be proved and an unprocessed clause, both in CNF. Each is reduced to a ﬁxed
size vector using an embedding network, and a combiner network combines the two embedding
vectors into a score for use as a clause selection heuristic. Ideally, the score would depend on
the current set of processed clauses, but we have restricted the inputs to negated conjecture
4

Deep Network Guided Proof Search
S. Loos, G. Irving, C. Szegedy, and C. Kaliszyk
Clause Embedder
Negated conjecture 
embedder
Concatenate
Fully Connected
(1024 nodes)
Fully Connected
(1 node)
Logistic loss
Clause tokens
Negated conjecture 
tokens
Conv 5 (1024) + ReLU 
Input token embeddings
Conv 5 (1024) + ReLU
Conv 5 (1024) + ReLU 
Max Pooling
Figure 1: Left: Overall network with clause and negated conjecture inputs. Right: Convolu-
tional embedding model. Other experiments use WaveNet or recursive embedding networks.
and clause for simplicity and speed. Thus, the overall architecture is
vc = femb(clause, wc)
vnc = femb(negated-conjecture, wnc)
p(useful|c, nc) = σ(gcomb(vc, vnc, wcomb))
where femb and gcomb are the embedding and combiner networks, wc, wnc, and wcomb are the
weights to be learned, and σ(z) = 1/(1 + e−z) is sigmoid (Figure 1, left). Note that we use
the same architecture to embed both negated conjecture and clause, but with diﬀerent learned
weights.
At training time, the output probabilities are trained using logistic loss towards p = 1 if
the clause was used in the proof, and towards p = 0 otherwise. At proof time, the unprocessed
clause with maximum probability is chosen to be processed.
For the embedding network femb, we have tried three architectures:
1. A simple convolutional network with a few convolutional layers followed by max-pooling.
2. A WaveNet (van den Oord et al., 2016) style network that can eﬀectively model long range
dependencies.
3. Recursive neural networks (Goller & Kuchler, 1996) whose topology depends on the syntax
tree of the formula to be evaluated.
In sections 4.3, 4.4, and 4.5, we give a detailed description of the models evaluated and
compare their predictive performance after describing the training and evaluation data in sec-
tion 4.1. The end-to-end system was only evaluated using the fastest models and those with
very good prediction performance. Later, we use the best models to generate new ATP proofs
for the “hard subset” of the Mizar corpus where current ATP methods have failed.
4.1
Data Collection
As described in Section 3.2, we have split the 32,521 theorems of Mizar that have at least
one proof into a training and validation set using a 90%-10% split. The proofs in our dataset
originate from various ﬁrst-order ATPs. Furthermore, even for proof traces originating from
5

Deep Network Guided Proof Search
S. Loos, G. Irving, C. Szegedy, and C. Kaliszyk
E, the conﬁguration of the preprocessing (skolemization and clausiﬁcation) has a big eﬀect on
the the symbols that appear in the clauses and their shape. Therefore, we have replicated the
proofs using a single, consistent conﬁguration of the preprocessing procedure of E in order to
avoid mismatch between our training set and the clauses seen at test time when we guide the
search with the trained model. Speciﬁcally, we train on proofs generated using the Auto208
conﬁguration detailed in the appendix.
4.2
Architectures
We consider three architectures for the embedding networks femb: simple convolutional models,
WaveNet (van den Oord et al., 2016) style models, and recursive networks (Goller & Kuchler,
1996). All experiments use the same combiner network gcomb with one 1024-unit hidden layer:
gcomb(vc, vnc) = W2 relu(W1 concat(vc, vnc) + b1) + b2
where W1 ∈R1024×2 dim v, W2 ∈R1×1024, b1 ∈R1024, and b2 ∈R.
At data collection time, we collect all symbols (constants, function names, variable names,
logical operations, and parentheses) into a vocabulary and the input layer converts each into
an embedding vector of dimension 1024 using table lookup. The embeddings are initialized
randomly and learned during the training process. We shared the same embedding vectors
between clause and negated conjecture embedding. The convolutional and WaveNet models
receive clause and negated conjecture as sequences of these embeddings; the recursive networks
use embeddings only for names at leaves of the CNF trees. Unlike Alemi et al. (2016), we
avoid character-level embeddings since proof search can involve very large clauses with large
computational cost.
All models were trained using TensorFlow (Abadi et al., 2015) and the Adam (Kingma &
Ba, 2014) optimizer.
4.3
Simple Convolutional Model
Following the premise selection models of Alemi et al. (2016), our convolutional models (“CNNs”
for “convolutional neural networks”) have relatively shallow depth as they give good results on
that related task. They consist of a stack of three one-dimensional convolutional layers, each
layer with patch size 5 (the number of inputs each output is connected to), stride 1, and a
rectiﬁed linear activation. We have tried several models with varying feature dimensions.
4.4
WaveNet Model
WaveNet (van den Oord et al., 2016) is a special type of hierarchical convolutional network that
employs dilated convolutions and residual connections. The dilated convolutions allow long
range feature dependencies with only moderate overhead, as higher layers have geometrically
increasing dilation factors (see Figure 2). While van den Oord et al. (2016) use causal dilated
convolutions, we use symmetric convolutions as our task is discrimination, not generation. Our
WaveNet embedding network consists of 3 WaveNet blocks, where each block consists of 7
convolutional layers dilated by d = 1, 2, 4, . . . , 64. We use the gated activation tanh(x)σ(x′)
of van den Oord et al. (2016), and residual connections for both layers and blocks (He et al.,
2015). For regularization, some experiments use 20% token-wise dropout at the input layer and
6

Deep Network Guided Proof Search
S. Loos, G. Irving, C. Szegedy, and C. Kaliszyk
Figure 2: The diﬀerence between dilated and non-dilated convolution. On the left hand side is
the schematics of a minimalist convolutional network with patch size s = 3, stride 1, whereas
on the right is a dilated convolution with s = 3, stride 1, and dilation factor d = 2.
20% feature-wise dropout at the input to each block (Hinton et al., 2012b). Overall,
femb(x) = (B ◦B ◦B)(Dt(x, p))
B(x) = x + (L64 ◦· · · ◦L2 ◦L1)(Df(x, p))
Ld(x) = x + tanh(Cd(x))σ(C′
d(x))
Cd(x)i = b +
s
X
j=1
wjxi−d(j−⌈s/2⌉)
where Dt(x, p) sets each token embedding to zero with probability p, Df(x, p) sets each in-
dividual feature to zero with probability p, Cd and C′
d are convolutions with distinct weights
and dilation factor d, and s = 3 is the patch size of the convolution. Here x, B, Ld, Cd are all
sequences of vectors, or 2-D overall. Our experiments use vectors of dimension 256 and 640.
4.5
Recursive Neural Network
Our third model class is recursive neural networks (Socher et al., 2011) that are constructed by
the parse tree of the ﬁrst-order logic formulas. The neural network topology reﬂects the parse
tree and is wired on the ﬂy using gather operations in TensorFlow.
To simplify the tree, all function applications are curried, giving the following types of layers:
• apply nodes that apply a function with exactly two children.
• or nodes that compute the embedding for the disjunction of exactly two children.
• and nodes that compute the embedding for the conjunction of exactly two children. This
is used only for embedding the negated conjecture, since the proof clauses do not contain
conjunctions.
• not nodes that compute the embedding for the negation of a single child node.
The weights of each type of layer is shared across the same tree. This means that the layer
weights are learned jointly for the same formula, as they tend to contain multiple instances of
the node of the same type.
At the leaves of the tree, we have the constants that can represent functions of various arity.
These symbols have their associated embeddings which are initialized randomly and learned
together with the rest of the network.
Each of these internal nodes are represented by either a fully connected layer with ReLU
activation or tree LSTM network (Tai et al., 2015). They aggregate the ﬁxed size children and
output a vector that has the length of the pre-set output embedding size (or two vectors for tree
7

Deep Network Guided Proof Search
S. Loos, G. Irving, C. Szegedy, and C. Kaliszyk
Figure 3: An tree LSTM block for a node with two children (left) compared with a conventional
sequence LSTM (right). For internal nodes, xi is empty in the ﬁrst layer and equal to the output
of the layer below for multilayer tree LSTMs. Figures courtesy of Chris Olah (2015).
LSTMs). Our tree LSTMs use separate forget gains per input and include oﬀ-diagonal forget
gate terms (see Figure 3 and Tai et al. (2015) for details).
The network learns independent weight matrices for these three (four for negated conjec-
tures) transformations. Although the same method is used for computing the embedding for
the proof-step clause and for the embedding, their weights are not shared: we end up with
seven sets of weights to learn in total. We tested the common embedding sizes of 256 and 512.
Greater embedding size gave rise to more accurate models.
5
Experimental Results
After training the deep neural networks as described in Section 4, we evaluate them using three
measures, each more conclusive and computationally expensive than the last.
The ﬁrst metric, presented in Section 5.1, checks that a trained model can accurately predict
whether a clause was used in the ﬁnal proof. This accuracy test is done on a holdout set of
proof tasks from the training data.
Next, in Section 5.2, we run E prover over the same holdout set of 9,159 FOL proof tasks
from Kaliszyk & Urban (2015a) using the trained networks to help guide the clause selection.
These theorems all have at least one ATP proof using classical search heuristics, and 96.6% of
these theorems can be proved using one of E prover’s built-in automated heuristics, so there is
little room for improvement on this dataset. However, it allows us to perform a sanity check
that the neural nets aren’t doing more harm than good when added to the auto heuristic.
The ﬁnal test is the most interesting but computationally expensive: do these deep network
guided selection heuristics allow us to prove Mizar statements that do not yet have any ATP
proof? For this, we use a corpus of 25,361 theorems from Mizar for which no proof was found in
Kaliszyk & Urban (2015a). Because this is the most computationally expensive task, we only
run it using the networks that performed best on the previous tasks. In Section 5.3, we present
the models that, in aggregate, allow us to ﬁnd proofs for 7.36% of these “hard statements”.
8

Deep Network Guided Proof Search
S. Loos, G. Irving, C. Szegedy, and C. Kaliszyk
Model
Embedding Size
Accuracy on 50-50% split
Tree-RNN-256×2
256
77.5%
Tree-RNN-512×1
256
78.1%
Tree-LSTM-256×2
256
77.0%
Tree-LSTM-256×3
256
77.0%
Tree-LSTM-512×2
256
77.9%
CNN-1024×3
256
80.3%
*CNN-1024×3
256
78.7%
CNN-1024×3
512
79.7%
CNN-1024×3
1024
79.8%
WaveNet-256×3×7
256
79.9%
*WaveNet-256×3×7
256
79.9%
WaveNet-1024×3×7
1024
81.0%
WaveNet-640×3×7(20%)
640
81.5%
*WaveNet-640×3×7(20%)
640
79.9%
Table 1: The accuracy of predicting whether a processed clause was ultimately required for the
proof. The accuracy is measured on a 50-50% split of positive and negative processed clause
examples, with various recursive deep neural network models. Models with an asterisk (*) were
trained on a data set which additionally included a sampling of unprocessed clauses as negative
examples. In order to facilitate a direct comparison with other models, the same evaluation
dataset was used, but this is slightly biased against the examples denoted with (*).
5.1
Accuracy Evaluations
Table 1 shows the accuracy on a 50-50% split of used and unused clauses of the holdout set of
the conjectures. Here CNN-N×L is a convolutional net with L layers of N dimensions, and
Tree-Type-N×L is a tree RNN or LSTM with L layers of N dimensions at each node of the
input tree. WaveNet-N×B×L has B blocks, with L layers, of dimension N. We include (D%)
to indicate that a dropout of D% is used as a regularizer during training.
The WaveNet 640 with dropout has the best accuracy at 81.5% accuracy, but many of the
CNN and WaveNet models noticeably outperform the others. Note that the time required for
evaluating the models for a set of examples varies widely. Given the fact that we limit the overall
running time instead of the number of evaluations performed, higher quality but slower models
might perform better in the system than slightly worse but much faster models. However with
specialized hardware for neural network evaluation, we can expect that the prediction quality
of the models will gain in importance compared to their running time.
5.2
Experiments on Statements with Existing ATP Proofs
The clause selection heuristic is one of the most important parts of E prover, as it is the primary
driver of the proof search. With a good heuristic, a proof may be found in a relatively small
number of search steps. In this section, we use the models from Section 5.1 with the highest
accuracy as the clause selection heuristic inside of E.2 These models, which are trained to select
clauses that are most likely to contribute to a proof, now assign a score to each unprocessed
clause, namely the trained value of p(useful|c,nc). In other words, the probability that a clause
2Due to its huge memory footprint, we were unable to experiment with WaveNet-1024 in E prover.
9

Deep Network Guided Proof Search
S. Loos, G. Irving, C. Szegedy, and C. Kaliszyk
c, is used in the ﬁnal proof, given the set of negated conjectures nc. E prover uses this score
to rank the set of unprocessed clauses, then at each step processes the clause that has the best
ranking.3 Since many new unprocessed clauses are generated when each clause is processed,
this selection order is crucial. A good clause selection heuristic can be the diﬀerence between
ﬁnding a proof after a small number of search steps, and ﬁnding a proof only after years of
computation time.
While our ultimate goal is to develop a heuristic that is powerful enough to prove the
challenging statements that don’t yet have an ATP proof, experimenting on this dataset is
computationally very expensive. Instead, we kept a holdout set of 9,159 statements which we
did not use as training data. These statements already have existing ATP proofs and tend to
be computationally less intensive, so we can use this holdout set to run more experiments and
directly compare with proofs generated by an existing Auto strategy, which we selected as the
best-performing strategy on this dataset as discussed in the appendix.
In this section, we ﬁnd that deep neural nets, which are computationally very expensive even
when used for inference, are most eﬀective when used in combination with existing heuristics.
We also use the holdout set to investigate which of the model architectures presented in Section 4
are most eﬀective.
5.2.1
Guidance Design
In our experiments, we found that our computation heavy neural networks did much better when
they were used in concert with existing, fast heuristics. In this section, we present diﬀerent
approaches to using neural networks to guide existing heuristics.
1. The Auto heuristic is standard in E (see appendix). This approach is already a hybrid
of several weighting functions and tuned parameters, but does not include any inference
from a deep neural network.
2. A pure neural network heuristic scores the clauses using only the trained neural network.
This approach is slow, as it must evaluate all clauses with the expensive neural network. It
also can not take advantage of ranking based on diﬀerent heuristics, as the Auto function
does, and we observe that it does not perform well on its own.
3. A hybrid approach alternates between deep network based guidance and the fast Auto
heuristic. This augments the standard clause selection methods with additional neural
network suggested clauses. While this process still can do relatively few proof search steps
due to the slowness of the neural network evaluations, which must still be done on all
unprocessed clauses to obtain a rank ordering.
4. A switched approach, which uses deep network guidance in the ﬁrst phase of the compu-
tation (either pure or hybrid). As time resources begin to run out, we switch to Auto, a
traditional complete search phase, which can process a lot of clauses without the overhead
of the deep network guidance.
Figure 4 left shows a direct comparison of these approaches to proof guidance using a simple
CNN in all cases. Not surprisingly, the pure CNN does not perform well on its own; however,
when we allow E prover to alternate between the CNN heuristic and the Auto heuristic, the
hybrid outperforms both the Auto and CNN heuristics for lower limits on the processed clauses.
Still, because the hybrid approach has all the overhead of the deep network evaluation, we see
this hybrid method bottoms out after around 7,500 processed clauses, due to a lack of resources.
3E prover uses a lowest-is-best ordering, so in implementation we use −p(useful|c, nc).
10

Deep Network Guided Proof Search
S. Loos, G. Irving, C. Szegedy, and C. Kaliszyk
102
103
104
105
Processed clause limit
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Percent unproved
Pure CNN
Hybrid CNN
Pure CNN; Auto
Hyrbid CNN; Auto
102
103
104
105
Processed clause limit
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Percent unproved
Auto
WaveNet 640*
WaveNet 256
WaveNet 256*
WaveNet 640
CNN
CNN*
Figure 4: The percentage of unsuccessful proofs at various processed clause limits using diﬀer-
ent selection heuristics. In the left ﬁgure, we use the same network (CNN-1024x3, with 256
embedding) throughout, but show the eﬀect of various interactions with the Auto heuristic. On
the right we use hybrid, two-phase guidance, but show the eﬀect of diﬀerent neural networks.
More detailed values are shown in Table 2.
The best of the guidance approaches we explored was the switched approach, which uses
the Auto heuristic to avoid running out of resources at a relatively small number of processed
clauses. The intuition behind this is that we expect the standard heuristics to be too weak
to avoid combinatorial explosion while neural network guidance is still too slow on current
hardware. If we run a guided proof search alone for awhile, it could end up selecting all the
essential clauses for the proof, but it might fail to close to proof due to its slowness.
Our
“switched” approach gives a cure to this shortfall of the network guided approach.
Throughout the remainder of this paper, all the proof guidance methods employ the two-
phase “switched” approach that ﬁrst runs a hybrid network-guided phases for 20 minutes, fol-
lowed by a standard heuristics-based phase for 10 minutes.
5.2.2
Comparison of Model Performance on Easy Statements
In this section we present the performance of four WaveNet and two CNN models used to guide
clause selection in E prover. These are the models with the highest accuracy from Table 1,
which are still small enough to ﬁt in memory. We also include all three models trained on a
data set that includes unprocessed clauses as negative examples, these models are indicated with
a (*). All experiments use the E theorem prover, version 1.9.1pre014 (Schulz, 2013), with some
modiﬁcations to enable integration with the trained deep neural networks as clause selection
heuristics.
In Figure 4 right and Table 2, we show the performance of each of these models with various
processed clause limits. All of the heuristics that beneﬁt from deep neural network guidance
outperform the Auto baseline, regardless of the number of clauses processed before a proof is
found. Both CNNs (embedding size 256) do very well, but we notice that the CNN* trained
with unprocessed clauses as negative examples begins to do better with higher processed clause
limits, which may better represent the clauses that are evaluated after several thousand clauses
are already processed. Somewhat surprisingly, the WaveNet models (embedding size 256 and
640), which were more accurate at predicting whether a clause would be used in the ﬁnal proof,
did not perform as well at the proof guidance task. This is likely because the WaveNet models
11

Deep Network Guided Proof Search
S. Loos, G. Irving, C. Szegedy, and C. Kaliszyk
Model
Accuracy
PC≤1,000
PC≤10,000
PC≤100,000
PC<∞
Auto
N/A
89.0%
94.3%
96.2%
96.6%
*WaveNet 640
79.9%
91.4%
95.0%
96.5%
96.6%
WaveNet 256
79.9%
92.3%
95.5%
96.8%
96.8%
*WaveNet 256
79.9%
92.2%
95.7%
96.8%
96.8%
CNN
80.3%
93.3%
96.4%
97.0%
97.1%
WaveNet 640
81.5%
92.2%
95.7%
97.0%
97.2%
*CNN
78.7%
93.0%
96.4%
97.2%
97.3%
Table 2: The percent of theorems proved in the “easy statements” with various model archi-
tectures. The training accuracy is duplicated from Table 1 for convenience. The values in the
PC≤N columns indicate the percent of statements proved requiring fewer than N processed
clauses (PC). The far right column (PC<∞) is the percent of statements proved within 30
minutes, with a memory limit of 16G, and no limit on processed clauses.
are much more resource heavy, and therefore could not evaluate as many clauses as the CNNs
given the same resources.
While these results indicate that the that guidance from deep neural networks can provide
some boost to traditional search heuristics, the Auto heuristic alone already performs very well
on this dataset, so the improvements are minor. The real test is on the set of “hard statements,”
which did not previously have ATP generated proofs.
5.3
Experiments on Hard Statements
Here we describe our results on a corpus of 25,361 theorems from the Mizar corpus for which
no proof was found by any of the provers, strategies, and premise selection methods considered
by Kaliszyk & Urban (2015a). We will call these “hard statements” in the rest of the paper.
Although all the hard statements have human proofs, this subset could neither be proved by
theorem prover E (Schulz, 2013) nor by Vampire (Kovács & Voronkov, 2013) with a timeout limit
of 15 minutes and default settings (auto and casc heuristics respectively) using the premises
derived from the human given proofs.
Also note that the premises passed to the theorem
prover form a very rough over-approximation of the set of necessary premises. Often around 10
to 20 dependencies are enough to prove the theorems, but the number of dependencies in the
backward envelope can be in the thousands.
The main bottleneck for network guided proof search is the evaluation time for the ranking
of clauses to be processed next. Given that we do not use special hardware for this purpose,
our proof search is completely dominated by the deep network evaluation.
If the number of premises is very high in the beginning, there is a much bigger hit on the
deep network guided proof search due to the larger number of clauses evaluations per step. This
motivates the use of additional premise selection as an important additional component.
Still, we ﬁrst present a baseline without premise selection and show that the relatively fast
premise selection phase is critical for good performance on the hard theorems with or without
deep network guidance. In the second subsection, we turn on premise selection and compare
various proof guidance models against the baseline auto heuristic.
12

Deep Network Guided Proof Search
S. Loos, G. Irving, C. Szegedy, and C. Kaliszyk
without premise selection
with premise selection
unguided
145
458
guided (hybrid)
137
383
Table 3: Number of hard theorems proved with various combinations of premise selection and
(unswitched) proof guidance. Note that even when our proof guidance is partial, it still produces
worse results than the variant without deep network guidance. This is due to the slowness of
deep network evaluation.
The sole purpose of this table is to highlight the importance of
premise selection for the hard statements. In other experiments, we concentrate on the two-
phase “switched” approach that combines guided and unguided search in a sequential fashion
and outperforms both unguided search and hybrid guidance without the switch.
5.3.1
The Importance of Premise Selection
Here we start with a comparison of four diﬀerent approaches on the hard statements. These
include guided and unguided proof search with and without premise selection.
For premise selection, we use the character level model from the DeepMath paper (Alemi
et al., 2016). The model is a very similar model to our convolutional proof guidance model,
but was trained on premise-conclusion pairs from a training set that was randomly chosen from
the 56% ATP-proved statements. One main diﬀerence is that our proof guidance convolutional
network is word level with an embedding learned for each token, whereas the premise selection
network takes character sequences as input. This limits quality, as the DeepMath paper suggests
that using a word level model with deﬁnitional embeddings gives the best results. We have opted
for the lower quality character level premise selection model for simplicity.
After premise selection we run four proof attempts: ﬁrst the premises are ranked by the
model scores and the top 32, 64, 128, and 256 diﬀerent premises selected (as long as the original
number of premises is not exceeded). We run E prover using the selected set of premises as
long as it does not ﬁnd a proof. We stop searching for a proof when a proof is found for any
subset of the premises.
The experimental results are given in Table 3.
We give experimental evidence that the
switched approach outperforms the unguided proof search. We have tested two diﬀerent premise
selection models to get a feel for the variability and complementarity of the results. It turns
out that diﬀerent premise selection models even with the same architecture can introduce a lot
of variations that can lead to diﬀerent number of theorems proved, but can result in choices
that complement each other well and help the proof search process by increasing the diversity
of starting set of premises.
5.3.2
Comparison of Model Performance on Hard Statements
All the proof guidance methods employed the two-phase approach that ﬁrst runs a hybrid
network-guided phases for 20 minutes, followed by a standard heuristics based phase for 10
minutes.
Here we tried two diﬀerent premise selection models “DeepMath 1” and “DeepMath 2” using
the same character level convolutional architecture as the best character level model described
in (Alemi et al., 2016). This way, we can evaluate the stability of result with respect to the
premise selection strategy. One can see that although the two models are trained the same way
and have comparable quality, they result in signiﬁcantly diﬀerent sets of theorems proved, but
13

Deep Network Guided Proof Search
S. Loos, G. Irving, C. Szegedy, and C. Kaliszyk
Model
DeepMath 1
DeepMath 2
Union of 1 and 2
Auto
578
581
674
*WaveNet 640
644
612
767
*WaveNet 256
692
712
864
WaveNet 640
629
685
997
*CNN
905
812
1,057
CNN
839
935
1,101
Total (unique)
1,451
1,458
1,712
Table 4: Number of theorems proved out of the 25,361 hard theorems, proved with various
combinations of premise selection (DeepMath 1 & 2) and clause selection guidance. The last
column shows the union of theorems proved with either premise selection step method in the
given row. The size of the union of the all theorems proved by methods in this in this table is
1,712 (6.8%). The number of theorems proved by the deep network guided methods is 1,665
(6.6%).
the number of theorems proved using both models is very similar and the “switch” strategy using
the simpler CNN performed best for both premise selection and proof guidance by a signiﬁcant
margin.
The experimental results are given in Table 4. The CNN models use a simple three layer
convolutional networks to rank the unprocessed clauses while the WaveNet models use the
WaveNet architecture which is signiﬁcantly slower to evaluate, but produced better proxy met-
rics on the holdout set. Note that the simple convolutional network based approach proves
86% more theorems than the unguided approach (4.34% versus 2.33% of the hard statements).
The overall number the statements proved by any means in this paper (including the use of
non-switched neural guidance) is 1,866 which is 7.36% of all the hard statements.
6
Conclusion
We have demonstrated the feasibility of guiding ﬁrst-order logic proof search by augmenting
the given clause selection method with ranking by deep neural networks.
With a properly
engineered mixture of neural guidance and hand-crafted search strategies, we get signiﬁcant
improvements in ﬁrst-order logic prover performance, especially for theorems that are harder
and require deeper search.
Due to the slowness of neural network evaluation, our method leads to an increased number
of successful proofs only if we utilize it in a two-phase approach where a deep network guided
phase is followed by a faster combinatorial search with given clauses selected quickly using the
existing hand-crafted clause selection strategies.
Additionally, we established that both the prediction accuracy of the deep network and its
speed are important for increased proving power. For example, our WaveNet model yields higher
accuracy on the holdout set than a simple convolutional network, but due to its much higher
computational cost, when used as a clause scorer in E prover, it still proves fewer theorems
under the same time constraints than the cheaper but lower quality convolutional network.
Currently our approach is computationally expensive, and we allow 30 minutes per proof
compared to 15 minutes for previous work. However, this extra time does not signiﬁcantly help
existing heuristics unless combined with neural proof guidance (see appendix). This suggests
14

Deep Network Guided Proof Search
S. Loos, G. Irving, C. Szegedy, and C. Kaliszyk
that the neural guidance represents a substantial improvement in constraining the search space.
Moreover, we expect that the inroads of specialized hardware for deep learning will mitigate
much of the computational overhead. This would allow higher performing models to play their
strength with dramatic eﬃciency and quality gains in the future.
Our approach is just the ﬁrst step of applying deep learning to guiding combinatorial search
processes and it is arguable that working with a purely syntactic input format the derived set of
features is not strong enough to create a semantically relevant representation of mathematical
content. Besides improving theorem proving, our approach has the exciting potential to generate
higher quality training data for systems that study the behavior of formulas under a set of logical
transformations. This could enable learning representation of formulas in ways that consider
the semantics not just the syntactic properties of mathematical content and can make decisions
based on their behavior during proof search.
