arXiv:1005.0896v1  [cs.AI]  6 May 2010
A two-step fusion process for multi-criteria decision
applied to natural hazards in mountains
Jean-Marc Tacnet
Cemagref-ETNA
2, rue de la pap`eterie B.P. 76
38402 Saint Martin d’Heres Cedex, France

Mireille Batton-Hubert
EMSE - SITE
29, rue Ponchardier
42100 Saint-Etienne, France

Jean Dezert
ONERA
29, avenue de la division Leclerc B.P. 72
92322 Chˆatillon Cedex, France

Abstract—Mountain river torrents and snow avalanches gen-
erate human and material damages with dramatic consequences.
Knowledge about natural phenomenona is often lacking and
expertise is required for decision and risk management purposes
using multi-disciplinary quantitative or qualitative approaches.
Expertise is considered as a decision process based on imperfect
information coming from more or less reliable and conﬂicting
sources. A methodology mixing the Analytic Hierarchy Process
(AHP), a multi-criteria aid-decision method, and information
fusion using Belief Function Theory is described. Fuzzy Sets and
Possibilities theories allow to transform quantitative and qualita-
tive criteria into a common frame of discernment for decision in
Dempster-Shafer Theory (DST ) and Dezert-Smarandache Theory
(DSmT ) contexts. Main issues consist in basic belief assignments
elicitation, conﬂict identiﬁcation and management, fusion rule
choices, results validation but also in speciﬁc needs to make a
difference between importance and reliability and uncertainty in
the fusion process.
Keywords: natural hazards, expertise, decision-making,
multi-criteria decision making, Analytic Hierarchy Process
(AHP), DST, DSmT.
I. INTRODUCTION
Mountain river torrents and snow avalanches generate hu-
man and material damages with dramatic consequences. In
the natural hazards context, risk is assessed as a combination
of hazard and vulnerability levels. This formulation can be
considered as equivalent to a combination of frequency and
gravity which is more currently used in industrial context
(ﬁgure 1).
Figure 1.
Equations of risk in natural hazards and industrial contexts.
Expertise is always required to deﬁne the types of possible
phenomena, to assess the hazard and risk levels and to propose
prevention measures. Expert judgements depend on quality
and uncertainty of the available information that may result
from measures, historical analysis, testimonies but also sub-
jective, possibly conﬂicting, assessments done by the experts
themselves. As an example, the deﬁnition of risks zones is
often based on the extrapolation of historical information
known on particular points using morphology based analysis
(ﬁgure 2).
Figure 2.
Information, expertise and decision in risk zoning applications.
At the end, phenomenon scenarios and decisions may very
well rely on very uncertain information without being able to
really know what was completely true, imprecise, conﬂicting
or simply unknown in the hypotheses leading to these results.
In that context, our essential hypothesis consists in considering
expertise as a decision process based on imperfect information
related to multiple criteria and coming from more or less
reliable and conﬂicting sources.
This paper proposes a methodology able to help decision
based on imperfect information. In section
II, we brieﬂy
introduce the principles of multi-criteria decision analysis
(MCDA) focusing on the AHP developed by T. Saaty
(section II-A). The section II-B analyzes the existing methods
methods using both MCDA methods and theories for uncer-
tainty management. In section
III, we present the different
steps of a new methodology applying to a multi-criteria deci-

sion problem based on imperfect information resulting from
more or less reliable sources. Conclusions and perspectives are
given in section IV.
II. METHODS FOR MULTI-CRITERIA DECISION ANALYSIS
AND IMPERFECT INFORMATION
Information and decision are closely linked and different
methods exist to take a decision on the basis of imperfect
information. From one hand, main principles of multi-criteria
decision analysis and existing theories to manage imperfect
information are over-viewed. From the other hand, we then
brieﬂy analyze the characteristics and lacks of existing meth-
ods methods using both MCDA methods and theories for
uncertainty management.
A. The Analytic Hierarchy Process
Multi-criteria decision analysis aims to choose, sort or rank
alternatives or solutions according to criteria involved in the
decision-making process. Main steps of a multi-criteria anal-
ysis consist in identifying decision purposes, deﬁning criteria,
eliciting preferences between criteria, evaluating alternatives
or solutions and analyzing sensitivity with regard to weights,
thresholds, .... Total aggregation methods such as the Multi-
Attribute Utility Theory (M.A.U.T.) [11], [13] synthesizes in
a unique value the partial utility related to each criterion and
chosen by the decision maker. Each partial utility function
transforms any quantitative evaluation of criterion into an
utility value. The additive method is the simplest method to
aggregate those utilities (ﬁgure 3).
Figure 3.
Multi-criteria decision method based on a total aggregation
principle.
The Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) [12], [19], [20] is a
single synthesizing criterion approach. This method is world-
wide used in almost all applications related with decision-
making [27]. AHP is a special case of complete aggregation
method based on an additive preference aggregation and can be
considered as an approximation of multi-attribute preference
models [11]. Its principle is to arrange the factors considered
as important for a decision in a hierarchic structure descend-
ing from an overall goal to criteria, sub-criteria and ﬁnally
alternatives in successive levels. It is based on three basic
steps: decomposition of the problem, comparative judgments
and hierarchic composition or synthesis of priorities (ﬁgure 4).
Figure 4.
Principles of the analytic hierarchy process.
At each level of the hierarchy, a preference matrix is built up
through pairwise comparisons using a semantic and ratio scale
to assess the decision maker preferences between the criteria of
the considered level. Through the AHP pairwise comparison
process, weights and priorities are derived from a set of
judgments that can be expressed either verbally, numerically
or graphically. The original AHP process uses an additive
preference aggregation and compares the solutions from one
to each other in a so-called ”Criterion-alternative approach”.
This implies to make pairwise comparisons between all the
solutions or alternatives in order to obtain preferences levels
between these alternatives. When dealing with great amount of
data, this becomes quickly quite difﬁcult. An other approach
so-called ”Criterion-index (or estimator)-alternative” is used
in our developments (ﬁgure 5). Instead of comparing all the
alternatives, the decision analyst evaluates, for each alternative,
criterion according pre-existing classes. Each evaluation class
corresponds to an increasing or decreasing level of satisfaction
of a given criterion involved in the decision making. For
example, the criterion human vulnerability exposed to natural
hazards can be assessed according to three classes based on
a number of existing and exposed buildings (ﬁgure 7). These
classes code some kind of ordinal levels corresponding to a
low, medium or strong contribution (or satisfaction) to (or
of) the criterion. In that way, the AHP method, despite the
known issues of complete aggregation methods, ﬁts quite well
to decision ranking problems where the alternatives are not all
known.
B. Making a decision on the basis of imperfect information
Several theories have been proposed to handle different
kinds of imperfect information: Fuzzy Sets Theory for vague
information
[29], Possibility Theory for uncertain and im-
precise information
[9], [30] and Belief Function Theory
that allows to consider uncertain, imprecise and conﬂicting
information. In addition to original Dempster-Shafer theory

Figure 5.
Criteria-Estimator-Solution model.
(DST ) [21], Dezert-Smarandache (DSmT ) theory has pro-
posed new principles and advanced fusion rules to manage
conﬂict between sources [7], [22].
Uncertainty and imprecision in multi-criteria decision mod-
els has been early considered [23]. MAUT in general [28]
and AHP in particular have already been associated to the
Evidence Theory
[3], [4] including the cases of several
sources [5]. A methodology called ER−MCDA (Evidential
Reasoning - Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis) mixing multi-
criteria decision analysis and information fusion
[25], [26]
is proposed to help the experts in a context of imperfect
information. Its main principles are described in section III.
III. THE ER −MCDA METHODOLOGY
The principle of the ER −MCDA methodology is to
use the multi-criteria decision analysis framework to analyze
the decision problem and to identify the criteria involved in
decision. Utility functions and aggregation steps are respec-
tively replaced by successive mapping and fusion processes.
The main steps of this methodology consist in (ﬁgure
6)
(1) analyzing the decision problem through a hierarchical
structure, (2) deﬁning the evaluation classes for decision
through a common frame of discernment, (3) evaluating the
qualitative or quantitative criteria, (4) mapping the evaluations
of criteria into the common frame of discernment for deci-
sion, (5) fusing the mapped evaluations of criteria to get a
basic belief assignment related to the evaluations classes of
decision (frame of discernment for decision). These steps are
independent one from each other. Therefore, imprecise and
uncertain evaluations of quantitative or qualitative criteria can
be done by the sources (experts) and re-used with different
mapping models.
A. Decision problem elicitation
The methodology is described through a sample problem
dealing with the sensitivity of an avalanche prone area (ﬁg-
ure 7) derived from a real existing decision framework used to
identify the sensitive avalanche paths [18]. For each avalanche
path, decision consists in choosing between sensitivity levels
described as not, low, medium or high sensitive paths. This
sensitivity depends on both vulnerability and hazard levels.
Vulnerability is assessed through the number of winter per-
manent occupants (quantitative criterion) and existing infras-
tructures (qualitative criterion).
Figure 6.
Four dissociated steps of the ER −MCDA methodology.
Figure 7.
A sample decision problem.
Sensitivity levels are the elements of the common frame
of discernment for decision. The fusion process will provide
basic belief assignments on each or combination of the
elements of this frame of discernment. In the classical DST
framework based on exhaustive and exclusive hypotheses,
the frame Θ is composed of 4 exclusive elements deﬁned
by HD1
=
’No sensitivity’, HD2
=
’Low sensitivity’,
HD3 = ’Medium sensitivity’ and HD4 = ’High sensitivity’.
In the DSmT framework (allowing non-empty intersections),
the
frame Θ
is
composed of 3
elements
deﬁned
by
HD1
= ’No sensitivity’, HD2
= ’Low sensitivity’ and
HD3 = ’High sensitivity’ (ﬁgure 8).
B. Evaluation of quantitative criteria
The quantitative criterion are evaluated through possibility
distributions which allow to represent both imprecision and
uncertainty. The source (an expert) provides evaluations as
intervals. Let us take as an example the criterion C111 cor-
responding to the number of permanent winter occupants:

Figure 8.
Two frames of discernment according to DST or DSmT
frameworks.
A represents the proposition ”x ∈[8, 15]”. N(A) = 0.75
represents the certainty level (conﬁdence) in the proposition
”x ∈[8, 15]”. N(A) can be viewed as a lowest probability for
A and Π(A) as un upper probability for A (ﬁgure 9).
Figure 9.
Using possibility distribution for imprecise criteria evaluation.
Any interval of the possibility distribution can be trans-
formed into basic belief assignment (ﬁgure 10) according to
relations between possibility and belief function theories [1],
[2], [10].
Figure 10. Possibility distribution for evaluation are transformed into masses.
Figure 11.
Mapping is based on surface ratios.
C. Mapping models: a link from evaluation to decision
A mapping model is a set of fuzzy intervals L −R linking
a criterion evaluation and the decision classes: it plays more
or less the same role than the utility function in a total
aggregation based multi-criteria decision method. For each
evaluation of a criterion by one source, each interval of the
possibility distribution (I(s,intj)) is mapped to the common
frame of discernment of decision according to surface ratios
(ﬁgures 11, 12). At the end of the mapping process, all the
criteria evaluations provided by each source are transformed in
basic belief assignments (bba’s) according the common frame
of discernment of decision: these bba’s are then fused in a
two-step process.
Figure 12.
Results of mapping of the evaluation of source n◦1 for criterion
C111.
D. Two steps of fusion
After the mapping step, the ER −MCDA process is
based on two successive fusion levels (ﬁgure 13). The ﬁrst
step consists in the fusion of bba’s corresponding, for each

criterion, to the different evaluations provided by different
sources.
Figure 13.
The fusion levels of the ER −MCDA process.
Reliability of each source is assessed using the classical
discounting factor (αs) proposed in the DST or DSmT
frameworks. Then, fusion of this discounted bba’s is done
using different fusion rules. The PCR6 rule [6], [7], [15] is
recommended to prevent aberrant decisions in case of highly
conﬂicting evaluations of a criterion (ﬁgure 14).
Figure 14.
Examples of fusion results.
The second step consists in the fusion of the bba’s corre-
sponding to each criterion and resulting from the ﬁrst step of
fusion (ﬁgure 13). In this second step, each criterion is consid-
ered as a source which is discounted according its importance
in the decision process as proposed by [3] (ﬁgure 15).
Results of fusion have to be interpreted to decide which
is the sensitivity level that will be chosen (NoS, LS, MS
or HS) according either to the maximum of basic belief as-
signments, credibility (pessimistic decision), plausibility (op-
timistic decision) or pignistic probability (compromise). The
Figure 15.
Importance discounting factors resulting from hierarchical multi-
criteria model.
ER−MCDA methodology produces a comparative decision
proﬁle in which decision classes (elements of the frame of
discernment) can be compared one to each other using DST
or DSmT to ﬁt in the best possible way to their nature
(ﬁgure 16).
Figure 16.
Comparison of fusion rules.
IV. CONCLUSION-DISCUSSION
The ER−MCDA methodology allows to make a decision
based on multiple and more or less important criteria on which
more or less reliable sources provide imperfect and uncertain
evaluations. A simpliﬁed decision sorting problem based on a
snow-avalanche risk management problem shows how the use
of multi-criteria decision analysis principles and information
fusion can be used to characterize and take information quality
or imperfection into account for decision purposes. In regard
with its aggregation principles and possible ”rank reversals”,
AHP is as much critized than it is widely used
[14].
Anyway, it remains an easy understandable method that can be

simply connected to fusion process frameworks. The Analytic
Hierarchy Process (AHP) elicits the criteria used for decision
and is used as a conceptual framework. The ER −MCDA
methodology contributes to improve traceability and quality
description of the expertise process through clearly dissociated
steps corresponding respectively to evaluation, mapping and
fusion based decision making. DSmT proposes more valu-
able modeling principles for vague, imprecise and uncertain
information and conﬂict management. Advanced fusion rules
such as partial conﬂicting rules (PCR) cope with conﬂict in
a more efﬁcient way than the classical Dempster’s rule used
in the DST framework.
Sensitivity analysis must still be applied to the ER −
MCDA methodology in order to explore the effects of
fusion orders, mapping models ...changes. Using the classical
discounting factor to consider both reliability and uncertainty
at the ﬁrst fusion step and importance at the second step of
fusion is not satisfactory. A new discounting process must be
proposed in this case [8], [25], [26].
From an operational point of view, an important application
ﬁeld consists in extending this methodology to spatial appli-
cations and specially to hazard and risk zoning maps.
