arXiv:1102.2748v1  [cs.CV]  14 Feb 2011
MANUSCRIPT SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANS. PATTERN ANAL. MACH. INTELL., JULY 2010
1
Feature Selection via Sparse Approximation for
Face Recognition
Yixiong Liang, Lei Wang, Yao Xiang, and Beiji Zou
Abstract—Inspired by biological vision systems, the over-complete local features with huge cardinality are increasingly
used for face recognition during the last decades. Accordingly, feature selection has become more and more important
and plays a critical role for face data description and recognition. In this paper, we propose a trainable feature selection
algorithm based on the regularized frame for face recognition. By enforcing a sparsity penalty term on the minimum
squared error (MSE) criterion, we cast the feature selection problem into a combinatorial sparse approximation problem,
which can be solved by greedy methods or convex relaxation methods. Moreover, based on the same frame, we propose
a sparse Ho-Kashyap (HK) procedure to obtain simultaneously the optimal sparse solution and the corresponding margin
vector of the MSE criterion. The proposed methods are used for selecting the most informative Gabor features of face
images for recognition and the experimental results on benchmark face databases demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed methods.
Index Terms—Face recognition, feature selection, sparse approximation, minimum squared error criterion, Ho-Kashyap
procedure.
✦
1
INTRODUCTION
W
ITHIN
the last several decades, face
recognition has received extensive at-
tention due to its wide range of application
from identity authentication, access control
and surveillance to human-computer interac-
tion and numerous novel face recognition al-
gorithms have been proposed [43], [28]. One
of the key issue to successful face recognition
systems is the development of effective face
representation, namely how to extract and se-
lect the discriminative features to represent face
image. According to the region from which fea-
tures are derived, face representation methods
can be generally divided into two categories:
holistic representation and local representation.
The holistic representation extract features from
the whole face image while the local represen-
tation calculating the features from the local
faical regions.
After the introduction of the well-known
Eigenfaces [33], the holistic representation meth-
•
The authors are with the Institute of Information Science and En-
gineering, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, 410083,
China.

ods were extensively studied [4], [24], [3], [13],
[37], [34]. However, local areas are often more
descriptive and more appropriate for dealing
with those facial variations due to expression,
partial occlusion and illumination, since most
variations in appearance only affect a small
part of the face region. Local feature analysis
(LFA) [25] pioneers the study of local repre-
sentation for face recognition. Recently, local
representation approaches have received more
attention and have shown more promising re-
sults [36], [14], [16], [5], [1], [39], [2], [23], [17],
[38], [6]. A lots of local feature descriptors,
such as Haar-like features [16], SIFT features
[5], histograms of oriented gradient (HOG) [2],
edge orientation histograms (EOH) [39], Gabor
features [36], [18], local binary patterns (LBP)
[1], [18], [22], Bio-inspired features [23], learned
descriptor [6] etc., have been successfully ap-
plied in face recognition. These local features
are often over-completed, whereas only a rel-
atively small fraction of them is relevant to
the recognition task. Thus feature selection is
a crucial and necessary step to select the most
discriminant local features to obtain a sparse
face representation. While the prior knowledge
to the choice of this local feature dictionary of

MANUSCRIPT SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANS. PATTERN ANAL. MACH. INTELL., JULY 2010
2
large cardinality is often limited and a consis-
tent theory is still missing, numerous learned
methods are emerging in the empirical practice
due to their effectiveness (refer to [12] for an
excellent review of feature selection approaches
in machine learning). Adaboost-based methods
are the most popular and impressive feature
selection methods in face recognition Scenario
[16], [42], [40], [27], [26], [19], [35]. One possible
problem of these methods is very time consum-
ing in the training stage for the need of train-
ing and evaluating a classiﬁer for each feature
component. An alternative is the regularized-
based method which sparsify with respect to a
dictionary of features by the sparsity-enforcing
regularization techniques [29], [8]. The main
merits of such a regularized approach are its
effectiveness even in the presence of a very
small number of data coupled with the fact
that it is supported by well-grounded theory
[8]. Another potential merit is that the reg-
ularized methods analyze all feature compo-
nents together and may be more appropriate to
capture groups of correlated features, whereas
the Adaboost-based method only consider the
relevance of each feature separately, thus may
ignore the possible dependencies between fea-
tures.
Based on the regularized frame, in this paper,
we propose a novel feature selection method
based on classical minimum squared error
(MSE) criterion [9] which assumes a linear de-
pendence between the feature components and
the discriminant functions. We cast the feature
selection problem into a combinatorial sparse
approximation problem by enforcing a sparsity
penalty term on the MSE criterion and the
solution can be obtained by greedy methods
such as matching pursuit (MP) [21] or the
orthogonal matching pursuit (OMP) [30], [31],
[32] and convex relaxation methods [31]. We
restrict ourselves to the linear models because
they are relatively easy to compute and in the
absence of information suggesting otherwise,
linear models are an attractive candidates. Fur-
ther, the linear model can be extended to the
nonlinear cases by explicitly or implicitly giv-
ing some function of the local feature compo-
nents. The latter is the well-known kernel trick.
Due to the arbitrary selection of margin vec-
tor, the MSE procedure cannot guarantee to
obtain the optimal separating vector even in
the separable case [9]. We impose the sparse
constrains on the Ho-Kashyap (HK) procedure
[9] and propose a named sparse HK (SHK)
procedure to obtain simultaneously the optimal
sparse solution and the corresponding margin
vector. Similar to the original HK procedure,
the proposed SHK procedure is an iterative
scheme that alternates between solution of the
sparse vector based on the current margin vector
and a process of updating the margin vector.
It is ﬂexible and can work with any greedy
methods or convex relaxation methods.
Gabor and LBP are two most representative
local features in face recognition. We select
Gabor feature as the start representation due
to its peculiar ability to model the spatial
summation properties of the receptive ﬁelds of
the so called ”bar cells” in the primary visual
cortex. Then we apply the proposed feature
selection method to select the most informative
Gabor features for face recognition. Experimen-
tal results on the benchmark face databases
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
feature selection methods.
Our method may be mainly inspired by the
work [8] which is also applying the sparse
regularized term to the linear model to perform
the feature selection. Nevertheless, the linear
model in [8] neglects the bias on the one hand
and only enforces the linear dependence be-
tween the feature components and the class
labels on the other hand. In fact, this simple lin-
ear dependence is equivalent to set all entries
of the margin vector equal to 1 in MSE criterion
model. Our method starts off with the MSE
criterion and considers simultaneously the bias
and the adaptive margin vector and hence can
be seemed as a generalization of the method
in [8]. Moreover, in [8] the sparse solution
is obtained through iterative soft-thresholding
method and the convergence relies on the care-
ful normalization of each features component
of all training samples at a time, which may de-
stroy the structure of the features. Our method
adheres to the original features without any
additional normalization and also obtain the
convergence.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows.

MANUSCRIPT SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANS. PATTERN ANAL. MACH. INTELL., JULY 2010
3
In Section 2, we start off with the MSE criterion
and propose a novel feature selection method
based on sparsity-enforcing regularized tech-
niques. Based on the same frame, in Section
3, we present a sparse extension of the classical
HK procedure for feature selection. In Section
4 we ﬁrst brieﬂy review the Gabor face repre-
sentation and then illustrate how to apply the
proposed feature selection frame to select the
most informative Gabor features for face recog-
nition. Experiments and analysis are described
in Section 5, whereas Section 6 concludes the
paper.
2
FEATURE
SELECTION
BASED
ON
sparse MSE CRITERION
In this section, we present a new feature se-
lection algorithm based on the MSE criterion.
As mentioned before, we restrict ourselves to
the case of a linear discriminant functions that
are linear in the components of feature x =
[x1, . . . , xd]T :
g(x) =
d
X
i=1
ωixi + ω0 = yTa,
(1)
where g(x) denotes the discriminant function;
ω0 is the bias or threshold; ωi(i
=
1, . . . , d)
is the weights; y = [1, x1, . . . , xd]T and a =
[ω0, . . . , ωd]T are the augmented feature vec-
tor and augmented weight vector, respectively.
Since the face recognition can be cast into a
classiﬁcation of the intra-personal and extra-
personal variation [24], we focus on a binary
classiﬁcation problem. As suggested in [9],
we substitute all negative samples (i.e. extra-
personal variations) with their negatives to for-
get the labels and look for a weight vector such
that yT
i a > 0 for all of the samples. Indeed, this
relation is invariant under a positive scaling of
a. Thus, we can deﬁne a canonical hyperplane
such that yT
i a = bi where bi is a positive
constant called the margin. Now the problem
can be reformulated as the following linear
system of equations:
Ya = b,
(2)
where Y = [y1, . . . , yn]T
∈Rn×(d+1) is the
augmented feature matrix and b = [b1, . . . , bn]T
is the margin vector. Due to the size of Y, it
is infeasible to obtain the exact solution of (2).
One classical relaxation is to solve the minimize
squared error criterion function
min ∥Ya −b∥2
2 = min
n
X
i=1
(yT
i a −bi)2.
(3)
It can be solved by a gradient search procedure.
However, the MSE solution do not provide
feature selection in the sense because it’s typi-
cally non-sparse. By enforcing sparse regulariza-
tion term on the MSE criterion, we can turn
the feature selection into solving the following
sparsity-enforcing MSE (SMSE) criterion:
min ∥Ya −b∥2
2 + τ 2∥a∥0,
(4)
where ∥· ∥0 is the l0 quasi-norm counting the
nonzero entries of a vector and τ is a threshold
that quantiﬁes how much improvement in the
approximation error is necessary before we ad-
mit an additional term into the approximation.
It is a classic combinatorial sparse approximation
problem and can be solved by greedy tech-
niques such as MP and OMP which construct a
sparse approximant one step at a time by select-
ing the atom most strongly correlated with the
residual part of the signal and use it to update
the current approximation. An alternative to
solving the SMSE criterion (4) is the convex
relaxation methods which replace the prob-
lem with a relaxed version that can be solved
more efﬁciently. The l1 norm provides a natural
convex relaxation of the l0 quasi-norm, and it
suggests that we may be able to solve sparse
approximation problems by introducing an l1
norm in place of the l0 quasi-norm. From this
heuristic, a relaxed version of SMSE (RSMSE)
criterion can be derived as follows:
min 1
2∥Ya −b∥2
2 + γ∥a∥1,
(5)
which is an unconstrained convex function and
thus standard mathematical programming soft-
wares can be used to ﬁnd a minimizer. The
parameter γ negotiates a compromise between
approximation error and sparsity. It has been
proved that if the feature matrix Y is incoher-
ent and the threshold parameters are correctly
chosen, then the solution to RSMSE criterion
(5) identiﬁes every signiﬁcant atom from the

MANUSCRIPT SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANS. PATTERN ANAL. MACH. INTELL., JULY 2010
4
solution to SMSE criterion (4) and no others
[31].
From a run-time point of view, we adopt
OMP to solve the SMSE criterion (4). Since
OMP is iterative, we must supply a criterion
for stopping the iteration. Here are two possi-
bilities:
• One may halt the procedure when the
norm of the residual declines below a spec-
iﬁed threshold.
• One may halt the procedure after pre-
deﬁned number of distinct feature compo-
nents have been selected.
In our implementation, the iteration is stopped
whenever one of the above conditions is satis-
ﬁed.
Notice that in the criterion (3) (4) and (5),
the entries of the margin vector b are arbitrary
positive constants. Obviously, different choice
of b would typically lead to different solutions.
As the MSE solution is directly related to the
Fisher discriminant vector with a proper choice
of the margin vector (i.e. the entries bi corre-
sponding to the same class are equal to the
ratio of the sample size of this class to the total
sample size) [9], the SMSE solution or RSMSE
solution gives a natural sparse generalization of
Fisher linear discriminant. Hereafter we refer
to the resulting feature selection algorithm as
sparse Fisher (SFisher) procedure. Moreover, if
we set b = 1n and ω0 = 0 (we refer to the
resulting algorithm as simpliﬁed SMES proce-
dure, or SSMES), in this special case the RSMSE
criterion (5) degenerates into the linear model
described in [8], and thus our method can also
be seemed as a generalization of the method in
[8].
3
FEATURE
SELECTION
BASED
ON
sparse HK PROCEDURE
Because the objective is minimizing ∥Ya −b∥2
2,
as discussed in [9], the MSE procedures yield
a solution whether the samples are linearly
separable or not, but there is no guarantee that
this vector is a separating vector even in the
separable case. However, in the separable case,
there do exist a margin vector ˆb with all positive
entries such that the corresponding MSE solu-
tion is the separating vector. The HK procedure
extends the MSE procedure to deal with this
problem by determining a and b alternately
where the components of b cannot decrease.
Borrowing from the same ideas, in this section
we propose a sparse version the HK procedure
to extend our method described in the former
section. Speciﬁcally speaking, in the proposed
SHK procedure there are two stages for each
iteration: one for sparse approximating that es-
sentially evaluates a and one for updating the
margin vector b. Sparse approximating can be
conveniently performed by using greedy or
convex relaxation algorithms to solve the SMES
criterion (4) with a given b. Similar original HK
procedure, the updating rule of b is to start
with b > 01 and to refuse to reduce any of its
components, namely

b(1) > 0
b(t + 1) = b(t) + 2η(t)e+(t),
(6)
where η(t) is a positive scale factor or learn
rate; e(t) = Ya(t) −b(t) is the error vector and
e+(t) = 1
2(e(t)+|e(t)|) is the positive part of the
error vector, respectively. Given some stopping
rules, our algorithm is:
Algorithm SHK.
Initialization: Set b(0) > 0, 0 < η(·) < 1. Set the
iteration index t = 1.
Repreat until convergence (stopping criterion):
• Sparse approximation stage: Use any greedy
algorithms or convex relaxation methods
to computer a(k) by approximating the
solution of SMES criterion (4).
• Margin vector update stage: b(t + 1) =
b(t) + 2η(k)e+(t).
• Set t = t + 1.
In our implementation, the stopping rule is that
when ∥b(t+1)−b(t)∥2 < ǫ is reached, the loop
is terminated.
It is noteworthy that although the conver-
gence of the original HK procedure can be
proven theoretically [9], owing to the intro-
duction of the sparse approximation stage, exact
analysis of the convergence of the proposed
SHK algorithm in a deterministic manner is
rather complicated or even impossible. Nev-
ertheless, we can obtain the convergence by
1. b > 0 means that every component of b is positive.

MANUSCRIPT SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANS. PATTERN ANAL. MACH. INTELL., JULY 2010
5
careful selection of η(t) which decreases with
t. Our choice is to set η(t) = η(1)
t .
4
GABOR
FEATURE
SELECTION
FOR
FACE RECOGNITION
In this section we describe how we specialize
the proposed feature selection frame to the case
of face recognition. We ﬁrst brieﬂy review the
Gabor representation of face and then describe
how to apply the proposed feature selection
methods to select Gabor features for face recog-
nition.
4.1
Gabor representation
We start with the widely used Gabor repre-
sentation because the kernels of Gabor ﬁlters
are similar to the 2D receptive ﬁeld proﬁles of
the mammalian cortical simple cells and exhibit
desirable characteristics of spatial locality and
orientation selectivity [36], [40], [26]. The Gabor
representation of a face image can be obtained
by convolving the image by a set of Gabor
ﬁlters which are commonly deﬁned as follows:
ψµ,ν = ∥kµ,ν∥2
2
σ2
e−
∥kµ,ν ∥2
2∥z∥2
2
2σ2
[eikµ,νz −e−σ2
2 ],
(7)
where z is the coordinate vector; parameters µ
and ν deﬁne the orientation and the scale of
the Gabor ﬁlter; parameters σ is the standard
deviation of Gaussian window; kµ,ν is the wave
vector given by kµ,ν = kνeiφµ, where kν = kmax
fν
and φµ = πµ
8 if eight different orientations have
been chosen; kmax is the maximum frequency,
and f is the spatial factor between kernels in
the frequency domain. In face recognition area,
researchers commonly use 40 Gabor ﬁlters with
ﬁve scales ν ∈{0, · · · , 4} and eight orientations
µ ∈{0, · · · , 7} and with σ = 2π, kmax =
π
2
and f =
√
2. However, we set the scale ranges
from -1 to 2 rather than from 0 to 4 due to the
using of smaller size of face images in our ex-
periments. Thus only 32 Gabor ﬁlters are used.
Convolving the face image with these 32 Ga-
bor ﬁlters and only extracting the magnitudes
information can then generate a high dimen-
sional Gabor representation. For example, for
an image with 64 × 64 pixels, the total number
of Gabor features is 4 × 8 × 64 × 64 = 131, 072.
A noticeable problem in discrete convolution
is the choice of proper size of the convolution
mask. It should be large enough to show the
nature of Gabor kernels and not be too large
for the computation efﬁciency. As suggested in
[10], we truncate the Gabor ﬁlters to six times
the span of the Gaussian function. As the span
of Gaussian function is
σ
kν , the Gabor mask
is then truncated to a width w =
6σ
kν + 1 =
24×2
ν
2 +1. Thus in our experiments the size of
Gabor ﬁlters are 19×19, 25×25, 35×35, 49×49
corresponding to the scale of ν ∈{−1, · · · , 2}.
4.2
Feature selection for face recognition
Now it time to turn our attention to the feature
selection of the high dimensional Gabor repre-
sentation. Similarly to Moghaddam et al. [24],
we temporarily cast the face recognition into a
classiﬁcation of the intra-personal (hereafter as
positive) and extra-personal (hereafter as neg-
ative) variation. For each pair of face images Ii
and I′
i, we compare the corresponding Gabor
feature components. Speciﬁcally, for each pair
of input images we obtain a feature vector
xi whose elements are the absolute difference
between the corresponding Gabor representa-
tions. Given a training set, we can then get
the augmented feature matrix Y following the
routine described in Section 2.
A by-no-means negligible problem in practi-
cal is the overwhelmingly huge size and unbal-
ance of the training samples [16]. For instance,
given a training set that includes K images for
each of the C individuals, the total number
of image pairs is
 CK
2

whereas only a small
minority, C
 K
2

of these pairs display the intra-
personal variation. Let C = 300 and K = 4,
then the size of positive samples and nega-
tive samples are 1, 800 and 717, 600 respectively
with their ratio be close to 1 : 400.
Obviously, such a huge samples size will
lead to severe memory and computational
problem. In addition, the unbalance training
samples may bias the performance of the fea-
ture selection. In order to obtain balanced sys-
tems of reasonable size, we randomly sample
the positive and negative samples with a com-
parable ratio to build the augmented feature
matrix Y. In practical, we can sample negative

MANUSCRIPT SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANS. PATTERN ANAL. MACH. INTELL., JULY 2010
6
samples while keeping all positive samples
with their ratio varying from 1 : 1 to 1 : 10.
Once we build the augmented feature matrix
Y, we can ﬁnd the solution of SMSE criterion
(4) with a given or an adaptive margin vector
b according to the procedure previously de-
scribed. Then the Gabor feature components
corresponding to non-zero entries of the aug-
mented weight vector a are selected as the
most informative ones and used for further face
recognition.
Recalled that the above feature selection
frame based on linear discriminant functions
also establishes a linear classiﬁer with a bias
w0 discriminating the intra-personal and extra-
personal difference, so it can be used for face
recognition directly. However, one can also
consider its usage as a pure feature selection
tool to reduce the numbers of Gabor features
and adopt some other common classiﬁers such
as nearest neighbor classiﬁer (NNC), Fisher classi-
ﬁer (FC) [9] or support vector machines (SVM) [7]
for the recognition.
5
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
In order to evaluate the proposed approach, we
carry out some experiments on two large face
databases: CAS-PEAL-R1 [11] and LFW [15]
face database. The CAS-PEAL-R1 face database
contains 30, 863 images of 1, 040 Chinese sub-
jects with different variations of pose, expres-
sion, accessories, age, and lighting. The LFW
face database contains 13, 233 labeled face im-
ages collected from news sites in the Internet.
These images belong to 5, 749 different indi-
viduals and have high variations in position,
pose, lighting, background, camera and quality.
Therefore LFW database is more appropriate to
evaluating face recognition methods in realistic
and unconstrained environments.
In all our experiments, each image is rotated
and scaled so that the centers of the eyes are
placed on speciﬁc pixels and then was cropped
to 64 × 64 pixels 2. As described before, we
only select 32 Gabor ﬁlters to extract the Gabor
features.
2. The eyes locations are given in CAS-PEAL-R1 database.
For LFW database, we adopted standard ﬁducial point detector
to extract the eyes locations and annotated them manually
whenever the automatic eyes locator failed.
5.1
Results on CAS-PEAL-R1 database
We restrictively follow the CAS-PEAL-R1 eval-
uation protocol which speciﬁes one training
set, one gallery set and six probe sets [11].
Therefore the training sets include 1, 200 im-
ages of 300 subjects and the ratio of intra-
personal sample size to extra-personal sample
size is 1, 800 : 717, 600. We keep all intra-
personal samples while randomly sampling the
extra-personal samples with a ratio of 1 : 7.
If all Gabor features are considered, the linear
problem we are about to build is rather large. In
fact, the size of the augmented feature matrix Y
is come to 131, 073 × 14, 400. Obviously direct
multiplication on such a matrix is infeasible.
One possible choice is to reduce the number
of Gabor features if possible. With the prior
knowledge of that the magnitude of the Gabor
ﬁlters is not sensitive to the positions, we can
reduce the number of positions by a simply
down sampling scheme with a factor 16. Thus
the number of positions is roughly one six-
teenth of the total number of pixels. So after
the down sampling, the size of the augmented
feature matrix Y is reduced to 8193 × 14, 400.
5.1.1
Feature selection results
We conducted experiments on the CAS-PEAL-
R1 training set using SSMES, SFisher and SHK
procedure to select 500 most informative Gabor
features, respectively. Their characteristics can
be observed by their statistics. The location dis-
tribution of selected Gabor features are shown
SSMES
SFisher
SHK
Fig. 1.
Location distribution of the ﬁrst 500
selected
Gabor
features
on
CAS-PEAL-R1
dataset.
in Fig. 1. It is interesting to see that most
of selected Gabor features resulting from all
three methods are located around the prominet
facial features such as eyebrows, eyes, nose
and mouth, while seldom being located on the

MANUSCRIPT SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANS. PATTERN ANAL. MACH. INTELL., JULY 2010
7
cheek area. This indicates that the prominent
facial features regions carry the most important
discriminating information while the cheek re-
gion conveying less information. Moreover, a
minority of selected features are located on
external features such as cheek contour and jaw
line. In fact, although the external region does
not cover the face much, the external features
implicitly uses shape information and thus are
useful for distinguishing thin faces from round
faces. This result is agreed with Ref. [41].
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
Gabor kernels
Frequency
(a)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
Gabor kernels
Frequency
(b)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
Gabor kernels
Frequency
(c)
Fig. 2. Distribution of 32 Gabor kernels in the
ﬁrst 500 leading Gabor features on CAS-PEAL-
R1 dataset. (a) SSMES. (b) SFisher.(c)SHK.
We also compared the frequency of Gabor
kernels in the selected Gabor features. Fig. 2
illustrates the frequency of the 32 Gabor ker-
nels in the leading 500 Gabor features selected
by SSMES, SFisher and SHK procedure. Ob-
viously, different scales and orientations con-
tribute different and the distribution of features
selected by different methods is somewhat uni-
form: the 0-scale and 1-scale are more likely
important than the other two scales and most
of horizontal and vertical Gabor kernels have
extracted stronger features than those with
other orientation.
5.1.2
Classiﬁcation results
The selected Gabor features are then adopted
for face recognition. The classical classiﬁers,
NNC and FC, are chosen to recognize the faces.
As mentioned above, the proposed feature se-
lection frame can perform the intra-personal
and extra-personal recognition task. Thus we
also used it for face recognition by treating
the face recognition as a series of pair matching
problems. However, in many situations there
are more than one subject satisfying the sep-
arating condition. In order to make a ﬁnal
decision we simply classify the unknown face
as the subject whose samples can maximize the
linear discriminant function (1), i.e. the margin.
Therefore in some sense it can be seen as a
maximum margin classiﬁer (MMC).
We also implemented 3 previous Gabor-
based approaches for comparison. The ﬁrst
is using Gabor feature without feature se-
lection for face representation and NNC for
recognition, which is denoted as ”G+NNC”.
The second method ”G+FC” denotes the GFC
method in [20], i.e. the PCA+LDA on down-
sampled Gabor features. The third method, ”G
Ada+FC”, is the AGFC method in [26] which
using Adaboost to select Gabor features and FC
for classiﬁcation. For clarity, ”G SSMES+NNC”,
”G SFisher+NNC” and ”G SHK+NNC” re-
spectively denote the method using SSMES,
SFisher and SHK procedure to select Gabor
features and NNC for recognition. Similarly,
for the other two classiﬁers, the corresponding
methods are denoted as ”G SSMES+MMC”,
”G SFisher+MMC”, ”G SHK+MMC” and ”G
SSMES+FC”, ”G SFisher+FC”, ”G SHK+FC”.
We investigated 3 kinds of distance measure-
ments: l1 distance, l2 distance and cosine dis-
tance, and found that for NNC, l1 distance
achieves the best performance while for FC,
the cosine distance performing best. Thus we
selected l1 distance for NNC and cosine distance

MANUSCRIPT SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANS. PATTERN ANAL. MACH. INTELL., JULY 2010
8
for FC. In our implementation, the number
of Gabor features used in ”G+FC” is down-
sampled to the dimension of 8, 192 and in ”G
Ada+FC”, 2, 000 Gabor features are selected
by Adaboost. The optimal dimension for PCA
and LDA are determined by testing all possible
dimensions. The results on 5 different probes
sets are shown and compared in Table 1.
TABLE 1
Recognition Performance comparisons on
different CAS-PEAL-R1 probe sets (%)
Methods
Age
Exp
Dis
Bac
Acc
G+NNC
78.79
81.34
98.18
93.49
63.63
G+FC
96.97
92.68
98.91
98.19
84.55
G SSMES+NNC
87.88
78.79
95.64
94.94
68.32
G SSMES+MMC
7.58
8.47
17.45
19.71
5.38
G SSMES+FC
100.00
89.94
98.18
97.47
79.34
G SFisher+NNC
93.94
77.26
96.00
94.94
68.45
G SFisher+MMC
74.24
74.97
93.82
91.68
49.85
G SFisher+FC
100.00
90.32
97.82
97.65
80.88
G SHK+NNC
93.94
79.87
96.36
95.12
69.98
G SHK+MMC
75.76
77.01
94.54
92.22
52.12
G SHK+FC
100.00
91.34
98.91
98.92
80.96
G Ada+FC
96.97
89.81
96.73
97.83
78.77
From Table 1, we can obtain several major
observations. First, although the proposed fea-
ture selection frame also establishes a classi-
ﬁer which can be straightforwardly used for
face recognition, its performances are not as
satisfactory as expected, especially for the ”G
SSMES + MMC” method. Our explanation is
that though the feature selection frame can se-
lect effectively the meaningful features, it may
overestimate or underestimate the correspond-
ing weights, leading to the over-ﬁtting prob-
lems. Comparing to the ”G SSMES + MMC”,
the classiﬁers used in ”G SFisher + MMC”
and ”G SHK + MMC” both consider the bias
and the margin and thus achieve better re-
sults. The second observation is that the FC
based methods (”G+FC”, ”C SMESS+FC”, ”C
SFisher+FC”, ”C SHK+FC” and ”G Ada+FC”)
perform much better than the other two clas-
siﬁers based methods. In general, the algo-
rithms with regularized-based feature selection
procedure only use 500 Gabor features and
slightly outperform ”G Ada+FC” with 2, 000
Gabor features selected by Adaboost and is
comparable to ”G+FC” using 8, 192 Gabor fea-
tures, which shows that the proposed feature
selection frame is effective for face recognition.
Third, SFisher and SHK perform better than
SSMES in the sense of both feature selection
and classiﬁcation. This results indicate that the
consideration of bias and the margin will not
make the learning process overﬁts the training
data but increase the generalizability.
5.2
Results on LFW database
We also conducted some experiments on the
LFW database for further investigation. Unlike
the CAS-PEAL-R1 database, the LFW database
have larger degree of variability and the recog-
nition is only to be done by pairs matching,
instead of searching for the most similar face
in the database. We still followed their protocol
which gives two Views: View 1 for model selec-
tion and algorithm development while View 2
for performance reporting. View 1 speciﬁes one
training set containing 2, 200 pairs and one test-
ing set containing 1, 000 pairs. View 2 consists of
ten sets with 600 images in each case. They can
be combined into 10 different training/testing
set pairs. In our experiments, the training set of
View 1 are chosen for training the feature selec-
tion model and the performance are reported
using 10-fold cross validation on the View 2.
The proposed feature selection frame is used
as a feature selector to select 500 most in-
formative Gabor features from the original
131, 072 original features. We directly adopted
the proposed frame as a classiﬁer to recognize
the unknown pairs in company with the SVM
classiﬁer. The corresponding methods are re-
ferred as ”G SMESS”, ”G SFisher”, ”G SHK”
and ”G SMESS+SVM”, ”G SFisher+SVM”, ”G
SHK+SVM” respectively. We also investigated
the performance of the method ”G+FC” which
uses all 131, 072 original features as represen-
tation and FC as a classiﬁer. The results of
the experiments are described in Table 2 below
and the ROC comparison curves of different
methods are illustrated in Fig. 3.
As can be seen, a direct application of pro-
posed feature selection frame as a classiﬁer per-
form somewhat worse than the performance
achieved by using a SVM classiﬁer. Recalled
that the ”G SFisher” algorithm actually per-
forms a sparse Fisher classiﬁcation which only

MANUSCRIPT SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANS. PATTERN ANAL. MACH. INTELL., JULY 2010
9
TABLE 2
Mean (± standard error) recognition accuracy
on View 2 of LFW data set (%)
Methods
Recognition accuracy
G+FC
67.10 ± 0.53
G SSMES
60.60 ± 0.64
G SFisher
66.70 ± 0.49
G SHK
68.27 ± 0.58
G SSMES+SVM
68.30 ± 0.59
G SFisher+SVM
69.18 ± 0.52
G SHK+SVM
70.32 ± 0.44
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
False Positive Rate
True Positive Rate
 
 
Gabor+FC
G SSMES
G SFisher
G SHK
G SSMES+SVM
G SFisher+SVM
G SHK+SVM
Fig. 3.
ROC curve comparison on View 2 of
the LFW data set. Each point on the curve
represents the average over the 10 folds of
(false positive rate, true positive rate) for a ﬁxed
threshold.
uses 500 features and achieves a compara-
ble performance of the ”G+FC” method using
131, 072 original features both in terms of ac-
curacy and ROC curve (the accuracy is slightly
lower, but the ROC performance is better). This
phenomena further demonstrates the effective-
ness of the proposed feature selection frame.
Again, SFisher and especially SHK perform
better than SSMES in the sense of both fea-
ture selection and classiﬁcation in this dataset,
which can be attributed to the consideration of
the bias and adaptive margin in the linear model
(2).
6
CONCLUSION
We have presented a novel feature selection
algorithm based on well-grounded sparsity-
enforcing regularization techniques for face
recognition. We cast the feature selection prob-
lem into a combinatorial sparse approximation
problem by enforcing a sparsity penalty term
on the MSE criterion, which can be solved
by greedy methods or convex relaxation meth-
ods. Moreover, we introduced the sparsity con-
strain into the traditional HK procedure and
proposed a sparse HK procedure to obtain si-
multaneously the optimal sparse solution and
the corresponding margin vector of the MSE
criterion. The proposed frame was applied to
select most informative Gabor features for face
recognition and the experimental results on
CAS-PEAL-R1 face database and LFW face
database are favorable to the previous state-of-
the-art Gabor-based methods. Our future work
includes exploring other more effective low-
level face representation and other sophisti-
cated classiﬁcation strategy to produce better
performance.
