manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
Data Assimilation in Chaotic Systems Using Deep
Reinforcement Learning
Mohamad Abed El Rahman Hammoud1, Naila Raboudi1, Edriss S. Titi2,3,
Omar Knio1and Ibrahim Hoteit1
1King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal 23955, Saudi Arabia
2Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB3
0WA, UK
3Department of Mathematics, Texas A & M University, College Station, TX 77843, USA
Key Points:
• Deep reinforcement learning (RL) is introduced for data assimilation
• RL generalizes to new situations unseen during training through actively learn-
ing from the data and system dynamics
• The RL agent allows for nonlinear state-adaptive correction of the forecast using
the observations
• The performance of the proposed RL algorithm surpasses that of the ensemble Kalman
filter (EnKF) with the Lorenz ’63

–1–
arXiv:2401.00916v1  [math.DS]  1 Jan 2024

manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
Abstract
Data assimilation (DA) plays a pivotal role in diverse applications, ranging from climate
predictions and weather forecasts to trajectory planning for autonomous vehicles. A prime
example is the widely used ensemble Kalman filter (EnKF), which relies on linear up-
dates to minimize variance among the ensemble of forecast states. Recent advancements
have seen the emergence of deep learning approaches in this domain, primarily within
a supervised learning framework. However, the adaptability of such models to untrained
scenarios remains a challenge. In this study, we introduce a novel DA strategy that uti-
lizes reinforcement learning (RL) to apply state corrections using full or partial obser-
vations of the state variables. Our investigation focuses on demonstrating this approach
to the chaotic Lorenz ’63 system, where the agent’s objective is to minimize the root-
mean-squared error between the observations and corresponding forecast states. Con-
sequently, the agent develops a correction strategy, enhancing model forecasts based on
available system state observations. Our strategy employs a stochastic action policy, en-
abling a Monte Carlo-based DA framework that relies on randomly sampling the pol-
icy to generate an ensemble of assimilated realizations. Results demonstrate that the de-
veloped RL algorithm performs favorably when compared to the EnKF. Additionally,
we illustrate the agent’s capability to assimilate non-Gaussian data, addressing a signif-
icant limitation of the EnKF.
Plain Language Summary
Reliable forecasts of the state of chaotic systems, such as environmental flows, require
combining observational data and dynamical model outputs through a process called data
assimilation. The ensemble Kalman filter (EnKF) is the most commonly adopted algo-
rithm for this task, however, is subject to some limitations when applied to nonlinear/non-
Gaussian systems. Recently, there has been interest in using deep learning (DL), par-
ticularly within a supervised learning setup, for DA. However, making DL models work
well in new situations that differ from those experienced during training is challenging.
In this work, we propose a new DA approach that leverages reinforcement learning (RL).
RL helps the system make corrections to its predictions based on observed data, even
if the model hasn’t been trained for those specific scenarios. Compared to the state of
the art DA algorithms, RL offers a novel framework for nonlinear corrections of the fore-
cast using the incoming observations. Numerical results show that the proposed RL al-
gorithm outperforms the EnKF and demonstrates the RL agent’s ability at addressing
some shortcomings of the EnKF.
1 Introduction
Assimilating observational data is essential for improving predictability and under-
standing complex dynamics in chaotic and dynamic physical systems. Chaotic dynam-
ical systems, such as those describing climate and weather, involve inherent imperfec-
tions and extreme sensitivity to initial conditions, whereas the observational data avail-
able for such systems often carry significant uncertainties (Eckmann & Ruelle, 1985). To
address the associated challenges, data assimilation (DA) combines real-world observa-
tions with numerical model outputs, continually refining model predictions by aligning
them with newly acquired observations to enhance the accuracy and reliability of the pre-
dictions (Ott et al., 2004). DA techniques are broadly categorized as variational and fil-
tering methods (Le Dimet & Talagrand, 1986; Ghil & Malanotte-Rizzoli, 1991; Lorenc,
2003; Hoteit et al., 2018). The ensemble Kalman filter (EnKF) represents one of the most
popular filtering DA techniques, especially in the context of large-scale nonlinear sys-
tems (Evensen, 2003). Operating within a Bayesian probabilistic framework, the EnKF
squentially splits the filtering (state estimation) process into cycles that alternate be-
tween forecast steps, driven by the system’s dynamical model, and analysis steps, which
–2–

manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
updates the forecast with incoming data (Evensen, 2003). This approach enables Gaussian-
based Monte Carlo (MC) approximations of both state forecast and analysis distribu-
tions through an ensemble of state samples (Hoteit et al., 2008).
EnKF schemes are considered as the gold standard when assimilating uncertain ob-
servations of the system states across diverse fields due to their robustness, capacity to
handle complex and high-dimensional systems, and computational efficiency (Houtekamer
& Mitchell, 1998). However, their applicability is not without constraints, particularly
when the underlying assumptions are compromised. In particular, challenges may arise
from the EnKF’s inherent linear assumption, and the necessity for maintaining a Gaus-
sian distribution within the ensemble, both of which become challenging in the presence
of strong nonlinearities (Kalnay, 2002; Hoteit et al., 2008). Additionally, whereas the Gaus-
sian assumption for both model and observational noise offers convenience, it may not
universally hold in real-world scenarios, thereby limiting EnKF’s performance, especially
when errors deviate significantly from Gaussian patterns. In such cases, it is necessary
to explore alternative approaches that are better suited for these scenarios; e.g. van Leeuwen
(2009).
Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a paradigm of artificial intelligence that deals with
how an agent can learn to make decisions through interactions with an environment, namely
to achieve a specific objective (Recht, 2019). It is inspired by behavioral psychology and
focuses on learning how to take actions in an environment to maximize some notion of
cumulative reward. Within the RL framework, an agent engages in trial-and-error ex-
ploration, testing various actions and observing their outcomes (Mnih et al., 2015). The
agent’s goal is to formulate an optimal strategy, often referred to as a policy, that guides
its actions to maximize the cumulative reward over a time horizon. It is noteworthy to
point out that the RL framework is inherently different from the supervised learning ap-
proaches because the latter require a pre-computed reference database for training, which
in this context consists in minimizing a global objective function (Glorot & Bengio, 2010;
Karniadakis et al., 2021). RL finds extensive applications in domains necessitating dy-
namic control and decision-making capabilities, encompassing fields such as robotics (Kober
et al., 2013), gaming (Mnih et al., 2013; Vinyals et al., 2019), autonomous navigation
(Sallab et al., 2017), fluid dynamics (Novati et al., 2021; Bae & Koumoutsakos, 2022),
and beyond.
In this work, we introduce a novel DA formalism utilizing RL as a strategy to ac-
tively update a nonlinear forecast correction scheme with the incoming data. The RL
agent learns through interactions with the environment, adapting to its changes, and ac-
tively applies nonlinear corrections to handle complex processes. Numerical experiments
were conducted with the Lorenz ’63 chaotic system (Lorenz, 1963), and the RL agent’s
performance was benchmarked against the EnKF algorithm using a large cardinality en-
semble under various experimental conditions. These include tracking a reference solu-
tion and assimilating normally-distributed noisy observations at various noise levels and
observation frequencies. Furthermore, we investigate the performance of the RL agent
at assimilating observations with different noise distribution models, namely uniform,
log-normal and Gaussian noise. We further explore the RL agent’s effectiveness at as-
similiating partial state observations.
The remaining of the manuscript is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the
RL-DA framework. The RL methodology for DA is then described in Section 3, where
a comprehensive overview of the RL framework is first introduced, accompanied by a de-
scription of the Lorenz ’63 system and the EnKF algorithm. Sections 4 and 5 present
our numerical results. Finally, Section 6 summarizes the main conclusions of this study.
–3–

manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
Figure 1.
Schematic of the proposed reinforcement learning-based data assimilation frame-
work using the Lorenz ’63 as the main example. The plot illustrates the Lorenz ’63 solution
trajectory (black curve) with an arbitrary assimilation window start time t (red triangle) and
corresponding end time t
+
δto (green square) when a new observation is available and assimi-
lated. The three dimensional state variables (x) of the model are shown at every model time step
δt (blue circles). At the last time step, the noisy observational data point (y) is shown (inverted
purple triangle) alongside the different evolution trajectories (orange curves) following several
corrections (F(st)) sampled from the policy function πθ(at|st). The policy πθ(at|st) considers as
input state vector the extended state vector composed of the concatenation of the forecast state
variables (x) and their time derivatives ( ˙x) at each time step δt between t and t + δto alongside
the innovation term, defined as the difference between the observation and its correspondent fore-
cast. The concatenation operation is denoted by ⊕, and for the sake of conciseness, concatenation
of x and ˙x at each δt is represented by the sub- and super-scripts of [x, ˙x]. Since a stochastic
policy is considered in the DA framework, an ensemble of F(st) correction terms are sampled
from πθ(at|st) when a noisy observation is available. Note that the state variables might not be
fully observed, hence H projects the forecast onto the observation space. Moreover, the observa-
tion y is considered to be a noisy estimate of the forecast with no restriction on the distribution
of the additive noise.
–4–

manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
2 Reinforcement Learning For Data Assimilation
In RL, agents make sequential decisions to achieve specific goals, with the focus
on maximizing cumulative rewards over time (Sutton & Barto, 2018; Bertsekas, 2019).
This aligns with decision-making scenarios where actions have consequences, and objec-
tives must be met. RL is particularly relevant to control systems (Azouani & Titi, 2014;
Kalantarov & Titi, 2018), where agents learn control policies to influence the behavior
of systems (Silver et al., 2014). The key concept in RL is the trade-off between explo-
ration, where the agent experiments with new actions, and exploitation, where the agent
chooses known actions with high rewards, mirroring real-world decision-making challenges
(Sallab et al., 2017). RL agents learn from feedback, adapt to changing environments,
and generalize knowledge to make decisions in new situations.
DA is an essential process used in scientific fields such as meteorology, oceanogra-
phy, and environmental modeling to guide the state of complex systems with incoming
observations (Ghil & Malanotte-Rizzoli, 1991; Hoteit et al., 2008). It involves merging
observational data with numerical models to enhance predictions once observational in-
formation is available (Kalnay, 2002). This process continuously drives the computed
system state to align with observations, thereby ensuring accurate and robust state es-
timates. DA accounts for model and observational uncertainties, offering more reliable
predictions for chaotic systems, making it indispensable for tasks such as weather fore-
casting (Rabier, 2005) and climate modeling (Pedatella et al., 2014). Hence, adopting
an RL framework for DA is a natural progression in the domain, enabling for a nonlin-
ear correction scheme that is also free from restrictive assumptions on the statistics of
the observations and model.
In RL, an agent exists in an environment that is described by a set of dynamical
rules characterizing its evolution, for example, a system of differential equations (Sutton
& Barto, 2018). The agent’s responsibility is to make decisions affecting its environment
in a way that it maximizes the cumulative reward, or achieves a particular goal. The ul-
timate outcome of the RL’s training procedure is an agent policy πθ(at|st), a mapping
from the observation space to the action space, which is evaluated to actively control the
behavior of the agent at state st in a dynamical system. The policy function is gener-
ally characterized by a neural network parameterized with θ. Policy functions can be cat-
egorized as either deterministic or stochastic; in a deterministic policy, the action with
the highest probability is chosen, whereas a stochastic policy relies on random sampling
to select an action. In the present framework, a stochastic policy was adopted from which
the DA correction term was sampled, where actions are sampled from a Gaussian pol-
icy (Schulman et al., 2017). Hence, after training, a policy function is obtained that could
be used to sample potential correction terms from a distribution that adapts to the agent’s
state, and allowing to generate an ensemble of states via MC sampling. In contrast with
most efforts put for developing efficient DA schemes; eg. (Lermusiaux, 2007; Farchi et
al., 2021; Buizza et al., 2022), the RL machinery relies on a nonlinear neural network to
provide a correction without being restricted to a pre-computed dataset for supervising
its training. Furthermore, the RL agent does not require any assumption on the noise
distribution of the observational errors nor restrictive assumptions on the model.
In this study, the chaotic Lorenz ’63 system of differential equations was consid-
ered to examine the performance of RL at DA for a chaotic dynamical system (Lorenz,
1963). The system describes the solution of a three-dimensional state vector, x = [x, y, z];
it is characterized by a chaotic attractor, where the solution is sensitive to initial con-
ditions and experiences a nonperiodic behavior (Eckmann & Ruelle, 1985; Bakarji et al.,
2023). In this setting, the agent receives information, in the form of an extended state
vector describing the system, denoted by states, that includes the forecast states and their
derivatives xf and ˙xf, respectively, at each model time step δt starting from the time
t of the previous observation till the next observational time step t + δto, and the in-
novation term y−Hxf. Here, H represents the observation operator that projects the
–5–

manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
model forecast x onto the observation space and y denotes a noisy observation of the
system state.
The agent interacts with the environment to change its course of evolution and adapts
to these changes to maximize the cumulative reward, as later defined, gathered over some
period of time (Silver et al., 2014). This interaction is formulated mathematically as:
xa = xf + F (st) ,
(1)
where the corrected state vector, denoted by a superscript a for analysis, xa is the sum
of the model forecast, xf, and the correction term F (st), which is sampled from πθ(at|st).
Note that this form of the update is similar to that of the Kalman Filter and the EnKF
algorithm, however, the latter rely on a linear update term (Kalman, 1960). In the cur-
rent configuration, the RL agent is not provided with statistical information regarding
the noisy observations. Instead, it employs an MC strategy, using an RL agent that em-
ploys random stochastic policy sampling. This approach generates an ensemble of as-
similated solutions, which are subsequently averaged to produce an improved estimate
of the system state, denoted by RL-50 in the following sections.
The training cycle is defined by specifying the reward function (Lillicrap et al., 2015).
We test out several reward functions in our preliminary investigation, where the agent’s
performance was evaluated using the mutual information, negative of the root-mean-squared
error (RMSE) and RMSE−1. While these reward functions are mathematically similar
(Seidler, 1971; Guo et al., 2005), the associated training stability is different. Accord-
ingly, the agent was trained to maximize the negative of the RMSE, which strikes a sat-
isfactory balance between interpretability, computational cost and agent’s performance.
3 Methods
3.1 Reinforcement Learning
The framework for RL involves training an agent through several interactions with
the environment, in the present context, the dynamical system. Training an RL agent
requires a large number of interactions with the environment and consequently a large
unavoidable computational load often several orders of magnitude greater than solving
the underlying differential equations. However, the field of RL has become more acces-
sible in recent times, thanks to open-source libraries like smarties (Novati & Koumout-
sakos, 2019) and stable baselines3 (Raffin et al., 2021), among others. In this work,
we leverage the capabilities of stable baselines3, a high-performance RL software de-
signed to exploit parallel computing, distributing the training process across multiple
computational nodes. In the present configuration, each node simulates a distinct tra-
jectory of the Lorenz ’63 system, providing a large set of agent-environment interactions
that are used to train the agent. In this parallelized setup, each computational node ac-
cumulates experiences by independently interacting with various instances of the envi-
ronment. These experiences are then structured into episodes defined as:
τ = {st, rt, at, st+1}0:T ,
(2)
where τ is the ordered set of interactions across a time horizon, t represents the time at
which the environment is at state st, at is the action the agent takes at that time, rt is
the reward the agent receives from performing action at and st+1 is the subsequent state.
The RL agent’s training objective is to maximize the expected cumulative discounted
reward function, defined as:
–6–

manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
Rt =
T
X
t=0
γtrt,
(3)
where γ ∈[0, 1) is the discount factor. In our specific setting, a smaller value of γ proves
advantageous, given the random noise sampling. This choice of reducing the emphasis
on distant future rewards results in a more stable agent performance.
The policy function πθ is a mapping between the agent’s state and the action space,
which can be structured either as a set of discrete actions or as a probability distribu-
tion function for continuous actions. As previously mentioned, policy functions are ei-
ther deterministic, the action to most likely result in the highest reward is chosen, or stochas-
tic, where actions are randomly sampled from a distribution that is typically approxi-
mated by a surrogate model. Here, the policy πθ is represented as a densely connected
multi-layer perceptron (Chen & Chen, 1995) parameterized by θ. Furthermore, actions
assume continuous values, leading πθ to output a probability distribution over possible
actions. Hence, the agent’s actions can be either sampled from this distribution, allow-
ing the agent to explore the environment and seek potentially rewarding outcomes, oth-
erwise, the action with the highest probability can be chosen.
3.2 Proximal Policy Optimization
In the present framework, we adopt the Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) al-
gorithm (Schulman et al., 2017) and briefly describe it here for completeness. PPO trains
an agent using two key components, each parameterized by distinct neural networks: an
actor network that takes the environment’s state as input and produces the correspond-
ing action, and a critic network that also takes the environment’s state as input and pre-
dicts the discounted reward (Mnih et al., 2016). In our study, both the actor and critic
networks are represented by multi-layer perceptrons, each composed of two hidden lay-
ers, each containing 128 neurons.
The essence of the PPO algorithm revolves around optimizing the actor network
to maximize the cumulative reward obtained by the agent, and the critic network to min-
imize the mean squared error between the predicted and actual expected cumulative re-
wards, starting from a given state. This optimization can be mathematically expressed
through two distinct loss functions. The actor network is optimized by maximizing the
actor’s objective function:
Jactor = E
h
min

qt (θ) ˆAt, clip (qt (θ) , 1 −ϵ, 1 + ϵ) ˆAt
i
,
(4)
where qt(θ) = πθ(at|st)/πold(at|st) is the ratio of the probability of adopting an action
at at state st using πθ to that of the previous policy πold. Furthermore, the present set-
ting relies on policy clipping with an ϵ = 0.2 (Schulman et al., 2017), where qt(θ) ∈
[1 −ϵ, 1 + ϵ]. This policy clipping mechanism helps maintain policy stability during pa-
rameter updates, stabilizing the training process. On the other hand, the critic loss is
given as:
Lcritic = E
h
ˆA2i
,
(5)
where, E is the expectation operator and ˆA is the advantage (Mnih et al., 2016), which
quantifies how favorable the observed outcome of selecting a particular action is com-
pared to the estimated discounted reward of the current state. The advantage is described
as:
ˆA = Vtarget −Vθ,old,
(6)
–7–

manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
where, Vtarget = PT −1
i=0 riγi + γT Vθ,old(sT ) is the discounted reward computed using
the agent’s interactions with the environment and Vθ,old is the discounted reward pre-
dicted by the critic network.
3.3 Lorenz ’63
The Lorenz ’63 is a set of three deterministic ordinary nonlinear differential equa-
tions developed to simulate simplified atmospheric convection (Lorenz, 1963). This sys-
tem is renowned for its manifestation of chaotic behavior, where even minuscule pertur-
bations in initial conditions lead to substantially divergent solution trajectories over time
(Eckmann & Ruelle, 1985). The Lorenz equations have been extensively studied in chaos
theory and nonlinear dynamics, and have been the fundamental benchmark to develop
new data assimilation techniques (Foias et al., 2001; Hayden et al., 2011). The Lorenz
’63 equations are given by:
˙x = σ(y −x),
(7)
˙y = x(ρ −z) −y,
(8)
˙z = xy −βz,
(9)
where, σ, ρ and β are typically positive constants. This system is known to exhibit a chaotic
attractor for σ = 10, ρ = 28 and β = 8/3. In this study, the system of equations were
solved using an 2nd order Runge-Kutta scheme with a time step δt = 0.001, which of-
fers a suitable balance between solution accuracy and computational time for the appli-
cation at hand.
3.4 Data assimilation using Reinforcement Learning
The present study explores a novel data assimilation framework that leverages RL
to assimilate noisy observations of the system states and improve estimates of the sys-
tem states. In this investigation, the environment is represented by the chaotic Lorenz
’63 system (Lorenz, 1963). The RL agent receives noisy information about the system’s
state variables, and its policy, πθ(at|st) that is contingent upon the environment’s state
st takes an action according to the preassigned strategy. The state upon which the agent’s
policy is evaluated consists of the extended vector composed by the concatenation

xf, ˙x
f
t ⊕

xf, ˙x
f
t+δt⊕...

xf, ˙x
f
t+δto⊕
h
yt+δto −Hxf
t+δto
i
. Notably, this selection preserves the
Markovian assumption inherent in the EnKF, as F

x|t+δto
t

= F (x(t + δto)). How-
ever, including forecast information from previous steps significantly enhances training
stability, even though it comes at the cost of a higher dimensional input. This gives rise
to the question of how long back-in-time should forecast states be considered.
In this context, we introduce an RL agent responsible for correcting model fore-
casts of the dynamical system states using the update equation:
xa
t+δto = xf
t+δto + Fθ

x|t+δto
t
, ˙x|t+δto
t
, yt+δto −Hxf
t+δto

,
(10)
where, Fθ represents the RL agent’s policy, parameterized by θ. The policy takes as in-
put the state vector x and the first-order derivatives ˙x at all time steps from t to t +
δto at δt increments, as well as the innovation term y −Hxf. Since a stochastic pol-
icy function is considered, the study examines the performance of a single RL agent by
taking maximum probability action, and the performance of an ensemble of agents by
randomly sampling the policy function for actions.
–8–

manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
3.5 Training the DA agent
The present experimental setup encompasses various hyper-parameters that require
tuning to achieve satisfactory performance. The parameters subjected to tuning include
the learning rate, γ, number of assimilation steps per episode (na,train), total number
of episodes, value function coefficient (vf), gradient clipping coefficient. Experiences have
shown that the performance of a stable agent is most sensitive to γ, vf and gradient clip-
ping.
The process of hyper-parameter optimization commenced with a Latin hypercube
sampling strategy to establish a baseline assessment of the acceptable range of values
for these parameters. Subsequently, the training process is repeated using a new set of
hyperparameters selected from within a finer-scale parameter space. For all experiments
conducted, we employed the ADAM stochastic optimization algorithm (Kingma & Ba,
2017) to optimize the loss function for the parameters of the actor and critic networks.
The parameters utilized for training the agents, which underpin the results presented in
this study, are detailed in Supplementary Table 1.
The RL agent’s training objective centered on maximizing the cumulative rewards
accrued over a specific time horizon. At each assimilation step, the reward was calcu-
lated as the negative RMSE between the observation and the forecast generated by the
preceding action. This choice was made because minimizing the RMSE is equivalent to
maximizing the mutual information between the compared quantities and because the
RMSE is ultimately the measure that is used to evaluate the performance of the agent.
More specifically, since the experiments in this study feature a well-defined reference so-
lution, we report the RMSE of both the RL and EnKF solutions with respect to the noise-
free reference solution. The RMSE hence provides quantitative estimates that help ex-
amine the assimilated solution in terms of forecast and analysis.
3.6 Ensemble Kalman Filter
The EnKF algorithm is commonly employed to estimate a discrete-time state pro-
cess, denoted as x = {xn}n∈N, based on observations from a corresponding process y =
{yn}n∈N. These processes are conventionally connected through a state-space system de-
scribed as follows:
 xt
=
M(xt−1) + ut
yt
=
H(xt) + vt,
,
(11)
where M represents the nonlinear dynamical model, that advances the system state from
time t to t+δt, and Ht the observation operator that projects xt from the state space
onto the observation space. Here, we make the simplifying assumption that H is linear,
although EnKF algorithms can readily accommodate cases with nonlinear H. The noise
terms, u = {ut}t∈N and v = {vt}t∈N are respectively the model and observation pro-
cess noises. The EnKF algorithm assumes ut and vt to follow Gaussian distributions with
zero means and covariances Qt and Rt, respectively. Furthermore, u and v are assumed
to be independent, jointly independent and independent of the initial state x0.
The filtering problem involves estimating the state, xt, based on observations up
to time t. EnKF algorithms are primarily designed to provide a MC approximation of
the system state distribution using an ensemble of system state realizations. From this
ensemble, empirical estimates of the posterior mean state and associated error covari-
ances are derived, typically in the form of sample means and covariances. The process
starts with an analysis ensemble of size Nens denoted as {xa,i
t }
Nens
i=1
available at time t.
Subsequently, the forecast ensemble at the next time step t+δt is computed by advanc-
ing each member xa,i
t−1 forward in time using the dynamical model, described as:
–9–

manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
xf,i
t+δt = M(xa,i
t ) + ηi,
(12)
where ηi ∼N(0, Qt). Upon receiving a new observation yt, each member of the fore-
cast ensemble is adjusted using the Kalman gain Kt to generate the analysis ensemble
{xa,(i)
t
}
Nens
i=1
according to:
xa,i
t
=
xf,i
t
+ Kt(yi
t −Htxf,i
t ),
(13)
Kt
=
Pf
t HT
t (HtPf
t HT
t + Rt)−1,
(14)
where Pf
t denotes the sample forecast error covariance computed from the forecast mem-
bers in (12) and yi
n represents perturbed observations, i.e., yi
t = yt + µi
t with µi
t is a
random noise sampled from the observational error distribution.
4 Tracking Reference Solutions
The RL-DA framework is systematically assessed under different experimental con-
ditions. In the first scenario, an RL agent was trained to track a reference solution us-
ing coarse-in-time, noise-free observations of all state variables. Given the stochastic na-
ture of the agent’s policy function, the assimilated solution was not expected to precisely
match the observations. Rather, the objective here was to investigate whether the cor-
rections could maintain a reasonably close solution in comparison to the reference, and
prevent them from diverging. Three training regimes were explored, involving observa-
tions every 5, 50, and 100 δt, corresponding to δto of 0.005, 0.05, and 0.1 time units, re-
spectively. Evolution curves of the RMSEs of the RL solutions are presented in the top
row of Figure 2. The average RMSE is represented by a solid black line, encircled by a
shaded region denoting one standard deviation (±σ), based on 50 repetitions of the ex-
periment involving different reference solutions. The plots indicate that the RMSE is on
average approximately 0.025 for an assimilation frequency T = δto/δt values of 5 and
50, and increase to 0.05 for T = 100. Furthermore, the top row of Figure 3 illustrates
RL and reference solutions for the z-variable in the Lorenz ’63 system, based on randomly
selected reference trajectories. These curves highlight strong agreement between the RL
solution and the reference, further corroborating the results presented in Figure 2.
5 Assimilating Noisy Observations
In a more realistic scenario, an ensemble of noisy observations are assimilated to
improve the model forecast. This investigation explores the influence of noise levels (σ),
T , statistical noise distribution, and partial state observability on the RL agent’s per-
formance. Moreover, we conduct a comparative analysis by benchmarking the outcomes
of the RL approach with those of the EnKF, which assimilates data from a relatively large
ensemble comprising 50 realizations. To ensure robustness and statistical significance,
each of the RL and EnKF experiments was repeated 50 times using different reference
solutions, providing a statistically significant estimate of the RMSE.
5.1 Noise Level
We examine the scenario of fully observed state available at regular intervals of T =
50, with additive noise drawn from a Gaussian distribution characterized by zero mean
and standard deviation σ. We investigate the influence of varying σ on the assimilated
solution by computing the RMSE for the complete trajectory, encompassing both fore-
cast and analysis phases. We compare the results obtained from a single RL agent, an
average solution derived from 50 distinct RL trajectories with actions randomly sam-
pled from the agent’s policy, and the EnKF solution based on an ensemble comprising
–10–

manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
(a) (N/A, 5, Id, 3x3) 
(b) (N/A, 50, Id, 3x3) 
(c) (N/A, 100, Id, 3x3) 
(d) (𝒩(0, 1), 50, Id, 3x3) 
(e) (𝒩(0, 2), 50, Id, 3x3) 
(f) (𝒩(0, 3), 50, Id, 3x3) 
(j) (𝒩(0, 1), 50, Id, 3x3) 
(k) (ℒ(0, 1), 50, Id, 3x3) 
(l) (𝒰(0, 1), 50, Id, 3x3) 
(g) (𝒩(0, 1), 5, Id, 3x3) 
(h) (𝒩(0, 1), 50, Id, 3x3) 
(i) (𝒩(0, 1), 100, Id, 3x3) 
(m) (𝒩(0, 1), 50, diag(1,0,0)) 
(n) (𝒩(0, 1), 50, diag(1,1,0)) 
(o) (𝒩(0, 1), 50, diag(1,0,1)) 
Figure 2.
Evolution of the mean RMSE (solid lines) and its ±σ (shadowed) based on 50 ex-
periment repetitions. Plotted are results for different experiments (a)-(c) tracking a noise-free
reference solution, and for assimilating noisy observations in the case of (d)-(f) varying noise lev-
els using normally-distributed noise, (e)-(i) different assimilation window lengths, (j)-(l) different
noise distributions and (m)-(o) partial observability. The captions beneath each subplot describes
the experimental condition in the order of noise distribution, δto/δt the observation frequency
and H the observation operator.
–11–

manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
50 realizations. Note that this comparison places the RL agent at a slight disadvantage,
as it was trained without any statistical information about the response of the system
to observation noise. Nonetheless, we believe that the comparison with the EnKF pre-
diction is meaningful as it represents the primary benchmark against which DA algorithms
are evaluated, despite the more suitable comparison with the Kalman Filter. Notably,
our algorithm consistently outperforms the Kalman Filter across all experiments and hence
not shown.
The second row of Figure 2 presents the RMSE evolution over time for the assim-
ilated solution, resulting from RL and EnKF under different σ values. The plots suggest
that, across all σ values considered, the EnKF solution exhibits slightly lower RMSE val-
ues than those of a single RL agent, and slightly larger RMSEs than the RL solution ob-
tained by averaging 50 action realizations. This observation yields two significant insights:
firstly, the potential computational efficiency gain from employing a single RL agent for
DA, reducing computational overhead by a factor of at least Nens, where Nens repre-
sents the ensemble size. Secondly, using a single RL agent with a stochastic policy al-
lows for sampling a diverse set of forecast corrections, yielding a new ensemble of state
estimates that when averaged, generally results in a lower RMSE compared to an EnKF
solution produced using an equivalent ensemble size.
Figure 4 illustrates the transition of the PDF after the correction is made along-
side the distribution of the corrections for the RL and EnKF. The results indicate that
the RL distribution is wider and covers more of the observations points than the EnKF,
meaning that the RL ensemble is richer in terms of information it provides even though
individual realizations perform poorer than the EnKF solution. On the other hand, the
mean of the RL solutions is closer to the reference solution than the average EnKF so-
lution, aligning well with the results obtained earlier. The plot also shows the distribu-
tion of the corrections, indicating that the distribution for the RL corrections is wider
than that of the EnKF and suggesting that the EnKF is conservative when performing
updates. Similar results for the remaining experiments are analyzed in the Supplemen-
tary.
As σ increases, noticeable high-amplitude, abrupt variations in RMSE are observed
in the assimilated solutions, and the time-averaged RMSE increases. In the second row
of Figure 3, we present the RL and reference evolution curves corresponding to the z-
variable. The results demonstrate that the RL solution closely follows the reference so-
lution for all σ values considered. However, as σ increases, slight deviations between the
RL solution and the reference become evident, particularly at the peaks and troughs of
the curves. Nevertheless, the RL agent successfully assimilates noisy data, at high noise
levels.
5.2 Assimilation Frequency
Observational data may often become available at varying time frequencies, neces-
sitating a DA scheme capable of accommodating different observation rates. In light of
this requirement, we trained an RL agent to assimilate noisy data for distinct T , thereby
examining the influence of high-frequency (T = 5), medium-frequency (T = 50), and
low-frequency (T = 100) observations. The middle row of Figure 2 depicts the progres-
sion of RMSE under varying T . Across all considered T , the results suggest that a sin-
gle RL agent exhibits slightly larger RMSE compared to those achieved by the 50-member
EnKF solution. For all cases, the 50 RL agent-averaged solution demonstrates a lower
time-averaged RMSE in contrast to the 50-member averaged EnKF solution. This in-
dicates that even when the RL agents do not communicate among each other, an MC
averaged solution achieves lower RMSEs than the EnKF solution with 50 members. Nev-
ertheless, these results underscore the need to develop more sophisticated RL approaches,
–12–

manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
(a) (N/A, 5, Id, 3x3) 
(b) (N/A, 50, Id, 3x3) 
(c) (N/A, 100, Id, 3x3) 
(d) (𝒩(0, 1), 50, Id, 3x3) 
(e) (𝒩(0, 2), 50, Id, 3x3) 
(f) (𝒩(0, 3), 50, Id, 3x3) 
(j) (𝒩(0, 1), 50, Id, 3x3) 
(k) (ℒ(0, 1), 50, Id, 3x3) 
(l) (𝒰(0, 1), 50, Id, 3x3) 
(g) (𝒩(0, 1), 5, Id, 3x3) 
(h) (𝒩(0, 1), 50, Id, 3x3) 
(i) (𝒩(0, 1), 100, Id, 3x3) 
(m) (𝒩(0, 1), 50, diag(1,0,0)) 
(n) (𝒩(0, 1), 50, diag(1,1,0)) 
(o) (𝒩(0, 1), 50, diag(1,0,1)) 
Figure 3.
Evolution of the z-variable for a sample RL solution (solid blue lines) and corre-
sponding reference (dashed red line). Plotted are results for different experiments (a)-(c) tracking
a noise-free reference solution, and for assimilating noisy observations in the case of (d)-(f) vary-
ing noise levels using normally-distributed noise, (e)-(i) different assimilation window lengths,
(j)-(l) different noise distributions and (m)-(o) partial observability. The captions beneath each
subplot describes the experimental condition in the order of noise distribution, T the observation
frequency and H the observation operator.
–13–

manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
potentially utilizing multi-agent RL (Albrecht et al., 2023), that incorporate ensemble
information when performing the correction step.
5.3 Noise Distribution
A major limitation of the EnKF is its reliance on normally-distributed observations
of system states. We investigate the impact of different statistical distributions of ob-
servations on the DA performance of the RL agent. Specifically, we examine cases in-
volving unbiased standard Gaussian, strongly positively biased standard log-normal, and
weakly positively biased standard uniform observational noise. The 4th row of Figure
2 presents the evolution curves of the RMSE for various observational noise distributions.
The plots illustrate that for the case of standard Gaussian noise, both the single RL agent
and EnKF solutions effectively assimilate noisy observational data with a slightly lower
RMSE value achieved by the EnKF solution. On the other hand, the 50-realization av-
eraged RL solution yields a lower RMSE compared to the 50-member EnKF solution.
For log-normal and uniform noise distributions, the EnKF experiences large errors when
assimilating noisy observations. Conversely, a single RL agent successfully assimilates
these noisy observations, providing an assimilated solution that is close to the reference
solution. Further improvements are observed when averaging the solutions obtained through
policy sampling across 50 different realizations. The penultimate row of Figure 3 presents
the RL and reference evolution curves for the z-variable. The plots indicate that the RL
solution follows the reference solution reasonably well for all the noise distributions that
were considered. The curves clearly illustrate that the RL agent is able to assimilate non-
Gaussian noisy observations even when observations are perturbed with biased noise.
5.4 Partial Observability
The practicality of DA lies in its ability to assimilate observations that partially
or even indirectly characterize the evolution of state variables within a dynamical sys-
tem. This is particularly valuable when the full system state cannot be directly observed,
such as in real-world climate and weather applications. To examine this setting, an RL
agent was trained to assimilate noisy observations of select state variables–specifically,
the x-variable alone, the x- and y-variables, and the x- and z-variables. The final row
of Figure 2 portrays the evolution of RMSE of the aforementioned experiments. The curves
demonstrate that, in all cases, the RL agent provides a suitable correction that adequately
guides the evolution of the full state. It is noteworthy that the RMSE of the solution ob-
tained using a single RL agent is comparable to, albeit slightly higher than that of the
EnKF with an ensemble of 50 realizations. As observed in previous experiments, the av-
eraged RL solution exhibits a lower average RMSE compared to the EnKF. To provide
a tangible illustration of the assimilated solution’s behavior, the final row of Figure 3 presents
curves depicting the temporal evolution of the z-variable for the case with partial sys-
tem states observability. These plots depict that the RL assimilated solution generally
tracks the reference, with occasional discrepancies that typically occur at the peaks and
troughs, as expected.
6 Discussion
This paper introduces RL as a novel approach for learning DA corrections. Through
extensive experimentation on the Lorenz ’63 dynamical system across various scenarios,
we showcase the potential of the proposed approach. Our investigation encompasses both
deterministic and stochastic settings, where RL agents are adeptly trained to track ref-
erence solutions and assimilate noisy data under varying conditions of assimilation win-
dow lengths, observational noise distributions, noise levels, and observed state variables.
–14–

manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
(a) (𝒩(0, 1), 50, Id, 3x3) 
(b) (𝒩(0, 2), 50, Id, 3x3) 
(c) (𝒩(0, 3), 50, Id, 3x3) 
Figure 4.
PDFs of the z-variable before (top) and after (middle) the correction step at time
t = 45 alongside the PDF of the correction (bottom) for the EnKF and RL solutions. The plots
are presented for the experiment analyzing the sensitivity of the data assimilation algorithms to
noise level.
The proposed RL-DA framework offers a paradigm shift by introducing new de-
grees of freedom to forecast-correction schemes, allowing for a nonlinear update term that
satisfies a predefined optimal criteria, such as minimizing the root-mean-squared error
in this study, hence, facilitating the discovery of novel correction strategies that are in-
formed by the dynamical system through agent-environment interaction experiences. Fur-
thermore, RL imparts robustness to correction strategies, rendering them stable even in
the presence of noisy perturbations and compounding errors. In this work, the RL agent
minimizes the ℓ2 norm of the innovation term, a formulation demonstrated to be equiv-
alent to maximizing the mutual information between observed state variables and their
forecast counterparts. Notably, this framework eliminates the need for a reference database
as opposed to supervised learning approaches, which are commonly established through
the assimilation of noisy observational data using methods such as the EnKF or vari-
ational methods (Talagrand & Courtier, 1987).
However, incorporating RL into DA raises critical questions warranting further ex-
ploration. While we employed the negative of the ℓ2 norm of the innovation term as the
reward function in this study, more sophisticated functions considering system dynam-
ics or ensemble information could potentially enhance the RL agent’s performance. More-
over, since the RL agent is trained using the system of differential equations describing
the evolution of a dynamical system, we speculate that this would force the agent to adapt
and overcome model errors, when present. An overarching concern pertains to the phys-
ical validity of RL-derived solutions, which remains an open, fundamental question as
is the case with other data-driven approaches when applied to physics-based applications.
Although we did not directly encounter violations of physical constraints in our present
setup, this avenue remains unexplored and in need for further exploration.
7 Open Research
All software and data used in the study will be made available upon acceptance
at https://github.com/mhammoud115/DA-RL.
