A Sneak Attack on Segmentation of Medical
Images Using Deep Neural Network Classiﬁers
Shuyue Guan
Department of Biomedical Engineering
The George Washington University
Washington DC, USA

https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3779-9368
Murray Loew
Department of Biomedical Engineering
The George Washington University
Washington DC, USA

Abstract—Instead of using current deep-learning segmentation
models (like the UNet and variants), we approach the segmenta-
tion problem using trained Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
classiﬁers, which automatically extract important features from
images for classiﬁcation. Those extracted features can be visu-
alized and formed into heatmaps using Gradient-weighted Class
Activation Mapping (Grad-CAM). This study tested whether the
heatmaps could be used to segment the classiﬁed targets. We
also proposed an evaluation method for the heatmaps; that is,
to re-train the CNN classiﬁer using images ﬁltered by heatmaps
and examine its performance. We used the mean-Dice coefﬁcient
to evaluate segmentation results. Results from our experiments
show that heatmaps can locate and segment partial tumor areas.
But use of only the heatmaps from CNN classiﬁers may not be
an optimal approach for segmentation. We have veriﬁed that the
predictions of CNN classiﬁers mainly depend on tumor areas,
and dark regions in Grad-CAM’s heatmaps also contribute to
classiﬁcation.
Index Terms—segmentation, convolutional neural network,
classiﬁcation, Grad-CAM, heatmap, deep learning, explainable
artiﬁcial intelligence
I. INTRODUCTION
For image classiﬁcation, the Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) has performed well in many tasks [1]. Traditional clas-
siﬁcation methods have relied on manually extracted features;
alternatively, the CNN automatically extracts the features from
images for classiﬁcation [2]. To visualize extracted features
from a CNN model, recent techniques such as the Grad-
CAM [3] can weight and combine the features to display
heatmaps of targets on input images, and the targets are the
basis of classiﬁcation. Thus, such techniques provide a way to
ﬁnd the targets of classiﬁcation from a trained classiﬁer.
Since the CNN has been applied to many medical image
classiﬁcation problems [4], it will be meaningful if we could
gain more knowledge or information about the objects of clas-
siﬁcation from extracted features of theirs. The development
of deep learning, moreover, has made signiﬁcant contributions
to medical image segmentation and become a research focus
in the ﬁeld of medical image segmentation [5]. Thus, our
question is whether it is possible to segment targets from a
trained classiﬁer of the targets.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 1: Results of Grad-CAM applied to Xception model
with input of an elephants image. (a) is the input image.
(b) is original image masked by Grad-CAM heatmap (using
‘Parula’ colormap) of the prediction on this input. (c) is the
Grad-CAM heatmap mask using gray-scale colormap. (d) is
original image ﬁltered by the heatmap mask.
If the features extracted from a trained classiﬁer (CNN)
model of targets could be used to segment the targets well,
it will beneﬁt medical image segmentation. For example, we
could segment breast cancer areas by re-using a classiﬁer for
breast cancer detection without training a new segmentation
model. A potential advantage of such segmentation is that
the objects in classiﬁcation tasks are often more difﬁcult to
segment from the background because their boundaries are
not as apparent as in many segmentation tasks.
Figure 1 shows an example of how the heatmap from the
Grad-CAM method segments the targets. We input an image
of African elephants (Figure 1a) into the Xception [6] neural
network model pre-trained by the ImageNet database [7].
The pre-trained Xception model can classify images including
arXiv:2201.02771v2  [eess.IV]  28 Jan 2022

1000-class targets1. Its top-1 prediction result of the input
image (Figure 1a) is ‘African_elephant’. Then, we apply
Grad-CAM to show the heatmap of this prediction; results are
shown in Figure 1. Finally, the input image ﬁltered by the
heatmap mask can be considered as a segmentation result of
the targets segmented from the background (grass and sky).
This example shows that we can achieve a segmentation
result without training a segmentation model but by using a
trained classiﬁer. In this study, we applied this method to mam-
mographic images for breast tumor segmentation. We used
breast tumor images from the DDSM database and various
CNN-based classiﬁer models (e.g., Xception). Since DDSM
describes the location and boundary of each abnormality by a
chain-code, we were able to extract the true segmentations of
tumor regions. We used the regions of interest instead of entire
images to train CNN classiﬁers. After training the two-class
(with- or without-tumor) classiﬁer, we applied Grad-CAM to
the classiﬁer for tumor region segmentation. We expect that
this will be a beneﬁcial method for general medical image
segmentation; e.g., we could segment breast cancer areas by re-
using a classiﬁer developed for breast cancer detection without
training a new segmentation model from scratch.
A. Related works
This study – that to segment breast tumors by re-using
trained classiﬁers – is inspired by applications of explain-
ability in medical imaging. A main category of explainability
methods is attribution-based methods, which are widely used
for interpretability of deep learning [8]. The commonly used
algorithms of attribution-based methods for medical images
are saliency maps [9], activation maps [10], CAM [11]/Grad-
CAM [3], Gradient [12], SHAP [13], et cetera.
In this study, we examined how the attribution maps (the
heatmaps) generated from the Grad-CAM algorithm can con-
tribute to the segmentation of breast tumors. The visualization
of the class-speciﬁc units [11], [14] for CNN classiﬁers is used
to locate the most discriminative components for classiﬁcation
in the image. The authors of Grad-CAM also evaluated the
localization capability of Grad-CAM [3] by bounding boxes
containing the objects. But those methods provide coarse
boundaries around the targets, and these studies have not
provided further quantitative analysis about the differences
between predicted and real boundaries of the targets. Thus,
they are considered to be methods for localization rather
than segmentation. For weakly-supervised image segmenta-
tion [3], [15], CAM/Grad-CAM’s heatmaps can be computed
and combined with other segmentation models, such as UNet
CNNs [16], [17], to improve segmentation performance. We
are aware of no similar study that has merely applied the
Grad-CAM algorithm by trained CNN classiﬁers to a speciﬁc
application of medical image segmentation, without using
any other segmentation models or approaches. We quantita-
tively analyzed the differences between predicted boundaries
from Grad-CAM and real boundaries of the targets, and
1https://image-net.org/challenges/LSVRC/2014/browse-synsets
we discussed the relationships between the performance of
segmentation and classiﬁcation based on the CNN classiﬁer.
II. METHODS
A. Grad-CAM method
To compute the class activation maps (CAM), Zhou et
al. [11] proposed to insert a global average pooling (GAP)
layer between the last convolutional layer (feature maps) and
the output layer in CNNs. The size of each 2-D feature map
is [x, y], and a value in the k-th feature map is f k
i,j. Suppose
the last convolutional layer contains n feature maps, then the
GAP layer will have n nodes for each extracted feature map.
From the deﬁnition, the value of the k-th node is the average
value of the k-th feature map:
F k = 1
xy
X
i∈{1,2,··· ,x}
j∈{1,2,··· ,y}
f k
i,j
(1)
After inserting the GAP layer, to obtain the weights of
connections from the GAP layer to the output layer requires
to re-train the whole network with training data. wc
k is the
weight of connection from the k-th node in the GAP layer to
the c-th node in the output layer (for the c-th class). Thus, the
CAM of c-th class is:
CAMc[i, j] =
n
X
k=1
wc
k · f k
i,j
(2)
The size of CAM is the same as that of the feature maps.
The authors (Selvaraju et al. [3]) of Grad-CAM noted that
re-training is not necessary. They applied the back-propagation
gradient and chain rule to calculate the connection weights wc
k
instead of re-training.
The value of the c-th node in output layer Y c is the score
of the target classiﬁcation for the c-th class:
Y c =
n
X
k=1
wc
k · F k
(3)
By taking the partial derivative of F k:
∂Y c
∂F k = wc
k
(4)
By the chain rule:
wc
k = ∂Y c
∂F k = ∂Y c
∂f k
i,j
· ∂f k
i,j
∂F k
(5)
From the Equation 1, by taking the partial derivative of f k
i,j:
∂F k
∂f k
i,j
= 1
xy
(6)
Therefore, by taking Equations 5 and 6 to eliminate the F k:
wc
k = ∂Y c
∂f k
i,j
· xy
(7)

True boundary
Grad-CAM
Left breast
Right breast
abnormal ROI
normal ROI
CNN Classifier
Test abnormal ROI
CAM
Compare
Dice
Tumor mask
Fig. 2: Flowchart of the Experiment #1. The true boundaries of tumor regions in abnormal ROIs are provided by the DDSM
database.
Finally, putting Equations 7 and 2 together, they ﬁnd the way
to compute the CAM for c-th class without really inserting
and training a GAP layer. Thus, it is called Grad-CAM:
Grad-CAMc[i, j] = xy ·
n
X
k=1
∂Y c
∂f k
i,j
· f k
i,j
(8)
The size of CAM (Grad-CAM) equals the size of feature
maps: [x, y], which is usually smaller than the size of input
images. For comparison, resizing is commonly applied to
CAMs to enlarge their size to be the same as input images.
B. Proposed experiments
We have two experiments. In the ﬁrst experiment, we used
the regions of interest (ROIs) of breast cancer images from
the DDSM [18] to train two-class (with/without tumors) CNN
classiﬁers. ROIs with tumors are called abnormal ROIs and
ROIs without tumors are called normal ROIs. After training the
two-class classiﬁer using these normal and abnormal ROIs, we
will apply Grad-CAM and the classiﬁer to test abnormal ROIs
to segment tumor regions. Then, we will use the true boundary
of the test whether abnormal ROIs can be used to evaluate
segmentation results. Figure 2 shows the ﬂowchart of this
experiment. The goal of the Experiment #1 is to verify how
well the medical targets are segmented by a trained classiﬁer
using Grad-CAM algorithm.
By using the Grad-CAM algorithm, the trained CNN clas-
siﬁers can generate CAMs from both normal and abnormal
ROIs. These CAMs can be considered as masks that indicate
the areas that are important to classiﬁcation. In the second
experiment, we trained CNN classiﬁers from scratch by only
using information of those areas. The training data are ROIs
ﬁltered by CAMs. It is an evaluation method for the CAMs:
to re-train the CNN classiﬁers using images ﬁltered by CAMs
and examine their performance. By combining with the Ex-
periment #1, the steps of Experiment #2 are (Figure 3):
• To train two-class classiﬁers with normal and abnormal
ROIs.
• To generate CAMs by inputting these ROIs in trained
classiﬁers using Grad-CAM algorithm.
• To create CAM-ﬁltered ROIs: resize CAMs (heatmaps)
to the same size of ROIs and convert their range of
values to [0, 1]; then, multiplied by the original ROIs.
The important areas to classiﬁcation are close to 1 in
CAMs thus, they will be kept in CAM-ﬁltered ROIs.
• To train the same two-class classiﬁers (same models)
from scratch again by CAM-ﬁltered ROIs.
The goals of the Experiment #2 are to examine 1) whether
Grad-CAM can really recognize the areas in the images that
are important to classiﬁcation; 2) whether the predictions of
CNN classiﬁers really depend on tumor areas.
ROIs filtered 
by CAMs
ROIs
CAMs
×
CNN Classifiers
Train
Grad-CAM
Train, Input
Fig. 3: Flowchart of the Experiment #2. The normal and
abnormal ROIs are used twice to train the CNN classiﬁers and
then to generate CAMs by trained classiﬁers using Grad-CAM
algorithm. The CNN classiﬁers to be trained by CAM-ﬁltered
ROIs are the same CNN models (same structures) as trained
by the original ROIs before but trained from scratch again.
For comparison, we additionally trained these CNN
classiﬁers by the truth-mask-ﬁltered ROIs. To create truth-
mask-ﬁltered ROIs is similar to generating the CAM-ﬁltered
ROIs. For abnormal ROIs, we multiply ROIs by their cor-
responding tumor masks so that only the tumor areas are

kept and the background (non-tumor area) is removed (pixel
values = 0). For normal ROIs, since there is no tumor area,
we multiply ROIs by randomly selected tumor masks from
abnormal cases, for the purpose of making normal/abnormal
ROIs have similar shapes (outlines).
III. MATERIALS
A. Mammography dataset
Mammography is the process of using low-energy X-rays to
examine the human breast for diagnosis and screening. There
are two main angles to get the X-ray images: the cranio-
caudal (CC) view and the mediolateral-oblique (MLO) view.
In this study, we used mammographic images from the Digital
Database for Screening Mammography (DDSM) [18]. The
DDSM database contains approximately 2620 cases in 16-
bit gray-value: 695 normal cases, 1925 abnormal cases (914
malignant/cancers cases, 870 benign cases and 141 benign
without callback) with locations and boundaries of abnormal-
ities. Each case includes four images representing the left and
right breasts in CC and MLO views.
B. Region of Interest (ROI)
We ﬁrstly downloaded mammographic images from DDSM
database and cropped the Region of Interest (ROI) by given
abnormal areas as ground truth information. Images in DDSM
are compressed in LJPEG format. To decompress and convert
these images, we used the DDSM Utility [19]. We converted
all images in DDSM to PNG format. DDSM describes the
location and boundary of actual abnormality by chain-codes,
which are recorded in OVERLAY ﬁles for each breast image
containing abnormalities. The DDSM Utility also provides the
tool to read boundary information and display them for each
image having abnormalities. Since the DDSM Utility tools run
on MATLAB, we implemented all pre-processing tasks using
MATLAB.
1
2
3
4
5
6
10 4
Fig. 4: The ROI (left) is cropped from an original image (right)
from DDSM dataset. The red boundary shows the tumor area.
The ROI is larger than the size of tumor area because of
padding.
We used the ROIs instead of entire images to train CNN
classiﬁers. These ROIs are cropped rectangle-shape images
(Figure 4) and obtained by:
• For abnormal ROIs from images containing abnormal-
ities, they are the minimum rectangle-shape areas sur-
rounding the whole given ground truth boundaries with
padding.
• For normal ROIs, they were cropped on the other side of a
breast having abnormal ROI and the normal ROI was the
same size (with padding) and location as the abnormal
ROI on different breast side. If both left and right breasts
having abnormal ROIs and their locations overlapping,
we discarded this sample. Since in most cases, only one
side of breast has tumor and the area and shape of left and
right breast are similar; thus, normal ROIs and abnormal
ROIs have similar black background areas and scaling.
• All ROIs are converted to 8-bit gray-value.
• All ROIs are only from the CC views.
The padding is added to all ROIs in order to vary the
locations of tumors in abnormal ROIs and to avoid excessive
proportion of the tumor area in a ROI. ROIs are larger than the
sizes of tumor areas because of padding. As shown in Figure 5,
the padding is added by some randomness and depended on
the size of tumors:
• Width: randomly adding 10%-30% of tumor width on left
and right sides.
• Height: similar as width.
w
h
0.1w~0.3w
0.1h~0.3h
Fig. 5: The padding is added to four sides of ROIs by some
randomness and depended on the size of tumor area.
After collecting ROIs, as shown in Figure 6, we have normal
ROIs and abnormal (tumor) ROIs to apply classiﬁcation (using
binary labels), and could have real tumor masks to apply
segmentation.
Abnormal 
(tumor) ROI
Normal ROI
Tumor mask
True boundary
Fig. 6: Examples of ROIs. The tumor mask is binary image
created from the tumor ROI and truth boundary of the tumor
area.

C. Classiﬁer models
To train CNN classiﬁers by normal and abnormal ROIs
and to generate CAMs using Grad-CAM algorithm, we
used six CNN models. They are: NASNetMobile [20], Mo-
bileNetV2 [21], DenseNet121 [22], ResNet50V2 [23], Xcep-
tion [6], and InceptionV3 [24].
IV. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
Except for cropping ROIs, experiments are implemented by
codes written in the Python language2.
A. Training CNN classiﬁers
Our dataset has 325 abnormal (tumor) ROIs and 297 normal
ROIs in total. To train the CNN classiﬁers, we divide the
dataset into 80% for training and 20% for validation. The
framework of deep learning models is Keras3. Every CNN
model is trained about 200 epochs with EarlyStopping4
setting. The classiﬁer models having the best validation (ac-
curacy) performance during each training were saved.
B. Obtaining CAMs and comparison
To input an abnormal ROI into the trained CNN classiﬁer
by using Grad-CAM algorithm, we can obtain a CAM for that
ROI. Then, we resized the CAM to the size same as the input
ROI. The CAMs are gray-value image, and the truth tumor
masks we have are binary image. Thus, we applied the mean-
Dice metric to compare CAMs and tumor masks.
The Dice coefﬁcient [25], [26] of two binary images A and
B is:
Dice(A, B) = 2 × |A ∩B|
|A| + |B|
To calculate Dice coefﬁcient requires both images are bi-
nary; thus, we need to transform the CAMs from gray-value
([0, 255]) to binary ({0, 1}). Suppose B is the CAM, it can
be binarized by setting a threshold (t): Bt(B > t) = 1 and
Bt(B ≤t) = 0, where Bt is the binarized CAM. Then, the
mean-Dice metric is deﬁned:
mean-Dice(A, B) =
1
256 ·
255
X
t=0
Dice(A, Bt)
(9)
C. Result of Experiment #1
We report the best validation accuracy (val acc) and av-
eraged mean-Dice (Dice) of Experiment #1 (described in
Section II-B and Figure 2) for each CNN classiﬁer in Table I.
The averaged mean-Dice is calculated using all 325 abnormal
(tumor) ROIs. Figure 7 shows CAMs of one tumor ROI
generated by using trained CNN classiﬁers and Grad-CAM
algorithm.
As shown in the result, CAMs from Xception overlap
the most regions of true tumor masks. But CAMs from
DenseNet121 and MobileNetV2 almost do not cover the true
2Papers, codes and additional material can be found at the ﬁrst author’s
website linked up with the ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3779-9368
3https://keras.io/api/applications/
4https://keras.io/api/callbacks/early stopping/
tumor regions. We could see from Figure 7, heatmaps (CAMs)
of the two classiﬁers highlight the corners and outer areas
of images instead of the tumor regions. Although CAMs
from DenseNet121 and MobileNetV2 have very small Dice
values with true tumor areas, they still have good classiﬁcation
performance. Thus, the result leads to two questions:
1) Can Grad-CAM really recognize the important areas in
the images to classiﬁcation?
2) Do the predictions of CNN classiﬁers really depend on
tumor areas?
Experiment #2 is proposed to examine the two questions.
TABLE I: Result of Experiment #1. Descending sort by
val acc.
Classiﬁer
val acc
Dice
InceptionV3
0.872
0.256
DenseNet121a
0.872
0.030
Xception
0.856
0.435
NASNetMobile
0.848
0.353
MobileNetV2a
0.840
0.034
ResNet50V2
0.840
0.365
aThese classiﬁers have very small Dice values.
Tumor ROI
Tumor mask
Xception
DenseNet121
ResNet50V2
MobileNetV2
NASNetMobile
InceptionV3
CAMs
Fig. 7: Result of Experiment #1. The ﬁrst row shows one of
the abnormal (tumor) ROIs and its truth mask. Other rows
show the CAMs of this ROI generated by using trained CNN
classiﬁers and Grad-CAM algorithm.
D. Result of Experiment #2
In addition, we add the best validation accuracy of CNN
classiﬁers trained by the CAM-ﬁltered ROIs (CAM val acc)
and by truth-mask-ﬁltered ROIs (mask val acc), which are

described in Section II-B and Figure 3, to the result in Table II.
It is extended from Table I and descending sort by Dice. And,
we plot the Dice and CAM val acc for the six CNN classiﬁers
in Figure 8.
TABLE II: Result of Experiment #2. Descending sort by Dice.
Classiﬁer
val acc
Dice
CAM val acc
mask val acc
Xception
0.856
0.435
0.816
0.880
ResNet50V2
0.840
0.365
0.792
0.880
NASNetMobile
0.848
0.353
0.768
0.872
InceptionV3
0.872
0.256
0.776
0.904
MobileNetV2
0.840
0.034
0.736
0.872
DenseNet121
0.872
0.030
0.704
0.896
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Dice
CAM_val_acc
Fig. 8: Plots of Dice and CAM val acc for the six CNN
classiﬁers in Table II.
As shown in Figure 8, in general, training on ROIs ﬁltered
by CAMs covering more tumor areas (higher Dice values)
leads to better classiﬁcation performance (CAM val acc).
InceptionV3 model is an exception: its Dice is smaller than
NASNetMobile’s but it has a higher CAM val acc than
NASNetMobile. The reason may be that InceptionV3 has a
better classiﬁcation capability than NASNetMobile because
1) the parameters in InceptionV3 are about ﬁve times of the
parameters in NASNetMobile5; 2) Table II shows InceptionV3
has higher val acc and mask val acc than NASNetMobile.
For all CNN classiﬁers, training on ROIs ﬁltered by truth
tumor masks (Figure 9a) leads to the best classiﬁcation perfor-
mance (Table II, mask val acc), even better than training on
original ROIs. Using truth-mask-ﬁltered ROIs is better than
CAM-ﬁltered ROIs simply because truth-mask-ﬁltered ROIs
contain the whole tumor areas (Dice = 1). And, the reason
that using truth-mask-ﬁltered ROIs is better than original ROIs
5https://keras.io/api/applications/
might be that original ROIs contain some irrelative informa-
tion interrupting classiﬁcation. Such result indicates that the
classiﬁcation depends on tumor areas more than other areas.
To conﬁrm this conclusion, we trained InceptionV3 on ROIs
ﬁltered by inverse truth tumor masks (Figure 9b). The inverse-
mask-ﬁltered ROIs exactly exclude the tumor areas (Dice
= 0). The best validation accuracy of InceptionV3 trained
by inverse-mask-ﬁltered ROIs is 0.616. Comparing with the
CAM val acc (0.776), val acc (0.872), and mask val acc
(0.904) of InceptionV3, ROIs containing smaller tumor areas
lead to worse classiﬁcation performance.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 9: Examples of truth-mask-ﬁltered (a) and inverse-mask-
ﬁltered (b) ROIs from the case shown in Figure 7.
V. DISCUSSIONS
The results of Experiment #1 show that the best segmen-
tation from Grad-CAM method is 0.435 (averaged mean-
Dice) by the Xception model. Such results indicate CAMs
may not perform segmentation well for binary-classiﬁcation
problems because the highlighted area (hot region) on the
CAM is almost the same for all CAMs (Figure 10). The
CNN classiﬁers may select some ﬁxed areas that are best
for classiﬁcation. Thus, these classiﬁers achieve a good clas-
siﬁcation performance but their CAMs are not optimal for
segmentation. In addition, the requirements of segmentation
and classiﬁcation are different: segmentation is based on local
(pixel-wise) decisions but classiﬁcation is based on a global
decision. The decision of classiﬁcation may depend on part of
the target-object and/or other parts outside of the target-object.
Therefore, only use of CAMs from CNN classiﬁers may not
be an optimal approach for segmentation; instead, to combine
CAMs with other segmentation methods can be a promising
direction [16], [17].
Experiment #2 veriﬁed that the predictions of CNN classi-
ﬁers mainly depend on tumor areas. The Grad-CAM algorithm
can recognize some of the important (tumor) areas to classi-
ﬁcation but its performance depends on classiﬁer models. As
shown by the DenseNet121 in Table II and Figure 7, its CAMs
have very small Dice values with true tumor areas but the
model still has a good classiﬁcation performance. This implies
that the dark regions in CAMs also contribute to classiﬁcation.
A. Future works
This study may raise other questions and discover the
starting points for future studies to make progress in the
understanding of deep learning. The Grad-CAM is not the only

Fig. 10: Some tumor ROIs and their CAMs from Xception.
method to generate the heatmap that reﬂects the basis of classi-
ﬁcation. In future works, we would test other techniques, such
as Saliency map [9], SHAP [13], and Activation map [10],
to create segmentation and make comparison. We found the
dark-regions in CAMs from Grad-CAM also contribute to
classiﬁcation; thus, we wonder if some other techniques could
solve this drawback.
Since the performance of Grad-CAM depends on classiﬁer
models, we would ask:
• What CNN architectures/types are good for segmentation
by Grad-CAM? And why?
• How do the bottom layers (fully-connected layers, layers
after the last convolutional layer) in CNN models affect
the CAMs?
And for weakly-supervised image segmentation [3], [15],
CAMs can be referred and combined with other segmentation
models, such as UNet CNNs [16], [17]. More works could
be done to fuse CAMs and segmentation models/methods to
improve their performance.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In this study, we found the best segmentation from the
Grad-CAM algorithm is 0.435 (averaged mean-Dice) by the
Xception model. The Grad-CAM algorithm can recognize
some of the important (tumor) areas to classiﬁcation but its
performance depends on classiﬁer models. It indicates that
the use of only Grad-CAM to train two-class CNN classiﬁers
may not be an optimal approach for segmentation; instead,
to combine Grad-CAM with other segmentation methods
could be a promising direction. In addition, we have veriﬁed
that the predictions of CNN classiﬁers mainly depend on
tumor areas, and dark regions in Grad-CAM’s heatmaps also
contribute to classiﬁcation. We also proposed an evaluation
method for the heatmaps; that is, to re-train and examine the
performance of a CNN classiﬁer that uses images ﬁltered by
heatmaps.
