Learning Overlapping Representations for the Estimation of
Individualized Treatment Eﬀects
Yao Zhang
Alexis Bellot
Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge
University of Cambridge
The Alan Turing Institute
University of Cambridge, UCLA
The Alan Turing Institute
Abstract
The choice of making an intervention depends
on its potential beneﬁt or harm in compar-
ison to alternatives.
Estimating the likely
outcome of alternatives from observational
data is a challenging problem as all outcomes
are never observed, and selection bias pre-
cludes the direct comparison of diﬀerently
intervened groups. Despite their empirical
success, we show that algorithms that learn
domain-invariant representations of inputs
(on which to make predictions) are often inap-
propriate, and develop generalization bounds
that demonstrate the dependence on domain
overlap and highlight the need for invertible
latent maps. Based on these results, we de-
velop a deep kernel regression algorithm and
posterior regularization framework that sub-
stantially outperforms the state-of-the-art on
a variety of benchmarks data sets.
1
Introduction
Counterfactual estimation poses the question of what
would have been the outcome, if a diﬀerent intervention
had been applied. In order to make decisions in complex
domains, making predictions on the causal eﬀects of
diﬀerent actions and how these may vary across individ-
uals is critical. In this paper we focus on the problem of
making these predictions based on observational data,
which is increasingly available in many domains such as
medicine, public policy and advertising. In this setting,
past actions, outcomes and context are available, but
not knowledge of the treatment assignment policy - we
do not know why a given individual was intervened
Proceedings of the 23rdInternational Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS) 2020, Palermo, Italy.
PMLR: Volume 108. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).
on or not. The treatment assignment mechanism will
often be causally aﬀected by context variables that
also causally inﬂuence the outcome. As an example,
motivated unemployed individuals are more likely to
both take advantage of government training programs
and ﬁnd a new job soon.
Learning from observational data requires adjusting
for the covariate shift that exists between groups of
individuals that are observed to have received diﬀer-
ent interventions. The challenge is how to untangle
confounding factors and make valid counterfactual pre-
dictions - the response if a diﬀerent treatment had
been applied.
Recent methods have predominantly
focused on learning representations regularized to bal-
ance these confounding factors by enforcing domain
invariance with distributional distances [11, 12, 20]. In
this paper we argue that domain invariance is often too
strict a requirement; overlapping support is suﬃcient
for identiﬁability of the causal eﬀect and equality in
densities is not necessary. We interpret the loss in pre-
dictive power of domain-invariant representations as
loss of information in the input variables that causally
inﬂuence the treatment assignment, which is also of-
ten highly predictive of the treatment eﬀect. Consider
the example above for illustration: it is precisely be-
cause motivation is predictive of job outcomes that it
confounds the treatment eﬀect.
We introduce an optimization framework based on
regularizing posterior distributions of the treatment
eﬀect that includes existing representation learning al-
gorithms for diﬀerent choices of regularization terms.
We take advantage of this framework to introduce a
novel type of regularization criteria for the problem of
treatment eﬀect estimation: the posterior counterfac-
tual variance for enforcing domain overlap, and invert-
ible representations to preserve the information content
of the underlying context. Such an objective enjoys
much better generalization in small sample regimes,
smoother representation surfaces with respect to the
outcomes, as can be seen in Figure 1, and a Bayesian
treatment of paramaters which allows consistent uncer-
arXiv:2001.04754v3  [stat.ML]  17 Feb 2020

Learning Overlapping Representations for the Estimation of Individualized Treatment Eﬀects
Representation optimized for 
Gaussian Likelihood and Wasserstein Distance
Representation optimized for 
Gaussian Likelihood
Representation optimized for 
Gaussian Likelihood and Counterfactual Variance
Figure 1: T-SNE visualizations of the learned embeddings for the control potential outcomes Y (0) of the IHDP
dataset. Each panel shows representations regularized by diﬀerent criteria and the colored heatmap represents
diﬀerent outcome magnitudes with diﬀerent colors. The left panel shows representations regularized by the
Wasserstein distributional distance and results in poor discrimination. The middle panel shows representations
optimized only for the factual data with the Gaussian likelihood. The right panel shows representations
regularized by the counterfactual variance, our proposed criteria. Much better separation in outcomes is obtained
by regularizing for the predictive variance, in contrast to using integral probability metrics such as the Wasserstein
distance. Similar plots for a comparison between the control and treated group, and the treated potential outcome
Y (1) can be found in Appendix 5.3.
tainty estimation in predictions.
We summarize our contributions as follows:
1. We develop a theory that justiﬁes regularizing for
the posterior variance to improve generalization
error and establish the limitations of distributional
distances.
2. We propose to use deep kernels and posterior regu-
larization as a general framework to learn individu-
alized treatment eﬀects for arbitrary regularization
terms.
3. We provide an instantiation of this algorithm in-
formed by novel generalization bounds that sub-
stantially improves upon the performance of state-
of-the-art prediction algorithms.
1.1
Related work
Due to the ability of deep neural nets to learn rich repre-
sentations, recent advances in predicting individualized
treatment eﬀects have focused on learning representa-
tions invariant to the treatment assignment policy that
achieve a small error on the factual data. The hope is
that the learnt representation and prediction function
can generalize to prediction of counterfactual outcomes.
Several methods follow this approach. [11] proposed
learning a representation of the data that makes the
treated and control distributions more similar, ﬁtting a
linear ridge-regression model on top of it. [17] built on
their approach to derive a more ﬂexible family of algo-
rithms including non-linear hypotheses. However, both
algorithms insist on quantifying divergence between
treated and control groups with integral probability
metrics.
In this work, we share the need for good representa-
tions but argue for enforcing support overlap rather
than equality in densities. [20], inspired by nearest-
neighbour methods, learn representation that preserve
local similarity information in feature space and were
able to show a decrease in the generalization error in
counterfactual estimation.
Adapting Bayesian algorithms for the problem of in-
dividualized treatment eﬀects has attracted a lot of
interest, in particular in the ﬁeld of medicine where
quantifying uncertainty is important. [1] regularize
counterfactual predictions through their posterior vari-
ance and similarly stress the importance to provide
conﬁdence in their estimates using credible intervals,
but did not investigate the generalization properties of
their algorithm and only allowed for limited expressive-
ness in their algorithm. Similarly, [10] used posterior
variance regularization to learn from unlabeled data
in situations where labeled data is scarce for improved
performance.
Our work has also strong connections with work on do-
main adaptation. In particular, estimating ITE requires
predictions of outcomes over a diﬀerent distribution
from the observed one. Our ITE error upper bound has
similarities with generalization bounds in domain adap-
tation given by [11, 12]. [12] and [21] have similarly ar-
gued against enforcing domain-invariance, and related

Yao Zhang, Alexis Bellot, Mihaela van der Schaar
the loss of predictive power of those representations to
the loss of information due to the non-invertibility of
learned representations.
2
ITE Problem formulation
To estimate what would happen under diﬀerent in-
terventions, we ﬁrst frame the causal problem as a
statistical one. We build upon the potential outcomes
framework [16], this gives us a formal mathematical rep-
resentation of the potential outcome using the notation
Y (a), which reads as observing Y if we do a.
Set up. Consider a population of individuals with each
individual i described by a context Xi ∈X (typically
Rd). An intervention T is applied to subjects in the
population. An important special case is when inter-
ventions are binary, T ∈{0, 1}: individual i’s response
to the intervention is a random variable denoted by
Yi(1), whereas i’s natural response when no interven-
tion is applied is denoted by Yi(0). The two random
variables, Yi(1), Yi(0) ∈R, are known as the potential
outcomes. As discussed, in observational data inter-
vention assignments generally depend on the subjects’
features, i.e. Ti ̸⊥⊥Xi. This dependence is quantiﬁed
via the conditional distribution p(Ti|Xi), also known
as the propensity score of subject i.
Assumption 1 (Consistency, ignorability and overlap).
For any individual i, assigned to intervention ti , we
observe Yi = Y (ti). Further, {Y (t)}t∈T and the data-
generating process p(X, T, Y ) satisfy strong ignorability:
Y (0), Y (1)
|=
T|X and overlap: ∀x, 0 < p(T|X) < 1.
Assumption 1 is a suﬃcient condition for causal identiﬁ-
ability [16]. Ignorability is also known as the no hidden
confounders assumption, indicating that all variables
that cause both T and Y are assumed to be measured.
Under ignorability therefore, any domain shift in p(X)
cannot be due to variables that causally inﬂuence T
and Y , other than through X.
Under Assumption
1, potential outcomes equal conditional expectations:
E[Y (t)|X = x] = E[Y |X = x, T = t], and we may
predict Y (t) by regression.
Objective. We attempt to learn predictors ft : X →
Y such that ft(x) approximates E[Y |X = x, T = t].
Predictors ft = wt ◦φ are formed by composing a
function wt : Z →Y that operates in a feature space
Z deﬁned by a representation φ : X →Z.
The individual eﬀect of an intervention T = 1 in context
X is measured by the conditional average treatment
eﬀect (CATE), τ(x) = E[Y (1) −Y (0)|X = x], and the
error in estimation is given by the empirical precision in
estimating heterogeneous eﬀects ϵPEHE, deﬁned as the
mean squared error in the estimation of the treatment
eﬀect τ(x),
ϵPEHE =
Z
(ˆτ(x) −τ(x))2 p(x)dx
(1)
Predicting τ for unobserved units involves prediction of
both potential outcomes, but since we only observe the
"factual" outcome for a speciﬁc treatment assignment,
and never observe the corresponding "counterfactual"
outcome, we never observe any samples of the true
treatment eﬀect in an observational dataset.
This
makes the problem of causal inference fundamentally
diﬀerent from standard supervised learning.
Notation.
We analyse the generalization proper-
ties of predictors ft and underlying representations
φ with respect to ϵPEHE in the next section.
To
do so we will make use of the following notation.
Let Px,t denote the input data distribution p(x, t),
Pt = p(yt|x)p(x, t) the joint factual distribution of x
and yt, P1−t = p(yt|x)p(x, 1 −t) the joint counterfac-
tual distribution of x and yt. Each instance in the
observed (factual) dataset Dt = {(xi,t, yi,t)}Nt
i=1, is as-
sumed to be sampled i.i.d from Pt. Dt−1 will be used
to denote the unobserved (counterfactual) data set that
results from ﬂipping the treatment assignment for each
instance. While we assume φ to be deterministic, in the
following section we let wt be a vector of weights with
prior distribution πt = N(0, λ−1
t I), λt > 0. In this
sense, πt deﬁnes the hypothesis space F of ft and we
write ˆρt for the posterior distribution of ft, itself a ran-
dom variable. We write µ(xi|Dt, Θt) and σ2(xi|Dt, Θt)
for its posterior mean and variance given context xi.
Θt includes all hyperparameters (both shared parame-
ters (in φ) and speciﬁc parameters to each treatment
group).
3
Intuition and theoretical results
Inherent to the approach of learning representations
for counterfactual inference is that the representation
must trade-oﬀbetween containing predictive informa-
tion about factual outcomes while mitigating the in-
formation content that drives the treatment selection
policy to ensure good generalization on counterfactuals.
In this section, we make several observations about the
deﬁciencies of enforcing domain invariance for this pur-
pose and propose alternatives based on the posterior
counterfactual variance. We start with a simple ex-
ample that illustrates the inadequacy of distributional
distances and the beneﬁts of counterfactual variance
minimization.
Toy example - Counterfactual variance vs. distri-
butional distances. In the middle panels of Figure 2
we show two simulated datasets. The left-hand/red
dataset arises from truncated normal distributions with

Learning Overlapping Representations for the Estimation of Individualized Treatment Eﬀects
Figure 2: Toy example illustrating the shortcomings
of distributional distances, like IPMs, for regularizing
representations in causal inference. Despite the fact
that suﬃcient support is satisﬁed in the red population
and not in the green population, IPMs (bottom) give
the opposite result, with larger discrepancy between
groups in the red population than in the green popu-
lation. In contrast, the counterfactual variance (top)
accurately describes the lack of support of the green
population.
large overlap in the tails; the right-hand/green dataset
arises from ordinary normal distributions with small
overlap in the tails. In both cases, we show treated and
control outcomes in diﬀerent shades. In both cases, the
outcome is y = sinc(4x). The red population satisﬁes
suﬃcient assumptions for identiﬁability of causal eﬀects;
the green population does not. However, as shown in
the bottom panels, both the MMD and Wasserstein dis-
tances are smaller in the green population than in the
red population. In contrast, the top panel shows that
the predictive variance of the counterfactual outcomes
much better describes this lack of overlap. Counterfac-
tual variance is adaptive to the prediction problem of
interest (given that it is obtained from a ﬁtted model),
providing a data-dependent measure to quantify dis-
tances in the underlying function class, perhaps more
precise when the underlying function to be estimated
are unknown. IPMs are deﬁned as worst-case distances
dependent on a function class to be speciﬁed a priori.
We make the observation also that IPMs need to be
approximated in practice which may be inaccurate for
high-dimensional representations and small training
data samples [2].
3.1
Generalization bounds
In this subsection, we develop a PAC-Bayes generaliza-
tion bound [14] for the empirical precision in estimating
heterogeneous eﬀects ϵPEHE, that shows speciﬁcally
why minimizing counterfactual variance can improve
generalization performance.
Theorem 1. With the assumption that the squared
loss function L : F ×X ×Y →R is sub-gaussian under
πt and Pt, and using the notation introduced above,
the following holds.
With probability at least 1 −δ
and for any posterior distribution ˆρt on F, ϵPEHE is
upper-bounded by
1
X
t=0
 
2 ˜D∞Lˆρt(Xt, Yt) + ( ˜D∞+ 1)Varˆρt(Xt)
+ Varˆρt(X1−t) + Ct,1(Nt, N1−t)
NtN1−t
KL(ˆρt∥πt)
+ Ct,2(Nt, N1−t)
NtN1−t
1
δ + Ct,3
!
(2)
Ct,1(Nt, N1−t), Ct,2(Nt, N1−t) are linear function in
their arguments, Ct,3 is constant, D∞(Px,1−t∥Px,t) =
supx
p(x,1−t)
p(x,t) , Lˆρt(X, Y) =
1
N
PN
i=1
 µ(xi|Dt, Θt) −
yi
2
is
the
posterior
prediction
loss,
Varˆρt(X)
is
the
posterior
variance
on
X,
Varˆρt(X)
=
1
N
PN
i=1 σ2(xi|Dt, Θt), ˜D∞= D∞(Px,1−t∥Px,t) + 1,
and ﬁnally KL(·∥·) is the Kullback-Leibler divergence.
Observe the dependence on the variance with respect
to the distribution of the observed data of the coun-
terfactual outcomes Varˆρt(X1−t). By minimizing the
counterfactual variance we can expect the representa-
tions φ of counterfactual data to encode a relatively
smoother prediction function w ◦φ(x), as can be seen
in Figure 1. The estimation of treatment eﬀects is in-
herently a label-scarce problem as counterfactual data
is not observed, representations resulting in smooth
prediction curves are especially important to generalize
beyond the factual data. This view of the problem of
estimating treatment eﬀects emphasizes the need of
regularization for good generalization. We note that
the sub-gaussian assumption on the loss function may
not hold in some cases e.g. large noise. In this case,
we may relax this assumption to sub-exponential with
all results and proofs otherwise unchanged [8].
3.1.1
Why distributional distances may be
inadequate?
While the toy example clearly illustrates the inability
of distributional distances to capture domain overlap,
we argue that by enforcing equality in full marginals,
optimizing for distributional distances may also overly

Yao Zhang, Alexis Bellot, Mihaela van der Schaar
penalize the model’s ability to predict factual observa-
tions when suﬃcient data is available, that is, when
domain overlap is satisﬁed.
In the following Theorem, we provide a bound on the
generalization error on counterfactual data that illus-
trates the interplay between distribution mismatch and
prediction loss on factual data. We show that distri-
bution mismatch becomes decreasingly relevant with
increasing data set size.
Theorem 2. Assume the notation introduced above,
for any posterior distribution ˆρt on F, the expected
counterfactual Gibbs risk1 RP1−t(Gˆρt) is bounded above
by,
1
2DPx,1−t(Gˆρt) + D∞(Px,1−t∥Px,t)LPt(Gˆρt).
(3)
where
DPx,1−t(ˆρt)
=
Ex∼Px,1−t

σ2(x|Dt, Θt)

is
the expected counterfactual variance,
LPt(ˆρt)
=
E(x,y)∼Pt
h µ(x|Dt, Θt) −y
2 + 1
2σ2(x|Dt, Θt)
i
is the
expected factual loss, and ﬁnally D∞(Px,1−t∥Px,t) =
supx
p(x,1−t)
p(x,t) .
The bound in Equation (3) describes the interaction
between the distribution mismatch and the prediction
error on factual data LPt(Gˆρt). D∞(Px,1−t∥Px,t) is
large if, for some x, Px,t has small density while Px,1−t
has large density (that is when there is poor overlap be-
tween them), which understandably, makes minimizing
the counterfactual risk RP1−t(Gˆρt) harder because few
examples from the other population are observed for
a given context. However, note that D∞(Px,1−t∥Px,t)
is multiplied by the expected factual loss LPt(Gˆρt)
(which decreases as the number of factual samples in-
creases, see Equation (10) in Theorem 7 of Appendix
1.3). The distribution mismatch D∞(Px,1−t∥Px,t) thus
becomes less important for generalization, if we can
minimize the expected factual loss LPt(Gˆρt) arbitrarily
well. This suggests that optimizing for distributional
distances between treated and control data at the ex-
pense of prediction error on the factual data may be
counterproductive. Representations regularized with
distributional distances may thus shrink the hypothesis
space and converge on solutions that, although bal-
anced across treatment groups, loose their predictive
power.
Here again, we note the presence of the counterfactual
variance LPt(ˆρt) in equation (3) which is not considered
by methods optimizing for the distributional diﬀerence
only.
1The expected counterfactual Gibbs risk is an upper
bound of the expected Bayesian counterfactual risk, a de-
tailed discussion of Gibbs and Bayesian risk is given in
Appendix 1.2.
3.2
Why encourage preserving information
content?
Assumption 1 gives suﬃcient conditions for unbiased
estimation of the treatment eﬀect using observational
data, but identiﬁability need not hold with respect to
the feature representation Z = φ(X), even if it does
with respect to X. For instance consider φ−1(z) :=
{x : φ(x) = z}, then,
p(Y |φ(x), t) =
R
x∈φ−1(z) p(Y |x, t)p(x|t)
R
x∈φ−1(z) p(x|t)
=
R
x∈φ−1(z) p(Y |x)p(x|t)
R
x∈φ−1(z) p(x|t)
̸= p(Y |φ(x))
(4)
in general, with equality only if φ is invertible. The con-
ditional independence in the strong ignorability assump-
tion, Y (0), Y (1)
|=
T|φ(X), required for estimating the
treatment eﬀect need not hold for non-invertible trans-
formations. In this sense, we may be introducing unob-
served confounders in representation space we hypothe-
size by the information lost in the map φ. Observe also
that our objective, the conditional average treatment ef-
fect τ(x) = E[Y (1)−Y (0)|X = x], is expressed in terms
of expectations. Similarly, it holds that in feature space,
E[Y (1) −Y (0)|φ(x)] =
R
x∈φ−1(z) E[Y (1) −Y (0)|x]dx
will in general not be equal to our quantity of interest
τ(x) = E[Y (1) −Y (0)|x] unless φ is invertible.
4
Algorithms
In this section, we describe a model for counterfac-
tual estimation, called DKLITE2 (Deep Kernel Learn-
ing for Individualized Treatment Eﬀects), motivated
by our analysis. Our proposed prediction algorithm
works in a feature space induced by φ indirectly via
a kernel function K : X × X →R, that intuitively
models the correlation between inputs x, x′ ∈X in a
possibly high-dimensional feature space. We extend
the expressiveness of K by transforming the inputs
through a non-linear mapping φ : X →Rdφ to form
k(φ(x), φ(x′)), a deep kernel [19]. The dimension dφ of
φ(x) can be chosen arbitrarily, and may therefore diﬀer
from the dimension of x. We let φθ be parameterized
by a neural network with parameters θ to encode a the
information content of input variables.
Prediction model.
The potential outcomes given
individuals covariates are assumed to take the form,
yi,t = ft(xi) + ϵi,t,
t ∈{0, 1}
(5)
2An
implementation
of
DKLITE
is
available
at
https://bitbucket.org/mvdschaar/mlforhealthlabpub.

Learning Overlapping Representations for the Estimation of Individualized Treatment Eﬀects
where ft(xi) = w⊤
t φ(xi) is given as a linear combination
of feature representations φ(·). wt ∈Rd is a weight vec-
tor, φ(·) the representation layer and ϵi,t ∼N(0, β−1
t
)
is a noise variable, t = 0, 1. We specify our uncer-
tainty in parameter values through the speciﬁcation of
prior distributions. Combined with the likelihood of ob-
served data, these determine the posterior distribution
of parameters and predictive distributions of treatment
eﬀects. For each component of the weight vector, in-
dependently, we assume wt ∼N(0, λ−1
t ). With knowl-
edge of φ, the posterior of wt is given by,
p(wt|Dt, Θt) = N(mwt, K−1
wt )
(6)
where Θt = {φ, βt, λt}, the posterior mean mwt =
βtK−1
wt Φ⊤
t Yt,
the
posterior
covariance
K−1
wt
=
βtΦ⊤
t Φt + λtIdφ×dφ and Φt the representation of Xt.
However, it can be diﬃcult to encode our knowledge
about good representation spaces for counterfactual
estimation in a Bayesian prior. Posterior regularization
oﬀers a more direct and ﬂexible mechanism for guiding
and controlling the posterior distribution.
Regularized Bayes. The regularized posterior is the
solution of the following optimization problem [22, 10]:
inf
q(f|D)L(q(f|D)) + Ω(q(f|D))
(7)
where L(q(f|D)) is the (KL-divergence between the
approximate posterior q(f|D) and the true posterior
p(f|D), and Ω(q(f|D)) is a regularizer of the approxi-
mate posterior q(f|D). We attempt therefore to learn
a posterior distribution as close as possible to the true
posterior while also fulﬁlling the requirements imposed
by the regularization term.
Inference. The predictive distribution for a testing
point x is obtained by marginalising over the posterior
wt. It is given by
ft(x) ∼N
 µ(x|Dt, Θt), σ2(x|Dt, Θt)

(8)
where µ(x|Dt, Θt) = m⊤
wtφ(x) and σ2(x|Dt, Θt) =
φ(x)⊤K−1
wt φ(x). Point estimates are given for example
by the posterior mean or median, optimal for minimiz-
ing squared loss or absolute loss, respectively. Note also
that knowledge of the full posterior allows us to quan-
tify our uncertainty around point estimates through
credible intervals, especially useful in medicine and
public policy, for example.
4.1
Learning φ
The framework of regularized Bayes described in (7)
provides us with a ﬂexible optimization objective, many
previous algorithms for treatment eﬀects can be re-
duced to speciﬁc instantiations of this problem. In this
section we describe the likelihood and regularization
terms that we use to encode the intuition and insights
derived from section 3. In Appendix 2, we show that
the ﬁnal loss function we derive can be reformulated a
speciﬁc instance of problem (7).
Likelihood of the factual data. Assuming the dis-
criminative model introduced in 5, we encourage good
prediction of the factual data by optimizing for the
negative log-likelihood of the factual data,
Llik = −
1
X
t=0
log(p(Yt|Xt, Θt))
(9)
Observe that we may re-write the negative log-
likelihood, Llik, as
Llik =
1
X
t=0
Nt
2 ln(2πβ−1
t
) + KL(ˆρt∥πt)
+ Ntβt
2

Varˆρt(Xt) + Lˆρt(Xt, Yt)

(10)
From Theorem 1, we see that the empirically estimable
quantities to optimize for in the upperbound (2), are
Varˆρt(X1−t), Varˆρt(Xt), Lˆρt(Xt, Yt) and KL(ˆρt∥πt).
The latter three already exist in our objective Llik, as
shown in Equation (10).
Posterior variance as regularization. Therefore,
by including an empirical estimate of the counterfactual
variance Varˆρt(X1−t) as a regularizer in our objective
we are eﬀectively optimizing for all terms given by the
PAC-Bayes upperbound in equation (2). We write this
regularization term as,
Lvar =
1
X
t=0
1
N1−t
N1−t
X
i=1
σ2(xi,1−t|Dt, Θt)
(11)
Since the deep kernel parameters are jointly learned,
the neural net φ is encouraged to learn a feature rep-
resentation in which the counterfactual examples are
close to the factual examples, thereby reducing the
variance on our predictions. The implication is that we
are optimizing for representations where counterfactual
data tend to cluster around the representations of fac-
tual data. This is a way to see how intuitively that we
are encouraging overlap in support in representation
space without enforcing equality in densities (i.e. the
size of the factual and counterfactual "clusters" need
not coincide).
Invertibility as regularization. While the loss due
to non-invertible representations is not directly observ-
able, we may associate it with the information content
of x lost in φ(x) and we found it to be an important
source of gain in performance, empirically. We can
encourage information content preservation with an

Yao Zhang, Alexis Bellot, Mihaela van der Schaar
IHDP (√ˆϵPEHE)
Twins (√˜ϵPEHE)
Jobs ( ˆ
Rpol(πf ))
In-sample
Out-sample
In-sample
Out-sample
In-sample
Out-sample
OLS/LR1
5.8 ± .3
5.8 ± .3
.319 ± .001
.318 ± .007
.22 ± .00
.23 ± .02
OLS/LR2
2.4 ± .1
2.5 ± .1
.320 ± .002
.320 ± .003
.21 ± .00
.24 ± .01
BLR
5.8 ± .3
5.8 ± .3
.312 ± .003
.323 ± .018
.22 ± .01
.26 ± .02
k-NN
2.1 ± .1
4.1 ±.2
.333 ± .001
.345 ± .007
.22 ± .00
.26 ± .02
BART
2.1 ± .1
2.3 ± .1
.347 ± .009
.338 ± .016
.23 ± .00
.25 ± .02
R-Forest
4.2 ± .2
6.6 ± .3
.366 ± .002
.321 ± .005
.23 ± .01
.28 ± .02
C-Forest
3.8 ± .2
3.8 ±.2
.366 ± .003
.316 ± .011
.19 ± .00
.20 ± .02
BNN
2.2 ± .1
2.1 ± .1
.325 ± .003
.321 ± .018
.20 ± .01
.24 ± .02
TARNET
.88 ±.02
.95 ± .02
.317 ± .002
.315 ± .003
.17 ± .01
.21 ± .01
CARWASS
.72 ± .02
.76 ± .02
.315 ± .007
.313 ± .008
.17 ± .01
.21 ± .01
CMGP
.63 ± .08
.74 ± .11
.320 ± .002
.319 ± .008
.22 ± .03
.24 ± .05
DKLITE
.52 ± .02
.65 ± .03
.288 ± .001
.293 ± .003
.13 ± .01
.14 ± .01
Table 1: Mean performance (lower better) of individualized treatment eﬀect estimation and standard deviation.
additional decoder ψ : Rdφ →X - a neural network
with the reversed structure of network φ (the encoder
in this sense) - trained to reconstruct the input x from
φ(x). The reconstruction loss is given as,
Lrec =
1
X
t=0
1
Nt
Nt
X
i=1
∥xi,t −ψ(φ(xi,t))∥2
2
(12)
We remark that some recent density estimation ap-
proaches, e.g. normalization ﬂows [15] and non-volume
preserving transformation [7], can be used as an alter-
native method to achieve invertibility.
Final loss function.
Based on the objectives de-
scribed above, our ﬁnal loss trades-oﬀbetween max-
imizing the likelihood of the observed (factual) data
under our model, minimizing the predictive variance of
the counterfactual outcomes and minimizing the recon-
struction loss of the representations. The loss is given
as follows,
Lfin = Llik + α1Lvar + α2Lrec
(13)
α1 > 0 and α2 > 0 are hyperparameter. Standard
methods for hyperparameter selection are not gener-
ally applicable for choosing hyperparameters because
counterfactuals are never observed. As an approxima-
tion scheme, we replace the missing counterfactuals
with their nearest factual neighbour to compute the
treatment eﬀects in cross-validation [17].
5
Experiments
The primary focus of our experiments will be on the
comparison of prediction performance on benchmark
tasks, the use of the posterior variance for decision-
making and, a deeper analysis of learned representa-
tions and source of performance gain. In the following,
we start by introducing competing prediction algo-
rithms before giving a brief description of the data and
appropriate performance metrics.
Competing algorithms. We compare DKLITE with
a total of 11 algorithms.
First we evaluate least
squares regression using treatment as an additional
input feature OLS/LR1), we consider separate least
squares regressions for each treatment (OLS/LR2),
we evaluate balancing linear regression (BLR) [11],
k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) [5], Bayesian additive re-
gression trees (BART) [4], random forests (R-Forest)
[3], causal forests (C-Forest) [18], balancing neural net-
works (BNN) [11], treatment-agnostic representation
network (TARNET), counterfactual regression with
Wasserstein distance (CARWASS) [17], and multi-task
gaussian process (CMGP) [1].
Data. Causal inference models are often impossible to
reliably validate using real-world data due to the ab-
sence of counterfactual outcomes. Various established
approaches for evaluating causal models have been pro-
posed, which we use for our analysis. We describe these
brieﬂy below and refer the reader to the accompany-
ing references and section 5 of Appendix for further
details. Additional results (e.g. average treatment ef-
fect estimation) are included in the same Appendix
section. We consider IHDP ( 747 instances described
by 25 covariates) [9, 1, 17, 20] in which counterfactual
outcomes are randomly generated via a predeﬁned prob-
abilistic model; Twins (11300 instances described by
30 covariates), in which outcomes are observed but the
treatment assignment is simulated; and ﬁnally, Jobs
(3212 instances described by 7 covariates) [17, 13, 6]
which is constructed from a mixture of experimental
and observational data with the treatment.

Learning Overlapping Representations for the Estimation of Individualized Treatment Eﬀects
Metrics. The metrics used to evaluate each data set
diﬀer slightly depending on the available outcome (real
or simulated) and the available treatment assignment
mechanisms (known or unknown). For the IHDP, we
use the empirical precision in estimating treatment ef-
fects ˆϵPEHE = 1
N
PN
i=1(τ(xi)−ˆτ(xi))2. For Twins, we
use the observed precision in estimating heterogeneous
eﬀects, ˜ϵPEHE = 1
N
PN
i=1(yi,1−yi,0−ˆτ(xi))2. For Jobs,
we use the policy risk that measures the expected loss
if the treatment is taken according to the ITE policy
prescribed by the algorithm, Rpol = 1−E[Y (1)|π(x) =
1]P(π(x) = 1) + E[Y (0)|π(x) = 0]P(π(x) = 0) where
π(x) = 1 if ˆy(1) −ˆy(0) > 0 and π(x) = 0, otherwise.
5.1
Prediction performance results
We report in-sample and out-of-sample performance in
Table 1. DKLITE targets aspects of the treatment ef-
fect estimation problem that have not been considered
before. Learning with such an objective signiﬁcantly
outperforms all competing algorithms and does so on
all benchmark data sets. The most relevant compar-
ison is perhaps with BNN [11] and CARWASS [17],
neural network models that enforces domain invariance
through distributional distances. The performance gain
highlights the predictive power of our representations.
5.2
Source of gain
Llik
Llik + Lvar
Llik + Lrec
IHDP
In-sample
1.46 ± .01
.98 ± .04
.96 ± .04
Out-sample
1.95 ± .14
1.24 ± .09
1.28 ± .13
Twins
In-sample
.308 ± .004
.292 ± .002
.291 ± .001
Out-sample
.323 ± .008
.294 ± .007
.293 ± .003
Jobs
In-sample
.18 ± .01
.14 ± .01
.15 ± .01
Out-sample
.28 ± .01
.23 ± .01
.24 ± .01
Table 2: Source of performance gain.
In this section, we analyze more deeply the contribu-
tion to the performance gain of each component of our
loss. We evaluate DKLITE optimized for diﬀerent com-
ponents of Lfin = Llik + α1Lvar + α2Lrec. As can be
seen in Table 2, including regularization based on the
counterfactual variance (Llik +α1Lvar) and reconstruc-
tion loss (Llik + α2Lrec), each evaluated separately,
already provides a signiﬁcant gain in performance with
respect to optimization on the factual data only (Llik).
Importantly though, combining them (Lfin) improves
performance further by an order of magnitude (see
DKLITE in Table 1), which suggests that Lvar and
Lrec capture to some extent "orthogonal" sources of
gain. The gain is especially important on relatively
smaller data sets, such as IHDP with 747 individuals,
and to a lesser extent on bigger data sets. These re-
sults illustrate the behaviour suggested by Equation 3
in Theorem 2: distribution mismatch between groups
becomes decreasingly relevant with increasing data set
size. In this setting, the error on the factual data (Llik)
drives generalization performance.
5.3
Leveraging the predicted uncertainty
Data-driven solutions for decision support have most
often been proposed without methods to quantify and
control their uncertainty in a decision. In contrast, in
medicine for example, a physician knows whether she
is uncertain about a case and will consult more experi-
enced colleagues if needed. We use this idea to show
that uncertainty informed treatment eﬀect estimation
can improve performance. An instantiation of this ap-
proach, termed DKLITE-U, is given by referring the
10 % most uncertain predictions for further scrutiny.
Performance in comparison to DKLITE is given in Ta-
ble 3. Note that especially on small data sets, such as
IHDP, predictions can be signiﬁcantly improved.
DKLITE
DKLITE-U
IHDP
In-sample
.52 ± .02
.46 ± .02
Out-sample
.60 ± .03
.53 ± .02
Twins
In-sample
.288 ± .001
.287 ± .001
Out-sample
.293 ± .003
.292 ± .002
Jobs
In-sample
.13 ± .01
.13 ± .01
Out-sample
.14 ± .01
.14 ± .01
Table 3: Performance of DKLITE-U on all data sets.
6
Discussion
In many domains understanding the eﬀect of interven-
tions at an individual level is crucial, but prediction of
those potential outcomes is challenging. Despite their
empirical success, we ﬁnd that algorithms enforcing
representations to satisfy domain invariance is often
too strong a requirement for causal predictions. This
stems from the fact that overlapping support is suﬃ-
cient for identiﬁability of the causal eﬀect and equality
in densities is not necessary.
We have proposed a bound on generalization perfor-
mance that shows the dependence on domain overlap
through the counterfactual variance which we inter-
pret as a proxy for domain overlap, and highlighted the
need for invertible latent maps. These results motivated
novel regularization criteria that we incorporated in a
deep kernel learning framework through posterior regu-
larization. We hypothesize that many existing models,
both frequentist (through representer theorems if opti-
mized with empirical risk minimization) and Bayesian,
can be reduced to speciﬁc instances of our framework
with diﬀerent regularization terms. We leave a formal
derivation of this unifying theory for future work.

Yao Zhang, Alexis Bellot, Mihaela van der Schaar
