On the Susceptibility and Robustness of Time Series
Models through Adversarial Attack and Defense
Asadullah Hill Galib
Computer Science and Engineering
Michigan State University

Bidhan Bashyal
Computer Science and Engineering
Michigan State University

Abstract
Under adversarial attacks, time series regression and classiﬁcation are vulnerable.
Adversarial defense, on the other hand, can make the models more resilient. It is
important to evaluate how vulnerable different time series models are to attacks
and how well they recover using defense. The sensitivity to various attacks and
the robustness using the defense of several time series models are investigated in
this study. Experiments are run on seven time series models with three adversarial
attacks and one adversarial defense. According to the ﬁndings, all models, particu-
larly GRU and RNN, appear to be vulnerable. LSTM and GRU also have better
defense recovery. FGSM exceeds the competitors in terms of attacks. PGD attacks
are more difﬁcult to recover from than other sorts of attacks.
1
Introduction
Time series analysis is a vital problem in data mining with many applications including ﬁnance,
weather forecasting, industrial maintenance, and many others. Deep Learning (DL) methods have
shown great success in analyzing time series data [13]. One downside of DL methods is that they
can be fooled easily by generating adversarial attacks. Adversarial attacks in deep learning have
been vastly studied for image recognition and classiﬁcation problem. Similarly, it is very important
to explore adversarial attacks in the time-series analysis as time series analysis uses various DL
algorithms. Designing a defense mechanism against these attacks is even essential for robustness.
From an adversarial standpoint, there has not been much research into DL models for time series
regression and classiﬁcation.
DL models for time series are also susceptible under adversarial attacks [10, 11, 12, 9, 8, 7]. Most
of this research concentrate on performing adversarial attacks for either regression or classiﬁcation
problems. Defense mechanism against the adversarial attacks for time series is also explored [9].
Mostly, this research focuses on different adversarial attacks and defenses rather than the model
itself. But it’s also worth considering how vulnerable different time series models are to attacks
and how effectively they can recover utilizing defense. This research examines the susceptibility
and robustness of various time series models to various attacks and defenses. To the best of our
knowledge, no previous research has explored this. Our contribution and the things we are addressing
are summarized in Table 1.
In this paper, we use 7 different DL time series models, such as Long -Short Term Memory(LSTM),
Stacked-LSTM (LSTM with more than one layer), Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU), Recurrent Neural
Network (RNN), Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), CNN-LSTM and ConvLSTM to train for
regression and classiﬁcation problems for time series analysis. Different adversarial mechanisms
such as Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM), Basic Iterative Method (BIM), and Projected Gradient
Descent (PGD) are used to attack the models. Additionally, we also implemented adversarial training
as a defense mechanism to tackle the attacks. We evaluate the performance of each adversarial attack
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:2301.03703v1  [cs.LG]  9 Jan 2023
