arXiv:1801.03968v3  [cs.AI]  5 Feb 2019
The Complexity of Learning of Acyclic Conditional Preference
Networks
Eisa Alanazia,∗, Malek Mouhoubb, Sandra Zillesb
aDepartment of Computer Science, Umm Al-Qura University, Makkah, Saudi Arabia
bDepartment of Computer Science, University of Regina, Regina, SK, Canada S4S 0A2
Abstract
Learning of user preferences, as represented by, for example, Conditional Preference Networks
(CP-nets), has become a core issue in AI research. Recent studies investigate learning of CP-nets
from randomly chosen examples or from membership and equivalence queries. To assess the opti-
mality of learning algorithms as well as to better understand the combinatorial structure of classes
of CP-nets, it is helpful to calculate certain learning-theoretic information complexity parame-
ters. This article focuses on the frequently studied case of learning from so-called swap examples,
which express preferences among objects that differ in only one attribute. It presents bounds on or
exact values of some well-studied information complexity parameters, namely the VC dimension,
the teaching dimension, and the recursive teaching dimension, for classes of acyclic CP-nets. We
further provide algorithms that learn tree-structured and general acyclic CP-nets from member-
ship queries. Using our results on complexity parameters, we prove that our algorithms, as well as
another query learning algorithm for acyclic CP-nets presented in the literature, are near-optimal.
1. Introduction
Preference learning has become a major branch of AI, with applications in decision support
systems in general and in e-commerce in particular [1]. For instance, recommender systems based
on collaborative ﬁltering make predictions on a single user’s preferences by exploiting information
about large groups of users. Another example are intelligent tutoring systems, which learn a
student’s preferences in order to deliver personalized content to the student.
To design and analyze algorithms for learning preferences of a single user, one needs an ab-
stract model for representing user preferences. Some approaches model preferences quantitatively,
thus allowing for expressing the relative magnitude of preferences between object pairs, while oth-
ers are purely qualitative, expressing partial orders or rankings over objects [2, 3].
Most application domains are of multi-attribute form, meaning that the set of possible alterna-
tives (i.e., objects, or outcomes) is deﬁned on a set of attributes and every alternative corresponds
to an assignment of values to the attributes. Such combinatorial domains require compact mod-
els to capture the preference information in a structured manner. In recent years, various models
∗Corresponding author
Preprint submitted to Elsevier
February 6, 2019

have been suggested, such as Generalized Additive Decomposable (GAI-net) utility functions [4],
Lexicographic Preference Trees [5], and Conditional Preference Networks (CP-nets) [6].
CP-nets provide a compact qualitative preference representation for multi-attribute domains
where the preference of one attribute may depend on the values of other attributes. The study of
their learnability [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 4] is an ongoing topic in research on preference elicitation.
For example, Koriche and Zanuttini [7] investigated query learning of k-bounded acyclic CP-
nets (i.e., with a bound k on the number of attributes on which the preferences for any attribute
may depend) and provided efﬁcient algorithms using both membership and equivalence queries,
cf. [12]. CP-nets have also been studied in models of passive learning from examples, both for
batch learning [8, 9, 10, 4] and for online learning [11, 13].
The focus of our work is on the design of methods for learning CP-nets though interaction
with the user, and on an analysis of the complexity of such learning problems. In particular, we
study the model of learning from membership queries, in which users are asked for information
on their preference between two objects. To the best of our knowledge, algorithms for learning
CP-nets from membership queries only have not been studied in the literature yet. We argue below
(in Section 7) why algorithms using membership queries alone are of importance to research on
preference learning. In a nutshell, membership queries seem to be more easily deployable in
preference learning than equivalence queries and, from a theoretical point of view, it is interesting
to see how powerful they are in comparison to equivalence queries. The latter alone are known to
be insufﬁcient for efﬁcient learning of acyclic CP-nets [7]. Therefore, one major part of this article
deals with learning CP-nets from membership queries only. Note that the importance of learning
from queries in general, and from membership queries in particular, is widely recognized in the
context of preference elicitation [14, 15, 16, 17].
In every formal model of learning, a fundamental question in assessing learning algorithms
is how many queries or examples would be needed by the best possible learning algorithm in
the given model. For several models, lower bounds can be derived from the Vapnik Chervonenkis
dimension (VCD) [18]. This central parameter is one of several that, in addition to yielding bounds
on the performance of learning algorithms, provide deep insights into the combinatorial structure
of the studied concept class. Such insights can in turn help to design new learning algorithms.
A classical result states that log2(4/3)d is a lower bound on the number of equivalence and
membership queries required for learning a concept class whose VCD equals d [19]. Likewise, it
is known that a parameter called the teaching dimension [20] is a lower bound on the number of
membership queries required for learning [21]. Therefore, another major part of this article deals
with calculating exact values or non-trivial bounds on a number of learning-theoretic complexity
parameters, such as the VCD and the teaching dimension. All these complexity parameters are
calculated under the assumption that information about user preferences is provided for so-called
swaps, exclusively. A swap is a pair of objects that differ in the value of only a single attribute.
Learning CP-nets over swap examples is an often studied scenario [7, 8, 22, 23, 13], which we
adopt here for various reasons detailed in Section 4.
Our main contributions are the following:
(a) We provide the ﬁrst study that exactly calculates the VCD for the class of unbounded
acyclic CP-nets, and give a lower bound for any bound k. So far, the only existing studies present
a lower bound [7], which we prove incorrect for large values of k, and asymptotic complexities
2

[24]. The latter show that VCD ∈Θ(2n) for k = n −1 and VCD ∈˜Θ(n2k) when k ∈o(n), in
agreement with our result that VCD = 2n−1 for k = n−1, and is at least VCD ≥2k−1+(n−k)2k
for general values of k. It should be noted that both previous studies assume that CP-nets can be
incomplete, i.e., for some attributes, preference relations may not be fully speciﬁed. In our study,
we ﬁrst investigate the (not uncommon) assumption that CP-nets are complete, but then we extend
each of our results to the more general case that includes incomplete CP-nets, as well. Further,
some of our results are more general than existing ones in that they cover also the case of CP-nets
with multi-valued attributes (as opposed to binary attributes.)
(b) We further provide exact values (or, in some cases, non-trivial bounds) for two other im-
portant information complexity parameters, namely the teaching dimension [20], and the recursive
teaching dimension [25].
(c) Appendix B gives an in-depth study of structural properties of the class of all complete
acyclic CP-nets that are of importance to learning-theoretic studies.
(d) We present a new algorithm that learns tree-structured CP-nets (i.e., the case k = 1) from
membership queries only and use our results on the teaching dimension to show that our algorithm
is close to optimal. We further extend our algorithm to deal with the general case of k-bounded
acyclic CP-nets with bound k ≥1.
(e) In most real-world scenarios, one would expect some degree of noise in the responses to
membership queries, or that sometimes no response at all is obtained. To address this issue, we
demonstrate how, under certain assumptions on the noise and the missing responses, our algorithm
for learning tree CP-nets can be adapted to handle incomplete or incorrect answers to membership
queries.
(f) We re-assess the degree of optimality of Koriche and Zanuttini’s algorithm for learning
bounded acyclic CP-nets, using our result on the VCD.
This article extends a previous conference paper [26]. Theorem 4 in this conference paper
included an incorrect claim about the so-called self-directed learning complexity of classes of
acyclic CP-nets; the incorrect statement has been removed in this extended version.
2. Related Work
This section sets the present paper into the context of the existing literature.
2.1. Preference Elicitation with Membership Queries
Preference elicitation is the interactive process of gathering information about the preferences
of a user of a system, mostly through queries, and is applied, e.g., in recommender systems and
combinatorial auctions. The goal of preference elicitation varies from learning a full preference
model [27, 28] to learning enough information to make a (near-)optimal recommendation to the
user [14, 15, 29]. Learning a full preference model is of practical interest, be it for situations
when the user’s most preferred items are not available or for the ease of adapting user models
when assuming that user preferences change over time. To reduce the user’s burden, one major
objective in preference elicitation is to keep the number of queries small. This has motivated
learning-theoretic studies on the efﬁcient use of queries in preference elicitation [14, 15, 16, 17].
3

One popular type of query used in preference elicitation is the so-called value query, which re-
quests the user to assign a numerical value to an item. Since such queries are in essence equivalent
to membership queries [16, 14], the notion of learning from membership queries is well-studied
in preference elicitation. For example, Boutilier at al. [15] studied preference elicitation in the
presence of user-deﬁned features. They cast the problem of learning deﬁned features as a concept
learning problem, which they solved using membership queries. Zinkevich et al. [17] focused on
learning preference functions that correspond to read-once formulas over certain kinds of gates
and used a classical algorithm for learning read-once formulas [30] in order to elicit user prefer-
ences via value/membership queries alone. Finally, Lahaie and Parkes [16] showed that any exact
learning algorithm with membership and equivalence queries can be converted to a preference
elicitation algorithm with value and demand queries.
Our work assumes that preferences are represented compactly via CP-nets and our goal is
to recover the full preference relation exactly. Since the structure of the network is not known in
advance, this problem is non-trivial. We need to devise algorithms that learn both the structure and
preference function for every variable in the network. Our work provides efﬁcient (and provably
close to optimal) algorithms to recover preferences exactly via membership queries alone and is
thus in line with some of the approaches discussed above [15, 17]. In order to prove that our
algorithms are close to optimal, we make use of a learning-theoretic parameter called the teaching
dimension [20], which we calculate for various classes of CP-nets in Sections 5 and 6.
2.2. Learning CP-Nets
The problem of learning CP-nets has recently gained a substantial amount of attention [8, 31,
9, 7, 24, 10, 11, 32, 33, 34, 4].
Both in active and in passive learning, a sub-problem to be solved by many natural learning
algorithms is the so-called consistency problem. This decision problem is deﬁned as follows. A
problem instance consists of a CP-net N and a set S of user preferences between objects, in the
form of “object o is preferred over object o′” or “object o is not preferred over object o′”. The
question to be answered is whether or not N is consistent with S, i.e., whether the partial order
≻over objects that is induced by N satisﬁes o ≻o′ if S states that o is preferred over o′, and
satisﬁes o ̸≻o′ if S states that o is not preferred over o′. The consistency problem was shown
to be NP-hard even if N is restricted to be an acyclic k-bounded CP-net for some ﬁxed k ≥2
and even when, for any object pair (o, o′) under consideration, the outcomes o and o′ differ in
the values of at most two attributes [8]. Based on this result, Dimopoulos et al. [8] showed that
complete acyclic CP-nets with bounded indegree are not efﬁciently PAC-learnable, i.e., learnable
in polynomial time in the PAC model. The authors, however, then showed that such CP-nets
are efﬁciently PAC-learnable from examples that are drawn exclusively from the set of so-called
transparent entailments. Speciﬁcally, this implied that complete acyclic k-bounded CP-nets are
efﬁciently PAC-learnable from swap examples. Michael and Papageorgiou [33] then provided a
comprehensive experimental view on the performance of the algorithm proposed in [8]. Their work
also proposed an efﬁcient method for checking whether a given entailment is transparent or not.
These studies focus on learning approximations of target CP-nets passively and from randomly
chosen data. By comparison, all algorithms we propose below learn target CP-nets exactly and
4

they actively pose queries in order to collect training data, following Angluin’s model of learning
from membership queries [12].
Lang and Mengin [9] considered the complexity of learning binary separable CP-nets, in var-
ious learning settings.1 The literature also includes results on learning CP-nets from noisy exam-
ples, namely, via statistical hypothesis testing [32], using evolutionary algorithms and metaheuris-
tics [35, 4], or by learning the induced graph directly, which takes time exponential in the number
of attributes [10]. These results cannot be compared to the ones presented in the present paper,
as (i) they focus on approximating instead of exactly learning the target CP-net, and (ii) the noise
models on which they build differ substantially from the settings we consider. In our ﬁrst setting,
there is no noise in the data whatsoever. The second setting we study is one in which the mem-
bership oracle may corrupt a certain number of query responses, but there is no randomness to the
process. Instead, one analyzes learning under an adversarial assumption on the oracle’s choice of
which answers to corrupt, and then investigates whether exact learning is still possible [36, 37, 38].
To the best of our knowledge, this setting has not been studied in the context of CP-nets so far.
As for active learning, Guerin et al. [11] proposed a heuristic online algorithm that is not
limited to swap comparisons. The algorithm assumes the user to provide explicit answers of the
form “object o is preferred over object o′”, “object o′ is preferred over object o”, or “neither of the
two objects is preferred over the other” to any query (o, o′). Labernia et al. [13] proposed another
online learning algorithm based on swap observations where the latter can be noisy. It is assumed
that the target CP-net represents the global preference for a group of users and the noise is due
to variations of a user’s preference compared to the global one. The authors formally proved that
their algorithm produces a close approximation to the target CP-net and analyzed the algorithm
empirically under random noise. Again, as in all the related literature discussed above, the most
striking difference to our setting is that these works focus on approximating the target CP-net
rather than learning it exactly.
To the best of our knowledge, the only studies of learning CP-nets in Angluin’s query model,
where the target concept is identiﬁed exactly, are one by Koriche and Zanuttini [7] and one by
Labernia et al. [22]. Koriche and Zanuttini assumed perfect oracles and investigated the problem
of learning complete and incomplete bounded CP-nets from membership and equivalence queries
over the swap instance space. They showed that complete acyclic CP-nets are not learnable from
equivalence queries alone but are attribute-efﬁciently learnable from membership and equivalence
queries. Attribute-efﬁciency means that the number of queries required is upper-bounded by a
function that is polynomial in the size of the input, but only logarithmic in the number of at-
tributes. In the case of tree CP-nets, their results hold true even when the equivalence queries
may return non-swap examples. The setting considered in their work is more general than ours
and exhibits the power of membership queries when it comes to learning CP-nets. Labernia et
al. [22] investigated the problem of learning an average CP-net from multiple users using equiv-
alence queries alone. However, neither study addresses the problem of learning complete acyclic
CP-nets from membership queries alone, whether corrupted or uncorrupted. Given that learning
from membership queries plays an important role in preference elicitation (see Section 2.1), our
1A CP-net is separable if it is 0-bounded, i.e., the preferences over the domain of any attribute are not conditioned
on the values of other attributes.
5

algorithms thus address a gap in the literature. We provide a detailed comparison of our methods
to those by Koriche and Zanuttini in Section 7. In a nutshell, our membership query algorithm
improves on theirs in that it does not require equivalence queries, but has the downside of not
being attribute-efﬁcient. The latter is not an artefact of our algorithm—we argue in Section 7 why
attribute-efﬁcient learning of CP-nets with membership queries alone is not possible.
2.3. Complexity Parameters in Computational Learning Theory
The Vapnik Chervonenkis Dimension, also called VC dimension [18], is one of the best studied
complexity parameters in the computational learning theory literature. Upper and/or lower sample
complexity bounds that are linear in the VC dimension are known for various popular models of
concept learning, namely for PAC learning, which is a basic model of learning from randomly
chosen examples [39], for exact learning from equivalence and membership queries, which is a
model of learning from active queries [19], and, in some special cases even for learning from
teachers [40, 41].
Because of these bounds, knowledge of the VC dimension value of a concept class C can
help in assessing learning algorithms for C. For example, if the number of queries consumed by
an algorithm learning C exceeds a known lower bound on the query complexity by a constant
factor, we know that the algorithm is within a constant factor of optimal. For this reason, the
VC dimension of classes of CP-nets have been studied in the literature. Koriche and Zanuttini
[7], for the purpose of analyzing their algorithms for learning from equivalence and membership
queries, established a lower bound on the VC dimension of the class of complete and incomplete
k-bounded binary CP-nets. Chevaleyre et al. [24] gave asymptotic estimates on the VC dimension
of classes of CP-nets. They showed that the VC dimension of acyclic binary CP-nets is Θ(2n)
for arbitrary CP-nets and ˜Θ(n2k) for k-bounded CP-nets. Here n is the number of attributes in
a CP-net. The results by Chevaleyre et al. are in agreement with our results, stating that VCD is
2n −1 for arbitrary acyclic CP-nets and at least (n −k)2k + 2k −1 for k-bounded ones.
Our work improves on both of these contributions. Firstly, we correct a mistake in the lower
bound published by Koriche and Zanuttini. Secondly, compared to asymptotic studies by Cheva-
leyre et al., we calculate exact values or explicit lower bounds on the VC dimension. Thirdly, we
calculate the VC dimension also for the case that the attributes in a CP-net have more than two
values.
To the best of our knowledge, there are no other studies that address learning-theoretic com-
plexity parameters of CP-nets. The present paper computes two more parameters, namely the
teaching dimension [20] and the recursive teaching dimension [25], both of which refer to the
complexity of machine teaching. Recently, models of machine teaching have received increased
attention in the machine learning community [42, 43], since they try to capture the idea of help-
fully selected training data as would be expected in many human-centric applications. In our study,
teaching complexity parameters are of relevance for two reasons.
First, the teaching dimension is a lower bound on the number of membership queries required
for learning [20], und thus a tool for evaluating the efﬁciency of our learning algorithms relative
to the theoretic optimum.
Second, due to the increased interest in machine teaching, the machine learning community
is looking for bounds on the efﬁciency of teaching, in terms of other well-studied parameters.
6

The recursive teaching dimension is the ﬁrst teaching complexity parameter that was shown to be
closely related to the VC dimension. It is known to be at most quadratic in the VC dimension [44],
and under certain structural properties even equal to the VC dimension [40]. However, it remains
open whether or not it is upper-bounded by a function linear in the VC dimension [41]. With
the class of all unbounded acyclic CP-nets, we provide the ﬁrst example of an “interesting” con-
cept class for which the VC dimension and the recursive teaching dimension are equal, provably
without satisfying any of the known structural properties that would imply such equality. Thus,
our study of the recursive teaching dimension of classes of CP-nets may be of help to ongoing
learning-theoretic studies of teaching complexity in general.
3. Background
This section introduces the terminology and notation used subsequently, and motivates the
formal settings studied in the rest of the paper.
3.1. Conditional Preference Networks (CP-nets)
We largely follow the notation introduced by Boutilier et al. [6] in their seminal work on CP-
nets; the reader is referred to Table 1 for a list of the most important notation used throughout our
manuscript.
Let V = {v1, v2, . . . , vn} be a set of attributes or variables. Each variable vi ∈V has a set
of possible values (its domain) Dvi = {vi
1, vi
2, . . . , vi
m}. We assume that every domain Dvi is of a
ﬁxed size m ≥2, independent of i. An assignment x to a set of variables U ⊆V is a mapping for
every variable vi ∈U to a value from Dvi. We denote the set of all assignments of U ⊆V by OU
and remove the subscript when U = V . A preference is an irreﬂexive, transitive binary relation ≻.
For any o, o′ ∈O, we write o ≻o′ (resp. o ⊁o′) to denote the fact that o is strictly preferred (resp.
not preferred) to o′, where o and o′ are incomparable w.r.t. ≻if both o ⊁o′ and o′ ⊁o holds. We
use o[U] to denote the projection of o onto U ⊂V and write o[vi] instead of o[{vi}].
The CP-net model captures complex qualitative preference statements in a graphical way. In-
formally, a CP-net is a set of statements of the form γ : vi
σ(1) ≻. . . ≻vi
σ(m) which states
that the preference over vi with Dvi = {vi
1, vi
2, . . . , vi
m} is conditioned upon the assignment of
Γ ⊆V \{vi}, where σ is some permutation over {1, . . . , m}. In particular, when Γ has the value
γ ∈OΓ and s < t, vi
σ(s) is preferred to vi
σ(t) as a value of vi ceteris paribus (all other things
being equal). That is, for any two outcomes o, o′ ∈O where o[vi] = vi
σ(s) and o′[vi] = vi
σ(t) the
preference holds when i) o[Γ] = o′[Γ] = γ and ii) o[Z] = o′[Z] for Z = V \(Γ ∪{vi}). In such
case, we say o is preferred to o′ ceteris paribus. Clearly, there could be exponentially many pairs
of outcomes (o,o′) that are affected by one such statement.
CP-nets provide a compact representation of preferences over O by providing such statements
for every variable. For every vi ∈V , the decision maker2 chooses a set Pa(vi) ⊆V \{vi} of
parent variables that inﬂuence the preference order of vi. For any γ ∈OP a(vi), the decision maker
2This can be any entity in charge of constructing the preference network, i.e., a computer agent, a person, a group
of people, etc.
7

notation
meaning
n
number of variables
m
size of the domain of each variable
k
upper bound on the number of parents of a variable in a CP-net
V
set of n distinct variables, V = {v1, v2, . . . , vn}
vi
variable in V , for 1 ≤i ≤n
Dvi
domain {vi
1, vi
2, . . . , vi
m} of variable vi ∈V
OU for U ⊆V
set of vectors (outcomes over U) that assign each vi ∈U a value in Dvi
O
set of all outcomes over the full variable set V ; equal to OV
o
outcome over the full variable set V , i.e., an element of O
o ≻o′
outcome o ∈O is strictly preferred over outcome o′ ∈O
o[U]
projection of outcome o ∈O onto a set U ⊆V ; o[vi] is short for o[{vi}]
x(= (o, o′))
swap pair of outcomes
V (x)
swapped variable of x
x.1 and x.2
o and o′ respectively, where x = (o, o′) is a swap
x[Γ]
projection of x.1 (and also of x.2) onto a set Γ ⊆V \ {V (x)}
Pa(vi)
set of the parent variables of vi; note that Pa(vi) ⊆V \{vi}
≻vi
u
conditional preference relation of vi in the context of u, where u ∈OP a(vi)
CPT(vi)
conditional preference table of vi
size(CPT(vi))
size (number of preference statements) of CPT(vi); note size(CPT(vi)) ≤m|P a(vi)|
E
set of edges in a CP-net, where (vi, vj) ∈E iff vi ∈Pa(vj)
C
a concept class
c
a concept in a concept class
X
instance space over which a concept class is deﬁned
Xswap
instance space of swap examples (without redundancies)
X swap
instance space of swap examples (with redundancies)
c(x)
label that concept c assigns to instance x
VCD(C)
VC dimension of concept class C
TD(C)
teaching dimension of concept class C
TD(c, C)
teaching dimension of concept c with respect to concept class C
RTD(C)
recursive teaching dimension of concept class C
Ck
ac
class of all complete acyclic k-bounded CP-nets, over Xswap
C
k
ac
class of all complete or incomplete acyclic k-bounded CP-nets, over X swap
emax
(n −k)k +
 k
2

(≤nk); maximum number of edges in a CP-net in Ck
ac or C
k
ac
Mk
(n −k)mk + mk−1
m−1 ; maximum number of statements in a CP-net in Ck
ac or C
k
ac
Uk
smallest possible size of an (m, n −1, k)-universal set
LIM
strategy to combat a limited oracle
MAL
strategy to combat a malicious oracle
F 1(x)
set of all swap instances differing from x in exactly one non-swapped variable
Table 1: Summary of notation.
8

may choose to specify a total order ≻vi
γ over Dvi. We refer to ≻vi
γ as the conditional preference
statement of vi in the context of γ. A Conditional Preference Table for vi, CPT(vi), is a set of
conditional preference statements {≻vi
γ1, . . . , ≻vi
γz}.
Deﬁnition 1 (CP-net [6]). Given, V , Pa(v), and CPT(v) for v ∈V , a CP-net is a directed graph
(V, E), where, for any vi, vj ∈V , (vi, vj) ∈E iff vi ∈Pa(vj).
A CP-net is acyclic if it contains no cycles. We call a CP-net k-bounded, for some k ≤n −1,
if each vertex has indegree at most k, i.e., each variable has a parent set of size at most k. CP-nets
that are 0-bounded are also called separable; those that are 1-bounded are called tree CP-nets.
When speaking about the class of “unbounded” acyclic CP-nets, we refer to the case when no
upper bound is given on the indegree of nodes in a CP-net, other than the trivial bound k = n −1.
Deﬁnition 2. CPT(vi) is said to be complete, if, for every element γ ∈OP a(vi), the preference
relation ≻vi
γ is deﬁned, i.e., CPT(vi) contains a statement that imposes a total order on Dvi for
every context γ over the parent variables. By contrast, CPT(vi) is incomplete, if there exists some
γ ∈OP a(vi) for which the preference relation ≻vi
γ is empty. Analogously, a CP-net N is said to be
complete if every CPT it poses is complete; otherwise it is incomplete.
Note that we do not allow strictly partial orders as preference statements; a preference relation
in a CPT must either be empty or impose a total order. In the case of binary CP-nets, which is the
focus of the majority of the literature on CP-nets, this restriction is irrelevant, since every order on
a domain of two elements is either empty or total. In the non-binary case though, the requirement
that every CPT statement be either empty or a total order is a proper restriction.
It would be possible to also study non-binary CP-nets that are incomplete in the sense that
some CPT statements impose proper partial orders, but this extension is not discussed below.
Lastly, we assume CP-nets are deﬁned in their minimal form, i.e., there is no dummy parent in
any CPT that actually does not affect the preference relation.
Example 1. Figure 1a shows a complete acyclic CP-net over V = {A, B, C} with DA = {a, ¯a},
DB = {b,¯b}, DC = {c, ¯c}. Each variable is annotated with its CPT. For variable A, the user
prefers a to ¯a unconditionally. For C, the preference depends on the values of A and B, i.e.,
Pa(C) = {A, B}. For instance, in the context of a¯b, ¯c is preferred over c. Removing any of the
four statements in CPT(C) would result in an incomplete CP-net.
Two outcomes o, ˆo ∈O are swap outcomes (‘swaps’ for short) if they differ in the value of
exactly one variable vi; then vi is called the swapped variable [6].
The size of a preference table for a variable vi, denoted by size(CPT(vi)), is the number of
preference statements it holds which is m|P a(vi)| if CPT(vi) is complete. The size of a CP-net N
is deﬁned as the sum of its tables’ sizes.3
3It might seem more adequate to deﬁne the size of a CPT to be (m −1) times the number of its preference
statements, as each preference statement consists of m−1 pairwise preferences. In the binary case, i.e., when m = 2,
this makes no difference. As this technical detail does not affect our results, we ignore it and deﬁne the size of a CPT
and of a CP-net simply by the overall number of its statements.
9

Example 2. In Figure 1, abc, ¯abc are swaps over the swapped variable A. The size of the CP-net
is 1 + 2 + 4 = 7.
We will frequently use the notation Mk = max{size(N) | N is a k-bounded acyclic CP-net},
which refers to the maximum number of statements in any k-bounded acyclic CP-net over n vari-
ables, each of domain size m. Note that a CP-net has to be complete in order to attain this maxi-
mum size. It can be veriﬁed that Mk = (n −k)mk + mk−1
m−1 .
Lemma 1. The maximum possible size Mk of a k-bounded acyclic CP-net over n variables of
domain size m is given by Mk = (n −k)mk + mk−1
m−1 .
Proof. We ﬁrst make the following claim: any k-bounded acyclic CP-net of largest possible size
has (i) exactly 1 variable of indegree r, for any r ∈{0, . . . , k −1} and (ii) exactly n −k variables
of indegree k.
For k = 0, i.e., for separable CP-nets, there is no r ∈{0, . . . , k −1}, so the claim states the
existence of exactly n vertices of indegree 0, which is obviously correct. Consider any k-bounded
acyclic CP-net N of largest possible size, where k ≥1. Since N is acyclic, it has a topological
sort. W.l.o.g., suppose (v1, . . . , vn) is the sequence of variables in N as they occur in a topological
sort. Clearly, v1 must have indegree 0. If v2 were also of indegree 0, then N would not be of
maximal size since one could add v1 as a parent of v2 without violating the indegree bound k. The
resulting CP-net would be of larger size than N, since the size of CPT(v2) would grow by a factor
of m without changing the sizes of other CPTs. Hence v2 has indegree 1 in N. With the same
argument, one can prove that vi has indegree i −1 in N, for 1 ≤i ≤k + 1. For the variables
vk+2, . . . , vn, one can apply the same argument but has to cap their indegrees at k because N is
k-bounded. Hence vk+1, . . . , vn all have indegree k. This establishes the claim.
It remains to count the maximal number of statements in a CP-net N of this speciﬁc structure.
The maximal number of statements for a given CP-net graph is obviously obtained when the CP-
net is complete, i.e., when the CPT for any variable v has m|P a(v)| rules. Summing up, we obtain
Pk−1
i=0 mi =
mk−1
m−1 statements for the ﬁrst k variables in the topological sort, plus (n −k)mk
statements for the remaining n −k variables.
■
From this lemma, we also know that the maximum possible number of edges in a k-bounded
acyclic CP-net is (n −k)k + Pk−1
i=0 i = (n −k)k +
 k
2

. We will use the notation emax to refer to
this quantity.
Deﬁnition 3. For given n ≥1 and k ∈{0, . . . , n −1}, let emax = (n −k)k +
 k
2

denote the
maximum possible number of edges in a k-bounded acyclic CP-net over n variables.
Note that emax ≤nk.
The semantics of CP-nets is described in terms of improving ﬂips. Let γ ∈OP a(vi) be an
assignment of the parents for a variable vi ∈V . Let ≻vi
γ = vi
1 ≻. . . ≻vi
m be the preference order
of vi in the context of γ. Then, all else being equal, going from vi
j to vi
k is an improving ﬂip over
vi whenever k < j ≤m.
Example 3. In Figure 1a, (a¯bc, abc) is an improving ﬂip with respect to the variable B.
10

A
B
C
a : b ≻¯b
¯a : ¯b ≻b
a ≻¯a
ab : c ≻¯c
a¯b : ¯c ≻c
¯ab : ¯c ≻c
¯a¯b : c ≻¯c
(a) The CP-net.
a¯b¯c
¯ab¯c
¯a¯bc
ab¯c
a¯bc
¯abc
abc
¯a¯b¯c
(b) The induced preference graph.
Figure 1: An acyclic CP-net (cf. Def. 1) and its induced preference graph (cf. Def. 4).
For complete CP-nets, the improving ﬂip notion makes every pair (o, ˆo) of swap outcomes
comparable, i.e., either o ≻ˆo or ˆo ≻o holds [6]. The question “is o ≻ˆo?” is then a special
case of a so-called dominance query and can be answered directly from the preference table of the
swapped variable. Let vi be the swapped variable of a swap (o, ˆo). Let γ be the context of Pa(vi)
in both o and ˆo. Then, o ≻ˆo iff o[vi] ≻vi
γ ˆo[vi]. A general dominance query is of the form: given
two outcomes o, ˆo ∈O, is o ≻ˆo? The answer is yes, iff o is preferred to ˆo, i.e., there is a sequence
(λ1, . . . , λn) of improving ﬂips from ˆo to o, where ˆo = λ1, o = λn, and (λi, λi+1) is an improving
ﬂip for all i ∈{1, . . . , n −1} [6].
Example 4. In Figure 1b, abc ≻¯a¯bc, as witnessed by the sequence ¯a¯bc →a¯bc →abc of improving
ﬂips.
Deﬁnition 4 (Induced Preference Graph [6]). The induced preference graph of a CP-net N is a
directed graph G where each vertex represents an outcome o ∈O. An edge from ˆo to o exists iff
(o, ˆo) ∈O × O is a swap w.r.t. some vi ∈V and o[vi] precedes ˆo[vi] in ≻vi
o[P a(vi)].
Therefore, a CP-net N deﬁnes a partial order ≻over O that is given by the transitive closure
of its induced preference graph. If o ≻ˆo we say N entails (o, ˆo). N is consistent if there is no
o ∈O with o ≻o, i.e., if its induced preference graph is acyclic. Acyclic CP-nets are guaranteed
to be consistent while such guarantee does not exist for cyclic CP-nets; the consistency of the latter
depends on the actual values of the CPTs [6]. Lastly, the complexity of ﬁnding the best outcome
in an acyclic CP-net has been shown to be linear [6] while the complexity of answering dominance
queries depends on the structure of CP-nets: PSPACE-complete for arbitrary (cyclic and acyclic)
consistent CP-nets [45] and linear in case of trees [46].
Example 5. Figure 2 shows an example of a cyclic CP-net that is consistent while Figure 3 shows
an inconsistent one. Note that both share the same CPTs except for CPT(C). The dotted edges
in the induced preference graph of Figure 3 represent a cycle.
11

A
B
C
a ≻¯a
ac : b ≻¯b
a¯c : b ≻¯b
¯ac : ¯b ≻b
¯a¯c : b ≻¯b
ab : c ≻¯c
a¯b : ¯c ≻c
¯ab : ¯c ≻c
¯a¯b : ¯c ≻c
(a) The network.
a¯b¯c
¯ab¯c
¯a¯bc
ab¯c
a¯bc
¯abc
abc
¯a¯b¯c
(b) The induced preference graph.
Figure 2: An example of a consistent cyclic CP-net.
A
B
C
a ≻¯a
ac : b ≻¯b
a¯c : b ≻¯b
¯ac : ¯b ≻b
¯a¯c : b ≻¯b
b : c ≻¯c
¯b : ¯c ≻c
(a) The network.
a¯b¯c
¯ab¯c
¯a¯bc
ab¯c
a¯bc
¯abc
abc
¯a¯b¯c
(b) The induced preference graph.
Figure 3: An example of an inconsistent cyclic CP-net.
3.2. Concept Learning
The ﬁrst part of our study is concerned with determining—for the case of acyclic CP-nets—the
values of information complexity parameters that are typically studied in computational learning
theory. By information complexity, we mean the complexity in terms of the amount of information
a learning algorithm needs to identify a CP-net. Examples of such complexity notions will be
introduced below.
A speciﬁc complexity notion corresponds to a speciﬁc formal model of machine learning.
Each such learning model assumes that there is an information source that supplies the learning
algorithm with information about a hidden target concept c∗. The latter is a member of a concept
class, which is simply the class of potential target concepts, and, in the context of this paper, also
the class of hypotheses that the learning algorithm can formulate in the attempt to identify the
target concept c∗.
Formally, one ﬁxes a ﬁnite set X , called instance space, which contains all possible instances
(i.e., elements of) an underlying domain. A concept c is then deﬁned as a mapping from X to
{0, 1}. Equivalently, c can be seen as the set c = {x ∈X | c(x) = 1}, i.e., a subset of the instance
space. A concept class C is a set of concepts. Within the scope of our study, the information
source (sometimes called oracle), supplies the learning algorithm in some way or another with
a set of labeled examples for the target concept c∗∈C. A labeled example for c∗is a pair
(x, b) ∈X × {0, 1} where x ∈X and b = c(x). Under the set interpretation of concepts, this
means that b = 1 if and only if the instance x belongs to the concept c∗. A concept c is consistent
12

with a set S ⊆X × {0, 1} of labeled examples, if and only if c(x) = b for all (x, b) ∈S, i.e., if
every element of S is an example for c.
In practice, a concept is usually encoded by a representation σ(c) deﬁned based on a repre-
sentation class R [47]. Thus, one usually has some ﬁxed representation class R in mind, with a
one-to-one correspondence between the concept class C and its representation class R. We will
assume in what follows that the representation class is chosen in a way that minimizes the worst
case size of the representation of any concept in C. Generally, there may be various interpretations
of the term “size;” since we will focus on learning CP-nets, we use CP-nets as representations for
concepts, and the size of a representation is simply the size of the corresponding CP-net as deﬁned
above.
At the onset of a learning process, both the oracle and the learning algorithm (often called
learner for short) agree on the representation class R (and thus also on the concept class C), but
only the oracle knows the target concept c∗. After some period of communication with the oracle,
the learner is required to identify the target concept c∗either exactly or approximately.
Many learning models have been proposed to deal with different learning settings [47, 12, 48,
49]. These models typically differ in the constraints they impose on the oracle and the learning
goal. One also distinguishes between learners that actively query the oracle for speciﬁc informa-
tion content and learners that passively receive a set of examples chosen solely by the information
source. One of the best known passive learning models is the Probably Approximately Correct
(PAC) model [49]. The PAC model is concerned with ﬁnding, with high probability, a close ap-
proximation to the target concept c∗from randomly chosen examples. The examples are assumed
to be sampled independently from an unknown distribution. On the other end of the spectrum, a
model that requires exact identiﬁcation of c∗is Angluin’s model for learning from queries [12]. In
this model, the learner actively poses queries of a certain type to the oracle.
In this paper, we consider speciﬁcally two types of queries introduced by Angluin [12], namely
membership queries and equivalence queries. A membership query is speciﬁed by an element
x ∈X of the instance space, and it represents the question whether or not c∗contains x. The
oracle supplies the learner with the correct answer, i.e., it provides the label c∗(x) in response
to the membership query for x. In an equivalence query, the learner speciﬁes a hypothesis c. If
c = c∗, the learning process is completed as the learner has then identiﬁed the target concept. If
c ̸= c∗, the learner is provided with a labeled example (x, c∗(x)) that witnesses c ̸= c∗. That
means, c∗(x) ̸= c(x). Note that x in this case can be any element in the symmetric difference of
the sets associated with c and c∗.
A class C ⊆2X over some instance space X is learnable from membership and/or equiva-
lence queries via a representation class R for C, if there is an algorithm A such that for every
concept c∗∈C, A asks polynomially many adaptive membership and/or equivalence queries and
then outputs a hypothesis h that is equivalent to c∗. By adaptivity, we here mean that learning
proceeds in rounds; in every round the learner asks a single query and receives an answer from the
oracle before deciding on its subsequent query. The number of queries to be polynomial means
that it is upper-bounded by a polynomial in size(c∗) where size(c∗) is the size of the minimal
representation of c∗w.r.t. R.
The above deﬁnition is concerned only with the information or query complexity, i.e., the
number of queries required to exactly identify any target concept. Moreover, C is said to be
13

efﬁciently learnable from membership and/or equivalence queries if there exists an algorithm A
that exactly learns C, in the above sense, and runs in time polynomial in size(c∗). Every one
of the query strategies we describe in Section 7 gives an obvious polynomial time algorithm in
this regard, and thus we will not explicitly mention run-time efﬁciency of learning algorithms
henceforth.
The combinatorial structure of a concept class C has implications on the complexity of learning
C, in particular on the sample complexity (sometimes called information complexity), which refers
to the number of labeled examples the learner needs in order to identify any target concept in the
class under the constraints of a given learning model. One of the most important complexity
parameters studied in machine learning is the Vapnik-Chervonenkis dimension (VCD). In what
follows, let C be a concept class over the (ﬁnite) instance space X .
Deﬁnition 5. [18] A subset Y ⊆X is shattered by C if the projection of C onto Y has 2|Y | concepts.
The VC dimension of C, denoted by VCD(C), is the size of the largest subset of X that is shattered
by C.
For example, if X contains 5 elements and C5
3 is the class of all subsets of X that have size at
most 3, then the VC dimension of C5
3 is 3. Clearly, no subset Y of X of size 4 can be shattered by
C5
3, since no concept in C5
3 would contains all 4 elements of Y . That means, one obtains only 15,
not the full 16 possible concepts over Y when projecting C5
3 onto Y . However, any subset Y ′ ⊂X
of size 3 is indeed shattered by C5
3, as every subset of Y ′ is also a concept in C5
3.
The number of randomly chosen examples needed to identify concepts from C in the PAC-
learning model is linear in VCD(C) [50, 39]. By contrast to learning from random examples, in
teaching models, the learner is provided with well-chosen labeled examples.
Deﬁnition 6. [20, 51] A teaching set for a concept c∗∈C with respect to C is a set S =
{(x1, ℓ1), . . . , (xz, ℓz)} of labeled examples such that c∗is the only concept c ∈C that satisﬁes
c(xi) = ℓi for all i ∈{1, . . . , z}. The teaching dimension of c with respect to C, denoted by
TD(c, C), is the size of the smallest teaching set for c with respect to C. The teaching dimension of
C, denoted by TD(C), is given by TD(C) = max{TD(c, C) | c ∈C}.
Consider again the class C5
3 of all subsets of size at most 3 over a 5-element instance space.
Any concept c containing 3 instances has a teaching set of size 3 in this class: the three positively
labeled examples referring to the elements contained in c uniquely determine c. However, concepts
with fewer than 3 elements do not have teaching sets smaller than 5, since any set consisting of
2 positive and 2 negative examples agrees with at least two different concepts in C5
3, and so does
every set of 1 positive and 3 negative examples and every set of 4 negative examples.
TDmin(C) = min{TD(c, C) | c ∈C} denotes the smallest TD of any c ∈C. In the class C5
3,
the value for TD is 5, while the value for TDmin is 3.
A well-studied variation of teaching is called recursive teaching. Its complexity parameter, the
recursive teaching dimension, is deﬁned by recursively removing from C all the concepts with the
smallest TD and then taking the maximum over the smallest TDs encountered in that process. For
the corresponding deﬁnition of teachers, see [25].
14

Table 2: The class C of all singletons and the empty concept over a set of t instances, along with the teaching dimension
value of each individual concept.
C
x1
x2
x3
x4
. . .
xt
TD
c0
0
0
0
0
. . .
0
t
c1
1
0
0
0
. . .
0
1
c2
0
1
0
0
. . .
0
1
c3
0
0
1
0
. . .
0
1
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
ct
0
0
0
0
. . .
1
1
Deﬁnition 7. [25] Let C0 = C and, for all i such that Ci ̸= ∅, deﬁne Ci+1 = Ci \ {c ∈Ci |
TD(c, Ci) = TDmin(Ci)}. The recursive teaching dimension of C, denoted by RTD(C), is deﬁned
by RTD(C) = max{TDmin(Ci) | i ≥0}.
As an example, consider C′ = {c1, c2, . . . , ct} to be the class of singletons deﬁned over the
instance space X = {x1, x2, . . . , xt} where ci = {xi} and let C = C′ ∪{c0}, where c0 is the
empty concept, i.e., c0(x) = 0 for all x ∈X . Table 2 displays this class along with TD(c, C) for
every c ∈C. Since distinguishing the concept c0 from all other concepts in C requires t labeled
examples, one obtains TD(C) = t. However, RTD(C) = 1 as witnessed by C0 = C′ (each concept
in C′ can be taught with a single example) and C1 = {c0} (the remaining concept c0 has a teaching
dimension of 0 with respect to the class containing only c0). Note that also VCD(C) = 1, since
there is no set of two examples that is shattered by C.
Similarly, one can verify that RTD(C5
3) = 3.
As opposed to the TD, the RTD exhibits interesting relationships to the VCD. For example, if
C is a maximum class, i.e., its size |C| meets Sauer’s upper bound
 |X|
0

+
 |X|
1

+ . . . +
 |X|
VCD(C)

[52], and in addition C can be “corner-peeled”4, then C fulﬁlls RTD(C) = VCD(C) [40]. The same
equality holds if C is intersection-closed or has VCD 1 [40]. In general, the RTD is upper-bounded
by a function quadratic in the VCD [44].
4. Representing CP-Nets as Concepts
Assuming a user’s preferences are captured in a target CP-net N∗, an interesting learning
problem is to identify N∗from a set of observations representing the user’s preferences, i.e.,
labeled examples, of the form o ≻o′ or o ⊁o′ where ≻is the relation induced by N∗[8, 7]. In
order to study the complexity of learning CP-nets, we model a class of CP-nets as a concept class
over a ﬁxed instance space.
The ﬁrst issue to address is how to deﬁne the instance space. A natural approach would be
to consider any pair (o, o′) of outcomes as an instance. Such instance would be contained in the
4Corner peeling is a sample compression procedure introduced by Rubinstein and Rubinstein [53]; the actual
algorithm or its purpose are not of immediate relevance to our paper.
15

concept corresponding to N∗if and only if N∗entails o ≻o′. In our study however, we restrict
the instance space to the set of all swaps.
On the one hand, note that our results, due to the restriction to swaps, do not apply to scenarios
in which preferences are elicited over arbitrary outcome pairs, as is likely the case in many real-
world applications.
On the other hand, for various reasons, the restriction to swaps is still of both theoretical and
practical interest and therefore justiﬁed. First, CP-net semantics are completely determined by the
preference relation over swaps, so that no information on the preference order is lost by restricting
to swaps. In particular, the set of all swaps is the most compact instance space for representing
the class of all CP-nets or the class of all acyclic CP-nets. Second, many studies in the literature
address learning CP-nets from information on swaps, see [7, 8, 22, 23, 13], so that our results
can be compared to existing ones on the swap instance space. Third, in the learning models
that we consider (teaching and learning from membership queries) learning becomes harder when
restricting the instance space. For example, a learning algorithm may potentially succeed faster
when it is allowed to enquire about preferences over any pair of outcomes rather than just swaps.
Since our study restricts the information presented to the learner to preferences over swaps, our
complexity results thus serve as upper bounds on the complexity of learning in more relaxed
settings. Fourth, for the design of learning methods, it is often desirable that the learner can check
whether its hypothesis (in our case a CP-net) is consistent with the labeled examples obtained. This
can be done in linear time for swap examples but is NP-hard for non-swap examples [6]. Fifth,
there are potential application scenarios in which the information presented to a learner may be in
the form of preferences over swaps. This is due to the intuition that in many cases preferences over
swaps would be much easier to elicit than preferences over two arbitrary outcomes. For example,
a user may be overwhelmed with the question whether to prefer one laptop over another if each
of them has a nice feature that the other does not have. It is likely easier for the user to express a
preference over two laptops that are identical except in a single feature.
One may argue that the VC dimension should be computed over arbitrary instances rather than
just swap instances, since it captures how difﬁcult a concept class is to learn when the choice of
instances is out of the learner’s (or teacher’s) control. However, for the following two reasons,
computing the VC dimension over swap instances is of importance to our study:
• We use our calculations on the VC dimension in order to assess the optimality of one of Ko-
riche and Zanuttini’s algorithms [7] for learning acyclic CP-nets with nodes of bounded in-
degree from equivalence and membership queries. It is well-known that log2(4/3)VCD(C)
is a lower bound on the number of membership and equivalence queries required for learning
a concept class C [19]. Since Koriche and Zanuttini’s algorithm that we assess is designed
over the swap instance space, an optimality assessment using the VC dimension necessarily
requires that the VC dimension be computed over the swap instance space as well.
• Although the VC dimension is best known for characterizing the sample complexity of learn-
ing from randomly chosen examples, namely in the model of PAC learning, existing results
exhibit a broader scope of applicability of the VC dimension. Recently it was shown that the
number of examples needed for learning from benevolent teachers can be upper-bounded by
16

a function quadratic in the VC dimension [44]. When studying the number of swap exam-
ples required for teaching CP-nets, thus again also the VC dimension over swap examples
becomes interesting.
We therefore consider the set {(o, o′) ∈O × O | (o, o′) is a swap} as an instance space.
The size of this instance space is nmn(m −1): every variable has mn−1 different assignments
of the other variables and ﬁxing each assignment of these we have m(m −1) instances. For
complete acyclic CP-nets, however, half of these instances are redundant as if c((o, o′)) = 0 then
we know for certain that c((o′, o)) = 1, and vice versa. By contrast, in the case of incomplete
CP-nets, c((o, o′)) = 0 does not necessarily mean c((o′, o)) = 1 as there could be no relation
between the two outcomes, i.e., o and o′ are incomparable, corresponding to both c((o, o′)) = 0
and c((o′, o)) = 0.
Consequently, the choice of instance space in our study will be as follows:
• Whenever we study classes of CP-nets that contain incomplete CP-nets, we use the instance
space X swap = {(o, o′) ∈O × O | (o, o′) is a swap}.
• Whenever we study classes of only complete CP-nets, we use an instance space Xswap ⊂
X swap that includes, for any two swap outcomes o, o′, exactly one of the two pairs (o, o′), (o′, o).5
Note that |Xswap| = nmn−1 m
2

= mnn(m−1)
2
. When we say that a learning algorithm, either
passively or through active queries, is given information on the label of a swap (o, o′) under
the target concept, we implicitly refer to information on either (o, o′) or (o′, o), depending
on which of the two is actually contained in Xswap.
We sometimes refer to Xswap as the set of all swaps without “redundancies”, since for the case
of complete CP-nets half the instances in X swap are redundant. Of course, for incomplete CP-nets
they are not redundant.
For x = (o, o′) ∈X swap, let V (x) denote the swapped variable of x. We refer to the ﬁrst
and second outcomes of an example x as x.1 and x.2, respectively. We use x[Γ] to denote the
assignments (in both x.1 and x.2) of Γ ⊆V \{V (x)}. Note that x[Γ] is guaranteed to be the same
in x.1 and x.2, otherwise x will not form a swap instance.
Now if N is any CP-net and induces the (partial) order ≻over outcomes, then N corresponds
to a concept cN over X swap (over Xswap, respectively), where cN is deﬁned as follows, for any
x ∈X swap (any x ∈Xswap, respectively.)
c(x) =
(
1
if x.1 ≻x.2
0
otherwise
In such case, we say that c is represented by N. Since no two distinct CP-nets induce exactly
the same set of swap entailments, a concept over the instance space X swap cannot be represented
by more than one CP-net, and a concept over the instance space Xswap cannot be represented by
5All our results are independent on the mechanism choosing which of two pairs (o, o′), (o′, o) to include in Xswap.
We assume that the selection is prescribed in some arbitrary fashion.
17

Xswap
(abc, ¯abc)
(ab¯c, ¯ab¯c)
(a¯bc, ¯a¯bc)
(a¯b¯c, ¯a¯b¯c)
(abc, a¯bc)
(ab¯c, a¯b¯c)
(¯abc, ¯a¯bc)
(¯ab¯c, ¯a¯b¯c)
(abc, ab¯c)
(a¯bc, a¯b¯c)
(¯abc, ¯ab¯c)
(¯a¯bc, ¯a¯b¯c)
c1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
c2
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
Table 3: The concepts c1 and c2 represent the CP-nets in Figures 1 and 2, respectively, over Xswap.
more than one complete CP-net. Therefore, in the context of a speciﬁc instance space, we identify
a CP-net N with the concept cN it represents and use these two notions interchangeably.
Consequently, we say that a concept c contains a swap pair x iff the CP-net representing c
entails (x.1, x.2). By size(c), we refer to the size of the CP-net that represents c.
Table 3 shows two concepts c1 and c2 that correspond to the complete CP-nets shown in Figures
1 and 2, respectively, along with one choice of Xswap. It is important to restate the fact that c(x)
is actually a dominance relation between x.1 and x.2, i.e., c(x) is mapped to 1 (resp. to 0) if
x.1 ≻x.2 (resp. x.2 ≻x.1) holds. Thus, we sometimes talk about the value of c(x) in terms of
the relation between x.1 and x.2 (x.1 ≻x.2 or x.2 ≻x.1).
In the remainder of this article, we ﬁx n ≥1, m ≥2, k ∈{0, . . . , n −1}, and consider the
following two concept classes:
• The class Ck
ac of all complete acyclic k-bounded CP-nets over n variables of domain size m.
This class is represented over the instance space Xswap.
• The class C
k
ac of all complete and all incomplete acyclic k-bounded CP-nets over n variables
of domain size m. This class is represented over the instance space X swap.
5. The Complexity of Learning Complete Acyclic CP-Nets
In this section, we will study the information complexity parameters introduced above, for
the class Ck
ac of all complete acyclic k-bounded CP-nets over n variables of domain size m. In
Section 6, we will extend our results on the VC dimension and the teaching dimension also to
the class C
k
ac of all complete and incomplete acyclic k-bounded CP-nets. It turns out though that
studying the complete case ﬁrst is easier.
Table 4 summarizes our complexity results for complete acyclic k-bounded CP-nets. The two
extreme cases are unbounded acyclic CP-nets (k = n −1) and separable CP-nets (k = 0).
To deﬁne the value Uk used in this table, we will ﬁrst introduce the notion of (z, k)-universal
set, which is typically used in combinatorics, cf. [54, 55].
Deﬁnition 8. Let S ⊆{0, 1}z be a set of binary vectors of length z and let k ≤z. The set S is
called (z, k)-universal if, for every set Z = {i1, . . . , ik} ⊆{1, . . . z} with |Z| = k, the projection
{(si1, . . . , sik) | (s1, . . . , sz) ∈S}
of S to the components in Z is of size 2k, i.e., it contains all binary vectors of length k.
In other words, a (z, k)-universal set S is a set of concepts over an instance space X of size z,
such that every subset of X of size k is shattered by S.
18

Example 6. Consider z = 10 and k = 3, and let S be the set of all binary vectors of length 10 that
contain no more than 3 components equal to 1. This set is (10, 3)-universal, since projecting it to
any set of three components yields all eight binary vectors of length 3. It is not (10, 4)-universal
since projections onto four components do not exhibit the binary vector consisting of four 1s.
The role of (z, k)-universal sets in our study will become evident later on when we investigate
the teaching dimension of classes of CP-nets. Here we present a generalization of (z, k)-universal
sets to the non-binary case in order to deﬁne the quantity Uk used in Table 4.
Deﬁnition 9. Let S ⊆{1, . . . , m}z be a set of vectors of length z with components in {1, . . . , m}.
Let k ≤z. The set S is called (m, z, k)-universal if, for every set Z = {i1, . . . , ik} ⊆{1, . . . z}
with |Z| = k, the projection
{(si1, . . . , sik) | (s1, . . . , sz) ∈S}
of S to the components in Z is of size mk, i.e., it contains all vectors of length k with components
in {1, . . . , m}.
Thus the classical (z, k)-universal sets correspond to (2, z, k)-universal sets in our notation.
To date, no formula is known that expresses the exact size of a smallest possible (z, k)-universal
set (or of a smallest possible (m, z, k)-universal set, respectively) in dependence of z and k (in
dependence of m, z, and k, respectively,) though some useful bounds on this quantity have been
established [55]. The quantity is of importance for our results on the teaching dimension.
Deﬁnition 10. Let n ≥1, m ≥2, k ≤n −1. When studying CP-nets over n variables, each
of which has a domain of size m, we denote by Uk the smallest possible size of an (m, n −1, k)-
universal set.
The following simple observations on universal sets will be useful for our studies.
Lemma 2. The smallest sizes for (m, n −1, k)-universal sets, for k ∈{0, 1, n} are as follows.
1. U0 = 1.
2. U1 = m.
3. Un−1 = mn−1.
Proof. The equality U0 = 1 is immediate by deﬁnition. U1 = m is obvious since, independently
of n, the m distinct vectors (1, . . . , 1), (2, . . . , 2), . . . , (m, . . . , m) form an (m, n −1, 1)-universal
set, and no smaller (m, n−1, 1)-universal set can exist. Finally, to realize all possible assignments
to the full universe of size n −1, exactly mn−1 vectors are required, yielding Un−1 = mn−1.
■
One observation from Table 4 is that VCD equals RTD for all values of m in Cn−1
ac . Further,
if m = 2 (the best-studied case in the literature), then TD(Cn−1
ac ) equals the instance space size
n2n−1. A close inspection of the case m = 2, as discussed in Appendix B, shows that Xswap has
only n instances that are relevant for C0
ac, and C0
ac corresponds to the class of all concepts over
these n instances. Thus the values of VCD, TD, and RTD are trivially equal to n in this special
case. The remainder of this section is dedicated to proving the statements from Table 4.
19

Table 4: Summary of complexity results for classes of complete CP-nets. Mk = (n −k)mk + mk−1
m−1 , as detailed in
Lemma 1; emax = (n −k)k +
 k
2

≤nk; the value Uk is deﬁned in Deﬁnition 10.
class
VCD
TD
RTD
Ck
ac
≥(m −1)Mk
n(m −1)Uk ≤TD ≤emax + n(m −1)Uk
(m −1)Mk
Cn−1
ac
mn −1
n(m −1)mn−1
mn −1
C0
ac
(m −1)n
(m −1)n
(m −1)n
5.1. VC Dimension
We begin by studying the VC dimension, with the following main result.
Theorem 1. For ﬁxed n ≥1, m ≥2, and any given k ≤n −1, the following statements hold
for the VC dimension of the class Ck
ac of all complete acyclic k-bounded CP-nets over n variables
with m values each, over the instance space Xswap.
1. VCD(Cn−1
ac ) = mn −1.
2. VCD(C0
ac) = (m −1)n.
3. VCD(Ck
ac) ≥(m −1)Mk = (m −1)(n −k)mk + mk −1.
The proof of Theorem 1 relies on decomposing Ck
ac as a product of concept classes over subsets
of Xswap.6
Deﬁnition 11. Let Ci ⊆2Xi and Cj ⊆2Xj be concept classes with Xi ∩Xj = ∅. The concept class
Ci × Cj ⊆2Xi∪Xj is deﬁned by Ci × Cj = {ci ∪cj | ci ∈Ci and cj ∈Cj}. For concept classes C1,
. . . , Cr, we deﬁne Qr
i=1 Ci = C1 × · · · × Cr = (· · · ((C1 × C2) × C3) × · · · × Cr).
It is a well-known obvious fact that VCD(
tQ
i=1
Ci) =
tP
i=1
VCD(Ci), see, e.g., [40, Lemma 16].
For any vi ∈V and any Γ ⊆V \ {vi}, we deﬁne CΓ
CPT(vi) to be the concept class consisting of
all preference relations corresponding to some CPT(vi) where Pa(vi) = Γ and |Γ| ≤k; here the
instance space X is the set of all swap pairs x ∈Xswap with V (x) = vi. Now, if we ﬁx the context
of vi by ﬁxing an assignment γ ∈OΓ of all variables in Γ, we obtain a concept class CΓ
≻vi
γ , which
corresponds to the set of all preference statements concerning the variable vi conditioned on the
context γ. Its instance space is the set of all swaps x with V (x) = vi and x[Γ] = γ.
Recall that V = {v1, . . . , vn}. By Sn we denote the class of all permutations of {1, . . . , n}.
Using this notation, we ﬁrst establish two lemmas before proving Theorem 1.
Lemma 3. Under the same premises as in Theorem 1, we obtain
Ck
ac =
[
σ∈Sn
n
Y
i=1
[
Γ⊆{vσ(1),...,vσ(i−1)},|Γ|≤k
Y
γ∈OΓ
CΓ
≻
vσ(i)
γ
.
6This kind of decomposition is a standard technique; the reader may look at [40, Lemma 16] for an example of its
usage in the computational learning theory literature.
20

Proof. By deﬁnition, for v ∈V and Γ ⊆V \ {v}, the class CΓ
CPT(v) equals Q
γ∈OΓ CΓ
≻vγ.7
Any concept corresponds to choosing a set Γv of parent variables of size at most k for each
variable v, which means Ck
ac ⊆Qn
i=1
S
Γ⊆V \{vi},|Γ|≤k CΓ
CPT(vi). By acyclicity, vj ∈Pa(vi) implies
vi /∈Pa(vj), so that for each concept c ∈Ck
ac some σ ∈Sn fulﬁlls
c ∈
n
Y
i=1
[
Γ⊆{vσ(1),...,vσ(i−1)},|Γ|≤k
CΓ
CPT(vσ(i)) .
Thus, Ck
ac ⊆S
σ∈Sn
Qn
i=1
S
Γ⊆{vσ(1),...,vσ(i−1)},|Γ|≤k
Q
γ∈OΓ CΓ
≻
vσ(i)
γ
.
Similarly, one can argue that every concept in the class on the right hand side represents an
acyclic CP-net with parent sets of size at most k. With CΓ
CPT(vi) = Q
γ∈OΓ CΓ
≻vi
γ , the statement of
the lemma follows.
■
Lemma 4. Using the notation introduced before Lemma 3, we obtain VCD(CΓ
≻vi
γ ) = m −1 for
any vi ∈V , Γ ⊆V \ {vi}, and γ ∈OΓ.
Proof. Let vi ∈V , Γ ⊆V \ {vi}, and γ ∈OΓ. By deﬁnition, CΓ
≻vi
γ is the class of all total orders
over the domain Dvi of vi. We show that CΓ
≻vi
γ shatters some set of size m−1, but no set of size m.
To show VCD(CΓ
≻vi
γ ) ≥m−1, choose any set of m−1 swaps over Γ ∪{vi} with ﬁxed context
γ, in which the pairs of swapped values in vi are (vi
1, vi
2),. . . , (vi
m−1, vi
m).
Fix any set S ⊆Xswap of m swaps over Γ ∪{vi} with ﬁxed context γ. To show that S is not
shattered, consider the undirected graph G with vertex set Dvi in which an edge between vi
r and vi
s
exists iff S contains a swap pair ﬂipping vi
r to vi
s or vice versa. G has m vertices and m edges and
thus contains a cycle. The directed versions of G correspond to the labelings of S; therefore some
labeling ℓof S corresponds to a cyclic directed version of G, which does not induce a total order
over Dvi. Hence the labeling ℓis not realized by CΓ
≻vi
γ , so that S is not shattered by CΓ
≻vi
γ .
■
These technical observations will help to establish a lower bound on the VC dimension of
classes of bounded acyclic CP-nets. Our upper bound relies on the following straightforward
generalization of an observation made by Booth et al. [5] (their Proposition 3), which states that
any concept class corresponding to a set of transitive and irreﬂexive relations (such as a class
of acyclic CP-nets) over {0, 1}n has a VC dimension no larger than 2n −1. We generalize this
statement to relations over {0, . . . , m}n and formulate it in CP-net terminology. Note that our
statement applies to any class of consistent complete CP-nets, whether acyclic or not.
Lemma 5 (based on [5]). Let n ≥1, m ≥2. Let X ⊆Xswap with |X| = mn be any set of mn
swaps over n variables of domain size m. Let C be any class of consistent complete CP-nets over
the same domain Xswap. Then C does not shatter X. In particular, VCD(C) ≤mn −1.
7Any concept representing a preference table for v with Pa(v) = Γ corresponds to a union of concepts each of
which represents a preference statement over Dv conditioned on some context γ ∈OΓ.
21

Proof. Suppose C shatters X. Then each labeling of X is consistent with some CP-net in C.
Observe ﬁrst that the induced preference graph of any CP-net in C has exactly mn vertices.
Each labeling of a swap corresponds to a directed edge in the induced preference graph of a CP-
net.8 Therefore, each labeling of all elements in X corresponds to a set of mn directed edges in the
induced preference graph. When ignoring the direction of the edges, the edge sets resulting from
these labelings are all identical, and we obtain a set of mn undirected edges over a set of exactly
mn vertices. Consequently, these edges form at least one cycle. Obviously, there exists a labeling
ℓof the elements in X that will turn this undirected cycle into a directed cycle. Since C shatters X,
it contains a concept c that is consistent with the labeling ℓ, i.e., whose induced preference graph
contains the directed edges corresponding to the labeling ℓ. In particular, this concept c has a cycle
in its induced preference graph. This contradicts the fact that c is a consistent CP-net.
Therefore, C does not shatter X. Since X was chosen arbitrarily, C shatters no set of size mn,
so that VCD(C) ≤mn −1.
■
We are now ready to give a proof of Theorem 1, which we restate here for convenience.
Theorem 1. For ﬁxed n ≥1, m ≥2, and any given k ≤n −1, the following statements hold
for the VC dimension of the class Ck
ac of all complete acyclic k-bounded CP-nets over n variables
with m values each, over the instance space Xswap.
1. VCD(Cn−1
ac ) = mn −1.
2. VCD(C0
ac) = (m −1)n.
3. VCD(Ck
ac) ≥(m −1)Mk = (m −1)(n −k)mk + mk −1.
Proof. Lemma 3 states that
Ck
ac =
[
σ∈Sn
n
Y
i=1
[
Γ⊆{vσ(1),...,vσ(i−1)},|Γ|≤k
Y
γ∈OΓ
CΓ
≻
vσ(i)
γ
,
which yields the bound
VCD(Ck
ac) ≥max
σ∈Sn
n
X
i=1
max
Γ⊆{vσ(1),...,vσ(i−1)},|Γ|≤k
X
γ∈OΓ
VCD(CΓ
≻
vσ(i)
γ
) .
By Lemma 4, we have VCD(CΓ
≻
vσ(i)
γ
) = m −1, independent of Γ and γ, so that one obtains, for
any σ ∈Sn,
VCD(Ck
ac)
≥
(m −1)
n
X
i=1
max
Γ⊆{vσ(1),...,vσ(i−1)},|Γ|≤k |OΓ|
=
(m −1)
n
X
i=1
max
Γ⊆{vσ(1),...,vσ(i−1)},|Γ|≤k m|Γ|
=
(m −1)Mk .
8For example, in Figure 2, the edge from a¯b¯c to ab¯c corresponds to the labeling 0 for the swap (a¯b¯c, ab¯c), and,
likewise, to the labeling 1 for the swap (ab¯c, a¯b¯c).
22

A
B
C
a ≻¯a
a : b ≻¯b
¯a : ¯b ≻b
¯a¯b
: ¯c ≻c
otherwise: c ≻¯c
N1
A
B
C
a ≻¯a
a : b ≻¯b
¯a : ¯b ≻b
a : c ≻¯c
¯a : ¯c ≻¯c
N2
A
B
C
a ≻¯a
a : b ≻¯b
¯a : ¯b ≻b
c ≻¯c
N3
Figure 4: Three networks each of which is subsumed by the ones to its left.
It remains to verify VCD(Ck
ac) ≤(m −1)Mk for k ∈{0, n −1}.
For k = 0, we have Mk = n, so let us consider any set Y of size greater than (m −1)n and
argue why Y cannot be shattered by C0
ac. Clearly, there exists a variable vi that is swapped in at
least m instances in Y . In order to shatter these ≥m instances with the same swapped variable, a
concept class of CP-nets would need to contain CP-nets in which some variables have non-empty
parent sets, which is not the case for C0
ac. Thus Y is not shattered, i.e., VCD(Ck
ac) ≤(m −1)Mk.
For k = n −1, the upper bound VCD(Ck
ac) ≤mn −1 = (m −1)Mn−1 follows immediately
from Lemma 5.
■
5.2. Recursive Teaching Dimension
For studying teaching complexity, it is useful to identify concepts that are “easy to teach.” To
this end, we use the notion of subsumption [7]: given CP-nets N, N′, we say N subsumes N′ if
for all vi ∈V the following holds: If y1 ≻y2 is speciﬁed in CPT(vi) in N′ for some context γ′,
then y1 ≻y2 is speciﬁed in CPT(vi) in N for some context containing γ′. If in addition N ̸= N′,
we say that N strictly subsumes N′.
Now let C ⊆Ck
ac. A concept c ∈C is maximal in C if no c′ ∈C strictly subsumes c. The size
of maximal concepts in Ck
ac equals Mk, by deﬁnition.
Example 7. Let C2
ac be the class of all unbounded complete acyclic CP-nets over three variables
V = {A, B, C}. Consider the three CP-nets in Figure 4. Clearly, N3 is subsumed by N2 and N1,
and N2 is subsumed by N1. Further, N1 is maximal with respect to C2
ac and thus also maximal with
respect to C
2
ac. Each of the three CP-nets also strictly subsumes any CP-net resulting from removal
of some of its statements. Since subsumption is transitive, the CP-net N1 strictly subsumes any
CP-net resulting from N2 after removal of statements.
The following two lemmas formalize the intuition that maximal concepts are “easy to teach.”
Lemma 6 gives an upper bound on the size of a smallest teaching set of any maximal concept, while
Lemma 8 implies that a maximal concept is never harder to teach than any concept it subsumes.
Lemma 6. Let n ≥1, m ≥2, and k ≤n−1. Let C ⊆Ck
ac be a subclass of the class of all complete
acyclic k-bounded CP-nets over n variables of domain size m. For any maximal concept c in C,
we have TD(c, C) ≤(m −1)size(c), i.e., (m −1)size(c) swap examples sufﬁce to distinguish c
from any other concept in C.
23

Proof. Every statement in the CP-net N represented by c corresponds to an order of m values for
some variable vi under a ﬁxed context γ. For every such order y1 ≻vi
γ . . . ≻vi
γ ym, we include
m −1 positively labeled swap examples in a set T. For 1 ≤j ≤m −1, the jth such example
labels a pair x = (x.1, x.2) of swap outcomes with V (x) = vi, the projection of x onto {vi} is
(yj, yj+1), and the projection of x onto the remaining variables contains γ. The set T then has
cardinality (m −1)size(c) and is obviously consistent with N.
It remains to show that no other CP-net in C is consistent with T. Suppose some CP-net c′ ∈C
is consistent with T. Note that, for each i and each context γ occurring in CPT(vi) in c, the
information in T determines a strict total order on Dvi. The corresponding preferences are all
entailed by c′ as well, since c′ is consistent with T. Therefore, c′ subsumes c. Since c is a maximal
concept, this implies that c′ does not strictly subsume c. Hence, c′ = c, i.e., c is the only concept
in C that is consistent with T.
■
Next, we determine the teaching dimension of maximal concepts in the class Ck
ac.
Lemma 7. Let n ≥1, m ≥2, and k ≤n −1. Further, let c be a maximal concept in the
class Ck
ac of all complete acyclic k-bounded CP-nets over n variables of domain size m. Then
TD(c, Ck
ac) = (m −1)Mk = (m −1)(n −k)mk + mk −1.
Proof. A teaching set for a maximal concept must contain m −1 examples for each of the
Mk statements in its CPTs, so as to determine the preferences for each context. This yields
TD(c, C
k
ac) = TD(c, Ck
ac) ≥(m −1)Mk. Lemma 6 then completes the proof.
■
The following lemma then shows that no concept c′ in Ck
ac has a smaller teaching dimension
than any maximal concept in Ck
ac that subsumes c′.
Lemma 8. Let n ≥1, m ≥2, and k ≤n −1, and consider the class Ck
ac of all complete acyclic
k-bounded CP-nets over n variables of domain size m. Then each non-maximal c′ ∈Ck
ac is strictly
subsumed by some c ∈Ck
ac such that TD(c′, Ck
ac) ≥TD(c, Ck
ac). In particular, if c is any maximal
concept in Ck
ac, then TD(c′′, Ck
ac)≥TD(c, Ck
ac) for each c′′ ∈Ck
ac subsumed by c.
Proof. From the graph G′ for c′, we build a graph G by adding the maximum possible number of
edges to a single variable v. As c′ is not maximal, it is possible to add at least one edge without
violating the indegree bound k. The CP-nets corresponding to G and G′ differ only in CPT(v).
Let c be the concept representing G and z be the size of its CPT for v. A smallest teaching set
T ′ for c′ can be modiﬁed to a teaching set for c by replacing only those examples that refer to the
swapped variable v; (m −1)z examples sufﬁce. To distinguish c′ from c, T ′ must contain at least
(m −1)z examples referring to the swapped variable v (m −1 for each context in CPT(v) in c).
Hence TD(c′, C
k
ac) ≥TD(c, C
k
ac).
■
As a consequence, the easiest to teach concepts in Ck
ac are the maximal ones. Using these
lemmas, one can determine the recursive teaching dimension of the concept classes Ck
ac, for any k.
Theorem 2. Let n ≥1, m ≥2, and k ≤n −1. For the recursive teaching dimension of the class
Ck
ac of all complete acyclic k-bounded CP-nets over n variables of domain size m, we obtain:
RTD(Ck
ac) = (m −1)Mk = (m −1)(n −k)mk + mk −1 .
24

As before, here Ck
ac is deﬁned over the instance space Xswap.
Proof. The upper bound on the recursive teaching dimension follows from Lemma 7 and then
repeated application of Lemma 6. The lower bound follows from Lemma 8 in combination with
Lemma 7—these two lemmas state that the smallest teaching dimension of any concept in Ck
ac is
that of any maximal concept, and that this teaching dimension value equals (m −1)Mk.
■
5.2.1. An Example Illustrating Teaching Sets
For the case of complete CP-nets, we will now illustrate our results on teaching sets through
examples. Let us consider the case where V = {A, B, C}, DA = {a, ¯a}, DB = {b,¯b}, and
DC = {c, ¯c}. We consider the class Cn−1
ac
of all complete acyclic CP-nets deﬁned over V . Figure
4 shows three concepts, N1, N2, and N3, from this class.
In order to illustrate Lemma 6, let us ﬁrst compute an upper bound on the teaching dimension
of the maximal concept N1. The claim is that TD(N1, Cn−1
ac ) is less than or equal to the size of
N1, which is 7. Consider a set of entailments E corresponding to the teaching set T as described
in the proof of Lemma 6. One possibility for E is the set consisting of the entailments abc ≻¯abc,
abc ≻a¯bc, ¯a¯b¯c ≻¯ab¯c, abc ≻ab¯c, a¯bc ≻a¯b¯c, ¯abc ≻¯ab¯c, and ¯a¯b¯c ≻¯a¯bc. E is obviously consistent
with N1. A closer look shows that it is also a teaching set for N1 with respect to Cn−1
ac . To see why,
consider the partition E = EA ∪EB ∪EC, where
• EA = {abc ≻¯abc},
• EB = {abc ≻a¯bc, ¯a¯b¯c ≻¯ab¯c}, and
• EC = {abc ≻ab¯c, a¯bc ≻a¯b¯c, ¯abc ≻¯ab¯c, ¯a¯b¯c ≻¯a¯bc}.
The set EC shows that C has at least two parents, which, in our case, have to be A and B. As
a result, Pa(C) = {A, B} and CPT(C) is deﬁned precisely: it is the CPT with the maximum
possible parent set {A, B} and EC contains a statement for every context over this parent set.
Similarly, EB shows that there must be at least one parent for B. Given the fact that B ∈Pa(C)
we conclude that Pa(B) = {A} as there is no other way to explain EC and EB together. Therefore,
we have identiﬁed CPT(B) precisely. In an acyclic CP-net, thus CPT(A) must be unconditional
(which is consistent with EA having one entailment only). Thus, E is a teaching set for N1 and
TD(N1, Cn−1
ac ) ≤size(N1) = 7.
Now, let us illustrate Lemma 8. For this purpose, consider the teaching dimension of N3 which
is not maximal w.r.t. Cn−1
ac . According to Lemma 8, there exists a concept N that subsumes N3 and
for which TD(N3, Cn−1
ac ) ≥TD(N, Cn−1
ac ). We follow the proof of Lemma 8. If G′ is the graph
of N3, we construct a new graph G as follows: G results from G′ by selecting the variable C and
adding two incoming edges (i.e., the maximum possible number of edges) to the node labeled by
this variable. A concept with such graph is N1. Let E be a set of entailments corresponding to a
teaching set for N3 with size equal to TD(N3, Cn−1
ac ). We claim that the number of entailments in
E whose swapped variable is C has to be greater than or equal 4. To see this, consider the CP-
net N with graph G where CPT(A) and CPT(B) are identical to the corresponding conditional
preference tables in N3. Moreover, for CPT(C) in N, for every entailment in e ∈E whose
swapped variable is C, a statement u : c ≻¯c or u : ¯c ≻c is created in agreement with e, where u
25

N1
N2
N3
abc ≻¯abc
✭✭✭✭✭
❤❤❤❤❤
ab¯c ≻¯ab¯c
abc ≻a¯bc
✘✘✘✘✘
❳❳❳❳❳
ab¯c ≻a¯b¯c
¯a¯b¯c ≻¯ab¯c
✘✘✘✘✘
❳❳❳❳❳
¯a¯bc ≻¯abc
abc ≻ab¯c
a¯bc ≻a¯b¯c
¯a¯b¯c ≻¯a¯bc
¯abc ≻¯ab¯c
abc ≻¯abc
✭✭✭✭✭
❤❤❤❤❤
ab¯c ≻¯ab¯c
abc ≻a¯bc
ab¯c ≻a¯b¯c
¯a¯b¯c ≻¯ab¯c
¯a¯bc ≻¯abc
abc ≻ab¯c
a¯bc ≻a¯b¯c
¯a¯b¯c ≻¯a¯bc
¯ab¯c ≻¯abc
abc ≻¯abc
ab¯c ≻¯ab¯c
abc ≻a¯bc
ab¯c ≻a¯b¯c
¯a¯b¯c ≻¯ab¯c
¯a¯bc ≻¯abc
abc ≻ab¯c
a¯bc ≻a¯b¯c
¯a¯bc ≻¯a¯b¯c
¯abc ≻¯ab¯c
Figure 5: Teaching sets for the three networks in Figure 4 w.r.t. the class Cn−1
ac
.
provides the values of A and B in e. For instance if the subset of E referring to swapped variable
C is {abc ≻ab¯c, ¯abc ≻¯ab¯c}, then one possible table for CPT(C) in N is {b : c ≻¯c,¯b : ¯c ≻c}.9
Note that TD(N3, Cn−1
ac ) ≤TD(Cn−1
ac ). By Table 4, TD(Cn−1
ac ) equals (m −1)nmn−1 which,
for m = 2 and n = 3 evaluates to 12.
In the sum, we discussed why TD(N1, Cn−1
ac ) ≤7 and TD(N1, Cn−1
ac ) ≤TD(N3, Cn−1
ac ) ≤12.
It is actually the case that TD(N1, Cn−1
ac ) = 7, TD(N2, Cn−1
ac ) = 9 and TD(N3, Cn−1
ac ) = 10. Figure
5 shows one possible example of minimum teaching sets for the three networks. In the displayed
choice of teaching sets, we selected 10 instances for teaching N3, use nine of them (some with
ﬂipped labels) to teach N2 and seven of them (some with ﬂipped labels) to teach N1. While this
is not the only choice of smallest possible teaching sets for these concepts, it illustrates that some
subset of the instances that are used to teach some concept, with appropriate labeling, can also
be used to teach a concept that subsumes it. In Figure 5, we show which instances are removed
from the teaching set of N3 by crossing them out. For instance, the entailment ab¯c ≻¯ab¯c is not
needed in the teaching set of N2 as the remaining examples provide enough evidence to conclude
that A ∈Pa(B) and A ∈Pa(C); thus one entailment for CPT(A) sufﬁces for teaching CPT(A).
5.2.2. Structural Properties of Interest to Learning-Theoretic Studies
The class Cn−1
ac
is interesting from a structural point of view, as its VC dimension equals its
recursive teaching dimension, see Table 4. In general, the VC dimension can exceed the recursive
teaching dimension by an arbitrary amount, and it can also be smaller than the recursive teaching
dimension [40]. Simon and Zilles [41] posed the question whether the recursive teaching dimen-
sion can be upper-bounded by a function that is linear in the VC dimension. So far, the best known
upper bound on the recursive teaching dimension is quadratic in the VC dimension [44].
9Alternatively, the CPT for C in N1 can also be used.
26

The computational learning theory literature knows of some structural properties under which
the VC dimension and the recursive teaching dimension coincide. In Appendix B, we show that
none of these structural properties apply to the class of complete unbounded acyclic CP-nets.
5.3. Teaching Dimension
Computing the teaching dimension is somewhat more involved. We will introduce some ter-
minology ﬁrst. In a teaching set, the purpose of a conﬂict pair for a variable vi given a variable vj
is to demonstrate that vj is a parent of vi.
Deﬁnition 12. Let n ≥1, m ≥2. Let N be a CP-net over n variables of domain size m, and
let vi, vj be variables in N. A conﬂict pair for vi given vj is a pair (x, x′) of swaps such that (i)
V (x) = V (x′) = vi, (ii) x.1 and x′.1 differ only in vj, (iii) x.2 and x′.2 differ only in vj, and (iv)
N entails x but not x′.
Obviously, the variable vj is a parent of the variable vi if and only if a conﬂict pair for vi given
vj exists. For instance, in the CP-net N1 in Figure 4, the variable C has a conﬂict pair given A,
since A is a parent of C. An example of a conﬂict pair here would be ((¯a¯b¯c, ¯a¯bc) , (a¯b¯c, a¯bc)). The
CP-net N1 entails (¯a¯b¯c, ¯a¯bc), but it does not entail (a¯b¯c, a¯bc). In the same ﬁgure, in the CP-net N3,
the variable C has no parents, so that each context over A and B results in the same preference for
C. In other words, C has no conﬂict pair given A and no conﬂict pair given B. The variable B in
N3 has a conﬂict pair given A but none given C.
When a variable vi in a CP-net c has the largest possible number of parents, conﬂict pairs for
each parent are an efﬁcient way of determining the parent set of vi. However, to teach the learner
the absence of parents, e.g., when the parent set of vi is empty, the previously introduced notion
of universal set becomes relevant. The idea is to use swaps over vi in which the contexts form an
(m, n −1, k)-universal set in order to show that vi has no parents at all. If however vi does have
parents, then such sets of swaps can help determine the preference relations for those parents.
Deﬁnition 13. Let n ≥1, m ≥2, and 0 ≤k ≤n −1. Let V = {v1, . . . , vn} be a set of n distinct
variables, where each vi ∈V has the domain {vi
1, . . . , vi
m} of size m. Fix any (m, n −1, k)-
universal set U, and let vi ∈V . Then deﬁne the set Uvi of contexts over V \ {vi} as follows.
Uvi = {(v1
j1, . . . , vi−1
ji−1, vi+1
ji+1, . . . , vn
jn) | (j1, . . . , ji−1, ji+1, . . . , jn) ∈U} .
We call Uvi the context set imposed by U and vi.
A set F ⊆Xswap of swaps is called a swap expression of Uvi, if |F| = (m −1)|Uvi| and, for
each (v1
j1, . . . , vi−1
ji−1, vi+1
ji+1, . . . , vn
jn) ∈Uvi there is an order a1 ≻a2 ≻. . . ≻am over the domain
Dvi = {a1, . . . , am} such that
((v1
j1, . . . , vi−1
ji−1, at, vi+1
ji+1, . . . , vn
jn), (v1
j1, . . . , vi−1
ji−1, at+1, vi+1
ji+1, . . . , vn
jn)) ∈F
for all t with 1 ≤t ≤m −1.
For example, consider n = 4, m = 2, and k = 2, and four variables A, B, C, and D with
domains {a, ¯a}, {b,¯b}, {c, ¯c}, and {d, ¯d}, respectively. A (2, 3, 2)-universal set of vectors is, e.g.,
U = {(0, 0, 0) , (1, 0, 1) , (0, 1, 1) , (1, 1, 0)} ,
27

since any projection of these vectors onto two of their three components yields all four binary
vectors of length 2. The context set UA imposed by U and A is then
UA = {bcd,¯bc ¯d, b¯c ¯d,¯b¯cd} .
Finally, a swap expression of UA is given as follows.
F = {(abcd, ¯abcd), (a¯bc ¯d, ¯a¯bc ¯d), (ab¯c ¯d, ¯ab¯c ¯d), (a¯b¯cd, ¯a¯b¯cd)} .
If A had a third value ¯¯a in its domain, then F would be twice as large; for each swap (ab∗c∗d∗, ¯ab∗c∗d∗)
in F, one would also include, for instance, (¯ab∗c∗d∗, ¯¯ab∗c∗d∗).
Lemma 9. Let n ≥1, m ≥2, and 0 ≤k ≤n −1. Let N be any k-bounded CP-net over n
variables of domain size m. Let vi ∈V be any variable in N.
The variable vi has at least one parent in N if and only if, for every (m, n −1, k)-universal set
U, the imposed context set Uvi contains two distinct contexts γ, γ′ ∈OV \{vi} such that N entails
γ : a ≻¯a but not γ′ : ¯a ≻a, for some values a, ¯a ∈Dvi.
Proof. First, suppose Pa(vi) ̸= ∅in N and let U be any (m, n −1, k)-universal set. Then there
are a, ¯a ∈Dvi and two distinct contexts α, α′ ∈OP a(vi) such that N entails α : a ≻¯a but not
α′ : ¯a ≻a.10 Since U is an (m, n −1, k)-universal set and the length of α and α′ is at most k,
there are some contexts β, β′ ∈OV \(P a(vi)∪{vi}), such that the contexts γ, γ′ ∈OV \{vi} belong
to Uvi, where γ, γ′ result from α, α′ by extension with β and β′, respectively. Clearly, N entails
γ : a ≻¯a but not γ′ : ¯a ≻a, since no variable over which β and β′ are deﬁned has an inﬂuence on
the preference over vi.
Second, suppose that there are two distinct contexts γ, γ′ ∈OV \{vi} such that N entails γ :
a ≻¯a but not γ′ : ¯a ≻a. This means that the preference over Dvi is conditional, i.e., vi has a
parent in N.
■
The following lemma gives upper and lower bounds on the teaching dimension of any single
concept in the class of complete acyclic k-bounded CP-nets.
Lemma 10. Let n ≥1, m ≥2, and 0 ≤k ≤n −1. Let Ck
ac be the class of all complete acyclic
k-bounded CP-nets over n variables of domain size m, over the instance space Xswap. Fix c ∈Ck
ac
and let ec denote the number of edges in c. The teaching dimension of the concept c with respect
to the class Ck
ac is bounded as follows.
(m −1)Mk ≤TD(c, Ck
ac) ≤ec + n(m −1)Uk .
Proof. The lower bound follows from Lemma 8 in combination with Lemma 7—these two lemmas
state that the smallest teaching dimension of any concept in Ck
ac is that of any maximal concept,
and that this teaching dimension value equals (m −1)Mk.
10Recall that variables do not have dummy parents, i.e., every parent listed in the parent set of vi must affect the
preference over Dvi.
28

A
D
B
C
a ≻¯a
d ≻¯d
a : b ≻¯b
¯a : ¯b ≻b
¯a¯b
: ¯c ≻c
otherwise: c ≻¯c
Figure 6: Target CP-net for illustration of Lemma 10 and Algorithm 2.
For the upper bound, it sufﬁces to show that c has a teaching set of size ec + n(m −1)Uk.
Consider a set T of labeled examples deﬁned in the following way. Fix any smallest (m, n−1, k)-
universal set U. For each variable vi and each context γ ∈Uvi, the set T includes m −1 examples
determining the preference order over Dvi under the context γ. Note that these examples form
a swap expression of Uvi. In addition to these n(m −1)Uk examples, for each variable vi with
Pa(vi) ̸= ∅and for each v ∈Pa(vi), the set T contains two swaps x, x′ over the swapped variable
vi that form a conﬂict pair for vi given v. By Deﬁnition 12, the contexts in these two swaps
are identical except for the variable v, which is assigned in a way that the two swaps display a
difference in the preference over Dvi. Any conﬂict pair (x, x′) for vi given v will be sufﬁcient for
this purpose. In particular, we can choose x and x′ in a way such that x is already contained in the
swap expression of Uvi included in T. Thus, in total, we add one labeled swap for each edge in c
on top of the n(m −1)Uk examples from the swap expressions.
Clearly, the size of T is ec + n(m −1)Uk. To show that T is a teaching set for c, let c′ be any
concept in Ck
ac that is consistent with T, and let vi be any variable.
Let P be the parent set of vi in c, and P ′ the parent set of vi in c′. The conﬂict pairs in T imply
that P ⊆P ′. Now, for every context α over P, the swap expression of Uvi contained in T shows
that all context extensions of α to contexts of length up to k give rise to the same preference order
over vi in c′. Therefore, P ′ cannot be a strict superset of P—otherwise all elements of P ′ \ P
would be dummy parents. So P = P ′.
As just stated, the swap expression of Uvi contained in T determines the preference order
over vi for each context α over P and each extension of such α to contexts over k variables. Since
every parent set in c′ has size at most k, the CPT of vi in c′ is thus fully determined. Consequently,
c = c′, i.e., T is a teaching set for c. This concludes the proof.
■
We illustrate the teaching set construction in the proof of Lemma 10 with an example.
Example 8. Consider the case n = 4, m = 2, and k = 2, and suppose the CP-net from Figure 6
is the target CP-net. Note that a smallest (3, 2)-universal set has exactly four elements, which will
be the cardinality of each set F considered for each variable. To construct a teaching set, each
variable will be treated separately.
For variable A, one selects a set of contexts that are imposed by a smallest (2, 3, 2)-universal
29

set. One such choice is {bcd,¯bc ¯d, b¯c ¯d,¯b¯cd}. This leads to the following swap expression F.
F = {(abcd, ¯abcd), (a¯bc ¯d, ¯a¯bc ¯d), (ab¯c ¯d, ¯ab¯c ¯d), (a¯b¯cd, ¯a¯b¯cd)} .
The set T will contain all the examples in F, together with their correct labels, which will show
that the target CP-net entails aγ ≻¯aγ for all γ ∈OV \{A}. This part of the teaching set T hence
determines that A has no parents and that a ≻¯a is the only statement in CPT(A).
For variable B, the same construction would yield a swap expression
F = {(abcd, a¯bcd), (¯abc ¯d, ¯a¯bc ¯d), (ab¯c ¯d, a¯b¯c ¯d), (¯ab¯cd, ¯a¯b¯cd)} .
Including these swaps with their correct labels in T reveals that abcd ≻a¯bcd, ¯a¯bc ¯d ≻¯abc ¯d,
ab¯c ¯d ≻a¯b¯c ¯d, ¯a¯b¯cd ≻¯ab¯cd. It is clear from these examples already that B must have at least one
parent, but the parent set itself is not yet determined. In order to show that A is a parent of B, we
select the swap x = (abcd, a¯bcd) from T and pick an appropriate swap x′ so that (x, x′) forms a
conﬂict pair for B given A; in this case x′ = (¯abcd, ¯a¯bcd). We add x′ with its label to T. Now we
claim that T fully determines CPT(B). To see this, partition F according to the values in A:
FA=a = {(abcd, a¯bcd), (ab¯c ¯d, a¯b¯c ¯d)} and FA=¯a = {(¯abc ¯d, ¯a¯bc ¯d), (¯ab¯cd, ¯a¯b¯cd)} .
Each set displays a single preference order over DB, so that B has no further parents. The set T
thus reveals that Pa(B) = {A} and that CPT(B) contains the statements a : b ≻¯b and ¯a : ¯b ≻b.
For variable C, the construction from the proof of Lemma 10 works similarly as for B. Two
conﬂict pairs reveal that A and B are parents of C, and partitioning the initial swap expression set
into four subsets (according to the four possible assignments to the variables A and B) will show
the same preference order over DC in each of the four parts, which will fully determine CPT(C).
Finally, variable D can be treated by analogy to the case of variable A.
Our main result on the teaching dimension can be stated as follows.
Theorem 3. Let n ≥1, m = 2, and 0 ≤k ≤n −1. The teaching dimension of the class of all
complete acyclic k-bounded CP-nets over n variables of domain size m, over the instance space
Xswap, is bounded as follows.
n(m −1)mk ≤n(m −1)Uk ≤TD(Ck
ac) ≤emax + n(m −1)Uk ≤nk + n(m −1)
n −1
k

mk .
For the values k = 0, k = 1, and k = n −1, the following holds:
1. TD(C0
ac) = (m −1)n.
2. TD(C1
ac) = (m −1)mn.
3. TD(Cn−1
ac ) = (m −1)nmn−1.
Proof. To obtain a lower bound of n(m −1)Uk on the teaching dimension, let us ﬁrst determine
the teaching dimension of any complete separable CP-net with respect to the class Ck
ac. Consider
any unconditional CPT, i.e., a CPT of the form CPT(vi) = {a1 ≻· · · ≻am}. To distinguish a
30

complete separable CP-net c with this CPT from all other concepts in Ck
ac, examples are needed
that show that vi has no parent. Since for CP-nets in Ck
ac, the variable vi can have up to k parents, a
teaching set for c has to demonstrate the following: For each set R of k variables in V \{vi}, and for
each of the mk possible contexts over R, the target CP-net c entails the same order a1 ≻· · · ≻am.
That means, a teaching set of swap pairs for c must “cover” each such context over R, and for
each such context provide at least m −1 examples so that the total order over the m domain
values of vi can be determined. In other words, the swap pairs with swapped variable vi that occur
in the teaching set for c must be partitioned into parts of size m −1, where each part forms an
(m, n −1, k)-universal set. The same applies to each of the n variables in V , since knowledge
of the CPT for any subset of V still leaves open the possibility of up to k parents for each of the
remaining variables. Consequently, to teach c, at least n(m −1)Uk examples are needed. Thus,
TD(Ck
ac) ≥n(m −1)Uk.
The upper bound of emax+n(m−1)Uk on the teaching dimension is immediate from Lemma 10.
The upper and lower bounds on Uk are not hard to obtain.
First, mk ≤Uk because an
(m, n −1, k)-universal set must yield mk distinct projections onto any set of at least k compo-
nents. Second, Uk ≤
 n−1
k

mk because an (m, n −1, k)-universal set can always be obtained as
follows: for each k-element subset of the n −1-element universe, include mk vectors, namely one
for each possible assignment of values in {1, . . . , m} to each of the k elements in the subset.
Concerning the values for k = 0, k = 1, and k = n −1, note that U0 = 1, U1 = m, and
Un−1 = mn−1 by Lemma 2, which yields the desired lower bounds on the teaching dimension
values for C0
ac, C1
ac, and Cn−1
ac , respectively.
For k = 0, we have emax = 0, so that the upper and lower bounds on the teaching dimension
coincide, yielding n(m −1).
For k = 1, we will show an upper bound of (m −1)mn, matching the lower bound. Consider
any variable vi in the target CP-net. If it has no parents, then its CPT can be taught with (m −
1)U1 = (m−1)m examples. If it has a parent, then (m−1)m suitably chosen examples sufﬁce to
teach the target preference relation over Dvi for every possible value of the parent variable. Since
k = 1, it is then clear that vi has no other variable, so that CPT(vi) is fully determined. Applying
the same reasoning to every variable, we obtain a teaching set of size n(m −1)m.
For k = n −1, the target concept is uniquely determined by a teaching set that speciﬁes an
order over m values via m−1 suitably chosen swaps over v, for each v ∈V and each of the mn−1
contexts over the remaining variables; i.e., the lower bound of (m −1)nmn−1 is attained.
■
Theorem 3 implies that, for Cn−1
ac , the ratio of TD over instance space size |Xswap| is
2
m. In
particular, in the case of binary CP-nets (i.e., when m = 2), which is the focus of most of the
literature on learning CP-nets, the teaching dimension equals the instance space size. However,
maximal concepts have a teaching dimension far below the worst-case teaching dimension.
6. The Complexity of Learning Potentially Incomplete Acyclic CP-Nets
In this section, we revisit our results on the VC dimension and the teaching dimension for the
case that CP-nets are potentially incomplete. This extension is useful for several reasons.
31

Table 5: Summary of complexity results for classes of potentially incomplete CP-nets. Mk = (n −k)mk + mk−1
m−1 ,
as detailed in Lemma 1; emax = (n −k)k +
 k
2

≤nk; the value Uk is deﬁned in Deﬁnition 10.
class
VCD
TD
C
k
ac
≥(m −1)Mk
2n(m −1)Uk ≤TD ≤emax + 2n(m −1)Uk
C
n−1
ac
mn −1
2n(m −1)mn−1
C
0
ac
(m −1)n
2(m −1)n
• In practice, a user’s preferences may not always be representable by a complete CP-net. For
example, the genre of a movie might be a parent variable of the variable representing the
lead actor. Now a user may prefer actor a1 over actor a2 when the genre is comedy, while not
having any preference between the same two actors for a different genre. In other words,
the user generally considers the two actors equally preferable, but considers a1 a better
comedian than a2. Such preference relation can be modeled with an incomplete CP-net.
• We will introduce algorithms that learn both complete and incomplete CP-nets from mem-
bership queries. In order to assess the optimality of these algorithms in terms of the number
of queries required, we will use the value of the teaching dimension of the corresponding
concept class. Likewise, we will reassess an algorithm by Koriche and Zanuttini [7] that
uses equivalence and membership queries for learning potentially incomplete CP-nets; for
this purpose we need to calculate the VC dimension of the corresponding concept class.
• Our extension of Theorem 1 to the case of potentially incomplete CP-nets substantially
improves on (and corrects) a result by Koriche and Zanuttini [7], who present a lower bound
on VCD(Ck
ac); their bound is in fact incorrect unless k ≪n.
The main results of this section are summarized in Table 5. The calculation of the RTD of
classes containing complete and incomplete CP-nets is left as an open problem.
6.1. VC Dimension
We will ﬁrst establish that Theorem 1 remains true when we allow incomplete CP-nets and use
the larger instance space X swap. In particular, the VC dimension Ck
ac of the class of all complete
acyclic k-bounded CP-nets (over Xswap) equals the VC dimension of the class C
k
ac of all complete
and incomplete acyclic k-bounded CP-nets (over X swap.)
Theorem 4. For ﬁxed n ≥1, m ≥2, and k ≤n −1, the value VCD(Ck
ac), taken over the instance
space Xswap, is equal to VCD(C
k
ac), taken over the instance space X swap. In particular,
1. VCD(C
n−1
ac ) = mn −1.
2. VCD(C
0
ac) = (m −1)n.
3. VCD(C
k
ac) ≥(m −1)Mk = (m −1)(n −k)mk + mk −1.
Proof. By deﬁnition, VCD(C
k
ac) ≥VCD(Ck
ac). It remains to show that VCD(Ck
ac) ≥VCD(C
k
ac).
32

Suppose X ⊆X swap is a set of swap instances that is shattered by C
k
ac. We need to show that
there is a set X′ ⊆Xswap such that |X′| = |X| and X′ is shattered by Ck
ac. Since X is shattered
by C
k
ac, there is no (o, o′) such that both (o, o′) and (o′, o) belong to X. Otherwise there would be
a c ∈C
k
ac such that c(o, o′) = c(o′, o) = 1, which is an impossible inconsistency.
The fact that there is no (o, o′) such that both (o, o′) and (o′, o) belong to X has two implica-
tions:
(i) Either X ⊆Xswap or swapping the order of some pairs in X results in a set X′ such that X′
is a subset of Xswap.
(ii) Every incomplete CP-net c ∈C
k
ac can be turned into a complete CP-net in Ck
ac by adding
statements to some of its CPTs without changing the value of c(x) for any x ∈X. (This is because
every incomplete CP-net results from a complete one by removing some CPT statement(s).) This
holds in particular for the set of 2|X| CP-nets in C
k
ac that witness the shattering of X: each of them
can be completed in a way so that the 2|X| completions still shatter X.
Combining (i) and (ii), there is a set X′ ⊆Xswap shattered by Ck
ac such that |X′| = |X|.
Theorem 1 then yields the claimed formulas.
■
6.1.1. Re-assessment of Koriche and Zanuttini’s contribution
Koriche and Zanuttini [7] present an algorithm for exact learning of potentially incomplete k-
bounded acyclic CP-nets from membership and equivalence queries. To evaluate their algorithm,
they compare its query consumption to the value log2(4/3)VCD(C), which is a lower bound on
the required number of membership and equivalence queries, known from fundamental learning-
theoretic studies [19]. In lieu of an exact value for VCD(C), Koriche and Zanuttini plug in a
lower bound on VCD(C), cf. their Theorem 6. Using our Theorem 4, we show in Appendix A that
this lower bound is not quite correct; consequently, here we re-assess the query consumption of
Koriche and Zanuttini’s algorithm.
For any k, their algorithm uses at most sN∗+eN∗log2(n)+eN∗+1 queries in total, for a target
CP-net N∗with sN∗statements and eN∗edges. In the worst case sN∗= Mk ≤VCD(C) and
eN∗=
 k
2

+(n−k)k (i.e., N∗is maximal w.r.t. C). This yields Mk +eN∗(log2(n)+1) queries for
their algorithm, which exceeds the lower bound log2(4/3)VCD(C) by at most log2(3/2)VCD(C)+
eN∗log2(n). This is a more reﬁned assessment compared to the term eN∗log2(n) that they report,
and it holds for any value of k.
6.2. Teaching Dimension
It is not difﬁcult to adapt our previous teaching dimension results to the case of learning both
complete and incomplete acyclic CP-nets, for various indegree bounds k.
Theorem 5. Let n ≥1, m = 2, and 0 ≤k ≤n −1. The teaching dimension of the class of all
complete and incomplete acyclic k-bounded CP-nets over n variables of domain size m, over the
instance space X swap, is bounded as follows.
2n(m−1)mk ≤2n(m−1)Uk ≤TD(C
k
ac) ≤emax+2n(m−1)Uk ≤nk+2n(m−1)
n −1
k

mk .
For the values k = 0, k = 1, and k = n −1, the following holds:
33

1. TD(C
0
ac) = 2(m −1)n.
2. TD(C
1
ac) = 2(m −1)mn.
3. TD(C
n−1
ac ) = 2(m −1)nmn−1.
Proof. For the lower bound, consider the empty CP-net, i.e., a separable CP-net without any state-
ments in any of its CPTs. We use the same argument as in the proof of Theorem 3 to show that
one needs at least n swap expressions of contexts imposed by universal sets to teach this CP-net.
Note however, that every swap (o, o′) in the resulting teaching set will be labeled 0, as the target
CP-net entails no preferences. This would leave open the option that the reverse swap (o′, o) could
be labeled 1 by the target CP-net. To exclude this option, the teaching set must contain the reverse
swap (o′, o) as well, with the correct label 0. Therefore, the lower bound is exactly twice as large
as the lower bound in Theorem 3.
For the upper bound, our argument is similar to that in the proof of Lemma 10. The construc-
tion of the teaching sets remains essentially the same: one includes (i) a swap expression of a
context set imposed by a universal set, in order to teach preferences once the parents are known,
as well as to determine when a variable has no parents (on top of the already found ones), and (ii)
a conﬂict pair (x, x′) for each edge in the target CP-net, where x is chosen from the swap expres-
sion set. The only difference is that we make the swap expression set twice as large by including
the reverse swap (x.2, x.1) to every (x.1, x.2) already included. This will make sure that, in the
case of a swap (o, o′) labeled 0, one can ﬁnd out whether the reverse swap (o′, o) is also labeled 0
(which would mean that the target CP-net entails no preference between o and o′) or whether the
reverse swap is labeled 1 (which would mean that the target CP-net entails the preference o′ ≻o).
The trivial upper and lower bounds on the value Uk, namely
 n−1
k

mk and mk, respectively,
were already established in Theorem 3.
For the special cases of k = 0, k = 1, and k = n −1, one only needs to adapt the argument in
the proof of Theorem 3 by forming the symmetric closure of the set of swaps used in the teaching
sets, i.e., always adding the reverse swaps.
■
7. Learning from Membership Queries
In this section, we investigate the problem of learning complete CP-nets from membership
queries alone, in contrast to the setting considered by Koriche and Zanuttini, where the learner
asks both membership and equivalence queries [7].
A membership query, represented by a pair (o, o′) of objects, corresponds to asking the user
directly whether they prefer o over o′ or not. In an idealized model, it is expected that the user
will always answer truthfully. An equivalence query, represented by a CP-net N, corresponds to
asking the user whether N correctly captures their preferences. The user is expected to answer
correctly, where a negative response is accompanied by a witness, i.e., a pair (o, o′) of objects for
which N entails a preference opposite to the user’s.
While in computational learning theory, beginning with Angluin’s seminal work on learning
regular languages [56], the combination of equivalence and membership queries has been the
most commonly investigated query scenario, we have several reasons for investigating learning
from membership queries only.
34

Firstly, from the cognitive perspective, answering membership queries of the form “is o better
than o′?” is more intuitive and poses less burden upon the user than comparing a proposed CP-
net to the true one (which is the case when answering equivalence queries). Considering that
membership queries can at times be perceived as too intrusive by the user, equivalence queries do
not seem reasonable at all. To the best of our knowledge, the only “real-world” implementations
of equivalence queries apply to situations in which the equivalence queries are answered by a
program rather than by a human user. One such application is in the area of formal methods,
where an equivalence query corresponds to a guess on the semantics of a program in a given
class of target programs, and a formal veriﬁcation procedure (comparable to a model checker)
can be run in order to verify the correctness of the guess. This works well for fully automated
reasoning about ﬁnite-state systems, where such veriﬁcation procedures can be implemented, but
it is unreasonable to assume that users of an e-commerce system (or of some similar kind of
application) can comprehend and verify equivalence queries about their preferences.11
Secondly, Koriche and Zanuttini showed that membership queries are powerful in the sense that
CP-nets are not efﬁciently learnable from equivalence queries alone but they are from equivalence
and membership queries [7]. Thus, an immediate question is whether membership queries alone
are powerful enough to efﬁciently learn CP-nets. In particular, we can consider learning from
membership queries as an extreme case of limiting the allowable number of equivalence queries
in order to investigate how much information can be obtained from the (intuitively less costly)
membership queries.
Thirdly, in preference elicitation in general, the notion of membership query is of central im-
portance, as is detailed in Section 2.1. For example, a value query asks how much an item is worth
to a user [14]. Clearly, a membership query asking the user to express a preference between two
items can always be simulated by two value queries. However, membership queries may be easier
to answer than value queries, as they do not require the user to quantify the value of an item.
The complexity results presented in Sections 5 and 6 have interesting consequences on learning
CP-nets from membership queries alone. In particular, it is known that the query complexity of
the optimal membership query algorithm is lower-bounded by the teaching dimension of the class
[21]. Therefore, in this section, we propose strategies to learn CP-nets and use the TD results to
assess their optimality. In what follows, we show near-optimal query strategies for tree CP-nets
and generally for classes of bounded acyclic CP-nets.
11Note that equivalence queries, from a learning-theoretic point of view, can be considered as a prediction system
“in action” [12]: a system corresponding to an equivalence query for N would keep predicting the user’s preferences
according to the entailments of N. As long as all predictions by the system are correct, the hypothesis N will
be maintained. When a prediction mistake is made, the system will update its hypothesis using the mistake as a
counterexample, which then results in a new equivalence query. In the end, the overall number of mistakes made
by the system equals the number of equivalence queries asked. To the best of our knowledge, there is no reasonable
application scenario in preference elicitation where such system would make sense. In practice, a system may want to
offer products to a user, and the system’s success lies in being able to identify the best product according to the user’s
preferences. However, the scenario of an equivalence query for a CP-net does not correspond to making guesses about
the best product, but rather to making guesses about preferences between any two arbitrary products, for which no
obvious counterpart (other than making membership queries) is seen in practice.
35

7.1. Tree CP-Nets
Koriche and Zanuttini [7] present an algorithm for learning a binary tree-structured CP-net N∗
that may be incomplete (i.e., it learns the superclass C
1
ac of C1
ac for m = 2.) Their learner uses
at most nN∗+ 1 equivalence queries and 4nN∗+ eN∗log2(n) membership queries, where nN∗is
the number of relevant variables and eN∗the number of edges in N∗. We present a method for
learning any CP-net in C1
ac (i.e., complete tree CP-nets) for any m, using only membership queries.
Later, we will extend that method to cover also the case of incomplete CP-nets.
Recall that, for a CP-net N, a conﬂict pair w.r.t. vi is a pair (x, x′) of swaps such that (i)
V (x) = V (x′) = vi, (ii) x.1 and x′.1 agree on vi, (iii) x.2 and x′.2 agree on vi, and (iv) N entails
one of the swaps x, x′, but not the other, cf. Deﬁnition 12. If vi has a conﬂict pair (x, x′), then vi
has a parent variable vj whose values in x and x′ are different. Such a variable vj can be found
with log2(n) membership queries by binary search (each query halves the number of candidate
variables with different values in x and x′) [54].
We use this binary search to learn tree-structured CP-nets from membership queries, by ex-
ploiting the following fact: if a variable vi in a tree CP-net has a parent, then a conﬂict pair
w.r.t. vi exists and can be detected by asking membership queries to sort m “test sets” for vi. Let
(vi
1, . . . , vi
m) be an arbitrary but ﬁxed permutation of Dvi. Then, for all j ∈{1, . . . , m}, a test set
Ii,j for vi is deﬁned by Ii,j = {(v1
j, . . . , vi−1
j
, vi
r, vi+1
j
, . . . , vn
j ) | 1 ≤r ≤m}. Since vi has no
more than one parent, determining preference orders over m such test sets of size m is sufﬁcient
for revealing conﬂict pairs, rather than having to test all possible contexts in OV \{vi}.
Example 9. Consider the set of variables V = {A, B, C} where DA = {a, a′, a′′, a′′′}, DB =
{b, b′, b′′, b′′′}, and DC = {c, c′, c′′, c′′′}. The following is one possible collection of test sets for the
variable A:
IA,1 = {abc, a′bc, a′′bc, a′′′bc}
IA,2 = {ab′c′, a′b′c′, a′′b′c′, a′′′b′c′}
IA,3 = {ab′′c′′, a′b′′c′′, a′′b′′c′′, a′′′b′′c′′}
IA,4 = {ab′′′c′′′, a′b′′′c′′′, a′′b′′′c′′′, a′′′b′′′c′′′}
Clearly, a complete target CP-net imposes a total order on every Ii,j, which can be revealed by
posing enough membership queries selected from the
 m
2

swaps over Ii,j; a total of O(m log2(m))
comparisons sufﬁce to determine the order over Ii,j. This yields a simple algorithm for learning
tree CP-nets with membership queries:
Algorithm 1. For every variable vi, determine Pa(vi) and CPT(vi) as follows:
1. For every value j ∈{1, . . . , m}, ask O(m log2(m)) membership queries from the
 m
2

swaps
over Ii,j to obtain an order over Ii,j. Note that, for m = 2, a single query is enough to obtain
an order over Ii,j.
2. If for all j1, j2 ∈{1, . . . , m} the obtained order over Ii,j1 imposes the same order on Dvi as
the obtained order over Ii,j2 does, i.e., there is no conﬂict pair for vi, then Pa(vi) = ∅. In
this case, CPT(vi) is fully determined by the queries in Step 1, following the order over Dvi
that is imposed by the order over any of the Ii,j.
36

3. If there are some j1, j2 ∈{1, . . . , m} such that the obtained order over Ii,j1 imposes a
different order on Dvi than the obtained order over Ii,j2 does, i.e., there is a conﬂict pair
(x, x′) for vi, then ﬁnd the only parent of vi by log2(n) further queries, as described by
Damaschke [54]. From these queries, together with the ones posed in Step 1, CPT(vi) is
fully determined.
The procedure described by Damaschke [54] is a binary search on the set of candidates for the
parent variable. Let (x, x′) be the conﬂict pair over variable vi, as found in Step 3, where
x
= (a1 . . . ai−1aiai+1 . . . an, a1 . . . ai−1aiai+1 . . . an) ,
x′
= (a′
1 . . . a′
i−1aia′
i+1 . . . a′
n, a′
1 . . . a′
i−1aia′
i+1 . . . a′
n) .
Initially, each variable other than vi is a potential parent. The set of potential parents is halved
recursively by asking membership queries for swaps (o, o′) over vi, with o(vi) = ai, o′(vi) = ¯ai,
and half of the potential parent variables in o and o′ having the same values as in x, while the other
half of the potential parent variables has values identical to those in x′. (The variables that have
been eliminated from the set of potential parent variables will all be assigned the same values as
in x.)
Example 10. Suppose the queries on the test sets revealed a conﬂict pair (x, x′) for the variable
v5, where
x
= (a1a2a3a4a, a1a2a3a4a) ,
x′
= (a′
1a′
2a′
3a′
4a, a′
1a′
2a′
3a′
4a) ,
and
a1a2a3a4a ≻a1a2a3a4a ,
while
a′
1a′
2a′
3a′
4a ≻a′
1a′
2a′
3a′
4a .
To ﬁnd the only parent of v5, Damaschke’s procedure will check whether
a1a2a′
3a′
4a ≻a1a2a′
3a′
4a .
If yes, then either v1 or v2 must be the parent of v5, and one will next check whether
a1a′
2a3a4a ≻a1a′
2a3a4a .
If yes, then v1 is the parent of v5, else v2 is the parent of v5. If, however, a1a2a′
3a′
4a ≻a1a2a′
3a′
4a,
then the second query would have been to test whether a1a2a′
3a4a ≻a1a2a′
3a4a, in order to
determine whether the parent of v5 is v3 or v4.
We formulate a result on learning complete tree CP-nets.
37

Theorem 6. Let n ≥1, m ≥2. Algorithm 1 learns every complete tree CP-net N∗∈C1
ac over n
variables of domain size m with
O(nm2 log2(m) + eN∗log2(n))
membership queries over swap examples in Xswap, where eN∗is the number of edges in N∗. In
particular, for m = 2, Algorithm 1 requires at most 2n + eN∗log2(n) queries.
Proof. Step 1 consumes O(m2 log2(m)) queries and is run n times, and Step 3 consumes an
additional log2(n) for every variable vi that has a parent. In total, this sums up to O(nm2 log2(m)+
eN∗log2(n)) queries. When m = 2, Step 1 requires only m queries for each variable vi, namely a
single query per test set, for 2 test sets. This results in a total of 2n + eN∗log2(n) queries.
The correctness of Algorithm 1 follows from the properties of conﬂict pairs and tests sets. The
existence of a conﬂict pair is equivalent to the existence of a parent, and the orders over the test
sets correspond to CPT statements for all relevant contexts. The m test sets as speciﬁed above are
sufﬁcient since each variable has at most one parent. Thus, the responses to the queries asked by
Algorithm 1 uniquely determine the target tree CP-net.
■
As Theorem 6 states, for the binary case, Algorithm 1 requires 2n + eN∗log2(n) queries at
most, i.e., compared to Koriche and Zanuttini’s method, when focusing only on tree CP-nets with
non-empty CPTs, our method reduces the number of membership queries by a factor of 2, while
at the same time dropping equivalence queries altogether.
It is a well-known fact that the teaching dimension of a concept class C is a lower bound on
the worst-case number of membership queries required for learning concepts in C [20]. We have
proven above that TD(C1
ac) = n(m −1)U1 = nm(m −1). That means that our method uses no
more than on the order of log2(m) + eN∗log2(n) queries more than an optimal one, which means,
asymptotically, it uses at most an extra eN∗log2(n) queries when m = 2.
For m = 2, i.e., when CP-nets are binary, it is not hard to extend our result to the case of
potentially incomplete CP-nets, at the cost of just doubling the number of queries. Perhaps not
coincidentally, the teaching dimension also essentially doubles when switching from complete
CP-nets to both complete and incomplete CP-nets, cf. Theorems 3 and 5.
Theorem 7. Let n ≥1, m = 2. There exists an algorithm that learns every (complete or incom-
plete) tree CP-net N∗∈C
1
ac over n binary variables with at most 4n + 2eN∗log2(n) membership
queries over swap examples in X swap, where eN∗is the number of edges in N∗.
Proof. The desired algorithm is a simple modiﬁcation of Algorithm 1; whenever Algorithm 1
asks a query for a swap x = (x.1, x.2), the new algorithm will ask two queries, namely one for
x = (x.1, x.2) and one for x′ = (x.2, x.1) (since it is no longer guaranteed that c(x′) = 1 whenever
c(x) = 0.) Other than that, the algorithm proceeds the same way as Algorithm 1. If both queries
x and x′ are answered with 0, then the target CP-net does not specify a preference between x.1
and x.2. Determining orders over test sets then works with at most twice the number of queries as
before, even if those orders are empty. Conﬂict pairs still imply the existence of a parent, and still
every variable has at most one parent, which can still be found with binary search. The claim then
follows from Theorem 6.
■
38

Let us compare the algorithm provided by Koriche and Zanuttini [7] to ours. While our algo-
rithm does not require equivalence queries, uses the same number of queries in total when learning
both complete and incomplete CP-nets, and is described for not necessarily binary CP-nets, Ko-
riche and Zanuttini’s has two desirable properties that our method does not have:
• It learns CP-nets with nodes of arbitrary bounded indegree k, not just for k = 1.
• It is attribute-efﬁcient, i.e., the number of queries it poses is polynomial in the size of the
target CP-net, but only logarithmic in the number n of variables.
The attribute-efﬁciency of their algorithm is possible only because equivalence queries are
allowed. In particular, consider the incomplete CP-net without edges in which every CPT is
empty. This CP-net has size 0, but to learn it only with membership queries over swap examples
requires to ask queries regarding every one of its n CPTs.
Concerning arbitrary values of k, Section 7.2 will reﬁne Algorithm 1 and present a new proce-
dure that efﬁciently learns any k-bounded acyclic CP-net when m = 2, i.e., in the binary case.
7.2. Bounded Binary Acyclic CP-nets
In this section, we show that the teaching dimension results for Ck
ac (cf. Theorem 3) imme-
diately yield a general strategy for learning complete acyclic CP-nets from membership queries
alone, when m = 2. Recall that, in the binary case, nUk ≤TD(Ck
ac) ≤emax + nUk, where Uk is
the size of an (n −1, k)-universal set U of minimum size.
For k ≥2, the quantity Uk is known to be Ω(2k log2(n −1)) and O(k2k log2(n −1)) [57].
Thus, using emax ≤nk, we obtain
Ω(n2k log2(n −1)) ∋TD(Ck
ac) ∈O(nk2k log2(n −1)) .
Our proposed method for learning Ck
ac from membership queries reuses the idea of universal
sets in teaching sets. For each variable vi, one selects a swap expression F of the context set Uvi
imposed by U. Then, for every variable vi, one queries the elements of such set F. The rest of
the method we propose is an adaptation of Algorithm 1. For simplicity, in the description of the
algorithm, we assume all variables have the same domain {0, 1}.
Algorithm 2. For every variable vi, determine Pa(vi) and CPT(vi) as follows:
1. Ask membership queries for all the elements of F. This step amounts to Uk membership
queries.
2. Initialize P = ∅; the set P will always contain all the parents of vi found so far. If |P| = k,
Pa(vi) must equal P, since no variable has more than k parents. In this case, go to Step 7,
else go to Step 3.
3. If all of the queried instances for F show the same preference over the values of vi, then vi
has no further parents, i.e., Pa(vi) = P. (This is because there are at most k parents for
vi and the same statement appears in every context of all potential parent sets of size k, cf.
Lemma 9.) In this case, go to Step 7.
Otherwise, there exist two contexts γ, γ′ ∈OV \(P ∪{vi}) for which γ : vi
1 ≻vi
2 and γ′ : vi
2 ≻
vi
1 are answers obtained from the queries in Step 1. Clearly, Pa(vi) contains an element of
V \ (P ∪{vi}).
39

4. Apply Damaschke’s binary search procedure [54] to determine one new variable v ∈Pa(vi),
by analogy to the procedure used in Algorithm 1. Add v to the set P. This step amounts to
at most log2(n −1) membership queries.
5. Partition F into two sets Fv=0 and Fv=1. Here Fv=z is the set of all swaps in F in which the
value of v is z. Note that these swaps have all been queried in Step 1 already.
6. If all of the queried instances for Fv=0 show a single preference over the values of vi, and
likewise all of the queried instances for Fv=1 show a single preference over the values of vi,
then Pa(vi) = P; go to Step 7.
Otherwise, recursively add parents to P by calling Step 3 once with Fv=0 in place of F
and once with Fv=1 in place of F, both times excluding the elements of P from the binary
search in Step 4.
7. From the queries posed above, CPT(vi) is fully determined.
Example 11. Consider n = 4, m = 2, and k = 2, and suppose the CP-net from Figure 6 is the
target. A smallest (3, 2)-universal set has four elements, which will be the cardinality of each set
F considered for each variable. Algorithm 2 will consider each variable in turn.
For variable A, it will ﬁrst ask four queries, one for each swap pair in, say, the following set
F = {(abcd, ¯abcd), (a¯bc ¯d, ¯a¯bc ¯d), (ab¯c ¯d, ¯ab¯c ¯d), (a¯b¯cd, ¯a¯b¯cd)} .
(Here the (3, 2)-universal set realizing all possible 2-dimensional context sub-vectors within 3-
dimensional context vectors would be {bcd,¯bc ¯d, b¯c ¯d,¯b¯cd}.) The responses show that aγ ≻¯aγ for
all γ ∈OV \{A}. The algorithm hence detects that A has no parents and that a ≻¯a is the only
statement in CPT(A).
For variable B, the same procedure applied to
F = {(abcd, a¯bcd), (¯abc ¯d, ¯a¯bc ¯d), (ab¯c ¯d, a¯b¯c ¯d), (¯ab¯cd, ¯a¯b¯cd)}
reveals that abcd ≻a¯bcd, ¯a¯bc ¯d ≻¯abc ¯d, ab¯c ¯d ≻a¯b¯c ¯d, ¯a¯b¯cd ≻¯ab¯cd. Two contexts γ and γ′ for
which the preference over DB differs are, for example, γ = acd, γ′ = ¯ac ¯d. Hence B must have at
least one parent among A, C, D, and applying Damaschke’s binary search to the context γ yields
that the preference given acd differs from the preference given ¯acd. So A must be a parent of B.
Partitioning F yields
FA=a = {(abcd, a¯bcd), (ab¯c ¯d, a¯b¯c ¯d)} and FA=¯a = {(¯abc ¯d, ¯a¯bc ¯d), (¯ab¯cd, ¯a¯b¯cd)} .
Each set displays a single preference order over DB in the queries originally asked, so that B has
no further parents. The algorithm has determined that Pa(B) = {A} and that CPT(B) contains
the statements a : b ≻¯b and ¯a : ¯b ≻b.
For variable C, queries for pairs in the corresponding set F reveal abcd ≻ab¯cd, ¯abc ¯d ≻¯ab¯c ¯d,
a¯bc ¯d ≻a¯b¯c ¯d, and ¯a¯b¯cd ≻¯a¯bcd. In the same way as for variable B, the algorithm ﬁnds a ﬁrst
parent of C, say A. This time, partitioning F into FA=a and FA=¯a will show that C must have
another parent, since the two contexts ¯ab ¯d and ¯a¯bd in FA=¯a give rise to two different preference
orders over DC. Another binary search ﬁnds the parent B. Since k = 2, the variable C has no
further parents, and the algorithm infers Pa(C) = {A, B} alongside the CPT statements for C.
Finally, Algorithm 2 would, similarly to the case of CPT(A), use four queries to learn CPT(D).
40

Theorem 8. Let n ≥1, m = 2, 0 ≤k ≤n −1. Algorithm 2 learns every complete binary
k-bounded CP-net N∗∈Ck
ac over n variables with
O(nUk + eN∗log2(n))
membership queries over swap examples in Xswap, where eN∗is the number of edges in N∗.
Proof. The number of queries made by Algorithm 2 can be upper-bounded as follows. The only
steps in which queries are made are Steps 1 and 3. Step 1 is run once for each of the n variables,
each time costing Uk queries, for a total of nUk queries. Step 3 is run once for each edge in the
target CP-net, each time costing at most log2(n) queries, for a total of O(eN∗log2(n)) queries. In
the sum, the query consumption of Algorithm 2 is in O(nUk + eN∗log2(n)).
We will next prove the correctness of Algorithm 2. Note that the set F in Step 1 of the
algorithm is a swap expression of a context set imposed by a (2, n −1, k)-universal set. By
Lemma 9, Algorithm 2 decides correctly in Step 2 whether or not vi has a parent. The same
lemma can be applied to any part of the set F as deﬁned in Step 5. Hence, Algorithm 2 correctly
determines the parent set of each variable. Since F is a swap expression of a context set imposed
by a (2, n−1, k)-universal set, and the domain is of size 2, the responses to queries in F determine
a preference order for each of the relevant contexts. Consequently, Algorithm 2 is able to infer all
CPT statements from those responses.
■
Thus, one can identify any concept c ∈Ck
ac with nUk + ec log2(n) membership queries, where
Uk ∈O(nk2k log2(n −1)). A universal set of such size was proven to exist by a probabilistic
argument with no explicit construction of the set [55]. However, a construction of an (n −1, k)-
universal set of size 2k log2(n−1)kO(log2(k)) is reported in the literature [57]. Therefore, one can ef-
fectively learn any concept in Ck
ac with a number of queries bounded by n2k log2(n−1)kO(log2(k))+
e log2(n), which is at most a factor of kO(log2 k) away from the teaching dimension, and thus at most
a factor of kO(log2 k) away from optimal. Moreover, when k2k < √n, there is an explicit construc-
tion of a (n, k)-universal set of size n [55], e.g., for n = 800 this construction is guaranteed to
work with an indegree up to 3 and for n = 1500 with an indegree up to 4. This can be utilized if
one is interested in learning sparse CP-nets over a large number of variables.
Finally, a simple adaptation of Algorithm 2 efﬁciently learns all k-bounded acyclic CP-nets,
whether complete or incomplete. As in the proof of Theorem 7, this comes at a cost of a factor of
2 in the number of queries. The proof is easily adapted from that of Theorem 8.
Theorem 9. Let n ≥1, m = 2, 0 ≤k ≤n −1. There exists an algorithm that learns every
(complete or incomplete) binary k-bounded CP-net N∗∈C
k
ac over n variables with
O(nUk + eN∗log2(n))
membership queries over swap examples in X swap, where eN∗is the number of edges in N∗.
We can now use our results on the VC dimension to compare the query consumption of our
algorithms to the sample complexity of PAC learning. PAC learning [49] is a model of learning
from randomly chosen examples, in which a target concept is approximated with high conﬁdence.
41

By comparison, our algorithms are guaranteed to learn the target CP-net exactly, by selecting
examples non-randomly.
The VC dimension of a concept class C is known to characterize the asymptotic sample com-
plexity for PAC-learning C; in particular, the number of examples required for learning with error
at most ǫ and conﬁdence at least 1 −δ is in Θ( 1
ǫ(VCD(C) + ln( 1
δ))) [50, 39]. That means, for
tree CP-nets, using our result VCD ≥2n −1, the PAC sample complexity is in Ω( 1
ǫ(n + ln( 1
δ))),
which is asymptotically at most a factor of log(n) below the query complexity of our algorithm,
which amounts to 2n + e log(n), where e ≤n −1. For k-bounded acyclic CP-nets, Theorem 4
yields a VC dimension of at least (n −k)2k + 2k −1, resulting in a PAC sample complexity of
Ω( 1
ǫ((n −k)2k + ln( 1
δ))), while our query complexity is n2k log(n)kO(log(k)). That means asymp-
totically, for constant k, a difference of no more than a factor of log(n), as in the tree case.
The query complexity of our algorithm improves on the best upper bound on the membership
query complexity claimed in the literature so far: Chevaleyre et al. [24] stated that k-bounded
acyclic CP-nets can be learned with O(knk+12k−1) membership queries, which asymptotically
exceeds our query complexity by a factor of
nk
kO(log(k)).
8. Learning from Corrupted Membership Queries
So far, we have assumed that all membership queries are answered correctly. This assumption
is unrealistic in many settings, especially when it comes to dealing with human experts that may
have incomplete knowledge of the target function. For instance, when eliciting CP-nets from
users, it could be the case that the user actually does not know which of two given outcomes is to
be preferred or does not want to respond to a query. When recommender systems explicitly request
information from users, be it in the form of item ratings or in the form of preference queries, not
all queries will be answered and some will be answered incorrectly.
In this section, we consider two models of learning from membership queries in which the
oracle does not always provide a correct answer. In particular, we consider the situation in which
there is a ﬁxed set L of instances x for which the oracle does not provide the true classiﬁcation
c∗(x). The set L is assumed to be chosen in advance by an adversary. There are two ways in which
the oracle could deal with queries to elements in L:
• A limited oracle returns “I don’t know” (denoted by ⊥) when queried for any x ∈L, and
returns the true label c∗(x) for any x ̸∈L [36, 38].
• A malicious oracle returns the wrong label 1 −c∗(x) when queried for any x ∈L, and
returns the true label c∗(x) for any x ̸∈L [36, 37].
In either case, the oracle is persistent in the sense that it will return the same answer every time
the same instance is queried. A concept class C is learnable with membership queries to a limited
(malicious, resp.) oracle if there is an algorithm that exactly identiﬁes any target concept c∗∈C
by asking a limited (malicious, resp.) oracle a number of membership queries that is polynomial
in n, the size of c∗, and |L| [36, 38]12.
12This corresponds to the strict learning model discussed in [36, 38].
42

Consider for instance the application scenario of a recommender system that explicitly asks
users for preferences over pairs of items. The limited oracle then corresponds to a user who
chooses to ignore some queries or who does not know which of the two presented items to prefer
(perhaps since the user doesn’t know the items well enough to express a preference.) The mali-
cious oracle is a simpliﬁed model of a user who misunderstands some queries and answers them
incorrectly, or who gets annoyed with queries and answers some of them on purpose incorrectly.
At ﬁrst, the assumption that the oracle is persistent may seem unrealistic. However, in practice,
this assumption translates into never asking the same query twice, since the system cannot possibly
gain information from repeating queries to a persistent user. Repeating queries to the user is often
undesirable, as it bears a high risk of annoying the user.
For practical applications, one might prefer models of probabilistic noise and learning algo-
rithms that infer approximations to the true target based on randomness in the noise. Instead, we
pursue the idealized goal of exactly identifying the target concept in the face of partial or incorrect
information, which is useful for studying strict limitations of learning.
It is obvious that exact learning is not possible unless some restrictions are made on the set
L. Note though that we assume that the learner has no prior information on the size or content of
L. Instead, we will study under which conditions on L learning complete acyclic CP-nets from
limited or malicious oracles is possible even if the learner has no information on these conditions.
We will restrict our analysis to the case of binary CP-nets. Further, we will make use of the
trivial observation that exact learnability with membership queries to a malicious oracle implies
exact learnability with membership queries to a limited oracle.
8.1. Limitations on the Corrupted Set
We ﬁrst establish that learning the class Ck
ac of all complete acyclic binary k-bounded CP-nets
over n variables is impossible, both from malicious and from limited oracles, when |L| ≥2n−1−k.
Proposition 1. Let m = 2 and 1 ≤k ≤n −1. If |L| ≥2n−1−k, then the class Ck
ac is not
learnable with membership queries to a limited oracle and not learnable with membership queries
to a malicious oracle.
Proof. It sufﬁces to prove non-learnability from limited oracles.
Consider a CP-net N in which all the variables are unconditional, except for one variable vi,
which has exactly k parents. Furthermore, let CPT(vi) impose the same order on the domain of
vi for all contexts over Pa(vi), except for one context γ over Pa(vi) for which CPT(vi) imposes
the reverse order over the domain of vi. Figure 7 shows an example of such a CP-net. Consider
the set X = {x = (x.1, x.2) ∈Xswap | V (x) = vi and x[Pa(vi)] = γ}. Each swap instance x
in X has the same values in the k parent variables of vi, and there are no choices for its values in
the binary swap variable vi either. For each of the remaining n −1 −k variables, there are m = 2
choices. Hence, the cardinality of X is 2n−1−k. Since |L| ≥2n−1−k, the adversary can choose L
so that X ⊆L.
Then, in communication with a limited membership oracle, the learner will not be able to
distinguish N from the CP-net N′ that is equivalent to N except for having the orders over the
domain of vi swapped in CPT(vi).
■
43

. . . . . . . . .
vi
γ : vi
1 ≻vi
2
otherwise: vi
2 ≻vi
1
Figure 7: A CP-net N ∈Ck
ac that, for |L| ≥2n−1−k, cannot be distinguished from any CP-net N ′ that differs from N
only in CPT(vi).
In essence, this negative result is due to the fact that the number of instances supporting a
statement in a CPT with k parents is 2n−1−k—having all these corrupted makes learning hopeless.
In particular, when k = n −1, i.e., for unbounded CP-nets, even a single corrupted query will
make learning impossible. This is because a CPT of a variable with n −1 parents may have
statements that are witnessed by only a single context, and thus by only a single swap pair x. The
adversary can choose L = {x} and not respond to the query x, so that the learner cannot ﬁgure
out the correct preference for the swap pair x.
In the remainder of this section, we will study assumptions on the structure of L that will allow
a learning algorithm to overcome the corrupted answers from limited or malicious oracles at the
expense of a bounded number of additional queries. That means, we will constrain the adversary
in its options for selecting L, without directly limiting the size of L. Roughly speaking, we no
longer look at the worst possible choice of the set L, but at a case where the corrupted responses
are “reasonably spread out.”
The goal is to be able to obtain the correct answer for any query x made by our algorithms that
learn from perfect oracles, simply by taking majority votes over a bounded number of additional
“veriﬁcation queries.” If we know that the corrupted oracle will affect only a small subset of
these veriﬁcation queries (small enough so that the majority vote over them is guaranteed to yield
the correct label for x,) we can use the same learning procedures as in the perfect oracle case,
supplemented by a bounded number of veriﬁcation queries.
Suppose that, for each x ∈Xswap, we could effectively compute a small set VQ(x) ⊆Xswap
such that the limited/malicious oracle would be guaranteed to return the correct label for x on
more than half of the queries for elements in VQ(x). In the case of membership queries to a
limited oracle, we could then simulate Algorithms 1 or 2 with the following modiﬁcation:
LIM If a query for x ∈Xswap made by Algorithm 1 (or 2) is answered with ⊥, replace this
response by the majority vote of the limited oracle’s responses to all queries over the set
VQ(x).
In the case of learning from malicious oracles, every query made by Algorithms 1 or 2 would have
to be supplemented by veriﬁcation queries:
MAL If a query for x ∈Xswap is made by Algorithm 1 (or 2), respond to that query by taking the
majority vote over the malicious oracle’s responses to all queries over the set VQ(x).
44

If q is an upper bound on the size of the set VQ(x), for any x ∈Xswap, the modiﬁed algorithms
then would need to ask at most qz membership queries, where z is the number of queries asked by
Algorithms 1 or 2.
It remains to ﬁnd a suitable set VQ(x) of veriﬁcation queries for any swap pair x, so that,
intuitively,
• the size of VQ(x) is not too large, and
• it is not too unreasonable an assumption that the corrupted oracle will return the true label
for x on the majority of the swap pairs in VQ(x).
To this end, we introduce some notation.
Deﬁnition 14. Let x = (x.1, x.2) ∈Xswap and 1 ≤t ≤n −1. Then we denote by F t(x) the
set of all swap instances x′ = (x′.1, x′.2) with the swapped variable V (x′) = V (x) and with a
Hamming distance13 of exactly t between x.i and x′.i when restricted to V \ {V (x)}, i.e.
F t(x) = {x′ ∈Xswap | V (x) = V (x′) = vs and |{v ∈V \ {vs} | x[{v}] ̸= x′[{v}]}| = t} .
For example, if x = (abcd, a¯bcd) where Dv1 = {a, ¯a}, Dv2 = {b,¯b}, Dv3 = {c, ¯c}, Dv4 =
{d, ¯d}, then for t = 1 we get
F 1(x) = {(¯abcd, ¯a¯bcd), (ab¯cd, a¯b¯cd), (abc ¯d, a¯bc ¯d)} .
Each swap in that set has the same swapped variable as x (namely v2) and has a context that differs
from that in x in exactly one variable.
There is a relationship between the entailment of an instance x and the entailments of the
elements of F t(x) for any t: Given a preference table CPT(vi), where vi has k parents, and given
t, it is not hard to see that
• |F t(x)| =
 n−1
t

, and
• the set F t(x) contains
 n−1−k
t

elements with the same entailment w.r.t. V (x) as in x itself.
These are the instances that share the same values in the parent variables of V (x) and, hence,
their entailments have to be identical.
If most of the elements in F t(x) share the same entailment, they could be used to compensate the
oracle corruption. However, queries to elements of F t(x) again might receive corrupted answers.
We will therefore impose a restriction on the overlap between the set L of instances with corrupted
responses and any set F t(x), speciﬁcally for t = 1.
We would like to constrain L so that querying the elements of F 1(x), and then picking the
most frequent answer, yields the true classiﬁcation of instance x. Figure 8 shows an example of an
instance x with V (x) = v5, its entailment and the entailments of the elements of F 1(x) assuming
k = 1 and Pa(v5) = {v1}.
We then obtain the following learnability result for the case that the indegree k is bounded to
be sufﬁciently small.
13The Hamming distance [58] between two vectors is the number of components in which they disagree.
45

abcde ≻abcd¯e
ab¯cde ≻ab¯cd¯e
abc ¯de ≻abc ¯d¯e
a¯bcde ≻a¯bcd¯e
¯abcd¯e ≻¯abcde
Figure 8: An example of the entailments of an instance x and F 1(x) for x = (abcde, abcd¯e) with Pa(v5) = {v1} and
CPT(v5) is {a : e ≻¯e, ¯a : ¯e ≻e}.
Theorem 10. Suppose n > 2k+2. For each swap pair x ∈Xswap, let the set VQ(x) of veriﬁcation
queries used by the LIM and MAL strategies be equal to F 1(x).
1. If |F 1(x)∩L| ≤n−2−2k for every x ∈Xswap, then the strategy LIM will learn any complete
acyclic k-bounded binary CP-net over n variables, when interacting with a limited oracle.
2. If |F 1(x) ∩L| ≤⌊n−1
2 ⌋−k −1 for every x ∈Xswap, learn any complete acyclic k-bounded
binary CP-net over n variables, when interacting with a malicious oracle.
Proof. Note that there are n−1 elements in F 1(x), of which at least n−1−k have the same label
in the target concept as x and at most k have the opposite label.
First, suppose |F 1(x) ∩L| ≤n −2 −2k for every x ∈Xswap, in the case of a limited oracle.
Then, for every x ∈Xswap, the limited oracle will respond with a label to at least |F 1(x)| −n +
2 + 2k = 2k + 1 of the queries for elements in F 1(x). Since at most k of these elements have the
opposite label as x, the majority of these queries will return the label for x. Therefore, the strategy
LIM will simulate Algorithm 2 with a perfect membership oracle and thus learn any complete
acyclic k-bounded binary CP-net over n variables.
Second, suppose |F 1(x) ∩L| ≤⌊n−1
2 ⌋for every x ∈Xswap, in the case of a malicious oracle.
Then, for every x ∈Xswap, the limited oracle will correctly respond to at least |F 1(x)| −⌊n−1
2 ⌋+
k +1 = ⌈n−1
2 ⌉+k +1 of the queries for elements in F 1(x). In the worst case, these ⌈n−1
2 ⌉+k +1
correctly answered queries contain all of the k elements of F 1(x) that have the opposite label
of x. That means that at least ⌈n−1
2 ⌉+ 1 of the n −1 queries over F 1(x) (and thus a majority)
return the correct label for x. Therefore, the strategy MAL will simulate Algorithm 2 with a
perfect membership oracle and thus learn any complete acyclic k-bounded binary CP-net over n
variables.
■
We obtain the following corollary.
Corollary 1. Suppose n > 2k + 2.
1. If |F 1(x) ∩L| ≤n −2 −2k for every x ∈Xswap, then the class of all complete acyclic k-
bounded binary CP-nets over n variables is learnable with membership queries to a limited
oracle.
2. If |F 1(x) ∩L| ≤⌊n−1
2 ⌋−k −1 for every x ∈Xswap, then the class of all complete
acyclic k-bounded binary CP-nets over n variables is learnable with membership queries
to a malicious oracle.
In either case, the worst-case number of queries can be upper-bounded by O(n2Uk +eN∗log2(n)),
which is in O(n22k log2(n)kO(log2(k)) + eN∗n log2(n)).
46

Proof. Learnability follows from Theorem 10. The bound on the number of queries is derived
from the bound in Theorem 8 by multiplying with a factor of O(n) due to the veriﬁcation query
set of size
 n−1
1

= n −1.
■
In the special case of learning tree CP-nets, i.e., when k = 1, we obtain the following improved
result.
Corollary 2. Suppose n > 4.
1. If |F 1(x) ∩L| ≤n −4 for every x ∈Xswap, then the class of all complete acyclic binary
tree CP-nets over n variables is learnable with membership queries to a limited oracle.
2. If |F 1(x)∩L| ≤⌊n−1
2 ⌋−2 for every x ∈Xswap, then the class of all complete acyclic binary
tree CP-nets over n variables is learnable with membership queries to a malicious oracle.
In particular, in either case, the worst-case number of queries is in O(n2 + eN∗n log2(n)), where
eN∗is the number of edges in the target CP-net N∗.
Proof. Learnability follows from Theorem 10. The bound on the number of queries is derived
from the bound in Theorem 6 by multiplying with a factor of O(n) due to the veriﬁcation query
set of size
 n−1
1

= n −1.
■
9. Conclusion
We determined exact values or non-trivial bounds on the parameters VCD and TD for the
classes of all (all complete, resp.) k-bounded acyclic CP-nets for any k, and used some of the
insights gained thereby for the design of algorithms for learning CP-nets from membership queries,
both in a setting where membership queries are always answered correctly and in settings where
some answers may be missing or incorrect. The VCD values we determined correct a mistake
in [7]. Further, we used the calculated TD values in order to show that our proposed algorithm
for learning complete tree CP-nets from membership queries alone is close to optimal, and the
calculated VCD values in order to reﬁne an optimality assessment of Koriche and Zanuttini’s
algorithm for learning all k-bounded acyclic CP-nets from equivalence and membership queries.
All our results were obtained over the swap instance space. When using membership queries,
a restriction of the instance space to swaps actually limits the options of the algorithm; one may
want to investigate whether our algorithms can be made more efﬁcient when given access to the
full set of outcome pairs. At the same time, lower bounds on the query complexity (as obtained
via the teaching dimension) might decrease when opening the choice to non-swaps.
For ﬁxed k, the number of membership queries made by our learning algorithms grows moder-
ately with n, with an asymptotic worst-case behavior of O(n log2(n)), (to be multiplied by n in the
corrupted setting), which is at most a factor of O(log2(n)) above the best achievable, and suggests
practical feasibility. In practice, running our algorithms may become prohibitive when k grows
too large—as is also evident in the complexity parameters we calculated for the unbounded case,
i.e., when k = n −1. Intuitively though, learning preferences that depend on a large number of
parent variables is a problem that one might prefer to approach with approximate learning. When
the dependency structure between the variables becomes so complex that unbounded CP-nets are
47

needed to model them, one might in practice worry about overﬁtting the observed preferences—a
simpler yet approximate CP-net may in such cases be a more desirable learning target. Knowledge
of the number of queries required for exact identiﬁcation of CPTs and CP-nets will then also be
useful in the design of heuristic approaches for approximating a target CPT or CP-net.
On top of the VCD and the TD, we calculated another parameter, RTD, for classes of all com-
plete k-bounded acyclic CP-nets. While we did not use our RTD results for optimality assessments
of proposed learning algorithms, they are of interest to learning-theoretic studies, as they exhibit,
with the class Cn−1
ac
of all complete unbounded acyclic CP-nets, the ﬁrst known non-maximum
class as well as the ﬁrst not intersection-closed class that is interesting from an application point
of view and satisﬁes RTD = VCD, cf. Appendix B. Thus further studies on the structure of CP-
nets may be helpful toward the solution of an open problem concerning the general relationship
between RTD and VCD [41].
