1
Bonseyes AI Pipeline - bringing AI to you
End-to-end integration of data, algorithms and deployment tools
MIGUEL DE PRADO, Haute Ecole Arc Ingenierie; HES-SO / Integrated Systems Lab, ETH Zurich,
Switzerland
JING SU, School of Computer Science & Statistics, Trinity College Dublin, Ireland
RABIA SAEED, Haute Ecole Arc Ingenierie; HES-SO, Switzerland
LORENZO KELLER, Nviso, Switzerland
NOELIA VALLEZ, Universidad de Castilla - La Mancha, Spain
ANDREW ANDERSON, School of Computer Science & Statistics, Trinity College Dublin, Ireland
DAVID GREGG, School of Computer Science & Statistics, Trinity College Dublin, Ireland
LUCA BENINI, Integrated Systems Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
TIM LLEWELLYNN, Nviso, Switzerland
NABIL OUERHANI, Haute Ecole Arc Ingenierie; HES-SO, Switzerland
ROZENN DAHYOT, School of Computer Science & Statistics, Trinity College Dublin, Ireland
NURIA PAZOS, Haute Ecole Arc Ingenierie; HES-SO, Switzerland
Next generation of embedded Information and Communication Technology (ICT) systems are interconnected
and collaborative systems able to perform autonomous tasks. The remarkable expansion of the embedded
ICT market, together with the rise and breakthroughs of Artificial Intelligence (AI), have put the focus on
the Edge as it stands as one of the keys for the next technological revolution: the seamless integration of AI
in our daily life. However, training and deployment of custom AI solutions on embedded devices require a
fine-grained integration of data, algorithms, and tools to achieve high accuracy and overcome functional and
non-functional requirements. Such integration requires a high level of expertise that becomes a real bottleneck
for small and medium enterprises wanting to deploy AI solutions on the Edge which, ultimately, slows down
the adoption of AI on applications in our daily life.
In this work, we present a modular AI pipeline as an integrating framework to bring data, algorithms, and
deployment tools together. By removing the integration barriers and lowering the required expertise, we can
interconnect the different stages of particular tools and provide a modular end-to-end development of AI
products for embedded devices. Our AI pipeline consists of four modular main steps: i) data ingestion, ii)
model training, iii) deployment optimization and, iv) the IoT hub integration. To show the effectiveness of
Authors’ addresses: Miguel de Prado, Haute Ecole Arc Ingenierie; HES-SO /, Integrated Systems Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland,

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the
full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires

© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
2577-6207/2019/1-ART1 $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
ACM Trans. Internet Things, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2019.
arXiv:1901.05049v3  [cs.LG]  11 Jun 2020

1:2
de Prado, Su, Saeed, et al.
our pipeline, we provide examples of different AI applications during each of the steps. Besides, we integrate
our deployment framework, Low-Power Deep Neural Network (LPDNN), into the AI pipeline and present its
lightweight architecture and deployment capabilities for embedded devices. Finally, we demonstrate the results
of the AI pipeline by showing the deployment of several AI applications such as keyword spotting, image
classification and object detection on a set of well-known embedded platforms, where LPDNN consistently
outperforms all other popular deployment frameworks.
CCS Concepts: • Computer systems organization →Pipeline computing; Embedded systems; • Com-
puting methodologies →Speech recognition; • Networks →Network reliability.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: AI pipeline, Deep Learning, Keyword Spotting, fragmentation
ACM Reference Format:
Miguel de Prado, Jing Su, Rabia Saeed, Lorenzo Keller, Noelia Vallez, Andrew Anderson, David Gregg, Luca
Benini, Tim Llewellynn, Nabil Ouerhani, Rozenn Dahyot, and Nuria Pazos. 2019. Bonseyes AI Pipeline -
bringing AI to you: End-to-end integration of data, algorithms and deployment tools. ACM Trans.
Internet Things 1, 1, Article 1 (January 2019), 25 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
1
INTRODUCTION
Embedded Information and Communication Technology (ICT) systems are experiencing a techno-
logical revolution [8]. Embedded ICT systems are interconnected and collaborative systems able to
perform smart and autonomous tasks and will soon pervade our daily life. The rapid spread of the
embedded ICT market and the remarkable breakthroughs in Artificial Intelligence (AI) are leading
to a new form of distributed computing systems where edge devices stand as one of the keys for
the spread of AI in our daily life [73].
The rapid adoption of Deep Learning techniques has prompted the emergence of several frame-
works for the training and deployment of neural networks. Frameworks such as Caffe [6], Tensor-
Flow [48] and PyTorch [42] have become the most popular training environments by providing great
flexibility and low complexity to design and train neural networks. These frameworks also support
the deployment of the trained networks, though such deployment is cloud-oriented which makes it
impractical for resource-constrained devices operating on the Edge. Hence, a second generation
of frameworks has come forth to cover such constrained requirements, e.g., TF Lite [49], ArmCL
[4], NCNN [37], TensoRT [50] and, Core ML [21]. Such deployment frameworks offer inference
engines with meaningful compression and run-time optimizations to reduce the computational and
memory requirements that neural networks demand and thus, meet the specifications for mobile
and embedded applications.
Developing embedded AI solutions for Computer Vision [63] or Speech Recognition [60] implies
a significant engineering and organizational effort that requires large investments and development.
Although the above-mentioned Deep Learning frameworks are powerful tools, a successful devel-
opment of custom AI solutions on the Edge requires a fine-grained integration of data, algorithms,
and tools to train and deploy neural networks efficiently. Such integration requires a high level of
expertise to overcome both software and hardware requirements as well as the fragmentation of
AI tools [11], e.g., massive and distributed computation for training while reduced and constraint
resources for inference, hardship in portability between frameworks, etc. All previous examples
represent a real bottleneck for small and medium enterprises who would like to deploy AI solutions
on the resource-constrained devices. Only large companies, e.g., Google [25] and Apple [16], can
build end-to-end systems for the optimization of Deep Learning applications and are taking the
lead of the AI industry [31], see Fig. 1.
As an alternative to monolithic and closed solutions, we form part of the Bonseyes project [59], a
European collaboration to facilitate Deep Learning to any stakeholder and reduce development time.
We propose an AI pipeline as a way to overcome the aforementioned technological barriers where
ACM Trans. Internet Things, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2019.

Bonseyes AI Pipeline - bringing AI to you
1:3
Fig. 1. AI pipeline and data wall. Companies with end to end solutions outperform the ones unable to
follow the complete cyclic process.
data, algorithms, and deployment tools are brought together to produce an end-to-end system. We
focus on the development of AI solutions for embedded devices, e.g., CPU Arm Cortex-A, embedded
GPU, or DSPs, that feature sufficient computational power to run such solutions but need to be
efficiently tailored to employ them in real-time applications. Our proposed AI pipeline provides
key benefits such as the reusability of custom and commercial tools thanks to its dockerized API,
and the flexibility to add new steps to the workflow. Thus, the contributions of our work are the
following:
• We present a modular AI pipeline as an integrating framework to bring data, algorithms, and
deployment tools together. By removing the integration barriers and lowering the required
expertise, we open up an opportunity for many stakeholders to take up AI custom solutions
for embedded devices.
• Our AI pipeline encourages the reusability of particular tools by interconnecting them on
different stages to provide a modular end-to-end development. The AI pipeline consists of
four main steps: i) data ingestion, ii) model training, iii) deployment optimization and, iv)
IoT hub integration, which we illustrate giving different examples of AI applications.
• We integrate deployment framework (LPDNN) into the AI pipeline and present its light-
weight architecture and deployment capabilities for embedded devices. Further, we show the
deployment of several AI applications such as keyword spotting, image classification and
object detection on a set of embedded heterogeneous platforms. Finally, we evaluate LPDNN
against a range of popular deployment frameworks where LPDNN consistently outperforms
all other frameworks.
The paper is organized as follows: in Section 2, we detail the State-of-the-Art. In Section 3, the
Bonseyes AI pipeline architecture is introduced. Section 4 describes the data ingestion process.
Section 5 presents the training of neural networks. In section 6, the deployment optimization is
detailed. Sections 7 introduces IoT hub integration and finally, in section 8 and 9, we present the
results and conclusions.
2
RELATED WORK
In this section, we introduce the state-of-the-art of AI pipelines and frameworks. We take a bottom-
up approach starting from those works that propose single services, e.g., training or deployment,
to then step up to those works presenting end-to-end solutions.
ACM Trans. Internet Things, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2019.

1:4
de Prado, Su, Saeed, et al.
2.1
Deep Learning Platforms for High-Performance Computing (HPC)
Open-source Deep Learning frameworks have developed fast in recent years. These frameworks
bring much convenience to AI project development as they provide the tools to design and train
neural networks with available libraries and built-in optimizers, instead of coding from scratch.
Here, we present a list of popular frameworks oriented for HPC-based AI applications.
• Google’s TensorFlow (TF) is a powerful framework that provides APIs in multiple languages.
TF is built for numerical computation using dataflow graphs in which nodes represent
mathematical operations, and graph edges represent multi-dimensional data arrays [48].
• Caffe was developed by Berkeley AI Research (BAIR) and by community contributors[6]. As
a pure C++ library, Caffe features expressive architecture, modularity design, and speed of
training and inference. Command line, Python, and Matlab interfaces are provided.
• PyTorch is a scientific framework based on Torch, a C-based library with its scripting language
LuaJIT [52]. PyTorch can be used as a native library and use popular Python libraries [42].
PyTorch employs dynamic computation graphs, which offers great flexibility.
• Microsoft Cognitive Toolkit (CNTK) is an open-source toolkit for commercial-grade dis-
tributed deep learning [19]. CNTK can be used as a library in Python, C#, or C++ programs.
• Apache MXNet is an open-source framework suited for flexible research prototyping and
production [36]. It features hybrid front-end, distributed training, and rich language bindings.
• Keras is a high-level neural networks API, written in Python and capable of running on top
of TensorFlow, CNTK, or Theano [30]. Keras is designed for easy and fast prototyping.
• ONNX is an open ecosystem that provides an open source format for AI models [3][2].
ONNX greatly improves interoperability between different deep learning frameworks and is
becoming a standard for model exchange.
Our AI pipeline currently supports Caffe and PyTorch off-the-shelf and is compatible with any of
the other frameworks by packaging and integrating them in the second step of the pipeline. Thus,
we provide flexibility for the user to select the most suitable training framework.
2.2
Edge-oriented Deep Learning Frameworks
HPC-oriented Deep Learning frameworks facilitate neural network training and deployment.
However, they are not efficient for deployment on resource-constrained devices. To address the
need of deployment optimization, a new set of frameworks has appeared to boost the run-time
performance of trained models.
• TensorFlow Lite is a framework tailored for on-device inference [49]. TF Lite does not support
the training of neural network directly, users need to convert a trained TF model into the TF
Lite format. Thereafter, on-device inference can be carried out through TF Lite Interpreter.
• Caffe2 is a lightweight deep learning framework focusing the deployment of AI on mobile
devices [18]. Built on the original Caffe, it comes with C++ and Python API’s providing speed
and portability. Caffe2 is now a part of PyTorch [17].
• Android Neural Networks API (NNAPI) is a C API designed for deployment on Android
devices [15]. NNAPI works as a base layer of functionality which is directly used by an
Android app. NNAPI supports and optimizes pre-trained models from TF or Caffe2.
• Arm Compute Library (CL) is a framework that collects low-level functions optimized for Arm
CPUs and GPUs [4]. This library is built specially to accelerate image processing, computer
vision, and machine learning tasks.
• Intel OpenVINO toolkit is a comprehensive toolkit for quickly developing computer vision
applications [29]. It is designed to maximizing CNNs performance on Intel hardware.
ACM Trans. Internet Things, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2019.

Bonseyes AI Pipeline - bringing AI to you
1:5
• Tencent NCNN is a high-performance neural network inference framework optimized for
mobile platforms [37]. Currently, a selection of Tencent apps integrate NCNN and making it
a popular tool for phone app developers. Most commonly used CNN networks are supported.
• Alibaba Mobile Neural Network (MNN) is a lightweight inference engine [34]. MNN is built
to accelerate inference on mobile and embedded devices on iOS and Android. Tensorflow,
Caffe and ONNX architectures are supported.
• Nvidia TensorRT is built on CUDA and it provides capabilities to optimize a trained model
for data centre, embedded devices or autonomous driving platforms [50]. TensorRT is widely
compatible with neural network models trained in major frameworks.
• Tengine by Open AI Lab is a lite, high-performance, and modular inference engine for
embedded devices [47]. Most Convolutional network operators are supported. Caffe, ONNX,
Tensorflow and MXNet models can be loaded directly by Tengine.
• Core ML is Apple’s tool to create or convert machine learning models for iOS apps [21]. Core
ML APIs enable on-device prediction with user data as well as on-device training. Besides, it
supports models from Caffe, Keras and conversions from TensorFlow and MXNet [20].
Our Bonseyes AI pipeline relies on LPDNN for the deployment on emdebbed devices. LPDNN
provides optimized, portable, and light implementations for AI solutions across heterogeneous
platforms. Besides, it can integrate third-party libraries or inference engines into its architecture,
which makes it very flexible for custom platforms.
2.3
End-to-end AI Pipelines
In Section 2.1 and 2.2 we have reviewed the frameworks for HPC- and edge-oriented AI-applications.
However, these frameworks are oriented for developers and not as off-the-shelf products for end
users. In this section we introduce the advances of AI as a Service (or AI pipeline).
The leaders in providing AI services are Google, Amazon, and Microsoft. Google AI Platform [23]
and AI Tools [24] offer great convenience to build AI pipeline with TensorFlow as a backend. These
platforms cover every step from data ingestion to model deployment, and they empower customer’s
AI applications for production. Amazon SageMaker [14] [13] is an end-to-end AI pipeline that
features easy deployment of machine learning models on AWS at any scale. Microsoft Azure [32]
is an enterprise-grade service designed to accelerate machine learning cycle. Azure highlights a
machine learning interpretability toolkit to explain model outputs during training and inference
phases [35]. Moreover, Azure has wide compatibility with open-source frameworks. Overall, these
AI pipelines provide a fast solution to build up an AI application out of training models, but their
deployment is mainly based on the cloud.
Next, we look into AI pipelines that provide edge-oriented deployment. Microsoft Azure IoT
Edge [33] enables direct deployment of business logic on edge devices via Docker containers.
However, this service is clearly in public preview as many tools are under development and limited
to specific options. Amazon AWS IoT Greengrass [26] provides local inference on edge devices
while depending on its cloud for management. They provide support for a range of edge devices
but the service is only available in few regions [27] and under amazon format.
Google AI Platform [23] also aims to edge deployment via TF Lite which makes the pipeline
very competitive and complete. On the other hand, the pipeline lacks flexibility to use or integrate
external tool and constrains the user to employ theirs. This fact bring incompatibility issues with
user custom systems and drops in performance as we explain later in Section 8.2.3.
Apart from enterprise-level general purpose AI services, we also look into an edge-oriented AI
service for vision tasks. Eugene is created as a suite of machine intelligence services toward IoT
applications [75]. With components of data labeling, model training, deployment optimization,
ACM Trans. Internet Things, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2019.

1:6
de Prado, Su, Saeed, et al.
and IoT integration, Eugene is an excellent example of AI service. The authors show how to tailor
deep neural networks to gain efficiency and introduce a scheduling algorithm to select the best
network depth at run time. However, Eugene’s IoT service pipeline is limited in a few aspects. First,
the scheduler is designed to tune the depth of ResNet, which raises questions about how effective
this design works for other network architectures. Network reduction methods such as pruning
may work in Eugene’s pipeline but with significant refactoring. Besides, very little information is
available on the supported hardware platforms and the deployment inference engine. Neither did
the authors mention system integration or support issues, which can be crucial for the successful
deployment of AI service. Bonseyes comes in to address all these drawbacks. A detailed explanation
of our proposed AI pipeline is provided in the following sections.
3
BONSEYES AI PIPELINE ARCHITECTURE
We introduce the fragmentation and obsolescence of tools and propose the pipeline as s solution to
create end-to-end environments for deep learning solutions.
3.1
Fragmentation and obsolescence of tools
The rapid evolution of technology in the field of machine learning requires companies to update
their environments continuously. Being able to upgrade to the latest algorithm or technology is
critical to maintaining the leadership in their field. Besides, upgrading existing data processing
tools is a very demanding task. Differences in library versions, run-time environments, and formats
need to be handled. These challenges can consume a significant amount of time and introduce
hard-to-solve bugs. Moreover, companies are often interested in acquiring the off-the-shelf code or
complete pipelines to reduce their costs and to acquire advanced technology that they would not
be able to develop in-house. Integrating externally generated code is an even more challenging
task as it is very likely that what is acquired is not compatible with the existing pipeline.
3.2
Pipeline as a Solution
One of the main objectives of the Bonseyes AI pipeline framework is to alleviate this problem and
link fragmented environments by defining a way to split the AI pipeline in reusable components,
define interfaces for interoperability and provide a documented reference implementation of the
interfaces to accelerate development. The main goals of the pipeline are twofold; on one side, to
isolate the different parts of the pipeline along with their dependencies, and on the other hand,
to insert in the glue code that combines them explicitly. The Bonseyes AI pipeline framework is
structured around three concepts:
• Tool: A software component that performs a specific function in the pipeline. An example of
a tool is a software that is capable of training a model from a training dataset.
• Artifact: The product of the execution of a tool, e.g. models, datasets. It can be an output of
the pipeline or an intermediate result that is processed by other tools.
• Workflow: A declarative pipeline description that lists the tools that need to be used and
the artifacts that need to be created. For example, a workflow may import a dataset and use
it to train a model.
The AI pipeline relies on Docker containers [9] to package all software dependencies needed
to run a tool, see Fig. 2. Besides, a high-level HTTP API is defined to control the workflows and
tools. The AI pipeline provides a collection of standard formats that define on-disk serialization
and HTTP REST API for them. In addition, the user can define additional formats with different
interfaces to adapt to new designs.
ACM Trans. Internet Things, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2019.

Bonseyes AI Pipeline - bringing AI to you
1:7
Fig. 2. Docker container including all submodules and interfaces.
Fig. 3. Bonseyes AI Pipeline: Data ingestion, Training, Deployment Optimization and IoT Hub Integration.
3.3
End-to-end AI Pipeline
Based on the previous concepts, we propose an end-to-end AI pipeline to develop and deploy Deep
Neural Network solutions on embedded devices. We propose a modular AI pipeline architecture
which contains four modular main tasks: i) Data ingestion, ii) Model training, iii) Deployment
on constraint environment and, iv) IoT hub integration, see Fig. 3. The four main tasks may be
decomposed into several steps that can be later accomplished by a set of tools. The number of
tools for each step is variable since it is possible to have several of them with the same purpose
but using different frameworks or dealing with data from various AI challenges such as image
classification, object detection or KWS. Moreover, some subtasks may also be optional. For example,
Data Partitioning may not be required if the raw data was already partitioned.
Fragmentation quickly occurs between these tasks as each one needs and employs specific
formats to operate. Therein, artifacts come into play as they represent the way by which data can be
stored and exchanged between tools. Artifacts must follow a definition to standardize them for each
problem type. Hence, tools define their inputs and outputs according to these artifact definitions.
This fact makes tools with the same input and output definitions to be easily interchangeable and
leads to modularized and reusable pipelines.
The end-to-end pipeline can be executed following a workflow definition from collecting the
data until IoT hub integration. A workflow specifies the steps that are required to obtain the final
result. This step involves describing which tools are used and in which order, and how the output
artifacts of one tool are used to feed another one.
In the Bonseyes framework, four different DNN-based AI applications and their corresponding
artifact definitions are currently available for the most common AI challenges, although it is possible
to add more if needed. These are: image classification, face recognition, keyword spotting and,
object detection. In the following sections, we introduce and explain the four main steps of the
Bonseyes AI pipeline showing different AI applications on each step.
ACM Trans. Internet Things, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2019.

1:8
de Prado, Su, Saeed, et al.
Fig. 4. Bonseyes AI Pipeline Architecture and functional units.
4
AI DATA INGESTION (1/4)
Data Ingestion is the first step in the AI pipeline, see Fig. 4. It entails the complete process from
acquiring the raw data to have it prepared for model training. The first step of this process involves
parsing the raw data and representing it in a standardized format to be used in the next steps
according to the problem definition, i.e., classification, KWS, etc. Thus, audio or images are stored
together with their annotations. This step is crucial since data is an essential part of the AI pipeline
and is shared across multiple stages. However, standardizing it is a tedious task due to the variety
of file formats and the lack of a consistent annotation representation. This is the reason why the
Bonseyes AI pipeline API provides a set of mechanisms to reduce the efforts when importing new
data. Collecting it from the internet or a local hard drive is already supported by specifying only
where the resource is located. Moreover, API also manages how the resulting dataset artifact is
stored.
After importing the data into the pipeline, a processing step may be carried out to prepare it
for model training. This process includes operations such as image resizing, normalization or face
alignment among others. This process can be accomplished by more than one step, which may
vary according to the data, the model to be trained, or even the application. Finally, the dataset may
also require to be partitioned into training, validation, and test sets depending on the needs. This
partitioning is not necessary if it was already done in the raw data, but a large number of public
datasets are stored in a single compressed file that requires further processing.
To illustrate this step of the AI pipeline further, we show an example of data ingestion
for a KWS application. Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) is a classical AI challenge where
data, algorithms, and hardware must be brought together to perform well. Speech source with
regional accents has high phonetic variance even in the same word, and expressions in dialects
may exceed the standard transcription dictionary. These scenarios suppose a great challenge as
retraining a recognizer system with a large amount of real-user data becomes necessary before
ACM Trans. Internet Things, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2019.

Bonseyes AI Pipeline - bringing AI to you
1:9
Fig. 5. Keyword Spotting (KWS). Process of recognizing predefined words from a speech signal. The process
involves a feature extraction step before the signal is fed into a DNN model. The model then compares the
input to the predefined words and detects their presence [76].
deploying the system. Therefore, only stakeholders that can acquire custom data and train on
it can overcome such a challenge. Keyword Spotting, a particular case of ASR, is the process of
recognizing predefined words from a speech signal, which in many cases, serves as a "wake-up"
signal to initiate a larger service, see Fig. 5.
We have set the AI Data Ingestion step to download the complete Google Speech Commands
dataset [1] containing WAV files. The raw data is downloaded from the provider, parsed, and
standardized into HDF5 format files to comply with reusability and compatibility. Because it is a
labeled dataset, we skip labeling in the pipeline. Finally, data are partitioned into training, validation,
and benchmarking sets. Regarding the training set, the import tool stores each WAV file together
with sample ID and class label in one data tensor. This single data tensor is used as input to the
next tool. Validation dataset and test dataset can be imported in the same way.
However, raw audio samples are difficult to process. Human’s voice is generated from vocal
cords vibration, which varies with different sounds. Spectral features of speech signals are more
representative than sound waveform in speech recognition. Human’s cochlea is more capable of
discerning low-frequency signals than high-frequency signals. To model cochlea characteristics,
we apply Mel scale over the power spectrum, and it shows higher resolution on low-frequency
bands. After discrete cosine transform of Mel log powers, we get Mel-frequency spectral coefficients
(MFCCs). MFCC is a widely used audio feature format for speech recognition [74].
Given the flexibility and modularity of the AI pipeline, we have integrated the MFCC generation
extraction process into the Data ingestion step as pre-processing option. This process employs
an audio feature generation tool which produces MFCC features of each audio sample and saves
them together with the keyword labels in an HDF5 file. The audio feature generation has been
accomplished by leveraging the Librosa library [71]. Since audio files in Google Speech Command
dataset are recorded in 16kHz sampling rate, a moving frame of 128ms length and 32ms stride
generates 32 temporal windows in one second. We apply 40 frequency bands per frame, and the
output MFCC features of one-second long audio sample are in a 40x32 tensor. The generated MFCC
features (training set and test set) can also be reused for training and benchmarking tools of new
models.
ACM Trans. Internet Things, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2019.

1:10
de Prado, Su, Saeed, et al.
5
TRAINING (2/4)
Training and accuracy benchmarking follows the data ingestion step of the AI pipeline. The training
step usually consists of a tool that requires a training dataset (and usually a validation dataset) and
produces a model. Since data are standardized, the same training tool can be used with different
datasets from the same problem type. On the other hand, the benchmarking tool requires a test
dataset and a trained model to produce an accuracy report as output. Visualization tools are often
used at this point to help the training process.
In general, an AI pipeline may require a different training framework, another versions of the
same one or even several configurations to solve different AI challenges. These differences often
lead to software configuration problems when a user tries to solve several AI challenges in the
same machine. In this respect, the main benefit of using the Bonseyes AI pipeline for training is
the encapsulation of all the needed software and dependencies inside the Docker container that
runs the tool. Thus, it is possible to have tools with different deep learning frameworks or different
configurations without interfering with each other since they run in an isolated environment.
Nonetheless, training procedures are defined in separate training tools to facilitate tools reusability
and modularity. Bonseyes includes off-the-shelf Caffe and PyTorch frameworks, but any other
framework could also be included.
The flexibility of the dockerized training pipeline allows us to create additional tools that perform
model optimizations during training, such as quantization or sparsification. In this case, the new
model can be trained from scratch using these optimizations or using a pre-trained model with a
new training dataset to optimize and adapt the final model.
To describe this step of the AI pipeline further, we detail an example of training for a KWS
application on Caffe. Two different KWS neural network architectures have been created to cross-
compare accuracy, memory usage, and inference time: Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and
Depth-wise Separable CNN (DS-CNN). Since the Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) -based models
do not show a significant advantage of accuracy over DS-CNN, memory footprint and inference
latency [76], we only develop two types of CNN models in this paper. In the following subsections,
we introduce the training configuration that we have followed, the networks architectures that we
have developed and, a final optimization step: a Neural Architecture Search.
5.1
Training Configurations
All training tools generate both the training model and the solver definition files automatically.
We have trained the CNN and DS_CNN models using Bonseyes-Caffe, [5]. These tools import the
output generated in the MFCC generation step using the training dataset where the extracted
MFCC features and labels are packed all together into an HDF5 file. Training is carried out with a
multinomial logistic loss and Adam optimizer [66] over a batch of 100 MFCC samples (since our
input sample size is 40 × 32, we opt to use a relatively big batch size). The batch size and number of
iterations are specified in the workflow files that control the execution of the tools. Each model
is trained for 40K iterations following a multi-step training strategy. The initial learning rate is
5 × 10−3. With every step of 10K iterations, learning rate drops to 30% of the previous step.
Further, a benchmarking tool has been built to validate the trained models. This tool takes two
inputs: the MFCC features generated from the test dataset (HDF5 file) and the trained model. The
inference is performed, and the predicted classes are compared with the provided ground truth,
and the results are stored in a JSON file.
ACM Trans. Internet Things, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2019.

Bonseyes AI Pipeline - bringing AI to you
1:11
5.2
Network Architectures
To build a KWS model with a small footprint, we have started off by modeling from a 6-layer
convolutional neural network. The CNN architecture contains 6 convolution layers, 1 average
pooling layer, and 1 output layer. More specifically, each convolution layer is followed by 1 batch
normalization layer [64], 1 scale layer and 1 ReLU layer [72]. Output features of the pooling layer
are flattened to one dimension before connecting with the output layer. CNN model architecture
is explained per layer in Table 1. We can see that the first convolution layer uses a non-square
kernel of size 4 x 10. This kernel maps on 4 rows and 10 columns of an MFCC input image, which
in turn refers to 4 frequency bands and 10 sampling windows. A 4 x 10 kernel has an advantage of
capturing power variation in a longer period and narrower frequency bands. This setting complies
with [76]. In the following convolution layers (Conv2 ∼Conv6) 3 x 3 square kernels are applied.
Depthwise Separable CNN (DS_CNN) was introduced by [62], and we also apply it for KWS. DS-
CNN improves the execution of standard CNN as it reduces the number of multiplication operations
by dividing a standard convolution into two parts: depth-wise and point-wise convolution. In this
study, we substitute the standard convolutional layer from the CNN model by depthwise separable
convolutions. Thus, a DS_CNN model has 1 basic convolution layer (Conv), 5 depthwise separable
convolution layers (DS_Conv), 1 average pooling layer, and 1 output layer. Both parts of the
DS_Conv layer, depthwise convolution, and pointwise convolution, are followed by 1 normalization
layer, 1 scale layer, and 1 ReLU layer. The first convolution layer is Conv instead of DS_Conv. This
setting follows the original MobileNet [62], and it helps to extract 2D structure from the input.
Model
conv1∗
conv2∗
conv3
conv4
conv5
conv6
TOP-1
MFPops
Size (KB)
CNN
4x10, 100
3x3, 100
3x3, 100
3x3, 100
3x3, 100
3x3, 100
94.2%
581.1
1832
DS_CNN
4x10, 100
3x3, 100
3x3, 100
3x3, 100
3x3, 100
3x3, 100
90.6%
69.9
1017
Table 1. Initial architectures of CNN and DS_CNN networks. Filter shape is defined as kh ×kw, M where
kh and kw are kernel height and kernel width, and M is the number of output channels. * conv1 has stride
shape 1 × 2 and conv2 has stride shape 2 × 2. All other convolutional layers have stride shape 1 × 1.
5.3
Neural Architecture Search
Although the manually designed CNN network achieves 94.2% prediction accuracy (Table 1), it is not
guaranteed to be the best choice for deployment. Applications on embedded devices are sensitive
to energy consumption, and a KWS model is required to respond with low latency. The exact
inference latency needs to be gauged on the hardware test, but we can hold an assumption that a
model with a smaller number of floating point operations (FPops) will be faster and be more energy
efficient. Joint optimization of model accuracy and FPops is challenging because these two metrics
cannot be implemented in one loss function. A solution of model selection comes from Neural
Architecture Search (NAS). NAS is a process of automating network architecture engineering [58].
Alternatively speaking, NAS offers a method to automatically explore high-dimensional network
hyperparameter space and populate network candidates with good prediction accuracy.
Elsken et al. categorized the tasks of NAS in three folds, including search space, search strategy,
and performance estimation strategy [58]. In this work, we have applied the popular search strategy
Tree-structured Parzen Estimator (TPE) [54]. The performance estimation strategy that we have
followed is a multinomial logistic loss function, and we have used Microsoft NNI library [55] for the
NAS experiment. The main challenge comes from search space setup as the number of possibilities
ACM Trans. Internet Things, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2019.

1:12
de Prado, Su, Saeed, et al.
Fig. 6. AI application types.
Fig. 7. Low-power Deep Neural Network (LPDNN) framework. LPDNN enables the deployment and
optimization of AI applications on heterogeneous embedded platforms such as CPU, GPU, GPU and, ASIC.
grows exponentially. We first explore optimization parameters (including learning rate, batch size,
weight decay strategy and training iterations) and then we freeze a set of optimization settings
to explore the target network parameters: kernel height kh, kernel width kw and output channel
number M of each convolution layer. When the network parameter search space is explored, a
selection of CNN architectures is available. These architectures are populated in a two-dimensional
space of model accuracy and FPops. We use Pareto frontier [70] to select candidate architectures. If
one candidate architecture is on Pareto frontier, it means no other candidate can be more accurate
without paying a higher computational cost, and vice versa. We’ve created an integrated solution
of neural architecture search and Pareto frontier selection, for the aim of performance-oriented
model selection. More details can be found in [53].
6
DEPLOYMENT OPTIMIZATION (3/4)
After training a Deep Neural Network (DNN), the next step in the Bonseyes AI pipeline is the
deployment of such DNN on embedded devices. The support and optimization for the deployment
of DNNs rely on LPDNN. LPDNN, which stands for Low Power Deep Neural Network, is an
enabling deployment framework which provides the tools and capabilities to generate portable and
efficient implementations of DNNs for constrained and autonomous applications such as Healthcare
Auxiliary, Consumer Emotional Agent, and Automotive Safety and Assistant. The main goal of
LPDNN is to provide a set of AI applications, e.g., object detection, image classification, speech
recognition, see Fig. 6, which can be deployed and optimized across heterogeneous platforms, e.g.,
CPU, GPU, FPGA, DSP, ASIC, see Fig. 7. In this work, we integrate LPDNN into the AI pipeline and
present its lightweight architecture and deployment capabilities for embedded devices. Further, we
show the deployment of KWS, image classification, and object detection applications on a set of
embedded platforms while comparing to other deployment frameworks.
ACM Trans. Internet Things, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2019.

Bonseyes AI Pipeline - bringing AI to you
1:13
Fig. 8. LPDNN full stack. LPDNN provides a complete development flow for AI solutions for embedded
devices by providing platform support, sample models, optimization tools and integration of external libraries.
6.1
LPDNN Architecture
One of the main issues of AI systems is the hardship to replicate results across different systems
[12]. To solve that issue, LPDNN features a full development flow for AI solutions on embedded
devices by providing platform support, sample models, optimization tools, integration of external
libraries and benchmarking at several levels of abstraction, see Fig. 8. LPDNN’s full development
flow makes the AI solution very reliable and easy to replicate across systems. Next, we explain
LPDNN architecture by describing the concept of AI applications and the LPDNN Inference Engine.
6.1.1
AI applications. AI applications are the result of LPDNN’s optimization process and the
higher level of abstraction for the deployment of DNN on a target platform. They contain all the
necessary elements or modules for the execution of DNN. The minimum number of modules that an
AI application may contain are two: pre-processing and inference engine modules. More modules
can be included to extend the capabilities of the AI application, e.g., connection of several neural
networks in a chain fashion.
Furthermore, AI applications contain a hierarchical but flexible architecture that allows new
modules to be integrated within the LPDNN framework through an extendable and straightforward
API. For instance, LPDNN supports the integration of 3rd-party self-contained inference engines
for AI applications. The AI application could select as a backend LPDNN Inference Engine (LNE) or
any other external inference engine integrated into LPDNN, e.g. Renesas e-AI [46], TI-DL [51]. The
inclusion of external engines also benefits LPDNN as certain embedded platforms provide their
own specific and optimized framework to deploy DNNs on them.
6.1.2
LPDNN Inference Engine. In the heart of LPDNN lies the Inference Engine (LNE), initially
introduced in [56], which is a code generator developed within the Bonseyes project to accelerate
the deployment of neural networks on resource-constrained environments[56]. LNE can generate
code for the range of DNN models and across a span of heterogeneous platforms. LNE supports a
wide range of neural network models as it provides direct compatibility with Caffe [6]. In addition,
LNE supports ONNX format [3], which allows models trained on any framework to be incorporated
into LPDNN providing they can export to ONNX, e.g., PyTorch or TensorFlow. The network model
ACM Trans. Internet Things, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2019.

1:14
de Prado, Su, Saeed, et al.
Fig. 9. LPDNN Inference Engine (LNE) [56]. Plugins can be included for specific layers which allows a
broad design space exploration suited for the target platform and performance specifications.
(Caffe, ONNX) is converted to an internal computation graph in an unified format. At this point,
several steps such as graph analysis for network compression and memory allocation optimization
are performed. LNE provides a plugin-based architecture where a dependency-free inference
core is complemented and built together with a set of plugins (acceleration libraries) to produce
optimized code for AI applications given a target platform, see Fig. 9. Thus, each layer is assigned an
implementation among the available computing libraries. Finally, layout conversions are performed
in the code generation process to assure the compatibility of the network execution. More details
of LNE are provided in 6.2.
6.1.3
Heterogeneous Computing Support. One of the main factors for LPDNN’s adoption is per-
formance portability across the wide span of hardware platforms. The plugin-based architecture
maintains a small and portable core while supporting a wide range of heterogeneous platforms,
including CPU, GPU, DSP, and FPGA. One of the objectives of Bonseyes is to provide full support
for reference platforms by providing:
• Board Support Package (BSP) containing OS images, drivers, and toolchains for several
heterogeneous platforms.
• A dockerized [9] and stable environment which increases the reliability by encouraging the
replication of results across platforms and environments.
• Optimization tools and computing libraries for a variety of computing embedded platforms
that can be used by LNE to accelerate the execution of neural networks.
6.2
Inference Optimizations
LPDNN contains several optimization tools and methods to generate efficient and light implemen-
tations for resource-constrained devices.
6.2.1
Network compression. LNE supports folding of batch normalization and scale layers into the
previous convolution or fully connected layer [22] at compilation time. This optimization provides
a reduction in memory size, as the weights of the folded layers are merged, and an acceleration
during the inference as the execution of the folded layers are skipped. In addition, some plugins in
LNE support fusion of activation layers into the previous convolution at run-time. Fusing activation
layers halves the number of memory accesses for a data tensor passing through the combination of
convolution + activation layer.
ACM Trans. Internet Things, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2019.

Bonseyes AI Pipeline - bringing AI to you
1:15
6.2.2
Memory optimization. LNE analyzes the computation graph for memory usage and optimizes
the overall allocation by sharing the same memory between layers that are not active concurrently
(similar to temporary-variables allocation techniques used in compilers). Besides, LNE enables
when possible in-place computation: layers share the same memory for input and output tensors.
6.2.3
Optimized plugins. Acceleration libraries can be included as plugins in LNE for specific layers
to accelerate the inference by calling optimized primitives of the library e.g., BLAS, ARM-CL [4],
NNPACK [38] cuDNN. Besides, several libraries can be combined or tuned to boost the performance
of the neural network execution. Certain computing processors may provide better performance
for specific tasks depending on the model architecture, data type, and layout. Thanks to LNE’s
flexibility, it is possible to select in what type of processor to deploy each layer and what backend
to use, see Fig. 10. Therefore, we find a design exploration problem - named Network Deployment
Exploration - when we aim to optimize metrics such as accuracy, latency, or memory.
Fig. 10. Design Space. Optimization can be
achieved by deploying each layer on different pro-
cessing systems based on their capabilities regarding
latency, memory or accuracy. Colours match Fig. 7.
Fig. 11. RL optimization [57]. In a first stage (500
episodes), the agent searches through the design
space to learn about the environment. In a second
stage, the agent start slowly selecting those imple-
mentation that yield a faster inference.
6.2.4
Network Deployment Exploration. To solve this space exploration problem, we propose
an automatic exploration framework called QS-DNN, which has been previously introduced in
[57]. QS-DNN implements a learning-based approach, based on Reinforcement Learning [68],
where an agent explores through the design space, e.g., network deployment across heterogeneous
computing processors, and empirically finds an optimal implementation by selecting optimal layer
configuration as well as cross-layer optimizations. The network deployment space can be defined
as a set of states S, i.e., layer representations. The agent explores such space by employing a set of
actions A, i.e., layer implementations, with the final aim of learning a combination of primitives
(from LNE’s acceleration libraries), that speeds up the performance of the DNN on a given platform,
see Fig. 11. QS-DNN has been integrated into LPDNN and is tightly coupled with LNE.
6.2.5
Network Quantization. Neural networks can be further compressed and optimized through
approximation [65]. A quantization exploration tool has been integrated within LPDNN, which
analyzes the sensitivity of each layer to reduced-numerical precision, e.g., int8 [43]. The tool yields
a set of quantization parameters (scale values) which are applied to the weight and output tensors
of each layer to minimize the loss in accuracy when using quantized methods. Thanks to LPDNN’s
benchmark architecture, it is possible to obtain latency measure per layer as well as the accuracy
of the network for specific quantization parameters.
ACM Trans. Internet Things, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2019.

1:16
de Prado, Su, Saeed, et al.
6.3
Deployment of AI applications
To demonstrate LPDNN’s optimizations and capabilities, we compare LPDNN with several de-
ployment frameworks for KWS, image classification, and object detection applications on a set of
embedded platforms. The reader is referred to Section 8.2.3 for the analytical results of the following
comparison scenarios.
6.3.1
LPDNN vs Caffe (KWS). KWS applications are often used as a "wake-up" signal for larger
systems due to their low energy consumption, which makes them affordable for always-on modes.
Based on this motivation, we focus on deploying the KWS models on a single core of a multi-core
CPU platform while leaving available other cores for more consuming tasks or powered-off if not
needed. We have chosen the Nvidia Jetson Nano [39], which features a quad-core ARM Cortex
A-57. Since the KWS models have been trained on Caffe, see Section 5, we compare the deployment
of LPDNN against Caffe for such models.
6.3.2
LPDNN vs PyTorch (object detection). Object detection applications must detect, iden-
tify, and localize multiple subjects in the input image. In this work, we show a body-pose estimation
model, a case of object detection, where the model has to identify and estimate the skeleton of the
people. We take two pre-trained resnet-based models, which have been initially trained by [67] on
PyTorch. We export the model to ONNX and import it in LPDNN where we can leverage LPDNN’s
optimization and, thus, compare PyTorch deployment with LPDNN’s. As body-pose estimation is a
very computationally intensive task, we evaluate a heterogeneous implementation for which we
propose a last generation automotive platform, the Nvidia Jetson Xavier, which features 8-core
ARM v8.2 and a 512-core Volta GPU [40].
6.3.3
Comparison with Embedded Deployment Frameworks (image classification). We
further compare LPDNN with state-of-the-art deployment frameworks which provide inference
engines for resource-constrained devices. Image classification is a classical AI applications where an
image needs to be classified according to its content. We show the deployment of a representative
range of models for the ImageNet challenge [28] on two embedded platforms: The Raspberry 3b+
[44] and Raspberry 4b [45] featuring a quad-core ARM Cortex-A53 and Cortex-A72, respectively.
We especially evaluate several network topologies for resource-constrained devices, e.g., Mobilenets,
Squeezenet, but also reasonably large networks like Resnet50, which allows us to show how the
inference engines adapt to the requirements of each network on the selected target platform. We
evaluate the following deployment frameworks: i) Caffe-SSD [7], ii) ArmCL-DEV20191107 [4], iii)
MNN-0.2.1.5 [34], iv) NCNN-20191113 [37], v) Tengine-DEV20190906 [47], vi) TFLite-2.0.0 [49], vii)
LPDNN-20191101.
7
IOT HUB INTEGRATION (4/4)
IoT hub integration is the last step of the AI pipeline. The rise and spread of highly distributed
embedded systems bring about scalability issues in the deployment and integration of such systems.
Generally, AI applications run on systems which are part of a broader application and service
ecosystem that support a value chain. The inclusion of AI enabled systems into an IoT ecosystem
is of particular interest when it comes to resource-constrained systems to alleviate computing
and memory demands. The heterogeneous nature of IoT and embedded devices not only in terms
of HW capabilities, i.e., computation, memory and power consumption, but also in terms of SW
support supposes a great challenge to build a global ecosystem. Further, several other problems,
such as security and privacy, need to be addressed in a distributed platform where information is
continuously shared.
ACM Trans. Internet Things, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2019.

Bonseyes AI Pipeline - bringing AI to you
1:17
Fig. 12. Bonseyes IoT tools. Bonseyes relies on the FIWARE platform [10] for the implementation of the
integration pipeline. It backs two main scenarios A) Edge-processing, B) Cloud-processing.
7.1
IoT scenarios
The IoT hub integration in the AI pipeline backs two main scenarios which are relevant for low-
power and autonomous environments, e.g., command voice in medical health care, pedestrian
detection in automotive, etc:
• Edge-processing: Data are processed on the embedded device, and results are retrieved and
stored in the cloud for further processing and exploitation, see Fig. 12-A.
• Cloud-processing Part of the computation steps in the embedded system is delegated to
server- or cloud-based AI engines. This scenario can be of great interest for constrained
systems when their resources are not able to offer enough computational power to execute
AI algorithms, see Fig. 12-B.
7.2
Bonseyes IoT Tools
Bonseyes relies on the FIWARE platform [10] for the implementation of the IoT hub integration. Both
edge-processing and cloud-processing scenarios are supported by the use of a set of FIWARE Generic
Enablers not only to exchange data between different enablers but also to manage embedded systems
as IoT agents. Also, the second scenario requires the use of Kurento Media Server to seamlessly
transfer media contents from the embedded platforms to the cloud computing infrastructure.
7.2.1
FIWARE. It is an open-source community which provides a rich set of APIs to facilitate the
connection to IoT devices, user interaction, and process of data. FIWARE offers a rich library of
components, called Generic Enablers (GE), which provide reference implementations that allow
users to develop new applications. GEs provide the general-purpose functions such as data context
management, IoT service enablement, advance web-based UI, security, interface to networks, the
architecture of application/services ecosystem, and cloud hosting.
7.2.2
Kurento Media Server. Kurento is a Stream-Oriented GE providing a media server and a set
of APIs to help the development of web-based media applications for browsers or smartphones.
It offers ready-made bricks of media processing algorithms such as computer vision, augmented
reality, and speech analysis.
In this work, we have focused on the edge processing scenario, since the selected embedded
platforms in Section 6 are fairly able to process data directly on the Edge. Hence, we have created a
dedicated media module in Kurento which call LPDNN’s AI application and stores the results.
ACM Trans. Internet Things, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2019.

1:18
de Prado, Su, Saeed, et al.
Model
Acc
Sparsity
Size (KB)
Model
Acc
Sparsity
Size (KB)
CNN
94.23%
0%
1832
DS_CNN
90.65%
0%
1017
CNN + Q
94.04%
0%
918
DS_CNN + Q
90.62%
0%
511
CNN + S
93.69%
39.6%
1832
DS_CNN + S
89.96%
27.9%
1017
CNN + Q + S
94.27%
39.8%
918
DS_CNN + Q + S
90.19%
27.7%
511
Table 2. KWS trained models: Benchmark of the models on test set. Q: Quantization (16-bit), S: Sparsity.
8
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In this section, we introduce the results of the AI pipeline and detail the outcome of the Training and
Deployment steps. We give examples of different AI applications while we analyze and demonstrate
the effectiveness and benefits of the Bonseyes AI pipeline for embedded systems.
8.1
Training
Table 2 shows benchmark scores of CNN models and DS_CNN models trained with Bonseyes-Caffe
[5] for the KWS application shown in Section 5. The test set contains 2567 audio samples which
are recorded from totally different speakers of the training samples. After 40K iterations training,
the CNN model marks 94.23% accuracy on the test set, and the model size is 1.8 MB. DS_CNN
model marks 90.65% accuracy, and the model size is 1 MB. With current hyper-parameter settings,
DS_CNN is 4% less accurate than CNN, but its model size is about half of CNN. According to Zhang
et al.[76], DS_CNN has the potential to be more accurate, and we will refine this model.
In this work, we have decided to build small footprint KWS models to ease the deployment on
embedded devices. As introduced in Section 5, we can apply quantization (Q), and sparsification
(S) functions to obtain a further compression in the models. On both CNN and DS_CNN, Q and S
have minor disadvantage (< 0.7% loss) on test accuracy. Moreover, 16-bit fixed-point quantization
can save half memory space and reduced bandwidth requirements at run time. An S model may
also leverage the amount of zeroes in its matrices and obtain benefits in memory and computation
when it is deployed. Finally, We also observe that a Q+S model is more accurate than an S model as
quantization may act as a regularizer and slightly increase the accuracy.
Manually designed CNN and DS_CNN models achieved over 90% prediction accuracy on KWS
(Table 1). However, these models contain much redundancy and suppose a challenge for performance
on embedded devices. We propose Neural Architecture Search method to explore KWS models
with reduced model size and FPops. 12 CNN models are spotted through NAS and Pareto-optimal
selection [53] and 3 models are presented in Table 4. In kws1, we can see that kernel sizes of conv2
to conv6 are no longer fixed at 3 × 3 but vary from 1 × 1 to 5 × 5. Output channels are all below
50. All these modifications reduce MFPops from 581.1 to 223.4 and improve TOP-1 accuracy from
94.2% to 95.1%. Further model size reduction is found in kws3 and kws9 by the price of a minor
drop in accuracy. Another observation is that 4 × 10 kernels of the first convolution layer are no
longer needed for an accurate KWS model. These rectangular kernels were designed to cover a
longer temporal sequence than frequency bands from MFCC features [76]. As MFCC features were
generated with 128ms frame length in this study, much longer than 40ms in literature, CNN with
only square kernels is capable of delivering accurate KWS models.
Overall, we can see that NAS discovers obsolete network sub-structures introduced by manual
network design. We leverage the advantages of DS_CNN and adapt CNN architectures in Table 4
to DS_CNN version (Table 5). Three new DS_CNN architectures are coined and are trained in 300K
iterations. Each DS_CNN model achieves higher prediction accuracy than the seed DS_CNN model.
ACM Trans. Internet Things, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2019.

Bonseyes AI Pipeline - bringing AI to you
1:19
In the meantime, the MFPops are only 11.9, 9.7 and 7.0 respectively. ds_kws9 reports the minimum
computational load in this study.
8.2
Deployment Optimization
Following the description of Section 6.3, we employ LPDNN’s tools to optimize the deployment of
AI applications on the embedded platforms, and we compare it with several well-known deploy-
ment frameworks. To ensure a fair comparison across the frameworks, we have enabled all the
optimizations as provided by each vendor of the framework. All benchmarks have been performed
identically: calculating the average of ten inferences after an initial (discarded) warm-up run. In
addition, we have set the platforms in performance mode, which sets the clocks to the highest
frequency. To ensure that the platform does not overheat, triggering thermal throttling, we have
monitored the platforms and sampled the OS registers each second.
8.2.1
LPDNN vs Caffe (KWS). We compare the deployment of the trained KWS models from
Table 4 and 5 between Caffe and LPDNN on the Nvidia Jetson Nano platform. Caffe has been
installed natively on the platform using Openblas as backend. On the LPDNN side, we employ LNE
coupled with an RL-based search (QS-DNN) to find an optimized solution for the deployment on
the target platform. Fig. 13a shows the results of the deployment when processing a one-second
audio input using a single-thread and 32-bit floating-point operations on the CPU.
Overall, we can see that while Caffe takes, from largest to smallest, between 50 ms and 24 ms to
process a single KWS network while LPDNN employs between 21 ms and 7 ms. Caffe-Openblas
featuring general-matrix multiplication (GEMM) only outperforms LPDNN-GEMM on KWS1.
Nonetheless, QS-DNN’s capability to learn an optimized combination of libraries makes LPDNN
significantly outperform Caffe on every network being up to x3.5 faster. Regarding LPDNN’s
acceleration libraries, it is noted that no single library outperforms all other libraries across all
networks. QS-DNN, however, always outperforms all individual libraries across all networks. Hence,
it is possible to prove that QS-DNN adapts to each specific use case and supposes a powerful tool
for LPDNN’s optimized deployment.
Networks can be further compressed through quantization by employing primitives featuring
reduced-numerical precision, as explained in Section 6.2.5. Fig. 13b illustrates an analysis of KWS1’s
layers using int8 primitives from armCL. We observe that GEMM int8 generally - but not always
- outperforms its FP32 counterpart. The overall improvement of having KWS1 full int8 accounts
for 52% over GEMM FP32, as Conv4-Conv6 are the most computational intensive layers, and 1/4
of the memory size with only 1% drop in accuracy. However, this improvement is shadowed by
efficient convolution primitives such as Winograd [69], whose F32 implementation outperforms
GEMM FP32 by 88%. Based on these results, we state that the use of quantization on Jetson Nano
devices provides a trade-off between latency and memory consumption for the KWS application.
8.2.2
LPDNN vs PyTorch (object detection). We compare the deployment of the (resnet-based)
body-pose estimation models presented in Section 6.3.2 between PyTorch and LPDNN on the Nvidia
Xavier platform. We have installed PyTorch natively on the platform using the latest release provided
by Nvidia [41]. We perform a first experiment deploying the models on the Arm CPU of the platform
and employing single-thread and 32-bit floating-point operations. PyTorch uses the ATen library
based on c++11, while LPDNN employs QS-DNN coupled to LNE to find an optimized combination
of primitives. Fig. 14a presents the deployment results, and we can observe that LPDNN amply
outperforms PyTorch on the CPU, being up to x15 faster for the resnet18-based model.
As PyTorch is mainly a training framework, we assume that CPU has not been largely optimized
in favour of GPU deployment. Hence, we perform a second experiment on the GPU employing
the same backend, CUDA-10, in both frameworks. As it can be in Fig. 14b, LPDNN outperforms
ACM Trans. Internet Things, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2019.

1:20
de Prado, Su, Saeed, et al.
(a) Inference time using FP32 operations. Caffe’s
time is given in black. Other colours represent the
deployment of LPDNN employing a single library.
On green, QS-DNN’s solution after having learnt
an optimized combination of primitives.
(b) Quantization analysis for KWS1. Speedup of
GEMM int8 primitives over GEMM F32 and com-
parison with Winograd F32 for each layer of the
network.
Fig. 13. LPDNN vs Caffe (KWS). Inference time using single-thread operations on the Nvidia Jetson Nano
(CPU) (the lower the better).
(a) CPU deployment using single-thread FP32.
(b) GPU deployment using FP32 and FP16.
Fig. 14. LPDNN vs PyTorch (Object detection). Inference time of the (resnet-based) body-pose estimation
models on the Nvidia Jetson Xavier.
PyTorch on both networks performing up to 28% faster. Further, we analyze the performance of
half-precision to speed up the inference and reduce memory footprint. PyTorch employing FP16
out-of-the-box turns out to be slower than FP32. This might be due to a direct conversion from FP32
to FP16, and, as [61] suggests, this conversion needs to be carefully carried out to keep performance
up. In LPDNN, by contrast, we set QS-DNN to automatically learn what data type performs better
and give an optimized combination of primitives for LNE. Thus, we achieve up to 65% improvement
on Resnet18 when leveraging mixed precision.
8.2.3
Comparison with Embedded Deployment Frameworks (image classification). To
demonstrate the capabilities of LPDNN further, we compare it with a range of embedded deployment
frameworks on the RPI3b+ and RPI4b1 for the ImageNet challenge as stated in Section 6.3.3. We have
built all the deployment frameworks natively and enabled all the optimizations as provided by each
vendor. To further guarantee a fair comparison, we have chosen five representative networks that
are used across all deployment frameworks: Alexnet, Resnet50-V1, Googlenet-V1, Squeezenet-V1.1, and
Mobilenet-V2-1.0-224. The reference networks are taken from Caffe repository, which we assume as
the reference framework, and are imported into each of the tested frameworks directly if supported
1Both platforms have been flashed with 64-bit Debian OS images
ACM Trans. Internet Things, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2019.

Bonseyes AI Pipeline - bringing AI to you
1:21
(a) RPI3
(b) RPI4
Fig. 15. Comparison with embedded deployment frameworks (Image classification). Inference re-
sults of the range of deployment frameworks for the reference networks on the RPI3 and RPI4. The bars
represent the relative speedup over Caffe, which displays the absolute time in milliseconds.
by the framework, or via an official conversion tool (provided by the framework2). All inferences
are performed using a single-thread and 32-bit floating-point operations on the CPU.
Fig. 15 presents the results of the reference networks across the range of deployment frameworks
on the RPI3 and RPI4. We show the relative speedup of each framework with respect to Caffe
(reference) for which we display the absolute time in milliseconds. We can easily observe two
general trends. i) Certain frameworks perform very well on a single network but drastically drop
performance on other networks, e.g., MNN, Tengine. ii) the deployment of some networks has been
remarkably optimized, e.g., several frameworks achieve over 4x improvement over the reference
in Mobilenet-V2, while generally, no framework accomplishes a comparable speed-up in other
network topologies, e.g., Googlenet, Squeezenet.
These two trends confirm the importance of selecting several network topologies to have a sound
estimation of the frameworks and how they can adapt to each structure. ArmCL and LPDNN are
the frameworks that provide the most stable performance improvements. From these two, LPDNN
obtains the highest speedups and outperforms all other frameworks across networks and target
platforms performing over 2x better than the average and 5x better than the worst performing
framework. LPDNN’s high performance can be explained by the abundant number of optimized
primitives that LPDNN contains and its ability to learn a combination of primitives for each network.
The stability across the two platforms proves that LPDNN is robust and can adapt to different
architectures while retaining high performance.
TF Lite exception. We have benchmarked all frameworks taking the networks from Caffe as
reference. TF Lite is the only framework that neither supports nor provides an official conversion
tool for Caffe networks and hence, we have employed MMDNN and ONNX for the conversion
to TF. From TF to TF Lite we use the official converter. We argue that this conversion, although
providing correct output classifications results, might be the cause of the low performance of TF
Lite. Therefore, we offer a new benchmark comparing TF Lite with LPDNN taking three networks
from TF repositories instead. We take Mobilenet-V2 from TF Lite repository and Googlenet-V1
and Resnet50-V1 from the original TF as they are not available in TF Lite directly. We convert
all of them from TF to LPDNN via ONNX and the last two from TF to TF Lite via TF Lite official
converter. Table 3 depicts the results of such benchmarks on the RPI3 and RPI4.
We can remark that the native TF Lite network, Mobilenet-V2, performs notably well, achieving
almost the performance of LPDNN. However, we can already see that the original networks from
2With exception of TF Lite. We convert Caffe to TF via MMDNN and ONNX. From TF to TF Lite we use the official converter.
ACM Trans. Internet Things, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2019.

1:22
de Prado, Su, Saeed, et al.
DNN
RPI3
RPI4
LPDNN
TF Lite
LPDNN
TF Lite
Mobilenet-V2 (from TF Lite)
217
246
105
119
Googlenet (from TF)
429
839
216
430
Resnet50 (from TF)
1172
2024
667
981
Table 3. Inference comparison in milliseconds between TF Lite and LPDNN taking TF original networks.
standard TF, converted to TF Lite, drop in performance being up to 2.5x slower than LPDNN. This
point denotes the lack of proper support in TensorFlow for other formats, e.g., Caffe, ONNX, TF,
as it appears that TF Lite only performs well when the networks have been written in a specific
format, i.e., TF Lite format, or contains a specific architecture, e.g., Mobilenet. This fact supposes a
constrained for users wanting to employ custom models as they would either have poor performance
when executing non TF Lite networks or have TF framework a fixed dependency. Nevertheless,
LPDNN also outperforms TF Lite using TF original models. We can thus prove LPDNN’s flexibility
and support for other network’s formats and its domain over the range of embedded-oriented
deployment frameworks.
9
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Nowadays, training and deployment of custom AI solutions on embedded and IoT devices poses
many issues as it requires a fine-grained integration of data, algorithms, and tools. These barriers
prevent the massive spread of AI applications in our daily life as only end-to-end systems can
overcome these hurdles and achieve accurate and fast solutions. In this work, we present a modular
end-to-end AI pipeline architecture, which brings data, algorithms, and deployment tools together
to facilitate the production and porting of AI solution for embedded devices. We ease the integration
and lower the required expertise by providing key benefits such as the reusability of tools thanks to
a dockerized API, and the flexibility to add new steps to the workflow. Thus, we propose a pipeline
with four main steps: i) data ingestion, ii) model training, iii) deployment optimization and, iv) the
IoT hub integration.
We have demonstrated the effectiveness of the AI pipeline by providing several examples of AI
applications in each of the steps and show the significance of a tight integration of the pipeline
steps toward having an efficient and competitive implementation. Thus, we are able to create a data
ingestion step for the Google speech commands dataset seamlessly and train two families of CNN
and DS_CNN networks achieving up to 95.1% and 92.6%. Further, we have presented the lightweight
architecture and deployment capabilities of our deployment framework, LPDNN, and demonstrate
that it outperforms all other popular deployment frameworks on a set of AI applications and across
a range of embedded platforms.
As future work, we envision to fully optimize and deploy trained models on very low-power
devices that can be employed for applications such as healthcare sensing, wearable systems, or
car-driving assistant.
