Whole-Slide Image Focus Quality: 
Automatic Assessment and Impact on  
AI Cancer Detection 
 
 

Yun Liu​1 
Melissa Moran​1 
Po-Hsuan (Cameron) Chen​1 
Trissia Brown​1 
Craig H. Mermel​1 
Jason D. Hipp​1 

 
Affiliations 
1​Google AI Healthcare, 1600 Amphitheatre Parkway, Mountain View, CA, USA 
 
Corresponding author: 

 

 
Abstract 
 
Background:​ Digital pathology enables remote access or consults and powerful image analysis 
algorithms. However, the slide digitization process can create artifacts such as out-of-focus (OOF). OOF 
is often only detected upon careful review, potentially causing rescanning and workflow delays. Although 
scan-time operator screening for whole-slide OOF is feasible, manual screening for OOF affecting only 
parts of a slide is impractical. 
Methods:​ We developed a convolutional neural network (ConvFocus) to exhaustively localize and 
quantify the severity of OOF regions on digitized slides. ConvFocus was developed using our refined 
semi-synthetic OOF data generation process, and evaluated using real whole-slide images spanning 3 
different tissue types and 3 different stain types that were digitized by two different scanners. 
ConvFocus’s predictions were compared with pathologist-annotated focus quality grades across 514 
distinct regions representing 37,700 35x35μm image patches, and 21 digitized “z-stack” whole-slide 
images that contain known OOF patterns. 
Results:​ When compared to pathologist-graded focus quality, ConvFocus achieved Spearman rank 
coefficients of 0.81 and 0.94 on two scanners, and reproduced the expected OOF patterns from z-stack 
scanning. We also evaluated the impact of OOF on the accuracy of a state-of-the-art metastatic breast 
cancer detector and saw a consistent decrease in performance with increasing OOF. 
Conclusions:​ Comprehensive whole-slide OOF categorization could enable rescans prior to pathologist 
review, potentially reducing the impact of digitization focus issues on the clinical workflow. We show that 
the algorithm trained on our semi-synthetic OOF data generalizes well to real OOF regions across tissue 
types, stains, and scanners. Finally, quantitative OOF maps can flag regions that might otherwise be 
misclassified by image analysis algorithms, preventing OOF-induced errors. 
 
 

 
Background 
Digital pathology is advancing into clinical workflows ​[1]​, enabled by the recent regulatory approval of the 
first Whole-Slide Image (WSI) scanner for primary diagnosis in the U.S. ​[2]​, as well as wider availability of 
cheaper storage and large technical infrastructure to manage gigapixel-sized image files. Digitization has 
several compelling use cases: archiving, telepathology for remote consults or diagnosis, teaching, and 
increasingly, facilitation of powerful image analysis algorithms ​[3,4]​. The process of digitization, however, 
can add artifacts to the imaging process, including color or contrast variations and out-of-focus (OOF) 
areas. These artifacts, particularly OOF areas, can hinder the rendering of accurate diagnoses by 
pathologists ​[1]​, or impact the accuracy of automated image analysis ​[5]​. 
 
We here distinguish between three general categories of OOF in decreasing severity: ​global OOF​ that 
affects the entire slide, ​regional OOF​ that affects larger tissue patches, and ​local OOF​ that affects 
individual cells or subcellular structures (Figure 1). Global OOF can be caused by the whole-slide scanner 
erroneously focusing on coverslip debris. Regional OOF can be particularly prominent in specific tissue 
types (such as fat), or affect an entire section of the slide (e.g. “scan lane”). Lastly, local OOF is common 
because typical tissue sections of approximately 5 microns are thicker than the depth of field of standard 
digital pathology scanners at high magnification. While a potential solution is the use of multiple focal 
depths (“z-stacking”), such techniques currently increase scan time and file sizes to an impractical extent 
for routine use. 
 
The different OOF categories have different impacts on the clinical workflow. Pathologists or 
histotechnicians may flag images with global OOF as low quality and order a rescan, which potentially 
results in reporting and workflow delays. Regional and local OOF can be much more difficult to detect 
consistently, particularly when reviewing a slide at low magnification. Rescans may only be requested 
after the pathologist has spent significant time reviewing other areas in the slide, before proceeding to 
evaluate specific areas of concern at higher magnification. Importantly, a technician can pre-screen all 
digital slides for global OOF, but that would be impractical for manual review for smaller OOF regions. 
OOF image artifacts can have even more severe consequences in automated image analysis by directly 
impacting detection and classification. Some studies found that systematic errors can be attributed to 
suboptimal focus quality, such as OOF germinal centers being mistaken for tumor metastases by an 
algorithm ​[5]​. 
 
While every WSI scanner has built-in focus evaluation that can be used for automatic rescans of the 
affected regions or for quality reporting, there are several shortcomings in existing methods: (1) despite 
built-in auto-focus control, most currently available WSI scanners still produce scans with focus issues ​[6]​, 
(2) focus evaluation methods across scanners are different, inhibiting comparison across devices, (3) 
focus metrics are not typically exported to the user with detail regarding the spatial distribution of focus 
quality, and (4) evaluation does not take the clinical relevance of the focus quality into account. For 
example, cytology diagnoses that more strongly rely on subcellular details require a higher focus quality 
than diagnoses that are based primarily on tissue architectural patterns, such as prostatic 
adenocarcinoma Gleason grading. 
 
A sizable body of work exists for automated focus quality assessment in microscopy images using 
manually engineered image features, e.g. ​[7]​. Newer approaches have used deep convolutional neural 
networks ​[8]​, which automatically learn the discriminative features and yield higher accuracies ​[9]​[10]​. The 

 
main challenge, particularly for the neural networks approaches, is the availability of training data to help 
generalization across a large variety of tissue morphologies and stain properties. To help generalization, 
previous works have generated simulated OOF examples using real in-focus images via synthetic 
Gaussian blurring ​[9]​, and additional perturbations such as brightness perturbations and artificial sensor 
noise ​[8]​. 
 
This work further improves the synthetic data generation approach by more closely mimicking the image 
acquisition process of real OOF artifacts. These improvements allowed us to build a robust, highly 
sensitive and fine-grained OOF predictor (ConvFocus) that distinguishes a large spectrum of focus 
degrees across different tissue and stain types. Our approach provides a generally applicable metric that 
is highly concordant with manually annotated focus quality and provides information about focus quality 
across every region in a WSI. Moreover, we quantify the sensitivity of a leading tumor detection algorithm 
to focus quality, which has not been shown in prior related work. 
Materials and Methods 
Overview 
Given a gigapixel-sized image of a whole pathology slide, our goal was to automatically detect and grade 
OOF regions at an accuracy level matching that of a pathologist across tissue, biopsy and stain types. To 
that end, we employed a convolutional neural network approach, which has shown superior performance 
over more classical machine learning approaches using hand-crafted features ​[9]​. We term our approach 
ConvFocus (Figures 2-3). 
Training Data 
Developing accurate neural networks requires large volumes of training data. Unfortunately, accurate 
delineation and grading of OOF areas in WSIs is a highly time-intensive task. For example, our 
pathologist spent 8-16 hours per slide to find, delineate and grade OOF regions (see the “Test Data” 
section for more details). Consequently, generating a sufficiently large pool of OOF training examples 
purely by manual annotation is impractical. Instead, we first manually assessed whether patches were 
completely in-focus or not. For each patch that was labelled “in-focus” by three independent raters, we 
then synthetically generated multiple additional OOF patches with varying but known degrees of OOF. 
The real in-focus image patches and the synthetically “de-focused” versions served as training examples. 
We next describe this process in detail. 
Whole-Slide Scans Used for Training 
26,526 different slides spanning a large variety of tissue, biopsy and stain types were used to train and 
validate our convolutional neural network. Of these, 8,135 slides had surgical sectioning site information 
available in a structured form (Table 1). 26,099 slides were scanned with an Aperio AT2 (Leica 
Biosystems, Germany) at 40X magnification (pixel size: 0.251×0.251μm), using a semi-automatic scan 
mode, and 427 slides were scanned using a Hamamatsu NanoZoomer XR (Hamamatsu Photonics, 
Japan) also at 40X magnification (pixel size: 0.227×0.227μm). 

 
Manual Annotation of In-focus Image Patches 
In-focus images were obtained by manual rating of random tissue-containing image patches from the 
training slides. First, tissue-containing regions were determined using a threshold. For every 128×128 
pixel patch (34×34μm), it was labeled as tissue-containing if the average luma value 
fulfilled 
 (with R, G, B in the range [0,1]). Next, 300×300
.212
.715
.072
 
Y = 0
· R + 0
· G + 0
· B
.0
.8
0
< Y ≤0
 
pixel-sized patches were randomly sampled from tissue-containing areas. Of those the top 8 (for the AT2) 
and top 24 (for the NanoZoomer XR) patches with the lowest average luma value were picked for manual 
assessment of whether the patch was in-focus. More patches were selected from NanoZoomer XR 
images because fewer images from that scanner were available in our database, thus this was necessary 
to achieve a more balanced training set with respect to scanner. This procedure was designed to select 
the densest tissue parts, which in most cases provided the highest density of sharp image gradients and 
best exposed OOF issues. 
 
These “densest” patches were then sent to trained non-pathologist raters for independent evaluation. 
Raters applied one of the following labels to each patch: “in-focus” if at least 75% of tissue area was 
in-focus, “out-focus” if at least 75% was OOF to any degree, and “undecided” otherwise. We selected 
approximately 166,000 patches that all three raters labeled as “in-focus” (i.e. consensus rating) to create 
semi-synthetic training data. 
Semi-synthetic Training Data Generation 
With the rater-determined in-focus patches, we synthetically generated 30 different versions with 
increasing severity of OOF ranging from class 0 to class 29. Class 0 represented the original in-focus 
patches, classes 1-28 represented fine-grained increasing OOF magnitudes, and class 29 covered a 
large range of strong OOF artifacts. 
 
Prior work used convolutions with 2-D Gaussian kernels with varying σ to simulate OOF. However, we 
hypothesized that real OOF artifacts in WSI more closely resemble the “bokeh” OOF effects in 
photography ​[11]​[12]​, which are generated by overlapping superpositions of the lens or the aperture 
shape. This motivated experimentation with a circular convolution kernel with varying radius r, which we 
will refer to as “Bokeh blurring”. 
 
To determine the relationship between the OOF class label and the blurring kernel size (i.e. Gaussian’s σ 
or Bokeh’s circular convolution stencil radius r), we visually assessed the synthetic blurring magnitudes 
for different mappings (Figure 4). Compared to a linear relationship, an exponential one was found to 
better represent the intermediate OOF grades. Specifically, for OOF classes 
, σ for Gaussian
 
1, 8]
c ∈[
2
 
blurring was chosen randomly from intervals 
, and the radius of the
 0.926
xp( 3
), 0.926
xp( 3
) )
[
· e
 · 28
c−1
 
· e
 · c
28
 
Bokeh blurring kernel from
, respectively. For class 
, σ values
 1.4
xp( 3
), 1.4
xp( 3
) )
[
· e
 · 28
c−1
 
· e
 · c
28
9
c = 2
 
were chosen from 
, and radius from
, respectively. To help the
 0.926
[
· exp( 3), 32 )
 
1
 
 1.4
[
· exp( 3), 200 )
 
 
 
 
network capture the full OOF interval range during training, varying blurring levels were randomly 
sampled from within the class-specific intervals, instead of only using the intervals’ center values. The 
scaling factors 0.926 and 1.4, and maximum values 132 and 200 were found to yield similar blur strengths 
for either method and the same OOF class. These scaling factors were determined by minimizing the sum 
of squared differences between RGB values of the images over all OOF classes (Figure 4). 

 
Post-blurring JPEG and Noise Artifacts 
In initial experiments, convolutional neural networks trained on Bokeh or Gaussian-blurred synthetic 
examples yielded poor prediction accuracy on real OOF images; erroneously predicting almost all OOF 
test patches as in-focus (see Results). We hypothesized that this was caused by the artificial smoothing 
removing other types of real artifacts. For example, grid-like artifacts at the edges of scan lanes and 
JPEG blocks are smoothed out in artificially blurred images, but would be present in real OOF images. 
Thus, several categories of other artifact types were re-added after synthetic blurring (Figure 5). 
 
Visual comparison at high magnification of synthetically blurred real in-focus images to real OOF revealed 
other artifacts beyond OOF: pixel noise, likely from the image sensor; and Joint Photographic Experts 
Group (JPEG) compression artifacts, likely from the lossy JPEG compression applied by scanners post 
digitization (scanner quality settings in our data ranged from 70-90). In synthetically blurred images 
however, both of these artifacts ranged from faint to absent, depending on the synthetic blurring 
magnitude, even if they were present in the original in-focus input images. This is because both pixel 
noise and JPEG artifacts typically consist of high spatial frequencies, which are diminished by blurring. 
 
Consequently, simulated JPEG compression artifacts were added back into the synthetically blurred 
images, implemented via JPEG encoding and decoding and an image quality parameter chosen between 
70 and 90%. Pixel noise was added because image sensors collect Poisson-distributed noise. Therefore, 
pixel-wise Poisson noise was simulated by mapping each color channel value 
c
R,
,
}
x
0, ],
c ∈[
1   ∈{
G B
to a noisy version 
 via: 
, with 
 referring to the Poisson distribution, and  inversely
x′
c 
(x /s)
x′
c = P
c
* s
P
s
 
controlling the signal-to-noise ratio. As the latter was observed to vary significantly between different 
scanners and objective magnifications, the noise portion during training was varied by randomly sampling 
s from the interval [0.01, 64.0] for each training patch. 
Test Data 
The OOF algorithms were evaluated using pathologist-graded real OOF artifacts (as opposed to synthetic 
OOF in the training set). Specifically, 3 prostate resection and 4 lymph node biopsy slides were used, 
including Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) and immunohistochemistry stains. Each WSI was scanned using 
two scanners at 40X magnification: a Leica Aperio AT2 (pixel size: 0.251×0.251μm) using its 
semi-automatic mode, and a Hamamatsu NanoZoomer S360 scanner (pixel size: 0.230×0.230μm) using 
its fully automatic mode. This resulted in two test sets: 7 WSIs per scanner. 
 
A pathologist then manually and non-exhaustively identified, delineated, and graded in-focus and OOF 
regions, using integral grades ranging from 0 (in-focus) to 6 (very strong OOF), see Figure 6. Half-grades 
(e.g. 1.5) were occasionally used when the degree of OOF was interpreted as between integral grades. 
Annotations were corrected by the pathologist as desired (blinded to algorithm predictions), to help 
achieve grading consistency across the different tissue and stain types, and scanner models. The 
delineated regions were rasterized using a 128×128 pixel-spaced grid to enable direct comparison with 
the predictions of the OOF classifier (see below). To ensure label purity, only patches completely 
contained within an delineated OOF region were used. These annotations produced a total of 37,715 
patches.  
 

 
In addition to pathologist annotations, we collected “z-stack” scans to further evaluate ConvFocus 
performance on a set of images that have real OOF with a consistent pattern. We digitized a lymph node 
biopsy slide with z-axis increments of ​0.4​μm, and spanning +4μm to -4μm (relative to the 
scanner-determined in-focus depth), see Figure 10(a). This produced a total of 21 WSIs of the same 
glass slide. 
Convolutional Neural Network-Based Algorithm 
Network Architecture 
Our convolutional neural network architecture was a series of convolutions and pools, equivalent to the 
Inception (v3) architecture ​[5,13]​ truncated at a lower layer (“MaxPool_3a_3x3” ​[13]​]) and with a reduced 
number of filters per layer (“depth_multiplier”=0.1) to reduce computation. For this task, we empirically 
observed that neither modification deteriorated performance (Results). The last layer was attached to a 
30-way classification layer to predict the 30 OOF classes. To handle the large image sizes of each WSI, 
we adopted a patch-based approach. Small crops of 139×139 pixels-sized patches (corresponding to 
approximately 35×35 μm at 40X magnification) for each WSI were used for training. To help improve 
performance, we applied data augmentation techniques described in ​[5]​, randomly perturbing the 
orientation, brightness, contrast, hue, saturation, and adding random translational jitter. The network was 
trained using the softmax cross-entropy loss function, using the same learning rate schedule and other 
hyperparameters described in [5]. 
Inferring OOF Heatmaps on WSIs 
To obtain algorithm predictions of OOF for every region on the slide, we applied ConvFocus in a sliding 
window fashion across each WSI to produce algorithm predictions for every 128×128 patch at 40X 
magnification. This stride was chosen to match the stride used for cancer detection (see below), and is 
adjustable. The final predicted OOF class for each patch was the class with maximal probability 
(“activation”) in the final layer of the network. To visualize these predictions, we used the “jet” colorspace, 
ranging from blue for class 0 (in-focus) to red for class 29 (strongly OOF) (Figure 3). 
ConvFocus Evaluation 
Each algorithm’s performance was evaluated by comparing the predicted OOF class (in the range 0 to 
29) to the corresponding pathologist-annotated OOF grades (0 to 6 in half-point increments, 13 grades 
overall) among all patches with annotations within the two test sets (one for each scanner: AT2 and 
S360). However, the numbers of patches across the 13 different pathologist-assigned grades were 
unevenly distributed within each test set, and the distributions differed between the two test sets. 
Therefore for each test set and grade, 3,000 patches were randomly sampled with replacement to obtain 
evenly distributed classes. 
 
Similar to prior work ​[9]​, the Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient was used as the main evaluation 
metric. To assess the statistical significance of the correlation, we used a two-sided test ​[14]​. Next, we 
computed a linear regression to evaluate deviation of the intercept from 0.0, since an “in-focus” patch 
(annotated grade: 0.0) should ideally be predicted as “in-focus” (ConvFocus class: 0). The regression’s 
slope was used to assess deviations from 4.83 (=29/6), which reflects a linear mapping of the ConvFocus 
OOF class range of [0,29] to the graded OOF range of [0,6]. 

 
 
In addition, ConvFocus was further evaluated on the z-stack test set by plotting the predicted OOF class 
against ​the z-level for a number of patches. Two aspects were qualitatively assessed. First, we checked 
for the presence of a “v”-shaped plot indicating that predicted OOF class increases (towards poorer focus) 
as the z-level goes further from in-focus (in either direction). Second, we checked if the “in-focus” plane 
(z=0) was generally predicted as the lowest OOF class. 
Measuring Cancer Detection Algorithm Performance As a 
Function of Focus Quality 
After validating ConvFocus, we used the algorithm to study the impact of OOF (both real and synthetic) 
on the performance of a cancer detection algorithm on the publicly available Camelyon 2016 challenge 
test dataset ​[15]​, consisting of 80 non-tumor and 48 tumor slides with pixel-level annotations of tumor 
locations. In the first experiment (real OOF), we employed the current best-performing breast cancer 
metastasis detector “LYNA” ​[5,16]​, which we configured to provide binary predictions at the same 
granularity as the OOF classifier. That is, for each image patch, predictions from both the breast 
metastasis and ConvFocus were available. Next, we stratified the patches by predicted OOF class. We 
then measured the LYNA algorithm’s performance for patches in each OOF class, merging the higher 
OOF classes to ensure sufficient numbers of both tumor and non-tumor patches. In a second experiment, 
we added artificial Bokeh blur at a selected strength to all patches in the test set, ran LYNA on all 
patches, and evaluated LYNA’s performance. We repeated this for a range of Bokeh-blur strengths. In 
both experiments, we used the patch-level area under receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC ​[17]​). 
Confidence intervals for the patch-level AUC were computed using the non-parametric bootstrap 
approach ​[18]​, with n=500 samples at the slide level. 
Results 
ConvFocus Evaluation 
Sample visualizations of ConvFocus’s predictions are shown in Figures 3 and 7, depicting regional OOF 
patterns such as OOF scan lanes and OOF tissue edges. Quantitative evaluation using a total of 37,715 
pathologist-graded OOF patches is reported in Table 2 and visualized in Figure 8, showing high 
Spearman rank correlations above 0.8 (p<0.001) between pathologist-graded OOF and ConvFocus 
predictions for slides scanned on both scanners tested: AT2 and S360. 
 
Each step in our proposed semi-synthetic data generation approach was derived using qualitative 
assessments of whether regions with strong OOF were appropriately detected (Figure 7). To quantify the 
improvements derived from each step, we also performed ablation experiments using several 
configurations (Table 2). Using Bokeh synthetic blurring instead of Gaussian yields only a small 
improvement in correlation metrics, but a large increase in the regression’s slope parameter values. Since 
the synthetic Gaussian and Bokeh blurring magnitudes were visually and quantitatively aligned 
(Methods), similar slope values were expected for the Gaussian-trained configuration. Instead, the 
Gaussian configuration classified patches annotated with OOF grades 5.0-6.0 as mid-range OOF classes 
14-20 (Figure A1) compared to 20 and above with the Bokeh configuration (Figure 8). Moreover, the 

 
majority of patches with no or weak OOF (annotated grades 0.0-1.5) were predicted as OOF classes 0-4 
by the Bokeh configuration (ConvFocus), compared to 5 and higher with the Gaussian configuration. 
 
We next assessed ConvFocus’s predictions for patches from a set of 21 “z-stack” images (Figure 9). 
Almost all patches were predicted to be in-focus at a z-level, though not necessarily at z=0 (Figure 10). A 
strong “v”-shaped trend was also observed: patches were generally predicted to be more OOF at z-levels 
further from the predicted in-focus z-level (on average at z=0). However, using the Gaussian 
configuration, few patches were predicted to have OOF class < 5 (Figures A2a and A3). Similarly,​ the 
configuration with Bokeh blur but linearly increasing convolution mask size (instead of exponential) 
resulted in less fine-grained sensitivity towards weak OOF degrees (Figures A2b and A4). 
Impact of Focus Quality on Cancer Detection Algorithm 
Performance 
Figure 11 shows the effect of OOF on patch-level AUC for the LYNA metastatic breast cancer detector. 
Results for the first experiment (effects of real OOF) are shown in black dots with gray bars that indicate 
95% confidence intervals. Since few image patches in the test set were predicted as higher OOF classes, 
we bucketed the classes into 5 groups: 0-4, 5-9, 10-14, 15-19, and 20-29. Results indicated a gradual 
drop in cancer detector performance with predicted OOF, as evidenced by decreasing AUC values and 
the associated upper bounds of the confidence intervals. 
 
To assess the effects of finer-grained OOF, we conducted a second experiment: synthetically adding 
OOF, as depicted by the blue curve. In contrast to the first experiment, since synthetic blur at each 
specific degree was applied uniformly across all slides, no class-merging was necessary. Results similarly 
showed the gradual and consistent drop in cancer detection with increasing OOF. 
Discussion and Conclusions 
We have developed and evaluated an automated focus quality detector (ConvFocus) to accurately locate 
and classify OOF regions as small as 32×32μm in gigapixel-sized WSIs. Our algorithm correlates well 
with pathologist-annotated focus quality grades on real OOF regions, and across multiple scanners 
despite different imaging characteristics (e.g. pixel size in the S360 is 9% smaller than in the AT2). 
Because different scanners do not generally digitize the same slide locations with the same focus quality, 
the actual image patches used in this evaluation are different. As a result, a direct and fair inter-scanner 
performance comparison is not possible. 
 
In a second evaluation using z-stacks to produce digitized images of varying OOF degrees, ConvFocus 
similarly produced sensible trends of increasing predicted OOF classes in both directions away from the 
scanner-determined in-focus plane. In this evaluation, while the scanner-determined in-focus plane (z=0) 
was on average predicted to be close to or the most in-focus, this was not necessarily true of all image 
patches. Further analysis is needed to determine whether this is caused by inaccuracies in focus 
detection by the scanner’s algorithm, or by ConvFocus. The asymmetry in this “v”-shaped trend may be 
because the z-levels’ span of 8μm exceeds the thickness of a tissue section (5μm), and thus some 
z-levels will overlap the coverslip or glass slide. This effect may be further exacerbated if the z=0 plane is 
not centered within the tissue section. 
 

 
A significant advantage of our semi-synthetic data generation approach is an easy extension to additional 
scanner models, tissues, and stain types. Specifically, input data can be generated by non-expert raters, 
improving the speed and cost of data collection. Our results indicate that our method of synthesizing OOF 
examples of different degrees enables better generalization to real OOF images. In terms of granularity, 
ConvFocus was developed for fine-grained discrimination between 30 OOF classes, significantly more 
than both our pathologist’s grading scale and prior works: 6 classes ​[9]​ and 12 classes ​[8,9]​. When the 
granularity was further increased in our experiments (e.g. to 40 classes, data not shown), training 
accuracy decreased, indicating that 30 classes is close to a meaningful upper bound of granularity. Our 
qualitative (Figure 4) and quantitative (Figure A1) analyses also found that human perception of OOF 
followed an exponential relationship with blur magnitude, as opposed to linear. The exponential 
relationship expands the granularity of fine-grained OOF classes, and is particularly relevant for use 
cases like lymphoma diagnosis, where even mild OOF may interfere with the ability to resolve crucial 
nuclear details. 
 
Prior works in synthetic data generation for training focus quality predictors have leveraged Gaussian 
blurring for histopathology ​[9]​ and Gaussian blurring with Poisson noise for cytology specimens from 
transmission light microscopes ​[8,9]​. By contrast, our work systematically demonstrates the value of 
adding Poisson noise and JPEG compression artifacts in histopathology, and using a synthetic blur 
(Bokeh) that more closely mimics real OOF. Our results indicate that generating synthetic OOF data using 
the Gaussian blur underestimates strong OOF. Based on these improvements, we showed that focus 
quality can be accurately predicted on a fine-grained scale using fairly shallow neural networks, which 
improves the speed of applying ConvFocus to large WSIs. 
 
We further investigated the impact of focus quality on an otherwise accurate algorithm’s interpretation ​[5]​, 
showing that algorithm performance was lower in image patches identified by ConvFocus as OOF. 
Furthermore, our controlled experiment of synthetically “de-focusing” the image patches showed similar 
trends, demonstrating that synthetic OOF causes degradations in algorithm performance. These findings 
suggest that focus quality can negatively impact algorithms, and that focus quality should be 
comprehensively assessed at the region level to avoid both false positive and false negative 
interpretations by an algorithm. 
 
The present work contains some limitations. Firstly, the cost of manual grading of focus quality has limited 
our test dataset size and diversity in terms of stains, tissue types, scanner models, as well as number of 
annotators. Further work will be needed to further validate the generalizability of ConvFocus against 
multiple rater annotations ​[9]​, and quantifications of z-stack prediction performance. Second, using our 
algorithm to compare focus quality across different scanners was confounded by the fact that different 
image patches are identified by our pathologist as OOF. Additional work will be needed to obtain 
scanner-agnostic or tissue-independent metrics of focus. Lastly, we have focused on the high 
magnification, 40X, which most clearly shows OOF artifacts. The extension to the next-lower 20X 
magnification is the subject of future work. 
 
 

 
Financial support and sponsorship 
This study was performed and funded by Google Research. 
Conflicts of interest 
T.K., Y.L., M.M., P.C., J.H., C.M., and M.S. are employees of Google, LLC and own Alphabet stock. 
T.B. is compensated by Google, LLC for the participation as pathologist in these studies.
