Zero-shot sim-to-real transfer of tactile control policies
for aggressive swing-up manipulation
Thomas Bi, Carmelo Sferrazza and Raffaello D’Andrea
Abstract— This paper aims to show that robots equipped with
a vision-based tactile sensor can perform dynamic manipulation
tasks without prior knowledge of all the physical attributes of
the objects to be manipulated. For this purpose, a robotic system
is presented that is able to swing up poles of different masses,
radii and lengths, to an angle of 180°, while relying solely on
the feedback provided by the tactile sensor. This is achieved
by developing a novel simulator that accurately models the
interaction of a pole with the soft sensor. A feedback policy that
is conditioned on a sensory observation history, and which has
no prior knowledge of the physical features of the pole, is then
learned in the aforementioned simulation. When evaluated on
the physical system, the policy is able to swing up a wide range
of poles that differ signiﬁcantly in their physical attributes
without further adaptation. To the authors’ knowledge, this is
the ﬁrst work where a feedback policy from high-dimensional
tactile observations is used to control the swing-up manipulation
of poles in closed-loop.
I. INTRODUCTION
Tactile sensors aim to provide robots with a sense of touch
that captures information from their environment through
physical contact. In this paper, the vision-based tactile sensor
presented in [1] is deployed in order to demonstrate that it
can provide robots with a dexterity akin to that of humans
in dynamic manipulation tasks. For this purpose, a robotic
system that performs swing-up maneuvers for different poles
is presented (see Fig. 1). The robotic system consists of a
parallel gripper, mounted to a linear motor, with two tactile
sensors acting as ﬁngers. Thereby, three key capabilities
enabled by the artiﬁcial sense of touch provided by the tactile
sensor are demonstrated: (i) The system is able to adapt its
motion and successfully swings up poles that differ in their
physical attributes (e.g. mass, length, and radius) without
prior knowledge of these attributes. (ii) The system does
not rely on external visual sensing; instead, the pose and
attributes of the pole in contact are implicitly inferred from
the tactile observations alone. (iii) The tactile observations
can be processed in real-time and act as feedback for closed-
loop control at 60 Hz. As a result, highly dynamic swing-up
manipulations are achieved without the need for a previous
in-hand exploration of the pole.
The three components that enable such adaptive dynamic
swing-up manipulation are presented here. First, the high-
dimensional force distribution acting on the sensor surface
is directly inferred from the sensor camera images using an
efﬁcient convolutional network, which is trained on purely
simulated contact interactions of the sensor with different
The authors are members of the Institute for Dynamic Systems and

(a) Simulation
(b) Reality
Fig. 1.
In this work, tactile control policies for the swing-up manipulation
of poles are learned in a simulation of the tactile sensor that runs faster than
real-time. When transferred to the real-world system, the policy achieves
the desired behaviour without further adaptation, and swings up poles to an
upright position without prior knowledge of the physical attributes of the
pole.
poles. Second, a novel simulator is developed that accurately
models the behaviour of the soft sensor surface when inter-
acting with a rigid cylindrical pole. This simulation is based
on combining the ﬁnite element method with state-of-the-art
semi-implicit time-stepping schemes for contact resolution
and runs at 360 Hz on a single core of an Intel Core i7-7700k
processor. Third, a framework for learning adaptive feedback
policies conditioned on a history of sensory observations is
proposed. The training of the policy is achieved entirely
in simulation using deep reinforcement learning. Thereby,
various strategies that facilitate the sim-to-real transfer of
policies learned in simulation are employed, namely dynam-
ics randomization [2], and privileged learning [3], [4].
A. Related Work
As reviewed in [5] and [6], many works have demonstrated
how robots can leverage the sense of touch in dexterous
manipulation tasks in closed-loop. For example, in [7] tactile
data is used to control both the grasping force and slippage
of a tactile gripper. Other examples include [8], where a pair
of grippers are used to pick one end of a cable and follow
it to the other end. Each gripper contains tactile sensors
from which the current pose and friction forces acting on the
arXiv:2101.02680v3  [cs.RO]  6 May 2021

cable can be estimated in real-time, enabling the approach
to generalize to cables of different thicknesses and materials,
based on a model learned from real data. A similar approach
was proposed in [9]; a dual palm robotic system estimates
the pose and the stick/slip behaviour of an object solely from
tactile feedback, in order to manipulate an object on a planar
surface to a desired position. In [10], a deep dynamics model
is learned that can predict future tactile observations based
on the previous observations and actions taken. Data for the
training of the dynamics model is autonomously collected
on the physical system. The learned model is then used
in an MPC-framework to manipulate a ball, analog stick,
and 20-sided die to a desired conﬁguration. Other learning-
based approaches rely on deep reinforcement learning to ﬁnd
optimal control policies directly on the physical hardware.
Examples include a 5-DoF arm that learns to reorient objects
using a latent representation of the tactile data [11], and a
robotic system that learns to type on a Braille keyboard [12].
While these approaches demonstrate robustness against
external disturbances and changes in object properties, the
manipulation tasks they solve generally do not require a high
degree of dynamicism. For more aggressive manipulation
tasks such as the swing-up manipulation of poles, feedback
control based on tactile data has proven to be challenging
and thus differing methods have been proposed. In [13],
the sensing and manipulation are separated into two steps.
First, the physical features of different poles are learned by
shaking and tilting the pole in-hand and observing the tactile
feedback. The learned features are then used to optimize
an open-loop trajectory of a robotic arm that dynamically
swings the pole up to a desired angle. The learning of the
physical features, as well as the trajectory optimization, are
performed end-to-end using models trained on a physically
collected dataset. In [14], tactile sensing and visual tracking
are combined to pivot an object to a desired angle by adjust-
ing the gripping force exerted by a two-ﬁnger gripper. This
fusion of visual and tactile information was also employed
on a robotic hand in [15] to perform highly dynamic tasks
such as pen spinning, ball dribbling, and ball throwing.
In this work, a uniﬁed approach is presented where ag-
gressive swing-up maneuvers can be achieved in closed-loop
from high-dimensional tactile feedback, without relying on
a visual tracking system or prior in-hand exploration of the
pole. Moreover, instead of relying on data collection on the
physical system, as is done in the learning-based methods
mentioned above, the feedback control policy is learned en-
tirely in simulation. This removes the cost of collecting data
on the physical system, which can be highly time-consuming.
Additionally, challenging motions that may lead to unsafe
behaviours by the physical hardware can be ﬁrst explored
without repercussions. This data can then be utilized to train
the policy to satisfy the safety constraints that are present on
the physical system. While simulators for the behaviour of
tactile sensors have been developed (see e.g. [16]–[23]), the
authors are not aware of any work where a simulation from
ﬁrst principles is utilized to learn tactile feedback control
policies. Rather, the mentioned works focus on gathering
Sensor 2
Sensor 1
Gripper
Linear motor
Fig. 2.
The robotic system presented in this paper consists of a parallel
gripper comprising two tactile sensor, and a linear motor to which the
gripper is mounted.
(a) Parallel gripper
(b) Tactile sensor
Fig. 3.
This ﬁgure shows exploded views of the gripper (a) and the tacile
sensor that acts as ﬁnger (b). A Dynamixel MX-28R controls the opening
and closing of the two ﬁngers, each of them equipped with a tactile sensor.
supervised datasets of tactile images in simulation to train
deep neural networks that can predict object position and
rotation ([16], [21]), the force distribution acting on the
sensor surface ([22], [23]), or the three-dimensional mesh
of the object in contact ([17]).
B. Outline
The hardware employed for the experiments is presented
in Section II. In Section III, the proposed methods are
described. This includes the sensing approach of the tactile
sensor in Section III-A, the design of the tactile simulator
in Section III-B, and the synthesis of the swing-up control
policy in Section III-C. Results from employing the learned
policy on the real-world system are presented in Section IV.
Finally, Section V draws conclusions and gives an outlook
on future work. In the remainder of this paper, vectors are
expressed as tuples for ease of notation, with dimension and
stacking clear from the context.
II. HARDWARE
The robotic system considered in this paper consists of
three main parts; a two-ﬁnger robotic gripper where each ﬁn-
ger comprises a tactile sensor, a linear motor (stator/slider),
to which the gripper is mounted, and ﬁnally, embedded
computing systems that process the sensing data and send
commands to the actuators. The linear motor and tactile
gripper are pictured in Fig. 2.
A. Tactile Gripper
To enable the high-resolution gripping capability of the
system, a custom 1-DoF parallel two-ﬁnger gripper was built
in-house, see Fig. 3a. A Dynamixel MX-28R servo motor
is used to control the distance between the two ﬁngers

with a resolution of 0.06 mm. Two tactile sensors, placed
opposite each other, act as ﬁngers for the gripper. The sensing
principle employed in this paper is based on [1]. Three soft
silicone layers are poured on top of an RGB ﬁsheye camera
(ELP USBFHD06H), surrounded by LEDs. The base layer
(ELASTOSIL ® RT 601 RTV-2, mixing ratio 7:1, shore
hardness 45A) is stiff and transparent, and serves as a spacer.
The middle layer (ELASTOSIL ®RT 601 RTV-2, ratio 25:1,
shore hardness 10A) is soft and transparent, and embeds a
spread of randomly distributed ﬂuorescent green particles. A
black top layer (made of the same material as the middle
layer) completes the sensor and shields it from external light
disturbances. The soft sensor’s surface is slightly curved to
provide a more anatomical grasping surface. An exploded
view of the sensor layers is shown in Fig. 3b.
B. Linear Motor
In order to achieve the translational motion of the gripper,
a linear motor comprising a stator and a slider is employed.
The stator (LinMot P01-23x160H-HP-R) contains the motor
windings, bearings for the slider, position capture sensors and
a microprocessor, and is thus able to generate motion with
respect to the slider. The slider (LinMot PL01-12x850/810-
HP) is a stainless steel tube and is ﬁxed to a table so that the
stator is the only moving part. The gripper is then mounted
to the stator through the use of a motor ﬂange (LinMot
PF02-23x120). A motor drive (LinMot C1100-GP-XC-0S-
000) controls the motion of the stator.
C. Embedded Systems
Two embedded devices are used to control the system.
First, a Raspberry Pi (RPi) runs two low-level controllers,
one for the linear motor and one for the gripper. The linear
motor controller tracks commanded acceleration setpoints,
while the gripper controller tracks the distance between the
two ﬁngers. Second, an NVIDIA Jetson TX2, a compact
embedded device with a built-in GPU, obtains the camera
images from the tactile sensor at 60 Hz, pre-processes the
images, and infers the force distribution. Note that this
pipeline is only executed for sensor 1 (see Fig. 2). This is
motivated by the fact that due to the planar nature of the
system, the forces acting on sensor 2 can be assumed to be
symmetrical to those acting on sensor 1. Furthermore, this
reduces the computational complexity of the pipeline.
The Jetson also receives the current actuator states from
the RPi. Control actions are then inferred using the proposed
control policy and are communicated to the low-level con-
trollers on the RPi that execute the commands.
III. METHOD
The proposed method can be divided into three different
parts. First, the vision-based tactile sensor estimates the force
distribution acting on its surface from its camera images.
Second, a simulator for the dynamics of a pole and the
given robotic system is developed. Third, a tactile feedback
control policy for the swing-up manipulation is learned in
the simulation using reinforcement learning.
Undeformed
image
Deformed
image
Polar
angle
Radial
distance
Fx
Fy
Fz
−16
0
16
−16
0
16
x[mm]
y[mm]
−16
0
16
x[mm]
−16
0
16
x[mm]
−0.4 N
0.4 N
0 N
Fig. 4. The features and labels of our supervised learning task. The features
are the images of the particles in the undeformed and in the deformed states.
Two additional channels provide the polar coordinates of the pixels. For the
labels, Fx, Fy and Fz denote the x, y and z components of the discretized
force distribution. The force distributions shown in the ﬁgure were collected
with a pole pivoting on the sensor (as in the experiments discussed in
Section IV). They show how the shape and pose of the pole manifest
themselves correctly in the force distribution readings. Additionally, the
lateral forces (Fx and Fy) on either side of the center of rotation point in
opposite directions, which can be deducted from their change in color.
A. Vision-Based Tactile Sensing
The tactile sensor employed in this paper follows the same
sensing principle as introduced in [1]. When the soft sensing
surface is subject to force, the material deforms and displaces
the particles tracked by the camera. This motion generates
different patterns in the images. The material deformation
at any point in time can thus be described by two camera
images, one where no loads are applied and the material is
at rest, and another at the current deformed state.
In [22], a method to generate such images in simulation
is presented to train a supervised learning architecture that
aims to accurately estimate the real-world 3D contact force
distribution. The same approach to generate training data is
employed here, using ﬁnite-element simulations of the sensor
surface under various contact conditions, where hyperelastic
material models for the sensor’s soft materials are employed.
The details of this procedure can be found in [22]. In
addition to the two mentioned images per datapoint, the polar
coordinates of each pixel are encoded here as two additional
image channels. Explicitly incorporating such spatial location
features has previously been shown to signiﬁcantly improve
accuracy where the location of image features is relevant for
the task at hand [24]. Using a fully convolutional neural net-
work based on ShufﬂeNet V2 [25], the resulting four-channel
image is then mapped to accurate contact force distribution
labels (see Fig. 4), with ground truth also obtained from ﬁnite
element simulations [26].
On the real-world sensor, camera images are preprocessed

(a) Original image
(b) Remapped image
(c) Simulated image
Fig. 5.
Camera images from the real-world sensor are preprocessed
converting the original image (a) to gray-scale, and remapping the image
using a calibrated camera model (b). The last image (c) corresponds to a
simulated image that is used for training and is provided for comparison.
φ
s
p
x
y
z
g
(a) Side-view sketch of the system.
x
z
y
axis of
symmetry
s
sensor 1
sensor 2
(b) Top-view sketch of the system.
Fig. 6.
The system can be described as a cart-pole augmented with a
parallel gripper that features the two sensors.
to match those of the simulated training dataset as described
in [22] and [23]. Speciﬁcally, images are converted to gray-
scale and remapped using the real-world camera model
(obtained via a state-of-the-art calibration technique [27])
to images of the same scene as if they were taken in the
simulated world. A circular mask is then applied to remove
any irrelevant image information. The results of this pre-
processing procedure are illustrated in Fig. 5. On the given
hardware, the force distribution for a given preprocessed
camera image can be inferred in real-time in 2.5 ms.
B. Tactile Simulation
In order to achieve a fast simulator, essential for training
reinforcement learning algorithms in a reasonable amount of
time, a few model simpliﬁcations are introduced here. First,
the material of the sensor is assumed to be linearly elastic.
Second, the forces acting on the sensor surface are decoupled
into two components: the forces arising due to the material
deformation in the z direction, and the lateral friction forces
resulting from the relative motion of the pole with respect
to the sensor. A real-time ﬁnite element approach is then
employed to compute the two mentioned force components.
1) Problem Statement: A sketch of the system considered
in this work is shown in Fig. 6, where a single coordinate
system is deﬁned. The x-axis is aligned to the moving axis
of the linear motor, denoted in the following as the cart.
The y-axis points in the opposite direction to gravity, i.e.
upwards. Finally, the z-axis is chosen such that all the points
on sensor 1 exhibit a negative z-coordinate. The reference
position s = (xs, ys, zs) is chosen with the point on the
curved surface of sensor 1 that is closest to the x-y plane (at
rest). While there are two tactile sensors, their positions are
symmetrical about the x-y plane. Hence, it sufﬁces to only
consider the position of a single sensor. Next, the orientation
of the pole is deﬁned by the angle φ. Lastly, p = (xp, yp, zp)
denotes the position of the center of mass of the pole. Note
that the sensor is ﬁxed in the y-direction (ys = 0) and the
pole is ﬁxed in the z-direction (zp = 0). These deﬁnitions
are illustrated in Fig. 6. The state vector x is then deﬁned as
x = (xs, ˙xs, zs, xp, ˙xp, yp, ˙yp, φ, ˙φ)
(1)
Since only the static behavior of the sensor material is
analyzed, ˙zs is not considered.
The inputs to the system are the cart acceleration and the
increment in zs between two subsequent timesteps:
u = (¨xs, ∆zs)
.
(2)
Note that on the real system, the servo commands are
mapped to ∆zs with a linear mapping identiﬁed from data.
Next, the pole is characterized as a rigid cylinder. Its radius
is given by rp, the mass by mp and its moment of inertia
about the center of mass and along the z-axis by Ip. The
length of the pole above its center of mass is given by lp,u
and the length below the center of mass by lp,l.
Given these deﬁnitions, the goal is to model the state
evolution over time, i.e., x(k + 1) = f(x(k), u(k)), where
k is the discrete time index, and f describes a functional
dependency. In the following, the time index (k) will be
omitted, and variables at time (k + 1) will be denoted by a
+ superscript, e.g. x+.
2) Equations of Motion: The pole is modeled as a free-
body constrained to move in the x-y plane, meaning that its
motion is governed by the force Fp = (Fp,x, Fp,y, 0) and
torque Tp = (0, 0, Tp,z) acting on its center of mass. Using
a semi-implicit integration scheme ([28], [29]) the equations
of motion are then given by
˙x+
s = ˙xs + ∆t ¨xs
x+
s = xs + ∆t ˙x+
s
(3)
˙x+
p = ˙xp + ∆t Fp,x
mp
x+
p = xp + ∆t ˙x+
p
(4)
˙y+
p = ˙yp + ∆t Fp,y
mp
y+
p = yp + ∆t ˙y+
p
(5)
˙φ+ = ˙φ + ∆t Tp,z
Ip
φ+ = φ + ∆t ˙φ+
(6)
z+
s = zs + ∆zs
(7)
In the following, the derivation of Fp and Tp is presented.
Both sensors are discretized using an identical mesh of
N = 576 ﬁnite elements (nodes). Hereafter, all quantities
introduced will refer to sensor 1, where the corresponding
counterparts of sensor 2 are clear from the symmetrical
context and are denoted using a tilde, i.e. ˜·. Then, for node
i of the mesh, let (xi, yi, zi) be its coordinates, and Fi the
force acting on the node. Each node i in contact with the
pole leads to a planar reaction force
Fp,i = −(Fi + ˜Fi) =⇒Fp,i,x:y = −2Fi,x:y
(8)

axis of
symmetry
Pole
∈C
∈F
∈N
x
z
y
Fi
˜Fi
Fp,i
Sensor 1
Sensor 2
Fig. 7.
The nodes of the ﬁnite element mesh are assigned to three sets: C
if in contact with the pole, F if constrained to not move, N otherwise.
where the implication follows from symmetry, with the x:y
subscript denoting the stacked x and y components of the
three-dimensional vector. Next, the gravitational force acting
on the pole is denoted by Fg =
 0, −mpg, 0
, where
g = 9.81 m s−2. Deﬁning ri :=
 xi −xp,
yi −yp,
0

,
the total force and torque acting on the pole are then
Fp = Fg +
X
i∈S
Fp,i ,
Tp =
X
i∈S
ri × Fp,i.
(9)
where S is the set of all nodes on the surface of the sensor.
As mentioned above, the contact forces are postulated to
be the superposition of forces F 0
i arising from the normal
indentation of the pole into the sensor, and the lateral friction
forces F f
i , that is, Fi = F 0
i + F f
i, which implies
Fp,i = −

F 0
i + ˜F 0
i

|
{z
}
=:F 0
p,i
−

F f
i + ˜F f
i

|
{z
}
=:F f
p,i
(10)
3) Forces Arising from Normal Indentation: The forces
F 0
i are derived using the ﬁnite element theory for linearly
elastic materials. Let U 0
i be the deformation of a node i.
Then, a linear relationship between the external forces and
deformations is found by the ﬁnite element method as:
F 0 = KU 0
(11)
where F 0 :=
 F 0
1 , . . . , F 0
N

, U 0 :=
 U 0
1 , . . . , U 0
N

, and
K is the global stiffness matrix, obtained in this work in
Abaqus/Standard. The system of equations in (11) can be
solved by introducing the following sets, displayed in Fig. 7:
• C: The set of all nodes that are in contact with the
pole. It is the intersection of the set of nodes at the
surface of the sensor (i.e., the set S) and the set of nodes
whose positions at rest collide with the pole, based on
the geometric properties of the pole considered. The
nodes in this set are assumed here to translate only
in z-direction, and their deformation is obtained by
ﬁnding the appropriate z-coordinate that intersects with
the surface of the pole (see Fig. 7).
• F: The set of all nodes that are in contact with the
base layer of the sensor. Since the base layer’s stiffness
is much larger than the stiffness of the sensor surface,
the nodes of this set are assumed to be rigid. Therefore,
their deformation is set to zero, i.e., U 0
i = 0, ∀i ∈F.
• N: The set of nodes that are neither in contact with
the base layer nor in contact with the pole. No external
forces are acting on these nodes, i.e., F 0
i = 0, ∀i ∈N.
Therefore, for a node i, once a corresponding set is identiﬁed,
either the force F 0
i or the deformation U 0
i is known. The
system (11) is then solved by using the UMFPACK library,
and F 0
p,i computed as in (10).
Note that here the current approach exploits the cylindrical
geometry of the poles, rendering a mathematically simple
intersection problem, which enables a highly efﬁcient iden-
tiﬁcation of the aforementioned sets. The extension to objects
of various geometries may still be addressed efﬁciently
by employing algorithms tailored to solve the intersection
problem for generic polygons, e.g., based on the Weiler-
Atherton clipping algorithm [30].
4) Lateral Friction Forces: In order to ﬁnd the lateral
friction forces for the nodes in contact, ﬁrst the case where
only the friction at a single node is unknown is considered.
From the solution of this case, an iterative method is utilized
to solve for all friction forces in the multi-contact case.
For this, it is assumed that all the friction forces except
for the one at node i are known. That is F f
j is known for all
j ̸= i. Let
vi,rel :=
 ˙xi
˙yi

−
 ˙xs
0

=
 ˙xp
˙yp

+
−ri,y
ri,x

˙φ −
 ˙xs
0

be the relative planar velocity of the point on the pole which
is in contact with the node i at time k. Then, by plugging in
the equations of motion (3)-(7), the relative velocity at the
next timestep is found to be
v+
i,rel = vi,rel−∆t
¨xs
0

+ Jii Fp,i,x:y
| {z }
F 0
p,i,x:y+F f
p,i,x:y
+
X
j̸=i
JijFp,j,x:y
(12)
where, for generic indices a and b,
Jab = ∆t


1
mp
+ ra,yrb,y
Ip
−ra,yrb,x
Ip
−ra,xrb,y
Ip
1
mp
+ ra,xrb,x
Ip

.
(13)
In this work, Coulomb friction is assumed, and two cases are
identiﬁed, where µ indicates both the static and kinetic fric-
tion coefﬁcients. First, for the static friction case, consider the
force F f,static
p,i
that takes on exactly the value to prevent motion
at node i. This force can be found by setting v+
i,rel = 0 in
(12) and solving for F f
p,i,x:y. If this force satisﬁes the friction
cone constraint, i.e.

F f,static
p,i

 ≤2µ
F 0
i,z
 ,
(14)
then F f
p,i,x:y = F f,static
p,i,x:y. The z-component is set to zero as it
would eventually cancel out when considering both ﬁngers.
If (14) is not satisﬁed, friction is not sufﬁcient to prevent
the motion at node i. In this case, kinetic friction is present,
where the force is opposite to the direction of the velocity and
is proportional to the normal component of the force. Since

2. Student Policy
Training
1. Expert Policy
Training
Simulation
Reinforcement
Learning
reward r(k)
- Pole Parameters
- Pole State
- Actuator States
- Force Distribution
Randomize
πs
Student
Policy
action u(k)
o(k−(T −1):k)
Observation
History
observation o(k)
x′(k)
Privileged
State
privileged state x′(k)
πe
Expert
Policy
action u(k)
Imitation
Learning
Fig. 8.
The ﬁgure depicts the privileged learning approach. The expert
and student policy training take place in two separate steps, both performed
entirely in simulation. Further, both policies are parametrized using two-
layer fully connected neural networks. For the reinforcement learning of
the expert policy, the SAC [31] method is employed to ﬁnd the optimal
policy according to (17). The student policy is then deployed to the real-
world system without further adaptation.
the velocity v+
i,rel and the friction force F f
p,i are coupled, an
approximation of the subsequent velocity is employed as
ˆv+
i,rel := vi,rel −∆t
¨xs
0

+ JiF 0
p,i,x:y +
X
j̸=iJjFp,j,x:y
which is the relative velocity at the subsequent step when
the effects of friction at node i are ignored. If the number of
nodes is sufﬁciently large, this approximation is close to the
true value, since the effect of the force at the single node i
is small compared to the combined effect of the remaining
forces at nodes j ̸= i. Using this approximation, the kinetic
friction is set to
F f
p,i,x:y = −2µ|F 0
i,z|ˆv+
i,rel/

ˆv+
i,rel

(15)
Given this solution to the single contact problem, the
multi-node contact case is solved by repeatedly iterating
over all nodes in contact until convergence, and updating
the friction force at node i using the above solution, given
the values at nodes j ̸= i of the current iteration. Then, Fp,i
is obtained as in (10) from F 0
p,i and F f
p,i, and ﬁnally Fp and
Tp can be computed as in (9).
C. Learning Tactile Control Policies
Given a simulation of a robotic system, deep reinforcement
learning algorithms have been successfully applied to learn
sophisticated behaviours [32]. These algorithms typically
depend on the Markov property of the system, i.e. they
assume that the state and physical parameters that fully
describe the system at a given time are available to the policy.
However, for the experiments presented in Section IV, the
physical parameters of the pole, e.g. the length, are unknown
to the policy and the Markov property no longer holds. In
reinforcement learning, such problems are typically dealt
with by using the history of observations and parametrizing
the policy using recurrent neural networks. However, such
approaches can be challenging to train.
The approach employed here exploits the fact that in
simulation the state and physical parameters are known. In a
ﬁrst stage, an expert policy πe is learned that has access to the
state as well as the simulation parameters. In a second stage,
a student policy πs that only has access to the observations
that are available on the real system is learned by imitating
the behaviour of the expert policy (see Fig. 8). This idea is
also referred to as privileged learning [3], [4].
1) State-Feedback Expert Policy: In order to achieve the
swing-up with a feedback policy that adapts to different
poles, the expert policy is conditioned on the state x(k)
(deﬁned in Section III-B), as well as the pole’s physical
parameters which may vary. This yields the augmented state
x′(k) :=
 x(k), rp, mp, Ip, lp,u, lp,l, µ
.
(16)
As a result, the policy may choose different control actions
based on the features of the pole.
The goal is then to ﬁnd a policy, π: x′(k) →u(k), that
is optimal in the sense of maximizing the expected sum of
future discounted rewards, i.e.
πe = max
π
E
 X
k
γkr(x′(k), π(x′(k)))
!
,
(17)
where γ is the discount factor. The reward function r is
shaped to encourage low slippage and pole orientations that
are close to 180°. The policy is learned using deep rein-
forcement learning, namely the SAC [31] algorithm with the
stable-baselines3 implementation [33]. The discount factor
is set to γ = 0.995 while the remaining hyperparameters,
as well as the policy network architecture, correspond to
the default ones proposed in [31]. During training, the pole
parameters are randomly sampled at each new episode such
that the policy learns the correct behaviour for different
poles. This dynamics randomization [2] also greatly aids in
the successful transfer from simulation to reality.
2) Tactile Student Policy: The expert policy is conditioned
on privileged knowledge, only available in simulation, and
can thus not be deployed on the real system, where the pole’s
pose and physical attributes can only indirectly be observed
through the available force distribution measurements. As a
result, the student policy must be able to reason over time
and implicitly recover the missing state information. First, in
order to condense the sensory information into a compressed
representation, an estimate of the pole’s orientation ˆφ(k)
is obtained by computing the force magnitude at each bin,
thresholding the magnitudes to obtain a binary image, and
ﬁnally applying a Hough line transform [34]. In addition, the
total sensed normal force F tot
z (k) is extracted by summing the
z-distribution at all bins. This is motivated by the fact that the
normal force yields direct information about the friction and
slippage, while the angle of the pole is the main quantity to
be controlled. Then, a student policy conditioned on a history
of condensed representations of the observations is learned
by imitating the behaviour of the expert policy.
A condensed observation at time k is given by
o(k) =
 xs(k), zs(k), ˆφ(k), F tot
z (k)

.
(18)

Note that xs(k) and zs(k) are known for the real system, and
the velocity of the cart ˙xs(k) is not included, since it can
implicitly be derived from the history of xs(k) observations.
The student policy πs is then parametrized by a neural
network that maps the history of the last T condensed
observations o(k−(T−1):k) to the control action u(k), where
T = 12 is the ﬁxed history length. The same stochastic net-
work as proposed in [31] is used, which outputs a squashed
Gaussian distribution over the control actions. This stochas-
ticity accomplishes a desirable smoothing of the policy. The
imitation of the expert policy is then posed as a supervised
learning task that minimizes the negative log-probability
L := −log Pr (πs (o(k−(T −1):k)) = πe (x′(k))) .
In this work, the DAGGER [35] method is employed, where
the dataset is continuously aggregated with the incoming data
from the training rollouts of the student policy. Labels are
obtained by querying the expert policy for the visited states.
At each training iteration, the student policy is updated by
performing an optimization step with batches sampled from
the aggregated dataset.
IV. RESULTS
The validity of the methods presented is veriﬁed on
the physical system, where the learned feedback policy is
deployed to swing up different poles.
Feedback is crucial for this task for three reasons: i) the
control actions to perform a successful swing up depend
on the physical parameters of the speciﬁc pole, which are
assumed to be unknown to the policy in this work, ii) these
control actions depend on the initial position and orientation
of the pole, which is likely to differ across trials on the
real system, iii) even when the physical parameters and
starting pose of the pole are well known, and a trajectory
is generated in simulation for such a conﬁguration, in the
authors’ experience this led to swing-ups with an offset in
the ﬁnal angle due to slight model mismatches. Feedback is
thus needed to precisely control the ﬁnal angle.
Throughout the following experiments, the initial grasping
of the pole is achieved by a human holding the pole between
the two tactile sensors. The gripper then slowly closes its
ﬁngers until the total force applied on the sensor by the pole
reaches a user-deﬁned threshold.
The student feedback control policy is evaluated on the
real-world robotic system on four different poles with masses
ranging from 20 g to 38 g, lengths from 20 cm to 35 cm,
and radii from 2.5 mm to 5 mm. For each pole, the control
policy is run ten times and the error from 180° in the ﬁnal
estimated angle ˆφ is recorded. Experiments show that all four
poles are successfully swung up to an upright position, and a
mean absolute error of 4.3° is achieved. A detailed analysis
of the experimental results is provided in an experimental
report [36]. These results demonstrate how a single policy
is able to adapt the robot’s motion to perform swing-up
maneuvers for a wide range of different poles without any
prior knowledge of the pole’s physical features, based on
the feedback provided by the tactile sensor. The resulting
behaviour of the policy for one of the listed poles is depicted
in Fig. 9. The supplementary video1 contains the trajectories
for the remaining poles. It is vital to note that the pole shown
in Fig. 9 is not contained in the distribution of poles that is
used while learning either the teacher or the student policy.
Moreover, the policy is transferred directly from the sim-
ulation to the real system with no adaptation needed. This
further asserts the robustness of the policy as it is able to
adapt to the real system that exhibits dynamics that are not
modeled in the simulation (such as dynamic effects of the
sensor material, unmodeled dynamics of the actuators, and
delays of the actuator commands).
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a strategy has been presented to transfer tac-
tile control policies for the swing-up manipulation of differ-
ent poles from simulation to a physical robotic system. As the
simulator has been shown to closely match the dynamics of
the real system, the policy learned in simulation generalizes
to the real-world robotic system with no adaptation needed.
Note that the system presented here does neither exploit a
ﬁxed pivot point nor directly control the rotational degree-
of-freedom of the pole, but it can achieve the desired motion
only through the presence of friction, whose modeling was
crucial in enabling a realistic simulation.
This constitutes an important step towards a general
framework to learn a wide variety of tactile manipulation
tasks safely in simulation. Yet, current results have only
been demonstrated for a single task on a single robotic
system. Future work will focus on several aspects to further
extend the generalizability of this work. In a ﬁrst step, the
proposed framework could be utilized to learn other pole
manipulation skills on the given system, e.g. the throwing
and catching of a pole. While such a policy was already
successfully learned in simulation (see Fig. 10), the transfer
to the physical system requires further work due to non-
idealities of the hardware. For instance, when the pole is
thrown in the air, it may leave the plane to which the motion
is assumed to be constrained. In fact, instead of relying on
the planar nature of the manipulation task, as was done in this
work, the suggested simulator could be extended to handle
non-planar tasks. As a result, manipulation skills for grippers
that can be controlled in six degrees of freedom could also
be learned. Moreover, in this paper, hand-engineered features
are extracted from the tactile observations, i.e. the orientation
and total normal force acting on the pole. These features
may not be relevant for other tasks, where learning such
features end-to-end with the policy, e.g. using autoencoders,
may further generalize the proposed framework.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank M. Egli and M. Mueller
for their contribution to the development of the system.
1https://youtu.be/In4jkaHzJLc

Fig. 9.
This ﬁgure shows a trajectory which results from employing the learned feedback control policy on the robotic system. As can be seen, the pole
is dynamically swung up to an upright position.
Fig. 10.
Using deep reinforcement learning, robust policies can be learned
to achieve various tasks. Here, the reward function is shaped to encourage
the throwing and catching of the pole after a rotation of 360°.
