1 
 
Identification and classification of TCM syndrome types among patients 
with vascular mild cognitive impairment using latent tree analysis 
 
Chen Fu, M.D.: Dongfang Hospital, Beijing University of Traditional Chinese 

Nevin Lianwen Zhang, Ph.D.: The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology; 

Bao Xin Chen, M.D.: Dongfang Hospital, Beijing University of Traditional Chinese 

Zhou Rong Chen, B.S.: The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology; 

Xiang Lan Jin, M.D.: Dongfang Hospital, Beijing University of Traditional Chinese 

 
Rong Juan Guo, M.D.: Dongfang Hospital, Beijing University of Traditional Chinese 

 
Zhi Gang Chen, M.D.: Dongfang Hospital, Beijing University of Traditional Chinese 

 
Yun Ling Zhang, M.D.: Dongfang Hospital, Beijing University of Traditional Chinese 

 
Corresponding Authors: Yun Ling Zhang, M.D.: Dongfang Hospital, Beijing 

Nevin L. Zhang, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hong Kong 

 

2 
 
Abstract  
Objective: To treat patients with vascular mild cognitive impairment (VMCI) using 
TCM, it is necessary to classify the patients into TCM syndrome types and to apply 
different treatments to different types. We investigate how to properly carry out the 
classification using a novel data-driven method known as latent tree analysis.  
Method: A cross-sectional survey on VMCI was carried out in several regions in 
northern China from 2008 to 2011, which resulted in a data set that involves 803 
patients and 93 symptoms. Latent tree analysis was performed on the data to reveal 
symptom co-occurrence patterns, and the patients were partitioned into clusters in 
multiple ways based on the patterns. The patient clusters were matched up with 
syndrome types, and population statistics of the clusters are used to quantify the 
syndrome types and to establish classification rules.  
Results: Eight syndrome types are identified: Qi Deficiency, Qi Stagnation, Blood 
Deficiency, Blood Stasis, Phlegm-Dampness, Fire-Heat, Yang Deficiency, and Yin 
Deficiency. The prevalence and symptom occurrence characteristics of each syndrome 
type are determined. Quantitative classification rules are established for determining 
whether a patient belongs to each of the syndrome types. 
Conclusions: A solution for the TCM syndrome classification problem associated 
with VMCI is established based on the latent tree analysis of unlabeled symptom 
survey data. The results can be used as a reference in clinic practice to improve the 
quality of syndrome differentiation and to reduce diagnosis variances across 
physicians. They can also be used for patient selection in research projects aimed at 
finding biomarkers for the syndrome types and in randomized control trials aimed at 
determining the efficacy of TCM treatments of VMCI. 
 
Key words: Vascular mild cognitive impairment, TCM syndrome classification, 
latent tree analysis, symptom co-occurrence patterns, patient clustering.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
1. Introduction 
With the global increase in population and life expectancy, dementia has become a 
prominent world health problem. It is one of the main diseases that have significant 
impacts on the health and quality of life among seniors. In 2005, the global 
prevalence of dementia was estimated to be 32.85 million, and it is expected to double 
every 20 years, to 65.7 million in 2035 and 131.4 million in 2055 [1]. 
Dementia can be classified as degenerative, vascular, or other types based on its 
etiology. Up to 34% of dementia cases show significant vascular pathology [2-7]. 
Recently, the construct of “vascular cognitive impairment” (VCI) has been introduced 
to capture the entire spectrum of cognitive disorders, ranging from mild cognitive 
impairment to fully developed dementia, that are caused by or associated with 
vascular factors [8]. VCI has three subtypes: Vascular dementia (VaD), Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) with a vascular component (mixed dementia), and the pre-dementia 
stage that is referred to as vascular mild cognitive impairment (VMCI or VaMCI) [9].  
There are currently no definitive checklists of diagnostic criteria for VCI and 
VMCI, and hence their prevalence are difficult to ascertain. However, it is known that 
the prevalence of VaD doubles every 5.3 years [10-11]. As the pre-dementia stage, 
VMCI is believed to be much more common.  
Some studies have shown that 46% of patients with VMCI developed dementia 
after five years [12]. It is therefore important to apply some interventions to prevent 
and postpone VMCI in order to reduce the occurrence of dementia. The current 
treatment options for VMCI target at improving symptoms (e.g. memory loss, 
psychological symptoms such as depression and anxiety), or controlling the various 
risk factors in order to prevent cognitive function impairment. There are no effective 
medicines for the management of VMCI in Western medicine. 
   In traditional Chinese medicine (TCM), cognitive impairment is categorized as 
“dementia” (chi dai or dai bing). Acupuncture and other TCM treatments have been 
used to treat VMCI in China for years. Reports on a number of studies indicate that 

4 
 
acupuncture techniques may be effective for improving intelligence, stimulating 
consciousness and enhancing memory, and appear to be beneficial for the 
management of cognitive and memory functions [13-15]. Findings from other studies 
suggest that oral Chinese Traditional Patent Medicine and comprehensive TCM 
intervention appear to improve the cognitive functions and quality of life for patients 
with cognitive impairment caused by leukoaraiosis [16-17].  
To treat patients with VMCI using TCM, it is necessary to classify the patients 
into TCM syndrome types and prescribe different treatments for different types. The 
efficacy of TCM treatment depends heavily on whether the classification is done 
properly, an important issue that has so far received little attention [18]. In this paper, 
we seek to identify the TCM syndrome types among patients with VMCI and to 
establish classification rules for them using a novel method called latent tree analysis 
(LTA) [19].  
The LTA method is a generalization of latent class analysis (LCA), a method 
often used in WM research to identify subtypes of a patient population in the absence 
of a gold standard [20,21]. LTA improves LCA by relaxing a key independence 
assumption made by LCA that is unrealistically strong. 
 
2. Data Collection 
Data used in this study were collected in a project on the TCM prevention and 
treatment of VMCI supported by the TCM Special Research Projects Program, China 
Ministry of Science and Technology under Contract No.200807011. Ethical approval 
for the project was given by The Ethics Committee on Clinical Research of Dongfang 
Hospital. 
The project involved seven top-graded hospitals in northern China: The Dongfang 
Hospital of Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Peking University People's 
Hospital, China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences Affiliated Wangjing Hospital, 
Tianjin Medical University Second Affiliated Hospital, Shandong University of 

5 
 
Traditional Chinese Medicine Affiliated Hospital, Changchun University of Chinese 
Medicine First Affiliated Hospital, and Hebei Medical University Traditional Chinese 
Medicine Hospital.  
All VMCI patients in the project were recruited between February 2008 and 
February 2012 from the neurology divisions and wards of the hospitals, and the 
surrounding communities.  Since there are no standard diagnostic criteria for VMCI, 
the research team set up the following criteria themselves based on the NINDS-CSN 
(National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke–Canadian Stroke Network) 
vascular cognitive impairment harmonization standards [8]: 
1) Age ≥ 50 years; 
2) Presence of vascular factors (cerebral hemorrhage, cerebral infarction, 
leukoaraiosis, hypertension, diabetes, hyperlipoidemia, coronary heart 
disease, etc.); 
3) Subjective complaints of cognitive impairment that were corroborated by an 
informant; 
4) Objective impairment in more than one domains of cognitive abilities by 
neuropsychologic assessments, including MMSE, Clinical Dementia Rating 
(CDR), Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) Beijing version. The 
thresholds for these tests were set as follows: MMSE score > 17 points 
(illiterates), or > 20 points (education years ≤ 6 years), or > 24 points 
(education years > 6 years)；MoCA score < 25 points (education ≤ 12 years), 
or < 26 points (education > 12 years)；CDR score＝0 or 0.5 points; 
5) Sustained cognitive decline for more than 6 months based on patient 
self-report or caregiver report; 
6) Normal abilities or mild impairment of daily living activities/social activities 
according to the result of Activities of Daily Living Scale (ADL); and 
7) Not meeting the criteria for the diagnosis of dementia in Statistical Manual of 

6 
 
Mental Disorders (DSM-IV-R).  
The exclusion criteria included the following: Patients with mental illness or 
serious physical illness which could affect neuropsychological examinations; those 
with Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAMD) score ≥ 17 points; and those refused 
to participate in this study and sign on the informed-consent form. 
The data collection teams consisted of neurology physicians and graduate students. 
The team members were trained in multiple sessions on various aspects of the data 
collection process and examined on the training materials. Only those who passed the 
examination were allowed to join the teams. The same training materials were used in 
all data collection centers.  
Data collection was carried out by interviewing all patients using an interviewer 
administered questionnaire. The interviewers first decided whether a patient should be 
included in the study according to the inclusion and exclusion criteria listed above. 
They then moved on to collect information on TCM signs and symptoms and filled 
out the questionnaire. A total number of 803 patients were successfully interviewed 
and their demographic characteristics are summarized in Table 1. 
The items in the questionnaire were extracted from both ancient and modern TCM 
literature on chi dai or dai bing patients. All signs and symptoms mentioned in the 
literature were initially included. The list was refined through multiple rounds of pilot 
surveys and expert consultations. Most items were polytomous and they were 
converted into dichotomous items for this analysis for simplicity, just as in the studies 
with LCA [20,21]. During preprocessing, a few items were combined. For example, 
edema on face and edema on limbs are combined into edema. The remaining 93 items 
are listed in Table 2. The items consist of signs and symptoms of interest to TCM. We 
will sometimes refer to them simply as symptoms for brevity. The data are unlabeled 
in the sense that the true syndrome types of the patients are unknown. 
There was a quality control personnel at each data collection center to ensure the 
authenticity and completeness of the questionnaires. The project team paid regular 

7 
 
visits to the data collection centers and randomly sampled questionnaires for 
authenticity, accuracy, and completeness checks. Data entry were carried out by two 
persons, each being responsible for entering half of the questionnaires and for 
verifying the other half.  
 
3. Method 
The VMCI data were studied using the LTA method described in [19]. The 
objective of the method is to reveal symptom patterns hidden in the data and to use 
those patterns to identify patient clusters that correspond to different TCM syndrome 
types. Statistical characteristics of the patient clusters are then used as quantitative 
characterizations of the syndrome types, and syndrome classification rules are thereby 
established. 
The analysis was carried using the Lantern software [22]. There were five steps: 
1. Pattern discovery: In the first step, latent tree analysis was performed to reveal 
symptom co-occurrence/mutual exclusion patterns hidden in the VMCI data. 
Lantern includes two algorithms for this purpose. In this study, the EAST 
(Extension Adjustment Simplification until Termination) algorithm [23] was 
used. The result is a latent tree model with multiple latent variables. Some of the 
latent variables reveal probabilistic symptom co-occurrence patterns, while 
others reveal probabilistic mutual-exclusion of symptoms. 
2. Pattern Interpretation: The second step was to determine the TCM syndrome 
connotations of the patterns discovered. In the case of a symptom co-occurrence 
pattern, the task was to determine what TCM syndrome type(s) can bring about 
the co-occurrence of the symptoms in the pattern. The result could be a single 
syndrome type that can explain all the symptoms in the pattern, or a 
combination of several syndrome types, each explaining some of the symptoms. 
If a latent variable represents the probabilistic mutual exclusion of two or more 
groups of symptoms, each group is a co-occurrence pattern and was interpreted 

8 
 
separately. Domain knowledge [24] was used in this step. 
3. Syndrome Identification: The pattern interpretation process gave rise to a list of 
syndrome types. Each syndrome type explains a list of symptoms from various 
co-occurrence patterns. If all key manifestations of the syndrome type are 
present on the list, then it was regarded as well supported by the data and was 
selected as a target for further analysis. Domain knowledge was used in this step 
also. 
4. Syndrome Quantification: For each syndrome type identified at the previous 
step, cluster analysis was performed on the patient population based on the 
symptoms that it explains. The symptom variables were not always used as 
features for the cluster analysis directly. If two or more symptom variables are 
from the same pattern, they were “combined” into one latent feature. The 
analysis divided the patients into several clusters. One patient cluster was 
identified as corresponding to the syndrome type. Population statistics of the 
patient cluster were used to quantify the syndrome type.  
5. Syndrome Classification: Finally, a classification rule was established for each 
syndrome type. The rule can be used to determine whether a patient belongs to 
the syndrome type.  
The main results，which will be presented in Sections 4.4 and 4.5， were obtained 
at the last two steps. The first three steps produced intermediate results that were 
necessary for the last two steps. They will be presented in Sections 4.1 to 4.3, along 
with discussions of some subtle practical issues that are not addressed in [19]. Those 
are important for researchers who wish to apply the method in their own work. 
 
4 Results 
4.1 Pattern Discovery  
Latent tree analysis of the VMCI data yielded a model with 32 latent variables. 

9 
 
The structure of the model is shown in Figure 3 in [19]. Some of the latent variables 
reveal probabilistic symptom co-occurrence (i.e., positive correlation) patterns, while 
others reveal probabilistic mutual exclusion (i.e., negative correlation) of symptoms. 
The patterns were extracted from the model using the Model Interpretation function 
of Lantern, which is explained in [19]. 
The co-occurrence patterns discovered are shown in the second column of Table 3. 
We see, for example, that the latent variable Y29 reveals the probabilistic 
co-occurrence of the three symptoms lack of strength, mental fatigue, and loose stool; 
Y30 reveals the probabilistic co-occurrence of frequent nocturnal urination and 
dripping urination; Y31 reveals the probabilistic co-occurrence of blurred vision and 
dry eyes; and so on. Note that there is only one symptom for Y23 in the table. This is 
because Y23 is directly connected to only one symptom variable in the model. 
Each co-occurrence pattern is given as a list of symptoms. Ordering in the list is 
important. Conceptually, a pattern corresponds to a class of patients [19]. Symptoms 
at the front of the list are more important than those at the end in determining whether 
a patient belongs to the cluster. For example, the list for the pattern Y27 consists of 
short of breath, sighing, hypochondrium distension or pain, tinnitus resemble tide, and 
stabbing headache. Those symptoms are ordered in descending importance, with short 
of breath being the most important and stabbing headache being the least important.  
The mutual-exclusion patterns discovered are shown in the second column of 
Table 4. For example, Y02 reveals the probabilistic mutual exclusion of two groups of 
symptoms: Y02-1 (anorexia, undigested food in stool, etc.) and Y02-2 (darkish 
tongue). The first group Y02-1 consists of more than one symptom. They are 
positively correlated and hence tend to co-occur. In other words, Y02-1 is a 
co-occurrence pattern. Similarly, Y09-1 (slow pulse, moderate pulse) and Y25-1 
(insomnia, dreamfulness) are also co-occurrence patterns. 
Y14 and Y15 each have three states. They reveal the mutual exclusion of thirst 
desire no drinks, thirst desire cold drinks, and thirst desire hot drinks. The symptom 

10 
 
dry mouth or throat is a higher level symptom. It is subsumed by the forgoing three 
symptoms and hence removed from further analysis. 
 
4.2 Pattern Interpretation 
To interpret the co-occurrence of a group of symptoms amounts to identifying the 
syndrome type(s) that can lead to the co-occurrence of the symptoms. Often there is 
no syndrome type that can explain the occurrence of all the symptoms in a pattern. 
Consequently, we have primary interpretations and secondary interpretations. A 
primary interpretation attempts to explain the co-occurrence of all symptoms in a 
pattern, and, when that is not possible, tries to explain the leading symptom and as 
many subsequent symptoms as possible. A secondary interpretation explains other 
symptoms or gives alternative explanations to some of the symptoms. 
The last two columns of Tables 3 and 4 give interpretations of all the patterns 
discovered by latent tree analysis. For example, Y01 reveals the probabilistic 
co-occurrence of four symptoms: Asthenia of defecation, dry stool or constipation, 
sallow complexion, and clear profuse urination. No single syndrome types can explain 
all the four symptoms. The primary interpretation is Qi Deficiency and it explains the 
co-occurrence of the first two symptoms. Blood Deficiency is a secondary 
interpretation and it explains the co-occurrence of the second and the third symptoms. 
In addition, dry stool or constipation can also be caused by Fire-Heat, Yin Deficiency 
and Qi Stagnation. Clear profuse urination is weakly correlated with the other three 
symptoms and it is a manifestation of Yang Deficiency.  
As the second example, consider Y06. It reveals the probabilistic co-occurrence of 
the two symptoms thick tongue fur and greasy tongue fur. The syndrome type 
Phlegm-Dampness explains both symptoms. It is the primary interpretation of the 
pattern. There are no secondary interpretations. 
As the third example, consider Y25-1. It is about the probabilistic co-occurrence of 
insomnia and dreamfulness. The two symptoms can be explained by any of the 

11 
 
following five syndrome types: Yin Deficiency, Fire-Heat, Blood Deficiency, Qi 
Deficiency, and Phlegm-Dampness. They are all primary and alternative 
interpretations of the pattern. There are no secondary interpretations. 
The above examples represent three possible scenarios one might encounter when 
interpreting a pattern. First, the pattern has only one primary interpretation and no 
secondary interpretations. The patterns Y06, Y08, Y18, Y23 and Y29, and Y02-2，
Y05-2, Y09-1, Y09-2, Y10-1,Y12-1, Y14-2 and Y15-1 fall into this category. Second, 
the pattern has more than one primary interpretations and no secondary interpretations. 
The patterns Y13, Y31, Y12-2, Y14-1, Y25-1 and Y25-2 belong to this category. 
Third, the pattern has both primary interpretations and secondary interpretations. The 
patterns Y01, Y04, Y03, Y07, Y11, Y16, Y17, Y19, Y20, Y21, Y22, Y24, Y26, Y27, 
Y30, Y02-1 and Y10-2 are in this category. 
The interpretation of Y14-1 (thirst desire no drinks) requires some discussions. 
According to TCM theory, the symptom can be due to Blood Stasis. In the VMCI data 
set, however, it is found (in the syndrome quantification step) to be negatively 
correlated with other manifestations of Blood Stasis such as purples or darkish lips, 
pale complexion, and blackish eyelid. We therefore conclude that, for the population 
under study, thirst desire no drinks is caused by other factors, namely Yin Deficiency 
and Phlegm-Dampness, rather than Blood Stasis. Blood Stasis is hence not included 
in Table 4 as an interpretation for the symptom. Similarly, the pattern Y09-1 (slow 
pulse, moderate pulse) can be explained by either Qi Deficiency or Phlegm-Dampness 
in theory. However, it is negatively correlated with other manifestations of 
Phlegm-Dampness such as thick tongue and greasy tongue fur, and hence 
Phlegm-Dampness is not listed as a possible explanation for the pattern. The pattern 
Y10-1 (pink tongue, hollow headache) can be explained by Qi Deficiency, Yang 
Deficiency, or Yin Deficiency. However, it is negatively correlated with other 
manifestations of Qi Deficiency and Yang Deficiency, and hence only Yin Deficiency 
is listed as its primary interpretation. 
In addition, several patterns are not interpreted. Y05-1 (white tongue fur) is not 

12 
 
interpreted because it considered normal for the population under study, namely 
seniors aged 60 or above and with VMCI. Y15-2 is not interpreted because it is 
subsumed by Y14-1 and Y14-2. 
 
4.3 Syndrome Identification   
Based on the patterns and their interpretations in Tables 3 and 4, we have 
identified eight syndrome types that are well supported by the data: Qi Deficiency, Qi 
Stagnation, Blood Deficiency, Blood Stasis, Phlegm-Dampness, Fire-Heat, Yang 
Deficiency, and Yin Deficiency. 
Take Yang Deficiency as an example. According to Tables 3 and 4, here are the 
symptom groups that it explains: 
Y24 (lassitude of limbs or body, fear of cold or cold limbs), Y26 (chest 
oppression, palpitation), Y30 (frequent nocturnal urination), Y02-1 (anorexia, 
undigested food in stool, bland taste in mouth, vomiting of saliva, diarrhea before 
dawn), Y15-1 (thirst desire hot drinks); Y01 (clear profuse urination), Y03 (pale 
complexion), Y04 (spontaneous sweating), Y07 (muscular twitching), Y19 (sore 
waist or knees), Y22 (dim complexion, blackish lower eyelid). 
There is a semicolon in the list. The symptom groups before the semicolon are from 
patterns for which the syndrome type is a primary interpretation, whereas the 
symptom groups after the semicolon are from patterns for which the syndrome type is 
a secondary interpretation.  
Those symptom groups cover different aspects of the impacts of Yang Deficiency, 
including its impacts on kidney (Y19), on the digestive system (Y02-1), on urination 
and drinking (Y30, Y15-1), on muscle (Y07), and on the striae and interstice (Y04), 
as well as its manifestations on the body and limbs (Y24), in the chest (Y26), and on 
the face (Y03, Y22). Since major aspects of the impacts of Yang Deficiency are 
covered, we conclude that there is sufficient information in the data to quantify Yang 

13 
 
Deficiency.  
The above list is quite long and the symptoms are not in any particular order. In 
the next section, we will order the symptoms according to their importance in 
characterizing Yang Deficiency. In addition, many of the symptoms will be pruned 
using the criterion of cumulative information coverage [19]. The result will be a clean 
and quantitative characterization of Yang Deficiency. Although it is not part of the 
final result, making the list is a necessary intermediate step. 
The lists of symptom groups that support each of the other seven syndrome types 
are listed below.  
 Blood Deficiency: Y03 (pale lips, pale complexion, dizzy headache, thin 
tongue, hemihidrosis), Y31 (blurred vision, dry eyes), Y12-2 (thin pulse), 
Y25-1 (insomnia, dreamfulness); Y01 (dry stool or constipation, sallow 
complexion), Y07 (muscular twitching), Y17 (trembling of limbs), Y21 
(dizziness), Y24 (numbness), Y26 (palpitation). 
 Blood Stasis: Y13 (varicose sublingual-veins, astringent pulse, tense pulse), 
Y22 (dim complexion, blackish lower eyelid, scaly skin), Y23 (purples or 
darkish lips), Y02-2 (darkish tongue); Y20 (tongue with ecchymosis), Y21 
(dizziness), Y24 (numbness), Y26 (palpitation), Y27 (stabbing headache). 
 Qi Deficiency: Y01 (asthenia of defecation, dry stool or constipation), 
Y08(sunken pulse, feeble pulse), Y20 (fat tongue, tooth-marked tongue), Y26 
(chest oppression, palpitation), Y29 (lack of strength, mental fatigue, loose 
stool), Y09-1 (slow pulse, moderate pulse), Y12-2 (thin pulse), Y25-1 
(insomnia, dreamfulness); Y02 (anorexia, bland taste in mouth), Y03 (pale 
complexion, dizzy headache, loose stool following dry feces), Y04 
(spontaneous sweating), Y16 (urinary incontinence,) Y19 (sore waist or knees), 
Y21 (dizziness), Y24 (lassitude of body and limbs), Y27 (short of breath), Y30 
(dripping urination). 
 Qi Stagnation: Y13 (varicose sublingual-veins, astringent pulse, tense pulse), 

14 
 
Y27 (short of breath, sighing, hypochondrium distention or pain), Y09-2 (taut 
pulse); Y01 (dry stool or constipation), Y17 (abdominal distension), Y26 (chest 
oppression). 
 Fire-Heat: Y16 (bitter taste in mouth, urinary incontinence), Y17 (acid 
swallow or epigastric upset, trembling of limbs), Y18 (aphtha on month or 
tongue, throbbing headache), Y21 (dizziness, distending headache, nausea or 
vomiting), Y05-2 (yellow tongue fur), Y14-2 (thirst desire cold drinks), Y25-1 
(insomnia, dreamfulness); Y01 (dry stool or constipation), Y04 (spontaneous 
sweating, dry tongue, fast pulse, fissured tongue), Y07 (fetid mouth odor, 
swift digestion rapid hungering), Y11 (agitation or short temper), Y19 
(tinnitus resemble tide), Y10-2 (red tongue), Y25-2 (flushed face). 
 Phlegm-Dampness: Y06 (thick tongue fur, greasy tongue fur), Y11 (sticky or 
greasy feel in mouth), Y20 (fat tongue, tooth-marked tongue), Y21 (dizziness, 
head feels as if swathed, distending headache, nausea or vomiting), Y12-1 
(slippery pulse), Y14-1 (thirst desire no drinks), Y25-1 (insomnia, 
dreamfulness); Y03 (dizzy headache), Y16 (urinary incontinence), Y19 
(expectoration). 
 Yin Deficiency: Y04 (tidal fever or night sweat, spontaneous sweating, dry 
tongue, fast pulse, fissured tongue), Y07 (vexing heat in chest, edema, fetid 
mouth odor, muscular twitching, swift digestion rapid hungering), Y19 (sore 
waist or knees, expectoration, tinnitus resemble cicada),Y31 (blurred vision, 
dry eyes), Y10-1(pink tongue, hollow headache), Y10-2(red tongue, little 
tongue fur),Y14-1 (thirst desire no drinks),Y25 (insomnia, dreamfulness, 
flushed face); Y01 (dry stool or constipation), Y03 (deep-red tongue, thin 
tongue), Y17 (trembling of limbs), Y21 (dizziness), Y22 (dim complexion, 
blackish lower eyelid), Y26 (palpitation). 
 
 

15 
 
4.4 Syndrome Quantification  
In the previous section, eight syndrome types were identified as well supported by 
data. A list of symptom groups was associated with each syndrome type. In the next 
step, we use those symptom groups to identify patient clusters of that correspond to 
the syndrome types, and use the population statistics of the patient clusters to quantify 
the syndrome types. This is done using the Joint Clustering function of Lantern. 
 
4.4.1 Quantification of Yang Deficiency 
Joint clustering for Yang Deficiency is performed using the model shown in 
Figure 1. The symptoms are from the symptom groups associated with Yang 
Deficiency in the previous section. If a group consists of only one symptom variable, 
then it is directly connected to the joint clustering variable Z at the top. If a group 
consists of multiple symptom variables, then they are “combined” into a latent feature 
and the latent feature is connected to Z. 
 Joint clustering partitions the patients in the VMCI data set into two clusters. 
Population statistics of the two clusters are as follows:  
 Yang Deficiency (0.38): Sore waist or knees (0.77), lassitude of limbs or body 
(0.69), frequent nocturnal urination (0.68), blackish lower eyelid (0.27), fear of 
cold or cold limbs (0.44), palpitation (0.45), chest oppression (0.51), thirst 
desire hot drinks (0.32), spontaneous sweating (0.38). 
 Non-Yang Deficiency (0.62): Sore waist or knees (0.21), lassitude of limbs or 
body (0.25), frequent nocturnal urination (0.28), blackish lower eyelid (0.02), 
fear of cold or cold limbs (0.12), palpitation (0.13), chest oppression (0.20), 
thirst desire hot drinks (0.08), spontaneous sweating (0.13). 
We see that the symptoms sore waist or knees, lassitude of limbs and body, fear of 
cold or cold limbs, etc. occur with higher probabilities in the first cluster than in the 
second cluster. Consequently, the first cluster is interpreted as Yang Deficiency, 

16 
 
whereas the second cluster interpreted as non-Yang Deficiency. 
According to the results, the prevalence of Yang Deficiency among the patients 
surveyed is 38%. Among the patients with Yang Deficiency, the symptom sore waist 
or knees occurs with probability 0.77, lassitude of limbs and body occurs with 
probability 0.69, fear of cold or cold limbs occurs with probability 0.44, and so on. 
Among the patients without Yang Deficiency, on the other hand, the corresponding 
probabilities are 0.21, 0.25, and 0.12 respectively. 
Note that, in the quantification given above, the items are ordered in such a way 
that the symptoms at the front are those whose occurrence probabilities in the two 
clusters differ the most. Such symptoms are the most important factors to consider 
when distinguishing between the two clusters. For example, although chest 
oppression occurs with higher probability than blackish lower eyelid in the Yang 
Deficiency cluster (0.51 vs 0.27), it is not as important as the latter because it also 
occurs with higher probability in the non-Yang Deficiency cluster (0.20 vs 0.02).  
Moreover, only the nine most important symptoms are used to characterize Yang 
Deficiency. This is because their cumulative information coverage has reached the 
cut-off 95% [19] and hence they are sufficient to capture the differences of the two 
clusters. In contrast, twenty symptoms are listed as relevant to Yang Deficiency in the 
previous section. Many of them are not important. 
  
4.4.2 Quantification of Yin Deficiency 
Joint clustering for Yin Deficiency partitions the patients into three clusters. The 
population statistics of the clusters are as follows. As before, the symptoms are sorted 
according to their importance in characterizing the differences among the three 
clusters. 
 Yin Deficiency I (0.38): Sore waist or knees (0.75), blurred vision (0.78), dry 
eyes (0.62), vexing heat in chest (0.08), fetid mouth odor (0.10), tidal fever 

17 
 
or night sweat (0.08), insomnia (0.54), tinnitus resemble cicada (0.43), 
dreamfulness (0.59), spontaneous sweating (0.18). 
 Yin Deficiency II (0.08): Sore waist or knees (0.75), blurred vision (0.52), dry 
eyes (0.37), vexing heat in chest (0.71), fetid mouth odor (0.71), tidal fever or 
night sweat (0.71), insomnia (0.77), tinnitus resemble cicada (0.43), 
dreamfulness (0.80), spontaneous sweating (0.79). 
 Non-Yin Deficiency (0.54): Sore waist or knees (0.14), blurred vision (0.26), 
dry eyes (0.16), vexing heat in chest (0.06), fetid mouth odor (0.08), tidal 
fever or night sweat (0.08), insomnia (0.21), tinnitus resemble cicada (0.10), 
dreamfulness (0.29), spontaneous sweating (0.19). 
The third cluster is interpreted as non-Yin Deficiency, whereas the other two are 
interpreted as two different subtypes of Yin Deficiency. The main differences between 
the first two clusters are that the symptoms such as vexing heat in chest, fetid mouth 
odor, and tidal fever or night sweat occur with much higher probabilities in the second 
cluster. Therefore, the first cluster is interpreted as Yin Deficiency, and the second 
cluster Yin Deficiency with Internal Heat. 
 
4.4.3 Quantification of Other Syndrome Types 
The results of joint clustering for other six syndrome types are listed below. For 
Blood Deficiency, Blood Stasis, Fire-Heat, and Qi Stagnation, the patients are 
partitioned into two clusters. For Qi Deficiency and Phlegm-Dampness, the patients 
are partitioned into three clusters, and two of the clusters are combined because, 
unlike in the case of Yin Deficiency, the differences between them are not important 
for treatment.  
 Blood Deficiency (0.32): Blurred vision (0.82), dry eyes (0.69), palpitation 
(0.56), insomnia (0.60), dizziness (0.62), dreamfulness (0.62), numbness 
(0.53), trembling of limbs (0.20), dry stool or constipation (0.47). 

18 
 
 Non-Blood Deficiency (0.68): Blurred vision (0.32), dry eyes (0.19), 
palpitation (0.11), insomnia (0.27), dizziness (0.39), dreamfulness (0.36), 
numbness (0.27), trembling of limbs (0.05), dry stool or constipation (0.23). 
 Blood Stasis (0.30): Purple or darkish lips (0.74), dim complexion (0.49), 
blackish lower eyelid (0.29), numbness (0.58), palpitation (0.42), scaly skin 
(0.19), tongue with ecchymosis (0.11). 
 Non-Blood Stasis (0.70): Purple or darkish lips (0.08), dim complexion (0.10), 
blackish lower eyelid (0.04), numbness (0.25), palpitation (0.18), scaly skin 
(0.04), tongue with ecchymosis (0.02). 
 Qi Deficiency (0.44): Sore waist or knees (0.70), lack of strength (0.73), 
lassitude of limbs or body (0.66), short of breath (0.62), chest oppression 
(0.54), palpitation (0.45), insomnia (0.58), urinary incontinence (0.38), 
mental fatigue (0.46), dreamfulness (0.61), asthenia of defecation (0.20). 
 Non-Qi Deficiency (0.56): Sore waist or knees (0.21), lack of strength (0.29), 
lassitude of limbs or body (0.23), short of breath (0.20), chest oppression 
(0.15), palpitation (0.11), insomnia (0.23), urinary incontinence (0.09), 
mental fatigue (0.18), dreamfulness (0.31), asthenia of defecation (0.05). 
 Qi Stagnation (0.35): Chest oppression (0.80), short of breath (0.77), sighing 
(0.42), hypochondrium distension or pain (0.20), abdominal distension (0.23), 
dry stool or constipation (0.35). 
 Non-Qi Stagnation (0.65): Chest oppression (0.06), short of breath (0.18), 
sighing (0,12), hypochondrium distension or pain (0.02), abdominal 
distension (0.07), dry stool or constipation (0.29). 
 Fire-Heat (0.31): Dry stool or constipation (0.55), insomnia (0.62), fetid 
mouth odor (0.30), agitation or short temper (0.79), trembling of limbs (0.24), 
acid swallow or epigastric upset (0.31), dreamfulness (0.64), spontaneous 
sweating (0.39), bitter taste in mouth (0.50), aphtha on mouth or tongue 

19 
 
(0.11). 
 Non-Fire-Heat (0.69): Dry stool or constipation (0.20), insomnia (0.27), fetid 
mouth odor (0.06), agitation or short temper (0.48), trembling of limbs (0.03), 
acid swallow or epigastric upset (0.08), dreamfulness (0.36), spontaneous 
sweating (0.16), bitter taste in mouth (0.26), aphtha on mouth or tongue 
(0.01). 
 Phlegm-Dampness (0.58): Greasy tongue fur (0.80), slippery pulse (0.60), 
sticky or greasy feel in mouth (0.29). 
 Non-Phlegm-Dampness (0.42): Greasy tongue fur (0.03), slippery pulse (0.27), 
sticky or greasy feel in mouth (0.05). 
 
4.4.4  A Technical Note 
We end this section with a subtle technical note concerning joint clustering and we 
explain the issue using the joint clustering model for Qi Deficiency (Figure 2).  Two 
symptom groups Y26 (chest oppression, palpitation) and Y27 (short of breath) are 
used in the model among others. In the global model (Figure 3 in [19]), the symptom 
variable short of breath is grouped, under Y27, with sighing and three other symptom 
variables. In the joint clustering model, sighing and the other variables are left out. 
Hence, short of breath might need to be re-grouped with other symptom variables 
from elsewhere so that the dependence among the variables is properly modeled. In 
Lantern, there is a search procedure that decides whether re-grouping is necessary and 
how it should be done. In the joint clustering model for Qi Deficiency, short of breath 
is automatically merged with Y26 (chest oppression, palpitation), and a new latent 
variable W is thereby created.   
 
4.5 Syndrome Classification 
Classification rules are obtained for the eight syndrome types using the Building 

20 
 
Rules function of Lantern, which is explained in [19]. The rule for a syndrome type 
tells us how to determine whether an individual patient belongs to the syndrome type. 
Here is the classification rule for Yang Deficiency: 
 Yang Deficiency: Sore waist or knees (3.7), lassitude of limbs or body (2.8), 
frequent nocturnal urination (2.5), blackish lower eyelid (3.8), palpitation (2.5), 
fear of cold or cold limbs (2.6), chest oppression (2.0), thirst desire hot drinks 
(2.4), spontaneous sweating (2.0), dim complexion (1.7), undigested food in 
stool (2.6), muscular twitching (1.4), pale complexion (2.0), diarrhea before 
dawn (2.1). Threshold: 9.1; Accuracy: 0.96.  
The rule gives a numerical score for each of the symptoms listed, and a threshold. 
They are calculated from the symptom occurrence probabilities and syndrome 
prevalence given in the previous subsection [19]. If the total score of a patient exceeds 
the threshold, then he is classified into the Yang Deficiency class. Otherwise, he is 
classified into the non-Yang Deficiency class. The accuracy of the rule is with respect 
to classification directly based on the joint clustering model [19].  
Note that the position of a symptom in the classification rule is determined not 
only by its score, but also by how frequently it occurs. For example, the score for the 
symptom undigested food in stool is 2.6, which is the fourth highest. However, the 
symptom occurs with low probability (<3%) and is hence applicable to only a small 
fraction of the patients. Consequently, it is placed toward the end of the rule. On the 
other hand, the symptom frequent nocturnal urination is placed at a much earlier 
position although its score (2.5) is lower. It occurs with high probability (45%) and 
hence applies to more patients.  
 Also note that the last four symptoms in the rule did not appear in the 
quantification of Yang Deficiency given in the previous section. They occur with low 
probabilities and hence they are not important factors to consider when describing the 
main differences between patients with Yang Deficiency and patients without Yang 
Deficiency. They are included in the rule because, when present, they are important 

21 
 
evidence for classifying individual patients. 
For Yin Deficiency, there are two classification rules, one for Yin Deficiency 
versus non-Yin Deficiency, and another for Yin Deficiency I versus Yin Deficiency II 
(with Internal Heat): 
 Yin Deficiency vs Non-Yin Deficiency: Sore waist or knees (4.2), blurred 
vision (3.0), dry eyes (2.8), tinnitus resemble cicada (2.8), insomnia (2.3), 
dreamfulness (2.0), expectoration (2.1), blackish lower eyelid (3.2), palpitation 
(1.9), dizziness (1.6), dry stool or constipation (1.4), vexing heat in chest (1.9), 
trembling of limbs (2.1), fetid mouth odor (1.7), dim complexion (1.0), tidal 
fever or night sweat (1.3). Threshold: 10.6; Accuracy: 0.98.  
 Yin Deficiency II vs Yin Deficiency I: Tidal fever or night sweat (4.9), vexing 
heat in chest (4.7), fetid mouth odor (4.5), spontaneous sweating (4.1), dry 
tongue (3.6), edema (3.3), thirst desire no drinks (2.8), fast pulse (3.1), 
deep-red tongue (3.3), dry stool or constipation (1.9), swift digestion rapid 
hungering (3.2). Threshold: 13.9; Accuracy: 0.97.  
The classification rules for the other six syndrome types are as follows:  
 Blood Deficiency: Blurred vision (3.4), dry eyes (3.2), palpitation (3.4), 
insomnia (2.0), dizziness (1.7), dreamfulness (1.6), numbness (1.6), trembling 
of limbs (2.4), dry stool or constipation (1.5), thin pulse (1.1), muscular 
twitching (2.1), sallow complexion (1.6), pale lips (1.9), dizzy headache (1.9), 
pale complexion (2.0). Threshold: 10.6; Accuracy: 0.98.  
 Blood Stasis: Purple or darkish lips (5.2), dim complexion (3.1), blackish 
lower eyelid (3.1), numbness (2.0), palpitation (1.7), scaly skin (2.5), tongue 
with ecchymosis (2.7), darkish tongue (1.0). Threshold: 6.4; Accuracy: 0.98. 
 Qi Deficiency: Sore waist or knees (3.2), lack of strength (2.7), lassitude of 
limbs or body (2.7), short of breath (2.7), chest oppression (2.8), palpitation 
(2.8), insomnia (2.2), urinary incontinence (2.7), dreamfulness (1.8), mental 

22 
 
fatigue (2.0), asthenia of defecation (2.4), sunken pulse (1.4), dizziness (1.3), 
spontaneous sweating (1.4), dripping urination (1.7), feeble pulse (2.4), thin 
pulse (1.2), dizzy headache (2.2). Threshold: 13.0; Accuracy: 0.96.  
 Qi Stagnation: Chest oppression (5.8), short of breath (3.9), sighing (2.4), 
hypochondrium distension or pain (3.4), abdominal distension (2.0), dry stool 
or constipation (0.4). Threshold: 6.2; Accuracy: 0.97. 
 Fire-Heat: Dry stool or constipation (2.2), insomnia (2.1), fetid mouth odor 
(2.6), agitation or short temper (2.0), trembling of limbs (3.1), acid swallow or 
epigastric upset (2.4), dreamfulness (1.6), spontaneous sweating (1.9), bitter 
taste in mouth (1.6), aphtha on mouth or tongue (4.1), dizziness (1.5), dripping 
urination (1.6), dry tongue (1.7), thirst desire cold drinks (2.5), throbbing 
headache (2.1). Threshold: 9.1; Accuracy: 0.94. 
 Phlegm-Dampness: Greasy tongue fur (7.1), slippery pulse (2.1), sticky or 
greasy feel in mouth(2.8), thick tongue fur (1.5), dizzy headache (1.8), 
tooth-marked tongue(1.0), fat tongue(1.0), urinary incontinence (0.6). 
Threshold: 3.7, Accuracy: 0.97. 
 
 
5 Discussions 
TCM syndromes are latent variables that cannot be “measured” directly. They can 
only be “measured” indirectly through symptoms. Based on symptom co-occurrence 
patterns discovered in data and domain knowledge, we have identified eight groups of 
symptoms that can be respectively used to “measure” eight syndrome types among 
patients with VMCI. The patients are partitioned into clusters based on each group of 
symptoms, and one of the patient clusters are matched up with the syndrome type. 
The population statistics of the patient cluster are used to quantify the syndrome type 
(Section 4.4), and to establish a classification rule (Section 4.5).  
 

23 
 
5.1 Quality of Results 
There is no ground truth against which to evaluate our results, which was what 
motivated our work at the first place. However, there are qualitative understandings in 
TCM theory as to which symptoms are the most important factors to consider when 
determining whether a patient belongs to a syndrome type. They are called key factors 
of syndrome differentiation, or bian zheng yao dian in Chinese. Our results match 
those key factors well. They also satisfactorily reflect the characteristics of the VMCI 
population under study. 
 
5.1.1 Results on Blood Deficiency 
According to TCM theory, the key factors for determining Blood Deficiency are 
pale lips, pale or sallow complexion, dizziness, palpitation, insomnia, and thin pulse. 
All those symptoms are present in our classification rule for Blood Deficiency 
(Section 4.5). The symptoms with the highest scores are blurred vision and dry eyes. 
Those reflect the characteristics of the population under study, which consists of 
patients with VMCI and aged 50 or above. According to TCM theory, seniors usually 
suffers from kidney deficiency, which can lead to liver Blood Deficiency (liver and 
kidney are from the same source), and hence poor vision (liver’s opening orifice is at 
eye). 
According to our syndrome quantification results (Section 4.4), blurred vision and 
dry eyes occur with the highest probabilities (0.82 and 0.69) in the Blood Deficiency 
class. Palpitation and insomnia also occur with high probabilities (0.56 and 0.60). 
Those suggest that, for the population under study, Blood Deficiency is mainly 
located at the liver and the heart. 
 
5.1.2 Results on Blood Stasis 
According to TCM theory, the key factors for determining Blood Stasis are local 

24 
 
unpalpable stabbing pain, and color change on the face, the lips and the tongue. In our 
classification rule for Blood Stasis, concordantly, the symptoms with the highest 
scores are purple or darkish lips, dim complexion, blackish lower eyelid. The rule also 
includes tongue with ecchymosis and darkish tongue. 
However, our rule does not match TCM theory well regarding local unpalpable 
stabbing pain. In the VMCI data set, there is only symptom about stabbing pain, i.e., 
stabbing headache. Stabbing pains at other locations of the body were not included in 
the survey due to their lack of presences in the TCM literature on chi dai or dai bing. 
The symptom stabbing headache occurred with very low frequency (<3%) in the 
survey and it is negatively, and weakly, correlated with other Blood Stasis symptoms 
listed above. Its score is -0.4 and is deleted during rule simplification [19]. 
 
5.1.3 Results on Qi Deficiency 
According to TCM theory, the key factors for determining Qi Deficiency are lack 
of strength, short of breath, and lassitude of limbs and body. In our classification rule 
for Qi Deficiency, those are among the symptoms with the highest scores. In addition, 
the four symptoms sore waist or knees, urinary incontinence, chest oppression and 
palpitation also have high scores. Those reflect the characteristics of the population 
under study. The patients in the population are seniors and hence are likely to suffer 
from kidney deficiency, which manifests as sore waist or knees and urinary 
incontinence. The patients in the population all suffer from vascular MCI (mild 
cognition impairment). The vascular factors can affect the heart and lead to chest 
oppression and palpitation.  
According to our quantification results, the symptoms chest oppression, palpitation, 
and sore waist or knees occur with high probabilities in the Qi Deficiency class. 
Those suggest that, for the population under study, Qi Deficiency is mainly located at 
the heart and the kidney. 
 

25 
 
5.1.4 Results on Qi Stagnation 
According to TCM theory, the key factors for determining Qi Stagnation are 
gastric distention and fullness, distension pain, and sighing. In our classification rule 
for blood Qi Stagnation, concordantly, the symptoms with the highest scores are chest 
oppression, sighing, hypochondrium distension or pain, and abdominal distension. 
 
5.1.5 Results on Fire-Heat 
According to TCM theory, common manifestations of Fire-Heat include flushed 
face, thirst, dry stool or constipation, red tongue, yellow tongue fur, and fast pulse. In 
our classification rule for Fire-Heat, dry stool or constipation and thirst desire cold 
drinks have high scores. The other top score symptoms are aphtha on mouth or tongue, 
fetid mouth odor, acid swallow or epigastric upset, insomnia, throbbing headache, and 
agitation or short temper. In TCM, those symptoms are considered manifestations of 
excess heat.  
However, the symptoms flushed face, red tongue, yellow tongue fur, and fast 
pulse are not present in our classification rule. They correlate weakly with the 
aforementioned symptoms in the data set. 
 
5.1.6 Results on Phlegm-Dampness 
According to TCM theory, the key factors for determining Phlegm-Dampness are 
the presence of visible phlegm and invisible phlegm, greasy tongue fur, and slippery 
pulse. Concordantly, greasy tongue fur and slippery pulse have high scores in our 
classification rule for Phlegm-Dampness. Dizzy headache and dizziness (invisible 
phlegm) are also present. The important role of dizzy headache and dizziness in the 
rule is consistent with the TCM claim that the blockage of brain collateral by phlegm 
is an important pathogenic factor for dementia. 
 

26 
 
5.1.7 Results on Yin Deficiency 
According to TCM theory, the manifestations of Yin Deficiency mainly fall into 
two categories: Those caused by the deprivation of nourishment of viscera and organs 
due to the lack of Yin fluid, and those caused by the relative excessiveness of Yang 
due to the failure by Yin to restrain Yang. In our classification rule for Yin Deficiency, 
the symptoms sore waist or knees, blurred vision, dry eyes and tinnitus resemble 
cicada are representative symptoms of the first category, while insomnia, 
dreamfulness, palpitation, expectoration are representative symptoms of the second 
category. 
According to TCM theory, the key characteristics of Yin Deficiency with Internal 
Heat are red and dry tongue, little tongue fur, and thin and fast pulse. In our rule for 
differentiating between Yin Deficiency II (with Internal Heat) and Yin Deficiency I, 
deep-red tongue, dry tongue and fast pulse have high scores. The other top score 
symptoms are tidal fever night seat, vexing heat in chest, fetid mouth odor, and 
spontaneous sweating. In TCM theory, those symptoms also suggest Heat caused by 
relative excessiveness of Yang due to weak Yin.  
However, the symptoms little tongue fur and thin pulse are not present in our 
classification rule. They correlate weakly with the aforementioned symptoms in the 
data set. 
 
5.1.8 Results on Yang Deficiency 
Our classification rule for the syndrome type Yang Deficiency matches TCM 
theory well in the sense that all the symptoms included in the rule are closely related 
to Yang Deficiency according to TCM theory. Indeed, the symptoms fear of cold or 
cold limbs, thirst desire hot drink, undigested food in stool, and diarrhea before dawn 
are the coldness manifestations of Yang Deficiency. The symptoms sore waist or knee, 
blackish lower eyelids, frequent nocturnal urination, and dim complexion suggest 
kidney Yang Deficiency. In addition, when Heart Yang fails to warm and push blood, 

27 
 
palpitation and chest oppression result in. Weak spleen Yang leads to malnutrition of 
muscle and meridians, which causes lassitude of limbs and body.  
Note that the three symptoms sore waist or knee, blackish lower eyelids, and dim 
complexion appear both in the rule for Yang Deficiency and the rules for Yin 
Deficiency. Their total score in the former rule exceeds the threshold, but not in the 
latter rule. The implication is that the co-occurrence of the three symptoms is 
sufficient evidence for concluding Yang Deficiency in the VMCI population, while in 
general one can only conclude kidney deficiency. The reason is that, in the population 
under study, the three symptoms are always accompanied by some coldness 
symptoms such as fear of cold or cold limbs, thirst desire hot drink. This is an 
interesting finding about the population that might be useful for treatment planning. 
                
5.2 Uses of Results 
Our classification rules are score-based and hence are convenient to use. They 
can be applied in three scenarios. 
First, a major weakness with TCM is the lack of gold standards for syndrome 
differentiation. In clinic practice, different physicians might draw different 
conclusions about the syndrome type of the same patient. This affects the efficacy of 
treatments and undermines patient confidence. The problem can be alleviated 
substantially if physicians can use the same set of rules as reference. Our 
classification rules can be used for the purpose. In addition, they can be used as a 
basis for the development of syndrome differentiation standards for VMCI. 
Second, randomized controlled trial (RCT) has been widely used to determine the 
efficacy of TCM treatments. To conduct RCT on a treatment for a TCM syndrome 
type, one needs to: (1) identify patients belonging to the syndrome types, and (2) then 
randomly divide them into treatment and control groups. Our classification rules can 
be used in the first step for RCT on TCM treatments for VMCI patients.  . 

28 
 
Third, there has been much interest on TCM syndrome essence study, where the 
objective is to identify biomedical indicators that can be used as gold standards for 
TCM syndrome differentiation [e.g., 25]. To conduct such research, one needs to: (1) 
divide patients into those who belong to a syndrome type and those who do not, and 
(2) compare the biomedical measurements of patients in the two classes. TCM 
syndrome essence study has so far achieved little success. A key reason is that the first 
step was not done properly [25]. In our work, the patient clusters are identified based 
on symptom occurrence patterns hidden in data. If there are indeed biomedical 
indicators that capture the “essence” of syndrome types, they should correlate well 
with syndrome occurrence patterns, and hence correlated well with the patient clusters 
identified by our method. As such, our work might help in finding biomedical 
indicators with high sensitivity and high specificity for TCM syndrome types. 
 
5.3 Strengths and Limitations 
In this paper we address the problem of classifying VMCI patients into TCM 
syndrome types. The results are quantitative. Eight syndrome types are identified. 
Prevalence and score-based classification rules are obtained for each of the syndrome 
types.  
The results are obtained using the latent tree analysis method. Consequently, they 
enjoy stronger evidence support than solutions one could get using the alternative 
approaches, namely the expert standardization and the supervised quantification 
approaches [19]. In expert standardization, syndrome classification solutions are 
determined by panels of experts. In supervised quantification, experts are asked to 
determine the syndrome types of individual patients. In both cases, the results depend 
heavily on who the experts are. The latent tree analysis method, on the other hand, 
relies only on symptom data. The results are relatively more objective. 
 One limitation of our work is that the data were all collected in northern China. 
It would be interesting to conduct the study in other regions of the country, or to 

29 
 
include patients from other parts of the country in the study. 
Another limitation is that only dichotomous data were used in our study, and 
hence severity of symptoms was not taken into consideration. This is mainly for the 
sake of simplicity. While it is possible and would be interesting to use polytomous 
data, doing so would substantially complicate the methodology, software, and the 
results. The literature on latent class analysis has mostly been focused on 
dichotomous data for the same reason [20, 21]. Since the results are meant to be 
guidelines for physicians to use as references, rather than rigid standards for 
physicians to follow meticulously, it is desirable to keep them as simple as possible. 
 
6 Conclusions 
    By analyzing the symptom data collected on 803 VMCI patients aged 50 or 
above using latent tree models, we have reached the conclusion that there are eight 
TCM syndrome types among the population: Blood Deficiency, Blood Stasis, 
Phlegm-Dampness, Fire-Heat, Qi Deficiency, Qi Stagnation, Yang Deficiency, and 
Yin Deficiency. In addition, two subtypes have been identified for Yin Deficiency, 
namely Yin Deficiency with and without Internal Heat. The prevalence and the 
symptom occurrence probabilities for the syndrome types and subtypes have been 
determined, and corresponding classification rules have been established. The results 
match TCM theory well and enjoy the strongest evidence support currently possible. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

30 
 
Competing Interests  
'The authors declare that they have no competing interests, financial or non-financial. 
 
Authors’ contributions  
 CF and NLZ were the main forces behind the conception and design of the work, and 
contributed equally to the paper. BXC,XLJ, RJG and ZGC and YLZ played key roles 
in data collection and results interpretation, and provided valuable comments on 
earlier versions of the manuscript. ZRC is part of the team that developed the Lantern 
software and he implemented the search procedure mentioned in Section 4.4. All 
authors have read and approved the final manuscript, and agree to be accountable to 
all aspects of the work. 
 
Acknowledgements:  
Research on this article was supported by Hong Kong Research Grants Council under 
grant 16202515, Guangzhou HKUST Fok Ying Tung Research Institute, China 
Ministry of Science and Technology TCM Special Research Projects Program under 
grants No.200807011 and No.201007002, Beijing Science and Technology Program 
under grant No.Z111107056811040, Beijing New Medical Discipline Development 
Program under grant No.XK100270569,and Beijing University of Chinese Medicine 
under grant No. 2011-CXTD-23.
