AI based approach to Trailer Generation for Online
Educational Courses
1st Prakhar Mishra
IIIT
Bangalore, India

2nd Chaitali Diwan
IIIT
Bangalore, India

3rd Srinath Srinivasa
IIIT
Bangalore, India

4th G. Srinivasaraghavan
IIIT
Bangalore, India

Abstract—In this paper, we propose an AI based approach
to Trailer Generation in the form of short videos for online
educational courses. Trailers give an overview of the course to
the learners and help them make an informed choice about the
courses they want to learn. It also helps to generate curiosity
and interest among the learners and encourages them to pursue
a course. While it is possible to manually generate the trailers, it
requires extensive human efforts and skills over a broad spectrum
of design, span selection, video editing, domain knowledge, etc.,
thus making it time-consuming and expensive, especially in an
academic setting. The framework we propose in this work is a
template based method for video trailer generation, where most of
the textual content of the trailer is auto-generated and the trailer
video is automatically generated, by leveraging Machine Learning
and Natural Language Processing techniques. The proposed
trailer is in the form of a timeline consisting of various frag-
ments created by selecting, para-phrasing or generating content
using various proposed techniques. The fragments are further
enhanced by adding voice-over text, subtitles, animations, etc., to
create a holistic experience. Finally, we perform user evaluation
with 63 human evaluators for evaluating the trailers generated
by our system and the results obtained were encouraging.
Index Terms—Video Trailer Generation, Machine Learning,
Natural Language Processing
I. INTRODUCTION
The growth of the internet has signiﬁcantly increased the
amount of free instructional content. These resources are
offered not only by big institutions but also by individual
content creators over various platforms such as Coursera,
Udemy, YouTube, etc. This increase in content production rate
has resulted in the creation of redundant courses and tutoring
videos for many topics over time. In spite of advantages
like on-demand accessibility, the abundance of options has
increased confusion and made it more challenging to select
a course that might be in line with learner’s interests. And
often, enrolling to a course that doesn’t meet the learner’s
expectations for a course’s curriculum and other aspects such
as expected level of commitment, the availability of support,
etc., causes the learner to lose motivation and eventually drop
the course. [1], [2].
This problem can be tackled to a certain extent by presenting
a video trailer to the learners before the start of the course
(learning pathway) to help them quickly glance through the
pathway and get an overall idea of the course content and its
format [3]–[5].
The idea of Trailers is not brand-new, and the ﬁlm industry
has been using them extensively for a while. Trailers, in
context of movies are mostly about advertising. They notify
viewers about an upcoming movie while generating interest
among them. Often the effectiveness of a trailer affects the
perception of the movie, even before it is released publicly.
The course trailers serve a greater purpose in the educational
context than simple course promotion. Before beginning the
learning journey, they aid in helping learners set realistic
expectations for their learning outcomes and competency
mastery.
Concept of trailers might resemble with that of summariza-
tion [6]–[8], but apart from incorporating a few elements of
summarization like shortening and abstracting out information
from substantial sized input source, trailers are different in
terms of their motivation, purpose and the impact they cre-
ate on the end users. Unlike summaries, trailers need not
be complete in their coverage. Also, they are designed to
give glimpses of a few interesting segments of the narrative
without revealing the main plot or climax of the underlying
narrative [9]. Although there is no clear demarcation of what
a climax is in academic narratives, based on our analysis of
many academic course trailers in popular MOOCs (Massive
Open Online Courses) such as Udemy1 and Coursera2, we
see prevalence of a common pattern in trailer timelines. The
timeline starts with an introduction about the course and the
instructor and ends with a call-to-action (CTA) which offers
opportunity to the learners to take action or start the course.
In between, there are several elements and factoids about the
course and its contents, that aim to arouse viewer interest.
The current approach of generating trailers is manual,
cumbersome and time-consuming, it requires someone with
relevant skills like designing, video editing, and a subject
matter expert to help in curating the trailer content. Although,
there are software products like Apple iMovie3, Windows
Movie Maker4 and others that people can use for generating
trailers by performing basic editing like cuts, merging frames,
1https://www.udemy.com
2https://www.coursera.org
3https://www.apple.com/in/imovie
4https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/p/movie-maker-video-editor/
9mvfq4lmz6c9
arXiv:2301.03957v1  [cs.CL]  10 Jan 2023

Fig. 1. Trailer Structure
etc. Yet the content to be placed in the trailer has to be curated
entirely by a human expert.
In our work, we propose a semi-automatic template based
framework for generating video trailers for learning pathways,
which are a sequence of related educational documents of
various forms [10]–[12]. Here, most of the content that is
placed in the trailer is auto-generated with a scope for taking
inputs from the creator. The framework for trailer generation
consists of various essential trailer fragments arranged as
a timeline of the trailer. Each fragment is composed of a
sequence of frames that are coherent within themselves in
terms of the topical information they present. And inherently,
each frame is composed of various types of elements and their
properties like font size, text styling, image size, etc. Fig. 1
shows the illustration for the same.
Once all the elements are generated and placed at their
respective positions within a frame of a trailer fragment,
a template is applied to it. The template consists of the
multi-modal experiences such as voice-over, subtitles, sounds,
animations, etc. It also determines the elements of the trailer
design such as number and ordering of fragments, frames and
elements. Fig. 2 shows the visual view of some of the frames
for one of the templates with it’s corresponding elements and
their positioning in the frames.
II. RELATED WORK
There are studies that discuss the idea, use and motivation
of having trailers for academic courses [3]–[5]. Also, there are
online educational platforms like Coursera and Udemy which
have course trailers. However, we could not ﬁnd literature on
approaches to generating trailers for academic courses. Hence,
in the following paragraphs we discuss some of the pioneering
works of trailer generation in-general across other domains.
Trailer generation can also be seen as special case of larger
research interest of adding an element of surprise to the engage
receiver’s attention in midst of information overload [13], [14].
Authors in [15]–[18] present an approach for automatic
trailer generation from movies as input. Hermes et al. [16]
create trailers for action movies by analyzing audio and
video signals present in movies and automatically detecting
features like faces, scene cuts, sound-volume, etc and use
ontology of the corresponding domain for producing trailers.
Irie et al. [17] propose a movie trailer generation method
which extracts symbols like title logo, main theme music and
selects impressive shot or speech segments based on clustering
methods and EM algorithm. Brachmann et al. [15] propose an
approach of generating action movie trailers using the concept
of trailer grammar, knowledge base and various ML techniques
for analyzing audio and images present in the movie. Smith
et al. [18] propose a system that understands and encodes
the patterns and emotions present in horror movies using
Convolution Neural Networks(CNN).
All the above methods use visual and audio cues to derive
the trailer frames, whereas we use raw text data and build
the necessary discriminative and generative Neural Network
models to create frames and its elements to be placed in the
trailer.
Hesham et al. in [19] explore the idea of creating movie
trailers from their subtitles. They ﬁrst classify the movie by
genre, identify important keywords and then rank important
subtitles. The trailer is then generated by stacking the movie
time-frames corresponding to the important subtitles. Gaikwad
et al. in [20] propose a technique to create previews of movies
by utilizing subtitles and ﬁnding the most representative scenes
by matching them with the plot summaries. Chi et al. [21]
propose an approach to automatically create marketing-style
short videos for a given product page url by extracting
elements and their styles present in the product html page
under speciﬁed tags.
Unlike the aforementioned works which primarily focus
on generating trailers based on an extractive strategies, in
our work we develop various modules that comprehend in-
put document and generate content for the trailer either by
paraphrasing or by using Natural Language Generator based
model.
As far as we know, automatic/semi-automatic generation
of video trailers for learning pathways is unexplored. Our
proposed approach of video trailer generation using Machine
Learning, Natural Language Processing and Generation tech-
niques is also unique.
III. PROPOSED SYSTEM
We propose a framework for trailer generation consisting of
different trailer fragments that form a trailer timeline, genera-
tion of the trailer fragments and ﬁnally applying templates that
determine the look and feel of the trailer. Based on our analysis
of multiple trailers presented for various online courses offered
on various educational platforms like Coursera and Udemy, we
designed and structured our trailer elements, fragments and
overall ﬂow of the trailer.
We propose a trailer timeline consisting of 7 trailer frag-
ments namely, Splash, Trailer Title, Author Details, Outline,
Meta-Information, Social Proof and ﬁnally the Call-to-Action.
Figure 3 shows the timeline of all the above-mentioned frag-
ments in the trailer. Each of these fragments deﬁne a speciﬁc
part of the trailer, their purpose and their importance in the
trailer. We deﬁne the fragments in detail in further part of
this section. As discussed earlier, fragments are composed of

Fig. 2. Illustration of Frames
Fig. 3. Trailer Timeline
a sequence of frames and each frame is composed of various
types of elements and their properties.
The overall approach for trailer generation is illustrated in
Fig. 4. All the resources mapped to a learning pathway form
the input to our Fragment Data Generator (FDG) module.
Template constraints that deﬁne the elements, fragments and
frames also form the input to FDG. The FDG along with other
sources like creator’s input, any images or information from
the web or knowledge bases, etc., can be incorporated into
the frames or the fragments. Once the elements for all the
frames across all the fragments are generated, we pass it to
the composition module for adding in other important aspects
of the trailer like voice-over, subtitles, sounds, etc., to add to
its multi-modal experience.
A. Fragment Data Generation
Following are the proposed trailer fragments arranged in the
order of their appearance in the trailer timeline-
Splash Fragment: The idea of splash fragment is to
display any introductory information related to the trailer such
as credits, software logo, etc., mostly obtained from creator’s
input. This optional fragment could also be the last fragment
in the trailer depending on the creator’s preference.
Trailer Title Fragment: In this fragment we generate a
short yet representative title for the entire trailer, hence giving
a quick idea about the topic that summarizes the underlying
pathway or the set of resources. We apply Hierarchical Title
Generation model [22] over the resources mapped to the
learning pathway to get the list of trailer titles. We select a title
among them based on their Term Frequency. In case, none of
the titles are above a threshold, we fall back on the fact that the
ﬁrst resource in the pathway is the proxy to the introductory
resource, and we generate the trailer title for it by applying
Single Document Title Generator [23], [24]. Figure 5 shows
the trailer title fragment generation ﬂow.
Author Details Fragment: A quick introduction about
the author or the instructor of the learning pathway could
help the learners build an implicit connect and trust. Majority
of the elements in the Author Details Fragment like author
names, afﬁliations and author’s image are expected from the
creator while creating the trailer. Template constraints such
as addressing multiple authors with different frame elements,
handling and getting relevant images to be put in this fragment
etc are also obtained from trailer creator. These inputs and
template constraints are plugged in the automation system
to ﬁll the overall author frame. Additionally, we crawl the
web to get relevant images, for example: we crawl the web
and get relevant afﬁliation images and place it in the desired
coordinates as deﬁned by the template. Also for the templates
that allow for having only the frontal face of author, we make
use of an open-sourced face recognition model5 to crop the
face from the uploaded author image. In case no author image
is provided to the system by the creator, we place a dummy
caricatured relevant sized image. Similarly, we have deﬁned
defaults for the features, frames and templates in case there is
no input from the trailer creator. For example, when multiple
authors exists, we display information w.r.t to the the ﬁrst
author entered by the creator and treat him/her as the primary
instructor and rest all the authors are abstracted by placing
them under the “and others” category.
Outline Fragment: This fragment gives an idea about
the speciﬁc topics that would be covered in the learning
pathway. This could help in setting learners’ expectation in
terms of the topics covered and in deciding whether the content
aligns to his/her end goals. For this we use Single Document
5https://docs.opencv.org/3.4/db/d28/tutorial cascade classiﬁer.html

Fig. 4. Trailer Generation Flow
Fig. 5. Trailer Title Fragment Generation Flow
Title Generator [23], [24] model to generate titles for all the
resources in the learning pathway which represents the outline
of the learning pathway.
Every template under the outline fragment limits the number
of text elements to be listed on the screen with the aim to
balance aesthetics and information at the same time. To adhere
to this prior constraint, we design a multi-step process to select
diverse, yet impactful set of elements from a relatively larger
list of outlines generated in the previous step. Fig. 6 shows
the entire pipeline of Outline Text Selection.
Let K be the number of text elements that the frame requires
and N be the total number of resources we have as input
and let K < N. We start with all the resources (N) given
by the user and remove any instance of assessments and
short documents under the assumption that such documents
won’t hold much informational content. After this we remove
any occurrence of exact duplicates and near duplicates in the
remaining set and pass the remaining resource list to the title
generator system to generate title for every resource.
Post this, we ﬁx the ﬁrst and the last position of the outline
with the ﬁrst and last resource title. We speciﬁcally do this
action because of the inherent ordering present in the input
resource as a part of learning pathway. Also intuitively, picking
ﬁrst and last sets a bound over the topic space to be covered
under a particular course.
Finally on this reduced set, we divide the space into bins of
equal size from which we randomly sample one outline ele-
ment from each bin to remaining K−2 positions in the outline
list. We use threshold based Jaccard and cosine similarity for
ﬁltering syntactic and semantic duplicates respectively. The
Jaccard similarity between any two documents is calculated as
an intersection over union of word sets for both documents. It
helps us get sense of syntactic similarity between documents.
For calculating cosine similarity, we vectorise our inputs using

pre-trained Sentence Transformers [25] and then measure the
semantic closeness between them using cosine similarity.
Algorithm 1 Duplicates Filter
1: resources = Array(1, 2, . . . , N −1, N)
2: remaining resources = Array(1, N)
3: for i ←2 to N −1 do
4:
scores = Array()
5:
for r ←remaining resources do
6:
scores ←calculate similarity(i, r)
7:
end for
8:
if max(scores) < threshold then
9:
remaining resources ←i
10:
end if
11: end for
12: return remaining resources
Since every pathway is composed of different resources of
various properties like length, style, etc., having one threshold
that ﬁts all does not work. Hence, our threshold is adaptable in
a way that guarantees at-least K items are selected post any of
the syntactic or semantic pruning steps. The threshold search
space is between 0 to 1 where for efﬁciency and tractability we
quantize it at 0.1. Then for each threshold we get remaining
resources as deﬁned in Algorithm 1. Finally the threshold that
guarantees at-least K items and possibly reduces the input set
by maximum is chosen as the ﬁnal threshold.
Meta-Information Fragment: The idea of having Meta-
Information Fragment is to inform learners about other impor-
tant aspects of the course like course structure, total reading
time, total number of resources, etc. We believe this would
help learners understand more about the learning pathway or
resources apart from just knowing the topics that would be
covered. Also, such information can be used by learners in
charting out their learning hours and estimating the efforts
it would take for the successful completion of the course.
Some of the elements that we generate automatically as part
of this fragment are: generating topical word clouds 6 bases on
word frequencies after pre-processing like stop-word removal,
estimating total reading time based on average reading speed
statistics and other pathway level derived statistics like total
resources, availability of discussion forum, etc.
Social Proof Fragment: Social Proof is one of the most
prominent ways of social inﬂuence and is based on the
heuristic that the users follow others similar to them when
uncertain [26]. We collect these statistics from the deployed
learning environments. This information is added to the video
trailer over time when different learners take this course and
the analytical data is available.
Call-to-Action Fragment: CTA is a marketing term which
is designed to push the audience in taking the desired actions.
It is an important aspect of any trailer because all of the
enthusiasm that is built in a learner while watching the trailer is
of no use if the learner is not clear on the next actionable [27],
6https://pypi.org/project/wordcloud/
[28] item. In our system, we randomly select phrases from a
set of pre-deﬁned list of potential key-phrases to be placed on
the screen at a pre-deﬁned location under this fragment. Some
of the phrases we use are ‘Start your learning today’, ‘Let’s
get started’, ‘Are you ready?’, etc., along with the action that
will take the learner on the learning pathway.
B. Additional Elements
In this subsection, we discuss two other interesting elements
that we propose to be added to the trailers, namely, Deﬁnition
Extractor and Paraphraser. These are shown as suggestions
to the trailer creator and it’s up to the creator to include them
and decide their placement in the trailer.
Deﬁnition Extractor: Deﬁnitions are descriptive elements
that we believe can help in introduction of concepts. To
select the deﬁnition from the learning resource, we propose a
discriminative model that classiﬁes a given piece of text into
Deﬁnition or Non-Deﬁnition class. For building the classiﬁer
model, we use a dataset7 that contains positive and negative
deﬁnition candidates extracted from Wikipedia for various
topics. Our best performing model is a ﬁne-tuned DistilBERT-
base-uncased8 model with a Deﬁnition class F1-score of 0.96
and Non-Deﬁnition class F1-score of 0.97 on the test set.
Paraphraser: We believe that this is an useful utility that
can be used in the Outline and Trailer title fragments. This
gives the creator an ability to re-write concisely any substan-
tially larger textual content present in any frame. We use a
publicly available pre-trained model9 for this task which ﬁne-
tunes a large sized T5 (Text-to-Text Transfer Transformer) [7]
model on a parallel corpus of sentence and it’s corresponding
paraphrase.
C. Video Composition
Video Composition module is responsible for stitching
together all the elements that need to be part of the trailer, such
as the Frame data, Voice-over text, Text-to-Speech (TTS), etc.,
into a trailer video. Fig. 4 pictorially shows the overall ﬂow
of the various components that are a part of the video compo-
sition. We use Python’s MoviePy library10 as our choice for
video editing and composition of the templates as it provides
us with all the necessary editing functions like inserting text,
concatenations and cuts, which we use to draft our templates.
After the frame-level data elements are in-place, the next
step is to generate voice-over text for each of the frames.
Voice-over text is deﬁned as the spoken-text that the narrator
speaks while a frame is displayed on the screen. For this,
we select grammar from a pre-deﬁned set of slot based
text grammars which we deﬁne per frame. The slots in the
grammar are nothing but the screen’s text elements. Finally,
once the Voice-over Text is generated for every frame, we
pass them through the IBM Watson’s Text-to-speech (TTS)
7http://nlp.uniroma1.it/wcl/
8https://huggingface.co/distilbert-base-uncased
9https://github.com/ramsrigouthamg/Questgen.ai
10 https://zulko.github.io/moviepy

Fig. 6. Outline Text Selection
API11 with relevant parameters such as voice-type, gender,
etc., by choosing from a list of speaker proﬁles to get the
audio ﬁles for every frame. Fig. 7 illustrates the ﬂow from
grammar selection to voice generation for the Trailer Title
Fragment. We then derive the frame duration accordingly to
make sure that the visual and audio aspects of the frames are
in sync and minimize any kind of lag on either ends. Finally,
along with all the above details, we input template constraints
like positioning of elements, and styles, user preferences, and
some basic animations like fade-in and fade-out settings to
come up with the ﬁnal trailer.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we describe the dataset, evaluation strategy
and results obtained for the trailers generated by our proposed
system.
Dataset: Apart from the datasets which we have used for
training and evaluating speciﬁc modules that are responsible
for generating fragment relevant data. We created three dif-
ferent learning pathways for our experiments and evaluation
of the generated trailers. Each learning pathway differs with
each other in the number of resources and stylometry. Two of
the pathways are based on text book chapters with difference
in number of resources mapped, and one pathway is video
lectures. We tried to take different pathways to evaluate our
model’s ﬂexibility on different types of learning pathways.
First one was created by sampling some chapters sequentially
from a freely available Machine Learning textbook [29]. For
second, we chose the speech-to-text transcription of a week’s
video lectures from an academic course on NLP. Our third
learning pathway is the entire ML textbook [29]12. All the
three corpus are analogous to learning pathways as they are all
semantically coherent, progressive and share the same global
topic.
Evaluation and Results: Trailers can be seen as gen-
erative tasks with an inherent notion of creativity. Here the
objective evaluation is not straight-forward because the ef-
fectiveness of a trailer is highly subjective and relies on the
human perception. However, we think that human evaluation
11https://cloud.ibm.com/catalog/services/speech-to-text
12Datasets can be found at: https://bit.ly/3ro3JLO
1
The ﬁrst trailer looked more catchy compared to the second
one. Being generated by an AI agent, both seems to be good.
2
Looks amazing. Great work!
3
You guys have truly done a remarkable work!
4
Good job, keep it up!
5
Great!
TABLE I
POSITIVE COMMENTS
1
Maybe I just felt that he was conveying info too fast
2
As of now, it sounds a bit robotic. Some improvements w.r.t
the TTS can help make it better.
3
Slowing the video when the information that is being conveyed
is relatively dense would be helpful. For example, when going
through the list of topics, speaking slowly helps. When giving
instructor names, one can be fast.
4
Also, if there’s some way to bring viewer’s attention to the
part of the slide that’s being mentioned, that would be better
where the content is not sequential.
5
Remove the date from the frame. Add something about what
can they do once they learn the course(what type of problems
can they solve)
TABLE II
IMPROVEMENTS SUGGESTED BY USERS
on various trailers generated can give us a good perspective
on the quality of the trailers. We had 63 human evaluators
consisting of Engineering graduates, Post-graduates and PhD
students well versed in the technical domain that represent our
dataset.
We evaluate 6 trailers13 in total that were generated from 3
different learning pathways as discussed above, i.e., 2 trailer
per learning pathway. These two trailers are based on two
templates T1, T2 created by us. Both the templates differ in
aesthetics and level-of-detail(LOD). The evaluation for each
trailer was done on a set of 8 questions on Likert-scale from
1 to 5, where 1 would mean very poor and 5 would mean very
good.
There were three separate groups of evaluators. Each group
was provided with 2 trailers based on 2 templates for the
same pathway. We thoughtfully perform this diversiﬁcation to
simulate the cluster sampling procedure, since showing all 6
trailers to the same evaluators would have created boredom,
resulting in not so accurate evaluation.
13Sample Trailers: https://bit.ly/3Hscie9

Fig. 7. Flow of Grammar selection to Voice-over generation
We also encouraged the evaluators to give free comments
for the trailers they evaluated, as this would help us improve
our system in future iterations. Table. I and II lists down some
of the positive comments and improvements suggested by the
users. Fig. 8 shows some of the trailer fragments generated by
our proposed system14.
Following is the list of 8 questions that were asked to the
evaluator during the evaluation. The text in italics highlights
the broader aspect of the evaluation feature.
Q1. Did you ﬁnd the trailer to be self-contained?
Q2. How were the fonts and styles used in the trailer in
terms of readability?
Q3. How did you ﬁnd the length and pace of the trailer?
Q4. As a user, how impressed are you with this trailer
overall?
Q5. Could this trailer evoke interest in someone taking
this course? (Ignoring any prior inclination to the topic)
Q6. How was the average duration of each frame?
Q7. Based on the trailer you just saw, do you think you
have a good impression of the course now?
Q8. How did you ﬁnd the sync between the audio and
visuals you saw?
As can be seen in Fig. 9, the scores obtained for each of the
survey questions are good and far above the average(score of
3) for almost all the trailers generated by our approach. Also,
in our study, we found both the templates performed equally
good. However, for Q5, the average scores is relatively lower
compared to other questions. On digging deeper we found
some of the comments of total 24 comments we received
mentioned about the difﬁculty of the course for not getting
interested in the course. This could mean that this question
(Q5) is more subjective.
14Detailed
demo
walk-through:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=
06VVuAlFhTk
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we presented a novel framework for au-
tomatically generating video trailers for a learning pathway
using ML and NLP techniques. We validated our trailers on
multiple corpus of varied granularity with human evaluation
and the results obtained were encouraging. This approach can
be adapted to different domains given enough data to train
the models involved in the entire process. We believe that
this approach can lay foundation to building more advanced
versions of trailer.
In future, we plan to improve the existing system by
incorporating suggestions obtained in the user evaluation and
adding more interesting themes like automatically detecting
learning outcomes given the resources. We also intend to create
an interactive dashboard to take inputs from the creator and
allow the creator to make edits to the auto-generated content.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We thank the Center of Excellence on Cognitive Com-
puting, funded by Mphasis F1 Foundation for funding this
research. We also thank Dr. Prasad Ram and Gooru team
(https://gooru.org) for the topical discussions and encourage-
ment.
