Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 42 (2011) 607-659
Submitted 09/11; published 12/11
Drake: An Eﬃcient Executive for Temporal
Plans with Choice
Patrick R. Conrad

Brian C. Williams

Room 32-227
32 Vassar St
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
Abstract
This work presents Drake, a dynamic executive for temporal plans with choice. Dy-
namic plan execution strategies allow an autonomous agent to react quickly to unfolding
events, improving the robustness of the agent. Prior work developed methods for dynami-
cally dispatching Simple Temporal Networks, and further research enriched the expressive-
ness of the plans executives could handle, including discrete choices, which are the focus of
this work. However, in some approaches to date, these additional choices induce signiﬁcant
storage or latency requirements to make ﬂexible execution possible.
Drake is designed to leverage the low latency made possible by a preprocessing step
called compilation, while avoiding high memory costs through a compact representation.
We leverage the concepts of labels and environments, taken from prior work in Assumption-
based Truth Maintenance Systems (ATMS), to concisely record the implications of the
discrete choices, exploiting the structure of the plan to avoid redundant reasoning or stor-
age. Our labeling and maintenance scheme, called the Labeled Value Set Maintenance
System, is distinguished by its focus on properties fundamental to temporal problems, and,
more generally, weighted graph algorithms. In particular, the maintenance system focuses
on maintaining a minimal representation of non-dominated constraints. We benchmark
Drake’s performance on random structured problems, and ﬁnd that Drake reduces the size
of the compiled representation by a factor of over 500 for large problems, while incurring
only a modest increase in run-time latency, compared to prior work in compiled executives
for temporal plans with discrete choices.
1. Introduction
Model-based executives elevate commanding of autonomous systems to the level of goal
states while providing guarantees of correctness (Williams, Ingham, Chung, & Elliott, 2003).
Using a model-based executive, a user can provide a speciﬁcation of the goal behavior of
the robot and leave it to a program, the executive, to determine an appropriate course of
action that meets those goals. Temporal plan executives are designed to work with plans
including timing requirements.
Typically, for an executive to be robust to disturbances, it must be able to react to the
outcomes of events on the ﬂy, otherwise, even seemingly inconsequential variations in the
outcomes of events may cause a failure. Thus, it can be helpful to follow a strategy of least
commitment and delay each decision until it is actually time to act on that decision, allowing
the executive to act with as much information as possible. In the case of temporal plans,
an executive following this strategy is said to dynamically dispatch the plan (Muscettola,
c⃝2011 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

Conrad & Williams
Morris, & Tsamardinos, 1998). Such an executive is responsible for determining when to
schedule events as late as possible while guaranteeing that a consistent schedule exists for
all the remaining events. If an external disturbance causes some timing requirement to be
violated, then the executive should discover the failure and signal it as soon as possible.
Making such decisions on the ﬂy requires some care, as on-line temporal reasoning can
introduce latency that is unacceptable for a real-time system. Therefore, Muscettola et al.
(1998) developed a low-latency executive for Simple Temporal Networks (STNs), where an
STN is comprised of a set of events and diﬀerence constraints on the time of execution of
the events. To achieve low latency, the executive is broken into two parts, a compiler and
a dispatcher. The compiler is run in advance to discover and explicitly record all temporal
constraints that cannot be quickly inferred on-line, thereby computing the dispatchable
form of the plan. The dispatcher uses this form to make real-time decisions using a greedy
strategy and local, low-latency inferences.
While dynamic scheduling has proven eﬀective, robustness can further be improved by
making additional decision dynamically, such as the assignment of an activity to a partic-
ular resource. Encoding these decisions requires a more expressive formalism than STNs.
Consequently, subsequent research has developed eﬃcient executives for more expressive
frameworks, many of which are variants of the STN. Examples of added features include
explicit modeling of uncertainty (Morris, Muscettola, & Vidal, 2001; Rossi, Venable, &
Yorke-Smith, 2006; Shah & Williams, 2008), discrete choices (Kim, Williams, & Abramson,
2001; Tsamardinos, Pollack, & Ganchev, 2001; Combi & Posenato, 2009; Shah & Williams,
2008), preferences (Hiatt, Zimmerman, Smith, & Simmons, 2009; Khatib, Morris, Morris,
& Rossi, 2001; Kim et al., 2001), discrete observations (Tsamardinos, Vidal, & Pollack,
2003), and combinations thereof.
This work focuses on enriching the executive to simultaneously schedule events and
make discrete choices as the execution unfolds. The ability to make discrete choices greatly
enriches an executive by oﬀering it the ability to dynamically allocate resources, order activ-
ities, and choose between alternate methods (sub-plans) for achieving goals. Although prior
works have developed executives for this type of plan, they have trade-oﬀs in performance.
For example, Tsamardinos, Pollack, and Ganchev (2001) presented an executive for Dis-
junctive Temporal Networks (DTN), a variant of STNs that include discrete choices. Their
executive extends the compilation strategy for STNs by breaking the DTN into its complete
exponential set of component STNs and then compiling and dispatching each in parallel.
Their strategy oﬀers low latency, but incurs a high storage cost for the dispatchable plan.
Another example, Kirk, is an executive for Temporal Plan Networks (TPNs), which extends
STNs by including a hierarchical choice between sub-plans, developed by Kim, Williams,
and Abramson (2001). Kirk selects a set of choices and performs incremental re-planning
whenever a disturbance invalidates that choice, leaving a small memory footprint, but po-
tentially inducing high latency when it selects new choices. Chaski is an executive presented
by Shah and Williams (2007) for temporal plans with resource allocation, whose expres-
siveness is between that of STNs and DTNs. Chaski takes an approach which is a hybrid
of the incremental strategy of Kirk and the compiled approach of Tsamardinos et al.: its
compiled representation is a base plan and a set of incremental diﬀerences, which provides
the beneﬁts of compiled execution while improving eﬃciency by exploiting structure in the
plan .
608

Drake: An Efficient Executive for Temporal Plans with Choice
We develop Drake, a novel executive for temporal plans with choice encoded using
the expressive representation of DTNs (DTNs dominate TPNs, TCNs, and STNs). Drake
achieves low run-time latency through compilation, yet requires less storage than the fully
exponential expansion approach taken by Tsamardinos et al. (2001). In order to accom-
plish this, Drake works on a compact representation of the temporal constraints and discrete
choices. To develop the compact representation, we begin with the idea, taken from truth
maintenance, of labeling consequences of inferences with the minimal set of choices that im-
ply the consequence; this minimal set is called an environment (McDermott, 1983; de Kleer,
1986). By monotonicity of inference, this consequence also holds for all sets of choices that
are a superset of the minimal environment, thus the environment is a compact encoding of
the decision contexts in which that consequence holds.
These ideas are directly applicable to temporal reasoning problems; Drake extends them
by leveraging properties fundamental to temporal reasoning problems, and weighted graph
problems in general. More speciﬁcally, temporal reasoning is non-monotonic, in the sense
that it does not need to explicitly represent all derivable constraints, only the tightest possi-
ble ones, referred to as the non-dominated constraints. Drake uses this property throughout
to reduce the computations and storage required. For example, in the inequality A ≤4 ≤8,
where A is a temporal event, there is no need to store the constraint A ≤8, as the tighter
inequality makes it unnecessary, or dominates it. The focus on non-dominated values or
constraints is central to a range of inference problems, including temporal inference, interval
reasoning, and inference over weighted graphs.
Dechter, Meiri, and Pearl (1991) proved that STN inference problems are reducible to
a widely used set of inference methods on weighted graphs, such as Single Source Shortest
Path and All-Pairs Shortest Path Problems. Our approach is to develop labeled analogues
to the weighted graph structures that support these shortest path algorithms, providing a
compact representation for Drake. In this paper, we ﬁrst present a new formalism for plans
with choice, the Labeled Simple Temporal Network (Labeled STN), which has the same
expressiveness as previous formalisms, but which shares ideas with the rest of our techniques.
Second, we explain a system for maintaining and deriving compact representations of values
that vary with choices, called the Labeled Value Set Maintenance System. Then, we use
Labeled Value Sets to construct Labeled Distance Graphs, which are distance graphs where
the edge weights may vary depending on the discrete choices. Finally, Drake’s compilation
and dispatching algorithms are built around these techniques. While the focus of this paper
is on dispatchable execution, the techniques surrounding labeled distance graphs hold the
promise of extending a wide range of reasoning methods involving graph algorithms to
include choice.
In practical terms, Drake’s compact encoding provides a reduction in the size of the plan
used by the dispatcher by over two orders of magnitude for problems with around 2,000
component STNs, as compared to Tsamardinos et al.’s work (2001). This size reduction
comes at a modest increase in the run-time latency, making Drake a useful addition to the
available executives.
609

Conrad & Williams
1.1 Overview of the Problem
Drake takes as its input a Labeled STN, which is a temporal constraint representation
with choices; in Section 3 we discuss how Labeled STNs can encode choices between sub-
plans, temporal constraints, and resource assignment, and mappings to related frameworks.
Drake’s output is a dynamic execution of the plan, where it determines in real-time when to
execute the events, such that at the end of the plan the execution times are consistent with
every temporal constraint implied by at least one complete set of choices, barring unforeseen
disturbances. If outside disturbances make every possible execution inconsistent, then Drake
signals the failure as soon as all possible solutions are rendered inconsistent.
Section 3 provides a formal deﬁnition of Labeled STNs; essentially, it is a collection of
events to schedule and the constraints the executive must follow. The events may be con-
strained with simple temporal constraints, which limit the diﬀerence in the scheduled times
of two events. Furthermore, the Labeled STN speciﬁes discrete choices, where assignments
to the choices may imply additional simple temporal constraints.
Throughout this paper, we use the following simple example, which includes a choice
between sub-plans.
Example 1.1 A rover has 100 minutes to work before a scheduled contact with its oper-
ators. Before contact, the rover must drive to the next landmark, taking between 30 and
70 minutes. To ﬁll any remaining time, the rover has two options: collect some samples
or charge its batteries. Collecting samples consistently takes 50 to 60 minutes, whereas
charging the batteries can be usefully done for any duration up to 50 minutes.
□
C
A
B
E
F
D
Always:
Drive, [30, 70]
Always: [0, 100]
Always: [0, 0]
If collecting: Collect
Samples, [50, 60]
If collecting: [0, 0]
If charging:
Charge [0, 50]
If charging: [0, 0]
Figure 1.1: This informal Labeled STN depicts Example 1.1. The rover needs to drive, then
either collect samples or charge its batteries within a certain time limit.
610

Drake: An Efficient Executive for Temporal Plans with Choice
Figure 1.1 shows an informal representation of the Labeled-STN corresponding to this
plan.
The notation [l, u] on an edge from vertex X to Y means that the diﬀerence in
the execution times of the events lies in the given interval, which expresses the constraint
l ≤Y −X ≤u. In this ﬁgure the text explains which temporal constraints are implied by
which choice; we develop precise notation later. There are two types of constraints drawn,
those that are always required, and those only required if the rover is either collecting
samples or charging.
Consider the following correct output execution sequence for the rover problem. In this
example, we focus on the form of the executive’s output, deferring the presentation of the
decision-making strategy until later.
Example 1.2 Drake starts executing the plan, arbitrarily denoting the starting time as
t = 0. At that time, it instructs the system to begin the drive activity, indicating that
the drive should take 40 minutes. The executive then waits until the system responds that
that the drive has completed, at time t = 45. Then Drake selects the sample collection
option, which had not been determined before, and initiates the activity with a duration of
50 minutes. At t = 95, the sample collection completes, ﬁnishing the plan within the time
limit of 100 minutes.
□
1.2 Approach: Exploiting Shared Structure through Labeling
Drake’s strategy during compilation is to begin with the Labeled STN, a concise statement
of the temporal constraints and the choices in the plan. Then, Drake constructs the La-
beled Distance Graph associated with the Labeled STN, yielding a single graph structure
representing all the possible choices and constraints. Next, Drake’s compiler computes the
dispatchable form of the problem, which is also a Labeled Distance Graph. This compila-
tion is performed in a uniﬁed process that is able to exploit any similarities between the
choices to make the representation compact. In contrast, the prior work of Tsamardinos et
al. (2001), breaks the input plan into independent STNs, hence their compilation strategy
cannot exploit any similarities or shared structures between the choices. There are patho-
logical cases, where every choice is completely unrelated, where there are no similarities
for Drake to exploit. However, we expect that nearly every real-world or human designed
plan has some degree of shared structure, because a plan usually has some unifying idea
which the choices are designed to accomplish. Indeed, we expect that most real plans have
signiﬁcant similarities, allowing Drake to perform well. This section gives an overview of
the intuition behind the representation Drake uses and the similarities that Drake exploit.
Before we continue discussing the rover example, consider Figure 1.2, which depicts
a small STN, its associated distance graph, and the dispatchable distance graph that is
the result of compilation. The set of events in the STN are represented as vertices in the
distance graph. Upper bounds in the STN induce edges in the forward direction, weighted
with the upper bound, and lower bounds induce edges in the reverse direction weighted
with the negative of the lower bound. The distance graph in Figure 1.2b is compiled, and
the compiler outputs a new distance graph that contains representations of the constraints
needed by the dispatcher. The dispatchable form in Figure 1.2c is used by a dispatcher;
execution times are propagated through the edges to determine when other events may be
executed.
611

Conrad & Williams
A
C
B
[3, 3]
[−2, 5]
[5, 10]
(a) Input STN
A
C
B
3 -3
5
2
10
-5
(b) Associated distance graph
A
C
B
3 -3
8
-5
(c) Dispatchable graph
Figure 1.2: A simple example of reformulating an STN into its associated distance graph
and its dispatchable form.
The rover example has a single binary choice, hence for this problem Tsamardinos et al.’s
(2001) algorithm separates the two possible STNs then compute their associated distance
graphs, which are shown in Figure 1.3. Note the repetition of certain edges in both graphs,
for example, the edge A →F, which is present throughout their compilation and dispatch
process. Plans with more choices can have an exponential number of repetitions, which can
be costly, and which Drake is designed to eliminate.
An informal version of the Labeled Distance Graph associated with the rover example is
shown in Figure 1.4. The diﬀering constraints that result from the two possible assignments
to the choice are distinguished by annotations called labels. For example, edge (B, C) has
weight S : 60, which indicates whenever sampling is chosen, the edge has a weight of at
most 60; the value 60 is labeled with the discrete choice, S, that implies it. We gather
all the possible values under all the choices into Labeled Value Sets, which are placed on
edges. In this example, each edge has a Labeled Value Set with exactly one labeled value,
although this is not true in general. A Labeled Distance Graph is essentially a distance
graph where the numeric weights are replaced with Labeled Value Sets. Although we develop
more precise notation later on in this article, this version shows the intuition behind the
approach.
Drake capitalizes on this improvement by using the compact representation
throughout compilation and dispatch, and this work develops the necessary machinery.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses related work on temporal execu-
tives and provides background on truth maintenance. Section 3 deﬁnes Labeled STNs and
their correct dynamic execution, specifying the problem Drake solves. Section 4 recalls the
612

Drake: An Efficient Executive for Temporal Plans with Choice
C
A
B
E
F
D
70
-30
100
0
0
0
60
-50
0
0
(a) Distance graph if collecting samples
C
A
B
E
F
D
70
-30
100
0
0
0
50
0
0
0
(b) Distance graph if charging
Figure 1.3: The Tsamardinos et al.
(2001) style distance graphs associated with the
Labeled-STN in Figure 1.1.
link between STNs and distance graphs, and provides the labeled version of distance graphs,
which Drake uses for reasoning. Section 5 presents the Labeled Value Set Maintenance Sys-
tem, completing the foundation of labeled techniques. Section 6 details the dispatcher and
Section 7 develops Drake’s compilation algorithm. Finally, Section 8 provides some theoret-
ical and experimental performance results, and Section 9 gives some concluding remarks.
2. Related Work
Before developing Drake, we give an overview of some relevant literature in the two major
areas Drake draws from: scheduling frameworks and truth maintenance.
613

Conrad & Williams
C
A
B
E
F
D
A: 70
A:−30
A: 100
A: 0
A: 0
A: 0
S: 60
S: −50
S: 0
S: 0
C: 50
C: 0
C: 0
C: 0
Figure 1.4: An informal labeled distance graph for the rover example.
A:, S: and C:,
correspond to weights that hold always, with sampling, and with charging,
respectively.
2.1 Scheduling Frameworks and Executives
As stated in the introduction, to achieve robustness, we need executives that make decisions
dynamically and with low latency over expressive temporal representations.
There are
known methods for manipulating and reasoning over Simple Temporal Networks eﬃciently,
which have been used as the foundation for most work in temporal executives. Furthermore,
numerous eﬀorts have formulated and developed extensions of STNs to include other useful
properties, including uncertainty, preferences, and discrete choices. We brieﬂy review some
of these eﬀorts. Since our work focuses on discrete choices, we discuss several eﬀorts to build
dynamic executives for these plans in more detail. These executives typically use one of
two approaches: they reason on all plans in parallel, or switch between plans incrementally.
However, these approaches, while promising, are typically either too memory intensive or
may have high latency.
Temporal Constraint Networks (TCNs), formalized by Dechter, Meiri and Pearl (1991),
capture many of the qualitative and metric temporal representations introduced by the AI
community. A restricted type of TCN, the Simple Temporal Network, is used throughout
recent work in temporal planning, temporal reasoning, and scheduling. Muscettola, Morris,
and Tsamardinos (1998) proposed framework for low-latency dynamic execution: a pre-
processing step called compilation and a run-time component called dispatch. Tsamardinos,
Muscettola, and Morris (1998) later provided a faster compilation algorithm. Further work
has also developed more eﬃcient methods for testing consistency of STNs (Xu & Choueiry,
2003; Planken, de Weerdt, & van der Krogt, 2008).
614

Drake: An Efficient Executive for Temporal Plans with Choice
Dechter et al. (1991) also proposed Temporal Constraint Satisfaction Problems, which
include discrete choices that alter the simple interval constraint between particular pairs of
events; each pair may have a choice of interval constraints, but choices for each pair of events
must be independent. Stergiou and Koubarakis (2000) loosened this structural restriction,
developing the Disjunctive Temporal Network (DTN). Tsamardinos, Pollack, and Ganchev
(2001) presented the ﬁrst dynamic executive for DTNs, which functions by generating the
component STNs implied by all combinations of the discrete choices and compiling them
independently, creating an exponential growth in memory use with respect to the number
of choices.
Another important line of extension to STNs is the Simple Temporal Network with Un-
certainty (STNU). Morris, Muscettola, and Vidal (2001) proved that an executive can test
for consistency of an STNU and compile it into dispatchable form in polynomial time. Mor-
ris (2006) described a more eﬃcient algorithm for testing dynamic controllability. Hunsberg
(2009, 2010) corrected a ﬂaw in the previous deﬁnitions and described an execution strategy
using the more eﬃcient dynamic controllability algorithm. Venable and Yorke-Smith (2005)
added temporal uncertainty to DTNs. Tsamardinos (2002) introduced a probabilistic for-
mulation of uncertainty in STNs. Conrad (2010) presents an extension of Drake to DTNs
with uncertainty.
Tsamardinos, Vidal, and Pollack (2003) introduced Conditional Temporal Problems
(CTP), adding uncontrollable discrete choices.
The executive cannot control, but may
only observe the values of some discrete choices at designated parts of the plan. Some of
their notation is quite similar to that used here for Drake, but there are two important
diﬀerences. First, a CTP is a strictly harder problem, since Drake is not concerned with
uncontrollable choices, meaning that their algorithm does more work than is necessary for
the simpler case.
Second, their algorithm does not use a compact representation; their
algorithm for consistency checking requires enumerating the possible scenarios. An open
problem for future research is to adapt their more general algorithms to take advantage of
the compactness of the Labeled Distance Graph.
Another useful feature added to STNs is preferences. Khatib, Morris, Morris, and Rossi
(2001) introduced a formulation including preferences for event execution times within the
simple interval bounds allowed by an STN, adding a notion of quality to the existing notion
of consistency. Rossi, Venable, and Yorke-Smith (2006) discuss simultaneous handling of
uncertainty and preferences.
Kim, Williams, and Abramson (2001) present Temporal Plan Networks, a representation
that provides simple temporal constraints over durations combined in series, parallel, and
with choice, where each choice has speciﬁed costs. Eﬃnger (2006) expands this to a simple
preference model, in which choices and activities have associated, ﬁxed costs. Kirk is a
dynamic executive for TPNs. Kirk performs optimal method selection just before run-time,
assigning the discrete choices and then dispatches the resulting component STN. If some
disturbance invalidates the STN that Kirk chose, then Kirk selects a new STN consistent
with the execution thus far. Further research developed incremental techniques to allow
Kirk to re-plan with lower latency (Shu, Eﬃnger, & Williams, 2005; Block, Wehowsky, &
Williams, 2006).
Shah and Williams (2008) present Chaski, an executive that dynamically dispatches
plans with task assignment over heterogeneous, cooperative agents, represented by a TCN,
615

Conrad & Williams
by removing some redundant data structures and computations performed by Tsamardinos
et al.’s (2001) algorithm. Shah and Williams point out that the component STNs of real-
world TCNs often diﬀer by only a few constraints, allowing a compact representation. They
record all the component STNs by storing a single relaxed STN and maintaining a list of
modiﬁcations to the relaxed STN that recover each of the original component STNs. By
avoiding redundant records of shared constraints, their results show dramatic improvements
in performance.
Our work is inspired by the observation that this technique, although
distinct, bears some resemblance to the environment labeling scheme that is employed by
an Assumption Based Truth Maintenance System (ATMS). We speciﬁcally adapted ATMS
ideas to work with a more general problem formulation than Chaski, expecting to see similar
performance improvements.
Combi and Posenato (2009, 2010) discuss applications of dynamic executives to business
work ﬂows, which include ﬂexibility over time of execution, hierarchical choice over execution
paths, and temporal uncertainty. Their formalism for plans, Workﬂow Schemata, is closely
related to DTN, STNU, and TPN frameworks, and they discuss variants of compilation
and dispatching algorithms specialized to their representations. Their work describes an
intriguing notion they call history-dependent controllability.
Under this model, if event
X starts one of two sub-plans, the executive may not invalidate either sub-plan until it
executes X and begins one of them. Drake does not impose a similar requirement, but the
requirement is certainly useful for preserving the executive’s ﬂexibility over future choices
as the execution unfolds. Their algorithms for testing controllability enumerate the possible
choices, and therefore suﬀers from memory growth.
Smith, Gallagher, and Zimmerman (2007) describe a distributed dynamic executive for
real world plans in the C TAEMS language. That representation uses STN temporal se-
mantics and includes other features intended to represent cooperative multi-agent plans.
Their language features a rich and practical notion of activity failure not present in STNs,
including the potential for interruption of activities. The executive is given discrete choices
over method selection and resource allocation, and attempts to maximize the utility of the
overall plan. Their preference model accounts for partial or total method failures and sup-
ports diﬀerent functions for accumulating reward, for example, summing or maxing. Their
executive uses a re-planning strategy, similar to Kirk, which is enhanced by Hiatt, Zimmer-
man, Smith, and Simmons (2009) with a type of compile-time analysis called strengthening.
This analysis performs a type of local repair that attempts to make the plan more robust
to uncertainties or activity failures.
There are two central approaches to dynamic executives that include discrete choices.
First, Tsamardinos et al.’s (2003) CTPs, Tsamardinos et al.’s (2001) DTN dispatcher, and
Combi et al. (2010) use a compile-time analysis to compute the implied constraints of every
possible plan and explicitly reason over them at run-time. Second, Kim et al. (2001), and
Smith et al. (2007) focus on a single, potentially optimal, assignment to the choices, and if
that becomes infeasible, they incrementally re-plan and extract a new plan. Both methods
have shortcomings, since explicit compilation is memory intensive and re-planning steps can
be computationally intensive, especially if the executive is forced to re-plan often. Drake,
like Chaski, provides a middle ground by working with a compilation strategy that has a
reduced memory footprint.
616

Drake: An Efficient Executive for Temporal Plans with Choice
2.2 Background on ATMSs
Stallman and Sussman (1977) introduced the profoundly useful idea of tracing the depen-
dency of deductions in a computerized aid to circuit diagnosis, in order to focus the search
for a consistent component mode assignment during transistor circuit analysis. The depen-
dencies it computes from solving the equations allow it to rapidly ﬁnd those choices that
might be responsible for the detected failure. They generalize this approach to combina-
torial search, introducing the dependency-directed backtracking algorithm, which ensures
that when a conﬂict is found that the search backs up far enough to ensure that the newly
found inconsistency is actually removed.
Doyle (1979) introduced Truth Maintenance Systems (TMSs) as a domain independent
method for supporting dependency-directed backtracking. The TMS represents data, their
justiﬁcations, and provides the ability to revise beliefs when assumptions change or con-
tradictions arise. For example, consider a problem solver designed to search for a solution
to a constraint satisfaction problem. When determining whether a particular solution is
consistent, the problem solver will perform a chain of inferences, providing the TMS with
the justiﬁcation for each step. If an inconsistency is found, the problem solver selects a new
candidate solution, and the TMS uses the justiﬁcations to determine which of the inferences
still hold under the new candidate and which must be recomputed to account for new cir-
cumstances. The TMS continually determines whether a particular datum, a general term
for any fact that arises in problem solving, is in or out, that is, currently believed true, or
not currently believed.
Later work relaxes the goal of maintaining a single, consistent assignment to all data
of in or out, and instead tracks the contexts in which particular facts hold, even if those
contexts may be mutually exclusive. McDermott (1983) uses beads to state a context, which
is a particular set of choices or assumptions on which the reasoning might rely, and provides
data pools that specify all the facts that hold in that context. De Kleer (1986) develops the
Assumption-based Truth Maintenance System, which uses a similar idea, but changes the
terminology to use environments and labels to specify contexts. The ATMS maintains a set
of minimal inconsistent environments, called conﬂicts or no-goods. These conﬂicts help the
system to avoid performing inferences for contexts that are already known to be inconsistent,
and the minimality of the conﬂict set makes the procedure tractable. The ATMS is designed
to simultaneously ﬁnd the logical consequences of all possible combinations of assumptions,
in contrast to the TMS, which focuses on ﬁnding any one set of assumptions that solve the
problem of interest. Hence, the ATMS is well suited as the foundation for an executive
that is intended to consider all possible choices simultaneously without incurring latency
for switching between choices. Finally, there is some development of the idea that when
working with inequalities, the ATMS only needs to keep tightest bounds on the inequalities,
which we use extensively; this concept was described by Goldstone (1991) as hibernation.
We leave our review of the details of the ATMS to later sections, as we develop Drake’s
machinery in depth.
3. Dynamic Execution of STNs and Labeled STNs
Now we are prepared to present the formal representation of the temporal plans that Drake
uses. Plans are composed of actions that need to be performed at feasible times, where we
617

Conrad & Williams
deﬁne feasible times through constraints on the start and end times of the plan activities.
Our work builds upon Simple Temporal Networks, and we begin by explaining how STNs
constrain the events of a plan and their feasible execution. We extend these deﬁnitions to
include discrete choices, thereby constructing Labeled STNs.
3.1 Simple Temporal Networks
Simple Temporal Networks provide a framework for eﬃciently reasoning about a limited
form of temporal constraints. A simple temporal network is deﬁned as a set of events related
by binary interval constraints, called simple interval constraints (Dechter et al., 1991).
Deﬁnition 3.1 (Event) An event is a real-valued variable, whose value is the execution
time of the event.
□
Deﬁnition 3.2 (Simple Interval Constraint) A simple interval constraint ⟨A, B, l, u⟩
between two events A and B requires that l ≤B −A ≤u, denoted, [l, u].
□
By convention, u is non-negative. The lower bound, l may be positive if there is a strict
ordering of the events, or negative if there is not a strict ordering. Positive or negative
inﬁnities may be used in the bounds to represent an unconstrained relationship.
Deﬁnition 3.3 (Simple Temporal Network) A Simple Temporal Network ⟨V, C⟩is
comprised of a set of events V and a set of simple interval constraints C.
A schedule
for an STN is an assignment of a real number to each event in V , representing the time
to schedule each event. The Simple Temporal Problem (STP) is, given an STN ⟨V, C⟩,
return a consistent schedule if possible, else return false. A consistent schedule is a schedule
that satisﬁes every constraint in C. If and only if at least one solution exists, the STN is
consistent.
□
Deﬁnition 3.4 (Dynamic Execution) A dynamic execution of an STN is the construc-
tion of a consistent schedule for the STN in real-time. The executive decides at time t −ϵ
whether to execute any events at time t, for some suitably small ϵ. If at some time, there
are no longer any remaining consistent schedules, return false immediately. The executive
may arbitrarily select any consistent schedule.
□
3.2 Adding Choice: Labeled STNs
This section deﬁnes our key representational concept, Labeled STNs, a variant of STNs that
is designed to include discrete choices between temporal constraints. Although equivalent
in expressiveness to Disjunctive Temporal Networks, Labeled STNs provide more consistent
terminology for Drake, and their corresponding labeled distance graphs make it easier to
extend standard STN and weighted graph algorithms to include choice. We show the precise
connection between DTNs and Labeled STNs at the end of this section. These deﬁnitions
are used throughout the compilation and dispatching algorithms presented later in this
work.
The input problem needs a succinct way to state what the choices of the input plan are
and what the possible options are that the executive may select between. We accomplish
this through a set of ﬁnite domain variables.
618

Drake: An Efficient Executive for Temporal Plans with Choice
Deﬁnition 3.5 (Choice Variables) Each choice is associated with a ﬁnite domain vari-
able xi. Each of these variables has a domain with size equal to the number of options
of that choice. X is the set of all the variables for a particular problem. An assignment
is a selection of a single option for a choice, represented as an assignment to the choice’s
associated choice variable.
□
Example 3.6 In the rover example, there is a single choice with two options, leading to a
single variable x ∈{collect, drive}. We might assign x = collect to represent the choice of
collecting samples.
□
In general, Drake will reason about the implications of combinations of assignments.
To specify these assignments to the choice variables, Drake uses environments.
Follow-
ing the ATMS, Drake annotates, or “labels” interval constraints and edge weights with
environments specifying when they are entailed.
Deﬁnition 3.7 (Environment) An environment is a partial assignment of the choice
variables in X, written e = {xi = dij, ...}. An environment may have at most one assignment
to each variable to be consistent. A complete environment contains an assignment to every
choice variable in X. An empty environment provides no assignments and is written {}.
We denote the set of possible environments as E and the set of complete environments as
Ec. The length of an environment is the number of assigned variables, denoted |e|.
□
Example 3.8 In a problem with two choice variables x, y ∈{1, 2}, some possible environ-
ments are {}, {x = 1}, {y = 2}, and {x = 1, y = 2}.
□
In a Labeled STN, diﬀerent assignments to the choice variables entail diﬀerent temporal
constraints, which we represent with labeled simple interval constraints.
Deﬁnition 3.9 (Labeled Simple Interval Constraint) A labeled simple interval con-
straint is a tuple ⟨A, B, l, u, e⟩for a pair of events A and B, real valued weights l and u
and environment e ∈E. This constraint states that, if the assignments in e hold, then the
simple interval constraint ⟨A, B, l, u⟩is entailed.
□
Then a Labeled STN is deﬁned analogously to an STN, but extended to include choices
and labeled constraints.
Deﬁnition 3.10 (Labeled Simple Temporal Network) A Labeled STN ⟨V, X, C⟩is a
set of events V , a set of choice variables X, and a set of labeled simple interval constraints
C. As with STNs, a schedule for a Labeled STN is an assignment of real numbers to each
event, indicating the time to execute the event. This schedule is consistent if there is a
full assignment to the choice variables so that the schedule satisﬁes every simple interval
constraint entailed by a labeled simple interval constraint.
□
Example 3.11 (Rover Problem as a Labeled STN) The rover problem of Example
1.1 has a single choice, with two options, collecting samples or charging the batteries.
Use a single choice variable x ∈{collect, charge} to represent the choice. The network
has events {A, B, C, D, E, F}. The labeled simple interval constraints below are written
e : l ≤B −A ≤u.
619

Conrad & Williams
{} : 0 ≤F −A ≤100
(1)
{} : 30 ≤B −A ≤70
(2)
{} : 0 ≤F −E ≤0
(3)
{x = collect} : 50 ≤C −B ≤60
(4)
{x = collect} : 0 ≤E −C ≤0
(5)
{x = charge} : 0 ≤D −B ≤50
(6)
{x = charge} : 0 ≤E −D ≤0
(7)
This notation states that the inequalities on lines 1-3 must always hold, lines 4-5 must
hold if the executive decides to collect samples, and lines 6-7 must hold if the executive
decides to charge the batteries. The schedule given in Example 1.2, A = 0, B = 45, C =
95, D = 45, E = 95, F = 95, is consistent with the full assignment x = collect.
The
constraints on lines 1-3 hold for any choice, so necessarily must hold here. Lines 4-5 give
constraints with environments whose assignments are all given in the full assignment, so
their simple interval constraints must hold, and do.
Lines 6-7 give constraints with an
environment that include diﬀerent assignments than our full assignment, so the constraints
do not need to hold for the schedule to be consistent.
□
Drake provides a dynamic execution of a Labeled STN, making decisions at run-time,
as late as possible.
Deﬁnition 3.12 (Dynamic execution of a Labeled STN) A dynamic execution of a
Labeled STN is the simultaneous real-time construction of a full assignment and a corre-
sponding consistent schedule. The executive decides at time t−ϵ whether it will execute any
events at time t, for some suitably small ϵ. Possible assignments to choices are only elim-
inated from consideration as necessary to schedule events. The executive may arbitrarily
select any consistent schedule.
□
Example 1.2 gave a dynamic execution of the rover problem because the dispatcher se-
lected choices and scheduling times dynamically, only choosing the option to collect samples
immediately before the start of the sample collection activity.
We conclude this section by discussing the equivalence of DTNs and Labeled STNs,
to allow for easier comparison to prior work. Recall the deﬁnition of DTNs (Stergiou &
Koubarakis, 2000).
Deﬁnition 3.13 (Disjunctive Temporal Network) A Disjunctive Temporal Network
⟨V, C⟩is a set of events V and a set of disjunctive constraints C. Each disjunctive constraint
Ci ∈C is of the form
ci1 ∨ci2 ∨... ∨cin,
(8)
for positive integer n and each cij is a simple interval constraint. As before, a schedule is
an assignment of a time to each event. The schedule is consistent if and only if at least
one simple interval constraint cij is satisﬁed for every disjunctive constraint Ci. A DTN is
consistent if and only if at least one consistent schedule exists.
□
620

Drake: An Efficient Executive for Temporal Plans with Choice
The DTN and Labeled STN deﬁnitions are analogous, except for the diﬀerence in how
choices are speciﬁed. We can construct a Labeled STN equivalent to any DTN by creating
a choice variable for each disjunctive constraint, with one value for each disjunct. Thus,
xi = 1...n. Each disjunctive constraint in the DTN, cij is labeled with environment xi = j.
Non-disjunctive constraints are labeled with {}.
Example 3.14 Consider a DTN with three events, A, B, C. Assume there are two dis-
junctive constraints, ⟨A, B, 3, 5⟩, and ⟨B, C, 0, 6⟩∨⟨A, C, −4, −4⟩. Then the correspond-
ing Labeled STN would have one binary choice, represented by x ∈{1, 2}.
It would
have three labeled simple interval constraints: ⟨A, B, 3, 5, {}⟩, ⟨B, C, 0, 6, {x = 1}⟩, and
⟨A, C, −4, −4, {x = 2}⟩.
□
To see the reverse construction, note that the DTN speciﬁes a set of simple interval
constraint in conjunctive normal form. Labeled STNs allow the speciﬁcation of somewhat
more complex boolean expressions, but all boolean expressions are reducible to conjunctive
normal form, so Labeled STNs are not more expressive.
The mapping from DTNs to
Labeled STNs is straightforward because we construct a Labeled STN that directly uses a
conjunctive normal form expression.
Example 3.15 Consider the rover problem, given as a Labeled STN in Example 3.11. If
we represent the constraint 0 ≤F −A ≤100 as CF,A, then we can identify that this problem
has the following boolean form
CF,A ∧CB,A ∧CF,E ∧((CC,B ∧CE,C) ∨(CD,B ∧CE,D))
(9)
We could expand this to conjunctive normal form
CF,A ∧CB,A ∧CF,E ∧(CC,B ∨CD,B) ∧(CC,B ∨CE,D) ∧(CD,B ∨CE,C)
(10)
From this form, we can construct a DTN directly.
□
Thus, like the DTN, Labeled STNs provide a rich notion of choice. Given the deﬁnition
of the problem that Drake solves in this section and the introduction of environments, the
next two sections develop the labeled machinery Drake uses to eﬃciently perform temporal
reasoning.
4. Distance Graphs and Temporal Reasoning
Dechter et al. (1991) showed that STN reasoning can be reformulated as a shortest path
problem on an associated weighted distance graph. This connection is important because
weighted graphs are easy to manipulate and have well developed theory and eﬃcient al-
gorithms, hence most practical algorithms for STNs are based on this connection. Drake
follows the prior literature, in that it frames the temporal reasoning as a labeled version
of shortest path problems. This section begins to develop the formalism for Labeled Value
Sets and Labeled Distance Graphs, which allow us to compactly represent the shortest path
problems and algorithms. We begin by reviewing the transformation for STNs.
621

Conrad & Williams
Deﬁnition 4.1 (Distance Graph associated with an STN) A distance graph associ-
ated with an STN is a pair ⟨V, W⟩of vertices V and edge weights W.
Each event is
associated with a vertex in V . The vertices exactly correspond to the events of the STN.
The weights are a function V × V →R. The simple temporal constraint l ≤B −A ≤u is
represented by the edge weights W(B, A) = u and W(A, B) = −l.
□
Figure 1.2 shows an example of the conversion from an STN to a distance graph. Re-
call that an STN is consistent if and only if its associated distance graph does not have
any negative cycles (Dechter et al., 1991). The compilation algorithm for an STN takes
the associated distance graph as an input and outputs another distance graph that is the
dispatchable form.
Deﬁnition 4.2 (Dispatchable form of a distance graph) A weighted distance graph
is the dispatchable form of an STN if an executive may dynamically execute the STN in
a greedy fashion to construct a consistent schedule using only local propagations.
The
dispatchable form is minimal if all the edges are actually needed by the dispatcher for
correct execution.
□
The all-pairs shortest path (APSP) graph of the distance graph associated with an STN
is a dispatchable form because it explicitly contains all possible constraints of the STN
(Muscettola et al., 1998). The minimal form is computable by performing pruning on the
APSP graph.
We begin building the labeling formalism by deﬁning labeled value pairs. Just as we
labeled simple temporal constraints with environments, labeled values associate values with
environments.
Deﬁnition 4.3 (Labeled Value Pair) A Labeled Value Pair is a pair (a, e), where a is a
value and e ∈E is an environment. The value a is entailed (usually as an assignment or an
inequality bound) under all environments where the assignments in e hold.
□
During compilation and dispatch, Drake uses labeled value pairs to track real valued
bounds, so a ∈R.
During compilation, when performing shortest path computations,
Drake tracks predecessor vertices, so the value may be a pair (b, v) ∈R × V .
Having
these two types of values complicates our discussion somewhat, but is necessary for the
compilation algorithms, and allows an elegant implementation of the relaxation algorithm
for directed, weighted graphs. The ATMS strategy of associating environments with values
is well founded for any arbitrary type of value, so both choices are sound. Labeled value
pairs always use minimal environments, that is, the environment speciﬁes the smallest set
of assignments possible for the implication to be true. This minimality is critical for the
labeling system to be eﬃcient.
Example 4.4 If there is a choice variable x ∈{1, 2}, then (3, {x = 1}) is a real valued
labeled value pair. Similarly, if A is an event, ((2, A), {x = 2}) is a possible predecessor
graph labeled value pair.
□
Now we have arrived at a crucial contribution of this paper: extending domination into
the labeled space. If we have the inequality B−A ≤4 ≤5, then it is clear that we only need
622

Drake: An Efficient Executive for Temporal Plans with Choice
to keep the dominant value, the four, and may discard the ﬁve. Shortest path algorithms
widely use the concept of dominance to propose many possible paths and keep only the
tightest one. When applied to labeled value pairs, dominance involves an ordering on two
parts, the value and the environment. In Drake, values are always ordered using real valued
inequalities, either ≤or ≥. This paper mostly uses ≤, except when reasoning on lower
bounds during dispatch, where explicitly noted. When necessary, a direct replacement of
the inequality direction suﬃces to extend the deﬁnitions. Environments are ordered through
the concept of subsumption.
Deﬁnition 4.5 (Subsumption of Environments) An environment e subsumes e′ if for
every assignment xi = dij ∈e, the same assignment exists in e′, denoted xi = dij ∈e′.
□
Example 4.6 An environment {x = 1, y = 2, z = 1} is subsumed by {x = 1, z = 1}
because the assignments in the later environment are all included in the former.
□
Then domination of labeled value pairs applies to both orderings simultaneously.
Deﬁnition 4.7 (Dominated Labeled Value Pair) Let (a, ea), (b, eb) be two labeled
value pairs where the values are ordered with ≤. Then (a, ea) dominates (b, eb) if a ≤b and
ea subsumes eb.
□
Example 4.8 If B −A ≤4 under {} and also B −A ≤4 under {x = 1}, then the
ﬁrst inequality is non-dominated because its environment is less restrictive. Thus (4, {})
dominates (4, {x = 1}). Likewise, if B −A ≤2 under {x = 1}, this constraint dominates
the constraint B −A ≤4 under {x = 1}, because the ﬁrst inequality is tighter and holds
within every environment where the second inequality holds, hence (2, {x = 1}) dominates
(4, {x = 1}).
□
To represent the various values a bound may have, depending on the choices the ex-
ecutive makes, Drake collects the non-dominated labeled value pairs into a Labeled Value
Set.
Deﬁnition 4.9 (Labeled Value Set) A Labeled Value Set, L is a set of non-dominated la-
beled value pairs, that is, a set of pairs (ai, ei). Thus, we may write L = {(a1, e1), ...(an, en)}.
No labeled value pair in the set is dominant over another pair in the set.
□
In any particular labeled value set, the values are all of the same type, either real values
or value/vertex pairs.
Example 4.10 Assume there is a single choice variable, x ∈{1, 2}.
Some real valued
variable, A ∈R has value 3 if x = 1 and 5 if x = 2. Then A is represented by the labeled
value set, A = {(3, {x = 1}), (5, {x = 2})}.
□
Finally, we can modify distance graphs to use Labeled Value Sets instead of real values
for the weights, leading to the deﬁnition of labeled distance graphs.
623

Conrad & Williams
Deﬁnition 4.11 (Labeled Distance Graph) A labeled distance graph G is a tuple
⟨V, E, W, X⟩.
V is a set of vertices and E is a set of directed edges between the ver-
tices, represented as ordered pairs (i, j) ∈V × V . W is a weight function from edges to real
valued labeled value sets, where each edge (i, j) ∈E is associated with a labeled value set
W(i, j). X is the description of the choices variables, deﬁning the set of environments that
may appear in the labeled value sets contained in W.
□
Example 4.12 Consider a simple graph with three vertices, V = {A, B, C}. This graph
contains edges E = {(A, B), (A, C), (B, C)}. There is one choice variable x ∈{1, 2}. Edge
(A, B) has weight 1 regardless of the choice. Edge (A, C) is 3 if x = 1 and 7 if x = 2.
Finally, edge (B, C) has weight 4 if x = 2. This labeled distance graph is shown in Figure
4.1.
□
A
B
C
(1, {})
{(4, {x = 2})}
{(3, {x = 1}),
(7, {x = 2})}
Figure 4.1: A simple Labeled Distance Graph with one choice variable, x ∈{1, 2}
The association between Labeled STNs and labeled distance graphs closely parallels the
association between STNs and distance graphs.
Deﬁnition 4.13 (Labeled Distance Graph Associated with a Labeled STN)
The labeled distance graph associated with a Labeled STN has a vertex associated with
every event in the Labeled STN. For each labeled inequality, denoted e : Y −X ≤w, where
e ∈E, X, Y ∈V , w ∈R, and the edge (X, Y ) ∈E. The labeled value set W(X, Y ) includes
the labeled value pair (w, e) if the pair is not dominated by another (w′, e′) ∈W(X, Y ). □
Example 4.14 Figure 1.4 is the essentially the labeled distance graph for the rover problem
described in Example 1.1, except that we replace the informal notation with equivalent
labeled value sets. For example, the edge (B, C) currently has weight S : 60, which we
replace with the labeled value set {(60, {x = collect})}.
□
Drake compiles the input Labeled STN by creating its associated labeled distance graph
representation and then constructing a new labeled distance graph through a transformation
of the input graph.
Deﬁnition 4.15 (Dispatchable Form of a Labeled STN) A labeled distance graph is
the dispatchable form of a Labeled STN if it represents all the constraints necessary to
accurately perform dispatch with a greedy strategy, using only local propagations.
□
624

Drake: An Efficient Executive for Temporal Plans with Choice
This section constructed the labeling structures Drakes uses, beginning with labeled
value pairs and then building labeled value sets from minimal sets of labeled pairs. Labeled
value sets are used to construct labeled distance graphs, and we deﬁned how to construct the
graph associated with a Labeled STN, on which Drake’s compilation algorithms operate.
5. Labeled Value Set Maintenance System
The previous section deﬁnes the representation for labeled distance graphs and labeled value
sets; this section provides tools for manipulating them. The primary focus of labeled value
sets is to maintain only non-dominated labeled value pairs, which makes the labeled value
sets compact and eﬃcient. This section introduces three concepts. First, we describe how
to extract values from a labeled value set, called a query, allowing us to ﬁnd the dominant
value implied by an environment. Second, how to handle assignments to choices that are
inconsistent, which are called conﬂicts. Third, how to apply functions to labeled value sets,
which allows us to perform computations on them directly.
First we deﬁne the query, which lets us extract the precise dominant value(s) that are
guaranteed to hold under a particular environment.
Deﬁnition 5.1 (Labeled Value Set Query) The query operator A(e) is deﬁned for la-
beled value set A and e ∈E. The query returns a set of values including ai from the pair
(ai, ei) ∈A, where ei subsumes e, if and only if there is no other pair (aj, ej) ∈A such that
ej subsumes e and aj < ai. If no environment ei subsumes e, then A(e) returns ∅.
□
Here we introduce a convention: when using pairs of real values and vertices for the
values of labeled value pairs, we consider inequalities over the pairs to be deﬁned entirely
by the real value. Thus, (5, A) < (6, E) and (5, A) ≮(5, E).
Example 5.2 Assume that there are two choice variables x, y ∈{1, 2}, and a real valued
variable A represented by a labeled value set, where A = {(3, {x = 1}), (5, {})}. A({x =
1, y = 1}) = 3 because the input environment is subsumed by both environments in the
labeled value set, but three is dominant. A({x = 2, y = 2}) = 5 because only the empty
environment in the labeled value set subsumes the input environment.
□
Example 5.3 Let A be a labeled value set with values that are pairs of real values and
vertices, A = {((3, A), {x = 1}), ((5, A), {y = 1}), ((5, B), {})}. Then A({x = 1, y = 2}) =
{(3, A)} because all the environments are subsumed, but (3, A) < (5, A) and (3, A) < (5, B).
A({x = 2, y = 1}) = {(5, A), (5, B)} because the tighter value is not applicable and neither
value with real part ﬁve is less than the other.
□
The query operator deﬁnes the expansion from the compact form to an explicit listing of
the values for each environment. Although Drake never performs this expansion, it is useful
for determining the correct behavior of a Labeled Value Set when designing algorithms.
Second, we consider conﬂicts, an important function of an ATMS that allows it to track
inconsistent environments. In our case, an inconsistent environment signals an inconsistent
component STN. The standard strategy in an ATMS is to keep a list of minimal conﬂicts,
also referred to as no-goods (de Kleer, 1986).
625

Conrad & Williams
Deﬁnition 5.4 (Conﬂict) A conﬂict is an environment e such that if e subsumes e′, then
e′ is inconsistent. The conﬂict e is minimal if there is no e′′ ∈E such that e′′ ⊂e, such that
e′′ is a conﬂict (Williams & Ragno, 2007).
□
Example 5.5 For example, the compilation process might determine that x = 1 and y = 1
are contradictory choices, and cannot be selected together during any execution. Then,
{x = 1, y = 1} is a conﬂict.
□
Often, reasoning algorithms keep a cache of conﬂicts to avoid performing work on envi-
ronments that were previously discovered to contain an inconsistency. In practice, the set of
conﬂicts can become large and unwieldy, leading some practical systems to keep only a sub-
set of conﬂicts, using principles such as temporal locality to maintain a small, useful cache.
Since the cache of conﬂicts is incomplete, the cache can miss, requiring the problem solver to
re-derive an inconsistency, but missing the cache would never lead to incorrectly accepting
an inconsistent solution. A good example of this is conﬂict learning in the widely studied
SAT-solver MiniSAT (En & Srensson, 2004). During real-time execution, an incomplete
cache of conﬂicts would require Drake to perform non-local propagation to re-test for incon-
sistency in the case of a cache miss. This extra step violates the principles of dispatchable
execution. Therefore, Drake maintains a complete cache of all known conﬂicts, allowing
Drake to verify that an environment is not known to be inconsistent with a single check
of the cache. Furthermore, Drake can quickly test whether any complete environments are
valid, as the inconsistencies are all readily available.
If there is a known conﬂict, Drake sometimes needs to determine how to avoid a conﬂict,
that is, what minimal environments ensure the conﬂict is not possible.
Deﬁnition 5.6 (Constituent Kernels, Williams et al., 2007) A conﬂict ec has an as-
sociated set of constituent kernels, each of which is an environment that speciﬁes a single
assignment that takes some variable assigned in the conﬂict and assigns it a diﬀerent value.
Hence, if ek is a constituent kernel, then any other environment e such that ek subsumes e
implies that ec does not subsume e, and hence is not subject to that conﬂict. Thus, we say
e avoids the conﬂict.
□
Example 5.7 If there are three variables, X, Y, Z ∈{1, 2}, assume {x = 1, y = 1} is a con-
ﬂict. Then the constituent kernels are {x = 2} and {y = 2}, as any complete environment
that does not contain the conﬂict must assign either x or y not to be one.
□
The ﬁnal tool needed is the ability to perform temporal and graph reasoning on labeled
value sets, which is principally accomplished through computing path lengths or propagating
inequality bounds. We can construct the approach by denoting the inference rule on values
as a function f. Then, we can build the method for applying f to labeled value sets from
the rule for applying it to labeled value pairs. We begin by deﬁning the union operation
on environments, which is the fundamental operation on environments during temporal
reasoning, as in the ATMS literature (de Kleer, 1986).
Deﬁnition 5.8 (Union of Environments) The union of environments, denoted e ∪e′ is
the union of all the assignments of both environments. If e and e′ assign diﬀerent values
to some variable xi, then there is no valid union and e ∪e′ = ⊥, where ⊥is the symbol for
626

Drake: An Efficient Executive for Temporal Plans with Choice
false. If e ∪e′ is subsumed by a conﬂict, then e ∪e′ = ⊥. This value signiﬁes that there is
no consistent environment where both e and e′ hold simultaneously.
□
Example 5.9 Most commonly, unions are used to compute the dependence of new derived
values. If A = 2 when {x = 1} and B = 3 when {y = 2}, then C = A + B = 5 when
{x = 1} ∪{y = 2} = {x = 1, y = 2}.
□
Using this notation, then an inference on labeled value pairs involves performing that
inference on the values to produce a new value, and unioning the environments to produce
a new environment.
Lemma 5.10 Consider labeled value pairs (a, ea), (b, eb). Applying some function f to the
pair yields (f(a, b), ea ∪eb).
□
Proof For any environment e, if ea subsumes e then a is entailed, and if eb subsumes e then
b is entailed, by the deﬁnition of labeled value pairs. Additionally, ea ∪eb subsumes e if and
only if ea subsumes e and eb subsumes e. Therefore, ea ∪eb subsumes e entails both values
a, b, and hence allows us to compute f(a, b). Thus, (f(a, b), ea ∪eb) is well deﬁned.
□
Note that in this lemma, ea ∪eb may produce ⊥, which would indicate that the labeled
value pair never holds in a consistent environment and may be discarded.
Example 5.11 Consider computing the quantity (3, {x = 1})+(6, {y = 1}) = (3+6, {x =
1} ∪{y = 1}) = (9, {x = 1, y = 1}).
□
If the function respects the dominance of values, then we may apply it to entire labeled
value sets.
Deﬁnition 5.12 A function f(a, b) is consistent with ≤dominance if for values a, b, c and
d, a ≤c, b ≤d =⇒f(a, b) ≤f(a, d), f(a, b) ≤f(c, b), f(a, b) ≤f(c, d).
□
Lemma 5.13 If variables A, B are represented by labeled value sets and f is consistent with
the domination ordering used for f, then the result C = f(A, B) is represented by a labeled
value set containing a non-dominated subset of the labeled value pairs (f(ai, bj), ei ∪ej)
constructed from every pair of labeled value pairs (ai, ei) ∈A and (bj, ej) ∈B.
□
Proof The lemma follows from the argument that the cross product of applying f to all
the labeled value pairs in A and B produces all possible labeled value pairs. Since we must
ensure that the labeled value pairs include all the dominant labeled value pairs for C, we
require f to be consistent with the ordering so that the dominant values of A and B, which
are all we have available, are suﬃcient to derive the dominant labeled value pairs of C.
□
We conclude this section with an example of relaxation of a labeled distance graph,
which is a core rule of inference for most weighted graph algorithms that uses the path
A →B →C to compute a possible path weight A →C. The derived path length replaces
the old path if the newly derived path length is shorter.
627

Conrad & Williams
Example 5.14 Consider the labeled distance graph in Figure 4.1. We compute W(A, B)+
W(B, C) = {(1, {})}+{(4, {x = 2})} = {(5, {x = 2})}. Compare this to the existing known
weights W(A, C) = {(3, {x = 1}), (7, {x = 2})}, and we determine that the new value
replaces the old value of 7. After the update, W(A, C) = {(3, {x = 1}), (5, {x = 2})}.
□
There are two fundamental inferences performed with labeled value sets: relaxation of
weighted edges during compilation, and sums and diﬀerences of edge weights to compute
bounds on execution times during dispatch. Both follow the framework outlined here, and
are explained in more detail in the compilation and dispatch sections, respectively. These
operations complete the deﬁnition of labeled value sets and the following sections use them
to construct compact compilation and dispatching algorithms.
6. Dispatching Plans with Choice
Given this foundation in Labeled STNs, labeled value sets, and labeled distance graphs, we
turn to the central focus of this article - dynamic execution of Labeled STNs. Recall that
the dispatcher uses a local, greedy algorithm to make decisions at run-time with low latency,
and that the accuracy of this approach is guaranteed by the compilation step. We begin
with the dispatcher because low latency execution is the fundamental goal of this work and
because, as in prior work, the compiler is designed to produce an output appropriate for
this dispatcher.
We adapt the STN dispatcher developed by Muscettola et al.
(1998) to work with
dispatchable labeled distance graphs. Essentially, Drake’s algorithms substitute real number
bounds on execution times, as in the STN dispatcher, with labeled value sets. Additionally,
we adapt Tsamardinos et al.’s (2001) approach to reasoning over multiple possible options,
that is, allowing the dispatcher to accept a proposed execution time for an event if at least
one full assignment to the choices is consistent with that schedule. We present Drake’s
dispatching algorithms by ﬁrst reviewing standard STN dispatching, and then adapt these
techniques to handle labels.
6.1 STN Dispatching
Muscettola et al. (1998) showed that given a dispatchable form of the STN, a simple greedy
dispatcher can correctly execute the network with updates performed only on neighboring
events in the dispatchable form of the STN. The dispatcher loops over the non-executed
events at each time step, selecting an event to execute if possible, or else waiting until the
next time step. This process continues until either all the events are executed or a failure
is detected.
Determining whether an event is executable relies on two tests. First, the dispatcher tests
whether the ordering constraints of an event have been satisﬁed, which is called testing for
enablement. A simple temporal constraint may imply a strict ordering between two events,
which the dispatcher must explicitly test to ensure that an event is not scheduled before an
event that must precede it. Second, the dispatcher eﬃciently tracks the consequences of the
simple temporal constraints between the event and its neighbors by computing execution
windows for each event. Execution windows are the tightest upper and lower bounds derived
for each event through one-step propagations of execution times. If the current time is in
628

Drake: An Efficient Executive for Temporal Plans with Choice
an event’s execution window and it is enabled, the event may be scheduled at the current
time.
Now we brieﬂy recall the derivation of these two rules for executing events. Recall that
each weighted edge in the distance graph corresponds to an inequality
B −A ≤wAB
(11)
where A and B are execution times of events and l is some real number bound. If we
select execution time tA for event A and B is not yet scheduled, then we can rearrange the
inequality as
B ≤wAB + tA
(12)
This produces a new upper bound for the execution time of B. Likewise, if A is not yet
scheduled and we select tB as the execution time of B, then we can rearrange the inequality
as
A ≥tB −wAB.
(13)
Thus, we derive a new lower bound for A. If, in this form, wAB < 0, then B < A, so event
B must precede A, implying an enablement constraint.
We can recast these rules in terms of propagations on the distance graph. If an event
A is scheduled at time t, then propagate it through all outbound edges (A, B) to derive
upper bounds B ≤wAB + t, and through all inbound edges (B, A) to derive lower bounds
B ≥t −wBA. Event B has event A as a predecessor if there is a negative weight edge
(B, A). As usual, dispatching is only aﬀected by the dominant upper and lower bounds, so
the dispatcher only stores the dominant constraints.
Example 6.1 Consider the dispatchable distance graph fragment in Figure 6.1. The exe-
cution windows begin without constraint, −∞≤A ≤∞and −∞≤B ≤∞. If we begin
execution at t = 0, B is not executable yet because it is not enabled; the negative weighted
edge (B, A) implies that A must be executed ﬁrst. A has no predecessor constraints and
zero lies within its execution bound, so may be executed at this time. Propagating the time
A = 0 allows us to derive the bounds 2 ≤B ≤8. Then B may be executed at any time
between 2 and 8. If the dispatcher reached time 9 without having executed B, then it must
signal a failure.
□
A
B
-2
8
Figure 6.1: A dispatchable distance graph fragment.
The ﬁnal consideration for the dispatcher is zero-related events. If two events are con-
strained to be executed at precisely the same time, then the prior work requires that the
events are collapsed into a single vertex in the dispatchable graph. Otherwise, zero-related
vertices may cause the dispatcher to make mistakes because they must occur together, yet
629

Conrad & Williams
they appear independently schedulable. Equivalently, the dispatcher may simulate the col-
lapse by always executing zero-related vertices as a set. For example, if A and B are known
to be zero-related, the dispatcher may schedule them together, scheduling the events at time
t if the execution windows and enablement constraints of both A and B are satisﬁed. Note
that since they are zero-related, it is impossible to have an enablement constraint between
them.
6.2 Labeled STN Dispatching
Drake relies on these same fundamental structures and rules as the STN dispatcher, but
modiﬁes each step to consider labels. Since edge weights are labeled value sets, the execution
windows are also labeled value sets, implying that the upper and lower bounds of execution
times for events may vary depending on the assignments to choices and may vary separately.
For each possible bound or enablement constraint, Drake’s dispatcher must either enforce
the constraint, or discard the constraint and decide not to select the associated environment.
Broadly, this is the same strategy as Tsamardinos et al. (2001), where the component STNs
are dispatched in parallel, and proposed scheduling decisions may be accepted if they are
consistent with at least one STN.
We begin by considering how to update the propagation rules to derive execution win-
dows.
The STN propagations involve adding edge weights (or negative weights) to the
execution time of an event.
The upper bound of every event is initially {(∞, {})} and
every lower bound is initially {(−∞, {})}. Upper bounds are dominated by low values,
or the ≤inequality, and lower bounds are dominated by large values, or the ≥inequality.
The following theorem describes the propagation of execution bounds, which is the labeled
implementation of Equations 12 and 13.
Theorem 6.2 If event A is executed at time t, then consider some other event B. For
every (wAB, eAB) ∈W(A, B), (wAB + t, eAB) is a valid upper bound for execution times
of B and for every (wBA, eBA) ∈W(B, A), (t −wBA, eBA) is a lower bound for execution
times of B.
□
Proof These rules are a direct extension of the STN propagation to the labeled case using
labeled operations as in Deﬁnition 5.12. Since the execution actually occurred, it holds
under all possible environments, thus we give it the empty environment {}. Then we apply
Deﬁnition 5.12, substituting the labeled version of addition.
□
At dispatch, these new bounds are added to the labeled value sets Bu and Bl, which
maintain the non-dominated bounds.
A
B
{(−5, {x = 1}), (−2, {})}
{(7, {x = 1}), (8, {})}
Figure 6.2: A dispatchable labeled distance graph fragment.
630

Drake: An Efficient Executive for Temporal Plans with Choice
Example 6.3 Consider the labeled distance graph fragment in Figure 6.2.
If event A
is executed at t = 2, then we derive bounds {(7, {x = 1}), (4, {})} ≤B ≤{(9, {x =
1}), (10, {})}
□
Since the bounds may vary between choices, Drake cannot generally expect to obey all
the possible constraints, but instead is only required to enforce all the constraints implied
by at least one complete environment.
Example 6.4 Assume an event has lower bounds represented by the labeled value set
A ≥{(2, {x = 1}), (0, {})}. This implies that under any set of choices where x = 1, A ≥2,
and otherwise, A ≥0 is suﬃcient. If the dispatcher executes A at t = 0, then it may not
select x = 1. Thus, if the dispatcher can restrict its choices to those that do not include
x = 1, while leaving other consistent options, then it may execute A at t = 0. If all the
remaining consistent full assignments to the choices require that x = 1, then the dispatcher
must wait until t = 2 before executing A.
□
Drake performs this reasoning by collecting the environments for the bounds that a
particular execution would violate, and by determining whether those environments can
be made conﬂicts without making every complete environment inconsistent. If complete
environments would remain consistent, the execution is performed and then environments
are made conﬂicts; otherwise the execution is not possible, and discarded.
Finally, Drake simulates the collapse of zero-related events. At each time, Drake at-
tempts to execute each event individually and also attempts to execute the sets of zero-
related vertices recorded by the compiler. As noted before, zero-related sets may exist under
some environments and not in others. If the zero-related set is enforced, then all of its mem-
ber events must be executed together, or not at all. Therefore, if the dispatcher considers
executing a set of events that is a strict subset of a particular zero-related set, leaving out at
least one other member of the zero-related set, then it must discard the environments where
the zero-related set is implied. Additionally, while there cannot be enablement constraints
between zero-related events under any complete environments where the zero-related group
holds, other environments may imply strict orderings between the events, which the dis-
patcher discards when executing the zero-group simultaneously. Hence, the dispatcher must
discard any associated environments.
We summarize the rules as follows, which are further illustrated in Example 6.7.
Theorem 6.5 If S is set with one event or a set of zero-related events in a Labeled STN,
then the set may be executed at time t if and only if there is at least one consistent complete
environment where:
1. For every Al that is the lower bound labeled value set of some A ∈S, such that Al ≤A,
for every (l, e) ∈Al such that l > t, e is a conﬂict.
2. For every Au that is the upper bound labeled value set of some A ∈S, such that
Au ≥A, for every (u, e) ∈Au such that u < t, e is a conﬂict.
3. For every pair of events, A ∈S, B /∈S, such that B is not yet scheduled, for every
(w, e) ∈W(A, B) such that w < 0, e is a conﬂict.
631

Conrad & Williams
4. For every zero-related set of events Z with environment e, if S ⊂Z, e is a conﬂict.
5. For every A1, A2 ∈S, for every (w, e) ∈W(A1, A2) such that w < 0, e is a conﬂict.□
Proof If there is a consistent full environment after creating these conﬂicts, then it is
necessarily not subsumed by the environments of any of the constraints that imply the
events cannot be executed at time t. Thus, the consistent full environment corresponds to a
component STN where every constraint holds, so the events may be executed. If there is no
consistent environment, then at least one of the above constraints prohibiting the proposed
execution exists in each remaining component STN, so the execution is not valid.
□
Similarly to the STN case, the dispatcher must check for missed upper bounds during
every time step. In an STN, a missed upper bound implies the execution has failed. In a
Labeled STN, a missed upper bounds implies that any complete environments subsumed
by the environment of the missed upper bound are no longer valid.
Theorem 6.6 If event A is not executed at time t, has upper bound labeled value set Au,
and (u, e) ∈Au such that u < t, then e is a conﬂict.
□
Proof The theorem follows from noting that the upper bound exists in every component
STN corresponding to a complete environment subsumed by e, thus every environment
subsumed by e is inconsistent, which by deﬁnition, makes e a conﬂict.
□
It is possible that missed upper bounds could invalidate all remaining complete en-
vironments, in which case dispatch has failed and the dispatcher should signal an error
immediately.
Example 6.7 Consider the dispatchable labeled distance graph in Figure 6.3, with events
A, B, C, D and choice variables x, y ∈{1, 2}.
There is a zero-related set {A, C} under
environment {x = 1}. Assume that the current time is t = 0 and no events have been
executed yet.
All the possible complete environments are initially consistent.
Consider
some possible executions and their consequences.
• Event C has no predecessors, and no restrictions from its execution window. However,
it is part of the zero-related set, so it may only be executed if we can make {x = 1}
a conﬂict, in order to remove the zero-related set from all possible executions. This
is feasible, so we may execute C at t = 0 and create the conﬂict.
If we do this,
then the ordering and inequality implied by edge (A, D) is necessary for a consistent
execution, as its environment cannot be made a conﬂict without making all complete
environments inconsistent.
• Event A has D as a predecessor under {x = 2}, C as a predecessor under {y = 1},
and is part of the zero-related set under {x = 1}. To execute A at t = 0, we would
need to make all three environments conﬂicts, but that would invalidate all possible
choices, so we may not execute A at t = 0.
632

Drake: An Efficient Executive for Temporal Plans with Choice
• The zero-related set {A, C} has no execution window restrictions from either A or
C, and has a predecessor D under {x = 2} from the edge (A, D). Additionally, edge
(A, C) has a negative weight −1 with environment {y = 2}, so that environment is
also made a conﬂict. Thus, we can create the conﬂicts {x = 2} and {y = 2} and
execute both A and B at t = 0.
• Event B has A as a predecessor under {y = 1} and A is not yet executed, so we may
make that environment a conﬂict and execute B. Assume that A and C are executed
at t = 0, then the enablement constraint is satisﬁed, but any execution of B before
t = 3 requires making {y = 1} a conﬂict. Additionally, if the current time grows to
t = 7 and B has not yet been executed, then the upper bound has been violated and
{y = 1} is then a conﬂict.
• Event D has predecessor C under environment {}, but C has not yet been executed.
Since making {} a conﬂict makes all complete environments inconsistent, D cannot
be executed.
□
A
B
C
D
{(0, {x = 1}),
(−1, {y = 1})}
{(0, {x = 1})}
{(6, {y = 1})}
{(−3, {y = 1})}
{(6, {y = 2})}
{(−1, {})}
{(−2, {x = 2})}
Figure 6.3: A dispatchable labeled distance graph.
This completes our presentation of Drake’s dispatch algorithms. Essentially, it makes
two adaptations to the STN dispatcher: (1) maintain labeled value sets for the execution
windows of events and (2) allow the dispatcher to select between the choices by creat-
ing conﬂicts. The next section describes the compilation algorithm, which computes the
dispatchable form of input Labeled STNs, ensuring that the local reasoning steps in the
dispatching algorithm will satisfy the requirements of the plan.
633

Conrad & Williams
7. Compiling Labeled Distance Graphs
We complete the description of Drake with the compiler, which reformulates the input La-
beled STN into a form the dispatcher is guaranteed to execute correctly. The compiler
leverages all of the labeling concepts we presented to eﬃciently compute a compact dis-
patchable form of input plans. An STN compiler takes a distance graph as its input and
outputs another distance graph, the minimal dispatchable form of the input problem. Sim-
ilarly, Drake’s compiler takes a labeled distance graph as its input and outputs a labeled
distance graph that is the minimal dispatchable form of the input.
Muscettola et al.
(1998) introduced an initial compilation algorithm for STNs that
operates in two steps. First, it computes the All-Pairs Shortest Path (APSP) graph asso-
ciated with the STN, which is itself a dispatchable form. Second, the compiler prunes any
edges that it can prove are redundant to other non-pruned edges, and which the dispatcher
therefore does not need to make correct decisions. The pruned edges are dominated, and
their removal signiﬁcantly reduces the size of the dispatchable graph. The compiler tests
for dominance by applying the following rule on every triangle in the APSP graph.
Theorem 7.1 (Triangle Rule, Muscettola et al., 1998) Consider a consistent STN
where the associated distance graph satisﬁes the triangle inequality; a directed graph sat-
isﬁes the triangle inequality if every triple of vertices (A, B, C) satisﬁes the inequality
W(A, B) + W(B, C) ≥W(A, C).
(1) A non-negative edge (A, C) is upper-dominated by another non-negative edge (B, C)
if and only if W(A, B) + W(B, C) = W(A, C).
(2) A negative edge (A, C) is lower-dominated by another negative edge (A, B) if and
only if W(A, B) + W(B, C) = W(A, C).
□
Although the basic concept of domination is unchanged, in that dominated constraints
are not needed by the executive, the speciﬁcs are quite diﬀerent here. Domination within a
labeled value sets refers to labeled values that make other labeled values within that same
set unnecessary. In the context of edge pruning, one edge could dominate another if the
two edges share a start or end vertex, but not both. When we develop the labeled version
of edge pruning, the labeled value from one edge weight labeled value set can dominate a
value from a diﬀerent edge weight labeled value set, where the corresponding edges share a
start or end vertex.
Example 7.2 Consider the two weighted graph fragments in Figure 7.1. In each case, edge
(A, C) is dominated, as shown by the theorem.
□
The compiler searches for all dominated edges and then removes them all together. Some
care is necessary to ensure that a pair of edges AC and BC do not provide justiﬁcation
for pruning each other; these edges are said to be mutually dominant. Typically, pruned
graphs have a number of edges closer to O
 N log N

, than N2, a signiﬁcant savings. As a
ﬁrst prototype of Drake, Conrad, Shah, and Williams (2009) introduced a labeled extension
of this algorithm. This extension was used to perform task execution on the ATHLETE
Rover within the Mars Yard at NASA JPL.
Although simple and eﬀective, this algorithm does not scale gracefully to large problems
because it uses the entire APSP graph an intermediate representation, which is much larger
634

Drake: An Efficient Executive for Temporal Plans with Choice
A
B
C
-5
-4
1
(a)
Lower
domination
weighted graph
A
B
C
2
5
3
(b)
Upper
domination
weighted graph
Figure 7.1: Examples of upper and lower dominated edges.
than the ﬁnal result. To resolve this, Tsamardinos, Muscettola, and Morris (1998) presented
a fast compilation algorithm that interleaves the APSP step and the pruning step, and avoids
ever storing the entire APSP graph. Their algorithm is derived from Johnson’s algorithm for
computing the APSP, which incrementally builds the APSP by repeated SSSP computations
(Cormen, Leiserson, Rivest, & Stein, 2001). Johnson’s algorithm uses Dijkstra’s algorithm
as an inner loop, providing it with faster performance than Floyd-Warshall for sparse graphs.
Essentially, the fast compilation algorithm loops over the events in the graph, computes the
SSSP for that event, and adds all non-dominated edges with the event as the source to the
dispatchable form. Thus, this algorithm only needs to store the ﬁnal dispatchable graph
and one SSSP, avoiding the bloat in the intermediate representation. Thus, this algorithm
has better space and time complexity than the APSP step followed by pruning.
This paper introduces a novel extension to the Drake system that adapts the fast com-
pilation algorithm to labeled graphs in order to avoid unnecessary storage growth during
compilation. The fast algorithm requires a number of steps; this section describes each
component of the original fast algorithm and its adaptation to the labeled setting. First,
we recall Johnson’s strategy to compute the APSP through iterated SSSP, and present
the labeled adaptation of the SSSP algorithm. Second, we discuss the predecessor graphs
that result from the SSSP and how to traverse them. Third, we describe how to interleave
pruning with the repeated SSSP computations. Finally, we discuss the issues arising from
mutual dominance, and the preprocessing step used to resolve them.
7.1 Johnson’s Algorithm and the Structure of the Fast Algorithm
Many shortest path algorithms on weighted distance graphs essentially perform repeated
relaxation over the graph. Floyd-Warshall loops repeatedly over the entire graph, relaxing
the edges and computing the entire APSP in a single computation. Johnson’s algorithm
computes the APSP one source vertex at a time, using Dijkstra’s SSSP algorithm as an
inner loop to perform relaxations more eﬃciently. Since Dijkstra’s algorithm only works
for positively weighted graphs, Johnson’s algorithm re-weights the graph before Dijkstra
calls and un-weights it afterward. Unfortunately, adapting Dijkstra’s algorithm to labeled
distance graphs is ineﬃcient because re-weighting both adds and subtracts labeled value
sets, and both are not compatible with a single ordering.
Therefore, we use Bellman-
Ford’s SSSP algorithm instead; we sacriﬁce the improved run-time of the fast algorithm,
635

Conrad & Williams
but preserve the lower space overhead. The fast STN compilation algorithm copies the
essential structure of Johnson’s algorithm. This section illustrates the overall algorithm in
the unlabeled case with a partial example.
Example 7.3 Consider one step of compilation shown in Figure 7.2. The input distance
graph is shown in Figure 7.2a. When we compute the SSSP of the input for source vertex
B, the output is the predecessor graph shown in 7.2b, which depicts the shortest distances
and paths from B. The weights on the vertices indicate that the complete APSP graph
should contain an edge from B to A with weight −4, B to C with weight −1, and B to D
with weight 0. Furthermore, in the original graph, the shortest path from B to A uses the
edge B →A. The shortest path from B to C is either B →C or B →A →C; both have
equal length. The shortest path from B to D is B →D.
However, the dispatchable form of this problem does not actually need all three of
these edges, which the compiler can deduce from the predecessor graph and SSSP values.
Roughly, since A has a lower distance from B than C, and is along a shortest path to C, the
edge BC is not necessary. Therefore, the other two edges are inserted in the dispatchable
graph, depicted in Figure 7.2c, and the edge BC is discarded. This process is repeated for
the other three vertices.
□
A
B
C
D
8
5
3
-4
-1
0
-1
3
1
(a) Input Distance Graph
A
−4
B
C
−1
D
1
(b) Predecessor Graph for Source
B
A
B
C
D
-4
0
(c)
Partial
dispatchable
graph with edges that have
source vertex B
Figure 7.2: A single step of the fast reformulation algorithm for STNs
7.2 Labeled Bellman-Ford Algorithm
Drake uses the Bellman-Ford algorithm as a central building block for the variant of the fast
STN algorithm Drake uses; Bellman-Ford derives the tightest possible edge weights, while
simultaneously deriving the predecessor graph. This graph provides enough information
to prune the dominated edges. To begin, we provide Algorithm 7.1, taken directly (with
slightly altered notation) from the work of Cormen et al. (2001). The algorithm loops over
the edges and performs relaxations, then tests for negative cycles to ensure the result is
valid. The value d[v] is the distance of the vertex v from the input source vertex s. The
value π[v] is the vertex that is the (not necessarily unique) predecessor of v when forming
636

Drake: An Efficient Executive for Temporal Plans with Choice
a shortest path from s to v. Relating to Figure 7.2b, d corresponds to the annotations next
to the vertices, and π speciﬁes the directed edges.
Algorithm 7.1 Bellman-Ford Algorithm
1: procedure BellmanFord(V, E, W, s)
2:
InitializeSingleSource(V, W, s)
3:
for i ∈{1...|V | −1} do
▷Loop for relaxation
4:
for each edge (u, v) ∈E do
5:
Relax(u, v, W)
6:
end for
7:
end for
8:
for each edge (u, v) ∈E do
▷Check for negative cycles
9:
if d[v] > d[u] + W(u, v) then
10:
return false
▷Fail if a negative cycle is found
11:
end if
12:
end for
13:
return true
14: end procedure
15: procedure InitializeSingleSource(V, s)
16:
for each vertex v ∈V do
17:
d[v] ←∞
18:
π[v] ←nil
19:
end for
20:
d[s] ←0
21: end procedure
22: procedure Relax(u, v, W)
23:
if d[v] > d[u] + W(u, v) then
24:
d[v] ←d[u] + W(u, v)
25:
π[v] ←u
26:
end if
27: end procedure
As we will see in the next few sections, the fast compilation algorithm for STNs requires
that we have access to the entire predecessor graph, which encodes all shortest paths in the
graph, rather than any single path. To compute the entire graph, Drake makes each π[v] a
set, and if Relax determines that d[v] = d[u] + W(u, v), it then pushes u onto d[v]. When
the strict inequality holds and d[v] is updated, π[v] is set to the single element set {u}.
Now we discuss the changes necessary to adapt the Bellman-Ford algorithm to Labeled
Distance Graphs. The relaxation procedure computes the new bound on the path length
from s to v, and if it dominates the old value, replaces the old value. If the vertex u allows
us to derive the current dominant value d[v], then it is stored in π[v]. Drake’s use of labeled
value sets that store value pairs (d, π) ∈R × V allow it to perform both tasks at once, with
one data structure.
637

Conrad & Williams
To see how this works, consider an example:
Example 7.4 In Figure 7.3a, edge (A, B) forms a snippet of a labeled distance graph;
consider computing the SSSP with source vertex A. We know that the initialization routine
under every choice is to set d[u] = 0 for the source vertex and d[u] = ∞for all others, and
to set π[u] = nil for every vertex. In the combined notation, the initial value for the weight
of the vertices is (0, nil) or (∞, nil), labeled with the empty environment {}. These are
the initial weights shown on the vertices.
The relaxation of this edge allows us to derive that B is distance 8 from A under environ-
ment {x = 1}, and has predecessor A. Hence, we add the labeled value pair ((8, A), {x = 1})
to the labeled value set for the weight of B. This new value has a tighter value for d, and
hence is kept, but does not dominate the old value, thus both are kept. This single insertion
step updates both the distance of B from A and the predecessor of B along the shortest
path. The result is depicted in Figure 7.3b.
□
It should now be clear why we elected to keep non-identical values with the same numeric
value: the labeled value sets can hold all the predecessors for the target vertices, and not just
a single predecessor. Algorithm 7.2 shows the generalization of this example. Initialization
is exactly as in the example, it assigns the initial values from the standard algorithm with
empty environments. During relaxation, following Lemma 5.13, the potential new path
lengths are the cross product addition of the weight of u added to the weight of the edge
from u to v, labeled with the union of the environments, if the union is valid and not
subsumed by any known conﬂicts. Naturally, when relaxing u through an edge to v, u
is the predecessor. When adding this value to the labeled value set d[v], the domination
criterion is used to determine if this new path length is non-dominated, and to prune non-
dominant path lengths and predecessors as appropriate.
The ﬁnal modiﬁcation of the original algorithm is in the test for negative cycles; a
negative cycle is detected if another relaxation of any edge would further decrease the
distance from the source to any other vertex. In the labeled case, some choices may have
negative cycles and others may not. We begin the computation by computing the relaxation
d[u]+W(u, v) with the labeled addition operator, and discard the predecessor vertices from
d[u], thus producing a real valued labeled value set. If there is any environment where
d[v] > d[u] + W(u, v) holds, that environment is a conﬂict of the Labeled STN.
Finding the minimal conﬂicts in practice is somewhat convoluted. Consider each pair
of labeled values (dv, ev) ∈d[v], (duw, euw) ∈d[u] + W(u, v) in turn. If dv > duw then there
might be a conﬂict, however, there may be some environments where a smaller, dominant
value of d[v] takes precedence over dv, thus preventing the inequality from being satisﬁed.
Hence, if it exists, the conﬂict we deduce is ev ∪euw after modifying the union to avoid any
other environments e′
v such that (d′
v, e′
v) ∈d[v] and d′
v ≤duw. It is possible that conﬂicts
could invalidate all possible choices, which the executive tests for, before determining that
the plan is dispatchable.
638

Drake: An Efficient Executive for Temporal Plans with Choice
Example 7.5 Consider the following values for the inequality test, given two binary choice
variables:
d[v] = {(2, {y = 1}), (4, {})}
(14)
d[u] + W(u, v) = {(3, {x = 1}), (5, {})}
(15)
(16)
We must ﬁnd and make conﬂicts for any minimal environments that imply d[v] > d[u]+
W(u, v) holds.
Each side of the inequality has two possible values, so we can consider
four pairs of values that could satisfy the inequality. Three of the pairs do not satisfy the
inequality, and thus can cause no conﬂict: (2, {y = 1}) < (3, {x = 1}), (2, {y = 1}) < (5, {})
and (4, {}) < (5, {}).
The last pair, (4, {}) > (3, {x = 1}), satisﬁes the inequality, so
this pair could imply that the union of corresponding environments, {} ∪{x = 1}, is a
conﬂict. However, to reach (4, {}) for the left hand side, we skipped over a smaller value,
(2, {y = 1}) ∈d[v]. To correctly address this ordering, the conﬂict must also avoid the
environment for the smaller value. Taking {} ∪{x = 1} and avoiding {y = 1} produces one
environment, {x = 1, y = 2}, which is a valid environment, and hence it is a conﬂict.
□
A
{((0 , nil) ,{})}
B
{((∞, nil) ,{})}
{(8, {x = 1})}
(a) Before Relaxation
{((0, nil), {})}
{((8, A), {x = 1}), ((∞, nil), {})}
A
B
{(8, {x = 1})}
(b) After Relaxation
Figure 7.3: A single labeled relaxation step.
7.3 Traversals of Labeled Predecessor Graphs
The fast compilation algorithm for STNs performs traversals of the predecessor graphs
produced by the SSSP analysis, and checks each edge along the traversal for dominance.
This is used to reduce the graph to minimal dispatchable form. In the unlabeled case, the
π[u] values specify a directed graph such as in Figure 7.2b, where we may use depth-ﬁrst
exploration to enumerate all possible paths beginning with the source vertex the SSSP is
computed for. However, in the labeled case, more care is necessary.
The simplest way to understand which paths are valid under complete environments is
to consider the projection of the predecessor graph under a particular complete environment
e. Take every labeled value set d[u] and query it under e. The result gives the shortest path
distance and any predecessors, producing a standard unlabeled predecessor graph.
639

Conrad & Williams
Algorithm 7.2 Labeled Bellman-Ford Algorithm
1: procedure LabeledBellmanFord(V, E, W, S, s)
2:
LabeledInitializeSingleSource(V, W, s)
3:
for i ∈{1...|V | −1} do
▷Loop over relaxations
4:
for each edge (u, v) ∈E do
5:
LabeledRelax(u, v, W)
6:
end for
7:
end for
8:
for each edge (u, v) ∈E do
▷Test for negative cycles
9:
for each labeled value pair (dv, ev) ∈d[v] do
10:
for each labeled value pair (duw, euw) ∈d[u] + W(u, v) do
11:
if dv > duw then
12:
AddConflict(ev ∪euw, split to avoid all e′
v such that
13:
(d′
v, e′
v) ∈d[v] and d′
v ≤duw)
14:
end if
15:
end for
16:
end for
17:
end for
18:
IsSomeCompleteEnvironmentConsistent?()
19: end procedure
20: procedure LabeledInitializeSingleSource(V, s)
21:
for each vertex v ∈V \ s do
22:
d[v] ←{((∞, nil), {})}
23:
end for
24:
d[s] ←{((0, nil), {})}
25: end procedure
26: procedure LabeledRelax(u, v, W)
27:
for labeled value pair ((du, πu), eu) ∈d[u] do
28:
for labeled value pair ((dw, πw), ew) ∈W(u, v) do
29:
AddToLVS(d[v], ((du + dw, u), eu ∪ew))
30:
end for
31:
end for
32: end procedure
640

Drake: An Efficient Executive for Temporal Plans with Choice
Example 7.6 Consider the labeled graph fragment in Figure 7.4a, where the vertices are
labeled with their SSSP weights for source vertex A.
Further consider the predecessor
graph and path lengths implied under environment e = {x = 1, y = 1}: d[B](e) = (2, A)
and d[C](e) = (1, A). Hence, both vertices B and C have A as their only predecessor, and
B is distance 2 from A, and C is distance 1 from A, as shown in Figure 7.4b. Vertex D is
distance 6 from A, with predecessor C. An important feature of this example is that for
this environment, C is not a predecessor of B, even though the pair (7, C) is labeled with
{y = 1}, which subsumes e. Predecessors are only provided by the dominant path length.□
{((0, nil), {})}
{((2, A), {x = 1, y = 1}),
((7, C), {y = 1}),
((∞, nil), {})}
A
B
C
D
{((1, A), {x
=
1}),
((3, A), {})}
{((6, C), {x = 1, y = 1}),
((8, C), {y
=
1}),
((∞, nil), {})}
{(2, {x = 1, y = 1})}
{(1, {x = 1}), (3, {})}
{(4, {y = 1})}
{(5, {y = 1})}
(a) Relaxed Graph
A
0
B
2
C
1
D
6
(b) Predecessor graph for
e = {x = 1, y = 1}
Figure 7.4: Extracting predecessor graphs from labeled SSSP
Although it is instructive to consider the projection of the SSSP onto an environment for
intuitive understanding, an implementation based on this approach is not eﬃcient in space
or time. As in the rest of this work, Drake directly performs the traversals on the labeled
representation. Since paths in the predecessor graphs may exist under some environments
and not others, we take the natural step and use minimal environments to specify when a
641

Conrad & Williams
particular path exists. Intuitively, we expect that the environment of a path is simply the
union of the environments of the labeled value pairs that speciﬁed the predecessor edges
used. This is true, but we require an extra step to test the validity of the path for that
environment.
Consider a partial path from the source vertex S, which passes through some subset of
vertices X1 →. . . Xn, constructed from labeled value pairs ((di, Xi), ei) ∈d[Xi+1], which
represent some path through the predecessor graph. Then the path is valid if, for every
vertex along the path, (di, Xi) ∈d[Xi+1](e1 ∪. . . en), and the path environment is e =
e1 ∪. . . en. Essentially, this tests that labeled value pairs used to construct the path are
actually still entailed by the union of all of their respective environments.
If a path is
invalid, all possible extensions are also invalid, because the same inconsistency will exist in
all extensions.
Example 7.7 We can apply this criteria to determine all the paths given by the SSSP in
Figure 7.4a. Begin with the source vertex, A, which clearly exists under all environments,
so we assign this partial path the empty environment. B contains the labeled value pair
((2, A), {x = 1, y = 1}), and thus is a candidate to extend our path. The union of the two
environments is {}∪{x = 1, y = 1} = {x = 1, y = 1}. When queried with this environment,
d[B] returns the labeled value pair that we used to propose the extension, so the path
A →B has environment {x = 1, y = 1}. B has no other possible extensions.
Returning to A, it has a possible extension to C because of the labeled value pairs
((1, A), {x = 1}) and ((3, A), {}). First, consider ((1, A), {x = 1}), and the query of d[C]
under {x = 1} shows that the path exists, so we have the partial path A →C with
environment {x = 1}. This path has a potential extension to B because of the labeled
value pair ((8, C), {y = 1}). However, the query d[B]({x = 1} ∪{y = 1}) = (2, A) ̸= (7, C),
so the extension is not valid, as expected from our earlier discussion. We may instead extend
this path to D, giving the path A →C →D the environment {x = 1, y = 1}. The queries
on both d[C] and d[D] give the values used to generate the path, and hence the path is
valid.
Returning to A, we consider the other path to B, using the labeled value pair ((3, A), {}).
Now the extension to B passes the query test, so A →C →B provides path length 7 if
{x = 1} but not {y = 1}. We label this path with the label {x = 1}, but must take care in
later algorithms not to use it to imply that 7 is the shortest path length for {x = 1, y = 1}.
Finally, we can extend the path to D, giving path A →B →D with length 8 under {y = 1},
with the same caveat.
□
Given this rule specifying the correct extensions to partial paths, we can construct a
depth-ﬁrst search to enumerate all possible paths in the acyclic predecessor graph, re-testing
at each step to ensure the path is valid.
7.4 Pruning Dominated Edges with the SSSP
With the strategy for ﬁnding labeled paths through the labeled predecessor graphs, the
extension of the pruning algorithm from the fast STN compilation algorithm is straight-
forward. Tsamardinos, et al. (1998) provide two theorems relating dominance of edges to
paths in the predecessor graph, adjusted slightly for our notation. In the following, A is
assumed to be the source vertex of the SSSP, and B and C are other vertices.
642

Drake: An Efficient Executive for Temporal Plans with Choice
Theorem 7.8 A negative edge (A, C) is lower-dominated by a negative edge (A, B) if and
only if there is a path from B to C in the predecessor graph for A.
□
Theorem 7.9 A non-negative edge (A, C) is upper-dominated if and only if there is a
vertex B, distinct from A and C, such that d[B] ≤d[C] and there is a path from B to C in
the predecessor graph for A.
□
Example 7.10 Figure 7.5 shows two simple examples on which we can apply these two
theorems. First, Figure 7.5a is a weighted distance graph and Figure 7.5c shows its pre-
decessor graph for source vertex A, on which we apply Theorem 7.8. Edge (A, C) is lower
dominated because the weight −5 on B implies an edge (A, B) with weight −5, which is
negative as the theorem requires. Furthermore, the predecessor graph has a path from B
to C in the predecessor graph for A. Therefore, edge (A, C) is dominated and needed in
the dispatchable form.
Figures 7.5a and 7.5c similarly exhibit Theorem 7.9. There is a path A →B →C in
the graph, and d[B] = 2 ≤d[C] = 5, so edge (A, C) is upper-dominated. Thus, edge (A, C)
is not needed in the dispatchable form.
In both these examples, this step derives every possible edge weight for edges in the
dispatchable form with A as their source, namely edges (A, B) and (A, C), and determines
that only (A, B) is actually needed.
□
In the labeled case, particular labeled edge weights are dominated if the above conditions
hold under all the environments the weight holds in.
Theorem 7.11 A negative labeled edge weight (dC, eC) in d[C] is lower-dominated by a
negative labeled edge weight (dB, eB) in d[B] if and only if eB = eC and there is a path from
B to C with environment eP in the predecessor graph for A such that eP = eC.
□
Theorem 7.12 A non-negative labeled edge weight (dC, eC) in edge d[C] is upper-dominated
if and only if there is a labeled edge weight (dB, eB) in d[B], such that B is distinct from A
and C, eB subsumes eC, dB ≤d, C, and there is a path from B to C with environment eP
in the predecessor graph for A such that eP = eC.
□
In practice, Drake searches over every path in the labeled predecessor graph with the
source vertex as its start, and applies these theorems to ﬁnd dominated edges. Speciﬁcally,
during the traversal, it records the smallest vertex weight of any vertices along the path,
not counting the source. That value is compared to other vertex weights of extensions of
the path to apply the domination theorems. Every time a vertex weight is found to be
dominated with some path, it is recorded in a list. After all traversals are done, every
labeled value in the vertex weights not present in the list of dominated values is converted
into an edge in the output dispatchable graph.
These two theorems require that eP = eC because the path must hold under all envi-
ronments where the value dC does, but we also do not want eP to be tighter. Recall that
the vertex weights we might prune also specify the paths. If eC is tighter than eP , then it
must have a lower path length than the one implied by eP , or else it would not be in the
labeled value set d[C]. Thus, we cannot guarantee that our path is the shortest path from
the source to C, so this path is not suitable to prune it.
643

Conrad & Williams
A
B
C
-5
-4
1
(a)
Lower
domination
weighted graph
A
B
C
2
5
3
(b)
Upper
domination
weighted graph
A
0
B
-5
C
-4
(c) Lower domination pre-
decessor graph
A
0
B
2
C
5
(d) Upper domination pre-
decessor graph
Figure 7.5: Simple edge domination examples.
Example 7.13 To demonstrate the application of these ideas, reconsider Figure 7.4a. Ex-
ample 7.6 gave the possible paths in the graph.
The ﬁrst path is A →B with path
environment {x = 1, y = 1}. After reaching B, the minimal vertex weight is 2, but there
are no extension of this path, so nothing can be pruned. In general, the ﬁrst step from the
source vertex cannot be pruned.
The next step of the traversal reaches C with environment {x = 1}, and the minimal
path length is 1. C cannot be pruned. This path cannot be extended to B, but it does
have an extension to D, using the vertex weight ((6, C), {x = 1, y = 1}). This path length
is strictly longer than the path length of 1, and the environment of the value is equal to the
environment of the path, so we add it to the pruned list.
Next consider path A →C under environment {} and path length 3. The extension
to B using ((7, C), {y = 1}) is also prunable. Note that this path could never be used to
prune the shorter path length ((2, A), {x = 1, y = 1}) because {x = 1, y = 1} ̸= {y = 1}.
Likewise, the extension to D prunes ((8, C), {y = 1}).
Collecting the non-pruned edges means that the algorithm adds edge (A, B) to the
output dispatchable graph with weight W(A, B) = {(2, {x = 1, y = 1})}, and adds edge
(A, C) with weight W(A, C) = {(1, {x = 1}), (3, {})}. We drop inﬁnite weights, allowing
them to be implicitly speciﬁed, and both ﬁnite weights of D were pruned, so it does not
add the edge (A, D) at all.
□
644

Drake: An Efficient Executive for Temporal Plans with Choice
Essentially, the pruning algorithm has the same structure as the unlabeled fast compi-
lation algorithm. The major diﬀerence is that the values to prune have environments and
that paths in the predecessor graph only exist under particular environments. Thus, the
pruning step must satisfy the pruning requirement with the identical environment to prune
a labeled value.
7.5 Mutual Dominance and Rigid Components
Tsamardinos et al. (1998) showed that rigid components in the distance graph of an STN
create mutual dominance, where two edges (A, B) and (A, C) are each used as evidence
to prune the other, and both are incorrectly removed when the algorithm of the previous
section is applied. The correct solution is to perform either pruning, but not both. Unfor-
tunately, it is diﬃcult to test for mutual dominance during the SSSP pruning step. Instead,
they present a pre-processing step that identiﬁes the rigid components, updates the output
dispatchable graph accordingly, and alters the input weighted distance graph to remove the
rigid components entirely, before beginning the process of computing edges in the dispatch-
able form through repeated SSSPs. This leaves a problem with no mutually dominated
edges, and thus the pruning step can prune all edges found to be dominated without any
risk of encountering this problem. This section adapts Tsamardinos et al.’s approach by
identifying labeled rigid components and uses a labeled analogue of the alteration process.
Example 7.14 Consider the predecessor graph fragment in Figure 7.6. There is a path
A →B →C, with d[B] = 1 and d[C] = 1, so that d[B] ≤d[C]. Thus, the edge (A, C)
can be pruned. Likewise, there is a path A →C →B that allows us to prune (A, B) from
the dispatchable graph. Then the result is that A is not constrained to the rest of the
events, which would allow the dispatcher to select an inconsistent schedule. These edges
are mutually dominant. Our algorithm is able to prune both edges because there is a path
B →C and C →B, if either did not exist, only one pruning would take place.
□
A
0
B
1
C
1
Figure 7.6: A predecessor graph, (A, B) and (A, C) are mutually dominant.
Tsamardinos et al. (1998) show that mutual dominance occurs if and only if there are
rigid components in the problem, which are collections of events that must be scheduled
with a ﬁxed diﬀerence in their execution times. In Figure 7.6, B and C are constrained to
occur at the same time, so they are rigidly connected. Rigidly connected components in a
645

Conrad & Williams
consistent distance graph coincide with strongly-connected components in the predecessor
graph for a single source shortest path for arbitrary connected vertices. Thus, they show
that we can identify all instances of possible mutual dominance by ﬁnding all the strongly-
connected components of the predecessor graphs, and then remove them.
Intuitively, we might understand the issue as the input problem having less degrees of
freedom than it appears to have. If two events are actually constrained to occur at the same
instant, then the dispatcher has one decision, not two. When compiling, each decision looks
redundant to the other, leading to incorrect prunings, as in Example 7.14. The solution
is to remove the redundancy by replacing the entire rigid component with a single vertex,
called the leader. The prior work actually removes all events other than the leader with a
preprocessing step, contracting the rigid component to a single vertex. Since we are working
with labeled distance graphs, where rigid components may exist only in some environments,
we must replicate this eﬀect indirectly, in two steps: provide information in the compiled
form so the dispatcher can respect the rigid component, and alter the input graph so that
under conditions where the rigid component exists, the compilation algorithm only reasons
over the leader.
The ﬁrst step of preprocessing is to identify the rigid components. Arbitrary graphs
might not be connected, so an SSSP from any arbitrary vertex may not reach all the
vertices, and thus cannot ﬁnd rigid components in the disconnected subgraph. A standard
strategy, as in the Johnson’s algorithm preprocessing step, is to introduce an extra vertex
for the preprocessing step, connected to every vertex with a zero weight edge. This extra
vertex is connected to every vertex, which makes it an ideal source to search from, even for
disconnected graphs. Furthermore, the extra vertex does not alter the rigid components in
the predecessor graph. In the labeled case, the equivalent approach is to introduce a new
vertex connected to every other vertex with an edge with weight (0, {}), so that the zero
weight edge applies under every environment. Then, the SSSP is computed with the added
vertex as the source. Finally, the algorithm searches the predecessor graph for cycles. The
simplest, if not necessarily the most eﬃcient, method in the labeled case is simply to use
our knowledge about ﬁnding paths in the predecessor graph to search for loops.
As we might expect, rigid components in Labeled STNs are given labels, since they may
only exist under some environments. We need to ﬁnd the maximal rigid components with
minimal environments. Thus, if there is a rigid component {A, B, C}, we do not separately
identify {A, B} as a rigid component. For every vertex in V , run a depth ﬁrst search for a
path back to the vertex. If found, the vertices on the path are a rigid component, and the
path environment is the environment of the rigid component. Note that a valid path may
visit any vertex up to twice, as in the example below. As the search ﬁnds rigid components,
it maintains a list of the maximally sized rigid components with minimal environments.
Example 7.15 Figure 7.7 shows a small labeled distance graph with vertices {A, B, C}.
Recall that having an opposing pair of edges, one with the negative weight of the other,
implies a rigid component, so this problem obviously has some.
To apply our technique, the algorithm ﬁrst adds another vertex X, and connects it
to each vertex with an edge with weight (0, {}). Figure 7.7b also shows the predecessor
graph computed after this has been done.
Second, the algorithm searches for loops in
the graph.
It begins with A: the path A →B →A with environment {x = 1} is a
loop, as is A →B →C →B →A with environment {x = 1, y = 1}.
These paths
646

Drake: An Efficient Executive for Temporal Plans with Choice
imply rigid components {A, B} with environment {x = 1} and {A, B, C} with environment
{x = 1, y = 1}, respectively. Note that the second path visits B twice. From B, it ﬁnd
paths B →A →B with environment {x = 1}, which is equivalent to the one found from
A, and B →C →B with environment {y = 1}, which is a new rigid component. The
paths from C re-derive the same rigid components. Thus, there are three maximal rigid
components, {A, B} with environment {x = 1}, {B, C} with environment {y = 1}, and
{A, B, C} with environment {x = 1, y = 1}.
If the two edges between B and C had the environment {x = 1} instead of {y = 1},
then there would only be a single maximal rigid component {A, B, C} with environment
{x = 1}. The smaller components, such as {A, B} with {x = 1}, would be non-maximal
and not needed.
□
A
B
C
{(3, {x = 1})}
{(−3, {x = 1})}
{(5, {y = 1})}
{(−5, {y = 1})}
(a) Labeled distance graph
{((∞, nil), {})}
X
A
B
C
{((−3, B), {x = 1}),
((0, X), {})}
{((−5, C), {y = 1}),
((0, A), {x = 1}),
((0, X), {})}
{((0, B), {y = 1}),
((∞, nil), {})}
(b) Predecessor graph of the added vertex X.
Figure 7.7: Identifying rigid components in labeled distance graphs.
After completing the search for rigid components, we must process them.
The ﬁrst
processing step is to identify a leader, the ﬁrst vertex to occur, which we will use to represent
the entire rigid component. The leader is the vertex with the lowest distance from the
added vertex, queried under the environment of the rigid component. Ties may be broken
arbitrarily.
The second processing step is to update the dispatchable form accordingly. Within the
rigid component, the events are rigidly bound together and the leader is executed before
any other event of the rigid component. Thus, in the dispatchable form, we constrain the
non-leader events to occur the correct, ﬁxed amount of time after the leader. Thus, if A
is the leader of the rigid component, and B is some other vertex of the rigid component
with environment e, the the output graph should have the labeled edge weight (d[B](e) −
d[A](e), e) on edge (A, B) and (d[A](e) −d[B](e), e) on edge (B, A).
If any events are
rigidly connected in a way such that they will be executed at the same time, the dispatcher
647

Conrad & Williams
needs them listed explicitly, because the execution window and enablement tests alone do
not guarantee correct execution of such plans. During this step we may identify maximal
groups of events that are constrained to occur at the same time as the leader, or the same
ﬁxed duration after the leader. For example, if A is the leader and both B and C follow A
by exactly three time units, then B and C are constrained to occur at the same time. As
usual, these zero-related vertices are recorded with a label, which is the same environment
as the rigid component.
Third, we need to alter the labeled distance graph so that the rigid component no longer
appears to exist, but is instead totally represented by the leader vertex. The algorithm
begins with edges that are interior to the rigid component. If (A, B) are both vertices in a
rigid component with environment e, then the algorithm prunes W(A, B) and W(B, A) of
any environments subsumed by e. If (d, ed) ∈W(A, B), then if e subsumes ed, the algorithm
removes the value pair. If e does not subsume ed, then replace (d, ed) with labeled values
(d, e′
d) where e′
d avoids e, which may require multiple new values. Repeat for W(B, A).
Finally, we need to adjust edges that enter or leave the rigid component to ensure the
input to the compiler has no cycles in any predecessor graphs. The idea is to move these
edges to the leader under the environments of the rigid component, and to remove them
from the non-leader. Assume A is the leader of a rigid component with environment e, B
is another vertex of the rigid component, and C is a vertex not in the rigid component. For
every labeled value (d, ed) ∈w(B, C) for some vertex, the algorithm puts (d + d[B](e) −
d[C](e), ed ∪e) in W(A, C). Next, it replaces (d, ed) ∈W(B, C) with values (d, e′
d) for each
possible e′
d that is a union of ed and the constituent kernels of e. The algorithm repeats
for W(C, B), putting (d + d[C](e) −d[B](e), ed ∪e) in W(C, A), and replacing (d, ed) with
(d′, e′
d) avoiding e. Unfortunately, this strategy leads to duplication that grows linearly with
the domain size of the choice variables. In practice, though, many problems do not have
any rigid components, or they are limited and the penalty is minor. Our results show some
outliers that may be associated with this growth, but most problems are not aﬀected.
Example 7.16 As usual, let x, y ∈{1, 2} be choice variables. Figure 7.8a depicts an input
labeled distance graph fragment. From the opposing edge weights 1 and −1, we can easily
identify that {A, B} is a rigid component under environment {x = 1}. We need to follow
the above procedure to process it.
First, A is always scheduled before B, and is therefore the leader. If we ran the SSSP on
an added vertex, we would ﬁnd that d[A]({x = 1}) = −1 and d[B]({x = 1}) = 0, proving
this assertion. Since d[B]({x = 1}) −d[A]({x = 1}) = 1, event B follows A by one time
unit. Therefore, edges are inserted into the output dispatchable form shown in Figure 7.8c
that enforce this delay.
Next, we alter the input graph to remove the rigid component, beginning with edges
between the rigid component’s vertices. Edge (B, A) has one weight on it, which is subsumed
by the environment of the rigid component, so it only exists when the rigid component does,
and thus has already been handled, and is pruned. Likewise, the weight (1, {}) ∈W(A, B)
is pruned.
On the other hand, the weight (2, {x = 2}) ∈W(A, B) already avoids the
environment of the rigid component, so is left unchanged.
Continue with edges that enter or leave the rigid component. (A, C) uses the leader
vertex, so does not directly require any modiﬁcation.
Edge (B, C) needs to be moved,
giving a new weight (4 + 1, {x = 1}) on W(A, C), which is already present, and requires
648

Drake: An Efficient Executive for Temporal Plans with Choice
no modiﬁcation. Since its environment is subsumed by the rigid component environment,
(4, {x = 1}) is removed from w(B, C). Edge (C, B) also needs to be moved. It leads to a
new value (2 −1, {y = 1} ∪{x = 1}) = (1, {x = 1, y = 1}) ∈W(C, A). Since {y = 1} is not
subsumed by the rigid component’s environment, we must modify the value on (C, B) so
that it avoids the environment. Avoiding {x = 1} means that {x = 2}, so we modify the
value (2, {y = 1}) →(2, {x = 2, y = 1}). These modiﬁcations completely remove the rigid
component and provide the dispatcher with suﬃcient information to correctly execute the
rigid components we have removed.
□
After these modiﬁcations the labeled distance graph is guaranteed not to have any cycles
in the predecessor graphs, and therefore has no rigid components. Thus the rest of the fast
algorithm given in this section correctly compiles it to dispatchable form. We adjusted
the unlabeled algorithm to search for labeled rigid components. Additionally, the unlabeled
algorithm removes the non-leader vertices of rigid components, moving and modifying edges
as necessary enforce the original input constraints. Since those vertices may be needed under
environments where the rigid component does not exist, Drake instead modiﬁes the process
of moving edges to replicate the eﬀect of removing the non-leader vertices.
Drake’s compilation algorithm is designed to use labeling concepts to compute a compact
version of the dispatchable form of plans with choice. The structure of this algorithm is
similar to the unlabeled version, but a number of modiﬁcations are made within each step to
reason about environments. This section completes the presentation of Drake’s algorithms.
8. Results
Finally, we explore Drake’s performance, both from a theoretical standpoint and experi-
mentally. Our analysis gives some justiﬁcation for why we expect Drake’s representation to
be compact, and our experimental results give evidence that Drake performs as intended.
8.1 Theoretical Results
We give a brief characterization of the analytical worst case performance of Drake’s algo-
rithms. The direct enumeration of STNs, as in Tsamardinos et al.’s (2001) work, uses one
STN for each consistent STN. If there are n choices with d options each, and v vertices,
and we assume that the compiled sparse graphs are of size O
 v log v

, then the compiled
size is O
 ndv log v

. In contrast, Drake does not store the component STNs independently,
but only stores the distinct values, so the size is O
 kv log v

, where k ≤nd. In the worst
case, where every single component STN is completely diﬀerent, there are no similarities
between choices to exploit, hence Drake’s compiled representation is the same size, but is
never worse, up to a constant.
There is a strong parallel to the existing theory about the tree width of general constraint
satisfaction problems. Dechter and Mateescu (2007) explain that while a general constraint
satisfaction problem with n variables of domain size d can in general only be solved in O
 nd
steps, many problems have more structure. The tree width, n∗≤n of the problem represents
the number of variables that eﬀectively interact, so that the search can be completed in
O
 (n∗)d
time. Similarly, in Labeled STNs, the choice variables may not interact fully, and
thus there is an eﬀective number of choice variables in the problem that is often smaller than
649

Conrad & Williams
A
B
C
{(1, {x = 1}), (2, {x = 2})}
{(−1, {x = 1})}
{(5, {x = 1})}
{(4, {x = 1})}
{(2, {y = 1})}
(a) Input labeled distance graph
A
B
C
{(2, {x = 2})}
{(5, {x = 1})}
{(2, {x = 2, y = 1})}
{(1, {x = 1, y = 1})}
(b) Contracted labeled distance graph
A
B
C
{(1, {x = 1})}
{(−1, {x = 1})}
(c) Dispatchable form of rigid component
Figure 7.8: An example of processing a rigid component from a Labeled Distance Graph.
the total number. In this notation, Drake’s compiled problems have size O
 (n∗)dn log v

.
The smaller base of the exponent can lead to signiﬁcant savings.
650

Drake: An Efficient Executive for Temporal Plans with Choice
The compile time and run-time latency are more diﬃcult to characterize, however,
because the overhead of the labeling operations also grows with n∗. Therefore, we do not
attempt an analytic analysis.
8.2 Experimental Results
This section presents an experimental validation of Drake’s compilation and dispatch algo-
rithms on randomly generated, structured problems. First, we develop a suite of random
structured Labeled STNs, derived from Stedl’s (2004) problem generator. Then we compile
and dispatch the suites of problems twice, once with Drake and once by explicitly enumer-
ating all component STNs, following techniques developed by Tsamardinos et al. (2001).
Finally, we compare the compiled size of the problems, the compilation time, and the exe-
cution latency. Throughout this section, our plots use the number of consistent component
STNs as the horizontal axis, because it appears to correlate well with the eﬀective diﬃculty
of the problem. For each of the metrics, we provide the results from the two methods side
by side in one plot, and show the ratio of performance in another one, to allow point-wise
comparison of the diﬀerence in performance between identical problems. The problems are
constructed from 2-11 binary choices or 2-7 ternary choices. There are 100 problems at
each of these sizes; the problems range from 4 consistent component STNs up to about
2000. The number of events ranges from 4 to about 22 as the number of component STNs
increase to keep a consistent ratio of constraints to events.
This comparison is performed with a Lisp implementation, run on a 2.66 GHz machine
with 4 Gb of memory. There are some performance related implementation details we have
omitted in prior sections. For example, labeled value sets are stored as ordered lists to
reduce insertion and query time. Additionally, we found that memoization of subsumption
and union operations dramatically improved performance. The implementation aggressively
prunes values with inconsistent environments to avoid any unnecessary reasoning. The STN
compiler and dispatcher exercise the same code as Drake to support a fair comparison, and
pays a small overhead in execution speed.
The ﬁrst metric of comparison is the size of the dispatchable form of the random prob-
lems. We computed this by serializing the graph representations to strings. Since Drake’s
compilation algorithm is derived from the fast STN compiler, the maximum memory foot-
print for both compilation and dispatch is no more than about double these numbers.
Since we designed Drake with this metric in mind, we expect the improvement to be clear
and signiﬁcant, and this is what Figure 8.1 shows. In the ratio plot, the value is the mul-
tiple of improvement of Drake over STN enumeration. Except for small problems, Drake’s
memory performance is superior, and the improvement ranges up to around a 700 times
smaller memory footprint for the largest problems. The STN enumeration Tsamardinos et
al. (2001) develops uses up to around 2 MB of storage, and although that is insigniﬁcant
for a modern desktop, it is often signiﬁcant for embedded hardware, especially if the system
must store a library of compiled plans. In contrast, Drake’s memory footprint is 1-10 kB for
most cases, which is trivial, even in large numbers, for any hardware. More than half the
worse performing examples, those that do not ﬁt in the main band of results, correspond
to ternary choices. We believe this likely corresponds to the growth caused by avoiding
environments when handling complex or overlapping rigid components in these problems.
651

Conrad & Williams
10
0
10
1
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
−1
10
0
10
1
10
2
10
3
10
4
Number of Consistent Component STNs
Compiled Size (kB)  
 
 
Drake
STN Enumeration
(a) The size of the dispatchable labeled distance graphs.
10
0
10
1
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
−1
10
0
10
1
10
2
10
3
Number of Consistent Component STNs
Compiled Size Ratio STN/Labeled STN     
(b) The ratio of the size of the compiled STN enumeration size to the size of Drake’s labeled distance graph.
Figure 8.1: The size of the dispatchable form of the random problems as a function of the
number of component STNs.
652

Drake: An Efficient Executive for Temporal Plans with Choice
The second metric is the time required to compile the random problems, shown in Figure
8.2. Often, Drake’s compilation times are much better, but they are highly variable. For
a number of the largest problems, Drake is up to about 1000 times faster. However, some
problems exhibit little improvement, and a few are up to 100 times slower for the worst
cases. Most problems take less than about ten minutes for both methods, but Drake takes
a few hours on ﬁve of the largest problems. We expect higher variability for the run-time
because the compilation algorithms loop repeatedly over the labeled graph, exacerbating
the variability shown in the compiled size. Thus, it is not surprising that on problems whose
dispatchable form is not compact, the run-time suﬀers.
The ﬁnal metric is the run-time latency incurred by the algorithms, shown in Figure
8.3. Drake’s reported latency is the maximum latency for a single decision making period
during a single execution of the entire problem. The STN enumeration latency reported
is the time required to identify, execute, and propagate the ﬁrst event in each consistent,
component STN. While these metrics are not identical, they are quite comparable. The
values reported at 10−3 seconds were reported as zero by Lisp’s timing features, and we
inﬂate them to ﬁt on a log scale.
Although diﬀerences in compilation time are interesting, increases in the run-time la-
tency are far more critical to Drake’s applicability in the real world.
Fortunately, the
situation looks favorable. Both systems execute all but the largest problems in under a
tenth of a second, and most small and moderate sized problems in around 10 milliseconds.
Although Drake is slower on a reasonable fraction of the problems, the margin is fairly low;
note that the cluster of values at a ratio of just less than 10−1 corresponds to the jump from
eﬀectively zero to about 10 milliseconds. We do not know the real ratio, but these points
create a visible cluster at 10−1 which may or may not be misleading. Instead, we focus on
larger problems where both methods are measurable, and where Drake generally performs
quite well. Again, a handful of problems are outliers, taking much more time, up to tens
of seconds, which would not be acceptable for most applications. We conclude that Drake
will perform well on embedded systems for many real world problems, in terms of memory
usage and latency.
Overall, these results are what Drake was designed to achieve. Using a compact represen-
tation provides a smaller memory footprint. Sometimes, exploiting the similarity between
choices makes reasoning fast, and other times it imposes an extra computational burden to
tease out the similarities, or lack thereof. Enumerating the STNs directly has quite pre-
dictable costs, both in time and space, and Drake is far more variable, depending on the
precise nature of the problem. While we ﬁnd these results quite promising, we must caution
that applications to particular problems could be better or worse, depending on factors we
do not know how to easily characterize. This is well illustrated by the few problems that
were outliers in all three metrics. It may be useful in future work to further investigate the
sources of variability in Drake’s performance.
As a practical note, we tightly regulated the number of events to focus our investigation
on the scaling with the number of choices. However, both algorithms should scale gracefully,
and with similar increases in space and time costs, to plans with more events. Overall,
Drake appears to provide a noticeably lower memory footprint for dispatching problems
with discrete choices than the direct enumeration strategy of Tsamardinos et al. (2001),
while only suﬀering from a mild increase in run-time latency.
653

Conrad & Williams
10
0
10
1
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
−2
10
0
10
2
10
4
10
6
Number of Consistent Component STNs
Compile Time (sec)
 
 
Drake
STN Enumeration
(a) The compile time for random problems.
10
0
10
1
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
−2
10
0
10
2
10
4
Number of Consistent Component STNs
Compile Time Ratio, STN/Labeled STN
(b) The ratio of the compile time of STN enumeration to Drake’s compile time.
Figure 8.2: The compile time of random problems as a function of the number of component
STNs.
654

Drake: An Efficient Executive for Temporal Plans with Choice
10
0
10
1
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
10
1
Number of Consistent Component STNs
Execution Latency (sec)
 
 
Drake
STN Enumeration
(a) The execution latency.
10
0
10
1
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
10
1
10
2
Number of Consistent Component STNs
Execution Latency Ratio STN/Labeled STN
(b) The ratio of the execution latency for STN enumeration to Drake’s execution latency.
Figure 8.3: The execution latency of random problems as a function of the number of com-
ponent STNs.
655

Conrad & Williams
9. Summary
This work presents Drake, a compact, ﬂexible executive for plans with choice. Drake takes
input plans with temporal ﬂexibility and discrete choices, such as Labeled STNs or DTNs,
and selects the execution times and makes discrete decisions at run-time (Dechter et al.,
1991). Choices substantially improve the expressiveness of the tasks that executives can
perform, and improve the robustness of the resulting executions. Prior execution approaches
typically impose signiﬁcant memory requirements or introduce substantial latency during
execution. Our goal in developing Drake is to develop a dispatching executive with a lower
memory footprint.
Building upon the concept of labels employed by the ATMS to compactly encode all
the consequences of a set of alternative choices, Drake introduces a new compact encoding,
called labeled distance graphs, to encode and eﬃciently reason over discrete choices, and
we introduce a corresponding maintenance system (de Kleer, 1986). Our adaptation of the
ATMS labeling scheme focuses on only maintaining non-dominated constraints, which allows
Drake to exploit the structure of temporal reasoning, cast as a shortest path problem on a
distance graph, to provide a compact representation. Furthermore, modifying the existing
unlabeled algorithms to account for labels does not change the overall structure of the
algorithms.
Drake’s compilation algorithm successfully compresses the dispatchable solution by over
two orders of magnitude relative to Tsamardinos, Pollack, and Ganchev’s (2001) prior work,
often reducing the compilation time, and typically introducing only a modest increase in
execution latency. Thus, we believe that Drake successfully realizes our initial goals. Within
our experiments, compilation typically takes less than ten minutes, but on occasion takes
hours. Although time consuming in the later case, this is still acceptable, since compilation
can be performed oﬀ-line, when a task is ﬁrst deﬁned. To summarize, Drake’s Labeled
STNs and labeled distance graphs enable an executive that strikes a useful balance between
latency and memory consumed, which is appropriate for real world applications. Drake’s
labeling scheme also provides the opportunity to extend a wide range of graph algorithms
to reason about and represent choice eﬃciently.
