Towards a Uniﬁed Taxonomy of Biclustering
Methods
Dmitry I. Ignatov1 and Bruce Watson2
1National Research University Higher School of Economics, Moscow, Russia

2Stellenbosch University, South Africa
Abstract. Being an unsupervised machine learning and data mining
technique, biclustering and its multimodal extensions are becoming pop-
ular tools for analysing object-attribute data in diﬀerent domains. Apart
from conventional clustering techniques, biclustering is searching for ho-
mogeneous groups of objects while keeping their common description,
e.g., in binary setting, their shared attributes. In bioinformatics, biclus-
tering is used to ﬁnd genes, which are active in a subset of situations,
thus being candidates for biomarkers. However, the authors of those bi-
clustering techniques that are popular in gene expression analysis, may
overlook the existing methods. For instance, BiMax algorithm is aimed
at ﬁnding biclusters, which are well-known for decades as formal con-
cepts. Moreover, even if bioinformatics classify the biclustering methods
according to reasonable domain-driven criteria, their classiﬁcation tax-
onomies may be diﬀerent from survey to survey and not full as well. So,
in this paper we propose to use concept lattices as a tool for taxonomy
building (in the biclustering domain) and attribute exploration as means
for cross-domain taxonomy completion.
Keywords: Biclustering, taxonomy, concept lattices, attribute explo-
ration
1
Introduction
Biclustering is a popular family of data analysis techniques within cluster-analysis.
Previously biclustering was known under the names direct clustering or subspace
clustering [1]. The term biclustering was proposed by Boris Mirkin in [2], p. 296:
The term biclustering refers to simultaneous clustering of both row and column
sets in a data matrix. Biclustering addresses the problems of aggregate represen-
tation of the basic features of interrelation between rows and columns as expressed
in the data.
The main advantage of biclustering technique lies in its ability to keep sim-
ilarity of grouped objects in terms of their common attributes. So, biclustering
is able to capture object similarity (homogeneity) expressed only by a subset
of attributes, which allows an analyst to clearly see why certain objects were
grouped together.
arXiv:1702.05376v1  [cs.AI]  17 Feb 2017

In the previous decade biclustering methods became extremely popular for
gene expression analysis analysis in bioinformatics. Here, genes which demon-
strate similar properties only in a subset of observable situations are considered
to be within a bicluster along with those situations. The ﬁrst rather compre-
hensive survey in the ﬁeld was done in [3]. Even though the survey was limited
only to biclustering in bioinformatics, the ﬁeld came to its maturity to have its
own classiﬁcation of the methods. The authors classiﬁed biclustering techniques
according to several properties: biclustering type, biclustering structure, the way
of bicluster generation, and the algorithmic strategy.
As it often happens, researchers from the bioinformatics domain overlooked
or even rediscovered biclustering methods which have been known for decades.
Thus, the notion of formal concept was known since the early 80-s [4], it corre-
sponds to maximal inclusion unit submatrices in Boolean matrices [5,6,7]. The
idea of closed sets from Formal Concept Analysis and from frequent itemset
mining were not considered in the bioinformatics domain. However, there are
numerous eﬃcient algorithms and applications, which can be treated as special
cases of biclustering-based ones. To the best of our knowledge there is no any
biclustering technique mentioned in bioinformatics which exploits ordered biclus-
ter hierarchies. Thus, in Formal Concept Analsis, biclusters (formal concepts)
are hierarchically ordered by the relation “be more general concept than”, which
proved its helpfulness for data exploration and taxonomy building in diﬀerent
domains.
The aim of this work is two-fold: on the one hand, we are going to shed
light on neighbouring domains where biclustering is actively used, and on the
other hand build lattice-based taxonomies using the existing classiﬁcations of
biclustering algorithms in the literature. The main open question in this work is
as follows: How to build a uniﬁed taxonomy of the biclustering techniques.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows. In Section 2, we shortly review
previous work on biclustering, taxonomies of algorithms, and related ﬁelds. In
Section 3 we give basic deﬁnitions of FCA and biclustering (in the most general
form). In Section 5 we outline several existing biclustering extensions under the
the name of multimodal clustering. Section 4 is the main part of the paper which
provides examples of diﬀerent taxonomies of biclustering algorithms obtained
from the literature.
2
Previous work
Construction of taxonomies of algorithms in Computer Science is not new. Thus,
in [8,9] a taxonomy of string matching algorithms was built guided by domain
experts according to TABASCO methodology. In those papers, it was shown that
concept lattices can be a good visualisation tool paired with interactive abilities
of modern computer software. Moreover, concept lattices were successfully used
for epistemic taxonomy building [10] combining multiple inheritance feature with
compact graphical representation.

In addition to the existing term biclustering, there are several others like co-
clustering or simultaneous clustering. Triclustering, Triadic FCA, multimodal
clustering, clustering of Boolean tensors, closed n-sets, relational clustering and
several other techniqes are all examples of possible biclustering extensions.
3
Basic deﬁnitions and models
3.1
Formal Concept Analysis
Deﬁnition 1. A formal context K = (G, M, I) consists of two sets G and M
and a relation I between G and M. The elements of G are called the objects
and the elements of M are called the attributes of the context. The notation
gIm or (g, m) ∈I means that the object g has attribute m.
Deﬁnition 2. For A ⊆G, let
A′ := {m ∈M|(g, m) ∈I for all g ∈A}
and, for B ⊆M, let
B′ := {g ∈G|(g, m) ∈I for all m ∈B}.
These operators are called derivation operators or
concept-forming
operators for K = (G, M, I).
Proposition 1. Let (G, M, I) be a formal context, for subsets A, A1, A2 ⊆G
and B ⊆M we have
1. A1 ⊆A2 iﬀA′
2 ⊆A′
1,
2. A ⊆A′′,
3. A = A′′′ (hence, A′′′′ = A′′),
4. (A1 ∪A2)′ = A′
1 ∩A′
2,
5. A ⊆B′ ⇔B ⊆A′ ⇔A × B ⊆I.
Similar properties hold for subsets of attributes.
Deﬁnition 3. A closure operator on set S is a mapping ϕ: 2S →2S with the
following properties:
1. ϕϕX = ϕX (idempotency)
2. X ⊆ϕX (extensity)
3. X ⊆Y ⇒ϕX ⊆ϕY (monotonicity)
For a closure operator ϕ the set ϕX is called closure of X.
A subset X ⊆G is called closed if ϕX = X.
Let (G, M, I) be a context, one can prove that operators
(·)′′ : 2G →2G, (·)′′ : 2M →2M
are closure operators.

Deﬁnition 4. A formal concept of a formal context K = (G, M, I) is a pair
(A, B) with A ⊆G, B ⊆M, A′ = B and B′ = A. The sets A and B are called the
extent and the intent of the formal concept (A, B), respectively. The subconcept-
superconcept relation is given by (A1, B1) ≤(A2, B2) iﬀA1 ⊆A2 (B1 ⊆B2).
This deﬁnition says that every formal concept has two parts, namely, its ex-
tent and intent. This follows an old tradition of the Logic of Port Royal (1662),
and is in line with the International Standard ISO 704 that formulates the fol-
lowing deﬁnition: “A concept is considered to be a unit of thought constituted
of two parts: its extent and its intent.”
Deﬁnition 5. The set of all formal concepts of a context K together with the
order relation I forms a complete lattice, called the concept lattice
of K and
denoted by B(K).
Deﬁnition 6. Implication A →B, where A, B ⊆M holds in context (G, M, I)
if A′ ⊆B′, i.e., each object having all attributes from A also has all attributes
from B.
3.2
Biclustering
In the ﬁrst survey on biclustering techniques [3], bicluster is deﬁned as a subma-
trix of an input object-attribute matrix. That is for a given matrix A ∈Rm×n,
a bicluster b is a pair (X, Y ), where X ⊆{1, · · · , m} and Y ⊆{1, · · · , m}. The
bicluster should fulﬁl a certain homogeneity property, which varies from method
to method, e.g., it may be allowed to contain only 1s inside the corresponding
submatrix (bicluster) in Boolean case.
For instance, for analysing large markets of context advertisement, we pro-
pose the following FCA-based deﬁnition of a bicluster [11,12].
Deﬁnition 7. If (g, m) ∈I, then (m′, g′) is called an object-attribute or OA-
bicluster with density ρ(m′, g′) = |I∩(m′×g′)|
|m′|·|g′|
.
Here are some basic properties of oa-biclusters.
Proposition 2.
1. 0 ≤ρ ≤1.
2. oa-bicluster (m′, g′) is a formal concept iﬀρ = 1.
3. if (m′, g′) is a oa-bicluster, then (g′′, g′) ≤(m′, m′′).
In ﬁgure 1 you can see the example of the oa-bicluster for a particular pair
(g, m) ∈I of a certain context (G, M, I). In general, only the regions (g′′, g′) and
(m′, m′′) are full of non-empty pairs, i.e. have maximal density ρ = 1, since they
are object and attribute formal concepts respectively. Some black cells indicate
non-empty pairs which one may found in such a bicluster. Therefore, the density
parameter ρ is a bicluster quality measure which shows how many non-empty
pairs the bicluster contains.
Deﬁnition 8. Let (A, B) ∈2G×2M be a oa-bicluster and ρmin be a nonnegative
real number, such that 0 ≤ρmin ≤1, then (A, B) is called dense if it satisﬁes
the constraint ρ(A, B) ≥ρmin.

g
m
g''
m''
g'
 m'
Fig. 1. OA-bicluster based on object and attribute closures
4
Existing taxonomies and their analysis
Since formal concept is a natural notion of bicluster for Boolean data and was
rediscovered or reused in bioinformatics, one may suppose that the taxonomy of
FCA algorithms is a part of the taxonomy of biclustering algorithms. In fact,
paper [13] proposed such a taxonomy (see ﬁg.2).
The classiﬁcation properties of the concept lattice building algorithms en-
coded as follows:
– m1 means incremental approach;
– m2 means that an algorithm uses canonicity based on the lexical order;
– m3 means that an algorithm divides the set of concepts into several parts;
– m4 designates that an algorithm uses hashing;
– m5 means that an algorithm maintains an auxiliary tree structure;
– m6 means usage of attribute cache;
– m7 encodes that an algorithm computes intents by subsequently computing
intersections of object intents (i.e., {g}′ ∩{h}′);
– m8 means that an algorithm computes intersections of already generated
intents;
– m9 encodes that an algorithm computes intersections of non-object intents
and object intents;
– m10 means that an algorithm uses supports of attribute sets.
We formed a context based on Table II “Overall comparison of the bicluster-
ing algorithms” [3] and build its concept-based taxonomy in Fig.3.
Originally, the authors used several criteria to classify the existing (reviewed)
biclustering algorithm: type of bicluster, structure of biclusters, type of bicluster
discovery, and algorithmic strategy.
Thus, with respect to the deﬁnition of bicluster (its type) the authors diﬀer-
entiate between 1) biclusters with constant values, 2) biclusters with constant

Fig. 2. The line diagram of concept lattice for FCA algorithms
values on rows or columns, 3) biclusters with coherent values, and 4) biclusters
with coherent evolutions.
The biclusters were classiﬁed into one of 9 classes according to their structure.
a) Single Bicluster
b) Exclusive row and column biclusters (rectangular diagonal blocks after row
and column reorder).
c) Non-Overlapping biclusters with checkerboard structure.
d) Exclusive-rows biclusters.
e) Exclusive-columns biclusters.
f) Non-Overlapping biclusters with tree structure.
g) Non-Overlapping non-exclusive biclusters.
h) Overlapping biclusters with hierarchical structure.
i) Arbitrarily positioned overlapping biclusters.
Diﬀerent biclustering methods pursue diﬀerent goals in terms of the number
of discovered biclusters. Thus, they may identify one bicluster at a time or be
targeted to discovering one set of biclusters at a time, or they can follow simul-
taneous bicluster identiﬁcation, which means that the biclusters are discovered
all at the same time. All the three types are possible values of Discovery type
attribute in the proposed taxonomy.
Since in many cases the biclustering enumeration is a hard task (the cor-
responding counting problem may belong to #P complexity class), diﬀerent
algorithmic enumeration strategies were proposed. Thus, Madeira and Oliviera
sort out several categories: 1) Iterative Row and Column Clustering Combina-
tion, 2) Divide and Conquer, 3) Greedy Iterative Search, 4) Exhaustive Bicluster
Enumeration, and 5) Distribution Parameter Identiﬁcation.

Fig. 3. The line diagram of concept lattice for the biclustering taxonomy of Madeira and Oliveira (2004)

One of the reasonable questions here is: Why should we build diagrams in-
stead of looking at tables? The answer is we need two complementary views,
object-attribute descriptions in tables and ordered clusters of objects such that
the objects inside a particular cluster (formal concept) share the same attributes.
It is not easy to ﬁnd such clusters with respect to permutations of rows and
columns manually even for small contexts. Moreover, by examining the concept
lattice of a certain taxonomy we can ﬁnd useful attribute dependencies, which
can help to discover the underlying taxonomy’s domain.
The previous classiﬁcation done by Madeira and Oliviera was extended and
completed almost 11 years later in [14]. We build the corresponding line diagram
in Fig.4.
In fact, the number of classiﬁed methods were extended to 47 from 16.
The authors slightly redesigned the proposed classiﬁcation criteria. Thus,
they split the analysed methods into two categories: metric-based and non-metric
based. We counted this split as two corresponding attributes in the related formal
context. However, we also decided to include all the mentioned evaluation metrics
into our analysis like “Measure:MSR” meaning Mean Squared Residue.
The remaining criteria have been changed or extended by the authors. For
instance, instead of bicluster types, now eight patterns has been proposed:
1. Constant;
2. Constant columns;
3. Coherent values;
4. Additive coherent values;
5. Multiplicative coherent values;
6. Simultaneous coherent values;
7. Coherent evolutions;
8. Negative correlations.
The sub-taxonomy based on bicluster structure now contains only six crite-
ria: row exhaustive, column exhaustive, non-exhaustive, row exclusive, column
exclusive, and non-exclusive.
By means of terms “exhaustive” and “exclusive” it is possible to describe the
desired structure. Thus, exhaustive means where all genes (conditions) should
belong to some bicluster, i.e. to be covered by it. Exclusive means whether a
gene (condition) has to belong no more than one bicluster; e.g., in non-exclusive
case overlapping is allowed.
The attribute algorithmic strategy has been altered in its original form from
[3]. The attribute Discovery from [3] has been renamed to Strategy, but the
values remain the same: one bicluster at a time, set of biclusters at a time, and
simultaneous bicluster identiﬁcation.

Fig. 4. The line diagram of concept lattice for the biclustering taxonomy of Pontes et al. (2015)

In the beginning of 2000s it was unusual that data analysts and biologists
can miss existing biclustering methods (like FCA), which were not applied in
the bioinformatics domain yet. However, later FCA was successfully applied
in the domain of gene expression analysis [15,16,17,7,18], formal concepts were
rediscovered by [6,19] in bioinformatics, approximate greedy [20] and fast [21,12]
methods for dense bicluster discovery in Boolean setting appeared.
However, even the recent taxonomy from [14] does not include any of them.
To overcome incompleteness caused by the bioinformatics domain view re-
striction, an attempt to extend the taxonomy of Madeira and Oliveira was done
in [11].
Fig. 5. The line diagram of concept lattice for the biclustering taxonomy of Ignatov
(2010)
In addition to the existing criteria, the attribute bicluster values type was
added taking two values: binary and numeric. The former shows whether the
method is able to ﬁnd patterns in Boolean object-attribute tables and the latter
indicates whether the input entries from R can be processed by an algorithm.
Another important criteria is whether an algorithm based on the notion of clo-
sure (operator) from FCA and Closed Frequent Itemset Mining, implicitly or
explicitly. The corresponding formal context is given below.

FCA-related biclustering
Type:const
Type:const with exceptions
Struct:Arbitr. overl.
Value type:binary
Closure:explicit
Closure:implicit
Val.type:numeric
BiMax
×
× ×
×
Box biclustering
×
× ×
× ×
FCA
×
× × ×
Freq. Closed Itemsets
×
× × ×
Association rules
×
× × ×
Fault-tolerant concepts
× × × ×
×
OA-biclusters
× × × × ×
In Fig.5 we show only those objects (biclustering algorithms) which were not
included in the taxonomy of Madeira and Oliveira. By so doing, we considered
three general approaches (Formal Concept Analysis, Frequent Closed Itemsets,
and Association Rules) and particular modiﬁcations of formal concepts (box
biclusters [20], fault-tolerant concepts [22], OA-biclusters [11,12]).
In [11] it was noted that every association rule of the form A →B corresponds
to the bicluster (A′∪B′, A∪B) or (A′∩B′, A∪B), hence it is possible to consider
association rules as a biclustering technique.
Later, the taxonomical issues of biclustering were discussed in [23]; the au-
thors sorted out binary, integer, and real-valued biclustering approaches. Fre-
quent itemset mining algorithms, BiMax, Association Rules and several others
were included into a recent survey on pattern-based biclustering algorithms [24].
Even though the idea of closure was mentioned by the survey authors, they did
not use closedness property of the studied patterns as a taxonomical attribute.
Moreover, even though the authors cited several FCA-based papers ob bicluster-
ing, they do not treat relationship of this discipline with biclustering. However,
as we have mentioned, such relationships were studied on a solid mathematical
and experimental level; for example, in [25] it was shown that biclustering of
numerical data is possible by means of triclustering of the corresponding binary
relation.
Implications and Attribute Exploration can help to ﬁnd hidden attribute
dependencies and extend the built taxonomy by new (counter)examples.
Below we provide the reader with top-10 (w.r.t. support measure) impli-
cations of Duquenne-Gigues base [26] derived from the formal context of the
taxonomy from [14].
– {Metric-based, Struct:Non-exclusive} →{Struct:Non-Exhaustive}, sup =
26

– {Type:Additive coherent val.} →{Struct:Non-Exhaustive}, sup = 20
– {Measure:MSR} →{Metric-based, Struct:Non-Exhaustive}, sup = 18
– {Type:Additive coherent val., Struct:Non-Exhaustive, Struct:Non-exclusive} →
{Metric-based}, sup = 18
– {Strategy:One} →{Struct:Non-Exhaustive, Struct:Non-exclusive}, sup =
17
– {Type:Coherent values, Struct:Non-Exhaustive} →{Struct:Non-exclusive},
sup = 15
– {Strategy:One set} →{Struct:Non-Exhaustive}, sup = 13
– {Measure:Var} →{Metric-based, Struct:Non-Exhaustive, Struct:Non-exclusive},
sup = 8
– {Type:Negative correlations} →{Struct:Non-Exhaustive, Struct:Non-exclusive},
sup = 7
– {Metric-based, Struct:Non-Exhaustive, Strategy:Simult} →
{Type:Additive coherent val., Struct:Non-exclusive}, sup = 7
Since we deal with implications, their conﬁdence measure is equal to 1. The
size of the whole set of implications in Duquenne-Gigues base is 105.
If we start attribute exploration for the same context, then the ﬁrst question
in a row is the following:
Is it true, that when biclustering technique has attribute “Strategy:One set”,
that it also has attribute “Struct:Non-exhaustive”?
An expert can either agree with the implication {Strategy:One set →Struct:Non-exhaustive}
or disagree. In the latter case, (s)he needs to provide a counterexample: a bi-
clustering technique which follows discovery strategy “one set of biclusters at a
time” but does not result in biclusters of the structure type “exhaustive”. There
is also an option to stop Attribute Exploration process at every step.
5
Multimodal clustering and closed n-sets
Since the ﬁeld of biclustering is a subdomain of multimodal or relational cluster-
ing, the taxonomy can be extended by applying similar criteria to n-ary relation
and tensor clustering algorithms.
Thus, the notion of formal concept was generalised for triadic [27] and polyadic
case [28]. There are eﬃcient algorithms to ﬁnd triconcepts [29] and poliadic
concepts (closed n-sets) [30]. There exist relaxations of triconcept and poliadic
concept notions, triclusters and n-clusters, which allow for certain entries in-
side such n-dic concept to be zeros [20,31,32]; the theoretical and experimental
comparison is done in [33]. There are also methods for mining closed patterns
in n-ary relations [34]. Two biclustering approaches can be used for mining two
formal contexts simultaneously, which shares either set of attributes or objects;
this results in pseudotriclusters [35]. As for purely biological applications of tri-
clustering we may suggest reading, for example, [36] and [37].

6
Conclusion and future work
Even though the taxonomy building of a particular subﬁeld of Data Analysis or
Computer Science is not as laborious as devising Carl Linnaeus’ pre-phylogenetic
taxonomy, this is not an easy task to merge several such existing taxonomies and
build a uniﬁed one. Similarly to new species discovery, new algorithms can be
proposed and since they can contain new speciﬁc features, new classiﬁcation
attributes may be needed.
One of the possible schemes of taxonomy maintaining here could be done in
terms of Attribute Exploration [5].
At a certain moment the group of expert ﬁxes the set of existing bicluster-
ing methods and proposes suitable criteria for their classiﬁcation. A person or a
team which has proposed a new biclustering method should classify the method
according to the chosen scheme, then it should be validated by experts. Such
a team can propose an extra criterion for method classiﬁcation. If a person or
a team is going to propose a new method for an unexplored combination of
classiﬁcation attributes, it is possible to run attribute exploration to see which
prospective types of methods are missing to date. By means of Object Explo-
ration, it may become clear that some attributes are missing, e.g. it is evident
that formal concepts or Boolean biclusters is only a particular case of bicluster
type with constant values and we need at least one new attribute, Boolean entry
values.
Since a taxonomy may be used not only for classiﬁcation itself, but as a search
index for potential users, we may suggest using several ways of interactive vi-
sualisation: tree-based (TABASCO-like), concept lattice based (line diagrams),
object-attribute tables, and nested line diagrams. The latter can help when some-
one is interested in a special main set of attributes, which should be shown in
the outer taxonomy on the line diagram; the inner taxonomy can be shown if
the method-seeker needs a ﬁner level granularity or more detailed description
inside of the selected node from the outer taxonomy.
It is important to note that taxonomies can be considered as a special case of
ontologies, and here FCA was successfully used both for ontology merging and
completion [38,39].
There are two main tasks for our future studies: 1) unifying the existing
bicluster taxonomies, and 2) creation a taxonomy of multimodal clustering tech-
niques. Even though there are several good tools for building and managing
concept lattices like Concept Explorer, we need to rely on more ﬂexible tools
with extensible components. In particular we hope that FCART can become our
tool of choice in the near future [40].
Acknowledgements. We would like to thank Sergei Obiedkov and Derrick
Kourie for a piece of advice and their earlier work on the topic. This work was
supported by the Basic Research Program at the National Research University
Higher School of Economics in 2015-2016 and performed in the Laboratory of
Intelligent Systems and Structural Analysis. The ﬁrst author was also supported
by Russian Foundation for Basic Research (grant #13-07-00504).
