Analysing Congestion Problems in Multi-agent
Reinforcement Learning
∗
Roxana R˘adulescu
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Lab
Vrije Universiteit Brussel
Belgium

Peter Vrancx
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Lab
Vrije Universiteit Brussel
Belgium

Ann Nowé
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Lab
Vrije Universiteit Brussel
Belgium

ABSTRACT
Congestion problems are omnipresent in today’s complex net-
works and represent a challenge in many research domains. In
the context of Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL),
approaches like diﬀerence rewards and resource abstraction
have shown promising results in tackling such problems. Re-
source abstraction was shown to be an ideal candidate for
solving large-scale resource allocation problems in a fully
decentralized manner. However, its performance and appli-
cability strongly depends on some, until now, undocumented
assumptions. Two of the main congestion benchmark prob-
lems considered in the literature are: the Beach Problem
Domain and the Traﬃc Lane Domain. In both settings the
highest system utility is achieved when overcrowding one re-
source and keeping the rest at optimum capacity. We analyse
how abstract grouping can promote this behaviour and how
feasible it is to apply this approach in a real-world domain
(i.e., what assumptions need to be satisﬁed and what knowl-
edge is necessary). We introduce a new test problem, the
Road Network Domain (RND), where the resources are no
longer independent, but rather part of a network (e.g., road
network), thus choosing one path will also impact the load on
other paths having common road segments. We demonstrate
the application of state-of-the-art MARL methods for this
new congestion model and analyse their performance. RND
allows us to highlight an important limitation of resource
abstraction and show that the diﬀerence rewards approach
manages to better capture and inform the agents about the
dynamics of the environment.
CCS Concepts
•Computing methodologies →Multi-agent systems;
Multi-agent reinforcement learning;
Keywords
Multi-agent reinforcement learning; Congestion problems;
Resource abstraction
1.
INTRODUCTION
Solving congestion problems is an important research area,
as they are present in a wide variety of domains such as
traﬃc control [16], air traﬃc management [2], data routing
∗This paper expands our AAMAS 2017 extended abstract [9]
with a detailed description of the RND problem domain,
extensive analysis of the resource abstraction method, and
additional analysis of the experimental results.
[14] and sensor networks [15]. Multi-agent reinforcement
learning (MARL) has proven to be a suitable framework for
such problems [13, 5, 8, 3], as it allows autonomous agents
to learn in a decentralized manner, by interacting within a
common environment.
We are interested here in MARL scenarios of independent
learners, where no direct communication takes place between
the agents.
As the task at hand is a resource selection
problem where the number of agents exceeds the available
capacity, the agents should coordinate in order to achieve a
high system utility. We consider here two main approaches
designed to achieve this goal: diﬀerence rewards [17] and
resource abstraction [8].
Diﬀerence rewards is a reward shaping approach that aims
to align the interests of agents and the system, as well as to
tackle the credit assignment problem in MARL, by informing
each agent of its own contribution to the performance of the
system. Resource abstraction is a recent approach designed to
oﬀer a more informative reward signal that improves learning
speed, coordination between agents, as well as the ﬁnal
solution quality. In [8] the authors have shown to outperform
diﬀerence rewards, however as we show in Section 5, we
cannot conﬁrm this conclusion. Our ﬁrst contribution is that
we provide clear insights on how resource abstraction guides
the collective behaviour of the agents and we highlight the
method’s limitations, assumptions and application guidelines.
Current benchmark congestion problems present in the
literature often make unrealistic assumptions regarding the
independence between the available resources. In complex
network management domains, such as smart grids and traﬃc
networks, resources are connected and interdependent, such
that using one resource impacts the load of others as well.
For this purpose we introduce the Road Network Domain
(RND), a problem that models the resources as a system of
interconnected roads. We proceed to demonstrate the appli-
cation of state-of-the-art MARL methods on this problem
and analyse their capacity of capturing the newly introduced
dynamics in the environment.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2
presents an overview of the theoretical concepts concerning
the congestion problem and describes the two main consid-
ered resource selection tasks, Section 3 oﬀers an in depth
explanation of the recently introduced resource abstraction
method, Section 4 introduces a new congestion problem
and how to apply existing methods for solving it, Section 5
presents and discusses the performed experiments and results,
and ﬁnally Section 6 oﬀers some concluding remarks and
future possible directions.
arXiv:1702.08736v2  [cs.MA]  30 Mar 2017

2.
BACKGROUND
2.1
Reinforcement Learning
Reinforcement Learning (RL) [10] is a machine learning
approach which allows an agent to learn how to solve a task
by interacting with the environment, given feedback in the
form of a reward signal. The solution consists in ﬁnding
a policy, i.e., a mapping between states and actions that
maximizes the received rewards. Q-learning is a common RL
value-based method, in which a value function is iteratively
updated to optimize the expected long-term reward. After a
transition from environment state s to s′, through action a,
Q-learning performs the following update on its estimated
state-action value function Q, which represents the quality
of actions in given states:
Q(s, a) = Q(s, a) + α[r + γ max
a′
Q(s′, a′) −Q(s, a)]
where α is the learning rate, γ is the discount factor and
r is the immediate reward received from the environment.
In order to address the exploration-exploitation trade-oﬀ
challenge in RL, one can use the ϵ-greedy action selection
method, which allows the agent to choose exploratory random
actions with a probability ϵ.
When transitioning to the multi-agent case, we consider
the scenario of independent learners interacting in the same
environment.
Solving a congestion problem can then be
viewed from two perspectives – agent-centred and system-
centred – that are often in conﬂict. Allowing selﬁsh entities
to act in their own interest in a resource-sharing system can
lead to a tragedy of the commons situation [6], which is a
detrimental outcome for both the system and the agents.
In multi-agent reinforcement learning a central concern
is thus providing a reward signal that will oﬀer a beneﬁcial
collective behaviour at the system level. A ﬁrst approach
is providing a local reward (L) which reﬂects information
about the parts of the system the agent is involved in. L is
individually received by each agent and encourages a selﬁsh
behaviour, as agents try to optimize their own reward. An
alternative approach is the global reward (G) which reﬂects
the global system utility and should stimulate agents to
perform actions beneﬁcial for the system. The global reward
signal can incorporate a signiﬁcant amount of noise, as the
individual eﬀect of an agent on the system’s utility can be
overshadowed by other learners’ eﬀect, i.e., credit assignment
problem. Additionally, in large systems, aggregating at each
time-step over all the components can be more costly than
relying on local information for the reward computation.
2.2
Resource Selection Congestion Problems
A congestion problem from a multi-agent learning per-
spective is deﬁned by a set of n available resources Ψ =
{ψ1, ..., ψn}. Each resource ψ is deﬁned by three properties:
ψ = ⟨wψ, cψ, xψ,t⟩, where wψ ≥0 represents the weighting of
the resource, cψ > 0 is the capacity of ψ and ﬁnally xψ,t ≥0
is the consumption of ψ at time t. A resource ψ is congested
when xψ,t > cψ. The local utility of a resource ψ is deﬁned
in terms of its properties:
L(ψ, t) = f(xψ,t, cψ, wψ)
(1)
In this paper we consider two resource selection problems
that have become benchmark problems for studying resource
allocation in RL. They mainly diﬀer with respect to their
local utility schemes. The ﬁrst problem is deﬁned as the
beach problem domain (BPD) [12], where all the available
resources are considered beach sections with the same weight
equal to 1 and the same capacity c:
L(ψ, t) = xψ,te
−xψ,t
c
(2)
The second type of problem is the traﬃc lane domain (TLD)
[11], where the agents have to select between several available
lanes, each having a diﬀerent capacity and weight (reﬂecting
the importance or desirability of the lane):
L(ψ, t) =



wψe−1
, xψ,t ≤cψ
wψe
−xψ,t
cψ
, xψ,t > cψ
(3)
For both problems the global utility is deﬁned as the sum
over all the local utilities at time t:
G(t) =
X
ψ∈Ψ
L(ψ, t)
(4)
At each time step the agents choose to move to a certain
beach section or traﬃc lane and receive a reinforcement in
accordance to the eﬀect of their joint action on the imple-
mented reward scheme. The main diﬀerence between the
two described local utility functions is represented by the
segment before the congestion point is reached. For BPD
(Figure 1a) the maximum utility for a resource is achieved
at optimum capacity (xψ,t = cψ), while for TLD (Figure 1b)
this condition is less strict, only requiring the lanes to be
under the congestion point (xψ,t ≤cψ).
If the number of agents exceeds the total capacity, the
conﬁguration achieving the highest global utility for these
benchmark problems is one that overcrowds one of the re-
sources and leaves the rest at optimum capacity. For the
BPD the congested resource can be any of the available beach
sections, while for the TLD it should be the lane with the
lowest weight and highest capacity combination [5].
2.3
Difference Rewards
Driven by the idea that the reward signals should allow
the agents to deduce their individual contribution to the
system, a reward signal we consider here is diﬀerence rewards
(D) [17]. Under a global system utility G, the diﬀerence
rewards for agent i is deﬁned as:
Di(z) = G(z) −G(z−i)
(5)
where z denotes a general term for either state, action or state-
action pair, according to the considered domain, and G(z−i)
is the global utility of a system from which the contribution
of agent i is removed. The diﬀerence rewards signal was
constructed following two main guidelines: (i) aligning the
reward received by the agent with the global system utility –
factoredness, while (ii) lowering the impact of other agents
on the reward signal – learnability, thus addressing the credit
assignment problem in a multi-agent setting [1, 12]. These
characteristics have proven to signiﬁcantly improve learning
performance [11, 7, 13], even in domains where G(z−i) cannot
be directly computed and should be estimated [2, 4, 3].
We now take a look at how the presented credit assignment
approach can be deﬁned for these congestion models. By
combining Equations 2, 4 and 5 we obtain the following
formulation of the diﬀerence rewards for the BPD case:
Di(t) = L(ψ, t) −(xψ,t −1)e
−(xψ,t−1)
c
(6)

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Consumption
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Local reward
w = 1, c = 6
(a) Local reward BPD, Equation 2
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Consumption
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
Local reward
w = 1, c = 6
(b) Local reward TLD, Equation 3
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Consumption
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
Abstract reward (Beach 1)
Group size = 1
Group size = 2
Group size = 3
Group size = 4
Group size = 5
(c) Abstract reward BPD, Equation 7
Figure 1: Local reward (TLD and BDP) and abstract reward (BDP) received by the agents selecting section 1 from 5 available
sections, each with capacity 6 and weight 1. After the congestion point of the resource is reached, the abstract reward approach
reﬂects the reward function over the x-axis, giving agents a high initial penalty for starting to overcrowd a section.
as the impact of agent i is solely limited to the chosen
resource ψ, thus all the other terms in the sum composing
the global reward cancel out. The same approach can be
used for Equations 3 and 5 for the TLD case.
2.4
Resource Abstraction
Resource abstraction [8] is an approach that aims to im-
prove learning speed, solution quality and scalability in large
MARL congestion problems. Resource abstraction provides
the agents with a more informative reward, facilitating coor-
dination in systems with up to 1000 agents [8].
Resource abstraction entails grouping a set of resources
into disjoint subsets, and modifying the local reward function
after the congestion point of a resource is reached, such that
agents using it will get a higher penalty for overcrowding the
resource.
An abstract group is deﬁned by aggregating the properties
of the composing resources. In the congestion model deﬁned
above, an abstract group b has the following properties: con-
sumption Xb,t = P
ψ∈b xψ,t, capacity Cb = P
ψ∈b cψ and
weight Wb =
1
|b|
P
ψ∈b wψ. In other words, resource abstrac-
tion creates virtual resources which are agglomerations of
resources. Given a resource ψ and the abstract group b to
which it belongs to, the abstract reward for an agents using
resource ψ at time t for the BPD is deﬁned as:
A(b, ψ, t) =
(L(ψ, t),
xψ,t ≤cψ
−Xb,te
−Xb,t
Cb
,
xψ,t > cψ
(7)
The same approach can be used for the TLD case.
3.
ANALYSING RESOURCE ABSTRACTION
Notice that, in order to apply resource abstraction, in-
formation is required regarding the weight, capacity and
consumption of the resources as well as the system utility
function, limiting the straightforward applicability on a real-
world domain, where such information might not be available.
Even though the work [8] presents a few guidelines and re-
marks on how the resource abstraction should be applied,
clear insights and explanations on how to create the group
abstractions are not present. We consider that a more thor-
ough understanding of the method is beneﬁcial to extend its
usability and applicability.
For a better understanding of how the resource abstraction
impacts the collective behaviour of the agents, we turn to
Figure 1c. We plot the abstract reward function of various
groups in the BPD, diﬀering in the number of composing
resources (ranging from size 1 to size 5). There are 5 available
beach sections, each with weight equal to 1 and capacity equal
to 6, giving a total capacity of 30 for the entire beach. We ﬁll
the resources uniformly until we reach the maximum capacity,
after which we proceed to overcrowd each of the abstract
groups (by overcrowding one of the composing resources).
We ﬁrst remark that after the congestion point of a resource
is reached, the abstract reward mirrors the reward function
over the x-axis (this is due to the second case of the function
presented in Equation 7). This causes the initial penalty
for starting to overcrowd a section to be more severe (i.e.,
a negative reward) compared to the local reward presented
in Figure 1a. However, continuing to overcrowd a section
results in smaller and smaller penalties and given enough
agents it will eventually converge to 0.
A second remark can be made on the eﬀect of the group
size. The initial penalty for congesting a resource is correlated
with the size of the group, thus we expect agents to prefer
overcrowding resources that are part of the smallest abstract
groups (e.g., in the case presented in Figure 1c starting to
overcrowd a group of size 1 returns a reward of -2, while
for a group of size 5 the reward is around -11). The same
reasoning can be applied for the TLD.
Lastly, we note that in order to determine the best con-
ﬁguration for the abstract groups, one should also have
knowledge on the ﬁnal desired collective behaviour of the
agents (e.g., for the BDP having a group of size 1 should
lead to the desired ”overcrowd one” behaviour). For more
complex domains, ﬁnding the optimal abstracts grouping can
prove to be impossible, as we show in Section 5, due to the
fact that the resource abstraction approach can no longer
capture the required collective behaviour.
4.
ROAD NETWORK DOMAIN
We propose the Road Network Domain (RND), a problem
that introduces a scenario in which the resources are not
independent, as using one path introduces additional load for
others as well. We model this problem as a network of roads
(e.g., Figure 2), where the agents have to choose between
paths of the network. Figure 2 presents an example of a

small network topology that can be explored, but that already
serves the points we want to make. Each road segment is
modelled as a resource, corresponding to the description
presented in Section 2.2. The RND can be used with the
utility functions of both BPD and TLD, with the former
creating a more challenging task, as the maximum value of
the utility is only achieved at optimum capacity. The local
reward of a path P is then simply the sum over all the local
rewards of the composing road segments ψ (e.g., roads AB
and BD for the path ABD):
Lpath(P, t) =
X
ψ∈P
L(ψ, t)
(8)
We compute the global system utility by summing over all the
local rewards of the roads segments present in the network
(see Equation 4).1
A
B
C
D
Figure 2: Topology example for the RND problem. The
agents have to travel from point A to point D and have 3
possible paths: ABD, ABCD, or ACD.
We consider that the RND introduces a challenge that is
often present in real-world domains (e.g., electricity grids,
traﬃc networks). Additionally, one can always increase the
diﬃculty of the problem by creating more complex network
structures and can easily translate in this model any real-
world situation of interest.
4.1
Difference Rewards
As the impact of agent i on the system is limited to the
composing road segments of his chosen path P, we can deﬁne
the diﬀerence rewards for the RND as follows, where f is a
local reward function (see Equation 1):
Di(t) = Lpath(P, t) −Lpath(P−i, t)
= Lpath(P, t) −
X
ψ∈P
f(xψ,t −1, cψ, wψ)
(9)
4.2
Resource Abstraction
We consider here two approaches for deﬁning the abstract
group construction for the resource abstraction method: over
road segments or over paths of the network. As a road seg-
ment is a resource, the properties of an abstract group over a
set of segments coincide with the ones deﬁned in section 2.4.
The abstract reward for each road segment ψ and its corre-
sponding group b is deﬁned as:
A(b, ψ, t) =
(
L(ψ, t),
xψ,t ≤cψ
−f(Xb,t, Cb, Wb),
xψ,t > cψ
(10)
1We sum over road segments rather than over paths in
order to avoid having segments that belong to multiple path
contributing more than once to the global utility value.
with f a local reward function (see Equation 1). Finally,
the abstract reward for choosing a path P at time t then
becomes the sum over the abstract reward of each composing
road segment:
Apath(P, t) =
X
ψ∈P
A(b, ψ, t)
(11)
We also extend the deﬁnition for an abstract group b over
a set of paths: consumption Xb,t = P
P ∈b xP,t, capacity
Cb = P
P ∈b cP and weight Wb =
1
|b|
P
P ∈b wP , where xP,t is
the number of agents that choose path P, cP = minψ∈P (cψ)
and wP =
1
|P |
P
ψ∈P wψ. We consider a path to be congested
if any of its composing roads is congested. We can now deﬁne
the abstract reward for a selected path P at time t as:
A(b, P, t) =
(
Lpath(P, t),
∀ψ ∈P : xψ,t ≤cψ
−f(Xb,t, Cb, Wb),
∃ψ ∈P : xψ,t > cψ
(12)
where b is the corresponding abstract group of P.
Next, we present a series of experiments designed to demon-
strate how to best use the resource abstraction method, but
also its limitations. Additionally, we test all the presented
approaches (local and global rewards, diﬀerence rewards
and resource abstraction) on the RND, and evaluate which
method can best model the underlying dynamics of the envi-
ronment in the reward signal.
5.
EXPERIMENTS
Each agent uses the Q-learning algorithm with an explo-
ration parameter ϵ = 0.05 and an exploration decay rate of
0.9999. As an important aspect of work is to understand
and explore resource abstraction, the parameters for the
experiment in Section 5.1 were chosen to match the setting
used in the original work [8]: learning rate α = 0.1, decay
rate for α is 0.9999 and the discount factor γ = 1.0. As
for the RND experiments (Section 5.2), after several tests,
the parameters chosen for the local reward L, global reward
G and diﬀerence rewards D are: learning rate α = 0.1, no
decay, and the discount factor γ = 0.9.
5.1
Beach Problem Domain
Our ﬁrst experiment is performed on the BPD and it aims
to explain and demonstrate the use of resource abstraction.
We borrow the original setting from [8], with 6 beach sec-
tions, each with capacity 6, thus a total system capacity of
36. There are 100 agents (creating a congestion scenario)
and the maximum system utility is 11.04, achieved when
overcrowding one of the sections with 70 agents, while keep-
ing the other ﬁve at the optimum capacity of 6 agents. Each
agent has three available actions: shift to the resource on
the left, shift to the one on the right and maintain position
and has 5 time-steps to ﬁnalize his action sequence for an
episode. We run the scenario for 4 000 episodes and plot the
global utility averaged over 50 trials, together with error bars
representing the standard deviation at every 500 episodes.
Recall that the local reward function for the BPD is the one
plotted in Figure 1a.
Figure 3 presents the results obtained for the BPD for the
following reward schemes: local reward L, global reward G,
diﬀerence rewards D and resource abstraction RA. There
are seven diﬀerent resource abstraction conﬁgurations, just

0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
Episodes
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Global utility
L
G
D
RA_3+3
RA_4+2
RA_5+1
RA_2+2+2
RA_3+2+1
RA_1+3+2
RA_2+1+3
Figure 3: BPD, 100 agents, 6 sections each with capacity
6. D together with all the RA conﬁgurations containing an
abstract group of size 1 achieve the highest performance.
like in [8], composed of either two or three abstract groups.
For example RA 3 + 2 + 1 denotes that the ﬁrst 3 sections
form one abstract group, the next 2 another one and the last
section represents an abstract group on its own.
Given the insights presented in the previous section on
how the grouping of the resources inﬂuences the collective
behaviour and knowing that the maximum utility is achieved
under the ‘overcrowd one’ behaviour, we expect that the RA
with abstract groups containing only one resource should
attain the best performances. The results presented in Fig-
ure 3 conﬁrm our expectations and provide the following
ranking of the RA conﬁgurations: all the variations contain-
ing a group of one resource achieve the best performance,
RA conﬁgurations where 2 is the smallest group size come
in second, while the grouping RA 3 + 3 comes in last, but
still above the G and L reward schemes schemes.
An important remark we make here concerns the perfor-
mance of the diﬀerence rewards D. In our experiment D
ranks among the best performing methods, in contrast to the
results obtained in [8], where D plateaued around the value
of 8. We also note that the diﬀerence rewards application to
the BPD described in Equation 14 of the work [8] does not
correspond to the equation we consider to be the correct one
(Equation 6). 2
Figures 4, 5, and 6 present the ﬁnal distributions of agents
over the resources for the conﬁgurations RA 4 + 2, RA 5 + 1,
and RA 2+1+3. The results are averaged over 50 trials and
each bar plot is accompanied by the standard deviation error.
Notice that in each case the agents overcrowd the resources
corresponding to the smallest abstract group.
RA 5 + 1
and RA 2 + 1 + 3 present two examples of how the optimal
conﬁguration can look like. We note that we did not include
the representations for RA 3+2+1 and RA 1+3+2 as they
are similar to RA 2 + 1 + 3. Visualizing the distribution for
conﬁgurations like RA 2 + 2 + 2 or RA 3 + 3 is not possible,
as the agents can end up overcrowding any of the abstract
groups.
2Di(t) = L(ψ, t) −xψ,te
−(xψ,t−1)
c
[8], whereas the second
term should be a function of (xψ,t −1).
1
2
3
4
5
6
Resources
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Consumption
RA_4+2
Figure 4: BPD, distribution of agents over the 6 beach
sections for the RA 4 + 2 setting. The agents choose to
overcrowd the group with the smallest size, meaning resources
5 and 6.
1
2
3
4
5
6
Resources
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Consumption
RA_5+1
Figure 5: BPD, distribution of agents over the 6 beach sec-
tions for the RA 5+1 setting. The agents choose to overcrowd
the group with the smallest size, meaning resource 6. This
distribution is one of the possible optimum conﬁgurations.
1
2
3
4
5
6
Resources
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Consumption
RA_2+1+3
Figure 6: BPD, distribution of agents over the 6 beach
sections for the RA 2 + 1 + 3 setting. The agents choose
to overcrowd the group with the smallest size, meaning
resource 3. This distribution is one of the possible optimum
conﬁgurations.

5.2
Road Network Domain
For our next experiments we test how the considered re-
ward schemes perform on the newly introduced Road Net-
work Domain. As previously mentioned, RND is designed
to work with any of the local utility functions presented
in Section 2.2. We create two types experiments, one us-
ing the local utility of BPD and another with TLD. For all
the experiments we use the network topology presented in
Figure 2. There are 50 agents, all starting at point A and
having to reach point D. They can choose between three
paths: ABD, ACD, or ABCD. Each RA conﬁguration is
expressed using a bracket notation depicting the abstract
groups over either paths or road segments. For example, in
the setting [ABD, ACD], [ABCD] there are two groups: one
of size 2 (ABD and ACD) and one of size 1 (ABCD).
For the BPD utility case all roads have a capacity of 5
and weight 1. We run the ﬁrst experiment, using RA over
the paths of the network, for 20 000 episodes and plot the
global utility averaged over 30 trials, together with error bars
representing the standard deviation at every 1 000 episodes.
Figure 7 exempliﬁes one of the possible optimum conﬁgura-
tions. The maximum global utility for this scenario is 5.22.
Figure 7: Example of the optimum distribution of 50 agents
over the network under the BPD local utility, where each
road segment has capacity 5 and weight 1. The colors encode
the best performing abstract group conﬁguration over road
segments found for this case: [AB], [AC], [CD], [BC, BD].
The results are presented in Figure 8. We remark that
none of the RA settings is able to capture the underlying
optimal conﬁguration, as this can no longer be expressed in
terms of a pure ‘overcrowd one’ behaviour, due to the de-
pendencies among the resources and the shape of the utility
function. This is a situation for which there does not exist an
abstract grouping to guide the agents towards the optimal
performance, [ABD, ACD], [ABCD] even performs worse
than L or G, as this setting drives agents to overcrowd the
path ABCD, contributing to the congestion of the other two
paths as well. On the other hand, D manages to achieve the
optimal performance in this scenario, demonstrating its ca-
pacity to allow agents to adapt to more diﬃcult environment
dynamics.
We perform a second experiment using the BPD local util-
ity scheme, deﬁning the RA over road segments this time, in
order to verify whether at this resource granularity level we
can achieve an optimum group abstraction. Notice that, in
this case, the number of possible RA settings is much higher,
making the decision about the abstract group creation even
harder. The L, G, and D results are the same as in Fig-
ure 8. We note that additional smoothing was performed,
to improve the visibility of the results obtained for the RA
and each plot is accompanied by the standard error. The
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
Episodes
−1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Global utility
L
G
D
[ABD,ACD],[ABCD]
[ABD],[ABCD,ACD]
[ABD],[ABCD],[ACD]
[ABD,ABCD],[ACD]
Figure 8: RND with BPD local utility, RA deﬁned over paths,
50 agents. RA can no longer capture the optimal required
behaviour, due to the dependencies between resources and
shape of the utility function. D manages to reach optimal
performance.
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
Episodes
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
Global utility
L
G
D
[AC],[AB,CD],[BC,BD]
[AC,BD],[AB,CD,BC]
[BC],[AB,BD],[AC,CD]
[AB],[AC],[CD],[BC,BD]
[AC],[CD],[AB,BC,BD]
[AC,CD],[AB,BC,BD]
Figure 9: RND with BPD local utility, RA deﬁned over
road segments, 50 agents.
Even at segment level RA is
unable to capture the optimal required behaviour, due to
the dependencies between resources and shape of the utility
function. D manages again to reach optimal performance.
results of this experiment are presented in Figure 9. We
remark again that none of the RA settings manage to reach
the optimum solution, with the best performing one being
[AB], [AC], [CD], [BC, BD]. A visual representation of this
best performing grouping can be found in Figure 7: the
two segments that need to be kept under the congestion
point (BC, BD) form the largest group, while all the others
form their own abstract group. Thus, the RND problem
has allowed us to demonstrate that having disjoint abstract
groupings is not a suﬃcient condition for being able to reach

an optimum solution and that the necessity of having indepen-
dent resources goes beyond having segments not belonging
to the same abstract group.
To better understand these results, we can turn again to
Figure 7. Notice that even though the capacity of the road
segments is 5, the optimum conﬁguration does not include
any segments having reached this value. We conclude that
we cannot express the solution as ‘overcrowd these segments
and keep the rest at optimum capacity’, thus being unable to
properly express the desired solution using the RA approach.
For the TLD utility case we use the network scenario
described in Figure 10. Increasing the weights for AC and BD
determines the maximum global utility to be achieved when
avoiding to overcrowd these segments and their corresponding
paths. Additionally, because the condition for receiving the
highest utility for a road segment is less strict compared to the
BPD utility scheme (maintaining the consumption under the
congestion point versus reaching the optimum capacity), the
maximum global utility is achieved when overcrowding the
path ABCD. An example of such a conﬁguration is presented
in Figure 11. We thus expect RA over paths to display a
good performance in this scenario, as it should be able to
capture the desired behaviour. We run this experiment for
2 000 episodes and plot the global utility averaged over 30
trials, together with error bars representing the standard
deviation at every 100 episodes. The highest global utility is
3.68.
A
B
C
D
c = 3, w = 1
c = 7, w = 5
c = 5, w = 1
c = 7, w = 5
c = 3, w = 1
Figure 10: Weights and capacities for each road segment in
the RND scenario considered under the TLD local utility.
A
B
C
D
5
46
5
41
4
45
Figure 11: Example of the optimum distribution of 50 agents
over the considered RND under the TLD local utility
Figure 12 presents the obtained results. We notice that
in all cases the convergence takes place very fast, however
the quality of the solutions vary from one setting to an-
other. The diﬀerence rewards approach, D, manages again
to achieve optimum performance. As expected, the RA con-
ﬁguration [ABD, ACD], [ABCD] also performs optimally, as
it explicitly encourages the congestion of the path ABCD.
[ABD], [ABCD], [ACD] comes close to the optimum per-
formance, however the agents will not always overcrowd
path ABCD in this case.
The next two conﬁgurations,
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Episodes
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
Global utility
L
G
D
[ABD,ACD],[ABCD]
[ABD],[ABCD,ACD]
[ABD],[ABCD],[ACD]
[ABD,ABCD],[ACD]
Figure 12: RND with TLD local utility, 50 agents.
[ABD, ABCD], [ACD] and [ABD], [ABCD, ACD], still per-
form better than L and G, although they encourage a sub-
optimal behaviour (overcrowd path ACD or ABD respec-
tively). Notice that in comparison to the results in Figure 8,
[ABD, ACD], [ABCD] goes from being the worst performing
setting to one of the best. This emphasizes how important it
is to have insights on what the desired collective behaviour
of the agents is, in order to provide well performing abstract
groupings.
6.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
The contribution of this work is two-fold.
Firstly, we
introduce a new congestion problem, the Road Network
Domain, in which the resources are no longer independent,
and the selection of one path inﬂuences the load in other parts
of the network. Secondly, we provide a thorough analysis
of the resource abstraction approach for resource selection
congestion problems, together with its limitations and clear
guidelines on how to best create the abstract groups according
to the desired outcome.
The Road Network Domain presents a novel challenge
for resource selection congestion problems, introducing the
realistic aspect of interconnected resources as we often ﬁnd
in real-word application such as: electricity grids or traﬃc
networks. We note that the network topology used here is a
small one, yet suﬃcient to illustrate the additional challenge,
and that more research is necessary in order to evaluate
scenarios that closely model real-world situations. A next
possible step would be to investigate the scalability of all
the methods, when dealing with a larger and more complex
network, especially when considering the challenge of tuning
the resource abstraction approach.
While resource abstraction seems to provide a strong
method of guiding agents towards an ‘overcrowd one’ be-
haviour (namely the smallest sized group), it fails when the
optimal conﬁguration can no longer be expressed in these
terms.
Additionally, we consider this method to have a
limited applicability in real-world domains, as it requires
information regarding each composing resource (capacity,

weight, consumption), as well as some intuition on the prob-
lem’s utility function.
We have also shown that the diﬀerence rewards approach
achieves a high performance in all the tested scenarios, manag-
ing to capture in the reward signal the necessary information
to allow the agents to coordinate indirectly, even in more
complex scenarios as the RND.
