DISO: A Domain Ontology for Modeling Dislocations in
Crystalline Materials
Ahmad Zainul Ihsan
Forschungszentrum Jülich, Institute
of Advanced Simulation – Materials
Data Science and Informatics (IAS-9),
Germany

Said Fathalla
Forschungszentrum Jülich, Institute
of Advanced Simulation – Materials
Data Science and Informatics (IAS-9),
Germany
Faculty of Science, University of
Alexandria, Egypt

Stefan Sandfeld
Forschungszentrum Jülich, Institute
of Advanced Simulation – Materials
Data Science and Informatics (IAS-9),
Germany
RWTH Aachen University, Faculty 5,
Germany

ABSTRACT
Crystalline materials, such as metals and semiconductors, nearly
always contain a special defect type called dislocation. This de-
fect decisively determines many important material properties, e.g.,
strength, fracture toughness, or ductility. Over the past years, sig-
nificant effort has been put into understanding dislocation behavior
across different length scales via experimental characterization
techniques and simulations. This paper introduces the dislocation
ontology (DISO), which defines the concepts and relationships re-
lated to linear defects in crystalline materials. We developed DISO
using a top-down approach in which we start defining the most
general concepts in the dislocation domain and subsequent spe-
cialization of them. DISO is published through a persistent URL
following W3C best practices for publishing Linked Data. Two po-
tential use cases for DISO are presented to illustrate its usefulness in
the dislocation dynamics domain. The evaluation of the ontology is
performed in two directions, evaluating the success of the ontology
in modeling a real-world domain and the richness of the ontology.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Computing methodologies →Ontology engineering; • In-
formation systems →Web Ontology Language (OWL); On-
tologies;
KEYWORDS
Ontology, Dislocation, Crystallographic Defects, Linked Data, Ma-
terials Science and Engineering
ACM Reference Format:
Ahmad Zainul Ihsan, Said Fathalla, and Stefan Sandfeld. 2023. DISO: A
Domain Ontology for Modeling Dislocations in Crystalline Materials. In
The 38th ACM/SIGAPP Symposium on Applied Computing (SAC ’23), March
27-March 31, 2023, Tallinn, Estonia. ACM, New York, NY, USA, Article 4,
8 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3555776.3578739
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SAC ’23, March 27-March 31, 2023, Tallinn, Estonia
© 2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9517-5/23/03.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3555776.3578739
1
INTRODUCTION
A dislocation is a one-dimensional lattice defect responsible for plas-
tic deformation in metals and other crystalline materials. It plays an
essential role in determining mechanical properties such as strength
and ductility. Since the existence of the dislocation was postulated
in the 1930s by Orowan [21], Taylor [34], and Polanyi [23], sig-
nificant efforts have been undertaken to understand all details of
systems of dislocations based on, e.g., dedicated microscopy tech-
niques for visualizing dislocations. These techniques and various
simulation methods were developed to predict the evolution of
dislocation.
In the recent years, data-driven approaches have brought new
methods and tools for analyzing and understanding the evolution
of dislocation systems [25, 26, 32]. Similarly, the whole MSE field,
a parent domain of the specialized domain of dislocations, is under-
going an unprecedented change. This change brings simulations
and experiments together and ultimately makes digital transfor-
mation in the field of Materials Science and Engineering (MSE)
possible [1, 17, 24].
While dislocations can be directly represented through the po-
sitions of atoms, in many cases, the idealized representation of
the dislocation as a mathematical line is preferred as it allows to
consider larger systems with fewer degrees of freedom. The “scale”
on which these mathematical lines are defined is larger than the
atomic scale (atoms are not visible there) but still contains effective
atomic scale information in the form of the dislocation microstruc-
ture. Therefore, this is often called the “mesoscale” even though this
is not a well-defined notion. To fully understand the behaviour of
materials, aspects from different length scales need to be considered.
This makes the knowledge representation of systems of dislocations
challenging, even though so far this has not been perceived as a sig-
nificant research hindrance in materials science. Formal knowledge
representation, i.e., via ontologies, enables interoperability and data
handling between related MSE domains, thus enabling machine
actionability. Ontology also allows the domain knowledge to be
represented by logical axioms that the machine can understand.
Ultimately, an ontology is an important component to enable the
establishment of the FAIR principles (Findable, Accessible, Interop-
erable, and Reusable) [36] in the MSE domains.
This paper represents the dislocation ontology (DISO), an onto-
logy representing the concepts and relationships in linear defects
arXiv:2401.02540v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  4 Jan 2024

SAC ’23, March 27-March 31, 2023, Tallinn, Estonia
A. Z. Ihsan et al.
in crystalline materials. DISO is an extended version of the onto-
logy presented in Ihsan et al. [15]. Indeed, DISO is a part of the
Dislocation Ontology Suite (DISOS)1. DISOS is an ontology suite
comprising several modules describing materials scientific concepts,
representations of dislocations, and different simulation models in
the dislocation domain. The contributions can be summarized as
follows:
• covering further characteristics of dislocation, including the
mathematical and numerical representation of the disloca-
tion line,
• adding new concepts, including Bravais Lattice, Space Group,
Point Group, Crystal System, and Vector,
• demonstrating the usefulness of the new version by showing
its ability to answer a set of predefined queries in various
complexity,
• creating human-readable documentation for the ontology
as well as adding ontology metadata (e.g. contributor, title,
date created, etc.), which will greatly improve its findability
and reusability,
• presenting two potential use cases for DISO: Dislocation
dynamics data and dislocation experiment data,
• creating RDF dataset of dislocation structure data produced
by MoDELib software [22] by mapping data stored in Hierar-
chical Data Format 5 (hdf5)2 files to RDF triples using DISO
classes, and
• evaluating the ontology using two different evaluation strate-
gies.
DISO is developed and maintained on a GitHub repository3. The
ontology is available (in several RDF serializations) via a persistent
identifier (i.e., https://purls.helmholtz-metadaten.de/disos/diso) pro-
vided by PIDA (Persistent Identifiers for Digital Assets)4. PIDA is
a service that provides persistent identifiers for digital assets. It
employs content negotiation [4], which is a mechanisms defined as
a part of HTTP serve different versions of a resource (i.e. the HTML
documentation or an RDF representation) at the same URI in accor-
dance with the client’s request. The dereferenceability of the IRIs
of the ontology terms over the HTTP protocol (cf. [19]) has been
checked using a Linked Data validator (i.e. Vapour5). Furthermore,
DISO is syntactically validated by the W3C RDF validation service6
to conform with the W3C RDF standards. To make it easier to un-
derstand and reuse our ontology, human-readable documentation
of the ontology is generated and can be found online via its URI.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents
related work of materials science domain ontologies and points
out the existing gaps. Section 3 describes the physical aspects of
dislocations and in section 4, the development of the ontology is
described. Section 5 shows two potential use cases and section 6
presents the evaluation of DISO using a criteria-based strategy.
Finally, section 7 concludes and sketches the envisioned future
work.
1https://purls.helmholtz-metadaten.de/disos
2https://www.hdfgroup.org/solutions/hdf5/
3https://github.com/Materials-Data-Science-and-Informatics/
Dislocation-Ontology-Suite/tree/main/DISO
4https://purls.helmholtz-metadaten.de/
5http://linkeddata.uriburner.com:8000/vapour?
6https://www.w3.org/RDF/Validator/
2
RELATED WORK
In the past decades, several researchers have been involved in the
knowledge representation of various fields of science [7], includ-
ing Materials Science and Engineering (MSE), through developing
domain ontologies.
Plinius [35] is an ontology developed for describing ceramic
materials covering the conceptualization of chemical compositions
ranging from the single atom to complex chemical substances. In
the “Materials Ontology” [3], a detailed structure of materials in-
formation consisting of substances, processes, environment, and
properties was conceptualized.
The “International Union of Crystallography”7 published and
distributed the Crystallographic Information File (CIF) and the
further developed CIF2 which currently co-exists with the CIF
file format. CIF serves as a de facto standard for crystallographic
information format exchange. The authors of CIF in [13] also have
further developed the STAR/CIF Ontology that was written in the
mathematical symbolic script language called dREL [31].
Another ongoing effort to establish semantic standards that ap-
ply at the highest possible level of abstraction is the Elementary
Multi-perspective Material Ontology (EMMO)8. EMMO has been de-
veloped in the context of the European Materials Modelling Council9
(EMMC) and provides a common semantic framework for describ-
ing material models, characterization, and data with the possibility
of extension and adaptation to other domains. However, EMMO cur-
rently contains only a small number of sub-domains. Furthermore,
it does not include the domain of dislocations which is of great
importance for materials scientists in the context of mechanical
deformation of nano- and micometer sized specimens.
Recent development work in materials design (e.g., with regards
to ab-initio methods) and crystallographic information resulted in
the Materials Design Ontology (MDO) [20] and the Crystal Structure
Ontology (CSO)10, respectively. The former represents information
on the atomic structure of materials via its “structure” ontology
module. The latter represents crystallographic information needed
to describe the crystallographic defect. However, both do not ex-
plicitly represent the physical and conceptual aspects of the crystal
structure that are directly related to the representation of defects
in crystals, particularly dislocations.
In summary, it can be concluded that even though significant
progress has been made concerning the ontology design in a number
of related domains, it becomes clear that a level-domain ontology
of dislocations in crystalline materials is still missing. Furthermore,
there are several attempts to represent materials science phenom-
ena in the literature, even though few researchers have addressed
the problem of semantically representing crystalline defects. There-
fore, developing a domain ontology of dislocations in crystalline
materials fills a clear gap and is an important step for the domain
of materials science.
7https://www.iucr.org/
8https://emmo-repo.github.io
9https://emmc.eu/
10https://purls.helmholtz-metadaten.de/disos/cso

Dislocation Ontology (DISO)
SAC ’23, March 27-March 31, 2023, Tallinn, Estonia
3
DESCRIPTION OF THE DOMAIN
In real crystalline materials, atoms are typically not perfectly or-
dered or positioned – at least not everywhere. Typically, various
types of crystallographic defects in a piece of material destroy the
local order of the crystal structure (on top of thermal fluctuations
that also affect the atomic positions). Such a defect might be a point
defect (e.g., a missing or extra atom) or, as shown in the left panel
of Figure 1, a dislocation (a strongly localized, tube-like region of
disorder containing the highly disordered dislocation core at the
center).
According to the geometry, there are two types of dislocations,
the so-called “edge” and “screw” dislocation. The latter is character-
ized by having a line sense parallel to its Burgers vector, whereas
in the former, the line sense is perpendicular to its Burgers vector.
Furthermore, also the atoms in the vicinity of the dislocation are
displaced from their perfect lattice sites. This lattice distortion sub-
sequently results in a stress field in the crystalline material around
the dislocation.
From a mesoscopic point of view, details from the smallest con-
sidered scale, the scale of the individual atoms are no longer visible.
Nonetheless, the dislocation line still can be observed: the tube-
like defect “region” is reduced to an idealized mathematical line
as shown in Figure 1 (see the center figure). Thus, moving from
the atomic scale to such a mesoscale is an idealization and strongly
reduces the amount of information to only the utmost necessary
information.
A wide range of experimental and computational techniques are
used to observe and predict dislocations in crystalline materials.
E.g., on the atomic scale, field ion microscopy or high-resolution
transmission electron microscopy is used to image the arrangement
of atoms. Then on the mesoscale, these techniques determine the
properties of individual dislocations and study the arrangement,
distribution, and density of dislocations in crystalline materials.
Examples of the techniques at the mesoscale are Transmission
Electron Microscopy (TEM) and, as a simulation method, Discrete
Dislocation Dynamics (DDD).
TEM is a microscopy technique that uses a particle beam of elec-
trons, transmitted through a specimen and passing some lenses,
ultimately generating a higher resolution (highly-magnified) im-
age. The transmitted beam is deflected once it hits the dislocation.
The deflection reduces the intensity of the transmitted beam and
increases the intensity of the diffracted beam. The dislocation then
appears as a dark line in the bright-field image.
The motion and interaction of dislocation lines during plastic
deformation mainly follow the governing equations of (linear) elas-
ticity theory. The DDD simulation method treats dislocations as
mathematical lines represented as polygons or splines and moves
them according to elastic interactions and further “local rules”.
Both techniques mentioned above observe the dislocation as a
mathematical line. However, they apply different approaches to
represent the mathematical line. In TEM, the image containing
the dislocation lines is represented by a pixels image. In DDD,
the mathematical dislocation line needs to be discretized to solve
the governing equations numerically. The particular type of dis-
cretization represents the mathematical line through the numerical
start
end
x
y
z
P0 P1
Pn
C(u)
start
end
local line
direction
dislocation
line
Burgers vector
Dislocation in
mesoscale
Idealization
Numerical
Representation
Dislocation in
atomic scale
Dislocation as
discretized line
Figure 1: The idealization represents the dislocation in the
mesoscale. Here, the individual atoms are no longer visible.
This idealization reduced the tube-like defect “region” to a
mathematical line. On the rightmost, the numerical repre-
sentation of a mathematical line as the discretized line is
illustrated.
representation. The discretization steps [12] are (also see the right-
most figure in Figure 1): the oriented curve of the dislocation line,
C(𝑢), where 0 ≤𝑢≤1, is discretized into a number of segments,
𝑛𝑠. The position vector for any point on the segment is defined by
C(𝑢) = P(𝑢) and the shape of a segment is defined by choosing
the shape function, N𝑖(𝑢), e.g., linear, circular, cubic spline segment.
However, this is only one possible discretization type, and also
others are commonly used in the DDD simulation community.
4
ONTOLOGY DEVELOPMENT
Developing domain ontologies attracts considerable interest from
several private and public sector organizations to capture their
knowledge about their domain of interest in a form that machines
can understand. In fact, the main goal of developing ontologies is to
share conceptualizations through which humans express meanings
of things that can act as communication interfaces between humans
and machines.
This section describes the development process of DISO, which
is an iterative approach, which means we started with an initial
version and then revise and refine the evolving ontology. Figure 2 il-
lustrates the workflow of this process which is inspired from several
well-known ontology development methodologies [18]. This figure
presents the main phases, their sub-tasks, and the roles involved
in the whole process. We have frequently interviewed domain sci-
entists as well as ontology engineers during the whole process in
order to improve the final outcome. This continues through the
entire development process.
4.1
Ontology Metadata
An important step towards improving ontology reuse is to provide
a systematic and comprehensive description of ontologies [29],
i.e., ontology metadata. Often, ontologies are not well docu-
mented or miss information about the ontology itself. Conse-
quently, these ontologies are therefore suffering from several
problems, including 1) being not optimally accessible to poten-
tial users, 2) hindering their reusability, and 3) identifying re-
quired ontologies for specific applications efficiently. Accordingly,
several DCMI Metadata Terms11 are added to the ontology, in-
volving terms:contributor, terms:created, terms:title, and
vann:preferredNamespacePrefix. As a next step, providing
11https://www.dublincore.org/specifications/dublin-core/dcmi-terms/

SAC ’23, March 27-March 31, 2023, Tallinn, Estonia
A. Z. Ihsan et al.
Figure 2: The workflow of the dislocation ontology development, illustrating the main phases, subprocesses, and roles involved
in the whole process.
human-readable documentation for the ontology is also crucial
because it is one of the main reuse problems identified in [11].
4.2
Reuse of existing models
One of the initial steps in the ontology development is to reuse terms
(i.e., classes or properties) from existing ontologies that describe
the same domain or topic. However, it is challenging for ontology
engineers to decide which of the existing ontologies is suitable to
be reused. In fact, the more ontologies a model reuses, the higher
the value of its semantic data is. Therefore, reusing terms from
other ontologies greatly increases semantic data value [10] of the
developed ontology.
After studying the literature, we decided to reuse several con-
cepts from two related ontologies, namely, Crystal Structure onto-
logy (CSO) and Crystalline Defect ontology (CDO). The former is
an ontology developed to represent crystallographic information
needed to describe the dislocation. The latter is an ontology con-
necting the physical materials entity to the crystal structure and
several defects in crystalline materials, e.g., point defect, dislocation,
and grain boundary.
Crystalline
Defect
Ontology
(CDO)12.
In
CDO,
the
EMMO:Material, which is a class from EMMO13, is reused
to describe the physical entity of crystalline materials. The
CDO:CrystallineMaterial class is subsequently a subclass of
EMMO:Material.
Crystal Structure Ontology (CSO)14. In CSO, several MDO [20]
classes are reused to describe the crystal coordinate system, mo-
tif (an arrangement of chemical species in the crystal struc-
ture) in a crystal structure, point groups, and space groups.
The standard coordinate system is defined by MDO:Basis and
MDO:CoordinateVector classes that CSO reuses. The motif reuses
MDO:Occupancy, MDO:Site, and MDO:Species. Subsequently, to
12https://purls.helmholtz-metadaten.de/disos/cdo
13https://emmo-repo.github.io
14https://purls.helmholtz-metadaten.de/disos/cso
define the point groups and space groups of a crystal structure,
MDO:PointGroup and MDO:SpaceGroup are reused. Lastly, to de-
fine the unit quantity of a property in CSO, CSO reuses sev-
eral classes from QUDT (Quantities, Units, Dimensions and Data
Types Ontologies) [14]. Classes that are reused from QUDT are the
QUDT:Quantity, QUDT:QuantityKind, and QUDT:QuantityValue.
4.3
Main Classes
The classes in our ontology are divided into two sets; 1) imported
from the ontologies introduced in subsection 4.2 and 2) newly
defined classes that are not explicitly defined in the existing related
ontologies.
Imported classes. Several classes have been imported from
the crystal structure ontology (CSO), involving CSO:Lattice
which represents the periodic arrangement of one or more atoms,
CSO:Vector which represents quantities that have both magnitude
and direction, and imported from crystallographic defect onto-
logy (CDO), involving CDO:CrystallographicDefect which rep-
resents lattice irregularity/lattice defects by having one or more of
its dimensions on the order of an atomic diameter.
New classes. Here, the focus is put on some chosen classes of
the main classes in the crystalline materials and line defect: 1)
Dislocation, as the entity of main interest, which models a linear
or one-dimensional defect around which some of the atoms are
displaced, 2) SlipPlane, which models the lattice plane to which
the dislocation is constrained to move, 3) SlipDirection, which
models the lattice direction where the slip occurs in the crystalline
materials, 4) LatticePlane, which models the lattice plane where
it forms an infinitely stretched plane that cuts through lattice points.
5) LatticeDirection, which models the direction inside the lattice
that connects two lattice points, and 6) DiscretizedLine, which
models the numerical representation of the dislocation line as a
mathematical line, e.g. an oriented curve, that is discretized into a
number of segments.

Dislocation Ontology (DISO)
SAC ’23, March 27-March 31, 2023, Tallinn, Estonia
Figure 3: Core concepts and interconnected relationships in the DISO ontology. Arrows with open arrow heads denote
rdfs:subClassOf properties between classes. Regular arrows visualize rdfs:domain and rdfs:range restrictions on proper-
ties. Furthermore, colored boxes represent different ontologies, e.g., MDO, CDO, CSO, and DISO.
4.4
Properties
Both data and object properties in DISO are divided into two cate-
gories: newly defined properties and reused ones:
New properties. The relationships between concepts are im-
plemented as object properties, for example, the relationship
between Dislocation and TransmissionElectronMicroscopy
can be represented by observedby property. Similarly, the re-
lationship between Dislocation and LineSense is represented
by hasLineSense property. Furthermore, several data proper-
ties also have been defined, such as directionMillerIndice,
planeMillerIndice, and slipArea.
Reused properties. Property cso:hasPositionVector from the
CSO ontology and several data properties from DCterms for adding
ontology metadata (see subsection 4.1) are reused. After defin-
ing new properties and identifying reused ones, the domain and
range for each property using rdfs:domain and rdfs:range are
defined, respectively. For instance, the domain of the data pro-
perty diso:slipArea is diso:DiscretizedLine and the range is
xsd:double.
Restricting properties. Several DISO classes use property
restrictions,
e.g.,
value
constraints.
For
instances,
the
observedby
property
which
connects
Dislocation
and
TransmissionElectronMicroscopy is restricted by a value
constraint of
owl:someValuesFrom and hasBurgersVector
which connects Dislocation and BurgersVector is restricted by
a value constraint of owl:allValuesFrom.
4.5
Instantiation of the Dislocation Ontology
As shown in Figure 4, an excerpt of the simulation data of dis-
location structure annotated by DISO is illustrated. Due to the
space limit, we only added a sample of crystallographic and dislo-
cation information. We instantiate several crystallographic-related
classes: crystal structure, Bravais lattice, crystal system, and unit
cell. Furthermore, we instantiate several dislocation-related classes:
dislocation, slip plane, slip direction, Burgers vector, and the repre-
sentation of dislocation in numerical simulation, e.g., line, segment,
and node. Lastly, the instance of crystalline material connects the
crystallographic information, i.e., crystal structure and dislocation
instances.
5
POTENTIAL USE CASES
In this section, we present two potential use cases for DISO: dislo-
cation dynamics simulation data and dislocation experiment data.
Use case 1. Dislocation dynamic (DD) simulation is a compu-
tational technique/simulation to determine individual dislocation
properties and study the arrangement, distribution, and density

SAC ’23, March 27-March 31, 2023, Tallinn, Estonia
A. Z. Ihsan et al.
&'2&U\VWDOOLQH0DWHULDO
&62&U\VWDO6WUXFWXUH
&62%UDYDLV/DWWLFH
&628QLW&HOO
'Ζ62'LVORFDWLRQ
'Ζ62%XUJHUV9HFWRU
'Ζ626OLS3ODQH
'Ζ626OLS'LUHFWLRQ
&62&U\VWDO6\VWHP
'Ζ62/LQH
'Ζ62'LVFUHWL]HG/LQH
'Ζ626HJPHQW
'Ζ621RGH
UGIW\SH
FGRKDV&U\VWDO6WUXFWXUH
UGIW\SH
FVRKDV/DWWLFH
UGIW\SH
FVRKDV&U\VWDO6\VWHP
FVRKDV8QLW&HOO
UGIW\SH
UGIW\SH
FGRKDV&U\VWDOORJUDSKLF'HIHFW
UGIW\SH
UGIW\SH
GLVRKDV%XUJHUV9HFWRU
UGIW\SH
GLVRPRYHV2Q
UGIW\SH
GLVRKDV6OLS'LUHFWLRQ
UGIW\SH
GLVRKDV0DWKHPDWLFDO5HSUHVHQWDWLRQ
UGIW\SH
GLVRKDV1XPHULFDO5HSUHVHQWDWLRQ
GLVRKDV6HJPHQW
UGIW\SH
GLVRKDV(QG1RGH
UGIW\SH
UGIW\SH
GLVRKDV6WDUW1RGH
)AA[VGVWULQJ
FVRFHQWHULQJ
GLVORFDWLRQB
(AA[VGGRXEOH
FVRYHFWRU0DJQLWXGH
AA[VGVWULQJ
GLVRSODQH0LOOHUΖQGLFH

GLVRGLUHFWLRQ0LOOHUΖQGLFH
VHJPHQWB
QRGHB
QRGHB
GLVRKDV6HJPHQW
VHJPHQWB
UGIW\SH
Figure 4: Sample of the instances of the dislocation dynamic data. Yellow points denote individuals of classes. Each individual
is defined by an arrow having rdf:type relationship to the respective class and individuals are connected by object properties
defined in DISO. Colored boxes represent classes from different ontologies, e.g., CDO, CSO, and DISO.
of dislocations in crystalline materials. In the dislocation domain,
there are various DD software available, including MoDELib [22],
ParaDIS [2], and microMegas [6]. Each software has a different set
of metadata to structure the input and output of the simulation. In
this regard, annotating/mapping the DD data/metadata to DISO
enables data interoperability between various DD software. In ad-
dition, it enables semantic search over materials science databases,
particularly in the dislocation domain.
Use case 2. An example of dislocation experiment data comes
from Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM). TEM is a microscopy
technique that uses a particle beam of electrons transmitting through
a specimen. In TEM, the generated data is a higher resolution
(highly-magnified) image/video that observes dislocation in a crys-
talline material. While the TEM image/video already has some
metadata to describe the data, the descriptive metadata about the
observed dislocation is still lacking. In this regard, leveraging DISO
along with the research data packager, such as RO-Crate [30], give
the formal metadata description to the dislocation experiment data
at ease, and ultimately it enables the data interoperability. More-
over, since RO-Crate is based on JSON-LD, annotating data with
DISO is straightforward.
6
EVALUATION
The evaluation of the quality of an ontology can be performed by
calculating metrics that evaluate the richness of the given ontology
(i.e. criteria-based evaluation) [10]. In this section, we are evaluat-
ing our ontology in two directions, evaluating the success of the
ontology in modeling a real-world domain and the quality of the
ontology. In one direction, we carried out the following steps in
order to evaluate the effectiveness of DISO: 1) defining a set of com-
petency questions (CQs) based on domain expert feedback during
several interviews, 2) formulating SPARQL queries corresponding
to CQs, 3) running the resultant SPARQL queries against the on-
tology instances (cf. subsection 6.1) using a SPARQL endpoint, 4)
analyzing the query results by comparing them to the correct an-
swers given by domain experts. On the other hand, we assess the
ontology using OntoQA [33] evaluation model.
6.1
Data
The dislocation dynamics data produced is a virtual specimen of
Nickel that consists of a number of dislocation lines. To fully de-
scribe the virtual specimen, the details of the crystal structure of
Nickel, such as unit cell lattice parameters, point group, and space
group data are taken from the Materials Project [16] repository.
In order to carry out the aforementioned steps, we prepared
a dislocation dynamics dataset15 that can be used for illustrating
how DISO is useful by answering competency questions prepared
by domain experts. Competency questions (CQs) determine what
knowledge has to be entailed in the ontology as well as a way of
evaluating how useful the ontology is by showing its capability to
answer. Therefore, we write Python scripts16 (using rdflib 6.0 [5]
Python library) that map DDD MoDELib [22] software output with
DISO classes and generate RDF triples (∼4𝐾triples), which can be
found on DISO GitHub repository.
6.2
Competency Questions
Evaluating ontologies with competency questions is among the
most widely used types of evaluating ontologies [8, 9, 27, 28].
15https://github.com/Materials-Data-Science-and-Informatics/
Dislocation-Ontology-Suite/blob/main/DISO/data/modelib-microstructure/
modelib-nickel-microstructure.h5
16https://github.com/Materials-Data-Science-and-Informatics/
Dislocation-Ontology-Suite/tree/main/DISO/python-script/modelib

Dislocation Ontology (DISO)
SAC ’23, March 27-March 31, 2023, Tallinn, Estonia
A total of 20 CQs (defined in the domain exploration step (cf.
Figure 2)) were collected and categorized into three categories: the
crystal structure, the dislocation, and the vector information.
For illustration, we pick CQ1 from the CQs set (listed in Table 1).
The corresponding SPARQL query to CQ1 is listed in Listing 1.
Table 1: Samples of competency questions.
No.
Competency Question
CQ1
What are the slip systems of a given crystal structure?
CQ2
What are the slip planes of a given crystal structure?
CQ3
In which slip planes does a dislocation move on?
CQ4
What is the Burgers vector of the dislocation?
CQ5
What is the Burgers vector magnitude of the dislocation?
CQ6
Given a slip plane of a crystal structure, what is the slip
direction?
CQ7
What is the family of slip direction, given a slip direction
in the crystal?
..
...
CQ20
Given a Burgers vector, what is its unit?
Listing 1: SPARQL query corresponding to CQ1.
1
PREFIX diso: <https://purls.helmholtz -metadaten.de/disos/diso#>
2
PREFIX cso: <https://purls.helmholtz -metadaten.de/disos/cso#>
3
PREFIX ex: <http:// example.org/>
4
SELECT ?cryst_struc ?slip_sys ?slip_plane_normal_val
5
?slip_direction_val WHERE{
6
?crystal_structure a cso:CrystalStructure ;
7
diso:hasSlipSystem ?slip_system .
8
?slip_system diso:hasSlipPlaneNormal ?slip_plane_normal ;
9
diso:hasSlipDirection ?slip_direction.
10
?slip_plane_normal diso:directionMillerIndice ?slip_plane_normal_val.
11
?slip_direction diso:directionMillerIndice ?slip_direction_val.
12
}
Table 2 shows the result of executing the above SPARQL query
on the generated RDF data in which the same crystal structure
consists of several slip systems.
Table 2: The result of CQ1 in Listing 1
Crystal Structure
Slip System
Plane Normal
Slip Direction
cryst_struc_0
slip_sys_0
[-1-11]
[0-1-1]
cryst_struc_0
slip_sys_1
[-11-1]
[110]
cryst_struc_0
slip_sys_2
[-111]
[-10-1]
cryst_struc_0
slip_sys_3
[1-1-1]
[01-1]
cryst_struc_0
slip_sys_4
[111]
[1-10]
cryst_struc_0
slip_sys_5
[-1-11]
[-10-1]
cryst_struc_0
slip_sys_6
[11-1]
[-101]
cryst_struc_0
slip_sys_7
[-11-1]
[011]
The complete set of the competency questions and the corre-
sponding SPARQL queries can also be found in the DISO GitHub
repository17.
6.3
OntoQA Evaluation
In this section, we assess the richness of DISO by using a criteria-
based evaluation called OntoQA [33]. OntoQA evaluates the on-
tology using schema metrics and population/instance metrics. To
17https://github.com/Materials-Data-Science-and-Informatics/
Dislocation-Ontology-Suite/blob/main/DISO/CQs/CQs.md
evaluate the ontology design and its potential for rich knowledge
representation, we use the following metrics:
• Relationship richness (RR) shows the diversity of relations
and placement of relations in the ontology. Formally, it is
defined by
𝑅𝑅=
|𝑃|
|𝑆𝐶| + |𝑃|
(1)
where P is the number of relationships in the ontology and
SC is the number of sub-classes. The more relations the
ontology owns, except is-a relations, the richer it is.
• Attribute richness (AR) shows the more slots/attributed that
are defined, the more knowledge the ontology delivers. For-
mally, AR is defined by
𝐴𝑅= |𝐴𝑇|
|𝐶|
(2)
where AT is the number of attributes for all classes and C is
the number of classes.
• Inheritance richness (IR) describes the distribution of infor-
mation across different levels of the ontology inheritance
tree. IR indicates how knowledge is grouped into different
classes and sub-classes in the ontology. Formally, IR is de-
fined by
𝐼𝑅= |𝑆𝐶|
|𝐶|
(3)
As shown in Table 3, we compare the results of DISO with
MDO [20] and CSO18. The former is an ontology representing the
domain of solid-state physics simulation in materials science. The
latter represents crystallographic information needed to describe
the dislocation. While the MDO ontology has a larger RR, i.e., it has
more diversity in relations in the ontology. DISO and CSO have
similar values in terms of IR, which means they represent a wider
range of knowledge compared to MDO. Concerning AR, DISO has
a larger AR than MDO but is slightly smaller than CSO, enabling
more knowledge per instance, which is more useful in the DD data.
Table 3: OntoQA Evaluation of DISO
Ontology
C
SC
AT
P
RR
AR
IR
MDO
37
49
14
32
0.40
0.38
1.33
CSO
30
49
19
24
0.33
0.63
1.63
DISO
38
62
23
33
0.35
0.61
1.63
7
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
In this paper, we presented the dislocation ontology, which is an
ontology that defines the linear defect concepts and relations in
crystalline materials. DISO is developed using a top-down approach
and is published through a persistent identifier, following W3C best
practices for publishing Linked Data. Two potential use cases for
DISO are presented to illustrate its usefulness in the dislocation
dynamics domain. We followed two evaluation strategies to demon-
strate the usefulness and the quality of the ontology. We developed
Python scripts to annotate the dislocation data generated from the
DDD MoDELib software with DISO classes resulting in an RDF
dataset.
18https://purls.helmholtz-metadaten.de/disos/cso

SAC ’23, March 27-March 31, 2023, Tallinn, Estonia
A. Z. Ihsan et al.
We are planning to improve DISO by modeling the linear elas-
ticity theory of dislocations, other defects (e.g., point defects, grain
boundaries), and the application use cases in the dislocation domain,
e.g., TEM data and dislocation simulation. In addition, ontology
alignment into EMMO would also be a very worthwhile undertak-
ing. This alignment extends the interoperability between domain
ontologies, particularly within the MSE community. The ontology
will continue to be maintained and extended in the context of the
Helmholtz Metadata Collaboration efforts of facilitating machine
readability and reuse of research data.
Since modularity is considered an emerging approach for devel-
oping ontologies, we are in the process of developing a dislocation
ontology suite (DISOS) which comprises several modules each rep-
resenting concepts in a specific area in the dislocation dynamics
domain.
8
