Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 44 (2012) 587-632
Submitted 03/12; published 07/12
SAP Speaks PDDL: Exploiting a Software-Engineering
Model for Planning in Business Process Management
J¨org Hoﬀmann

Saarland University, Saarbr¨ucken, Germany
Ingo Weber

NICTA, Sydney, Australia
Frank Michael Kraft

bpmnforum.net, Germany
Abstract
Planning is concerned with the automated solution of action sequencing problems de-
scribed in declarative languages giving the action preconditions and eﬀects. One important
application area for such technology is the creation of new processes in Business Process
Management (BPM), which is essential in an ever more dynamic business environment. A
major obstacle for the application of Planning in this area lies in the modeling. Obtain-
ing a suitable model to plan with – ideally a description in PDDL, the most commonly
used planning language – is often prohibitively complicated and/or costly. Our core obser-
vation in this work is that this problem can be ameliorated by leveraging synergies with
model-based software development. Our application at SAP, one of the leading vendors of
enterprise software, demonstrates that even one-to-one model re-use is possible.
The model in question is called Status and Action Management (SAM). It describes
the behavior of Business Objects (BO), i.e., large-scale data structures, at a level of ab-
straction corresponding to the language of business experts. SAM covers more than 400
kinds of BOs, each of which is described in terms of a set of status variables and how their
values are required for, and aﬀected by, processing steps (actions) that are atomic from a
business perspective. SAM was developed by SAP as part of a major model-based software
engineering eﬀort. We show herein that one can use this same model for planning, thus
obtaining a BPM planning application that incurs no modeling overhead at all.
We compile SAM into a variant of PDDL, and adapt an oﬀ-the-shelf planner to solve
this kind of problem.
Thanks to the resulting technology, business experts may create
new processes simply by specifying the desired behavior in terms of status variable value
changes: eﬀectively, by describing the process in their own language.
1. Introduction
Business processes are workﬂows controlling the ﬂow of activities within and between en-
terprises (Aalst, 1997). Business process management (BPM) is concerned, amongst other
things, with the maintenance of these processes. To minimize time-to-market in an ever
more dynamic business environment, it is essential to be able to quickly create new pro-
cesses. Doing so involves selecting and arranging suitable IT transactions from huge in-
c⃝2012 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

Hoffmann, Weber & Kraft
frastructures. That is a very diﬃcult and costly task. Our application supports this task
within the software framework of SAP1, one of the leading vendors of enterprise software.
A well-known idea in this context, discussed for example by Jonathan, Moore, Stader,
Macintosh, and Chung (1999), Biundo, Aylett, Beetz, Borrajo, Cesta, Grant, McCluskey,
Milani, and Verfaillie (2003), and Rodriguez-Moreno, Borrajo, Cesta, and Oddi (2007),
is to use technology from the ﬁeld of planning. This is a long-standing sub-area of AI,
that allows the user to describe the problem to be solved in a declarative language. In
a nutshell, planning problems come in the form of an initial state, a goal, and a set of
actions, all formulated relative to a set of (typically Boolean or at least ﬁnite-domain) state
variables. A solution (or “plan”) is a schedule of actions transforming the initial state into
a state that satisﬁes the goal. The planning technology solves (in principle) any problem
described in that language. By far the most wide-spread planning language is the planning
domain deﬁnition language (PDDL) (McDermott, Ghallab, Howe, Knoblock, Ram, Veloso,
Weld, & Wilkins, 1998).2
The idea in the BPM context is to annotate each IT transaction with a planning-like
description formalizing it as an action. This enables planning systems to compose (parts
or approximations of) the desired processes fully automatically, i.e., based on minimal user
input specifying from where the process will start (initial state), and what it should achieve
(goal). Very closely related ideas have been explored under the name semantic web service
composition in the context of the Semantic Web community (e.g., Narayanan & McIlraith,
2002; Agarwal, Chaﬂe, Dasgupta, Karnik, Kumar, Mittal, & Srivastava, 2005; Sirin, Parsia,
& Hendler, 2006; Meyer & Weske, 2006).
Runtime performance is important in such an application. Typically, the user – a busi-
ness expert wishing to create a new process – will be waiting online for the planning outcome.
However the most mission-critical question, discussed for example by Kambhampati (2007)
and Rodriguez-Moreno et al. (2007), is: How to get the planning model? To be useful, the
model needs to capture the relevant properties of a huge IT infrastructure, at a level of
abstraction that is high-level enough to be usable for business experts, and at the same
time precise enough to be relevant at IT level. Designing such a model is so costly that one
will need good arguments indeed to persuade a manager to embark on that endeavor.
In the present work, we demonstrate that this problem can be ameliorated by leveraging
synergies with model-based software development, thus reducing the additional modeling
overhead caused by planning. In fact, we show that one can – at least in our particular
application – re-use exactly, one-to-one, models that were built for the purpose of software
engineering, and thus reduce the modeling overhead to zero.
It has previously been noted, for example by Turner and McCluskey (1994) and Kitchin,
McCluskey, and West (2005), that planning languages have commonalities with software
speciﬁcation languages such as B (Schneider, 2001) and OCL (Object Management Group,
2006). Now, typically such speciﬁcation languages are mathematically oriented to describe
1. http://www.sap.com
2. There are many variants of planning, and of PDDL. All share concepts similar to the short description we
just stated. However, that description corresponds best to “classical planning”, where (amongst other
things) there is no uncertainty about the action eﬀects. We will discuss some details in Section 2.1.
Throughout the paper, unless we refer to one of the particular planning formalisms deﬁned in here, we
use the term “planning” in a general sense not targeting any particular variant.
588

SAP Speaks PDDL
low-level properties of programs. This stands in contrast with the more abstract models
needed to work with business experts. But that is not always so.
As part of a major eﬀort developing a ﬂexible service-oriented (Krafzig, Banke, & Slama,
2005; Bell, 2008) IT infrastructure, called SAP Business ByDesign, SAP has developed a
model called Status and Action Management (SAM). SAM describes how “status variables”
of Business Objects (BO) change their values when “actions” – IT transactions aﬀecting
the BOs – are executed. BOs in full detail are vastly complex, containing 1000s of data
ﬁelds and numerous technical-level transactions. SAM captures the more abstract business
perspective, in terms of a smaller number of user-level actions (like “submit” or “reject”),
whose behavior is described using preconditions and eﬀects on high-level status properties
(like “submitted” or “rejected”). In this way, SAM corresponds to the language of busi-
ness users, and is in very close correspondence with common planning languages. SAM is
extensive, covering 404 kinds of BOs with 2418 transactions. The model creation in itself
constitutes a work eﬀort spanning several years, involving, amongst other things, dedicated
modeling environments and educational training for modelers.
SAM was originally designed for the purpose of model-driven software development,
to facilitate the design of the Business ByDesign infrastructure, and changes thereunto
during its initial development and afterwards. Business ByDesign covers the needs of a
great breadth of diﬀerent SAP customer businesses, and is ﬂexibly conﬁgurable for these
customers.
That conﬁguration involves, amongst other things, the design of customer-
speciﬁc processes, appropriately combining the functionalities provided.
Describing the
properties of individual processing steps, rather than supplying each BO with a standard life-
cycle workﬂow, SAM is well-suited to support this ﬂexibility. However, the business users
designing the processes are typically not familiar with the details of the infrastructure. Using
SAM for planning, we obtain technology that alleviates this problem. As its output, our
technology delivers a ﬁrst version of the desired process, with the relevant IT transactions
and a suitable control-ﬂow. As its input, the technology requires business users only to
specify the desired status changes – in their own language.
The intended meaning of SAM is, to a large extent, the same as in common planning
frameworks. There are some subtleties in the treatment of non-deterministic actions. One
problem is that many of the non-deterministic actions modeled in SAM have “bad” outcomes
that preclude successful processing of the respective business object (example: “BO data
inconsistent”). That problem is aggravated by the fact that, in SAM’s “non-determinism”,
repeated executions of the same action are not independent (example: “check BO consis-
tency”). We discuss this in detail, and derive a suitable planning formalism. We compile
SAM into PDDL, thus creating as a side-eﬀect of our work a new planning benchmark. An
anonymized PDDL version of SAM is publicly available.
On the algorithmic side, we show that minimal changes to an oﬀ-the-shelf planner suﬃce
to obtain good empirical performance. We adapt the well-known deterministic planning
system FF (Hoﬀmann & Nebel, 2001) to perform a suitable variant of AO* (Nilsson, 1969,
1971). We run its heuristic function on non-deterministic actions simply by acting as if
we could choose the outcome, i.e., by applying the “all-outcomes determinization” (Yoon,
Fern, & Givan, 2007). We run large-scale experiments with this modiﬁed FF, on the full
SAM model as used in SAP. We show that runtime performance is satisfactory in the vast
majority of cases; we point out the remaining challenges.
589

Hoffmann, Weber & Kraft
We have also integrated our planning technology into two BPM process modeling en-
vironments, making the planning functionality conveniently accessible for non-IT users.
Processes (and plans) in these environments are displayed in a human-readable format.
Users can specify status variable values, for example the planning goal, in simple intuitive
drop-down menus. One of the environments is integrated as a research extension into the
commercial SAP NetWeaver platform. Having said that, our technology is not yet part of
an actual SAP product; we will discuss this in Section 7.
The treatment of non-deterministic actions, in our formalism and algorithms, is speciﬁc
to our application context.
This notwithstanding, it is plausible that these techniques
could be useful also in other applications dealing with such actions. From a more general
perspective, the contribution of our work is (A) pointing out that it is possible to leverage
software-engineering models for planning, and (B) demonstrating that such an application
can be realized at one of the major players in the BPM industry, thus providing a large-
scale case study. The principle underlying SAM – modeling software artifacts at a level of
abstraction corresponding to business users – is not limited to SAP. Thus our work may
inspire similar approaches in related contexts.
We next give a brief background on planning and BPM. We then discuss the SAM model
in Section 3, explaining its structure, its context at SAP, and the added value of using it
for planning.
We design our planning formalization in Section 4, explain our planning
algorithms in Section 5, and evaluate these experimentally in Section 6. Section 7 describes
our prototypes at SAP. Section 8 discusses related work, and Section 9 concludes.
2. Background
We introduce the basic concepts relevant to our work. We start with planning, then overview
business process management (BPM) and its connection to planning.
2.1 Planning
There are many variants of planning (for an overview, see Traverso, Ghallab, & Nau, 2005).
To handle SAM, we build on a wide-spread classical planning framework, planning with
ﬁnite-domain variables (e.g., B¨ackstr¨om & Nebel, 1995; Helmert, 2006, 2009). We will ex-
tend that framework with a particular kind of “non-deterministic” actions, whose semantics
relates to notions from planning under uncertainty that we outline below.
Deﬁnition 1 (Planning Task) A ﬁnite-domain planning task is a tuple (X, A, I, G). X
is a set of variables; each x ∈X is associated with a ﬁnite domain dom(x). A is a set of
actions, where each a ∈A takes the form (prea, eﬀa) with prea (the precondition) and eﬀa
(the eﬀect) each being a partial variable assignment. I is a variable assignment representing
the initial state, and G is a partial variable assignment representing the goal.
A fact is a statement x = c where x ∈X and c ∈dom(x). We identify partial variable
assignments with conjunctions (sets, sometimes) of facts in the obvious way. A state s is a
complete variable assignment. An action a is applicable in s iﬀs |= prea. If f is a partial
variable assignment, then s ⊕f is the variable assignment that coincides with f on each
variable where f is deﬁned, and that coincides with s on the variables where f is undeﬁned.
590

SAP Speaks PDDL
Deﬁnition 2 (Plan) Let (X, A, I, G) be a ﬁnite-domain planning task. Let s be a state,
and let T be a sequence of actions from A. We say that T is a solution for s iﬀeither:
(i) T is empty and s |= G; or
(ii) T = ⟨a⟩◦T ′, s |= prea, and T ′ is a solution for s ⊕eﬀa.
If T is a solution for I, then T is called a plan.
One can, of course, deﬁne plans for ﬁnite-domain planning tasks in a simpler way; the
present formulation makes it easier to extend the deﬁnition later on.
We remark that,
despite the simplicity of this formalism, it is PSPACE-complete to decide whether or not
a plan exists (this follows directly from the results in Bylander, 1994).
Unlike in classical planning, there exist disjunctive eﬀects in SAM, i.e., actions that
have more than one possible outcome. This type of situation is dealt with in planning under
uncertainty. To model SAM’s disjunctive eﬀects appropriately, we will need a mixture of
what is known as non-deterministic actions (e.g., Smith & Weld, 1999) and what is known
as observation actions (e.g., Weld, Anderson, & Smith, 1998).
Non-deterministic actions a are like usual actions except that, in place of a single eﬀect
eﬀa, they have a set Ea of such eﬀects, referred to as their possible outcomes. Whenever
we apply a at plan execution time, any one of the outcomes in Ea will occur; separate
applications of a are independent. For example, a might throw a dice. At plan generation
time, we do not know which outcome will occur, so we must “cater for all cases”. The most
straightforward framework for doing so is conformant planning (e.g., Smith & Weld, 1999),
where the plan is still a sequence of actions, and is required to achieve the goal no matter
what outcomes occur during execution. Note that this does not exploit observability, i.e.,
the plan does not make case distinctions based on what outcomes actually do occur. To
handle SAM, we will include such case distinctions, along the lines of what is known as
contingent planning (e.g., Weld et al., 1998). In that framework, case distinctions are made
by explicit observation actions in the plan. Typically, an observation action a observes the
– previously unknown – value of a particular state variable x at plan execution time (for
example, the value of a dice after throwing it). The plan branches on all possible values of
x, i.e., a has one successor for each value in dom(x). Thus the plan is now a tree of actions,
and the requirement is that the goal is fulﬁlled in every leaf of that tree.
The most wide-spread input language for planning systems today is the Planning Do-
main Deﬁnition Language (PDDL), as used in the international planning competitions
(IPC) (McDermott et al., 1998; Bacchus, 2000; Fox & Long, 2003; Hoﬀmann & Edelkamp,
2005; Younes, Littman, Weissman, & Asmuth, 2005; Gerevini, Haslum, Long, Saetti, &
Dimopoulos, 2009). We do not get into the details of this language, since for our purposes
here PDDL is merely a particular syntax for implementing our formalisms. More important
for us, regarding the usability of our PDDL encoding of SAM, is the fact that PDDL has a
lot of variants, with varying degrees of support by existing planning systems. Our PDDL
syntax for SAM is in the PDDL variant used in the non-deterministic tracks of the IPC,
i.e., the tracks dealing with non-probabilistic planning under uncertainty (Bonet & Givan,
2006; Bryce & Buﬀet, 2008). Speciﬁcally, we use only the most basic PDDL constructs (of-
ten referred to as “STRIPS”), except in action preconditions where we use quantiﬁer-free
formulas (Pednault, 1989; Bacchus, 2000). This PDDL subset is supported by most existing
591

Hoffmann, Weber & Kraft
planners, in particular all those based on FF (Hoﬀmann & Nebel, 2001) or Fast Downward
(Helmert, 2006). The limiting factor for planner support are the non-deterministic actions,
for which we use the most common syntax, namely the “(oneof eﬀ1 . . . eﬀn)” construct from
the non-deterministic IPC. Non-deterministic actions are supported by only few planners.
Further, the semantics we will give to plans using these actions, as ﬁts our application based
on SAM, is non-standard and not supported by existing planners. This notwithstanding,
several existing approaches are closely related (cf. Section 8), and, as we show herein, at
least one planner – Contingent-FF (Hoﬀmann & Brafman, 2005) – can be adapted quite
easily and successfully to deal with the new semantics.
2.2 Business Process Management
According to the commonly used deﬁnition (e.g., Weske, 2007), a business process consists
of a set of activities that are performed in coordination in an organizational and technical
environment.
These activities jointly realize a business goal.
In other words, business
processes are how enterprises do business. Business process models serve as an abstraction
of the way enterprises do business. For example, a business process model may specify
which steps are taken, by various entities across an enterprise, to send out a customer quote
answering a request for quotation. The atomic steps in such a process model may be both,
manual steps performed by employees, or automatic steps executed on the IT infrastructure.
We will refer to process models simply as “processes”.
An explicit model of processes allows all sorts of support and automation, addressed
in the area of business process management (BPM). Herein, we are mostly concerned with
process creation and adaptation. That is done in BPM modeling environments. Importantly,
the users of these environments will typically not be IT experts, but business experts – the
people familiar with, and taking decisions for, the business. The dominant paradigm for
representing business processes are workﬂows, also called control-ﬂows, often formalized
as Petri nets (e.g., Aalst, 1997).
Such a control-ﬂow deﬁnes an order of execution for
the process steps, within certain degrees of ﬂexibility implied, for example, by parallelism.
For business experts, the control-ﬂow is displayed in a human-readable format, typically a
ﬂow diagram. Our application at SAP uses Business Process Modeling Notation (Object
Management Group, 2008), short BPMN, which we will illustrate in Section 7.
An alternative paradigm for representing business processes, which relates to the SAM
model we consider herein, are constraint-based representations (e.g., Wainer & de Lima
Bezerra, 2003; van der Aalst & Pesic, 2006; Pesic, Schonenberg, Sidorova, & van der Aalst,
2007). These model processes implicitly through their desired properties, rather than ex-
plicitly through concrete workﬂows. This kind of representation is more ﬂexible, in that,
by modifying the model, we can modify the entire process space. For example, we might
add a new constraint “archive customer quotes only if all follow-ups have been created”.
Such a representation is also more explicit about the reasons for process design, supporting
human understanding. The downside is that, for actual automated process execution, a
concrete control-ﬂow design is required. One way of viewing our planning technology is
that it provides the service of generating such control-ﬂow designs for SAM.
Processes are executed on IT infrastructures, like the one provided by SAP. Such exe-
cution coordinates the individual processing steps, prompting human users as appropriate,
and performing all the necessary data updating on IT level. This is realized in dedicated
592

SAP Speaks PDDL
process execution engines (Dumas, ter Hofstede, & van der Aalst, 2005). Clearly, the exe-
cution poses high demands on the structure of the workﬂow. The most basic requirement is
that the atomic process steps correspond to actual steps known to the IT infrastructure.3
The requirements on business processes, such as legal and ﬁnancial regulations, are
subject to frequent updates. The people responsible for adapting the processes – business
experts – are not familiar with the IT infrastructure, and may come up with processes
whose “atomic steps” are nowhere near what can be implemented easily, partially overlap
with whole sets of existing functions, and/or require the implementation of new functions
although existing functions could have been arranged to do the job. Thus there is a need
for intensive communication between business experts and IT experts, incurring signiﬁcant
costs for human labor and increased time-to-market.
How can planning come to the rescue? As indicated, the basic (and well-known) idea
is to use a planning tool for composing (an approximation of) the process automatically,
helping the business expert to come up with a process close to the IT infrastructure. The
main novelty in our work is that we leverage a pre-existing model, SAM, getting us around
one of the most critical issues in the area: the overhead for creating the planner input.
3. SAM
We explain the structure of the SAM language, and give a running example. We outline
the background of SAM at SAP, and explain the added value of using SAM for planning.
3.1 SAM Structure and Example
Status and Action Management (SAM) models belong to business objects (BOs). Each BO
is associated with a set of ﬁnite-domain “status” variables, and with a set of actions. Each
status variable highlights one value that the variable will take when a new instance of the
BO is created. Each action is described with a textual label (its name), a precondition, and
an eﬀect. The precondition and eﬀect are propositional formulas over the variable values.
Deﬁnition 3 (SAM BO) A SAM business object o is a triple (X(o), A(o), I(o)). X(o) is
a set of status variables; each x ∈X(o) is associated with a ﬁnite domain dom(x). A(o) is
a set of actions, where each a(o) ∈A(o) takes the form (prea(o), eﬀa(o)); prea(o) (the pre-
condition) is a propositional formula over the atoms {x = c | x ∈X(o), c ∈dom(x)}; eﬀa(o)
(the eﬀect) is a negation-free propositional formula over these same atoms, in disjunctive
normal form (DNF). I(o) is a variable assignment representing o’s initial state.
This structure is in obvious correspondence with that of Deﬁnition 1. The only diﬀer-
ences are that there is no “goal”, and that the preconditions and eﬀects are more complex.
In our planning application, the goal is set by the user creating a new process. We discuss
in Section 4 how to extend Deﬁnitions 1 and 2 to handle SAM preconditions and eﬀects.
Note that there are no cross-BO constraints in SAM – each BO o refers only to values
of its own variables. This is a shortcoming of the current version of SAM: in reality, BOs
do interact. We will get back to this further below.
3. Another important requirement is an appropriate data-ﬂow (van der Aalst, 2003; Dumas et al., 2005),
e.g., sending a manager the documents required to decide whether or not to accept a customer quote.
Since, in our case, the data is encapsulated into business objects, this is not a major issue for us.
593

Hoffmann, Weber & Kraft
Action name
precondition
eﬀect
Check CQ Completeness
CQ.archiving:notArchived
CQ.completeness:complete OR
CQ.completeness:notComplete
Check CQ Consistency
CQ.archiving:notArchived
CQ.consistency:consistent OR
CQ.consistency:notConsistent
Check CQ Approval Status
CQ.archiving:notArchived AND
CQ.approval:necessary OR
CQ.approval:notChecked AND
CQ.approval:notNecessary
CQ.completeness:complete AND
CQ.consistency:consistent
Decide CQ Approval
CQ.archiving:notArchived AND
CQ.approval:granted OR
CQ.approval:necessary
CQ.approval:notGranted
Submit CQ
CQ.archiving:notArchived AND
CQ.submission:submitted
(CQ.approval:notNecessary OR
CQ.approval:granted)
Mark CQ as Accepted
CQ.archiving:notArchived AND
CQ.acceptance:accepted
CQ.submission:submitted
Create Follow-Up for CQ
CQ.archiving:notArchived AND
CQ.followUp:documentCreated
CQ.acceptance:accepted
Archive CQ
CQ.archiving:notArchived
CQ.archiving:archived
Figure 1: Our SAM-like running example, modeling the behavior of “customer quotes” CQ.
For illustration, Figure 1 gives a SAM-like model for a BO called “customer quote (CQ)”,
that will be our running example. For conﬁdentiality reasons, the shown object and model
are artiﬁcial, i.e., they are not contained in SAM as used at SAP. By “CQ.x:c” we denote
the proposition x = c, in the object CQ. The initial state I(CQ) is:
• “CQ.archiving:notArchived”,
• “CQ.completeness:notComplete”,
• “CQ.consistency:notConsistent”,
• “CQ.approval:notChecked”,
• “CQ.submission:notSubmitted”,
• “CQ.acceptance:notAccepted”,
• “CQ.followUp:documentNotCreated”.
When using this example below, where relevant we will assume that the goal entered by the
user is “CQ.followUp:documentCreated AND CQ.archiving:archived”.
The reader should keep in mind that this is merely an illustrative example, which neces-
sarily is simple. In particular, the intended life-cycle workﬂow is rather obvious, given the
action descriptions in Figure 1. This is very much not the case in general. The Business
Objects modeled in SAM have up to 15 status variables, yielding up to 12 million possible
states (combinations of variable values) even for a single BO. In other words, SAM is a
ﬂexible model – after all, that was its main design purpose – and describes a large num-
ber of combination possibilities in a compact way. Furthermore, in two of the application
scenarios for planning ((A) and (C) in Section 3.3 below), we are actually looking not for
entire life-cycles but for process fragments that may begin or end at any BO status values.
594

SAP Speaks PDDL

SAM was created by SAP as part of the development of the IT infrastructure supporting
SAP Business ByDesign. That infrastructure constitutes a fully-ﬂedged SAP application.
Its key advantage over traditional SAP applications is a higher degree of ﬂexibility, facili-
tating the use of SAP software as-a-service. Individual system functions are encapsulated
as software services, using the service-oriented architectures paradigm (Krafzig et al., 2005;
Bell, 2008). The software services may be accessed from standard architectures like BPM
process execution engines, thus enabling their ﬂexible combination with other services. To
further support ﬂexibility, the Business ByDesign IT infrastructure is model-driven. IT ar-
tifacts at various system levels are described declaratively using SAP-proprietary modeling
formats. Business objects are one such IT artifact, and SAM is one such format.
The original purpose of SAM was to facilitate the design, and the management of
changes, during the development of the Business ByDesign infrastructure (a formidably
huge enterprise). Of course, SAM also serves the implementation of changes to the infras-
tructure later on, should changes be required. New developments are ﬁrst implemented and
tested on the model level. Then parts of the program code are automatically generated from
the model. Straightforward code skeletons contain the status variables, as well as function
headers for the available actions (similar to what Eclipse does for Java class deﬁnitions). In
addition, the skeletons are ﬁlled with code fragments performing the precondition checks
and updates on status variables. Changes pertaining to the status variable level can thus
be implemented in SAM models, and automatically propagated into the code. In this sense,
the original semantics of SAM is as follows:
(I) When a BO o is newly created, the values of the status variables are set to I(o).
(II) BO actions a(o) whose precondition prea(o) is not fulﬁlled are either disallowed, or
raise an exception when executed; which one is true depends on the part of the
architecture attempting to execute the action.
(III) Upon execution of an action a, the status variables change their values as prescribed
by one of the disjuncts in the eﬀect DNF eﬀa(o). The only aspect controlled outside
SAM is which disjunct is chosen: that choice is made based on BO data content not
reﬂected in SAM.
The intention behind SAM is to formulate complex business-level dependencies between
individual processing steps, using simple modeling constructs that facilitate easy modiﬁ-
cation. The formulation in terms of preconditions and eﬀects relative to high-level status
variable values was adopted as a natural means to meet these requirements. Of course, this
design also took some inspiration from traditional software modeling paradigms (Schneider,
2001; Object Management Group, 2006).
Leveraging SAM for planning is a great opportunity because of the eﬀort it takes to build
such a model. SAM was developed continuously along with Business ByDesign, across a
time span of more than 5 years. Throughout this time, around 200 people were involved (as
a part-time occupation) in the development. SAP implemented a dedicated graphical user
interface for this development. There are design patterns for typical cases, there are nam-
ing conventions, there is a fully-ﬂedged governance process, and there even is educational
training for the developers. A council of senior SAP architects supervises the development.
595

Hoffmann, Weber & Kraft
3.3 Applications of SAM-Based Planning
The Business ByDesign infrastructure is designed to be very general and adaptable, covering
the needs of a great breadth of diﬀerent SAP customers’ business domains. To adapt the
infrastructure to their practice, SAP customers may choose to create their own processes
as compositions of the functionalities provided (as Web services), in a way tailored to their
needs. Indeed, a second motivation behind SAM, beside its role for software development,
was to facilitate such ﬂexibility, by describing the possible process space in a declarative
manner, rather than imposing standard workﬂows as is a common methodology in other
contexts such as artefact-centric business process modeling (e.g., Cohn & Hull, 2009). SAM
shares this motivation with constraint-based process representation languages. It also shares
their downside, in that the actual workﬂows still need to be created. In this context, there
are at least three application scenarios for planning based on SAM:
(A) Development based on SAM. During model-driven development based on SAM,
planning enables developers to examine how their changes aﬀect the process space.
This greatly facilitates experimentation and testing. For example, planning can be
used for debugging, testing whether or not the goal can still be reached, or whether
the changes opened any unintended possibilities, like, reaching an undesired state of
the BO (e.g., “CQ.consistency:notConsistent AND CQ.acceptance:accepted”). More
than such reachability testing (essentially a model checking task), planning serves to
generate entire processes, which as we shall see take the form of BPMN process models
with parallelism and conditional splits. Developers can examine the space of processes
generated in this way, determining for diﬀerent combinations of start/end conditions
how these can be connected. Note that the generality oﬀered by the planning approach
is an absolute requirement here – the process generation tool must be at least as general
as SAM, handling propositional formula preconditions and eﬀects.
(B) Designing extended/customized processes. Individual SAP customers have in-
dividual requirements on their processes, and thus may use the same BOs in diﬀerent
ways. For example, even if the end state of customer quotes (which in practice are
much more complex than our illustrative example) always involved being archived,
diﬀerent businesses may diﬀer on the side conditions: one organization only archives
POs if all follow-ups have been created; another archives only POs that were success-
ful; a third organization archives POs immediately and automatically after getting
a response; a fourth only based on an explicit user-request. Part of the motivation
behind SAM is to provide such ﬂexibility. Planning based on SAM can be used to
automatically generate a ﬁrst version of the desired process.4
(C) Process redesign. Sometimes the best option is to design a new process from scratch.
If the business experts doing so are not aware the underlying IT infrastructure, then
this incurs huge costs at process implementation time.
SAM opens the possibility
for business experts to “explain” the individual steps in the new process in terms of
status variable value changes, i.e., in terms of a start/end state corresponding to what
the business user considers to be an atomic processing step. Planning then shows
if and how these status changes can be implemented using existing transactions. In
4. The alternative – equipping each BO with a standard life-cycle or a set thereof – would come at the
prize of a ﬂexibility loss for complex BOs, and is not the choice made by SAP.
596

SAP Speaks PDDL
particular, the planner can be called for some business object X (e.g., a sales order)
from within a process being created for some other object Y (e.g., a customer quote).
Hence, despite the mentioned absence of cross-BO constraints in the current version
of SAM, planning can help to create non-trivial processes spanning several BOs.
All these use cases are supported by our prototype at SAP; we will illustrate its use for (C),
in a cross-BO situation as mentioned, in Section 7.3.
An obvious requirement for the planner to be useful is instantaneous response. Typically
a user will be sitting at the computer and waiting for the planner to answer. Further, all
functionality must be accessible conveniently. In particular, each time a user wants to call
the planner, she needs to provide the planning goal (and possibly the initial state). It is
essential that this can be done in a simple and intuitive manner, without in-depth expertise
in IT or about the BO the question. Thus we limit ourselves to conjunctive goals in the
sense of “I want these status variables to have these values at the end of the process”, like
the goal “CQ.followUp:documentCreated AND CQ.archiving:archived” in our illustrative
example. In our prototype, such goals are speciﬁed using simple drop-down menus.
SAM was not originally intended to do planning, and is of course not perfect for that
purpose. We will discuss the main limitations in Section 9, but we need to brieﬂy touch
on two points here already. The absence of cross-BO constraints in the current version
of SAM has implications for planner setup and performance, and will play a role in our
experiments.5 Another issue is plan quality. The duration/cost of the actions may diﬀer
vastly, but SAM does not contain any information about this: it is not relevant to SAM’s
original purpose, software engineering. We will not address plan quality measures herein.
Our planning algorithm of course attempts to ﬁnd small plans. But it gives no quality
guarantee in that regard, and the practical value of such a guarantee would be doubtful.
4. Planning Formalization
We design the syntax and semantics of a suitable planning formalism capturing SAM, and
we illustrate that formalism using our running example.
4.1 SAM Planning Tasks: Syntax
Given the close correspondence of SAM business objects (Deﬁnition 3) with ﬁnite-domain
planning tasks (Deﬁnition 1), it is straightforward to extend the latter to capture the former.
Deﬁnition 4 (SAM Planning Task) A SAM planning task is a tuple (X, A, I, G) whose
elements are the same as in ﬁnite-domain planning tasks, except for the action set A. Each
a ∈A takes the form (prea, Ea) with prea being a propositional formula over the atoms
{x = c | x ∈X, c ∈dom(x)}, and Ea being a set of partial variable assignments. The
members eﬀa ∈Ea are the outcomes of a.
As discussed above, we keep the goal as simple as possible. For the eﬀects, in place of
the negation-free propositional DNF formulas of Deﬁnition 3, we now have sets Ea of out-
comes. The action preconditions are as in Deﬁnition 3. This generalizes the partial variable
5. As we shall discuss in Section 9, BO interactions do exist. An according extension of SAM is planned,
which could in principle be tackled using the exact same planning technology as presented herein.
597

Hoffmann, Weber & Kraft
assignments from Deﬁnition 1 – which are equivalent to negation-free conjunctions over the
atoms {x = c | x ∈X, c ∈dom(x)} – to arbitrary propositional formulas over these atoms.
That generalization poses no issue for deﬁning the plan semantics; at implementation level,
most current planning systems compile such preconditions into negation-free conjunctions,
using the methods originally proposed by Gazen and Knoblock (1997).
To obtain a SAM planning task (X, A, I, G), when given as input a SAM business object
o = (X(o), A(o), I(o)) along with a goal conjunction G(o), we ﬁrst set X := X(o), I := I(o),
and G := G(o). For each a(o) ∈A(o) we include one a into A, where prea := prea(o). As
for eﬀa(o), we create one partial variable assignment eﬀa for each disjunct in that DNF
formula, and we deﬁne the possible outcomes Ea as the set of all these eﬀa.
By convention, we denote with Ad := {a ∈A | |Ea| = 1} and And := {a ∈A | |Ea| > 1}
the sets of deterministic and non-deterministic actions of a SAM planning task, respectively.
If a ∈Ad, then by eﬀa we denote the single outcome of a.
4.2 SAM Planning Tasks: Semantics
SAM action preconditions prea(o) are in direct correspondence with usual planning precon-
ditions, cf. point (II) in Section 3.2. By contrast, SAM’s disjunctive eﬀects eﬀa(o) require
to create a mix of two diﬀerent kinds of planning actions – non-deterministic actions and
observation actions – from the literature. To understand this, reconsider the role of SAM
action eﬀects eﬀa(o) in their original environment, i.e., point (III) in Section 3.2. Any one
of the disjuncts will occur, and at plan generation time we do not know which one. At plan
execution time, the SAP system executing the action will observe the relevant data content,
and will decide which branch to take. In the example from Figure 1, “Check CQ Complete-
ness” will answer “CQ.completeness:complete” if the BO data is complete, and will answer
“CQ.completeness:notComplete” otherwise. Of course, the SAP system keeps track of which
outcomes occured. In other words, (a) SAM’s disjunctive eﬀects correspond to observation
actions, that (b) internally observe environment data not modeled at the planning level.
Due to (a), it makes perfect sense to handle such actions by introducing case distinctions
at plan generation time, one for each outcome. Due to (b), there is no direct link of the
“observation” to a reduction of uncertainty at planning level. During execution, the values
of the “observed variables” are known prior to the “observation” already, and change as a
result of applying that action. For example, “CQ.completeness.notComplete” is considered
to be true prior to the ﬁrst application of “Check CQ Completeness”, and may be changed
to “CQ.completeness.complete” by that action. In that respect, and in that the outcome
set (an arbitrary DNF) is more general than the domain of a particular variable, SAM’s
disjunctive eﬀects are more similar to the common notions of non-deterministic actions.
For simplicity, we will henceforth refer to SAM’s disjunctive-eﬀects actions as non-
deterministic actions. Another important point regarding these actions is that data content
is not allowed to change while the process is running; the data is ﬁlled in directly upon cre-
ation of the BO. Thus the outcome of a non-deterministic action will be the same throughout
the plan execution, and it makes no sense to execute such an action more than once in a
plan. For example, there is no point in repeatedly applying “Check CQ Completeness”.
A ﬁnal issue is to decide what a “plan” actually is. Cimatti, Pistore, Roveri, and Traverso
(2003) describe the three most common concepts, in the presence of non-deterministic ac-
598

SAP Speaks PDDL
tions: strong plans, strong cyclic plans, and weak plans. We will discuss the latter two
below; the most desirable property is the ﬁrst one. A strong plan guarantees to reach the
goal no matter which action outcomes occur. We now deﬁne this formally, for our setting.
An action tree over A is a tree whose nodes are actions from A, and whose edges are
labeled with partial variable assignments. Each action a in the tree has exactly |Ea| outgoing
edges, one for (and labeled with) each eﬀa ∈Ea. In the following deﬁnitions, And
av refers
to the subset of non-deterministic actions that have not yet been used, and are thus still
available, at any given state during plan execution. Recall that s⊕eﬀa, deﬁned in Section 2,
over-writes s with those variable values deﬁned in eﬀa, and leaves s unchanged elsewhere.
Deﬁnition 5 (Strong SAM Plan) Let (X, A, I, G) be a SAM planning task with A =
Ad ∪And. Let s be a state, let And
av ⊆And, and let T be an action tree over A ∪{STOP}.
We say that T is a strong SAM solution for (s, And
av) iﬀeither:
(i) T consists of the single node STOP, and s |= G; or
(ii) the root of T is a ∈Ad, s |= prea, and the sub-tree of T rooted at a’s child is a strong
SAM solution for (s ⊕eﬀa, And
av); or
(iii) the root of T is a ∈And
av, s |= prea, and, for each of a’s children reached via an edge
labeled with eﬀa ∈Ea, the sub-tree of T rooted at that child is a strong SAM solution
for (s ⊕eﬀa, And
av \ {a}).
If T is a strong solution for (I, And), then T is called a strong SAM plan.
Compare this to Deﬁnition 2. Item (i) of the present deﬁnition is essentially the same,
saying that there is nothing to do if the goal is already true. In diﬀerence to Deﬁnition 2,
we then distinguish deterministic actions (ii) and non-deterministic ones (iii). In the former
case, a has a single child and we require the remainder of the tree to solve that child,
similarly as in Deﬁnition 2. In the latter case, a has several children all of which need to be
solved by the respective sub-tree. This corresponds to the desired case distinction observing
action outcomes at plan execution time.
Note that, throughout the plan, there is no uncertainty about the current variable values.
Note also that we solve, not a state, but a pair consisting of a state and a subset of non-
deterministic actions. This reﬂects the fact that whether or not an action tree solves a state
depends not only on the state itself, but also on which non-deterministic actions are still
available. The maintenance of the set And
av ensures that we allow each non-deterministic
action only once, on each path through T (but the action may occur several times on
separate paths). Thus any one execution of the plan applies the action at most once.
The problem with Deﬁnition 5 is that strong plans typically do not exist. To illus-
trate this, consider Figure 2, showing a weak SAM plan, a notion we will now formally
deﬁne, for our running example from Figure 1.
Recall that the goal is assumed to be
“CQ.followUp:documentCreated AND CQ.archiving:archived”.
If either of “Check CQ
Completeness” or ““Check CQ Consistency”, as shown at the top of Figure 2, result in a
negative outcome (“CQ.completeness:notComplete” or “CQ.completeness:notConsistent”),
then the goal becomes unreachable. Thus a strong plan does not exist for this SAM plan-
ning task. That phenomenon is not limited to this illustrative example. In our experiments,
almost 75% of a very large sample of SAM planning tasks did not have a strong plan.
To address this, one can deﬁne more complicated goals, or a weaker notion of plans. For
the former option, one could use goals specifying alternatives, preferences, and/or temporal
599

Hoffmann, Weber & Kraft
Check CQ Completeness
Check CQ Consistency
Check CQ Approval Status
Submit CQ
Y
Y
N
N
Mark CQ as Accepted
Archive CQ
notNec
Nec
Decide CQ Approval
granted
notGranted
Submit CQ
Mark CQ as Accepted
Archive CQ
Create Follow−Up for CQ
Create Follow−Up for CQ
Figure 2: A weak SAM plan for the running example from Figure 1. STOP actions not
shown, FAIL actions marked by (red) crosses.
plan properties (e.g., Pistore & Traverso, 2001; Dal Lago, Pistore, & Traverso, 2002; Sha-
parau, Pistore, & Traverso, 2006; Gerevini et al., 2009). However, goals will be speciﬁed
online by business users and it is absolutely essential for this to be as simple as possible.
We hence decided to go for the second option.6
The weak plans of Cimatti et al. (2003) are too liberal for our purposes. They guarantee
only that at least one possible execution of the plan reaches the goal, posing no require-
ments on all the other executions. For example, in Figure 2, this would mean to allow
the plan to handle only the left-hand side outcome of “Check CQ Approval Status”, i.e.,
“CQ.approval:notNecessary”, and to do nothing at all about (attach the empty tree at) its
other outcome, “CQ.approval:necessary”.
So what about strong cyclic plans? There, the plan may have cycles, provided every
plan state can, in principle, reach the goal. This allows to “wait for a desired outcome”, like
a cycle around a dice throw, waiting to obtain a “6”. Alas, repetitions of non-deterministic
SAM actions will always produce the same outcome. It is futile to insert a cycle at the
top of Figure 2, waiting for the desired outcome of “Check CQ Completeness”. While it is
plausible to prompt a user to edit the BO content and then repeat the check (placeholders for
such cycles could be inserted as a planning post-process), this is not a suitable exception
handling in general. Exception handling depends on the business context, and typically
depends on the actual customer using the SAP system. This is impossible to reﬂect in a
model maintained centrally by SAP.
In conclusion, from the perspective of SAM-based planning there is not much one can
do other than to highlight the bad outcomes to the user, so that the exception handling can
6. Some works on more complex goals can be employed to deﬁne alternative notions of “weak plans” (by
using trivial fall-back goals). We will discuss this in some detail in Section 8.
600

SAP Speaks PDDL
be inserted manually afterwards. Of course, a non-deterministic action should have at least
one successful outcome, or else it would be completely displaced in a process. Further, it is
essential to highlight outcomes as “bad” only if they really are “bad”, i.e., to not mark as
failed any outcomes that could actually be solved. Our deﬁnition reﬂects all this:
Deﬁnition 6 (Weak SAM Plan) Let (X, A, I, G) be a SAM planning task with A = Ad∪
And. Let s be a state, let And
av ⊆And, and let T be an action tree over A ∪{STOP, FAIL}.
We say that T is a weak SAM solution for (s, And
av) iﬀeither:
(i) T consists of the single node STOP, and s |= G; or
(ii) the root of T is a ∈Ad, s |= prea, and the sub-tree of T rooted at a’s child is a weak
SAM solution for (s ⊕eﬀa, And
av); or
(iii) the root of T is a ∈And
av, s |= prea, and, for each of a’s children reached via an edge
labeled with eﬀa ∈Ea, we have that either: (a) the sub-tree of T rooted at that child
is a weak SAM solution for (s ⊕eﬀa, And
av \ {a}); or (b) the sub-tree of T rooted at
that child consists of the single node FAIL, and there exists no action tree T ′ that is
a weak SAM solution for (s ⊕eﬀa, And
av \ {a}); where (a) is the case for at least one
of a’s children.
If T is a weak solution for (I, And), then T is called a weak SAM plan.
Compared to Deﬁnition 5, the only diﬀerence lies in item (iii), which no longer requires
every child to be solved.
Instead, the arrangement of options (a) and (b) means that
failed nodes – leaves in the tree that stop the plan without success – are tolerated, as
long as at least one child is solved, and every failed node is actually unsolvable. This is
in obvious correspondence with our discussion above. In Figure 2, the failed nodes, i.e.,
the sub-trees consisting only of the special FAIL action, are crossed out (in red). Note
the diﬀerence to Cimatti et al.’s (2003) deﬁnition of “weak plans” discussed above: we
are not allowed to cross out the right-hand side outcome of “Check CQ Approval Status”,
i.e.,“CQ.approval:necessary”, because that outcome is solvable.
We remark that allowing non-deterministic actions only once (or, more generally, having
an upper bound on repetition of non-deterministic actions) is required for Deﬁnition 6 to
make sense. In item (iii), the deﬁnition recurses on itself when stating that some children
may be unsolvable. While such recursion occurs also at other points in Deﬁnitions 5 and 6,
at those points the action tree T considered is reduced by at least one node. For unsolvable
children of non-deterministic actions in Deﬁnition 6 (iii) (b), such a reduction is not given –
the quantiﬁcation is over any action tree T ′ that may be suitable to solve the child. What
makes the recursion sound, instead, is that the set of available non-deterministic actions is
diminished by one. Without this, the notion of “weak SAM plan” would be ill-deﬁned: the
recursion step may result in the same planning task over again, allowing the construction
of planning tasks that are considered “solvable” if they are “unsolvable”.7
7. Concretely, say we obtain Deﬁnition 6’ from Deﬁnition 6 by considering states s only, removing the
handling of And
av. Consider the example with one variable x whose possible values are A and B, with
initial state I : x = A, with goal G : x = B, and with a single action a with two possible outcomes, x = A
or x = B. Say T consists only of a. Then the “bad” outcome of a, i.e., the state x = A, is identical to the
original initial state I. If I is “unsolvable” according to Deﬁnition 6’, then this outcome of a qualiﬁes for
Deﬁnition 6’ (iii) (b), and thus the overall task – the same state I – is considered to be “solvable”. By
contrast, using Deﬁnition 6 as above, the plan must solve the state/available-non-deterministic-actions
pair (x = A, {a}), and the bad outcome of a is the diﬀerent pair (x = A, ∅). That pair is unsolvable, and
hence a is a weak plan.
601

Hoffmann, Weber & Kraft
The following observation holds simply because Deﬁnition 5 captures a special case of
Deﬁnition 6:
Proposition 1 (Weak SAM Plans Generalize Strong SAM Plans) Let (X, A, I, G)
be a SAM planning task with A = Ad ∪And. Let s be a state, let And
av ⊆And, and let T be
an action tree over A ∪{STOP}. If T is a strong SAM solution for (s, And
av), then T is a
weak SAM solution for (s, And
av).
In other words, any strong SAM plan is also a weak SAM plan, and hence in particular
any SAM planning task that is solvable under the strong semantics is also solvable under
the weak semantics. The inverse is obviously not true. A counter-example is our running
example in Figure 2.
We remark that, trivially, deciding whether a plan exists is hard for both, Deﬁnition 5
and Deﬁnition 6. The special case where all actions are deterministic is a generalization of
Deﬁnition 2, where as mentioned that problem is PSPACE-complete.
4.3 SAM Planning Tasks: Running Example
For illustration, we encode our running example, Figure 1, into a SAM planning task
(X, A, I, G).
We set X := {Arch, Compl, Cons, Appr, Subm, Acc, FoUp}, abbreviat-
ing the status variable names mentioned in Figure 1. For example, Arch stands for the
variable “CQ.archiving”. The domain of each of Arch, Compl, Cons, Subm, Acc, and FoUp
is {true, false}. This serves to abbreviate the various names used for the respective variable
values in Figure 1. The domain of Appr is {notChecked, nec, notNec, granted, notGranted}.
In what follows, for brevity we write facts, i.e., variable/value pairs, involving true/false
valued variables like literals. For example, we write ¬FoUp instead of (FoUp, no).
The initial state of the SAM BO, and thus the SAM planning task, is:
• I = {¬Arch, ¬Compl, ¬Cons, (Appr, notChecked), ¬Subm, ¬Acc, ¬FoUp}
The goal is “CQ.followUp:documentCreated AND CQ.archiving:archived”:
• G = {FoUp, Arch}
The deterministic actions Ad are:
• “Mark CQ as Accepted”: (¬Arch ∧Subm, {Acc})
• “Create Follow-Up for CQ”: (¬Arch ∧Acc, {FoUp})
• “Archive CQ”: (¬Arch, {Arch})
• “Submit CQ”: (¬Arch ∧((Appr, notNec) ∨(Appr, granted)), {Subm})
Note here that action eﬀects are sets of partial variable assignments, i.e., sets of sets of facts.
For the deterministic actions, there is just one partial variable assignment so we omit the
second pair of set parentheses to avoid notational clutter. Note also that we do not have
“delete eﬀects”. The eﬀects assign new values to the aﬀected variables, implicitly removing
their old values, cf. the meaning of s ⊕eﬀa as deﬁned in Section 2.
The non-deterministic actions And are:
• Check CQ Completeness: (¬Arch, {{Compl}, {¬Compl}})
• Check CQ Consistency: (¬Arch, {{Cons}, {¬Cons}})
602

SAP Speaks PDDL
• Check CQ Approval Status:
(¬Arch ∧(Appr, notChecked) ∧Compl ∧Cons, {{(Appr, nec)}, {(Appr, notNec)}})
• Decide CQ Approval:
(¬Arch ∧(Appr, nec), {{(Appr, granted)}, {(Appr, notGranted)}})
Figure 2 shows a weak SAM plan for this example. For presentation to the user, a simple
post-process (outlined in Section 7.1) transforms such plans into BPMN workﬂows.
5. Planning Algorithms
We design an adaptation of FF (Hoﬀmann & Nebel, 2001), using a variant of the AO* for-
ward search from Contingent-FF (Hoﬀmann & Brafman, 2005), as well as a na¨ıve extension
of FF’s heuristic function. We assume that the reader is familiar with heuristic search in
general, and we refer to the literature (e.g., Pearl, 1984) for that background.
5.1 Search
For strong SAM planning – Deﬁnition 5 – we use AO* tree search (Nilsson, 1969, 1971).
For weak SAM planning – Deﬁnition 6 – we use a variant of that search that we refer to as
SAM-AO*. We focus in what follows mainly on SAM-AO*, since AO* is well-known and
will become clear as a side eﬀect of the discussion.
Search is forward in an AND-OR tree whose nodes are states (OR nodes) and actions
(AND nodes). The OR’ed children of states are the applicable actions, the AND’ed children
of actions are the alternative outcomes (for deterministic actions, there is a single child so
the AND node trivializes). Like in AO*, we propagate “node solved” and “node failed”
markers. The mechanics for this are the usual ones in the case of OR nodes, i.e., the marker
of the node is the disjunction of its childrens’ markers. For AND nodes, SAM-AO* diﬀers
from the usual conjunctive interpretation, implementing the weak SAM planning semantics
of Deﬁnition 6: amongst other things, an AND node is failed only if all its children are
failed. Figure 3 provides an overview of SAM-AO*, highlighting the diﬀerences to AO*.
Figure 4 illustrates the algorithm on a simpliﬁcation of our running example.
One feature of the algorithm that is immediately apparent is the book-keeping which
non-deterministic actions are still available. Recall here that, in line with Deﬁnitions 5
and 6, we allow each non-deterministic action at most once in any execution of a plan. For
the search algorithm – both in strong planning (AO*) and in weak planning (SAM-AO*) –
this means that OR nodes contain not only a state s, but a pair (s, And
av) giving the state as
well as the subset of And that has not been used up to this node. We will refer to such pairs
as search states from now on. The book-keeping of the sets And
av is straightforward. For the
initial state, all non-deterministic actions are still available. Whenever a non-deterministic
action a is applied, for its outcome states, a is no longer available. For illustration, consider
how the action sets are reduced in Figure 4 (B–D).
The heuristic function h, that we assume as a given here, takes as arguments the search
state, i.e., both the state and the available non-deterministic actions. This is because action
availability aﬀects goal distance and hence the heuristic estimates. By h(s) = 0 the heuristic
indicates goal states, and by h(s) = ∞it may indicate that the state is unsolvable. The
algorithm trusts the heuristic, i.e., it assumes that h only returns these values if the state
603

Hoffmann, Weber & Kraft
procedure SAM-AO*
input SAM planning task (X, A, I, G) with A = Ad ∪And, heuristic function h
output A weak plan for (X, A, I, G), or “unsolvable”
initialize T to consist only of NI; content(NI) := (I, And)
status(NI) :=solved if h(I, And) = 0, failed if h(I, And) = ∞, unknown else
while status(NI) =unknown do
Ns := select-open-node(T); (s, And
av) := content(Ns)
for all a ∈Ad ∪And
av with s |= prea do
if a ∈Ad and is-direct-duplicate(Ns, s ⊕eﬀa, And
av) then skip a endif
insert Na as child of Ns into T; content(Na) := a
And
av
′ := And
av if a ∈Ad, else And
av
′ := And
av \ {a}
for all eﬀa ∈Ea do
s′ := s ⊕eﬀa
insert Ns′ as child of Na into T; content(Ns′) := (s′, And
av
′)
status(Ns′) := solved if h(s′, And
av
′) = 0, failed if h(s′, And
av
′) = ∞, unknown else
endfor
status(Na) := SAM-aggregate({status(N ′) | N ′ is child of Na in T})
endfor
status(Ns) := OR-aggregate({status(N ′) | N ′ is child of Ns in T})
propagate-status-updates-to-I (Ns)
endwhile
if status(NI) =failed then return “unsolvable” endif
return an action tree corresponding to a subtree T ′ of T s.t. NI ∈T ′ and:
for all inner nodes Ns ∈T ′: status(Ns) = solved and Ns has exactly one child Na in T ′;
for all nodes Na ∈T ′: all children Ns′ of Na in T are contained in T ′
is-direct-duplicate(N, s′, And
av) :=

true
∃predecessor N0 of N s.t. content(N0) = (s′, And
av)
false
else
SAM-aggregate(M) :=







solved
∃m ∈M : m = solved, and
∀m ∈M : (m = solved or m = failed)
failed
∀m ∈M : m = failed
unknown
else
OR-aggregate(M) :=



solved
∃m ∈M : m = solved
failed
∀m ∈M : m = failed
unknown
else
Figure 3: Pseudo-code of SAM-AO*, highlighting the diﬀerences to AO*.
s is indeed a goal state/unsolvable. Detecting unsolvable states is within the capabilities of
FF’s heuristic, and is of paramount importance for planning with SAM models. Its behavior
is like that of the heuristic in Figure 4 (B–D), which immediately marks all unsolvable nodes
as being such. We get back to this in Section 5.2.2 below.
The overall structure of SAM-AO* is the same as that of AO*. Starting with the initial
search state (compare Figure 4 (A)), we iteratively use select-open-node to select an OR node
Ns in the tree that has not yet been expanded and whose status is unknown; the selection
criterion is based on the node’s f-value, as explained below. We expand the selected node
with the applicable actions (in Figure 4 (B), we omit “Check CQ Consistency” to save
space), and we insert one new node for each possible outcome of these actions (“Comp” vs.
604

SAP Speaks PDDL
A
B
D
C
unknown; h=2
−Comp, −Cons; CheckComp, CheckCons
Comp, Cons; (none)
solved; h=0
failed; h=infty
Comp, −Cons; (none)
Comp, −Cons; CheckCons
−Comp, −Cons; CheckCons
Check CQ Completeness unknown
Check CQ Consistency
−Comp, −Cons; CheckComp, CheckCons
Comp, Cons; (none)
solved; h=0
failed: h=infty
Comp, −Cons; (none)
Comp, −Cons; CheckCons
solved; h=1
−Comp, −Cons; CheckCons
failed: h=infty
solved; h=2
Check CQ Completeness solved
Check CQ Consistency
−Comp, −Cons; CheckCons
unknown; h=1
unknown; h=2
−Comp, −Cons; CheckComp, CheckCons
unknown
Check CQ Completeness
unknown; h=2
solved
solved
−Comp, −Cons; CheckComp, CheckCons
Comp, −Cons; CheckCons
failed; h=infty
failed; h=infty
solved; h=1
Figure 4: Phases of SAM-AO* in a simplifaction of the running example (Figure 1), with
only the two variables “CQ.completeness” and “CQ.consistency”, and only the
two actions “Check CQ Completeness” and “Check CQ Consistency”. The goal,
using the abbrevations here, is “Comp, Cons”. For search states (s, And
av), on the
left-hand side of the semicolon we show the state s, and on the right-hand side
we show the set And
av of available non-deterministic actions.
“-Comp” in Figure 4 (B)); we will discuss the is-direct-duplicate function below. Each new
node, i.e., the corresponding search state, is evaluated with the heuristic function. Once all
outcomes of an action a were inserted, the status of a is updated. Once all actions applicable
to the current node Ns are inserted, the status of Ns is updated. The latter update, reﬂected
in the OR-aggregate equation in Figure 3, is exactly as in AO*. A key diﬀerence to AO* lies
in the former update, reﬂected in the SAM-aggregate equation. That equation is in obvious
correspondence with Deﬁnition 6. In Figure 4 (B), neither of these updates yields any new
information, because the status of one of the action outcomes, “Comp, Cons; CheckCons”,
is “unknown”. That changes in Figure 4 (C), where the status of both outcomes becomes
deﬁnite (solved/failed), and the updates propagate this information to the action a and the
search state node Ns it was applied to.
After the status of Ns and a has been set, propagate-status-updates-to-I (Ns) performs a
backward iteration starting at Ns, updating each action and search state along the way to
I using the same two functions, OR-aggregate and SAM-aggregate. This is necessary since
the status of Ns may have changed, and that may aﬀect the status of any predecessors.
This happens, for example, in Figure 4 (D) where the status of the ﬁrst node and action
now change from “unknown” to “solved”. The algorithm terminates when the initial node
605

Hoffmann, Weber & Kraft
(the search tree root) is solved or failed. In the former case, a solved sub-tree is returned.
That happens in Figure 4 (D), and the sub-tree returned is equivalent to the start (top two
actions) of our example plan in Figure 2.
In addition to status markers, SAM-AO* also annotates search states with their f-
values, as well as the current best action. This is not shown in Figure 3 since it is (almost)
identical to what is done in AO*. The f-value of a search state node is the minimum of
those of its children, plus 1 accounting for the cost of applying an action; a minimizing child
is the best action. The f-value of an action node is the maximum of its children, except –
and herein lies the only diﬀerence to AO* – that we do not set the action value to ∞unless
all its children are marked as failed. The select-open-node procedure starts in NI and keeps
choosing best actions until it arrives at a non-expanded state, which is selected as Ns.
The is-direct-duplicate function in Figure 3 disallows the generation of search states that
are identical to one of their predecessors in the tree. We refer to this as direct duplicate
pruning. Note that the method prunes duplicates only within deterministic parts of the
search tree. If a predecessor node N0 as in Figure 3 is found, then all actions between
N0 and N are deterministic, because otherwise content(N0) would contain strictly more
non-deterministic actions than N. Obviously, direct duplicate pruning preserves soundness
and completeness of the search algorithm. We have:
Proposition 2 (SAM-AO* is Complete and Sound) Let (X, A, I, G) be a SAM plan-
ning task, and let h be a heuristic function. SAM-AO* terminates when run on the task with
h. Provided h(s) = 0 iﬀs is a goal state, and h(s) = ∞only if s is unsolvable, SAM-AO*
terminates with success iﬀthere exists a weak SAM plan for the task, and the action tree
returned in that case is such a plan.
This follows from the known results about AO*, by deﬁnition, and by two simple obser-
vations. First, eventually, on any tree path no non-deterministic actions will be available
anymore. Second, direct duplicate pruning allows only ﬁnitely many nodes in a SAM plan-
ning task without non-deterministic actions.
The reader might wonder whether stronger duplicate pruning methods could be de-
ﬁned, across the non-deterministic actions in the tree.
A na¨ıve approach, asking only
whether a predecessor of N contains the same state – and ignoring the sets of available
non-deterministic actions – does not work for SAM-AO*. It renders that algorithm un-
sound. This is because such a pruning method may mark solvable search states as failed,
and failed nodes can be part of the solution in a weak plan. For illustration, consider the
simple example where we have a variable x with values A, B, C, the initial state A, the goal
C, and three actions: a1 has precondition A and the two possible outcomes B and C; a2
has precondition B and outcome A; a3 has precondition A and outcome C. Say the search
has chosen to apply a1 ﬁrst. Consider a1’s unfavorable outcome B. At this point, in order
to obtain a plan, we must apply a2, a3 to achieve the goal C. However, the outcome state
s : x = A of a2 is the same as the initial state. Hence s is pruned, hence a1’s outcome B
is marked as failed, hence the algorithm wrongly concludes that a1’s outcomes qualify for
Deﬁnition 6 (iii), and that a1 on its own is a plan.
606

SAP Speaks PDDL
5.2 Heuristic Function
To compute goal distance estimates, we use “all-outcomes-determinization” as known in
probabilistic planning (Yoon et al., 2007) to get rid of non-deterministic actions, then run
the FF heuristic (Hoﬀmann & Nebel, 2001) oﬀ-the-shelf. For the sake of self-containedness,
we next explain this in some detail. The reader familiar with FF may skip to Section 5.2.2.
5.2.1 Relaxed Planning Graphs
FF’s heuristic function is one out of a range of general-purpose planning heuristics based on
a relaxation widely known as “ignoring delete lists” (McDermott, 1999; Bonet & Geﬀner,
2001). Heuristics of this kind have emerged in the late 90s and are still highly successful.
In what follows, we assume that action preconditions and the goal are conjunctions of
positive atoms, and are thus equivalent to sets of facts. For more general formulas, such as
the preconditions in SAM planning tasks, one can apply known transformations (Gazen &
Knoblock, 1997) to achieve this.
The name “delete lists” comes from a Boolean-variable representation of planning tasks.
Translated to our context, the relaxation means that variables accumulate, rather than
change, their values. For illustration, say we have “CQ.archiving:notArchived” in our run-
ning example, and we apply the action “Archive CQ” whose eﬀect is “CQ.archiving:archived”.
Then, in the relaxation, the resulting state will be “CQ.archiving:notArchived, CQ.archiving:
archived”, containing both the old and the new value of the variable “CQ.archiving”. Thus
the other actions of this BO, that all require the customer quote to not be archived yet,
remain applicable, and in diﬀerence to the plan from Figure 2, a relaxed plan can archive
the CQ right at the start and then proceed to the rest of the processing.
Viewing variable assignments as sets of facts, relaxed action application is equivalent to
taking the set union of the current state with the action eﬀect.
This yields a strictly
larger set of facts than the real application of the action (“CQ.archiving:notArchived,
CQ.archiving:archived” instead of “CQ.archiving:archived”). Satisfaction of preconditions
and the goal is then tested by asking for inclusion in that set. Bylander (1994) proved
that, within the relaxation, plan existence can be decided in polynomial time.
He also
proved, however, that optimal relaxed planning, i.e., ﬁnding the length of a shortest pos-
sible relaxed plan, is still NP-hard. Therefore, the heuristics used by practical planners
approximate that length. Speciﬁcally, the FF heuristic we build on herein computes some
not necessarily optimal relaxed plan. The algorithm doing so consists of two phases. First,
it builds a relaxed planning graph (RPG) to approximate forward reachability. Then it
extracts a relaxed plan from the RPG.
Figure 5 shows how an RPG is computed in our planner. The algorithm gets the state
s as well as the remaining non-deterministic actions, And
av. It then determinizes the latter
actions, inserting each of their possible outcomes as an individual new deterministic action
into the new action set A′. The following loop is a simple ﬁxed point operation over sets of
facts. The initial set F0 is equal to the state s whose goal distance shall be estimated. Each
loop iteration then increments Ft with the eﬀects of all actions whose preconditions have
been reached. In case all goals are reached, the algorithm stops with success and returns
the iteration index t. If a ﬁxed point occurs before that happens, the algorithm returns ∞.
607

Hoffmann, Weber & Kraft
procedure RPG
input SAM planning task (X, A, I, G) with A = Ad ∪And,
state s, available non-deterministic actions And
av
output Number of relaxed parallel steps needed to reach the goal, or ∞
A′ := Ad ∪{(prea, {eﬀa}) | a ∈And
av, eﬀa ∈Ea}
F0 := s, t := 0
while G ̸⊆Ft do
A′
t := {a ∈A′ | prea ⊆Ft}
Ft+1 := Ft ∪S
a∈A′
t eﬀa
if Ft+1 = Ft then return ∞endif
t := t + 1
endwhile
return t
Figure 5: Pseudo-code for building a relaxed planning graph (RPG).
If the RPG returns t < ∞, the heuristic function algorithm enters its second phase,
relaxed plan extraction. This is a straightforward backchaining procedure selecting sup-
porting actions for the goals, and then iteratively for the supporting actions’ preconditions.
The backchaining makes sure to select only feasible supporters by exploiting the reachability
information encoded in the sets Ft. Note here that t itself is not a good heuristic estimator
because it counts parallel action applications – we could make transactions on 1000 BOs in
parallel and still count this as a single step.
Consider our simpliﬁed example from Figure 4. For the root node “Comp, Cons; Check-
Comp, CheckCons”, the relaxed plan returned will be ⟨”Check CQ Completeness+”, ”Check
CQ Consistency+”⟩, where the superscript “+” indicates that these are actions from the
determinized set A′ in Figure 5, choosing the positive outcome of each of these actions.
The heuristic value returned is 2, as in Figure 4.
Indeed, all the heuristic values from
Figure 4 are as would be returned by FF’s heuristic.
In particular, if “-Comp”, i.e.,
“CQ.completeness:notComplete”, holds in a state, but the action “Check CQ Complete-
ness” is no longer available, then the heuristic value returned is ∞because no action in
A′ can achieve the goal “Comp”, and thus the RPG ﬁxed point does not contain the goal.
Similarly if “-Cons” holds in a state but “Check CQ Consistency” is no longer available.
5.2.2 Detecting Failed Nodes
It follows directly from, e.g., the results of Hoﬀmann and Nebel (2001), that the RPG stops
with success iﬀthere exists a relaxed plan for the task (X, A′, s, G). From this, we easily
get the following result which is relevant for us:
Proposition 3 (RPG Dead-End Detection in SAM is Sound) Let (X, A, I, G) be a
SAM planning task with A = Ad ∪And. Let s be a state, and let And
av ⊆And be a set of
non-deterministic actions. If the RPG run on these inputs returns ∞, then there exists no
weak SAM solution for (s, And
av).
To see this, note that the action set A′ of Figure 5 is, from the perspective of plan
existence, an over-approximation of the actual action set Ad ∪And
av we got available. A′
allows us to choose, for any non-deterministic action, the outcome that we want. Thus,
from a plan using Ad ∪And
av we can trivially construct a plan using A′. So if no plan using
608

SAP Speaks PDDL
A′ exists then neither does a plan using Ad ∪And
av. From here it suﬃces to see that non-
existence of a relaxed plan (based on A′) implies non-existence of a real plan (based on A′).
That is obvious, concluding the argument.
It is of course a very strong simpliﬁcation to act as if one could choose the outcomes of
non-deterministic actions. Part of our motivation for doing so is to demonstrate that it is not
necessary, at least in this application context, to dramatically enhance oﬀ-the-shelf planning
techniques. The simplistic approach just presented suﬃces to obtain good performance.
This is particularly true regarding the ability to detect dead-ends. We experimented with a
total of 548987 planning instances based on SAM. Of these (within limited time/memory)
we found a weak plan for 441884 instances. Around half of the actions in these plans are
non-deterministic, and these typically yield failed nodes in the plan. For every one of these
failed nodes, in every one of the 441884 solved instances, the RPG returned ∞.
5.2.3 Helpful Actions Pruning
We also adopt FF’s helpful actions pruning. Aside from the goal distance estimate, the
relaxed plan can be used to determine a most promising subset H(s) – the helpful actions
– of the actions applicable to the evaluated state s. Essentially, H(s) consists of the actions
that are applicable to s and that are contained in the relaxed plan computed as described
above in Section 5.2.1.8 This action subset is used as a pruning method simply by restricting,
during search, the expansion of state s to consider only the actions H(s). This kind of
heuristic action pruning is of paramount importance for planner performance (Hoﬀmann &
Nebel, 2001; Richter & Helmert, 2009).
In the SAM setting, one important aspect of FF’s helpful actions pruning is that it is
accurate enough to distinguish relevant BOs from irrelevant ones. That is to say, if a BO
is not mentioned in the goal, then no action pertaining to it will ever be considered to be
helpful. This is simply because, as pointed out previously, SAM currently does not model
cross-BO interactions. So if a BO Y is not in the goal then relaxed plan extraction will
never create any sub-goals pertaining to Y .
The obvious – and well-known – caveat of helpful actions pruning is that it does not
preserve completeness. H(s) may not contain any of the actions that actually start a plan
from s. If that happens, then search may stop unsuccessfully even though a plan exists.
This pertains to classical planning just as it pertains to AO* and SAM-AO* as used herein.
Importantly, helpful actions pruning in SAM-AO*, i.e., for weak SAM planning as per
Deﬁnition 6, has another more subtle caveat: it does not preserve soundness. Consider
again the example where we have a variable x with values A, B, C, the initial state is A, the
goal is C, and we have three actions of which action a1 has precondition A and two possible
outcomes B and C, a2 has precondition B and outcome A, and a3 has precondition A
and outcome C.
Say the search has applied a1.
Say that Ns := (s, And
av) is the node
corresponding to a1’s unfavorable outcome B. The only way to complete a1 into a plan is
to attach a2, a3 to Ns. Presume that helpful actions pruning, at the node Ns, removes a2.
Then Ns is marked as failed, and we wrongly conclude that a1 on its own is a plan.
8. FF’s deﬁnition of H(s) is a little more complicated, adding also some actions that were not selected for
the relaxed plan but achieve a relevant sub-goal. We omit this for brevity. Recent variants of helpful
actions pruning, for diﬀerent heuristic functions like the causal graph heuristic (Helmert, 2006), do not
make such additions, selecting H(s) based on membership in abstract solutions only.
609

Hoffmann, Weber & Kraft
Using helpful actions pruning, one may incorrectly mark a node Ns as failed. If such Ns
is a leaf in a weak plan T, marked as failed even though it is solvable by action tree T ′, then
T is not a valid plan. This can be ﬁxed, in a plan-correction post-process, by attaching T ′ to
Ns, where T ′ is found by running SAM-AO* without helpful actions pruning on Ns. We did
not implement such a post-process because, according to our experiments, it is unnecessary
in practice: as discussed at the end of the previous sub-section, all failed nodes Ns in our
441884 weak plans have heuristic value ∞, and are thus proved to be, indeed, unsolvable.
6. Experiments
We will describe our prototype at SAP in the next section. In what follows, we evaluate our
planning techniques in detail from a scientiﬁc point of view. Our experiments are aimed at
understanding three issues:
(1) What is the applicability of strong respectively weak planning in SAM?
(2) Is the runtime performance of our planner suﬃcient for the envisioned application?
(3) How interesting is SAM as a planning benchmark?
We ﬁrst explain the experiments setup. We then describe our experiments with FF for
strong plans, and with FF for weak plans; we summarize our ﬁndings with blind search.
While these experiments consider instances pertaining to a single BO, we ﬁnally examine
what happens when scaling the number of relevant BOs.
6.1 Experiments Setup
All experiments were run on a 1.8 GHz CPU, with a 10 minute time and 0.5 GB memory
cut-oﬀ. Our planner is implemented in C as a modiﬁcation of FF-v2.3. The source code, the
problem generator used in our experiments, and the anonymized PDDL encoding of SAM are
available for download at http://www.loria.fr/~hoffmanj/SAP-PDDL.zip. Our SAM-
AO* implementation is modifed from the AO* implementation in Contingent-FF (Hoﬀmann
& Brafman, 2005). Like that planner, we weight heuristic values by a factor of 5 (we did
not play with this parameter).
We focus on the case where the initial state is set as speciﬁed in SAM. Thus a SAM
planning instance in what follows is identiﬁed by its goal: a subset of variable values. The
number of such instances is ﬁnite, but enormous; just for choosing the subset of variables to
be constrained we have 21110 options. In what follows, we mostly consider goals all of whose
variables belong to a single BO. This is sensible because, as previously stated, SAM currently
does not reﬂect interactions across BOs. We made an instance generator that allows to
create instance subsets characterized by the number |G| of variables constrained in the goal
(this parameter is relevant for business users, and as we shall see it also heavily inﬂuences
planner performance). For given |G|, the generator enumerates all possible variable tuples,
and allows to randomly sample for each of them a given number S of value tuples. The
maximum number of variables of any BO, in the current version of SAM, is 15. We created
all possible instances for |G| = 1, 2, 3, 13, 14, 15 where the number of instances is up to
around 50000. For all other values of |G|, we chose a value for S so that we got around
50000 instances each. The total number of instances we generated is 548987.
610

SAP Speaks PDDL
Since SAM currently does not model cross-BO interactions, for a single-BO goal we
can in principle supply to the planner only those actions pertaining to that BO. We will
henceforth refer to this option as using the BO-relevant actions. Contrasting with this, the
full actions option supplies to the planner all actions (no matter which BO they pertain
to). We will use the BO-relevant actions in some experiments where we wish to enable the
planner to prove the planning task to be unsolvable – with the full actions, this is always
impossible because the reachable state space is much too vast. In our baseline, however, we
use the full actions. The motivation for this is that helpful actions pruning will detect the
irrelevant actions anyway (cf. Section 5.2), and in the long term, it is likely that SAM will
model cross-BO interactions.
6.2 Strong SAM Plans
In our ﬁrst experiment, we evaluate the performance of strong planning on SAM, i.e, we
run FF in a standard AO* tree search forcing all children of AND nodes to be solved. We
identify two parameters relevant to the performance of FF: the kind of BO considered, and
|G|. Figure 6 shows how coverage and state evaluations (number of calls to the heuristic
function) depend on these parameters.
Consider ﬁrst Figure 6 (a). The x-axis ranges over BOs, i.e., each data point corresponds
to one kind of BO.9 The ordering of BOs is by decreasing percentage of solved instances. For
each BO, the y-axis shows the percentage of solved, unsolved, and failed instances within
that BO. The overall message is mixed. On the one hand, coverage is perfect for 194 of
the 371 BOs, so for more than half of the BOs all the tested instances have a strong plan
which is found by FF. On the other hand, for the other 177 BOs, coverage is rather bad.
For 51 of the BOs, not a single instance is solved. On the 126 BOs in between, coverage
declines steeply. Importantly, when counting unsolved cases in total (across BOs), it turns
out that 88.83% of the instances are unsolved. In other words, for almost 90% of the
tested cases FF’s search space does not contain a strong SAM plan. Of course,
this percentage pertains to the particular distribution of test cases that we used. Still this
result indicates that the applicability of strong planning in SAM is quite limited.
Another interesting aspect of Figure 6 (a) is that failed cases are rare: they constitute
only 0.8% of the total instance set. That is, due to helpful actions pruning, FF’s search
spaces are typically small enough to be exhausted within the given time and memory.
Consider now Figure 6 (b), which shows coverage on the y-axis over |G| on the x-axis.
Again, the message is mixed. On the one hand, with a single goal (|G| = 1), 58.85% of
the instances are solved with a strong plan. On the other hand, the number of solved cases
declines monotonically, and quite steeply, over growing |G|. With 2 goals we are at 36.95%,
with 4 goals at 29.03%, with 5 goals at 23.86%. For |G| ≥10, the number of solved cases
is less than 5%, and for |G| ≥13, the number is less than 1%.
One may wonder at this point whether it is FF’s helpful actions pruning that is re-
sponsible for the frequent non-existence of strong plans. The answer is “no”. In a second
experiment with strong planning, we ran FF without helpful actions, giving as input only
9. Note that we do not include all 404 BOs. Precisely, we consider 371 of them. The remaining 33 BOs
are not interesting for planning: all variable values not true in the initial state are unreachable because
these values are set by procedures not encoded in SAM.
611

Hoffmann, Weber & Kraft
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 100
 0
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
 300
 350
Coverage
BO
SOLVED
UNSOLVED
FAILED
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 100
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
 10  11  12  13  14  15
Coverage
|G|
SOLVED
UNSOLVED
FAILED
(a)
(b)
 1
 10
 100
 1000
 10000
 100000
 0
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
 300
 350
Number of evaluated states
BO
UNSOLVED MAX
SOLVED MAX
UNSOLVED MEAN
SOLVED MEAN
 1
 10
 100
 1000
 10000
 100000
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
 10  11  12  13  14  15
Number of evaluated states
|G|
UNSOLVED MAX
SOLVED MAX
UNSOLVED MEAN
SOLVED MEAN
(c)
(d)
Figure 6: Strong planning with FF on full action sets.
Coverage (a,b) and state
evaluations (c,d) data, plotted over individual kinds of BOs (a,c) and |G| (b,d).
“SOLVED”: plan found. “UNSOLVED”: search space (with helpful actions prun-
ing) exhausted. “FAILED”: out of time or memory. Ordering of BOs in (c) is by
increasing y-value for each curve individually.
the BO-relevant actions in order to enable proofs of unsolvability. The result is very clear:
the number of solved cases hardly changes at all. The total percentage of solved cases in
the previous experiment is 10.38%, the total percentage in the new experiment is 10.36%.
This low success rate is due to unsolvability, not to prohibitively large search spaces. In
total, 74.1% of the instances are proved unsolvable; FF fails only on 15.54%.
Given the above, the applicability of strong planning in SAM appears limited unless we
can restrict attention to BOs with few variables and/or to single-goal planning tasks. From
a more general perspective, the best option appears to be to:
(I) Try to ﬁnd a strong SAM plan (using FF with AO*).
(II) If (I) fails, try to ﬁnd a weak SAM plan (using FF with SAM-AO*).
In this setting, it is relevant how long we will have to wait for the answer to (I). Figures 6
(c) and (d) provide data for this. We consider the instances where FF terminated regularly
(plan found or helpful actions search space exhausted), and we consider performance in
terms of the number of evaluated states, i.e., the number of calls to the heuristic function.
612

SAP Speaks PDDL
The ordering of BOs in Figure 6 (c) is by increasing y-value for each curve individually;
otherwise the plot would be unreadable. The most striking observation is that, for 351 of
the 371 BOs, the maximum number of state evaluations is below 100. For solved instances,
this even holds for 369 BOs, i.e., for all but 2 of the BOs. The maximum number of state
evaluations done in order to ﬁnd a plan is 521, taking 0.22 seconds total runtime. The mean
behavior is even more good-natured, peaking at 9.85 state evaluations. Waiting for a “no”
can be more time consuming, with a peak at 42954 evaluations respectively 110.87 seconds.
However, since all the “yes” answers are given very quickly, for practical use in an online
business process modeling environment it seems feasible to simply give the strong planning
one second (or less), and switch to weak planning in case that was not successful.
Consider Figure 6 (d). Like in (c), we can observe the very low number of state evalua-
tions required for the solved cases. Somewhat surprisingly, there is no conclusive behavior
over |G|. The reasons are not entirely clear to us. The “UNSOLVED MAX” curve is ﬂat at
the top because larger search spaces lead to failure. The discontinuities around |G| = 12 are
presumably due to BO structure. Few BOs have more than 12 variables, so the variance in
the data is higher in this region. For the sharp drops in “UNSOLVED MAX” and “SOLVED
MAX”, an additional factor is that there are very few strong plans for such large goals (cf.
Figure 6 (b)): those strong plans that do exist are found easily; disproving existence of a
strong plan can be easier for larger goals, since this increases the chance that the relaxed
plan will identify at least one unsolvable goal.
Summing up our ﬁndings regarding the issue (1) [applicability of strong vs. weak plan-
ning in SAM] we wish to understand in these experiments, SAM does not admit many
strong plans, but those instances that do have them tend to be solved easily by FF.
6.3 Weak SAM Plans
We will now see that weak SAM planning can solve 8 times as many instances as
strong SAM planning – namely around 80% of our test cases. Precisely, of the 548987
instances, 441884 are solved; all but 43 of these are solved by the default conﬁguration of
our planner. The average percentage of non-deterministic actions, across all weak plans, is
48.29%; the maximum percentage is 91.67%. Figure 7 shows our results, giving the same
four kinds of plots as previously shown for strong planning in Figure 6.
Consider ﬁrst Figure 7 (a). We see that, now, coverage is perfect in 274 of the 371 kinds
of BOs, as opposed to the 194 BOs of which that is true for strong planning. The latter
BOs are a subset of the former: wherever strong planning has perfect coverage the same is
true of weak planning. Whereas strong planning has 0 coverage – no instance solved at all
– for 51 BOs, we have no such cases here. The minimum coverage is 18.07%, and coverage
is below 50% only for 9 BOs. In total, while strong planning solves only 10.38% of the test
cases, we now solve 80.48%. That said, we still have 17.12% unsolved cases and 2.4% failed
cases, and this gets much worse for some BOs. Per individual BO, the fraction of unsolved
instances peaks at 81.92%, and the fraction of failed instances peaks at 14.98%.
Consider now Figure 7 (b). |G| = 1 is handled perfectly – 100% coverage as opposed
to 58.85% for strong planning – but this is followed by a fairly steady decline as |G| grows.
An explanation for the discontinuity at |G| = 3, 4 could be that for |G| = 3 our experiment
613

Hoffmann, Weber & Kraft
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 100
 0
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
 300
 350
Coverage
BO
SOLVED
UNSOLVED
FAILED
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 100
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
 10  11  12  13  14  15
Coverage
|G|
SOLVED
UNSOLVED
FAILED
(a)
(b)
 1
 10
 100
 1000
 10000
 100000
 1e+06
 0
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
 300
 350
Number of evaluated states
BO
UNSOLVED MAX
SOLVED MAX
UNSOLVED MEAN
SOLVED MEAN
 1
 10
 100
 1000
 10000
 100000
 1e+06
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
 10  11  12  13  14  15
Number of evaluated states
|G|
UNSOLVED MAX
SOLVED MAX
UNSOLVED MEAN
SOLVED MEAN
(c)
(d)
Figure 7: Weak planning with FF on full action sets. Coverage (a,b) and state eval-
uations (c,d) data, plotted over individual kinds of BOs (a,c) and |G| (b,d).
“SOLVED”: plan found. “UNSOLVED”: search space (with helpful actions prun-
ing) exhausted. “FAILED”: out of time or memory. Ordering of BOs in (c) is by
increasing y-value for each curve individually.
is exhaustive while for |G| = 4 we only sample. As above, the higher variance for large |G|
can be explained by the much smaller number of BOs in this region.
Figures 7 (c) and (d) provide a deeper look into performance on those instances where
FF terminated regularly (plan found or helpful actions search space exhausted). Like in
Figure 6 (c), the ordering of BOs in Figure 7 (c) is by increasing y-value for each curve
individually. The number of state evaluations is typically low. The phenomenon is not quite
as extreme as shown for strong planning in Figure 6 (c). This is likely because the more
generous deﬁnition of plans makes it more diﬃcult for FF to prove AND nodes unsolvable,
and hence to prune large parts of the search space. In detail, for 350 of the 371 BOs, the
maximum number of state evaluations is below 100; for solved instances, this holds for 364
BOs (the corresponding numbers for strong planning are 351 and 369).
The maximum
number of state evaluations done in order to ﬁnd a plan is 54386, taking 27.41 seconds total
runtime (521 and 0.22 for strong planning). From the “SOLVED MEAN” curve we see that
this maximal case is very exceptional – the mean number of state evaluations per BO peaks
614

SAP Speaks PDDL
at 47.78. Comparing this to the “UNSOLVED MEAN” curve, we see that a large number
of search nodes is, as one would expect, much more typical for unsolved instances.
In Figure 7 (d), we see that the overall behavior of state evaluations over |G| largely
mirrors that of coverage, including the discontinuity at |G| = 3, 4.
The most notable
exception is the fairly consistent decline of “SOLVED MAX” for |G| > 3. It is unclear to
us what the reason for that is.
What is the conclusion regarding the issues (2) [planner performance] and (3) [bench-
mark challenge] we wish to understand? For issue (2), our results look fairly positive. In
particular, consider only the solved instances (weak plan found). As explained above, the
number of state evaluations is largely well-behaved. In addition, the heuristic function is
quite fast. As stated, the maximum runtime is 27.41 seconds. The second largest runtime
is 2.6 seconds, and the third largest runtime is 1.69 seconds; all other plans are found in
less than 0.3 seconds. So a practical approach could be to simply apply a small cut oﬀ, like
0.5 seconds, or perhaps a minute if time is not as critical. This yields a quick step (II) as a
follow-up of the similarly quick step (I) determined above for strong planning.
What this strategy leaves us with are, in total, 17.12% unsolved instances and 2.4%
failed ones. Are those an important benchmark challenge for future research? Answering
this question ﬁrst of all entails ﬁnding out whether we can solve these instances when not
using helpful actions pruning, and if not, whether they are solvable at all.
We ran FF without helpful actions pruning on the unsolved and failed instances of
Figure 7, slightly more than 100000 instances in total. We enabled unsolvability proofs
by giving as input only the BO-relevant actions, and we facilitated larger search spaces by
increasing the time/memory cut-oﬀs from 10 minutes and 0.5 GB to 30 minutes and 1.5 GB
respectively. All failed instances are still failed in this new conﬁguration. Of the previously
unsolved instances, 47.43% are failed, and 52.52% are proved unsolvable.10 Only 0.05% –
43 instances – are now solved (the largest plan contains 140 actions). The inﬂuence of |G|
and the kind of BO is similar to what we have seen. The number of state evaluations is
vastly higher than before, with a mean and max of 10996.72 respectively 289484 for solved
instances. But the heuristic is extremely fast with only the BO-relevant actions, and hence
ﬁnding a plan takes a mean runtime of only 0.12 seconds. The max, second max, and third
max runtimes are 2.94 seconds, 0.7 seconds, and 0.53 seconds respectively; all other plans
are found in less than 0.15 seconds. Thus, with the above, all but 6 of the 441884 weak
plans in this experiment are found in less than 0.5 seconds.
All in all, changing the planner conﬁguration achieves some progress on the instances
not solved by the default conﬁguration, and it appears that many of them are unsolvable
anyway. But certainly they are a challenge for further research.
6.4 Blind Search
To explore to what extent heuristic techniques are actually required to successfully deal with
this domain – and thus to what extent the domain constitutes an interesting benchmark
10. Unsolvability of certain goal value combinations, i.e., partial assignments to a BO’s variables, occurs
naturally since these variables are not independent.
For example, some of the unsolvable instances
required a BO to simultaneously satisfy “BO.approval:In Approval” and “BO.release:Released”. In our
running example, this kind of situation arises, e.g., when requiring “CQ.approval:notChecked” together
with “CQ.acceptance:accepted”.
615

Hoffmann, Weber & Kraft
for such techniques – we ran an experiment with blind search. We used AO* with a trivial
heuristic that returns 1 on non-goal states and 0 on goal states. Since weak planning is
much more applicable than strong planning in SAM, we used the weak planning semantics.
We provided as input only the BO-relevant actions – otherwise, blind forward search is
trivially hopeless due to the enormous branching factor.
For the sake of conciseness, we do not discuss the results in detail here. In summary,
blind search is quite hopeless. It runs out of time or memory on 79.36% of our test instances.
It solves 19.04% of them – as opposed to the 80.48% solved based on FF. Interestingly, due
to FF’s ability to detect dead-ends via relaxed planning graphs, blind search is worse than
heuristic search even at proving unsolvability: in total, this happens in 5.99% of the cases
using FF, and in 1.60% of the cases using blind search.
That said, for BOs that have only few status variables and/or status values, and for
goals of size 1 or 2, blind search fares well, if not as well as heuristic search. The interesting
benchmarks lie outside this region – which is the case for more than 90% of our test instances.
6.5 Scaling Across BOs
FF does not scale gracefully to planning tasks with several BOs. We selected, for each BO,
one solved instance m(BO) with maximum number of state evaluations. Since that will
be of interest, we include here all 404 BOs, i.e., also those 33 BOs all of whose planning
goals are trivial (either unsolvable or true in the BO’s initial state already); m(BO) is 1 for
these BOs. We generated 404 planning tasks COMk, for 1 ≤k ≤404, combining the goals
m(BO) for all BOs up to number k, in an arbitrary ordering of the BOs. We compared
the data thus obtained against data we refer to as ACCk, obtained by summing up the
state evaluations when running FF in turn on each of the individual goals m(BO). This
comparison is valid since the BOs are mutually independent, and a plan for COMk can be
obtained as the union of the plans for the individual goals. Figure 8 shows the data.
 0
 10000
 20000
 30000
 40000
 50000
 60000
1
100
200
300
400
Number of evaluated states
Number of BOs
COMBINED
ACCUMULATED-INDIVIDUAL
Figure 8: Weak planning with FF when scaling the number of relevant BOs.
State evaluations plotted over the number of BOs for which a goal is speciﬁed.
“COMBINED” means that FF is run on the conjunction of all these goals (COMk
in the text). “ACCUMULATED-INDIVIDUAL” gives the sum of the data when
running FF individually on each single goal (ACCk in the text).
616

SAP Speaks PDDL
As Figure 8 shows quite clearly, FF does not scale gracefully to planning tasks with
several BOs.11 The largest instance solved is k = 103, with 38665 evaluations. The sum of
state evaluations when solving the 103 sub-tasks individually is 529. A possible explanation
is that, adding more goals for additional BOs, more actions are helpful. The increased
number of nodes may multiply over the search depth. Interestingly, the disproportionate
search increase occurs even when the new goal added is trivial. For example, ACC98 has just
1 more state evaluation than ACC97, while for COM98 and COM97 that diﬀerence amounts
to 251 state evaluations. On the other hand, for up to k ≤14 BOs, ACCk is still below
1000; the diﬃculties arise only when k becomes quite large.
7. Application Prototypes at SAP
We have integrated our technology into two BPM modeling environments. We next brieﬂy
explain how we transform the planner output into a BPM format. We then outline the
positioning of our prototypes at SAP, and illustrate the business user view of our technology.
We close with a few words on how the prototypes have been evaluated SAP-internally.
7.1 Transforming Plans to Business Processes
Business users expect to get a process model in a human-readable BPM workﬂow format.
We use BPMN (Object Management Group, 2008). The BPMN process model correspond-
ing to Figure 2 is depicted in Figure 9. This process model makes use of alternative (“x”)
and parallel (“+”) execution, uniﬁes redundant sub-trees (“Submit CQ” . . . “Archive CQ”),
removes failed outcomes, and highlights in red those nodes that may have such outcomes.
These changes are obtained using the following simple post-process to planning.
Check CQ
Consistency
Check CQ
Completeness
Check CQ 
Approval 
Status
Decide CQ 
Approval
Submit CQ
Mark CQ as 
Accepted
Create Follow-
Up for CQ
Archive CQ
Approval:
Necessary
Approval: 
not
Necessary
Figure 9: Final BPM process created for the running example.
11. The “vertical” part of the plot for ACCk is because, as we noticed before, the globally maximal number
of state evaluations, 54386 for BO 347, is an extreme outlier.
617

Hoffmann, Weber & Kraft
First, we remove each failed node together with the edge leading to it. In our run-
ning example, Figure 2, this concerns the “N” branches of “Check CQ Completeness” and
“Check CQ Consistency”, and the “notGranted” branch of “Decide CQ Approval”. Next,
we separate property checking from directing the control ﬂow. We do this for each node
that has more than 1 child. We replace each such node with a process step bearing the same
name, followed by an XOR split (BPMN control nodes giving a choice to execution). In the
example, this concerns “Check CQ Approval Status”. We then re-unite XOR branches using
XOR joins (BPMN control nodes leading alternative executions back together), avoiding
redundancies in the process by ﬁnding pairs of nodes that root identical sub-trees. In Fig-
ure 2, this pertains to the two occurrences of “Submit CQ”. We introduce a new XOR join
node taking the incoming edges of the found node pair. We attach one copy of the common
sub-tree below that XOR join. We insert a BPMN start node, join all leaves via a new XOR
join, and attach a BPMN end node as the new (only) leaf of the plan. Finally, we introduce
parallelism by ﬁnding non-interacting sub-sequences of actions in between the XOR splits
and joins that were introduced previously. (This is a heuristic notion of parallelism, that
does not guarantee to detect all possible parallelizations in the process.)
7.2 Positioning of our Prototypes at SAP
As part of the eﬀort to transfer our research results to the SAP product development
organization, we integrated our planning approach into two BPM prototypes.
The ﬁrst one, called Maestro for BPMN (Born, Hoﬀmann, Kaczmarek, Kowalkiewicz,
Markovic, Scicluna, Weber, & Zhou, 2008, 2009), is a BPMN process modeling tool devel-
oped by SAP Research primarily for the purpose of research and early prototyping. We
focus in what follows on our other prototype, which is implemented in the context of the
commercial SAP NetWeaver platform (SAP, 2010). NetWeaver is one of the most promi-
nent software platforms at SAP, and is the central platform for SAP’s service-oriented
architecture. It encompasses all the functionalities required to run an SAP application.
Our prototype is implemented as a research extension of SAP NetWeaver BPM.
SAP NetWeaver BPM consists of diﬀerent parts for process modeling and execution.
Our planning functionality is integrated into the SAP NetWeaver BPM Process Composer,
NetWeaver’s BPM modeling environment targeted at the creation of new processes. The
process modeling is done in BPMN notation; that notation is given an execution semantics
by NetWeaver BPM’s process execution engine.
7.3 Demonstration of our NetWeaver BPM Prototype
We brieﬂy illustrate what using our planning functionality will look like to business users.
We consider application scenario (C) as described in Section 3.3, where the business user
redesigns a new process from scratch. For application scenarios (A) and (B) from Section 3.3
– using planning during SAM-based development, respectively generating a process template
at the beginning of the modeling activity – the same interface can be used.
In designing a new process, the user chooses the “atomic” process steps according to
his/her intuition. At IT level, this is no more than drawing a box and inserting a descriptive
text. To align this intuitive design with the actual IT infrastructure the process should run
on, our planner allows to check how the atomic steps can be implemented based on existing
618

SAP Speaks PDDL
Figure 10: Screenshot of our BPM modeling environment, showing how business users spec-
ify planning goals.
transactions. Say the user has designed the process model shown in Figure 10. Amongst
others, the process contains a step “Release Purchase Order”, whose intention is to order
the purchase of a special part required to satisfy the customer demand, after the customer
quote has been accepted. The user now wishes to inﬂate “Release Purchase Order” to an
actual IT-level process fragment having the intended meaning. A double click on the step
opens the shown interface for entering the planning initial state and goal, i.e., the desired
status variable value changes, associated to this step. The status variable values are chosen
via drop-down menus, selecting “initial conditions” on the left-hand side and “goals” on
the right-hand side. In the present case, the goal is “PO.Status:Ordered”, and the initial
condition is “PO.Status:Created” because the purchase order (PO) was already created
beforehand and shall now be released.
Once the status variable values are entered, the user clicks on “Call composer”. This
invokes the planner, using the speciﬁed initial condition/goal to deﬁne the SAM planning
619

Hoffmann, Weber & Kraft
Notification: 
Quote 
rejected
Notification: 
Quote 
accepted
Mark Customer 
Quote as 
Rejected
Cancel Purchase 
Order (2)
Create Sales 
Order from 
Quote and 
archive Quote
Release 
Purchase 
Order
Trigger Follow-
up SO processing
Timeout
End
Notification: 
Quote 
rejected
Notification: 
Quote 
accepted
Mark Customer 
Quote as 
Rejected
Cancel Purchase 
Order (2)
Trigger Follow-
up SO processing
Timeout
End
Create Sales 
Order from 
Quote and 
archive Quote
Process 
Purchase Order 
Data
Check Purchase 
Order Data
Check Purchase 
Order Approval 
Status
Decide Purchase 
Order Approval
Place Purchase 
Order
PO Approval 
Not Necessary
PO Approval Necessary
Figure 11: The BPMN process snippet from the screenshot in Figure 10, before (left) and
after (right) calling the planner.
The aﬀected steps are highlighted in bold;
actions with failed outcomes are highlighted in red as before.
task.12 The returned plan is transformed to BPMN, and is inserted into the process model in
place of the atomic step that the user had been working on; see the illustration in Figure 11.
In the shown case, the plan is a process snippet containing ﬁve atomic transactions with
one XOR split and two possibly failed outcomes, showing that releasing the PO entails to
ﬁrst process its data, then check this data, and then invoke an approval process similar to
that of our illustrative example;13 ﬁnally, the PO is being ordered.
Note here that, while cross-BO interactions are not part of the SAM model, the planner
helps to create a process that spans multiple BOs, and that indeed ties together functionality
that cuts across departmental boundaries. The process snippet shown in Figure 10 invokes
the purchase of goods from a supplier as soon as a customer accepts a quote. This is relevant
for companies that sell highly customized goods (e.g., special-purpose ships), and who in
12. In the current implementation of the prototype, if the value of a variable x is not speciﬁed in the “initial
condition” given by the user, then the planner does not make use of x, i.e., all preconditions on x
are assumed to be false until x is set by an action eﬀect. One could of course easily make this more
comfortable, by assuming SAM’s initial values as a default, and by propagating the eﬀects of earlier
SAM transactions (on the same BO) along the process structure. First investigations into the latter
have been performed (May & Weber, 2008).
13. Indeed, approval is one of the design patterns that SAP applied throughout SAM. The actual pattern is
more complicated than our illustrative version here.
620

SAP Speaks PDDL
turn must procure customized parts from their suppliers (e.g., ship engines). Such processing
requires to combine services from BOs belonging to Customer Relationship Management
(CRM) and Supplier Relationship Management (SRM), and hence from the two “opposite
ends” of the system (and company). The designer of the process will typically be intimately
familiar with only one of these two, making it especially helpful to be able to call the planner
to obtain information about the other one.
7.4 Evaluation of our Prototype at SAP
Our prototype was part of a research transfer project with the NetWeaver BPM group,
and shaped during several feedback rounds with developers and architects. The evaluation
within SAP consisted mainly of prototype demonstrations at various SAP events.
For
example, an early version of the tool was demonstrated at the 2008 global meeting of SAP
Research “BPM and SI” (SI stands for “Semantic Integration”), which included participants
from SAP partners and development. The demonstrations received positive feedback from
SAP software architects. The perception was that this functionality would signiﬁcantly
strengthen the link between SAP BPM and the underlying software infrastructure, making
it much easier to access the services provided in an eﬀective manner. Most critical comments
were focused on some choices in the user interface design, such as “non-logicians will not
understand the meaning of the NOT symbol”, or “the list of several hundred BOs is too
long for a drop-down box”.
We do not have customer evaluation data, and it is not foreseeable when we (or anyone
else) will be able to obtain such data. When our ﬁrst prototype became available, a partner
organization committed to perform a pilot customer evaluation. That commitment was
retracted in the context of the 2008/2009 ﬁnancial crisis. Anyway, real customer evaluation
data may be impossible to come by, let alone publish, due to privacy reasons.
There are also some issues arising from the positioning of our prototype inside the SAP
software architecture. The NetWeaver process execution engine currently does not connect
to the actual IT services that implement SAM’s “actions”. While SAM is in productive
use within Business ByDesign, NetWeaver BPM is built on a diﬀerent technology stack. A
connection could in principle be established relatively easily – after all, service-orientation
is intended to do exactly this sort of thing – however this connection has not as yet been on
SAP’s agenda, and it involves some SAP-internal political issues. The fact that the main
drivers of the presented technology – the authors of this paper – have left the company in
the meantime does of course not help to remedy this problem.
8. Related Work
The basic idea explored in this paper – using planning systems to help business experts to
come up with processes close to the IT infrastructure – has been around for quite a long
time. For example, it was mentioned more than a decade ago by Jonathan et al. (1999). It
is also discussed in the 2003 roadmap of the PLANET Network of Excellence in AI Planning
(Biundo et al., 2003). More recently, Rodriguez-Moreno et al. (2007) implemented the idea
in the SHAMASH system. SHAMASH is a knowledge-based BPM tool targeted at helping
with the engineering and optimization of process models (Aler, Borrajo, Camacho, & Sierra-
Alonso, 2002). The tool includes, amongst other things, user-friendly interfaces allowing
621

Hoffmann, Weber & Kraft
users to conveniently annotate processes with rich context information, in particular in
the form of “rules” which roughly correspond to planning actions. These rules (and other
information) then form the basis for translation into PDDL, and planning for creation of
new process models.
The largest body of related work was performed during the last decade under a diﬀerent
name, semantic web service composition (SWSC), in the context of the Semantic Web
Community (e.g., Ponnekanti & Fox, 2002; Narayanan & McIlraith, 2002; Srivastava, 2002;
Constantinescu, Faltings, & Binder, 2004; Agarwal et al., 2005; Sirin, Parsia, Wu, Hendler,
& Nau, 2004; Sirin et al., 2006; Meyer & Weske, 2006; Liu, Ranganathan, & Riabov, 2007).
In a nutshell, the idea in SWSC is (1) to annotate web services with some declarative
abstract explanation of their functionality, and (2) to exploit these “semantic” annotations
to automatically combine web services for achieving a more complex functionality. While
SWSC terminology diﬀers from what we use in this paper, the idea is basically the same
(although most SWSC works do not address BPM speciﬁcally).
The key distinguishing feature of the present work is our approach to obtaining the
planning input (the “semantic annotations”).
Ours is the ﬁrst attempt to address the
planning/SWSC problem based on SAM, and more generally based on any pre-existing
model at all.
Since modeling is costly (Kambhampati, 2007; Rodriguez-Moreno et al.,
2007), this shift of focus gets us around one of the major open problems in the area. The
modeling interfaces in SHAMASH (Rodriguez-Moreno et al., 2007), and some related works
attempting to support model creation (Gonzalez-Ferrer, Fernandez-Olivares, & Castillo,
2009; Cresswell, McCluskey, & West, 2009, 2010), address the same problem, but in very
diﬀerent ways and to a less radical extent.
Whereas these works attempt to ease the
modeling overhead, our re-use of SAM actually removes that overhead completely.
Having said that, of course there are relations between SAM planning and previous work,
at the technical level. In particular, the planning and SWSC literature contains a multitude
of works dealing with actions that, like SAM’s disjunctive eﬀect actions, have more than one
possible outcome. Our semantics for such actions, as detailed already in Section 4.2, is a
straightforward mixture of two wide-spread notions in planning: observation actions, where
one out of a list of possible observations is distinguished, and non-deterministic actions,
where one out of a list of possible eﬀects occurs (e.g., Weld et al., 1998; Smith & Weld,
1999; Bonet & Geﬀner, 2000; Cimatti et al., 2003; Bryce & Kambhampari, 2004; Hoﬀmann
& Brafman, 2005; Bonet & Givan, 2006; Bryce, Kambhampati, & Smith, 2006; Bryce &
Buﬀet, 2008; Palacios & Geﬀner, 2009).
A prominent line of research in web service composition, known as “the Roman model”
(e.g., Berardi, Calvanese, De Giacomo, Lenzerini, & Mecella, 2003, 2005; De Giacomo &
Sardi˜na, 2007; Sardi˜na, Patrizi, & De Giacomo, 2008; Calvanese, De Giacomo, Lenzerini,
Mecella, & Patrizi, 2008), also deals with a notion of “non-determinism” in the component
web services, however the framework is very diﬀerent from ours. The web services in the
Roman model are stateful. That is, each service has a set of possible own/internal states,
and the service provides a set of operations to the outside world, which are responsible for
transitions in the service’s internal state. The composition task is to create a scheduler (a
function choosing one service for each operation demanded) interacting with the component
services in a way such that they implement a desired goal transition system. Similarly, the
web service composition techniques developed by Marco Pistore and his co-workers (e.g.,
622

SAP Speaks PDDL
Pistore, Marconi, Bertoli, & Traverso, 2005; Bertoli, Pistore, & Traverso, 2006, 2010) deal
with this form of non-determinism in stateful component services formalized as transition
systems. In their work, the composition task is to create a controller transition system such
that the overall (controlled) behavior satisﬁes a planning-like goal (expressed in the EAGLE
language, cf. below). In that latter aspect – attempting to satisfy a planning goal – their
framework is slightly closer to ours than the Roman model.
The main distinguishing feature of our formalism is its notion of “weak SAM plans”,
allowing failed action outcomes but only if they are proved unsolvable, and only if at least
one outcome of each action is successful. Some other works have also proposed notions
of plans that do not guarantee to achieve the goal in all cases, and some notions of more
complex goals can be used to achieve similar eﬀects. We now brieﬂy discuss the notions
closest to our own approach.
The notions of weak and strong plans, as discussed in Section 4.2, were ﬁrst introduced by
Cimatti, Giunchiglia, Giunchiglia, and Traverso (1997) and Cimatti, Roveri, and Traverso
(1998b), respectively. Strong cyclic plans were ﬁrst introduced by Cimatti, Roveri, and
Traverso (1998a). That notion is orthogonal to weak SAM plans in that neither implies the
other. For example, if a “bad” action outcome invalidates, as a side eﬀect, the preconditions
of all actions in the task, then that action may form part of a weak SAM plan, but never
of a strong cyclic plan. Vice versa, strong cyclic plans have a more general structure, in
particular allowing non-deterministic actions to appear more than once in an execution.
Pistore and Traverso (2001) generalize weak, strong, and strong cyclic plans by handling
goals taking the form of CTL formulas. However, as pointed out by Dal Lago et al. (2002),
such goals are unable to express that the plan should try to achieve the goal, and give up
only if that is not possible. Dal Lago et al. design the goal language EAGLE which addresses
(amongst others) this shortcoming. EAGLE features a variety of goal operators that can
be ﬂexibly combined to form goal expressions. One such expression is “TryReach G1 Fail
G2”, where G1 and G2 are alternative goals. The intuition is that the plan should try to
achieve G1, and resort to G2 if reaching G1 has become impossible. More precisely, a plan
T for such an EAGLE goal is optimal if, for every state s it traverses: (1) T is a strong plan
for G1 ∨G2; (2) if there exists a strong plan for G1 from s, then T is such a strong plan;
and (3) if there exists a weak plan for G1 from s, then T is such a weak plan. Applying this
to our context, say we restrict plans to execute each non-deterministic action at most once.
It is easy to see that, within this space of plans, every weak SAM plan is optimal for the
EAGLE goal “TryReach G Fail TRUE”: weak SAM plans mark s as failed only if reaching
G from s is impossible. However, not every action tree T that is optimal for “TryReach G
Fail TRUE” is a weak SAM plan. That is because (2) and (3) do not force every action
to have at least one solved outcome. In tasks for which no weak SAM plan exists, any
action tree (e.g., the empty tree) is optimal for “TryReach G Fail TRUE”. In tasks with a
weak SAM plan, “TryReach G Fail TRUE” forces each solvable action outcome to provide
a solution, but imposes no constraints below failed outcomes (which may thus be continued
by arbitrarily complex sub-plans).
Shaparau et al. (2006) deﬁne a framework that has a similar eﬀect in our context. They
consider contingent planning in the presence of a linear preference order over alternative
goals. Action trees T are plans if they achieve at least one goal in every leaf, i.e., they are
strong plans for the disjunction of the goals. Plan T is at least as good as plan T ′ if, in every
623

Hoffmann, Weber & Kraft
state common to both, the best possible outcome achievable using T is at least as good as
that achievable using T ′. T is optimal if it is at least as good as all other plans. Given
this, like for the EAGLE goal “TryReach G Fail TRUE” discussed above, every weak SAM
plan is optimal for the goal preference “G, TRUE”, but the inverse is not true because, in
unsolvable tasks and below unsolvable outcomes in solvable tasks, “G, TRUE” permits the
plan to do anything.
Mediratta and Srivastava (2006) deﬁne a framework also based on contingent planning,
but where the user provides as additional input a number K. Then, (1) a “plan” is any tree
T with ≥K leaves achieving the goal; and (2) if such T does not exist, then a “plan” is any
tree whose number of such leaves is maximal. Due to (1), failed nodes are not necessarily
unsolvable (the plan may simply stop once it reached K). Due to (2), even a task where
the goal cannot be reached at all, i.e., no matter what the action outcomes are we cannot
achieve the goal, has a “plan”. In addition, in our application context there is no sensible
way, for the human modeler, to choose a meaningful value for K.
Summing up, related notions of weak plans exist, but none captures exactly what we
want in SAM. On the algorithmic side, all the works listed here use symbolic search (based
on BDDs), and are thus quite diﬀerent from our explicit-state SAM-AO* search. The single
exception is the planner described by Mediratta and Srivastava (2006), which is based on a
variant of A*, but for a diﬀerent plan semantics as described.
Research has been performed also into alternative methods, not based on planning, for
automatically generating processes. For example, K¨uster, Ryndina, and Gall (2007) describe
a method computing the synchronized product of the life-cycles of a set of business objects,
and generating a process corresponding to that product. That process serves as the basis for
customer-speciﬁc modiﬁcations. Clearly, that motivation relates to ours; but the intended
meaning of the output (the generated process), and the input assumed for its generation,
are quite diﬀerent. As for the input, K¨uster et al.’s life-cycles are state machines describing
all possible behaviors of the object, which in our formulation here corresponds to the space
of all reachable states. That space can be generated based on SAM, but it can be huge even
for single BOs, not to mention their product (cf. our results for blind search and scaling
across BOs, Sections 6.4 and 6.5). Heuristic search gets us around the need to enumerate
all these states. As for the output, K¨uster et al.’s generated processes guarantee not only to
comply with the BO behaviors (which ours do as well), but also to cover them, essentially
representing all that could be done.
This is very diﬀerent from the plans we generate,
whose intention is to show speciﬁcally how to move between particular start and end states.
Altogether, the methods are complementary. Planning has computational advantages if the
involved objects have many possible states, as is often the case in SAM.
9. Conclusion
We have pointed out that SAP has built a large-scale model of software behavior, SAM,
whose abstraction level and formalization are intimately related to planning models in lan-
guages such as PDDL. We have shown how to base a promising BPM application of planning
on this fact. Getting the planner input for free, we avoid one of the most important obstacles
for making this kind of planning application successful in practice. Our solution is speciﬁc
to our particular context in its treatment of non-deterministic actions and failed outcomes,
624

SAP Speaks PDDL
but such phenomena are quite common in both planning and web service composition, and
our novel approach to dealing with them might turn out to be relevant more generally.
The main open issue is to obtain concrete data evaluating the business value of our
application. Some other points are:
• Our modiﬁcation of FF successfully handles many SAM instances, ﬁnding plans within
runtimes small enough to apply realistic online-setting cut-oﬀs. About 15% of the
instances we encountered still present challenges. These instances could serve as an
interesting benchmark for approaches dealing with failed outcomes in ways related to
what we do here (cf. Section 8).
• The current SAM model does not reﬂect dependencies across BOs. Such dependencies
do, however, exist in various forms. For example, some BOs form part of the data
contained in another kind of BO, some actions on one kind of BO create a new
instance of another kind of BO, and some actions must be taken by several BOs
together. There is an ongoing activity at SAP Research, aiming at enriching SAM to
reﬂect some of these interactions, with the purpose of more informed model checking.
All the interactions can easily be modeled in terms of well-known planning constructs
(object creation, and preconditions/eﬀects spanning variables from several BOs), so
we expect that this extended model will enable us to generate more accurate plans. As
the results from Section 6.5 indicate, additional planning techniques may be required
to improve performance in case the number of interacting BOs becomes large. But
for smaller numbers (up to around a dozen BOs) the performance of our current tool
should still be reasonable.
• SAM currently provides no basis for automatically creating a number of additional
process aspects. An important aspect is exception handling, for which at the moment
we can only highlight the places (failed nodes) where it needs to be inserted. Another
issue is data-ﬂow.
This is mostly easy since the application data is already pre-
packaged in the relevant BOs, but there are some cases, like security tokens, not
covered by this. An open line of research is to determine how these aspects could be
modeled, in a way that can be exploited by corresponding planning algorithms.
• It may also be interesting to look into methods presenting the user with a set of
alternative processes.
For discerning between relevant alternatives, such methods
require extensions to SAM, like action duration, action cost, or plan preferences.
From a more general perspective, the key contribution of our work is demonstrating the
potential synergy between model-based software engineering and planning-based process
generation. Re-using some (or even all) of the required models, the human labor required
to realize the planning is dramatically reduced. SAM’s methodology – business-level de-
scriptions of individual activities within a software architecture – is not speciﬁc to SAP.
Thus, exploiting this synergy is a novel approach that may turn out fruitful far beyond the
particular application described herein.
