Framework for Variable-lag Motif Following Relation Inference
In Time Series using Matrix Profile analysis
Naaek Chinpattanakarn
King Mongkut’s Institute of Technology Ladkrabang
Bangkok, Thailand

Chainarong Amornbunchornvej
National Electronics and Computer Technology Center
Pathumthani, Thailand

ABSTRACT
Knowing who follows whom and what patterns they are following
are crucial steps to understand collective behaviors (e.g. a group
of human, a school of fish, or a stock market). Time series is one
of resource that can be used to get insight regarding following
relations. However, the concept of following patterns or motifs and
the solution to find them in time series is not obvious. In this work,
we formalize a concept of following motifs between two time series
and present a framework to infer following patterns from data. The
framework utilizes one of efficient and scalable methods to retrieve
motifs from time series called matrix profile method. We compare
our proposed framework with several baseline. The framework
performs better than baseline in the simulation dataset. In the
dataset of sounds from video, the framework is able to retrieve the
following motifs within a pair to time series that two singers sink
following each other. In the cryptocurrency dataset, the framework
is capable of capturing the following motifs within a pair of time
series from two digital currency. Our framework can be utilized in
any field of time series.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Computer systems organization →Embedded systems; Re-
dundancy; Robotics; • Networks →Network reliability.
KEYWORDS
time series, following relations, matrix profile, data science
ACM Reference Format:
Naaek Chinpattanakarn and Chainarong Amornbunchornvej. 2018. Frame-
work for Variable-lag Motif Following Relation Inference In Time Series
using Matrix Profile analysis . In Proceedings of Make sure to enter the correct
conference title from your rights confirmation emai (Conference acronym ’XX).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 10 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
1
INTRODUCTION
Followership is a process that one instance, a follower, interacts
with other instance called a leader to achieve a collective goal [10],
which is a counter part of leadership. Understand followership
enables opportunities to get insight of how collective behaviors
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
© 2023 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/18/06...$15.00
https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
organized to serve the collective purpose, which can be a group of
human [10], primates [17], or man-made system [3]. Nevertheless,
how can we infer followership from data? What are patterns that
followers imitate their leader?
Variable-Lag Following Motifs Inference Problem : Con-
sidering two time series, some patterns might appear in one
time series, then, the same patterns might appear in another
time series. This indicates that one time series follows the spe-
cific patterns of another time series. Given two time series,
the goal is to find a set of patterns (motifs) that occur in
both time series with arbitrary time delays.
In time series analysis, a following relation can be defined as
a relation of two time series that one time series initiates patterns
and another time series follows the similar patterns with some
time delay [2, 3]. The following relation can be infer from time
series regarding who follows whom using Dynamic Time Warping
(DTW) [16] by the framework proposed in [1–3]. However, there an
issue when one time series is not completely follows another time
series; a follower imitates only some patterns of its leader while the
leader also imitates some patterns of its follower. For instance, in
Fig 1, the follower simply imitates a pattern of leader. In contrast,
in Fig. 2, there are four patterns or motifs that are followed by some
time series. In this case, the follower imitates the motifs A and B of
the leader, while the leader also follows the motifs C and D of the
follower. This issue breaks the concept of the traditional following
relation that assume the role of absolute leader and follower.
To solve the issue, in this work, we propose the concept of the
following-motif set. Specifically, instead of finding a following rela-
tion, we propose to find a set of motifs and roles of time series of
each motif, which can tell us regarding 1) who initiates the motif,
2) who follows the motif, and 3) the time delay between initiation
and imitation. We provide a problem formalization of inferring a
following-motif set along with the framework using the matrix
profile framework [22] to infer it in time series. Our framework is
capable of:
• Inferring arbitrary-lag following-motif sets: our methods
can infer a set of motifs that occur in both time series with arbi-
trary time delays;
• Quantifying arbitrary-lag following-motifs: our methods
can report the similarity of following motifs between two time
series for arbitrary delays.
We evaluate the performance of our framework using simulation
datasets and manifests the use cases of our framework in two real-
world datasets: the time series of sounds that two singers sings the
same piece of lyrics, and the time series of cryptocurrency prices.
arXiv:2401.02860v2  [cs.LG]  18 Jan 2024

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
N. Chinpattanakarn and C. Amornbunchornvej
Figure 1: Time series of following relation that the follower
(red) follows the leader (blue) with a single motif.
Figure 2: Time series of following relation that the follower
(blue) follows the leader (red) with multiple motifs (highlight
intervals). In some motifs, the follower follows the leader (A
and B motifs), while in some motifs, the leader follows the
follower (C and D motifs.)
Our framework performed batter than baselines in most cases. The
proposed framework can be utilized in any kind of time series.
2
RELATED WORK
Most works of following relations are in the realm of time series
that have real-world applications (e.g. flock of birds [5], behavior
of pedestrians [9], a group of baboons [2, 3], a school of fish [3],
NASDAQ stock market [3]). However, the definition of following
relation can be different.
The work in [5] defined the following pattern as a situation
when one object is in the front of other individual. The work in [1–
3, 9] defined a following pattern as a situation when one time
series is similar to another time series with some time delay. The
works [9] in utilized the sliding window similar to the cross correla-
tion method [7] while the works in [1–3] utilized the Dynamic time
warping (DTW) [16] to infer a following relations, which makes the
framework more robust results since only utilizing sliding window
cannot handle distortion between time series well.
However, the gap still remain since all these work cannot find mul-
tiple motifs from a pair of time series X and Y that some motifs
might be initiated by X and be followed by Y but some might be ini-
tiated by Y and be followed by X. Moreover, the following-relation
inference framework that deploys DTW or time-window sliding
approaches cannot be scaled well. Especially, for DTW, we need
a warping path from a dynamic programming matrix of DTW to
find a following relation, which prohibits the utilizing of Keogh’s
bound [8] to reduce the computational time of DTW. To solve this
problem of finding following motifs with who follows whom, we
need a method to infer motifs efficiently.
The motif discovery problem was introduced in the work [6], and
since then there are several methods have been proposed to find
motifs in time series [11–13, 19, 22]. One of the well-known ef-
ficient methods to retrieve motifs from time series is to use the
representation called Matrix Profile introducing in [20, 22]. The
matrix profile inference frameworks were developed to discover
motifs in time series in [20, 22]. The frameworks were scalable to
compute million data points to find exact motifs in reasonable time,
which makes in one of the efficient framework to deploy for finding
motifs. While matrix profile can be efficiently and scalably utilized
to find many types of patterns in time series (e.g. motifs [22], dis-
cord [20], Shapelets [20], anomaly patterns [15, 18]), to the best of
our knowledge, the matrix profile has not been utilized to solve the
problem of finding following motifs yet.
In this work, we formalize Variable-Lag Following Motifs
Inference Problem and propose a framework to find a following
motifs in time series based on the matrix profile method in [20]. In
the next section, the problem formalization and related details are
provided.
3
PROBLEM STATEMENT AND ALGORITHM
Definition 3.1 (Time series). A time series 𝑈= (𝑢1, . . . ,𝑢𝑛) is a
length-𝑛sequence of real values (𝑢1, . . . ,𝑢𝑛) where 𝑢𝑖∈R is a
value at time step 𝑖.
Definition 3.2 (Subsequence of time series). A subsequence 𝑈𝑡,𝑚
of time series 𝑈is a subsequence of 𝑈starting at 𝑡and ending at
𝑡+ 𝑚: 𝑈𝑡,𝑚= (𝑢𝑡, . . . ,𝑢𝑚) where 1 ≤𝑡≤𝑚≤𝑛.
Definition 3.3 (Distance profile). Let 𝑄= (𝑞1, . . . ,𝑞𝑚) and 𝑈=
(𝑢1, . . . ,𝑢𝑛) be time series. A distance profile 𝐷𝑄(𝑈) is a sequence
vector of Euclidean distance of 𝑄over all possible subsequence𝑈𝑡,𝑚
of 𝑈that have their length 𝑚. Formally, 𝐷𝑄(𝑈) = (𝑑1, . . . ,𝑑𝑛−𝑚+1)
where 𝑑𝑡= ∥𝑄−𝑈𝑡,𝑚∥2
Definition 3.4 (Similar join set). Let 𝑊and 𝑈be time series and
𝜔be a time window. Similar join set 𝐽𝑊,𝑈is a set of pairs of subse-
quences of 𝑊and their set of 1-nearest neighbor subsequences in
𝑈. Formally, suppose we have 𝑑𝑈
1𝑛𝑛(𝑊𝑡,𝜔) as a minimum distance
between 𝑊𝑡,𝜔and its 1-nearest neighbor subsequences in 𝑈.
𝐽𝑊,𝑈= {(𝑊𝑡,𝜔, ˆ𝑈𝑡)} where

Framework for Variable-lag Motif Following Relation Inference In Time Series using Matrix Profile analysis
Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
ˆ𝑈𝑡= 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑈ˆ𝑡,𝜔⊆𝑈(∥𝑊𝑡,𝜔−𝑈ˆ𝑡,𝜔∥2 = 𝑑𝑈
1𝑛𝑛(𝑊𝑡,𝜔)).
Definition 3.5 (Matrix profile [22]). A matrix profile 𝑃𝑈,𝑊is a
Euclidean distance between each subsequence𝑈𝑡,𝜔and its 1-nearest
neighbor subsequences in 𝑊. Formally,
𝑃𝑊,𝑈= (𝑑𝑈
1𝑛𝑛(𝑊1,𝜔), . . . ,𝑑𝑈
1𝑛𝑛(𝑊𝑛−𝜔+1,𝜔)).
Definition 3.6 (variable-lag following motifs set). Let 𝑊and 𝑈be
time series and 𝜔be a time window. We call
𝑆𝑊⪯𝑈= {(𝑊𝑡,𝜔,𝑈𝑡+Δ𝑡,𝜔)|𝑊𝑡,𝜔= 𝑈𝑡+Δ𝑡,𝜔}
a set of variable-lag-following motifs of 𝑈following 𝑊.
According to Def. 3.6, we call variable-lag following motifs since
each motif in W might be followed by some motif in U with arbitrary
time delay and a different motif might be followed with a different
time delay.
Problem 1: Variable-Lag Following Motifs Inference
Problem
Input
:Time series 𝑊and 𝑈as well as a time window 𝜔.
Output:A set of following motifs of 𝑈following 𝑊: 𝑆𝑊⪯𝑈.
Algorithm 2: VLfollowingMotifsInferFunction
input :Time series𝑊and 𝑈as well as a time window 𝜔.
output:A set of following motifs of 𝑈following 𝑊:
𝑆𝑊⪯𝑈.
1 Initial: 𝑆𝑊⪯𝑈= ∅;
2 for each subsequence 𝑊𝑖,𝜔, ⊆𝑊do
3
Inferring
ˆ𝑈𝑖= 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑈ˆ𝑖,𝜔⊆𝑈(∥𝑊𝑖,𝜔−𝑈ˆ𝑖,𝜔∥2 = 𝑑𝑈
1𝑛𝑛(𝑊𝑡,𝜔));
4
for each subsequence 𝑈𝑗,𝜔, ⊆ˆ𝑈𝑖do
5
Let Δ𝑖= 𝑗−𝑖;
if Δ𝑖≥0 and 𝑈𝑗,𝜔= 𝑊𝑖,𝜔then
6
𝑆𝑊⪯𝑈←𝑆𝑊⪯𝑈∪{(𝑊𝑖,𝜔,𝑈𝑗,𝜔)};
end
end
end
7 Return 𝑆𝑊⪯𝑈;
Proposition 3.7. Algorithm 2 is a solution of Variable-Lag
Following Motifs Inference Problem .
Proof. (Forward direction)
Given time series 𝑈,𝑊and a time window 𝜔, for each 𝑊𝑖,𝜔in 𝑊,
the algorithm finds its set of 1-nearest-neighbor subsequences ˆ𝑈𝑖
and it only includes a pair (𝑊𝑖,𝜔,𝑈𝑗,𝜔) to 𝑆𝑊⪯𝑈when the motif
𝑊𝑖,𝜔appears the same time or before 𝑈𝑗,𝜔, 𝑗−𝑖≥0, and both
subsequence must be equal. Since the algorithms iterates the same
process for every subsequence 𝑊𝑖,𝜔, the result 𝑆𝑊⪯𝑈consistent
with the definition 𝑆𝑊⪯𝑈= {(𝑊𝑡,𝜔,𝑈𝑡+Δ𝑡,𝜔)|𝑊𝑡,𝜔= 𝑈𝑡+Δ𝑡,𝜔} in
Def. 3.6.
(Backward direction) Given 𝑆𝑊⪯𝑈= {(𝑊𝑡,𝜔,𝑈𝑡+Δ𝑡,𝜔)|𝑊𝑡,𝜔=
𝑈𝑡+Δ𝑡,𝜔}, assuming that there is (𝑊ˆ𝑡,𝜔,𝑈ˆ𝑡+Δˆ𝑡,𝜔) ∈𝑆𝑊⪯𝑈but it is
not a solution of the algorithm.
The for loop in line 2 of Algorithm 2 guarantees that the algo-
rithm search for all possible subsequence of 𝑊, hence, 𝑊ˆ𝑡,𝜔must
be analyzed by the algorithm.
Suppose ˆ𝑈ˆ𝑖is a set of all 1-nearest-neighbor subsequences of
𝑊ˆ𝑡,𝜔. Since 𝑈ˆ𝑡+Δˆ𝑡,𝜔= 𝑊ˆ𝑡,𝜔, 𝑈ˆ𝑡+Δˆ𝑡,𝜔must be a part of ˆ𝑈ˆ𝑖and being
a part of the algorithm solution, which contradicts with the initial
assumption.
Hence, Algorithm 2 is a solution of Variable-Lag Following
Motifs Inference Problem .
□
4
METHODS
Our proposed Following motif method measures leadership of
leader time series by classifying time steps of following motif re-
lation on each time series and subtracting following motif indices
arrays of follower and leader time series to have a value. The greater
the value is above zero, the more likely it is that the time series acts
as a leader.
4.1
Matrix Profile inference
For our method, the ability of Matrix Profile algorithm to find the
most similar parts of two time series can be used to search for the
same motif in both leading time series and following time series.
To find the most similar parts of two inputted time series, Matrix
Profile inference algorithm results in Matrix Profile (MP), which
represents z-normalized Euclidean distance every subsequence and
its (non-trivial) nearest neighbor within the same time series, and
Matrix Profile Index (MPI), which represents time steps of the most
nearest part of the inputs.
Algorithm 3: Matrix Profile inference algorithm
input :Query Time series 𝑇𝑞, Reference Time series
𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑓, subsequence length 𝑚
output:Matrix Profile 𝑀𝑃, Matrix Profile Index 𝑀𝑃𝐼
1 Initialize: 𝑀𝑃←∞, 𝑀𝑃𝐼←0;
2 for each sub-sequence 𝑇𝑞(𝑖,𝑚) ⊆𝑇𝑞do
3
Initialize: 𝐷←∅;
4
for each sub-sequence 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑓(𝑗,𝑚) ⊆𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑓do
5
𝐷𝑗←
√︄
Í𝑚−1
𝑘=0
𝑇𝑞[𝑖+𝑘]−𝜇𝑇𝑞(𝑖,𝑚)
𝜎𝑇𝑞(𝑖,𝑚)
−
𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑓[𝑗+𝑘]−𝜇𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑓(𝑗,𝑚)
𝜎𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑓(𝑗,𝑚)
2
;
end
6
for each element 𝐷𝑗in 𝐷do
7
if 𝐷𝑗< 𝑀𝑃[𝑖] and 𝑖≠𝑗then
8
𝑀𝑃[𝑖] ←𝐷𝑗;
9
𝑀𝑃𝐼[𝑖] ←𝑖;
end
end
end
10 Return 𝑀𝑃, 𝑀𝑃𝐼;
To illustrate how to perform matrix profile inference, the Matrix
profile inference algorithm 3 is one example (STAMP) of many
algorithms that can perform the task. Algorithm 3 does window
sliding with reference time series by a window-size query, which
cuts from the query time series, to calculate z-normalized euclidean
distance in each slide. Thus, one sliding of the query results in

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
N. Chinpattanakarn and C. Amornbunchornvej
a distance value for each time step of the reference time series.
Excluding trivial matching time steps, Matrix profile and Matrix
profile indices array are updated the lower distance value if the
distance value is lower than their current element. After the matrix
profile algorithm finishes every sliding window of cutting query
and calculating distance for each query and reference time series.
Then, Matrix profile and the indices array, which has its size as
the length of reference time series subtracted with window size,
contain the shortest distances and the most similar query starting
indices.
The reason of z-normalization in matrix profile is to have the
same size of time series to compare shapes of the two time series
due to its main focus on searching similar shapes on its inputted
time series.
4.2
Following motif method
Following motif method can provide set of leading motifs’ indexes
and following motifs’ indexes, and determine which time series
leads, from the two inputted time series: leader and follower time
series. The method is composed of Matrix Profile algorithm, some
set theory operations, percentile and average mean.
Algorithm 4: Following Motif Method
input :Leader time series leader_ts, Follower time series
follower_ts, Default value: Time window wd = 300,
Threshold of Motif and Discord thresh = 0.01
output:Leading Result,Leading Result Value,and Index
Arrays of Following Motif Relation for Leader and
Follower time series
1 Initialize: 𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑚𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑓= {∅, ∅};
2 𝑀𝑃𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑟, 𝑀𝑃𝐼𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑟←MatrixProfile(𝑓𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑡𝑠, 𝑤𝑑,𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑡𝑠);
3 𝑀𝑃𝑓𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟, 𝑀𝑃𝐼𝑓𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟←
MatrixProfile(𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑡𝑠, 𝑤𝑑, 𝑓𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑡𝑠);
4 𝑀𝑃𝑎𝑟𝑟𝑎𝑦= {𝑀𝑃𝑓𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟, 𝑀𝑃𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑟};
5 for each sub-sequence 𝑀𝑃𝑖⊆𝑀𝑃𝑎𝑟𝑟𝑎𝑦do
6
𝑚𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑓𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒= (50 −𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ)-th percentile value of 𝑀𝑃𝑖;
7
𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑚𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑓[𝑖] ←{𝑖| 𝑀𝑃𝑖< 𝑚𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑓𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒,𝑖∈
{0, . . . , len(𝑀𝑃𝑖) −1};
end
8 𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑚𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑓[1] = 𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑚𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑓[1][1 : len(𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑚𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑓[0])];
9 𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒= 𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑚𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑓[0] −𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑚𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑓[1];
10 𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒←
1
len(𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒)
Ílen(𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒)
𝑖=1
(𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒[𝑖]);
11 𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑑= (𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒> 0);
12 Return 𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑑,𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒,𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑚𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑓;
In Algorithm 4, Matrix Profile’s algorithm results the array of
the shortest distance between a part, whose size is time window, of
reference time series and query time series. The lower value of the
shortest distance array at some indices, the more likely the motifs
exist at the indices. Thus, Matrix Profile of leader time series, which
has leader time series is reference time series, provides low values
at the indices that the time series contains motifs.The similar case
occurs for the follower time series.
In line 2-3 of Algorithm 4, 𝑀𝑃𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑟, 𝑀𝑃𝑓𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟Matrix Profiles
of leader and follower time series are the arrays that can be extracted
for the areas of motifs on both leader and follower time series. The
algorithm version of Matrix Profile’s algorithm is STAMP algorithm
due to its performance in our problem.
Using Matrix Profile algorithm for having motifs found area on
the two time series in Algorithm 2 and Algorithm 4 are similar but
the difference is that Algorithm 2 line 6 uses the loop for collect-
ing the most similar parts, which the follower’s part follows the
leader’s part, after every distance profile calculation. Meanwhile,
Algorithm 4 uses the two Matrix Profiles with percentile threshold.
The reason of using the threshold in Algorithm 4 is to prevent
mismatching, excluding trivial match, of the most similar parts of
the two time series. In many cases, many leading motifs on leader
time series are similar enough and result in following the wrong
motifs on follower time series; the following motifs mismatch the
another similar leading motif, which is not its own leading motif.
Moreover, similarity measurement of the two parts of the time
series cannot be 𝑈𝑗,𝜔= 𝑊𝑖,𝜔in the noisy and real-world setting
because the following lag is arbitrary of every time steps, which
provides chance of different length of the two parts on the two time
series and the varied shape of the following motif. Those issues
are also a reason of the mismatching. If we uses similarity mea-
surement for different length of two Time Series such as Dynamic
Time Warping, and Longest Common Subsequence instead. It will
increase computational complexity due to their characteristic of
dynamic programming.
In line 4, we pack 𝑀𝑃𝑓𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟and 𝑀𝑃𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑟in an array for the
loop purpose. Thus, the first and second of the array’s index are
associated with follower and leader respectively.
To extract time steps of the leader and follower where motif
exists, in between line 6 and 7, we determine the thresholds of motif
with the assumption that the shortest distance, where motifs are
found on the two following time series, is from 0th to (50-thresh)th
percentile value of Matrix Profile. The parameter thresh is used for
tuning the threshold to cover all of the motif area. Subsequently,
we use the thresholds to create new indices arrays of motifs.
In line 8, if motifs on leader time series leads the motifs’ pattern
on follower time series, the length of motifs on the leader must be
equaled to the length of the motifs on the follower.
To determine leader and follower time series by the method,
the method element-wise subtracts 𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑚𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑓of the follow by
𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑚𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑓of the leader as in line 9 because the indexes of the
motifs on the follower are behind the leader’s indexes. The more
subtracted elements are positive, The more likely the inputted leader
time series leads another time series.
In line 10, result of leading in value is assigned by average mean
of the index difference array. The leading value is sum of the differ-
ence array, that have its center at zero to separate two classes(leader
and follower), and scale down the value by dividing length value
of the difference array. The further leading value to zero, the more
confident the inputted leader is the real leader time series. If the
leading value is more than 0, the inputted leader is real leader.
Default input parameters - such as time window, gap of motif
(percentage of inputted time series’ length) - are the best set of
parameters for the synthesis and real data set of our experiment.
In the aspect of computational cost, the proposed algorithm
has time complexity as 𝑂(𝑛2𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑛)) since we use STAMP [20] as

Framework for Variable-lag Motif Following Relation Inference In Time Series using Matrix Profile analysis
Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
the main computation part where 𝑛is the length of time series.
Moreover, note that we could also use SCRIMP++ [21] which is
only 𝑂(𝑛2). Both STAMP and SCRIMP++ allow computation both
as anytime and contract algorithms [14]. In practice this implies
that datasets with up to say ten million datapoints can easily be
analyzed in realtime interactive sessions.
5
EXPERIMENTS
The methods were evaluated with three types of synthetic time
series simulation (1,000 time series for each) and two real time
series of music and Cryptocurrency domains. The synthetic and
real world data sets were tested with two tasks: Determining which
time series leads or follows, and predicting time steps of following
motifs task.
5.1
Experimental setup
To determine which time series leads or follows, we compared
performance of the following motif method with three existing
methods, which have their parameter leader and follower time
series: FLICA [1, 3], Maximum Cross Correlation, and Variable-Lag
Transfer Entropy (VL-Transfer Entropy) [4].
For the experiment of those methods with every pair of synthetic
and real world time series, suppose A is leading time series and B
is a following time series as a ground truth (GT). 1), if the predicted
result (PR) agrees with GT, then the pair of time series is counted
as a true positive case. 2) if A does not follow B, then it is counted
as a false negative case. In contrast, 3) if PR states that B follows
A, which contradicts GT, then it is counted as a false positive case.
Lastly, 4) if B does not follow A, then it is counted as a true negative
case.
To predict the following motif time steps, following motif method
is the only method that results in a set of following motifs time
steps. If the predicted following motif time step matches following
motif ground truth, one true positive is counted. Otherwise, if the
predicted following motif time step does not match following motif
ground truth, it is counted as a false negative. If the predicted non-
following motif time step matches non-following motif ground
truth, one true negative is counted. Otherwise, if the predicted non-
following motif time step matches the following motif time step, it
is counted as a false positive.
5.2
Synthetic time series simulation
We have three synthetic time series simulations: Fixed length single
motif simulation, Continuous fixed length multiple motif simula-
tion, Noncontinuous fixed length multiple motif simulation. Each
simulation has 1,000 pairs of Leader and Follower Time Series. gen-
erated from random seed 0 to 999. The patterns in each simulation
are created by Sine function:

𝑛· sin
𝑥1
𝑥2

for 𝑛∈{0, 1, 2, . . . , motif length},
where
𝑥1
|{z}
in [0.2,2.0]
,
𝑥2
|{z}
in [3.00,5.00]
.
(1)
Figure 3: Fixed length single motif simulation with random
seed 0
Figure 4: Continuous fixed length multiple following motifs
simulation with random seed 1
Figure 5: Noncontinuous fixed length multiple following
motifs simulation with random seed 1

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
N. Chinpattanakarn and C. Amornbunchornvej
• Single Motif: For each pair of time series, we generate one motif
that appears in the leader time series first, then, the same motif
appears in the follower time series later with some time delay.
• Continuous Following: The continuous following is following
motif patterns that does not break from noisy interruption, of the
follower time series. The motif length is random from
⌈length(time series) × percent(2.5% to 10%)⌉
and the length of non-motif is
⌈length(motif) × percent(120%)⌉
. The maximum motif patterns that leader can have is 10.
• Noncontinuous Following: The noncontinuous following data
set is similar to continuous following data set except adding more
noisy part to interrupt the half way of time steps in the following
part:
 First half following part
Interrupting part
Last half following part
The size of new noisy part is 10 to 15 percent of the entire time
series and it is generated by normal distribution random with
mean = 0 and standard deviation = 0.5. The size of the follower is
same as continuous following data set. Because after adding the
new noisy part, we trim the part that beyond its original size.
• Mixed Types: The mixed type data set (3,000 pairs of time se-
ries) is composed of the Single Motif (1,000 pairs), Continuous
Following (1,000 pairs), and Noncontinuous Following data set
(1,000 pairs).
For every type of data set, the motif pattern is generated by
equation 1. On follower time series, the following starting time
steps starts at
⌈length(leader) × percent(20% to 35%)⌉
The non-following motif in both time series are filled with random
noise, generated by normal distribution random with mean = 0
and standard deviation = 0.5. The lag of follower is varied from the
leader in range of 0 to 3. The follower is added normal distribution
random with mean = 0 and standard deviation = 0.1 twice. Every
random in each pair is determine by random seed from 0 to 999.
5.3
Real world dataset
We collect real world time series from music and Cryptocurrency
domains: a part of the song Lost Stars from the 2014 finale of The
Voice, performed by Adam Levine and Matt McAndrew, from second
12 to 45, and Cryptocurrency opening price trends of BTC/USDT
and ETH/USDT in June 10,2023 in 30 minutes for 24 hours.
5.3.1
Vocal extracted sounds of Lost Stars by Adam Levine and
Matt McAndrew. The vocal sounds of Adam and Matts taking turns
singing, as in Figure 6, are two time series that each contain the
singing of "Please, don’t see. Just a boy caught up in dream and
fantasies", and "Take me hand Let’s see where we wake up to-
morrow" for Adam and the singing of "Please, see me. Reaching
out for someone I can’t see", and "Best laid plans, Sometimes are
just a one night stand" for Matt. We collect the sound data from
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YFsGH5iToys in .wav format,
then we extracted vocals from the song, trimmed the vocal data
from 0:12 to 0:45, and separated vocals of Adam and Matt by Au-
dacity. The separated vocals are loaded by Python Librosa with
Figure 6: Real World Time Series1: Lost Star by Adam and
Matt
Figure 7: Real World Time Series2: Normalized BTC/USD and
ETH/USD to compare leading and following interval
sampling rate = 11025, then the vocals are sampled down by av-
erage groups of data points, with each group containing an equal
fraction (5%) of the data points.
5.3.2
Cryptocurrency Opening Price of Bitcoin/USDT and Ether/USDT
Time Series. The opening-price data of the two Cryptocurrency are
collected by 30 minutes of interval in June,10 2023 (1300 time-steps).
In Figure 7, normalization of the two price Time Series is to com-
pare the shape and lag of following relation. Most of the time steps
of Bitcoin’s price leads the shape trend of Ether’s price. We collect
the the data via Binance’s API with Python library python-binance.
6
RESULTS
6.1
Synthetic time series simulation
6.1.1
Performance of methods for determining which time series
leads or follows. Table 1 reports comparison of Following Motif
Method, FLICA, Cross Correlation, and Varied lag-Transfer Entropy
to result which time series in each pair of Following Relation time
series is leader. Each data set contains 1,000 pairs of leader and
follower and mixed type data set is merged of the other data sets. For
VL-Transfer Entropy, we assume that the following motif patterns

Framework for Variable-lag Motif Following Relation Inference In Time Series using Matrix Profile analysis
Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
is occurred by the cause of leader time Series on the follower. Thus,
the leader causes the follower to follows the leader’s motifs.
Table 1 illustrates the best performance of Following Motif Method
in precision, recall, F1, and accuracy at the data sets of continuous
following, non-continuous following and mixed types. For single
motif data set, Following Motif Method beats Cross Correlation in
Recall, F1, and Accuracy and have slightly lower Precision of 0.006.
This is because finding the lag that produces the maximum value
of the dot product is slightly more effective than finding similarity
of time series’ shape by normalized Gaussian distance function of
matrix profile inside Following Relation Method, Even though thick
noise is added and disturbs comparing shape of the following motif
relation.
Reason of similar values of metrics at every data set for FLICA
is the similar number of True Positive and True Negative and of
False Positive and False Negative. The reason of similar values
also exists for the result of Cross Correlation at Continuous and
Non-continuous following data sets.
6.1.2
Performance of Following Motif Method for the finding of
time steps of following motifs task. Finding time steps of follow-
ing relation on both leader and follower Time Series "Which time
steps is associated with the following motif relation?" can only be
calculated by only Following Motif Method.
Table 2 reports result of the finding Following Relation time
steps at data sets of single motif, continuous following motif, and
mixed type. The significantly highest all metrics of single motif
data set shows better performance to multiple following motif. The
obviously higher accuracy than F1-score for every data set indicates
that the Following Motif Method is effective to detect non-related
the following motif relation time steps from the entire time series.
6.2
Real datasets
The following motif method’s result of determining which time
series leads of real world data set are correct for both Lost Star
singing and Bitcoin and Ether price time series.
6.2.1
Lost Stars Singing by Adam Levine and Matt McAndrew. Ta-
ble 3 reports performance of following motif method in both tasks
with different degrees of normal distribution noise of standard de-
viation 0.00, 0.001, and 0.005. The table shows the metrics for every
degrees of noise above 0.86 for predicting following motif time
steps. Figure 8 illustrates green(predicted), red(ground truth) and
yellow(the predicted overlapped ground truth) highlighted time
steps as following motif relation interval on Leader (Adam singing)
and Follower (Matt singing). The table and figures are resulted from
Following Motif Method with parameters (window size 700 and
percentile gap 10) with the three degrees of noise.
The LeadVol in the table 3 are the leadership value of the inputted
leader time series. The greater LeadVol from zero, the inputted
leader likely is real leader. Every degree of noise shows significantly
high LeadVol which determine correct leader to the ground truth.
The method can find the following pattern in rhythm of singing
even the leader and follower sing different lyrics. The following pat-
tern is almost entirely detected and covered inside the highlighted
by the method. The method determine Adam singing leading Matt
singing.
Figure 8: Following Relation Method indicates following or-
dered points on leader and follower Time Series of Lost Star
Singing with Resolution (Gaussian noise Std. = 0.000)
The ground truth following motif interval of leader are [0,5700]
and [12100,15100]. For the follower, the interval are [6400,12000]
[15300,18533].
6.2.2
Cryptocurrency: Bitcoin and Ether to USDT. The following
method correctly determine Bitcoin as leader and results in LeadVol
of 0.0198.
Figure 9 illustrate highlighted time steps as following motif rela-
tion interval on Leader (Bitcoin Opening Price Signal) and Follower
(Ether Opening Price Signal), resulted from Following Motif Method
with parameters (window size 150 and percentile gap 5). The time
steps that Bitcoin is leading the Ether motifs,that can be detected
in window size 150, are highlighted.
In Figure 7, although the following lags of those two cryptocur-
rency are varied and small, the following relation method still can
effectively detect the time steps of Bitcoin leading Ether’s motifs.
We concluded the performance by comparing Figure 7 (groundtruth)
with Figure 9 (result). The method determine Bitcoin leading Ether.
7
CONCLUSION
In this work, we formalized a concept of following motifs between
two time series and presented a framework to infer following pat-
terns from data. The framework utilized one of efficient and scalable
methods to retrieve motifs from time series called matrix profile
method. We compared our proposed framework with several base-
lines. The framework performed better than baselines in the simu-
lation datasets. In the dataset of sounds recording, the framework
was able to retrieve the following motifs within a pair of time series
that two singers sang following each other. In the cryptocurrency

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
N. Chinpattanakarn and C. Amornbunchornvej
Dataset
Result
Following Motif Method
FLICA
Cross Correlation
VL-Transfer Entropy
Single Motif
Precision
0.995
0.693
1.000
0.774
Recall
0.997
0.693
0.986
0.597
F1
0.996
0.693
0.993
0.674
Accuracy
0.996
0.693
0.993
0.712
Continuous Following
Precision
1.000
0.732
0.872
0.241
Recall
1.000
0.732
0.872
0.111
F1
1.000
0.732
0.872
0.152
Accuracy
1.000
0.732
0.872
0.381
Noncontinuous Following
Precision
0.984
0.663
0.684
0.203
Recall
0.983
0.663
0.684
0.085
F1
0.983
0.663
0.684
0.120
Accuracy
0.984
0.663
0.684
0.376
Mixed Types
Precision
0.993
0.696
0.851
0.406
Recall
0.993
0.696
0.847
0.264
F1
0.993
0.696
0.849
0.315
Accuracy
0.993
0.696
0.850
0.489
Table 1: Performance of methods for determining which time series leads or follows. The bold text represents the best performer.
Figure 9: Yellow highlighted interval as following motif re-
lation interval in Leading and Following Motif Time Series
(Price of Bitcoin and Ether)
Dataset
Precision
Recall
F1-score
Accuracy
Single
0.703
0.802
0.703
0.915
Cont.
0.553
0.708
0.621
0.705
Mixed
0.591
0.737
0.656
0.819
Table 2: Performance of Following Motif Method for inferring
time steps of following motifs task.
Noise
LeadVol
Precision
Recall
F1-score
Accuracy
0.000
0.168
0.916
0.862
0.889
0.862
0.001
0.215
0.960
0.891
0.924
0.906
0.005
0.235
0.962
0.898
0.929
0.911
Table 3: Following Motif Method’s performance for determining
which time series leads and inferring following motif time steps
with real vocal time series, added different degrees of noise.
dataset, the framework was capable of capturing the following mo-
tifs within a pair of time series from two digital currencies, which
implied that the values of one currency followed the values of an-
other currency patterns. Our framework can be utilized in any field
of time series to get insight regarding following patterns between
time series.
The code and datasets can be found at https://github.com/hughnaaek/Following-
Motif-Relation.
