Safe Exploration in Continuous Action Spaces
Gal Dalal 1 2 Krishnamurthy Dvijotham 2 Matej Vecerik 2 Todd Hester 2 Cosmin Paduraru 2 Yuval Tassa 2
Abstract
We address the problem of deploying a reinforce-
ment learning (RL) agent on a physical system
such as a datacenter cooling unit or robot, where
critical constraints must never be violated. We
show how to exploit the typically smooth dynam-
ics of these systems and enable RL algorithms
to never violate constraints during learning. Our
technique is to directly add to the policy a safety
layer that analytically solves an action correc-
tion formulation per each state. The novelty of
obtaining an elegant closed-form solution is at-
tained due to a linearized model, learned on past
trajectories consisting of arbitrary actions. This
is to mimic the real-world circumstances where
data logs were generated with a behavior policy
that is implausible to describe mathematically;
such cases render the known safety-aware off-
policy methods inapplicable. We demonstrate the
efﬁcacy of our approach on new representative
physics-based environments, and prevail where
reward shaping fails by maintaining zero con-
straint violations.
1. Introduction
In the past two decades, RL has been mainly explored in
toy environments (Sutton & Barto, 1998) and video games
(Mnih et al., 2015), where real-world applications were
limited to a few typical use-cases such as recommender
systems (Shani et al., 2005). However, RL is recently also
ﬁnding its path into industrial applications in the physi-
cal world; e.g., datacenter cooling (Evans & Gao, 2016),
robotics (Gu et al., 2016), and autonomous vehicles (Sallab
et al., 2017). In all these use-cases, safety is a crucial con-
cern: unless safe operation is addressed thoroughly and en-
sured from the ﬁrst moment of deployment, RL is deemed
incompatible for them.
In real-world applications such as the above, constraints are
an integral part of the problem description, and never vio-
1Technion, Israel Institute of Technology 2Google DeepMind.

lating them is often a strict necessity. Therefore, in this
work, we deﬁne our goal to be maintaining zero-constraint-
violations throughout the whole learning process. Note that
accomplishing this goal for discrete action spaces is more
straightforward than for continuous ones. For instance, one
can pre-train constraint-violation classiﬁers on ofﬂine data
for pruning unsafe actions. However, in our context, this
goal becomes considerably more challenging due to the in-
ﬁnite number of candidate actions. Nevertheless, we in-
deed manage to accomplish this goal for continuous action
spaces and show to never violate constraints throughout the
whole learning process.
Speciﬁcally, we tackle the problem of safe control in phys-
ical systems, where certain observable quantities are to be
kept constrained. To illustrate, in the case of datacenter
cooling, temperatures and pressures are to be kept below
respective thresholds at all times; a robot must not exceed
limits on angles and torques; and an autonomous vehicle
must always maintain its distance from obstacles above
some margin. In this work, we denote these quantities as
safety signals. As these are physical quantities, we exploit
their smoothness for avoiding unexpected, unsafe opera-
tion. Moreover, we deal with the common situation where
ofﬂine logged data are available; it thus can be used to pre-
train models for aiding safety from the initial RL deploy-
ment moments.
Safe exploration, as depicted above, traditionally requires
access to data generated with some known behavior pol-
icy upon which gradual safe updates are performed; see
(Thomas, 2015) for a comprehensive study of such off-
policy methods. Such data are necessary because, unless
assumed otherwise, actions in one state might have catas-
trophic consequences down the road.
Hence, long-term
behavior should be inferred in advance prior to deploy-
ment.
In contrast, in this work, we eliminate the need
for behavior-policy knowledge as we focus on physical
systems, whose actions have relatively short-term conse-
quences. Obviating behavior-policy knowledge is a key
beneﬁt in our work, as lack of such data is a challenging
yet familiar real-world situation. It is rarely the case that
past trajectories in complex systems were generated using
a consistent behavior policy that can be mathematically de-
scribed. Such systems are traditionally controlled by hu-
mans or sophisticated software whose logic is hard to por-
arXiv:1801.08757v1  [cs.AI]  26 Jan 2018

Safe Exploration in Continuous Action Spaces
tray. Hence, off-policy RL methods are deemed inappli-
cable in such situations. Contrarily, we show how single-
step transition data can be efﬁciently exploited for ensur-
ing safety. To demonstrate our method’s independence of
a behavior policy, in our experiments we generate our pre-
training data with purely random actions.
Our approach relies on one-time initial pre-training of a
model that predicts the change in the safety signal over a
single time step. This model’s strength stems from its sim-
plicity: it is a ﬁrst-order approximation with respect to the
action, where its coefﬁcients are the outputs of a state-fed
neural network (NN). We then utilize this model in a safety
layer that is composed directly on top the agent’s policy to
correct the action if needed; i.e., after every policy query,
it solves an optimization problem for ﬁnding the minimal
change to the action such that the safety constraints are met.
Thanks to the linearity with respect to actions, the solution
can be derived analytically in closed-form and amounts to
basic arithmetic operations. Thus, our safety layer is both
differentiable and has a trivial three-line software imple-
mentation. Note that relating to our safety mechanism as a
‘safety layer’ is purely a semantical choice; it merely is
a simple calculation that is not limited to the nowadays
popular deep policy networks and can be applied to any
continuous-control algorithm (not necessarily RL-based).
2. Related Work
As this work focuses on control problems with continuous
state and action spaces, we limit our comparison to the liter-
ature on safe RL in the context of policy optimization that
attempts to maintain safety also during the learning pro-
cess. Such an example is (Achiam et al., 2017), where
constrained policy optimization was solved with a mod-
iﬁed trust-region policy gradient. There, the algorithm’s
update rule projected the policy to a safe feasibility set in
each iteration. Under some policy regularity assumptions,
it was shown to keep the policy within constraints in ex-
pectation. As such, it is unsuitable to our use-cases, where
safety must be ensured for all visited states. Another recent
work (Berkenkamp et al., 2017) described control-theoretic
conditions under which safe operation can be guaranteed
for a discretized deterministic control framework. An ap-
propriate Lyapunov function was identiﬁed for policy at-
traction regions if certain Lipschitz continuity conditions
hold. Though under the appropriate conditions safe explo-
ration was guaranteed, knowledge on the speciﬁc system
was required. Moreover, a NN may not be Lipschitz con-
tinuous with a reasonable coefﬁcient. Lastly, very recent
work (Pham et al., 2017) utilized an in-graph QP solver
ﬁrst introduced in (Amos & Kolter, 2017). It exhibited an
approach similar in nature to the one we take: solve an op-
timization problem in the policy-level, for ensuring safety
on a state-wise basis. However, two main differences are
to be noticed. First, the solution there relied on an in-graph
implementation of a full QP solver (Amos & Kolter, 2017),
which runs an iterative interior-point algorithm with each
forward propagation. This is both a challenge to implement
(currently only a pytorch version is available), and com-
putationally expensive. An additional difference from our
work is that in (Pham et al., 2017) expert knowledge was
required to explicitly hand-design the physical constraints
of a robotic arm. Contrarily, in our method no such manual
effort is needed; these dynamics are learned directly from
data, while also being behavior-policy independent.
To summarize, this work is the ﬁrst, to our knowledge, to
solve the problem of state-wise safety directly at the pol-
icy level, while also doing it in a data-driven fashion us-
ing arbitrary data logs. Moreover, it can be applied to any
continuous-control algorithm; it is not restricted to a spe-
ciﬁc RL algorithm or any at all.
3. Deﬁnitions
We consider a special case of constrained Markov decision
processes (CMDP) (Altman, 1999), where observed safety
signals should be kept bounded. First, let us denote by [K]
the set {1, . . . , K}, and by [x]+ the operation max{x, 0},
where x ∈R. A CMDP is a tuple (S, A, P, R, γ, C), where
S is a state space, A is an action space, P : S × A × S →
[0, 1] is a transition kernel, R : S × A →R is a reward
function, γ ∈(0, 1) is a discount factor, and C = {ci :
S × A →R | i ∈[K]} is a set of immediate-constraint
functions. Based on that, we also deﬁne a set of safety sig-
nals ¯C = {¯ci : S →R | i ∈[K]}. These are per-state ob-
servations of the immediate-constraint values, which we in-
troduce for later ease of notation. To illustrate, if c1(s, a) is
the temperature in a datacenter to be sensed after choosing
a in s, ¯c1(s′) is the same temperature sensed in s′ after tran-
sitioning to it. In the type of systems tackled in this work,
P is deterministic and determines f s.t. s′ = f(s, a). Thus,
we have ¯ci(s′) ≜ci(s, a). For a general non-deterministic
transition kernel, ¯ci(s′) can be deﬁned as the expectation
over s′ ∼P(·|s, a). Lastly, let policy µ : S →A be a
stationary mapping from states to actions.
4. State-wise Constrained Policy Optimization
We study safe exploration in the context of policy optimiza-
tion, where at each state, all safety signals ¯ci(·) are upper
bounded by corresponding constants Ci ∈R:
max
θ
E[
∞
X
t=0
γtR(st, µθ(st))]
(1)
s.t.
¯ci(st) ≤Ci ∀i ∈[K] ,
where µθ is a parametrized policy.

Safe Exploration in Continuous Action Spaces
We stress that our goal is to ensure state-wise constraints
not only for the solution of (1), but also for its optimization
process. This goal might be intractable in general since for
an arbitrary MDP some actions can have a long-term ef-
fect in terms of possible state paths. However, for the types
of physical systems we consider it is indeed plausible that
safety constraints can be ensured by adjusting the action in
a single (or few) time step(s). In the context of our real-
world use-cases, cooling system dynamics are governed
by factors such as the ﬁrst-order heat-transfer differential
equation (Goodwine, 2010), and the second-order Newton
differential equation that governs the water mass transfer.
The latter also governs the movement of a robotic arm or a
vehicle on which one applies forces. In these types of con-
trol problems, it is feasible to satisfy state-wise constraints
even in the presence of inertia given reasonable slack in
the choice of Ci. We expand on this further and provide
evidence in Section 7.
5. Linear Safety-Signal Model
Solving (1) is a difﬁcult task, even for the types of systems
listed above. A major contributor to this challenge is the
RL agent’s intrinsic need to explore for ﬁnding new and
improved actions. Without prior knowledge on its envi-
ronment, an RL agent initialized with a random policy can-
not ensure per-state constraint satisfaction during the initial
training stages. This statement also holds when the reward
is carefully shaped to penalize undesired states: for an RL
agent to learn to avoid undesired behavior it will have to
violate the constraints enough times for the negative effect
to propagate in our dynamic programming scheme.
In this work, we thus incorporate some basic form of prior
knowledge, based on single-step dynamics.
Single-step
transition data in logs is rather common, and, as explained
before, more realistic compared to also knowing behav-
ior policies. We do not attempt to learn the full transi-
tion model, but solely the immediate-constraint functions
ci(s, a). While it is attractive to simply approximate them
with NNs that take (s, a) as inputs, we choose a more ele-
gant approach that comes with signiﬁcant advantages listed
in Subsection 6.1. Namely, we perform the following lin-
earization:
¯ci(s′) ≜ci(s, a) ≈¯ci(s) + g(s; wi)⊤a,
where wi are weights of a NN, g(s; wi), that takes s as
input and outputs a vector of the same dimension as a. This
model is a ﬁrst-order approximation to ci(s, a) with respect
to a; i.e., an explicit representation of sensitivity of changes
in the safety signal to the action using features of the state.
See Fig. 1 for a visualization.
Remark 1. Linear approximations of non-linear physi-
cal systems prove accurate and are well accepted in many
Figure 1. Each safety signal ci(s, a) is approximated with a lin-
ear model with respect to a, whose coefﬁcients are features of s,
extracted with a NN.
ﬁelds, e.g. aircraft design (Liang & Sun, 2013). For a com-
prehensive study see (Enqvist, 2005).
Given a policy-oblivious set of tuples D = {(sj, aj, s′
j)},
we train g(s; wi) by solving
arg min
wi
X
(s,a,s′)∈D
 ¯ci(s′) −(¯ci(s) + g(s; wi)⊤a)
2 , (2)
where ¯ci(s) is assumed to be included in s.
In our experiments, to generate D we merely initialize the
agent in a uniformly random location and let it perform uni-
formly random actions for multiple episodes. The episodes
terminate when a time limit is reached or upon constraint
violation. The latter corresponds to real-world mechanisms
governing production systems: high-performance, efﬁcient
control is often backed up by an inefﬁcient conservative
policy; when unsafe operation ﬂags are raised, a preemp-
tion mechanism is triggered and the conservative policy
kicks in to ensure constraint satisfaction.
Training g(s; wi) on D is performed once per task as a pre-
training phase that precedes the RL training. However, ad-
ditional continual training of g(s; wi) during RL training is
also optional. Since in our experiments continual training
showed no beneﬁt compared to solely pre-training, we only
show results of the latter.
6. Safety Layer via Analytical Optimization
We now show how to solve problem (1) using the policy
gradient algorithm (Baxter & Bartlett, 2001) via a simple
addition to the policy itself. We experiment with Deep De-
terministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) (Lillicrap et al., 2015)
whose policy network directly outputs actions and not their
probabilities. However, our approach is not limited to it
and can be added, as is, to probabilistic policy gradient or
any other continuous-control algorithm.
Denote by µθ(s) the deterministic action selected by the
deep policy network. Then, on top of the policy network

Safe Exploration in Continuous Action Spaces
Original 
policy
Safety layer
Figure 2. A safety layer is composed on top of a deep policy
network, solving an action correction optimization program with
each forward-propagation. Our linearized safety-signal model al-
lows a closed-form solution ˜µθ(s) = arg mina f(s, a, µ(s)) that
reduces to a trivial linear projection.
we compose an additional, last layer, whose role is to solve
arg min
a
1
2∥a −µθ(s)∥2
(3)
s.t. ci(s, a) ≤Ci ∀i ∈[K] .
This layer, which we refer to as safety layer, perturbs the
original action as little as possible in the Euclidean norm in
order to satisfy the necessary constraints. Fig. 2 visualizes
its relation to the policy network.
To solve (3) we now substitute our linear model for ci(s, a),
introduced in Section 5, and obtain the quadratic program
a∗= arg min
a
1
2∥a −µθ(s)∥2
(4)
s.t. ¯ci(s) + g(s; wi)⊤a ≤Ci ∀i ∈[K] .
Thanks to the positive-deﬁnite quadratic objective and lin-
ear constraints, we can now ﬁnd the global solution to this
convex problem. Generally, to solve it one can implement
an in-graph iterative QP-solver such as in (Amos & Kolter,
2017). This would result in a method similar to the one
in (Pham et al., 2017), but with the advantage that all the
physical constraint model is learned directly from data in-
stead of being hand-designed. Alternatively, if the num-
ber of active constraints is known to be bounded by some
m ≤K, one can exhaustively iterate on all
 K
m

combina-
tions of possibly active constraints and select the optimal
feasible one; this would be reasonable for a small m.
However, in this work, at the expense of one simplifying
assumption, we gain the beneﬁt of obtaining a closed-form
analytical solution to (4) that has a trivial three-lines-of-
code software implementation. The assumption is that no
more than a single constraint is active at a time. As demon-
strated in our experiments, this is reasonable to assume
when an agent navigates in a physical domain and avoids
obstacles. As the distance from each obstacle is modeled
as a separate constraint, only a single obstacle is the clos-
est one at a time. Proximity to corners shows to pose no
issues, as can be seen in the plots and videos in Section 7.
Moreover, for other systems with multiple intersecting con-
straints, a joint model can be learned. For instance, instead
of treating distances from two walls as two constraints, the
minimum between them can be treated as a single con-
straint. In rudimentary experiments, this method produced
similar results to not using it, when we grouped two con-
straints into one, in the ﬁrst and simplest task in Section 7.
However, jointly modeling the dynamics of more than a
few safety signals with a single g(·; ·) network is a topic re-
quiring careful attention, which we leave for future work.
We now provide the closed-form solution to (4).
Proposition 1. Assume there exists a feasible solution to
(4) denoted by (a∗, {λ∗
i }K
i=1), where λ∗
i is the optimal La-
grange multiplier associated with the i-th constraint. Also,
assume |{i|λ∗
i > 0}| ≤1; i.e., at most one constraint is
active. Then
λ∗
i =
g(s; wi)⊤µθ(s) + ¯ci(s) −Ci
g(s; wi)⊤g(s; wi)
+
(5)
and
a∗= µθ(s) −λ∗
i∗g(s; wi∗),
(6)
where i∗= arg maxi λ∗
i .
Proof. As the objective function and constraints in (4) are
convex, a sufﬁcient condition for optimality of a feasible
solution (a∗, {λ∗
i }K
i=1) is for it to satisfy the KKT condi-
tions. The Lagrangian of (4) is
L(a,λ) =
1
2∥a −µθ(s)∥2 +
K
X
i=1
λi
 ¯ci(s) + g(s; wi)⊤a −Ci

;
and hence the KKT conditions at (a∗, {λ∗
i }K
i=1) are
∇aL = a∗−µθ(s) +
K
X
i=1
λ∗
i g(s; wi) = 0,
(7)
λ∗
i
 ¯ci(s) + g(s; wi)⊤a∗−Ci

= 0 ∀i ∈[K] . (8)
First, consider the case where |{i|λ∗
i > 0}| = 1, i.e., λ∗
i∗>
0. We then easily get (6) from (7). Next, from (8) we have
that ¯ci∗(s)+g(s; wi∗)⊤a∗−Ci∗= 0. Substituting (6) in the
latter gives λ∗
i∗g(s; wi∗)⊤g(s; wi∗) = g(s; wi∗)⊤µθ(s) +
¯ci∗(s) −Ci∗. This gives us (5) when i = i∗. As for i ∈
[K] \ {i∗}, the corresponding constraints are inactive since
λ∗
i = 0. Hence, ¯ci(s) + g(s; wi)⊤a∗−Ci < 0, making
the fraction in (5) negative, which indeed results in a value
of 0 due to the [·]+ operator and gives us (5) also when
i ∈[K] \ {i∗}.
To conclude the proof, consider the second case where
λ∗
i = 0 ∀i ∈[K]. From (7) we have that a∗= µθ(s).
This gives us (6) since λ∗
i∗= 0. Lastly, (5) holds due to

Safe Exploration in Continuous Action Spaces
the same inactive constraints argument as above, this time
uniformly ∀i ∈[K].
The solution (6) is essentially a linear projection of the
original action µθ(s) to the “safe” hyperplane with slope
g(s; wi∗) and intercept ¯ci∗(s) −Ci∗. In terms of imple-
mentation, it consists of a few primitive arithmetic opera-
tions: vector products followed by a ’max’ operation. The
beneﬁts of its simplicity are three-fold: i) it has a trivial,
almost effortless software implementation; ii) its computa-
tional cost is negligible; and iii) it is differentiable (almost
everywhere, as is ReLu).
6.1. An Alternative: Additional Loss Term
To stress the prominence of our linear model in solving (3),
we now brieﬂy describe the drawbacks of an alternative
likely choice we initially experimented with: a straight-
forward (s, a)-fed NN model for ci(s, a). In this case, an
approximate solution to (3) can be obtained by penalizing
the objective for constraint violations and solving the un-
constrained surrogate
arg min
a

1
2∥a −µθ(s)∥2 +
K
X
i=1
λi [ci(s, a) −Ci]+

,
(9)
where {λi > 0} are now hyper-parameters. Problem (9)
can be solved numerically using gradient descent. How-
ever, even though from our experience this approach in-
deed works (corrects actions to safe ones), it is inferior to
our analytic approach for several reasons:
1. Running gradient descent with every policy query (i.e.
forward propagation) requires sophisticated in-graph
implementation and is computationally intensive.
2. Since the sensitivity of ci(s, a) varies for different en-
tries in a, different orders of magnitude are observed
in entries of the resulting gradient ∇aci(s, a). This
causes numerical instabilities and long convergence
times, and requires careful stepsize selection.
3. Solutions to the non-convex (9) are local minima,
which depend on non-reliable convergence of an itera-
tive optimization algorithm, as opposed to the closed-
form global optimum we obtain for (4).
4. There are K hyper-parameters necessitating tuning.
7. Experiments
Per each task introduced next, we run the initial pre-
training phase described in Section 5. We construct D with
1000 random-action episodes per task. We then add our
pre-trained safety layer to the policy network. As men-
tioned earlier, our RL algorithm of choice for the experi-
ments is DDPG (Lillicrap et al., 2015). In this section we
show that during training, DDPG never violates constraints
and converges faster compared to without our addition.
To mimic the physics-based use-cases described in this
work, where continuous safety signals are observations of
the state ought to be constrained, we set up appropriate sim-
ulation domains in Mujoco (Todorov et al., 2012). In these
domains, an object is located in some feasible bounded re-
gion. Each of the constraints, therefore, lower bounds the
object’s distance to each of the few boundaries. Though
the lower bound on the distance is zero by the tasks’ deﬁ-
nition, in practice we set it to be some small positive value
to allow slack for avoidance actions in the presence of in-
ertia. In all simulations, the episode immediately termi-
nates in the case of a constraint violation. These conditions
comply with the ones in our real-world examples: a dat-
acenter cooling system’s maximal temperature set for the
formulation and algorithm need not be the one originally
deﬁned by the datacetner operator; a lower, more conserva-
tive value can be set to allow for some slack. Episode ter-
mination corresponds to preemption, followed by a swap to
some backup heuristic each time the conservative tempera-
ture cap is reached.
We now introduce our two new Mujoco domains: Ball and
Spaceship, consisting of two tasks each. The dynamics of
Ball and Spaceship are governed by ﬁrst and second order
differential equations, respectively. As such, they are rep-
resentative domains to the systems of interest in this paper.
7.1. Ball Domain
In the Ball domain, the goal is to bring a ball as close as
possible to a changing target location, by directly setting
the velocity of the ball every 4-th time-step (it is common
for the operational frequency of a typical torque controller
to be less than the environment’s one). Each episode lasts
at most 30 seconds, during which the target is appearing in
a new, uniformly random location every 2 seconds. Let us
now deﬁne the d-dimensional [a, b]-cube B(d)
[a,b] = {x|a ≤
xi ≤b, i = 1, . . . , d}. The feasible region for the ball is
B(d)
[0,1], while for the target it is B(d)
[0.2,0.8]. If the ball steps
out of B(d)
[0,1], the episode terminates. To allow some slack
in maneuvering away from the boundaries, we set Ci in (3)
so as to constrain the ball’s feasible region to effectively
be B(d)
[0.1,0.9]. This is for the safety layer to start correcting
the actions once the ball steps out of the latter cube. Let
the ball location, ball velocity and target location respec-
tively be xB, vB, xT ∈Rd. Then, s = (xB, vB, xT + ϵd),
where ϵd ∼N(0, 0.05 · Id×d); i.e., only a noisy estimate
of the target is observed. The action a = vB; i.e., it is

Safe Exploration in Continuous Action Spaces
Figure 3. Ball-1D (left) and Ball-3D (right) tasks. The goal is to
keep the green ball as close as possible to the pink target ball by
setting its velocity. The safe region is the [0, 1] interval in Ball-1D
and the [0, 1] cube in Ball-3D; if the green ball steps out of it, the
episode terminates.
to set the velocity of the ball. Actions are taken every 4
time-steps and remain constant in between. The dynam-
ics are governed by Newton’s laws, with a small amount
of damping. The reward has a maximum of 1 when the
ball is exactly at the target and quickly diminishes to 0
away from it: R(s, a) =

1 −10 · ∥xB −xT ∥2
2
+ . Lastly,
γ = 0.99. Our experiments are conducted on two tasks:
Ball-1D where d = 1, Ball-3D where d = 3. Images of the
two can be found in Fig. 3.
As the ball’s velocity is controlled directly, its dynamics
are governed by a ﬁrst-order differential equation. This do-
main thus represents phenomena such as heat transition and
several known control tasks such as maintaining the speed
of a rotating engine, whether it is a classic steam engine or
cruise-control in modern vehicles (Sotomayor et al., 2006).
7.2. Spaceship Domain
In the Spaceship domain, the goal is to bring a space-
ship to a ﬁxed target location by controlling its thrust en-
gines. Hence, as opposed to setting velocities in the Ball
domain, here we set the forces.
Our ﬁrst task for this
domain is Spaceship-Corridor, where the safe region is
bounded between two inﬁnite parallel walls. Our second
task, Spaceship-Arena, differs from the ﬁrst in the shape of
the safe region; it is bounded by four walls in a diamond
form. Images of the two tasks are given in Fig. 4. Episodes
terminate when one of the three events occur: the target is
reached, the spaceship’s bow touches a wall, or the time
limit is reached. Time limits are 15 seconds for Corridor
and 45 seconds for Arena. Relating to the screenshots in
Fig. 4, the spaceship’s initialization location is uniformly
random in the lowest third part of the screen for Corridor,
and the right-most third part of the screen for Arena.
In this domain, the state is the spaceship’s location and ve-
locities; the action a ∈[−1, 1]2 actuates two thrust engines
in forward/backward and right/left directions; the transi-
tions are governed by the rules of physics where damping
is applied; the reward is sparse: 1000 points are obtained
Figure 4. Spaceship-Corridor (left) and Spaceship-Arena (right)
tasks. The goal is to bring the green spaceship to to the pink
rounded target by controlling its thrust engines. Touching the
walls with the spaceship’s bow terminates the episode.
when reaching the target and 0 elsewhere; and γ = 0.99.
As in the Ball domain, a small gap away from each wall is
incorporated in the choice of Ci in (3). This is for the safety
layer to begin correcting the actions a few time-steps before
the spaceship actually reaches a wall with its bow. For both
tasks, this gap is 0.05, where, for comparison, the distance
between the walls in Corridor task is 1.
Since the control is via forces, the spaceship’s dynamics
are governed by a second-order differential equation. This
domain thus represents situations such as pumping masses
of water for cooling, and actuating objects such as robotic
arms.
7.3. Implementation Details
Per each of the four tasks above, we pre-train the safety-
signal model for each of the task’s constraints; i.e., we
solve (2) for each i ∈[K] using that task’s data-set D.
In a hyper-parameter sweep, we witnessed that the ability
to achieve our end-goal is relatively insensitive to the archi-
tecture of g(·; wi) and a simple one sufﬁces. Namely, for
achieving zero-constraint-violations after plugging g(·; wi)
into the safety layer, a single-layered NN with 10 hidden
neurons was adequate for all tasks. For training we use
Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2014) with a batch size of
256. We also report that low validation errors for g(·; wi)
don’t necessarily correspond to a better safety layer; it is
the exploratory nature of D that matters. Speciﬁcally, we
witnessed the following counter-intuitive behavior: gener-
ating D with a policy that ﬁxes a single randomly drawn
action for each episode, as opposed to a random action in
each step, yields better regression accuracy for g(·; wi) but
lesser safety layer performance.
Based on a hyper-parameter sweep for DDPG, for the ac-
tor and critic we use two-hidden-layer NNs of respective
sizes (100, 100) and (500, 500). The rest of the experiment
parameters were taken to be as in (Lillicrap et al., 2015).

Safe Exploration in Continuous Action Spaces
Figure 5. Accumulated constraint violations (lower is better) throughout the training of DDPG+reward shaping, per each task. Plotted
are medians with upper and lower quantiles of 10 seeds. The x-axis corresponds to different choice of M – the margin from limits in
which reward penalty is incurred. The optimal choice of M is colored red.
7.4. Safety Layer versus Reward Shaping
Before exhibiting the performance of our safety layer, we
ﬁrst relate to a natural alternative approach for ensuring
safety: manipulate the agent to avoid undesired areas by
artiﬁcially shaping the reward. This can be done by set-
ting the reward to large negative values in subsets of the
state-space. In our case, those areas are the neighborhood
of the enclosing boundaries. Therefore, for comparison,
we ﬁrst ran a series of such reward shaping experiments on
DDPG without the safety layer. We set the penalty to be
on the same scale as the original reward: −1 in the Ball do-
main and −1000 in the spaceship domain. The margin from
boundaries in which the shaping occurs is a parameter M
which we cross-validated per each task. We experimented
with values of M ∈{0.08, 0.11, 0.14, 0.17, 0.2, 0.23}. Per
each M, we ran DDPG, where each training episode is fol-
lowed by an evaluation episode for which we count whether
it terminated due to a constraint violation. Fig. 5 gives, per
each M, the median with upper and lower quantiles of ac-
cumulated constraint violations of 10 seeds of DDPG runs.
Per each task, we mark the best choice of M in red.
Fig. 5 depicts the drawbacks of reward shaping for ensur-
ing safety. The ﬁrst fault is the failure to achieve our zero-
constraint-violations goal; all parameter choices resulted in
signiﬁcant portions of the episodes terminating due to vio-
lations. The second drawback is the difﬁculty of choosing
the correct parameter. As seen in the ﬁgure, there is no
clear trend for the dependence on M; each task has a dif-
ferent ’best value’, and the plots have no structure.
Next, we compare the performance of our safety layer to
that of the best reward shaping choice, and to no reward
shaping at all. Namely, we compare the following alterna-
tives: DDPG, DDPG+reward shaping, and DDPG+safety
layer. For reward shaping we use the same simulation re-
sults of the best M (colored red in Fig. 5). The comparison
outcomes are summarized in Fig. 6. Its top row gives the
sum of discounted rewards per evaluation episode, and the
bottom provides the number of constraint violations, accu-
mulated over all evaluation episodes. The plots show me-
dians along with upper and lower quantiles of 10 seeds.
The most prominent insight from Fig. 6 is that the con-
straints were never violated with the safety layer. This is
true for all 10 seeds of each of the four tasks. Secondly,
the safety layer dramatically expedited convergence. For
Spaceship, it is, in fact, the only algorithm that enabled
convergence. In contrast, without the safety layer, a sig-
niﬁcant amount of episodes ended with a constraint viola-
tion and convergence was often not attained. This is due
to the nature of our tasks: frequent episode terminations
upon boundary crossing impede the learning process in
our sparse reward environments. However, with the safety
layer, these terminations never occur, allowing the agent to
maneuver as if there were no boundaries. Next, the follow-
ing domain-speciﬁc discussion is in order.
In the Ball domain, since in the 1D task the target is al-
ways located in one of two possible directions, its reward
is less sparse compared to 3D. This easy setup allowed
DDPG to converge to a reasonable return value even with-
out reward shaping or the safety layer; in 3D this hap-
pened only for the upper quantile of the seeds. In both
tasks, an improvement was obtained with reward shaping.
Nonetheless, DDPG+safety layer obtained the highest dis-
counted return with much faster convergence. As for cu-
mulative constraint violations, as DDPG converged slower
than DDPG+reward shaping, it also stabilized later on a
higher value. All the same, DDPG+safety layer accom-
plished our safety goal and maintained 0 accumulated con-
straint violations.

Safe Exploration in Continuous Action Spaces
Figure 6. Convergence and constraint violations of DDPG, DDPG+reward shaping, and DDPG+safety layer, per each task. Plotted are
medians with upper and lower quantiles of 10 seeds. The top row shows the sum of discounted rewards, where the bottom gives the
cumulative number of episodes terminated due to a constraint violation. As shown by the bottom blue curves, with the safety layer,
constraints were never violated.
In the Spaceship domain, the reward is obtained only once
at the target, and the spaceship is re-initialized away from
it with each constraint violation. This setup proves fatal
for DDPG, which was not able to converge to any rea-
sonable policy in both tasks. Surprisingly, reward shap-
ing poses no improvement but rather has an adverse ef-
fect: it resulted in highly negative episodic returns. On
the other hand, DDPG+safety layer converged extremely
fast to a high-performing safe policy. This behavior stems
from the closed-region type of tasks; exploring while stray-
ing away from the walls allowed the spaceship to quickly
meet the target and then learn how to reach it. With re-
gards to safety, DDPG+safety layer again prevailed where
DDPG and DDPG+reward shaping failed, and maintained
0 accumulated constraint violations.
7.5. Videos
To visualize the safety layer in action, we depict the inten-
sity of its action correction via the magnitude of the dom-
inant Lagrange multiplier λ∗
i∗as calculated in (5). We do
so by coloring the Ball and Spaceship objects in varying
shades of red. We share two videos of the colored agents
showcasing the following.
In Video 1, to track the learning process of an agent with the
safety layer, we recorded several episodes during training
in the Spaceship-Corridor task. These exhibit how the ma-
neuvers produced by the safety layer to dodge the walls are
gradually learned by the agent, as demonstrated by the less
frequent coloring of the spaceship red. Video 1 is found in
https://youtu.be/KgMvxVST-9U. In Video 2, per
each task of the four, we show episodes of i) the ﬁrst DDPG
iteration (initialized with a random policy) with the safety
layer off; ii) the same random initial policy but with the
safety layer on; and iii) the ﬁnal iteration of DDPG+safety
layer, to demonstrate the task’s goal. Video 2 is found in
https://youtu.be/yr6y4Mb1ktI.
8. Discussion
In this work, we proposed a state-based action correc-
tion mechanism, which accomplishes the goal of zero-
constraint-violations in tasks where the agent is constrained
to a conﬁned region. This is in contrast with the standard
reward shaping alternative, which has failed in achieving
the above goal. The resulting gain is not only in maintain-
ing safety but also in enhanced performance in terms of
reward. This suggests our method promotes more efﬁcient
exploration – it guides the exploratory actions in the direc-
tion of feasible policies. Since our solution is stand-alone
and applied directly at the policy level, it is independent of
the RL algorithm used and can be plugged into any other
continuous control algorithm.
Throughout this work, we relate to a preemption mech-
anism implemented in real-world critical systems, which
halts the RL agent in borderline situations and replaces it
with a safe-operation heuristic. The latter runs until the sys-

Safe Exploration in Continuous Action Spaces
tem is back to being far from operation limits. This heuris-
tic is expected to be conservative and less efﬁcient than the
RL agent; hence, the contribution of our work can also be
interpreted as in reducing operational costs by minimizing
the number of times such takeovers occur.
Lastly, an advantage of our approach over off-policy meth-
ods, often considered in industry, is that one does not
need to know the behavior policy used to generate exist-
ing data logs.
This is thanks to our single-step model,
which we train on trajectories generated with random ac-
tions. These trajectories are always within operating limits
(due to episode termination when the limits are crossed)
and are independent of any particular policy whose long-
term behavior can be elevated. Nevertheless, they carry
rich information due to their exploratory nature. It is thus
intriguing to study in future work additional types of pre-
training data that are typical to speciﬁc real-world domains.
