IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS. PREPRINT VERSION. ACCEPTED DECEMBER, 2022
1
Foldsformer: Learning Sequential Multi-Step Cloth
Manipulation with Space-Time Attention
Kai Mo1, Chongkun Xia1, Xueqian Wang1, Yuhong Deng1, Xuehai Gao2 and Bin Liang3
Abstract—Sequential multi-step cloth manipulation is a chal-
lenging problem in robotic manipulation, requiring a robot to
perceive the cloth state and plan a sequence of chained actions
leading to the desired state. Most previous works address this
problem in a goal-conditioned way, and goal observation must
be given for each speciﬁc task and cloth conﬁguration, which
is not practical and efﬁcient. Thus, we present a novel multi-
step cloth manipulation planning framework named Foldformer.
Foldformer can complete similar tasks with only a general
demonstration and utilize a space-time attention mechanism to
capture the instruction information behind this demonstration.
We experimentally evaluate Foldsformer on four representative
sequential multi-step manipulation tasks and show that Folds-
former signiﬁcantly outperforms state-of-the-art approaches in
simulation. Foldformer can complete multi-step cloth manipula-
tion tasks even when conﬁgurations of the cloth (e.g., size and
pose) vary from conﬁgurations in the general demonstrations.
Furthermore, our approach can be transferred from simula-
tion to the real world without additional training or domain
randomization. Despite training on rectangular clothes, we also
show that our approach can generalize to unseen cloth shapes
(T-shirts and shorts). Videos and source code are available at:
https://sites.google.com/view/foldsformer.
Index Terms—Deep Learning in Grasping and Manipulation,
Perception-Action Coupling
I. INTRODUCTION
C
LOTH manipulation has wide applications in domes-
tic, medical and industrial settings, such as laundry-
folding [1], [2], surgery [3] and manufacturing [4]. Most
of these tasks can be seen as sequential multi-step cloth
manipulation, where sequential chained actions should be
planned to achieve the desired cloth state. There are some
challenges for sequential multi-step cloth manipulation: Unlike
Manuscript received: September, 2, 2022; Revised November, 18, 2022;
Accepted December, 9, 2022. This paper was recommended for publication by
Editor Markus Vincze upon evaluation of the Associate Editor and Reviewers’
comments. This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of
China (2022YFB4701400/4701402), National Natural Science Foundation of
China (No. U1813216, U21B6002, 62203260), the Shenzhen Science Fund
for Distinguished Young Scholars (RCJC20210706091946001), Guangdong
Young Talent with Scientiﬁc and Technological Innovation (2019TQ05Z111),
China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2022M711823). (Corresponding au-
thor: Chongkun Xia & Xueqian Wang.)
1Kai Mo, Chongkun Xia, Xueqian Wang, and Yuhong Deng are
with
the
Center
for
Intelligent
Control
and
Telescience,
Tsinghua
Shenzhen
International
Graduate
School,
518055
Shenzhen,
China.

2Xuehai Gao is with the Research Institute of Tsinghua University in

3Bin Liang is with the Navigation and Control Research Center, Depart-

Digital Object Identiﬁer (DOI): see top of this page.
General Demonstration Sub-goals
Cloths of different 
configurations
Infer Actions
Robot Execution & Achieved
Foldsformer
Fig. 1.
Overview. Foldsformer can complete similar tasks even when the
cloth conﬁgurations vary from that in a genral demonstration.
rigid objects, cloth has inﬁnite degrees of freedom, making
it hard for state representation; The cloth dynamics is also
complex [5], and slightly different interactions may lead
to signiﬁcantly different cloth behaviors; Further, a single
counter-productive action may crumple the cloth and make it
difﬁcult to recover [6], which means completing a sequential
multi-step cloth manipulation task requires only a particular
set of chained actions.
For multi-step cloth manipulation, early works designed
hard-coded policies with task-customized grippers and cloth
with markers, making it hard to generalize these policies to
other settings [1], [2]. Recently, learning-based approaches
have shown great potential for cloth manipulation by tackling
the difﬁculties in state estimation or modeling with neural
networks. Some of these approaches learn task-speciﬁc se-
quential multi-step cloth manipulation policies from expert
demonstrations. Although these approaches are demonstrated
to be effective, different models should be trained to perform
different tasks [7], [8], [9]. Others learn a goal-conditioned
policy from random data and can achieve arbitrary cloth goal
states. Lee et al. [10] speciﬁes the goal state with a single
image at test time. However, for a sequential multi-step cloth
manipulation task, the cloth of the goal state can be highly
self-occluded, and a single image fails to contain enough
information about the goal. Weng et al. [11] speciﬁes the
goal state with a sequence of sub-goal images from an expert
demonstration at test time. For the goal-conditioned policies
mentioned above, the goal images must be given for each
speciﬁc task and cloth conﬁguration by human demonstrators,
which is not practical and efﬁcient. When conﬁgurations of the
cloth vary from that in the goal, these policies’ performances
arXiv:2301.03003v1  [cs.RO]  8 Jan 2023

2
IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS. PREPRINT VERSION. ACCEPTED DECEMBER, 2022
greatly downgrade.
In this work, we address the problem mentioned above in
sequential multi-step cloth manipulation. We propose a novel
framework named Foldsformer that can complete similar tasks
of different cloth conﬁgurations with a general demonstration.
We design a novel encoder in Foldsformer based on the space-
time attention mechanism. Given a general demonstration
containing a sequence of sub-goals that describe a multi-
step task, this encoder can capture the instruction information
behind this demonstration that helps Foldsfomer to perform
similar tasks even when the cloth conﬁguration varies (see
Fig. 1). We ﬁrst leverage large-scale pre-training from random
actions and then transfer it to different tasks through only
100 expert demonstrations per task ﬁne-tuning. Experimental
results show that our approach greatly outperforms three
previous state-of-the-art baselines [10], [11], [12]. We then
demonstrate that our approach trained in simulation can be
transferred to the real world without additional training or
domain randomization. We also show that our learned model
can successfully generalize to T-shirts and shorts despite being
trained on rectangular clothes. In summary:
• We propose a novel framework named Foldsformer for
sequential multi-step manipulation. Foldsformer can com-
plete similar tasks on clothes of different conﬁgurations
with a general demonstration.
• We propose a novel encoder architecture in Foldsformer
based on space-time attention. This encoder enables a
robot to learn instruction information behind a general
demonstration.
• We conduct experiments to demonstrate that Foldsformer
can be zero-shot transferred to the real world and gener-
alize to unseen T-shirts and shorts despite being trained
only on rectangular cloths.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Sequential Multi-Step Cloth Manipulation
There are two mainstream approaches for sequential multi-
step cloth manipulation: analytical approaches and learning-
based approaches. Analytical approaches are mainly task-
speciﬁc, these approaches manually divide a task into sev-
eral steps and then design scripted actions for each step.
Doumanoglou et al. [1] and Bersch et al. [2] design complete
pipelines for cloth folding. Yamakawa et al. [13] achieve
dynamic folding of cloth with custom high-speed robot hands
and high-speed sliders. Miller et al. [14] model cloth as
as polygons and complete folding tasks with a model-based
optimization approach. However, these analytical approaches
mainly use task-customized robot systems to adapt to their
scripted actions. It is hard to generalize them to other settings.
Learning-based approaches can be divided into two cate-
gories: model-based and model-free. Model-based approaches
learn a forward cloth dynamic model and use it for plan-
ning [15], [12], [16], [17]. However, these model-based ap-
proaches require time-consuming planning like Cross Entropy
Method or Model Predictive Control to achieve the goal cloth
state. As for model-free approaches, some approaches learn
task-speciﬁc cloth manipulation policies from expert demon-
strations [7], [8], [9]. However, these task-speciﬁc policies
fail to reuse information for different tasks efﬁciently. Some
approaches learn a goal-conditioned policy that can achieve
arbitrary unseen cloth states purely from random data. Lee et
al. [10] learn a goal-conditioned pick-and-place policy with
standard Deep Q-network and use predeﬁned sets of fold
angles and fold distances to ensure learning efﬁciency, but this
discrete action space limits its manipulation ability. Weng et
al. [11] propose a ﬂow-based policy and divide a multi-step
goal into a sequence of sub-goals at test time, making it easier
to perform multi-step tasks. However, when the cloth conﬁgu-
ration varies from that in demonstration sub-goal images, the
ﬂow estimation can be disturbed by the variation of the cloth
conﬁgurations. Hence, the ﬂow-based representation fails to
describe the change in the cloth states between the current
observation and the sub-goal. Ganapathi et al. [18] learns
dense visual correspondences between cloths of different size,
color, and pose for sequential multi-step cloth manipulation.
However, it relies on demonstration observations and actions
provided by a human expert at test time. In contrast, our
approach only needs general demonstration observations and
can perform similar tasks on different cloth conﬁgurations
without accessing the expert actions.
B. Space-time Attention
The large-scale adoption of the attention mechanism was
ﬁrst proposed by Transformer architecture [19] in natural
language processing and achieved great success. The attention
mechanism can capture both local and global contexts with
less domain-speciﬁc inductive bias, making it easily applied to
some other domains. Vision Transformer [20] extends Trans-
former architecture to image classiﬁcation tasks by splitting
images into sequences of image patches. Bertasius et al. [21]
propose TimeSformer and adapt the standard Transformer to
video with space-time attention mechanism. The space-time
attention mechanism extracts a video’s temporal and spatial
features separately with a great speed-accuracy trade-off. By
leveraging space-time attention, TimeSformer is also faster
to train than traditional CNN video architecture and achieves
higher efﬁciency. By utilizing the space-time attention mech-
anism, we extract the spatiotemporal features of a sequence
of subgoals to capture the instruction information behind the
demonstration.
III. APPROACH
A. Problem Formulation
Our goal is to enable a robot to perform sequential multi-
step cloth manipulation tasks under the instruction of a general
demonstration. Let each task be deﬁned by a sequence of
sub-goal observations G : {xg
1, xg
2, ..., xg
N}, these sub-goal ob-
servations are obtained from an expert demonstration. Rather
than a single goal, we use sub-goals because the cloth of the
goal state in sequential multi-step cloth manipulation tasks
can be highly self-occluded. A single goal loses part of the
information about the full goal state. Unlike prior works [11],

MO et al.: FOLDSFORMER: LEARNING SEQUENTIAL MULTI-STEP CLOTH MANIPULATION WITH SPACE-TIME ATTENTION
3
Foldsformer Architecure
Foldsformer Encoder
Current 
Observation
Decomposition 
into Patches
Linear
Embedding
+
Demonstration Sub-goals
Depth Image with 
Background Masked 
Foldsformer
Encoder
Feature
Filtering
Pick Decoder
Place Decoder
Pick Heatmap
Place Heatmap
+
+
+
+
Linearly Embed Patch
Learnable Position Embedding
Saptial
Self-Attn.
Shared 
Weights
L×
Norm
Concatenate
(a)
Saptial
Self-Attn.
Norm
Temporal 
Self-Attn.
Norm
…
…
Temporal 
Attn.
…
Norm
Norm
MLP
(b)
(c)
Add
Query Patch
Spatial Neighbourhoods of the Query Patch
Temporal Neighbourhoods of the Query Patch
Fig. 2. Foldsformer Architecture. Foldsformer takes the current observation depth image and the sub-goal depth image sequence as input and outputs a
pick heatmap and a place heatmap that simultaneously estimates a pick point and a place point. In the Foldsformer encoder block, we split the input into
two vectors and process them in different ways, and we ﬁnally make a fusion to aggregate information. For illustration, we denote the query patch in red,
its spatial neighborhoods in blue, and its temporal neighborhoods in green. Patches without color are not used for the attention computation of the red patch.
(a) Visualization of the space multi-head self-attention. The self-attention is computed for every patch in all images. (b) Visualization of the time multi-head
self-attention. The self-attention is computed for every patch in sub-goal images. (c) Visualization of the time multi-head attention. The self-attention is
computed for every patch in the current observation image.
[22], [23], we do not require the cloth conﬁguration in sub-
goals to be the same as the cloth conﬁguration at test time. A
general demonstration should be applied in different settings.
We formulate the problem as learning a policy π that
infers a pick-and-place action at ∈A from the current visual
observation of the cloth ot ∈O and the sub-goals G:
π(ot, G) →at = (ppick, pplace) ∈A
(1)
where ppick is the pixel pick point of the end effector when
grasping part of the cloth, and pplace is the pixel place point
of the end effector when releasing the grasp.
B. Foldsformer
Previous approaches input the current observation ot and
each sub-goal xg
i sequentially to their goal-conditioned poli-
cies [11], [22], [23]. In this way, these policies can not access
a complete picture of the multi-step task, resulting in the loss
of the temporal information of the sub-goal sequence. Hence,
these policies can only capture limited instruction information
from the demonstration sub-goals, as they can only access
each sub-goal separately. Our insight is that we can allow the
policy to access all the sub-goals together and take advantage
of the temporal features of all sub-goal images to obtain more
instruction information about a multi-step task.
The schematic of the proposed Foldsformer architecture
can be found in Fig. 2. Foldsformer is a variant of TimeS-
former [21] in sequential multi-step cloth manipulation. Folds-
former takes the current observation ot and the demonstration
sub-goal observation sequence G as input and outputs a pick
heatmap and a place heatmap estimating a pick point and a
place point simultaneously. Further details of Foldsformer are
described below.
Foldsformer input. Foldsformer takes as input a sequence
of depth images X = {ot, G} ∈RH×W ×1×(F +1) that consists
of the current observation depth image ot of size H × W and
F sub-goal depth images G of size H × W. We use depth
rather than RGB inspired by [11], because the gap between
simulated depth images and real depth images is small. By
using depth-only input, our approach can be easily transferred
to the real world without any domain randomization.
Decomposition into patches. We decompose each image
into N non-overlapping patches, each of size P × P, then
we ﬂatten these patches into vectors x(p,t) ∈RP 2 with p =
1, ..., N denoting spatial locations and t = 1, ..., F+1 denoting
an index over images.
Linear Embedding. We map each patch x(p,t) into an
embedding vector z(p,t) ∈RD of D dimensions linearly:
z(0)
(p,t) = Ex(p,t) + epos
(p,t)
(2)

4
IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS. PREPRINT VERSION. ACCEPTED DECEMBER, 2022
where E ∈RD×P 2 is a learnable matrix, epos
(p,t) ∈RD denotes
a learnable position embedding that encodes the spatial and
temporal position of each patch.
Foldsformer Encoder. We design our Foldsformer encoder
block (see Fig. 2) based on the divided space-time attention
mechanism in TimeSformer [21]. Compared to the TimeS-
former encoder block, Foldsformer encoder block ﬁrst splits
the input into vectors corresponding to the current observa-
tion and vectors corresponding to the demonstration sub-goal
sequence, then processes them in different ways and ﬁnally
makes a fusion of them to aggregate information. We process
them separately because the cloth’s conﬁguration in the current
observation may differ from that in the demonstration sub-goal
sequence.
Let z(l)input ∈R
H
P × W
P ×D×(F +1) denote the input vectors of
the encoder block l, with l = 1, ..., L denoting an index over
blocks. z(l)input can be split in time dimension into vectors
z(l)
obs ∈R
H
P × W
P ×D×1 that correspond to the current observation
image and z(l)
subgoal ∈R
H
P × W
P ×D×F that correspond to the
sub-goal image sequence.
We ﬁrstly compute multi-head self-attention [20] of vectors
z(l)
obs and z(l)
subgoal with the same weights in space dimension.
Each patch and its spatial neighbors within the same image are
used for the space self-attention computation (see Fig. 2(a)).
We use residual connection after space self-attention to aggre-
gate information:
z(l)space
obs
= SpaceMSA(LN(z(l)
obs)) + z(l)
obs
z(l)space
subgoal = SpaceMSA(LN(z(l)
subgoal)) + z(l)
subgoal
(3)
where LN() denotes LayerNorm [24], and SpaceMSA() de-
notes space multi-head self-attention. This space multi-head
self-attention extracts spatial information corresponding to the
cloth state in the current observation image and each sub-goal
image.
We then compute multi-head self-attention of vectors
z(l)space
subgoal in time dimension. Each patch and its temporal
neighbors at the same spatial location are used for the time
self-attention computation (see Fig.
2(b)). We use residual
connection after time self-attention to aggregate information:
z(l)time
subgoal = TimeMSA(LN(z(l)space
subgoal)) + z(l)space
subgoal
(4)
where TimeMSA() denotes time multi-head self-attention.
This time multi-head self-attention extracts temporal informa-
tion corresponding to the cloth state changes among all sub-
goal images.
After space multi-head self-attention and time multi-head
self-attention, we then add a time multi-head attention (see
Fig. 2(c)) to fuse the extracted information of the current
observation and the sub-goals. The time multi-head attention
is computed in time dimension (see Fig. 2(c)), where z(l)space
obs
serves as the query, z(l)time
subgoal serves as the key and the value.
We use residual connection after the time multi-head attention
to aggregate information:
z(l)time
obs
= LN(TimeMA(z(l)space
obs
, z(l)time
subgoal,
z(l)time
subgoal)) + z(l)space
obs
(5)
where TimeMA() denotes time multi-head attention.
Then, the concatenation z(l)cat of z(l)time
obs
and z(l)time
subgoal is
projected and passed through an MLP, using residual connec-
tion:
z(l)cat = Concatenate(z(l)time
obs
, z(l)time
subgoal)
z(l)output = MLP(LN(z(l)cat)) + z(l)cat
(6)
The output of the Foldsformer encoder block z(l)output
keeps the same dimension as the input of the Foldsformer
encoder block z(l)input, so these encoder blocks can be stacked
in a sequence to make the network deep. Our encoder consists
of several Foldsformer encoder blocks.
Feature ﬁltering. In the Foldsformer encoder output, we
only use the vectors that correspond to the current observation
and vectors that correspond to the last image in the sub-
goal image sequence, i.e., the goal image. Let zoutput
(t)
∈
R
H
P × W
P ×D×(F +1) denote the encoder output, where t =
1, ..., F + 1 denotes an index over images. We choose zoutput
(1)
and zoutput
(F +1) and concatenate them for the decoder input:
zﬁlter = Concatenate(zoutput
(1)
, zoutput
(F+1) )
(7)
In this way, the decoder only takes as input the feature of
the current observation and the goal image to infer an action,
forming closed loop feedback.
Decoder. We build a pick decoder and a place decoder to
estimate a pick and place point, respectively. The two decoders
have the same architecture. Similar to [25], we consider a
progressive upsampling strategy that alternates convolutional
layers and upsampling operations. The two decoders take zﬁlter
as input, then output a predicted pick heatmap Qpick and a
predicted place heatmap Qplace that have the same size as the
input images. From the two heatmaps, we can get the optimal
pick point and the optimal place point:
ppick = argmaxpQpick(p)
pplace = argmaxpQplace(p)
(8)
Loss. We supervise the whole network using the binary
cross-entropy(BCE) loss between predicted heatmaps Qpick,
Qplace and groud truth heatmaps Qgt
pick, Qgt
place, and compute
the sum of them:
L = BCE(Qpick, Qgt
pick) + BCE(Qplace, Qgt
place)
(9)
C. Implementation Details
We collect training data and evaluate Foldsformer and the
baselines in the SoftGym suite [26], a particle-based simulator
built on Nvidia Flex. In our simulation environment, a top-
down camera provides depth and RGB images of size 224 ×
224, and the cloth is put at the center of the camera view.
Our training data consists of samples generated by random
actions and expert demonstrations. For collecting random
training samples, we ﬁrst generate 1000 random initial con-
ﬁgurations of rectangular cloths whose size and pose are
randomized. Then we collect 6000 trajectories of length 8
using random actions. Inspired by [11], 80% of the random
actions are biased to pick corners, and 20% of the pick actions

MO et al.: FOLDSFORMER: LEARNING SEQUENTIAL MULTI-STEP CLOTH MANIPULATION WITH SPACE-TIME ATTENTION
5
TABLE I. Mean particle distance error (mm) and inference time (sec) on four sequential multi-step cloth manipulation tasks in simulation. The best results
are bolded. We bold the results of Foldsformer (Full Approach) and Foldsformer (NoTimeAttn) in the Double Straight task that have a signiﬁcant overlap.
Approach
Double Triangle
Double Straight
All Corners Inward
Corners Egdes Inward
Inference Time
FabricFlowNet [11]
102.20 ± 19.39
85.34 ± 19.67
33.64 ± 11.76
36.95 ± 9.95
∼0.002
Lee et al. [10]
109.82 ± 39.96
114.71 ± 26.06
27.21 ± 11.47
70.67 ± 22.24
∼0.061
Fabric-VSF [12]
114.62 ± 35.46
116.94 ± 24.52
46.05 ± 23.38
51.82 ± 16.65
∼6.512
Foldsformer (Goal-Conditioned)
93.30 ± 43.35
80.81 ± 38.39
49.46 ± 19.55
56.66 ± 43.25
∼0.007
Foldsformer (NoTimeAttn)
59.86 ± 44.58
60.90 ± 47.52
9.11 ± 3.09
22.97 ± 20.42
∼0.005
Foldsformer (Full Approach)
19.64 ± 17.08
59.09 ± 44.82
3.06 ± 1.83
8.11 ± 7.96
∼0.011
are uniformly sampled over the cloth. We use corner bias
because most sequential multi-step cloth manipulation tasks
tend to pick corners. For collecting expert demonstrations,
we use scripted demonstrator policies to get 100 trajectories
of expert demonstrations per task. In SoftGym, the cloth is
modeled as a grid of particles, and the ground truth position
of each particle can be accessed. Thus, we can easily get the
true corners and script a demonstrator.
In each trajectory, we take a sequence of actions and record
the initial observation o0, actions ai = (p(i)
pick, p(i)
place), and
the next observation oi after action ai, with i = 1, 2, ..., M
denoting an index over actions. Mathematically, a trajectory
T of length M consists of a sequence of observations and
actions:
T = {o0, a1, o1, ..., oM−1, aM, oM}
(10)
To train Foldsformer faster, we split each trajectory whose
length is M into sub-trajectories whose length is K. Let
Si = {oi, ai+1, oi+1, ..., oi+K−1, ai+K, oi+K|i = 0, 1, .., M −
K} denote a sub-trajectory. From a sub-trajectory, we can
get K training samples: the input (oi+j, oi, oi+1, ..., oi+K)
and the action ai+j+1 used to supervise the network with
j = 0, 1, ..., K −1. In this way, we can get (M −K + 1)H
training samples from each trajectory of length M, making
our approach sample-efﬁcient.
In this work, the patch size (P), the embedding vectors’
dimension (D), the number of encoder blocks (L), and the
length of the sub-trajectory (K) are set to 16, 256, 8, 4,
respectively. Each encoder alternates 5 convolutional layers
and 4 bilinear upsampling layers. The kernel sizes, strides,
and ﬁlter sizes of the convolutional layers are [1, 1, 1, 1, 1],
[1, 1, 1, 1, 1], [256, 256, 128, 128, 1], respectively. The scale
factors of the bilinear upsampling layers are set to 2. We train
Foldsformer with a batch size of 32, a learning rate of 0.0001,
and an Adam optimizer [27] for 20 epochs. It takes about 9
hours on an NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU, and the BCE loss drops
to about 0.02.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
A. Simulation Setup
As mentioned in Sec. III-C, we use SoftGym [26] simulator
for training and evaluation. We evaluate Foldsformer and
the baselines on 4 sequential multi-step cloth manipulation
tasks, which can be achieved by 2, 3, 4, and 4 actions,
respectively (see Fig. 3 for details.): (i) Double Triangle;
(ii) Double Straight; (iii) All Corners Inward; (iv) Corners
Edges Inward. We consider 40 different cloth conﬁgurations
per task, combining 10 different sizes and 4 different rotation
angles. For task (i), task (ii), and task (iv), we use square
cloth, the 10 different sizes range from 31.25cm×31.25cm to
36.875cm×36.875cm divided into 0.625cm×0.625cm inter-
vals. For task (ii), we use rectangular cloth, and the 10 different
sizes range from 31.25cm × 27.5cm to 36.875cm × 32.5cm
divided into 0.625cm × 0.5cm intervals. The 4 different
rotation angles are 0◦, 30◦, 45◦and 60◦. Given a sequence
of demonstration sub-goal images where the square cloth
size is 34.375cm × 34.375cm, the rectangle cloth size is
34.375cm × 27.5cm and the rotation angle is 0◦, a policy
needs to perform on all 40 different cloth conﬁgurations. Our
error metric is the mean particle position error between the
cloth states achieved by the policy and a scripted demonstrator
mentioned in Sec. III-C that can access the ground truth
particle positions.
We compare our approach Foldsformer to three previous
state-of-the-art baselines for sequential multi-step cloth ma-
nipulation: FabricFlowNet [11], which learns a ﬂow-based
policy; Lee et al. [10], which uses ofﬂine RL for arbitrary-
goal cloth folding; Fabric-VSF [12], which learns a forward
cloth dynamic model in pixel space and use it for planning.
We adapt FabricFlowNet to a single-arm variant. Although the
original approaches [10], [12] use only a single goal image,
we provide sub-goals for them.
To further evaluate the importance of the components of
our approach, we conduct two ablations in simulation: A
standard goal-conditioned variant of our approach (“Goal-
Conditioned”), which only takes as input the current ob-
servation and each sub-goal separately; An variant of our
approach (“NoTimeAttn”), which removes time attention in
the Foldsformer encoder block described in Sec. III-B.
For each task, we ﬁne-tune our approach, the baselines, and
the ablations with 100 expert demonstrations.
B. Simulation Results
Simulation results can be found in Table. I. Foldsformer
achieves the lowest mean particle error over all tasks and
shows a larger improvement over the baselines. Fig. 3 shows
representative qualitative results on 5 of all 40 different
clothes. As can be seen, even when the size and pose of
the cloth are different from that of the cloth in demonstration
sub-goals, Foldsformer performs all tasks successfully, while
the baselines fail to complete most of the tasks. Although the
inference time1 of Foldsformer is slower than FabicFlowNet
(∼0.002s vs. ∼0.011s), it is still acceptable in real-time
applications.
1The inference time is tested on one machine with Intel i9-9900K CPU
(3.60GHz) and NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080Ti

6
IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS. PREPRINT VERSION. ACCEPTED DECEMBER, 2022
Double Straight
Foldsformer
(Ours)
FabricFlowNet
Lee et al.
Different Initial Configurations & Achieved
Initial
31.25
25
34.375
27.5
30°
45°
60°
Fabric-VSF
27.5
34.375
Sub-goals
Double Triangle
Foldsformer
(Ours)
FabricFlowNet
Lee et al.
Different Initial Configurations & Achieved
Initial
31.25
31.25
34.375
34.375
30°
45°
60°
Fabric-VSF
34.375
34.375
Sub-goals
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
All Corners Inward
Foldsformer
(Ours)
FabricFlowNet
Lee et al.
Different Initial Configurations & Achieved
Initial
31.25
31.25
34.375
34.375
30°
45°
60°
Fabric-VSF
34.375
34.375
Sub-goals
Corners Edges Inward
Foldsformer
(Ours)
FabricFlowNet
Lee et al.
Different Initial Configurations & Achieved
Initial
31.25
31.25
34.375
34.375
30°
45°
60°
Fabric-VSF
34.375
34.375
Sub-goals
Fig. 3. Qualitative Results in Simulation Experiments. We evaluate Foldsformer and the baselines on 4 sequential multi-step cloth manipulation tasks: (a)
Double Triangle. (b) Double Straight. (c) All Corners Inward. (d) Corners Edges Inward.
For the ablations, the “Goal-Conditioned” ablation validates
the signiﬁcance of allowing a policy to access all the sub-goals
together. A policy can capture more instruction information
by accessing all the sub-goals together rather than accessing
them separately. The “NoTimeAttn” ablation demonstrates the
beneﬁts of time attention to leverage the temporal features of
the sub-goal images. Previous approaches input the sub-goals
separately, leading to the loss of these temporal features.
C. Real World Setup
Fig. 4(a) shows the robot system in the real world. We
use a 7-DOF Franka Emika Panda robot arm with a standard
two-ﬁnger panda gripper. The pick and place trajectories are
planned by using MoveIt! [28]. We obtain RGB-D images
from an Intel Realsense D435i camera mounted at the end of
the arm. Before capturing images, the arm moves to a ﬁxed
pose where the camera can capture an effective workspace of
56cm × 56cm. To narrow the gap between simulated depth
images and real-world depth images, we crop the center of
the raw depth images from the camera and segment the cloth
by color-thresholding the background. Similar to [11], we also
add the difference between the simulated surface and the mean
depth of the support surface in the real world to align the
depth between real and simulated depth images. Through these
simple techniques, our approach trained in simulation can be
transferred to the real world successfully without additional
training or domain randomization.
We use 3 square cloths of different size: a 20cm × 20cm
cloth, a 30cm×30cm cloth and a 35cm×35cm cloth. We vary
the pose by placing the cloths in 3 rotation angles (0◦, 30◦,
and 45◦). We also use a T-shirt (50cm × 35cm) and a pair
of shorts (40cm × 32cm) which are unseen during training.
All clothes can be found in Fig. 4. We complete the same
four tasks in simulation using the 3 square cloths. In each
task, given a sequence of demonstration images where the
cloth’s size is 30cm × 30cm, and the rotation angle is 0◦,
Foldsformer should perform the task on all 9 combinations of
Franka Panda Arm
RealSense D435i
Effective 
Workspace
56 cm
Cloth
20 cm
20 cm
30 cm
30 cm
35 cm
35 cm
40 cm
32 cm
50 cm
35 cm
Two-Finger Gripper
(a)
(f)
(d)
(e)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 4. Experimental Setup. (a) Robot system. (b) A 20cm × 20cm cloth.
(c) A 30cm × 30cm cloth. (d) A 35cm × 35cm cloth. (e) A 50cm × 35cm
T-shirt. (f) A pair of shorts (40cm × 32cm).

MO et al.: FOLDSFORMER: LEARNING SEQUENTIAL MULTI-STEP CLOTH MANIPULATION WITH SPACE-TIME ATTENTION
7
Achieved
Sub-goals
All Corners Inward
0°
30°
45°
0°
Achieved
Sub-goals
Double Straight
0°
0°
30°
45°
Sub-goals
Double Triangle
Achieved
0°
0°
30°
45°
Achieved
Sub-goals
Corners Edges Inward
0°
0°
30°
45°
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Achieved
Sub-goals
T-Shirt Folding
Achieved
Sub-goals
Shorts Folding
(f)
Fig. 5. Qualitative Results in Real World Experiments. Foldsformer performs 4 sequential multi-step cloth manipulation tasks on square cloths in the real
world: (a) Double Triangle. (b) Double Straight. (c) All Corners Inward. (d) Corners Edges Inward. Foldsformer also completes a T-shirt folding task and
a shorts folding task where the T-shirt and shorts are unseen cloth shapes during training: (e) T-shirt Folding. (f) Shorts Folding. Pick and place actions are
visualized as red arrows.
different cloth size and pose. We also test the generalization
of Foldsformer by completing a T-shirt folding task and a
shorts folding task where the T-shirt and the shorts (see
Fig. 5) are unseen cloth shapes during training. Similar to
previous works [10], [11], [29], we evaluate the performance
quantitatively by using Mean Intersection over Union (MIoU)
between the cloth masks achieved by Foldsformer and a human
demonstrator and a penalty for wrinkles (WR) that calculates
the fraction of pixels inside the cloth mask detected as edges
by the Canny edge detector [30].
D. Real World Results
Table. II shows the quantitative results, and Fig. 5 shows
part of our representative qualitative results. As can be seen,
Foldsformer performs all the tasks successfully, even when the
cloth’s size and pose differ from the cloth in demonstration
sub-goals. Foldsformer can also generalize to the T-shirt
and shorts, which are unseen during training. By accessing
the complete picture of the task that contains all sub-goals
together, Foldsformer can learn the instruction information
and be robust to the variation of cloth conﬁgurations. Our
encoder enables the instruction information learned from a
general demonstration can guide Foldsformer perform similar
tasks on different cloth conﬁgurations. Hence, only a general
demonstration is required by human demonstration and can
TABLE II. MIoU and mean WR on six sequential multi-step cloth
manipulation tasks in the real world
Task
MIoU
mean WR
Double Triangle
0.885
0.022
Double Straight
0.872
0.035
All Corners Inward
0.911
0.042
Corners Edges Inward
0.923
0.044
T-shirt Folding
0.801
0.106
Shorts Folding
0.676
0.061
be applied to different settings, which is more practical and
efﬁcient than previous approaches. Besides, since the cloth
is often self-occluded and partially observable, providing all
sub-goals together is helpful for an agent to obtain the global
knowledge of a multi-step task and then infer proper chained
actions. Videos of robot executions can be found on our project
website.
V. LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Failure cases in our experiments mainly come from grasping
failures. Since we use a pick-and-place action primitive in
2D pixel space, it’s hard to determine the number of the
grasped cloth layers. This grasp quality is crucial in the real-
world setting, especially for Double Straight and Corners
Edges Inward tasks. Fig. 6 illustrates this failure case. The
cloth size should also be much smaller than the robot arm’s
workspace due to physical reachability limitations. Meanwhile,
the sim-to-real transfer relies on color-thresholding the back-
ground, which is not feasible in some cluttered backgrounds.
Further, although Foldsformer can successfully perform tasks
on clothes of different conﬁgurations with a single general
demonstration, the demonstration sub-goals still need to be
generated by expert demonstrations. In future work, we will try
(a)
(b)
Fig. 6.
Failure Case. Failure cases in our experiments mainly come from
grasping failures. (a) Desired Grasp. The gripper is supposed to grasp one
layer of the towel. (b) Executed Grasp. The gripper grasps two layers of the
towel.

8
IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS. PREPRINT VERSION. ACCEPTED DECEMBER, 2022
to make a fusion of visual information and tactile signals [31]
to improve the grasp quality and reliability. We will also
explore generating the sub-goals automatically.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we present a novel framework named Folds-
former for sequential multi-step cloth manipulation. We utilize
the space-time attention mechanism to capture the instruction
information behind a general demonstration that can guide
Foldsformer complete similar tasks on different cloth conﬁgu-
rations. Experiments results indicate that Foldsformer is effec-
tive and practical for sequential multi-step cloth manipulation
tasks both in simulation and in the real world. Furthermore,
Foldsformer can also generalize to unseen cloth shapes despite
only being trained on rectangular cloths.
