1
IoT-based Route Recommendation for an Intelligent
Waste Management System
Mohammadhossein Ghahramani, Member, IEEE, Mengchu Zhou, Fellow, IEEE,
Anna Molter, and Francesco Pilla
Abstract—The Internet of Things (IoT) is a paradigm char-
acterized by a network of embedded sensors and services.
These sensors are incorporated to collect various information,
track physical conditions, e.g., waste bins’ status, and exchange
data with different centralized platforms. The need for such
sensors is increasing; however, proliferation of technologies comes
with various challenges. For example, how can IoT and its
associated data be used to enhance waste management? In smart
cities, an efﬁcient waste management system is crucial. Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (AI) and IoT-enabled approaches can empower cities
to manage the waste collection. This work proposes an intelligent
approach to route recommendation in an IoT-enabled waste
management system given spatial constraints. It performs a
thorough analysis based on AI-based methods and compare their
corresponding results. Our solution is based on a multiple-level
decision-making process in which bins’ status and coordinates are
taken into account to address the routing problem. Such AI-based
models can help engineers design a sustainable infrastructure
system.
Index Terms—Smart Cities, Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Waste Man-
agement, Route Recommendation, Evolutionary Algorithms, Op-
timization.
I. INTRODUCTION
T
HE world’s population living in urban areas is expected to
continue to grow at a fast pace. Such population growth
can lead to an increasing waste generation. Today, big cities
worldwide face various waste management challenges due to
rapid growth in population and consumption. Generally speak-
ing, waste management consists of different procedures like
garbage collection, transport, processing, waste disposal, and
monitoring [1]. The challenges in this ﬁeld include insufﬁcient
infrastructure for waste collection, lack of ﬁnancial resources,
health issues, and proper waste management planning [2]. In
this work, we deal with waste collection and route optimiza-
tion. A waste management process is explicitly identiﬁed as a
service. It consumes a signiﬁcant portion of a municipality’s
This work was supported by Science Foundation Ireland under Grant
16/IA/4610. The authors would like to acknowledge both Bigbelly and
Futurestreet for providing the data used in this work. For the purpose of
Open Access, the author has applied a CC BY public copyright licence to
any Author Accepted Manuscript version arising from this submission.
M. Ghahramani is with the Spatial Dynamics Lab, University College

M. C. Zhou is with the Helen and John C. Hartmann Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, New Jersey Institute of Technology,

A. Molter is with the Spatial Dynamics Lab, University College Dublin,

F. Pilla is with the Spatial Dynamics Lab, University College Dublin,

operating budget. A considerable amount of this budget goes
on garbage collection and transportation. The scenario seems
to be an unreasonable wastage of resources if bins are collected
while partially ﬁlled up. To deal with this situation, bins should
be built on a microcontroller-based platform to be monitored
effectively. In this way, the information about the status of
bins (i.e., the level of garbage in bins) can be obtained before
dispatching garbage collector vehicles for garbage collection.
The conventional way of collecting garbage is a cumbersome
procedure requiring much individual effort, time, and cost
[3]. Developing new enabling technologies can help alleviate
the situation. Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) has made its way
into different areas, e.g., engineering [4], [5], urban planning
[6], and management [7]. AI-based models are incorporated
in different ﬁelds of study, such as manufacturing, to solve
various problems like process planning, route optimization,
and extracting insights from sensor data [8]–[11]. AI and IoT
technologies can pave the way to develop an efﬁcient system
and automate waste management practices. They offer new
strategies for reducing the cost, and the complexity of waste
management [12].
AI-based approaches like Genetic Algorithm (GA) can be
adopted to increase efﬁciency and reduce cost [13]. Their ap-
plications to waste management can make garbage collection
processes smart. Such methods can substitute traditional ones
for planning routes for waste collection while using fewer
resources in transportation. Route planning in the context of
waste management is deﬁned as the process of identifying
and evaluating the feasibility of routes for collecting garbage
efﬁciently. This process includes different phases, e.g., iden-
tifying pickup locations, clustering locations/bins, measuring
the amounts of waste to be collected, and planning a route [14].
Proposing an efﬁcient and practical waste collection approach
is consistent with the characteristics of a given problem. In this
work, we develop our solution based on the inherent properties
of the concerned problem using Evolutionary Algorithms. The
problem is formulated and modeled based on two different
scenarios, i.e., discrete optimization [15] and continuous one
[16]. Spatial constraints are integrated into the implemented
models. They are employed to address proximity issues to be
explained later. First, we explain how a routing problem is
modeled based on both approaches. Then, we compare them
and show the former (i.e., the proposed discrete optimization
model) can provide a much better solution than the latter.
Finally, different discrete algorithms are compared with the
proposed discrete model to validate the result.
All bins are built on a microcontroller-based platform, em-
arXiv:2201.00180v1  [cs.AI]  1 Jan 2022

2
bedded with sensors informing about the level of garbage using
an Application Programming Interface (API). Our solution
includes several phases. The ﬁrst phase deals with deﬁning
different fullness levels, e.g., 60% capacity of a given bin.
Whenever bins come to this predeﬁned level, they are given
a priority upon their collection. Moreover, those bins whose
capacity does not reach a minimum level (e.g., 20% capacity)
are not considered in the second phase of the algorithm.
It should be mentioned that considering this ﬂexibility can
reduce the complexity of the algorithm signiﬁcantly. The
status of bins is obtained by querying the interface using
API. The second phase concerns planning the best path given
the bins’ status determined in the prior phase. Dealing with
spatial optimization problems is more challenging than non-
spatial ones. Topological constraints should be considered
when solving a spatial optimization problem; in other words,
the physical properties of spatial points and their neighbors
should be considered. The main contributions of an efﬁcient
spatial optimization method include computational efﬁciency,
ﬂexibility, and optimization quality. In line with the mentioned
goals, we propose an approach that improves computational
efﬁciency and achieves much higher optimization quality than
existing ones. The contributions of this work are as follows:
1) An optimized IoT-based model including intelligent ve-
hicle routing strategies coupled with spatial constraints
is proposed to offer promising search capability in a
discrete and continuous domain for waste management.
2) The model can maintain diverse solutions given different
decision-making constraints for sustainability concerns.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: some
related work about the models that have been designed for
waste collection is described in Section II; both implemented
models are discussed in Section III; the experimental settings
and the comparison results are shown in Section IV; and the
future work and conclusions are presented in Section V.
II. RELATED WORK
Recent studies have been focused on different ways to
exploit the opportunities offered by AI and machine learn-
ing due to the limitations of conventional computational
approaches [17]. In environmental engineering, leveraging
IoT sensors has enabled access to data that can be traced
throughout various planning phases, from higher-level strategic
planning processes to lower-level operational planning. AI-
based techniques such as Artiﬁcial Neural Network, multi-
layer perception, Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System, and
Evolutionary Algorithms have been implemented to address air
pollution and emissions reduction [18]–[20]. Moreover, dif-
ferent technologies, such as cloud and edge computing [21]–
[25], are also embedded in today’s urban infrastructures [26]–
[29]. These technologies are used to store and process data
from almost anywhere. They are being adopted across various
enterprises to improve operations and develop better analytics
to enhance decision-making ability. Given these technologies,
intelligent data-driven mechanisms can be developed to enable
authorities to manage waste effectively.
Broadly speaking, route optimization is referred to as an
NP-Hard problem. Therefore, most studies in this context are
based on heuristic and meta-heuristic algorithms [30]–[34].
However, meta-heuristics can provide more robust, effective,
and cost-efﬁcient solutions to multi-objective problems. The
quality of solutions provided by these algorithms is much
higher than those obtained by conventional heuristic ones [35].
Hence, meta-heuristics have received considerable attention
for solving problems. Wy et al. [36] develop a heuristics
method to model a rollon–rolloff waste collection vehicle
routing problem. To do so, they propose a neighborhood
search-based iterative heuristic approach. In [37], a parallel
meta-heuristic approach based on simulated annealing (SA)
is proposed to incorporate asynchronous and synchronous
Markov chains. A residual capacity and radical surcharge
algorithm have been considered to generate an initial solution
for the model; then, local search methods are implemented to
optimize the obtained solution. These models can be compu-
tationally expensive since heuristic and meta-heuristic algo-
rithms are integrated. Wang et al. have introduced a memetic
algorithm with competition to solve the routing problem [38].
Their solution is based on a k-nearest neighbor approach
coupled with a SA strategy. First, they have implemented a
permutation-based method to encode the solution. Then, an
effective decoding method has been constructed. Finally, SA
has been used to ﬁnd optimal routes. Different variants of
the classical SA algorithm have also been adopted for route
optimization in [39], [40]. However, a sequence of collection
tasks has not been considered in these studies. To alleviate
this concern, an optimization problem is solved by using meta-
heuristics such that the number of collection trips is minimized
[41]. The work [41] provides a theoretical model for a routing
problem with the characteristics of full loads and multiple
trips. A traveling salesman problem [42], as a combinatorial
optimization problem, has been considered to model vehicle
routing problems [43], [44]. For these problems, diverse opti-
mal solutions should be provided. GA has been used in waste
management planning to model waste accumulation, facility
siting, and generation [45]. Amal et al. have proposed a GIS-
based Genetic Algorithm for optimizing the route of solid
waste collection. They use a modiﬁed version of the original
Dijkstra algorithm in GIS to generate optimal solutions. They
have also conducted a case study at Sfax city in Tunisia to
validate the performance of their method [46].
Several approaches to route planning for waste management
have been proposed in the literature. Some of them are based
on periodic collection [36]; while in some others, the collec-
tion procedure is done within a speciﬁc time window [39]. Col-
lection approaches can vary according to urban characteristics,
i.e., residential or commercial/industrial areas. In residential
areas, the collection is primarily on a door-to-door basis and
carried out by vehicles passing along the streets to collect
accumulated garbage from households. In commercial dis-
tricts, trucks visit different locations, e.g., designated business
locations like hotels and shopping malls or waste containers in
industrial regions, to collect garbage. Despite the advantages
of the existing models, they are not efﬁcient if used to solve
our concerned problem. They cannot appropriately model the
associations among spatial objects. Effective solutions are
highly dependent on the characteristics of problems to be

3
solved. For example, we deal with proximity issues in this
work. To address such concerns, spatial constraints should
be integrated into our approach. This work aims to present
an efﬁcient approach given the problem characteristics while
addressing all related concerns. It also compares its results
with other methods.
III. WASTE COLLECTION MODELS
The proposed IoT-based model is based on integrated al-
gorithms, including GA and an artiﬁcial neural network. The
associated cost of the model is calculated by incorporating
ANN into the model. Generally speaking, GA consists of
different phases, i.e., parent selection, crossover, mutation,
and creating the ﬁnal population [9]. Parent selection is a
vital phase, consisting of a ﬁnite repetition of various proce-
dures, such as selecting parent strings, recombining strings,
and mutation operations. The reproductive phase’s goal is
to choose cost-efﬁcient individuals from the population and
produce new offsprings for the next generation. An effective
mechanism should be considered to deal with the exploration
and exploitation of an algorithm and avoid premature conver-
gence. The mentioned concerns can lead to a loss of diversity.
An efﬁcient solution should also eliminate the cost scaling
issue and adjusts the selection procedure. All related concerns
have been addressed in this work. We consider a selection
pressure approach and adjust the balance between exploration
and exploitation by recombining crossover operators to adjust
their probabilities. Consequently, individuals are produced
throughout the mating pool by establishing a hybrid roulette
tournament pick operator. A discussion for determining the
exploration and exploitation rate is presented throughout the
paper. Given the proposed model, garbage collectors can be
sent to respective locations to collect garbage based on all bins’
status. The implemented approach is practicable for different
route planning.
A. Spatial Constraints
The information about bins is obtained by querying API
of a waste management company (i.e., Bigbelly bins and
Futurestreet) based in Dublin, Ireland. The model interactively
submits Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) requests, and the
server returns responses. The response contains spatial and
non-spatial information, coordinates of bins in Docklands (i.e.,
a vibrant area in Dublin), and their corresponding fullness
status (Fig. 1). The parameters of HTTP requests such as
API Token, Station IDs, StartTime, and EndTime are also
contained. We deal with spatial characteristics and associated
complexities in this work. Spatial analysis can be much more
challenging than traditional data processing due to the com-
plexity of possible patterns. In such an analysis, observations
should be deﬁned based on spatial relationships, e.g., spatial
adjacency [47]. Different methods (e.g., graph-based, grid
neighbors, K-nearest neighbors, distance-based, and higher-
order methods) deﬁne adjacency for a point or areal data.
Some of these techniques are based on inter-point distances
like k-nearest neighbors, while others are based on neighbors
of areal units. As explained, an effective spatial analysis should
Fig. 1: Querying API to check the status of waste bins.
Fig. 2: Distribution of bins in Docklands, Dublin.
be developed based on such proximity measures. However,
deﬁning adjacency criteria depends on the characteristics of a
given data and relies on the spatial distribution of observations
(e.g., bins together with all related features). The distribution
of bins in Docklands (the area where our concerned bins
are located) is demonstrated in Fig. 2. As can be seen, a
river runs through the area where the bins are located. In
this scenario, deﬁning a neighborhood list is challenging as
ﬁnding shared boundaries among different areal units does
not account for cross-area relationships segregated by bridges.
Those units that are connected by bridges cannot be considered
as neighborhood links. Therefore, we have implemented the
neighborhood list used in the proposed algorithm based on a
graph-neighbor approach to overcome such shortcomings. To
that end, two different graph-based techniques, i.e., Delaunay
triangulation and Gabriel graph methods [48], are used. We
have found that the former results in a more robust outcome.
By deﬁning this proximity measure, bins are automatically
divided into two groups. As illustrated in Fig. 2, two groups
of bins can be separated automatically.

4
B. Spatial Objective Function
Suppose that, at n spatial data points (bins) bi, i ∈1, 2, ..., n,
we observe yi = y(bi). y(bi) is the status of the ith bin. This
vector can be deﬁned as:
Y =

y1, y2, . . . , yn
⊤
(1)
Then, each bi is deﬁned as: bi = (longitude; latitude; Yi;
Ci), including the coordinates of all bins in Docklands, Yi is
the associated percentage of fullness of the ith waste bin bi,
and Ci represents the cluster that the ith bin belongs to. It
is worth mentioning that each bi is implemented as a spatial
data point, consisting of different slots, such as projection-
string, plot-order, and bounding-box. These features are used
for projection purposes. The deﬁned spatial data points are the
objects of Coordinate Reference Systems.
The spatial-weights-matrix W is also deﬁned by considering
all nearby bins as:
W =
wij

n×n
(2)
the weights between pairwise adjacent bins bi and bj satisfy:
wij > 0 for any adjacent bins, and wii=0 for any i.
(3)
Let G = (V, E) be an undirected weighted graph with n
bins, where V = {V1, V2, ..., Vn} is a set of spatial nodes, and
E is a matrix representing connecting edges (indicating the
path between two nodes). i.e.,
E =
Eij

n×n
(4)
where i and j represent bins i and j. The distance among bins
is also considered as the edge’s length (e.g., the weight value of
edge (i, j) is denoted as dij). The desired path (the algorithm’s
objective function) can be formulated as the permutation Θ.
min f(Θ) =
n−1
X
k=1
dΘ(k)Θ(k+1) + dΘ(n)Θ(1)
(5)
where Θ(k) is the kth element of permutation Θ.
Based on the deﬁned list of bins and their pairwise dis-
tances, the aim is to search for the shortest path in a weighted
graph such that each bin is visited exactly once. This problem
is an NP-hard optimization problem and computationally ex-
pensive since the number of permutations of n nodes grows
exponentially with n. Given the nature of this problem, it
is challenging to propose a solution based on determinis-
tic algorithms. Hence, we propose two different approaches
based on meta-heuristic techniques to obtain near-optimal
solutions. The implemented techniques are population-based
models coupled with meta-heuristic search algorithms. Such
approaches enable us to ﬁnd a near-optimal solution within
a reasonable time while avoiding the need for exhaustively
exploring the input space. It should be mentioned that most
studies have been focused on proposing solutions based on a
continuous optimization domain. We aim to ﬁnd an appropriate
algorithm so that it can offer promising search capability and
maintain diverse solutions. Since we deal with a combinatorial
optimization problem, a GA is selected. It should be noted that
some of the evolutionary algorithms, such as Particle Swarm
Optimization (PSO) or covariance matrix adaptation evolution-
ary strategies, are originally proposed for a continuous search
space [49].
GA includes a repetition of different operations sequences,
i.e., parent selection, recombination, and mutation. We imple-
ment two variants of GA (with different genetic operators) in
continuous and discrete cases. We show that the one conduct-
ing for the discrete space performs much better. The models
treat all bins (chromosomes in GA terminology) as bit-strings.
Both models rely on a population of individuals (candidate
solutions) to explore a search space. These candidates are a
set of chromosomes and encoded as strings. The models use an
initial population and genetic operators such as crossover and
mutation. These operations are implemented to produce a new
generation by recombining a population’s chromosomes. Then,
ﬁtter individuals are chosen given an objective function. The
operators are also utilized for exploring and exploiting search
space. It is of great importance to balance the exploration and
exploitation of an algorithm. Exploring the input space is done
to ﬁnd an optimal solution by using a crossover operation.
Besides, a mutation operator is considered to avoid premature
convergence of the algorithm. We have controlled the explo-
ration/exploitation level by a selection pressure parameter (β
in this work). This parameter β is used in the parent selection
phase. All the procedures, iteratively, are repeated until some
termination criteria are met. The best solution (the one with
the minimum cost when the algorithm ends) is then selected.
As explained, the goal is to ﬁnd the best route for waste col-
lection. The ﬁrst step is to deﬁne an initial population. Then,
dynamic crossover and mutation operators are developed. The
deﬁned spatial objective function is used to minimize the
total traveled distance. The procedures are described for both
scenarios next.
C. Implemented Model: Discrete Scenario
In this scenario, a discrete GA coupled with the deﬁned
spatial objective function is implemented. To that end, an
initial population is randomly generated (given the algorithm’s
population size). The cost associated with each chromosome
is measured based on the deﬁned objective function. These
costs should be minimized. The initial population is deﬁned
as individuals, including n-dimensional chromosomes. A path
set (ζ) can be deﬁned as a permutation of n bins.
ζ = (b1, b2, . . . , bn)
(6)
Algorithm 1 represents the way in which the initial popu-
lation is created.
Then, cost-efﬁcient chromosomes from the population are
sorted and selected. A parent selection phase is employed for
creating a new population at each iteration. In the reproduction
phase, permutative crossover and permutative mutation opera-
tors are implemented. These operations are to be explained
later. All the procedures are repeated until a termination
criterion is met. A feasible solution to the problem satisﬁes
the discussed constraints. Let F be the set of all solutions; the
aim is to ﬁnd an optimal one (f ∗∈F) given the cost function.

5
Algorithm 1: Pseudo-code for creating initial popula-
tion given their cost (Discrete Scenario)
Input : Spatial-Data-Frame (b1, b2, .., bn)
Dist ←distance function
Output: cost ←ﬁtness of each permutation
1 n ←number of bins
2 P ←[]
3 ηp ←Size of population
4 L ←0
5 Select bins given their level of fullness
6 #
CostFn
7 for i ←1, ..., ηp do
8
Pi.position ←a random permutation
9
Pi.cost ←calculate cost given:
10
for i ←1, ..., n −1 do
11
cost.append ←cost of each permutation:
12
L = L + Dist(Pi, Pi+1)
13
end
14 end
15
P ←Sort population (P);
16 return initial individuals;
In another word, we are looking for a permutation Θ∗of n
bins (b1, b2, ..., bn) such that:
n
X
k=1
d(bΘ∗(k), bΘ∗(k+1)) ≤
n
X
k=1
d(bΘ(k), bΘ(k+1))
(7)
The cost of each solution is calculated by using an ANN
model. These costs are used for different purposes like parent
selection and then the solution. The objective in the par-
ent selection phase is to select two solutions (with lower
costs) from the population such that newly created offsprings
would inherit their parents’ characteristics. There are different
methods to select parents, e.g., Random Selection, Rank
Selection, Stochastic Universal Sampling (SUS), Tournament
Selection, and Boltzmann Selection. We do not adopt the
Random Selection since it has no selection pressure parameter.
Rank Selection and SUS suffer from premature convergence.
Applying these methods can easily lead to a local optimum.
Instead, we have employed Boltzmann Selection. This method
is inspired by Simulated Annealing and can help maintain a
good diversity. The probability of a solution being chosen is
measured given the below Boltzmann probability:
p(i) =
e−βLi
Pηp
k=1 e−βLk
(8)
where ηp is the size of the initial population, and L is the
deﬁned cost function. β is the selection pressure. Parents are
determined according to probabilities, which are proportional
to the costs calculated earlier. In other words, solutions with
a lower cost are more likely to be selected than those with
a greater one. It is worth mentioning that β is selected, such
that P
i∈H p(i) = 0.7, where H is the set of half of the best
solutions (population is sorted according to their cost values,
and ηp/2 of them are selected). Consequently, the Roulette
Wheel mechanism is implemented for sampling. This process
is repeated until a predeﬁned number of parents are selected.
Therefore, solutions with the greatest cost have a minimal
chance of being chosen. These procedures are described in
Algorithm 2.
After selecting parents, a crossover operation should be
employed. On this basis, the chromosomes of selected par-
ents are combined to create new offspring. We deal with a
combinatorial problem; hence, traditional methods (like one-
point, two-point, and uniform crossovers) for conducting the
crossover operation are not suitable. Two cut points on each
pairwise parent have been considered in order to create a
permutative crossover. The portion after each cut point has
been selected and exchanged (the selected bit strings of the
ﬁrst parent are mapped onto the other parent’s string). All
bits are then checked to ensure there are no conﬂict bits to
guarantee each chromosome is permutation without repetition.
In this way, new offsprings are created. To avoid being
trapped in a local minimum, a mutation operator has been
considered. It also maintains a good diversity in a newly
generated population. Different types of mutation operations
(e.g., insertion, inversion, and swap) have been considered
in our model. Generally, one or more bits of chromosomes
are replaced, such that generated offsprings also maintain
permutation patterns. The pseudo-code realizing the algorithm
operators is given in Algorithm 3.
As stated, the goal is to minimize cost function L. To that
end, an Artiﬁcial Neural Network (ANN) has been integrated
into the model. The model gets the objective function (i.e., L)
as an input. Then, the ANN is used to measure corresponding
cost values in different iterations. Iteratively, different solu-
tions (permutations) are generated and evaluated by GA’s op-
erations. A Levenberg-Marquardt training algorithm consisting
of two layers (15 neurons in the hidden layer) is utilized. It
enjoys adaptive weights with full connectivity among neurons
in the input and hidden layers. All costs are calculated, and the
path is selected such that the corresponding cost is minimized.
D. Implemented Model: Continuous Scenario
In this scenario, we implement GA that leverages random
keys to encode solutions. Despite the method used above
(where a stream of integers is used to represent the order in
which bins are to be visited), in this model, each bit string
in a chromosome is assigned with a random number drawn
uniformly from [0, 1) and sorted in ascending order. Hence,
each solution has two different parts, i.e., an integer part
and a fractional one. The former refers to what we used for
permutation, while the latter indicates random key numbers
assigned to bit strings. The initial population is generated by
creating n chromosomes, where n is the number of bins. Then,
a real number drawn randomly from [0, 1) is given to each bin.
New individuals are spawned in the algorithm’s reproduction
phase given a predeﬁned crossover rate and mutation one.
The procedure realizing the initial population generation is
presented in Algorithm 4.
After the initial population is generated, different operators
are performed for passing the best solutions in the population

6
Algorithm 2: Pseudo-code for ﬁnding an optimal path
(Discrete Scenario)
Input : CostFn,
P ←Initial Population
Output: Optimal Path
1 IMax ←Maximum Iterations
2 θ ←Crossover rate
3 ηc ←Size of crossover (based on θ)
4 ηm ←Size of mutation
5 for i ←1, ..., IMax do
6
#
Crossover operation
7
Pr(s ∈P) =
exp
(−β)∗
Ls
LargestCost
Pηp
k=1 exp
(−β)∗
Lk
LargestCost
8
for i ←1, ..., ηc do
9
Select two parents (γ) based on the RW
function;
10
Generate two offsprins (α);
11
[α(i, 1).position, α(i, 2).position] ←
CrossoverFn(γ1.position, γ2.position)
12
[α(i, 1).cost, α(i, 2).cost] ←
CostFn(γ1.position, γ2.position)
13
end
14
15
#
Mutation operation
16
for i ←1, ..., ηm do
17
Select one parent (γ) based on the RW
function;
18
[α(i).position] ←MutationFn(γ.position)
19
[α(i).cost] ←CostFn(γ.position)
20
end
21
P ←[P, Offsprings, and Mutants];
22
P ←Sort and select ﬁrst ηp individuals;
23
S∗←P(1).position;
24
Cost∗(i) ←P(1).cost;
25 end
26
return optimal path;
to the next generation based on an elitist strategy. First, two
parents are selected, and a parametrized single crossover is
considered for producing two new offsprings. In the deﬁned
crossover, one random position in the array of bits is se-
lected and exchanged. As discussed earlier, after the initial
population is generated, the parent selection operation should
be conducted in the reproduction phase. The objective is to
choose solutions with minimal cost. The cost function and the
ANN used for calculating costs are both the same as those
described in the previous section. The newly added offsprings
inherit bits based on a probability measure discussed earlier.
Second, a mutation operator is implemented to ensure a diverse
population. It should be mentioned that each time a new
solution is generated, it is compared to previous solutions
in the population to make sure no duplicate individuals are
maintained. The maximum number of iterations (the algorithm
termination criterion) is also set to 1000. Algorithm 5 realizes
the elitist strategy in the random-key approach.
Algorithm 3: Pseudo-code for deﬁning the algorithm’s
operators (Discrete Scenario)
Input : Two parents, (γ)
Output: Offsprings
1 Function [O1, O2] = CrossoverFn(γ1, γ2)
2
CrossoverMethod ←{One-Point Crossover}
3
return two offsprings;
4 end
5 Function M = MutationFn(γ)
6
Apply three mutation operators (Swap, Inversion,
and Insertion);
7
Prswap ←probability of using Swap operator;
8
Prinsertion ←
probability of using Insertion operator;
9
Prinversion ←
probability of using Inversion operator;
10
Method ←
RW(Prswap, Prinsertion, Prinversion);
11
switch Method do
12
case 1 do
13
Swap(γ)
14
end
15
case 2 do
16
Insertion(γ)
17
end
18
case 3 do
19
Inversion(γ)
20
end
21
end
22
return mutant;
23 end
Algorithm 4: Pseudo-code for creating initial popula-
tion given their cost (Continuous Scenario)
Input : Spatial-Data-Frame (b1, b2, .., bn)
Dist ←distance function
Output: cost ←ﬁtness of each solution
1 Select bins given their level of fullness
2 n ←number of bins
3 ηp ←Size of population
4 S ←
n uniformly random numbers in the interval (0,1)
5 #
Turn a real vector into a permutation
6 S ←sorted(S)
7 L ←0
8 #
CostFn
9 for i ←1, ..., n −1 do
10
cost.append ←cost of each permutation:
11
L = L + Dist(Si, Si+1)
12 end
13
return solutions and costs;
IV. RESULTS
In this work, we have proposed an optimized IoT-based
waste collection model, including intelligent vehicle routing

7
Algorithm 5: Pseudo-code for ﬁnding optimal path
(Continuous Scenario)
Input : CostFn,
P ←Initial Population
Output: Optimal Path
1 i ←0
2 Randomly initial population (Pi)
3 Evaluate each solution in Pi
4 ηp ←Size of population
5 Repeat
6 for j ←1, ..., ηp do
7
Select two parents from (Pi)
8
Pj = CrossoverFn(P1, P2)
9
Pj = MutationFn(Pj)
10
Pi+1 ←Pj
11 end
12
i ←i + 1
13 return optimal path;
Fig. 3: Comparing the costs of both models in different iterations.
strategies coupled with spatial constraints. The goal is to
present an efﬁcient and practical waste collection approach
given the characteristics of the concerned bins data. Dublin
City Council has partnered with Big Belly Bins to install
110 smart bins across the Dublin Docklands area. All bins
are built on a microcontroller-based platform, embedded with
sensors informing about the level of garbage. These sensors
provide real-time information showing the capacity of each
of the bins. This allows us to see how much waste each
bin contains in terms of percentages, i.e., 60% or 80%. The
proposed IoT-based solution deﬁnes the level of fullness, and
the optimal path is determined. We have proposed two dif-
ferent scenarios based on a hybrid approach. All experiments
are conducted on an 18-core system with 192 GB memory.
Two implemented hybrid meta-heuristic methods (integrated
with ANN) evaluate various solutions to optimize the deﬁned
objective function. The volume of the dataset and the number
of bins are considered for deﬁning the initial population rate.
The number of neurons is designated based on a trial and
error method. Moreover, the volume of the concerned dataset
Fig. 4: Comparing different discrete algorithms.
has been considered in deﬁning the initial population rate.
As stated, the cost of each solution is calculated by using an
ANN model. These costs have been used for different purposes
like parent selection. To that end, a multilayer perceptron
with Levenberg-Marquardt training algorithm has been used
(since it converges faster and more accurately towards our
problem) consisting of two layers of adaptive weights with
full connectivity among neurons in the input and hidden layers.
Note that ANN is only used for cost calculation; hence, we
have not included much information about this phase. The
model queries API, and the information of bins (including
their locations and level of fullness) is obtained. The optimal
route is then detected after a series of iterative computations
(given the termination criterion, e.g., the number of iterations
or computation time). Fig. 3 displays the cost values in each
iteration for both models. As can be seen, the algorithm
based on discrete optimization converges much faster than the
continuous one. The experimental results and the impacts of
different parameter settings for the discrete and continuous
methods are presented in Tables I and II, respectively. We have
also implemented several discrete evolutionary algorithms and
compared their results with the proposed discrete approach.
Fig. 4 reveals the results obtained from different discrete
evolutionary algorithms and shows the effectiveness of our
approach. The suggested paths resulting from both algorithms
are demonstrated in Fig. 5. As can be seen in this ﬁgure,
the second approach (Fig. 5(b)) is trapped in an optimal
local solution. As discussed throughout the paper, the level
of fullness of bins has also been taken into account. When
collectors are dispatched to collect waste, the level of fullness
of bins is monitored. Fig. 6 illustrates the result given such
consideration at a certain time. The level of fullness of bins
depicted in blue in Fig. 6(a) is less than 20%, and 30% for
those in Fig. 6(b). Given all results, we can conclude that the
proposed discrete model is superior to the continuous one.

8
Fig. 5: Results of two implemented models after 1000 iterations, i.e., a) optimal path given the disceret optimization model and b) optimal
path given the continuous optimization model
Fig. 6: Results of the discrete model given two different settings after 1000 iterations: a) the level of bins’ fullness is 20%, b) the level of
bins’ fullness is 30%
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We have proposed an IoT-based model coupled with spatial
constraints to solve a route recommendation problem in this
work. We have modeled and solved the concerned problem
through two different scenarios, i.e., discrete and continuous
optimization approaches. Both methods are validated on a case
study, and the results are compared. Although most studies
have focused on continuous optimization methods, we have
shown that a discrete algorithm is more efﬁcient in dealing
with the problem. The latter can be easily trapped into local
optima. Different types of operators (e.g., permutation-based
crossover and mutation operations) are designed to maintain
diverse candidates during a search operation. We have also
implemented some speciﬁc measures to control the balance
between the exploration and exploitation of both algorithms.
An artiﬁcial neural network is utilized to calculate the as-
sociated cost in each iteration of the algorithms. Different
discrete methods are also compared with our proposed discrete
approach to validate the efﬁciency and effectiveness of the
proposed model, and the results are illustrated. The main
drawback of the state-of-the-art is that it cannot appropriately
model the associations among spatial objects, consequently
ﬁnd an optimal route. The proposed model can enable us to
ﬁnd an optimal solution within a reasonable time. It should
be mentioned that the model can recommend multiple routes.
A driver can then select the most favorable route from the
suggested ones. In this work, we only obtain information about
bins that are located in Docklands. As a part of our future
work, we plan to consider all bins in Dublin.
