1
Towards Neural Knowledge DNA 
Haoxi Zhang 1, Cesar Sanin 2, Edward Szczerbicki 3, 
1 Chengdu University of Information Technology, Chengdu, China 
2 The University of Newcastle, NSW, Australia 
3 Gdansk University of Technology, Gdansk, Poland 

Abstract: In this paper, we propose the Neural Knowledge DNA, a 
framework that tailors the ideas underlying the success of neural networks 
to the scope of knowledge representation. Knowledge representation is a 
fundamental field that dedicate to representing information about the world 
in a form that computer systems can utilize to solve complex tasks. The 
proposed Neural Knowledge DNA is designed to support discovering, 
storing, reusing, improving, and sharing knowledge among machines and 
organisation. It is constructed in a similar fashion of how DNA formed: 
built up by four essential elements. As the DNA produces phenotypes, the 
Neural Knowledge DNA carries information and knowledge via its four 
essential elements, namely, Networks, Experiences, States, and Actions. 
 
 
___________________________________________ 
Keywords: Neural Knowledge DNA, Neural Networks, Knowledge 
Representation. 

 
2
INTRODUCTION 
Knowledge representation is a fundamental field that dedicate to representing 
information about the world in a form that computer systems can utilize to solve 
complex tasks (Davis et al. 1993). It is the study of thinking as a computational process. 
Then, what is knowledge? This is a question that has been discussed by philosophers 
since the ancient Greeks, and it is still not totally demystified. Drucker P. F. (2011) 
defines it as “information that changes something or somebody - either by becoming 
grounds for actions, or by making an individual (or an institution) capable of different 
or more effective action”. While the Oxford Dictionary (2015) defines Knowledge as 
“facts, information, and skills acquired through experience or education; the 
theoretical or practical understanding of a subject”. O'Dell and Hubert (2011) claim 
that Knowledge is not knowledge until the information inside itself has been taken and 
used by people. And for scientists and researchers in the AI field, we can argue it as 
“knowledge is not knowledge until the information inside itself has been taken and 
used by computers, machines, and agents”.  
Consequently, a good knowledge representation shall easy to be used by different 
systems to allow storing, reusing, improving, and sharing knowledge among these 
systems. A survey carried out by Liao (2003) found that there were generally seven 
categories of knowledge-based technologies and applications developed until 2002. In 
another study (Matayong & Mahmood 2012), after analysing 30 published articles 
between 2003 and 2010 from high quality journals, found nine core theories in the 

 
3
knowledge-based area. However, there are limitations to these technologies: most of 
them are designed for one specific kind of product; they don‟t have standard knowledge 
presentation; most systems lack the capability for information sharing and exchange 
and most of these systems only focus on supporting a particular stage of a product 
lifecycle (Li, Xie, & Xu 2011). 
Recent studies (LeCun et al. 2015; Gallant 2015; Lescroart et al. 2013) in artificial 
neural networks (ANN) and psychology have found that the image representations in 
ANN are very similar to those in bio brains; which inspires us that why do not organise 
and store knowledge as or close to the way how it exists in the human brain?  
In this paper, we propose the Neural Knowledge DNA (NK-DNA), a framework 
adapting ideas underlying the success of neural networks to the scope of knowledge 
representation for neural network-based knowledge discovering, storing, reusing, 
improving, and sharing. 
THE NEURAL KNOWLEDGE DNA 
The Neural Knowledge DNA (NK-DNA) is designed to store and represent the 
knowledge captured by its domain. It is constructed in a similar fashion of how DNA 
formed (Sinden 1994): built up by four essential elements. As the DNA produces 
phenotypes, the Neural Knowledge DNA carries information and knowledge via its 
four essential elements, namely, States, Actions, Experiences, and Networks (Figure 1.).  

 
4
 
Figure 1. Structure of the NK-DNA 
The NK-DNA‟s four-element combination is also inspired by reinforcement 
learning and Markov Decision Processes (Sutton & Barto 1998; Michael 2015): States 
are situations in which a decision or a motion can be made or performed, Actions are 
used to store the decisions or motions the domain can select. While Experiences are 
domain‟s historical operation segments with feedbacks from outcomes, which stored as 
et = (st, at, rt, st+1) at each time-step t. And Networks store the detail of neural networks 
for training and using such knowledge, such as network structure, deep learning 
framework used (if a third-party deep learning framework is used, like MxNet, Caffe, 
etc.), and weights. Figure 2 shows a concept of the NK-DNA-carried knowledge. 

 
5
 
Figure 2. Concept of the NK-DNA-carried knowledge 
INITIAL EXPERIMENT  
We examined our NK-DNA in a very simple maze problem. The NK-DNA supported 
the agent to store the knowledge of the maze (Figure 3.).  
In this initial experiment, the agent is expected to find the shortest path to block 8 
from block 1. And the agent uses reinforcement learning (Sutton & Barto 1998; 
Michael 2015) and ANN to learn the maze.  

 
6
 
Figure 3.  The very simple maze 
 
First, the States and Actions are pre-defined, for example, there are 8 states, and for 
state 1, the agent can either “go to block 2” or “go to block 4” (i.e. the actions of state 
1). Then, the agent starts from state 1, and randomly picks an action of its current state 
to explore the maze as long as it reaches the state 8, and the agent gets a reward for 
reaching state 8. Meanwhile, the agent stores every single movement (i.e. from one 
state to another state) with reward from it as an Experience (st, at, rt, st+1) during its 
exploring of the maze, and perform gradient descent to train the neural network that 
indicates how wise an action is for a state. For more information about algorithms and 
methods used in the agent, please refer to works (Lillicrap et al., 2016; Mnih et al., 
2015). Finally, after exploring the maze, the agent is trained, and its knowledge about 
the maze is stored in the NK-DNA as Actions, States, Experiences, and Networks. This 
allows the agent for sharing and reusing such knowledge in the future.  

 
7
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we proposed the Neural Knowledge DNA, a framework adapting ideas 
underlying the success of neural networks to knowledge representation for neural 
network-based knowledge discovering, storing, reusing, improving, and sharing. By 
taking advantages of neural networks and reinforcement learning, the NK-DNA stores 
the knowledge learnt through domain‟s daily operation, and provides an easy way for 
future accessing, reusing, and sharing such knowledge. At the end of this paper, we 
tested our proposal idea in an initial experiment, and the results show that the NK-DNA 
is very promising for knowledge representation, reuse, and sharing among neural 
network-based AI systems. 
For further work, we will do: 1) Refinement and further development of the Deep 
Learning Engine; 2) Further design and development of the NK-DNA framework, 
especially, for supporting a range of third-party deep learning frameworks; 3) 
Exploring and developing methods for reasoning tasks.
