Empirical learning aided by weak domain 
knowledge in the form of feature importance 
 
Ridwan Al Iqbal 
Department of Computer Science 
American International University Bangladesh 
Dhaka, Bangladesh 

Abstract 
Standard hybrid learners that use domain knowledge require stronger 
knowledge that is hard and expensive to acquire. However, weaker domain 
knowledge can benefit from prior knowledge while being cost effective. 
Weak knowledge in the form of feature relative importance (FRI) is 
presented and explained. Feature relative importance is a real valued 
approximation of a feature’s importance provided by experts. Advantage of 
using this knowledge is demonstrated by IANN, a modified multilayer 
neural network algorithm. IANN is a very simple modification of standard 
neural network algorithm but attains significant performance gains. 
Experimental results in the field of molecular biology show higher 
performance over other empirical learning algorithms including standard 
backpropagation and support vector machines. IANN performance is even 
comparable to a theory refinement system KBANN that uses stronger 
domain knowledge. This shows Feature relative importance can improve 
performance of existing empirical learning algorithms significantly with 
minimal effort. 
 
1 
Introduction 
Empirical learning methods are the dominant methods for supervised learning problems. But 
these methods are dependent on significant amount of training data and training time to 
perform well. Furthermore, It has been shown [1] that learning algorithms simply refine the 
knowledge provided through the inductive bias in the algorithm. So, a learner only learns 
what it already knows with a better accuracy. Therefore, providing more prior knowledge 
greatly improves performance. A learner’s learned model will also usually be much more 
comprehensible if the learner takes existing knowledge into account [2]. 
There has been extensive research to combine prior knowledge into learning algorithms (e.g. 
TangentProp [3], FOCL [4], RAPTURE [5], KBANN [6], KSVM [7]). Different systems use 
different forms of prior knowledge. Many of them use propositional logic such as KBANN. 
Eccentric forms of prior knowledge have also been used such as, derivatives of instances in 
TangentProp [3]; Certainty factors in RAPTURE [5]. However, the use of these hybrid 
systems has not been prevalent in real world applications. 
The main reason for this is the high cost and difficulty of obtaining domain knowledge [8] 
[9] . The prior knowledge needed in these systems is “deep” and extensive; in fact, they are 
called theory refinement systems; for they essentially refine an existing domain theory. Such 
domain theories are sufficient to classify instances on their own in many cases. This means 
much more resources and expertise are required to acquire such deep prior knowledge. But 

such deep prior knowledge may not be available or cost effective in many problem domains. 
However, we propose that incorporating a “weaker”/“shallow” form of domain knowledge 
may benefit learning by providing the best of both plain empirical and hybrid theory 
refinement systems. 
Weaker knowledge-based learners should have the following capabilities: Firstly, they 
should be superior to plain empirical systems in terms of classification accuracy if given the 
same training set. Secondly, they should be equally accurate to the empirical systems with 
smaller training set or training time. Moreover, the domain knowledge should be acquirable 
with much less expertise and over wider problem types. 
This paper introduces Feature relative importance (FRI) as a form of weaker/shallow prior 
knowledge. The idea is to weight features according to their importance or contribution in 
the classification. There are already feature selection and ranking algorithms available e.g. 
[10] [11] [12]. However, these algorithms are only preprocessors that select and modify a 
dataset, discarding irrelevant features. However, it cannot be concluded that the other 
dimensions are unimportant: a different (possibly even disjoint) subset of features may yield 
the same predictive accuracy. The actual learning algorithms do not take the importance of 
attributes into account after feature selection and consider all features to be equally 
important. Knowledge about importance can be used to guide through the search space and 
achieve faster and better learning.  
Feature relative importance represents importance of features as a real valued normalized 
weight in the [0, 1] range. Human experts can provide feature importance much easier than 
stronger domain theories.  So, knowledge acquisition will also be cheaper and faster.  
We then present the IANN (Importance aided Neural Network) algorithm to demonstrate the 
benefit of FRI in empirical learning and show its superior performance compared to ordinary 
Multilayer neural networks. IANN is a simple modification of the standard neural network 
learning procedure but attains much higher performance. Briefly, IANN algorithm uses FRI 
initialize the NN and then uses a modified form of Backpropagation to train the network.  
In the subsequent section, IANN is applied in the real world domain of molecular biology, 
specifically the problem of recognizing eukaryotic splice junctions and promoter genes. The 
performance is analyzed and compared with many popular learning algorithms as well as 
hybrid learning systems. It is shown that IANN performs better than plain empirical systems 
such as neural networks, C4.5 and support vector machines. In fact, IANN performs 
comparable to KBANN which uses a much stronger prior knowledge about the domain. 
Brief outline of the paper: Section 2 provides an explanation of FRI, section 3 describes the 
IANN while section 5 describes the experimental results. Section 5 concludes the paper. 
We now describe the notation used in this paper. Ik, is used to refer the FRI of a feature Ak. A 
represents the set of all features in the data set S of a learning model L. Neural network 
weights are represented by wij which is the weight of the connection going from unit i to unit 
j. 
j represents the error of unit j; , learning rate,  Xij, the input between an unit i to unit j. 
Layerk or Lk is the set of units of layer k, where k is 1 for the first hidden layer; Inputs(k) is 
the set of all units that is input to k. U is the set of all network units. 
 
2 
Feature relative importance 
2.1 
Feature relative importance formalism 
Feature importance is provided by experts in our algorithm. But we must define what we 
mean by importance before we can use that knowledge. Importance is defined in terms of a 
feature’s influence on a trained learner. A trained learner can be represented by a real valued 
scoring function 
 where, 
 is the input vector. There are many measures of 
feature importance provided in the feature selection and ranking domain e.g. sensitivity 
analysis [13]; FIRM [14]; saliency [11]. It generally depends on the domain; different 
definitions may be more appropriate depending on one's goals. Our definition is based on 
[14]. 

Definition 1: Feature importance of a feature Ik*, is a representation of the total 
dependency of the learned model  on the feature Ak  A to make a decision on a particular 
instance. 
 Ik* ( Ak , )    dk     
 
 
 
 (1) 
We have to define the term “dependency” that we just used to define Feature importance. 
The exact definition will vary based on the learning model. But a general definition is: 
Definition 2: Dependency dk is the expected score of learner’s score function y conditional 
only to the feature Ak given a input vector X: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
FRI is just a normalized approximation of Feature importance made by human experts. So, 
we can now define FRI. 
Definition 3: Feature relative importance Ik is a normalized approximation of actual 
importance of a feature Ak relative to feature set A on the learning problem L . Feature 
relative importance Ik is defined as: 
 Ik ( A, Ak , L ): Ik 
 
We can deduce the following relationship: 
  
 
 
Ik  Ik*  
 
 
 
 
(2) 
Thus from (1) & (2): 
 
            
           Ik  dk 
 
 
 
 
 
(3) 
One important aspect of importance is that, FRI is a ratio. So, the knowledge comes from the 
variation in importance, not the absolute value of importance itself. A feature set with all 
features having FRI value of 1 is equivalent to a feature set having FRI value of 0.2 on all 
features. As long as the ratio is maintained between highly important and unimportant 
features, the value of FRI can be set arbitrarily.  
FRI is a weak knowledge because apart from importance, no straight forward relationship 
between features and the actual learned model can be deduced from FRI. Human experts can 
point out the importance of a feature more easily than other forms of prior knowledge. So, it 
has less costly knowledge acquisition step than other theory refinement systems. 
An example problem about “suitable weather conditions for play” is presented below to 
explain how FRI is used to represent an expert’s knowledge about a feature’s importance. 
 
2.2  
Playing condition example problem 
This example problem has 7 features: sky, temperature, humidity, wind, date, season and 
traffic. We determine the importance of these features through intuition. 
 
Table 1: Playing conditions problem feature importance to FRI conversion 
Feature 
Importance FRI  
Sky 
Medium 
0.7 
Temperature High 
1.0 
Humidity 
High 
1.0 
Wind 
Medium 
0.7 
Date 
Irrelevant 
0 
Road traffic 
Irrelevant 
0 
Season 
Low 
0.3 
  
As we can see in Table 1, the actual FRI values are a matter of choice. The features Sky and 
Wind have medium importance but they are not given the value of 0.5. Any alternate set of 

FRI values can also be chosen as long as the difference is maintained between features. 
Important features should have highest values while less-important features should have 
lower values. 
In the subsequent section we present the IANN algorithm that uses FRI domain knowledge. 
 
3 
The IANN algorithm 
3.1  
Introduction  
For an empirical learner, domain knowledge is normally used to tailor the bias that is 
otherwise provided through randomization or experimentation. Feed forward neural 
networks are provided bias in mainly three ways: the network topology, initial weights and 
the training algorithm used [15]. Network topology is usually set through experimentation; 
training algorithm popularly used is Backpropagation while network weights are normally 
initialized randomly.  
IANN modifies normal multilayer perceptrons (MLP) by modifying weight initialization 
step and the training rule. Currently, we have not been able to find a way to tailor network 
architecture with FRI that actually improves performance. Importance is weak domain 
knowledge so it may not provide any insight about network topology. As a result, topology 
still must be selected by users in the traditional ways and must be fully connected.  
We want to modify MLP using FRI, but the question is, “How the importance of a feature 
affects a particular network?” To answer this question, dependency for neural networks is 
defined. We know from definition 2 that the dependency is the output of the scoring function 
conditional only to the particular feature. The output function [15] of a single hidden layer 
neural network is: 
 
Thus, for a neural network which is a real valued non-linear function, dependency 
corresponds to the partial derivative of output function yk with respect to Ak:  
Definition 3: Dependency dk of feature Ak on a neural network N is the partial derivative of 
y with respect to feature value xk of a feature Ak. 
 
 
This computation of dependency is straight forward for a linear learner such as perceptron, 
as the dependency on a feature is simply its weight. However, as the number of layers 
increase, the dependency gets distributed into the weights of higher layers and finding a 
straight forward dependency becomes difficult. The derivative of (4) is:  
 
Where, 
 
 
Thus, the derivative depends on the current input to the network as well as the network 
weights. It has been shown that the computation of the derivative is np-complete [11]. 
Trying to use this particular formulation to influence neural networks through FRI is not a 
plausible choice. We instead use an assumption that higher dependency on a feature means 
higher average absolute weight on the first hidden layer that is directly connected to the 
input. Thus from (3) & (5) we can come to this following intuition which forms the basis of 
our algorithm: 
Intuition 1: In a feed forward network, Feature relative Importance of a feature is 
proportional to its average absolute weight on a trained network. 

 
 
Clearly, this intuition is not correct in several cases. The relationship between importance 
and weight gets complex as more layers are added and the neural network gets more 
expressive power. Moreover, weights are not necessarily a proper measure of importance. In 
fact, by multiplying any feature of the inputs by a positive scalar and dividing the associated 
weight by the same scalar, the importance of the corresponding feature can be changed 
arbitrarily. However, experimentation has shown that our intuition works on many cases. So, 
this is a viable assumption. 
From this intuition we can suppose that feature with higher FRI value should have more total 
weight in the first network layer that is directly connected with inputs; as that is the only 
layer where features have a direct role. Therefore, the focus of IANN is this layer. The 
training rule and weight initialization step are changed in IANN from ordinary MLP. They 
are explained in the next subsections. 
 
3.2  
IANN training rule 
Based on intuition 1, features with higher FRI values should not only have higher total 
weights, but they should also be more “active” while training; that is, these features should 
have more weight change while training. IANN provides more “chance” to more important 
layers to change weights by providing them with a higher learning rate.  
The general Backpropagation training rule [16] is as follows: 
 
ij = 
j Xij ; i 
 Inputsj , j  U; 
IANN provides a learning rate proportional to the FRI value. This is done by multiplying 
FRI value into delta weight. The training rule changes only for the units of the first Layer. 
 
ij = 
j Xij Ii ;      i  Inputsj , j  Layer1 ; 
However, this rule can be extended to all units by setting Ik to be 1 for all hidden and output 
layer units. This simplifies implementation of the training rule. The updated training rule 
becomes, 
 
ij = 
j Xij Ii ;     i 
 Inputsj , j  U; 
Due to this rule, important features will converge to local optimum faster while unimportant 
features will take more time to change weights. However, as unimportant features have 
proportionally less weight in a trained network from our intuition; this means a smaller 
learning rate is sufficient for convergence. Moreover, weight initialization will also have 
higher probability to set smaller weights into unimportant features. So, they have to make 
fewer changes into their weights. 
 
3.3 
Weight initialization 
Weight initialization in IANN is similar to normal MLP except in the first hidden layer; 
where it is done in such a way so that important features have larger weight while less 
important features have lower weight. This can be usually done by simply setting the weight 
to be FRI and perturbing with a random number. However, testing has shown this to be 
ineffective. This is due to the fact that, this generates a general pattern of weight in all 
hidden layer units; larger weights in all important unit weights, while smaller weights in all 
unimportant units. Intuition 1 says only the average absolute weight will be proportional to 
FRI not the weights of all units. The power of hidden layers comes from the variation in 
initial weights. Thus, this simple weight initialization method sacrifices variation and also 
performance. So, we developed a new method of weight initialization that is based on our 
intuition and also improved performance.  

First, a random number of features are selected for each of the units of the first hidden layer. 
The connection between these features and the unit is set to the FRI value with a randomly 
set sign. Other feature weights of the unit are set to a random number just like ordinary 
Multilayer perceptrons, but the range is half of that of the selected features. So, if the range 
of value for the selected features is [-1,1], the range for other features is [-0.5,0.5]. This 
ensures higher weight for features with FRI greater than 0.5. The weights of other layers are 
set randomly just like normal neural networks. IANN only modifies the first layer weight 
initialization procedure. 
 
Table 2: IANN weight initialization 
Goal: Set the weights of connections of Layer1 based on FRI 
Require: FRI I1….In 
1. 
For  unit j  Layer1 do 
2. 
     c = random number [0, n]; select c number of features randomly into Fs. 
3. 
     For k   feature set A  do 
4. 
          If k   Fs 
5. 
              Set 
ij to Ik randomchoose(1,-1) 
6. 
         Else 
7. 
               Set 
ij to random number[-0.5,0.5]  
8. 
     End for 
9. 
End for      
 
This procedure ensures some features get the FRI value as their initial weight in each hidden 
layer units but not all. The variation of initial weights is maintained while important features 
do have higher average initial weights. Only few features get “promoted” or “demoted” 
based on FRI while others have random weights. 
 
4 
Experimentation with IANN 
4.1  
Introduction and setup 
This section reports the experimental results of using IANN which attains significant higher 
performance while being a simple modification. This is due to the benefit of using weak 
prior knowledge. Two real world problems of DNA analysis [6] were experimented 1
16
. We 
compared the datasets with several popular learning algorithms: standard backpropagation 
MLP [
], C4.5 [17], k-nearest neighbour [18] and support vector machines [19]2
6
. We also 
compared IANN with the theory refine system KBANN [ ]. 
The first dataset is the promoter recognition dataset. A promoter, which is a short DNA 
sequence that precedes a gene sequence, is to be distinguished from a nonpromoter. The 
input is a sequence of 57 nucleotides (one of A, T, G or C). The dataset has 936 instances 
with 236 positive and 702 negative examples.  
The second dataset is about splice-junction determination. This is a 3 class problem; the task 
is to determine into which of the three categories the specified DNA sequence belongs: 
Exon/Intron borders (EI), Intron/Exon borders (IE) or neither. The input is also a DNA 
sequence with 60 nucleotides. The dataset had 1007 instances selected randomly from a 
population of 3190. The percentage split of the classes is 25% EI, 25% IE & 50% neither 
                                                          
1 The datasets are available at ftp://ftp.cs.wisc.edu/machine-learning/shavlik-group/datasets/ 
2 Weka 3.6.2 (www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/) implementations of the empirical learning algorithms were used in 
the experiments. 

examples. We employed the 10-fold cross validation methodology for both datasets.  
A prior knowledge of propositional rules is also present with both datasets. We constructed 
the FRI for the datasets using these rules as a basis to recognize the important features. The 
features that are antecedent in more number of rules are given higher importance. The FRI 
given to these important features are 0.9, 0.8 and so on based on importance; while features 
that are not mentioned in any of the rules are given a low FRI of 0.3. This importance 
distribution is also similar to what found by [20]. The topology for the network is a single 23 
unit hidden layer for the promoter dataset and 24 units for the splice-junction dataset. This 
topology generalizes as well as, or better than, all others we tried during a search of 
topology space. 
The ordinary backpropagation NN had the same network topology as IANN . KBANN used 
the propositional rules as the domain theory. For the SVM, linear (u*v) kernel was found to 
be the most effective. For both IANN and ordinary NN, the network was trained for 100 
epochs and no validation set was used. 
 
4.2  
Results 
Table 3: (a) promoter dataset performance;       (b) Splice-junction dataset performance 
Learner 
Correctness (%) 
IANN 
94.97 
Backpropagation 
93.45 
SVM 
89.74 
C4.5 
89.95 
Near. N. (k=3) 
90.49 
KBANN 
93.70 
Learner 
Correctness (%) 
IANN 
94.83 
Backpropagation 
93.23 
SVM 
88.77 
C4.5 
90.86 
Near. N. (k=20) 
87.28 
KBANN 
93.68 
 
It is apparent from the results that IANN outperforms other empirical algorithms and 
unexpectedly, it even outperforms KBANN in both datasets. IANN outperforms standard 
backpropagation learner even though IANN is a very simple adjustment of the standard 
algorithm.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Learning curve for splice-junctions 
The advantage of FRI prior knowledge can be more clearly evident by the splice-junctions 
learning curve in Figure 1.  The splice junction set with full population of 3190 instances 
was used in this experiment. The training examples were randomly selected from the 
population while remaining instances became test examples. Error rate of ordinary 
0
15
30
45
60
75
0
100
200
300
400
500
IANN
KBANN
BackPropagation
Percent Error on test set
Number of training examples
500
1000 1500 2000

backpropagation and KBANN were plotted for a comparison between the no knowledge, 
weak knowledge and strong knowledge learner. The results of KBANN and backpropagation 
were acquired from an earlier experiment [21].  
 
We can see that KBANN learns the fastest with fewer examples in beginning. However, 
IANN quickly reaches KBANN within 100 training examples and continues to be better. An 
interesting trend is both knowledge aided algorithms reach an optimum performance and 
then the error rate actually climbs. But Backpropagation follows a decreasing trend 
throughout before reaching an error rate of 5.5%. IANN achieves the best performance of 
4.3% for 1000 examples.  
 
5 
Conclusion and future directions 
We have proposed a simple and efficient procedure of incorporating feature importance into 
neural network learning. The performance of such a learner shows feature importance aided 
learners can achieve superior performance over ordinary empirical learners and can even 
compare to stronger knowledge based learners without having the extra cost of a deep 
domain theory. This approach of incorporating feature importance into learners is worthy of 
further development. Possible future applications maybe areas where expert knowledge is 
not readily available and there is a scarcity of training data as well. IANN can be used in 
such domains with both fewer training data and expert knowledge. Furthermore, 
Modifications of existing popular empirical learners should also be developed that utilize 
feature importance. Currently it is assumed that feature importance knowledge provided by 
experts is almost correct to some extent. However, if its accuracy is questionable then 
performance will actually degrade. So, a learning algorithm can be developed that can 
correct FRI knowledge through training examples. 
Current machine learning algorithms rely too much on training examples. Incorporating 
more and more domain knowledge is the way for improvement. Our proposed method can be 
a stepping stone towards that goal for domains where deep knowledge is not available or 
cost effective.
