arXiv:1901.04824v1  [stat.OT]  14 Jan 2019
Approaching Ethical Guidelines for Data
Scientists
Ursula Garzcarek
Cytel Inc, Clinical Research Services ICC
Route de Pré-Bois, 20 C.P. 1839, 1215 Geneva 15, Switzerland

Detlef Steuer
Helmut-Schmidt-Universität, Universität der Bundeswehr Hamburg
Holstenhofweg 85, 22043 Hamburg, Germany

Last updated January 16, 2019
The goal of this article is to inspire data scientists to participate in the debate on
the impact that their professional work has on society, and to become active in public
debates on the digital world as data science professionals. How do ethical principles
(e.g., fairness, justice, beneﬁcence, and non-maleﬁcence) relate to actual situations
in our professional lives? What lies in our responsibility as professionals by our
expertise in the ﬁeld? More speciﬁcally this article makes an appeal to statisticians
that may consider themselves not as data scientists, nor what they do as data science,
to join that debate, and to be part of the community that establishes data science
as a proper profession in the sense of Airaksinen [28], a philosopher working on
professional ethics. As we will argue, data science has one of its roots in statistics
and at the same time extends beyond it. To shape the future of statistics, and to take
responsibility for the statistical contributions to data science, statisticians should
actively engage in the discussions.
In Section 1 the term data science is deﬁned, and the technical changes that have
led to a strong inﬂuence of data science on society are outlined. In Section 2.1
the systematic approach from [39] is introduced. Along the lines of that approach
prominent examples are given for ethical issues arising from the work of data
scientists. In Section 3 we provide reasons why data scientists should engage in
shaping morality around data science and to formulate codes of conduct and codes
of practice for data science professionals. In Section 4 we present established ethical
guidelines for the related ﬁelds of statistics and computing machinery. Section 5
1

describes necessary steps in the community to develop professional ethics for data
science. Finally in Section 6 we motivate our own engagement and give our starting
statement for the debate: Data science is in the focal point of current societal
development. Without becoming a profession with professional ethics, data science
will fail in building trust in its interaction with and its much needed contributions to
society!
1 Deﬁnition of data science, the roots and the changing role
We start with the deﬁnition of data science as given by Donoho which we ﬁnd very useful. We
will describe how data science relates to statistics and machine learning and why the role of a
data scientists in society is becoming increasingly important.
1.1 Deﬁnition of data science
There is currently no generally agreed deﬁnition of data science. Here we use the deﬁnition of
Donoho [1] of greater data science:
Data science is the science of learning from data; it studies the methods involved in the analysis
and processing of data and proposes technology to improve methods in an evidence-based
manner. The scope and impact of this science will expand enormously in coming decades as
scientiﬁc data and data about science itself become ubiquitously available.
Donoho also provides a classiﬁcation of the related activities into six divisions:
1. Data gathering, preparation, and exploration,
2. data representation and transformation,
3. computing with data,
4. data modeling,
5. data visualization and presentation,
6. science about data science.
Items 1 to 5 describe the work of a data scientist, item 6 diﬀerentiates what he calls greater data
science from data science.
1.2 Relation of data science, statistics and artiﬁcial intelligence
The lack of an agreed deﬁnition of data science is a symptom of a larger problem: it is not (yet)
a profession of its own. Some see it as subdivision of machine learning, and thus a subdivision
of artiﬁcial intelligence, others as subdivision of statistics, that is exploratory statistics, and
many see it as a collection of methods from both statistics and machine learning, used by people
of diﬀerent professional backgrounds, or people with no actual professional background only
trained in the application of those methods, without the necessary formal scientiﬁc education.
By starting with the deﬁnition of Donoho (sec. 1.1) we already make two statements:
2

1. Data science should become a profession in the sense of Airaksinen [28], with a deﬁnition,
a grounding in science, and a task and responsibility in society, and
2. exploratory statistics is a historical predecessor of data science.
With respect to the second point, we do not claim exploratory statistics to be the only predecessor
of data science. With the same right, people from the artiﬁcial intelligence community can see
machine learning as a historical predecessor of data science. Therefore, we want the machine
learning and artiﬁcial intelligence community to work together with the statistics community on
the ﬁrst point.
1.3 The changes of the societal impact of data science
The biggest, relatively recent changes in practical data science are the availability of vast amount
of data together with the increase in computational power. Technically speaking this enables
fast, low-cost processing of ever-changing large data bases by algorithms to derive continuously
updated highly condensed and aggregated data, i.e. results. These results can be fed into human
decision making, that is based on the interpretation and understanding of the results, or they can
be used in rules for automatic decision making. Whether or not, at least interim, the decisions
are made with human understanding of the results and how they were generated, distinguishes
black-box algorithms from other algorithms.
Focus of this article are the consequences of processing and analysing vast amounts of data
about humans and human behaviour.
Todays possibilities in these respects change human
interaction and thus society directly and fundamentally. Examples for this broad claim will be
given in subsequent sections.
As data science is the focal point of these developments the role of data scientists in soci-
ety becomes more inﬂuential and important. With increased inﬂuence and importance comes
increased responsibility.
2 Ethical issues in data science
The awareness that data science and its algorithms have an increased and fundamental impact on
society is vivid around the world. There are ongoing or starting discussions in many countries
and organisations in legal and political context, actually too many to cite. Instead, we refer to
any search in news portals, social media and internet with terms as algorithm, impact, society.
Actually such considerations are not really new. To our knowledge, the ﬁrst data science
application recognised to have a large impact on societal processes are election forecasts and
polls on voting behaviour. Many countries have thus regulations on what is allowed to publish
when in context of an upcoming or ongoing elections. An overview over such regulations is
given in [18].
A systematic approach to identify, describe and categorise those ethical issues was undertaken
by CNIL (Commission nationale de l’informatique et des libertés) in 2017 [38, 39]. The report
is the result of a public debate organized by the french data protection authority. We will follow
its structure and give examples for each of the given categories of ethical issues to make them
tangible. The main points relevant for consideration by data scientists are identiﬁed.
3

2.1 Six main ethical issues according to CNIL
In the debate six main issues were identiﬁed. Citations referencing [38] are given in front of
each of the following sections. These ciatations are set in italics to be easily identiﬁable.
2.1.1 Autonomous machines: a threat to free will and responsibility?
Delegation of complex and critical decisions and tasks to machines increases the human capacity
to act and poses a threat to human autonomy and free will and may water down responsibilities.
The most widely discussed application of this type are autonomous vehicles. Autonomous
vehicles have the potential to increase traﬃc safety, but who is responsible for remaining acci-
dents? Will it be possible to overrule a machine’s decision on lowest or allowable risk, i.e. in
case of an emergency.
On a more abstract level any suﬃciently complex system may be called an autonomous
machine.
Already today many Kafkaesque situations arise due to complex semi-automatic regulations,
i.e. the story of a man who was released from his job by an algorithm due to an error, and no
human was able to stop that procedure [11] after the lay-oﬀwas triggered.
It must be noted, that in these settings the data scientist is not involved directly. May be she or
he built some model in preparation to steer the machine, but the implementation generally was
not her or his task.
2.1.2 Bias, discrimination and exclusion
Algorithms and artiﬁcial intelligence can create biases, discrimination or even exclusion towards
individuals and groups of people
General remarks
This issue is one where data science expertise is very important for under-
standing the extent of the problem. We start stressing one point that is often overlooked, when
algorithmic bias is discussed. The very nature of the most commonly applied algorithms, -called
pattern recognition or classiﬁcation and clustering-, if applied to humans, is applying prejudice.
In statistical language they form a prior belief on an individual generated by experience with
other individuals assigned to the same group. Goal of these algorithms is the assignment of a new
object, in this case a person, according to some measured characteristics of this person into some
group. Judgements and predictions on e.g. future behaviour or reactions to a medical treatment
for the individual are then made according to previously observed behaviours or reactions of the
other’s in the group. Obviously, if this leads to an improved medical decision making, this is to
the beneﬁt to the individual and the society at large.
In many examples, though, there is a possible beneﬁt to some and a negative impact on others.
In those cases, questions of fairness and justice are touched by the use of these algorithms for
judgement/prediction and decision making in general. Any of their use constitute bias, if the
measured characteristics, that lead to the assignment into the group, are only correlated but not
causally related to the features that are judged about. Formally the reason is, that the relationship
between what is predicted or judged about for the individual and the measured characteristic of
4

the individual is conditionally independent given the individual. Note that this bias is created
independently on whether or not the underlying database is representative for the larger population
for the measured characteristics. The bias is created by applying an approach (= data + method)
that is suitable for correlational analyses only for judgements that require causal reasoning on
individual level.
Practically this is not diﬀerent from humans basing their judgement on a person, on experiences
(= data) they have made with other people that are alike based on some arbitrary (that is bearing
no causal relationship) assessment on similarity. If this is implemented by an algorithm the
impact can be more severe, as the identical bias is applied to more people and forms a more
systematic bias towards certain groups. Combined with monopolies on data ownership, - like
currently for social media or search data -, and with the scalability of computing power such a
systematic bias can easily become a universal norm. Where the algorithm uses characteristics
that include or are related to protected characteristics by anti-discrimination laws (mostly race,
sexual orientation, religion or belief, age and disability) any judgement and any decision based
on the algorithm constitute instances of discrimination, when they result in one person being
treated less favourably than another in a comparable situation.
This does not happen only in badly designed or malfunctioning systems. It is in the core of all
classiﬁcation applied to people.
Another, -practically incurable-, drawback of those algorithms is that they infer from data of
the past, - on the members of the group and/or the individual on which one wants to judge -, and
human behaviour on an individual level and their patterns do change over time.
Examples
The probably most famous example is COMPAS (Correctional Oﬀender Manage-
ment Proﬁling for Alternative Sanctions) a software used in the US judicial system to classify
the probability of defendants’ recidivism. A good discussion of the approach can be found in
[27]. It was shown in a detailed analysis [5, 6] that the privately owned algorithm used in the
juridical system gave far better prognoses for white than for black people, thus it discriminated
implicitly based on color. The machine generated prognosis was intended just to help the judges,
but in interviews it could be seen, that it played a crucial rule in the judgements. Especially
decisions by the judges whether defendants could get out on parole or had to go to jail were
strongly inﬂuenced by the algorithm’s output and discriminated against black people.
It must be stressed, that this bias in application was not intentional as far as it is known.
The bias most probably was introduced through available data on prisoners in conjunction with
the above described fundamental misunderstanding that observed correlations would be good
enough to make decisions that require causal reasoning.
Examples of the application of algorithms are not restricted to the US. In Europe for example
there is a recent initiative in Austria to classify unemployed people in one of the three possible
groups: bad (<= 25%), mediocre or good chances (>=66%) to be employed for at least 6 months
in 24 months from now [19]. The idea is to spend money to bring people back into the workforce
more on target. Controversial is the stated goal to spend less money on those in the lowest group.
It is reported that age and nationality increase one’s probability to be put in the lowest group.
Both points seem to be openly discriminating. The oﬃcial stance is, that the algorithm does not
decide, but only helps a human to decide and therefore no discrimination would happen. This is
5

ignoring to the large inﬂuence that those supportive systems have, when there is a shortage of
money: decision makers typically need to justify, if they deviate from the algorithmic choices,
but not if they follow the machine’s decision. The default mode of operation may change through
the use of such a simple helper algorithm.
A very similar system is already in use in Poland [20].
In the examples given, in addition to generating bias, the automatic classiﬁers act like self-
fulﬁlling prophecies. The automatic, even secret, classiﬁcation of an individual will inﬂuence his
or her future life, in the direction the chosen algorithm determines. At the same time it becomes
impossible to assess the algorithms performance in the future, as the future of the individual’s
life is changed based on the algorithms outcome and there is no control group.
Also the algorithms act very similar to ancient oracles. For an outsider it is impossible to
ﬁnd out which characteristics of a person exactly have led to the given classiﬁcation. They are
black-box algorithms, a feature shared by many of the algorithms from the artiﬁcial intelligence
community. There only is the saying of the oracle, no reasoning, and no possible recourse.
Black-box algorithms therefore will always be problematic for usage in any juridical system or
for any scoring implying a value judgement of an individual, i.e. credit scoring.
These applications are examples for applications where some people have a beneﬁt and others
negative consequences from the application of the algorithm. It is accepted, that the application
may be not in the interest of the individual that is judged.
Of course this is not a drawback inherent in using algorithmic decision making. It is possible
to set up procedures with no intention to inﬂict negative consequences on some to the beneﬁt
of others, if care is given to transparency and possible discriminating behaviours. For example
in Germany there exists a program RADAR-iTE (Regelbasierte Analyse potentiell destruktiver
Täter zur Einschätzung des akuten Risikos - islamistischer Terrorismus) [2] where an algorithm is
used to try identifying the more dangerous people in a group of people already under investigation
by law enforcement.
Decisions are based on a set of 72 questions which are transparent for anybody involved. Be-
cause those under inspection by RADAR-iTE already are under investigation, the most important
aspect of its application is resource allocation by law enforcement. There is no additional nega-
tive eﬀect on those individuals that are judged to be high risk beyond being under investigation
already. Publicized numbers [3] give around half (96 of 205) of the suspects are considered low
risk after classiﬁcation by RADAR-iTE, only around 40% (82 of 205) are considered high risk.
Transparency of all steps seems guaranteed throughout all decisions performed with respect to
algorithmic classiﬁcations.
In this case those applying the algorithms and those being judged share in some sense the goal
to reduce the number of individuals that are observed. The application of the algorithm has the
potential to help an individual by being removed from the group of high risk people.
The implications of a similar algorithm if it was applied to screen the overall population would
lead to a completely diﬀerent asessment. Technically, there is no barrier to such a use. It can
only be prevented by morality and law.
6

2.1.3 Algorithmic proﬁling
Personalizing versus collective beneﬁts: Individuals have gained a great deal from proﬁling and
ever ﬁner segmentation. This mindset of personalising can aﬀect the key collective principles
like democratic and cultural pluralism and risk-sharing in the realm of insurance.
The most discussed form of personalizing in the age of the internet is the so-called ﬁlter bubble
[36]. The scandal around Cambridge Analytica using Facebook data for micro-targeting a very
speciﬁc subset of the public with the aim to inﬂuence the US elections in 2016 made the dangers
of highly personal news and marketing feeds obvious [7, 8].
As a reaction the legislative started to formulate laws to reduce the risks of such personalized
targeting with fabricated news, i.e. in Germany the “Netzwerkdurchsetzungsgesetz” [9]. Face-
book restricted the admission to personal data for third parties in the aftermath of that scandal
[10].
A data scientists role, if implementing schemes for targeting speciﬁc sub-population identiﬁed
by proﬁling with the help of the vast amount of information available on each active person in the
internet, should at least be to warn of possible misuse. She or he should understand the dangers
for society and only help to implement lawful or ethical algorithms.
A nice example for the second point on risk-sharing are telemetry data collected by so-called
smart devices and transmitted to insurance companies. Since the beginning of 2018 each new
automobile in the EU has to record telemetry data in a system called eCall [21]. While that
system will only transfer data in case of an emergency, there are systems that collect lots of
information about all aspects of car usage, down to location and the music the driver listens to
[4]. First there are obvious problems with privacy, if there can be unlawful information sharing.
The second problem here are insurance companies who try to give personalized policy premiums
based on level of data sharing a car owner accepts. Probably even more problematic are health
data, which can be accessed by insurance companies [15].
While at ﬁrst nothing seems at stake if an unhealthy living style is punished with higher policy
costs, a second look reveals that the fundamental principle of an insurance, namely risk sharing
among a large group, is eroded. In addition there is a direct conﬂict of personalized insurance
policies and personal freedom. Big monetary pressure on customers to live a good live in the
sense of the insurance companies must be expected.
2.1.4 Preventing massive ﬁles while enhancing AI: seeking a new balance
Artiﬁcial intelligence by being based on advanced techniques of machine learning requires a
signiﬁcant amount of data. Still, data protection laws are rooted in the belief that individuals’
rights regarding their personal data must be protected and thus prevent the creation of massive
ﬁles. AI brings up many hopes: to what extent the balance chosen by the lawmaker and applied
until now should be renegotiated?
A ﬁeld of research that is already very experienced and advanced in using large databases on
humans and trying to ﬁnd ways to make that balance is the medical ﬁeld. Thus the following
two examples are able to illustrate the beneﬁts of the availability of collected personal data and
how the risks for individuals regarding their privacy or for the society regarding fair access to
information were mitigated.
7

In July 2018 some valsartan products were discovered to have been contaminated with N-
nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA). In September 2018 an expedited assessment of cancer risk
associated with exposure to NDMA through contaminated valsartan products could be published
[30], providing reassuring interim evidence that the short term overall risk of cancer in users
of valsartan contaminated with NDMA was not markedly increased.
This fast assessment
in a relatively large cohort (5150 Danish patients) was possible by linking data from four
oﬃcial Danish registries on individual level thus collecting information on prescriptions, cancer
diagnosis hospital admissions, mortality and migration. Privacy was implemented by a process
where oﬃcials from the registries perform the linking, derive the important information, and
then de-identify the data before it is sent to the scientists.
In 2018 the German health insurance company DAK Gesundheit in cooperation with scientists
from the University of Bielefeld published a report on the health status and the health costs of
children and adolescents based on the claims database from the people insured with the DAK
Gesundheit [33].
Next to some general overview on the health status, a key topic was the
investigation of the inﬂuence of socioeconomic status and education of the parents on the health
and induced health costs of the children. The main conclusion is that education is a stronger
inﬂuencing factor than socioeconomic status and that important preventive measures consist of
giving children good health education. In the same report, and by guest authors [34], also the
results from the KiGGS study [35] are discussed. That study puts its emphasis more on the
principle of equal opportunity and the inﬂuence of socioeconomic status on general health and
speciﬁcally mental health. Publishing this together shows sensitivity of the topic in the political
debate and the role that an open scientiﬁc environment has to play.
Both, the valsartan case and the DAK study show that there are true beneﬁts for public health
that can be generated from using large medical databases. When balancing these beneﬁts with
the risk for privacy violations for the people whose data is used, in the valsartan case, we want to
highlight the high trust from the citizens that is given to oﬃcials: if data on any medical problem
one encounters in life can be linked to the home address, citizens need to trust the government
that this data is not accessible or made accessible to anyone that uses this information with other
than the best intentions. With the DAK study we want to highlight another important aspect
of balancing beneﬁt-risk: the ownership of data, and fair access to data. Data is the new oil,
and evidence generation shapes how beneﬁt is deﬁned and how it is implemented. Thus, if risk
is shared by people of all political opinions, then fairness requires that evidence generation is
possible for people from diﬀerent political opinions.
In general, an important measure for respecting privacy is to de-identify data in the databases,
and making them non-identiﬁable. Guidelines exist for de-identiﬁcation processes (e.g. the
Safe Harbor method [32]), yet, with growing databases through social media use and genetic
and biomarker research, non-identiﬁability is a moving target.
A good counter-measure is
implemented in the process for requesting access in the so called MIMIC-III database [31] on
critical care unit patients. In addition to a required training on data privacy, and a strict de-
identiﬁcation of the data, all scientists accessing the data have to submit a data use agreement
with 10 points, among which there is one requiring the scientists take immediate action should
they realize that there is a way to de-identify data. This is acknowledging the fact that de-
identiﬁcation is no guarantee to de-identiﬁability at all times by installing a process to monitor
de-identiﬁability by those who have the expertise and knowledge, namely the data scientists,
8

holding them responsible for it and giving them, as a community, a general credit of trust.
2.1.5 Quality, quantity, relevance: the challenges of data curated for AI
The acceptance of the existence of potential bias in datasets curated to train algorithms is of
paramount importance.
Even if implemented in best of mind, there may be unexpected bias in the training data going
beyond what has already been said about bias in Section 2.1.2. There are many examples to ﬁnd,
we want to give two.
One famous example of algorithmic training going wrong was Microsoft’s twitter bot Tay
[13]. Tay was implemented to act on Twitter as a regular user. The bot should learn from the
comments by others how to perform common twitter conversations. In less than a day the humans
had learned how to manipulate the learning algorithm in such a way that Tay started to speak out
fascistic and racist paroles. Microsoft decided to take Tay oﬄine less than a day after it started
learning.
A recent example for a similar event is an AI system at amazon. That system should help
to ﬁnd the most qualiﬁed applicants in their huge stream of applications. The experiment had
to be stopped, when it was noted that the algorithm systematically downgraded applications of
women. In [12] some probable causes for that behaviour are given. The training data contained
mostly applications of men, so most of the successful applicants were men. There are not too
many details, but as a consequence any appearance of the word woman reduced the chances of
that applications.
Finally the whole project was stopped, even after the developing team tried to correct for
known shortcomings, because there was no guarantee the machine would not devise ways to
discriminate in other ways [12].
The important observation in both cases is, that these black-box algorithms couldn’t be im-
proved. They had to be taken oﬄine and completely replaced. As an obvious consequence such
algorithms should not be used, where such a replacement is complicated or dangerous.
2.1.6 Human identity before the challenge of artiﬁcial intelligence
Hybridisation between humans and machines challenges the notion of our human uniqueness.
How should we view the new class of objects, humanoid robots, which are likely to arouse
emotional responses and attachment in humans?
This point from the debate in France run by CNIL is given only for the sake of completeness.
At the moment, we do not believe that this is an ethical issue where data scientists have a special
responsibility due to their expertise.
2.2 Conclusion from CNIL’s report
The given examples show the multitude of complex ethical issues that arise from a data scientist’s
work. In the next section we argue that ethical guidelines for data scientists are one mean to help
them taking their responsibility.
9

3 Guidance for data science
The call for more guidance for digital technologies in media in general is loud and all across
the globe, leading to various initiatives and groups engaging in discussions around ethical rules
for developing and implementing those technologies. For an overview on initiatives and ethical
values in the tech ﬁeld visit the website of the think tank doteveryone [16] or the blog of
Erickson [17]. There is a long history of computer scientists discussing the ethics of algorithms.
A good starting point is the website fatml.org.
Here fatml is an acronym for Fairness,
Accountability, and Transparency in Machine Learning and stands for a series of conferences. For
the german speaking communities, we recommend the slides to the one day workshop Ethische
Leitlinien wissenschaftlicher Fachgesellschaften of the Deutschen Gesellschaft für Medizinische
Informatik, Biometrie und Epidemiologie (GMDS) [14] or the Algorithmic Accountability Lab
(AAL) at the University of Kaiserslautern aalab.informatik.uni-kl.de. AAL provides a
good source for current discussions not speciﬁc for data scientists but about the use of algorithms
in general with some hints toward data science.
This article is in that sense, one contribution among many. Its main purpose is to broaden the
audience and increase the number of participants in the discussions, and to foster the development
of morality, a set of deeply held, widely shared, and relatively stable values [37] on data science
within and around the data science community. As any ethical guidance, be it in form of codes,
oaths, and even law, only has the intended impact, if people are willing to follow it, and the
chance for that is high, if the underlying norms and values are in accordance with, in this case,
the data science community’s own morality.
3.1 Do we really need more ethical guidelines?
Not everyone would agree that data scientists need more guidance how to make moral decisions
in their professional life: many do work in companies with codes of conduct, work for institutions
that require some oath, or are members of scientiﬁc societies that give ethical guidelines to their
members, or have religious beliefs that give guidance to wrong or right in their life, and there is
the fundamentally skeptical view that paper does not blush. Also, we are all obliged to obey to
law. So what does a special set of ethical rules for the profession of data science add?
Four rationales:
1. For the individual data scientist, the translation from very general ethical principles from
common morality, law or religion, to an ethical issue at work can be quite diﬃcult.
Especially since most issues are not about intentions, but about the consequences of one’s
work. Those consequences are often not very easy to judge upon. Having some reference
to well-thought through and well-reasoned guidelines in that sense is not more nor less
than having publications on speciﬁc methods: it helps to avoid re-inventing the wheel
ever so often. In addition, it can be very helpful to have such a reference along with the
reasoning for justiﬁcation, if the consequences of an ethical decision increase the workload
for a colleague or costs for an employer or client.
2. For data scientists as a community, having formulated codes of conduct or some service
ideal makes the diﬀerence of acting as professionals or merely having a job that does data
10

crunching. In sociology, a profession is deﬁned by means of professionalism. This implies
that a profession has a certain degree of autonomy in society, its members’ expertise is
based on science, and the professional work exempliﬁes a service ideal [28]. In other
words: without a service ideal, there is no professionalism and without professionalism,
there is no profession.
3. For data scientists as members of society, for their clients, employers and colleagues,
written rules of conduct for data science services can help to establish a relationship of
trust. If they are written clearly, they give lay people some mean to know what to expect
from a data scientist, to compare what they are getting against that standard, and ﬁnally
gain trust if the expectations are met. Being trusted as a professional increases social
status, reputation and possibly the money that is paid for the service.
A code of conduct or ethical guidelines may even be the start of a well deﬁned job deﬁnition
for data scientist!
4. In case of conﬂicts of interests an ethical guideline under the maintainership of some
professional society may oﬀer an arbitration process between diﬀerent interests.
4 Existing guidelines and codes
In the previous section, we provided references to ongoing eﬀorts to develop ethical guidelines
to data science itself and connected scientiﬁc or technical ﬁelds. Here, we want to give more
details on the three main guidelines from the ﬁelds of statistics and computer sciences from some
of the largest and oldest established associations for those communities. If one could establish
additional sub-guidelines that ﬁlled the gaps with respect to data science aspects, the audience
would immediately be very large, and there would be no need to establish a new association.
Both, ACM and ASA, acknowledge data science as an important ﬁeld in their domains.
4.1 ASA: Ethical guideline for statistical practice
The American Statistical Association was founded in Boston in 1839 and has more than 19000
members worldwide.
The current Ethical Guidelines [23] have been updated and approved
by the ASA Board in April 2018.
The guideline has eight sections, six of which describe
the responsibilities towards individuals and groups of people to which the statistical work may
matter:
• Professional integrity and accountability,
• integrity of data and methods,
• responsibilities to science/public/funder/client,
• responsibilities to research subjects,
• responsibilities to research team colleagues,
11

• responsibilities to other statisticians or statistics practitioners,
• responsibilities regarding allegations of misconduct,
• responsibilities of employers, including organizations, individuals, attorneys, or other
clients employing statistical practitioners.
Checking which of the ethical issues discussed in Section 2.1 are covered, one recognises, that
implicitly, it is a clear call for human responsibility addressing the issue raised on autonomous
machines (Section 2.1.1). It only touches very brieﬂy on the risk, that information presented
as aggregates on groups may lead to bias, discrimination and exclusion (Section 2.1.2). It sets
high standards for privacy and respecting data conﬁdentiality (Section 2.1.4). With the integrity
of data and methods section and throughout almost any other point, it gives clear guidance on
quality, quantity, and relevance of data, and to a general notion of scientiﬁc honesty. It also
addresses ethical issues speciﬁc to human studies, not covered in section 2.1, but very relevant
to all scientists working in that ﬁeld. The guidelines have gaps concerning those ethical issues
that result from the implementation of statistical procedures into daily practice. Missing are
discussions on all ethical issues that can arise from implementing algorithmic results without
further human interaction into automatic decision making.
4.2 ACM: Code of ethics and professional conduct
The Association of Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947 and has more than
100.000 members worldwide. The ACM has ethical guidelines for a long time. The Code [24]
as it is named, has just been updated and adopted by ACM in June 2018. It has a preamble, and
four sections:
1. General ethical principles,
2. professional responsibilities,
3. professional leadership responsibilities and
4. compliance with the code.
On a general level The Code addresses all ethical issues that we present in Section 2.1. Yet,
the Code is not a code for data science, and it is not providing the constructive guidance ASA
gives on the integrity of data and methods related to scientiﬁc honesty and on responsibilities to
research subjects.
4.3 Ethical guidelines of the German Informatics Society
The German Informatics Society (GI) has a long history of its ethical guidelines [25]. The latest
update was in June 2018. These guidelines are concise and consist of a preamble and 12 very
short sections.
• Sections 1 to 4 concentrate on aspects of the professional competence of computer scien-
tists,
12

• sections 5 and 6 are about individual working conditions,
• sections 7 and 8 are about teaching and researching in the ﬁeld of computer science.
• Very interesting are sections 9, 10, and 11 which clearly state the societal responsibilities
of computer scientists. We see some intercept with the work of data scientists there.
• Finally section 13 deﬁnes a mediating role of the German Informatics Society in case of
conﬂicts stemming from these guidelines.
There are no data science speciﬁc sections in these guidelines, nevertheless many important
aspects are touched. We think the structure of the ethical guidelines of the GI can be a good
skeleton to develop ethical guidelines for data science.
4.4 Conclusion from examining existing guidelines
The ethical guidelines for statisticians from the ASA are constructive and detailed for the ethical
issues of statisticians and data scientists in the sense of Donoho (Section 1) that work in research
and the special responsibilities towards participants in human studies. The Code of the ACM
covers the area of using data from and about humans outside from human studies and issues that
arise from implementing algorithms from data science for repeated use and that have impact on
individuals and communities. What we have in mind is a combination of those aspects, maybe
structured as in the guidelines of the GI, as data scientists work on data from all sources and
across all those areas.
5 Development of ethical guidelines for data science
There are hurdles to overcome before a meaningful guideline can be established. In our view the
main ones are the lack of a sense of community and a lack of communication on ethics.
5.1 Data scientists have to perceive themselves as a community
At the moment the term data scientist in not a protected professional title. Data scientists can have
anacademic training in statistics, or computer science, astheir mainﬁeldsof professional training,
but also engineering, psychology, business management, or they can be trained programmers or
only have been following a three-month course on data science learning Python, Julia, or R. In
that sense, data science today is not a profession but only an occupation. [28]. Between the data
scientists from statistics and computer science, on the ground, there is not much tension, but
there are many turf battles on academic levels. So the ﬁrst step would be to realize that ethical
guidelines are a shared interest and to then start discussing the content within data science related
societies, at conferences, in University courses, at work with colleagues.
Being a community does not mean that there is a need for a new association. A good option
would be to add data science speciﬁc guidelines to those of the ACM, the ASA, and the GI.
Such an approach would have the big advantage, that it would not require to ﬁrst establish a new
data science association. Of course the authors would like to see the european statistics societies
embracing ethical issues in their agenda.
13

5.2 Data scientists have to overcome shyness or ignorance to discuss ethics and
own moral views related to data science
In the perception of the authors it is very uncommon for data scientists to express any moral view
on the work they do or on the impact their work may have for fellow people and the society at
large. That might be, because only recently society and data scientists themselves have realized
how much impact data science services have on individuals and communities. Maybe that is
because the very nature of this impact is, to be de-personalized and it is easy to overlook one’s own
responsibility. Maybe it is because most people in data sciences are coming from a mathematical,
technical, or computer science background and are in general less vocal on anything outside hard
science. The places to change such culture fundamentally should be universities and colleges
where data science is taught. Ethics and professional ethics should be part of the curriculum, just
as inspiring critical thinking and expressing one’s views. In the meantime every data scientist
can work towards that goal within her or his environment. Crucial is taking part in discussions
at work in critical projects or within any community when there are e.g. discussions on the
so-called digital revolution, the inﬂuence of social media, or algorithms in health care or the
criminal justice system.
Talking about ethical questions must become natural for any data scientist.
6 Conclusion
We wrote this article for most parts without assuming that our views are generally shared views,
or that anyone has to agree that any given speciﬁc application is good or bad. Underlying, there
is an understanding that the morality of the data science community is evolving and that it is
a shared task to develop it, which in turn needs open discussions. Yet, there is at least one
fundamental basic moral conviction of the authors, which we have taken as a generally agreed
moral principle: as a human being one has to think about possible consequences of one’s actions.
That responsibility for the consequences grows with the knowledge and the potential one has to
think about consequences.
Finally we want to start the the debate with a ﬁrst statement:
Data science is in the focal point of current societal development.
To build trust in data
science and its interaction with society and to empower data science to take its resposibility for
its contributions to society, data science must develop professional ethics and become a clearly
deﬁned profession!
