PEng4NN: An Accurate Performance Estimation
Engine for Efﬁcient Automated Neural Network
Architecture Search
Ariel Keller Rorabaugh∗, Silvina Ca´ıno-Lores∗, Michael R. Wyatt II∗, Travis Johnston†, and Michela Taufer∗
∗University of Tennessee, Knoxville, USA †Oak Ridge National Lab, Oak Ridge, USA

Abstract—Neural network (NN) models are increasingly used
in scientiﬁc simulations, artiﬁcial intelligence, and other high
performance computing (HPC) ﬁelds to extract knowledge from
datasets. Each dataset requires tailored NN model architec-
ture, but designing individual structures by hand is a time-
consuming and error-prone process. Neural architecture search
(NAS) automates the design of NN architectures. NAS attempts
to ﬁnd well-performing NN models for specialized datsets, where
performance is measured by key metrics that capture the
NN capabilities (e.g., accuracy of classiﬁcation of samples in
a dataset). Existing NAS methods are still resource intensive,
especially when searching for highly accurate models for larger
and larger datasets.
To address this problem, we propose a performance estimation
strategy that reduces the resources for training individual NNs
and increases NAS throughput without jeopardizing accuracy.
We implement our strategy via an engine called PEng4NN that
plugs into existing NAS methods; in doing so, PEng4NN predicts
the ﬁnal training accuracy of NNs early in the training process,
informs the NAS of NN performance, and thus enables the NAS
to terminate training NNs early. We assess the effectiveness of
our engine on three diverse datasets (i.e., CIFAR-100, Fashion
MNIST, and SVHN). By reducing the quantity of training
epochs needed, our engine achieves substantial throughput gain;
on average, our engine saves 61% to 82% of the training
epochs needed, increasing throughput by a factor of 2.5 to 5
compared to a state-of-the-art NAS method. We achieve this gain
without compromising accuracy, as we demonstrate with two key
outcomes. First, across all our tests, between 74% and 97% of
the ground truth best models lie in our set of predicted best
models. Second, the accuracy distributions of the ground truth
best models and our predicted best models are comparable, with
the mean accuracy values differing by at most .7 percentage
points across all tests.
I. INTRODUCTION
Neural networks are powerful models that are increasingly
leveraged in traditional HPC-oriented ﬁelds like scientiﬁc
simulations and new research areas such as high-performance
artiﬁcial intelligence and high-performance data analytics.
However, ﬁnding a suitable neural network architecture is
a time-consuming, data-dependent process involving several
rounds of hyperparameter selection, training, validation, and
manual inspection.
Recent works have proposed methods to automate the
design of neural networks, including neural architecture search
(NAS) strategies to ﬁnd near-optimal models for a given
dataset. NAS involves selecting neural network (NN) models
from the search space, training them on the target dataset,
evaluating their performance, and using information about
NN performance to select new NNs from the search space.
This process is computationally intensive and time-consuming
for even a single network, and it is typically conducted in
an iterative manner, which increases the need for computing
power even further.
In order to improve the throughput and efﬁciency of NAS,
NN models can be analyzed to estimate their performance and
establish early termination criteria or steer searching mecha-
nisms. Limited research exists in the area of NN performance
estimation and early termination criteria, and such methods are
often directly integrated into a particular NAS implementation.
In this paper, we propose PEng4NN, a performance estimation
engine that predicts fully-trained network accuracy early in the
training process. Crucially, PEng4NN decouples the search and
estimation strategies in state-of-the-art NAS methods: it plugs
into existing NAS workﬂows and outputs performance esti-
mates for the NN models. This information can be leveraged
by the NAS to redirect computational resources from training,
thus increasing the throughput of the NAS and allowing it to
explore more candidate models.
The contributions of this work are:
1) The deﬁnition of a core accuracy predictive function
that models the accuracy of an NN independently of its
architecture and the dataset it aims to classify.
2) The design of a performance estimation strategy agnostic
to the NAS method and dataset of choice, capable of
accurately inferring the performance of a given NN model
in fewer training epochs than comparable state-of-the-art
methods.
3) The implementation of this strategy as PEng4NN, a fully
decoupled performance estimation engine that can plug
into existing NAS engines for classiﬁcation problems.
4) A systematic characterization of widely accepted bench-
mark datasets for NN training and validation (i.e.,
CIFAR-100, Fashion MNIST, and SVHN).
5) An evaluation of PEng4NN on the characterized bench-
mark datasets, including analysis of our engine’s gain and
accuracy.
arXiv:2101.04185v2  [cs.LG]  11 Aug 2021

II. LIMITATIONS OF NEURAL ARCHITECTURE SEARCH
Neural networks (NN) are powerful and ﬂexible models
that can be tailored to many complex learning tasks like
speech and natural language processing, image classiﬁcation,
and even multidimensional scientiﬁc problems. Despite their
success, NNs are still hard to design manually and they
must be tuned for each speciﬁc dataset. Recent works aim
to automate the design of NN for a given dataset by con-
ducting a neural architecture search (NAS) that selects the
number, type, and sequence of layers, and chooses the hyper-
parameters that describe how each layer functions. In current
literature there are several strategies to conduct NAS, including
random searches, grid searches, hyper-parameter sweeps, rein-
forcement learning, evolutionary optimization, gradient-based
optimization, and bayesian optimization [1]. Most of these
strategies are implemented as search engines that incorporate
on-the-ﬂy learning to improve the generated models iteratively.
The aggregated load of training all the NNs in the vast search
space makes NAS a computationally intensive problem that
requires a high-throughput approach, especially in the early
stages of NAS in which up to 88% of NN fail to ever learn
[2]. Consequently, scientists must either allocate signiﬁcant
time on the largest compute resources available (in the range
of tens of thousands of GPU hours [3]) or make assumptions
about the models to simplify the search.
To alleviate this issue, NAS can be supported by perfor-
mance estimation strategies that provide information (e.g.,
accuracy or loss) for a given model trained on a speciﬁc
dataset. These estimates enable the NAS to truncate the
training process, compare partially-trained NNs, and steer
the search towards models that yield better performance. As
a result, performance estimation strategies can improve the
efﬁciency and throughput of the NAS. This results in an
overall NAS workﬂow in which the NAS strategy selects an
NN model from the search space for a speciﬁc dataset and
feeds this model to the performance estimation strategy, which
returns a performance estimate that can be leveraged by the
NAS. Figure 1 shows the tightly-coupled vision of this NAS
workﬂow as found in the literature [1]. This yields that a
performance estimation strategy is tailored for a speciﬁc NAS
method, which imposes restrictions to the generalization of the
performance estimation strategy for different NAS engines. A
coupled design also prevents conducting optimizations in the
resource allocation for each component of the workﬂow, their
orchestration, and the mechanisms to exchange data efﬁciently
amongst them. All of these limitations can reduce the efﬁ-
ciency and throughput of the NAS workﬂow as a whole. This
work addresses these limitations by designing a decoupled
performance estimation strategy that we implement as the
PEng4NN performance estimation engine. By decoupling the
NAS from PEng4NN, we can plug our engine into diverse
NAS applied to different datasets.
III. PERFORMANCE ESTIMATION ENGINE (PEng4NN)
Our performance estimation strategy relies on a fully de-
coupled NAS and NN performance estimation, as shown in
Fig. 1.
Overview of current NAS workﬂows and their tightly-coupled
relationship between the search and performance estimation strategies.
Figure 2. In doing so, we pursue a strategy that is agnostic to
the NAS methods and datasets. We implement this strategy
in PEng4NN, our fully decoupled performance estimation
engine. PEng4NN augments NAS strategies to improve their
throughput and efﬁciency. Each time the NAS selects an NN
model, it ﬁrst passes that model to PEng4NN. The performance
estimation engine iteratively executes a four-step process de-
picted in Figure 2. PEng4NN begins each iteration by training
and validating the NN. It then constructs a core accuracy
predictive function based on the NN’s validation performance.
PEng4NN passes the prediction derived from this function to
the prediction analyzer that determines whether a stable perfor-
mance estimate was found. With this information, PEng4NN
decides whether to output a ﬁnal estimate or continue the
iterative process. The following subsections describe in detail
the components of PEng4NN.
A. NN training and validation
The dataset of interest for the classiﬁcation problem is di-
vided into a training set and a validation set. At each iteration,
PEng4NN trains a given NN model M on the training data
for a constant number of epochs, E, where an epoch means
one cycle through the training set. The value of parameter E
is user-deﬁned. In all of our tests, we let E = 0.5, meaning
that PEng4NN trains the NN for 0.5 epochs at each iteration
(i.e., the NN is trained on half the training data). PEng4NN
then validates the NN and calculates its classiﬁcation accuracy
(aV ) and loss (lV ) for the validation set at the current epoch
(e). Note that we select a batchsize and truncate our datasets
to be divisible by the batchsize. As a result we ensure we can
train for precisely 0.5 epochs.
B. Core accuracy predictive function
We deﬁne the predictive function that we ﬁt to the NN accu-
racy data across epochs, and we analytically determine bounds
and initial values for the predictive function’s parameters.
Then, we describe how we leverage Sci-Py’s optimize.curve ﬁt
method (Curve Fit) to ﬁt our chosen function to the historic
accuracy data of a given NN model. Finally, we show how
we use the ﬁtted predictive function to determine a maximum
accuracy prediction for the NN at each iteration of the engine.

Fig. 2. Overview of PEng4NN, our solution of a decoupled performance estimation engine that, given an input NN model provided by the NAS, outputs a
performance estimate that can be leveraged by the NAS.
1) Deﬁning the function: We hypothesize that NN accuracy
curves can be modeled with functions of the form f(x) =
a −b(c−x). Empirical observation suggests that the accuracy
curves of NNs tend to be concave down and increasing, with
a horizontal asymptote that the accuracy values approach; the
family of functions f(x) = a−b(c−x) shares these properties.
The function parameter a describes the horizontal asymptote;
the parameter b controls steepness of the curve/corner; the
parameter c denotes a horizontal shift. Figure 3a depicts a
sample function with different values for b: f(x) = 32 −
b(5−x), with a solid blue line for b = 2 and a dashed red line
for b = 6. The dashed red line with the larger b value is the
steeper curve, illustrating that larger values for the parameter
b correspond to steeper curves. Figure 3b depicts a sample
function with different values for c: f(x) = 32 −2(c−x), with
a solid blue line for c = 0 and a dotted red line for c = 5.
The dotted red line with c = 5 is shifted right by 5 points as
compared to c = 0, illustrating that the parameter c denotes a
horizontal shift.
2) Bounding and initializing the function:
We deﬁne
bounds for the three function parameters a, b and c.
Bounding a: The maximum accuracy prediction (deﬁned by
parameter a) should be strictly greater than 0% and at most
100%. In many cases, the accuracy of an NN increases very
quickly at ﬁrst, and the rate of improvement decreases over
epochs.
During early iterations of PEng4NN Curve Fit has limited
datapoints for ﬁtting the function. We observe empirically
for some NNs that during these ﬁrst steps Curve Fit expects
unreasonable accuracy growth because it sees only the steepest
portion of the accuracy curve with the largest rate of increase.
Then, if a is unbounded, Curve Fit selects a larger value
for a than is reasonable (i.e., larger than 100%). We want
to distinguish this scenario from NNs that are simply very
accurate. If we bound a by 100, then Curve Fit may predict
100% accuracy in both situations described above. Instead,
we allow a to be slightly larger than 100. This enables us
to disallow convergence if the value of a is greater than 100
(a) f(x) = 32 −b(5−x)
(b) f(x) = 32 −2(c−x)
Fig. 3. Sample function with different values for parameters b and c
(i.e., in the case that Curve Fit has seen only the steepest part
of the curve and predicts unreasonable accuracy growth). In
PEng4NN, we bound a by 0.5 ≤a ≤102.5 and initialize it
with a = 10.
Bounding b: The function is undeﬁned at any non integer
powers if b < 0; therefore, b must be strictly positive.
Furthermore, if b < 1, then the function no longer has
the desired shape; instead of increasing up to a horizontal
asymptote as x increases, the function approaches negative
inﬁnity as x increases. Thus, b ≥1. In PEng4NN, we bound
b by 1 ≤b ≤∞and initialize it with b = 1.001.
Bounding c: The parameter c represents a horizontal shift
of the function. We begin by proving that any horizontal shift
to the left (that is, a shift by c where c is negative) implies

that f(1) ≥a −1.
Consider the function f(x) = a−b(c−x). If c < 0, it follows
that f(1) = a −bi, where i < −1, or f(1) = a −1
bj , where
j > 1. Then, because b ≥1, it follows that f(1) ≥a −1.
Before passing the validation accuracy values per epoch to
Curve Fit, we rescale the x values so that the initial value for
x is 1, meaning that the corresponding epoch values will be
rescaled to start at 1. Then, f(1) ≥a−1 means that the initial
accuracy is within 1% of the maximum accuracy; in other
words, the NN accuracy improves by only 1% throughout
training. Such behavior is modeled by a ﬂat line with b = 1,
in which case the value of c has no effect on the function.
Because of this observation, we conclude that horizontal shifts
to the left are not needed, and hence c ≥0. In PEng4NN, we
bound c by 0 ≤c ≤∞and initialize it with c = 100.
3) Fitting the function to predict accuracy: Algorithm 1
shows the internal procedure in the core accuracy predictive
function. Given an NN model M, the procedure takes as
input the current training epoch (e), the history of validation
performance and predicted accuracy as a list ordered by epoch
(H), the validation accuracy (aV ) and loss (lV ) at epoch e, and
the predictive function f(x) = a −b(c−x) that is bounded and
initialized with the values speciﬁed in the previous section.
The ﬁrst step in our core predictive procedure is the creation
of a new tuple of performance metrics for M at the speciﬁed
epoch (he). This tuple is inserted in the performance history
H for M (Line 3) so that it is taken into consideration as
a new datapoint for the Curve Fit method. The rest of the
steps required to ﬁt the function f only take place if there
are enough datapoints to conduct the Curve Fit method. In
this case f is an exponential function, thus we need at least
Cmin = 3 datapoints in H to proceed (Line 4).
Recall that the constant number of training epochs per
iteration of PEng4NN (E) is user-deﬁned (see Sec. III-A).
We rescale H as a new list H′ in which the ﬁrst epoch
value is 1 (Line 5), since this enables us to assign general
bounds for the parameters a, b, and c that do not depend on
the value of E. For example, if the NN is validated every
half epoch, the ﬁrst epoch value is 0.5, so H is rescaled by
multiplying by 2 every value of e in the list. Then we feed
H′ to SciPy’s optimize.curve ﬁt method to ﬁnd the function f
that best ﬁts the historic accuracy data for the NN model (Line
6). We deﬁne the maximum accuracy prediction aP given
by the predictive function f as the value of the parameter
a that results from Curve Fit. We update this value aP in
the performance tuple for the current epoch (he) so that it is
reﬂected in the performance history (Line 8).
As a result of the core accuracy predictive function, we
output the updated history of validation performance and
accuracy predictions (H) for further analysis.
C. Prediction analyzer
Each time the core accuracy predictive function receives a
new validation performance measurement for an NN model
M at epoch e, it generates a maximum accuracy prediction
aP that is appended to the history of measured and predicted
TABLE I
SYMBOLS FOR ACCURACY PREDICTIVE FUNCTION ALGORITHM.
Symbol
Deﬁnition
M
NN model identiﬁer
e
Current epoch in which the prediction will be calculated
aV
Validation accuracy from NN validation component
lV
Validation loss from NN validation component
aP
Predicted accuracy
H
Ordered list of < M, e, aV , lV , aP > tuples, each representing
the validation accuracy aV and loss lV of an NN M at a speciﬁc
epoch e, plus the accuracy prediction aP
f
Initial function for the Curve Fit method
Cmin
Minimum cardinality of the dataset f will be ﬁtted to
a
Horizontal asymptote for the ﬁtted function at epoch e
b
Steepness of the ﬁtted function at epoch e
c
Horizontal shift of the ﬁtted function at epoch e
Algorithm 1 Procedure for accuracy predictive function.
Input: Current training epoch (e); history of validation performance
and predicted accuracy (H); validation performance at epoch e
(i.e., accuracy, aV , and loss, lV ); function to ﬁt (f) and minimum
required cardinality (Cmin)
Output: History of validation performance and predicted accuracy
(H), updated with the latest prediction aP
1: procedure PREDICTOR(e, H, aV , lV , f)
2:
he ←< M, e, aV , lV , 0 >
3:
H ←insert(he)
4:
if |H| ≥Cmin then
5:
H′ ←rescale epochs(H)
6:
a, b, c ←optimize.curve fit(H′, f)
7:
aP ←a
8:
H ←update prediction(H, he, aP )
9:
return H
values H. The ﬁtted function and the associated aP vary
from one iteration to the next because new performance
measurements are appended to H. The goal of the prediction
analyzer is to determine whether the performance estimates
for M have converged to a stable value, which we denote by
AP .
We
describe
the
prediction
analyzer
component
of
PEng4NN by ﬁrst deﬁning the parameters that control the
prediction analysis. We then describe the conditions to detect
convergence and show how we compute the output estimate.
1) Parameterizing the analysis: We determine six parame-
ters to control the behavior of the prediction analyzer and its
convergence criteria:
• N, the number of most recent accuracy predictions to
consider. We use N = 3.
• E, the number of epochs per iteration. We use E = 0.5.
• emax, the maximum number of epochs we allow an NN
to train. We use emax = 20.
• t, the threshold describing how much variability is small
enough to establish convergence and report a ﬁnal per-

formance estimate. We use t = 0.5.
• LOSS, a boolean describing whether or not to enable
a validation loss check in the analyzer. It is useful for
datasets on which an NN’s accuracy may be noisy or slow
to increase, more commonly encountered in unbalanced
datasets. We use LOSS = true for unbalanced datasets
and LOSS = false otherwise. When the loss check
is enabled, it is only activated if the latest accuracy
prediction indicates that the given NN is not performing
better than guessing or has not learned more than a single
class (for example, accuracy of 10% in the case of a
balanced 10 class dataset). We call such an accuracy
prediction a never-learn prediction.
• L, the number epochs to consider in the loss check. We
use L = 5.
These parameters, summarized in Tab. II, constitute part of the
input arguments for the prediction analyzer procedure and can
be adjusted in PEng4NN to tune the overall iterative process.
2) Analyzing the convergence of the predictions: Algorithm
2 shows the internal procedure in the prediction analyzer.
Given an NN model M, the procedure takes as input the
current training epoch (e), the history of validation perfor-
mance and predicted accuracy (H), and the six conﬁguration
parameters described above. We ﬁrst check if we have reached
the minimum number of epochs to assess convergence (Line
3). If not, this means the number of tuples in H is not
sufﬁcient to analyze whether the predictions are stable, so
we must continue training. On the other hand, if we reached
the maximum number of training epochs (emax), we return
the maximum observed validation accuracy aV (Line 4) with
convergence status false.
We assume that, if convergence is achieved, the ﬁnal per-
formance estimate (AP ) corresponds to the accuracy predicted
by the predictive function in the current epoch (aP ) (Line 5).
We deﬁne three conditions for reaching convergence:
• Condition 1: The most recent maximum accuracy predic-
tion (AP ) must be less than or equal to 100%. Otherwise,
the prediction is not valid to establish convergence (Line
6). Recall that parameter a of the ﬁtted function deter-
mines the max accuracy prediction. Recall also that we
allow Curve Fit to choose a larger than 100 so that we can
detect if Curve Fit is predicting unreasonable accuracy
growth. This condition ensures that we have a realistic
value for AP .
• Condition 2: The N most recent maximum accuracy
predictions are all within the threshold t of their mean
(Line 7). In other words, for each of the N most recent
predictions pi, it checks if mean −t ≤pi ≤mean + t.
• Condition 3: If the loss check is activated (Line 8) and the
most recent maximum accuracy prediction aP is a never-
learn prediction (Line 9), then the minimum validation
loss lVmin = min{lV ∈H} has not decreased for at least
L epochs (Line 10). This condition ensures that the NN
is not merely learning slowly or irregularly, as can be the
case especially with unbalanced datasets. On the contrary,
if the accuracy is not increasing, and the validation loss
TABLE II
SYMBOLS FOR PREDICTION ANALYZER ALGORITHM.
Symbol
Deﬁnition
e
Current epoch in which the predictions are analyzed
H
Ordered list of < M, e, aV , lV , aP > tuples, each representing
the validation accuracy aV and loss lV of an NN M at a speciﬁc
epoch e, plus the accuracy prediction aP
N
Number of most recent accuracy predictions to consider in the
analysis. We use N = 3
E
Number of epochs per iteration. We use E = 0.5
emax
Maximum number of epochs to train. We use emax = 20
t
Maximum performance variability allowed for convergence. We
use t = 0.5
LOSS
Indicates whether the loss check is enabled
L
Number of epochs to consider in the loss check. We use L = 5
lVmin
Minimum validation loss observed
AP
Most recent accuracy estimate for the NN model M on conver-
gence
Algorithm 2 Procedure for prediction analyzer.
Input: Current training epoch (e); history of validation performance
and predicted accuracy (H); conﬁguration parameters
Output: Convergence status (converged)
Output: Performance estimate (predicted accuracy (AP ) if conver-
gence is achieved; maximum observed validation accuracy (aV )
if emax is reached)
1: procedure ANALYZER(e, H, N, E, emax, t, LOSS, L)
2:
converged ←false
3:
if e ≤N · E then exit
4:
if e = emax then return max{aV ∈H}
5:
AP ←aP from H in epoch e
6:
if AP > 100 then exit
7:
if last N aV ∈H are within t then
8:
if LOSS is true then
9:
if AP is never-learn then
10:
if last L · E lV ∈H ≥lVmin then
11:
converged ←true
12:
else converged ←true
13:
if converged is true then return AP
14:
else exit
is not decreasing, this indicates that the NN is likely not
continuing to learn.
There are two possible outcomes based on these conditions.
If the conditions are all true, it means the prediction has
converged. In this case, the performance estimation engine
outputs AP with convergence status true (Line 13). On the
other hand, if any one of the conditions is not met, and the
NN has not yet trained for emax epochs, the procedure ends
with convergence status false (Line 14).
Based on the output of the prediction analyzer, we can es-
tablish the termination criteria for PEng4NN. If a performance
estimate is returned, PEng4NN terminates and sends this value
to the NAS. This can occur in two scenarios: either we reached
convergence and the output is AP , or we reached emax and

Fig. 4. Example of the estimate and predictive function given by PEng4NN
for a neural network trained on CIFAR-100
the output is max{aV ∈H}. We can distinguish these cases
by inspecting the value of the convergence status. On the other
hand, if no value is returned, then PEng4NN will begin the
next iteration and resume training the NN model.
As an example, Figure 4 depicts the end result of this
process for one of the NNs we trained on CIFAR-100. The
x-axis indicates the number of training epochs, and the y-axis
indicates accuracy of the NN. The dotted red line indicates
the point at which the prediction converges; this is when
our engine outputs the performance estimate and terminates
the iterative training process. In this example, our engine
terminates the iterative process and outputs the performance
estimate after 7 epochs. The predictive function from the ﬁnal
iteration is graphed, along with validation accuracy datapoints
for the NN across emax = 20 epochs for comparison. Note
that only the accuracy values from the ﬁrst 7 epochs were used
to ﬁt the predictive function and estimate performance.
IV. EVALUATION
We describe our experimental setup and evaluate our engine
to answer two key questions: (i) “What savings are gained by
our approach?” and (ii) “How accurate are the predictions
made by our approach?”
A. Experimental Setup
1) Dataset Characterization: To the best of our knowledge,
there is no systematic characterization of datasets used in
ML evaluations. This makes the assessment of the generality
and applicability of a method in the area of NN research
a case-driven discussion [4]–[9] that is also found in works
tackling the problem of evolutionary NN design [10], [11]. We
characterize three of the most commonly used datasets (i.e.,
CIFAR-100, F-MNIST, and SVHN) that act as benchmarks
in the evaluation of novel methods and techniques for NN.
Four key attributes demonstrate the diverse nature of these
datasets—number of samples, number of classes, number of
image color channels, and sample size [12], plus an additional
aspect of the internal balancing of the sample distribution per
class, which is known to affect the performance of NNs in
terms of accuracy [13]. Table III summarises these attributes
TABLE III
CHARACTERIZATION OF CIFAR-100, F-MNIST, AND SVHN.
CIFAR-100
F-MNIST
SVHN
Number of samples
60,000
70,000
600,000
Training set
50,000 (83%)
60,000 (86%)
373,257 (62%)†
Validation set
10,000 (17%)
10,000 (14%)
26,032 (4%)†
Number of classes
100
10
10
Samples per class
600
7,000
6,500 to 19,000
Balanced
Yes
Yes
No
Number of channels
3
1
3
Sample size (pixels)
32×32
28×28
32×32
Example image
†SVHN also contains 531,131 samples that can be used as additional training
data, which we did not use in our evaluation.
and shows a sample from each dataset. We evaluate PEng4NN
with these datasets that we describe below.
CIFAR-100: This dataset was introduced in 2009 [14] as
a subset of the 80 Million Tiny Images dataset [15], aimed
towards improving tasks of unsupervised training of deep gen-
erative models. It is still one of the most popular benchmarks
in the ﬁeld of computer vision due to the manageable size of
the dataset, the resolution of its images, and its challenges for
NN models [16]–[18].
Fashion MNIST (F-MNIST): This dataset [19] serves as a
replacement for the original MNIST dataset comprising ten
classes of handwritten digits [20]. It shares the same image
and dataset size, data format, and structure of training and
testing splits with MNIST, making it a popular benchmark for
NN models targeting computer vision problems [21]–[23].
SVHN: Like MNIST, SVHN [24] contains digits, but in
this case they are obtained from real-world house numbers,
thus contain color information, various natural backgrounds,
overlapping digits, and other distracting features. These char-
acteristics make SVHN a more difﬁcult dataset compared to
MNIST, which makes SVHN a very popular benchmark for
NNs [25].
2) Neural Network Generation: We train a set of diverse
NNs on each of these datasets, where each NN is generated
with randomly selected parameters. We randomize the ker-
nel, stride, and padding for convolutional layers (in ranges
[1, 5], [1, 5], and [0, 5], respectively) and pooling layers (in
ranges [1, 5], [1, pool kernel], and [1, pool kernel/2], respec-
tively).We also randomize the number of ﬁlters of each hidden
convolutional layer (allowing a maximum of 400 for any given
layer), number of convolutional layers (between 1 and 10), and
the learning rate of the network (between 10−6 and 1+10−6).
We add a pooling layer after each convolutional layer, and
two fully connected layers at the end. Overall, we generate
and train a set of 343 NNs on CIFAR-100, 505 NNs on F-

MNIST, and 290 NNs on SVHN.
B. Performance Estimation Engine Gain
To answer ﬁrst the question, “What savings are gained by
our approach?” we utilize two metrics—number of training
epochs saved and throughput gain—for each of the three
datasets. We compare the gain to state-of-the-art predictions
using MENNDL [26].
1) Training Epochs Saved: We compare the epoch at which
PEng4NN terminates the training of each NN model to the
epoch at which MENNDL terminates training of that model
using its built-in early termination criterion. MENNDL trains
each NN for a maximum of 20 epochs, terminating training
earlier than that if the network’s minimum training loss has not
decreased for at least 10 epochs. In contrast, PEng4NN trains
each NN for a maximum of 20 epochs, terminating training
when the engine’s prediction converges (as in Fig. 4), avoiding
additional training.
Figure 5 depicts the distribution of NN models according
to the percentage of training epochs our method saves for
each NN, for our three datasets. Percentage of epochs saved
is denoted on the x-axis and percent of total NN samples
on the y-axis. The height of a rectangle denotes the percent
of total samples that save the indicated portion of training
epochs: taller rectangles to the right indicate that more samples
save a larger percentage of epochs (i.e., there is a larger
region of avoidable training for these samples). The dashed
line indicates the mean percentage of training epochs saved.
For balanced datasets, such as CIFAR-100 and F-MNIST,
PEng4NN’s iterative process terminates as soon as the accu-
racy predictions converge to a value between 0% and 100%.
We observe that 40% to 50% of models save more than
90% of the training epochs on CIFAR-100 and F-MNIST (in
Fig. 5a and Fig. 5b). For unbalanced datasets, such as SVHN,
we describe in Section III an additional condition that we
require for prediction convergence for an NN with a never-
learn prediction. This delays convergence, and thus we see
smaller savings on SVHN (in Fig. 5c). Even so, we observe
that nearly 40% of models save 80% or more of the training
epochs on SVHN.
For all three datasets, we cut the mean number of training
epochs needed to evaluate networks by well over half. We
demonstrate respective mean savings of 75%, 82%, and 61%
of the training epochs on CIFAR-100, Fashion MNIST, and
SVHN, as compared to MENNDL’s early termination criterion
(indicated by the dashed lines in Figs. 5a-c).
2) Throughput Gain: The ability of our performance es-
timation engine to predict ﬁnal NN model accuracy early in
the training process has immediate implications for NAS. As
shown in Figure 5, we can anticipate reducing required training
epochs by 60-80% (mean savings depending on data set). The
reduction in training epochs for individual NNs increases the
number of networks that can be explored and evaluated using
the same amount of wall time and compute resources.
For example, on CIFAR-100 in Fig. 5a, the mean savings
is approximately 75%; this means PEng4NN evaluates the
models in
1
4 the computation needed by MENNDL. This
corresponds to a throughput gain of about 4×, allowing 4×
the number of networks to be explored with the same com-
putational resources. Similarly, PEng4NN yields a throughput
gain of 5× on F-MNIST and 2.5× on SVHN. Exploring more
network structures gives the NAS additional opportunity to
ﬁnd better NN models. Alternatively, if the NAS had a ﬁxed
problem size (i.e., a set number of models to explore), then
one could evaluate those models using fewer computational
resources.
C. Performance Estimation Engine Accuracy
We now address the second question, “How accurate are the
predictions made by our approach?” Recall that the NAS pro-
cess involves generating models, evaluating their performance,
selecting the best models at each step, and using these best
models to inform the next generation of models (Section I).
PEng4NN reports accuracy estimates for all the generated NNs
(see Section III), and the NAS uses these estimates to select
the best models. This means it is important for PEng4NN to
accurately identify the best NN models from among the set
generated by the NAS, as these are the models that are used
to create the next generation of models. Thus, in evaluating
our prediction accuracy, we compare the ground truth best
x% of all our generated models with the predicted best x%
of models as identiﬁed by PEng4NN. We use PEng4NN’s
performance estimates for all the NNs to create a set of our
engine’s predicted best x% of models. In our tests, in order
to identify the ground truth best x% of models, we allow the
NNs to continue training and validating for a full 20 epochs,
even after PEng4NN has reported accuracy estimates for them.
The models that achieve the highest validation accuracy are
the ground truth best models.
We use two metrics to measure the accuracy of PEng4NN’s
predictions: overlap, which represents the proportion of the
ground truth best models that are also in the set of predicted
best models, and accuracy distribution, which depicts the
similarity between the NN accuracy values of the ground truth
and predicted best models.
1) Overlap: Overlap quantiﬁes how many of the ground
truth best models appear in the predicted best models and
is deﬁned as
|ground truth ∩prediction|
|ground truth|
. The overlap value ranges
between 0 and 1; the closer to 1, the better. For example,
overlap = 0.8 would mean that 8/10 of the ground truth
set is overlapping with the prediction set. One could trivially
maximize the overlap by simply predicting more best models
and allowing additional false positives. We avoid this by
ensuring that the number of our predicted best models is
always the same as the number of ground truth best models.
See Figure 6 for simple illustrative examples of this metric
with overlap values equal to 0, 25%, and 100%.
Table IV shows the overlap between PEng4NN’s set of the
predicted best x% of NN models and the ground truth best x%
of NN models for different values of x and our three datasets.
Across these datasets, for x values ranging from 10% to 30%,

(a) CIFAR-100
(b) F-MNIST
(c) SVHN
Fig. 5. Percentage of training epochs saved.
Fig. 6. Overlap metric examples. Left: overlap = 0, Center: overlap = 1/4,
Right: overlap = 1
the overlap of ground truth best models and predicted best
models lies between 0.74 and 0.97.
Figure 7 corresponds to the second row of Table IV and
depicts, for each dataset, the maximum accuracy estimates and
actual maximum accuracy values of all NN models, indicating
the ground truth and predicted best 20% and their intersection.
Actual maximum accuracy is on the x-axis; the estimation
engine’s accuracy estimates are on the y-axis. The purple
triangles depict all NNs that are in both the predicted best
20% of models and the ground truth best 20% of models. The
blue circles depict NNs that are in the predicted best 20% of
models and not in the ground truth best 20% of models. Last,
the red squares depict NNs that are in the ground truth best
20% of models but not in the predicted best 20% of models.
Because the x-axis indicates actual maximum accuracy, the
most accurate models are the furthest to the right of the graph,
and the least accurate models are the furthest to the left. We
observe that the most accurate models from the set of ground
truth best models lie in the intersection with the predicted best
models, and the ground truth best models that lie outside of
the intersection with the predicted best models tend to be the
least accurate ones.
Finally, in the lower left corner of the graph, we see NN
models with very low actual accuracy and predicted accuracy;
these are models that never learn (i.e. whose accuracy never
increases). We see also that there are some outliers parallel to
the x-axis that have varying levels of actual accuracy but are
predicted to have very low accuracy. Validation accuracy for
these models does not increase for several epochs. Part of our
ongoing work involves studying ways to distinguish between
NNs that never learn and NNs that do not learn for many
epochs but eventually begin to learn (the outliers).
2) Accuracy Distribution: We compare the ground truth
and predicted best models with the mean and distribution of
the NN accuracy values. Table V shows the difference between
the mean accuracy values of the ground truth and predicted
best x% of models for x = 10, 20, 30. In all cases, the mean
network accuracy of the ground truth best models is very close
to the mean network accuracy of the predicted best models:
their difference ranges from 0.2 to 0.83 percentage points
across all three image datasets and x values.
Figure 8 corresponds to the second row of Table V and
depicts the NN accuracy distributions of the ground truth best
20% of models and of the predicted best 20% of models for
each of our three datasets. The boxplot shows the 5th, 25th,
50th (red line), 75th and 95th percentiles. The dot represents
the mean. Note that the CIFAR-100 ﬁgure has a different scale
than the F-MNIST and SVHN ﬁgures. We observe that for
each dataset, the NN accuracy distributions of the ground truth
best models and of the predicted best models are comparable.
In fact, for all three datasets, the mean NN accuracy for the
ground truth best 20% networks lies within 0.7 percentage
points of the mean for the predicted best 20% networks.
On CIFAR-100, the mean accuracy of the ground truth best
models is 36.0%, while the mean accuracy of the predicted
best models is 35.3%. On F-MNIST, the mean accuracy of the
ground truth best models is 89.8%, while the mean accuracy of
the predicted best models is 89.6%. Last, on SVHN, the mean
accuracy of the ground truth best models is 85.6%, while the
mean accuracy of the predicted best models is 85.3%.
D. Discussion
Our
experiments
show
that
across
diverse
datasets,
PEng4NN reduces needed training epochs and achieves a
throughput gain compared to state-of-the-art NAS while main-
taining accuracy in the predicted best models. CIFAR-100,
F-MNIST, and SVHN are representative datasets that show
diverse values for key dataset attributes (such as samples
per class and sample distribution per class). Many of these
attributes have implications for dataset classiﬁcation difﬁculty
and the performance of NNs. The demonstrated gain and accu-
racy of PEng4NN across all three of these datasets exempliﬁes

(a) CIFAR-100
(b) F-MNIST
(c) SVHN
Fig. 7. Accuracy estimate and actual accuracy for all neural networks, indicating the intersection between ground truth best 20% of models and predicted
best 20% of models.
(a) CIFAR-100
(b) F-MNIST
(c) SVHN
Fig. 8. Network accuracy distribution of the top 20% of models.
GT = ground truth top 20%, P = predicted top 20%
our engine’s general applicability for datasets with disparate
properties and difﬁculty.
We observe empirically that unbalanced datasets like SVHN
can exhibit additional delay in learning and validation accuracy
noise compared to balanced datasets like CIFAR-100 and F-
MNIST. To address this, we utilize an additional condition
for convergence on unbalanced datasets. If accuracy is not
increasing, this condition checks if the NN’s minimum vali-
dation loss has decreased within recent epochs. If validation
loss has attained a new minimum, this can be an indication
that the network is learning slowly, and the condition prevents
early convergence in this case.
Furthermore, when studying overlap of the ground truth and
predicted best models on all three datasets, we observe outlier
models that are predicted to have very low accuracy but have
various higher actual accuracy values. These are models that
initially do not learn, but eventually learn after a several-epoch
delay. Augmenting PEng4NN to differentiate between these
outliers and models that never learn is part of our current
work.
TABLE IV
OVERLAP OF THE ACTUAL BEST x% OF MODELS AND THE PREDICTED
BEST x% OF MODELS FOR EACH DATASET. Note: the sets of actual and
predicted best models have the same size.
CIFAR-100
F-MNIST
SVHN
10%
0.79
0.74
0.90
20%
0.74
0.87
0.87
30%
0.88
0.97
0.95
TABLE V
DIFFERENCE IN THE MEAN ACCURACY VALUES OF THE GROUND TRUTH
BEST X% OF MODELS AND PREDICTED BEST X% OF MODELS.
CIFAR-100
F-MNIST
SVHN
10%
0.83
0.66
0.22
20%
0.70
0.26
0.33
30%
0.58
0.20
0.27
V. RELATED WORKS
Recent works have proposed different performance esti-
mation strategies. The two most common approaches for
truncating training are to train for a ﬁxed but signiﬁcantly
reduced number of epochs (e.g., 20 instead of 100s) [27], [28]
or to train until either the maximum accuracy or minimum loss
has not improved for a user-speciﬁed amount of time (e.g.,
if the maximum observed accuracy does not improve for 5
epochs). Such methods are commonly included in NN software
like Keras1. Limited research exists in the area of predicting
NN performance [29]–[32]. Some methods target hyperparam-
eter search, which involves ﬁnding the best hyperparameter
conﬁguration for a given human-designed network but does
not explore different architectures [29]. Domhan et al. [29]
and Klein et al. [30] use probabilistic methods involving com-
1See https://keras.io/api/callbacks/early_stopping/

putationally expensive Markov Chain Monte Carlo sampling.
The approach of Swersky et al. [32] automatically pauses and
restarts training of models based on the predicted trajectory
of the loss curves. Baker et al. [31] extract features from NNs
to use in training a series of regression models to estimate
performance.
The solution presented in this paper ampliﬁes these ap-
proaches by introducing two key components. The ﬁrst one
is the core accuracy predictive function that provides accurate
estimations of the performance of an NN in terms of its
maximum accuracy. The second is the prediction analyzer that
ensures the stability of these estimations. We design these
components to generate performance estimates agnostic to the
NN model and the classiﬁcation dataset in an effective way.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
This work introduces PEng4NN, an engine that decouples
the search and estimation strategies of NAS workﬂows. It
generates accurate performance estimates for NN models
and assists NAS strategies in the exploration of the neural
architecture search space. Our solution is instrumental for
NAS efﬁciency and throughput: it reduces the training epochs
required by 60% to 80% on average, resulting in an increase
in the throughput of explored networks of 2.5× to 5×. Future
work will leverage PEng4NN in state-of-the-art NAS engines
to demonstrate how it can increase the efﬁcient interleaving
of training, validation, and scientiﬁc predictions and analyses
in analytics-driven workﬂows.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research used resources of the Oak Ridge Leadership
Computing Facility at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory,
which is supported by the Ofﬁce of Science of the U.S. Depart-
ment of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC05-00OR22725.
