International Journal of Engineering Trends and Technology (IJETT) – Volume 6 Number 6- Dec 2013 
 
       ISSN: 2231-5381                    http://www.ijettjournal.org                               Page 333 
 
In-Memory Database Systems - A Paradigm Shift 
Mohit Kumar Gupta1, Vishal Verma2, Megha Singh Verma3 
1Blogger at www.vedantatree.com 
2Department of Computer Science, M L N College, Yamuna Nagar, INDIA 
3Department of Computer Science, D A V College for Girls, Yamuna Nagar, INDIA 
 
 
Abstract — In today’s world, organizations like Google, Yahoo, 
Amazon, Facebook etc. are facing drastic increase in data. This 
leads to the problem of capturing, storing, managing and 
analyzing terabytes or petabytes of data, stored in multiple 
formats, from different internal and external sources. Moreover, 
new applications scenarios like weather forecasting, trading, 
artificial intelligence etc. need huge data processing in real time. 
These requirements exceed the processing capacity of traditional 
on-disk database management systems to manage this data and 
to give speedy real time results. Therefore, data management 
needs new solutions for coping with the challenges of data 
volumes and processing data in real-time. An in-memory 
database system (IMDS) is a latest breed of database 
management system which is becoming answer to above 
challenges with other supporting technologies. IMDS is capable 
to process massive data distinctly faster.  This paper explores 
IMDS approach and its associated design issues and challenges. 
It also investigates some famous commercial and open-source 
IMDS solutions available in the market. 
 
Keywords — In-Memory Database System (IMDS), Design issues 
and challenges for IMDS, Commercial and open-source IMDS. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
With the increasing demand of real time data processing, 
traditional (on-disk) database management systems are in 
tremendous pressure to improve the performance. With the 
increasing amount of data, which is expected to touch 40ZB 
(1ZB = 1 billion terabytes) by 2020, means 5247 GB of data 
per person [1], and with traditional DBMS architecture, it is 
becoming more and more challenging to process the data and 
to produce analytical results in almost real time. For on-disk 
databases, disk I/O operations are the main bottleneck, which 
are very slow operations and can’t be optimized beyond a 
limit being mechanical in nature. Although traditional on-disk 
DBMS have tried to improve on this by introducing various 
caching techniques to cache the frequently accessed data, 
however, it comes at the cost of synchronization of cache with 
disk and vice versa and to implement various complex logic to 
manage transaction and resources, which itself pose as a 
limitation to performance. So what is the way forward? 
Here comes the in-memory database system concept, which 
actually changed the whole architecture paradigm for the 
database management system. An in-memory database system 
or main-memory database system is a breed of database 
management system that stores data entirely in main memory 
instead of keeping it on disk [2]. With decreasing cost of main 
memory, and advance technological innovations, it becomes 
quite feasible to store large amount of data in main memory. 
Once data is stored in main memory, speed of reading and 
writing the data will be improved drastically as it eliminates 
disk I/O operations. A POC done by McObject shows; that in-
memory database supports read at 4x speed and write at 420x 
speed than traditional DBMS [3]. It is a big d3fference if we 
can transform this benefit in real time data processing and 
hence in managing and processing the big data. Further, 
having all data in main memory, now there is no need to 
implement complex caching logics and hence caching 
overhead is also eliminated. This is how IMDSs are moving to 
win over traditional databases for speed challenges.  
Applications of in-memory databases will be in all domains 
that require real-time performance and very low latency like 
weather forecasting, trading application, social networking 
websites, artificial intelligence etc. Another important use for 
in-memory database systems is in real-time embedded 
systems such as IP network routing, telecom switching, 
industrial control etc. 
II. ARCHITECTURE OVERVIEW 
Main architectural attribute in IMDS is that whole design is 
geared towards using the main memory for data storage, 
instead of using disks. Fig. 1 shows a very simply high level 
design of IMDS. 
This is a major paradigm shift in DBMS design approach, 
which triggers many other design optimizations. Now DBMS 
needs not to be worried about optimizing the disk I/O 
operations, and about caching like techniques for these 
optimizations. Whole designed will be geared to have high 
performance data access, manipulation and analysis relying on 
main memory data store. Since IMDS involves no disk 
oriented algorithms, therefore it frees the database design to 
leave typical B-Tree kind of data structure and go for better 
main memory access friendly data structures like T-Tree, and 
possibly open the arena to invent better in-memory storage 
data structures. Further, Query optimization is now focused on 
improving the in-memory data structure and algorithms to 
execute the query, instead of improving the I/O kind of 
operations, which 
are having 
mechanical 
limitations. 
Overhead to manage the concurrent transactions will be lesser, 
because data access is much faster and hence the locks will be 
freed comparatively faster.  
As whole data is loaded in-memory, so the distributed data 
management nodes can also use the shared main memory 
locations or high speed WAN network to enable the virtually 
one data location and hence faster data access even in case of 
distributed nodes [4]. Moreover, having all data in main 

                 International Journal of Engineering Trends and Technology (IJETT) – Volume 6 Number 6- Dec 2013 
 
       ISSN: 2231-5381                    http://www.ijettjournal.org                               Page 334 
 
memory enable the design to utilize the extended capacity of 
memory pointers on 64 bit systems. 
A common misconception is that traditional database 
systems can give the same performance if we change the data 
store from disk to main memory. And that IMDS is nothing 
but a traditional database having data store in RAM only. 
However, it is not true. Reason is that it is not only the data 
access operations which are getting fast with main memory 
based design, but there are many other optimizations which 
are possible now. As discussed earlier, now database systems 
need not to worry about complex caching and synchronization 
algorithms. Further, we can redesign and optimize data 
structures, indexes approach, query execution rules and 
algorithms considering main memory data store; which would 
be quite different than traditional databases [3].  
A. Few Design Highlights  
1)  Client/ server architecture:  Some IMDSs use client/ 
server architecture, where server can be run on powerful 
machines with multi-core processors and vast amounts of 
RAM and multiple clients can interact with server for requests. 
Even when residing on the same computer, client and server 
processes communicate via inter-process communication 
messaging. Other IMDSs use an in-process architecture in 
which the database system runs entirely within the application 
process; instead of separate client and server processes. Later 
is useful in especially useful in embedded applications. In-
process architecture is simpler, which means it has a smaller 
code size (shorter execution path). Simpler code is also less 
prone to defects. In-process design eliminates inter-process 
communication, resulting in lower latency. In-process IMDSs 
further accelerate performance and reduce complexity by 
eliminating server tasks such as managing sessions and 
connections, and allocating and de-allocating resources. 
However former, i.e. Client/server is an enterprise DBMS 
kind of design. It is useful in right sizing the database capacity 
and performance by installing the server software on a more 
powerful computer, and clients may be on lesser powerful 
nodes. As a result, it is capable to manage resources in better 
way and serve requests in optimized manner even with limited 
resources. 
2)  Shared Nothing architecture (SN): The ‘Shared nothing 
architecture’ principle is that every database node work 
absolutely independently without having any dependency on 
other nodes. In case of dependency, failure at one node can 
affect other nodes also and hence bring down all or most of 
the database system. SN helps in achieving high availability in 
case of node failure, as control can be routed to other active 
node without any dependency. 
3)  Partition aware databases: It is an approach where data 
storage is managed by horizontal partitioning i.e. tables are 
partitioned in rows and placed in different servers where these 
are mostly required. One of criteria for partition could be 
based on demography. Use of horizontal partitioning results in 
reduced number of rows in a table and hence less overhead of 
indexing and searching. It also means having data in a node 
which is near to its consumer. However, there could be a 
problem when some operation needs joins on partitioned table 
and other tables. Now if other tables or data are present in 
different node, a distributed join will be slower. To mitigate 
this problem, a design approach is to make database aware 
that which tables or data should be collocated on a node. Once 
database is aware about it, it will make sure that related data 
should be stored on single node (replication may include 
replicating whole data set to other nodes to avoid single point 
of failure). Hence, now the joins will take place on single 
node and much faster without the overhead of distributed data. 
4)  Scalable infrastructure: Having SN architecture in place, 
it is possible for any node from available set to cater the 
request. Hence, it is also easily possible to add any number of 
nodes as and when required. Architecture can support the 
automatic replication of data to this newly added node and 
hence making it fully functional to cater the requests. In the 
same way, nodes can also be removed easily if load is 
decreased. The high availability distributed architecture will 
automatically ensure that no new request is being sent to this 
node and will be redirected to other available nodes only. All 
this means, a huge saving in infrastructure cost if hosting 
platform is cloud, where provisioning of resources to scale up 
or down can be very fast on demand. This also means that DB 
can scale linear just by adding more nodes horizontally, which 
is much easy than adding or removing capacity vertically as in 
case of traditional database systems. 
5)  Disaster recovery: Being highly available systems, it is 
very easy to make disaster recovery itself. When data is 
available on multiple nodes, it becomes obvious to recover 
any failed node from other available nodes. However, another 
design principle applied is to provide disk storage backup for 
systems logs. Here backup is done in asynchronous processes 
so that it won’t affect the main database performance. Users 
may be able to choose the backup options from various 
 
Fig. 1 High Level Design of IMDS 

                 International Journal of Engineering Trends and Technology (IJETT) – Volume 6 Number 6- Dec 2013 
 
       ISSN: 2231-5381                    http://www.ijettjournal.org                               Page 335 
 
available options like backup to disk on selective nodes, 
replication to other nodes and may be more in future. 
6)  Distributed data with WAN based clustering support: 
For a worldwide application, different part of database would 
be required in different geography. One of the design 
possibilities in IMDS is to partition the data based on data 
required at a particular node. So node will host the data which 
is most required there. Other commonly accessed data tables 
will be replicated in real time basis. However, in case, if data 
hosted at other nodes is also required for some specific 
scenarios, all the nodes can act as single database by 
exploiting the high speed network power of LAN and 
customer will not feel the difference of having distributed 
database across the nodes. This is another valuable design 
element, which can help in managing the storage capacity and 
to manage the amount of data at a particular node. 
B.  Challenges for IMDS 
Despite 
the 
promising 
design 
attributes 
for 
high 
performance, IMDS face some challenges in compare to 
traditional on-disk databases. While the robust traditional 
database systems, as a matter of design based on hard disk, 
guarantee atomic, consistent, isolated and durable (ACID) 
nature of the transactions. IMDSs have various challenges 
with assuring the durable characteristic due to its RAM-based 
design. Different products are offering diverse ways to cope 
with this issue. To achieve durability, in-memory database 
systems are applying the following techniques [5]:  
1)  Persistent 
main 
memory: 
Latest 
technological 
developments in main memory arena like NVRAM (Non-
Volatile RAM) or battery powered main memory enable the 
scenario where data in main memory will not be lost. 
2)  Transaction logging: With transaction logging, every 
transaction will be logged to a persistent store, which will 
enable the roll-forward mechanism to restore the database in 
case of power failure. To avoid making transaction logging 
the bottleneck in overall performance, different design 
strategies are to write the logs first in stable memory (faster 
than disk write) and then to disk in asynchronous processes 
and hence the main database operations will not wait for the 
logging to be completed. 
3)  High availability implementation: High availability 
implementation is another design approach to address this 
problem. High availability means replicating the data to other 
available nodes in real time. That will enable to create the 
copies of data in almost real time and hence will reduce the 
probability of complete data failure. In case, if any one node 
goes down, other node will take over the request and will 
process it. 
So various approaches given above are answer to the 
challenge of volatile main memory and this list is increasing 
very fast with more and more design and technical 
innovations in this area. 
 
 
III. IMDS SOLUTIONS AVAILABLE IN MARKET 
In recent years, variety of IMDS solutions (both 
commercial and open source) made available in market from 
giant players of database market such as IBM, Oracle, SAP, 
VMWare etc. Although all of them share the capability to 
maintain the database in main memory and supports industry 
standards such as SQL for data processing, they offer different 
set of features. Following sub-sections investigates some 
famous commercial and open-source in-memory databases: 
A. Commercial IMDS 
1)  TimesTen: TimesTen [6] is in-memory relational 
database system from Oracle with features like durability, 
query optimization, recoverability etc. It offers instant 
responsiveness and very high throughput required by today’s 
real time applications such as telecom, capital markets and 
defence.  It also provides multiple interfaces such as JDBC, 
ODBC and other SQL APIs.  
2)  SolidDB: SolidDB [7] is a hybrid disk/ in-memory 
relational database system from IBM. It offers extreme speed, 
availability and adaptability required for mission-critical 
applications. There are a number of deployments of solidDB 
in telecommunication networks, enterprise applications and 
embedded software and systems.  
3)  extremeDB: extremeDB [8] from McObject is an 
extremely fast in-memory database system. It is designed 
explicitly for real-time applications and for embedded systems 
such as set-up boxes, telecom/ networking devices, industrial 
control system etc. It states to offers unmatched performance, 
reliability and development flexibility. 
4)  SQLFire: SQLFire [9] is an in-memory distributed SQL 
database from VMware vFabric. It states to offer high 
throughput, dynamic & linear scalability, and continuous 
availability of data. It is designed by utilizing the research and 
development done on in-memory cache ‘GemFire’ by same 
vendor and hence is quoted to be very mature and feature rich. 
5)  HANA: HANA [10] is distributed in-memory relational 
database system from SAP. It supports features like column-
based storage and queries, data compression and parallel 
processing which makes possible forecasting, planning, 
analysis and simulation in real or near to real time.  It states to 
offer support for complex queries and high performance for 
complex queries. 
B. Open-source IMDS 
1)  SQLite: SQLite [11] is an open-source relational in-
memory database engine. It is small, fast and reliable DBMS 
suited for embedded systems such as cellphones, PDAs, set-up 
boxes etc. It is also used for local/ client storage in web 
browsers. However, it has limited support for complex SQL 
queries, triggers and views. 
2)  CSQL: CSQL [12] is another open-source main-
memory 
relational 
database 
system 
developed 
at 
sourceforge.net. It is designed to provide high performance on 
simple SQL queries and DML statements that involve only 

                 International Journal of Engineering Trends and Technology (IJETT) – Volume 6 Number 6- Dec 2013 
 
       ISSN: 2231-5381                    http://www.ijettjournal.org                               Page 336 
 
one table. It supports to work in embedded as well as 
client/server mode. Apart from acting as relational storage 
engine, it can also be used as a cache for existing disk-based 
commercial databases. 
3)  MonetDB: MonetDB [13] is an open-source column-
oriented 
main-memory 
database 
management 
system 
developed at the National Research Institute for Mathematics 
and Computer Science in the Netherlands. It was designed to 
provide high performance on complex queries in large 
databases, such as combining tables with hundreds of columns 
and multi-million rows. MonetDB is one of the first database 
systems to focus its query optimization. It has been 
successfully applied in high-performance applications for data 
mining, OLAP, XML Query, GIS etc. 
IV. CONCLUSIONS 
When it comes to processing large amounts of data with 
low latency, in-memory database seems to be a definitive 
answer and a turning point in design strategies. They offer so 
many advantages and it is only a matter of time when we shall 
see many new innovations to address their current challenges 
or limitations. With in-memory replicated data nodes, IMDS 
provides a very efficient way to support highly available and 
performance oriented database management systems. With 
continuous improvements in main memory technology and 
high speed networks, future will support the ‘store anywhere, 
use anywhere’ with high processing speed and virtually one 
database base system accessible anywhere in world. If all 
knowledge accumulated in world can be processed and used at 
high speed, it will be a definitive revolution in many high-tech 
fields like Artificial Intelligence, various forecasting services 
and so on.
