Experimental quantum stochastic walks simulating associative memory
of Hopﬁeld neural networks
Hao Tang,1, 2, 3 Zhen Feng,1, 3 Ying-Han Wang,1, 4 Peng-Cheng Lai,1, 4 Chao-Yue Wang,1, 4 Zhuo-Yang Ye,1, 4
Cheng-Kai Wang,1, 4 Zi-Yu Shi,1, 3 Tian-Yu Wang,1 Yuan Chen,1, 3, 5 Jun Gao,1, 3, 5 and Xian-Min Jin1, 2, 3, ∗
1School of Physics and Astronomy, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
2Institute of Natural Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
3Synergetic Innovation Center of Quantum Information and Quantum Physics,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230026, China
4Zhiyuan Innovation Research Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
5Institute for Quantum Science and Engineering and Department of Physics,
Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China
With the increasing crossover between quantum information and machine learning, quantum sim-
ulation of neural networks has drawn unprecedentedly strong attention, especially for the simulation
of associative memory in Hopﬁeld neural networks due to their wide applications and relatively sim-
ple structures that allow for easier mapping to the quantum regime. Quantum stochastic walk, a
strikingly powerful tool to analyze quantum dynamics, has been recently proposed to simulate the
ﬁring pattern and associative memory with a dependence on Hamming Distance. We successfully
map the theoretical scheme into a three-dimensional photonic quantum chip and realize quantum
stochastic walk evolution through well-controlled detunings of the propagation constant. We demon-
strate a good match rate of the associative memory between the experimental quantum scheme and
the expected result for Hopﬁeld neural networks. The ability of quantum simulation for an impor-
tant feature of a neural network, combined with the scalability of our approach through low-loss
integrated chip and straightforward Hamiltonian engineering, provides a primary but steady step
towards photonic artiﬁcial intelligence devices for optimization and computation tasks of greatly
improved eﬃciencies.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The crossover between quantum information and ma-
chine learning has been an emerging ﬁeld1 to gen-
erate both the quantum-enhanced machine learning
tasks2–6
and the machine-learning-assisted quantum
algorithms7–10. The former utilizes the quantum super-
position to speed up the machine learning performance,
which has been recently studied in tasks such as princi-
pal component analysis (PCA)2 and support vector ma-
chines (SVM)3–5.
The latter applies machine learning
techniques to quantum problems ranging from the phase
transition in condensed matter physics7,8 to the quan-
tum state classiﬁcation9,10, in order to improve the data
processing eﬃciency for complex quantum systems.
Among the various machine learning techniques, arti-
ﬁcial neural networks have drawn lots of attention due
to their versatile utilities for deep learning11–13 and neu-
romorphic computing14,15.
Similar to those in human
brain, artiﬁcial neural networks consist of neuron struc-
tures, and include mechanisms on attractor dynamics,
ﬁring pattern, training rules, etc. A very neat and pop-
ular type of neural networks is Hopﬁeld network16,17, a
single-layered and recurrent neural network with undi-
rected connections between neurons. The signal trans-
mission between neurons is always directed, from the
synapse in one neuron to the dentrites in the other neu-
ron, but the bidirectional connections between two neu-
rons can still be realized by mutually receiving signals
from the other’s synapse, as illustrated in Fig.1.a. With
ﬂexible connections among neurons, Hopﬁeld neural net-
work presents a prominent feature, the associative mem-
ory, which directly drives the network to form the ﬁring
pattern at the energy minima closest to the initial in-
put pattern (Fig.1.b). Such a content-addressable mem-
ory system can be widely applied to optimization, image
processing18,19, and even identifying genetic segments
of RNA20, where the distance between patterns can be
quantiﬁed by Hamming Distance and the energy min-
ima become the optimized task solution. Therefore, even
though Hopﬁeld network is not as fancy as many trendy
deep learning networks, quantum simulations for the for-
mer are still appealing, because it shows the important
associative memory and its relatively simple structure al-
lows for an easier mapping into the quantum regime that
can serve as building blocks for more advanced quantum
structures20.
Quantum neural networks have hence been proposed
and were hoped to fully comply with both neural net-
work mechanisms and quantum theory.
However, this
is confronted with a severe dilemma that the non-linear
activation functions inherently contradict the linear evo-
lution in quantum theory21. Some recent theoretical pro-
posals stick to complete neural networks using universal
quantum gates20,22,23, but their experimental realization
could be too challenging at this stage, even for one single
neuron, let alone a considerably large number of neurons
that are required to make the neural network really work.
On the other hand, some alternative approaches that sim-
ulate partial neural features, e.g., the quantum associa-
tive memory24–26, have been more extensively studied in
theory.
A model of quantum stochastic walks, a mix-
ture of quantum and classical walk27, has been raised to
arXiv:1901.02462v2  [quant-ph]  20 Apr 2019

2
FIG. 1: The Hopﬁeld network and the mapping to integrated photonics. (a) Schematic diagram of bidirectional signal
transmission between two neurons. The green arrows show the transmission from the synapse in one neuron to the dentrite in
the other neuron. (b) Schematic diagram of the Hopﬁeld network that memorizes the energy minima that are closest to the
initial ﬁring pattern in terms of Hamming Distance. (c) Schematic diagram of a seven-state network in the photonic waveguide
array. The Waveguide 1-7 represent the seven states, and the long array of waveguides on the side represent the sink for State1
and State 7, respectively. Two scenarios of initial patterns are considered, with the initial ﬁring state being State 2 only in
Scenario A and being State 4 only in Scenario B.
simulate the ﬁring pattern and associative memory28. Al-
though it is worth emphasizing that such simulation does
not realize the real quantum neurons, yet the mapping
between neural networks and quantum stochastic walks
has already been of great interest: It is a strong crossover
between a representative neural feature and a very ver-
satile quantum approach, thus bridging two separated
ﬁelds together and greatly broadening the applications
for each ﬁeld. So far, this has been limited in theories
only, but with the experimental advances of quantum
walks29–34 and quantum stochastic walks35,36, its experi-
mental demonstration becomes much more appealing and
promising.
II.
RESULTS
Therefore, in this letter, we experimentally present the
quantum stochastic walk in a three-dimensional (3D)
photonic quantum chip and use it to demonstrate the
feature of associative memory. In our setting, as shown
in Fig.1.c, we propose a seven-state network represented
by an array of seven waveguides that sequentially cor-
respond to the following states:
|000000⟩, |000001⟩,
|000011⟩, |000111⟩, |001111⟩, |011111⟩and |111111⟩.
Each state diﬀers from its neighboring state by a Ham-
ming Distance of one, that is, only one diﬀerent sym-
bol in the same position of the two binary strings. In a
mapping to waveguide arrays, the Hamming Distance is
equivalent to the count of waveguide spacings. For exam-
ple, Waveguide 1 which represents State 1 (|000000⟩) has
a Hamming Distance of six (or six waveguide spacings)
from Waveguide 7 representing State 7 (|111111⟩). The
mutually evanescent coupling between neighbouring pho-
tonic waveguides simulates the undirected connections in
a Hopﬁeld network. Now we make State 1 and State 7 as
two dynamic basins, or the ‘sink states’, by connecting
to Waveguide 1 and Waveguide 7 each a long array of
50 auxiliary waveguides (See APPENDIX for fabrication
details). The spacing for adjacent auxiliary waveguides
is much smaller than that for the seven state waveguides,
yielding a much stronger coupling coeﬃcient for the for-
mer, so photons would pass other states and evolve to
the two sink states.
As suggested by Schuld et al 28, the network evolution
can be simulated by a quantum stochastic walk:
dρ
dt = −(1−ω)i[H, ρ]+ω
X
ij
(LijρL†
ij−1
2{L†
ijLij, ρ}) (1)
where the ﬁrst part right to the equation (containing
i[H, ρ]) is the coherent and symmetric Hamiltonian term,
and the second part (containing Lij and L†
ij) is classical
Lindblad term that causes diagonal and non-coherent en-
vironment noises in the open quantum system. In this
model28, the connections between sites are undirected,
while adding an extra directed site in the Lindblad term
creates a sink of an energy minimum, and the noises from
the Lindblad term assist and enhance the direct jump to
those sinks.
A photonic model that realizes such quantum stochas-
tic walks has been proposed36.
It introduces quanti-
tatively controllable diagonal decoherent terms into a
photonic quantum system, and was demonstrated for a
‘maze’ escaping problem36. This method, which can ac-
tually be quite useful for simulating many problems in

3
FIG. 2: Experimental evolution patterns.
An experi-
mental evolution pattern (a) for Scenario A, with initial pho-
ton injection in State 2, (b) for Scenario B with initial photon
injection in State 4. Both are from one sample with a ∆βA of
0.4 mm−1. For each scenario, the dashed ellipses in the left
and right wing correspond to Sink 1 and Sink 2, respectively,
and the inserted data shows the ratio of the light intensity in
Sink 1 and that in Sink 2.
open quantum systems, had never been used in experi-
ments after its invention. We manage to realize the ex-
perimental implementation once again, and apply it to an
entirely new ﬁeld, the simulation of a machine learning
feature.
In the photonic model, the diagonal and non-coherent
noise can be created eﬀectively by controlling ∆β, which
is the detuning of propagation constant in the diagonal
term of the Hamiltonian matrix, while the long array of
auxiliary waveguides can be employed to create the sinks.
In light of this ∆β model, we randomly pick ∆β from
the uniform distribution of a certain amplitude, ∆βA.
We fabricate the waveguide structure using femtosecond
laser direct writing and realize the ∆β by adjusting the
writing speed (see APPENDIX for more details). We set
a few ∆βA in diﬀerent samples of the same array struc-
ture to vary the contribution of classical walk, since it has
been qualitatively demonstrated that36, a higher detun-
ing amplitude of the propagation constant corresponds
to a larger portion of the Lindblad terms in the quantum
stochastic walk.
We now consider two representative scenarios of ini-
tial patterns, where the initial ﬁring state is State 2 only
in Scenario A, and State 4 only in Scenario B. The two
scenarios diﬀer in their Hamming Distance between the
initial state and the sink states, that is, State 2 is closer
to State 1 than to State 7, whereas State 4 has an equal
Hamming Distance to State 1 and State 7. We inject the
780 nm vertically polarized laser beam into Waveguide
2 and Waveguide 4 to simulate Scenario A and Scenario
B, respectively. We measure the evolution patterns us-
ing a CCD camera, with an example shown in Fig.2 and
calculate the ratio of light intensity at Sink 1 and Sink 2.
It has been theoretically proven by both the Hopﬁeld
neural network model and the quantum stochastic walk
model28, that the walk always fully evolves to the sink
state closest to the initial state in terms of the Hamming
Distance, and if there are two sink states of an equal
Hamming Distance to the initial state, the walk will end
up with equal probabilities at the two sink states. Most
ﬁring patterns can be classiﬁed into either of these two
representative scenarios. In experiment, the probability
distribution is reﬂected by the light intensity, and the
retrieved results agree with theory well.
To quantita-
tively evaluate the performance, we propose that, if the
light intensity in sink State 1 is more than two times of
that in sink State 7 for Scenario A, within certain ex-
perimental tolerance, the walk still has a clear preference
for sink State 1 indicating the simulation of associative
memory for Scenario A is correct; whereas for Scenario B,
we regard the simulation is correct if the light intensity
ratio stays between 40%:60% and 60%:40% that suggests
a roughly balanced distribution. The inserted values in
Fig.2.a and b both show a correct simulation result.
We investigate the match rate of associative memory,
as shown in Fig.3. For both Scenario A (Fig.3.a) and
Scenario B (Fig.3.b), we prepare 20 samples and analyze
their light intensity ratio from the measured patterns.
Among the 20 samples we’ve prepared, the conﬁgura-
tions of the waveguide structure are identical but ∆β
values are diﬀerent: there are four groups of ∆βA as 0.1,
0.2, 0.3 and 0.4 mm−1 for Group A-D respectively, and
each group includes ﬁve samples which have various ran-
dom ∆β values under the same ∆βA. The dots in the
shadowed range are those that show the correct simula-
tion result, while the dots outside the range do not match
our tight criteria, so we can count that Scenario A and B
have a match rate of the associative memory as 80% and
75%, respectively. The quantum stochastic walk on the
photonic waveguide system has thus demonstrated posi-
tive results for simulating the associative memory eﬀect
that’s consistent with the theory28.
From Fig.3 the match rate does not show clear diﬀer-
ences among groups of diﬀerent delta beta amplitudes,
which suggests a robust simulation of associative mem-
ory insensitive to the parameter of the quantum model.
Additionally, the change of ∆βA does have some other
eﬀects. As predicted in the theoretical paper28, the pro-
portion of classical term in the quantum stochastic walk

4
0.00 
2.00 
4.00 
6.00 
8.00 
A1 A2 A3 A4 A5 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 C1 C2 C3 C4 C5 D1 D2 D3 D4 D5
Intensity Ratio
a
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
A1 A2 A3 A4 A5 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 C1 C2 C3 C4 C5 D1 D2 D3 D4 D5
Intensity Ratio
b
FIG. 3:
The match rate for associative memory. The experimentally characterized light intensity ratio of Sink 1 and
Sink 2 for Scenario A in (a) and Scenario B in (b) for all twenty samples. The shadowed areas show the criteria of the correct
simulation of associative memory for each scenario. The match rate for associative memory can be counted as the percentage
of dots in the shadowed area over the total number of dots in each each scenario.
Transfer Efficiency to Sinks
ΔβA  (mm-1)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
 
 
Average Total
Average Scenario A
Average Scenario B
 
 
 
FIG. 4: The transfer eﬃciencies. The experimental transfer eﬃciencies to the sink states for samples with diﬀerent ∆βA
in (a) Scenario A and (b) Scenario B. The small circles represent the individual result for each sample. The columns show
the average for each group of the same ∆βA, and the attached error bars are calculated by the standard variance of the ﬁve
individual results within each group. Average Total stands for the average value for all results from both Scenario A and
Scenario B in the same group of ∆βA.
inﬂuences the transfer eﬃciency at the same evolution
time. Correspondingly, we measure the portion of light
intensity in the sink State 1 and 7 over the total light
intensity as the transfer eﬃciency to the sink states, and
plot the transfer eﬃciency for samples of diﬀerent ∆βA
in Fig 4.
For both Scenario A and B, the increase of
∆βA clearly enhances the transport eﬃciency comparing
to the pure quantum walk where ∆βA equals zero. A
slight drop of the transport eﬃciency when ∆βA further
increases to 0.4 mm−1 is consistent with the theoretical
prediction that an optimal transfer eﬃciency exists at a
certain classical amount of the walk. From the feature
of the enhanced transfer eﬃciencies over pure quantum
walks, we have veriﬁed the positive role of classical terms
in speeding up the formation of the associative memory
in quantum stochastic walks.
III.
CONCLUSION
Through this work, we have presented the ﬁrst at-
tempt to experimentally simulate the associative mem-
ory of Hopﬁeld networks using quantum stochastic walks
on photonic waveguide arrays. The simulation does not
realize full features of neurons, but focuses on a most
important feature of Hopﬁeld network, the associative
memory. Just like Hopﬁeld network ‘memorizes’ the dy-

5
namic basin that’s close to the initial pattern in terms of
the Hamming Distance, we use the quantum stochastic
walk of photons to ‘memorize’ the correct sinks depen-
dent on the waveguide spacing. We have a faithful imple-
mentation of the theoretical proposal by demonstrating
the theoretically proposed two diﬀerent and very repre-
sentative types of ﬁring patterns that most scenarios can
be classiﬁed into. Both the theoretical proposal and our
experimental results suggest a modest speedup through
the approach of quantum stochastic walk. Even though
the speedup is not extremely high, we manage to set the
ﬁrst real step forward towards its experimental demon-
stration and this could serve as a building block for future
quantum devices.
It is further inspiring to see the scalability of our
approach for this work. In fact, the theoretical proposal
itself has scaling advantages.
It uses a very plain
mapping into the quantum stochastic walks, which, even
for very large evolution spaces, can be straightforwardly
implemented in photonic systems. One may concern if a
larger scale in experiments would cause losses to destroy
the originally modest quantum speedup advantages,
noticing that error correction is critical for universal
quantum computing, and some approach of using phase-
shifters37–39 to construct a designed unitary matrix
has only limited scales reported, because of stringent
fabrication requirements and a polynomially increasing
number of phase-shifters when the scale increases. On
the other hand, our approach is to ﬂexibly construct the
Hamiltonian matrix that contains the coupling informa-
tion through deﬁning the waveguide structure directly.
The scalability for such a scheme could beneﬁt from the
larger-scale and lower-loss evolution system that can
be straightforwardly laid out on integrated photonic
chips, and the ﬂexible and precise setting of coupling
coeﬃcients through curvature, space control, etc. These
allow for the potential feasibililty for wider associative
memories in more complex ﬁring patterns, and a scalable
solution to another task, experimental quantum fast
hitting, has also been recently demonstrated40.
In
future, more tasks can be mappped into the Hamiltonian
matrix on a photonic quantum chip using such an analog
quantum computing approach.
Our attempt as an
elementary example brings up great many possibilities
for scalable analog quantum computing applications
worthy of further explorations.
