1 
Ontologies for the Integration of  
Air Quality Models and 3D City Models  
 
Claudine Metral 
Institut d’architecture - University of Geneva 
Site de Battelle - 7, route de Drize - CH 1227 Carouge/Geneva - Switzerland 

 
Gilles Falquet 
Department of Information Systems - University of Geneva 
Site de Battelle - 7, route de Drize - CH 1227 Carouge/Geneva - Switzerland 

 
Kostas Karatzas, 
Informatics Applications and Systems Group, Dept. of Mechanical Engineering 
Aristotle University, GR-54124 Thessaloniki, Greece 

 
Abstract 
In the perspective of a sustainable urban planning, it is necessary to investigate cities in 
a holistic way and to accept surprises in the response of urban environments to a 
particular set of strategies. For example, the process of inner-city densification may 
limit air pollution, carbon emissions, and energy use through reduced transportation; on 
the other hand, the resulting street canyons could lead to local levels of pollution that 
could be higher than in a low-density urban setting.  
The holistic approach to sustainable urban planning implies using different models 
in an integrated way that is capable of simulating the urban system. As the 
interconnection of such models is not a trivial task, one of the key elements that may be 
applied is the description of the urban geometric properties in an “interoperable” way. 
Focusing on air quality as one of the most pronounced urban problems, the geometric 
aspects of a city may be described by objects such as those defined in CityGML, so that 
an appropriate air quality model can be applied for estimating the quality of the urban 
air on the basis of atmospheric flow and chemistry equations.  
It is generally admitted that an ontology-based approach can provide a generic and 
robust  way to interconnect different models. However, a direct approach, that consists 
in  establishing correspondences between concepts, is not sufficient in the present 
situation. One has to take into account, among other things, the computations involved 
in the correspondences between concepts.  
In this paper we first  present theoretical background and motivations for the 
interconnection of 3D city models and other models related to sustainable development 
and urban planning. Then we present a practical experiment based on the 
interconnection of CityGML with an air quality model. Our approach is based on the 
creation of an ontology of air quality models and on the extension of  an ontology of 
urban planning process (OUPP) that acts as an ontology mediator.   
 
Keywords 
Ontology, 3D city model, air quality model, street canyon model, sustainable urban 
planning    

 
 
2 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Sustainable development and urban planning 
One of the most often cited definitions of sustainability is the one created by the 
Brundtland Commission in its report (Brundtland, 1987) which defined sustainable 
development as development that "meets the needs of the present without 
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs." The report 
highlighted three fundamental components to sustainable development: environmental 
protection, economic growth and social equity.  
Regardless of whether environmental issues are not the only aspects of sustainable 
planning and decision processes, they are impossible to circumvent. In urban areas, one 
of  the most important environmental problems is air pollution, mostly induced by 
vehicle traffic. This pollution can cause severe damages on health and is particularly 
crucial because of the high density of population in cities. The improvement of air 
quality is therefore imperative and must be taken into account in a sustainable urban 
planning process. In fact a deep understanding and an accurate prediction of urban flow 
and pollutant dispersion in cities is required for a more proactive urban planning. In 
addition, the existing EU legal framework (Dir 96/62 and the associated “daughter” 
directives), dictate the use of air quality models as one of the ways to be applied for 
atmospheric quality assessment and related policy making. 
 
Air quality models 
Air quality models are important tools to study, understand and predict air pollution 
levels. Among the various categories, 3D air pollution models are those that aim at 
“reconstructing” the environment, its properties and governing physical laws. Current 
air quality models and the associated simulation systems apply a number of 
(simplifying) assumptions about the environment, in particular its geometry and its 
physical properties, according to the scale of interest. Thus, models that are used for the 
study of air quality at a local-to-regional scale make use of a grid-base spatial 
resolution, where each grid cell has dimensions in the order of magnitude of 1 x 1 km. 
Coming down to the urban scale, simulation models try to reconstruct the building 
shapes and basic geometrical characteristics and dimensions, in order to improve 
simulation results. 
 
3D city models 
At the same time, 3D city models are rapidly developing (a number of cities have 
already been modeled in CityGML). These models could provide the air quality models 
with (some of) the missing information they require to be more precise and effective. 
On the other hand, urban planners and stakeholders need information about the impact 
of their development plans on air quality evolution (current air quality and future 
scenario projections). Thus their models must be complemented with data originating 
from air quality models. However, these data do not fit directly into the urban planning 
models, they must be adapted (aggregated, computed, etc.) to these models. 
 

 
 
3 
2. CityGML 
 
What is CityGML? 
CityGML is  an open information model for the representation and exchange of virtual 
3D City Models on an international level (OGC, 2006) (Kolbe et al, 2005) (Kolbe et al, 
2006). CityGML defines the classes and relations for the most relevant topographic 
objects in cities and regional models with respect to their geometrical, topological, 
semantical, and appearance properties. It has been defined in this way because purely 
graphical or geometrical 3D models, if appropriate for visualization purposes, are not 
sufficient for applications such as urban and landscape planning, architectural design, 
touristic and leisure activities, 3D cadastres, environmental simulations, mobile 
telecommunications, disaster management, homeland security, vehicle and pedestrian 
navigation, training simulators or mobile robotics. 
CityGML differentiates five consecutive Levels of Detail (LOD), from terrain alone 
to architectural models (outside and interior). With LOD increasing, objects become 
more detailed, both at the geometry and the thematic level. Besides their attributes, 
objects in CityGML can have external references to corresponding objects in other 
databases or data sets. For example, a building in CityGML may be related to a 
cadastral database. 
With the Application Domain Extensions (ADE), CityGML provides an extension 
mechanism  so as  to enrich the data with identifiable features for specific domain areas, 
such as environmental noise mapping. 
CityGML is implemented as an XML application schema of the Geography 
Markup Language 3 (GML3), the extendible international standard for spatial data 
exchange and encoding issued by the Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) and the ISO 
TC211. 
 
Underlying concepts of CityGML 
The main thematic fields are:  
- the terrain (named as Relief Feature),  
- the coverage by land use objects (named as Land Use),  
- transportation (both graph structures and 3D surface data), 
- vegetation (solitary objects, areas and volumes, with vegetation classification),  
- water objects (volumes and surfaces), 
- sites, in particular buildings (bridge, tunnel, excavation or embankment in the 
future), 
- City Furniture (for fixed object such as traffic lights, traffic signs, benches or bus 
stops).  
 
So the main underlying concepts of CityGML (see figure below) are : 
Relief  Feature, Land Use, Site, Building (as subconcept of Site), Transportation Object, 
Vegetation Object, Water Object, City Furniture. 
Buildings in CityGML can be represented with roofs, walls, windows, doors, rooms and 
even furniture (depending on the LOD) associated to the concepts Roof Surface, Wall 
Surface, Window, Door,  Room and Building Furniture (see figure below). 
 

 
 
4 
Relief
Feature
City Model
City
Furniture
Relief
Component
Water Body
Vegetation
Object
Water 
Object
City Object
Transportation
Complex
Auxiliary
Traffic Area
Road
Square
Water Boundary
Surface
Water Surface
Water Closure
Surface
Solitary
Vegetation
Object
Plant 
Cover
Raster Relief
LandUse
City Object
Group
Abstract
Building
Building
Building Part
Room
Building
Furniture
Opening
Boundary
Surface
Site
Window
Ceiling Surface
Interior
Wall Surface
Floor Surface
Roof Surface
Wall Surface
Ground Surface
isA link
partOf link
Generic City
Object
Transportation
Object
Railway
Track
Traffic Area
Water Ground
Surface
Door
Closure Surface
Building
Installation
Breakline
Relief
Mass Point
Relief
TIN 
Relief
Relief
Feature
City Model
City
Furniture
Relief
Component
Water Body
Vegetation
Object
Water 
Object
City Object
Transportation
Complex
Auxiliary
Traffic Area
Road
Square
Water Boundary
Surface
Water Surface
Water Closure
Surface
Solitary
Vegetation
Object
Plant 
Cover
Raster Relief
LandUse
City Object
Group
Abstract
Building
Building
Building Part
Room
Building
Furniture
Opening
Boundary
Surface
Site
Window
Ceiling Surface
Interior
Wall Surface
Floor Surface
Roof Surface
Wall Surface
Ground Surface
isA link
partOf link
Generic City
Object
Transportation
Object
Railway
Track
Traffic Area
Water Ground
Surface
Door
Closure Surface
Building
Installation
Breakline
Relief
Mass Point
Relief
TIN 
Relief
 
 
 
3. OUPP: an ontology of urban planning 
 
CityGML, with its urban and geometric concepts and their semantic relationships, is 
useful for representing an urban planning project, but not sufficient. Indeed, some non 
geometric concepts such as right of way or more abstract concepts such as soft mobility 
don't exist in CityGML. Similarly, relationships such as is used by or participates to are 
missing (see figure below). This is why we decided to define an ontology of urban 
planning process (OUPP). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OUPP has been defined and is still under development in the framework of  the 
"Integrating Urban Knowledge into 3D City Models" research project funded by the 
Swiss Confederation and part of the European COST Action "Towntology". The main 
objective of this research is to contribute to a better communication between the various 
actors involved in an urban planning process. The main sources for OUPP are master 
and local plans (such as PLQ), as well as GIS data of Geneva. 
City GML
Urban
Planning
Process
Other types of concepts such as 
right_of_way (droit de passage ) or 
soft_mobility (mobilité douce )
Other types of relations such as
is_used_by
Geometric concepts

 
 
5 
An urban planning project (that uses urban data and documents such as spatial data 
from GIS, 3D city models, texts, maps, plans, pictures) is represented by an ontology 
with concepts and instances related to the data and documents. With this representation, 
a user can not only view in an integrated way the project but also accede only to the 
knowledge that fits its profile and centers of interest (Metral et al, 2006). 
In our research, use of CityGML is done from OUPP. More precisely, OUPP refers 
to the concepts that exist in CityGML. An ontology alignment has been realized 
between OUPP and CityGML, with 1 to 1, 1 to many and many to 1 alignment relations 
(an example of a n to 1 alignment relation is given in figure below). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. Air quality models 
 
The aims of air quality models 
In urban areas, traffic-related pollution is one of the more environmental crucial 
problems (EEA, 2006). As air pollution entails damages on humans, vegetation and 
ecosystems, reducing pollutant emissions to the atmosphere is imperative. Models of air 
pollutant dispersion, transport and transformation have been defined. They are used for 
supporting such reductions and, more generally, for supporting environmental decision 
making 
  
The diversity of air quality models 
According to (Moussiopoulos et al 2006), models describing the dispersion and 
transport of air pollutants in the atmosphere can be distinguished in many ways such as: 
- the spatial scale (global; regional-to-continental; local-to-regional; local), 
- the temporal scale (episodic models, (statistical) long-term models), 
- the treatment of the transport equations (Eulerian, Lagrangian models), 
- the treatment of various processes (chemistry, wet and dry deposition) 
- the complexity of the approach.  
 
Urban scale models 
protected tree
tree to cut down
compensation
tree
vegetation
PLQ
City Object
City Model
Vegetation
Object
Plant Cover
OUPP
CityGML
Solitary
Vegetation
Object
!
!
!

 
 
6 
At this scale, in general, air flow is very complex, as it depends not only on the 
meteorological conditions but also on the characteristics of urban obstacles such as 
buildings (form, orientation with regard to the wind direction, etc.). The air flow 
patterns that develop around buildings govern the dispersion mechanisms and dictate 
concentration levels in a built environment. 
Air quality may become seriously poor in densified urban areas. Street canyons, 
that are relatively narrow streets between buildings lining up continuously along both 
sides, are more and more frequent in such areas. Unfortunately they can induce serious 
pollution problems because pollutants emitted in a street canyon (such as vehicle 
exhaust gases) tend to disperse less than those emitted in an open area, while the 
combination of pollutants emitted and local meteorological conditions may trigger 
pollution production mechanisms that result in accumulated concentration levels and 
bad air quality  
 
Street canyon models 
Various types of numerical models have been employed to simulate flow and dispersion 
of pollutants in urban street canyons. While most are two-dimensional models such as 
(Baik & Kim, 1999) (Huang et al, 2000), there exists some three-dimensional models 
such as (Kim and Baik, 2004) (Santiago et al, 2007).  
The flow and pollutant dispersion in urban street canyons are mainly controlled by 
meteorological conditions (such as the prevailing wind direction and speed) and canyon 
geometry, in particular the street aspect ratio (ratio of the building height to the width 
between buildings). When wind blows over buildings with different shapes and sizes, it 
is disturbed by the buildings, and turbulent eddies, that can stream into the street 
canyon, are produced. The turbulence intensity, which depends on the geometric 
configuration of the surrounding buildings, has an effect on the pollutant dispersion in 
the street canyon (Kim & Baik, 2003). Furthermore, when the street bottom or the 
building wall is heated by solar radiation, thermally induced flow is formed that 
combines with mechanically induced flow formed in the canyon (Kim & Baik, 2001) 
(Huang et al, 2002) (Liu et al, 2003). Lastly, pollutants emitted from automobiles, for 
example NO and NO2, are chemically reactive (Baik et al, 2007).  
Air pollution modeling within street canyons has to deal with problems at the so 
called neighborhood scale, i.e. 100 m to 1 km. As the flow around a building is 
influenced by the geometry and the scale of the obstacle (Fig 1), the modeling attempts 
applied so far focus on the representation of both aspects of the urban web via detailed 
3d representations. For this reason, mesh-based 3D modeling is applied, trying to 
represent as much as possible the actual geometry, scale, and physical characteristics of 
the area of interest (Fig 2).   
 

 
 
7 
 
Figure 1: Flow around a building (cube) 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: 3-d modeling within a city. Figure taken from E. Solazzo: Advanced Tools for Rational Energy 
Use towards Sustainability  with emphasis on microclimatic issues in urban applications. Presentation 
made duting the ATREUS project meeting in Thessaloniki,Greece 
(http://aix.meng.auth.gr/atreus/thessaloniki_meeting.html) 
 
 
The basic problem resulting from this approach is the fact that it is very demanding 
when it comes to computational resources. In addition to that, the mesh-based 
simulation needs to be supplemented by the proper parameters, representing the thermal 
characteristics of the surfaces, their relative position in accordance to the sun, 
mechanically generated turbulence (from traffic). These types of problems could be 
automatically solved, if  urban modeling were possible via the use of semantically rich 
3D objects (such as CityGML objects). For instance, the thermal characteristics of a 
surface could be derived from data such as surface geometry and orientation, material, 
color, etc. that exist in 3D city models. In addition, some of the most important 
parameters like the roughness length in urban airflow modeling, also result 
“automatically” from 3D data about obstacle shape, dimensions and relative position, 

 
 
8 
thus making the use of a 3D urban model extremely advantageous in comparison with 
the way that it is currently being done.  
Studies realized with street canyon models revealed that favorable meteorological 
conditions and appropriate urban geometry can reduce pollutant concentration levels 
(Kovar-Panskus et al., 2002). Therefore, results generated by these models are crucial 
for a sustainable and proactive urban planning process. On the other hand, street canyon 
models take as input parameters relative to the geometry, the topology and the 
semantics of streets and buildings. Such data are available in 3D city models expressed 
in CityGML, either directly, either in another form and possibly through some 
computations. Thus, the interconnection of  air quality models with CityGML and 
OUPP is a first step towards taking into account the city in a more holistic way. 
 
5. Towards an ontology of air quality models 
 
The first phase of our ontology of air quality models focuses on street canyon models. 
 
Underlying concepts and properties of street canyon models 
Street canyon models are based on equations taking as input: 
- the pollutant source characteristics (source location, emitted product, etc.) 
- the meteorological conditions, mainly the ambient wind conditions (speed, direction 
relative to the street canyon, etc.) but also, to some extent, the thermal conditions 
(solar heating) 
- the street canyon geometry, in particular its aspect ratios (height-to-width ratio for 
2D and 3D models, height-to-length ratio for 3D models) or its orientation relative to 
the ambient wind 
and producing as output: 
- a flow characterized mainly by its vortices (intensity, rotation direction, location, 
etc.)  
- a pollutant dispersion distribution. 
 
Thus, the main underlying concepts are: Street Canyon, Meteorological Conditions, 
Pollutant Source, Flow , Vortex (as part of Flow) and Pollutant Dispersion Distribution. 
The concepts Pollutant Source and Pollutant Dispersion Distribution refer to each other. 
The Ambient Wind Conditions and Thermal Conditions are also main concepts, defined 
as part of Meteorological Conditions. As a street canyon is the space between buildings 
that line up continuously along both sides of a relatively narrow street (Liu et al, 2003), 
the concept Street Canyon  has to be defined from the concepts Street and Building. A 
flow and its vortices are both vector fields. Thus the concept Vector Field has to be 
added as superconcept of Flow and of Vortex. The pollutant concentration distribution is 
a scalar field that we want to associate to isosurfaces for visualization of the values. 
Thus we also need the concepts Scalar Field and Isosurface (see figure below).  
 

 
 
9 
 
Figure 3: The Street Canyon part of the air quality ontology 
 
The concepts with their properties are shown  below: 
 
Street Canyon 
 
shape 
wide / square / narrow 
 
height-to-width ratio 
ratio of the Building height to the Street width 
height-to-height ratio ratio of the Building height at windward side to the Building 
height  
 
at leeward side 
 
 
orientation  
(absolute) 
leeward side location (depends on the current wind conditions) 
windward side location 
 
level 
street-level / building-level / roof-level 
 
Street 
 
location 
(absolute) 
 
width 
 
orientation 
(absolute) 
 
albedo 
(average reflection coefficient) 
 
Building 
 
location 
(absolute) 
 
height 
 
roof slope 
 
albedo 
(average reflection coefficient) 
 
Meteorological Conditions 
 
Ambient Wind Conditions (as part of Meteorological Conditions) 
speed 
direction  
(absolute) 
turbulence intensity 
Stre
distributi
Vector
Buildi
 Street 
Canyon
 Street 
Polluta
nt
Meteorologi
cal
street
buildin
has
Ambient 
Wind
 
Thermal
has
has
Flo
Vorte
has
 Pollutant 
Dispersio
n
has
source
Scalar 
Field
Isosurfa
isosurfa
is
is
is
part
part
part

 
 
10 
 
Thermal Conditions  
(as part of Meteorological Conditions) 
sunshine duration 
temperature of air 
temperature at street bottom 
temperature on surface of building at leeward side 
temperature on surface of building at windward side 
 
The direction of the ambient wind to the street canyon (required in the equations of 
the model) can be computed from the absolute direction of the ambient wind and the 
absolute orientation of the street 
 
Pollutant Source  
 
emitted product 
 
origin 
traffic-related / chemical toxics / biological toxics 
 
reactivity 
reactive / non-reactive 
 
source location 
street-level / advected 
 
emission rate 
continuous / non-continuous 
 
dispersion distribution which is a Pollutant Dispersion Distribution 
 
 
Flow  (which is a Vector Field) 
regime 
isolated roughness flow / wake interference flow / skimming 
flow 
 
Vortex   
is a Vector Field 
part of 
a Flow 
intensity 
weak / strong 
rotation direction 
clockwise / counter-clockwise 
location 
origin 
mechanically induced / thermally induced 
shape 
portal vortex / roll-type vortex / horseshoe vortex 
 
 
Isosurface 
 
value range 
 
geometry  
a closed surface 
 
Vector Field 
 
Scalar Field 
 
isosurface  
property which refers to Isosurface concept 
 
Pollutant Dispersion Distribution (which is a Scalar Field) 
 
source 
a Pollutant Source 
 
 
6. Interconnecting CityGML and air quality models 
 
In this section we will present different integration patterns that occur when 
interconnecting CityGML (CG) and an air quality model (AQ) and how to represent 
them in the OUPP ontology. Our goal is to provide a formal (logical) description of the 
interconnections at the conceptual level that can easily be turned into an automated 

 
 
11 
(computerized) process. The main idea is to create “associative” concepts and axioms in 
OUPP that refer to the interconnected concepts in AQ and CG. The aim is  
1. to represent potentially complex integration patterns 
2. to put all the integration related entities in OUPP and avoid modifying AQ or 
CG 
3. to provide a kind of centralized mediator for integrating other models (water 
quality, noise reduction, etc.)  
 
The interconnection technique we propose here is inspired by the work of Mitra, 
Wiederhold and Kersten (2000) on articulation ontologies. In their interconnection 
architecture the semantic relationships between two source ontologies are described by 
articulation rules (implications between concepts of the two ontologies), which are then 
translated to yield concepts in an articulation ontology and semantic implication edges 
between the articulation ontology and the source ontologies, They also propose 
functional rules that are intended to normalize values expressed in different systems of 
measurement.  In the following, we extend this approach by defining interconnection 
concepts that may have different types of semantic links with the source (CG and AQ) 
ontologies. Another aspect that distinguishes our approach from most of the other 
approaches (see (Kalfoglou and Schorlemmer, 2003) or (Shvaiko and Eurenat, 2005) 
for surveys) is the role of the OUPP ontology. In our context, the OUPP is not simply 
an articulation or a semantic bridge, it is a ontology with its own concepts that may not 
exist in the other ones. 
 
Interconnection patterns 
 
0. Property ranges 
 
The simples interconnection pattern occurs when a property of a concept in one 
ontology has its range in the other ontology. For instance, the geometry property of an 
isosurface in AQ is a surface, which is a concept defined in CG. In this situation it is not 
necessary to define an interconnection concept. 
 
1. Concepts with different viewpoints 
 
The properties of the two concepts are not the same in both ontologies and some 
properties can be computed from those in the other ontology. For instance, street in AQ 
has a width property while street in CG has a geometry. In addition, the width in AQ 
can be derived from the geometry in CG. 
We introduce the following interconnection concept (concepts with the same name 
are distinguished by prefixing them with the ontology name) 
 
OUPP:street 
 
properties 
 
 
in_AQ  
a AQ:street 
 
 
in_CG  
a CG:street 
 
Each instance of OUPP:street refers to the same street in AQ and CG. 
 

 
 
12 
The following axiom expresses the dependency between the width and geometry 
properties  
  
for all s in OUPP:street : s.in_AQ.width = width_computation( s.in_CG.geometry) 
 
where width_computation represents the (possibly complex) geometric function that 
computes the width of the polygon that forms the street geometry in CG. 
Another similar examples is AQ:building, with its roof slope computed from the 
roof surface of CG:building and its albedo obtained from the surfaces, material, and 
color of CG:building. 
 
2. Instances derived from several instances in the other ontology 
 
This is a more complex integration pattern where a concept instance in one ontology 
corresponds to a set of concept instances in the other one. For example, a street canyon 
(in AQ) exists only if there is some street (in CG) bordered by buildings in a particular 
configuration. The interconnection concept has the following definition: 
 
OUPP:street_canyon 
 
properties 
 
 
in_AQ  
a AQ:street_canyon 
 
 
street  
a CG:street 
 
 
buildings_1 
a set of CG:building  
 
 
buildings_2 
a set of CG:building 
 
where buildings_1 and buildings_2 refer to the sets of buildings that border the street on 
both sides. The following axiom defines the notion of street canyon 
  
for all c in OUPP:street_canyon :  
 
for all x in c.buildings_1 : borders(x, s) 
 
and 
 
for all y in c.buildings_2 : borders(y, s) 
 
and 
 
continuously_aligned(c.buildings_1) 
 
and 
 
continuously_aligned(c.buildings_2) 
 
where borders and continuously_aligned are geometric predicates. In addition, the 
properties of the street canyon in AQ depend on its components (in CG) properties (as 
in case 1) and possibly on other factors. For example 
 
for all c in OUPP:street_canyon : c.height-to-height_ratio =  
average_height(c.buildings_1) / average_height(c.buildings_2) 
 
 

 
 
13 
 
 
Figure 4: Concepts in OUPP as mediators between the Air Quality and CityGML ontologies 
 
This interconnection technique can be used to “import” theoretical results from one 
domain into another. For instance, consider the following result:  
 
An experiment led by Baik and Kim (2002) showed that, with buildings of 
similar height on both sides of the canyon and a street aspect ratio H/W of 2 
(building height of 80m and street width of 40m for example), the pollutant 
concentration in the lower region of the street canyon is higher near the 
downwind building than near the upwind building. On the other hand, in the 
upper region of the canyon, the concentration is higher near the upwind 
building than near the downwind building.  
 
As the lower part of the street canyon corresponds to the area most people walk or 
cycle, it is important to take into account (import) this result in sustainable urban 
planning. For example, if most of the time the wind blows in the same direction, it is 
preferable to position a cycle path on the upwind side of the canyon as it is the side with 
the lower level of pollutant. 
This can be formally represented by defining a new concept “street canyon with 
favourable upwind side” (SCFUS for short) in OUPP. This concept would be associated 
with  the following axiom: 
 
for all s in OUPP:SCFUS : (0.9 < x.in_AQ.height-to-height_ratio < 1.1)   
and (1.9 < height-to-width ratio < 2.1) 
 
Similarly, we could define the concept of potentially polluted street as streets that 
belong to a street canyon where air flow simulation produces a flow with one or more 
vortices (thus keeping pollutants in the canyon)  
From a software engineering point of view, the integration patterns we have shown 
here specify the computational processes that are necessary to transfer and translate data 
from one model into the other one.  
 
 

 
 
14 
7. Conclusion and future work 
 
In this paper we have argued that the integration of air quality models with 3D city 
models can greatly improve air quality modeling and sustainable urban planning. Air 
quality modeling can take advantage of the semantically rich representations of 3D city 
models to facilitate air flow simulation. The simulation results and other theoretical 
results from air quality modeling can then enrich 3D city models to help urban planners 
deal with air pollution issues.  
We have proposed a theoretical and practical approach to air quality and 3D city 
model integration that is based on the definition of an air quality ontology and the use of 
an urban planning process ontology that acts as a mediator. Through this approach it is 
possible to support sophisticated interconnection patterns and to formally specify them. 
In addition, the OUPP mediation ontology can be re-used to integrate several other 
models that are of interest for sustainable urban planning. 
In the near future we plan to enrich this integration example with other results and 
concepts from air quality modeling. Then we will apply this same approach to integrate 
other models, in particular water quality models. We will also develop computational 
tools to effectively re-use and transfer data between models.
