Model-based Deep Reinforcement Learning for Dynamic Portfolio
Optimization
Pengqian Yu * 1 Joon Sern Lee * 1 Ilya Kulyatin 1 Zekun Shi 1 Sakyasingha Dasgupta 1
Abstract
Dynamic portfolio optimization is the process of
sequentially allocating wealth to a collection of as-
sets in some consecutive trading periods, based on
investors’ return-risk proﬁle. Automating this pro-
cess with machine learning remains a challenging
problem. Here, we design a deep reinforcement
learning (RL) architecture with an autonomous
trading agent such that, investment decisions and
actions are made periodically, based on a global
objective, with autonomy. In particular, with-
out relying on a purely model-free RL agent, we
train our trading agent using a novel RL architec-
ture consisting of an infused prediction module
(IPM), a generative adversarial data augmentation
module (DAM) and a behavior cloning module
(BCM). Our model-based approach works with
both on-policy or off-policy RL algorithms. We
further design the back-testing and execution en-
gine which interact with the RL agent in real time.
Using historical real ﬁnancial market data, we
simulate trading with practical constraints, and
demonstrate that our proposed model is robust,
proﬁtable and risk-sensitive, as compared to base-
line trading strategies and model-free RL agents
from prior work.
1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) consists of an agent interact-
ing with the environment, in order to learn an optimal policy
by trial and error for sequential decision-making problems
(Bertsekas, 2005; Sutton & Barto, 2018). The past decade
has witnessed the tremendous success of deep reinforce-
ment learning (RL) in the ﬁelds of gaming, robotics and
recommendation systems (Lillicrap et al., 2015; Silver et al.,
2016; Mnih et al., 2015; 2016). However, its applications in
the ﬁnancial domain have not been explored as thoroughly.
*Equal contribution 1Neuri PTE LTD, One George Street, #22-
01, Singapore 049145. Correspondence to: Sakyasingha Dasgupta

Pre-print paper.
Dynamic portfolio optimization remains one of the most
challenging problems in the ﬁeld of ﬁnance (Markowitz,
1959; Haugen & Haugen, 1990). It is a sequential decision-
making process of continuously reallocating funds into a
number of different ﬁnancial investment products, with the
main aim to maximize return while constraining risk. Clas-
sical approaches to this problem include dynamic program-
ming and convex optimization, which require discrete ac-
tions and thus suffer from the ‘curse of dimensionality’ (e.g.,
(Cover, 1991; Li & Hoi, 2014; Feng et al., 2015)).
There have been efforts made to apply RL techniques to al-
leviate the dimensionality issue in the portfolio optimization
problem (Moody & Saffell, 2001; Dempster & Leemans,
2006; Cumming et al., 2015; Jiang et al., 2017; Deng et al.,
2017; Guo et al., 2018; Liang et al., 2018). The main idea is
to train an RL agent that is rewarded if its investment deci-
sions increase the logarithmic rate of return and is penalised
otherwise. However, these RL algorithms have several draw-
backs. In particular, the approaches in (Moody & Saffell,
2001; Dempster & Leemans, 2006; Cumming et al., 2015;
Deng et al., 2017) only yield discrete single-asset trading
signals. The multi-assets setting was studied in (Guo et al.,
2018), however, the authors did not take transaction costs
into consideration, thus limiting their practical usage. In re-
cent study (Jiang et al., 2017; Liang et al., 2018), transaction
costs were considered but it did not address the challenge
of having insufﬁcient data in ﬁnancial markets for the train-
ing of robust machine learning algorithms. Moreover, the
methods proposed in (Jiang et al., 2017; Liang et al., 2018)
directly apply a model-free RL algorithm that is sample
inefﬁcient and also doesn’t account for the stability and risk
issues caused by non-stationary ﬁnancial market environ-
ment. In this paper, we propose a novel model-based RL
approach, that takes into account practical trading restric-
tions such as transaction costs and order executions, to stably
train an autonomous agent whose investment decisions are
risk-averse yet proﬁtable.
We highlight our three main contributions to realize a model-
based RL algorithm for our problem setting. Our ﬁrst contri-
bution is an infused prediction module (IPM), which incor-
porates the prediction of expected future observations into
state-of-the-art RL algorithms. Our idea is inspired by some
arXiv:1901.08740v1  [cs.LG]  25 Jan 2019

Model-based Deep Reinforcement Learning for Dynamic Portfolio Optimization
attempts to merge prediction methods with RL. For exam-
ple, RL has been successful in predicting the behavior of
simple gaming environments (Oh et al., 2015). In addition,
prediction based models have also been shown to improve
the performance of RL agents in distributing energy over
a smart power grid (Marinescu et al., 2017). In this paper,
we explore two prediction models; a nonlinear dynamic
Boltzmann machine (Dasgupta & Osogami, 2017) and a
variant of parallel WaveNet (van den Oord et al., 2018).
These models make use of historical prices of all assets in
the portfolio to predict the future price movements of each
asset, in a codependent manner. These predictions are then
treated as additional features that can be used by the RL
agent to improve its performance. Our experimental results
show that using IPM provides signiﬁcant performance im-
provements over baseline RL algorithms in terms of Sharpe
ratio (Sharpe, 1966), Sortino ratio (Sortino & Price, 1994),
maximum drawdown (MDD, see (Chekhlov et al., 2005)),
value-at-risk (VaR, see (Artzner et al., 1999)) and condi-
tional value-at-risk (CVaR, see (Rockafellar et al., 2000)).
Our second contribution is a data augmentation module
(DAM), which makes use of a generative adversarial net-
work (GAN, e.g., (Goodfellow et al., 2014)) to generate
synthetic market data. This module is well motivated by
the fact that ﬁnancial markets have limited data. To illus-
trate this, consider the case where new portfolio weights are
decided by the agent on a daily basis. In such a scenario,
which may not be uncommon, the size of the training set
for a particular asset over the past 10 years is only around
2530, due to the fact that there are only about 253 trading
days a year. Clearly, this is an extremely small dataset that
may not be sufﬁcient for training a robust RL agent. To
overcome this difﬁculty, we train a recurrent GAN (Esteban
et al., 2017) using historical asset data to produce realistic
multi-dimensional time series. Different from the objective
function in (Goodfellow et al., 2014), we explicitly consider
the maximum mean discrepancy (MMD, see (Gretton et al.,
2007)) in the generator loss which further minimizes the
distribution mismatch between real and generated data dis-
tributions. We show that DAM helps to reduce over-ﬁtting
and typically leads to a portfolio with less volatility.
Our third contribution is a behavior cloning module (BCM),
which provides one-step greedy expert demonstration to
the RL agent. Our idea comes from the imitation learning
paradigm (also called learning from demonstrations), with
its most common form being behavior cloning, which learns
a policy through supervision provided by expert state-action
pairs. In particular, the agent receives examples of behavior
from an expert and attempts to solve a task by mimicking
the expert’s behavior, e.g., (Bain & Sommut, 1999; Abbeel
& Ng, 2004; Ross et al., 2011). In RL, an agent attempts
to maximize expected reward through interaction with the
environment. Our proposed BCM combines aspects of con-
ventional RL algorithms and supervised learning to solve
complex tasks. This technique is similar in spirit to the
work in (Nair et al., 2018). The difference is that we create
the expert behavior based on a one-step greedy strategy by
solving an optimization problem that maximizes immediate
rewards in the current time step. Additionally, we only up-
date the actor with respect to its auxiliary behavior cloning
loss in an actor-critic algorithm setting. We demonstrate that
BCM can prevent large changes in portfolio weights and
thus keep the volatility low, while also increasing returns in
some cases.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work that
leverages the deep RL state-of-art, and further extends it
to a model-based setting and integrate it into the ﬁnancial
domain. Even though our proposed approach has been rig-
orously tested on the off-policy RL algorithm (in particular,
the deep deterministic policy gradients (DDPG) algorithm
(Lillicrap et al., 2015)), these concepts can be easily ex-
tended to on-policy RL algorithms such as proximal policy
optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) and trust region
policy optimization (Schulman et al., 2015) algorithms. We
showcase the overall algorithm for model-based PPO for
portfolio management and the corresponding results in the
supplementary material. Additionally, we also provide algo-
rithms for differential risk sensitive deep RL for portfolio
optimization in the supplementary material. For the rest of
the main paper, our discussion will be centered around how
our three contributions can improve the performance of the
off-policy DDPG algorithm.
This paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we re-
view the deep RL literature, and formulate the portfolio
optimization problem as a deep RL problem. We describe
the structure of our automatic trading system in Section 3.
Speciﬁcally, we provide details of the infused prediction
module, data augmentation module and behavior cloning
module in Section 3.2 to Section 3.4. In Section 4, we report
numerical experiments that serve to illustrate the effective-
ness of methods described in this paper. We conclude in
Section 5.
2. Preliminaries and Problem Setup
In this section, we brieﬂy review the literature of deep rein-
forcement learning and introduce the mathematical formula-
tion of the dynamic portfolio optimization problem.
A Markov Decision Process (MDP) is deﬁned as a 6-tuple
⟨T, γ, S, A, P, r⟩. Here, T is the (possibly inﬁnite) decision
horizon; γ ∈(0, 1] is the discount factor; S = S
t St is
the state space and A = S
t At is the action space, both
assumed to be ﬁnite dimensional and continuous; P : S ×
A × S →[0, 1] is the transition kernel and r : S × A →R
is the reward function. Policy is a mapping µ : S →A,

Model-based Deep Reinforcement Learning for Dynamic Portfolio Optimization
specifying the action to choose in a particular state. At each
time step t ∈{1, . . . , T}, the agent in state st ∈St takes
an action at = µ(st) ∈At, receives the reward rt and
transits to the next state st+1 according to P. The agent’s
objective is to maximize its expected return given the start
distribution, Jµ ≜Est∼P,at∼µ[PT
t=1 γt−1rt]. The state-
action value function, or the Q value function, is deﬁned as
Qµ(st, at) ≜Esi>t∼P,ai>t∼µ[PT
i=t γ(i−t−1)ri|st, at].
Deep deterministic policy gradient (DDPG) algorithm (Lil-
licrap et al., 2015) is an off-policy model-free reinforce-
ment learning algorithm for continuous control which utilize
large function approximators such as deep neural networks.
DDPG is an actor-critic method, which bridges the gap
between policy gradient methods and value function ap-
proximation methods for RL. Intuitively, DDPG learns a
state-action value function (critic) by minimizing the Bell-
man error, while simultaneously learning a policy (actor) by
directly maximizing the estimated state-action value func-
tion with respect to the network parameters.
In particular, DDPG maintains an actor function µ(s) with
parameters θµ, a critic function Q(s, a) with parameters θQ,
and a replay buffer R as a set of tuples (st, at, rt, st+1) for
each experienced transition. DDPG alternates between run-
ning the policy to collect experiences (i.e. training roll-outs)
and updating the parameters. In our implementation, train-
ing roll-outs were conducted with noise added to the policy
network’s parameter space to encourage exploration (Plap-
pert et al., 2017). During each training step, DDPG samples
a minibatch consisting of N tuples from R to update the
actor and critic networks. DDPG minimizes the follow-
ing loss L w.r.t. θQ to update the critic, L = PN
i=1(ri +
γQ(si+1, µ(si+1)) −Q(si, ai|θQ))2/N. The actor parame-
ters θµ are updated using the policy gradient ∇θµJµ =
PN
i=1 ∇aQ(s, a|θQ)|s=si,a=µ(si)∇θµµ(s|θµ)|s=si/N. To
stabilize learning, the Q value function is usually computed
using a separate network (called the target network) whose
weights are an exponential average over time of the critic
network. This results in smoother target values.
Financial portfolio management is the process of constant
redistribution of available funds to a set of ﬁnancial assets.
Our goal is to create a dynamic portfolio allocation sys-
tem that periodically generates investment decisions and
then act on these decisions autonomously. Following (Jiang
et al., 2017), we consider a portfolio of m + 1 assets, in-
cluding m risky assets and 1 risk-free asset (e.g., broker
cash balance or U.S. treasury bond). We introduce such
notation: given a matrix g, we denote the ith row of g by
gi,:, and the jth column by g:,j. We denote the closing,
high and low price vectors of trading period t as pt, ph
t and
pl
t where pi,t is the closing price of the ith asset in the tth
period. In this paper, we choose the ﬁrst asset to be risk-
free cash, i.e., p0,t = ph
0,t = pl
0,t = 1. We further deﬁne
the price relative vector of the tth trading period as ut ≜
pt ⊘pt−1 = (1, p1,t/p1,t−1, . . . , pm,t/pm,t−1)⊤where
⊘denotes the element-wise division. In addition, we let
hi,t ≜(pi,t −pi,t−1)/pi,t−1 denote the percentage change
of closing price at time t for asset i, the space associated
with its vector form h:,t (hi,:) as H:,t ⊂Rm (Hi,: ⊂Rk1)
where k1 is the time embedding of prediction model. We de-
ﬁne wt−1 as the portfolio weight vector at the beginning of
trading period t where its ith element wi,t−1 represents the
proportion of asset i in the portfolio after capital realloca-
tion and Pm
i=0 wi,t = 1 for all t. We initialize our portfolio
with w0 = (1, 0, . . . , 0)⊤. Due to price movements in the
market, at the end of the same period, the weights evolve
according to w
′
t = (ut ⊙wt−1)/(ut · wt−1), where ⊙is
the element-wise multiplication. Our goal at the end of
period t is to reallocate portfolio vector from w
′
t to wt by
selling and buying relevant assets. Paying all commission
fees, this reallocation action shrinks the portfolio value by
a factor ¯ct ≜c Pm
i=1 |w
′
i,t −wi,t| where c is the transac-
tion fees for purchasing and selling. In particular, we let
ρt−1 denote the portfolio value at the beginning of period
t and ρ
′
t at the end. We then have ρt = ¯ctρ
′
t. The imme-
diate reward is the logarithmic rate of return deﬁned by
rt ≜ln(ρt/ρt−1) = ln(¯ctρ
′
t/ρt−1) = ln(¯ctut · wt−1).
We deﬁne the normalized close price matrix at time t by
Pt ≜[pt−k2+1 ⊘pt|pt−k2+2 ⊘pt| · · · |pt−1 ⊘pt|1]
where 1 ≜(1, 1, . . . , 1)⊤and k2 is the time embed-
ding. The normalized high price matrix Ph
t is deﬁned by
Ph
t ≜[ph
t−k2+1⊘pt|ph
t−k2+2⊘pt| · · · |ph
t−1⊘pt|ph
t ⊘pt],
and low price matrix Pl
t can be deﬁned similarly. We fur-
ther deﬁne the price tensor as Yt ≜[Pt Ph
t Pl
t]. Our
objective is to design a RL agent that observes the state
st ≜(Yt, wt−1) and takes a sequence of actions (port-
folio weights) over the time at = wt such that the ﬁnal
portfolio value ρT = ρ0Est∼P,at∼µ[exp(PT
t=1 γt−1rt)] is
maximized.
3. System Design and Data
In this section, we discuss the detailed design of our pro-
posed RL based automatic trading system.
Agent 
IPM 
DAM 
BCM 
AE 
Data Fetcher 
Market 
DH 
Broker 
Trade Execution Engine  
MSE 
Figure 1. Trading framework.

Model-based Deep Reinforcement Learning for Dynamic Portfolio Optimization
The trading framework referenced in this paper is repre-
sented in Figure 1 and is a modular system composed of a
data handler (DH), an algorithm engine (AE) and a market
simulation engine (MSE). The DH retrieves market data
and deals with the required data transformations. It is de-
signed for continuous data ingestion in order to provide
the AE with the required set of information. The AE is a
collection of models containing RL agents and environment
speciﬁcations. We refer the readers to Algorithm 1 in the
supplementary material for further details. The MSE is an
online event-driven module that provides feedback of ex-
ecuted trades, which can eventually be used by the AE to
compute rewards. In addition, it also executes investment
decisions made by the AE. The strategy applied in this study
is an asset allocation system that rebalances the available
capital between the provided set of assets and a cash asset
on a daily frequency.
The data used in this paper is a mix of U.S. equities1 on
tick level (trade by trade) aggregated to form open-high-low-
close (OHLC) bars on an hourly frequency2.
In the ﬁnancial domain, it is common to use benchmark
strategies to evaluate the relative proﬁtability and risk pro-
ﬁle of the tested strategies. A common benchmark strategy
is the constantly rebalanced portfolio (CRP), where at each
period the portfolio is rebalanced to the initial wealth dis-
tribution among the m + 1 assets including the cash. This
strategy can be seen as using the mean-reverting nature of
stock prices, as it sells those that gained value while buying
more of those losing value. In (Cover, 1991) it is shown
that such a strategy is asymptotically the best for stationary
stochastic processes such as stock prices, offering exponen-
tial returns and is, therefore, an optimistic benchmark to
compare against. Transaction fees c have been ﬁxed at a
conservative level of 20 basis points3 and, given the use
of market orders, an additional 50 basis points slippage4 is
1We use data from Reﬁnitiv DataScope, with experiments car-
ried out on the following U.S. Equities: Costco Wholesale Corpo-
ration, Cisco Systems, Ford Motors, Goldman Sachs, American
International Group and Caterpillar. The selection is qualitative
with a balanced mix of volatile and less volatile stocks. An ad-
ditional asset is cash (in U.S. dollars), representing the amount
of capital not invested in any other asset. Furthermore, a generic
market variable (S&P 500 index) has been added as an additional
feature. The data is shared in supplementary ﬁles, which will be
made available publicly later.
2We execute orders hourly, while the agent produces decisions
daily.
3One basis point is equivalent to 0.01%.
4Slippage is deﬁned as the relative deviation of the price at
which the orders get executed and the price at which the agent
produced the reallocation action. This conservative level of slip-
page is due to the lack of equity volume data, as during less liquid
trading periods the agent market orders might inﬂuence the market
price and get a worse trade execution than expected in a simulated
environment.
applied.
Performance monitoring is based on a set of evaluation
measures such as Sharpe and Sortino ratios, value-at-risk
(VaR), conditional value-at-risk (CVaR), maximum draw-
down (MDD), annualized volatility and annualized returns.
Let Y denote a bounded random variable. The Sharpe ratio
of Y is deﬁned as SR ≜E[Y ]/
p
var[Y ]. Sharpe ratio, rep-
resenting the reward per unit of risk, has been recognized
not to be desirable since it is a symmetric measure of risk
and, hence, penalizes the low-cost events. Sortino ratio,
VaR and CVaR are risk measures which gained popularity
for taking into consideration only the unfavorable part of
the return distribution, or, equivalently, unwanted high cost.
Sortino ratio is deﬁned similarly to Sharpe ratio, though
replacing the standard deviation
p
var[Y ] with the down-
side deviation. The VaRα with level α ∈(0, 1) of Y is the
(1 −α)-quantile of Y , and CVaRα at level α is the expected
return of Y in the worst (1 −α) of cases.
3.1. Network Architecture
In this subsection, we provide a qualitative description of
our proposed network before delving into the mathematical
details in the subsequent subsections.
Data Fetcher
IPM
FE
FE
FA
FA
NI
NI
Agent
Actions
(desired portfolio 
allocation)
Memory
Critic Network
Actor Network
BCM
DAM
Figure 2. Agent architecture.
Figure 2 shows how we integrate the IPM, BCM and DAM
into our network architecture. In particular, the DAM is
used to append generated data to each training episode. The
data fetcher fetches data from the augmented data in a step-
wise fashion. This data is then fed to both the IPM and
agent, which have multiple neural networks.
To illustrate our proposed off-policy version of dynamic
portfolio optimization algorithm, we adapt the actor-critic
style DDPG algorithm (Lillicrap et al., 2015). In this set-
ting, at least two networks (one for the actor and one for the
critic) are required in the agent as shown in Figure 2. Fur-
thermore, our implementation utilizes both target networks
(Mnih et al., 2015) and parameter noise exploration (Plap-
pert et al., 2017), which in itself necessitates two additional
networks for the actor. Our agent, comprising of six sepa-
rate networks (four networks for the actor and two networks
for the critic), is described in Algorithm 1 of supplementary

Model-based Deep Reinforcement Learning for Dynamic Portfolio Optimization
material Section A.
We next discuss how the agent is trained and tested. For
each episode during training, we select an episode of data
by selecting a random trading date that satisﬁes our desired
episode length. The training data of each episode is then
augmented by synthetic data generated by the DAM. At
each time step of the episode, market data, i.e., data cor-
responding to the current time step of interest, fetched via
the data fetcher is used to train the IPM which produces
predictions of price percentage changes in the next time
step. At the same time, the agent’s networks are updated
by making use of data sampled from the memory (also re-
ferred to as the replay buffer) via the prioritized experience
replay (Schaul et al., 2015). Once the agent’s networks are
updated, an action, i.e., desired portfolio allocation in the
next time step, can be obtained from the actor network that
has been perturbed with the parameter noise. The MSE
then executes this noisy action and the agent moves to the
next state. The corresponding state, action, rewards, next
state and computed one-step greedy action, produced by the
BCM, are stored in the memory. This process is repeated
for each step in the episode and for all episodes. During the
testing period, the IPM continues to be updated at each time
step while the agent is frozen in that it is no longer trained
and actions are obtained from the actual actor network, i.e.,
the actor network without parameter noise.
As shown in Figure 2, actor and critic networks in the agent
consist of feature extraction (FE), feature analysis (FA) and
network improvement (NI) components. The FE layers aim
to extract features given the current price tensor Yt. In our
experiments, we have 8 assets including cash and a time
embedding k2 = 10. This essentially means that we have a
price tensor of the shape 3 × 8 × 10 if using the channels
ﬁrst convention. The FE layers can be either LSTM-based
recurrent neural networks (RNN, see (Hochreiter & Schmid-
huber, 1997)) or convolutional neural networks (CNN, see
(Krizhevsky et al., 2012)). We ﬁnd that the former typically
yields better performance. Thus, the price tensor is reshaped
to a 24 × 10 tensor prior to being fed to the LSTM-based
FE network.
The outputs at each time step of the LSTM-based FE net-
work are concatenated together into a single vector. Next,
the previous actions, wt−1, is concatenated to this vector.
Finally, it is further concatenated with a one-step predicted
price percentage change vector produced by the IPM and a
market index performance indicator (i.e., the price ratio of
a market index such as the S&P 500 index). The resulting
vector is then passed to a series of dense layers (i.e., multi-
layer perceptrons), which we refer to as the feature analysis
(FA) component. We remark that the network in (Jiang et al.,
2017) does not have dense layers, which may not account
for non-linear relationships across various assets.
Finally, we have a network improvement (NI) component for
each network which speciﬁes how the network is updated.
Speciﬁcally, NI synchronizes the learning rates between the
actor and the critic, which preserves training stability by
ensuring the actor is updated at a slower rate than the critic
(Bhatnagar et al., 2009). It is also important to note that
the actor network’s NI component receives gradients from
the BCM, which makes use of one-step greedy actions to
provide supervised updates to the actor network to reduce
portfolio volatility.
3.2. Infused Prediction Module
Here, for the IPM, we implemented and evaluated two dif-
ferent multivariate prediction models, trained in an online
manner, differing in their computational complexity. As
the most time efﬁcient model, we implemented the nonlin-
ear dynamic Boltzmann machine (Dasgupta & Osogami,
2017) (NDyBM) that predicts the future price of each asset
conditioned on the history of all assets in the portfolio. As
NDyBM does not require backpropagation through time,
it has a parameter update time complexity of O(1). This
makes it very suitable for fast computation in online time-
series prediction scenarios. However, NDyBM assumes that
the inputs come from an underlying Gaussian distribution.
In order to make IPM more generic, we also implemented
a novel prediction model using dilated convolution layers
inspired by the WaveNet architecture (van den Oord et al.,
2018). As there was no signiﬁcant difference in predictive
performance noticed between the two models, in the rest of
the paper we provide results with the faster NDyBM based
IPM module. However, details of our WaveNet inspired
architecture can be seen in supplementary section D.
We use the state-space augmentation technique, and con-
struct the augmented state-space eS ≜St × H:,t+1 ×
H:,t+1 × H:,t+1:
each state is now a pair ˜st
≜
(st, xt+1), where st
∈
St is the original state, and
xt+1 ≜(h:,t+1, hh
:,t+1, hl
:,t+1) ∈X
⊂Rm×3 where
h:,t+1, hh
:,t+1, hl
:,t+1 ∈H:,t+1 is the predicted future close,
high and low asset percentage price change tensor.
The NDyBM can be seen as an unfolded Gaussian Boltz-
mann machine for an inﬁnite time horizon i.e. T →∞
history, that generalizes a standard vector auto-regressive
model with eligibility traces and nonlinear transformation
of historical data (Dasgupta & Osogami, 2017). It repre-
sents the conditional probability density of x[t] given x[:t−1]
as, p(x[t]|x[:t−1]) = QN
j=1 pj(x[t]
j |x[:t−1])5. Where, each
factor of the right-hand side denotes the conditional proba-
bility density of x[t]
j given x[:t−1] for j = 1, . . . , N. Where,
N = m × 3 are the number of units in the NDyBM. Here,
5For mathematical convenience, xt and x[t] are used inter-
changeably.

Model-based Deep Reinforcement Learning for Dynamic Portfolio Optimization
x[t]
j is considered to have a Gaussian distribution for each j:
pj(x[t]
j |x[:t−1]) =
1
√
2 π σ2
j exp

−
 x[t]
j −µ[t]
j
2
2σ2
j

.
Here, µ ≜(µj)j=1,...,N is the vector of expected values of
the j-th unit at time t given the history up to t −1 patterns.
It is represented as:
µ[t] = b + Pd−1
δ=1 F[δ]x[t−δ] + PK
k=1 Gk α[t−1]
k
.
Where, b ≜(bj)j=1,...,N is a bias vector, α[t−1]
k
≜
(α[t−1]
j,k
)j=1,...,N are K eligibility trace vectors, d is the time-
delay between connections (i, j) and
F[δ] ≜( ˜fi,j)(i,j)∈{1,...,N}2 for 0 < δ < d, Gk ≜
(gi,j,k)(i,j)∈{1,...,N}2 for k = 1, . . . , K are N × N weight
matrices. The eligibility trace can be updated recursively as,
α[t]
i,j,k = λk α[t−1]
i,j,k + x[t−di,j+1]
i
. Here, λk is a ﬁxed decay
rate factor deﬁned for each of the k column vectors. Addi-
tionally, the bias parameter vector b, is updated at each time
using a RNN layer. This RNN layer computes a nonlinear
feature map of the past time series. Where in, the output
weights from the RNN to the bias layer along with other
NDyBM parameters (bias, weight matrices and variance),
are updated online using a stochastic gradient method.
Following (Dasgupta & Osogami, 2017)6, the NDyBM is
trained to predict the next time-step close, high and low
percentage change for each asset conditioned on the history
of all other assets, such that the log-likelihood of each time-
series is maximised. As such NDyBM parameters are up-
dated at each step t, following the gradient of the conditional
probability density of x[t]: ∇θ log p(x[t]|x[−∞,t−1]) =
PN
i=1 ∇θ log pi(x[t]
i |x[−∞,t−1]).
In the spirit of providing the agent with additional mar-
ket signals and removing non-Markovian dynamics in the
model, along with the prediction, we further augment the
state space with a market index performance indicator. The
state space now has the form ˜st ≜(st, xt+1, It) where,
It ∈R+ is the market index performance indicator for time
step t.
3.3. Data Augmentation Module
The limited historical ﬁnancial data prevents us from scaling
up the deep RL agent. To mitigate this issue, we augment the
data set via the recurrent generative adversarial networks
(RGAN) framework (Esteban et al., 2017) and generate
synthetic time series. The RGAN follows the architecture of
a regular GAN, with both the generator and the discriminator
substituted by recurrent neural networks. Speciﬁcally, we
generate percentage change of closing price for each asset
separately at higher frequency than what the RL agent uses.
We then downsample the generated series to obtain the
6Details of the learning rule and derivation of the model as per
the original paper. Algorithm steps and hyper-parameter settings
are provided in supplementary.
synthetic series of high, low, close (HLC) triplet vector
xt. This approach avoids the non-stationarity in market
price dynamics by generating a stationary percentage change
series instead, and the generated HLC triplet is guaranteed to
maintain their relationship (i.e., generated highs are higher
than generated lows).
We assume implicitly that the ith assets’ percentage change
vector hi,: follows a distribution: hi,: ∼pi
data(hi,:). Let H
be the hidden dimension. Our goal is to ﬁnd a parameterized
function Gi
ψ such that given a noise prior pz(z), z ∈Rk1×H
the generated distribution pi
g(Gi
ψ(z)) are empirically simi-
lar to the data distribution pi
data(hi,:). Formally, given two
batches of observations {Gi
ψ(z)(j)}b
j=1, {h(j)
i,: }b
j=1 from
distributions pi
g and pi
data where b is the batch size, we want
pi
g ≈pi
data under certain similarity measure of distributions.
One suitable choice of such similarity measure is the maxi-
mum mean discrepancy (MMD) (Gretton et al., 2012). Fol-
lowing (Li et al., 2015), we can show (see supplementary
material) that with RBF kernel, minimizing \
MMD
2
b, which
is the biased estimator of squared MMD results in matching
all moments between the two distribution pa, pb.
As discussed in previous works (Arjovsky et al., 2017; Ar-
jovsky & Bottou, 2017), vanilla GANs suffer from the prob-
lem that discriminator becomes perfect when the real and
the generated probabilities have disjoint supports (which is
often the case under the hypothesis that real-world data lies
in low dimensional manifolds). This could lead to generator
gradient vanishing, making the training difﬁcult. Further-
more, the generator can suffer from mode collapse issue
where it succeeds in tricking the discriminator but the gen-
erated samples have low variation.
In our RGAN architecture, we model each asset i separately
by a pair of parameterized function Di
φ, Gi
ψ, and we use
\
MMD
2, the unbiased estimator of squared MMD between
pi
g and pi
data, as a regularizer for the generator Gi
ψ, such that
the generator not only tries to ’trick’ the discriminator into
classifying its output as coming from pi
data, but also tries
to match pi
g with pi
data in all moments. This alleviates the
aforementioned issues in vanilla GAN: ﬁrstly \
MMD
2 is
deﬁned even when distributions have disjoint supports, and
secondly gradients provided by \
MMD
2 are not dependent
on the discriminator but only on the real data. Speciﬁcally,
both the discriminator Di
φ and the generator Gi
ψ is trained
with gradient descent method. The discriminator objective
is:
maxφ 1
b
Pb
j=1
h
log Di
φ(h(j)
i ) + log

1 −Di
φ(Gi
ψ(z(j)))
i
,
and the generator objective is:
minψ 1
b
Pb
j=1
h
log

1 −Di
φ(Gi
ψ(z(j)))
i
+ ζ \
MMD
2

Model-based Deep Reinforcement Learning for Dynamic Portfolio Optimization
given a batch of b samples {z(j)}b
j=1 drawn independently
from a diagonal Gaussian noise prior pz(z), and a batch of
b samples {h(j)
i }b
j=1 drawn from the data distribution pi
data
of the ith asset.
In order to select the bandwidth parameter σ in the RBF
kernel, we set it to the median pairwise distance between
the joint data. Both discriminator and generator networks
are LSTMs (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997).
Although generator directly minimises estimated \
MMD
2,
we go one step further to validate the RGAN by conducting
Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) test. Our results show that the
RGAN is indeed generating data representative of the true
underlying distribution. More details of the KS test can be
found in supplementary material.
3.4. Behavior Cloning Module
In ﬁnance, some investors may favor a portfolio with lower
volatility over the investment horizon. To achieve this, we
propose a novel method of behavior cloning, with the pri-
mary purpose of reducing portfolio volatility while main-
taining reward to risk ratios. We remark that one can broadly
dichotomize imitation learning into a passive collection of
demonstrations (behavioral cloning) versus an active col-
lection of demonstrations. The former setting (Abbeel &
Ng, 2004; Ross et al., 2011) assumes that demonstrations
are collected a priori and the goal of imitation learning is
to ﬁnd a policy that mimics the demonstrations. The latter
setting (Daum´e et al., 2009; Sun et al., 2017) assumes an
interactive expert that provides demonstrations in response
to actions taken by the current policy. Our proposed BCM
in this deﬁnition is an active imitation learning algorithm.
In particular, for every step that the agent takes during train-
ing, we calculate the one-step greedy action in hindsight.
This one-step greedy action is computed by solving an opti-
mization problem, given the next time period’s price ratios,
current portfolio distribution and transaction costs. The ob-
jective function is to maximize returns in the current time
step, which is why the computed action is referred to as
the one-step greedy action. For time step t, the objective
function is as follows:
max
wt
ut · wt −c Pm
i=1 |wi,t −wi,t−1|
s.t.
Pm
i=0 wi,t = 1,
0 ≤wi,t ≤1, ∀i.
(1)
Solving the above optimization problem for wt yields an
optimal expert greedy action denoted by ¯at. This one-step
greedy action is then stored in the replay buffer together
with the corresponding (st, at, rt, st+1) pair. In each train-
ing iteration of the actor-critic algorithm, a mini-batch of
{(si, ai, ri, si+1, ¯ai)}N
i=1 is sampled from the replay buffer.
Using the states si that were sampled from the replay buffer,
the actor’s corresponding actions are computed and the log-
loss between the actor’s actions and the one-step greedy
actions ¯ai is calculated:
¯Lµ = −1×
PN
i=1
Pm
j=0 ¯ai,j log(µ(si))j + (1 −¯ai,j) log(1 −(µ(si))j)
N(m + 1)
.
(2)
Gradients of the log-loss with respect to the actor net-
work ∇θµ ¯Lµ can then be calculated and used to perturb
the weights of the actor slightly. Using this loss directly
prevents the learned policy from improving signiﬁcantly
beyond the demonstration policy, as the actor is always tied
back to the demonstrations. To achieve this, a factor λ is
used to discount the gradients such that the actor network
is only slightly perturbed towards the one-step greedy ac-
tion, thus maintaining the stability of the underlying RL
algorithm. Following this, the typical DDPG algorithm as
described above is executed to train the agent.
4. Experiments
All experiments7 were conducted using a backtesting envi-
ronment, and the assets used are as described in Section 3.
The time period spanning from 1 Jan 2005 to 31 Dec 2016
was used to train the agent, while the time period between
1 Jan 2017 to 4 Dec 2018 was used to test the agent. We
initialize our portfolio with $500, 000 in cash. We imple-
ment a CRP benchmark where funds are equally distributed
among all assets, including the cash asset. We also compare
the previous work (Jiang et al., 2017) as a baseline which
can be considered as a vanilla model-free DDPG algorithm
(i.e., without data augmentation, infused prediction and be-
havioral cloning)8. It should be noted that, compared to the
implementation in (Jiang et al., 2017) our baseline agent is
situated in a more realistic trading environment that does
not assume an immediate trade execution. In particular, our
backtesting engine executes market orders at the open of
the next OHLC bar9, as well as adds slippage to the trading
costs. Additional practical constraints are applied such that
fractional trades of an asset are not allowed.
As shown in Table 1, adding both DAM and BCM to the
baseline leads to a very small increase in Sharpe ratio (from
0.56% to 0.57%) and Sortino ratio (from 0.78% to 0.79%).
There are two hypotheses that we can draw here. First, we
hypothesize that the vanilla DDPG algorithm (in its usage
within our framework) is not over-ﬁtting to the data since
the use of data augmentation has a relatively small impact
on the performance. Similarly, it could be hypothesized that
7Algorithm of our model-based DDPG agent is detailed in
supplementary material Section A.
8In fact, our baseline is superior to the prior work (Jiang et al.,
2017) due to the addition of prioritized experience replay and
parameter noise for better exploration.
9Refer to Section 3 for details on these terms.

Model-based Deep Reinforcement Learning for Dynamic Portfolio Optimization
Table 1. Performances for different models (last column represents IPM+DAM+BCM model. ann. and accnt. stand for annualized and
account, respectively).
CRP
Baseline
IPM
DAM
BCM
IPM+DAM
IPM+BCM
DAM+BCM
All
Final accnt. value
574859
570482
586150
571853
571578
575430
577293
571417
580899
Ann. return
7.25%
7.14%
8.64%
7.26%
7.24%
7.60%
7.77%
7.22%
8.09%
Ann. volatility
12.65%
12.79%
14.14%
12.80%
12.79%
12.84%
12.81%
12.77%
12.77%
Sharpe ratio
0.57
0.56
0.61
0.57
0.57
0.59
0.61
0.57
0.63
Sortino ratio
0.80
0.78
0.87
0.79
0.79
0.83
0.85
0.79
0.89
VaR0.95
1.27%
1.30%
1.41%
1.30%
1.30%
1.29%
1.28%
1.30%
1.27%
CVaR0.95
1.91%
1.93%
2.11%
1.94
1.93%
1.93%
1.92%
1.93%
1.91%
MDD
13.10%
13.80%
12.20%
13.70%
13.70%
12.70%
12.60%
13.70%
12.40%
the baseline is efﬁcient in its use of available signals in the
training set, such that, the addition of behavior cloning by
itself, has a negligible improvement of performance. By
making use of just IPM, we observe a signiﬁcant improve-
ment over the baseline in terms of Sharpe (from 0.56 to
0.61) and Sortino (from 0.78 to 0.87) ratios, indicating that
we are able to get more returns per unit risk taken. However,
we note that the volatility of the portfolio is signiﬁcantly
increased (from 12.79% to 14.14%). This could be due to
the agent over-ﬁtting to the training set, with the addition
of this module. Therefore, when the agent sees the testing
set, its actions could result in more frequent losses, thereby
increasing volatility.
To reduce over-ﬁtting, we integrate IPM with DAM. As
can be seen in Table 1, the Sharpe ratio is actually reduced
slightly compared to the IPM case (from 0.61 to 0.59) al-
though volatility is signiﬁcantly reduced (from 14.14% to
12.84%). This reduces the overall risk of the portfolio.
Moreover, this substantiates our hypothesis of the agent
over-ﬁtting to the training set. One possible reason for IPM
over-ﬁtting to the training set while the baseline agent does
not is the following: the IPM is inherently more complex
due to the presence of a prediction model. The increased
complexity in terms of larger network structure essentially
results in higher probability of over-ﬁtting to the training
data. As such, using DAM to diversify the training set is
highly beneﬁcial in containing such model over-ﬁtting.
One drawback of using IPM+DAM is the decreased return
to risk ratios as mentioned above. To mitigate this, we
make use of all our contributions as a single framework (i.e.
IPM+DAM+BCM). As shown in Table 1, we are not only
able to recover the performance of the original model trained
using just IPM, but surpass the IPM performance in terms
of both Sharpe (from 0.61 to 0.63) and Sortino ratios (from
0.87 to 0.89). It is worthwhile to note that addition of BCM
has a strong impact compared to IPM+DAM in reducing
volatility (from 12.84% to 12.77%) and MDD (from 12.7%
to 12.4%). The observation of behavior cloning reducing
downside risk is further substantiated when comparing the
model trained via IPM versus the model trained with IPM
and BCM; the Sharpe and Sortino ratios are maintained
though annualized volatility is signiﬁcantly reduced. In
addition, when comparing baseline versus baseline with
BCM, we see that MDD is reduced and Sharpe and Sortino
ratios have small improvements.
We can conclude that IPM signiﬁcantly improves portfolio
management performances in terms of Sharpe and Sortino
ratios. This is particularly attractive for investors who aim to
maximize their returns per unit risk. In addition, DAM helps
to prevent over-ﬁtting especially in the case of larger and
more complex network architectures. However, it is impor-
tant to note that this may impact risk to reward performance.
BCM as envisioned, helps to reduce portfolio risk as seen by
its ability to either reduce volatility or MDD across all runs.
It is also interesting to note its ability to slightly improve the
risk to return (reward) ratios. Enabling all three modules,
our proposed model-based approach can achieve signiﬁcant
performance improvement as compared with benchmark
and baseline. In addition, we provide details on an addi-
tional risk adjustment module (that can adjust the reward
function contingent on risk) with experimental results in
supplementary material. Usage of the presented modules
with a PPO based on-policy algorithm is also provided.
5. Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed a model-based deep reinforce-
ment learning architecture to solve the dynamic portfolio
optimization problem. To achieve a proﬁtable and risk-
sensitive portfolio, we developed infused prediction, GAN
based data augmentation and behavior cloning modules, and
further integrated them into an automatic trading system.
The stability and proﬁtability of our proposed model-based
RL trading framework were empirically validated on sev-
eral independent experiments with real market data and
practical constraints. Our approach is applicable not only
to the ﬁnancial domain, but also to general reinforcement
learning domains which require practical considerations on
decision making risk and training data scarcity. Future work
could test our model’s performance on gaming and robotics
applications.

Model-based Deep Reinforcement Learning for Dynamic Portfolio Optimization
