21 
Inferring Parameters and Structure of Latent Variable Models by 
Variational Bayes 
Hagai Attias 

Gatsby Unit, University College London 
17 Queen Square 
London WC1N 3AR, U.K. 
Abstract 
Current methods for learning graphical mod­
els with latent variables and a fixed structure 
estimate optimal values for the model param­
eters. Whereas this approach usually pro­
duces overfitting and suboptimal generaliza­
tion performance, carrying out the Bayesian 
program of computing the full posterior dis­
tributions over the parameters remains a dif­
ficult problem. Moreover, learning the struc­
ture of models with latent variables, for which 
the Bayesian approach is crucial, is yet a 
harder problem. 
In this paper I present 
the Variational Bayes framework, which pro­
vides a solution to these problems. This ap­
proach approximates full posterior distribu­
tions over model parameters and structures, 
as well as latent variables, in an analytical 
manner without resorting to sampling meth­
ods. Unlike in the Laplace approximation, 
these posteriors are generally non-Gaussian 
and no Hessian needs to be computed. The 
resulting algorithm generalizes the standard 
Expectation Maximization algorithm, and its 
convergence is guaranteed. I demonstrate 
that this algorithm can be applied to a large 
class of models in several domains, including 
unsupervised clustering and blind source sep­
aration. 
1 
Introduction 
This paper focuses on learning graphical models from 
data. A standard method to learn a model is maxi­
mum likelihood (ML). This method estimates optimal 
values for the model parameters within a fixed graph 
structure from a given dataset. There are three main 
problems with ML learning. First, it produces a model 
that overfits the data and subsequently have subopti-
mal generalization performance. Second, it cannot be 
used to learn the structure of the graph, since more 
complicated graphs assign a higher likelihood to the 
data. Third, it is computationally tractable only for a 
small class of models. 
The Bayesian framework (Mackay 1992a, 1992b; 
Cooper and Herskovits 1992; Heckerman et al. 1995) 
provides, in principle, a solution to the first two prob­
lems. In this framework one considers an ensemble 
of models, characterized by a probability distribu­
tion over all possible parameter values and structures. 
Rather than learning a single model from a given 
dataset, one computes the distribution over the en­
semble of models given these data. Model uncertainty 
is thus taken into account, leading to enhanced gen­
eralization performance. In addition, complex mod­
els are effectively penalized by being assigned a lower 
posterior probability, hence optimal structures can be 
identified. In models that contain hidden variables, 
the posterior one computes is the joint distribution 
over models and hidden variables given the data. 
Unfortunately, computations in the Bayesian frame­
work can seldom be performed exactly, due to the need 
to integrate over models. Approximations therefore 
must be made (see, e.g., Cheeseman and Stutz 1995; 
Chickering and Heckerman 1997; Friedman 1998), the 
major schemes being Markov chain Monte Carlo meth­
ods and Laplace approximation. The former attempts 
to achieve exact results but typically requires vast 
computational resources. The latter has lower com­
plexity of O(m2 N), where m is the number of pa­
rameters and N the dataset (sample) size, but is a 
good approximation only in the limit N /m -t oo; in 
particular, is assumes that all posterior distributions 
are Normal (but see the discussion in Mackay 1998a). 
Naturally, the situation becomes worse when hidden 
variables exist. 
In this paper I present the Variational Bayes frame­
work for computations in graphical models. 
This 
framework facilitates analytical calculations of poste-

22 
Attias 
rior distributions over the hidden variables, param­
eters and structures. It draws together variational 
ideas from intractable hidden variables models (Saul, 
Jaakkola and Jordan 1996; Ghahramani and Jor­
dan 1997) and from Bayesian inference (Waterhouse, 
Mackay and Robinson 1996; Jaakkola & Jordan 1997; 
Mackay 1998), which, in turn, draw on the work of 
Neal and Hinton (1998). The posteriors are obtained 
via an iterative EM-like algorithm whose convergence 
is guaranteed. Focusing on the parameter posterior, 
its resulting approximation is more efficient than the 
Laplace as the Hessian needs not be computed, and 
produces non-trivial posteriors for any sample size. In 
addition, the BIC/MDL model selection criteria are 
obtained from VB in the large sample limit. The VB 
framework is developed in section 2, and is applied to 
mixture models in section 3 and to the blind source 
separation problem in section 4. Learning structure of 
complex models is discussed in section 5. 
Notation. We shall use the Dirichlet, Normal, and 
Wishart distributions V, N, W in the following 
parametrization: 
V({7rs}i {As}) 
()( 
N(x; p,, 'E) 
()( 
W(r;a,B) 
()( 
m 
II 71'"'·-1 
8 
, 
s·l 
-(x-p,)TE(x-P,)/2 
e 
, 
I r la-1 e-TrBr . 
(1) 
Note that 'E is the inverse covariance (a.k.a. preci­
sion) matrix of N. We also use the Normal-Wishart 
distribution 
NW(x, r; a, B, p,, (3) = W(r; a, B)N(x; p,, (3r) . 
(2) 
2 
The Variational Bayes Framework 
for Graphical Models 
2.1 
Definitions 
We restrict our attention in this paper to directed 
acyclic graphs (a.k.a. Bayesian networks). Let M de­
note a set of model structures. The variables in a 
structure m E M are divided into two sets: visible 
(data) variables v; E V and hidden (latent) variables 
h; E H. Each variable is a vector of some dimension, 
whose coordinates may assume either discrete or con­
tinuous values. A structure m specifies (a) the visible 
set V ,  which is the same for all models; (b) the hidden 
set H; (c) the dependencies (i.e., directed edges) be­
tween the variables; and (d) the parametrized form of 
the probabilistic dependencies p( u; I pa;, II;, m), where 
u; E V U H, pa; is the set of parents of u;, and II; 
denotes the parameter set of this conditional distribu­
tion. Hence, different structures may have different 
numbers of hidden variables, and a given hidden vari­
able may have a different dimensionality or assume a 
different set of values in different structures. The rea­
son we consider vector variables rather than the cus­
tomary scalars is that we shall occasionally be using 
real-valued distributions p(u; I pa;, II;, m) that allow 
correlations between the coordinates of u;, which are 
therefore not conditionally independent; of course, this 
could have also been achieved using a slightly more 
complicated graph. 
Denoting the complete set of parameters by e = 
U;{ll;}, the relevant joint distribution is 
p(V,H,G,m) = ITp(u; I pa;,ll;,m)p(e I m)p(m) (3) 
where p(G I m) is the prior distribution on the param­
eters of structure m and p( m) is the prior over our set 
of structures. As a final note on terminology, the term 
model will refer to a pair ( e, m) of a specific structure 
and specific parameter values. 
We are interested in the ensemble likelihood p(Y). This 
is the likelihood TinP(V 
= Yn I e,m) assigned to 
the dataset Y = {Yn, n = 1 : N} by model (8, m), 
averaged over the ensemble of models described by 
p(G, m) = p(G I m)p(m). This quantity is also known 
as marginal likelihood or evidence. Note that its calcu­
lation requires averaging over all configurations of the 
hidden units within each model. The ensemble like­
lihood is generally computationally intractable, as it 
requires (a) integrating the joint (3) over the parame­
ters, which typically cannot be performed analytically; 
(b) summation over all possible values of the hidden 
variables. For discrete variables, the number of terms 
in these sums is exponential in the number of nodes, 
whereas for real-valued variables these sums may turn 
into analytically intractable integrals; (c) summation 
over all possible structures, whose number grows ex­
ponentially with the maximum numbers allowed for 
nodes and edges. In the following we address these 
issues within a variational framework. 
2.2 
Ensemble Likelihood and Occam Factor 
The Variational Bayes framework is formulated as fol­
lows. Starting from the ensemble liklehood, we use the 
Neal-Hinton representation (Neal and Hinton 1998) to 
place a lower bound on it: 
c 
= 
logp(Y) ?. F = L J de 2: 
mEM 
H 
( 
e 
I Y) l 
p(Y,H,e,m) 
q H, -, m 
og q(H, e, m I Y) , 
(4) 
where the sum over H ranges over all possible val­
ues of all hidden variables and implies integration for 

continuous variables. The inequality (4) holds for an 
arbitrary conditional distribution q. The optimal q 
is obtained by setting the functional derivative of the 
right hand side with respect to q to zero; the re­
sulting equation is solved only by the true posterior, 
q = p(H, e, m I Y), obtained from (3) using Bayes' 
rule. It is easy to show that in this case the inequality 
(4) becomes an equality. However, the computation of 
the true posterior is intractable and approximations 
must be made. Our approach restricts the space of al­
lowed q to distributions where the parameters are con­
ditionally independent of the hidden variables given a 
structure, i.e., have the form 
q(H, e, m I Y) = q(H I m, Y)q(e I m, Y)q(m I Y) . (5) 
This posterior will generally differ from the true one 
and is termed the variational posterior. It will be op­
timized to produce the best approximation to the true 
posterior. Hence, we get a lower bound :F on the en­
semble likelihood, which splits into two terms: 
:F 
:Fe,m - Ve,m , 
" 
p(Y,H I e,m) 
:Fe,m 
= 
(Ź q(H I m) log 
q(H I m) 
}e,m , 
H 
Ve,m = KL[q(e,m) II P(e,m)] , 
(6) 
where the average Oe,m in the first term is com­
puted with respect to the model posterior q(e, m), 
and the second term is the Kullback-Leibler (KL) 
distance between q(e, m) and p(e, m), i.e., Ve,m = 
(logq(e,m)/p(e,m))e,m· 
The dependence of the 
variational posteriors on the data Y is henceforth omit­
ted. As we shall see, the first term corresponds to the 
likelihood term, whereas the second term is the Occam 
factor which penalizes for over complex models. Thus, 
our score function :F may be interpreted as a penal­
ized likelihood, where the penalty is the KL distance 
between the posterior and prior distributions over the 
ensemble of models. 
2.3 
Large Sample Limit 
To gain some insight into F, consider the large sam­
ple limits N -+ oo. In this case, the model posterior 
is strongly peaked about its mean, the maximum like­
lihood (ML) model (eo ,m0), with a covariance that 
typically decreases as 1/N. To compute the first term 
of F in this limit, only the ML model (eo,mo) needs 
to be included; the relative correction will be 0(1/N). 
To compute the second term, we approximate q(e, mo) 
by a multi variable Gaussian distribution with the same 
mean and covariance. We thus obtain 
:F(N -+ oo) = 
:Fo- 'Do , 
'L'o = 
" (H) I 
p(Y, HI eo) 
.,.-, 
7f q 
og 
q(H) 
Inferring Model Structure by Variational Bayes 
23 
I eo I 
-2- IogN - logp(eo) , 
(7) 
where I eo I is the number of parameters in the ML 
model, and the m0 dependence is omitted. Let us first 
focus on maximizing Fo alone. As shown in (Neal 
and Hinton 1998), this is a generalized representation 
of the ML problem where we seek a single parame­
ter value e0. The ordinary EM algorithm is obtained 
by maximizing Fo w.r.t. q(H) and eo alternately: In 
the E-step of the rth iteration we set 8:Fof8q(H) = 0, 
which gives q(H) = p(H I Y, ehr-l)); in the M-step 

variational EM algorithm (Saul et a!. 1996) was in­
troduced for cases where the computation of the exact 
posterior p(H I Y) is intractable. Instead, a form q(H) 
which allows performing the calculation is used; it has 
its own set of parameters, and in the E-step these pa­
rameters are optimized to minimize the KL distance 
between q(H) and the true posterior. 
Second, the penalty V0 reduces in this limit to a term 
that is linear in the number of the ML model param­
eters, plus a simple regularirer -logp(eo). Finally, 
we point out that the Bayesian information criterion 
(BIC) (Schwartz 1978) and the minimum description 
length criterion (MDL) (Rissanen 1987) both emerge 
as a special case of our large sample expression (7), cor­
responding to using flat prior p( e) and exact (rather 
than variational) posterior q(H). 
2.4 
Optimal Posteriors and Relation to EM 
To find the optimal variational posterior over the pa­
rameters for a given structure m, we set 8F J8q(e I 
m) = 0 in (6) and obtain 
logq(e I m) = (!ogp(Y,H I e,m))H[m 
+ 
logp(e I m) -logzm, 
(8) 
where the average (·)H[m in the first term is computed 
w.r.t. the hidden variable posterior q(H I m), and Zm 
is a normalization constant. In spite of the apparent 
complexity of (8), the resulting posterior is typically 
quite simple. First, averaging over the hidden vari­
ables using the variational posterior q(H I m) is ob­
tained in a closed form; this is a key property of the 
variational approach (see below). 
Second, if we use directed graphs where each node 
has its own parameters, and if we use a parameter 
prior that factorizes over the nodes, then the param­
eter posterior factorizes as well. To see this, recall 
the joint distribution over the nodes (3), and assume 
p(e I m) = !1;P(0; I m). From (8) we then have 
logq(e I m) 
= L(logp(u; I pa;,O;,m))Hfm 

24 
Attias 
+ l:)ogp(Bi I m) -log Zm 
I: log q(Bi I m) , 
(9) 
proving that, given a particular graph structure, the 
posteriors over the parameters of different nodes are 
mutually independent. 
Third, the functional form of the parameter poste­
rior is determined by the distributions that define our 
model, as well as by the priors. In general, using stan­
dard forms for these distributions leads to a standard 
form for the posterior. We now demonstrate it for 
two cases of interest. (i) Discrete to discrete: As­
sume that node u; and its parents pai are discrete, 
so their connection is described by a probability table, 
p( Ui = s I pai = t, B;) = e¦ .• Æ 0, where the parame­
ters satisfy the normalization condition Ls BL = 1 for 
each t. In this case, an appropriate prior on the pa­
rameters is a Dirichlet distribution with hyperparame­
ters .XL: p(Bi I m) =Tit D( {B¦,.}; {A¦ .• }). To perform 
the average over H in ( 9) we need the variational pos­
terior over the hidden variables, which factorizes into 
Tin q(u? = s, paf = t). It is straightforward to show 
that this averaging gives again a posterior which is a 
product of Dirichlet distributions with modified hyper­
parameters: 
q(Bi I m) =II D( {et.}; {.XL+ NirL}) , 
(10) 
t 
where irf.s = Lnq(uf = s,paf = t I m)/N. 
(ii) Discrete to Normal: Assume that node ui 
is continuous and Normally distributed conditioned 
on its parents pai, which are discrete: p( Ui = x I 
pa; = t, B;) = N(x; J.l.t, 4t), with the parame­
ters ei = {J.Lt, 4t} having a Normal-Wishart prior 
NW(at, Bt,et,i3t) independently for each t. It can 
be shown that the posterior q(Bi I m) is also Normal­
Wishart with modified hyperparameters: 
q(ei I m) 
(11) 
t 
at+ Nift, Bt + NirtB³, ´µ' i3t + Nirt) , 
where B5 and ´¶ are determined from the first two 
moments of the hidden variable posterior q( uf = x I 
paf = t, m), and ift = Ln q(paf = t I m)/N. 
Hence, in both cases the posterior has the same form as 
the prior. Notice that its covariance becomes 0(1/N). 
In fact, (10,11) show that as the sample size N in­
creases, the influence of the prior on the form of the 
posterior diminishes. These results will be revisited 
below as specific models are being considered. 
Next, to find the variational posterior over the hidden 
variables for a given structure m, we may try similarly 
to set 8F j8q(H I m) = 0 in (6), arriving at 
logq(H I m) = (logp(Y, HIe, m))elm -logz;,.' (12) 
where the average Oe!m is computed w.r.t. the pa­
rameter posterior q( 8 I m), and z;,. is a (different) nor­
malization constant. This procedure will be success­
ful for some models, one of which is illustrated below. 
However, for many interesting models the resulting 
posterior will be quite difficult to work with, e.g., com­
puting the normalization constant will be intractable, 
as well as performing the average in (8). In such cases 
we choose a parametric form for q(H I 4>, m) with a 
separate set of parameters 4>, termed variational pa­
rameters, that are optimized to maximize F. The cru­
cial consideration in the choice of this posterior is that 
it allows performing all the required calculations an­
alytically, while still providing a good approximation 
in the relevant sense. Below we shall demonstrate how 
this is done. 
Finally, the posterior over the structures m is similarly 
shown to be given by 
logq(m) = ((logp(Y,HI8,m))Him 
p(G I m) 
+ log q(G I m) )elm -log z . (13) 
As will be illustrated below, the parameter posteriors 
that emerge from VB turn out to have a parametric 
functional form, with these parameters (which should 
not be confused with the model parameters) being suf­
ficient statistics (SS) computed from the data by an 
iterative, two-step, EM-like algorithm. In the E-step 
the hidden variable posterior is computed using the old 
SS; in the M-step the new SS are computed, updating 
the parameter posterior. in the large sample limit, 
this algorithm reduces to ordinary EM (Dempster et 
al. 1977). 
2.5 Predictive Quantities and Labeling 
The probability that a hypothesis is true given the 
data D is determined by averaging over all models us­
ing their posteriors. For example, for density estima­
tion applications, the predictive density for a new data 
vector y is 
p(y I Y) = L J d8 L 
mEM 
H 
p(y I H,G,m)p(H,G,m I Y) . 
(14) 
One approach is to directly replace the true poste­
rior by the variational one q(H, 8, m I Y). Unfortu­
nately, since the variational posterior is designed to 
compute analytically averages over the logarithm of 

p(y I H, e, m) rather than the actual distribution, ad­
ditional approximations may be necessary. 
However, the variational approach allows a rather at­
tractive alternative route. Instead of considering the 
predictive density we consider its logarithm, given by 
logp(y I Y) = 1ogp(Y')-1ogp(Y), where Y' = YU{y} 
is the augmented dataset. We now repeat the ex­
act same steps used to compute the lower bound 
F :S logp(Y) (4,6), and compute F' ::; logp(Y'). This 
calculation requires only little additional effort, as the 
required posterior q(H, e, m I Y') is very close to the 
old one q(H, 8, m I Y) which can be used for initial­
ization. The predictive distribution is then given by 
p(y I Y) = eF'-F. 
(15) 
In fact, in the large sample limit we obtain F' - F = 
I:m q(m)( (logp(y I H,G,m))Him )elm with no addi­
tional computation. 
For other applications, such as unsupervised classifica­
tion and blind source separation, the most likely value 
of a hidden variable hi given a new data vector y is 
required. This value is given by the MAP estimate 
hi = arg maxh, p( hi I y, Y). Again, one approach is to 
directly replace the true by the variational posterior, 
giving 
Inferring Model Structure by Variational Bayes 
25 
3 
Variational Bayes Mixture Models 
3.1 
Definitions 
Mixture models constitute a useful tool for flexible 
density estimation. These models have been investi­
gated and analyzed extensively (see, e.g., Titterington 
et a!. 1985), and efficient methods exist for fitting a 
given model to data. However, the issue of determin­
ing the required number of mixture components is still 
an open problem. When viewed in the framework of 
unsupervised classification, this becomes the issue of 
determining the number of unobserved classes. While 
the Bayesian approach provides the solution in prin­
ciple, no satisfactory practical algorithm has emerged 
from the application of involved sampling techniques 
(Richardson and Green 1997; Rasmussen 1999) and 
approximation methods (e.g., Cheeseman and Stutz 
1995) to this problem. We now show that an elegant 
solution is provided by the VB approach. 
We consider models of the form 
m 
p(y I e,m) = LP(Y I s,G,m)p(s I e,m) 
(17) 
s=l 
hi = argrr:,x L q(m)( (p(y,H lll,m))H'Im )elm , (16) 
m EM 
(compare to (3)), where m is the number of compo­
nent, which determines the structure of the model. y 
denotes the observed data vector, s = 1, ... , m is the 
hidden component label, p( s 1 e, m) = rr. the compo­
nent probabilities which sum to one, and p(y I s, 8, m) 
the component distributions. Whereas our approach 
can be applied to arbitrary models, for simplicity we 
shall first consider the classical mixture model where 
the data are real-valued and the component distribu­
tions are Normal, p(y I s, e, m) = N(y; 1-Ls> r .), where 
1-Ls is the mean and r s the inverse covariance matrix. 
We use non-informative priors (this point will be re­
visited later) on the parameters e = {tL,,r.,7r.}, i.e., 
p({rr,}) is flat, p({tL,}) is flat within an m-dim hyper­
cube whose edge length -+ oo, and p( {f s}) = IT. I 
r 8 l-1. Finally, we use a structure prior p(m) = 1/ K 
for I :S m :S K with K being the maximal number of 
components. 
where the average (·)H'Im is performed w.r.t. q(H I m) 
over all hidden variables after marginalizing it over 
hi. Alternatively, we may compute ·the posterior for 
the augmented dataset as above, focus on the factor 
q(H I m, Y') and marginalize over all hidden variables 
but hi to obtain hi = arg maxh, I:m q(hi I m, Y'). 
A labeling problem may arise when computing a MAP 
estimate of hidden variables given new data. Consider 
two graph structures m1, m2 which contain the same 
hidden variables hi, hj, and assume both are invariant 
under the permutation hi t-t hJ. Then the node la­
beled hi in m1 may be labeled hi in m2, producing 
an incorrect estimate when summing over structures 
in (16). The same problem may arise from permuta­
tion of discrete values of a hidden variable (i.e., com­
ponent label in mixture models). The honest way to 
avoid labeling problems is by incorporating appropri­
ate prior information about the relevant hidden vari­
ables into the model to break its permutation invari­
ance. A practical solution is to approximate the sum 
over all structures by a small number of most probable 
ones, and use post-processing to correct label switches. 
Of course, the problem is completely avoided if only 
the single most probable structure is used in place of 
the sum in (16). 
3.2 Learning Algorithm 
We can now follow the steps outlined above for a 
dataset Y = Yl:N and derive the variational poste­
rior distributions over parameters q( 8 I m), compo­
nent label q(sl:N I m), and structure q(m). When 
doing this, we find that the parameter posterior fac­
torizes into q(G I m) = f18q(tL8,f8 I m)q({1r,} I m), 
as predicted from (9). The mean and inverse covari­
ance are jointly Normal-Wishart; note that they fac­
torize over s as well. The component probabilities are 
jointly Dirichlet. These results are consistent with the 

26 
Attias 
general properties (10,11). 'fo make the results more 
transparent we further restricted the parameter pos­
terior to factorize the mean from the covariance (al­
though all calculations can be fully carried out using 
their joint distribution), arriving at 
q(IL. I m) 
q(r. I m) 
q({7rs} I m) 
(18) 
W(r.;a.,B.), 
D({1rs};N?r1 + 1, ... ,N7rm + 1), 
where a. = N1r8/2 and Bs = a.f';-1. Hence the means 
are Normal, the inverse covariances are Wishart, and 
the component probabilities remain Dirichlet. The pa­
rameters appearing in (18) will be defined shortly. 
The label posterior factorizes over the data instances, 
q(s1,N I Y, m) = ITn q(sn I Yn, m) for obvious reasons, 
and is given for instance n by 
q(sn I m) 
= 
_!_1fsx If'. I e-(y.-{Lff".(y.-{L,)/2) 
Zn 
271" 
X 
e-d/2N1t, , 
(19) 
where d is the data dimensionality, Zn a normaliza­
tion constant, fi8 
= exp(w(N7r. + 1) - w(N + m)), 
f' s =I Bs l-1 exp(dw(a.)) , and I]! is the psi (digamma) 
function. 
The VB approach has therefore led us to an EM-like 
algorithm for each structure m, where in the E-step 
we learn the label posterior (19), and in the M-step 
we learn the parameter posteriors (18). In fact, we 
obtain the following learning algorithm for the param­
eters, which determine the sufficient statistics (SS) of 
these distributions. First we initialize 7r., {L., f' s to 
appropriate values. Next we compute q(sn I m) from 
(19). Then we compute the new SS by 
= 
t. 
= 
1 
(1)sjm, 
fLs = -=-(Y)sjm, 
(20) 
1rs 
1 ( 1 
) -1 
(1- N- ) -=-( y- fLs)(Y- fLs)T)sjm 
, 
1rs 
'lrs 
where Osim implies averaging w.r.t. the label poste­
rior, i.e., (f (y))sjm = l:n f(Yn)q(sn I m)jN. These 
steps are repeated until convergence; the case 7r s :-s: 
1/N will be commented upon below. 
Several remarks deserve to be made at this point. (a) 
Whereas no prior assumptions about them have been 
made, the parameters posteriors that emerge from ap­
plying VB to the mixture model using uninforma­
tive priors have non-trivial functional forms that are 
intuitively appealing. More importantly, in general 
they are not Normal, unlike those resulting from the 
Laplace approximation. (b) In fact, no complications 
would appear if we generalize the priors to have the 
same functional form of the corresponding posteriors 
(besides the appearance of appropriate hyperparam­
eters). (c) The quantities 1r8, {L8, f'. learned by the 
rules (20) are the means of the posterior distributions 
(18) over the parameters (more precisely, *• are the 
mean component probabilities only in the large sample 
limit). The covariances of these posteriors are 0(1/N). 
(d) In the large sample limit, the posteriors collapse 
onto their means, and also *• = ?r., f'. = f' •. There­
fore in this limit we recover the ordinary EM algo­
rithm. (e) Most strikingly, when the number of data 
vectors assigned to component s is one or less, i.e., 
*• :-s: 1/N, it can be shown that the rules (19-20) are 
replaced by q( sn = s) = 7r s = 0, effectively declaring 
component s nonexistent. This property is important 
since it protects our algorithm from the following well­
known problem with the ordinary EM algorithm for 
mixture models: There, one component may become 
centered at a single data vector, sending its covariance 
to zero and the model likelihood to infinity; the result­
ing wrong model is thus assigned a higher likelihood 
than the correct one. The VB algorithm automatically 
eliminates such a component. 
Finally, once the posterior distributions over the pa­
rameters and label conditioned on structure have been 
obtained, the posterior distribution over model struc­
ture q(m) is given by 
( ) 
1 
(
( 
p(y1,N,S1,N,e I m)) 
) 
( ) 
q m 
= 
- exp 
log 
( 
e I 
l 
•. e1m , 21 
z 
q s1,n, 
m 
where Os,ejm refers to averaging w.r.t. q(s1,n, e I m). 
The resulting closed-form expression is omitted. 
Also omitted is the expression we obtained for the pre­
dictive density (15); we point out, however, that it is 
not a mixture of Normal distributions. 
3.3 
Results 
I applied the VB mixture model algorithm to several 
toy problems; Fig. 1 presents the results on two of 
them. In the first (top) 600 data points were generated 
from a 2-dim mixture model with Normal components, 
whose covariances are represented by the ellipses on 
the top left panel. The algorithm was then applied 
with maximum number of components K = 10; the 
resulting log-posterior over the number of components 
is shown on the top right panel, indicating that the 
posterior is sharply peaked at the correct value m = 3. 
In the second problem (bottom), the VB algorithm 
was applied to 800 data points generated from a 3-
dim noisy spiral. Here there is no 'correct' number; 
the resulting posterior (whose logarithm is plotted on 
the bottom right panel) is peaked at m = 11. The 
means of the resulting posterior over the covariances 

3-cluster data 
-2&------- 
6 
D4 
2 
-2 
0 
2 
y1 
spiral data 
y1 
-50 
I-1oo 
.,. 
¯-150 
-200 
-2W°2±--4---6----8--²10 
m 
m 
Figure 1: Application of the VB mixture model to den­
sity estimation. Top: Data generated from a 3-component 
model (left) and the resulting log-posterior over the number 
of components. Bottom: Data generated from a noisy spi­
ral and the means of the covariance posterior correspond­
ing to an 11-component model (left), and the log-posterior 
over the number of components. 
for this case are represented by their axes (bottom 
left). Larger numbers of components were observed to 
produce overlaps. The VB mixture is currently being 
applied to the task of handwritten character recogni­
tion. 
4 
Blind Source Separation 
4.1 
Definitions 
In the blind source separation (BSS) problem, a.k.a. 
independent component analysis (ICA) (Jutten and 
Herault 1991; Bell and Sejnowski 1995; Cardoso and 
Lahed 1996; Attias and Schreiner 1998), one is pre­
sented with multivariable time series data. It is as­
sumed that these data, which are generally corre­
lated, arise from several individual source signals that 
are mutually statistically independent. The sources 
are unobservable and are mixed together by an un­
known linear transformation, corrupted by unobserv­
able noise. The task is to recover the sources from 
the data. A successful solution to this problem will 
have many applications in areas involving processing 
of multisensor signals, such as speech recognition and 
enhancement, analysis and classification of biomedi­
cal data, target localization and tracking by radar and 
sonar devices, and wireless communication. 
Let xj denote the signal emitted by source j = 1 : m 
Inferring Model Structure by Variational Bayes 
27 
at time n, and let yj denote the signal received at 
sensor i = 1 : d at the same time. In the instantaneous 
mixing version of this problem, we assume that the two 
are linearly related: Yn = Ax n + Un, where the d x m 
matrix A is termed the mixing matrix, and uj are zero­
mean Gaussian noise signals with inverse variance .A.;. 
We also assume that we have good approximations for 
the independent source densities p; (x;). We shall use 
the model p;(x;) = cosh-2(x; /2)/2, which has been 
shown to be accurate for the purpose of separating 
speech sources (Bell and Sejnowski 1995; Attias and 
Schreiner 1998). Thus, the graph we consider is given 
by 
p(x I m) 
p(y I x,A,m) 
m 1 
x· 
= IT 2cosh-2( {), 
j=l 
d 
m 
= ITN(y;;LA;;x;,.A.;). (22) 
i=l 
j=l 
In terms of (3), we have hidden variables H = {x;}, 
parameters e = {A;;}, and structure m determined 
by the number of sources. 
Most existing ICA algorithms address the simplified 
case where the noise vanishes and the mixing matrix 
is square invertible, so the number of sensors equals 
the number of sources. Furthermore, m is assumed 
known in advance. Using maximum likelihood, one 
computes the distribution assigned to the data by the 
model (A, m), p(y I A, m) =I A l-1 p(x I m), and 
chooses A to maximize it. The sources are then recov­
ered via x = A -1y. 
The more general case of non-square mixing and non­
zero noise is harder, since one has to compute p(y I 
A, m) = J dx p(y I x, A, m)p (x I m), where the m­
dim integration is non-trivial due to the non-Gaussian 
nature of the sources: Lewicki and Sejnowski (1998) 
integrated over the sources using the Laplace approx­
imation. Attias (1999a) solved this problem by mod­
eling each source density by a 1-dim mixture of Gaus­
sians, which allows the above integral to be calculated 
analytically. The sources are then reconstructed by 
a MAP estimate: :X:= argmaxxp(x I y,A,m ). This 
approach results in an EM algorithm that learns both 
the mixing and noise covariance matrices, as well as 
the source distributions, from noisy data. Since the 
computational complexity of the algorithm increases 
exponentially with the number of sources, the large m 
case is treated in (Attias 1999a) by a structured varia­
tional approximation (Ghallramani and Jordan 1997). 
However, in realistic cases the observed data is gener­
ated by an unknown number of sources m. Here we 
exploit the VB approach to compute the posterior dis­
tribution over m from a dataset Y of sensor signals. 

28 
Attias 
We point out that realistic situations include many ad­
ditional complications, such as multipath propagation 
and reverberant conditions (see (Attias and Schreiner 
1998) for a treatment of the zero-noise convolutive 
blind separation problem), as well as non-stationarity; 
these issues are beyond the scope of the present paper. 
4.2 
Learning Algorithm 
For the prior distribution on the mixing matrix, we 
choose the elements A;; to be independent, zero-mean 
Normal variables with precision a 
as a single hyperpa­
rameter, i.e., 
(a )dm/2 ( a 
) 
p(Aia, m)= 27r 
exp -2H . (23) 
This prior becomes uninformative in the limit a 
-t 0. 
For simplicity, we keep a and the noise precisions >.; 
as hyperparameters, although VB can treat them in a 
full probabilistic manner with little added effort. The 
structure prior employed is p(m) = 1/ K for 1 :S m :S 
K with K being the maximal number of sources. 
Following the discussion of section 2.4, we find that 
the mixing matrix posterior is Normal, 
q(A I m) = N(A; A, :E), 
(24) 
whose mean and covariance are given by 
A;; = [Cyx(C!x)-1]ij , 
E;;,kt = 
1 ( . ) -1 
>.;N C"x ;t 8;k , 
c!x 
Q 
= Cxx +>.iN I, 
(25) 
where that E;;,kt is the expectation of (A;;-A;; )(Akt­
Akt). 
Viewing A;; as a dm x 1 vector formed by 
concatenating the columns of A into a large col­
umn, note that :E has a block-diagonal form consist­
ing of d blocks of dimension m x m. The correlation 
matrices are Cyx = (yxT)xlm = 'LnYnP/N and 
Cxx = (xxr)xlm = 'Ln(PnP + r-1)/N; the aver­
ages are computed w.r.t. the source posterior q(x I m) 
(26). We point out that in the large sample limit, 
the covariance of A vanishes and its mean becomes 
A= Cyx(Cxx)-1, a form appearing in the ordinary 
EM algorithms for factor analysis (Rubin and Thayer 
1982) and independent factor analysis (Attias 1999a). 
However, the source posterior cannot be obtained by 
directly optimizing :F (see (12)), due to the non­
Gaussian nature of the sources. Instead we use two 
variational tricks. First, noting that the source pos­
terior factorizes over instances, i.e., q(x1,N I m, Y) = 
Tin q(xn I m, Yn), we choose a Normal distribution at 
each instance n, 
q (xn I m) = N(xn; Pn> r n) , 
(26) 
where the mean p and (general) inverse covariance 
r, termed variational parameters, may depend on the 
data Yn, and will be adapted to help this posterior 
best approximate the optimal one. Second, in order 
to adapt them we must compute the expected value of 
logp(Y, x I A,m) under this posterior, which poses a 
difficulty, again due to the form of p(x I m). To over­
come it, we exploit Jensen's inequality to compute a 
bound on this quantity: 
 
cosh(x;/2) 
(logp(x I m))xlm = -2 L....(log 
2 
)xlm 
i=l 
In general, the accuracy of this lower bound depends 
on the variational parameters p and r, especially on 
the latter: Note that in the zero-noise case (>.; -too), 
r-1 vanishes and the bound is exact. I found experi­
mentally that, for the distributions of p and r arising 
in the cases treated in the present paper, the mean 
error of the bound is smaller than 4%. 
Given the posterior over A, we can now set 8:F /8pn = 
0 and derive the fixed point equation 
where A = diag(>.1, ... , >.d)· 
This equation can be 
solved iteratively for each n, using the initial value 
Pn = (AT A)-1 Ayn which is exact in the limit of 
low noise and large sample size. The variational pre­
cision matrix turns out from e;: 1 or n = o to be n­
independent: 
Finally, optimizing the hyperparameter a gives 
An optimization rule for the hyperparameters A; can 
similarly be derived but is omitted. We also omit the 
structure posterior q( m). 
Hence, like in the mixture model case, VB led to an 
EM-like algorithm for each m, where the E-step learns 
the source posterior (26), and theM-step learns the pa­
rameter posterior (24). The algorithm actually learns 

0.6 
0.5 
0.4 
 03 
0.2 
0.1 
source number posterior 
2 
m 
source reconstruction error 
0 
-2!lsL__o--s----,1-0--1Js 
SNR(dB) 
Figure 2: Left: Application of the VB source separation 
algorithm to 11-dim data generated by linear mixing of 5 
speech and music signals. 
Left: The resulting posterior 
over the number of sources. 
Right: 
log-error in recon­
structed sources w.r.t. the original ones for different noise 
levels. 
the SS of these distributions as follows. First we ini­
tialize A, E, >.;, a to appropriate values. Next we 
compute the SS of q(x I m) using (28-29). Then we 
compute the new SS of q(A I m) from (25,30). These 
steps are repeated until convergence. 
We remark that a Variational Bayes algorithm for 
the more conventional method of factor analysis can 
straightforwardly be derived. In that case, the sources 
are Normal and the source posterior (26) is actually 
optimal (within the VB framework). The resulting 
equation for p can be solved in a single iteration. 
However, as is well known, the Gaussian nature of 
the sources prevents factor analysis from performing 
source separation. 
4.3 Results 
I applied the VB source separation algorithm to 11-
dim data generated by mixing 5 speech and music sig­
nals obtained from commercial CDs. Each signal was 
1sec long at sampling frequency 8.82kHz. The sig­
nals were mixed by a random 11 x 5 mixing matrix, 
and different levels of Gaussian noise were added. The 
posterior over the number of sources found by the al­
gorithm is plotted in Fig. 2 (left), and is peaked at 
the correct value of m = 5. The sources were then 
reconstructed from the data using a MAP estimate. 
The log-error of the reconstructed w.r.t. the original 
sources is plotted for different signal-to-noise (SNR) 
levels in Fig. 2 (right), and is seen to decrease with 
increasing SNR as expected. Additional experiments 
with different numbers of sources and of sensors gave 
similar results. 
Inferring Model Structure by Variational Bayes 
29 
5 
Hierarchical Mixtures and Probable 
Structures 
Whereas the integration over all model parameters 
and structures is tractable in the two models dis­
cussed above, in more complicated models such a full 
Bayesian treatment is practically impossible. Consider 
the hierarchical mixture model constructed as follows. 
Each mixture component s = 1, ... , I has a probability 
p(s II) = 1r., and a distribution of a blind separation 
model with k, sources and ad x k, mixing matrix A,. 
Hence, the graphical model is described by the joint 
distribution 
p 
= p(y I x,A,7rl:l,s,kl:I,I)p(x I s,k,)p(s II) 
p(A I k,, s)p(7rt:l II)p(kl:l II)p(I) . 
(31) 
This model is potentially useful for pattern recognition 
on speech and image data. The reason is that these 
data typically have long-tailed distributions, which are 
modeled more efficiently by exponential rather than 
Normal component distributions. However, denoting 
by K the maximal number of sources for each com­
ponent and by L the maximal number of components, 
we have K L possible structures for this model. 
A simple way to obtain a polynomial time algorithm is 
to include only the most probable structure and pos­
sibly a few neighboring structures. Formally, this pro­
cedure amounts to making the factorized variational 
approximation 
with T covering a small range of To numbers includ­
ing zero and w; Æ 0 satisfying Lr w; = 1. The form 
(32) allows only a single number of components I0, 
and restricts each component s to a range of To pos­
sible source numbers about k] with probabilities w;. 
The quantities I0, k?,1, wr,1 are variational parame­
ters which depend on the dataset Y; their optimiza­
tion amounts to performing a local search in structure 
space for the most probable structures (although the 
w; may be fixed). Of course, alternative variational 
structure posteriors are possible. 
6 
Conclusion 
This paper developed an approximation scheme for 
Bayesian inference in graphical models with hidden 
variables, and demonstrated it on density estimation 
and blind source separation tasks. A comparison of 
the accuracy of VB with that of the Laplace approx­
imation against a Monte Carlo standard would be 

30 
Attias 
an important undertaking. It will be exciting to ap­
ply the VB framework to complex Bayesian networks 
(e.g., Attias 1999b), including dynamic models, and 
demonstrate its performance on real-world tasks such 
as speech recognition and scene analysis.
