663 
Bayesian Control for Concentrating Mixed Nuclear Waste 
Robert L. Welch 
Gensym Corporation 
Boulder, Colorado 80303 

Abstract 
A control algorithm for batch processing of 
mixed waste is proposed based on conditional 
Gaussian Bayesian networks. The network is 
compiled during batch staging for real-time re­
sponse to sensor input. 
INTRODUCTION 
Mixed waste remediation is an example of an industrial 
operation that transforms input of low quality, high vari­
ability and uncertain composition into consistent and high 
quality output. Moreover, control of many of the process­
ing steps is dependent on an accurate knowledge of the 
composition of the material input. When control is not 
optimized, product quality may suffer, processing time 
may increase maintenance and repairs may be more fre­
quent, and severe damage to equipment is possible. Yet, 
obtaining accurate knowledge or estimates of the input 
stream composition may be impossible or time consum­
ing, may reduce throughput, and may increase costs. With 
this uncertainty, optimal control must balance the costs of 
obtaining more accurate knowledge about the input stream 
against costs of repair, maintenance, associated shut­
downs, and, generally, reduced throughput. 
Here, a Bayesian controller is used in real time to manage 
this tradeoff. A Bayesian network predicts the quality of 
the input stream. Sensor input is used to derive a posterior 
distribution of the input composition. From the latter, the 
optimal control setting is computed. 
Complexity Workarounds 
Although Bayesian networks provide superior representa­
tion and inference capabilities, it is also known that 
"solving" a Bayesian network is NP-hard (Cooper 
[1990]). Hence use of a Bayesian network for real-time 
control is problematic. 
A common work-around to Bayesian network complexity 
is to use approximate solutions often in the form of "any­
time" algorithms (Dean and Boddy [1994], Horvitz 
Clayton Smith 
University of Denver Research Institute 
Denver, Colorado 80208 

[ 1987], Ibarguengoytia et al [ 1998], Horsch and Poole 
[1998]). Here we demonstrate a different approach, one 
that has largely been ignored within the uncertainty in AI 
community, based on exploiting differences in the update 
frequency of sensor variables. A large complex Bayesian 
network is needed for assessment of the joint distribution 
of all system variables relevant to the real time decision 
problem. 
Yet only a small portion of the network is 
needed at run time for the most frequent control decisions. 
This reduced distribution corresponds to a conditional 
sub-network of the original Bayesian network, which can 
be evaluated, in real time, using standard exact solution 
methods. 
ln this paper we apply this approach to the control of a 
process having both batch and continuous components. 
The staging of the batches provides ample time to update 
the larger Bayesian network and compile the smaller sub­
network used for control of the continuous processing of 
the batch. 
l.lHE SEITING: WASIE REMEDIATION 
We work with an example of the cleanup of buried nu­
clear waste. A burial site has received nuclear waste of 
various types in a random fashion over a number of years. 
The last addition was several decades ago, and by now 
container damage and leakage have resulted in an unde­
termined level of soil contamination. The task (see figure 
I) is to retrieve the waste and soil separately into large 
boxes ( 100 cu. ft.), then to assay each box for transuranic 
(TRU) contamination. This TRU assay uses a relatively 
slow, but relatively precise, neutron emission method. 
The boxes that exceed an assay threshold for TRU content 
are sent to further processing, those below the threshold 
are returned to the pit. 
The high waste boxes move to vitrification; the high soil 
boxes are sent to a segmented gate, soil sorter (y-sort) to 
concentrate the contamination into a reduced volume. 
This device works by assaying small volumes (0.1 cu. ft.) 
of soil using a gamma detector, which provides a very 
rapid, but much less precise method. 
As before, high 

664 
Welch and Smith 
Dump 
Prior Estimate 
lo 
lo 
BatchMaker 
hi 
SLAG 
FORMING 
Figure I. Material Flow in Nuclear Waste Retrieval and Processing 
level portions are sent to vitrification, low level portions 
are returned to the pit, after verification by the relatively 
precise neutron assay. 
The objective of the Bayesian controller is to establish a 
sorting algorithm, which will optimize the operation of the 
soil sorter, under conditions of very high uncertainty. 
The radioisotopes that are the source of ganuna are not the 
long lived TRU isotopes. Instead they accompany the 
TRU in proportions that vary with the type of waste. If the 
ratio of the gamma emitter to the neutron emitting TRU 
were known, then the bias in the sensor could be compen­
sated. However, depending on the origin of the TRU­
waste, the ratio of gamma emissions to neutron emissions 
can vary by factors of over I 04 among the types of wastes, 
and by a factor of I 0 within a waste type. 
In addition, the amount of contamination in any portion of 
soil under assay will vary significantly from sample to 
sample. A small speck of waste with a high gamma, low 
TRU contamination will provide a stronger signal, than a 
large bit of low ganuna, high TRU waste. The specifica­
tions, which must be met, are based on the slow, neutron 
emission analysis for TRU. These considerations make 
the gamma signal difficult to interpret. If the waste type 
where known, then a higher ganuna indicates a greater 
TRU contamination. But with mixed waste, a higher 
gamma may instead indicate presence of a waste type that 
is a high gamma emitter but has low TRU contamination. 
Yet, operational and economic considerations are com­
pelling for using the ganuna emissions sensor for sorting. 
The primary cost considerations are the volume of the slag 
produced and the throughput of the sorter. 
Although the waste composition and the extent of the 
spread of contamination are not known with certainty, an 
imperfect prior estimate can be obtained from several 
sources: dump records, waste composition logs, process­
ing records, non intrusive surveys of the waste site, and 
the assays of process streams which are anterior and pos­
terior to the sorter. 
Therefore, in light of uncertainty about the composition of 
waste dispersed into the soil, we have considered the use 
of optimal Bayesian control to minimize the volume of 
material, which must be vitrified. Using Bayesian meth­
ods, assay and sensor readings lead to revised beliefs in 
the type of waste in the soil sample, thus to better control 
decision. 
The same economic considerations that led to the selec­
tion of the ganuna sensor for its greater throughput also 
require that the sorter algorithm be fast, with a sub-second 
response between reading and control actuation. 
2 BAYESIAN NE1WORK BASED SOR1ER 
CONIROL 
Although uncertainty and improved knowledge of the 
composition of the waste and soil streams is important at 
several stages in the remediation process, we concentrate 
in this paper on the segmented sorter. The main charac­
teristics of this process control problem are the following: 
I. 
A multi criteria objective to achieve high throughput 
and low slag volume subject to maximum contamina­
tion constraints on soil returned to the pit and mini­
mal contamination of slag drums. The parameters are 
specified contractually. 

%l. 
II 
we: 
waste com!^i]oA( 
L _---;;)(ED-WASlE SOIL CONTAM !NATION CONCENTRATOR 
] 
friability 
sample contaminate density 
FIG 2A: WASlE CHARAClERISTICS 
SOIL ASSAY 
sample sensor 
FIG 20: CONTAMINATE 
CONCENTRATOR 
= 
 
., 
§" 
(j 
0 
::s 
a 
-
:3' 
... 
(j 
0 
::s 
,., 
# 
5" 
.... 
-
a:: 
· 
>< 
... 
Q. 
" 
,., 
-
... 
e: 
$ 
., 
it 
 
8i 

666 
Welch and Smith 
Figure 2. Displayed is the full Bayesian network for the contaminate concentrator model. Oval shaped nodes are continuous variables 
with conditional log Gaussian distributions. The upper bar chart (2E) shows the prior waste distribution from dump records. The mid­
dle chart (2F) shows the posterior waste composition (WC) after updating the network with the assay results (ACD). Lower chart (2G) 
and displayed network shows posterior distributions given the concentrator reading of a soil sample (SS & ACD). The two graphs 
show predicted sample contamination SCD given assay results (ACD) before (2H) and after (2J) observation of sample sensor (SS). 
At the concentrator (fig 20), the predicted soil sample contamination and sensor are shown. Even though the sensor reading is quite 
high (8.0), the model predicts a low contamination ( -34.5). The reason is that the high sensor reading is an indicator of high amounts 
of the wt-0 waste type, which has a high ratio of masking agent to contaminate. The nodes WC, L, M, Fare the nearest ancestral dis­
crete nodes to SCD and are, therefore, the source of the mixture distributions of SCD. 
2. 
Volume reduction can only be achieved with a small 
sort sample. TRU waste contamination is attached to 
soil particles. The contaminated particles could be 
uniformly distributed through the soil box but most 
likely the TRU waste is highly concentrated in small 
very active particles distributed irregularly in the box. 
The soil box assay only provides a total contamina­
tion measurement. Slag volume reduction is depend­
ent on the ability to pick out the small samples of soil 
that contain the highly active particles. 
3. 
Studies showed that the neutron sensor could not be 
effective with small samples and does not have the 
throughput required. The gamma sensor can achieve 
high throughput with small samples, but is biased as 
explained in the previous section. 
4. 
Uncertainty arises because of the unknown state of 
the buried waste, the location of various waste types 
in the pit, the state of the containers, amount of leak­
age and the transport mechanisms for penetration of 
waste into the surrounding soil. These factors con­
tribute to the contamination, dispersion and mixture 
composition of the soil input at the segmented sorter 
A Bayesian network representing variables involved in in­
situ leakage and transport and in-process assay and con­
centration of mixed waste was constructed from expert 
knowledge and a representative network is shown in Fig­
ure 2. This network can be partitioned into four compo­
nents. 
The waste characteristics component (2A) begins with the 
root node (WC) representing the waste composition of a 
section of the pit from which a soil batch was extracted. 
The prior is assessed from a three-dimensional database of 
the pit. The soil surrounding the waste is collected into 
large bins (I 00 cu ft). Each bin is a batch of soil to be 
processed by the concentrator. The prior distribution of 
WC is assessed from dump records and is shown in the 
upper bar chart. The column of nodes represents various 
characteristics of the waste types. For display purposes, 
the charts show 5 waste types and 7 characteristics. In a 
typical application there would be several times those 
numbers. 
The container condition sub-network (28) represents ex­
pert knowledge about the processes that can destroy con-
tainer integrity and transport waste contamination into the 
surrounding soil. The potential for container leakage is 
affected both by the type of waste stored in the container 
and unknown events that may have occurred at the time of 
dumping up until the time of retrieval. 
The average contamination of the batch is measured at an 
assay station. The assay sub-network (2C) predicts the 
assay results (ACD and AMD). The actual assay is as­
serted into the Bayesian network and the network is up­
dated. This results in a conditional posterior distribution 
over the mixtures of waste (WC) in the batch (middle bar 
chart - 2F), as well as the distribution of the sample con­
tamination (SCD) to be seen at the concentrator (graph 
2H). Finally the concentrator sub-network predicts the 
radiation as measured by the concentrator sensor array 
(SS) as well as the actual contamination (SCD). As the 
batch is processed, the sensor array assesses the contami­
nation of small soil samples (0.1 cu ft). The small sample 
sensor value is input to the Bayes network for another 
update (chart 2G). This second update provides a predic­
tion of the actual sample contamination. (graph 2J) This 
prediction is the posterior probability distribution that is 
conditioned on the section of the pit where the batch was 
extracted, the information collected at the batch assay, the 
measured contamination of soil in the batch already proc­
essed, and the sensor reading for the current sample. 
From this derived posterior of the actual sample contami­
nation the expected loss of diverting the sample to the slag 
stream is compared with the expected loss of accepting it 
into the clean soil stream. The controller chooses the ac­
tion that minimizes the expected loss. 
3. A DECISION RULE FOR OPTIMAL 
CONTROL. 
There are two actions for the controller: divert the sample 
to the slag stream or accept it as clean for the restoration 
of the pit. For simplicity, we assume that there is a rejec-
tion threshold c such that if a sample is accepted as clean 
when in fact its contamination is greater than cthen a loss 
is incurred. Such a loss may be a penalty that is assessed 
or it may be the cost of reworking the sample when dis­
covered at a later point in the process. Similarly, rejecting 
a sample that is clean also incurs a loss, for example, the 

Bayesian Control for Concentrating Mixed Nuclear Waste 
667 
cost of unnecessary maintenance and storage. This loss 
matrix is displayed in Table I. 
A decision rule D maps information to action. The opti­
mal decision minimizes expected loss given the informa­
tion: 
D* (I)= arg min i A(d, c) dP(c I I) 
It is not hard to show that D* has the following form when 
A is given by table 1: 
D*(I) =divert iffP(c > c \1) > Ao I A1• 
Table 1: A(d, c)= Loss matrix of the divert decision 
decision 
outcome 
1\ 
1\ 
C$C 
c>c 
divert 
Ao 
Ao 
do not divert 
0 
AI 
c = sample contaminate density 
A 0 = cost of conversion to slag and long term storage 
A 1 = cost of making the error of allowing a toxic sam-
pie to return to pit 
4. COMPILATION FOR A REAL TIME 
CONTROLLER 
In theory, the Bayesian network of Figure 2, after updat­
ing with the assay and sensor observations, provides the 
distribution P( cii) 
= P(SCD I ACD, SS) needed for se­
lecting the best control decision. However, there are two 
practical complications. 
1. 
The network contains a mixture of discrete and con­
tinuous variables. 
2. 
Solving the network for each new value of the sensor 
requires too much computing resources for real time 
control. 
4.1 COMPLICATIONS IN A CG-NETWORK 
The mixture of discrete and continuous variables can be 
handled using the cg-network algorithm proposed by Lau­
ritzen [1992]. However, the Lauritzen algorithm only pro­
vides an approximation, the closest Gaussian to the mix­
ture. This approximation can be very gross. Also, the al­
gorithm needs some minor alteration to accommodate near 
zero values. It is not hard to modifY the algorithm to ac­
commodate these problems (see appendix). However, the 
time for updating the full network did not meet the re­
quirements of the controller. 
4.2 A REAL TIME ALGORITHM FOR BATCH 
PROCESSING 
A Bayesian network is a representation of the joint distri­
bution of the variables in a problem. Many variables that 
are needed to assess the network are unobserved, hidden 
variables that give structure and meaning to the network. 
Among the observed variables there are differences in the 
frequency of observation. 
Such variations can be ex­
ploited in the control setting for efficient processing. 
Controls are determined at run time only by the most fre­
quently observed variables. Furthermore, only a few un­
observed variables have a direct impact on the control 
decision. Thus, by eliminating most variables through 
instantiation (of the less frequently observed variables) or 
integration (of the hidden variables), a large Bayesian 
network can often be reduced to a small network of only a 
few variables. This is the strategy employed in hierarchi­
cal control (Sethi and Zhang, 1994). The human nervous 
system is an example of a hierarchical control system. 
The optimal control requires P(c I I), or P (SCD I ACD, 
SS) in our example. At run time while processing a soil 
batch, the assay variable is fixed, so that what is required 
is P (SCD I SS; ACD), the probability of the actual con­
tamination given the observed measured value, holding 
ACD constant. In the segmented sorter controller, the 
SCD 
Figure 3: Run-time network compiled from net­
work in figure 2. 
network of figure 2 is reduced to that of figure 3 between 
the time a soil box leaves the soil assay station and is 
loaded into the sorter. 
The joint distribution of figure 3 is fairly easily derived 
from the clique tree representation of figure 2 to obtain 
the clique tree for figure 3. The runtime network (figure 
3) is updated with each sensor value and the resulting dis­
tribution of SCD is used to compute the optimal control 
decision as given above in section 3. 
When the variable SMD is also integrated out of the net­
work of figure 3, the result is a mixture bivariate distribu­
tion for SCD and SS. (Figure 4 ). Each component of the 
mixture has a positively sloped major axis, indicating a 
positive correlation between sensor and sample contami­
nation for a given waste type. However, the bivariate 

668 
Welch and Smith 
Gaussian that minimizes the Kullback-Liebler distance to 
this mixture has a negatively sloped major axis, indicating 
an inverse relation between sensor and contamination. 
This is a result of the high gamma, low neutron radiation 
from the waste type wt-0. Such waste has relatively short 
life and should not be included in long term slag storage 
and maintenance. 
contami natQ 
35 
Figure 4. 
95% ellipsoids of mixture components of the joint 
distribution of sensor (SS) and sample contaminate (SCD) 
given the assay reading. Dark lines indicate the components 
of the mixture distribution. The gray ellipsoid is the 95% prob­
ability level for the Gaussian approximation given by the Lau­
ritzen algorithm. 
A network like figure 3 is small enough that the network 
can be evaluated and a decision computed in less than a 
second, even with many waste types. If millisecond con­
trol decisions are required, the control decision rule can 
be computed as a function of the sensor reading, SS. The 
form of the rule will, in general, be a collection of real 
intervals {[sk, sk+tl } in which diversion of the sample to 
the slag stream is optimal. This rule is simple enough that 
it can be loaded onto the PLC (programmable logic con­
troller) implementing the divert action. 
5. CONCLUSIONS 
Many control problems involve uncertainty about the 
meaning of sensory information. Bayesian networks pro­
vide the analysis upon which an optimal control solution 
can be calculated. The computational complexity that 
comes with the Bayesian method can be an obstacle to 
implementing a Bayesian network based controller. Nev­
ertheless, careful architectural design can reduce the re­
source requirements of runtime computation. In the ex­
ample studied in this paper, much of the computation can 
be completed off line, during the staging of batches in a 
batch process system. 
Essentially one recognizes that 
many of the variables in the original network, though im­
portant for the original assessment, can be absorbed into a 
marginal distribution of variables that are either sensors 
that change during processing or key variables that are 
essential for making the control decision. 
Computation of the marginal joint distribution can be 
computed through a mixture of strategies. Often this can 
be accomplished by using the potentials of the cliques for 
the larger network. 
Adding arcs to the network or con­
straints on the triangulation of the network can help. Con­
ditioning methods as in footnote 1, and node elimination 
methods as found in the Shachter algorithm can also be 
employed. 
A batch processing system is the simplest example where 
differences in the observation frequency provide a strat­
egy for reducing the runtime computation of controls. 
Further study of network exact solution algorithms that are 
built for hierarchical control architectures holds promise 
for bringing the power of Bayesian networks to real time 
process control in highly uncertain environments.
