A FRAMEWORK FOR FAST SCALABLE BNN INFERENCE USING 
GOOGLENET AND TRANSFER LEARNING 
 
 
KARTHIK E 
SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY, 
CHRIST (DEEMED TO BE UNIVERSITY) 

ABSTRACT 
 
Efficient and accurate object detection in video and image analysis is one of the major 
beneficiaries of the advancement in computer vision systems with the help of deep learning. 
With the aid of deep learning, more powerful tools evolved, which are capable to learn high- 
level and deeper features and thus can overcome the existing problems in traditional 
architectures of object detection algorithms. The huge amount of visual information and 
demand of high throughput requirements are the major the bottle neck in the existing object 
detection architectures. The work in this project aims to achieve high accuracy in object 
detection with good real time performance. 
In the area of computer vision, lot of research are going in the area of detection and processing 
of visual information, by improving the existing algorithms. Binarized neural network have 
shown high performance in various vision tasks such as image classification, object detection 
and semantic segmentation. In this thesis, object detection is done using binarized neural 
network with tensor flow to improve the accuracy and to reduce the execution time. The 
Modified National Institute of Standards and Technology database (MNIST), Canadian 
Institute For Advanced Research (CIFAR) and Street View House Numbers (SVHN) datasets 
are used which is implemented using pretrained convolutional neural network (CNN) that is 
22 layers deep. Supervised learning is used in the work, which classifies the particular dataset 
with the proper structure of the model. In still images, to improve the accuracy, Googlenet is 
used. The final layer of the Googlenet are replaced with the transfer learning to improve the 
accuracy of the Googlenet. At the same time, the accuracy in moving images can be 
maintained by transfer learning techniques. Hardware is the main backbone for any model to 
obtain faster results with large number of datasets. Here, Nvidia Jetson Nano is used which is 
a graphics processing unit (GPU), that can handle large number of computations in the process 
of object detection. Results show that the accuracy of object detected by transfer learning 
method is more when compared to the existing methods. 

KEYWORDS 
 
 
 
Item 
Description 
 
Framework 
Framework is an interface which allows to build deep learning 
models quickly into underlying algorithm. 
Googlenet 
Googlenet is a pre trained version of convolutional neural network 
that is 22 layers deep 
Transfer Learning Transfer Learning is used to store knowledge that is gained while 
solving one problem and applying it to a different but related 
problem. 
TensorFlow 
TensorFlow is an open source library which uses numerical 
computations to determine data flow graphs for solving 
mathematical operations. 
BNN 
Binarized Neural Network 
 
CNN 
Convolutional Neural Network 
 
GPU 
Graphics Processing Unit 
 
FPS 
Frames Per Unit 
 
BN 
Batch Normalization 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
For humans, visual recognition is one of the five inevitable basic senses. In order to pick up a 
pen we need to find which part of object is recognized and later on grasp it. To recognize 
human, we determine where the face is a part of it [1]. For coordinating all these activities, the 
neurons in the brain sends the signal. Similarly, the deep learning techniques are used which 
mimics the neurons to identify an object. Several algorithms are developed for deep learning 
techniques but it’s hardware implementation is the biggest challenge. First, the neural network 
model is trained and then with the help of computer vision the object is identified. For example, 
imagine a robot wants to pick a glass from the table. To perform this action, the robot must 
first find the glass and then the image classification is done to accurately finds the object [2]. 
Recently, the visual data has grown drastically and the size of the data to be processed by the 
algorithm is also huge. Now, nearly 1 billion photos are uploaded each day on Facebook [3], 
which is a typical example of the case. Besides this, the difficulty in classifying a set of grains 
into fine and coarse grains in unfavorable lighting condition also need to be addressed. With 
the advent of deep learning techniques, all the above challenges are effectively overcomed. 
Deep learning is sub-field of machine learning that studies statistical model called deep neural 
networks. Deep learning has made a big impact on computer vision which enhanced image 
classification and object detection. All these advantages come at the price of increase in 
computational resources becomes of its complex frameworks like Tensor flow and Torch7. 
Graphics processing unit (GPU) is employed which increases the shared models and open 
source codes. Larger and deeper architecture are trained to handle with bigger datasets. 
Weakly supervised learning methods are often applied to beat the restrictions. 
As different objects are on different scale of the pictures, therefore the window is employed 
to seek out all positions of the pictures. For an outsized dataset the window is difficult to use 
except for fixed images window method is suitable [5]. To acknowledge different objects 
feature extraction is applied. Manually it can distinguish all types of objects. Googlenet and 
TensorFlow is employed to spot the pictures from the dataset. A classifier distinguishes the 
target object to be identified. Among classifiers, the back- ground subtraction model [9] is 
employed which is more efficient. The goal of the work is to enhance BNN based real time 
object detection using Googlenet and transfer learning. 

MATERIAL AND METHODS 
 
Binary neural network is difficult to train so the deep learning framework are used for training 
the networks. Googlenet dataset is of 22 layers were deep networks integrate high level 
features and classifiers. Network depth increases and accuracy gets saturated which degrades 
rapidly. It is not caused by over fitting model which leads higher training error. There exists a 
solution to deeper model the added layers are identifying mapping and other layers are of 
shallower model. Comprehensive experiments on Googlenet show that extremely deep nets 
are easy to optimize but exhibit higher training error when depth increases where deep nets can 
enjoy accuracy gain from increased depth [10]. 
The MNIST dataset has 95.8% accuracy where as CIFAR-10 and SVHN have 80.1% and 
94.9% accuracy. CNN will require millions of floating-point operations are in tera operations 
per second on FPGA. CNN is focused on supervised learning and it receives input from small 
receptive field in the previous layer. Each pixel in the output image is the sum of all synapse 
weight and corresponding images. Pooling layers are simple down sample of 2D images. Max 
pooling replaces into small subtiles and replaces each subtile with largest element. Three types 
of binarizations are considered as binary input activations, binary synapse weight and binary 
output activations. The predetermined portion of synapse have zero weight and all other 
synapse have weight one 98.7% accuracy is determined by MNIST dataset. Systolic array is 
used which is a single processing engine style architecture using theoretical roofline model 
optimized for execution of each layer. 
FIGURE 1: Implementation on Zynq board 

Finn, a framework for building fast and flexible FPGA accelerator. CNNs implementations use 
floating point parameters. BNN performance using Roofline model with Alexnet is implemented on 
Zynq board. Trained using 32-bit Floating point numbers. The major advantages are comparing 
different platforms is to simply compare their accuracy, FPS and power consumption when working 
on the same benchmark datasets (MNIST, CIFAR-10 and SVHN) [7]. The disadvantage is all 
prototypes have been implemented on the Xilinx Zynq-7100. 
Comparison of Existing Problem Statements: 
 
TABLE 1: Comparison of Research Papers 
 
 
Experimental or Analytical Work Completed in the Project 
The object detection is used to detect a known class, cars and so on. An example, of a 
bicycle detection in an image specifies the location of certain parts. The pose is determined 
by a 3-Dimensional specifying the object relative to camera. The object system constructs a 
model from object class from object class from set of training examples. A fully connected 
layer can be converted by a 1-Dimensional convolutional layer. Output SoftMax layer of 
shape of number of classes are predicted. If we are using sliding window approach then there 
are passed to Binary Net four times where each time sliding window crops the input image 
matrix [5]. 

 
 
 
FIGURE 2: Classification of Layers 
 
 
It is decided by number of filters used in Max pool layer. The main advantage is sliding 
window runs and computes all values simultaneously. This technique is fast, but the weakness 
of this techniques is that position of bounding boxes is not accurate. Googlenet is used which 
achieves high accuracy in running in real time. It divides the image into grids. The goal is to 
improve accuracy. The series of convolution feature layers are added at the end of network. 
Generate the initial sub segmentation which uses generated regions to produce the final 
candidate region proposals. These regions are wrapped into a square and fed into BNN which 
consists of feature extracted from images. It takes huge amount of time to train the network. It 
can be implemented real time as it takes around 47 seconds for each test image [4]. 
 
 
 
FIGURE 3: Existing Architecture for FINN 

Human learners have different ways to transfer knowledge between tasks. We recognize and the 
relevant knowledge is applied from previous tasks to the new tasks. In development of 
algorithm transfer learning is the most ongoing research in deep learning. The Transfer 
Learning is used only to transfer knowledge that is learned and can be implemented to other 
models. Similarly, the last layer of CNN with the help of Googlenet is changed accordingly 
to improve the accuracy in identifying the objects. A Convolutional neural network (CNN) 
consists of one or more layers used for image processing, classification, segmentation and so 
on. It consists of different filters in order to improve the performance and accuracy. 
The Binarized Neural Networks (BNN) is an upgradation of CNN that consists of binary 
weights and activations with a limit of [-1, +1] and it is easily compatible with transfer 
learning. CNN has less feature compatibility and it takes more time to train images when 
compared to BNN. First, the network structure is optimized which removes the Batch 
Normalization (BN) that makes BNN to run without any loss of accuracy. Second, an 
architecture of parallelism is proposed which is a perfect load balancer of BNN. Third, both 
the convolutional layers and fully connected layer are combined to give better performance in 
order to improve the accuracy. 
The Nvidia Jetson Nano board is a GPU acts as a platform so that the proposed algorithm is 
implemented on it. The performance of GPU is comparatively greater and even it takes less 
time to show the final output. It has high throughput which helps the computer vision to 
identify the objects exactly. 
Convolutional Neural Network: 
 
 
FIGURE 4: Architecture of CNN 

It is a class of deep networks which is used for visual imagery. It uses multi-layer perceptron’s 
which is a fully connected network. It can handle more complex network by simplified layers. 
The convolutional layers depend on convolutional kernels that are defined by width and 
height, and the depth of convolutional filter must be equal to number of channels of input 
feature map [10]. 
The only difference between CNN and the Artificial Neural Network (ANN) is that CNN are 
used in pattern recognition within the images. It allows to encode images into the architecture. 
ANN struggle to compute the image data this is one of the major limitations of it. MNIST data 
are suitable for ANN because the image dimensions are small with 784 weights. It is composed 
of multiple blocks such as convolution layers, pooling layers and fully connected layers which 
learn spatial hierarchies through back propagation algorithm. 
In image pixel values are stored in a 2-Dimensional array and a kernel is applied for each 
position which makes CNN more efficient in image processing. Extracted features can become 
more complex it is called as training, which is an optimization algorithm called as 
backpropagation. A model under kernels and weights is of loss function which is updated 
through back propagation with optimization algorithm [4]. 
It performs down sampling of inputs that has a feature map with height×width and then further 
down sampled which is the average of all elements that is applied. The advantages are it 
reduces number of learnable parameters and enables the CNN to accept input of different sizes. 
Last layer activation function is applied to last fully applied layers which is different from 
others. Activation function is selected according to the task. It is applied to multi classification 
task which is a SoftMax function that is normalized and it is with a range between 0 and 1 and 
all values sum to 1 [7]. 
Finds kernels in convolution layers and weights in fully connected layers and gives the labels 
on a training dataset. Backpropagation is used for training neural networks which plays 
essential role to calculate the loss function through forward propagation by the optimization 
algorithm. Deep learning is used to classify images from large number of training data which 
uses corresponding labels for efficient classification using CNN. In object detection CNN is 
used to classify data based on the labeled dataset which uses unsupervised learning to the 
algorithm [10]. Transfer learning can be incorporated which trains a network on the large 
dataset such as Googlenet then it is applied to the given task. Feature extraction removes the 
last layer of the network and maintains the remaining network which consists of fixed feature 
extractor. The classifiers such as support vector machines are used which follows the fine- 
tuning method which is a part of kernels [11]. 

Transfer Learning: 
 
Transfer learning is realized with the help of TensorFlow which is the artificial intelligence 
framework that can handle the new layers to be implemented on Googlenet. It is the 
improvement of learning that adds layers from the existing architecture. When network is 
trained on large datasets then the model is learned to perform a particular task. Fine tuning 
methods are obtained if the neural network is small then it is better to make changes to the last 
layers such that only these layers can be retrained on the network [10]. 
 
 
 
FIGURE 5: Implementing Transfer Learning on Last Layer of the network 
 
 
Transfer learning is used when there is an improvement task for transfer of knowledge that has 
already been learned. Most algorithms have developed to assign a single task which is used to 
formulate and solve the challenges. Both inductive and reinforcement learning are used for 
task mapping. It is inspired by the human learners that they transfer knowledge between tasks. 
Machine learning algorithms address the isolated tasks. 
There are three ways to improve transfer learning. First is initial performance in target task 
using transfer knowledge which is compared to initial performance when further learning is 
not done. Second is the amount of time that the model will take to fully learn the targeted task 
when transfer knowledge is compared to time which learns from scratch. Third is final 
performance level that is achieved in target task when compared to final level without transfer. 
If the performance of the model is decreased then negative transfer has occurred [10]. 

Googlenet: 
 
It is a pre trained model that is of 22 layers which consists of nearly 1000 classes. Inception 
layer covers a big area but also keeps the fine resolution of images. It convolves parallel layers 
which is 1x1 and 5x5 matrix. The Gabor filters is a linear filter for texture analysis handles 
better model sizes. Googlenet uses 9 Inception layers. The final con- cat layer is obtained by 
pooling method. Pooling reduces the network sizes by SoftMax techniques through matrix 
multiplication operations. Max Pooling is the down sample of the input image whereas the 
average pooling is the average output of each feature maps [7]. 
FIGURE 6: Layers of Googlenet 
 
The noise is removed by the wiener filter and the performance of GoogLeNet is better than 
AlexNet on various parameter including time, accuracy. The architecture is of different size 
filters for same images and obtains the output. It is of 22 layers. The 1x1 convolution is used 
for dimension reduction. and the weights are selected with appropriate features. It contains 
multiple inception modules to form a deep network from which high accuracy is obtained. 
Transfer learning is used to recognize the objects using the numerous images and labeling of 
objects are based on probabilities [8]. 
To classify the images dataset of different images are loaded. It is of training the data and the 
other is validation of images. The Googlenet helps to analyze network which helps in layer 
information of network which gives information on weights, bias for convolutional layers. 
Loading pretrain network is an extraction of features from input images from convolutional 
layers and compared with the output layers into predicted label, loss value. Googlenet can also 
be used to conduct retraining of new data set. The network that is to be trained is at augmented 
image datastore. It restricts overfitting with a good training accuracy [9]. 

TensorFlow: 
 
It is an open source library for dataflow which uses math library for machine learning 
application such as neural networks. TensorFlow is developed by Google Brain team which 
can run multiple GPU. The architecture is easily compatible with various plat- forms such as 
desktops and clusters of servers to mobile devices. The computations are in the form of 
dataflow graphs which performs on multidimensional arrays referred as tensors. TensorFlow 
is available in 64-bit Mac, Linux and Windows. Kubeflow is introduced which is the 
Kubernetes deployed in Tensor processing unit. In 2017 TensorFlow lite was introduced which 
is the GPU inference engine for micro controllers and mobile devices [12]. 
Keras is an open source library for neural network that can be run on top of the Tensor- Flow 
which acts as an interface rather than standalone framework. It is used to build blocks such as 
layers, objectives and activation functions which makes image data easier to analyze with the 
code. 
 
 
FIGURE 7: TensorFlow with Keras Package 

DESIGN / PROTOTYPE 
 
Most of algorithm for object detection are sensitive to background and cannot detect edge of 
the object. It uses shape fragment features which is a multi-scale. Most methods can be 
classified as point-based approaches and boundary curve approaches is always limited to 
noises in the images. It is of pure handwritten digits. Shape based methods are segmentation 
errors for object detection and recognition. Appearance based methods consider the 
appearance feature of the object instead of geometrical properties. It uses extrapolating known 
strategies from 2D single view object class detection by combining classifiers for separate 
viewpoints. To match the shape robustly, iterative methods are used. It contains one key point 
and two connected line segments. For a rigid object, if more than 3 points are matched then it 
is easy to estimate the object pose. When view point changes appearance of object is different. 
For 2D object modeling we need to setup the constraint between all the views for same object. 
For 3D object modeling it is a model that is a Multiview representation of a 3D object class 
[13]. 
 
 
FIGURE 8: Proposed Architecture 
 
To build a custom architecture rather than the fixed architecture were all neural net- works are 
kept in on chip memory. This avoids the off-chip memory which minimizes the latency by 
overlapping the computation. The separate mapping of layers ensures that it has heterogeneity. 

A BNN accelerator has various constraints when imposed on the use case. It uses clock 
frequency to control the classification throughput. BNN uses 1-bit values for all input 
activations, weights and output activations which computes binary dot products with fewer 
hardware resources. The hardware can be implemented by the pop count operation that counts 
number of set bits in batch normalization which determines the output activation. The block 
diagram consists of Theano, Binarynet, BNN. FPS target, Finn synthesizer, Googlenet, 
Transfer learning, bit file and platform with board. 
Hardware Implementation: 
 
Nvidia Jetson Nano is used to run multiple neural networks for image classification, object 
detection. It is basically implemented by Baleno Etcher which is installed in the SD Card. 
GPU is used for parallel operations mainly for fast computing and a large dataset can be 
processed easily. 
The GPU is most preferred when compared to CPU. The GPU have high computedensity and 
high computations per Memory access. It is mainly built for parallel operations which includes 
many parallel execution units (ALUs) and Graphics is the best case of parallelism. Deep 
pipelines are used which is of hundreds of stages with high through- put and latency [8]. 
It has better flow control logic, gather memory access. The CPU have low compute density 
and complex control logic with larger caches. It is optimized for serial operations with fewer 
execution units (ALU) and higher clock speeds. It consists of shallow pipelines which is of 
less than 30 stages and it includes low latency tolerance whereas new CPU have more 
parallelism. The components are Micro SD Card slot, 40 pin expansion header, Micro USB 
Port gigabit Ethernet Port, USB 3.0 ports, HDMI output port, display port connector DC Barrel 
jack , MIPI CSI Camera connector [10]. 
 
 
FIGURE 9: Physical Structure of board 

 
FIGURE 10: Components of Nvidia Jetson Nano 
 
Googlenet retrain these models which often choose between fast processing and prediction 
accuracy. Object detection is chosen over image classification because of determining size and 
position of objects in images. It focuses on retraining pre trained models with custom datasets 
with known framework. Classifies the images through retraining the model by transfer 
learning mainly uses TensorFlow object detection API framework. It is trained on the inception 
v2 dataset. Cameras capture different viewing angles of prototype. To increase the stability of 
models when training, evaluating and testing all models. The training model uses Googlenet 
framework with set of 0.001 and a batch size of 64 [13]. 

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 
It gives a detailed review on deep learning, based object detection frameworks which handles 
different clutter and low resolution with modifications using BNN. Then the transfer learning 
and the Googlenet are compared [14]. 
 
For the purpose of this project the available MNIST, CIFAR-10, SVHN dataset is used. It consists of 
25k object annotations. The project is implemented in Python 3. Googlenet is used for image pre- 
processing. Fine tuning is done which is trained end to end on the dataset [12]. 
TABLE 2: Comparison of accuracy of objects 
 
Object detection plays a vital role and it has to be accurate with a very less margin of errors 
with the least amount of resources possible. In this project few of the image detection 
algorithms which is used to develop a system to detect objects mainly used in the automation 
industry [5]. By this the accuracy of Googlenet with Transfer Learning is better than the 
Googlenet. 
These solutions take multiple regions of the frame for feature extraction and perform the object 
detection over these regions [6]. The objects are stored in the database and are compared with 
the objects. The system identifies object based on the threshold value example: 35% feature 
mapping criteria and the objects are identified from database [9]. 
A particular class of such methods relies on graph models where an object is decom- posed 
into a number of parts, each one is represented by a graph vertex. The efficient modelling as 
graphs can be used for effective representation of images for detection and retrieval of objects. 
The instruments capable to classify such huge amounts of data has become a real challenge 
[2]. 
Googlenet provides features for customization, and production capable deployments for object 
detection tasks. Adjusting minimum probability by default, objects detectedless than 50% will 
not be shown. 

 
FIGURE 11: Graph of Accuracy v/s Class 
 
 
BNN topology follows the backpropagation model which shows greater accuracy when it is 
combined with the neural networks like Googlenet. Model sizes are much smaller than the full 
precision model. It consists of unseen topologies, traffic matrices and con- figurations that are 
used as the baseline of BNN. At digital design the inference time is less at BNN and even 
execution is faster and accurate. The bit width frequency is reduced which is the off-chip data 
transfer and the overhead of bits. FINN synthesizer has a fast, scalable inference that has a 
significant redundancy and high classification accuracy which reduces the floating point to 
binary values. It uses flexible heterogeneous architecture which comprises of convolutional 
and pooling layers that classifies billions of images with least possible time. 
Googlenet is a pretrained network that is 22 layers deep which classifies nearly 1000 objects 
like keyboard, mouse, laptop and so on. It contains pooling filter and activation functions. The 
pooling is of two types, one is max pooling which is the down sample of the input and another 
is the average pooling which is the average output of each feature map. Pooling is the spatial 
reduction of network filters that uses SoftMax technique which is the normalized exponential 
function. The main reason Googlenet is chosen in the model is that the network size is less so 
that more images can be trained in the dataset. Transfer learning is the transfer of knowledge 
of the model that can be incorporated to similar models to obtain a better output. 
This can be increased for high certainty cases. Using a custom object class, we can find the 
object class of unique objects. Detection speed can be reduced by setting the speed to be fastest 
[8]. Input type is the file path to an image file stream of an image as input image. Output type 
specify the detect object from image function should return image in the form of a file. 

 
 
FIGURE 12: Googlenet 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 13: Googlenet with Transfer Learning 

 
 
FIGURE 14: Before Transfer Learning is applied on Pre trained Images 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 15: After Transfer Learning is applied on Pre trained Images 

CONCLUSION 
 
An accurate and efficient object detection algorithm is developed and studied using 
BNN with transfer learning technique. This project uses recent techniques in the field 
of computer vision and deep learning. It can be used in real time to determine accuracy 
of objects. The Googlenet has an average precision of 93% whereas Googlenet with 
Transfer Learning it has reported an average precision of 98% for different objects. It 
is also flexible to extend to other frameworks. The Tensor Flow API is used to 
determine the accuracy of a object from the images present in the dataset. It shows the 
comparison of the objects before and after where accuracy is improved drastically. It 
overall creates the instances of objects from particular class in an image which 
classifies the object. A high performance is obtained by using the Tensor Flow API 
which has minimal power consumption and latency. This technology is mainly used 
for embedded applications and automation industry. Nvidia Jetson Nano has the good 
performance were this hard- ware platform is constantly updated by deep neural 
network libraries which increases the performance in computer vision tasks. 
As a step for future work, several short coming that came across during the development 
of the proposed algorithm are analyzed in some extent. During detection process we 
don’t know whether to detect object first or the part first. Using depth images, it is 
easy to segment the objects using thermal camera. For properly detecting the 
background objects, a 3D model can be proposed to point object detection and 
segmentation of images. Further it can be focused on implementing larger networks 
like Resnet and higher performance convolutions can be obtained.
