The Medical Authority of AI: A Study of AI-enabled Consumer-facing Health 
Technology 
Yue You, YY, and You 
College of Information Sciences and Technology, The Penn State University, University Park, PA, USA, 

Yubo Kou, YK, and Kou 
College of Information Sciences and Technology, The Penn State University, University Park, PA, USA,  

Xianghua Ding, XD, and Ding 

Xinning Gui, XG, and Gui 
College of Information Sciences and Technology, The Penn State University, University Park, PA, USA,  

Recently, consumer-facing health technologies such as Artificial Intelligence (AI)-based symptom checkers (AISCs) have 
sprung up in everyday healthcare practice. AISCs solicit symptom information from users and provide medical suggestions 
and possible diagnoses, a responsibility that people usually entrust with real-person authorities such as physicians and expert 
patients. Thus, the advent of AISCs begs a question of whether and how they transform the notion of medical authority in 
people’s everyday healthcare practice. To answer this question, we conducted an interview study with thirty AISC users. We 
found that users assess the medical authority of AISCs using various factors including AISCs’ automated decisions and 
interaction design patterns, associations with established medical authorities like hospitals, and comparisons with other health 
technologies. We reveal how AISCs are used in healthcare delivery, discuss how AI transforms conventional understandings 
of medical authority, and derive implications for designing AI-enabled health technology. 
CCS CONCEPTS • Human-centered computing~Human computer interaction (HCI)~Empirical studies in HCI 
Additional Keywords and Phrases: Medical authority, Artificial intelligence, Symptom checkers, Consumer-
facing health technology 
ACM Reference Format: 
NOTE: This block will be automatically generated when manuscripts are processed after acceptance. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Healthcare consumers’ perception of medical authority keeps evolving along with technological advances 
[47,93,124]. Different from the notion of trust, authority has a structural and sociotechnical property, distributed 
and embodied within organizational members [11]. In this paper, medical authority refers to the power 
distributed in the whole healthcare socio-technical context, involving all stakeholders such as traditional 
authorities and health technologies. Healthcare consumers’ medical authority perception and experience play 
an important role in whom and what venues they deem trustworthy and seek information from. The Internet 
allows people to turn to other people including strangers and nonprofessionals for medical information [18,109], 

 2
through which they ascribe medical authority to these online sources. Such ascription of authority also takes 
place as healthcare consumers seek potential diagnoses from Artificial Intelligence (AI)-based symptom 
checkers (AISCs, or AISC apps). AISC apps can assess users’ symptoms and provide potential diagnostic 
results. AISC apps have been popular in the healthcare market, and were used more than 100 million times in 
2019 in the United States alone [89]. 
Consumer-facing AI health technologies bring radical changes to our very idea of medical authority. Usually, 
when people seek assessments for their symptoms, they ask help from doctors or ask their symptoms online. 
During this process, people are inclined to delegate authority to doctors and online peers [44,93,127]. With the 
advent of AI-enabled health technologies, new dynamics have been introduced into the existing network of 
medical authority. Unlike AI technologies designed for clinical practice, whose accuracy and authority can be 
evaluated by established authorities (e.g., medical professionals [24]), the authority of consumer-facing AI 
health technologies usually cannot be assessed by their users since they are laypersons without sufficient 
medical knowledge. If users blindly trust the diagnoses from consumer-facing AI health technologies, they may 
risk their lives [40], since these systems may generate inaccurate diagnoses and cause unintended 
consequences [63]. In this situation, it is important to know how users perceive and understand medical 
authority with the emergence of consumer-facing AI health technologies. 
The concern for the medical authority of AI is also bound up with multiple growing concerns about AI systems, 
such as transparency [35,36], accountability [74], and authority [34]. In healthcare, a stream of research has 
investigated the accuracy [57,111] as well as usability [84,87] of AISC apps, factors influencing the authority of 
medical professionals [47,59], and the effect of online social forums [39,133] and Internet searches [120] on 
medical authority. Yet, few studies examined the authority of AISC apps and how these apps influence people’s 
perception and experience of medical authority. Also, without such knowledge, it is difficult for designers and 
researchers to improve the future design of AISC apps. It is in this context we ask how the AISC apps impact 
how their users understand and experience medical authority.  
To answer this research question, we conducted 30 semi-structured interviews with AISC app users in China. 
Many popular medical apps in China, such as Chunyu Doctor, Zuoshou Doctor, and WeDoctor, have already 
embedded an AI-enabled symptom checking function. Hence, AISC apps in China are ideal for us to investigate 
how users’ understanding of medical authority to acquire rich data and insights. We found that the medical 
authority was dynamically constructed in users’ interactions with AISC apps. First, the medical authority of AISC 
apps was associated with the endorsements from established authorities, such as reputable companies and 
hospitals. Second, how the user experience of AISC apps is designed also influenced participants’ authority 
perception. Lastly, participants actively compared the results of AISC apps with results from another healthcare 
entities or organizations to adjust their medical authority perception. Based on these findings, we discuss the 
sociotechnical nature of the medical authority in the area of AISC apps and reflect upon the relationship between 
medical authority and interaction design. Lastly, we provide implications for designing AISC apps. 
Our contributions are multi-fold: First, we contribute a deeper understanding of the authority of AI situated in 
the intersection of health informatics and HCI. Second, we articulate and foreground the notion of medical 
authority in understanding AI-enabled health technologies. Third, we deliver empirical and conceptual insights 
into how users interact with AISC apps and how the use influences their clinic visits, a growing phenomenon 
that has been understudied. Fourth, we shed light on the development and interaction design of AI-powered 
healthcare systems. 

 3
2 LITERATURE REVIEW 
In this section, we will discuss existing studies on AISC apps, authority in medicine, and authority in AI 
technology, as well as how our study expands these lines of inquiry. 
2.1 
AISC apps 
An AI-enabled symptom checker, also known as a self-diagnosing tool, is a type of consumer-facing digital 
health tool using AI techniques. They provide potential diagnoses and assist with triage (e.g., inform users 
whether they should seek medical care) [112]. Most studies on AISC apps focus on evaluating their 
effectiveness. Several studies have evaluated AISC apps’ diagnostic accuracy by engaging multiple medical 
experts to assess checkers’ features and performance through clinical vignettes [57,111]. While Babylon Health 
Inc. claimed their symptom checker, Babylon, had accuracy comparable to medical experts [85,103], a large 
amount of research has found that AISC apps were less accurate than physicians. In 2015, the British Medical 
Journal evaluated twenty-three AISC apps, disclosing that symptom checkers have proposed the correct 
diagnoses only 34 percent of the time [112]. In addition, the diagnostic capabilities of AISC apps are inferior to 
the diagnostic capabilities of medical professionals for certain diseases and conditions, such as HIV or hepatitis 
C [12], some ophthalmic conditions [115], DCM symptoms [31], and inflammatory arthritis [101].  
Several studies have investigated the usability of AISC apps [84,87]. They found that users’ evaluation of 
AISC apps changed in interactions [102]. One study also found the accuracy of diagnostic results depended on 
effective interactions between symptom checkers and users [77]. The researchers in this study found when 
users interacted with symptom checkers, they encountered problems regarding repetition patterns, navigation, 
description of symptom attributes. Another study pointed out five major drawbacks of AISCs based on users’ 
perspectives: failing to factor into patient history in their algorithms, rigid input requirements, problematic probing 
questions, lacking support for all health conditions, and being short of sufficient functions for follow-up 
treatments [138]. 
Recent research has also reviewed the development process of healthcare applications, such as the 
applications’ developers [72], regulation, consent and ownership [100], the role of health applications in 
healthcare [71]. Researchers found that there were a lack of professional medical involvement in the 
development process and design of mobile applications [19] and a lack of criteria to assess the expert or 
authority of the medical content [98]. These factors can influence the credibility of health applications. However, 
these studies all focus on the health applications market in general and do not specifically focus on AISC apps 
to explore their reliability and authority.  
Little research has examined the factors influencing the authority of AISC apps from users’ perspectives. To 
our best knowledge, only one study stated that symptom checkers could be viewed as a dubious authority as 
they may misdiagnose users [69]. Therefore, our study aims to explore the authority of AISC apps from users’ 
perspectives. 
2.2 
Authority in medicine 
When patients seek help from doctors, they usually grant authority and responsibility to doctors [127]. Patients 
make decisions not only due to the evaluation of relevant information, but also because of doctors’ authority 
[68]. The authority of doctors can be regarded as a kind of expert authority (i.e., “authority grounded in a 
persistent differentiation of function and specialized ability between bearer and subject” [10]). Other studies 

 4
regard doctors as a charismatic authority (i.e., “the qualities of an individual distinguished by a strong and 
magnetic personality that makes him/her attractive to a wide population and gives him the possibility to control 
and affect large”) [80,96]. One study also recognizes doctors as an epistemic authority (i.e., because doctors 
“possess superior knowledge and judgment about diagnosis, prognosis, and the medical consequences of 
treatment”, people believe in doctors’ proposition because of their faith in doctors rather than the content) [6]. 
Medical authority is a key institution in medicine that structures the legitimacy of healthcare practice, the 
distribution and validation of medical knowledge, as well as certification and licensure [26,41]. Thus, the 
authority could engender trust, but differs trust that is focused on a type of belief in a one-to-one relationship 
[117]. In this paper, medical authority captures our interest in how AISC apps impact not only their users’ trust, 
but also decision-making, action, experience, and broader socio-technical contexts. 
Prior research has examined interior and exterior factors that would influence doctors’ authority. The interior 
factors consist of doctors’ communication skills in consultations [88,94], exclusive medical knowledge and 
expertise [45,47,64,80,83], reputation [83], and uniqueness of diagnostic results given by doctors [29]. Starr 
stated that doctor authority stemmed from the legitimacy of doctors (“which derives from their training, 
credentialing and expertise”) and patients’ belief on them [83]. Another study conducted in Lebanese has 
investigated people’s trust in doctors [114]. This study found that good personal characteristics (e.g., “non-
materialistic”) and social factors (e.g., a good reputation) of doctors could stimulate more trust from the public. 
In addition, this study found that doctors graduating from reputable schools and working in respectable hospitals 
could also gain people’s trust. The exterior factors include the appearance of doctors [55], governments’ 
monitoring of medical quality [113], and societal characteristics [47]. Although acknowledging doctors as 
primary decision-making authority [59], patients sometimes challenge doctors’ authority based on their own 
feelings [97], their rising educational levels [47], easier access to medical knowledge [80,99,132], and autonomy 
(“patients make their own decisions, and that they are enabled to do so”) [126]. 
Information technology (IT) also influences how healthcare consumers understand doctors’ authority [93]. 
Healthcare consumers grant cognitive authority (i.e., “the information sources, people or texts, that influence 
people’s thoughts and are deemed credible” [51]) to relatable sources regardless of whether they are officially 
authoritative [44]. For example, patients searched for medical information not only from medical professionals 
but also from IT resources, such as online social networks or forums [39,133] and Internet searches 
[5,90,106,123]. Through online forums, patients tend to present themselves as authoritative, providing medical 
information for other people [7,51]. However, people do not always use information from IT to question doctors’ 
authority; rather, they sometimes utilize online medical knowledge to affirm medical authority. For example, 
patients would still choose to see a doctor after searching for medical information online [105,120].Thus, IT 
might undermine the monopoly of doctors [5,14,18,21,49,53,125] through computerized retrieval and 
information storage [47,93,124], and change the doctor-patient relationship in medical consultations 
[46,48,82,83,110]. 
These studies have investigated the distribution of authority in medicine, but they mainly focus on offline 
medical visits and online information seeking. Little research has focused on the authority of consumer-facing 
AI-powered diagnostic systems. Also, it is still unclear what the difference is between these AI systems and 
human authority in medicine (i.e., doctors). Therefore, our paper explores the authority of consumer-facing AI 
health technologies and how they affect medical authority. 

 5
2.3 
Al authority 
AI systems can process information like human beings and aid complex tasks [107] through computer 
algorithms [56,122]. The use of AI could result in “the isolation of a particular information processing problem, 
the formulation of a computational theory for it, the construction of an algorithm that implements it, and a 
practical demonstration that the algorithm is successful” [79].  
Several studies have examined the AI authority by comparing AI systems with human authority in a variety 
of settings, such as law, art, biosensing, driving, sports journalism, and education. A study found that artificial 
performers gained authority because they could supplement and even outperform human performers [62]. 
Suggestions provided by artificial performers seem to be professional and based on scientific evidence, making 
these artificial performers authoritative. Another example is that researchers illustrated that AI systems had the 
same authority as humans in monitoring cheating through an experimental study and questionnaire responses 
[52]. However, some people question the authority of AI systems especially regarding law [134] and art [54]. 
These studies demonstrated that AI systems could not replace human authority due to the lack of human value 
[54], morality, social intelligence, human judgment [42], and judicial transparency [8,15,121]. For instance, a 
robot lawyer could not replicate a human lawyer since only humans could deal with the core lawyering function 
[134]; AI art lacked the authority of creativity because people doubted its autonomy [54]; people showed their 
concern for the automated driving due to its unclear legal accountability [15].  
Specifically, some AI researchers have drawn from the notion of algorithmic authority, which is “the legitimate 
power of algorithms to direct human action and to impact which information is considered true” [73], to discuss 
people’s trust in AI algorithms [38,50]. Although AI algorithms can introduce risk and bias [16,135], the existing 
body of research has pointed out that people ascribe authority to AI-based systems because they tend to trust 
automated aids [34], believe in biodata [3], and anticipate that they can get better decisions from these systems 
[2]. Researchers also found that people trusted AI algorithms if they were efficient [65] and objective [37,65]. 
For instance, one study illustrated that users presumed that advertising algorithms are authoritative since they 
can receive appropriate advertisements [37].  
With these concerns, previous studies have emphasized how to deal with the uncertain authority of AI 
systems and algorithms. First, researchers argued that AI algorithms or applications should involve the human 
intervention or human judgment [73,119,129]. Studies have pointed out that humans should always be in the 
decision-making loops [1] and be responsible for the final decision [116]. One study found that AI algorithms 
with the intervention of a human could outperform either of the two [67]. Concerning judicial transparency, 
having a human-in-the-loop can assign liability to the human authority and hold the human accountable [66]. 
Second, researchers found that people would increase the trust in AI algorithms only after the algorithms were 
well-developed and people understood their capabilities [50].  
These studies have revealed the difference between AI authority and human authority as well as people’s 
assessment of AI authority. Yet, we have limited knowledge of how AI authority is constructed in the wild. Also, 
although these studies have compared AI with human authority, they did not consider AI authority by entangling 
AI systems with all other stakeholders, such as human authority, users, and other IT systems. Nor do prior 
studies focus on the authority of AI in the domain of healthcare. Thus, our study aims to explore the medical 
authority of AI in healthcare. 

 6
3 
METHODS 
In this section, we will describe the AISC apps we studied in our work and the qualitative study conducted to 
investigate how our participants assessed medical authority. 
3.1 
AISC Apps under study 
As the digital healthcare industry in China has developed rapidly, many AISC apps have emerged in China’s 
healthcare market. The most well-known AISC apps among them are WeDoctor, Zuoshou Doctor, Chunyu 
Doctor, Mighty Doctor, and Intelligent Doctor. These apps are popular with relatively high ratings in mobile app 
stores (above 4.0/5.0). These apps are developed by either hospitals or for-profit companies backed by medical 
agencies. For example, Intelligent Doctor, a mini program in WeChat, is developed and operated by Guangdong 
Second Provincial General Hospital. Mighty Doctor, a mini program embedded in Alipay, was developed by the 
VHS group (Valurise Health Solutions International group, a company providing AI risk control services) and 
Mayo Clinic (an American nonprofit academic medical center) [139]. WeDoctor and Chunyu Doctor are 
developed by big technology companies. Symptom checkers usually use AI technologies to analyze big data 
and triage symptoms [86]. The AISC apps in our paper are embedded with AI technology as stated in their 
websites. For example, Zuoshou Doctor uses AI technologies such as deep learning, big data processing, and 
semantic comprehension with a conversational user interface [140].  
Users usually self-diagnose themselves with an AISC app following three steps: creating a personal profile, 
inputting symptoms, and receiving an initial diagnosis. In the first step, most AISC apps require users to enter 
age (e.g., Intelligent Doctor, Mighty Doctor, Chunyu Doctor, and Zuoshou Doctor). Some apps also allow users 
to input other personal demographic information. For example, users can input information regarding their 
gender, weight, height, and medical history on Zuoshou Doctor. 
In the second step, these apps utilize diverse forms to solicit input from users. Some apps (e.g., Zuoshou 
Doctor, WeDoctor, and Intelligent Doctor) interact with users and collect information through a chatbot (a 
computer program using Artificial Intelligence techniques, which can be used to interact and communicate with 
humans [70]). Other apps (e.g., Chunyu Doctor and Mighty Doctor) ask users to select their symptoms from a 
preset list of symptoms or a human figure (see Figure 1).  

 7
 
 
 
Figure 1: Different forms of inputting symptoms: the chatbot of Zuoshou Doctor (left), the symptom list of Mighty Doctor 
(middle), and the human figure of Chunyu Doctor (right). 
In the last step, all these apps provide a diagnostic report. For example, Chunyu Doctor provides a report 
including tentative medical diagnoses, “similarity ratio” (i.e., the probability showing that how many people with 
the same symptoms as the participant were diagnosed with the potential disease), treatment options, and 
relevant recommendations (e.g., recommending online or offline doctors and hospitals) (see Figure 2). 
 
Figure 2: A diagnostic report of Chunyu Doctor. 
3.2 
Researcher reflexivity 
We are university researchers from China or the US, working at the intersection of HCI and health informatics. 
We conduct research to help make the health IT systems support quality health service delivery at a lower cost, 
and support individuals to manage their own and their loved ones’ health easily and safely. There is no conflict 
of interest between us and any health technology companies. The study was motivated primarily by the 
observation that many of our friends and family members in China and the US use AISC apps. Although some 
companies, such as Babylon (see [85,103]), claim that their AISC apps have high accuracy, it remains in doubt 

 8
whether these tools are safe for users. Driven by this concern, we feel it is important to investigate how users 
perceive these symptom checkers. 
3.3 
Data collection and analysis 
To understand how AISC apps affect medical authority from users’ perception and experience, we conducted 
30 semi-structured interviews with AISC app users from China. We obtained the university IRB approval before 
the study. We recruited participants through social media and snowball. Specifically, we distributed the flyer 
through WeChat Moments and Weibo (i.e., a popular Chinese microblogging website similar to Twitter). Our 
own social contacts also broadly distributed the flyer via their social media. Our participants had diverse 
backgrounds and did not know each other (see the Table 1 in Appendix). Some of our participants have some 
basic knowledge about AI as basic programming classes are usually required for college students in China, but 
most of them did not. An online screening survey was then sent to people who were interested in our study to 
establish eligibility. We collected information about their age, the AISC apps they had used, their goals of using 
these apps, and the last time they used the AISC app(s). The eligibility criteria specified that participants should 
be over the age of 18, had used AISC apps to consult for possible illnesses, and used AISC apps within one 
year. We stopped conducting interviews when the data reached “theoretical saturation [27]”. We finally recruited 
30 participants with diverse backgrounds. Our participants had diverse occupations, such as student, engineer, 
data analyst, landscape designer, and accountant. Their age ranged from 20 to 55. Most of them were in their 
20s and 30s. They had used a variety of AISC apps for themselves or their family members or friends (e.g., S8 
used Zuoshou Doctor for her mother). Then we conducted audio-recorded interviews via Wechat calls or Zoom 
videos chat in Mandarin with the consent of our participants. The interview duration ranged from 30 minutes to 
1 hour. We started by asking their demographic information, when they started to use AISC apps, and how they 
started to use AISC apps. We then probed on their experiences of AISC app use, such as how they perceived 
the accuracy of diagnostic results from these apps, how they felt about the interactions with these apps, and 
whether they felt these apps were authoritative. We particularly asked which app they preferred if they had used 
multiple apps and how they perceived the conversation design of AISC apps if these apps use a chatbot to 
interact with users. We then transcribed these interviews in Mandarin. 
We applied thematic analysis to analyze these transcripts in an inductive approach [17]. We first immersed 
ourselves in reading the data to familiarize the whole dataset. We then started to analyze data and generated 
over thirty initial codes using the data analysis software DeDoose. After that, we searched for the relationship 
between codes and formed candidate themes and sub-themes. Next, to reach internal homogeneity and 
external heterogeneity [75], we reviewed and refined these themes through rounds of discussions and coding. 
The final thematic map includes four parts: the endorsements by established authorities, data provenance and 
transparency, the charismatic authority through interaction design, and relational authority distributed in a socio-
technical context of healthcare. When reporting findings, we use S1, S2, etc. to denote different participants. 
Representative quotes were translated into English for reporting. 
4 
FINDINGS 
AISC apps impacted how our participants experienced and assessed medical authority. First, participants’ 
authority perception of AISC apps was associated with established authorities. Second, authority perception 
was influenced by data provenance and transparency. Third, with ongoing interactions, participants’ perception 
of AISC apps’ authority was developed based on their interaction design patterns (i.e., “personalities”). Finally, 

 9
we found the medical authority was distributed in an intertwined socio-technical context including all relevant 
stakeholders (e.g., the user self, human authority, search engines, online community, and other AISC apps). 
4.1 
The endorsements by established authorities 
Users ascribe authority to AISC apps based on whether they are supported by established authorities. That is, 
the authority of AISC apps is reliant upon the reputation of the entities running behind them. For example, S10 
told us: 
“First of all, you must have an understanding of this platform before you choose it, right? For example, I knew 
the background of Chunyu Doctor and Alipay from the Pencilnews or 36 Kr. Before using these apps, I have 
read news articles about them, and learned that they are reliable, because their developers are specialized to 
make these medical apps. Let alone the background of Alipay, which is a big company, you will naturally trust 
a big platform, a big company.” (S10) 
For this participant, she chose Chunyu Doctor and Mighty Doctor only after she had an understanding of 
their operator background. She approved the authority of these two AISC apps since they were developed by 
professional companies and thus had a reliable background endorsement.  
Also, participants were likely to ascribe authority to AISC apps that were affiliated with hospitals or doctors, 
as S21 put: 
“On Baidu, everyone can give an answer to me. Thus, its information is not trustworthy. Chunyu Doctor and 
Zuoshou Doctor are official apps provided on platforms that also have online doctors. The co-presence of apps 
and online doctors definitely increases the credibility of these apps. I think Baidu is less trustworthy than 
searching on these professional platforms.” (S21)  
Baidu is a Chinese search engine similar to Google. Baidu does not have a medical knowledge base or 
database. People can search for their symptoms using Baidu and receive a diversity of answers from various 
websites. Thus, it is difficult to identify the credibility and accuracy of these answers and websites (e.g., S17 
stated, “You don’t have the ability and time to distinguish the correct information from Baidu”). Therefore, in the 
case of S21, authority was granted to AISC apps instead of Baidu due to AISC apps’ affiliated online doctors. 
Similarly, S7 tended to ascribe authority to AISC apps rather than an online community (i.e., Baidu Knows, 
which is a Chinese question-and-answer online community). She thought online peers exaggerated her 
conditions due to the lack of a certification. She commented: 
“I have used Baidu Knows before to ask questions. But the answer was too exaggerative. Some online users 
are not very responsible. They would say that you had very serious diseases, because they may not have a 
certification. So asking questions on Baidu Knows may not be so credible as AISC apps.” (S7) 
4.2 
Data provenance and transparency 
Authority perception is also influenced by AISC apps’ data sources’ credibility and transparency. Participants 
desired to know data provenance, or where the data originated from. Most of them regarded the data from 
established authorities as credible and authoritative. Thus, participants’ assessment of AISC apps’ authority 
was associated with the credibility of the data source. For instance, S10 mentioned: 
“If the app wants to increase the credibility, it should disclose some information appropriately, such as how 
many hospitals, medical records these apps used. The information presented on these platforms including 
doctors, hospitals, patients, and symptoms, etc., [can improve their credibility].” (S10)  

 
10
As S10 said, AISC apps could improve their credibility by showing that their data was provided by established 
authorities (e.g., hospitals). She desired more transparency such as whether these apps used medical records.  
While the participant above expressed her desire to know the data source of AISC apps, other participants 
doubted the data source and data quantity of these apps. S12 told us: 
“I think their data [used to provide diagnoses] is insufficient. Because these apps were just developed. It’s 
unclear where their data comes from, and if they have enough data. I feel hospitals wouldn’t give their data to 
those companies, so I think their information and data is not enough. If they show me that their algorithmic 
models are obtained from big data mining, they may have to prove where the data comes from, whether the 
data is accurate and correct, right? This is very important. If the data is unreliable, it may affect their algorithmic 
models.” (S12) 
In this case, S12 cast doubt over the data source and data quantity of AISC apps. From her viewpoint, the 
accuracy of AISC apps was highly related to their data sources. Since she guessed that these AISC apps could 
not acquire data from the established authorities (i.e., hospitals), she questioned the accuracy of AISC apps 
and hesitated to ascribe authority to them.  
Thus, from the viewpoints of the above participants, the authority of AISC apps was associated with the 
credibility of the data sources. 
4.3 
The charismatic authority of AISC apps developed through the interaction design patterns 
Similar to doctors who maintain charismatic authority through their personalities and appearances such as the 
style of attire, AISC apps also acquire charismatic authority through their perceptible features (i.e., interaction 
design patterns). Our participants’ assessment of AISC apps’ authority was developed through their interaction 
with these apps, during which they evaluated AISC apps’ input functions, probing questions, and 
anthropomorphic design. 
4.3.1 The charismatic authority of input design. 
User input is usually the first type of interaction in users’ encounters with AISC apps. Its design helps participants 
form the first impression of AISC apps’ authoritativeness. For example, participants would evaluate the authority 
of AISC apps based on the way they solicited symptom information. On the one hand, when participants felt 
that AISC apps were presenting them the right set of symptoms to select from, they would ascribe authority to 
AISC apps. As S21 put, “I think the results given are correct, because, for example, it asked me some 
symptoms, which I think I also have, such as my dry throat and the like.” (S21) 
On the other hand, if participants could not input their symptoms in their expected way, they started to 
question the authority of AISC apps. For example, S12 was upset by the fact that the term “runny nose” was 
under the category of nasal congestion. Because she only had a runny nose without nasal congestion, she 
perceived the input function was insufficient to input her symptoms accurately, as she explained: 
“But I don't think the options it offers are comprehensive. For example, I know that I have caught a cold 
recently, and then I wanted to choose the symptom of runny nose, but I could not find it at the first glance. And 
after a long while, I found it in the category of nasal congestion. Then I felt that its options are not very 
comprehensive, because I didn’t have the symptom of nasal congestion. It is not easy to use.” (S12)  
Additionally, the limited input also influenced participants’ assessment of AISC apps’ authority, as S16 put, 
“It doesn’t let me describe my symptoms. It just lets me choose from its options, to choose some symptoms that 

 
11
are plausible. So, the final result for me is only for reference.” (S16) In this case, since S16 could only choose 
symptoms from a preset list but not describe them by text, she doubted the accuracy of her input, influencing 
her assessment of the authority of AISC apps. 
4.3.2 The charismatic authority of probing questions design. 
Users’ second type of interaction with AISC apps is answering probing questions, which also impacts 
participants’ assessment of AISC apps’ authority. Participants tended to evaluate AISC apps’ authority by 
examining if their probing questions were comprehensive and in-depth, as illustrated by S21’s comment, 
“I think that Chunyu Doctor is incomprehensive, just like I selected ‘snoring’, and then it asked me if I had 
the following symptoms. I then selected ‘snore’, ‘nasal congestion’, and ‘blocked nasal cavity’ from its options. 
It didn't ask me how long these symptoms lasted, and when they started, it asked generic questions. I couldn't 
believe it, and I felt it was bad.” (S21)  
Drawing from his experience, lacking probing questions regarding frequency and duration of symptoms 
made him doubt the comprehensiveness of Chunyu Doctor, determining his assessment of its authority. Similar 
to S21’s experience, S11’s assessment of Zuoshou Doctor’s authority was affected by the great number of 
irrelevant questions, as she complained: 
“I asked about the acne on my face, and then it [Zuoshou Doctor] asked me a lot of questions. It asked me 
what other symptoms I may have, I said no. Then it asked again, ‘what other symptoms did you have,’ and after 
I selected some symptoms, it continued to ask me, ‘do you still have any other symptoms?’ But in fact, I just 
have the acne on my face. It asked me so many questions!” (S11) 
In the above comments, S11 complained about the number of questions. She consulted for the acne on her 
face, but Zuoshou Doctor asked too many questions that were irrelevant to the acne. These inapplicable 
questions made her hesitate to grant authority to Zuoshou Doctor. 
4.3.3 The charismatic authority of anthropomorphic design. 
The anthropomorphic design might also influence participants’ assessment of AISC apps’ authority. Some 
participants desired human-like conversations. For instance, S9 noted that “I think using human-like dialogue 
is better, as we can get better user experience and accept these apps more easily.” (S9)  
However, participants stressed that the conversational style should be serious in the medical context. They 
tended to ascribe authority to formal language rather than human-like language. For example, S10 said:  
“There is no need to be too personified. In that case, the app may look like cute. It would seem like the app 
has a child’s tone, which would make me feel it untrustworthy naturally. Anthropomorphism may be good for 
some entertainment platforms, but not for medical-related platforms. The design of medical-related platforms 
should be more serious.” (S10) 
In this case, S10 thought since the AISC app was for medical-related diagnoses instead of entertainment, 
the language used in the app should be more formal and serious. The overly personified language would make 
the app seem less authoritative. Another participant stressed the accuracy of language use in his authority 
assessment. He told us: 
“For user experience, the human-like conversational style of Zuoshou Doctor is very good. But after all, the 
platform is used for medical consultation rather than for enjoyment; it is a platform for solving problems. The 

 
12
importance of user experience may be less than the importance of accuracy. I think the most important thing is 
accuracy, which is greater than user experience and its promotion.” (S14) 
In the above comments, S14 thought the anthropomorphic conversational design was acceptable and could 
improve the app’s user experience. However, accuracy was a more important factor than user experience when 
considering authority because the AISC app was medical-related and aimed at problem-solving. 
4.4 The relational medical authority distributed in a socio-technical network 
Authority implies relational ties, and can be distributed over a group of agents in the field [32,58]. We found that 
participants ascribed medical authority not solely based on their interactions with one particular AISC app, but 
through a network of medical entities: they not only used one AISC app, but also utilized multiple channels, 
such as themselves, online doctors, offline doctors, online search engines, online communities, and various 
AISC apps for the purpose of cross-validation and comparison. In this network, the authority of AISC apps is 
thus relational, distributed across multiple entities. 
4.4.1 Relational medical authority arising from respect for diagnostic procedures. 
AISC apps’ authority was also evaluated based on how these apps related themselves to the established 
diagnostic procedures. For example, AISC apps always showed respect for doctors or hospitals through their 
prompts, reflecting how they want to be accurate in their language and capacity, as S17 described, “I think 
these AI diagnoses are still very conservative about the probability of their diagnoses, they show this kind of 
prompt on their platforms: ‘If you really feel particularly unwell, you had better go to the hospital and call 120’.”  
Specifically, the authority of AISC apps is influenced by users’ assessment of diagnostic procedures adopted 
by established authorities (i.e., established diagnostic procedures). Usually, people acquire an accurate 
diagnosis through complex diagnostic procedures in clinical practice. When using AISC apps, our participants 
tended to compare their procedures with the established ones. The relational authority is developed through 
this process. 
To reach an accurate diagnostic result, an established diagnostic process needs to guarantee that sufficient 
information is collected, such as health history and lab test results. However, participants perceived that AISC 
apps could not collect sufficient information (e.g., body test data) in their probing processes comparing with the 
established diagnostic procedures, which affected their assessment of AISC apps’ authority. S14 reported: 
“For some diseases that I don’t know, or some severe diseases, I feel the app is very unreliable. Because 
when we go to the hospital, the doctor will also let us do a blood test first, do a CT scan, or a B-scan 
ultrasonography. Without these tests, even you consult a famous doctor, he or she cannot perform a good 
diagnosis.” (S14)  
In this comment, S14 did not grant authority to AISC apps because these apps could not do some lab tests, 
such as CT scan and B-scan ultrasonography that were necessary for clinical settings.  
In addition, some participants found that AISC apps lacked expertise in developing a right order of probing 
questions, in comparison to the standard order of questions asked by a doctor during a clinical visit. The 
communication skills of medical professionals are important in the probing process, since various probing 
questions are associated with patients’ feelings [91]. Thus, some participants were not satisfied with how AISC 
apps ask probing questions, realizing these AISC apps lacked the communication skills of human doctors. S16 
reported:  

 
13
“I think the results from human doctors are more accurate. If we don’t understand some medical jargon, or if 
we want to know more, human doctors can immediately understand what you want to say, and then guide you 
step by step to speak it out.” (S16)  
Here, this participant thought in established diagnostic procedures, human doctors could guide patients to 
describe their symptoms efficiently, while AISC apps could not do this. Also, from the standpoints of some 
participants, a human doctor had more comprehensive knowledge than AISC apps, as S12 said,  
“It’s more reliable to go to hospitals and talk with the doctor face to face, because these apps or platforms 
only have explicit knowledge, but the doctors also have their tacit knowledge, and their own experience after 
diagnosing with a large number of patients.” (S12)  
This participant thought human doctors had not only explicit knowledge that could be used in AISC apps but 
also tacit knowledge which could only be acquired through previous experience. Since AISC apps did not have 
tacit knowledge as human doctors, S12 did not ascribe authority to AISC apps. 
In addition, in a clinical visit, healthcare consumers know clearly that doctors and hospitals are held 
accountable for the diagnoses. However, AISC apps did not have a clear accountability mechanism. When our 
participants did not have a clear understanding of AISC apps’ procedures and accountability mechanisms, their 
authority assessment was affected. S9 described: 
“When I went to the hospital to see a doctor, I have records here. If something goes wrong, the hospital will 
be responsible. But after I use an app, if there are some follow-up problems that are not easy to solve, how can 
I deal with them? The developer is far away from me. I don’t know which hospital owns it, and I don’t know if it 
will be accountable.” (S9) 
In this case, S9 complained that AISC apps did not disclose who should be responsible for follow-up 
problems after their medical consultations. In contrast, in a clinical visit, physicians or hospitals will be held 
accountable.  
4.4.2 Distributed medical authority through comparisons and cross-validations among entities. 
Participants constructed medical authority through clinical visits and the use of multiple diagnostic tools (e.g., 
AISC apps, Baidu, and online communities). They cross-validated the results from multiple diagnostic tools and 
referred to clinical diagnoses as well as their personal experience to make medical decisions. During these 
processes, the medical authority is distributed to different diagnostic tools, offline doctors, and the user self. 
First, our participants cross-validated information from AISC apps and other online tools, including Baidu, 
other AISC apps, online communities, and Online Ask the Doctor platforms (i.e., platforms that allow people to 
consult a healthcare provider online). In other words, participants considered an AISC app authoritative when 
they confirmed its result with that from other tools. In turn, these tools were also considered authoritative. For 
example, S8 said, “I think if I look for a diagnosis, I will not just use one software. I will definitely go to Baidu or 
something else. If I can get the same results, I might believe it.” As she mentioned, she might ascribe authority 
to AISC apps only after she received the same results from AISC apps and Baidu. Likewise, S3 shared an 
experience of using Zhihu (a Chinese question-and-answer online community), Baidu, and AISC apps: 
“Sometimes I also searched for answers on Zhihu again. After browsing a lot of information from Baidu, Zhihua 
and apps, I can confirm if I have any problems.” In this case, S3 cross-validated the results from Zhihu, Baidu, 
and AISC apps when assessing the medical authority. Similarly, S17’s authority assessment arose when 
different AISC apps presented to him the same diagnostic results based on similar inputs. he noted:  

 
14
“I also compared the results from these apps. Like you entered similar symptoms in these three apps. If they 
can give me similar diagnoses, then I believe that they are qualified, and their accuracy is acceptable.” (S17)  
In another case, S14 compared AISC apps with Online Ask the Doctor platforms, as he told us, “When I got 
sick, I first asked online doctors, then I also used AI tools, so that I could have a comparison. It is similar to a 
comparative control experiment.” Here, S14 used both AISC apps and Online Ask the Doctor platforms to cross-
validate the diagnostic results.  
Second, participants also referred to medical professionals to assess the authority of AISC apps. Some 
participants would grant authority to AISC apps if the results from AISC apps were similar to those from medical 
professionals. For example, S22 mentioned: 
“The first feeling it gave me is pretty good and reliable. It is consistent with my previous diagnosis by the 
doctor. I just wanted to see if it is reliable as the doctor said, if the results are the same, I will definitely use it in 
the future.” (S22)  
In her case, S22 tended to ascribe authority to the AISC app when she found the result from it was consistent 
with that from a previous medical visit.  
If the results from AISC apps were different from the results diagnosed by medical professionals, participants 
would raise questions about AISC apps. For instance, S20 told us:  
“Zuoshou Doctor recommended me a kind of medicine. It said the medicine was used for joint pain and the 
like, which is quite consistent [with the patient’s symptoms]. But when I went to the pharmacy, after I talked with 
the pharmacist, I thought I still had to see the doctor. The pharmacist said that there was just a similar one, and 
they said this medicine couldn’t have a therapeutic effect. But the feedback from the Zuoshou Doctor did not 
make me feel that I must see a doctor. We plan to see the doctor later.” (S20)  
In this case, S20 used Zuoshou Doctor at first and planned to buy the recommended medicine because he 
was convinced by the AISC app. However, he changed his mind after talking with the pharmacist. The 
pharmacist recommended him a similar medicine and told him this medicine could not heal arthritis. As a result, 
S20 hesitated to ascribe authority to Zuoshou Doctor and decided to see a doctor instead. 
Third, AISC apps, as a new factor in medical authority network, have influenced participants’ decision making 
in clinical visits. Our study reflects that people came to AISC apps due to a variety of constraints, including 
physical, financial, and temporal. For instance, S23 used Chunyu Doctor because he lived in suburbia and it 
was difficult for him to go to a hospital, as he stated, “I think Chunyu Doctor is good, because I can find medicine 
or something on it. I’m living in a remote place. It is inconvenient to go to the hospital. It may be more convenient 
to use the app for diagnosis.” S15 showed his concerns for the high registration fees charged by the hospital, 
as he said, “Many hospitals now charge between 10 and 50 RMB for registration fees. The fee to see a specialist 
is 300 RMB. It’s hard for most family to pay it.” 
With the awareness of AISC apps’ strengths, participants strategically used AISC apps as a tool in their 
clinical visits, distributing medical authority in both AISC apps and offline doctors. Before in-person visits, 
participants utilized AISC apps to judge whether they need to see a doctor, as 27 told us, “For ailments, Zuoshou 
Doctor has a lot of detailed information, so there is no need to see a doctor. But I will go to see a doctor if my 
symptoms do not get better after a while or my situation is serious.” In this case, S27 made decisions on whether 
to see a doctor based on the severity of her symptoms—she would go to the hospital only with serious conditions. 
Participants would also choose to see a doctor if all AISC apps suggested them to do it, as S13 told us, “If all 
the results I got (from three apps) suggest that I need to go to the hospital, I will do it.” However, not all 

 
15
participants heavily depended on AISC apps’ recommendations to make decisions regarding whether they 
should see a doctor. For example, S29 said: “Using Zuoshou Doctor has slight effect on whether to go to the 
hospital. Because if I feel my symptom is serious through my bodily experience, I will definitely go to the hospital 
no matter what results I get from Zuoshou Doctor.” Here, S29 decided whether or not to see a doctor based on 
her bodily experience instead of recommendations from Zuoshou Doctor. In addition, some participants used 
AISC apps before the clinical visits in order to acquire symptom-related information and release mental pressure, 
as S21 said, “I just took a look at what the disease might be using Zuoshou, so I would not be nervous, could 
have an overview of my symptoms, and could get prepared before talking to the doctor.” 
During clinical consultations, AISC apps were regarded as a helpful tool in the patient-provider 
communication. For example, S3 told us: “I will tell the result from apps to the doctor, because my knowledge 
in medicine is very limited. I think these results are good references for doctors.” In this case, S3 thought 
diagnostic results from AISC apps were good references for doctors and thus could facilitate the communication. 
After the clinical visits, some participants used AISC apps to seek for more possible diagnoses and 
information. For example, S8 told us: 
“After consulting a doctor, since the doctor did not give us an accurate diagnosis, we also used Zuoshou 
Doctor. It [Zuoshou Doctor] asked a few more questions, such as if my mother had numbness or nausea. I think 
there’s a possibility of numbness because when I took my mother to the hospital, the doctor also asked if there 
were numbness-related symptoms. I think the diagnosis it offered is possible for my mother to have.” (S8) 
In this example, S8 used Zuoshou Doctor to explore possible diagnoses after seeing a doctor. This case 
implies the use of AISCs has changed the traditional practices of seeking diagnoses. Participants would use 
AISC apps as a supplement to clinical visits, which is in line with the previous research stating that people use 
IT to question or affirm doctors’ authority. S20 reported a more specific example: 
“I twisted my leg when playing badminton, and then I went to the school hospital to check it. I felt that the 
doctor’s diagnosis was not very accurate. I wanted to test it again. Because the plaster given to me by the 
doctor could only reduce swelling and analgesia. I wondered if there might be other medicines and if I had other 
diseases. I didn’t think the doctor could give me more results, so I used the app to test it myself.” (S20) 
In this case, S20 came to Chunyu Doctor to seek for other possible medicines and medical diagnoses after 
seeing a school doctor, because S20 felt dissatisfied with the doctor’s diagnosis and the plaster prescribed by 
the school doctor. Thus, the AISC apps, as a supplementary tool in clinical visits, have brought changes to 
medical authority. 
Last, we found that participants would grant authority to AISC apps if the result was consistent with their 
bodily experience and perception. For example, S30 told to us: 
“I am 50 years old now, in menopause, and I can’t sleep well. Zuoshou Doctor said it might be menopausal 
problems. I obviously have these menopausal symptoms now, so I think although Zuoshou Doctor is a machine, 
it’s good at providing diagnoses.” (S30) 
The above comments indicate that S30 evaluated the authenticity of Zuoshou Doctor based on her 
perception of her symptoms. Since Zuoshou Doctor diagnosed her illness as menopausal problems, which was 
consistent with her bodily experience, she tended to grant authority to Zuoshou Doctor.  
However, if the results contradict participants’ perception, they may lower their expectations for AISC apps’ 
authority, as S15 said, “I remember that Zuoshou Doctor said there was 90% chance of brain atrophy. It was 
impossible, because I think I am not that unhealthy. It’s impossible for me to have such a serious illness.” Here, 

 
16
since S15 thought the diagnostic result (i.e., brain atrophy) was inconsistent with his perception of his health 
status, he thought the diagnosis from Zuoshou Doctor seemed unreasonable and exaggerative. 
Participants also perceived the authority of AISCs by examining whether the features of AISCs are in line 
with participants’ knowledge for the disease, as S11 said, “In fact, before you ask questions, you already have 
some common knowledge. Then based on that, you can roughly judge what kind of disease you may have.” 
More specifically, S5 told us using his example: “I have used multiple apps, such as Zuoshou Doctor and 
Chunyu Doctor. In fact, I know that people usually have hypoglycemia after playing basketball. Only Zuoshou 
Doctor accurately said I had hypoglycemia, which I thought was accurate.” Here, S5 thought the diagnostic 
result from Zuozhou Doctor (i.e., hypoglycemia) was accurate based on his knowledge for hypoglycemia—
people may have hypoglycemia after playing basketball. Thus, S5 granted authority to Zuoshou Doctor based 
on his knowledge for the disease. 
5 
DISCUSSION 
The present work aims at understanding how the advent of AISC apps influences people’s assessment of 
medical authority in everyday healthcare practice. By invoking the notion of authority, our research was centered 
on the identification of socio-technical factors and processes that impacted how participants understood and 
constructed authority. Our research goal was not to provide a definitive, quantitative account of to what degree 
participants considered AISC apps authoritative. It is possible that regarding one particular feature on an AISC 
app, participants developed different authority perceptions. Such difference did not invalidate our findings. 
We found that participants’ medical authority assessment was influenced by the endorsements by 
established authorities, data provenance and transparency, and developed along with the interactions. 
Participants perceived and constructed authority based on the interaction design patterns of AISC apps. The 
medical authority was distributed in the socio-technical context of healthcare through the use of multiple self-
diagnostic tools and comparisons with clinical visits. These findings together point to how AI helps distribute the 
medical authority within an ecosystem of multiple entities, and how medical authority is dynamically developed 
through human-AI interaction. 
5.1 
Distributing medical authority in a healthcare ecosystem 
AI-enabled health technologies are a distinct force shaping the conception of medical authority in ordinary 
people’s everyday health practices. On the one hand, the ways participants assessed the authority of AISCs 
were similar to how they evaluated doctors’ personalities [88,94], their own feelings [97], or online searching 
using search engines [5,90,106,123]. They still acknowledged the medical authority of other entities in the 
healthcare ecosystem and prioritized the authoritativeness of established authorities like doctors and hospitals. 
Endorsements from established authorities like doctors, hospitals, or reputable healthcare companies could 
boost participants’ confidence in those apps. Moreover, they relied upon similar patterns such as charismatic 
features to construct authority. 
On the other hand, the authority conception of AISCs has unique characteristics. Previous studies have 
shown that healthcare consumers have utilized IT such as search engines for medical information seeking, 
which in turn shaped their authority perception [5,90]. While people have ascribed more authority to online 
information with reputable and credible sources or publishers [22,104], search engines are also criticized for 
lacking a medical database and the provision of unsubstantiated results, thus hurting their authoritativeness 

 
17
[112]. In comparison, AISC apps are usually supported by established authorities (i.e., hospitals and reputable 
companies). In addition, comparable to the epistemic authority of doctors who own trustworthy medical 
knowledge acquired from certified programs [64,80], our participants put more trust in AISC apps with reliable 
data sources, suggesting a credible knowledge base. 
Different from previous AISC research that relies upon expert evaluations of AISCs [57,111], our work 
illustrates how users perceive and verify the medical authority of AI from a user’s perspective. Existing studies 
often aim to develop a trust theory for healthcare chatbots [131] or to establish a standardized assessment 
framework to evaluate health AI technologies [108]. These studies focus on the criteria formulated to evaluate the 
healthcare applications. However, they do not illustrate how users perceive the applications in detail. Our study 
reveals that users perceive the medical authority of AI by comparing the recommendations from AISC apps with 
their bodily experience and medical knowledge, recommendations from other self-diagnosis tools (e.g., 
competing AISC apps and search engines), as well as diagnoses from offline doctors. 
The medical authority of AI should be understood in terms of an ecosystem rather than a singular entity. In 
the Anatomy of an AI System [28], Crawford and Joler traced how the Amazon Echo relies upon its ecosystem, 
the global network of materials, labor, and data. Similarly, our participants’ accounts of AISCs were ripe with 
how they were concerned about who developed the algorithms, who supplied the data, as well as who 
sponsored the apps. These are all constitutive elements that grant and sustain the medical authority of AISC 
apps—AISC apps are not produced in a vacuum. 
There is also a broader ecosystem of medical authority to include entities that are not involved in their making. 
Recent studies have defined the healthcare “ecosystem” [95,128,137], including “physicians, patients, medical 
societies, hospital systems, software developers, the health information technology industry, and governmental 
regulatory agencies” [95]. However, these studies mainly focused on clinical practice rather than consumer-
facing settings. Our study focused on the consumer-facing context of AISC apps, and showed that how 
participants distributed medical authority to AISC apps depended on its own features as much as other, 
unrelated entities (e.g., competing AISC apps, online communities, search engines), as well as unrelated 
established authorities. Thus, the medical authority of AI is a relational sociotechnical network including software 
developers, software operators, hospitals, medical professionals, healthcare consumers, online peers, search 
engines, and various online self-diagnosis tools. 
The authority network influences AISC users’ decision-making in two primary ways. First, the authority 
network renders the decision-making process distributed. That is, participants’ medical decision-making does 
not rest with one single AISC app or offline doctors, but relies upon a socio-technical network of those 
aforementioned entities. Several participants mentioned how they moderated their medical authority perception 
through comparison with their personal experience and cross-validation with results from multiple AISC apps, 
search engines, online communities, as well as offline established authorities. A trend of previous research has 
found that users seek information from online peers [92], online social networks [39,133], and Internet searches 
[5]. Our work echoes with these studies and proposes a broader authority network regarding how patients seek 
for diagnostic information and make decisions in the practices of care management using AISCs. 
Second, the authority network has potentials to enact AISC apps as a patient-centered system to supplement 
clinical visits and to break the “critical barriers between clinicians and patients [30]”. In recent years, there is an 
increasing body of work in Health Informatics and HCI that emphasizes the importance of patient-centered care, 
revealing that health care systems should shift the focus to patients’ needs [13,30], actively engage patients in 

 
18
the healthcare decision-making [118], and consider individual, health professions, as well as society to manage 
illness [43]. This calls for health technology to help healthcare consumers’ self-management and explore their 
needs. As reflected in our findings, our participants would come to AISC apps when they met with temporal, 
physical, and financial constraints in offline medical visits. Therefore, AISC apps could be possibly regarded as 
a useful tool to support patient-centered care and supplement in-person visits. 
Previous scholarship has shown how health technologies supported practices of care management (e.g., 
[9,23,33,61]). Similarly, the burgeoning AISC apps can be adopted in doctor-patient collaboration in everyday 
healthcare before, during, and after the clinical visits. Before in-person visits, our participants utilized AISC apps 
to acquire information of their symptoms, decide whether or not to see a doctor, and release mental pressure. 
This implies AISC apps could help patients prepare themselves with symptom-related information and release 
their mental pressure before seeing a doctor. During the offline visits, some participants mentioned AISC apps 
could be used as a kind of communication tool in the probing process. These two findings are in line with 
previous research that stated patient-centered health information technologies could help patients collect 
information and elicit their preferences to clinicians regarding health care decisions [30], reflecting that AISC 
apps have the potential to be regarded as a patient-centered health technology to help patients make medical 
decisions. After the clinical visits, participants utilized AISC apps to acquire other possible diagnoses. This 
reveals that AISC apps can be used as a supplement to clinical visits and influence doctor’s authority, which is 
in line with a stream of previous studies reporting that people use information from IT to question or confirm 
doctors’ authority [39,105,133]. Recent research has proposed the “last mile” of AI implementation, in which AI 
algorithms are tested and embedded in real-world practice [25]. As resesarchers emphasized the importance 
of crossing over technical challenges (e.g., data governance [20]) to bridge the “last mile” gap between the 
reality and AI algorithms, our work focuses on end users’ viewpoints regarding how AI technology has been 
implemented in their daily life, illustrating how AI technology plays around in healthcare delivery. We reinforce 
the call for further research regarding how to bridge the “last mile” gap of AI technology to fit in healthcare users’ 
needs. 
Ascribing authority to AI healthcare technologies might come with risks for health consumers. Different from 
doctors, who own authoritative medical knowledge [64], the reliability of AISC apps is unclear [58,61]. While 
medical professionals possess a systematic body of medical knowledge to assess the efficiency and authority 
of clinical diagnostic tools [2,6,9], healthcare consumers usually do not have such knowledge. This is partially 
why they relied upon a broader ecosystem to assess AISC apps. Previous work has reflected upon how the 
authority of IT might mislead healthcare consumers [40,46], and how the inaccurate evaluation of AI may lead 
to severe consequences such as mortality [76,81]. Thus, there is an urgent need to understand the unintended 
consequences of AI health technologies as AI gradually transforms how people experience and perceive 
medical authority in their everyday healthcare practices.  
5.2 
Developing medical authority through human-AI interaction 
Previous studies have evaluated AI systems’ capabilities and outputs [62,134], such as accuracy and efficiency 
[37,65], autonomy [54], and ethics and honesty [42]. By contrast, our study explored how healthcare consumers’ 
AI authority perception unfolds in human-AI interactions. In other words, it is not only the results, but also human-
AI interaction processes, that matter to authority perception. 

 
19
HCI researchers have already drawn from classic HCI knowledge such as usability guidelines and heuristics 
to design guidelines for human-AI interaction (e.g., [4,130]). Our research on medical authority contributes to 
this line of thought by articulating important dimensions to consider when designing human-AI interaction in the 
medical domain. First, charismatic design matters to healthcare consumers’ authority assessment and trust, but 
not in a similar way they experience that of other AI applications such as chatbots. Previous studies emphasized 
how anthropomorphic design, such as anthropomorphic behaviors [78], active listening skills [136], and casual 
conversational style [60], could make chatbots charismatic. However, the anthropomorphic design could erode 
the authority of AISC apps. Our participants like S10 thought since AISC apps were health-related, too 
personified language would make them look less authoritative. Instead, participants preferred charismatic 
features that could indicate authority, such as using formal and serious language. 
In addition, healthcare consumers’ authority perception is not necessarily static. It might change along 
through healthcare consumers’ medical journey in both offline and online worlds. For instance, after consulting 
with a pharmacy doctor whose statements were inconsistent with the results acquired from Zuoshou Doctor, 
S20’s authority assessment of Zuoshou Doctor had been changed. Therefore, human-AI interaction is not only 
about the exact moment and the exact location where the interactions happen. Instead, the broader socio-
technical context of human-AI interaction matters for us to understand how healthcare consumers experience 
AI health technologies. 
5.3 
Implications for design 
Our work stressed the need for improving the design of consumer-facing AI-enabled healthcare systems. 
Designers and developers of AI-enabled healthcare systems should consider enhancing transparency by 
disclosing information from other entities in the AI ecosystem. The first type of information is the endorsements 
by established authorities. Consumer-facing AI-enabled healthcare systems can display information regarding 
their developers, sponsors, and data sources. In addition, Consumer-facing AI-enabled healthcare systems 
may present diagnostic information from other sources for reference to cross-validate medical authority. For 
example, relevant information from Baidu can be presented on the apps. Also, online or offline doctors’ 
diagnoses of similar cases may be shown in the final report of AI healthcare systems.  
AI-enabled healthcare systems may improve their interaction design, focusing on design patterns and 
procedural design. For example, in the case of AISC apps, they can improve their input flexibility, advance the 
presentation of probing questions, and intensify their knowledge base by mimicking established authoritative 
diagnostic procedures to gain authority.  In the future, AI-enabled healthcare systems may provide guidance 
and warnings to let users notice the potential risks since they do not have sufficient knowledge to identify proper 
diagnostic information. AI-enabled healthcare systems can also introduce doctor-like customer services. When 
users doubt the diagnoses or have difficulties in describing their symptoms, they can turn to doctors for help. 
6 CONCLUSION 
Our study investigated how AISC apps influence users’ assessment of medical authority. By conducting 30 
semi-structured interviews, we described how medical authority was constructed along with the interactions 
between healthcare consumers and AI-enabled healthcare technologies. With the growing capacity and 
prevalence of AI in the healthcare domain, what we understand as medical authority is and will be experiencing 
tremendous changes. Even if the medical authority of AI systems today is still considered inferior to established 

 
20
authorities, we shall not take the impact of AI lightly. In healthcare, authority perception can have significant 
impacts on healthcare consumers’ information-seeking, decision-making, behaviors, and ultimately health 
outcomes. As consumer-facing AI health technologies enter the playing field and influencing the landscape of 
medical authority, limited understandings of this influence have been accumulated. Future work should ponder 
how the medical authority of AI intersects with growing concerns over AI accountability, transparency, fairness, 
and ethics, as well as necessary regulatory frameworks to govern the authority landscape.
