Learning Why Things Change:
The Diﬀerence-Based Causality Learner
Mark Voortman

Decision Systems Laboratory
School of Information Sciences
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA, 15260, USA
Denver Dash∗

Intel Research
Pittsburgh, PA, 15213, USA
Marek J. Druzdzel†

Decision Systems Laboratory
School of Information Sciences
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA, 15260, USA
Abstract
In this paper, we present the Diﬀerence-
Based Causality Learner (DBCL), an algo-
rithm for learning a class of discrete-time dy-
namic models that represents all causation
across time by means of diﬀerence equations
driving change in a system.
We motivate
this representation with real-world mechan-
ical systems and prove DBCL’s correctness
for learning structure from time series data,
an endeavour that is complicated by the ex-
istence of latent derivatives that have to be
detected. We also prove that, under common
assumptions for causal discovery, DBCL will
identify the presence or absence of feedback
loops, making the model more useful for pre-
dicting the eﬀects of manipulating variables
when the system is in equilibrium. We ar-
gue analytically and show empirically the ad-
vantages of DBCL over vector autoregression
(VAR) and Granger causality models as well
as modiﬁed forms of Bayesian and constraint-
based structure discovery algorithms.
Fi-
nally, we show that our algorithm can dis-
cover causal directions of alpha rhythms in
human brains from EEG data.
1
INTRODUCTION AND
MOTIVATION
In the past 20 years in AI, the practice of learning
causal models from data has received considerable at-
tention [cf., Pearl and Verma, 1991, Cooper and Her-
skovits, 1992, Spirtes et al., 2000]. Existing methods
∗Also Department of Biomedical Informatics, School of
Medicine, University of Pittsburgh.
† Also Faculty of Computer Science, Bia lystok Univer-
sity of Technology, Wiejska 45A, 15-351 Bia lystok, Poland.
are based on the formalism of structural equation mod-
els (SEMs), which originated in the econometrics lit-
erature over 50 years ago [cf., Strotz and Wold, 1960],
and Bayesian networks [Pearl, 1987] which started the
paradigm shift of graphical models in AI and machine
learning 20 years ago. These methods have predomi-
nately focused on the learning of equilibrium (static)
causal structure, and have recently gained inroads into
mainstream scientiﬁc research, especially in biology
[cf., Sachs et al., 2005].
Despite the success of these static methods, many real-
world systems are dynamic in nature and are accu-
rately modeled by systems of simultaneous diﬀeren-
tial equations.
Temporal causality, in general, has
been studied extensively in econometrics over the past
four decades: Granger causality and vector autore-
gression (VAR) methods have become very inﬂuential
[cf., Granger, 1969, Engle and Granger, 1987, Sims,
1980]. In AI, there has been work on learning Dynamic
Bayesian Networks (DBNs) [Friedman et al., 1998] and
modiﬁed Granger causality [Eichler and Didelez, 2007].
None of these models explicitly take into account the
fact that many dynamic systems are based on diﬀeren-
tial equations. This makes their representations overly
general for such systems, allowing arbitrary causal re-
lations across time. In this paper, we show that dif-
ferential equations impose strict constraints on cross-
temporal causal edges, and we present a method that
is capable of exploiting that fact.
This paper considers Diﬀerence-Based Causal Models
(DBCMs), a class of discrete-time dynamic models in-
spired by Iwasaki and Simon [1994] that models all
causation across time by means of diﬀerence equations
driving change in the system.
This paper presents
the ﬁrst method to learn DBCMs from data:
the
Diﬀerence-Based Causality Learner (DBCL). This al-
gorithm treats diﬀerences as latent variables and con-
ducts an eﬃcient search to ﬁnd them in the course of
constructing a DBCM. This method exploits the fact
that unknown derivatives have ﬁxed relationships to

known variables and so are easier to ﬁnd than latent
variables in general. We prove that DBCL correctly
learns DBCMs given faithfulness and a conditional in-
dependence oracle, and show empirically that it is also
robust in the sense of avoiding unnecessary calcula-
tions of higher-order derivatives, thus preventing mis-
takes due to numerical errors. We show that compared
to Granger causality and VAR models, DBCL output
is much more parsimonious and informative. We also
show empirically that it outperforms variants of the
PC algorithm and greedy Bayesian search algorithms
that have been modiﬁed to assume DBCM structure.
Finally, we prove that DBCL will always identify in-
stantaneous feedback loops when the underlying sys-
tem is a DBCM, making it easier to detect when an
equilibrated model will be causal. To our knowledge,
no other method for causal discovery is guaranteed to
identify the presence or absence of feedback loops.
2
DIFFERENCE-BASED CAUSAL
MODELS
Stated brieﬂy, a DBCM is a discrete-time model, based
on SEMs, with a graphical interpretation very similar
to DBNs. Contemporaneous causation is allowed, i.e.,
like DBNs, variables can be caused by other variables
in the same time slice. The deﬁning characteristic of
a DBCM is that all causation across time is due to a
derivative (e.g., ˙x) causing a change in its integral (e.g.,
x). This cross-temporal restriction makes DBCMs a
subset of causal models as deﬁned by Pearl [2000] and
structural equation models similar to those discussed
50 years ago by Strotz and Wold [1960]. DBCM-like
models were discussed by Iwasaki and Simon [1994]
and Dash [2003, 2005] to analyze causality in dynamic
systems, but to date no algorithm exists to learn them
from data.
As an example, consider the set of equations describ-
ing the motion of a damped simple harmonic oscillator
(SHO). A block of mass m is suspended from a spring
in a viscous ﬂuid and several diﬀerent forces are acting
on it, such as the forces resulting from the spring and
that of gravity. The harmonic oscillator is an archety-
pal dynamic system, ubiquitous in nature. Although
a linear system, it can form a good approximation to
many nonlinear systems close to equilibrium. Further-
more, the F = ma relationship is a canonical exam-
ple of contemporaneous causation: applying a force to
cause a body to accelerate instantly. Thus, although
this system is simple, it illustrates many important
points. Causal interactions even in such a simple sys-
tem are problematic when using standard representa-
tions for causality, as we will show shortly.
Like all mechanical systems, the equations of motion
for the harmonic oscillator are given by Newton’s 2nd
law describing the acceleration a of the mass under
the forces (due to the weight, due to the spring, Fx,
and due to viscosity, Fv) acting on the block. These
forces instantaneously determine a; furthermore, they
indirectly determine the values of all integrals of a,
in particular the velocity v and the position x, of the
block. The longer time passes, the more inﬂuence the
forces have on those integrals. Writing this continu-
ous time system as a discrete time model, v and x
are approximately determined by the diﬀerence equa-
tions: vt+1 = vt + at∆t and xt+1 = xt + vt∆t, result-
ing in the cross-temporal causal links in the graph of
Figure 1(a) and (b). Thus, diﬀerential equation sys-
tems imply cross-temporal arcs with a regular struc-
ture. DBCMs assume that all cross-temporal arcs are
of this form.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 1: (a) The causal graph of a DBCM for the
mass-spring system is always ﬁrst-order Markovian.
(b) The shorthand graph of (a) using dashed edges
to indicate cross-temporal causation. (c) The unrolled
graph with all v’s and a’s marginalized out is inﬁnite-
order Markovian.
More formally, DBCMs are a restricted form of struc-
tural equation models (SEMs). We ﬁrst review these
models, and then discuss our additional constraints.
We use the notation (A ⊥⊥B | C) to indicate that
variable A is conditionally independent on B given a
set of variables C.
Deﬁnition 1 (structural equation model). A SEM is
a pair ⟨V , E⟩, where V = {V1, . . . , Vn} is a set of
variables, and E = {E1, . . . , En} is a set of equations
such that each Ei ∈E can be written in the form:
Vi := fi(W i, γi) where W i ⊆V \ Vi is called the set
of causes (or parents) of Vi, denoted by Pa(Vi), and
the γi are noise terms such that (γi ⊥⊥γj), i ̸= j.
The noise terms γi are intended to represent the set of
causes of each variable that are not directly accounted
for in the model. Historically, SEMs use linear equa-
tions with normally distributed noise terms.
A SEM deﬁnes a directed graph such that each vari-
able X ∈V is represented by a node and there is
an edge Y →X for each Y ∈Pa(X). In this way,
SEMs can model relations between variables in a very

general way. Furthermore, SEMs can be used to rep-
resent causality in dynamic systems for a discrete-
time-setting by deﬁning the set of variables to be a
time-series: V = V 0 ∪V 1 ∪V 2, . . ., where V t =
{V t
1 , . . . , V t
n} denotes the set of n variables at time t.
We call SEMs that partition their variables according
to time indices dynamic SEMs.
DBCMs are a restricted form of dynamic SEMs. They
assume that all causation across time is due to instan-
taneous causation of the diﬀerence of some variables:
Deﬁnition 2 (Diﬀerence variable). Let V = V 0 ∪
V 1 ∪V 2 ∪. . . be a time-series. The n-th order dif-
ference variable ∆nV t of variable V t ∈V t is deﬁned
recursively as:
∆nV t = ∆n−1V t+1 −∆n−1V t,
with ∆0V t = V t.
In particular: ∆1V t = V t+1 −V t, which we some-
times shorten to ∆V t.
When we invert the diﬀer-
ence equation to give the value of V t+1 in terms of
its past value and its diﬀerence, we call it the integral
equation of V t+1. I.e., the integral equation of V t+1
is V t+1 = V t + ∆V t. Integral equations are identi-
ties and so are always deterministic. The graphs of
Figure 1 use the standard notation from physics such
that the derivative of x is velocity (v ≡∆1x) and the
derivative of velocity is acceleration (a ≡∆2x).
A DBCM is a dynamic SEM in which all causation
across time is due to the presence of integral equa-
tions.
Because all DBCMs are based on diﬀerence
equations that do not vary from time to time, we can
restrict ourselves to partitioning the variables into two
time slices {0, 1}, where the 0th time slice determines
the initial conditions and 1st time slice determines the
transitions:
Deﬁnition 3 (Diﬀerence-Based Causal Model). A
DBCM M is a dynamic SEM S = ⟨V , E⟩with V =
V 0 ∪V 1 and E = E 0 ∪E 1 such that there exists
a cross-temporal parent of some variable V 1
i ∈V 1 if
and only if E1
i is the integral equation for variable V 1
i .
This deﬁnition implies that the parent set of a vari-
able X1 that has parents in the previous time slice is
Pa(X1) = {X0, ∆X0}. If this is the case, we call X an
integral variable. An integral variable X is part of a
chain of causation ∆jX0 →∆j−1X1 →. . . →Xj.
We call the highest derivative (∆jX) of this chain
the prime variable of X, which we will also denote
as Prime(X). In the example of Figure 1, variables x
and v are integral variables, and a is the prime variable
of x and v.
Finally, any variable that is not an integral variable
and is not a prime variable is called a static vari-
able. This term does not imply that the variable is
not changing from time-step to time-step, because it
might have a causal ancestor that is part of an inte-
gration chain. However, we use this term to empha-
size that the change is not due to a dynamic process
involving these variables. In Figure 1, m, Fv and Fx
are static variables.
The deﬁnition of DBCMs does not require that the
contemporaneous structure be acyclic; however, in this
paper we only consider acyclic DBCMs. It should be
emphasized that this assumption does not restrict us
to non-feedback systems; rather, this assumption im-
plies that all feedback requires time to occur and thus
will only occur through an integral variable. E.g., the
position x of the mass in the SHO causes an instan-
taneous spring force Fx that results in an instanta-
neous acceleration a.
Over time, a causes a change
in x via integration. Thus we have the feedback loop:
x0 →F 0
x →a0 →v1 →x2.
Although the instan-
taneous part, x0 →F 0
x →a0, is acyclic, this is still
a feedback system. Fb(X) is the set of instantaneous
descendants of X which are also ancestors of Prime(X)
(in this example, Fb(x) = {Fx}). Another interpreta-
tion is that by rejecting instantaneous loops we assume
that the observation time-scale is much smaller than
any time-scale of the system dynamics.
Since the contemporaneous structure is not changing
over time, the equations in E 0 and E 1 are partially
overlapping: those that correspond to contemporane-
ous structure are identical in both sets, but E 0 con-
tains initial conditions for all integral variables, and
E 1 contains integral equations for integral variables.
The graph in Figure 1(b) is a compressed version of the
fully unrolled DBCM. The cycle in the graph caused by
the dashed links is really an acyclic structure extending
across time.
2.1
COMPARISON OF
REPRESENTATIONS
Dynamic SEMs, like Granger causality and VAR mod-
els, allow arbitrary edges to exist across time.
For
many real physical systems this representation is too
general.
DBCMs, by contrast, assume that all causation works
in the same way as in mechanical systems. This re-
striction represents a tradeoﬀbetween expressibility
and tractability. On one hand, DBCMs are only able
to represent mechanical systems that are ﬁrst-order
Markovian. On the other hand, DBCMs are in princi-
ple easier to learn because, even when the derivatives
are unobserved in the data as we will assume (e.g., in
the previously introduced example we do not include
v and a, or any other derivative in the data set), at
least we know something about these latent variables

that are required to make the system Markovian.
When confronted with data that was generated by dif-
ferential equations with some derivatives missing, the
distinction between DBCL and the other approaches
becomes glaring.
Whereas, as we will show shortly,
DBCL attempts to search for and identify the latent
derivative variables, other approaches would try to
marginalize them out. One might suspect that there
is not much diﬀerence. For example, one might expect
that a second order diﬀerential equation would sim-
ply result in a second-order Markov model when the
derivatives are marginalized out. Unfortunately that is
not the case, because the causation among the deriva-
tives forms an inﬁnite chain into the past. Thus, any
approach that tries to marginalize out the derivatives
must include inﬁnite edges in the model, for example,
such as those in Figure 1(c). In the harmonic oscil-
lator system with all derivatives marginalized out, all
parents of a in time-slice i of the DBCM are parents
of x for all time slices j > i + 1. Thus, the beneﬁts of
using the DBCM representation are not merely com-
putational, but in fact, without learning the deriva-
tives directly, the correct model does not have a ﬁnite
representation.
3
DBCM LEARNING
The DBCM Learning problem can be posed in the
following way: Given time-series data over a set of
variables V , derive a DBCM over a set of variables
V ∪V∆, where V∆contains diﬀerences of variables
that are derived from the original data. In other words,
DBCL does not assume all relevant derivatives or the
order of those derivatives are known. Instead, it treats
these missing derivatives as latent variables and tries
to discover them. We assume that, aside from these
derivatives, there are no other latent confounding vari-
ables present. Note, for example, that this assumption
also rules out the existence of structures of the form
∆X →X →Y , where ∆X and X are latent and Y is
observable, because the X process forms a latent chain
across time that can confound Y at diﬀerent times.
DBCL relies on the standard assumption of faithful-
ness [Spirtes et al., 2000]. Faithfulness is the converse
of the Markov condition, and it is the critical assump-
tion that allows structure to be uncovered from inde-
pendence relations. However, when a dynamic system
goes through equilibrium, by deﬁnition, faithfulness is
violated. For example, if the motion of the block in the
simple harmonic oscillator reaches equilibrium then,
by deﬁnition, the equation a = (Fx + Fv + mg)/m be-
comes 0 = Fx+Fv+mg. This means that the values of
the forces acting on the block are no longer correlated
with the value of a, even though they are direct causes
of a. Thus, by assuming faithfulness, we are implicitly
assuming that no equilibrations have occurred.
3.1
THE ALGORITHM
DBCL consists of two steps: (1) detecting prime (and
integral) variables (V∆), and (2) learning the contem-
poraneous structure. The ﬁrst step is achieved by cal-
culating numerical derivatives of all variables and then
deciding which ones should be prime variables. This
is based on the following theorem, which exploits the
fact that only prime variables can always be made in-
dependent across time by conditioning on variables in
V 1:
Theorem 1 (detecting prime variables). Let I be the
set of conditional independence relations implied by
faithfulness applied to a DBCM M = ⟨V , E⟩with
V = V 0 ∪V 1 and E = E 0 ∪E 1. Let ∆jX0 de-
note the j-th order diﬀerence of some X0 ∈V 0. Then
∆jX0 is the prime variable of X0 if and only if it can
be d-separated from itself in the future and none of the
lower order diﬀerences can be d-separated, i.e.:
1. there
exists
a
W
⊂
V 1
such
that
(∆jX0 ⊥⊥∆jX1 | W ) ∈I, and
2. there
exists
no
set
W ′
⊂
V 1
such
that
(∆kX0 ⊥⊥∆kX1 | W ′) ∈I, for all k < j.
Once we have found V∆, the set of integral and
prime variables in the model, learning contemporane-
ous structure over the two-time-slice model becomes a
problem of learning a time-series model from causally
suﬃcient data (i.e., there do not exist any latent com-
mon causes).
Theorem 2 shows that we can learn the contempora-
neous structure from time-series data despite the fact
that data from time-to-time is not independent. This
is because we know by construction that the integral
variables will d-separate the time slices, so all struc-
ture between variables can be obtained by conditioning
only on variables in the same time slice:
Theorem 2 (learning contemporaneous structure).
Let I be the set of conditional independence rela-
tions implied by faithfulness applied to a DBCM M =
⟨V , E⟩, where V = V 0 ∪V 1.
There is an edge
X1 −Y 1 if and only if:
1. Either X1 or Y 1 is not an integral variable, and
2. there exists no V ′1 ⊂V 1 \ {X1, Y 1} such that
(X1 ⊥⊥Y 1 | V ′1) ∈I.
In addition to having discovered the latent variables
in the data, and the structure between non-integral

variables, we also know that there can be no contem-
poraneous edges between two integral variables, and
integral variables can have only outgoing contempo-
raneous edges. We can thus restrict the search space
of causal structures. Theorems 1 and 2 together with
these constraints form the basis of the DBCL algo-
rithm:
Algorithm 1 (DBCL (sketch)).
Input:
a maximum diﬀerence parameter kmax > 0,
a time-series dataset D over a set of variables V ′ =
V 0 ′ ∪V 1 ′.
Output: a set V∆of prime and integral variables,
and a partially directed graph G over V = V
′ ∪V∆.
1. Find relevant latent derivatives (Theorem 1):
(a) Initialize k = 0, and let V∆be all diﬀerences
up to kmax.
(b) Let W be all variables plus their diﬀerences
up to kth order that are in V∆.
(c) For all V ∈V ′ without a prime variable,
check to see if there exists a set W ′ ⊂W
that renders ∆iV 0 independent of ∆iV 1, for
the i ≤k. If so, remove all ∆jV 1, j > i′,
from V∆where i′ is the lowest i for which
the independence occurred.
(d) Let k = k +1. If not all prime variables have
been found and k ≤kmax, go to Step 1b.
2. Learn the structure (Theorem 2):
(a) Learn the contemporaneous structure by us-
ing any correct causal discovery algorithm
under causally suﬃcient data.
Impose the
following constraints:
i. Forbid edges between all integral vari-
ables.
ii. If X is an integral variable with an edge
X −Y , direct the edge such that X →Y .
(b) Add all cross-temporal links speciﬁed by the
set of integral and prime variables.
The output of DBCL will depend on the algorithm
used in Step 2.
Our implementation is based on
the constraint-based search PC algorithm, so the con-
temporaneous structure will be a partially directed
graph that represents the statistical equivalence class
in which the true directed graph belongs. One might
argue that because there are deterministic relation-
ships (the integral equations) in a DBCM, the faithful-
ness assumption is not valid. However, all determinis-
tic relations involve exactly 3 variables, e.g., ∆X0, X0
and X1. However two of those variables are in time
slice 0, so DBCL’s conditioning tests never involve all
three variables at the same time. The hidden variable
thus eﬀectively adds noise to the deterministic rela-
tionship.
3.2
IDENTIFICATION OF EMC
VIOLATION
Given a model output from DBCL, one might be in-
terested in performing causal inference, i.e., predicit-
ing the eﬀects of manipulating components of the sys-
tem. This operation is complicated by the presence of
equilibrations that may have occurred in the system.
Dash [2003, 2005] shows that some dynamic systems
do not obey Equilibration-Manipulation Commutabil-
ity (EMC), i.e., the causal graph that results when
an equilibrium model is manipulated can be diﬀerent
from the (true) graph that results when the dynamic
model is manipulated and then equilibrated.
Dash
points out two conditions which aid in EMC identi-
ﬁcation: First, if a variable is self-regulating, meaning
that X ∈Pa(Prime(X)), then when X is equilibrated,
the parent set of X and the children set of X are un-
changed. Thus, with respect to manipulations on X,
the EMC condition is obeyed. Second, a suﬃcient con-
dition for the violation of EMC exists when the set of
feedback variables of some (non-self-regulating) X is
nonempty in the equilibrium graph. In this case, there
will always exist a manipulation that violates EMC.
Given a DBCM with all edges oriented, it is trivial to
check these two conditions; however, since DBCL is
not guaranteed to ﬁnd the orientation of every edge
in the DBCM structure, it is not obvious that DBCL
is useful for identifying EMC violation. The following
theorem shows that DBCL output will always identify
self-regulating variables:
Theorem 3. Let D be a DBCM with a variable X
that has a prime variable Prime(X).
The partially
directed graph returned by Algorithm 1 with a perfect
independence oracle will have an edge between X and
Prime(X) if and only if X is self-regulating.
It is easy to show that a feedback set of X is empty
if and only if all paths from X to Prime(X) have
a collider. Again, since DBCL is not guaranteed to
identify all edge orientations, not all colliders are nec-
essarily identiﬁed. According to the faithfulness con-
dition, DBCL will detect a correct equivalence class,
and so will detect the correct adjacencies and the
correct v-structures (unshielded colliders); thus The-
orem 4 shows that we can always identify whether or
not Fb(X) is empty:
Theorem 4. Let G be the contemporaneous graph
of a DBC model.
Then for a variable X in G,
Fb(X) = ∅if and only if for each undirected path P =
⟨P0, P1, . . . , Pn⟩between P0 = X and Pn = Prime(X),
there exists a v-structure Pi →Pj ←Pk in G such that
Pi, Pj, Pk ∈P.
Theorem 4 asserts that we can determine whether or

not there exists a directed path from X to Prime(X).
In fact, this theorem does not make use of the fact
that the path terminates on a prime variable, so it
actually serves as an identiﬁability proof for all causal
descendants of any integral variable.
4
RESULTS
For our empirical studies, we generated data from real
physical systems that are representative of the type of
systems found in nature. We also applied DBCL to
real EEG brain data to reveal the causal propagation
of alpha waves.1
Validation of DBCL is complicated by the fact that, as
far as we know, there exist few suitable baseline meth-
ods that are even in principle able to correctly learn
a DBCM when derivatives are unknown. As discussed
in Section 2.1, if one tries to learn causal relations with
the latent variables marginalized out, an inﬁnite-order
Markov model results (Figure 1(c)).
The FCI algo-
rithm [Spirtes et al., 2000], which attempts to take into
consideration latent variables, would also result in an
inﬁnite-order Markov model because it does not try to
isolate and learn the latent variables and the structure
between them and the observables. The structural EM
algorithm [Friedman, 1998] does try to learn explicit
latent variables and structure. However, applying it
naively would be unfair since DBCL uses background
information about the latent variables that structural
EM would not be privy to.
Thus, in order to provide a fair baseline, we chose
to adapt some standard algorithms for discovery from
causally suﬃcient data by providing them with known
information about the latent derivatives.
We used
both the PC algorithm and a greedy Bayesian ap-
proach on a data set with all diﬀerences up to some
maximum kmax = 3 calculated a priori, and we applied
some heuristics to interpret the output as a DBCM.
While perhaps not fully satisfying, we felt that this
provided the fairest comparison to a baseline.
Es-
sentially, this allows us to assess how well Step 1
of DBCL (the main novel component) performed on
learning latent diﬀerences. Once those latent diﬀer-
ences are found, we used the PC algorithm and the
Bayesian search algorithm to recover the contempora-
neous structure, but without imposing the structure
of a DBCM. In PC and DBCM we used a signiﬁcance
level of 0.01. The Bayesian approach starts with an
empty network and then ﬁrst greedily adds arcs us-
ing a Bayesian score with the K2 prior [Cooper and
1All
experiments
were
performed
with
SMILE,
a
Bayesian
inference
engine
developed
at
the
Decision
Systems
Laboratory
and
available
at
http://genie.sis.pitt.edu/.
Herskovits, 1992], and then greedily removes arcs. For
the Bayesian approach we discretized the data into ﬁve
bins with approximately equal counts. It is possible to
use a Bayesian approach without discretizing the data
[Geiger and Heckerman, 1994], which we may explore
in the future.
4.1
HARMONIC OSCILLATORS
We tested DBCL on models of two physical systems,
namely a SHO and the more complex coupled SHO
shown in Figure 2(a). Although the SHO is a deter-
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2: (a) The causal graph of the coupled SHO
system. (b) A typical Granger causality graph recov-
ered with simulated data. (c) The number of parents
of x1 over time-lag recovered from a VAR model (typ-
ical results).
ministic system, having noise is still realistic: e.g., fric-
tion, air pressure, temperature, all of these factors are
weak latent causes that add noise when determining
the forces of the system. Thus all non-integral equa-
tions used Gaussian error terms that were resampled
at every time interval. For both systems we selected
parameters of our models in such a way that they were
stable, i.e., produced measurements within reasonable
bounds. We generated 100 data sets of 5,000 records
for each system. We should emphasize that, as men-
tioned earlier, we do not include the derivatives in the
data set, but only the original variables.
We ﬁrst computed Granger causality models and VAR
models for some of the simulated data for the coupled
SHO just to illustrate how uninformative these models

are when the latent derivatives are unknown. Those re-
sults are shown in Figure 2(b) and Figure 2(c), respec-
tively. The Granger graph is more diﬃcult to interpret
than the DBCM because of the presence of multiple
double-headed edges indicating latent confounders. It
was noted that the sole integral variables appeared in
the Granger graph with reﬂexive edges, which might
lead to an alternative algorithm for ﬁnding prime vari-
ables. However, the Granger graph does not provide
enough information to perform causal reasoning. The
VAR model is also diﬃcult to interpret, as it attempts
to learn structure over time of an inﬁnite-order Markov
model. The graph of Figure 2(c) shows that variable
x1 has 65 parents spread out over time-lags from 1 to
100 (binned into groups of ∆t = 20) at signiﬁcance
level of 0.05. Thus while VAR models might be use-
ful for prediction, they provide little insight into the
causality of DBCMs.
There were four algorithms used for quantitative base-
lines: two based on the PC algorithm and two based on
the Bayesian algorithm. We will call them PC1, PC2,
B1, and B2, respectively. For all baselines the proce-
dure for detecting the prime variables was the same:
all derivatives up to a maximum order were precalcu-
lated, and prime variables were determined to be the
lowest order derivative that was not connected to itself
in the future in the output graph. In the second step
PC1 and B1 reported the contemporaneous structure
that was found during the search for prime variables.
For PC2 and B2, a separate step was made wherein we
created a new dataset using only the derivatives found
in step 1, and relearned contemporaneous structure
from this reduced dataset. The results for the SHO
are shown in the following table:
%∆low
%∆hi
%Edel
%Eadd
%Oerr
PC1
0.00
0.50
39
230
26
PC2
0.00
0.50
100
100
1.0
B1
17
72
60
200
20
B2
17
72
78
120
14
DBC
0.00
0.50
0.40
1.2
0.60
The ﬁrst two columns of the table show the percentage
of derivatives too low and to high, respectively. The
other three columns of the table show the percent-
age of edges that were deleted, added, and incorrectly
oriented. For example, on average, DBCL added 1.2
extra edges for every 100 edges in the correct graph,
whereas PC2 added 104 extra edges per 100 original
edges.
The table below shows the results for the coupled SHO:
%∆low
%∆hi
%Edel
%Eadd
%Oerr
PC1
0.00
12
40
200
23
PC2
0.00
12
84
26
14
B1
0.00
93
64
170
8.5
B2
0.00
93
42
140
21
DBC
0.00
0.25
0.58
1.3
6.4
These results show that DBCL is eﬀective at both
learning the correct diﬀerence variables and of learn-
ing contemporaneous structure of these systems. For
the SHO, the PC baselines are performing as well as
DBCL for discovering prime variables; however, when
the network gets more complicated, there is a clear
diﬀerence.
Also, in all cases the second step makes
a big diﬀerence between baselines and DBCM, most
likely because enforcing the DBCM structure is essen-
tial. We did try other signiﬁcance levels besides 0.01,
but all results showed the same trend.
4.2
EEG BRAIN DATA
In our second experiment, we attempted to learn a
DBCM of the causal propagation of alpha waves, an
8-12 Hz signal that typically occurs in the human brain
when the subject is in a waking state with eyes closed.
Subjects were asked to close their eyes and then an
EEG measurement was recorded. The data consisted
of 10 subjects and a multivariate time series of 19 vari-
ables was recorded for each subject 2, containing over
200,000 time steps at a sampling rate of 256 Hz. Each
variable corresponds to a brain region using the stan-
dard 10-20 convention for placement of the electrodes
on the human scalp.
Alpha rhythms are known to operate in a speciﬁc fre-
quency band peaking at 10 Hz. To focus our results
more on this process, we tried learning a DBCM us-
ing just the 10 Hz power signal over time. We divided
the data into 0.5s segments, performed a FFT on that
segment and extracted the power of the 10 Hz bin for
each time slice. When learning the DBCM, we used
the same signiﬁcance level and kmax as before. The
result for subject 10 is displayed in Figure 3. The cir-
cles represent the 19 variables that correspond to the
brain regions.
The top of this graph represents the
front of the brain and the bottom the back. The small
squares in each circle represent the derivatives that
were found. The lower left is the original EEG signal,
the lower right the ﬁrst derivative, the top right the
second derivative, and the top left the third deriva-
tive. In some regions, no derivatives were detected, so
those squares have been left out.
Here (and in typical subjects) there are only a few
regions that required derivatives to explain their vari-
ation. The locations of those regions varied quite a bit
from subject to subject, but there were some common
patterns. Across all subjects, 16 of 20 occipital regions
had at least one derivative present. This contrasts to
the frontal lobes where across all subjects only 1 of 70
frontal regions had one derivative or more. When a
region had at least one derivative, rarely, if ever, did
2Data available at http://www.causality.inf.ethz.ch
/repository.php?id=17

Figure 3: Output of DBCL on data ﬁltered for alpha
wave power.
it also have an incoming edge from some region that
did not have a derivative. This suggests that the re-
gions containing the dynamic processes were the pri-
mary drivers of alpha-wave activity.
Since most of
these drivers occurred in the occipital lobes, this is
consistent with the widely accepted view that alpha
waves originate from the visual cortex.
There were many regions that did not require any
derivatives to explain their signals. The alpha wave
activity in these regions is quickly (< 0.5s) determined
given the state of the generating regions. One hypoth-
esis to explain this is given by G`omez-Herrero et al.
[2008] where they point out that conductivity of the
skull can have signiﬁcant impact on EEG readings by
causing local signals to be a superposition of readings
across the brain. Thus, if the readings of alpha waves
detected in, say, the frontal region of the brain is due
merely to conductivity of the skull, we would have ef-
fectively instantaneous determination of the alpha sig-
nal in those regions given the value in the regions gen-
erating the alpha waves.
We should note that when DBCL is applied to the
raw (unﬁltered) data, the resulting DBCM is much less
neat: Most regions have at least one derivative present,
and connectivity among regions is much higher and
more diﬃcult to interpret. This is not surprising given
the massively parallel activity occuring in the brain,
and it suggests that when seeking to learn causal in-
teractions in the brain, it may be useful to partition
brain signals into diﬀerent frequency bands. We hope
to look more fully into diﬀerent bands and possibly for
causal interactions among diﬀerent bands.
5
DISCUSSION
The main contribution of this work is to present a new
representation for learning models from time-series
data. While DBCMs have been discussed elsewhere in
terms of analyzing causality of dynamic systems, there
has not as yet been an algorithm to learn them from
data. This paper presents such an algorithm and, in
the process, makes DBCMs accessible to a wide range
of practitioners in econometrics, biology and AI who
currently rely on Granger causality, vector autoregres-
sion or graphical models to model dynamic systems.
We have argued that DBCMs are particularly suited
to learning systems which are based on diﬀerential
equations, and have shown empirically that, for such
systems when the relevant derivatives are unknown,
DBCL will learn models accurately where existing ap-
proaches will fail. We have proven that under common
assumptions DBCL will learn the correct equivalence
class for a DBCM, and have shown that several im-
portant feautures of the underlying DBCM are identi-
ﬁable from this equivalence class, such as the presence
of feedback loops and the set of descendants of integral
variables.
While there exist mathematical dynamic systems that
cannot be written as DBCMs, we believe that sys-
tems based on diﬀerential equations are ubiquitous in
nature, and, therefore, will be well approximated by
DBCMs. Furthermore, we have argued that there does
not exist a representation that is capable of learning
a ﬁnite model of these systems without ﬁrst ﬁnding
the correct latent derivative variables. This is because
marginalizing out latent derivative variables results in
an inﬁnite-order Markov model. Thus our method can
be viewed as contributing to the very hard problem of
discovering latent common causes in diﬀerence equa-
tion systems.
We have also shown that DBCL can learn parsimo-
nious representations for causal interactions of alpha
waves in human brains that are consistent with previ-
ous research. We plan to apply this method to under-
standing causal pathways in the brain more broadly
using a combination of EEG and MEG brain data.
In general, we ﬁnd it surprising that after nearly 50
years of developing theories for identiﬁcation of causes
in econometrics, rarely, if ever, have researchers at-
tempted to apply these theories to even the simplest
dynamic physical systems. We feel that our work thus
exposes a glaring gap in causal discovery and represen-
tation, and we hope that by reversing that process—
applying a representation that works well on known
mechanical systems to more complicated biological,
econometric and AI systems—we can make new in-
roads to causal understanding in these disciplines.
