IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING
1
A Motion Planning Strategy for the Active
Vision-Based Mapping of Ground-Level Structures
Manikandasriram S.R.1, Andr´e Phu-Van Nguyen2, and Jerome Le Ny2, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—This paper presents a strategy to guide a mobile
ground robot equipped with a camera or depth sensor, in order
to autonomously map the visible part of a bounded three-
dimensional structure. We describe motion planning algorithms
that determine appropriate successive viewpoints and attempt
to ﬁll holes automatically in a point cloud produced by the
sensing and perception layer. The emphasis is on accurately
reconstructing a 3D model of a structure of moderate size
rather than mapping large open environments, with applications
for example in architecture, construction and inspection. The
proposed algorithms do not require any initialization in the form
of a mesh model or a bounding box, and the paths generated
are well adapted to situations where the vision sensor is used
simultaneously for mapping and for localizing the robot, in the
absence of additional absolute positioning system. We analyze the
coverage properties of our policy, and compare its performance to
the classic frontier based exploration algorithm. We illustrate its
efﬁcacy for different structure sizes, levels of localization accuracy
and range of the depth sensor, and validate our design on a real-
world experiment.
Note to Practitioners— The objective of this work is to
automate the process of building a 3D model of a structure of
interest that is as complete as possible, using a mobile camera or
depth sensor, in the absence of any prior information about this
structure. Given that increasingly robust solutions for the Visual
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping problem (vSLAM) are
now readily available, the key challenge that we address here is
to develop motion planning policies to control the trajectory of
the sensor in a way that improves the mapping performance.
We target in particular scenarios were no external absolute
positioning system is available, such as mapping certain indoor
environments where GPS signals are blocked. In this case, it
is often important to revisit previously seen locations relatively
quickly, in order to avoid excessive drift in the dead-reckoning
localization system. Our system works by ﬁrst determining the
boundaries of the structure, before attempting to ﬁll the holes
in the constructed model. Its performance is illustrated through
simulations and a real-world experiment performed with a depth
sensor carried by a mobile manipulator.
Index Terms—Motion Planning, Active Sensing, Active SLAM,
Autonomous Mapping, Autonomous Inspection
I. INTRODUCTION
Part of this work was performed while the ﬁrst author was visiting
Polytechnique Montreal, under a Globalink Fellowship from MITACS. This
work was also supported by NSERC (Grant 435905-13) and the Canada
Foundation for Innovation (Grant 32848).
1M. S.R. is with the Robotics Institute, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,

2A.
Phu-Van
Nguyen
and
J.
Le
Ny
are
with
the
De-
partment
of
Electrical
Engineering,
Polytechnique
Mon-
treal,
and
GERAD,
Montreal,
QC
H3T
1J4,
Canada.

Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TASE.2017.2762088
A
CCURATE 3D computer models of large structures have
a wide range of practical applications, from inspecting an
aging structure to providing virtual tours of cultural heritage
sites [1], [2]. In civil engineering for example, an important
problem is that of construction progress monitoring, i.e.,
comparing the state of a building under construction over
time to the project plan. The process of regularly updating
the estimate of the state of the building has traditionally been
performed manually, but in recent years new methods have
been developed to automate it using data obtained from a
variety of sensors, e.g., positioning systems, stationary 3D
laser scanners [3], high resolution video cameras [4], or still
cameras carried by UAVs [5].
This paper considers the problem of guiding in real-time a
mobile autonomous robot carrying a vision sensor, in order to
build a 3D model of a structure. For this, we need to address
two problems. First, we need a robust mapping system that
can build the 3D model in real-time when given a sequence
of images or depth maps as input. This is a widely researched
problem called Visual Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
(vSLAM) or real-time Structure from Motion (SfM), for which
several open source packages offer increasingly accurate and
efﬁcient solutions [6], [7]. The second problem relates to
active sensing [8], as we need motion planning strategies
that can guide a mobile sensor to explore the structure of
interest. For mapping, monitoring or inspection applications,
certain classical strategies such as frontier-based exploration
algorithms [9], which guide the robot to previously unexplored
regions irrespective of whether it is part of the structure of
interest or not, are not necessarily well adapted.
Some recent work considers the problem of reconstructing
a 3D model of arbitrary objects by moving a depth sensor
relative to the object using different forms of next best view
planning algorithms [10], [11]. Typically, these systems itera-
tively build a complete 3D model of the object by heuristically
choosing the next best viewpoint according to some perfor-
mance measure. However, much of this work is restricted to
building models of relatively small objects that are bounded
by the size of the robot workspace. In contrast, our focus
is on 3D reconstruction of larger but still bounded structures
such as buildings, which can be several orders of magnitude
larger than a mobile robot. The related problem of automated
inspection deals with large structures such as tall buildings
[5] and ship hulls. Bircher et al. [12] assume that a prior 3D
mesh of the structure to inspect is available and compute a
short path connecting viewpoints that together are guaranteed
1545–5955 c⃝2017 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted.
Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or
promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in
other works
arXiv:1602.06667v3  [cs.RO]  11 Nov 2017

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING
2
to cover all triangles in the mesh. In [13], Englot et al. begin
by assuming a safe bounding box of the hull and construct
a coarse mesh of the hull by tracing along the walls of this
box in a ﬁxed trajectory without taking feedback from the
actual geometry of the structure. Moreover, this coarse mesh
is manually processed ofﬂine to yield an accurate 3D mesh,
which is then used to inspect the ﬁner structural details. Yoder
and Scherer [14] also assume a bounding box and develop
an algorithm combining next best view planning and frontier-
based exploration to encourage coverage of the structure.
Sheng et al. [15] use a prior CAD model of an aircraft to
plan a path for a robotic crawler such that it inspects all the
rivets on the surface of the aircraft. In this paper however,
we do not assume any prior information in terms of a 3D
mesh, CAD model or a bounding box around the structure, and
focus on reactive path-planning to build the model online. Our
mapping problem is also related to coverage path planning,
see, e.g., [16]–[19] and the references therein, which has
traditionally focused on developing algorithms ensuring that
a mobile robot passes over all points in a 2D environment,
assuming a sufﬁciently accurate localization system.
In computer vision and photogrammetry, SfM techniques
aim at building a 3D model of a scene from a large number
of images [20]–[23], but most of this work focuses on batch
post-processing and typically assumes a given dataset, whereas
here our focus is essentially on how to acquire an appropriate
set of images. Let us mention however the work of Daftry et
al. [24], which presents an interactive real-time SfM system
providing online feedback to the user taking pictures, alerting
him or her when a new picture cannot be properly integrated
in the model. Also, Tuite et al. [25] develop a competitive
game where players are encouraged to take pictures that
help build complete 3D models. We emphasize that we do
not discuss in details the task of actually building a model
from a collection of pictures or depth maps, which can be
executed by one of the available vSLAM or real-time SfM
systems, such as the Real-Time Appearance Based Mapping
package (RTAB-Map) [6] that we use in our experiments. Our
work focuses on actively exploring the environment with an
autonomous robot to build a complete model in real-time,
with our controller taking at any time the current model as
an input. Which package we use for model reconstruction has
little inﬂuence on our algorithms, for example any vSLAM
system based on pose-graph optimization [26] could be used.
State-of-the-art batch SfM systems can also be used to post-
process the sequence of images or depth maps captured using
our policies in order to obtain a more accurate model ofﬂine.
Naturally, eventual completeness of the model is limited by
the physical characteristics of the robot, and speciﬁcally the
reachable space of the sensor, see Fig. 1.
Finally, another line of work in informative path planning
relates to autonomous exploration and coverage of relatively
large environments, using variants of frontier based explo-
ration algorithms for example [28]–[31]. While these papers
focus on path planning to quickly build models of potentially
large and complex spaces, they do not address the problem
of autonomously delimiting and mapping as completely as
possible a speciﬁc bounded structure of interest.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 1. Comparison of the a) Simulated Model in Gazebo [27] that needs to
be mapped and b) Reconstructed 3D model by a mobile ground robot using
our policies. Only the bottom portion is mapped due to the limited reachable
space of the sensor.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows. After
presenting the problem statement in Section II, we develop
in Section III a motion planner allowing a ground robot
equipped with a camera or depth sensor to autonomously
determine the boundaries of an initially unknown structure.
Then, Section IV describes an algorithm for detecting missing
portions in the 3D model constructed during the boundary
determination phase, and an exploration strategy to improve
the completeness of the model. In Section V we analyze the
level of coverage completeness that can be expected from our
strategy. The behavior of the proposed policies is illustrated in
Section VI through simulations, and the resulting accuracy of
the constructed models compared to that obtained using the
classical frontier based exploration algorithm. Experimental
results are presented in Section VII to validate the algorithms
under more realistic illumination conditions. One justiﬁcation
for our incremental exploration approach is that we focus
on using the vSLAM module both for mapping the structure
as well as localizing the robot, although an additional dead-
reckoning system such as wheel odometry could be present
as well. In the absence of an independent source of accurate
absolute positioning, it is important to close loops relatively
frequently with the vSLAM system, i.e., revisit regions that
have already been explored, in order to control the growth of
the localization errors building up with visual odometry alone.
We also help the vSLAM system by following the boundaries
of the structure, where visual features are likely to be present.
II. PROBLEM STATEMENT AND ASSUMPTIONS
Consider the problem of constructing a 3D model of a
given structure of ﬁnite size, e.g., a monument or a building,
using a mobile ground robot carrying an imaging or depth
sensor, such as a Kinect, a monocular or stereo camera, or
a LIDAR. Initially, no approximate model of the structure
nor map of the environment is available, and the actual size

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING
3
(a)
(b)
Fig. 2.
(a) Starting conﬁguration for the robot and camera with respect to
the structure. (b) Initial image seen by the camera: the robot only knows that
the structure in the ﬁeld of view (FOV) is the one that should be mapped.
of the structure is also unknown. The sensor (also called
camera in the following) provides a sequence of point clouds
obtained directly or computed from depth and/or luminance
images. These local point clouds, together with an estimate of
the sensor trajectory, can then be assembled and registered
in a coordinate frame in real-time using available SLAM
algorithms, such as RTAB-Map [6] or RGBD-SLAM [7], and
post-processing then allows us to build a dense 3D model
or a 3D occupancy grid stored in an OctoMap [32]. We do
not directly address here the model reconstruction problem in
vSLAM. Instead, we focus on determining good trajectories
for the robot allowing a vSLAM module (and potentially
a batch SfM module in post-processing) to produce a high
quality model, which ideally should capture the entire visible
portion of the structure accurately. A key challenge is to
develop strategies that are applicable for any type of structure
while respecting the physical limitations of the platform.
We assume that initially the robot is positioned along the
structure to be mapped, with the camera capturing point clouds
mounted on its right and facing the structure at a distance
D measured in a horizontal plane, see Fig. 2. In normal
operations, we wish to maintain this distance D between the
structure and the path of the camera, where D is chosen
based on the camera’s resolution. Deﬁne a global ﬁxed Frame
of Reference (FoR) G := {Og, xg, yg, zg}, in which the
global point cloud is to be assembled. Note that we write
vectors in bold. The robot FoR R := {Or, xr, yr, zr} (forward,
left, up) coincides initially with G, but is attached to a
point Or that moves along with the robot. For concreteness
to describe our scenario and algorithms, the camera FoR
C := {Oc, xc, yc, zc}, is assumed to be rigidly attached to the
robot except for the yaw motion, which is left unconstrained.
Assumption 1: The center Oc of the camera mounted on the
mobile ground robot has ﬁxed coordinates (0, 0, hc) in frame
R, and in addition we always maintain zr = zc.
Such a choice of camera conﬁguration determines which parts
of the structure are not visible at all, and hence cannot
be mapped by any algorithm implemented on this platform.
However, other system conﬁgurations could be handled with
some of the more generic tools developed in this paper.
Fig. 3 shows our conventions for the different FoR used.
The imaging plane of the camera is deﬁned by yczc, with xc
pointing towards the front of the camera on the optical axis.
Coordinates in the camera, robot and global FoR are denoted
using superscripts as vc, vr and vg respectively for a vector v.
Fig. 3. The camera is kept at a constant height above the robot’s base. The
red, green and blue lines correspond to the x, y and z axes respectively and
both the camera and robot can rotate along their z axes. The yellow region
corresponds to the view frustum of the camera.
We assume that initially xc = −yr so that the camera points
to the right of the robot. We make two additional assumptions
for simplicity of exposition. The ﬁrst one guarantees that there
exists collision free paths around the structure.
Assumption 2: The horizontal distance of the closest obsta-
cle from the structure is at least 2D.
The next assumption simpliﬁes the problem of detecting,
tracking and removing the ground surface from point clouds,
a processing step performed in Algorithm 1 to compute
waypoints that only depend on the structure to inspect.
Assumption 3: The structure and the robot are placed on the
horizontal plane zg = 0. In particular, we have zc = zr = zg.
In the following we ﬁx the z-coordinate of Or to be zero. A
consequence of these assumptions is that relatively horizontal
surfaces that are at the same height or above the camera center
for example cannot be mapped, and the maximum height
(measured in the R or G frame) of the structure that can be
mapped is Hmax = hc + D tan ψ/2, where ψ is the vertical
angle of view of the camera. Assumption 3 could be removed
by using recent classiﬁcation systems that can differentiate
between ground and non-ground regions [33] to pre-process
the point clouds before sending them to our system.
Finally, there are additional implicit assumptions that we
state informally. First, since we rely on an external mapping
module to build the 3D model, the conditions that allow
this module to operate sufﬁciently reliably must be met.
For example, vSLAM generally requires appropriate scene
illumination and the presence of a sufﬁciently rich set of visual
features. Second, we concentrate on the reconstruction of the
details of the model at a scale comparable with or larger than
the typical length of the robot. If features at a smaller scale
need to be included, e.g., ﬁne structural details on a wall, our
system could be augmented with a more local planner for a
robotic arm carrying the sensor [10], [34], as well as targeted
computer vision techniques [23]. Finally, for reasons explained
in Section III-C, we assume that the robot is equipped with
sensors capable of detecting obstacles in a 180◦region ahead
of it and within a distance of D, see Fig. 8.
We divide our mapping process into two phases, see Fig. 4.
The ﬁrst is the Perimeter Exploration (PE) phase, during which
the robot moves with the structure on its right to determine its
boundaries. The robot continuously moves towards previously

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING
4
unseen regions of the structure, with the exploration directed
towards ﬁnding the limits of the structure and closing a ﬁrst
loop around it relatively quickly rather than trying to map all
its details. The PE phase ends when our algorithm detects that
the robot has returned to the neighborhood of its starting point
Og and the vSLAM module detects a global loop closure. After
completing the PE phase, the system determines the locations
of potential missing parts in the constructed 3D model. Next,
in the Cavity Exploration (CE) phase, the system explores
these missing parts in the model. The following subsections
explain each step of our process in detail.
C0
C1
D
D
D
D
D
D
Perimeter
Exploration
Cavity
Exploration
Og
view
frustum
Or
xg
yg
C2
Cavity entrance side
Cavity exit side
C3
Mapped boundaries
Fig. 4. Overview of the two phases of the mapping strategy. The gray area
represents the slice M in the plane zg = hc of the structure to map, with the
assumption that any potential hanging structure above the white area leaves
enough vertical clearance for the mobile ground robot to navigate.
III. PERIMETER EXPLORATION
In this section, we present a method to autonomously
determine the boundaries of an unknown structure. From
Assumptions 2 and 3, zg = 0 and zg = Hmax are bounding
horizontal planes for the model. The remaining problem is to
determine the expansion of the structure in the xgyg plane.
To do this, the robot moves clockwise around the structure by
determining online a discrete sequence of successive goals or
waypoints. It tries to keep the optical axis of the depth sensor
approximately perpendicular to the structure, which maximizes
the depth resolution at which a given portion of the structure
is captured, and increases the density of captured points. It
also tries to maintain the camera center Oc on a smooth path
at a ﬁxed distance D from the structure.
A. Determination of the next goal
The pseudo-code to determine the next position and orienta-
tion of the camera in our PE algorithm is shown in Algorithm
Algorithm 1 Algorithm for computing the next goal for the
camera using the current point cloud in the camera FoR.
1: function COMPUTENEXTGOAL(cloud full)
2:
cloud ←PCLremoveGroundPlane(cloud full)
3:
cloud slice ←ﬁlterForwardSlice(cloud)
4:
pc ←PCLcompute3Dcentroid(cloud slice)
5:
[v1, v2, v3; λ1, λ2, λ3] ←PCA(cloud slice)
6:
˜n ←v3 −(v3 · zc)v3 ▷Projection on the xcyc plane
7:
n ←˜n sign(˜n · −−→
Ocpc); n ←n/∥n∥
8:
r ←zc × n
9:
goal ←pc −D n + step r
10:
return goal, n
11: end function
1. It takes as input the current point cloud produced by the
camera in its FoR. For its implementation we rely on the Point
Cloud Library (PCL) [35].
Since the next goal should depend only on the structure, we
ﬁrst remove the ground plane from the captured point cloud
by removing all points below a certain height to obtain a point
cloud P. Next, on line 3, we select a subset S of P referred to
as the forward slice, which adjoins the part of the structure that
must be explored next, see Fig. 5a. Concretely, we choose S so
that its yc-coordinates satisfy yc
max −yc
max−yc
min
3
≤yc ≤yc
max,
where yc
min and yc
max are the minimum and maximum yc-
coordinate values for all points in P. On line 5, following
[36], we compute via Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
the normal direction to that plane Π which best ﬁts S. In
more details, denote S = {pc
i : i = 1, 2, . . . , m} and deﬁne the
covariance matrix X =
1
m
Pm
i=1(pc
i −pc)(pc
i −pc)T , where
pc = 1
m
Pm
i=1 pc
i is the centroid of S computed on line 4. We
compute the eigenvectors [v1, v2, v3] of X, ordered here by
decreasing value of the eigenvalues λ1, λ2, λ3. The eigenvector
v3 for the smallest eigenvalue corresponds to the normal to
the plane Π.
The algorithm returns n, computed from the projection of
the normal vector v3 on the xcyc plane, and taken to point
in the direction of the vector −−→
Ocpc. This vector n deﬁnes the
desired orientation of the camera. The algorithm also returns
the next goal point goal = pc −D n+step r for the center Oc
of the camera, where r = zc × n is computed on line 8, and
step = yc
max−yc
min
6
. The term step r, which is along the plane
Π, is used to shift the goal forward so that both sections of a
corner fall in the FOV of the camera, as in the situation shown
on Fig. 5a. This prevents the algorithm from making slow
progress around corners. Furthermore, the interior angle of a
corner could be acute, as shown in Fig. 5b, and consequently
the farther section of the corner would not be visible from the
camera. Such a case can be detected by monitoring the width
of S to fall below a threshold. In this case we modify the
computation of the goal to be goal = pc+D r which allows the
robot to move around sharp corners of the structure. Finally,
the computed camera pose is transformed into the global FoR
to obtain the next goal point gg for the camera center Oc. We
simplify the notation gg to g in the following, where we work
in the global reference frame.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING
5
 
π
xc
yc
Camera
Shortest Path
Planned Camera Path
p
_
g
Dn
(a)
 
xc
yc
Camera
Shortest Path
Planned Camera Path
p
_
g
Dr
(b)
Fig. 5.
Top-down view illustrating the computation of the next goal, for a
corner section of the structure. In (a), the forward slice S (highlighted in red)
contains a portion of the farther section of the corner, whereas for the acute
corner in (b), it does not and becomes very narrow.
B. Local path planning to the next goal
In order to move the camera center to g while keeping it
approximately at the desired distance D from the structure
along the way, we use a local path planner based on potential
ﬁelds [37], [38]. A potential function encoding the structure
as obstacles in the neighborhood of the camera, as well as the
goal g, is sampled in the form of a cost map on a local 2D grid
of size 2D×2D centered on the camera’s current position, see
Fig. 6. Assumption 2 guarantees that all the occupied cells in
this cost map denote the structure itself. For k occupied cells
centered at {xj}k
j=1, the potential function N(x) is deﬁned as
N(x) = α∥x −g∥2 +
k
X
j=1
Ij(x)dj(x),
(1)
with dj(x) =
1
β∥x −xj∥; Ij(x) =
(
1
if ∥x −xj∥≤D
0
otherwise,
for some scalar parameters α, β. Here dj is the repulsion from
the jth occupied cell, and is limited by Ij to a neighborhood
of radius D around the cell. A path for the camera is obtained
by following the negative gradient of N, i.e., ˙x = −∇N(x).
Denoting Jx = {j : Ij(x) = 1} the occupied cells in the D-
neighborhood of x, we have
−∇N(x) = 2α(g −x) +
X
i∈Jx
1
β∥x −xi∥3 (x −xi).
(2)
Let MD = {x : Jx ̸= ∅} denote the region that is at
distance at most D from the structure. Assuming a small
value of β, the summation term in (2) is dominant whenever
x ∈MD and pushes the path away from the structure.
However, this term vanishes as soon as x /∈MD. Then,
assuming that the camera starts at x0 on the boundary ∂MD of
MD, it remains approximately on ∂MD if −→
xg points toward
the interior of MD. It is possible that this condition is not
satisﬁed by the point g computed in the previous subsection, in
which case we replace g by g1, which is obtained by selecting
a new goal = pc −D′ n + step r for D′ < D such that this
condition is satisﬁed. The path will then slide on ∂MD until
it reaches its goal [39]. Finally, this path for the center of the
camera is used to compute a corresponding path for the center
Fig. 6.
The potential ﬁeld for a goal at (4, 3) with D = 3 is shown as a
heat map and the corresponding gradient vectors are shown as a vector ﬁeld.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 7.
a) While the robot is following the structure, its forward facing
sensors detect an obstacle ahead (robot conﬁguration shown in faded colors).
This obstacle is outside the ﬁeld of view of the camera, shown in b). The
position of the robot at the next waypoint along the new direction to explore,
determined by using the arm to scan ahead, is shown in bright colors.
xr
Robot
D
A
B
yr
 
ᶫ
ᶰ
Fig. 8. When the robot is currently following section A of the structure, a
later section B of the structure could interfere with the planned path. The
angle ω made by section B with respect to section A satisﬁes ω ∈[0, π).
Also, the two sections could be connected to form a non-convex corner.
of the robot, which then needs to be tracked using a platform
speciﬁc controller.
Overall, during the PE phase the robot attempts to maintain
a viewpoint orthogonal to the structure, even though it replans
for a new goal according to Algorithm 1 only at discrete times.
Note that only the computation of the next goal happens at
discrete instants but the vSLAM module updates the model at
a higher rate as per the capabilities of the hardware.
C. Replanning due to the structure interferring
Assumption 2 guarantees that the robot can move sufﬁ-
ciently freely around the structure, but this does not prevent the
structure itself from interfering with the path planned above.
Consider the situation shown in Fig. 7a. The wall ahead of
the robot does not fall into the FOV of the camera due to

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING
6
the limited horizontal angle of view, yet the robot should not
approach this wall closer than a distance D. Hence, if the robot
detects obstacles in its forward D-neighborhood, it is stopped
at its current position and the yaw motion of the camera is
used to scan ahead and face the new section of the structure.
More precisely, as illustrated in Fig. 8, we use the costmap
from the previous subsection to turn the camera to face along
the direction from the robot center Or to the ﬁrst occupied
cell in the D-neighborhood of the robot. The next goal is then
recomputed using the newly captured point cloud.
D. End of the PE phase
The end of the PE phase corresponds to the robot closing
a loop around the structure. Therefore, we require that the
vSLAM module detects a global loop closure based on the
captured images, i.e., recognizes that the robot has returned to
the vicinity of a known point. The robot continues traveling
on the PE path until this condition is met. Detecting a global
loop closure is not necessarily straightforward because of
localization errors, notably the drift accumulating in dead-
reckoning systems such as the visual odometry function of the
vSLAM module, or the wheel odometry system. However, it is
typically possible to place a unique object or mark on or near
the structure in the initial FOV, which helps prevent incorrect
loop closures. If available, absolute positioning sensors such
as a GPS receiver in the case of outdoor operations can also
indirectly help improve the loop closure detection by limiting
the localization drift. One can also use the measurements of a
compass to detect when the robot is traveling along an edge of
the structure that has the same orientation as the starting edge,
and focus the search for a loop closure along these edges.
IV. COMPLETING THE MODEL: CAVITY EXPLORATION
There are two possible types of ﬂaws in the model obtained
at the end of the PE phase. Type I ﬂaws correspond to holes
that are present in the already explored regions. As noted
in Section II, these holes could be due to limitations of the
sensor or local occlusions caused by small irregularities in the
structure itself, and should be ﬁlled using a platform with a
more appropriate reachable space, hence we do not consider
them further. Type II ﬂaws, called cavities in the following,
correspond to regions that were skipped during the PE phase,
due to the situation depicted on Fig. 7 in particular. These
cavities will be ﬁlled during the CE phase, where the robot is
allowed to move closer to the structure, although this means
that the model will not necessarily be reconstructed up to a
height Hmax in some places.
A. Cavity Entrances
In this subsection we describe an algorithm to determine the
locations of the entrances of the cavities in the model, which
will be subsequently used by the CE strategy. We use a voxel
based 3D occupancy grid constructed from the global point
cloud, and maintained in a hierarchical tree data structure by
the OctoMap [32] library. Internally, this library performs ray
casting operations, labelling the occupancy measurement of
(a) With frontier voxels
(b) Cavity entrance voxels shown in red
Fig. 9.
a) The constructed OctoMap with occupied voxels shown in blue
and frontier voxels shown in yellow. These yellow voxels form the boundary
of the explored region, but most of them lie along the top and bottom faces
of the view frustums. b) The cavity entrance voxels are shown in red.
each voxel along the line segment from the camera position
to each point in the point cloud as free and the point itself as
occupied. For this, we require the vSLAM module to provide
the sequence of point clouds and associated estimated camera
positions used in assembling the current model. All voxels in
the occupancy grid that are not labeled free or occupied are
called unknown. Using the constructed OctoMap, we compute
a set of frontier voxels, whose deﬁnition is adapted from [9].
Deﬁnition 1: A frontier voxel is a free voxel with at least
one neighboring unknown voxel.
Recall that the camera is constrained to move in a horizontal
plane during the PE phase. Consequently, many frontier voxels
lie along the top and bottom faces of the view frustums, see
Fig. 9a, but do not correspond to cavities to explore. We can
ignore them by only considering frontier voxels for which the
normal vector n, computed using the nearby frontier voxels
[36], makes a sufﬁciently small angle with the horizontal
plane. In other words, we keep only the frontier voxels for
which the z-coordinate of the normal n satisﬁes |ng
z| < α, for
some chosen threshold α. Next, Type I ﬂaws can result in fron-
tier voxels, which we also want to exclude from consideration.
Therefore, we require that the distance to the closest occupied
voxel should be greater than some threshold d0, which can
be chosen as a small fraction of the distance maintained from
the structure, say 0.1 D. As the number of voxels in a typical
structure is very large, we do not perform this thresholding
exactly but instead we use an estimate for the distance to the
structure obtained from OctoMap. The hierarchical structure
of OctoMap allows efﬁcient multi-resolution queries, see Fig.
10, and thus we keep as cavity entrance voxels only those that
are marked free at a resolution of approximately d0.
Finally, we call cavity entrance voxels the frontier voxels
that satisfy the two preceding conditions, see Fig. 9b. The
cavity entrance voxels are clustered using an Euclidean clus-
tering algorithm from PCL [35] and each cluster is referred to
as a cavity entrance. Moreover, there could be some sparsely
located cavity entrance voxels, which are removed by setting
a minimum size for the cavity entrance.
B. Cavity Exploration
Once the cavity entrances have been determined, we can
start the CE phase. We explore each detected cavity using a
motion analogous to the PE phase, wherein we maintain the
structure to the right at a distance ∆∈[δ, D] that is determined
online based on the available clearance in the cavity and δ is
the minimum required distance for the mapping module. For

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING
7
(a) Leaf size: 0.05m, depth: 16
(b) Leaf size: 0.4m, depth: 13
Fig. 10.
OctoMap queried at depth level 16 and 13 respectively. In this
paper, the value of D is 3m and the threshold d0 is chosen as 0.4m.
Fig. 11. Robot at a starting viewpoint for exploring a cavity. All the cavity
entrance voxels are also shown. We also show on the left an ending viewpoint,
where the vSLAM system detects that it is back in a region already explored
during the PE phase.
this, we require a starting viewpoint for each cavity entrance
and an algorithm to compute ∆. The starting viewpoint is
chosen from the set of camera poses returned by the vSLAM
module during the PE phase and such that the centroid of
the cavity entrance lies within the view frustum. Additionally,
the centroid should not be occluded by the structure from the
camera position. From these camera poses, the one with the
earliest timestamp is chosen as starting viewpoint, see Fig. 11.
The timestamps of the starting viewpoints of the cavity
entrances are used to sort them in increasing order and each
of the cavities is explored in sequence. A typical cavity has
at least two cavity entrances bordering it, as shown in Fig. 9b
and it is possible to have more cavity entrances in some cases.
During the CE phase, if the centroid of a cavity entrance falls
within the view frustum of the current camera position and is
not occluded by the structure, we remove that cavity entrance
from our list.
Exploring conﬁned regions during the CE phase requires
certain modiﬁcations to the PE policy. Recall that the system
skipped the cavities during the PE phase as the robot came
closer than a distance D from the structure. Therefore during
the CE phase, only the region directly ahead of the robot
and within a distance ∆is checked for interference of the
computed path with the structure. Moreover, our potential
ﬁeld-based local path planner now returns paths that maintain
a distance ∆from the structure. For this, using the notation
of Sections III-A and III-B, we modify goal as goal ←
pc −∆n + step r and transform to the global FoR to obtain
the new point g. The distance ∆is chosen by starting from
the minimum value δ and increasing it until we reach a local
minimum of N∆(g) along n, where the deﬁnition of N∆is
adapted from (1) with ∆replacing D. Similarly, when an acute
angled corner is encountered during the CE phase, we modify
goal as goal ←pc + ∆r.
When the robot exits a cavity, the point clouds captured
by the camera correspond to parts of the structure that are
already present in the model from the PE phase. Consequently,
the system can detect that it has ﬁnished exploring the current
cavity by monitoring the loop closures obtained by the vSLAM
module. The robot can then choose the next region to explore
from its current list of remaining cavity entrances, and can
travel there by following again the PE path. Alternatively,
the number of changes in the occupancy measurements of the
OctoMap could be used to detect the end of the cavity, as point
clouds captured after exiting the cavity ideally would not add
new information to the OctoMap. But this solution tends to
be less robust because localization errors and sensor noise can
induce a large number of changes even when the camera is
viewing a region that is already present in the model.
V. COVERAGE ANALYSIS
In this section we provide some analysis of the coverage
completeness of the PE and CE strategies. To simplify the
discussion, we focus on the case of simple structures consist-
ing of vertical walls, potentially supporting hanging structures
under which the mobile robot is able to pass. We then analyze
the boundary coverage in 2D for the slice M of the structure
on the plane zg = hc, see Fig. 4.
First, we analyze the PE phase. We assume that the path
planner is able to keep the robot at distance D from M, in
other words, the robot’s path remains on the boundary ∂MD
deﬁned in Section III-B, keeping the structure on its right.
Note that MD is the Minkowski sum M ⊕BD of M and a
closed disk of radius D.
Lemma 1: The path followed by the robot during PE phase
cannot self-intersect, except at the initial point Og.
Proof: During the PE phase, the robot keeps the structure
at distance D on its right as it moves forward. Fig. 12 then
illustrates the impossibility for the robot’s path to intersect
itself during PE. Indeed, in case (a) of a counter-clockwise
cycle, one can show that before the merging point the robot’s
obstacle detector would have seen the structure on its left at
distance at most D (point A on Fig. 12), and implemented
the left turn as explained in Section III-C. In case (b) of a
clockwise cycle, the tube of width 2D around the robot’s
trajectory would collide with the structure before closing the
path, which again would have induced a left turn. In both cases
we have a contradiction.
A
(a)
(b)
Fig. 12.
Impossibility of self-intersection during PE. The dashed curve
represents the boundary of the structure, the solid curve the path of the robot.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING
8
Recall that a simple closed curve (SCC) is a non-self-
intersecting, continuous loop. We then have
Corollary 1: Suppose ∂MD consists of a ﬁnite set of
disjoint SCCs. Then, during the PE phase, the robot travels
on the SCC of ∂MD on which it initially started, in the
direction that keeps MD on its right. Moreover, assuming
the loop closure detection does not incorrectly terminate the
PE phase too early, the robot reaches back its starting point
Og on this curve.
Proof: The robot progresses along ∂MD, and its path
cannot self-intersect by Lemma 1, so it must eventually reach
back its starting point since the length of ∂MD is ﬁnite.
It cannot switch to another SCC than the one on which it
started, since it would violate the assumption that the planner
maintains a distance D with M.
Corollary 1 characterizes the part of the boundary of MD
that the PE strategy covers, assuming the path planner and PE
termination algorithm work correctly. The robot ideally travels
on an SCC that is part of ∂MD, which we call the PE curve
in the following. We orient this curve in the direction of travel
of the robot, with MD on the right.
Let us now turn to the analysis of the CE phase. Let Mδ =
M ⊕Bδ be the Minkowski sum of M and the closed disk of
radius δ, where δ is the minimum horizontal clearance deﬁned
in Section IV-B. We work under the mild assumption that
both ∂MD and ∂Mδ consist of a ﬁnite set of disjoint SCCs,
although ∂MD can have a strictly smaller number of such
curves in general. The notation of the following proposition
is illustrated on Fig. 13.
A
⌃D
⇥δ
⇥D
Fig. 13. Illustration of the notation used in Proposition 1. Here Cδ = A⊕Bδ.
Proposition 1: Let ΣD be the oriented PE curve, and Cδ be
a connected component of Mδ in the region on the right of
ΣD. Let Θδ be one of the SCC forming ∂Cδ, orient Θδ such
that Cδ is on its right, and let ΘD be the (possibly empty)
SCC forming the boundary of Θδ ⊕BD−δ on the left of Θδ.
If ΘD ∩ΣD ̸= ∅, then at the end of the PE and the CE phase,
the view frustum has covered the curve Θδ.
Referring to Fig. 4, M has four components Ci, i =
0, . . . , 3. MD has a unique component since by adding a
buffer D the components merge into one. Note however that in
general, MD does not have to be simply connected, nor even
path connected. The dashed line representing the PE curve is
also the boundary of MD. Now Mδ has three components,
because C0 and C2 merge once we add a buffer δ. C1 and
C3 remain disconnected in Mδ however, which allows the
robot to enter the passages separating C0 and C1 on the one
hand, and C2 and C3 on the other hand. At the end of cavity
exploration, the boundary of the components C1 ⊕Bδ and
(C0 ∪C2) ⊕Bδ will be mapped, but C3 ⊕Bδ does not satisfy
the hypothesis of Proposition 1 (the boundary of C3 ⊕BD
does not share any point with the PE curve), and in this case
its boundary indeed is not mapped. The robot cannot map the
whole boundary of C0 or C2 individually, since it cannot pass
between these two structures that are less than δ apart.
Proof: Note that ΘD is a SCC that forms part or all of
∂CD, where CD = Cδ ⊕BD−δ, i.e., ΘD consists of points
that are at distance D of the portion of the structure in Cδ.
As a result, all the points belonging to ΘD must be either
also on ΣD or on the right of ΣD. A ﬁrst possibility is that
ΘD = ΣD, in which case the curve Θδ is covered at the end
of the PE phase.
If Θδ is not covered at the end of the PE phase there is a
point on Θδ that lies on a cavity entrance (frontier boundary
between the free and unknown region) and that is reachable by
a path starting from ΣD (since Cδ is a connected component
of Mδ, a robot could travel along Θδ during the CE phase).
Assuming this point is detected by the procedure of Section
IV-A, during the CE phase the robot will travel to this point
and remove it from its list of cavities to explore, keeping Cδ
on its right along the way. It will then continue following a
path along Cδ contained in the annulus between Θδ and ΘD,
until Θδ has been entirely covered by the view frustum. The
coverage of Θδ terminates since it is a SSC.
In conclusion, the cavity entrances computed at the end of
the PE phase act as attractors for the robot during the CE
phase. However, the robot only covers those frontier voxels
that it can reach while still keeping the structure on its right
as a guide and remaining at a distance between δ and D
away from it. For example, if it enters a large room after
going through a cavity entrance, it will not try to cover the
area far away from the walls (hence, it does not try to cover
obstacle C3 on Fig. 4). One could potentially attempt to cover
these interior areas as well at the same time, e.g., by using
a 2D coverage algorithm when we enter a wide cavity, but
this would require in general a sufﬁciently precise absolute
positioning system complementing the odometry information
of the vSLAM module. This might not be a trivial requirement,
for example because the structure itself might obstruct GPS
reception. Instead, our algorithm is motivated by the fact that
keeping the structure in range helps maintain the accuracy of
the visual odometry component of the vSLAM module. By
trying to exit a cavity quickly once we enter it, the vSLAM
module can also close loops more frequently as the robot
returns to the PE curve, before accumulating too much error
through the odometry.
VI. SIMULATION RESULTS
We illustrate the behavior of our policies via 3D simulations
for different sizes of the structure, camera range values and
localization accuracy levels for the robot. The implementation
of our motion planning policies is integrated with the Robot
Operating System (ROS) Navigation Stack [40], which is
supported by many mobile ground robots. All the simulations

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING
9
TABLE I
SIMULATION RESULTS FOR DIFFERENT SIZES OF THE STRUCTURE AND
RANGE OF THE CAMERA
Model
Perimeter
Camera Range
Path Length
Small Γ
42m
4.5m
72.08m
Small Γ
42m
12.0m
53.79m
Large Γ
84m
4.5m
106.23m
Large a
94m
4.5m
179.65m
TABLE II
SIMULATION RESULTS FOR DIFFERENT LEVELS OF LOCALIZATION
ACCURACY
k
nk
µ
σ
max
0.00
65520
0.05m
0.04m
0.20m
0.25
72636
0.08m
0.06m
0.27m
0.50
82728
0.11m
0.09m
0.40m
0.75
111321
0.16m
0.13m
0.94m
are performed using the Gazebo simulator [27]. The vSLAM
algorithm used is RTAB-Map [6].
The simulations are carried out with publicly available
models of a Clearpath Husky A200 robot and a Kinect depth
sensor whose range can be varied [41], see Fig. 2. A UR5
robotic arm is used to carry the sensor, but only yaw motions
of the arm are allowed, as described in Section II. For
illustration purposes, we consider artiﬁcial structures made of
short wall-like segments. We refer to the structure used in most
of the previous illustrations as the Small Γ model. The Large
Γ model has the same shape as Small Γ but is twice the size.
We also illustrate the effectiveness of our policy for a realistic
model of a house, and compare its performance with that of
the classic Frontier-Based Exploration (FBE) algorithm [9].
We have included a supplementary MP4 format video, which
shows the simulation and real-world experiments with a Husky
robot following our policies for mapping the Small Γ model
using a Kinect sensor.
A. Structure Size and Camera Range
The relative size of the structure with respect to the range of
the camera affects the trajectory determined by our algorithms.
Fig. 14 shows simulation results for 4 scenarios. With a camera
range of 4.5m, the Large Γ model is completely mapped at
the end of the PE phase. For the Small Γ model a cavity
remains, which is subsequently explored during the CE phase.
Increasing the camera range to say 12m allows the Small Γ
structure to be mapped at the end of the PE phase as well, see
Fig. 14b. One can see on Fig. 14d that the robot following our
policies is able to map large structures with multiple cavities
of different sizes. Table I lists the path lengths obtained for
the different test cases.
B. Localization accuracy
The Husky robot combines data from an Inertial Measure-
ment Unit (IMU), a standard GPS receiver and wheel odom-
etry to achieve a relatively small localization error overall. In
order to evaluate the impact of localization accuracy on our
(a) Model: Small Γ, Range:
4.5m
(b) Model: Small Γ, Range:
12m
(c) Model: Large Γ, Range:
4.5m
(d) Model: Large a, Range:
4.5m
Fig. 14.
The projection of the reconstructed model on the xgyg plane is
shown in black and the trajectory followed by the robot based on our policies
is shown in blue.
algorithms, we simulate the effect of large wheel slippage by
introducing a zero mean additive Gaussian white noise to each
of the wheel encoder measurements, with a variance equal to
k(vx + ωz)/2, where vx is the linear velocity of the robot,
ωz is its yaw rate and k is a proportionality constant, also
called noise level in the following. Increasing k results in
a poorer alignment of the point clouds, but all portions of
the structure, except the horizontal faces, are still captured in
the reconstructed model, see Fig. 15. Note that our policies
compute the next waypoint at discrete times and therefore
assume that the drift in localization between waypoints is
sufﬁciently small so that the robot reaches the next waypoint
with the camera facing the structure.
We use the CloudCompare [42] software to compute the
distortion in the reconstructed model Ck, for a noise level k,
with respect to a reference point cloud CR generated using
a different mobile platform with almost perfect localization.
First, we register Ck to CR using an Iterative Closest Point
(ICP) algorithm [43]. We then deﬁne for every point in Ck,
its error to be the distance to the nearest neighbor in CR.
Table II lists the simulation results for mapping the Small Γ
model with different noise levels k, where nk is the number of
points in Ck and µ, σ, max are respectively the mean, standard
deviation and maximum value of the errors of all points in Ck.
The table indicates that both the mean and standard deviation
of the errors increase with the noise level.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING
10
(a) Reconstructed model with k =
0.75
(b) Model: Small Γ, Range: 4.5m
Fig. 15.
a) Large errors in localization results in poor alignment, although
all portions of the structure have been captured in the model, see Fig. 16a for
comparison. b) The projection of the reconstructed model on the xgyg plane,
when compared to Fig. 14a, shows the distortion introduced due to the noisy
wheel odometry.
TABLE III
COMPARISON BETWEEN OUR POLICY AND FRONTIER BASED
EXPLORATION
Proposed Policy
FBE
Small Γ
Path Length
72.08m
49.78m
Unique closest point set size
6, 063
5, 398
Mean Error
0.05m
0.12m
House
Path Length
59.89m
47.55m
Unique closest point set size
9, 182
7, 402
Mean Error
0.05m
0.12m
C. Comparing with Frontier-based Exploration
The Frontier Exploration [44] package available in ROS
relies on a 2D LIDAR to build an occupancy grid that is
used to compute the frontiers. The package requires the user to
deﬁne a 2D polygon that encloses the structure. The algorithm
then explores until there are no more frontiers inside the
user-deﬁned polygon. In comparison to the FBE algorithm,
our algorithms 1) do not require a user deﬁned bounding
polygon; 2) maintain as much as possible a ﬁxed distance
from the structure (during the PE phase), thereby ensuring
that all portions up to a height of Hmax are mapped; 3)
consistently explore the structure while keeping it on the right,
which can be important from a user perspective to understand
the behavior of the robot. On the other hand, the trajectory
prescribed by the FBE algorithm depends on the size of the
user-deﬁned bounding polygon. A large bounding polygon will
cause the robot to explore areas far away from the structure
and will possibly not maintain a ﬁxed direction of exploration.
Our strategy produces the same path every time for a given
structure whereas the path computed by the FBE algorithm
could differ greatly between two trials. The robot also often
gets stuck while using the FBE algorithm as the computed
waypoints are often too close to the structure.
In order to get a quantitative measure of the structure cov-
erage, we use again the CloudCompare software to compute
essentially the projection of the reconstructed model C on the
(a) Proposed Policy
(b) Frontier based Exploration
(c) Frontier based Exploration
(d) Model: Small Γ, Range: 4.5m
(e) Model: House, Range: 4.5m
Fig. 16. (a-d) Comparison of the reconstructed model using our policies and
FBE. Fig. (c) should be compared to Fig. 1b. (d,e) The trajectories prescribed
by FBE for the Small Γ and House structure are shown in blue.
reference point cloud CR. Namely, for each point in C we
compute the closest point in CR. Note that multiple points in
C can have the same closest point in CR. In this case, we
remove these duplicate points to obtain the unique closest
point set. Then, as long as the reconstructed model aligns
relatively well with the reference model, the cardinality of the
unique closest point set is taken as our estimate of the structure
coverage. Table III compares the level of structure coverage
achieved by our policies and FBE with a camera range of
4.5m for two of the environments considered. For the Small
Γ model, our reference point cloud has 6, 116 points with a
minimum distance of 0.1m between points. For the House
model, our reference point cloud has 10, 889 points with a
minimum distance of 0.1m between points. Since the height
of the House model is more than Hmax, we only take the
portion of the reconstructed model up to the height Hmax for
computing the structure coverage and mean error for the two
algorithms.
Table III shows that our policies achieve a higher level
of structure coverage than FBE for the environments consid-
ered and our proposed coverage metric. Note also that the
smooth trajectory prescribed by our policies is beneﬁcial to
the vSLAM module to achieve a better alignment and a lower
value for the mean error in the reconstructed model, especially
if the robot localization accuracy is poor. A visual inspection

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING
11
of Fig. 16a and Fig. 16b shows the improvement in model
reconstruction when using our algorithms compared to FBE.
VII. REAL-WORLD EXPERIMENT
Fig. 17.
Left: the Husky robot used in our experiments with the robotic
arm, depth sensor and laser range scanner. All other sensors seen are not
used. Right: the indoor structure being inspected.
Here we discuss an example of real-world experiment using
the Husky robot shown in Fig. 17, equipped with a Kinova
robotic arm carrying a Kinect v2 depth sensor. A SICK
laser range scanner is used only for obstacle detection. All
computations are done in real-time on an embedded Intel
i5 based computer without the help of a dedicated GPU.
The structure was built from cork display panels and foam
insulation boards. As shown in Fig. 17, it mimics the small
Γ model used in simulation and its dimensions are 8.2 m by
4 m. To help the vSLAM algorithm detect a loop closure, we
place a visual marker (a colorful poster seen on Fig. 17) on
the structure in front of the starting point of the robot. Since
the panels are similar on both sides we also put visual markers
inside the structure to conﬁrm that the cavity inspection has
correctly mapped all of the inside. The most computationally
intensive part of our algorithm is the detection of cavity
entrances, see Section IV-A, which takes a few seconds of
computation for this structure at the end of the PE phase.
Due to the limited space available to maneuver around the
structure, we reduce the obstacle sensing region to a range
of 1.8 m and to a 10 degree cone in front of the robot. The
depth camera range is cut at 4.0 m and we set the desired
wall distance D to 1.5 m. For odometry we use the extended
Kalman ﬁlter (EKF) from [45] with IMU and wheel odometry
data as inputs. The output of the EKF is sent to RTAB-Map [6]
for mapping and localization purposes. Since we use a ground
robot on ﬂat terrain, we constrain RTAB-Map’s mapping to 3
degrees of freedom (x, y and yaw angle).
The behavior of our algorithm is illustrated on the accompa-
nying video, and the model produced online with the vSLAM
module is shown in Fig. 18. Overall, the executed trajectory
conﬁrms that our algorithm correctly performs perimeter ex-
ploration followed by cavity inspection. Noise in the depth
measurements can be an issue if left unﬁltered. However,
proper calibration and applying a standard speckle and bi-
lateral ﬁlter can alleviate the problem. In our experiments,
we tuned the parameters of these ﬁlters by placing the robot
in a location where signiﬁcant noise was measured. We then
Fig. 18. An angled view of the constructed model. The cyan lines with squares
indicate the path taken by the robot.
increased the maximum speckle size and size of the bilateral
ﬁlter window until most of the visible noise was removed.
The experiment also illustrates some practical issues that
can degrade mapping performance. First, because of the height
of the boards used to build the structure and the limited space
available to navigate around it, the robotic arm was extended
so that the depth sensor was at a height of 1.2m. It then tended
to shake during acceleration changes of the robot, making the
sensor vulnerable to producing blurry images. This could be
mitigated by a better control of the smoothness of the robot
trajectories, a stiffer orientable platform to hold the sensor,
and by using a stereo camera with global shutters in bright
daylight to reduce motion blur. During testing we also noticed
that the algorithm can be sensitive to gaps or ”windows” in
the structure. In front of a gap, the depth sensor can detect
surfaces inside the structure, which can then perturb the goal
calculation algorithm described in section III-A. This can be
addressed by reducing the range of the sensor measurements
to a value close to the desired distance D.
In summary, among the possible failure cases of our algo-
rithm, we identiﬁed during our experiments and simulations: i)
waypoint determination errors due to the presence of gaps or
windows in the structure; and ii) incorrect global loop closures
due to the possible self-similarity of the structure, which can
be mitigated by adding a unique marker at the starting point.
VIII. CONCLUSIONS
This paper presents motion planning strategies that guide
a mobile ground robot carrying a camera or depth sensor to
autonomously explore the visible portion of a bounded three-
dimensional structure. The proposed policies do not assume
any prior information about the size or geometry of the struc-
ture. Coupled with state-of-art vSLAM systems, our strategies
are able to achieve high coverage in the reconstructed model,
given the physical limitations of the platform. We illustrate
the efﬁcacy of our approach via 3D simulations for different
structure sizes, camera range and localization accuracy, and
we have tested our system in real-world experiments. In ad-
dition, a comparison of our policies with the classical frontier

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING
12
based exploration algorithms clearly shows the improvement
in performance for a realistic structure such as a house.
