TOWARDS COGNITIVE AI SYSTEMS: A SURVEY AND PROSPECTIVE ON
NEURO-SYMBOLIC AI
Zishen Wan 1 Che-Kai Liu * 1 Hanchen Yang * 1 Chaojian Li * 1 Haoran You * 1 Yonggan Fu 1 Cheng Wan 1
Tushar Krishna 1 Yingyan (Celine) Lin 1 Arijit Raychowdhury 1
ABSTRACT
The remarkable advancements in artificial intelligence (AI), primarily driven by deep neural networks, have
significantly impacted various aspects of our lives. However, the current challenges surrounding unsustainable
computational trajectories, limited robustness, and a lack of explainability call for the development of next-
generation AI systems. Neuro-symbolic AI (NSAI) emerges as a promising paradigm, fusing neural, symbolic,
and probabilistic approaches to enhance interpretability, robustness, and trustworthiness while facilitating learning
from much less data. Recent NSAI systems have demonstrated great potential in collaborative human-AI scenarios
with reasoning and cognitive capabilities. In this paper, we provide a systematic review of recent progress in
NSAI and analyze the performance characteristics and computational operators of NSAI models. Furthermore, we
discuss the challenges and potential future directions of NSAI from both system and architectural perspectives.
1
INTRODUCTION
Remarkable advancements in artificial intelligence (AI)
have had a profound impact on our lives and numerous
industries. These advancements are primarily driven by
deep neural networks (DNN) and a virtuous cycle involving
large networks, extensive datasets, and augmented comput-
ing power. As we reap the benefits of this success, there is
growing evidence that continuing our current trajectory may
not be viable for realizing AI’s full potential. First, the esca-
lating computational requirements and energy consumption
associated with AI are on an unsustainable trajectory (Wu
et al., 2022), threatening to reach a level that could stifle
innovation by restricting it to a select few organizations.
Second, the lack of robustness and explainability remains
a significant challenge, likely due to inherent limitations in
current learning methodologies (Wan et al., 2021; Dwivedi
et al., 2023). Third, contemporary AI systems mostly oper-
ate in isolation, with limited collaboration between humans
and AI agents. Hence, it is imperative to develop next-
generation AI paradigms that address the growing demand
for efficiency, explainability, and trust in AI systems.
Neuro-symbolic AI (NSAI) represents an emerging AI
paradigm that integrates neural, symbolic, and probabilistic
approaches to enhance explainability, robustness, and enable
*Equal contribution
1Georgia Institute of Technology. Cor-
respondence to:

Workshop on Systems for Next-Gen AI Paradigms, 6 th Confer-
ence on Machine Learning and Systems (MLSys), June 4-8, 2023,
Miami, FL, USA. Copyright 2023 by the author(s).
learning from much less data in AI (Fig. 1). Neural methods
have proven highly effective in extracting complex features
from data for tasks such as natural language processing
and object detection. On the other hand, symbolic methods
enhance explainability and reduce the dependence on exten-
sive training data by incorporating established models of the
physical world, and probabilistic methods enable cognitive
systems to more effectively handle uncertainty, resulting in
improved robustness under unstructured conditions. The
synergistic fusion of neural, symbolic, and probabilistic
methods positions NSAI as a promising paradigm capable
of ushering in the third wave of AI (Garcez & Lamb, 2023).
NSAI promises many possibilities for AI systems that ac-
quire human-like communication and reasoning capabilities,
enabling them to recognize, classify, and adapt to new situa-
tions autonomously. In addition to its superior performance
Neural Network
Scalable
Flexible
Handle inconsistency
Symbolic
Probabilistic 
Interpretable
Explainable
Data-eﬃcient
Robust to 
uncertainty
CPU
GPU
Domain-Speciﬁc 
Accelerator
Challenges
Research Opportunities
1
2
3
4
(Section 4)
(Section 2)
(Section 3)
Unifying neuro-symbolic-prob models
Developing efﬁcient software frameworks
Benchmarking diverse NSAI workloads
Designing cognitive architectures
Large #algos and #HW
Ad-hoc model design
Heterog. compute kernels
Limited extensibility
Neuro-Symbolic AI Algorithms
+
+
Hardware Compute Platforms
Limited evaluation tasks
Building more cognitive datasets/testbeds
1
2
3
4
5
Human-like Cognitive AI 
Learning, Reasoning, 
Collaboration
5
Figure 1. Overview of neuro-symbolic AI systems, and challenges
and opportunities in advancing next-generation cognitive AI.
arXiv:2401.01040v1  [cs.AI]  2 Jan 2024

Towards Cognitive AI Systems: a Survey and Prospective on Neuro-Symbolic AI
compared to traditional AI models in tasks such as image
and video question answering (Mao et al., 2019; Yang et al.,
2020), NSAI holds significant potential for enhancing real-
time responses, energy efficiency, explainability, and trust-
worthiness of collaborative human-AI applications. These
applications include collaborative robotics, mixed-reality
systems, and human-AI interactions in the metaverse, where
robots can seamlessly interact with humans in complex en-
vironments, AI agents can reason and make decisions in a
robust and explainable manner, and intelligence is perva-
sively embedded and untethered from the cloud.
In this paper, we provide a systematic survey, evaluation,
and analysis of NSAI systems, promising a next-generation
AI paradigm. First, we review and categorize the state-of-
the-art NSAI systems from a structured perspective (Sec. 2).
Second, we analyze various NSAI workloads on hardware
platforms, examining their runtime characteristics and un-
derlying compute operators (Sec. 3). Lastly, we discuss
the challenges and opportunities for NSAI system research
and our outlook on the road ahead (Sec. 4). To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first paper to assess NSAI from
both a system and architecture perspective, aiming to inspire
the design of next-generation cognitive computing systems
through synergistic advancements in NSAI algorithms, sys-
tems, architecture, and algorithm-hardware co-design.
2
NEURO-SYMBOLIC AI ALGORITHMS
In this section, we systematically review and categorize the
recent research progress in NSAI algorithms.
Overview. NSAI represents an interdisciplinary approach
that synergistically combines symbolic reasoning with neu-
ral network (NN) learning to create intelligent systems,
leveraging the complementary strengths of both to enhance
the accuracy and interpretability of the resulting models.
Given that NSAI algorithms typically incorporate both sym-
bolic and neural components, various NSAI paradigms can
be categorized based on how these components are inte-
grated into a cohesive system. Inspired by Henry Kautz’s
NSAI taxonomy (Kaut, 2020), we systematically categorize
these NSAI algorithms into five paradigms, as summarized
in Tab. 1. We elaborate each of these paradigms below. Ad-
ditionally, Tab. 2 provides examples of several underlying
operations based on the categorization in Tab. 1.
Symbolic[Neuro] refers to an intelligent system that em-
powers symbolic reasoning with the statistical learning ca-
pabilities of NNs. These systems typically consist of a com-
prehensive symbolic problem solver that includes loosely-
coupled neural subroutines for statistical learning. Exam-
ples include DeepMind’s AlphaGo (Silver et al., 2017) and
AlphaZero (Zhang & Yu, 2020), which use Monte-Carlo
Tree Search (MCTS) as the symbolic solver and NN state
estimators for learning statistical patterns.
Table 1. Survey of recent NSAI algorithms into five groups, with a
summary of their underlying operations and vector formats.
Category
NSAI Algorithm
Underlying Operation
If Vector
Symbolic[Neuro]
AlphaGo (Silver et al., 2017)
NN, MCTS
Vector
Neuro|Symbolic
NVSA (Hersche et al., 2023)
NN, mul, add
Vector
NeuPSL (Pryor et al., 2022)
NN, fuzzy logic
Vector
NSCL (Mao et al., 2019)
NN, add, mul, div, log
Vector
NeurASP (Yang et al., 2020)
NN, logic rules
Non-Vector
ABL (Dai et al., 2019)
NN, logic rules
Non-Vector
NSVQA (Yi et al., 2018)
NN, pre-defined objects
Non-Vector
Neuro:Symbolic
→Neuro
LNN (Riegel et al., 2020)
NN, fuzzy logic
Vector
Symbolic Mathematics
(Lample & Charton, 2019)
NN
Vector
Differentiable ILP
(Evans & Grefenstette, 2018)
NN, fuzzy logic
Vector
NeuroSymbolic
LTN (Badreddine et al., 2022)
NN, fuzzy logic
Vector
Deep ontology networks
(Hohenecker & Lukas, 2020)
NN
Vector
Neuro[Symbolic]
GNN+attention
(Lamb et al., 2020)
NN, SpMM, SDDMM
Vector
NLM (Dong et al., 2019)
NN, permutation
Vector
Neuro|Symbolic refers to a hybrid system that combines a
neural system and a symbolic system in a pipeline, where
each component typically specializes in complementary
tasks within the pipeline. To the best of our knowledge, the
majority of NSAI algorithms fall into this category. For ex-
ample, IBM’s neuro-vector-symbolic architecture (NVSA)
(Hersche et al., 2023) uses an NN as the frontend for per-
ception and semantic parsing, and a symbolic reasoner as
the backend for probabilistic abductive reasoning on the
RAVEN (Zhang et al., 2019) and I-RAVEN (Hu et al., 2021)
datasets. Other examples include neuro-probabilistic soft
logic (NeuPSL) (Pryor et al., 2022), neural probabilistic
logic programming (DeepProbLog) (Manhaeve et al., 2021),
neuro-answer set programming (NeurASP) (Yang et al.,
2020), nerual symbolic dynamic reasoning (Yi et al., 2020),
neural symbolic concept learner (NSCL) (Mao et al., 2019),
abductive learning (ABL) (Dai et al., 2019), and neuro-
symbolic visual question answering (NSVQA) (Yi et al.,
2018) on the CLEVRER dataset (Yi et al., 2020).
Neuro:Symbolic→Neuro approach incorporates symbolic
rules into NNs to guide the learning process, where symbolic
knowledge is compiled into the structure of neural models
for enhancing the model interpretability. For instance, log-
ical NNs (LNNs) (Riegel et al., 2020) encode knowledge
or domain expertise as symbolic rules (first-order logic or
fuzzy logic) that act as constraints on the NN output. Other
examples include deep learning for symbolic mathematics
(Lample & Charton, 2019) and differentiable inductive logic
programming (ILP) (Evans & Grefenstette, 2018).
NeuroSymbolic is a type of hybrid approach that combines
symbolic logic rules with NNs. It involves mapping sym-
bolic logic rules onto embeddings that serve as soft con-
straints or regularizers on the NN’s loss function. Logical
tensor networks (LTNs) (Badreddine et al., 2022), for in-
stance, use logical formulas to define constraints on the ten-
sor representations, which has proven successful in knowl-
edge graph completion tasks. These tasks aim to predict

Towards Cognitive AI Systems: a Survey and Prospective on Neuro-Symbolic AI
Table 2. Enumeration of the underlying operations based on Tab. 1.
Underlying Operations
Examples
Fuzzy logic
(LTN)
F = ∀x(isCarnivor(s)) →(isMammal(x))
{isCarnivor(s):[0, 1], isMammal(x):[1, 0]} →F = [1, 0]
Mul and Add (NVSA)
Xi ∈{+1, −1}d →(Xi · Xj)/(Xi + Xj)
Logic rules
(ABL)
Domain: animal(dog).carnivore(dog).mammal(dog)
Logical formula: mammal(x) ∧carnivore(x)
ABL: hypos(x) : −animal(x), mammal(x), carnivore(x)
Pre-defined objects
(NSVQA)
equal color: (entry, entry) →Boolean
equal integer: (number, number) →Boolean
missing facts or relationships between entities. Other exam-
ples of this approach include deep ontology networks (Hohe-
necker & Lukas, 2020) and tensorization methods (Garcez
et al., 2019). As the inference is still governed by NNs,
it remains a research question whether this approach will
compromise the interpretability.
Neuro[Symbolic] refers to a system that empowers NNs
with the explainability and robustness of symbolic reason-
ing.
Unlike Symbolic[Neuro], where symbolic reason-
ing is used to guide the neural model learning process, in
Neuro[Symbolic], the neural model incorporates symbolic
reasoning by paying attention to specific symbolics at cer-
tain conditions. For instance, graph neural networks (GNNs)
are often adopted as strong candidates for representing sym-
bolic expressions when endowed with attention mechanisms
(Lamb et al., 2020). In particular, this attention mechanism
can be leveraged to incorporate symbolic rules into GNN
models, enabling selective attention to pertinent symbolic
information in the graph. Other examples include neural
logic machines (NLM) (Dong et al., 2019).
3
NSAI SYSTEM PROFILING
In this section, we analyze the performance characteristics
of three recent NSAI models and discuss their system bottle-
neck, workload operators, and optimization opportunities.
3.1
NSAI Model and Experimental Methodology
Model Overview. We select three NSAI models for profil-
ing analysis: an LNN on a logic program task (Riegel et al.,
2020), an LTN on a binary classification task (Badreddine
et al., 2022), and an NVSA (Hersche et al., 2023) on the
Raven’s Progressive Matrices task (Zhang et al., 2019), rep-
resenting Neuro:Symbolic→Neuro, NeuroSymbolic, and
Neuro|Symbolic NSAI systems (Sec. 2), respectively. The
readers are referred to their references for more details.
Runtime Profiling Method. We first conduct function-
level profiling to capture runtime statistics, and then use the
PyTorch Profiler (Maxim Lukiyanov, Guoliang Hua, Geeta
Chauhan, and Gisle Dankel, 2021) to measure the CPU and
GPU runtimes of each model at a per-function granularity.
The experiments are conducted on a system with an Intel
Xeon Silver 4114 CPU and an Nvidia RTX 2080 Ti GPU.
Compute Operator Analysis Method. On top of the above
profiling, we perform compute operator-level profiling for
further analysis. We classify each neuro and symbolic work-
load of the LNN, LTN, and NVSA models into six operator
categories: convolution, matrix multiplication (MatMul),
vector/element-wise operation (e.g., tensor add, div, and
norm), data transformation (e.g., reshape and transpose),
data movement (e.g., inter-device transfer), and others (e.g.,
fuzzy logic, and logic rule) (Susskind et al., 2021).
3.2
NSAI Model Profiling Results
Runtime Breakdown. Compared to neuro workloads, sym-
bolic workloads are not negligible in computing latency and
may become a system bottleneck. Fig. 2(a) shows the run-
time breakdown for each model, where the neuro (symbolic)
workloads account for 54.6% (45.4%), 48.0% (52.0%), 7.9%
(92.1%) runtime of the LNN, LTN, and NVSA models, re-
spectively. Notably, the symbolic workload dominates the
NVSA’s runtime, predominately due to the sequential and
computational-intensive rule detection during the involved
reasoning procedure. This reasoning computation depends
on the result of the frontend neuro workload and thus lies
on the critical path during inference; Nevertheless, there are
still opportunities for leveraging data pre-processing and
parallel rule query to reduce this bottleneck.
Runtime Scalability. We observe that the neuro vs. sym-
bolic runtime proportion shown in Fig. 2(a) remains rela-
tively stable across various test sets under the same size,
whereas the total runtime increases quadratically with the
test set size. For example, when the test set size increases
from 2×2 to 3×3, the symbolic workload runtime percent-
age only increases from 92.06% to 94.71%, but the total
runtime of the NVSA model increases by 5.02×, indicating
the potential scalability bottleneck of NSAI models.
Fig. 2(b) partitions the neuro and symbolic workloads of the
LNN, LTN, and NVSA models into six operator categories
with runtime breakdown. Below is the workload analysis:
Neuro Workload Analysis. The neuro workload is domi-
nated by the MatMul and activation operations. LTN (neuro)
is dominated by MatMul due to its heavy MLP components,
while NVSA’s (neuro) majority runtime is on MatMul and
convolution because it adopts ResNet18 as the perception
0.00%
LNN
0.51%
43.6%
16.4%
39.5%
0.00%
0.00% 0.00%
19.3%
17.3%
39.4%
24.0%
0.00% 62.5%
26.8%
7.20%
3.48%
0.00%
0.00% 0.00%
73.1%
2.40%
6.36%
18.1%
30.7% 34.8%
22.0%
3.11%
9.40%
0.00%
35.7% 0.52%
49.9%
6.82%
7.12%
0.00%
0%
15%
30%
45%
(Neuro)
LNN
(Symbolic)
LTN
(Neuro)
LTN
(Symbolic)
NVSA
(Neuro)
NVSA
(Symbolic)
Conv
MatMul
Vector/Element
Data
Data 
Other
Transform
Movement
-wise
>60%
0
20
40
60
80
Normalized Time (%)
LNN LTN NVSA
Neuro
Symb.
100
54.55%
45.45%
47.98%
52.02%
7.94%
92.06%
(a)
(b)
Figure 2. (a) Runtime breakdown and (b) compute operation anal-
ysis for three neuro-symbolic AI models - LNN, LTN and NVSA.

Towards Cognitive AI Systems: a Survey and Prospective on Neuro-Symbolic AI
backbone for feature extraction. By contrast, a large portion
of LNN’s (neuro) runtime is on element-wise operations due
to the sparse syntax tree structure composed of proposition
logic. Notably, data movement also takes up a significant
amount of LNN’s (neuro) runtime because of its unique
bidirectional dataflow during reasoning inference.
Symbolic Workload Analysis. The symbolic workload is
dominated by vector and scalar operations exhibiting low op-
erational intensities and complex control flows. Both LNN
(symbolic) and LTN (symbolic) have a large number of logic
operations, posing parallelism optimization opportunities in
their database queries and arithmetic operations, especially
for larger symbolic models. Meanwhile, LNN (symbolic) is
severally data movement-bounded due to its sparse and ir-
regular memory accesses and bidirectional inference, where
model-aware dataflow architecture would likely be benefi-
cial for alleviating this bottleneck. Notably, the element-
wise operations usually stem from high-dimensional dis-
tributed vector computations (e.g., binding, bundling, and
permutation) for symbolic representation, which is difficult
to process efficiently on GPUs. Therefore, the challenges of
accelerating these computations will become increasingly
important as the task and feature complexities further grow.
4
CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
In this section, we discuss the challenges and opportunities
for NSAI systems, and outlines our vision for the future,
focusing on the system and architecture perspectives.
Building ImageNet-like NSAI datasets. NSAI systems
hold great potential in achieving human-like AI (Booch
et al., 2021). However, their current applications are limited
to basic decision-making and reasoning problems (Garcez
et al., 2022), falling short of the broader vision of human
cognitive abilities, such as interpretability, deductive reason-
ing, systematicity, productivity, compositionality, inferential
coherence of mental thought, and causal and counterfactual
thinking. To significantly advance the metacognitive ca-
pabilities of NSAI systems, more challenging and suitable
datasets are highly desirable to unleash NSAI’s potential.
Unifying neuro-symbolic-probabilistic models. Integrat-
ing neural, symbolic, and probabilistic approaches offers
promise to improve AI models’ explainability and robust-
ness. However, the current attempts to combine these com-
plementary approaches are still in a nascent manner (Wang
& Yang, 2022) - how to integrate them in a principled man-
ner remains a fundamental and open challenge. We en-
vision a unified framework to design algorithms that op-
portunistically combine neural, symbolic, and probabilistic
components, and for quantifying scaling laws for neuro-
probabilistic-symbolic inference versus large neural models.
Developing efficient software frameworks. NSAI sys-
tems typically utilize underlying logic, such as fuzzy logic,
parameterization, and differentiable structures, to support
learning and reasoning capabilities. However, most NSAI
system implementations create custom software for deduc-
tion for the particular logic used, which limits modularity
and extensibility (Aditya et al., 2023). Therefore, new soft-
ware frameworks are needed that can encompass a broad set
of reasoning logical capabilities and provide practical syn-
tactic and semantic extensions while being fast and memory-
efficient. Moreover, new programming models, compilers,
and runtimes that can facilitate the ease and efficient real-
ization of the neuro-symbolic-probabilistic models are of
significance to realize the full promise of NSAI paradigms.
Benchmarking diverse NSAI workloads. Given the pro-
liferation of NSAI algorithms and the rapid advancements
in hardware platforms, it is crucial to benchmark NSAI sys-
tems in a comparable, quantitative, and validatable manner.
To achieve this, from the system aspect, we need repre-
sentative benchmarks that capture the essential workload
characteristics (e.g., compute kernels, access patterns, and
sparsity) of neural, symbolic, and probabilistic models, and
that can be quantitatively tested in human-AI applications.
Additionally, from an architectural and hardware perspec-
tive, we need modeling-simulation-characterization frame-
works to enable the development of novel architectures for
these workloads and build optimized modular blocks as
libraries by leveraging workload characteristics, as other
emerging domains (Krishnan et al., 2022a; Wan et al., 2022).
Benchmarking NSAI will guide ML researchers and system
architects in investigating the trade-offs in accuracy, perfor-
mance, and efficiency of various NSAI algorithms, and in
implementing systems in a performance-portable way.
Designing cognitive hardware architectures. NSAI work-
loads that combine neural, symbolic, and probabilistic meth-
ods feature much greater heterogeneity in compute kernels,
sparsity, irregularity in access patterns, and higher memory
intensity than current DNN workloads. This leads to an in-
creasing divergence with the current hardware roadmap that
largely focuses on matrix multiplication or nearest neighbor
search, and regular dataflows, e.g., systolic arrays (Krishnan
et al., 2022b) or compute-in-memory crossbars (Crafton
et al., 2022). Therefore, we need novel architectures with
dedicated processing units, memory hierarchies, and on-chip
interconnects that can handle the additional complexities in
computations and communications. Additionally, the archi-
tecture needs to provide flexibility with both configurable
interconnects and full addressable memories to keep pace
with NSAI algorithmic innovations.
5
CONCLUSION
NSAI is an emerging paradigm for next-generation effi-
cient, robust, explainable, and cognitive AI systems. This
paper systematically reviews recent NSAI algorithms, char-

Towards Cognitive AI Systems: a Survey and Prospective on Neuro-Symbolic AI
acterizes their system performance, analyzes their workload
operators, and identifies the challenges and opportunities
towards fullfiling next-generation NSAI systems.
