Learning Bidirectional Action-Language Translation with Limited
Supervision and Testing with Incongruent Input
Ozan ¨Ozdemira, Matthias Kerzela, Cornelius Webera, Jae Hee Leea, Muhammad
Burhan Hafeza, Patrick Brunsb, Stefan Wermtera
aKnowledge Technology, Department of Informatics, University of Hamburg,
Vogt-Koelln-Str. 30, 22527 Hamburg, Germany
bBiological Psychology and Neuropsychology, University of Hamburg, Von-Melle-Park 11,
20146 Hamburg, Germany
ARTICLE HISTORY
Compiled February 23, 2023
ABSTRACT
Human infant learning happens during exploration of the environment, by interac-
tion with objects, and by listening to and repeating utterances casually, which is
analogous to unsupervised learning. Only occasionally, a learning infant would re-
ceive a matching verbal description of an action it is committing, which is similar to
supervised learning. Such a learning mechanism can be mimicked with deep learn-
ing. We model this weakly supervised learning paradigm using our Paired Gated
Autoencoders (PGAE) model, which combines an action and a language autoen-
coder. After observing a performance drop when reducing the proportion of super-
vised training, we introduce the Paired Transformed Autoencoders (PTAE) model,
using Transformer-based crossmodal attention. PTAE achieves signiﬁcantly higher
accuracy in language-to-action and action-to-language translations, particularly in
realistic but diﬃcult cases when only few supervised training samples are available.
We also test whether the trained model behaves realistically with conﬂicting multi-
modal input. In accordance with the concept of incongruence in psychology, conﬂict
deteriorates the model output. Conﬂicting action input has a more severe impact
than conﬂicting language input, and more conﬂicting features lead to larger interfer-
ence. PTAE can be trained on mostly unlabelled data where labeled data is scarce,
and it behaves plausibly when tested with incongruent input.
KEYWORDS
Unsupervised learning; weak supervision; autoencoders; object manipulation;
robot action; language grounding; Transformers; bidirectional translation
1. Introduction
Embodiment, i.e., action-taking in the environment, is considered essential for lan-
guage learning (Bisk et al. 2020). Recently, language grounding with robotic object
manipulation has received considerable attention from the research community. Most
approaches proposed in this domain cover robotic action execution based on linguistic
input (Hatori et al. 2018; Shridhar, Mittal, and Hsu 2020; Shao et al. 2020; Lynch
and Sermanet 2021), i.e., language-to-action translation. Others cover language pro-
duction based on the actions done on objects (Heinrich et al. 2020; Eisermann et al.

arXiv:2301.03353v2  [cs.CL]  22 Feb 2023

2021), i.e., action-to-language translation. However, only few approaches (Ogata et al.
2007; Yamada et al. 2018; Antunes et al. 2019; Abramson et al. 2020; ¨Ozdemir, Kerzel,
and Wermter 2021) handle both directions by being able to not just execute actions
according to given instructions but also to describe those actions, i.e., bidirectional
translation.
Moreover, as infants learn, the actions that they are performing are not permanently
labeled by matching words from their caretakers, hence, supervised learning with la-
bels must be considered rare. Instead, infants rather explore the objects around them
and listen to utterances, which may not frequently relate to their actions, hence, un-
supervised learning without matching labels is abundant. Nevertheless, most language
grounding approaches do not make use of unsupervised learning except those that use
some unsupervised loss terms (Yamada et al. 2018; Abramson et al. 2020; ¨Ozdemir,
Kerzel, and Wermter 2021), while large language models (LLMs) (Devlin et al. 2019;
Radford et al. 2019; Brown et al. 2020) introduced for various unimodal downstream
language tasks rely on unsupervised learning for pretraining objectives.
In order to reduce this dependence on labeled data during training, we introduce
a new training procedure, in which we limit the amount of training data used for
supervised learning. More precisely, we only use a certain portion of training samples
for crossmodal action-to-language and language-to-action translations whilst training
unimodally on the rest of the training samples. As crossmodal translation requires
each sample modality to be labeled with the other modality (e.g., an action sequence
must be paired with a corresponding language description), we artiﬁcially simulate the
realistic conditions where there is a large amount of unlabelled (unimodal) data but
a much smaller amount of labeled (crossmodal) data.
slide blue quickly
Figure 1.
Our table-top object manipulation sce-
nario in the simulation environment: the NICO robot
is moving the blue cube on the table. The performed
action is labeled as “slide blue quickly”. Our approach
can translate from language to action and vice versa;
i.e., we perform actions that are described in language
and also describe the given actions using language.
Another aspect of human language
learning is that it takes place in an envi-
ronment and while using diﬀerent modal-
ities such as vision and proprioception.
Concepts such as weight, softness, and
size cannot be grounded without being in
the environment and interacting with ob-
jects. Language learning approaches that
use multiple modalities and take action in
an environment into account are prefer-
able to those that use a unimodal ap-
proach to process large amounts of text.
A recent study (Canals and Mor 2023) in
language teaching concludes that learn-
ing is enhanced when the language learner
uses language to produce meaningful out-
puts. Hence we strive to devise embodied
multimodal models that tackle language
grounding. To this end, our robotic object
manipulation dataset is generated from a
simulation setup as seen in Figure 1. We use a humanoid child-size robot Neuro-
Inspired COmpanion (NICO) (Kerzel et al. 2017; Kerzel et al. 2020) to perform var-
ious actions on cubes on a table and label those actions with language descriptions.
We introduce further details of our setup in Section 4.
Diﬀerent from other approaches, our previous Paired Gated Autoencoders (PGAE)
model (¨Ozdemir, Kerzel, Weber, Lee, and Wermter 2022) can bidirectionally trans-
2

late between language and action, which enables an agent not only to execute actions
according to given instructions but also to recognize and verbalize its own actions
or actions executed by another agent. As the desired translation task is communi-
cated to the network through an additional signal word in the language input, PGAE
can ﬂexibly translate between and within modalities during inference. However, when
trained under limited supervision conditions, PGAE performs poorly on the action-to-
language translation task, under two conditions: Firstly, we experiment with reducing
the number of supervised training iterations while using the whole data set for super-
vised training. Secondly, we experiment with reducing the number of training samples
used with the supervised signals. In both instances, though the ﬁrst is more trivial than
the second, the action-to-language performance of PGAE suﬀers as the proportion of
supervision decreases.
To overcome this hurdle, we present a novel model, Paired Transformed Au-
toencoders (PTAE), in this follow-up paper. Inspired by the successful application
of the Crossmodal Transformer in vision-language navigation by the Hierarchical
Cross-Modal Agent (HCM) architecture (Irshad, Ma, and Kira 2021), PTAE replaces
PGAE’s gated multimodal fusion mechanism and optionally the LSTM-based (long
short-term memory) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) encoders with a Crossmodal
Transformer. Thanks to its more eﬃcient and sequence-retaining crossmodal attention
mechanism, PTAE achieves superior performance even when an overwhelming major-
ity of training iterations (e.g., 98 or 99%) consist of unsupervised learning. When the
majority of training samples are used for unsupervised learning, PTAE still maintains
its perfect action-to-language performance up to 80% of training samples learned uni-
modally and performs relatively well for the 90% case (over 80% sentence accuracy).
Even for the cases where only 1 or 2% of the training samples are used in a supervised
fashion, which is analogous to realistic few-shot learning settings, PTAE describes ac-
tions well over chance level with up to 50% success rate. Our results hint that PTAE
precludes the need for large amounts of expensive labeled data, which is required for
supervised learning, as the new architecture with the Crossmodal Transformer as the
multimodality fusion technique signiﬁcantly outperforms PGAE (¨Ozdemir et al. 2022)
under the limited supervision training conditions.
Furthermore, inspired by the concept of incongruence in psychology and to test
the robustness of the trained model to noise, for each task we introduce an extra
input that is contradictory to the expected output of the model. For example, for
language-to-action translation, we introduce extra conﬂicting action input showing an
action that is diﬀerent from the expected action from the model. The intertwined
processing of language and action input in the Crossmodal Transformer resembles
the tight interconnection between language and sensorimotor processes that has been
observed in the human brain (Hauk, Johnsrude, and Pulverm¨uller 2004; van Elk et al.
2010). Embodied accounts of human language comprehension assume that linguistic
information induces mental simulations of relevant sensorimotor experiences. As a
direct consequence of embodied language processing, conﬂicts between linguistic input
and sensorimotor processes have been shown to result in bidirectional impairments
of language comprehension on the one hand and perceptual judgments and motor
responses on the other hand (Aravena et al. 2010; Glenberg and Kaschak 2002; Kaschak
et al. 2005; Meteyard, Bahrami, and Vigliocco 2007), although the strength of these
behavioral eﬀects has recently been debated (Winter et al. 2022). In our PTAE model,
we found asymmetry in terms of the impact of the action and language modalities on
the performance of the model. Regardless of the output modality, introducing extra
contradictory action input aﬀects the model performance much more than introducing
3

it in the language modality.
Our contributions in this work can be summarized as:
(1) We introduce PTAE that handles realistic learning conditions that mainly in-
clude unsupervised/unpaired language and action experiences while requiring
minimal use of labeled data, which is expensive to collect.
(2) We show plausible behavior of the model when testing it with psychology-
inspired contradictory information.
The remainder of this paper is as follows: in Section 2, we summarize diﬀerent
approaches in language grounding with robotic object manipulation. In Section 3, we
deﬁne our PTAE in detail. Section 4 introduces the experiments and their results. In
Section 5, we discuss these results, while Section 6 concludes the paper.
2. Related Work
There are several approaches toward intelligent agents that combine language learning
with interactions in a 3D environment. A comprehensive research program (Abramson
et al. 2020) proposed combining supervised learning, reinforcement learning (RL),
and imitation learning. In the environment, two agents communicate with each other
as one agent (setter) asks questions to or instructs the other (solver) that answers
questions and interacts with objects accordingly. However, the scenario is abstract
with unrealistic object interaction. Hence, proprioception is not used as the actions
are high level, and a transfer of the approach from simulation to the real world would
be non-trivial.
Jang et al. (2021) proposed BC-Z which leverages a large multi-task dataset (100
tasks) to train a single policy, which is supervised with behavior cloning to match
the actions demonstrated by humans in the dataset. To generalize to new tasks, the
policy is conditioned on a task description; a joint embedding of a video demonstra-
tion, and a language instruction. This allows passing either the video command or
the language command to the policy when being trained to match the actions in a
demonstration. BC-Z generalizes to diﬀerent tasks but requires a large collection of
human demonstrations, which is expensive. It also relies on human intervention to
avoid unsafe situations and to correct mistakes.
Inspired by Yamada et al. (2018), we introduced the bidirectional Paired Varia-
tional Autoencoders (PVAE) (¨Ozdemir et al. 2021) that is capable of modeling both
language-to-action and action-to-language translation in a simple table-top setting
where a humanoid robot interacts with small cubes. The approach can pair each robotic
action sample (a sequence of joint values and visual features) with multiple language
descriptions involving alternative words replacing original words. The two variational
autoencoder networks of the model do not share any connections but are aligned with
a binding loss term. Due to the lack of common multimodal representations, PVAE
needs to be prepared for each translation task in advance. To overcome this issue, we
proposed a bidirectional attention-based multimodal network, PGAE (¨Ozdemir et al.
2022), which can ﬂexibly translate between the two modalities with the help of a signal
phrase.
Another approach, CLIPort (Shridhar, Manuelli, and Fox 2021), combines the CLIP
model (Radford et al. 2021) for pretrained vision-language representations with the
Transporter model (Zeng et al. 2020) for robotic manipulation tasks. Transporter takes
an action-centric approach to perception by detecting actions, rather than objects, and
4

then learns a policy, which allows CLIPort to exploit geometric symmetries for eﬃcient
representation learning. On multiple object manipulation tasks, CLIPort outperforms
CLIP and Transporter alone. Further, CLIPort trained on multiple tasks performs
better in most cases than CLIPort trained only on particular tasks. This supports
the hypothesis that language-conditioned task-learning skills can be transferred from
one task to another. However, the approach is only realized with a relatively simple
gripper as it does not output joint angle values but 2D pixel aﬀordance predictions.
The actual action execution relies on the calibration between the robotic arm base
and the RGB-D camera.
More recently, the same authors introduced Perceiver-Actor (PERACT) (Shridhar,
Manuelli, and Fox 2022), which is designed to eﬃciently learn multi-task robotic ma-
nipulations according to given language input by utilizing voxel grids extracted from
RGB-D images. The backbone of the model is the Transformer-based Perceiver IO
(Jaegle et al. 2021) that uses latent vectors to tackle the processing of very long se-
quences. After the processing of appended language and voxel encodings by Perceiver
IO, the voxels are decoded again to generate discrete actions by using linear trans-
formations. PERACT achieves promising results in multiple tasks such as opening a
drawer, turning a tap, and sliding blocks. However, as it only produces discrete actions,
it relies on a random motion planner to execute instructions.
SayCan (Ahn et al. 2022), utilizes LLMs to provide task-grounding capabilities to
the agent, which is capable of executing short-horizon commands. The use of LLMs
helps to ground these capabilities in the real world using value functions of the agent
in order to produce feasible and useful instructions. However, the approach is limited
to the set of skills that the agent can possess in the environment. An LLM is utilized
to assign aﬀordance probabilities to these skills according to a given high-level user
instruction. The way these skills are deﬁned in language (the wording, the length,
etc.) can aﬀect the performance of the whole system, e.g., LLMs tend to favor shorter
phrases over longer ones.
GATO (Reed et al. 2022) is a single multi-task, multi-embodiment model that is
general and performs well on hundreds of tasks in various domains such as playing Atari
games, manipulating objects, image captioning, etc. Regardless of the modality (e.g.,
vision, proprioception, language, etc.), the input is ﬂattened and embedded before it
is provided to the model. The model is a large Transformer decoder that has the same
weights and architecture for all tasks and is trained solely in a supervised manner.
However, despite performing moderately in each task, the approach cannot compete
with specialized approaches in various tasks.
The encoder-decoder-based VisuoMotor Attention model, VIMA for short, (Jiang
et al. 2022) is another object manipulation approach. It deals with robot action gen-
eration from multimodal prompts by interleaving language and image or video frame
tokens at the input level. VIMA uses an object detection module to extract objects
and bounding boxes from visual input to use as object tokens. The object tokens
are then interleaved with the language tokens and processed by the pretrained T5
model (Raﬀel et al. 2020) which is used as the encoder. On the decoder end, the ap-
proach uses a causal Transformer decoder which consists of cross- and self-attention
layers and autoregressively generates actions based on the history of previous actions
and the multimodal prompt. It is shown that VIMA outperforms state-of-the-art ap-
proaches, including GATO, on a number of increasingly diﬃcult object manipulation
tasks involving zero-shot generalization with unseen objects and their combinations.
An apparent weakness of VIMA is that it relies on the performance of oﬀ-the-self
object detectors.
5

<BOS>
pull
red
<EOS>
pull
fast
j1
v1
jM
vM
j1
 ĵ2
y1
yN-1
v1
vM-1
v2
 ĵ2
ĵM-1
y2
ĵM
x1
y1
y3
'execute:
pull red
fast'
LSTM
LSTM
LSTM
 ĵ3
LSTM
LSTM
LSTM
Crossmodal Transformer
FFW
FFW
h
Lfeats
Afeats
hdec
hdec
A
L
Figure 2.
The architecture of the PTAE model. The inputs are a language description (incl. a task signal)
and a sequence of visual features (extracted using the channel-separated convolutional autoencoder) and joint
values, while the outputs are a description and a sequence of joint values. Language encoder can be an LSTM,
the BERT Base model (Devlin et al. 2019), or the descriptions can be directly passed to the transformer word
by word. The action encoder can be an LSTM or the action sequence can be passed directly to the transformer.
Both decoders are LSTMs - we show unfolded versions of the LSTMs. The bottleneck, where the two streams
are connected, is based on the Crossmodal Transformer. h is the shared representation vector.
Diﬀerent from most of the aforementioned approaches, our model is bidirectional: it
can not only produce actions according to given language descriptions but also recog-
nize actions and produce their descriptions. As our model is based on an autoencoder-
like architecture, it can be trained in a mostly unsupervised way by asking the model
to reproduce the given language or proprioception input. Moreover, our approach is
ﬂexible during inference since it does not need to be reconﬁgured for the translation
task: due to the inclusion of the task signal in the language input, our PTAE can
reliably execute the desired task on the go, whether it is a translation from language
to action or vice versa. This is an essential step towards an autonomous agent that
can interact within the environment as well as communicate with humans.
3. Paired Transformed Autoencoder
Our model, named PTAE, is an encoder-decoder architecture that is capable of bidi-
rectional translation between robot actions and language. It consists of a Crossmodal
Transformer that is the backbone and multimodality fusion mechanism of the architec-
ture, and LSTM-based decoders that output language and joint values respectively.
As input, PTAE accepts language descriptions of actions including the task signal,
which deﬁnes the translation direction, as well as a sequence of the concatenation
of multivariate joint values and visual features. According to the task signal, PTAE
outputs joint values required for executing a particular action or it outputs language
descriptions of an action.
As shown in Figure 2, PTAE is composed of a Crossmodal Transformer, which ac-
cepts multimodal input (i.e., language, proprioception, and vision), and language and
action decoders that output language descriptions and joint values respectively. The
language and action input can optionally be preprocessed by LSTM-based encoders
as in the case of PGAE1. However, after some initial trials with both cases, in this
1For exact deﬁnitions of LSTM-based language and action encoder, readers may refer to the PGAE paper
6

Scaled Dot Product Attention
Lfeats
Afeats
Input
Emb.
V
Conc.
K
Q
Pos.
Emb.
Lfeats
Input
Emb.
FFW
h
FFW
FFW
FFW
Scal.
Dot
Prod.
Att.
Figure 3.
The architecture of the Crossmodal Transformer: Language features are embedded and used as
the query vector (Q), whereas the embedded action features are used as the key (K) and value (V) vectors.
The positional embedding is applied only to the language features. The multi-head attention (MHA) involves
the Q-, K- and V-speciﬁc feedforward (FFW) and scaled dot product attention layer following the original
Transformer architecture. The multiple heads are then concatenated and fed to the ﬁnal FFW, which outputs
the common hidden representation vector h.
paper, we do not use any extra encoding layers before the Crossmodal Transformer
for the sake of simplicity and model size as we do not see any signiﬁcant change in the
performance.
3.1. Crossmodal Transformer
The Crossmodal Transformer replaces the Gated Multimodal Unit (GMU) (Arevalo
et al. 2020) in our previous PGAE model (¨Ozdemir et al. 2022) and can be employed
essentially as language and action encoders. The simpliﬁed architecture of the Cross-
modal Transformer can be seen in Figure 3. The functionality of the Crossmodal
Transformer is to extract the common latent representations of paired language and
action sequences. Following the HCM architecture (Irshad et al. 2021), we use the lan-
guage modality as queries (Q vectors) and the action modality (concatenated visual
features and joint values) as keys (K vectors) and values (V vectors). The language de-
scriptions are represented as one-hot encoded vectors, whilst action input is composed
of joint values of NICO’s left arm and the visual features from images recorded by
the camera in NICO’s eye. As in PGAE, we use a channel-separated convolutional au-
toencoder (CAE) to extract visual features from images. The Crossmodal Transformer
encodes the common latent representations as follows:
Q = ReLU

W token · xt + btoken
+ PE(xt)
(1 ≤t ≤N + 1),
K, V = ReLU
 W act · [vt; jt] + bact
(1 ≤t ≤M),
At = MHA(Q, K, V )
(1 ≤t ≤N + 1),
ht = PWFF(At)
(1 ≤t ≤N + 1),
h = AvgPool(ht)
(1 ≤t ≤N + 1),
where x, v, and j are linguistic, visual, and proprioceptive inputs respectively – note
that when no language or action encoder is used, x corresponds to Lfeats, while the
(¨Ozdemir et al. 2022).
7

concatenation of visual features and joint values [vt; jt] corresponds to Afeats in Figure
3. ReLU is the rectiﬁed linear unit activation function while PE, MHA, and PWFF
are the positional encodings, multi-head attention layer, and the position-wise feed-
forward layer as used in the original Transformer paper (Vaswani et al. 2017). As the
Transformer architecture does not include any recurrence, we employ a ﬁxed sinusoid
function-based PE layer on the language features to include the position information.
At is the crossmodal attention vector for time step t, whereas ht is the hidden vec-
tor for time step t. AvgPool is the average pooling applied on the time axis to the
sequential hidden vector to arrive at the common latent representation vector h. For
our experiments, we employ a single-layer Crossmodal Transformer with 4 parallel
attention heads.
3.2. Language Decoder
We use an LSTM as the language decoder in order to autoregressively generate the
descriptions word by word by expanding the common latent representation vector h
produced by the Crossmodal Transformer:
hdec
0 , cdec
0
= W dec · h + bdec,
hdec
t
, cdec
t
= LSTM(yt−1, hdec
t−1, cdec
t−1) (1 ≤t ≤N −1),
yt = soft(W out · hdec
t
+ bout)
(1 ≤t ≤N −1),
where soft represents the softmax activation function. y0 is the vector for the symbol
indicating the beginning of the sentence, the <BOS> tag.
3.3. Action Decoder
Similarly, an LSTM is employed as the action decoder to output joint angle values at
each time step with the help of the common representation vector h:
hdec
0 , cdec
0
= W dec · h + bdec,
hdec
t
, cdec
t
= LSTM(vt, ˆt, hdec
t−1, cdec
t−1)
(1 ≤t ≤M −1),
ˆt+1 = tanh(W out · hdec
t
+ bout)
(1 ≤t ≤M −1),
where ˆt is the predicted joint values for time step t and tanh is the hyperbolic tangent
activation function. We take ˆ1 as j1, i.e., ground-truth joint angle values corresponding
to the initial position of the arm. The visual features used as input v are extracted
from the ground-truth images and used similarly to teacher forcing, whereas the joint
angle values ˆt are used autoregressively.
3.4. Visual Feature Extraction
Following the PGAE pipeline (¨Ozdemir et al. 2022), the channel-separated convolu-
tional autoencoder (CAE) is used to extract visual features from ﬁrst-person images
from the eye cameras of NICO recorded in the simulation. We utilize channel sep-
aration when extracting visual features: an instance of the CAE is trained for each
RGB color channel. In a previous paper (¨Ozdemir et al. 2021), we show that channel
8

separation distinguishes object colors more accurately than the regular CAE without
channel separation.
We feed each instance of the channel-separated CAE with the corresponding chan-
nel of RGB images of size 120 × 160. The channel-separated CAE is made up of a
convolutional encoder, a fully-connected bottleneck, and a deconvolutional decoder.
Each RGB channel is trained separately, after which we extract the channel-speciﬁc
visual features from the bottleneck and concatenate them to arrive at composite visual
features. These visual features make up v which is used as vision input to PTAE. For
further details on the visual feature extraction process, readers may refer to ¨Ozdemir
et al. (2021).
3.5. Loss Function
We use two loss functions to calculate the deviation from the ground-truth language
descriptions and joint values. The language loss, Llang, is calculated as the cross entropy
between input and output words, while the action loss, Lact, is the mean squared error
(MSE) between original and predicted joint values:
Llang =
1
N −1
N−1
X
t=1
 
−
V −1
X
i=0
x[i]
t+1 log y[i]
t
!
,
Lact =
1
M −1
M−1
X
t=1
∥jt+1 −ˆt+1∥2
2 ,
where V is the vocabulary size, N is the number of words per description, and M is the
sequence length for action trajectories. The total loss is then the sum of the language
and action losses:
Lall = αLlang + βLact
where α and β are weighting factors for language and action terms in the loss function.
In our experiments, we take both α and β as 1.0. We use the identical loss functions as
PGAE except for the weight vector used in the language loss to counter the imbalance
in the frequency of words, after seeing that it is unnecessary for PTAE.
3.6. Training Details
Visual features are extracted in advance by the channel-separated CAE before train-
ing PTAE and PGAE. Visual features are necessary to execute actions according to
language instructions since cube arrangements are decisive in manipulating the left
or right object, i.e., determining whether to manipulate the left or right cube de-
pends on the position of the target cube. After extracting visual features, both PGAE
and PTAE are trained end-to-end with all three modalities. After initial experiments,
PGAE is trained for 6,000 epochs, while PTAE is trained for 2,500 epochs using the
gradient descent algorithm and Adam optimizer (Kingma and Ba 2015). For PTAE,
we decided that h has 256 dimensions following Irshad et al. (2021), whereas the same
vector has 50 dimensions in PGAE. x has 28 dimensions, j has 5 dimensions, N is
9

equal to 5, while M is 50 for fast and 100 for slow actions. For both PGAE and PTAE,
we take the learning rate as 10−5 with a batch size of 6 samples after determining them
as optimal hyperparameters. PTAE has approximately 1.5M parameters compared to
PGAE’s a little over 657K parameters.
4. Experiments
We use the same dataset (¨Ozdemir et al. 2021) as in the PGAE paper (¨Ozdemir et al.
2022), except that in this paper we exclude experiments with another agent from the
opposite side of the table. The dataset encompasses 864 samples of sequences of images
and joint values alongside their textual descriptions. It consists of robot actions on
two cubes of diﬀerent colors on the table by the NICO robot, generated using inverse
kinematics and created in the simulation environment using Blender software2. The
NICO robot has a camera in each eye, which is used to record a sequence of egocentric
images. According to the scenario, NICO manipulates one of the two cubes on the table
with its left arm at a time. Accordingly, we use and record 5 joints of the left arm during
object manipulation. In total, the dataset includes 12 distinct actions3, 6 cube colors,
288 descriptions 4, and 144 patterns5 (action & cube arrangement combinations). The
144 patterns are randomly varied six times in terms of action execution in simulation:
we arrive at a dataset of 864 samples in total. Out of 864 samples, 216 samples that
involve every unique description and action type are excluded and used as the test set.
The remaining 648 samples make up the training set. The vocabulary consists of the
following words divided into 3 categories:
• 6 action words (3 original/3 alternative): “push/move-up”, “pull/move-down”,
“slide/move-sideways”
• 12 color words (6 original/6 alternative): “red/scarlet”, “green/harlequin”,
“blue/azure”, “yellow/blonde”, “cyan/greenish-blue”, “violet/purple”
• 4 speed words (2 original/2 alternative): “slowly/unhurriedly”, “fast/quickly”
The sentences consist of a word from each category: therefore, our textual descriptions
are 3-word sentences. For more details on the dataset, readers may consult our pre-
vious work (¨Ozdemir et al. 2021). PGAE and PTAE are trained on this dataset and
their performances are tested in terms of action-to-language and language-to-action
translations under diﬀerent amounts of supervision.
Task signals. We use four signals to train PTAE. According to the given signal, the
input and output of the model change. The signals are:
• Describe: action-to-language translation
• Execute: language-to-action translation
• Repeat Action: action-to-action translation
• Repeat Language: language-to-language translation
According to the latter two “repeat” signals, the network uses mainly unimodal infor-
mation. The “describe” and “execute” signals, on the other hand, involve crossmodal
2https://www.blender.org/
3The actions are distinguished based on the action type (PUSH, PULL, or SLIDE), the position of the
manipulated object (LEFT, or RIGHT), and speed (SLOW, or FAST).
4As we have 6 action words, 12 color words, and 4 speed words, we reach 288 distinct descriptions.
5We have 12 distinct actions and 12 cube arrangements (e.g., red-green); thus their combinations make 144.
10

translation from one modality to the other. The unimodal signals are used in the
unsupervised learning of an autoencoder, whereas the crossmodal signals are used
in supervised learning, where coordinated action values and language labels must be
available. In the case of PGAE training, an additional “repeat both” signal is also
used, which also requires coordinated labels, and leads to slightly better performance
(¨Ozdemir et al. 2022). For the PTAE, however, this was found unnecessary.
Figure 4.
Sentence accuracy for action-to-language translation on the test set wrt. supervised training itera-
tions. Supervised training refers to crossmodal translation cases “describe” and “execute”. The two crossmodal
signals receive the same number of iterations between them out of the supervised iterations. We report the
results for 1%, 2%, 10%, 20%, 50%, and 66.6% (the regular training case) crossmodal (supervised) iterations.
These percentages correspond to the fraction of supervised training iterations for PGAE and PTAE. Note that
the 100% case is not shown here, since the models need unsupervised iterations (unimodal repeat signals) to
be able to perform the “repeat language” and “repeat action” tasks.
Reduction of supervised training. We restrict the amount of supervision by in-
creasing the ratio of unsupervised learning iterations, i.e., training with the unimodal
“repeat” signals, in the overall training iterations. Thereby the ratio of supervised
learning iterations, i.e., training with the crossmodal signals, decreases. The resulting
training paradigm is analogous to developmental language learning, where an infant
is exposed only to a limited amount of supervision. We train both PTAE and PGAE
with varying ratios of unimodal/total training iterations. For another set of experi-
ments, we restrict the amount of supervision by limiting the proportion of training
samples used for crossmodal translation tasks. We test the performance of both mod-
els with varying degrees of unsupervised training under diﬀerent schemes (limiting the
percentage of iterations or samples) on the crossmodal translation tasks.
In this work, we investigate action-to-language and language-to-action translations
because they are the more important and diﬃcult tasks. For the “repeat” tasks, the
results match our previous work; therefore, the readers can refer to our publication
(¨Ozdemir et al. 2022). Figure 4 shows the results of PGAE and PTAE on action-
to-language translation with diﬀerent percentages of training iterations used in a su-
pervised fashion. Both PGAE and PTAE with diﬀerent training regimes based on
11

Figure 5.
Sentence accuracy for action-to-language translation on the test set wrt. supervised training sam-
ples. Supervised training refers to crossmodal translation cases “describe” and “execute”. We limit the number
of training samples for the supervised tasks. We report the results for the 1%, 2%, 5% 10%, 20%, 50%, and
66.6% cases as well as the 100% regular training case. These percentages correspond to the fraction of training
samples used exclusively for the supervised training for PGAE and PTAE, i.e., both “execute” and “describe”
signals are trained with only a limited number of samples corresponding to the percentages.
diﬀerent proportions of supervised training iterations achieve accuracies higher than
the chance level (2.78%), which we calculate based on our grammar (action, color,
speed): 1 ÷ (3 × 6 × 2). The action-to-language translation performance of PGAE falls
when the ratio of crossmodal (viz. supervised) training iterations is low, particularly
when 10% or a smaller proportion of the iterations are supervised. Even though the
description accuracy slightly increases to over 95% when supervised training amounts
to only 20% of all training iterations (it may partially be due to overﬁtting), it sharply
drops to well below 50% when the rate is decreased to 2%. PGAE is able to describe
36% of the test samples when only 1% of the training iterations are used to learn
crossmodal translations between action and language. In contrast, PTAE maintains
its perfect description accuracy even when it has only been trained with 1% supervised
training iterations. While there is a detrimental impact of reduced supervision, i.e.,
the limitation on the percentage of crossmodal training iterations, on the action-to-
language translation performance of PGAE, transformer-based PTAE is not aﬀected
by the same phenomenon. For space reasons, we do not report language-to-action
results wrt. diﬀerent percentages of supervised iterations, but we observed a similar
trend comparable with Figure 4.
In order to further investigate the performance of PTAE with limited supervision,
we introduce a more challenging training regime. We limit the number of training
samples shown to supervised signals, “describe” and “execute”, and show the rest of
the training samples only on “repeat action” and “repeat language” modes. We train
both PGAE and PTAE with varying percentages of supervised training samples. The
results can be seen in Figure 5. In all cases with diﬀerent proportions of supervised
training samples, both PGAE and PTAE outperform the chance level. While main-
taining perfect sentence accuracy down to 20% supervised training and keeping up
12

its performance for 10% supervised training for the “describe” signal, PTAE’s perfor-
mance drops sharply when the ratio of training samples used for crossmodal signals
is 2% and below. Nevertheless, PTAE beats PGAE in each case when trained on dif-
ferent percentages of supervised training samples. PGAE’s performance suﬀers even
when 50% of training samples are used for supervised signals; it drops below 80% -
PTAE retains 100% for the same case. It takes more than 90% of the training samples
to be exclusively used in the unsupervised signals for PTAE’s performance to decrease
meaningfully (from 100% to 81%), while this ratio is much lower for PGAE as its per-
formance already drops signiﬁcantly at 50%. Even for 1% supervised training samples
which amount to only 7 training samples, PTAE manages to translate one-third of the
test samples from action to sentences.
Figure 6.
Joint value prediction error in language-to-action translation on the test set wrt. supervised training
samples. Supervised training refers to crossmodal translation cases “describe” and “execute”. We limit the
number of training samples for the supervised tasks. We report the results for the 1%, 2%, 5% 10%, 20%, 50%,
and 66.6% cases as well as the 100% regular training case. These percentages correspond to the fraction of
training samples used exclusively for the supervised training for PGAE and PTAE. “execute” and “describe”
translations are shown the same limited number of samples.
Language-to-action translation results with respect to diﬀerent percentages of su-
pervised training samples for PGAE and PTAE are shown in Figure 6. We show the
deviation of the produced joint values from the original ones in terms of the normalized
root-mean-squared error (NRMSE), which we obtain by normalizing the root-mean-
squared error (RMSE) between the predicted and ground-truth values by the range of
joint values – the lower percentages indicate better prediction (0% NRMSE meaning
predicted values are identical with ground-truth values), whereas the higher percent-
ages indicate worse prediction (100% NRMSE meaning the RMSE between predicted
and ground-truth values is equal to the range of possible values). We can see a similar
trend as in action-to-language translation apart from the regular case (100%) when
PGAE has a lower error than PTAE, which is probably due to the fact that PGAE
is trained for more than two times the number of iterations than PTAE since it takes
longer for PGAE’s training loss to reach a global minimum. In all other cases, limiting
the ratio of training samples to be used in the supervised modes impacts PGAE’s
13

language-to-action performance heavily: the NRMSE rises from less than 0.5% to al-
most 8% when the percentage of supervised samples is reduced to two-thirds of the
training samples. The error rate increases further as the number of training samples
used in the crossmodal training modes decreases. The NRMSE for PTAE is also in-
versely proportional to the ratio of supervised training samples. However, the impact
of limiting the number of training samples for supervised modes on PTAE is much
lower than on PGAE. When the percentage of supervised training samples is reduced
to 1%, the deviation from the ground-truth joint values is only a little more than 4%
for PTAE, whereas the same statistic for PGAE is almost 14%.
Figure 7.
Model performance on the test set wrt. no. of conﬂicts introduced in the extra input. For action-
to-language and language-to-language (the top row), we show the predicted sentence accuracies. For language-
to-action and action-to-action, we show the normalized root-mean-squared error (NRMSE) for predicted joint
values. The modality in which the conﬂicts are introduced is given in the x-axis. For each signal, we add extra
conﬂicting inputs either in the action or language input. When the conﬂict is introduced in action, we also
test having the conﬂict only in the vision and only in the proprioception submodality - in this case, the other
submodality has the matching input.
Exposure to conﬂicting input modalities. We also investigate the impact of
contradictory extra input on the performance of PTAE. For this, we use PTAE-regular
that is trained with 33% unsupervised training iterations and no contradictory input.
We test the robustness of our approach to varying numbers of conﬂicts (up to 3) in
the extra input. The deﬁnitions of the added conﬂict per task signal are:
• “describe”: Here, we add a conﬂicting description to the language input (conﬂict
in language).
• “execute”: Here, we use a conﬂicting sequence of vision and proprioception input
(conﬂict in action).
• “repeat action”: Here, we add a conﬂicting description to the language input
(conﬂict in language).
• “repeat language”: Here, we use a conﬂicting sequence of vision and propriocep-
14

tion input (conﬂict in action).
The conﬂicts are introduced using the following scheme:
• for the conﬂict in the extra language input; one, two, or all of the action, color,
and speed words that constitute a description, do not match with those of the
ground-truth paired description of the action. For instance, for the input action
paired with the description “push red slowly”, a description like “push green
slowly” (one conﬂict present, namely color), or “pull green fast” (all three con-
ﬂicts present; action, color, speed) is given to the model as conﬂicting extra
language input.
• for the conﬂict in the extra action input; one, two, or all of the action-type,
position, and speed aspects, which form distinct actions, do not match with the
language description. We choose one of those action trajectories that are not
paired with the given language input. The conﬂict(s) can be in the action type
(e.g., pushing instead of pulling), the position of the manipulated object (e.g.,
the left cube being pulled instead of the right), or the speed of the action (e.g.,
the cube is being pulled fast instead of slowly).
The results of this experiment are given in Figure 7. In the case of the “describe” and
“repeat action” signals, the action supplies the relevant input whereas the language
is the conﬂicting distractor. Here, we observe only a slight decrease in performance.
In the case of action-to-language translation (“describe”) the sentence accuracy goes
down from 100% to 95% when there are three conﬂicting input elements (action type,
color, speed). Action-to-action (“repeat action”) translation manages to retain its
performance as the error in joint values only slightly increases from 1.03% to 1.09%
for the case with 3 conﬂicts.
In the case of “execute” and “repeat language” signals, the language supplies the
relevant input while the action is the conﬂicting distractor. Here, we observe a big
performance drop. Language-to-action translation (“execute”) suﬀers heavily as the
deviation of the predicted joint values from the ground-truth joint values increases from
0.99% to 4.95%. In the language-to-language translation case (“repeat language”),
PTAE loses its ability to repeat the given language description when one or more
conﬂicting elements (action type, position, speed) are introduced with the extra input:
the sentence accuracy decreases from 100% to 0%.
Therefore, we can see the asymmetric impact of conﬂicts in the two modalities,
namely, when language input is introduced as a contradictory element, the perfor-
mance drops slightly, whereas when the contradictory input is introduced in the action
stream, the model is aﬀected heavily and performs poorly. The output modality has
no signiﬁcant impact on the result; for example, we can see that both “describe” and
“repeat language” output language at large, but they are aﬀected very diﬀerently by
the conﬂicting input. To test whether the bigger impact of conﬂicting action input
is due to the involvement of two modalities in action (vision and proprioception), we
also tried introducing the conﬂict either only in vision or only in proprioception (the
relatively brighter bars in the two charts on the right in Figure 7). In either case, the
performance is still substantially negatively aﬀected, although the drop in performance
is naturally not as severe as introducing the conﬂict in both modalities.
15

5. Discussion
The experimental results on action-to-language and language-to-action translations
show the superior performance and eﬃciency of our novel PTAE model under lim-
ited supervision. Limiting the percentage of supervised crossmodal iterations during
training has no adverse eﬀect on PTAE as it maintains its perfect sentence accuracy
when translating from action to language. In contrast, the previous PGAE model’s
action-to-language translation accuracy drops substantially when only a tiny propor-
tion of the training iterations are supervised. When we challenge both models more
by limiting the number of training samples for the supervised crossmodal “execute”
and “describe” signals, we see a similar pattern: when half or less than half of the
training samples are used for supervised signals, action-to-language sentence accuracy
for PGAE decreases directly proportional to the ratio of supervised samples. PTAE,
on the other hand, retains its action-to-language performance up until when an over-
whelming majority of training samples are used in a supervised fashion. Even after
being trained with 2% supervised training, which amounts to only 13 samples out of
648, PTAE is able to describe more than half of the action sequences correctly. All
in all, PTAE shows superior action-to-language performance than PGAE for varied
levels of limited supervision.
The adverse eﬀect of limiting the number of supervised training samples on the
language-to-action performance can already be seen for PGAE even when only one-
third of the samples are excluded as the error rate between predicted and ground-truth
joint values rises signiﬁcantly. It continues to increase gradually after reducing the level
of supervision further. On the contrary, PTAE is robust against limited supervision
with respect to the ratio of crossmodal training samples until the supervised percentage
is brought down heavily. Achieving similar error rates on the range from one-ﬁfth of
training samples to all of them being trained in a supervised fashion also shows that for
PTAE the learning of language-to-action translation reaches a plateau, where added
labels do not provide additional useful information. After reducing the supervised
ratio further, it can be seen that the error rate gradually increases, albeit only just
over 4% for PTAE when only 7 samples are used for the supervised signals. Overall,
these results indicate the clear superiority of Transformer-based multimodal fusion
over a simpler attention mechanism by GMU in terms of performance and eﬃciency.
Although it is relatively larger than PGAE, PTAE is trained much faster and reaches
a global optimum in less than half of the training iterations of PGAE. It is clear
from these results that scaled dot-product attention, which forms the backbone of
the Crossmodal Transformer, can work with a low proportion of supervision during
training, whereas gated attention, which is used by GMU, requires a much larger
supervised proportion to learn the crossmodal mapping between action and language.
The Crossmodal Transformer utilizes a relatively long set of matrix operations over
all time steps (temporal information is kept until the extraction of the representation
vector), while GMU relies on simpler equations over the mean input features that no
longer bear a temporal dimension.
When introducing a conﬂicting modality input during testing, we observed an asym-
metry in that a conﬂicting action input leads to a larger disturbance than a conﬂicting
language input. One possible reason is that the Crossmodal Transformer architecture
is asymmetric: As input, we are using action input as two input vectors (K and V:
keys and values), whereas language as one input vector (Q: queries). This setting was
chosen because the opposite setup (with action as queries) was found less performant.
Our setup can be interpreted as language-conditioned action attention. A computa-
16

tionally more expensive architecture could combine both asymmetric setups, as has
been done for learning vision and language representations (Lu et al. 2019).
Another possible reason for the larger impact of a conﬂicting action could be that
the action input combines two submodalities, vision, and proprioception, and therefore
involves more information than the language input. However, limiting the conﬂict to
one of the submodalities did not completely remove the asymmetry as introducing the
conﬂict only in one action submodality (vision or proprioception) still had a stronger
eﬀect on the model performance than a conﬂicting language input. Unlike language,
vision contains the complete information to perform a task. Consider the example “pull
red slowly” for language-to-action translation. Here, the language does not contain
any information about whether the object is on the left or right side, so the agent can
only execute this correctly when also taking visual input into account during action
execution. In contrast, in the opposite direction (action-to-language translation) and
in action repetition, the visual input has complete information.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, we introduced a paired Transformer-based autoencoder, PTAE, which we
trained largely by unsupervised learning with additional, but reduced supervision. The
PTAE achieves signiﬁcantly better action-to-language and language-to-action transla-
tion performance under limited supervision conditions compared to the former GMU-
based model, PGAE. Furthermore, we tested the robustness of our new approach
against contradictory extra input. In line with the concept of incongruence in psy-
chology, these experiments show that conﬂict deteriorates the output of our model,
and more conﬂicting features lead to higher interference. We also found an asymmetry
between the action and language modalities in terms of their conﬂicting impact: the
action modality has signiﬁcantly more inﬂuence over the performance of the model
regardless of the main output modality.
Our novel bidirectional embodied language learning model is ﬂexible in performing
multiple tasks and it is eﬃcient and robust against the scarcity of labeled data. Hence,
it is a step towards an autonomous agent that can communicate with humans while
performing various tasks in the real world. In the future, we will expand our approach
with reinforcement learning to reduce the need for expert-deﬁned action trajectories.
Furthermore, a reinforcement learner may explore more dexterous object manipula-
tion with diversiﬁed action trajectories. With more realistic action execution, we will
attempt to tackle the problem of sim-to-real transfer. Lastly, diversifying our action
repertoire will inevitably lead to more diverse natural language descriptions, which we
can tackle by employing a pretrained Transformer-based large language model as a
language encoder.
Disclosure statement
The authors report there are no competing interests to declare.
17

Funding
This work was supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG) under Project
TRR 169 Crossmodal Learning (CML), LeCareBot, IDEAS, and MoReSpace.
