CAHIER DU LAMSADE
404
January 2023
What is a decision problem?
Alberto Colorni, Alexis Tsoukiàs
Laboratoire d’Analyse et Modélisation
de Systèmes pour l’Aide à la Décision
UMR 7243
arXiv:2301.02758v1  [cs.AI]  7 Jan 2023

What is a decision problem?
Alberto Colorni†, Alexis Tsoukiàs‡
† POLIEDRA, Politecnico di Milano
‡CNRS-LAMSADE, PSL, Université Paris Dauphine
Abstract
This paper presents a general framework about what is a decision prob-
lem. Our motivation is related to the fact that decision analysis and oper-
ational research are structured (as disciplines) around classes of methods,
while instead we should ﬁrst characterise the decision problems our clients
present us. For this purpose we introduce a new framework, independent
from any existing method, based upon primitives provided by (or elicited
from) the client. We show that the number of archetypal decision problems
are ﬁnite and so the archetypal decision support methods.
1

1
Introduction
The reader should be aware that this paper does not address the title question
in a comprehensive way. The problem of what is a decision and what is
a decision problem has been addressed in philosophy, psychology and the
cognitive sciences, economy, political science etc.. We are not going to
make a survey of this, for the rest, extremely interesting literature which is
out of the scope of the paper. The reader interested in these aspects can have
a look to a number of fundamental texts such as [18], [22], [23], [41], [45],
[49], [51], [62].
Our proposition is instead pretty technical and formal. Operational Re-
search and Decision Analysis are seen as part of a more general Decision
Aiding Methodology (see [55]) aiming to help real decision makers to un-
derstand, formulate and model their problems and possibly reach a reason-
able solution (if any). We are concerned by that type of activities occurring
in a decision aiding situation where a “client” (very broadly deﬁned) asks for
some advice or help to an “analyst”, such an advice being expected to come
under form of a formal model allowing some form of rationality (see [26]).
We call such activities a “decision aiding process” (see [54]). At a certain
point of that process the analyst will have to formulate a “decision problem”
requiring some computing to be performed by some algorithms, providing
a result which is expected to be used in order to present a recommendation
relevant to the decision maker’s “decision problem”.
Our focus is exactly here: what is a decision problem for the analyst?
The proposal of the paper is to suggest a general framework within which
it is possible to identify all possible models, algorithms, procedures which
routinely analysts use in their job as well as to allow to invent ones (if pos-
sible). General frameworks have been suggested in the literature since the
existence of Operational Research and Decision Analysis (see [9], [16], [24],
[58]). The fact is that all such frameworks are based upon classes of mod-
elling options or solution methods (mathematical programming, utility the-
ory, multiple criteria decision analysis, game theory) and are constrained by
the algorithms to be used in order to compute solutions. This is visible to
all textbooks and manuals in our ﬁeld (see for instance [14], [39]) as well
as consulting the list of keywords for the major OR conferences or journals:
these include either methods or application ﬁelds. There is no categorisation
independent from the solving methods and algorithms.
The framework we suggest aims instead at introducing a structure which
allows to categorise problems without any reference on which method is
going to be used to solve them. “Methods” should then follow as a conse-
quence of such categories and not vice-versa. Actually we may consider that
decision problems could require the use of several different methods in order
to handle their complexity. Such a challenge needs to address a number of
2

difﬁcult questions which we partially consider in this paper.
• Which are the necessary and sufﬁcient features in order to characterise
any potential decision problem?
• Which is the strictly necessary information the client needs to provide
in order to allow the analyst to model a decision problem?
• Which are the strictly necessary questions the analyst needs to make
to the client in order to make a meaningful decision model?
• Which are the conditions of validity to be met in order to be conﬁdent
about the model and the recommendations could entail?
We do not claim this paper provides an answer to all the above ques-
tions. We claim instead we have some important intermediate results. We
established the necessary features describing the whole space of decision
problems as well the primitives (the strictly necessary information) in order
to handle such problems.
Practically speaking such results imply that the possible archetypes of
decision problems is ﬁnite (given that the number of features characterising
them is ﬁnite and discrete). They also imply that the classes of archetypal
methods, depending upon the possible combinations of the primitives, are
also ﬁnite.
The paper is organised as follows. Section 2, introduces the fundamen-
tal concepts and the notation used all along the paper. Then Section 3, in-
troduces and explains the notion of “primitives” which is central for the
construction of our framework: the minimal necessary information allow-
ing to handle a decision problem. Section 4, analyses how decision support
methods are designed focussing on two notions: preference aggregation and
optimisation. Section 5, presents two examples which allow to understand
why our framework is both interesting and generic. We discuss our ﬁndings
in Section 6, before concluding.
2
Concepts and Notation
In order to be as precise as possible we are going to establish a-priori an
interpretation of a number of concepts which we are going to use in the rest
of the paper. We also introduce some notation.
• A procedure is a sequence of elementary mathematical operations trans-
forming a mathematical structure to another one. Typical examples in-
clude: inverting a matrix, multiplying two vectors, ordering two num-
bers, transitively closing a graph, closing a logic formula, computing
an average etc..
3

• An algorithm is a sequence of procedures with a precise information
manipulation purpose. Typical examples include: the simplex algo-
rithm, the variants of the SAT-algorithm, natural deduction, ﬁnding a
kernel in a graph, linear regression etc..
• A protocol is a sequence of procedures and/or input/output steps al-
lowing to collect information and to interact with the client. Typical
examples are the construction of an utility function, indifference swaps
in conjoint measurement, encoding beliefs etc..
• A method is a set of algorithms and protocols allowing to elaborate the
information provided by the client for some decision aiding purpose.
Typical examples include: the Branch and Bound method, multiple
criteria decision analysis methods, preference learning methods etc..
• A model is a structural representation of the information elaborated in
a decision aiding process and for the time being we are going to use
two types of models: the “problem formulations” and the “evaluation
models” as introduced in [4] and [54].
Recall that we are considering a formal deﬁnition of what a decision
problem is. A ﬁrst intuitive remark is that for this purpose we need to start
from a set (representing feasible solutions of whatever the problem is) upon
which we are going to construct our recommendation. We agree to denote
this set as A and for the time being we accept any type of element within
it (including the empty set consisting in doing nothing). However, most of
the times the set A is more than just an enumeration: it will typically be
described against different dimensions/attributes/variables/points of view, a
set we will denote as D. A second remark is that in order to establish more
formally our problem we need to deﬁne what type transformations the set A
is going to undertake: we will denote this as a “problem statement” Π. We
will denote the collection of these three concepts as a problem formulation
Γ = ⟨A, D, Π⟩. More details about these concepts are going to be discussed
in the next Section.
We are now able to introduce the ﬁrst deﬁnition of our paper.
Deﬁnition 2.1 A decision problem for the analyst consists in ﬁnding an ap-
propriate partitioning of the set A, relevant for the decision maker’s con-
cerns.
Remark 2.1 The reader should note that the deﬁnition applies also in the
case the partitioning is “uncertain”: such as fuzzy partitions (where ele-
ments of A could have variable membership to different equivalence classes)
or interval partitions (where elements of A could belong to the union of
equivalence classes).
4

Along the paper we are going to use extensively preference relations.
The basic relation we will adopt will be ⪰which will read as “at least as
good as” (≻will represent the asymmetric part of ⪰, while ∼will represent
the symmetric part). We will only make the hypothesis that this is a reﬂexive
binary relation. The interested reader can see more about properties, pref-
erence structures and related matters in [33] or [46] from which we adopt
deﬁnitions and notation.
In this paper we are going to adopt a scheme of the modelling process as
depicted in Figure 1. The idea is to separate the raw information as provided
by the client (Ground Information) from the necessary information to build a
decision support model (Primitives) and this from the information provided
to an algorithm used for decision support purposes (Input).
Ground
Information
-
Primitives
-
Input
6
Learning
Protocols
6
Modelling
Tools
Figure 1: The modelling process
More precisely we have:
Ground Information consisting in collecting the client’s statements about
the problem for which she asked an advice. These come under the form of
dimensions which matter for the decision (and these can be values, opinions
or scenarios), elements of how a solution can be designed and preference
statements.
Learning Protocols are procedures allowing to identify preference state-
ments within the client’s discourse and to translate them in ordering rela-
tions. In order to do so we need to establish (in agreement with the client)
the sets on which such relations apply.
Primitives is the strictly necessary formalised information the client needs
to provide to the analyst in order to engage the decision aiding process. As
noted these can be provided either directly (ground information) or indi-
rectly (through learning protocols).
Modelling Tools are the usual analytic tools an analyst uses in order to
transform primitives in decision aiding objects. Examples include the pro-
cedures allowing to construct a value function, a set of constraints, a proba-
bility distribution etc..
The Input is the information modelled in such a way that a decision
aiding method can be applied.
The reader should retain that the modelling process is not straightfor-
ward. The ground information usually comes in a “messy” form and it takes
5

some effort to learn and construct the primitives out of it. It should also be
noted that are the primitives that constraint the use of certain methods. If
the primitives do not allow to construct a probability distribution, methods
modelling uncertainty under such a form are unsuitable and we need to look
for alternative formalisms. Last, but not least, it should be clear that the
primitives represent a commitment for the client. The analyst should make
clear to the client that without establishing such primitives it is impossible
to provide any reasonable support (at least in a formal way). A client can be
evanescent, but up to a certain limit.
Example 2.1 Ground Information. Consider a city of N districts of which
we know the geography, the network and the distances. A client claims she
needs to cover the city with a number of facilities. She asks an advice on
where these should be located in order to minimise the openings.
Learning Protocols. A discussion with the client, besides an analysis of her
claims reveals that the two dimensions which matter for her decision is the
covering of the city and the number of openings. Moreover, the notion of
coverage is established on the hypothesis that an opening to any district
“covers” the “adjacent” districts.
Primitives. We call “opening” the decision to locate a facility to one among
the 20 districts of the city. We denote with xj ∈{0, 1} the location decision
with j = 1 · · · N. The set A of potential solutions is then the combinatorial
structure A = {0, 1}20. Consider two such solutions χ, ψ ∈A and two
distinct dimensions: covering and opening. We establish two preference re-
lations: ⪰c⊆A × A and ⪰o⊆A × A such that χ ⪰c ψ iff the covering
provided by χ is not inferior to the covering provided by ψ (c(χ) ≥c(ψ))
and χ ⪰o ψ iff the openings foreseen by χ are not superior to the opening
foresee for ψ (o(χ) ≤o(ψ)).
Modelling Tools. In order to be more operational we need to give a more
quantitative and formal model for the two dimensions of opening and cover-
ing. As far as opening is concerned we establish a function O : A 7→{0, 20}
such that o(χ) = P
xj∈χ xj (the opening of a solution being the number of
districts in which a facility is located). As far as the covering is concerned
we ﬁrst introduce an “adjacency relation” γ ⊆J × J (J being the set of
district indices), establishing an adjacency matrix G. Given a district j we
denote with G(j) = {i : γ(i, j) = 1} (the set of districts being adjacent to
i). Given a solution χ the covering of χ will be a function C : A 7→{0, 20}
established as c(χ) = |{i : ∀xj ∈χ xj = 1 ∧γ(i, j) = 1}| (the number of
districts covered by any opening in χ).
Input. Since the client claims that any solution needs to “cover” the city,
the covering dimension will only discriminate between acceptable (the ones
satisfying full coverage) and unacceptable solutions. However, among all
such acceptable solutions we seek the ones which minimise the openings.
The result will be a well known combinatorial optimisation problem:
6

min P
j xj
∀i ∈J
P γ(i, j)xj ≥1
(1)
xj ∈{0, 1}
(2)
□
3
Primitives
Let’s analyse now in more details and more formally the concept of prim-
itives. As already introduced, the idea is to identify the strictly necessary
information with which we can construct a reasonable advice to the client.
We can summarise this information in three topics: the problem statement,
the set upon which the preferences are expressed and the attributes or di-
mensions used to express preferences (these three establishing the problem
formulation), plus the preferences themselves. We will present these topics
in that precise order for reasons which will be clear at the end of the section.
3.1
Problem Statement
The notion of problem statement has already been introduced in [5, 10, 54].
As already introduced in Deﬁnition 2.1 any decision problem we may con-
sider (both in theory and in practice) boils down to constructing a set A and
then partitioning it in n classes. The concept of partition is well deﬁned and
considering (from a formal point of view) a decision as the partitioning of
a set is simple and robust: it applies equally well in presence of fuzzy sets
(fuzzy partitions) and in presence of different forms of uncertainty, includ-
ing the case where an element of the set A could belong to a union of several
equivalence classes (of the set A) without knowing which one precisely.
There are several ways in which the partitioning of A can be done, result-
ing in different ways to construct the equivalence classes [A]i (i = 1, . . . , n)
to which the set A is partitioned. We focus on two different types of choices.
1. The ﬁrst choice concerns the “comparisons” used in order to construct
the classes of the partition. Such preferences come under the form of
a binary relation denoted by S and for which we have two options:
• S is a relation deﬁned on A, in other terms S ⊆A × A, and we
call this a “relative comparison”;
• S is a relation comparing the elements of A to some externally
deﬁned norms (or standards) and vice versa. More precisely, if
N is the set of norms, then S ⊆A × N ∪N × A, and we call
this an “absolute comparison”.
7

2. The second choice concerns the existence or not of an “order” upon
the classes of the constructed partition. Let us make this point clearer.
Consider [A] = {[A]1, . . . , [A]n} the set of all classes partitioning A.
Let us deﬁne a binary relation ≽⊆[A] × [A] of the type “at least as
good as”, separable in a symmetric part (∼) and an asymmetric (≻)
part. We have two cases:
• ≽= ∅which amounts saying there is no order among the classes;
• ≽is reﬂexive, antisymmetric and transitive (a partial order), with
a nonempty asymmetric part ≻. In this case, we consider the
classes as (at least partially) ordered. The reader will note that
this option is compatible with stronger ordered structures such as
complete orders or even complete orders admitting a numerical
representation on an interval scale or ratio scale. However, such
strong ordered structures are not necessary.
Combining the above two choices, we can deﬁne four basic problem
statements:
– ranking (partitioning in ordered classes, using relative comparisons);
– rating (partitioning in ordered classes, using absolute comparisons);
– clustering (partitioning in unordered classes, using relative compar-
isons);
– assignment (partitioning in unordered classes, using absolute compar-
isons).
For all the above cases, there are at least two special subcases, relevant from
an algorithmic point of view (because result in speciﬁc procedures ﬁtting
these speciﬁc requirements):
– when the classes are just two (complementary);
– when one or more classes have a given cardinality.
For instance, a “choice” problem statement is a ranking problem state-
ment with only two classes: the elements to be chosen and the rest. The
reader will note that most optimisation problems ﬁt the ranking problem
statement with only two classes (the chosen/optimal ones and the rest). Equally
easy is to realise that most pattern recognition, diagnosis signal process-
ing, and classiﬁcation problems ﬁt the assignment problem statement, while
most data analysis problems correspond to either clustering or rating prob-
lem statements.
We can now state our ﬁrst fundamental claim upon which we build our
theory.
Claim 1 Any decision problem belongs to one of the four categories: rank-
ing, rating, clustering and assignment.
8

Remark 3.1 We draw the attention of the reader to the fact that a “real
decision aiding process” typically consists in solving a sequence of formal
decision problems of the type we deﬁned in this paper. Each of such deci-
sion problems may be characterised by a different problem statement. Un-
der such a perspective decision aiding consists in handling mix of problem
statements.
3.2
Attributes and sets
Let’s start talking about the set A and how this is constructed in more details.
The reader should note that our task is not to have a complete description of
what the alternative options of action could be for the client, but a description
which matters for her/him. The presentation here follows essentially the
text appeared in [11]. We consider two different spaces within which the
set A can be described: the variables space and the values space. In the
ﬁrst case we consider that any element of A results from the combination
of “elementary choices”, instantiating variables from different domains. In
the second case we consider that each element of A has an image in a space
of “descriptors” or “features” describing speciﬁc potential consequences. In
other terms we consider the set A as possible realisations of the variables xi,
each realisation having an image in a space of valuable consequences. More
formally:
1. The variables space is the product space of all the variables which
might be used in order to compose an alternative. We consider n in-
dependent variables xi i ∈{1 · · · n}. If ∀i xi ∈R then A is a subset
of a vector space (A ⊆Rn). If ∀i xi ∈Z then A is a combinatorial
structure (A ⊆Zn). Without loss of generality we will only consider
the case where Z = {0, 1} since any other combinatorial structure can
be obtained from that one. There is of course always the case where
the set A is an enumeration of “objects” (a list). In this case we will
consider that each alternative corresponds to a single variable. If we
call the domain of each variable xj as Xj, then clearly A = Q
j Xj.
Hereafter we will represent a generic element of A as < x >.
Example 3.1 Consider a well known production management prob-
lem where the system (under consideration) produces a number of dif-
ferent items x1, x2, · · · , xn. If for each item we have a continuous
set of feasible values Xj then a solution (en element of A) is a bundle
⟨¯x1, ¯x2, · · · , ¯xn⟩where ¯xj ∈Xj is an instance. Consider instead a
the case of a set of candidates for a scholarship. Then each candidate
will be represented by a variable xj whose domain Xj = {0, 1} (being
chosen or not). The set A will be any feasible combination of xj (for
instance if only one scholarship is available then only combinations of
9

cardinality 1 are feasible).
□
2. The values space, where each element of A (independently from how
it has been composed in the variables space) is mapped, is a set of at-
tributes or evaluation dimensions D. Each Dj (j ∈{1 · · · m}) should
be seen as a function Dj : A 7→Ej where Ej is the set of all pos-
sible values an object can take under that attribute (often the domain
Ej is called the scale of the attribute Dj). Of course each Ej can be
either an interval of the reals or of the integers. There is however, a
special case where the domain Ej is composed by nominal labels (for
instance colours: Ej = {red,yellow,green...}). Without loss of gen-
erality we will associate to this set a set of integers, paying attention
not to consider the underlying ordering structure of the numbers. In-
dependently of how the domains Ej are established we denote the set
D(A) ⊆Q
j Ej as the image of A in the values space.
Example 3.2 Consider a set of lottery tickets {a, b, c, · · · }. To each
ticket we associate a set of possible outcomes depending on whether
the ticket is extracted as ﬁrst prize, second prize, or no prize at all. We
can denote this through scenarios 0, 1, 2, · · · the scenario 0 represent-
ing not being extracted. We obtain for each ticket a vector ⟨a0, a1, a2 · · · ⟩,
⟨b0, b1, b2 · · · ⟩which represent all possible payoffs for each ticket.
Equally, considering the production system case if a solution is a
bundle ⟨¯x1, ¯x2, · · · , ¯xn⟩, then given two attributes such as the price
and the workforce consumption for any solution will be represented as
p(⟨¯x1, ¯x2, · · · , ¯xn⟩) or w(⟨¯x1, ¯x2, · · · , ¯xn⟩).
□
3. There might be connections between the two spaces. More precisely it
is often the case that each single variable (used in order to compose the
set A) can be itself assessed against the attributes D. In other terms we
may have that Dj(⟨x1 · · · xn⟩)
=
F(Dj(x1) · · · Dj(xn)), F being
an aggregation function, not necessarily linear.
Example 3.3 Consider again the production system case. If a solu-
tion is a bundle ⟨¯x1, ¯x2, · · · , ¯xn⟩, and we can associate a price for
each single variable xj then the price of any solution will be repre-
sented through a function F(⟨p( ¯x1), p( ¯x2), · · · , p( ¯xn)⟩) possibly ad-
ditive: p(⟨¯x1, ¯x2, · · · , ¯xn⟩) = p( ¯x1) + p( ¯x2) + · · · + p( ¯xn).
□
4. The important concept to bear in mind is that the set D should sat-
isfy “separability”. There might be inﬁnite different dimensions under
which the elements of A can be described and assessed. What we are
interested are the ones which are relevant for the client. The way to
check it is whether the client would use that precise dimension in or-
der to discriminate two alternatives (for the rest identical) in case of a
decision to be taken. If yes, it means that this dimension matters to the
10

client and is separable, otherwise it remains a potential descriptor of
A, for the moment irrelevant for the client and the decision process.
Example 3.4 Consider a set of patients who need to be sorted to dif-
ferent hospital departments. Although we may know several informa-
tion about them (sex, age, residence, height, mass etc.), not all of them
are relevant for being sorted within the hospital. Most of the times
only the symptoms will be considered as relevant information for this
assignment decision. The rest of the attributes are thus, non separable
for this decision problem.
□
Example 3.5 Let’s discuss the above through a very well known example:
the “knapsack problem”. There are n different objects, each of which can
be chosen in order to be carried within a container (the knapsack). It turns
natural to associate to each such object a variable xj ∈{0, 1} representing
the choice to carry or not that speciﬁc object. The set A = {0, 1}n is thus
described in the variables space by the 2n possible “bundles” of objects.
Let’s consider now three attributes: value, weight and colour to be used in
order to assess the different possible bundles (alternatives). Let’s now make
the hypothesis that we know the value, weight and colour of each single
object: we will represent them as v(xj), w(xj) and c(xj). It is natural to
consider that ∀< x > ∈A w(< x >) = P
j w(xj) (the weight of each
bundle will result as the sum of the weight of the objects composing it). It
is equally easy to understand that we cannot use such a linear aggregation
as far as the colour is concerned. The value attribute could be linear (∀<
x > ∈A v(< x >) = P
j v(xj), but only if there are not “absorbing
values among objects” (if I pick x1 is useless to pick x2). Last, but not least,
the discussion with the client could reveal that ﬁnally the colour is not a
separable attribute, in the sense that she/he would not make any decision
just because two bundles have a different colour.
We are now able to introduce our second fundamental claim.
Claim 2 A decision problem exists if there is at least one separable attribute
describing the set A.
Remember that a decision problem corresponds to a partitioning of the
set A (using one among the four fundamental problem statements). How-
ever, such a partitioning can occur if there is at least one dimension, con-
sidered relevant by the client, to be used in order to discriminate the objects
among them: a separable attribute. The issue however, is to understand
where the set A comes from. It can be certainly be provided by the client
as an input, but most of the times this is not the case. Clients have a vague
idea of what they have to decide: it is part of the decision aiding process
11

to construct a precise set of alternatives upon which we can apply a formal
decision problem. How is the set A constructed?
We can now state the ﬁrst result of our paper.
Proposition 3.1 Constructing the set A is itself a decision problem.
Proof. Suppose a decision situation for which the client claims that the set
A is totally unknown. If this is to be considered as a decision problem then
exists at least one separable attribute which is able to discriminate and as-
sess the (unknown) set A. We already know that for each such separable
attribute exists a set E of values (representing the domain of the attribute).
The simple hypothesis to do is A = E. In other terms we assume that exists
a decision variable having as domain E. This automatically establishes a set
A0 upon which we can apply a partitioning procedure aiming at satisfying
the client’s requirements. There are two cases:
1. The partition is satisfactory. The procedure stops, since the client is satis-
ﬁed.
2. The partition is unsatisfactory. We have again two, non exclusive, cases:
2.1. Add further separable attributes, under which we can reﬁne further the
partitioning of A0.
2.2. Add further decision variables enriching the set A0.
In both cases we generate a new set A1, using the partition of A0 and the
new attributes and/or variables introduced. We can now apply upon A1 a
new partitioning procedure.
Consider now the generic step i of this procedure where Ai = S
i[Ai−1]i. If
this partitioning is satisfactory then we end, otherwise we repeat the proce-
dure. This will end when the client declares to be satisﬁed.
■
Discussion. The case where the set A is totally unknown is rather un-
realistic. In most of the cases the client comes with a vague idea of what
this set should look like and we are able to establish some decision variables
describing the composition of A and some separable attributes assessing it.
However, most of the times this set will result to be “unsatisfactory” and
the way through the client (and the analyst) realise it is that, whatever the
partitions generated out of this set, the client is unsatisﬁed with the result.
Under such a perspective what the theorem practically tell us is that the
construction of the set A is a process (part of the whole decision aiding pro-
cess) combining two activities: one, creative, consisting in identifying new
attributes and/or variables and one, technical, consisting in solving a deci-
sion problem generating new partitions of the incumbent set Ai (at step i of
the process; the reader can check the similarities of this idea with the con-
cepts of “expansive partitions” in formal design theory: [20]). This process
is subjectively driven by the client’s satisfaction (as always in a decision
aiding process).
12

3.3
The preferences
The interested reader can have more information on this topic in [15], [29],
[35], [46]. Let’s start talking about “preference statements”. These are sen-
tences expressed (typically) by the client within which we can identify es-
sentially two objects (implicitly or explicitly):
- one or more sets upon which preferences are expressed;
- one or more binary relations representing formally such preferences.
Let’s give some examples.
Example 3.6 In the following X, Y, Z · · · represent elements of the set upon
which preferences are expressed.
1 X is nice;
2 X ﬁts better than Y ;
3 X has a very bad score;
4 X is very similar to Y ;
5 X meets the requirements;
6 X and Y will do better than X and Z;
7 X is preferred to Y more than Z being preferred to W;
8 A “red and long stick” is better than a ”yellow and short” one.
9 Price is more important than comfort.
What these sentences reveal? First of all there are three different sets
that are involved: the ﬁrst one is the set of objects (we call it A) which is
assessed, then occasionally a set of norms or standards (we call it N; when se
say that X is “nice” we implicitly assume that somewhere exists a standard
of “nice” to which X is compared), and then there is a set (D) of attributes
upon which a preference relation may be expressed.
Then we have the ordering or preference relations: in the following we
will use a generic binary relation ⪰, which is reﬂexive and decomposable in
an asymmetric part (≻) and a symmetric one (∼); any of these being poten-
tially empty. The reader should note that we use the term “preference” also
in the case we consider only symmetric comparisons such as similarities.
We get the following types of preference statements:
- if ⪰⊆A × A then we call ⪰a ﬁrst order relative comparison;
- if ⪰⊆A × N ∨N × A then we call ⪰a ﬁrst order absolute comparison;
- if ⪰⊆2A × 2A then we call ⪰a ﬁrst order extended relative comparison;
- if ⪰⊆A2 × A2 then we call ⪰a ﬁrst order preference intensity compari-
son;
- if |D| ≥2 and ⪰⊆D(A) × D(A) then we call ⪰a ﬁrst order multi-
attribute relative comparison;
- if ⪰⊆D × D then we call ⪰a ﬁrst order relative importance or a second
order relative comparison (and we denote it ≫);
- combinations of the above (for instance we can have ﬁrst order multi-
13

attribute preference intensity comparisons or second order extended relative
comparisons etc.).
Example 3.7 Consider the cases presented in example 3.6. Case 1 is a First
Order Absolute Comparison, case 2 is a First Order Relative Comparison,
case 3 is a First Order Absolute Comparison, case 4 is First Order Rela-
tive Comparison, case 5 is a First Order Absolute Comparison, case 6 is a
First Order Extended Relative Comparison, case 7 is a First Order Inten-
sity Relative Comparison, case 8 is a First Order Multi-Attribute Relative
Comparison, case 9 is a Second Order Relative Comparison.
There are two more issues we need to address when preferences need to
be modelled on different multiple dimensions for decision purposes.
- The ﬁrst one consists in checking preferential independence. Consider
two preference statements of the type x ⪰1 y and x ⪰2 y. If for any
reason there is a logical dependance between the two statements (of the type
∀x, y
φ(x ⪰1 y) →ψ(x ⪰2 y), where φ, ψ are logical connectives) we
consider the preferences to be conditional. Otherwise we satisfy preferential
independence. For more details on this topic the reader can see [3], [4], [61].
- The second one consists in distinguishing explicitly the semantic difference
between x ⪰y and ¬(x ⪰y) when these two sentences are not one the
complement of the other. In these cases we talk about explicit “negative”
preference statements, a typical example being the use of “veto conditions”
while stating a decision rule (see more in [53], [56], [57]).
3.4
More about the primitives
Let’s summarise our concepts and ﬁndings. As already introduced the con-
cept of a primitive for a decision problem is related to the strictly necessary
information required in order to be able to elaborate a decision model and a
recommendation for the client. We can now give a more formal deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 3.1 Primitives are pieces of information relevant to a decision
aiding process which can only be obtained from the ground information and
the learning protocols to submit to the client.
Under such a perspective the set D of separable attributes is a primitive
because we can only get it discussing with the client about what matters
for her. The set A instead, since can be constructed elaborating upon the
set D is not strictly speaking a primitive. However, in case we need to
combine decision variables in order to construct elements of A, these should
be considered as primitives since we can only get them from the client.
Certainly, preferences are primitives: we cannot really elaborate a de-
cision model and any recommendation without knowing the client’s prefer-
ences. However, not any type of preference statements are primitives. For
this purpose we present two speciﬁc propositions.
14

Proposition 3.2 Second order preference statements are not primitives.
Proof. In order to show the proposition we need to show that there is al-
ways a procedure through which we can construct a second order preference
statement from other primitives or constructed information. Consider the set
D of dimensions and consider two subsets H and G of D, such that pref-
erences expressed upon H are independent from those expressed upon G.
Then it is sufﬁcient to set up a learning protocol identifying elements of A
such that x ⪰H y, y ⪰G x and x ⪰H∪G y, which can only be justiﬁed by
the existence of a binary relation upon 2D such that H ≫G (which is a sec-
ond order preference statement). In case preferential independence does not
hold then the existence of a logical implication among ﬁrst order preference
statements establishes a connection between subsets of dimensions and thus
a second order preference statement.
■
Proposition 3.3 First order preference intensity comparisons are not prim-
itives.
Proof.
Once again it is sufﬁcient to show the existence of a procedure
through which we can construct preference intensity comparisons from other
primitives. This is the case, considering the procedure of indifference swaps
through which we construct value functions (which are actually a measure
of preference intensity).
■
Discussion. What the propositions tells us is that what we strictly need
during a decision aiding process are ﬁrst order relative or absolute compar-
isons, but we do not need second order ones, of the type commonly known in
the literature as relative importance parameters or “weights” (see [37], [47]).
This is compatible with the existing literature (see [5], [25]) where the notion
of “relative importance” is conditional to ﬁrst order preference statements.
Extending the notion of relative importance to likelihoods of scenarios (usu-
ally known as probabilities), the topic has already discussed independently
in [38] and in [12] (see also [31], since likelihoods can be derived comparing
simple lotteries among them (ﬁrst order preference statements).
The fact that certain information considered useful for the construction
of a decision model and the conduction of a decision aiding process are not
primitives does not mean these are useless or irrelevant. It simply tells us we
need to assess whether it pays to obtain them directly or whether it should be
preferred an indirect procedure constructing them. It also tells us that their
absence is not a prejudice to a satisfactory conduction of the decision aiding
process, although their presence can be of great help.
15

4
Algorithms and Methods
Once the notion of primitives is set up we need to understand how to pro-
ceed with constructing decision models and appropriate methods aimed at
providing a “solution” to that decision problem and a recommendation to
the client. Let us recall that in our setting we have introduced the notion of
problem formulation as the triplet Γ = ⟨A, D, Π⟩, where A is the set of al-
ternatives assessed against D, the set of evaluation attributes (or dimensions)
and Π is the problem statement (how A is partitioned).
Intuitively speaking, the different dimensions or attributes may have 3
different origins:
- multiple values relevant for the decision and the client;
- multiple opinions, of diverse stakeholders who might be relevant for the
decision and the client;
- multiple scenarios which may occur in the future and for which different
preferences have to be expressed.
The generic situation therefore, is the one where preferences are ex-
pressed on any among these three types of dimension. We will represent
this general framework in Figure 2.
multiple scenarios
and
epistemic states
multiple values
multiple opinions
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
-
6
       	
      Figure 2: Multiple Dimensions
It is easy to realise that there might be combinations of such dimensions.
The opinion of a stakeholder can depend from multiple values and/or multi-
ple scenarios she may want to consider. At the same time a value could be
formed out of the opinion of different experts. It is equally easy to realise
16

that the “cube” we show in Figure 2 is just a convenient way to represent
how these three types of dimensions combine. In reality nothing impedes
that this “cube” has more than 3 dimensions in case values, opinions and
scenarios result from the combination of other values, opinions and scenar-
ios. The intuitive idea here is that in order to compute a recommendation (or
to solve a decision problem) we need to move along the edges of the “cube”
in order to simplify the problem and aggregate the preferences when these
are expressed on multiple dimensions at the same time. Said in other terms:
if we know preferences expressed on several values (opinions or scenarios),
considering that these will not be unanimous, we need to ﬁnd a way to put
them together, constructing a simpler primitive on a single dimension. Mov-
ing along the edges of the “cube” in Figure 2 represents exactly this type of
simpliﬁcation. This is essentially the idea of optimisation.
4.1
Optimisation
In order to develop further our reasoning we need to introduce the concept
of “optimisation procedure”.
Deﬁnition 4.1 We deﬁne as optimisation procedure any algorithm solving
the problem infx∈A f(x) where A is the set of alternatives and f(x) is some
function from A to a partially ordered set.
The reader will note that we use the notation inf and not min since the
image of A for f(x) might not be totally ordered. We can now state a new
proposition for our theory.
Proposition 4.1 If primitives (preferences) are expressed on a single dimen-
sion then any problem statement results in using an optimisation procedure
for partitioning A.
Proof. Let’s recall that we have a set A and as a primitive a binary relation
⪰⊆A × A (or ⪰⊆A × N ∪N × A). Consider the problem statements
where the equivalence classes are ordered (ranking and rating). Then given
the relation ⪰(which is not necessarily an ordering relation) we construct
a binary relation ≽“as near as possible” to ⪰and then extracting the inf
of ≽is straightforward. We then repeat the procedure with the remaining
elements of the set A.
Consider now the assignment problem statement. Assigning an element
x ∈A to any among the predeﬁned classes is equivalent to a constraint
satisfaction problem, given than any logical clause we may conceive for the
assignment rule can be translated to one or more constraints. But then any
constraint satisfaction problem can be solved through an optimisation pro-
cedure (although not necessary; [2], [7], [52]).
17

Finally, consider the clustering problem statement. Typically we will use the
primitive binary relation to construct a “distance” (see [21], [28]) and then
optimise a “ﬁtting function”.
■.
Discussion. There are three remarks we need to do here. The ﬁrst one
concerns the fact that optimisation applies once we have a single dimen-
sion primitive upon the set A. This means we need to reduce our decision
problem to a single dimension one. The second one concerns the fact that
although any problem statement can be reduced at using an optimisation
procedure, this does not imply that we always adopt an optimisation proce-
dure in order to solve a precise problem. It often happens that other ad-hoc
designed procedures might be more efﬁcient. This does not invalidate our
proposition: any type of decision problem, when primitives are on a single
dimension is solvable through an optimisation procedure. The third remark
is more general: the fact that in order to solve decision problems we use
optimisation procedures does not mean that decision support, from an oper-
ational point of view, is optimisation. As it will be clear at the end of the
paper (and as reported in the literature; [54]) aiding to decide is a much more
complicated process than solving one or more formal decision problems.
4.2
Preference Aggregation
Let’s come back to Figure 2. As already mentioned the general situation is
the presence of multiple dimensions (under form of values, opinions, sce-
narios or combinations of these) through which preferences are expressed.
If this is the case then the “cube” can be seen as a long hierarchy where
a set of “children nodes” contributes deﬁning the primitive over a “parent
node”, which combined with other nodes at this level contributes deﬁning
the primitive over a parent mode at a superior level etc., as shown in Figure
3.
d
d
d
d
d
Scenarios
d d d d d
Stakeholders
d
d
d
d
Attributes-1
d
d
d
d
Attributes-2






A
A
HHHH




B
B
B
J
J
J
   


B
B
B

   


B
B
B

Figure 3: Many decision problems hierarchically related
18

Remark 4.1 The reader should note that:
- The hierarchy shown in Figure 3, Scenarios, Stakeholders, Attributes-1,
Attributes-2 is just an example. Any sequence of different type of dimensions
could ﬁt.
- There might be cases where, despite the presence of different levels of such
hierarchies (for instance in Figure 3 the bottom level is Attribute-2, then
Attribute-1, then Stakeholders), the aggregation step might have to move
two or more steps all-together because of preferential dependencies (back
to the example we might have to aggregate the two levels of attributes in one
step although semantically different).
In other terms, technically speaking, before we can optimise along a
certain dimension (as from proposition 4.1), we need to aggregate the pref-
erences (primitives) as these are expressed at the level of the nodes which
contribute deﬁning this dimension (if any). We need to handle a preference
aggregation procedure [4], [5]. The reader should note that it does not mat-
ter if we aggregate preferences expressed under values, opinions or scenari.
From a technical point of view the problem is the same: construct a binary
relation upon the set A out of a set of binary relations upon the same set A.
We are not going to present any precise method for this purpose (the topic
is extremely large and diversiﬁed; see [8], [40], [48], [59]). We are going
instead to present and discuss what we need to check before we can proceed
with any preference aggregation procedure.
1. The ﬁrst issue we need to address is whether it is possible to use more
than a simple binary relation when modelling preferences. More pre-
cisely, whether it is possible to measure the difference among prefer-
ences: know that the difference of preference between x and y is more
than the difference of preference between z and w. If this is the case
we can construct measurement scales which allow to quantify propor-
tions and distances of values. This is typically what happens when we
use cost functions or value functions or any other measure of “impact”
which is expected to provide a quantitative information (more than
simply ordinal; see [43]). Actually this is the implicit hypothesis in
almost all mathematical programming methods, models for decision
under risk, quantitative economics etc..
2. The second issue is related to commensurability. Supposing on each
single dimension to be able to construct measurement scales allowing
to compare differences of preferences, we need to check whether these
are comparable among them. The question here is to know if the dif-
ference of preference between x and y on dimension k is larger (or
smaller) than the difference of preference between z and w on dimen-
sion l. If it is the case (and is not always the case), then we can con-
struct appropriate “trade-offs” among the different dimensions: prac-
19

tically we can reduce all different dimensions to a single measurement
scale, making extremely easy to aggregate preferences.
3. The third issue has already been introduced in section 3.3 and concerns
preferential independence. Supposing we can measure differences of
preferences and these are commensurable among the different dimen-
sions, then linear models of aggregation require preferential indepen-
dence among any subset of dimensions. Alternatively non-linear mod-
els might be deployed in order to take into account interactions among
preferences expressed along the different dimensions. This holds for
any type of preference aggregation procedure (see [3], [17]).
4. The fourth issue has also been introduced in section 3.3 and consists
in checking if explicit negative preference primitives are admissible.
In other terms we need to know if the models satisfying x ⪰y are the
complement of the those satisfying ¬(x ⪰y). If it is not (and there
are plenty of real world situations and of models where it is not; see
[32], [34]) then we need to design appropriate methods to take this
modelling option into account.
5. Last, but not least we need to establish the properties the method, the
result and the recommendation need to satisfy. Besides satisfying re-
quirements of meaningfulness (see [30], [43], [44]) we may need to
enforce a number of characteristics of our results and the method used.
We may need the method to be explicable or we may need the result to
satisfy anonymity, non-manipulability or scalability (see social choice
theory; [8]).
A ﬁrst consequence of the above presentation is that the number of
archetypal methods for preference aggregation is bounded by the number of
combinations of the possible answers to these questions (these being ﬁnite).
In other terms there is a ﬁnite number of possible archetypal preference ag-
gregation methods (see [60]).
Proposition 4.2 The number of archetypal methods solving decision prob-
lems is ﬁnite.
Proof. A method solving a decision problem is a combination of prim-
itives and preference aggregation procedures (plus optimisation). Since the
number of primitives is ﬁnite and the possible preference aggregation meth-
ods are also ﬁnite, the number of archetypal methods is also ﬁnite.
■.
We can now summarise our presentation in Figure 4 where arcs repre-
sent the existence of a procedure allowing to obtain the information at the
destination node from the information available at the origin node. Usually
our primitives are the binary relations ⪰j we see at the top left of the Figure.
20

These are essentially learned from the “client” either directly or indirectly. If
appropriate conditions are fulﬁlled then these binary relations can be repre-
sented by functions fj (measures) either simply ordinal or more than ordinal
(ratio or interval scales). It could be the other way also. We come to know
directly the functions (we get measures from some reliable source) and from
these we infer the preferences represented by the binary relations. In both
cases what we are looking for is either a binary relation which represents
all the binary relations together or a function which does the same aggre-
gating the functions. It could be that we can infer the global function from
the global binary relation and vice-versa (if appropriate conditions are met).
Typically we either aggregate the binary relations to a global binary relation
or the functions to a global function. However it might be that we can di-
rectly aggregate the binary relations to a global function as it happens for
conjoint measurement functions [5], [6].
⪰(x, y)
⪰i (x, y)
fi(x), fi(y)
F(x, y)
-

-

?
?

R
Figure 4: The preference aggregation problem
5
Two examples
It is time to start completing our journey. Let’s make the point. For the time
being we have shown that:
- a decision problem is always handled through an optimisation procedure;
- most of the times we need to aggregate preferences expressed under mul-
tiple dimensions (values, opinions or scenari) to one dimension primitive
(where optimisation applies), a problem we call preference aggregation;
- preference aggregation methods depend on how the ﬁve issues presented
in section 4.2 are considered.
Recall that a decision problem essentially consists in partitioning a set
(which we call A) and that we have already shown that constructing the set
A is itself a decision problem. We have shown that any method aimed at
handling decision problems is a mix of three procedures:
21

1. set construction procedures;
2. preference aggregation procedures;
3. optimisation procedures.
In order to show that, and at the same time explain our point of view,
we are going to use two examples, one in combinatorial optimisation and
the other in decision under risk, for which we certainly have well known
methods to use, but for which our framework applies and can improve the
whole decision aiding process.
Example 5.1 We continue with example 2.1. Let’s see now how our frame-
work applies in solving this problem. At the beginning we have an initial set
A0 which is the whole combinatorial structure {0, 1}20 (20 binary relations
resulting to 220 possible combinations. How many evaluation dimensions do
we consider? Since the client declares willing to “cover” the city, we need
to “cover” each single district. We introduce n binary relations (one for
each district j) of the type ⪰j⊆j A × {0, 1} and we consider a rating prob-
lem for which, given any solution ⟨¯x1 · · · ¯xn⟩, we want ∀j⟨¯x1 · · · ¯xn⟩⪰j 1.
If we know the adjacency matrix G, such that for any two given districts i
and j γij = 1, γ ∈G iff the two districts are adjacent we can rewrite the
preference constraint in a more suitable form which is ∀j P
i γijxi ≥1.
The above deﬁne 20 rating decision problems (with two ordered classes:
the feasible and the unfeasible solutions) which if solved one after the other
(20 different steps of set construction) will result in a set A20 which contains
only feasible solutions for all 20 districts. We are now able to introduce
a binary relation ⪰o⊆A20 × A20 such that given two solutions (let’s call
them 1 and 2) ⟨x1
1 · · · x1
n⟩⪰o ⟨x2
1 · · · x2
n⟩iff o(x1
1 · · · x1
n) ≥o(x2
1 · · · x2
n)
where o : A 7→{1 · · · 20} is a function measuring the openings. Clearly
o(x1 · · · xn) = P
j xj and the ranking decision problem consists in solving
min P
j xj.
□.
Discussion. Many readers will naturally ask why do we need such a com-
plicated version for a problem which is already well known in the literature.
There are two reasons for which we believe such a presentation is conve-
nient.
The ﬁrst one is generality. What we want to show is that our framework
applies to any type of decision problem and generalises all methods we can
design in order to handle decision problems. Although this is a well known
combinatorial optimisation problem we can apply to it the same process we
may apply for any type of decision problem and which we summarise as
follows:
1. construct an initial set A0 either as combination of descriptive attributes
or as combination of values of evaluation attributes;
2. identify the primitives (preferences on different several dimensions);
22

3. aggregate preferences in order to create new primitives on less dimen-
sions;
4. reﬁne the set Ai (at generic step i);
5. go ahead until the reﬁned set is partitioned in a way which satisﬁes the
client’s demand.
The second one (related to the ﬁrst one) is the possibility to revise and/or
update the model in a clear and formal way as soon as there are reasons for
which we need to do so. Since we have a general process we just need to go
through it and make the appropriate modiﬁcations.
Suppose we want to relax the covering requirement: instead of covering
the whole city (which might be too expensive) we just consider covering
as much as possible. If this is the case, then covering becomes an eval-
uation dimension and for this purpose we also need to introduce for each
district a new binary variable (yj: being covered by a facility or not) be-
sides the “opening variables” (xj: open a facility or not). The result will
be that our initial set A0 will now be {0, 1}40 (we now have 40 binary vari-
ables). The 20 rating problems (equivalent to the feasibility constraints) will
now be formulated as ∀j P
i γijxi ≥yj. Further on we need to introduce
a new preference relation ⪰c⊆A × A such that (using the same notation
of the example) ⟨x1
1 · · · x1
n⟩⪰c ⟨x2
1 · · · x2
n⟩iff c(x1
1 · · · x1
n) ≥c(x2
1 · · · x2
n)
where c : A 7→{1 · · · 20} is a function measuring the covering. Clearly
c(x1 · · · xn) = P
j αijxj and the ranking decision problem consists in solv-
ing max P
j yj and min P
j xj.
Should we want to transform any of the two ranking problems to a rating
problem (feasibility) we can introduce well known constraints of the type
P
j kjxj ≤K where kj is the cost of each opening and K the available
budget or P
j pjyj ≥P where pj is the population of each district and P
the target to reach.
Example 5.2 Alice is considering submitting a paper to a prestigious con-
ference being very (very) selective (acceptance rate r). Besides, the con-
ference location is not easy to reach and ﬂying there can become very ex-
pensive. If Alice submits the paper (s) and buys the ticket now (b) it is still
possible to ﬁnd it at an affordable price (t). The problem is that she has to
buy it using her own funds and she will be reimbursed only in case the paper
is accepted. If she submits the paper and buys (B) the ticket only in case the
paper is accepted the price will rise (T) and could exceed the department’s
budget (K), making impossible attending the conference (the probability of
this being the case being p). Noting the reward for attending the conference
with R, Alice’s problem can be represented with the decision tree shown in
ﬁgure 5.
There are three immediate possible actions (¬s: not submit, s¬b: sub-
mit and not buy the ticket, sb: submit and buy the ticket) and three possible
scenarios (a+: paper accepted and sufﬁcient budget, a−: paper accepted,
23

sb
s¬b
¬s
0
a, r
¬a, 1 −r
a, r
¬a, 1 −r
−t, R
−t, −R
−R
B
¬B
−R
T < K, p
T > K, 1 −p
−T, R
−R
Figure 5: Alice’s Decision Tree
but insufﬁcient budget, ¬a: paper not accepted). Let’s consider Alice’s pref-
erences:
• a+: sb ≻a+ s¬b ≻a+ ¬s
• a−: sb ≻a−¬s ≻a−s¬b
• ¬a: ¬s ≻¬a s¬b ≻¬a sb.
The interested reader can complete the exercice computing for which
acceptance rate (r) and for which reward (R) Alice could take the risk to
submit the paper and buy the ticket, but it is easy to observe that for low
acceptance rates and for a risk averse decision maker the scenario ¬a is by
far the most likely to occur and that a rational decision will be to not submit
the paper although this is extremely frustrating.
□
Discussion. The previous example shows a typical problem of decision
under risk. Once again the reader could ask why our framework improves
the knowledge we have about these (well known) problems. There are es-
sentially two reasons for which we consider our framework interesting.
1. The ﬁrst is the more generally setting of the decision problem. In the
example we do not use expected utilities, not even probabilities. We only
show the potential actions, the different evaluation dimensions (in this case
the scenarios), the outcomes and the preferences. Modelling the decision
problem using the usual maximisation of subjective expected utility is cer-
tainly easy and useful, but only under well known hypotheses (which we
do not discuss here). The decision problem however, is not to solve the ex-
pected utility maximisation, but to rank the potential actions considering the
preferences along the different scenarios.
2. The second is related to the overall insatisfaction Alice will show with
the solutions we prospect to her. Submitting the paper implies taking very
24

sw
¬s
sb
s¬b
a
¬a
−q, −t, R
−q
Figure 6: New option for Alice
high risks, while not submitting the paper (although rational) is very frustrat-
ing. This opens the question: can we design other options out of the ones we
have presently? For this purpose we need to dig a little more in Alice’s pref-
erences and how these are computed. For the time being we only consider
three dimensions corresponding to the three scenarios. On each of these the
preferences are computed using a single dimension which is the balance be-
tween costs (the ticket price) and beneﬁts (the reward). Potentially these are
two distinct dimensions to consider (perhaps not to compensate as we did).
Moreover, when considering the cost dimension we only consider the cost
of buying the ticket and we do not distinguish (separate) the cost of booking
the ticket without actually buying it. In other terms we do not consider the
time between booking and buying the ticket, time which may have a value.
If we do so we may realise that there is another potential action to do: pay
(an amount q) for booking the ticket (ﬁxing the price at t) and then wait to
see if the paper is accepted or not. In other terms we can add at the root of
the decision tree a new branch as shown in ﬁgure 6. With that branch the
preferences on the three scenarios turn to be:
• a+: sb ≻a+ sw ≻a+ s¬b ≻a+ ¬s
• a−: sb ≻a−sw ≻a−¬s ≻a−s¬b
• ¬a: ¬s ≻¬a sw ≻¬a s¬b ≻¬a sb.
The option sw is always the second best one and a low cost −q could com-
pensate the high likelihood that the paper could not be accepted. With that
model it is more likely that, although Alice is risk adverse, she will ac-
cept the risk wasting q given the reward R (which was not the case for t).
What we observe is that representing the problem through our framework
we get precise hints on how to construct new alternatives: separating new
evaluation attributes. More precisely: separating the attribute “cost” in two
different ones, cost of the booking and cost of the ticket, we are able to
value the time between booking and buying and create new alternatives. In
other terms we are able to introduce explicitly the time and the value of the
information we get using this time.
25

6
Discussion
Before concluding this paper it is important to discuss three points.
1. Aiding to decide, constructing decision support, is a far more complex
activity than solving a decision problem as presented here (see [42],
[45], [26], [27], [54]) and this is known since the very beginning of
our discipline (see [1]). The framework we suggest in this paper is not
about conducting a decision aiding process, but about organising the
formal knowledge we use when considering a client’s demand in such
a way that pushes us to focus upon the features of this demand before
considering any solution method.
2. The results we presented in this paper have some simple consequences:
- The number of archetypal decision problems are ﬁnite and so are the
possible archetypal methods that can be designed. We can construct
many variations of any archetypal method, but our fundamental op-
tions in designing them are few and ﬁnite.
- Real decision problems are sequences of different formal decision
problems either because we reﬁne the set of possible solutions or be-
cause we need to update beliefs, information and values or because we
need to revise them.
- Independently from modelling values, opinions or scenarios the for-
mal basis of the process handling the problems is always the same: ag-
gregating preferences expressed under different dimensions and then
optimise for a given problem statement.
3. It is easy to observe that while we try to provide decision support we
alternate two types of activities: designing solutions and evaluating
them (a concept already present in the literature; see [50], [19]). In
this paper we have shown that constructing a set of alternatives upon
which apply a decision problem is itself a decision problem, but the
creative process of constructing the set is a far more complex topic.
We suspect that formal design theory could be useful for this purpose
(see [13], [20], [36]).
7
Conclusion
The fundamental reason for which we considered reformulating what for-
mally a decision problem is, is related to the training of decision analysts
and operational researchers as well as the design of decision support meth-
ods. Most of the existing training frameworks are “method-based” in the
sense that we describe “methods” without considering the speciﬁcities of
our clients’ problems. We suggest instead, that we should ﬁrst characterise
26

the problems and then ﬁnd or construct an appropriate method. For this rea-
son we suggest a new framework which does not make any reference on how
problems are “solved”, but on how problems are formally characterised with
respect to the information provided by our clients.
We succeeded in establishing a minimal number of features (primitives)
which are strictly necessary in order to elaborate a reasonable recommenda-
tion and at the same time are sufﬁcient for characterising different archetypal
decision problems. Such primitives are the set of alternatives, the problem
statement, the descriptive and evaluative attributes and the preferences ex-
pressed by the clients. The different primitives being ﬁnite and their possible
states being also ﬁnite means we have a ﬁnite number of archetypal decision
problems and thus, a ﬁnite number of archetypal methods to solve them. We
also show that constructing the set of alternatives (upon which we establish
a decision problem) is a decision problem itself. The consequence is that
a decision aiding process turns to be a sequence of decision problems to
be solved where we alternate essentially two steps: aggregating preferences
and optimising.
Our ﬁndings open several questions among which we want to emphasise
two topics:
1. The ﬁrst one consists on how to organise training materials based on such
a new framework and how to practically teach our discipline and our meth-
ods under this new perspective.
2. The second one consists on establishing characterisation schemes be-
tween archetypal decision problems and archetypal decision support meth-
ods showing which properties are satisﬁed and why in order to provide ex-
plicable, accountable and convincing recommendations when automatic de-
cision making devices are used.
We conclude with two open research questions:
- if primitives are ﬁnite then it should be possible to establish protocols of
minimal interaction with the client collecting the necessary information for
handling a decision problem;
- designing the set of alternatives is a crucial (and often neglected) step of
the whole decision aiding process: for this purpose we need to establish new
alternative design procedures and methods.
