Privacy-Preserving Cloud-Aided Broad Learning
System
Haiyang Liua, Hanlin Zhanga,∗, Li Guoa, Jia Yua,b,c, Jie Lind
aCollege of Computer Science and Technology, Qingdao University
266071 Qingdao, China
bInstitute of Big Data Technology and Smart City, Qingdao University
266071 Qingdao, China
cState Key Laboratory of Information Security, Institute of Information Engineering,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, 100093 Beijing, China
dSchool of Electronic and Information Engineering, Xian Jiaotong University
710049 Xian, China
Abstract
With the rapid development of artiﬁcial intelligence and the advent of the 5G
era, deep learning has received extensive attention from researchers.
Broad
Learning System (BLS) is a new deep learning model proposed recently, which
shows its eﬀectiveness in many ﬁelds, such as image recognition and fault detec-
tion. However, the training process still requires vast computations, and there-
fore cannot be accomplished by some resource-constrained devices. To solve
this problem, the resource-constrained device can outsource the BLS algorithm
to cloud servers. Nevertheless, some security challenges also follow with the
use of cloud computing, including the privacy of the data and the correctness
of returned results. In this paper, we propose a secure, eﬃcient, and veriﬁable
outsourcing algorithm for BLS. This algorithm not only improves the eﬃciency
of the algorithm on the client but also ensures that the clients sensitive infor-
mation is not leaked to the cloud server. In addition, in our algorithm, the
client can verify the correctness of returned results with a probability of almost
1. Finally, we analyze the security and eﬃciency of our algorithm in theory and
prove our algorithms feasibility through experiments.
Keywords:
broad learning system (BLS), deep learning, secure
outsourcing computations, privacy preserving.
1. Introduction
Recently, deep neural network has become a research hotspot in the ﬁelds of
artiﬁcial intelligence and big data analysis, which demonstrates impressive per-
∗Corresponding author

Preprint submitted to Journal of LATEX Templates
January 11, 2021
arXiv:2101.02826v1  [cs.CR]  8 Jan 2021

formance, especially in fault detection, face recognition [1] and spam detection
[2]. Although the deep neural network has many advantages, the deep neural
network’s training process is time-consuming because of the characteristics of
its multilayer network structure. In addition, when the model fails to achieve
the expected performance, the time-consuming training process needs to be re-
peated many times. To address this issue, Broad Learning System (BLS) was
proposed by Chen [3]. The BLS is a new neural network based on the ran-
dom vector functional link neural network (RVFLNN). Instead of retraining the
model from scratch, BLS can reconstruct the existing neural network quickly by
incremental learning. Nowadays, BLS demonstrates eﬃcient learning capability
in a wide range of applications, e.g., fault diagnosis [4] and image recognition [5].
Nevertheless, with the increase of data sets and nodes in the network, the scale
of the matrix that BLS needs to deal with in the training process can reach tens
of thousands or even millions. Although compared with other deep structures,
the training speed of BLS has been greatly improved, it still contains complex
calculations.
Due to the limited computing power, some end devices may not be able to
complete the training process of BLS. The wireless intelligent sensor camera in
the Internet of Things is a typical end device with limited computing power. In
some cases, if these wireless intelligent sensors with limited computing power
can train the BLS model and execute the next step based on the results, it
will greatly reduce the reaction time of IoT devices and improve the eﬃciency
of data analysis and processing. For example, in the intelligent transportation
system, if the intelligent wireless sensor device can identify the vehicles on the
road, it can timely adjust the signal lights according to the road conditions, so
as to eﬀectively relieve the traﬃc pressure. Due to the limitation of their own
structure, the computing power of these wireless sensor devices is very limited
[6]. Therefore, most of them can only be used for information acquisition, not
for training model.
The emergence of cloud computing provides a solution to the above problem.
Cloud computing is an Internet-based computing resource interaction mode,
which integrates various services, applications and other resources, and can be
provided to client in the form of services through the Internet. Cloud computing
can quickly deploy resources or obtain services based on virtualization technol-
ogy. At the same time, cloud computing services can provide resources on de-
mand according to client requirements to achieve dynamic resource expansion,
and pay according to usage, so that client can conveniently use cloud computing
services and reduce The processing burden of the client. Beneﬁting from the
2

above-mentioned characteristics of cloud computing, the client can use a vari-
ety of end devices to access resources in the cloud from any network coverage
area without worrying about the amount of resources and capacity planning.
This allows resource-constrained client uses cloud computing to solves heavy
computing tasks.
Although cloud computing has many advantages, its unique service out-
sourcing and other characteristics also bring unprecedented security challenges.
First, the cloud may disclose the client’s sensitive information, which will cause
disastrous consequences to the client. Second, client may receive an incorrect
result. The incorrect results can be caused by software errors and malicious ex-
ternal attacks. Also, the cloud server may return a random result to the client
in order to save computing resources. To solve these problems, the following
requirements for outsourcing computations should be met: (1) The designed al-
gorithm must ensure the conﬁdentiality of the data, which means that the cloud
server cannot obtain the client’s sensitive information. (2) Client can verify the
calculation results returned by the cloud server. (3) The designed algorithm
must ensure that the amount of work (including transformation, recovery, and
correctness veriﬁcation) required by the client under this algorithm is less than
the amount of work to perform the original computation on its own. Otherwise,
the client does not need to seek the help of the cloud. From the perspective of
applications, an outsourcing computing algorithm should be secure, veriﬁable,
and eﬃcient.
In this paper, we propose a secure and eﬃcient outsourcing algorithm for
BLS. Our algorithm solves the problem that the resource constrained end devices
can’t train the BLS model. We verify the feasibility of our algorithm through
speciﬁc experiments. The main contributions of this paper are summarized as
follows:
• As far as we know, our proposed algorithm is the ﬁrst secure outsourcing
algorithm for the Broad Learning System. Our algorithm allows the client
to use the cloud server to safely and eﬀectively solve the high-dimensional
data problem in the BLS, so that the BLS can be widely used in some
resource-constrained devices.
• In our algorithm, all inputs and outputs are obscured, and the cloud can-
not obtain any sensitive information. Also, the client can eﬀectively verify
the results of cloud server calculations.
• Our algorithm can greatly reduce the training time of BLS and save lo-
cal computing resources.
We prove the correctness, privacy, reliability
3

and eﬃciency of our proposed algorithm from theoretical and experimen-
tal perspectives. In our algorithm, the client computation complexity is
reduced from O(n3) to O(n2).
The general structure of this paper is as follows. In section II, we introduced
broad learning system and outsourced computing. In section III, we describe
the system model and design goals. We introduce the process of outsourcing
algorithm in section IV. In section V, we evaluate the algorithm through perfect
experiments. In section VI, we brieﬂy introduce the related research on BLS
and security outsourcing. Finally, we give a conclusion in section VII.
2. Research background
In this section, we ﬁrst give a brief analysis and introduction of BLS. Also,
a simple introduction and analysis to cloud computing is given.
2.1. Broad Learning System
Broad Learning System (BLS) is a type of neural network based on RVFLNN
[7, 8, 9] proposed by Professor Chen. Diﬀerent from the traditional deep struc-
ture, BLS optimizes the network structure by extending the network width.
In BLS, the original input is transmitted by building feature nodes, and the
structure is extended by building enhanced nodes. All mapped feature nodes
and enhancement nodes can be directly connected to the output, and obtain
the expected connection weight through the pseudoinverse. In addition, when
the existing model can not meet the client’s requirements, BLS can make the
model more perfect by incremental learning, and the tedious retraining process
is saved. The detailed process of the BLS algorithm is as follows:
a) Select n samples as the training set, where each sample has m dimensions.
Before training, we need to perform preprocessing operations such as geomet-
ric normalization and image normalization on the data, all data is arranged
to form a matrix Xn×m.
b) For n groups of feature mapping nodes, the generation method of each group
of feature mapping nodes is as follows.
Zi = φ(XWfi + βfi), i = 1, ..., n,
(1)
where Wfi and βfi are randomly generated.All feature nodes are represented
as Zn = [Z1, ..., Zn].
4

Fig. 1: BLS model
c) Similarly, for m groups of enhancement nodes, the generation method of each
node is as follows.
Hj ≡ξ(ZnWhj + βhj), i = 1, ..., m,
(2)
where Whj and βhj are randomly generated. All enhancement nodes are
represented as Hm = [H1, ..., Hm].
d) Join the matrices Zn and Hm horizontally to form a matrix A.
e) Therefore, the BLS model can be expressed by the following equation
Y = [Z1, ..., Zn|H1, ..., Hm]W m
= [Zn|Hm]W m
= AW m,
(3)
where Y is the output matrix which belongs to Rn×c, W m = [Zn|Hm]+Y =
A+W m. W m are the connecting weights of BLS, which can be approximately
calculated through pseudoinverse.
f) Select some samples as the testing set and repeat steps a to d. The prediction
result can be obtained by multiplying the matrix A1 extracted from the
5

testing set with the parameter W m.
Remark 1. Pseudoinverse is considered to be a very convenient method to solve
the output layer of neural network, which can be easily computed through the
ridge regression approximation. Ridge regression can be represented as follow.
arg min
W : ∥AW −Y ∥σ1
ν + λ∥W∥σ2
µ ,
(4)
where σ1 = σ2 = ν = µ = 2. λ is the coeﬃcient of the sum of squares of
the weight W, which represents the constraint on the sum of squares of the
weight. This solution is equivalent with the ridge regression theory, which adding
a positive number to the diagonal of AT A or AAT to approximate Moore-Penrose
generalized inverse [10]. Theoretically, if λ = 0, the inverse problem degenerates
into the least square problem.
However, if λ →∞, the solution is heavily
constrained and approaches to 0. Accordingly, we have
W = (λI + AT A)−1AT Y,
(5)
where I is the unit matrix. Speciﬁcally, we have that
A+ = lim
λ→0(λI + AT A)−1AT .
(6)
Derive from the above, we can obtain the pseudoinverse matrix we want, and
the parameter W can be easily obtained by using the pseudoinverse matrix A+.
2.2. Cloud Computing
Cloud computing is a type of distributed computing, which provides avail-
able, convenient and on-demand network access. With cloud computing tech-
nology, client can use the cloud server to complete complex calculations and
massive data processing, which can signiﬁcantly reduce the local computation
overhead. The powerful storage capacity of the cloud server enables diﬀerent
end devices to realize data sharing when using cloud computing services. As
long as the client can access the Internet, they can access the information stored
in the cloud and applications on the cloud. At the same time, the price of cloud
computing services is low. The client can ﬂexibly use various services provided
by the cloud server according to their own computing needs. Cloud is a huge
resource pool, which gathers a lot of computing resources. And cloud computing
center can integrate and manage these huge computing resources to give client
unprecedented computing and storage capabilities. In short, the core concept
of cloud computing is to take the Internet as the center, and connect the tan-
gible and intangible resources associated with the Internet to form a platform
6

to provide the client with fast and safe computing and storage services, so that
everyone on the Internet can use the powerful computing resources and storage
resources in the cloud server.
3. System Model and Design Goals
In this section, we will introduce the system model, design objectives of
outsourcing computation.
3.1. System Model
Fig. 2: System model
As shown in Fig. 2, assume that the computing power and memory of the
client are severely limited, and the client needs to train the BLS model [11, 12].
Due to the limited local computing power, the training process of BLS cannot
be completed. Therefore, the client leverages the powerful computing power
of cloud servers to solve this problem. However, the cloud server can not be
fully trusted as it is generally controlled by private enterprises. Therefore, the
client needs to ensure that any private data in the input and output cannot
be leaked. The client ﬁrst generates the key matrix K and stores it locally,
and then uses the key matrix K to obscure the input information A. Next, the
client sends the computing task f(x) and input A′ to the cloud server. The
cloud server performs calculation tasks to obtain the calculation result S, and
returns the result S to the client. Then, the client recovers S, and calculate a
value t locally based on the recovered result. After that, the client encrypts t
as t′ with the key matrix. The client sends the next computing task g(x) and
7

t′ to the cloud server. The cloud server executes the calculation task g(x) and
returns the calculation result R to the client. Next, the client recovers Rk from
the result R. Finally, the client veriﬁes the result. If the veriﬁcation passes, the
client accepts the result; otherwise, if the client detects an error or fraud, the
client rejects Rk.
3.2. Threat Model and Design Goals
In our paper, we consider the cloud server to be malicious, which means
that the cloud server may steal the client’s privacy information. Also, the cloud
may return an invalid result to the client. In order to ensure that client can use
cloud computing services safely, our algorithm should meet the following goals.
• Correctness: If the outsourcing algorithm is executed honestly, the ﬁnal
result obtained by the client must be correct.
• Security: During the execution of the algorithm by the cloud server, the
server cannot obtain any private data about the client.
• Soundness: The algorithm must ensure that client will not receive the
incorrect results.
• Eﬃciency: In the outsourcing algorithm, the amount of local calculation
performed by the client should be suﬃciently less than the amount of
calculation required by the client to solve the original problem on its own.
4. Secure Outsourcing Algorithm for Broad Learning System
In this section, we ﬁrst explain the basic idea of how we design secure out-
sourcing algorithms for the broad learning system.
Then, we introduce the
framework and details of our proposed outsourcing algorithm.
4.1. Design Rationale
Our goal is to design a secure and eﬃcient outsourcing algorithm for broad
learning system, in which all input and output will be obscured. Our outsourcing
algorithm enables the client to safely outsource complex computing to the cloud
server. In BLS, using ridge regression to ﬁnd pseudoinverse is the most time-
consuming part. The speciﬁc process of calculating pseudoinverse is as follows:
A+ = lim
λ→0(λI + AT A)−1AT .
(7)
8

Because it involves large-scale matrix operation, the time complexity of this
part can reach O(n3). Thus, our protocal focuses on improve the eﬃciency of
this process.
The ﬁrst step in an outsourcing algorithm is to calculate AT A.
AT and
A have to be obscured because they contain sensitive information. Similarly,
the calculation result AT A should also be obscured.
Next, the cloud server
calculates Eq.(7) and returns the ﬁnal result A+ to the client. In this process,
the inputs (λI + AT A)−1 and AT , the output A+ need to be obscured.
Now we roughly describe how to obscure input and output. In the ﬁrst step
of the outsourcing algorithm for BLS, inputs A and AT need to be obscured.
In order to reduce the amount of calculation for the client to obscure the input
information, we use two special matrices (sparse matrix Q and sparse positive
deﬁnite matrix P) to obscure the inputs. The advantage of using these two
special matrices is that after obscuring matrix A to get A′, only need to calculate
(A′)T for A′ to get the fuzzy result of matrix AT . After the above blinding
operations, the input and output are eﬀectively obscured. The client can make
full use of the special properties of the orthogonal matrix to easily recover the
real results. In the algorithm, the obscuring process of the second step has the
same logic as the ﬁrst step.
4.2. Generic Framework
The proposed outsourcing algorithm for BLS should be composed of the
following seven sub-algorithms.
• ProbTransformation1: The client generates keys K1 and K2 randomly
and stores it locally. In order to obscure the private information, the client
encrypts the original matrix Φ to ΦK1 with the key K1.
• Computation1: The cloud calculates the corresponding result S accord-
ing to the algorithm and returns it to the client.
• Recovery1: The client uses the key matrix K1 to recover SK1 from the
result S returned by the cloud.
• ProbTransformation2: After obtaining SK1, the client uses λ and SK1
to calculate value t. Next, client uses key matrix K2 to encrypt t to obtain
t′.
• Computation2: After receiving the input t′, the cloud calculates result
R′ and returns R′ to the client.
9

• Recovery2: After receiving R′, the client decrypts R′ using the key ma-
trix K2 to obtain the real result R.
• Veriﬁcation: After obtaining the decrypted result R, the client veriﬁes
that R is correct. If the veriﬁcation result is correct, The client accepts
the result R; otherwise, if an error or fraud is detected in the result, the
client rejects R.
4.3. Algorithm Details
Algorithm 1 shows the process of key matrix construction. Firstly, we deﬁne
two key matrices P and Q, which are based on permutation and Kronecker delta
function. P can be constructed as follows:
P(i, j) = ωiδπ1(i),j
1 ⩽i, j ⩽m,
(8)
where ω1, ..., ωm is from random space Ω= {−1, 1}, π1 is a random permutation
π1 ∈{1, . . . , m}, and δx,y is Kronecker delta function.
The construction of
Kronecker delta function is as follows
δx,y =
(
1, x = y,
0, x ̸= y.
(9)
The key matrix Q can be constructed as below:
Q(i, j) = a(i)δπ2(i),j
1 ⩽i, j ⩽n,
(10)
where π2 is a random permutation, π2 ∈{1, . . . , n}, a is a set of nonzero random
integers, ai ∈{1, . . . , n}
i = 1, 2, ..., n. It is easy to ﬁnd inverse matrix for both
P and Q, Q−1(i, j) = π2(i)−1δπ−1
2
(i),j. Since P is a sparse orthogonal matrix,
P −1 = P T .
The process of obscuring the matrices and outsourcing computation is shown
in Algorithm 2. In the outsourcing algorithm, the client wants to get the pseu-
doinverse of matrix A. Simultaneously, the client expects that neither matrix A
nor its pseudoinverse is exposed to the cloud. To obscure the inputs and output,
the client obscures A as follows:
A′ = PAQ.
(11)
The matrix A is transformed into matrix A′. Next, the client sends A′ to the
10

Algorithm 1 Constructing Key Matrix
Require:
m and n.
Ensure:
P and Q.
1: Set two random permutations π1, π2,where π1 ∈{1, . . . , m}and π2 ∈{1, . . . , n}.
2: Set a group of random numbers ω1, ..., ωm from random space Ω= {−1, 1}.
3: For each i from 1 to m do
4:
For each j from 1 to m do
5:
P(i, j) = ωiδπ1(i),j.
End For
6: End for
7: For each i from 1 to n do
8:
For each j from 1 to n do
9:
Q(i, j) = π2(i)δπ2(i),j.
End For
10: End for
11: Output P and Q.
cloud server and calculate A′T A′
A′T A′ = QT AT P T PAQ.
(12)
Since P is a sparse orthogonal matrix, P T P = E. Consequently, we have that
A′T A′ = QT AT AQ.
(13)
Then the cloud returns the calculation result A′T A′ to the client. From Eq.(13),
we know that the real result is obscured by key matrices P and Q, the client
decrypts A′T A′ with the key matrix to get the correct result AT A easily.
AT A = (QT )−1A′T A′Q−1
= (QT )−1QT AT AQQ−1
(14)
Next, client uses AT A to calculate R1 and obscure the sensitive information:
R1 = lim
λ→0(λI + AT A)
R2 = QT R1Q.
(15)
The client sends the calculated R2 to the cloud server. Then the cloud server
11

calculates the inverse matrix of R2.
R−1
2
= Q−1R−1
1 (QT )−1.
(16)
Then client commands the cloud server to calculate the product of the inverse
matrix of R2 and A′T as R3:
R3 = R−1
2 A′T
= Q−1R−1
1 (QT )−1QT AT P T
= Q−1R−1
1 AT P T
= Q−1 lim
λ→0(λI + AT A)−1AT P T .
(17)
As discussed above, the client protects both the input and output privacy
through the process of outsourcing.
Algorithm 2 Obscure Matrix and Outsourcing Computation
Require:
Matrix A.
Ensure:
R3 (Results returned by cloud computing).
1: Client calculatesA′ = PAQ.
2: Client sends A′ to cloud.
3: Client calculates A′T A′.
4: Client returns A′T A′ to client.
5: Client decrypts A′T A′ with the key matrix.
AT A = (QT )−1A′T A′Q−1.
6: Client calculate
R1 = lim
λ→0(λI + AT A).
7: Client calculates R2 = QT R1Q.
8: Send R2 to cloud.
9: Could calculates R3 = R−1
2 A′T .
10: Output R3.
After receiving the result, the client recovers the result R3 with key matrices
P and Q. As the relationship between real result and R3 is showed by Eq.(17),
the client can easily get the real result:
R4 = QR3P
= lim
λ→0(λI + AAT )−1AT .
(18)
The veriﬁcation procedure is shown in Algorithm 3. If R4 is the pseudoin-
12

Algorithm 3 Veriﬁcation Algorithm
Require:
m.
Ensure:
R4.
1: Client randomly selects a m × 1 vector γ whose every element is randomly gener-
ated.
2: Client computes Aγ.
3: Client computes R4(Aγ).
4: If R4(Aγ) ̸= γ
5:
Output “reject the wrong result”.
6: End if
7: Output R4.
verse of matrix A, then R4 should satisfy
R4A = I.
(19)
However, the time complexity of the matrix multiplication on the left side is
O(n3). To solve this problem, the client needs generates a random vector γ,
then the client veriﬁes whether
R4Aγ = γ.
(20)
To verify if the above equation holds, the client ﬁrst calculates (Aγ), in
which time complexity is O(n2). Next, the client calculates R4(Aγ). Because
(Aγ) is also a vector, the time complexity is also O(n2) to calculate R4(Aγ). If
the result returned by the cloud passes the veriﬁcation of algorithm 3, the client
accepts the result. Otherwise, the client declares that the result is wrong and
asks the cloud to calculate again until the correct result is returned.
The complete secure outsourcing algorithm for BLS is shown in Algorithm
4.
5. Analysis of Outsourcing Algorithm for Broad Learning System
In this section, we prove that our proposed outsourcing algorithm for BLS
is correct, secure, veriﬁable, and eﬃcient.
5.1. Correctness Analysis
In this part, we prove the correctness of the outsourcing algorithm we pro-
posed. As long as the cloud server executes in accordance with the algorithm,
the correct result will be obtained by the client.
13

Algorithm 4 BLS-based Cloud Computing Outsourcing Algorithm
Require:
Matrix A.
Ensure:
R4 ( Real Result).
1.
ProbTransformation1
• Set two random permutations π1, π2,where π1 ∈{1, . . . , m} and π2 ∈
{1, . . . , n}.
• Set a group of random numbers ω1, ..., ωm from random space Ω= {−1, 1}.
• For each i from 1 to m do
For each j from 1 to m do
P(i, j) = ωiδπ1(i),j.
End For
End for
• For each i from 1 to n do
For each j from 1 to n do
Q(i, j) = π2(i)δπ2(i),j.
End For
End for
• Client calculatesA′ = PAQ.
2.
Computation1
• Client sends A′ to cloud.
• Cloud calculates A′T A′.
• Cloud returns A′T A′ to client.
3.
Recovery1
• Client decrypts A′T A′ with the key matrix.
AT A = (QT )−1A′T A′Q−1.
4.
ProbTransformation1
• Client calculates
R1 = lim
λ→0(λI + AT A).
• Client calculates R2 = QT R1Q.
5.
Computation2
• Send R2 to cloud.
Could calculates R3 = R−1
2 A′T .
6.
Recovery2
• Client decrypts the result R3 returned by the cloud with keys matrix P and
Q.
R4 = QR3P = lim
λ→0(λI + AAT )−1AT .
7.
Veriﬁcation
• Client randomly selects an m × 1 vector γ whose every element is randomly
generated.
• Client computes Aγ. Then the client computes R4(Aγ).
• If R4(Aγ) ̸= γ
Output “reject the wrong result”.
End the algorithm.
End if
Output R4.
14

First, we prove that the result of the client’s ﬁrst recovery from the cloud
server is correct. The proof is as follows:
AT A = (QT )−1A′T A′Q−1
= (QT )−1QT AT AQQ−1
= ((QT )−1QT )AT A(QQ−1)
= AT A.
(21)
According to the above derivation process, we can prove that the client can
recovery the result by Eq.(14). Next we prove the correctness of the ﬁnal result
R4 obtained from the cloud. The derivation process of R4 is as follows:
R4 = QR3P
= QR−1
2 A′T P
= QQ−1R−1
1 (QT )−1QT AT P T P
= (QQ−1)R−1
1 ((QT )−1QT )AT (P T P)
= R−1
1 AT
= lim
λ→0(λI + AT A)−1AT .
(22)
Consequently, R4 is the ﬁnal calculation result. Finally we derived the veri-
ﬁcation process and proved that the veriﬁcation result must be correct. The
client veriﬁes whether the calculation result is correct by checking whether the
equation R4Aγ = γ holds. If R4 is the correct result, the derivation process is
as follows:
R4Aγ = lim
λ→0(λI + AT A)−1AT Aγ
= A+Aγ
= (A+A)γ
= γ.
(23)
Based on the above derivation, we can conclude that as long as the cloud
server honestly executes the algorithm, the correct calculation result can be
obtained and the client can eﬀectively verify the correctness of the calculation
result.
5.2. Security Analysis
Input Privacy: In our outsourcing algorithm, as shown in Eq.(11), the
original matrix A is obscured into matrix A′ = PAQ, and the second input
15

data R1 sent to cloud is obscured as Eq.(15). All sensitive information of clients
is hidden by P and Q. As shown in Eq.(8) and Eq.(10), P and Q are generated
by random permutation. The probability of cloud server getting P is
1
2nn!, and
the probability of getting Q is
1
nnn!. Thus, even if the cloud has input matrices
A′ and R2, the probability of recovering the client’s original data can be ignored.
Output Privacy: In our outsourcing algorithm, the computation on the
cloud server mainly involves matrix multiplication and matrix inversion. The
cloud will return the results to the client twice. The ﬁrst output of the cloud
is shown in Eq.(13). The key matrix Q obscures the result AT A that client
really wants to obtain. Without knowing the key matrix Q, the probability of
the cloud server obtaining the original input matrix A is
1
nnn!, which can be
ignored.
The second output of the cloud is shown in Eq.(17). The key matrices P and
Q hide the pseudoinverse. According to Eq.(8) and Eq. (10), the probability of
the cloud to infer the correct pseudoinverse result is
1
2nn!nnn!. Thus, without
knowing P and Q, the cloud cannot recover the pseudoinverse from the output.
Based on the above analysis, we can conclude that our algorithm can ensure
the input privacy and the output privacy.
5.3. Veriﬁability Analysis
The result veriﬁcation methods are presented in Section IV-D. In this section,
we prove that our proposed algorithm has robust cheating resistance.
We need to prove that client can detect cloud fraud with a probability of
almost 1. The client sends the obscured input and computation tasks to the
cloud server, and if the cloud server has fraudulent behavior, the client will
receive an incorrect result. On the client, in order to verify the correctness of
the result returned by the cloud server, client need to recover real result R4 as
shown in Eq.(18). Then client check whether the result R4 satisﬁes R4Ar = r.
According to the characteristics of the pseudoinverse matrix, we know that if
the R4 is wrong, then R4Ar = r must not hold. If R4 satisﬁes R4Ar = r, then
R4 must be the correct result that the client wants.
According to the above analysis, we can draw a conclusion that our out-
sourcing algorithm can detect the cheating behavior of cloud with a probability
of almost 1, and at the same time, it can be ensured that all the correct results
will pass the veriﬁcation successfully.
5.4. Eﬃciency Analysis
In this section, we analyze the eﬃciency of our proposed algorithm in detail,
including the computation cost of the client and the cloud. In addition, We
16

also analyze the amount of calculation that our proposed algorithm saves for
the client.
• Client-Side Overhead: To ensure the security of the algorithm, in our
outsourcing algorithm, transformation, recovery and veriﬁcation need to
be performed on the client. We ﬁrst analyze the key generation part of
the transformation phase. Algorithm 1 shows the complete process of key
generation, from which we can ﬁnd that the time complexity of key gen-
eration is O(n). Next, We analyzed the rest of the transformation phase.
In the algorithm, we transform the original input twice. The ﬁrst trans-
formation is shown in Eq.(11), and the second transformation is shown in
Eq.(15). Although the two transformation processes involve matrix mul-
tiplication, the time complexity only is O(n2) because the key matrix is
sparse. Thirdly, we perform the analysis on recovery operation. After the
cloud returns the calculation result to the client, the client recovers it to
get the pseudoinverse matrix R4 as Eq.(18). According to the above, the
time complexity of the decryption process is also O(n2). Finally, we an-
alyze the client’s operation in the veriﬁcation process. In the veriﬁcation
process, we make full use of the characteristics of the pseudoinverse ma-
trix. As shown in Eq.(20), the time complexity of veriﬁcation also reduces
to O(n2) after introducing a random vector.
• Cloud-Side Overhead: Overhead of cloud server is generated by com-
puting the data sent by client according to the outsourcing algorithm. In
our proposed algorithm, cloud operations include computing the product
of two matrices and ﬁnding the inverse matrix. Because the obscured ma-
trix sent to the cloud is the same size as the original matrix, there is no
need for additional operations in the cloud. It implies that there is no ad-
ditional computation introduced by our proposed algorithm. Therefore, in
the outsourcing algorithm, the cost of calculating the pseudoinverse matrix
by the cloud server is the same as the cost of calculating the pseudoinverse
matrix by the client, and both are O(n3).
6. Experimental Analysis
In this section, in order to verify the eﬀectiveness of our outsourcing algo-
rithm, we conduct experiments and analyze the experimental results. In our
experiment, we use a PC with an Intel-i5 2.4 GHz CPU and 8 GB of RAM to
simulate a client and use a PC with an Xeon W-2123 3.6 GHz CPU and 32 GB
17

of RAM to simulate a cloud server. All our experiments are implemented with
the Pycharm platform using Python. In the experiment, we use the MNIST
data set and the NORB data set as experimental samples. The MNIST data set
contains 70000 handwritten digits, 60000 of which are used as the training set
and 10000 as the testing set. These samples are from 250 diﬀerent people, and
each sample is represented by a 28 * 28 gray-scaled pixels, as shown in Fig.3.
NORB is a 3D object image recognition data set. It contains 50 toy images
in 5 general categories of quadrupeds, people, airplanes, trucks and cars. The
shooting uses 2 cameras, 6 diﬀerent lighting conditions, and 9 speciﬁc Shooting
angles, 18 elevation angles. The training set includes 5 instances of each cate-
gory, and the remaining 5 instances are the test set. The sample in NORB is
shown in Fig.4.
Fig. 3: Examples in MNIST data set[13]
6.1. Experimental Process
Fig.5 shows the workﬂow of the outsourcing algorithm for BLS. After select-
ing data set X, the client constructs mapped feature nodes and enhancement
nodes successively. The mapped feature nodes and enhancement nodes are hor-
izontally spliced into matrix A, and A is sent to the cloud server to outsource
computing the pseudoinverse of A. After obtaining the pseudoinverse of A by
outsourcing algorithm, we calculate the global weight W according to Eq.(3).
Next, we continue to train the BLS model. After training, we select some sam-
ples as the testing set, and generate the mapping feature nodes and enhancement
nodes in the same way. Then we identify each test sample and calculate the
accuracy of model identiﬁcation.
18

Fig. 4: Examples in NORB data set[14]
Fig. 5: Process of outsourcing BLS algorithm
6.2. Evaluation Results
(a) The time comparison on
client
(b) The time comparison in
diﬀerent phases
(c) The time comparison on
client and cloud side
Fig. 6: Evaluation results for BLS computing outsourcing algorithm in MNIST
19

(a) The time comparison on
client
(b) The time comparison in
diﬀerent phases
(c) The time comparison on
client and cloud side
Fig. 7: Evaluation results for BLS computing outsourcing algorithm in NORB
We set the size range of input matrix A of outsourcing computing part
from 1000 × 1000 to 8000 × 8000.
We evaluate the experimental results in
terms of time eﬃciency and accuracy.
Fig.6 and Fig.7 show the evaluation
results of the experiment. Sub-ﬁgure 6(a) and Sub-ﬁgure 7(a) compare the time
cost of the client who uses the outsourcing algorithm and the time cost of the
client who does not use the outsourcing algorithm.
We can ﬁnd that when
the size of the matrix is the same, there is a huge diﬀerence between the time
cost to complete the training for the client who uses the outsourcing algorithm
and who does not. Obviously, using our outsourcing algorithm can save the
client a signiﬁcant amount of time.
The reason is that client who does not
use outsourcing algorithm needs a lot of computing resources to complete the
training process on the local side. After using the outsourcing algorithm, the
complex calculation will be handed over to the cloud, and the client only needs
to perform a small amount of simple calculation locally. Sub-ﬁgure 6(b) and
Sub-ﬁgure 7(b) compare the time cost of the client among diﬀerent phases of the
outsourcing algorithm. From the ﬁgures, we can observe, the transformation and
recovery phase is more time-consuming than the veriﬁcation phase. The reason
is that the client needs to conduct twice the transformation and recovery phase,
and each time, the client needs to perform the sparse matrices multiplication
twice. Meanwhile, the veriﬁcation phase only needs one simple calculation as
Eq.(20). Sub-ﬁgure 6(c) and Sub-ﬁgure 7(c) compare the time cost of client and
cloud server in the proposed outsourcing algorithm. The time cost of the cloud
is much higher than that of the client, because the cloud needs to calculate the
matrix multiplication, in which the time complexity is O(n3), while the client
only needs to perform transformation, recovery, and veriﬁcation, in which the
time complexity is only O(n2).
To evaluate the accuracy of our proposed outsourcing algorithm, we compare
20

Number of Feature Nodes
Number of Enhancement Nodes
Without Outsourcing Test Accuracy(%)
Outsourcing Test Accuracy(%)
200
800
55.76
55.76
1000
1000
82.62
82.62
1000
2000
88.19
88.19
1000
3000
88.15
88.14
1000
4000
88.75
88.41
1000
5000
91.44
91.31
1000
6000
91.39
91.39
1000
7000
92.89
92.73
Table 1: Recognition accuracy of two algorithms in MNIST
Number of Feature Nodes
Number of Enhancement Nodes
Without Outsourcing Test Accuracy(%)
Outsourcing Test Accuracy(%)
200
800
60.77
60.77
1000
1000
71.72
71.72
1000
2000
81.77
77.31
1000
3000
84.21
81.74
1000
4000
88.75
84.16
1000
5000
85.69
85.69
1000
6000
84.93
84.94
1000
7000
85.88
85.94
Table 2: Recognition accuracy of two algorithms in NORB
the recognition accuracy of the outsourcing algorithm with the original BLS al-
gorithm. The comparison results are shown in Table 1 and Table 2. From these
two tables, we can ﬁnd that the recognition accuracy of the two algorithms is
slightly diﬀerent. This is because in our outsourcing algorithm, in order to en-
sure that the client’s data is not leaked by the cloud, we need to transformation
or recovery the data every time the client communicates with the cloud server,
the accuracy of the data after transform or recover may be slightly diﬀerent,
thus the accuracy of recognition is changed. The above experiments show that
our algorithm greatly reduces the time cost of the client with only a small change
in the accuracy rate, which is of great signiﬁcance for the promotion of BLS.
21

7. Related Work
In this section, we review the development of cloud computing and secure
outsourcing computations. We also introduce the related researches of the BLS.
7.1. Cloud Computing
Cloud computing is an Internet-based computing resource interaction mode,
which integrates various services, applications and other resources[15, 16]. Cloud
computing is a service that can provide resources on-demand in a short period
of time. The development of cloud computing greatly promotes the new ap-
plication of traditional technology in the cloud computing platform [17, 18].
Barroso et al. in [19] proposed an architecture for search applications based on
the distributed characteristics of cloud servers, which allows a single query to
use multiple servers. Kienzler et al. in [20] proposed a large-scale data process-
ing method leveraging the cloud server. This method provides an incremental
data processing model, which makes full use of the powerful computing power
of the cloud server, meanwhile hides the data transmission delay. Shen et al.
in [21] proposed a distributed computing scheme using the cloud server. The
scheme uses distributed collaboration to obtain the computing results, which
makes full use of the computing resources, meanwhile ensures the privacy and
correctness of the ﬁnal solution. Robert L. Grossman et al. in [22] proposed
a mining method using high-performance cloud servers. This scheme uses the
storage and computing services provided by the cloud server to archive, analyze,
and mine large distributed data sets.
7.2. Secure Outsourcing Computations
Although cloud computing has brought many conveniences to people, it also
has brought some new challenges [23, 24].
Secure outsourcing computations
have attracted attention from researches. In [25, 26], some secure outsourcing
solutions for speciﬁc computing were proposed. However, these solutions are
based on cloud fully trusted and cannot verify the results. In the current cloud
computing environment, cloud servers are monopolized in private enterprises,
and therefore can not be fully trusted.
To solve the above problems, the research direction of outsourcing comput-
ing has turned to the design of a secure outsourcing algorithm under a malicious
cloud model. In recent years, the secure outsourcing computations of matrix
operations under the malicious cloud model has attracted more and more at-
tention from researchers. Chen et al. in [27] proposed an algorithm for solving
large-scale linear equations. The algorithm makes full use of the characteristics
22

of the sparse matrix and realizes the outsourcing calculation of large-scale linear
equations under the complete malicious cloud model. Luo et al. in [28] proposed
a secure outsourcing algorithm for large-scale QR decomposition and LU decom-
position. The algorithm uses the rich computing resources of the cloud, so that
client can eﬃciently perform large-scale QR and LU factorization. Zhang et al.
in [29] proposed an outsourcing scheme that can securely use cloud servers to
solve the quadratic congruences problem in the Internet of Things. This algo-
rithm solves the problem that resource-constrained IoT devices cannot calculate
the quadratic congruences. While improving the computing eﬃciency of IoT de-
vices, this algorithm also ensures data privacy. Wang et al. in [30] proposed a
secure outsourcing solution for linear programming problems. In the algorithm,
the original linear programming problem is transformed into a random prob-
lem. Salinas et al. in [31] proposed a secure outsourcing algorithm to eﬃciently
solving large-scale sparse linear systems of equations. The algorithm not only re-
duces the time required for client calculations, but also reduces the memory I/O
operations by the client. Zhang et al. in [32] proposed a secure edge computing
framework for the matrix multiplication, which allows resource-constrained IoT
devices to eﬃciently and safely complete complex matrix calculations by using
edge servers.
7.3. BLS Development History
Broad Learning System (BLS) is an eﬃcient incremental learning algorithm
proposed by Chen et al [3]. It solves the time-consuming problem of repeated
training in some cases by incremental learning. However, the accuracy of the
original BLS model is not so satisfactory in some large-scale data sets. Hence,
on the basis of the original algorithm of BLS, many researchers have improved
the structure of BLS. Liu et al in [33] proposed an improved BLS based on
K-means clustering algorithm. Compared with the original system, it achieves
satisfactory performance on more complex data sets. Zheng et al. in [34] pro-
posed a system based on the maximum correntropy criterion and BLS. To ob-
tain a more robust BLS, they adopt the maximum entropy criterion to train
the output weight of the BLS. With the continuous improvement of BLS, some
researchers have used BLS to achieve impressive performance in image process-
ing and other ﬁelds. Lin et al. in [35] proposed a ﬂexible approach for human
activity recognition based on BLS, which improves the model training speed
and prediction accuracy by introducing BLS. Kong et al. in [36] proposed an
image classiﬁcation method based on semi-supervised BLS. This method merges
the category probability structure into the generalized learning model to obtain
23

a semi-supervised generalized learning version and introduces BLS into the hy-
perspectral imagery (HSI) classiﬁcation, thereby improving eﬃciency. After the
above improvements, BLS becomes more and more powerful. However, no one
has proposed an outsourcing algorithm for BLS.
8. Conclusion
In this paper, we design a secure and eﬃcient outsourcing algorithm for the
BLS, in which the time complexity on the local client is reduced from O(n3) to
O(n2). As a consequence, resource-constrained devices can eﬃciently accom-
plish the complex training process of the BLS. In the outsourcing process, our
algorithm ensures that the original inputs and output are kept secret to the
cloud server. And the client can verify the results returned by cloud with a
probability of almost 1. Also, we verify the eﬃciency of the algorithm through
experiments. With our proposed algorithm, the BLS can be applied in a broader
range of applications regardless of the computation power of end devices, which
promotes the popularization of the BLS.
9. Acknowledgement
This research is supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China
(61572267), National Development Foundation of Cryptography (MMJJ20170118),
the Joint Found of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (U1905211),
Key Research and Development Project of Shandong Province (2019GGX101051),
K. C. Wong Education Foundation, Natural Science Basic Research Plan in
Shaanxi Province of China (2019JQ-124).
