arXiv:1203.4184v2  [astro-ph.CO]  7 Nov 2012
Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 000, 000–000 (0000)
Printed 5 November 2018
(MN LATEX style ﬁle v2.2)
The Initial Conditions of the Universe from Constrained Simulations
Francisco-Shu Kitaura⋆
Leibniz-Institut f¨ur Astrophysik Potsdam (AIP), An der Sternwarte 16, D-14482 Potsdam, Germany
5 November 2018
ABSTRACT
I present a new approach to recover the primordial density ﬂuctuations and the cosmic
web structure underlying a galaxy distribution. The method is based on sampling Gaussian
ﬁelds which are compatible with a galaxy distribution and a structure formation model. This
is achieved by splitting the inversion problem into two Gibbs-sampling steps: the ﬁrst being
a Gaussianisation step transforming a distribution of point sources at Lagrangian positions
–which are not a priori given– into a linear alias-free Gaussian ﬁeld. This step is based on
Hamiltonian sampling with a Gaussian-Poisson model. The second step consists on a likeli-
hood comparison in which the set of matter tracers at the initial conditions is constrained on
the galaxy distribution and the assumed structure formation model. For computational rea-
sons second order Lagrangian Perturbation Theory is used. However, the presented approach
is ﬂexible to adopt any structure formation model. A semi-analytic halo-model based galaxy
mock catalog is taken to demonstrate that the recovered initial conditions are closely unbiased
with respect to the actual ones from the corresponding N-body simulation down to scales of
a ∼5 Mpc/h. The cross-correlation between them shows a substantial gain of information,
being at k ∼0.3 h/Mpc more than doubled. In addition the initial conditions are extremely
well Gaussian distributed and the power-spectra follow the shape of the linear power-spectrum
being very close to the actual one from the simulation down to scales of k ∼1 h/Mpc.
Key words: (cosmology:) large-scale structure of Universe – galaxies: clusters: general –
catalogues – galaxies: statistics
1
INTRODUCTION
The primordial density ﬂuctuations of the Universe comprise
all the information of the cosmological large-scale structure at
any later time assuming that the theory of structure formation
is known. Accurate estimates of the initial cosmic density ﬁeld
would hence also lead to a reconstruction of the formation of
cosmic structures. This is one of the main motivations under-
lying constrained simulations of the local Universe (see e.g.
Mathis et al. 2002; Klypin et al. 2003; Lavaux 2010). The recon-
structed density ﬁeld is especially valueable as it permits one to
study the cosmic web and perform environmental studies (see e.g.
Hahn et al. 2007; Forero-Romero et al. 2009; Jasche et al. 2010;
Mu˜noz-Cuartas et al. 2011; Wang et al. 2012; Platen et al. 2011).
Moreover, undoing the major effects of gravity on large scales has
been shown to increase the cosmological information. For this pur-
pose a large amount of techniques (mostly based on local transfor-
mations) has been developed which Gaussianise the cosmic den-
sity ﬁeld (see e. g. Neyrinck et al. 2009, 2011; ?; Weinberg 1992;
Yu et al. 2011; Neyrinck et al. 2011; Zhang et al. 2011). I refer to
Kitaura & Angulo (2012) for more complex nonlocal linearisation
schemes. In particular tracing the structures back in time within

the Zeldovich approximation (Zel’dovich 1970) can already sig-
niﬁcantly improve the baryon acoustic oscillation (BAO) measure-
ments (see e.g. Eisenstein et al. 2007; Padmanabhan et al. 2012;
Xu et al. 2012; Mehta et al. 2012).
The classical approach in the literature to solve the boundary
problem to ﬁnd the initial positions of a set of particles governed
by the Eulerian equation of motion and gravity is based on the
least action principle (see Peebles 1989; Nusser & Branchini 2000;
Branchini et al. 2002). A similar approach consists on relating the
observed positions of matter tracers (e.g. galaxies) in a geometrical
way to a homogeneous distribution by minimizing a cost function
(see e.g. Lavaux et al. 2008). One still needs then to ﬁnd the cor-
responding Gaussian ﬁeld to that point source distribution (see e.g.
Lavaux 2010).
Ideally, one would wish to sample the density ﬁeld δ({q})
at the initial conditions {q} (Lagrangian positions) given the data
at the present, in our case study, given a set of galaxies with their
Eulerian coordinates {xG}:
δ({q}) ↶P(δ({q})|{xG}) ,
(1)
where the arrow indicates the sampling process. The relationship
between both coordinate systems is summarised by the following
equation: x = q+Ψ, where Ψ is the displacement which a particle
suffers to go from its initial position q to its ﬁnal position x. One
c⃝0000 RAS

2
F. S. Kitaura
should note that the structure formation model is encoded in the
displacement ﬁeld Ψ. However, this direct approach is extremely
complex since the PDF is highly non-Gaussian as the galaxies live
in structures which have undergone nonlinear structure formation.
An attempt to ﬁnd a statistical formulation of such a PDF im-
plies including the biased nature of a galaxy distribution beyond
the Poisson statistics (Kitaura 2012a) and higher order correlation
functions beyond the 2-point statistics (Kitaura 2012b). Such a sta-
tistical description could be relevant to deal with primordial non-
Gaussianities which will not be considered in this work.
I suggest in this letter to radically simplify the problem split-
ting it into well deﬁned ones which encode our physical under-
standing of structure formation on large scales in a forward ap-
proach. In the next section, the method is presented in detail fol-
lowed by a validation section based on tests with synthetic data.
Finally the conclusions and discussion section is presented.
2
METHOD
Let us suppose that we have an unbiased sample of matter tracers at
initial (Lagrangian) positions {q}. The problem of the reconstruc-
tion of the primordial density ﬂuctuations would be reduced to ﬁnd
the Gaussian ﬁeld corresponding to a discrete point-source distri-
bution. Once we knew the initial Gaussian ﬁeld, we could apply a
model of structure formation and match the structures we ﬁnd in
our simulation with the actual ones given by the observed galaxy
distribution in a likelihood comparison procedure. In this way an
iterative procedure can be constructed which yields a set of Gaus-
sian ﬁelds corresponding to the initial distribution of matter tracers
constrained on some data. The set of solutions will depend on the
particular structure formation model and the matching criteria.
In terms of conditional PDFs the two steps described above
can be expressed in the following way:
δ({q})
↶
P(δ({q})|{q})
(2)
{q}
↶
P({q}|{xG}, δ({q}, mSF)) ,
(3)
where mSF denotes the assumed structure formation model.
(i) Step 1 (Eq. 2): Gaussianisation step: Sampling the Gaus-
sian ﬁeld given a set of matter tracers at the initial conditions.
The ﬁrst step can be solved using Bayes theorem. The posterior
distribution P(δ({q})|{q}) is given by the product of a Gaussian
prior and a Poissonian likelihood (see Kitaura & Enßlin 2008, Ki-
taura et al 2010). We assume a Gaussian prior P(δ({q})|C) de-
scribing the initial ﬁeld δ({q}) which only depends on the correla-
tion function (variance) C or power-spectrum and thus on a set of
cosmological parameters. The likelihood P({q}|δ({q}) is mod-
eled by a Poissonian PDF describing the discrete nature of the test
particles at their Lagrangian positions. In order to sample from such
a posterior PDF the efﬁcient Hamiltonian Sampling technique is
applied (see Jasche & Kitaura 2010; Kitaura et al. 2012). This step
yields Gaussian ﬁelds on a mesh with Nc cells. One should note
that similar approaches exist since long in the literature usually
known under the term constrained realisations (see Bertschinger
1987; Hoffman & Ribak 1991; van de Weygaert & Bertschinger
1996).
(ii) Step 2 (Eq. 3): Structure matching step: Likelihood com-
parison: Sampling the set of matter tracers at the initial condi-
tions given an initial Gaussian ﬁeld and a galaxy distribution.
The second step requires a structure formation model linking the
initial Gaussian ﬁeld to the observed structures given by the set of
-10
-5
0
5
10
10
-4
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
1
-10
-5
0
5
10
10
-4
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
1
PDF
δ
⟨S(δ({q}))⟩≃0.05
⟨K(δ({q}))⟩≃−0.03
⟨M(δ({q}))⟩≃−10−6
Figure 1. Matter statistics. Black curve represents the PDF of the overden-
sity for the mean over 500 samples of the reconstructed initial Gaussian
ﬁeld. Shaded regions indicate 1 and 2 sigma contours. The dashed curve
stands for the PDF of the nonlinear 2LPT reconstruction of the same sam-
ple. The average skewness, kurtosis and mean of the initial conditions are
also indicated by ⟨S(δ({q}))⟩, ⟨K(δ({q}))⟩and ⟨M(δ({q}))⟩, respec-
tively.
galaxies {xG} to perform a constrained simulation. We need to
sample the high dimensional statistical space spanned by the en-
semble of nonlinearly evolved density ﬁelds compatible with the
data. To ﬁnd computationally feasible solutions we have to assume
at this stage a simpliﬁed structure formation model which remains
accurate on large-scales. Motivated by the recent ﬁndings in the
accuracy of tracing the cosmic structures back in time and esti-
mating the peculiar velocity ﬁelds with second order Lagrangian
perturbation theory (2LPT) we have chosen here to use this ap-
proximation (see Kitaura & Angulo 2012; Kitaura et al. 2012). In
this framework we can compute the displacement ﬁeld Ψ(q) from
the Gaussian ﬁeld δ({q}) in an efﬁcient way with FFTs. A random
homogeneous Poisson distribution of Np particles is moved to the
redshift in which the observations are present according to the pre-
viously computed displacement ﬁeld. For technical details we refer
to Buchert (1994); Bouchet et al. (1995); Bernardeau et al. (2002).
We then assign a number of closest particles N G
p to each galaxy,
where each particle must be closer than a certain distance dmax.
Here we have done an efﬁcient k-d tree implementation for differ-
ent species based on a homogeneous partition. The id’s of parti-
cles and galaxies are stored on a grid permitting us to look up fast
which particles are in the surrounding of a particular galaxy. In this
way each galaxy xi
G is assigned a set of particles {x}i answer-
ing the question: where does the matter come from which formed
the structures we observe today. The galaxy bias that is put in this
method is given by the 2LPT halo bias constructed around galaxies
(for a review on the halo-model see Cooray & Sheth 2002). A sim-
ilar procedure was suggested by Scoccimarro & Sheth (2002). This
bias can be improved with a stochastic halo-model on top of the
2LPT realisation as performed in the same work. More soﬁsticated
approaches could be done based on halo occupation distribution
models (see the recent work by Manera et al. 2012, and references
therein). This point needs to be further investigated. One should no-
tice that the ﬁrst step searches for Gaussian ﬁelds compatible with
a given power-spectrum and in this way already partly corrects for
c⃝0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000

The Initial Conditions
3
the bias in a k-dependent way. As we know the initial positions
of the particles associated to each galaxy we obtain a distribution
of Lagrangian positions {q} which trace the initial Gaussian ﬁeld.
This closes one iteration permitting us to go to the ﬁrst step again.
In the ﬁrst iteration the Gaussian ﬁeld is assumed to be zero and
thus the initial displacement ﬁeld vanishes.
3
VALIDATION OF THE METHOD
In this section the numerical experiments are presented which have
been performed to validate the method. As an input for our stud-
ies we have taken a galaxy catalogue which uses a semi-analytic
halo-model scheme (De Lucia & Blaizot 2007) based on the Mil-
lennium Run simulation (Springel et al. 2005) with a box of 500
h−1 Mpc side. In particular we have considered a uniform subsam-
ple of about 530 000 galaxies including all galaxy types conform-
ing a nonlinear biased tracer of the underlying matter distribution.
This set-up permits us to test whether our reconstructions of the
initial conditions and the cosmic web resemble the actual ones of
the simulation.
We have made a great effort optimising our computer code
KIGEN to cope with the hard computational task presented in this
work (for the ﬁrst version see Kitaura & Angulo 2012). We employ
the Hamiltonian sampling technique in the Gaussianisation step
based on the ARGO-code (ﬁrst and last works Kitaura & Enßlin
2008; Kitaura et al. 2012, respectively) and the efﬁcient 2LPT
structure formation model with parallel FFTs.
To compute the Gaussianisation step (Eq. 2) and the dis-
placement ﬁelds (Eq. 3) with FFTs we have used a mesh of
Nc=1283 cells. Structure formation was simulated using 2LPT
with Np=3843 particles. Only particles closer than dmax = 2 dL
where considered to be friends of a galaxy with dL = L/N 1/3
c
being the cell side, allowing for up to N G
p = 50 particles associ-
ated to each galaxy. We have tested KIGEN with N G
p =1, 5, 10, 20,
30, 50, ﬁnding a stable behaviour already with N G
p =20. For safety
we chose N G
p =50 leaving a thorough analysis for furture work.
We gave equal weights to those particles, but could improve the
method considering different weights for instance according to the
luminosity of the galaxy. We have also performed tests with fewer
particles ﬁnding a worse resemblance with the actual density ﬁelds
from the simulation. Nevertheless, a careful study is still to be done
to quantify the required number and weights of particles for a given
resolution and different galaxy type. In addition, we discarded cells
with less or equal 3 particles as such weak constraints correspond
to very low density regions which are not correctly captured by
the 2LPT approximation. Going to third order could mitigate this
problem (see discussion in Scoccimarro & Sheth 2002).
We have performed 1500 iterations and found convergence in
the matter statistics and the power-spectra of the reconstructed ini-
tial conditions after about 600 iterations. For safety we consider,
however, only the last 500 iterations.
Let us start demonstrating that the ﬁrst step in our recon-
struction method leads to Gaussian distributed ﬁelds. Fig. 1 shows
the matter statistics of 500 samples after convergence has been
achieved. The continuous black curve shows the mean PDF of
the overdensity for the 500 samples of the reconstructed initial
Gaussian ﬁeld after 1000 iterations. The low skewness, kurtosis
and mean values indicate that it is indeed Gaussian distributed,
whereas the gravitationally evolved ﬁeld using 2LPT unveils a
highly skewed PDF (dashed curve).
Fig. 2 shows the power-spectrum of the reconstructed initial
conditions in comparison to the one corresponding to the galaxy
overdensity ﬁeld and the ensemble averaged power-spectrum of
primordial ﬂuctuations in a Λ-CDM Universe with the same cos-
mological parameters as in the Millennium Run (see Springel et al.
2005). The good agreement between the reconstruction and linear
theory demonstrates that shot noise and gravitational nonlinear evo-
lution have been removed. On large scales (k < 0.2 h−1 Mpc) we
ﬁnd that the ﬁelds reveal a great resemblance with the actual linear
power-spectrum from the ﬁrst snapshot of the simulation (see left
panel of Fig. 2).
A visualisation of the results is given in Fig. 3. Here we show
how the reconstruction of the initial ﬁeld leads to constrained non-
linear density ﬁeld estimates which nicely follow the structures
traced by the galaxies. This is emphasised by the upper right panel
in which the input galaxies are overplotted on top of the cosmic
web reconstruction. It is also remarkable how difﬁcult it is to rec-
ognize the cosmic web in the initial Gaussian ﬁeld (lower left panel
in the of Fig. 3), and nevertheless how accurately this ﬁeld leads to
the observed structures.
To quantify this resemblance we have computed the cell-to-
cell correlation between the initial conditions δ(q) given by the
ﬁrst available snapshot of the Millennium Run at redshift z =127
and the galaxy ﬁeld δG(x) in comparison to our reconstructed ini-
tial ﬁeld δrec(q) after 1000 iterations (see upper panels in Fig. 4,
for similar studies see Kitaura and Angulo 2011). We ﬁnd that the
complex nonlinear and nonlocal relation between the initial and
ﬁnal ﬁelds including galaxy biasing is straightened to a closely un-
biased relation with our reconstruction scheme.
Finally we compute the propagator from the ﬁrst available
snapshot of the Millennium Run at redshift z =127 and the sam-
ple of reconstructed initial conditions after 1000 iterations and the
galaxy overdensity, ﬁnding that the correlation is more than dou-
bled at k =0.3 h−1 Mpc. We can also see however, that a number
of galaxies in low density regions, mostly living in small ﬁlamen-
tary structures, do not match any structure of the recovered cosmic
web. The reason is that those isolated galaxies which do not form
groups do have a low number of particles associated to them which
leaves them nearly unconstrained. We should also remind that the
structure formation model we are using is simpliﬁed and especially
fails in low density regions (see Scoccimarro & Sheth 2002).
4
CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION
In this work I have presented a new approach to recover the initial
conditions and the cosmic web structure underlying a galaxy dis-
tribution. The method is based on sampling Gaussian ﬁelds which
are constrained on a galaxy distribution and a structure formation
model.
This is achieved by splitting the inversion problem into two
Gibbs-sampling steps: the ﬁrst being a Gaussianisation step trans-
forming a distribution of point sources at Lagrangian positions
–which are not a priori given– into a linear alias-free Gaussian
ﬁeld. The second step being a matching procedure in which the
set of matter tracers at the initial conditions is constrained on the
galaxy distribution and the structure formation model we assume.
For computational reasons we use second order Lagrangian Pertur-
bation Theory. We demonstrate taking a semi-analytic halo-model
based galaxy mock catalog that the recovered initial conditions are
closely unbiased with respect to the actual ones from the corre-
sponding N-body simulation down to scales of a few h−1 Mpc.
The cross-correlation between them shows a substantial gain of
c⃝0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000

4
F. S. Kitaura
0.01
0.10
1.00
1
10
P (k)/P L(k)
k [h−1 Mpc]
0.01
0.10
1.00
1
10
10
2
10
3
10
4
P (k)
k [h−1 Mpc]
Figure 2. Left panel: Ratio between the power-spectrum of the sample of 500 reconstructed initial Gaussian ﬁelds after 1000 iterations P (k) and the power-
spectrum from the ﬁrst available snapshot of the Millennium Run at redshift z =127 gridded with nearest grid point on a mesh with 1283 cells (P L(k)) (black
curve). The excess of power at high k is due to aliasing. Dashed curve: same as previous case, but with power-spectrum P (k) corresponding to the galaxy
overdensity. Dotted curve: Same as continuous black curve, but with P L(k) being given by the theoretical Λ-CDM model. Right panel: power-spectra of the
sample of 500 reconstructed initial Gaussian ﬁelds after 1000 iterations (black curve), the galaxy sample (dashed curve), and the theoretical Λ-CDM model
(dotted curve). Shaded regions indicate 1 and 2 sigma contours.
Figure 3. Reconstruction of the initial conditions and of the cosmic web. Upper left panel: slice about 4 h−1 Mpc thick averaged over 9 neighbouring slices
through a galaxy catalogue (about 530 000 mock galaxies in a volume of 500 h−1 Mpc side (De Lucia & Blaizot 2007)). Each galaxy is represented by a
red circle. Upper right panel: same slice through a sample after 1000 iterations showing the logarithm of the reconstructed nonlinear matter density ﬁeld
using 3843 particles gridded on a 1283 mesh with triangular shape cloud. The mock galaxies corresponding to the same slice are over-plotted indicating the
accuracy of the reconstruction method. Lower left panel: same slice through the reconstructed initial conditions corresponding to the same sample which are
Gaussian distributed. Lower right panel: same as upper right panel without the mock galaxies.
c⃝0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000–000

The Initial Conditions
5
information. In addition the initial conditions are extremely well
Gaussian distributed and the power-spectra closely follow the shape
of the linear power-spectrum down to scales of k ∼1 h Mpc−1.
The approach presented here has several advantages with respect to
previous methods. It provides a set of joint estimates of the initial
conditions, the cosmic web and the peculiar velocity ﬁeld given a
galaxy distribution.
We note, that during the submission process of this letter an
independent work has appeared on the arxiv trying to solve the
same problem presented here using the second order Lagrangian
perturbation framework within Eq. 1 (Jasche & Wandelt 2012).
Their method is substantially different from the one presented here,
although in its essence both try to solve the boundary problem
of ﬁnding the initial conditions in a probabilistic way using the
Bayesian framework. While the present approach uses an adap-
tive particle based scheme and hereby models the collapse of La-
grangian regions to compact objects following the idea suggested
in Scoccimarro & Sheth (see 2002) and developed in Manera et al.
(2012), their grid-based approach relies on the Poissonian assump-
tion to model the galaxy distribution. Furthermore their approach
has been only tested with mock catalogues generated with such a
2LPT-Poisson model while we test ours with a semi-analytic halo-
model based galaxy sample based on N-body simulations. The KI-
GEN-code can be immediately substituted by a different structure
formation model, while their’s is more focused on 2LPT leaving the
redshift distortions unresolved. We note that this can be modeled in
a straightforward way within the particle based method presented
here. One just needs to add a second displacement to include co-
herent ﬂows having the following mapping relation s = q + Ψ +
(v · ˆr)ˆr/(Ha), where v is the full three dimensional velocity ﬁeld
(which can be accurately computed within 2LPT, see Kitaura et al.
2012), ˆr is the unit sight line vector, H the Hubble constant and a
the scale factor. Fingers-of-god could be modeled with a dispersion
term (see discussion in Kitaura & Enßlin 2008). The KIGEN-code
is ﬂexible and could be extended to be more precise by includ-
ing a more detailed structure formation description like the one
provided by full N-body simulations. This will imply, however,
a high computational cost. Although the results seem to indicate
that this approach could be useful for power-spectrum reconstruc-
tions as well, one should be cautious since the power-spectrum
is included as a prior in the Gaussianisation step. This assump-
tion could be relaxed including an additional Gibbs-sampling step
for power-spectrum estimation as proposed by Kitaura & Enßlin
(2008); Jasche et al. (2010); Kitaura et al. (2012). Note that the as-
sumed power-spectrum did not include any kind of wiggles. The
features in the power-spectra of the recovered ﬁelds show how-
ever a great resemblance with the actual one indicating that this
method could be useful for BAO reconstruction. Redshift space dis-
tortions caused by the proper motions of galaxies can be treated in
the same framework as we show in a subsequent work (see dis-
cussion above and Kitaura et al. 2012, for a similar approach). The
scatter between the recovered initial conditions and the actual ones
could be reduced by improving the resolution and the constraints,
for instance giving different weights to the galaxies according to
their luminosity, or using a compiled halo catalogue as an input.
This framework could also permit one to include a light-cone and
consider hereby evolution effects by producing different snapshots
at several redshifts. The forward approach is also especially robust
as it is calibrated with the input data in each iteration.
In summary, the method presented here provides a very pow-
erful approach to the inversion problem of density ﬁeld reconstruc-
tion of the initial conditions and the present cosmic web.
-3 -2 -1 0
1
2
3
-2
0
2
4
6
8
δG(x)
δ(q)
-3 -2 -1 0
1
2
3
-2
0
2
4
6
8
δrec(q)
δ(q)
Figure 4. Cell-to-cell correlation after Gaussian smoothing with radius 5
h−1 Mpc between: the initial conditions δ(q) given by the ﬁrst available
snapshot of the Millennium Run at redshift z =127 (left panel:) and the
galaxy ﬁeld δG(x), (right panel:) and the reconstructed initial Gaussian
ﬁeld after 1000 iterations δrec(q). The dark colour-code indicates a high
number and the light colour-code a low number of cells.
