Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
3D Shape Perception Integrates Intuitive
Physics and Analysis-by-Synthesis
Ilker Yildirim1,2,3*†, Max H. Siegel4,5*†, Amir A.
Soltani4,5,6†, Shraman Ray Chaudhari7 and Joshua B.
Tenenbaum4,5*
1*Department of Psychology, Yale University, New Haven, CT.
2Department of Statistics & Data Science, Yale University, New
Haven, CT.
cWu-Tsai Institute, Yale University, New Haven, CT.
4Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, MIT, Cambridge,
MA.
5The Center for Brains, Minds, and Machines, MIT, Cambridge,
MA.
6Department of Psychology, Boston College, Chestnut Hill,
Massachusetts, USA.
7Department of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science,
MIT, Cambridge, MA.

†These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract
Many surface cues support three-dimensional shape perception, but peo-
ple can sometimes still see shape when these features are missing – in
extreme cases, even when an object is completely occluded, as when
covered with a draped cloth. We propose a framework for 3D shape per-
ception that explains perception in both typical and atypical cases as
analysis-by-synthesis, or inference in a generative model of image for-
mation: the model integrates intuitive physics to explain how shape can
be inferred from deformations it causes to other objects, as in cloth-
draping. Behavioral and computational studies comparing this account
with several alternatives show that it best matches human observers in
1
arXiv:2301.03711v1  [q-bio.NC]  9 Jan 2023

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
2
Shape perception integrates intuitive physics and analysis-by-synthesis
both accuracy and response times, and is the only model that corre-
lates signiﬁcantly with human performance on diﬃcult discriminations.
Our results suggest that bottom-up deep neural network models are
not fully adequate accounts of human shape perception, and point to
how machine vision systems might achieve more human-like robustness.
Introduction
For more than a century, vision scientists have studied the many cues that
humans or machines use to recover shape. Edges or bounding contours, gradi-
ents of shading or texture, stereo disparity, and motion parallax are just a few
of the cues that can be computed from the visible surface of an object and that
can reliably indicate an object’s three-dimensional (3D) shape across diﬀerent
views (Bulthoﬀ, 1991). When available, surface cues eﬀectively support shape
perception in humans and machines. However, a set of recent studies (Lit-
tle & Firestone, 2021; Phillips & Fleming, 2020; Wong, Bi, Soltani, Yildirim,
& Scholl, 2022; Yildirim, Siegel, & Tenenbaum, 2016) present a challenge to
the classical cue-based theory of shape perception: Even when a surface is
obscured, humans can sometimes perceive shape, without directly seeing the
object at all. Consider the synthesized images of cloth-covered objects in Fig.
1A and B, in which each object is completely occluded by a thin, cotton-like
fabric draping over it. Although the draped shapes look very diﬀerent from
the comparison objects (shown in randomly chosen orientations), observers
can nonetheless pick out which unoccluded airplane or chair matches the 3D
shape of the appropriate occluded object. 1
Here we ask: How can people perceive object shape (and pose, size, cat-
egory, etc.) in these images, when all the classic visual cues are mostly or
entirely absent? Even those image cues that are present may be highly mis-
leading, as they belong not to the underlying object’s shape but the surface
of the occluding cloth. Somehow we are able to interpret the shape of the
cloth as an interaction between the underlying rigid object’s geometry and the
way the cloth drapes and deforms upon contact. While sculptors have long
exploited this capacity of the visual system to depict human faces and ﬁgures,
only recently have detailed behavioral studies provided convincing evidence
that humans somehow “undo” (Phillips & Fleming, 2020; Wong et al., 2022)
the eﬀect of the cloth to access the hidden object. Thus far, a computational
account of vision that can explain shape perception, even in the absence of
surface cues, remains absent.
There are at least two ways one might explain how people perceive the
shape of draped objects, corresponding to two contemporary frameworks which
each seek to advance beyond classical cue-based approaches to 3D shape. One
1The correct shape matches in Fig. 1A and B are: (A) left airplane on top goes with left on
bottom, right on top goes with right on bottom; (B) left chair on top goes with right on bottom,
right on top goes with left on bottom.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Shape perception integrates intuitive physics and analysis-by-synthesis
3
Fig. 1 Seeing 3D shape through a cloth. (A) Bottom row: two diﬀerent airplanes. Top row:
the same airplanes, draped with cloth and presented in random order and in a random pose.
(B) Same as (A) but for two diﬀerent chairs. Despite the variation in viewpoint and complete
occlusion of the cloth-draped objects, human observers can still match the cloth-draped and
unoccluded object pairs. (See note in main text for correct answer.) (C-E) Sculptors have
long displayed their skill in works that are crafted from a single rigid material but convey
both an illusory eﬀect of cloth draping and rich 3D shape for the object under the illusory
cloth, as in Giovanni Strazza’s (c. 1850s) “Veiled Virgin” (C, marble), Gabriel Klasmer’s
(2000) “Car in the Sun” (D, ﬁberglass), or Wendell Castle’s (1985) “Ghost Clock” (E,
mahogany, partially bleached).
possibility is that instead of a relatively constrained set of interpretable, mean-
ingful cues, often derived from an analysis of the geometry of objects and of
image formation processes, the human visual system might engage a much
larger set of cues which are obtained through some black-box learning mecha-
nism (and are therefore diﬃcult to write down or interpret). Recent computer
vision models based on deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) have
demonstrated learned feature hierarchies which facilitate impressive object
recognition capabilities (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, & Hinton, 2012; LeCun, Ben-
gio, & Hinton, 2015) and which are relatively robust to variation in appearance
and pose even though the model training objective does not explicitly include
these goals. Moreover, these same features have been shown to enable many
other seemingly disparate visual tasks, including shape perception, with only
minor adaptation (e.g. ﬁne-tuning, or adding one or a small number of addi-
tional output layers) (Hong, Yamins, Majaj, & DiCarlo, 2016). Perhaps these
features are suﬃciently robust to generalize across even more extreme image
transformations, such as cloth occlusion.
A second possibility is that we see 3D shape via “analysis by synthesis”, or
inference in a physics-based generative model of how scenes form and give rise
to images (Mumford, 1994; Yuille & Kersten, 2006). On this view, shape per-
ception is not driven solely or primarily by a ﬁxed, universal set of image cues,
computed bottom-up from any image and suﬃcient for any downstream task.
Rather, we infer 3D shape through a top-down interpretation process based

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
4
Shape perception integrates intuitive physics and analysis-by-synthesis
on an internal model of how images are formed and the role that shape plays
in that model. The generative model approach sees cloth draping as just one
exemplar of a potentially unbounded space of atypical presentations of objects,
in which some aspects of the physics of scenes and images grossly alter an
object’s appearance from its typical form while remaining easily interpretable
by humans: consider as other examples viewing an object such as the chair or
airplane in Fig. 1 outside in a rainstorm, or under ten feet of cloudy water,
or through colored plastic wrap, or in the light of a full moon at night. The
open-ended compositionality of the visual world may imply that it is diﬃcult
or impossible to specify or learn a single set of bottom-up image cues or fea-
tures which reliably and robustly encode an object’s 3D shape even in such
atypical, rare conditions. Instead, a system should model individual, scene-
level causes – the physical objects and processes that generate images – and
how they combine and yield visual input. Then, by reversing their eﬀects, it
may recover the original physical scene. Thus a visual system could still iden-
tify a draped object and even perceive its ﬁne-grained 3D shape if it were able
to model and somehow invert cloth physics.
Our goal in this paper is to use the perception of objects under cloth
as a case study to evaluate concrete versions of each of these accounts of
shape perception. The theoretical merits of the pure bottom-up and top-
down approaches have been extensively debated in the literature, but it has
been diﬃcult to ﬁnd strong evidence distinguishing the bottom-up cue-based
and top-down model-based approaches; until recently, neither discriminative
classiﬁers nor Bayesian generative models performed well in realistic visual
tasks, so comparisons with biological vision were limited to controlled sce-
narios with simpliﬁed, non-naturalistic stimuli (Liu, Knill, & Kersten, 1995).
Advances in algorithms and computing hardware, however, have led to DCNN
and analysis-by-synthesis models that achieve good performance with complex
natural images and can now be rigorously evaluated as models of how we per-
ceive 3D shape in challenging cases with rich naturalistic stimuli. They also
let us explore various hybrid accounts that to date have received very little
direct evaluation in human psychophysics: in particular, we compare human
judgments with top-down analysis-by-synthesis models attempting to match
images at either the level of raw pixels or intermediate-level representations
based on DCNN features.
To our knowledge, only one empirical study has studied human percep-
tion in light of these improved methods. Erdogan and Jacobs (2017) deﬁned a
compositional generative model of 3D shape and compared human judgments
of shape similarity2 with those derived from bottom-up classiﬁers and from
top-down inference in a 3D generative model, concluding that the latter might
underlie shape perception because it correlated better with human responses.
But this study, while pioneering, provides only limited evidence for top-down
2Erdogan and Jacobs (2017) elicited graded similarity judgments between diﬀerent objects (so
that the study and target items could be similar but not identical). In contrast, we use forced-
choice judgments of same or diﬀerent object identity; the correct shape is always a response
option.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Shape perception integrates intuitive physics and analysis-by-synthesis
5
analysis-by-synthesis in perception. The best bottom-up model was also quan-
titatively predictive of human judgments and performed almost as well as the
top-down model. With more training and improved DCNNs, the quantitative
gap between these models might be expected to narrow even further. In addi-
tion, neither model improved dramatically over a simple baseline matching test
to target images at the pixel level. Here, we demonstrate a stronger, qualitative
distinction between model classes enabled by our completely occluded cloth-
draped stimuli: standard DCNNs and pixel-based observers, unlike people and
our generative models, perform no better than chance on harder instances and
even with extensive specialized training show little improvement.
Our design choices oﬀer several other advantages. Because we chose uncom-
mon stimuli with variable diﬃculty, we ﬁnd meaningful variance in human
performance and response time, which allows for ﬁner-grained model evalua-
tions and comparisons of humans and models on trial-by-trial speed as well as
accuracy. The generative model that we consider performs iterative inference
with signiﬁcant stimulus-driven variation in the number of computational steps
and therefore can be directly compared with subjects’ reaction times, poten-
tially revealing signatures and roles for feedback or recurrence in biological
shape perception.
Results
The Object-Under-Cloth Task
While in some cases humans can recognize draped objects from a single image
(e.g., Fig. 1C, D), we chose as our experimental setting a visual match-to-
sample task that allows us to directly address the above three possibilities. We
choose this setting as we are primarily interested in how generative models
can support online, detailed 3D shape perception, rather than object catego-
rization or any kind of memory-based process. The essence of our proposal
is that observers may perceive the 3D shape of cloth-covered objects in arbi-
trary orientations by approximately simulating in their minds the process of
how cloth drapes over the object in three dimensions, and imagining what
the resulting 2D image would look like. So we constructed an experimental
task that should be directly solvable via this mechanism: We show observers
an unoccluded matching object along with a target draped shape (i.e., the
initial matching object rendered in computer graphics under a simulation of
cloth draping) and an unoccluded distractor object, in a two-alternative forced
choice (2AFC) task. We call this the “occluded” condition to contrast with a
control “unoccluded” condition (see below).
We chose 10 diﬀerent everyday object categories (airplane, bicycle, bus,
car, chair, guitar, motorcycle, pistol, riﬂe, table) and sampled object meshes
for each category from a large repository of 3D shapes (Chang et al., 2015).
We used 24 unique exemplars from each category, yielding 120 visual-matching
trials; each trial used two shapes, and each unique shape appeared in one
trial. Each trial presented an unoccluded target shape, a distractor shape, and

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
6
Shape perception integrates intuitive physics and analysis-by-synthesis
Fig. 2 Matching a target shape to one of two unoccluded test objects. (A) Left: A trial in
the occluded task condition. The top image shows a “target item”, the bottom-left image
shows a “matching test item” and the bottom-right image shows a “distractor test item”.
Right: Trials from the occluded task. Each triplet displays, from left-to-right, target item;
matching test item; and distractor test item for one trial. We show “easier” trials, with
diﬀerent-category distractor and matching test items, and “harder” trials, where both test
items are of the same category. (B) Left: A trial from the unoccluded task condition, spatial
conﬁguration as in (A). Right: Each triplet shows a trial from the unoccluded task, showing
instances of easier and harder trials.
the target shape after cloth draping. We varied the similarity between the
distractor and matching items (Fig. 2A, right) to generate visual-matching
triplets ranging in diﬃculty. In half of the trials, the target and distractor
objects were drawn from the same category; these we term “harder” trials
because same-category shapes are generally more diﬃcult to distinguish than
diﬀerent-category objects, which we call “easier”.
To create the cloth-occluded stimuli, we simulated cloth draping via a
particle-based physics engine (Macklin, M¨uller, Chentanez, & Kim, 2014); we
chose simulation parameters (e.g., number of iterations) and the mechani-
cal and material properties of the simulated cloth (e.g., stiﬀness and mass)
to enable eﬃcient, stable simulation of natural-looking cotton-like cloth (see
Materials & Methods).
In the unoccluded condition, we use the same objects but show the tar-
get shape without cloth; see Fig. 2B. In this version of the task, viewpoint
variability and the shape similarity between the matching and distractor test
items are the only confounding variables.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Shape perception integrates intuitive physics and analysis-by-synthesis
7
Physics-Based Analysis-By-Synthesis (PbAS)
We formalize the problem of matching a cloth covered object with its unoc-
cluded counterpart as approximate Bayesian inference in a causal generative
model. Our physics-based analysis-by-synthesis (PbAS) method combines
physics and graphics knowledge with statistical inference and optimization.
The model consists of three components: a generative model for scenes
and images, feature extraction for approximately Bayesian inference (using
a pseudo-likelihood approach), and a simulator-in-the-loop inference engine
based on Bayesian optimization. As an account of how people can perceive
the shapes of objects under cloth (or other challenging viewing conditions),
we posit that each of these three components has some analog in the mind
and brain, and that they operate and interact in something like the ways we
specify here – not precisely as we have implemented them, but close enough
that the speed and accuracy characteristics of the PbAS model can be quan-
titatively compared with human behavior, along with diﬀerent model variants
and alternative accounts.
The generative model in PbAS captures the physical scene variables, includ-
ing object shape and pose, cloth properties, and the mechanics of how they
interact, which together produce the geometry of the occluding cloth surface.
It further includes a model of graphics – how surface geometry, material, and
light interact to generate an image (some factors, like optics, are handled
implicitly; see e.g. Koch, Baig, and Zaidi (2018) for an explicit treatment,
including modeling, of human representation of visual scene geometry). Given
a hypothesized 3D object shape in a hypothesized pose, the model produces
a synthesized or hypothetical image which may be compared with the image
actually observed. In the analysis by synthesis framework, perception requires
inverting this process to recover the object shape and pose likely to have given
rise to the observed image (Fig. 3A, B).
Like most generative models, PbAS is too complex to invert exactly. A
ubiquitous approximation algorithm, Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC),
iteratively constructs samples from a target distribution like the posterior, but
in our case requires far too many iterations to work because each step includes
costly physics simulation. We sought instead to maximize the posterior using
Bayesian optimization (Snoek, Larochelle, & Adams, 2012), which relative to
MCMC provides a guided inference scheme where the next scene hypothesis
to evaluate is informed by all (instead of only the current) evaluations of the
posterior function (Cranmer, Brehmer, & Louppe, 2020). BayesOpt simulta-
neously estimates and optimizes the posterior, providing an algorithm which
eﬃciently samples increasingly more probable hypotheses for object shape and
rotation given an input occluded image (Fig. 3B). (Psychologically, BayesOpt
can be seen as implementing a kind of goal-conditioned mental imagery; see
Hamrick and Griﬃths (2013) for an application in the context of mental rota-
tion.) The probability of a scene hypothesis is computed by comparing its
corresponding rendered hypothesis image with the input, using a feedforward

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
8
Shape perception integrates intuitive physics and analysis-by-synthesis
feature hierarchy fenc implemented as the ﬁrst fully-connected layer of a pre-
trained DCNN (Krizhevsky et al., 2012). While the goal of inference in our
model is posterior probability maximization, the optimization trajectory is
also of interest for comparison with human behavior.
PbAS can arrive at a reasonable percept rapidly (Fig. 3C, D) compared
to sampling-based methods like standard MCMC. It therefore provides a
more plausible quantitative standard for understanding average human accu-
racy, how accuracy improves with longer viewing time, and stimulus-driven
variability in response time.
Synthesis: Generative Model
The generative model consists of (i) latent variables describing the scene: a 3D
object shape S and its rotation R; (ii) a forward physics simulator along with
cloth parameters: cloth size, position, stiﬀness, mass, and friction, denoted fΨ;
and (iii) a rendering function and lighting parameters, together denoted fΓ.
We set the physics simulation parameters fΨ and renderer parameters fΓ to
the same values as used for stimuli generation (see Section “The object-under-
cloth task” and Materials & Methods). While the model is designed to perceive
cloth-covered objects, it applies to unoccluded objects, as in the unoccluded
task condition, as a special case by setting fΨ to the identity function.
Given an occluded input observation (indicated as “Input” in red frame,
Fig. 3B) and an unoccluded “context object” (in blue frame, Fig. 3B), we
wish to estimate the object shape S and rotation R that best explains the
input image. More formally, we wish to invert the generative model to ﬁnd
scene hypotheses that explain perceptual input using Bayesian inference, which
amounts to ﬁnding the posterior
Pr(S, R | Iobs) ∝Pr(Iobs | S, R, fΨ, fΓ)Pru(S)Pr(R)δfΨδfΓ
= Pr(Iobs | Ihyp)Pru(S)Pr(R),
(1)
where Pr(Iobs | S, R, fΨ, fΓ) is a likelihood term induced by the physics engine
fΨ and rendering function fΓ, and the delta functions select ﬁxed physics fΨ
and rendering fΓ parameters. For brevity, in the equality in Eq. 1 and below
we write Ihyp = fΨ(fΓ(S, R)) for the hypothesis image given latent scene
parameters and suppress the delta notation. We next explain each term.
The context object allows observers to form a distribution Pru(S) over
the possible shape of the draped object; because the context object is pre-
sented as a 2D rendering, its shape is uncertain. Even though human observers
do not need auxiliary shape information to process cloth-occluded images,
this accompanying context object provides a computationally tractable shape
hypothesis space for generative modeling (see the Discussion for future direc-
tions relaxing this constraint). We represent this shape uncertainty Pru(S)
using a categorical distribution over the K nearest neighbors of the actual con-
text object (excluding the context object itself) in a large repository of shapes
(the ShapeNet dataset (Chang et al., 2015); see Fig. 3B). In our simulations

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Shape perception integrates intuitive physics and analysis-by-synthesis
9
we take K = 4 and each neighbor is assigned a probability as a function of
its distance rank; see Materials & Methods. We place a uniform prior over
rotations Pr(R) covering the half-sphere centered at canonical pose.
Executing the physics simulator fΨ with a scene hypothesis (a sampled
shape S and its rotation R) results in a draped cloth geometry G (Fig. 3B).
Passing the resulting scene to the rendering function fΓ in turn yields an image
Ihyp = fΓ(G) of the cloth-draped object (Fig. 3B), i.e. a hypothesis image
which may be compared with an input observed image Iobs to evaluate its
likelihood under the scene hypothesis.
The detailed geometry resulting from cloth simulation (e.g. the partic-
ular pattern of wrinkles) can vary signiﬁcantly with even small changes in
the values of random variables (Macklin et al., 2014); therefore, calculating
an accurate likelihood (through marginalization) for any scene hypothesis is
computationally intractable (Cranmer et al., 2020). As a result, we deﬁne a
pseudo-likelihood function Pr(Iobs | Ihyp) based on the distance D(Iobs, Ihyp)
between the input and hypothesis images in a suitable feature space arising
from an encoder fenc(·); here, we set D = ℓ1 and adopt the features com-
puted by the ﬁrst fully-connected layer of AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012)
as the encoder fenc. The PbAS (pseudo-) likelihood for an input image, given
a hypothesis image rendered from a scene proposal, is then
Pr(Iobs | Ihyp) ∝exp (−∥(fenc(Iobs) −fenc(Ihyp)∥1)
With these choices for the prior and likelihood, the posterior Pr(S, R | Iobs)
of Eq. 1 depends only on two terms: the discrepancy Pr(Iobs | Ihyp) between
the observed image and the rendered latent parameters, and the uncertainty
Pru(S) over the shape of the context image.
By measuring the discrepancy between rendered scene hypotheses and
observed images in terms of DCNN encoder-based features, the PbAS model as
described is an instance of a hybrid top-down/bottom-up (or model-based/cue-
based) approach to 3D shape recovery (see also Wang, Mei, Yuille, and
Kortylewski (2021)). We also consider a purely top-down analysis-by-synthesis
approach which is identical except that image discrepancies are computed in
terms of raw pixel deviations. The likelihood is then simply
Pr(Iobsms | Ihyp) ∝exp
 −∥Iobs −Ihyp∥1

We refer to this alternative as the “Pixel Likelihood PbAS” model, or “Pixel-
PbAS” for short.
Analysis: Inference Using Bayesian Optimization
The posterior Pr(S, R | Iobs) of Eq. 1 contains all information that our
model extracts from an observed image Iobs, but computing this distribu-
tion is intractable. Standard simulation-based inference methods based on
MCMC ensure eventual convergence to the full posterior but in practice spend

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
10
Shape perception integrates intuitive physics and analysis-by-synthesis
Fig. 3 Overview of Physics-based Analysis-by-Synthesis (PbAS). (A) Application of the
PbAS model to solve the object-under-cloth task. Given an image triplet, two PbAS models
are run in parallel; each execution takes as input a test item and the target item. On each
iteration, the two executions of the model are compared to determine how well the target
item is explained by each test candidate. (B) Interpreting an input cloth-covered image (red
frame), with a context unoccluded object (u; blue frame) supplying a prior over object shape
Pru(S). Bayesian optimization (BayesOpt) eﬃciently guides inference, improving shape (S)
and rotation (R) hypotheses across iterations. S and R proposals initialize the cloth drap-
ing simulation, then are evaluated by computing the distance D between the current scene
hypothesis (rendered to a hypothesis image) and the input in a suitable feature encoding
space fenc. (C) Visualization of three inference (panel B) trajectories over time. Rows are
independent runs of PbAS each with input as in A, B (red frame) and show the cumulative
best scene hypothesis at each iteration. Blocks show hypotheses visualized with (upper; ”Pre-
diction”) and without (lower; ”Without cloth”) cloth occlusion. Model estimation accuracy
improves with increasing iteration number, but some uncertainty remains as the model (like
people) cannot in general perfectly identify the shape or pose of a draped object. (D) Evolu-
tion of model accuracy averaged across multiple runs in the occluded task condition. Model
predictions by iteration for 15 same-category “harder” and 15 diﬀerent-category “easier”
trials.
too many iterations in low probability regions (Cranmer et al., 2020). We
focus instead on the maximum a posteriori (MAP) setting: ﬁnding the best
single scene interpretation rather than the full posterior over all possible
latent variable settings. Following previous work in simulation-based inference
(J¨arvenp¨a¨a et al., 2019; Kandasamy, Schneider, & P´oczos, 2015; Tamura &
Hukushima, 2018), we employ Bayesian optimization (or BayesOpt (Snoek et

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Shape perception integrates intuitive physics and analysis-by-synthesis
11
al., 2012)); unlike gradient-based algorithms, BayesOpt allows us to optimize
functions which include procedures, such as our scene renderer, which do not
expose or do not support gradients. See Materials & Methods for an overview
and details of BayesOpt applied in PbAS.
Solving the Object-Under-Cloth Task Using the Model
Human participants see two unoccluded context objects (i.e., test items) and
one target object on each trial. Recall that by its design, the PbAS model
interprets a target (i.e., cloth-draped or unoccluded depending on experiment
condition) object in the context of an unoccluded object. Thus, to model a
given trial, we form two pairs, each consisting of a context object (either the
matching item or the distractor item) and the target object, and apply PbAS
to each pair (Fig. 3A). Each PbAS run aims to explain the same input image,
but with diﬀerent shape hypotheses derived from either the matching object
or the distractor object. At every iteration, we save the current best parameter
estimates (i.e., shape and rotation) and the log posterior score for that scene
hypothesis. Using the odds ratio decision rule, we obtain the model’s best
estimate of the underlying shape for each inference step.
We ran the PbAS model 32 times on each trial, for 200 iterations each,
and treated each of these runs as a simulated participant (although with ﬁner
temporal resolution). At each of the 200 iterations, we averaged the binary
decisions across runs to obtain mean accuracy predictions – i.e., simulating the
accuracy of participants’ average shape choices. In our analysis we compare the
dynamics of model choice with human decisions sampled at three diﬀerent time
intervals, corresponding to three diﬀerent presentation durations that varied
across experimental conditions (see the Section “Iterative reﬁnement in PbAS
explains Human Accuracy and Response Time” for comparisons of models and
human behavior). Fig. 3D shows how the average model performance changes
as a function of iteration for a subset of our stimuli.
Bottom-Up Models Based On DCNNs
To help evaluate the PbAS model and its correspondence with human per-
ception, we considered several well-studied bottom-up models as comparisons
for human and model performance. Recent computer vision models based
on DCNNs learn powerful visual feature hierarchies achieving state-of-the-art
object recognition performance. These feature hierarchies are relatively robust
to variation in pose and lighting, can predict certain aspects of variance in
neural and behavioral data, and are considered the “current best models of
the primate visual stream” (Schrimpf et al., 2018). Moreover they are useful
for visual tasks beyond object recognition; these features have been used for a
number of other vision problems e.g. object localization and pose estimation
(Yamins & DiCarlo, 2016), among others, with minor or no modiﬁcation. In
testing these pretrained models, our goal is not to establish whether DCNNs,
considered as a model class, can perform the object-under-cloth task. DCNNs
are universal function approximators; with enough data, enough compute, and

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
12
Shape perception integrates intuitive physics and analysis-by-synthesis
the right architecture and optimization procedure, they are likely able to learn
to perform our visual-matching task. Instead, our goal is to assess whether
the features learned from categorizing objects in natural scenes can suﬃce to
perceive cloth-occluded shapes as well.
Because our synthesized stimuli and task design diﬀer from those used
for the pretrained DCNNs, we also test the same networks after ﬁne-tuning
them using images similar to our experimental stimuli. We tested the following
architectures, each pretrained using ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009): AlexNet
(Krizhevsky et al., 2012), ResNet-50 (He, Zhang, Ren, & Sun, 2016), and
VGG16 (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014). Each DCNN was ﬁne-tuned separately
for the cloth-occluded and unoccluded conditions. The task was the same visual
matching problem presented to humans: given an image containing two unoc-
cluded test shapes and one target object (a “triplet”; objects sampled from a
total of 50 shapes), determine which test shape corresponds to the target. We
repeated this process 32 times; thus we ﬁne-tuned 32 copies (to match the num-
ber of PbAS runs per trial) of each architecture for each occlusion condition.
We report the average accuracy of these 32 ﬁne-tuned networks. See Materials
& Methods for dataset generation, ﬁne-tuning, and evaluation procedures.
For both the pretrained and ﬁne-tuned conditions, we found that no archi-
tecture was more accurate than AlexNet (see Fig. S1). Therefore, we use
both the pretrained AlexNet and our ﬁne-tuned variant in our comparisons of
bottom-up models with behavior.
Iterative Reﬁnement in PbAS Explains Human Accuracy
and Response Times
To evaluate PbAS as a candidate model for human perception, we compared
its predictions on the object-under-cloth task with two key behavioral mea-
sures: average accuracy and response time. We recruited human subjects and
assigned them to either the occluded or unoccluded condition (see Fig. 2A, B
left panels). Participants were also divided into three presentation time con-
ditions: the two ﬁxed (1 or 2 second) time conditions and the unlimited time
condition, which presents stimuli until subjects respond. In total, the exper-
iment consisted of 2 occlusion × 3 presentation time = 6 conditions in a
between-subjects design.
As is typical in modeling studies, we compared the average accuracy of
PbAS and alternative models with that of humans. Because accuracy measures
alone might simply favor models that are more performant, we also examined
how PbAS “response times” – the number of inference iterations used per trial
– might explain human response times on the same trials.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Shape perception integrates intuitive physics and analysis-by-synthesis
13
Explaining Human Accuracy Across Presentation Time
Conditions
We ﬁrst established that behavioral performance is signiﬁcantly aﬀected by
task setting. While participants performed well above chance across all occlu-
sion and presentation time conditions, their performance varied with respect
to these design parameters. Most obviously, human performance was better in
the unoccluded setting (p < .05). With longer presentation time, average per-
formance signiﬁcantly improved (p < .05, Fig. S2A; see Fig. S2B for results
broken down by occlusion condition) and response times increased (p < .05,
Fig. S2C; see Fig. S2D for results broken down by occlusion condition). We
also note that there was no learning eﬀect throughout the experiment, with
participants’ average performance remaining fairly constant across trials (Fig.
S5).
The design of our behavioral experiment oﬀers a multifaceted view of
human performance in terms of presentation time, trial diﬃculty (deﬁned as
whether test items are of same or diﬀerent category; Fig. 2), and occlusion
condition. In Fig. 4A, we present average human accuracy levels for each pre-
sentation time, pooled with respect to the two diﬃculty types (“Diﬀerent
Category” vs. “Same Category”) and two occlusion conditions (occluded vs.
unoccluded). Observers performed signiﬁcantly above chance even in the most
challenging setting with cloth occlusion, same-category distractors, and the
briefest presentation time (1 second). Note also that performance improved
with longer presentation time in the same-category distractor trials where,
unlike the easier diﬀerent-category distractor case, performance does not reach
ceiling even with unlimited presentation time. We now ask whether PbAS and
bottom-up models can explain these nuanced results.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
14
Shape perception integrates intuitive physics and analysis-by-synthesis
Fig. 4 PbAS explains how human accuracy increases with longer stimulus presentation
time. (A) Behavioral accuracy for each presentation time, occlusion condition, and diﬃculty.
(A trial is said to be hard if the distractor test item is of the same category as the target
item, and easy if the distractor test item is of a diﬀerent category than the target item.) (B)
Divergence between model and human performance at each model iteration. Colored lines
show ℓ2 distance between PbAS model and human accuracy levels in indicated presentation
time condition. Human accuracy at each increasing presentation time is best matched by
model at correspondingly greater iteration (colored triangles). (C) Accuracy of the PbAS
model at the three iteration numbers chosen to be close to the best matching iterations
marked by colored triangles in (B). (We show results for 50 rather than 48 iterations; see text
for details.) Evolution of PbAS accuracy levels over these snapshots closely matches human
accuracy levels at the corresponding presentation times; compare (A). (D) Performance of
the bottom-up network (BU) and the ﬁne-tuned (FT) variants; FT model reports ensemble
average. Unlike humans and the PbAS model, in harder cloth-occluded trials with same-
category distractors, the BU and FT models remain close to chance (dashed lines). (E)
Performance of the “Pixel-PbAS” model, which performs a more top-down form of analysis-
by-synthesis by attempting to explain input images at the pixel level, by excluding the
bottom-up image encoding module. Relative to the PbAS model, this model requires more
iterations to reach human-level performance; more critically, it qualitatively misses a key
aspect of behavior by performing equally well across occlusion conditions, speciﬁcally in
the harder same category trials. Error bars in panels A, C and E show standard deviation;
signiﬁcance determined using independent-sample t-tests. (F) ℓ2 distance between human
accuracy (A) and models: PbAS, bottom-up network pretrained (BU) and after ﬁne-tuning
(FT), and PbAS without image encoding (using pixels for likelihood computation; “Pixel-
PbAS”). For the PbAS and Pixel-PbAS models, for each presentation time, we present the
distances based on their corresponding best-matching iteration number. Error bars show
95% bootstrapped conﬁdence intervals; “***”: p < .001; “*”: p < .05; “n.s.”: not signiﬁcant
(p > .05).

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Shape perception integrates intuitive physics and analysis-by-synthesis
15
We compared average human accuracy levels for each presentation time
condition (collapsing over occlusion and diﬃculty) with PbAS accuracy at each
model iteration. The comparison used the ℓ2 distance. We found that the longer
the presentation time, the more model iterations are needed to best match
behavior: the ﬁt for 1 second data requires fewer (48) iterations than are needed
for the 2 second condition (80), and even more iterations (110) are needed
to match the unlimited time data (Fig. 4B). The performance of the PbAS
model at the best-ﬁtting iteration numbers for each presentation time closely
matches their corresponding behavioral accuracies (compare Fig. 4A and C,
which shows model performance at iterations 50, 80, and 110 for simplicity;
model accuracy levels at 48 and 50 iterations are essentially identical). In
particular, the correspondence between PbAS and behavior (measured as the
ℓ2 distance between behavioral and model accuracy levels) is stronger than it
is for any other model (Fig. 4F, p < .05, except PbAS vs. FT in the 1 second
condition; see below).
Unlike the PbAS model, the bottom-up features derived from pre-trained
DCNNs failed to explain human accuracy levels, nor did they after ﬁne-
tuning these networks separately for each occlusion condition (Fig. 4D, F). As
expected, the performance of the pretrained bottom-up network declined sub-
stantially under occlusion, but it did so even for the easier diﬀerent category
distractor trials (Fig. 4D, “Bottom-up (BU)”). For the harder cloth-draped,
same-category trials, the performance of the bottom-up model reduced to
chance (Fig. 4D, “Bottom-up (BU)”). Fine-tuning this network improved its
overall performance, but most of this improvement manifested in the diﬀerent-
category trials and indeed its performance remained near chance in the harder
cloth-occluded trials with same category distractors (Fig. 4D, “Fine-tuned
(FT)”). These results are reﬂected in the correspondence between human and
network accuracy. In all but one condition, the discrepancy between bottom-up
and ﬁne-tuned models, and human behavior, is higher than it is for PbAS (Fig.
4F). (In the 1-second condition, the ﬁne-tuned model is statistically insepara-
ble from PbAS, but it decouples from behavior in ﬁner-grained trial-by-trial
analysis, as we explain in the next section (see also Figs. 5, S3, S4)).
Overall, unlike PbAS, the discrepancy between human and network accu-
racy levels increased with presentation time, suggesting the need for additional
computations beyond the bottom-up processing implemented in these DCNN
models (Fig. 4F).
These results provide support for the role of top-down computations (the
generative model) in the hybrid architecture embodied in PbAS: The DCNN
feature hierarchies that alone cannot explain behavior are useful when they
guide inference (by deﬁning the likelihood) in the generative model. Is this
bottom-up component necessary to explain behavior? We evaluated a model
that removed the image encoding module. This ablation – referred to as the
Pixel Likelihood PbAS (or “Pixel-PbAS” for short) – computes likelihood in
the pixel space, keeping everything else unchanged from PbAS. We found that
this ablation fails to reproduce an important aspect of behavior: Unlike the

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
16
Shape perception integrates intuitive physics and analysis-by-synthesis
PbAS model and human judgments, the Pixel-PbAS model performs equally
well in the harder (i.e., same category) occluded and unoccluded trials (Fig.
4E). Moreover, it takes longer to reach human level accuracy relative to PbAS,
requiring about 30 more iterations for each presentation time condition (Fig.
4E). Finally, this model does not match behavior as well as PbAS; using its
best-ﬁtting iteration numbers, the distance to behavior is greater than that
of PbAS (Fig. 4F; p < .05 for each pairwise comparison, using direct boot-
strap hypothesis testing). However, we note that unlike the bottom-up models,
the distance from the Pixel-PbAS model to behavior is constant or decreases
slightly across presentation time conditions, indicating that the iterative reﬁne-
ment of scene hypotheses is still crucial to explain how behavioral performance
improves with longer exposure times. These results establish that both top-
down and bottom-up components of the PbAS architecture are needed to
account for behavior. Relative to the bottom-up models, PbAS’s superior
account of behavior is not merely a result of its better task performance, but is
instead due to its making similar perceptual judgments, and errors, as humans.
The next two sections provide further evidence for these conclusions using
ﬁne-grained error and response time analyses.
Explaining Trial-Level Human Accuracy
Fig. 5
Fine-grained analysis of human accuracy at the level of individual trials in the unlim-
ited time condition. PbAS explains behavior better than alternative models. (A) Trial-level
average accuracy correlations between models and humans in the unlimited time condition.
PbAS, bottom-up network pretrained (BU) and after ﬁne-tuning (FT), and the PbAS model
without image encoding (“Pixel-PbAS”). (The ﬁne-tuned model reports ensemble average
of multiple ﬁne-tuned networks.) Error bars show bootstrapped 95% conﬁdence intervals.
Statistical comparisons are made using direct bootstrap hypothesis testing (“***”: p < .001;
“n.s.”: p > .05). (B) The hardest, same-category trials reveal that only the PbAS model
consistently correlates with behavior in both the unoccluded and occluded conditions. The
x-axis values are normalized to range between 0 and 1. Correlation coeﬃcients are indicated
on each scatter plot; bootstrapped 95% conﬁdence intervals in brackets.
Next, we evaluated the ability of the models to explain average human accu-
racy at the level of individual trials. In the unlimited time condition, we found

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Shape perception integrates intuitive physics and analysis-by-synthesis
17
that the trial-by-trial accuracy of the PbAS model at the best-ﬁtting iteration
(iteration 110, marked by the dark blue triangle in Fig. 4B) correlated well
with behavior, and did so consistently in both occlusion conditions (0.55 and
0.62 in unoccluded and cloth-occluded conditions; Fig. 5A). In the unoccluded
condition, PbAS better correlated with behavior relative to the pretrained
bottom-up network features (p < .001, using bootstrap direct hypothesis test-
ing), but ﬁne-tuning was eﬀective in closing the gap; PbAS and the ﬁne-tuned
model showed no diﬀerence (p = .31). However, in the occluded condition, the
PbAS model better explained behavior relative to both the pretrained and
ﬁne-tuned alternatives (p < .001; Fig. 5A). PbAS also correlated with behav-
ior better than the Pixel-PbAS model in both the unoccluded and occluded
conditions (p < .001; Fig. 5A; see Fig. S3 for qualitatively similar results in
the other two presentation time conditions.) Despite the superior quantitative
account of PbAS, we note that none of the models considered could explain
all of the reproducible variance in the behavioral data. Split-half correlations
across participants (see Materials & Methods) in the unlimited presentation
time condition were around r = .80 for both occlusion conditions, signiﬁcantly
higher (p < .05) than the correlation achieved by PbAS.
What underlies the PbAS model’s ability to consistently account for
behavioral accuracy at the trial-level across both occlusion conditions? We
hypothesize that both top-down generative knowledge and our bottom-up fea-
ture embedding are crucial. To address, we ﬁrst notice that in the easier,
diﬀerent category trials, humans performance is at ceiling, especially in the
unlimited time condition (see the Diﬀerent Category bars in Fig. 4A). There is
therefore little variance to explain in these easier trials. Thus, we focus on the
diﬃcult same-category trials where there is appreciable variance in behavioral
accuracy across trials. We ﬁnd that in these diﬃcult trials, when compared to
the bottom-up models, only PbAS can account for behavior in both occlusion
conditions (Unoccluded: r = .44[.36, .51]; Occluded: r = .44[.33, .54], where
[l, u] indicates lower/upper 95% conﬁdence intervals). In the regular, unoc-
cluded condition, the ﬁne-tuned model (and to some extent the pretrained
model) can explain some of these ﬁne-grained behavioral patterns, however,
these models, especially the ﬁne-tuned model, decouple from behavior under
cloth occlusion (Fig. 5B). The Pixel-PbAS model also falls short of the perfor-
mance of the full PbAS model in both occlusion conditions (p ¡ .001; Fig. 5B;
see Fig. S4 for qualitatively similar results in the other two presentation time
conditions), further demonstrating the necessity of both top-down generative
knowledge and the bottom-up image embedding for successful prediction of
behavior.
Explaining Trial-Level Response Times As Iterative Inference
Our analyses have so far focused on accuracy. Here, we analyze human response
times to ask whether the time course of inference in PbAS can explain the evo-
lution of observers’ perceptual decision-making at the level of individual trials
– how long they decide to view a stimulus before making their choice. Thus,

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
18
Shape perception integrates intuitive physics and analysis-by-synthesis
in the unlimited time condition, we compare the number of iterations required
for the model to arrive at a decision on a given trial (in a given experimental
condition) with the average human response time for that trial. To do so, we
devised a simple decision rule in the model that applies to individual trials. At
each model iteration, this decision rule compares the average model accuracy
to a criterion set to the average participant accuracy within the trial’s con-
dition. We record the earliest iteration that PbAS performance exceeds that
criterion (or the maximum iteration number, 200, otherwise) and take it as a
predictor for that trial’s average response time. This is akin to a drift-diﬀusion
model3 (Usher & McClelland, 2001) where evidence accumulation naturally
arises from the iterative reﬁnement of scene hypotheses in the PbAS model.
The results are response time predictions for each trial of each condition in
the experiment.
Fig. 6 Trial-level response time comparisons. Trial-by-trial average human response times
(log milliseconds) are explained by the PbAS model (log number of iterations) based on
a simple decision threshold (see text for details). The PbAS model captures signiﬁcantly
more variance than the ablated Pixel-PbAS model in each occlusion condition (p < .001,
using direct bootstrap hypothesis testing). For each comparison, the mean correlation and
bootstrapped 95% conﬁdence intervals (in brackets) are shown.
Despite the simplicity of this decision rule, we found a remarkable corre-
spondence between the number of iterations needed to solve a trial in PbAS
and the time humans took to respond on that trial (Fig. 6); the relationship
holds for both occlusion conditions. No parameters (beyond taking human per-
formance as criterion for each condition) were ﬁt to explain response times.
Because the Pixel-PbAS model also performs iterative inference, we can test
its ability to explain response time data as we did with PbAS. We found that
PbAS gave a better account of response time data than the ablated model in
each occlusion condition (Fig. 6).
Discussion
We presented evidence for the use of generative model computations in visual
perception, in the form of physics-based mental simulations. Our behavioral
3Unlike standard drift diﬀusion models, the drift rate and other parameters arise from model
inference; no parameters are ﬁt save the criterion.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Shape perception integrates intuitive physics and analysis-by-synthesis
19
results as well as recent related literature (Little & Firestone, 2021; Phillips &
Fleming, 2020; Yildirim et al., 2016) raise a fundamental question: How is it
possible to perceive the shape of an object when none of the classic visual cues
to shape are visible? We proposed that the mind and brain exploit internal
representations of the physical processes which form scenes and images. Our
Physics-based Analysis by Synthesis (PbAS) model incorporates knowledge
of scene structure and dynamics to explain, through online optimization and
physics simulation, why a cloth-covered object appears the way it does – as the
result of dropping a cloth on an inferred shape in an inferred pose. We tested
PbAS in a shape matching task which required subjects to match a cloth-
draped object with its unoccluded (and randomly rotated) counterpart, in the
presence of a distractor. The PbAS model predicts not only overall human
accuracy in this visual matching task, but also how performance improves with
longer stimulus presentation times. Crucially, the number of inference steps
needed to reach a behaviorally-determined performance threshold predicts, on
a trial-by-trial basis, average participant response times.
Our work adds to the growing literature showing that perception in the
brain can be understood as eﬃcient approximate inference in generative mod-
els, or analysis-by-synthesis (Echeveste, Aitchison, Hennequin, & Lengyel,
2020; Erdogan & Jacobs, 2017; Yildirim, Belledonne, Freiwald, & Tenenbaum,
2020; Yuille & Kersten, 2006). Past studies have examined some predictions of
this theory, but have not provided quantitative evidence that such rich gener-
ative models – incorporating shape, object interaction dynamics, and sensory
features – are used online during perception. PbAS also diﬀers from previ-
ously considered generative models in its focus on scene elements and causal
processes, which when composed allow it to interpret images which are out-
side typical perceptual experience. In this way, our work identiﬁes the ﬂexible
use of ad hoc dynamic scene properties in perception, such as cloth mechan-
ics, that only indirectly inﬂuence image formation and are not usually seen
as cues to 3D shape. Perceiving shape through cloth occlusion highlights how
such “nuisance” variables can play a central role in 3D object perception. Our
work argues that the compositional use of generative models provides the best
way of understanding how these factors inﬂuence perception.
Bottom-up models based on DCNNs performed poorly both in the object-
under-cloth task and in mimicking human behavior. A DCNN that has been
ﬁne-tuned on thousands of images of cloth-occluded objects produces behavior
with roughly similar average accuracy as humans in our briefest presentation
conditions (1 sec), but unlike the PbAS model fails to explain how performance
improves with time and does not correlate at all with trial-by-trial accuracy
in the most challenging conditions (occluded with cloth and same-category
distractors, for all presentation conditions tested). DCNNs, as a model class,
should in principle be able to learn any mapping from inputs to outputs,
but our ﬁne-tuning results show that in practice, the data requirements can
be substantial (and likely exceed human experience) and the best results far
from human-like. Given the broader context of the many atypical, challenging

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
20
Shape perception integrates intuitive physics and analysis-by-synthesis
viewing conditions that the visual system may encounter, these ﬁndings under-
score the importance of generalization and robustness, ongoing challenges for
DCNNs, and illustrate how top-down knowledge can enable perception in dif-
ﬁcult novel contexts. Bottom-up models do, however, play an important role
in our framework; relative to the ablated Pixel-PbAS model, the hybrid archi-
tecture implemented in PbAS demonstrates that powerful feature hierarchies
can usefully facilitate or guide inference in generative models. This perspec-
tive is compatible with much research on “core” object recognition showing
the explanatory power of bottom-up models (DiCarlo, Zoccolan, & Rust, 2012;
Yamins et al., 2014). Future work should also evaluate continuing developments
in DCNNs, trained using alternative loss functions, architectures or datasets
(Geirhos et al., 2021; Konkle & Alvarez, 2022), which may show improved
generalization to diﬃcult perceptual tasks.
The PbAS model suggests that perception of cloth-covered objects in the
brain relies on a combination of feedforward, feedback, and recurrent compu-
tation. We believe that this is valuable as, relative to the case of feedforward
processing, there is little evidence to constrain or generate hypotheses regard-
ing the role of feedback and recurrent computation in visual scene analysis
(Gilbert, 2013). PbAS suggests a new computational goal for feedback and
recurrence in the brain, which is in some ways related to pattern theory as
expressed in Mumford (1994): Such processing might implement the progres-
sive unfolding of one or a number of physical simulations. It is likely that these
forms of neural computation implement multiple computational goals needed
for such diverse functions as attention, learning, and perception (Gilbert,
2013). The hypothesis suggested by PbAS – internal simulations of physical
processes – is not exclusive of the others and future work should explore their
combination.
The present implementation of the PbAS model accounts for behavior
in the speciﬁc matching task we studied here (Fig. 1A, B; Fig. 2). Future
work should exploit its modular architecture to address other experimental
paradigms and perceptual problems. For example, from an image of a single
draped object (without a comparison unoccluded object), humans can often
infer its category, approximate pose, and partial shape (Fig. 1C-E). While
evaluating PbAS in this more diﬃcult scenario is beyond the scope of the
present paper, the framework readily extends to this setting; see Fig 7 for a
demonstration from a proof-of-concept implementation.
Our results suggest that shape perception under cloth draping involves
mental operations beyond the rapid, bottom-up processing believed character-
istic of traditional object recognition (Grill-Spector & Kanwisher, 2005). To
what extent are the computations hypothesized by PbAS – 3D shape infer-
ence, mental rotation, or mental simulations of physical and image formation
processes – also engaged in rapid, automatic visual processing? And how do
they relate to other cognitive mechanisms supporting dynamic processing such
as visual routines (Ullman, 1987) and mental imagery (Shepard & Metzler,
1971)?

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Shape perception integrates intuitive physics and analysis-by-synthesis
21
Fig. 7 Seeing the shape of a single cloth-draped object, without the aid of unoccluded
candidates (cf. Fig. 2A, B). By expanding its shape hypothesis space to contain a large
set of category-speciﬁc objects (as opposed to the four nearest neighbors of the available
context object as in our main model) and removing the unoccluded inference module, PbAS
can obtain plausible estimates of 3D pose and geometry. Rows show (from left) input image
containing target cloth-covered object and four inferred shape/pose hypotheses under this
modiﬁed PbAS model, ordered from high to low posterior probability.
Recent psychophysical work suggests that these computations might be
implemented in the visual system as part of spontaneous processing of sen-
sory data. Wong et al. (2022) studied cloth-covered object perception across
a battery of visual tasks, ﬁnding evidence that scenes are rapidly and auto-
matically parsed as the appropriate physical causes. In addition to behavioral
probes, cognitive neuroscience can address where in the brain the computa-
tions speciﬁed by the PbAS model might be implemented (see Shams and
Beierholm (2022) for a recent review of Bayesian causal models and inference
in the brain). For example, fMRI studies (Fischer, Mikhael, Tenenbaum, &
Kanwisher, 2016) have identiﬁed brain regions supporting intuitive physical
judgments in a dorsal frontoparietal network; it is of signiﬁcant interest to

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
22
Shape perception integrates intuitive physics and analysis-by-synthesis
answer whether the same or similar brain regions are also recruited during the
perception of cloth-draped objects.
The PbAS framework discussed and supported here may also play a broader
role in visual processing beyond our cloth-draped object setting, unifying
competencies beyond traditional shape and object perception. A common
computational engine may therefore support perception of the dynamical prop-
erties of objects, such as the relative masses of colliding rigid bodies or single
objects reacting to the application of external forces (Sanborn, Mansinghka, &
Griﬃths, 2013; Schwettmann, Tenenbaum, & Kanwisher, 2019; Wu, Yildirim,
Lim, Freeman, & Tenenbaum, 2015); the stiﬀness of deformable objects under-
going natural transformations (Bi, Shah, Wong, Scholl, & Yildirim, 2021;
Paulun & Fleming, 2020; Paulun, Schmidt, van Assen, & Fleming, 2017); vis-
cosity and ﬂow of liquids (Bates, Yildirim, Tenenbaum, & Battaglia, 2019;
Kubricht et al., 2017; Van Assen, Barla, & Fleming, 2018); and in general the
perception of the physical (i.e., non-intentional) causal history of an object
(Chen & Scholl, 2016; Fleming & Schmidt, 2019; Schmidt, Phillips, & Flem-
ing, 2019). In each of these cases, it is at least plausible that the brain uses
generative models to simulate the physical processes that could have produced
the observed scene, and compare the results of these simulations to the sensory
input. A better understanding of how the brain supports these abilities could
also lead to more robust, and more human-like, machine vision systems.
Materials and Methods
Generative model
Cloth Simulations
We used the FLeX engine, a particle-based physics engine, for cloth physics
simulation (Macklin et al., 2014). Simulation parameters as well as the
mechanical-material properties of the cloth were chosen so as to achieve fast,
stable simulation of natural-looking, cotton-like cloth. Simulation parameters
were as follows. Iterations: 4; subiterations: 19; particle radius: 0.0078; collision
distance: 0.0078; shape collision margin: 0.00078; particle collision margin: 0.0;
relaxation mode: default; relaxation factor: 1.3; drag: 0.09; damping: 0.0; dis-
sipation: 0.0; restitution: 0.0. The mechanical-material properties of the cloth
were as follows. Strength stiﬀness: 0.8; bend stiﬀness: 0.64; shear stiﬀness: 0.4;
particle mass: 1.0; static friction: 0.18; dynamic friction: 1.1.
To increase simulation eﬃciency, we simpliﬁed the geometry of the
ShapeNet meshes using Blender (Blender Online Community, 2015)). First,
we corrected the surface normals on each mesh by ensuring that they were
consistent and pointed outwards. Second, we used Blender’s “Solidify” mesh
modiﬁer with the thickness parameter set to −0.0001. Finally, we merged faces
that were adjacent and approximately coplanar (with surface normals diﬀering
by less than 0.02 rad ≈1.15°).

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Shape perception integrates intuitive physics and analysis-by-synthesis
23
We initialized simulations by placing a square cloth (represented compu-
tationally with 210 × 210 particles) just above the geometric center of the
rotated object to be draped. We then ran the simulation for 150 steps, suﬃ-
cient to fully drape all objects we tested. Each cloth simulation took between
3 and 40 seconds on a NVIDIA 2080TI GPU, on the order of 1000 times
faster than alternative implementations using CPU-based cloth simulation and
unsimpliﬁed meshes.
Image Rendering
The scene was lit to minimize shadows. We placed 14 point lights with energy
0.5 on a sphere with radius 1.22 (object radius normalized to 1), with lights
distributed approximately equidistant using the Fibonacci sphere algorithm.
We rendered these scenes to 224×224 images using Blender’s internal renderer.
To equate the texture appearance of the draped and unoccluded images, we
replaced the optical materials associated with the original ShapeNet meshes
with a diﬀuse material (diﬀuse color 0.75 in each RGB channel, diﬀuse intensity
0.75, and specular intensity 0.07). We used a very similar material to render
draped cloths (diﬀuse color 0.8 in each RGB channel, diﬀuse intensity 0.8, and
specular intensity 0.05). We reasoned that equating the texture appearance
in this way would aid the bottom-up neural network models in emphasizing
shape over texture (Geirhos et al., 2018).
The experimental stimuli underlying the object-under-cloth task are pub-
licly
available:
https://github.com/CNCLgithub/intuitive-physics-3d-shape
-perception-stimuli.
Approximating Shape Distance
Given two shapes from ShapeNet Si and Sj, we deﬁne a shape distance met-
ric by (1) rendering each object in a standard canonical pose, (2) passing each
image through a pretrained AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) and extracting
feature activations at the ﬁrst fully-connected layer (i.e., applying fenc as for
pseudo-likelihood evaluation during inference), and (3) evaluating the ℓ1 dis-
tance between the feature activations for each shape. The resulting measure is
similar to that used when calculating the pseudo-likelihood.
Shape Prior
Given an unoccluded context object s0, we modeled the observer’s shape
uncertainty Pru(S) as a categorical distribution over the K = 4 shapes near-
est to s0. Let dsk be the weight of the kth closest shape sk to s0; then
Pru(S = sk) ∝exp(−dsk) with 1 ≤k ≤K. The Shapenet database forms
a sparse approximation to the space of all object shapes, and we found that
the distance between an object and its closest neighbors could vary wildly;
one reason is that some object classes have many more exemplars than others.
Therefore, a prior deﬁned solely using shape distance showed high variance
across trials and was unsuitable for our purposes (e.g., it induces arbitrary

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
24
Shape perception integrates intuitive physics and analysis-by-synthesis
bias towards either the distracting or matching object from trial to trial). The
unnormalized weights for each nearest shape were instead assigned based on
the rank order of their distance to the context object, starting at ds1 = 750
and increasing at increments of 75 so that dsk = 750 + (k −1)75. The scale
of these weights was chosen so that the relative contributions of the prior and
likelihood were comparable.
Inference Using Bayesian Optimization
In comparison with traditional inference schemes based on random-walk
MCMC (Cranmer et al., 2020), Bayesian optimization provides a more guided
or “active” approach to inference, where the next scene hypothesis to evaluate
the posterior on is informed by all of the previous evaluations of the posterior.
In adopting Bayesian optimization, we forego full posterior estimation (which
MCMC can provide in principle) in favor of a good point maximum a posteriori
(MAP) estimate. This choice is further motivated by the computational cost
of cloth simulation, which is responsible for nearly all of the work our model
must do. BayesOpt requires many fewer iterations, and therefore cloth sim-
ulations, than random-walk MCMC. It trades expensive overhead (compared
to other methods) in choosing search candidates for greater search eﬃciency
(Snoek et al., 2012).
Following Kandasamy et al. (2015), we sought to learn a function from
latent scene variables (i.e., shape and rotation) to their (unnormalized) log
posterior scores. By specifying a tractable Gaussian Process (GP) prior over
functions and conditioning on all available data, BayesOpt yields an online
strategy for adaptively choosing parameter settings to evaluate and prescribes
how the results update the GP posterior. The uncertainty in the GP approxi-
mation of the log posterior score decreases as the number of inference iterations
increases (i.e., as more evaluations of the posterior are observed). This prob-
abilistic approximation is computationally cheap to evaluate and has support
over the entire range of scene hypotheses (i.e., can be evaluated for any scene
hypothesis including those that are previously not evaluated).
BayesOpt requires speciﬁcation of the GP kernel, which encodes prior
assumptions about (e.g) the smoothness of functions (Rasmussen & Williams,
2006), and an acquisition function which selects the next hypothesis given
the results of all previous evaluations. In our work, we used a Mat´ern kernel
with ν = 1.5 (the Mat´ern 3/2 kernel) and Automatic Relevance Deter-
mination (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006) to learn a probabilistic mapping
from latent scene hypothesis onto posterior scores; and we use the Expected
Improvement (EI) as our acquisition function, which favors scene hypothe-
ses that are expected to most improve the posterior score. Each iteration of
BayesOpt consists of (i) updating the estimated regression function (from
scene hypotheses to posterior scores) and (ii) optimizing the acquisition func-
tion to determine which scene hypothesis to evaluate in the next iteration. We
next describe each of these two components.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Shape perception integrates intuitive physics and analysis-by-synthesis
25
Scene hypotheses are coded specially for BayesOpt. We represent rotations
using normalized Euler angles R = {Rx, Ry, Rz}, with each orthogonal axis
taking values in [0, 1] and together spanning the half-sphere of rotations. The
shape variable is discrete, which we transform to a continuous encoding using
vector quantization. We map the interval [0, 0.25) to shape hypothesis (i.e.,
nearest neighbor) 1; [0.25, 0.50) maps to the next nearest neighbor, shape 2,
and so on up to shape 4. The GP therefore learns a regression function from
a 4-dimensional input (three numbers for rotation, one for shape) to a scalar,
the log posterior score.
With this GP approximation at hand, we deﬁne an “acquisition function”
which uses the current GP state to select the most promising scene hypothe-
sis to try in the next iteration j + 1, (S(j+1), R(j+1)). Various active sampling
(or learning) heuristics are proposed in the literature (see e.g. J¨arvenp¨a¨a et al.
(2019); Kandasamy et al. (2015); Snoek et al. (2012)). We adopt the EI acqui-
sition function (Snoek et al., 2012), which chooses the scene hypothesis that is
expected to most improve the current posterior score, given all of the previous
posterior evaluations. At each iteration j of our model, the inference procedure
evaluates a scene hypothesis chosen to optimize the EI acquisition function. EI
uses a parameter, denoted ϵ (set to 330 in our simulations), to trade-oﬀbetween
how much to weigh the predicted posterior score vs. the uncertainty around
that prediction (notice that the GP-based probabilistic regression provides
both the predicted mean posterior score and variance around that prediction
for the entire range of scene hypotheses). To ﬁnd the scene hypothesis that
optimizes EI, we generate 100, 000 random scene hypotheses and use the high-
est scoring to initialize further local search (using L-BFGS-B). This procedure
yields the scene hypothesis (Sj, Rj) to be evaluated in the next iteration of
the model. We evaluate the posterior at this scene hypothesis using Eq. 1.
We implemented our inference scheme using the BayesOpt (Nogueira, 2014)
and GPy (GPy, 2012) packages. Code implementing the PbAS model (as well
as our behavioral data and analysis) will be made publicly available before
publication.
Bottom-Up Models
We tested three DCNN architectures: AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012),
ResNet50 (He et al., 2016), and VGG16 (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014). These
models provide powerful feature hierarchies that are learned as a result of
training to classify images from the large-scale real-world ImageNet (Deng et
al., 2009) dataset.
Imagesets for Fine-tuning
Imagesets for ﬁne-tuning were derived from the 5 shapes/category × 10 cat-
egories = 50 object shapes. These are the identical set of objects as those
underlying the experimental training trials used to familiarize human partici-
pants with the task. (We note that in our behavioral experiments, we did not

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
26
Shape perception integrates intuitive physics and analysis-by-synthesis
provide feedback during the training phase and indeed did not ﬁnd any evi-
dence of learning in our behavioral data; see Fig. S5.) We used 8 imagesets per
occlusion condition, with 500 unique trials in each set giving 500 × 8 = 4000
image triplets. (We evaluated how the amount of data used for ﬁne-tuning
inﬂuenced performance, ﬁnding that performance plateaued at 8 imagesets,
compared with alternative groups of 1, 2, 8, 18, 28, and 38 imagesets). For
each triplet, we sampled two objects and randomly rotated, draped, and ren-
dered them using our stimulus generation pipeline. We reserved 2 imagesets
for test and the remaining were used for training. To minimize bias, a set of
8 imagesets was sampled from a larger pool of 54 at the beginning of each
ﬁne-tuning procedure. We ﬁne-tuned each model 32 times for each occlusion
condition and report accuracy averaged over the condition-speciﬁc replicas.
Modifying Network Architectures for Fine-tuning
To ﬁne-tune AlexNet and VGGG16, we removed their top classiﬁcation layer
and replaced it with a linear fully connected layer of size 120. We trained the
linear layer from scratch and ﬁne-tuned the weights of the layer preceding it.
Unlike AlexNet and VGG16, the ResNet-50 model does not contain multi-
ple ﬁnal fully-connected layers; thus, we used a modiﬁed approach to ﬁne-tune
it.We replaced both its top classiﬁcation layer as well as the preceding Aver-
age Pooling layer with a convolutional layer with kernel size 2, stride 2, and
dilation 2, without zero-padding. This convolutional layer takes as input 2048
feature maps (the number of output feature maps in the fourth Residual Block
of the ResNet-50 model) each with dimensionality 7 × 7 and outputs 300 fea-
ture maps (each with dimensionality 3 × 3). The ReLU activation function is
applied to the ﬂattened outputs of this convolutional layer, which is followed
by a single linear fully-connected layer of size 120. We trained the weights of
the new convolutional layer as well as the fully-connected layer from scratch,
while keeping all other weights in the network unchanged.
Details of the Training Procedure
To adapt the networks to our visual matching task, we used metric learning
with a triplet margin loss (Schultz & Joachims, 2003). The goal is to adapt the
network’s representational space so that distance in that space reﬂects the sim-
ilarity structure of our stimuli. Concretely, the distance between an “anchor”
image and a “positive example” should be smaller than the distance between
the anchor and “negative example”. A training triplet has the same structure
as our behavioral match-to-sample task setup: anchor corresponds to the tar-
get item; positive example corresponds to the ground-truth matching test item;
and the negative example corresponds to the distractor test item. (Remember
that the training datasets are crafted diﬀerently for each occlusion condition
and diﬀerent networks are trained for each of these occlusion conditions.) We
ﬁne-tuned each architecture for a total of 200 epochs and used a held-out test
set to make sure the models did not overﬁt over the course of training.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Shape perception integrates intuitive physics and analysis-by-synthesis
27
We set batch size to 8 and set the triplet loss margin to 2.0. We used
the ADAM optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2015) with ASMGrad (Reddi, Kale, &
Kumar, 2018) using the following optimization parameters. We set β1 to 0.9,
β2 to 0.999, learning rate to 1.2 × 10−6 and ℓ2 weight decay to 1.8 × 10−3 at
the beginning of training. In an attempt to optimize the performance of the
bottom-up networks, we explored a range of custom learning rate schedules
as well as regularization methods. During training, we scheduled the learning
rate as the following. The learning rate is multiplied by 1.2 from epoch 1
to epoch 12. From epoch 13 to epoch 161, the learning rate is annealed by
multiplying it with 0.985, after which it was kept constant until epoch 200. In
addition, to avoid overﬁtting, we employ regularization using a weight decay
strategy and data augmentation. From epoch 13 to 161, we multiply the weight
decay parameter by 1.04 and 1.03 in ﬁne-tuning the occluded and unoccluded
task conditions, respectively. (We observed that without this scheduled weight
decay, models essentially memorized the training image set, giving rise to a
substantial discrepancy between training and test performance.) As a form
of data augmentation, during training, we randomly perturb each image by
adding white noise (variance set to 8.3×10−3) with probability 0.3 (the added
noise was restricted to the foreground pixels). All pixel values were truncated
to ensure that their values lie between 0 and 1.
Evaluation of the bottom-up models on the
object-under-cloth task
The accuracy of the pretrained bottom-up model on a given trial was calculated
using the following procedure. Recall that each trial in the object-under-cloth
task consists of three images: the target item, the matching test item, and the
distractor test item. We compute a feature embedding of each of these three
images from the ﬁrst fully-connected layer of the network. We deﬁne a correct
answer (accuracy=1 for this trial) from the network if the correlation between
the embeddings of the target item and the matching test item (denoted corrm)
is greater than the correlation between the embeddings of the target item and
the distractor test item (denoted corrd). Otherwise, the network got the trial
wrong (accuracy=0). The accuracy levels of the pretrained bottom-up model
underlying Fig. 4D, F are calculated in this way.
In Fig. 5 where we require a continuous covariate per trial from each model
(as opposed to a binary accuracy label), we use Luce’s choice rule (i.e., soft-
max) to transform the above mentioned correlation values to a continuous
score: corrm/(corrm +corrd). Notice that the model predictions in Fig. 5B are
normalized to the range of [0, 1] for all models.
The trial-level accuracy of the ﬁne-tuned model is calculated in a manner
similar to the PbAS model. For a given trial and a ﬁne-tuned network, we select
the test item that is closer to the target item as the network’s guess and report
the fraction of correct guesses (i.e., the closest test item was the matching test
item) across the ensemble of 32 independently ﬁne-tuned networks.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
28
Shape perception integrates intuitive physics and analysis-by-synthesis
Behavioral Methods
Participants
A total of 173 participants were recruited from Amazon’s crowdsourcing plat-
form Mechanical Turk. The experiment took about 20 minutes to complete.
Each participant was paid $1.50. A total of 12 subjects were excluded due
to performing at or below chance performance (1 in Unoccluded-1sec; 4 in
Occluded-1sec; 3 in Occluded-2secs; and 4 in Occluded-Unlimited). Approval
for our behavioral study was obtained from the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology Institutional Review Board (the Committee on the Use of Humans
as Experimental Subjects), and we obtained each participant’s informed
consent prior to any experimental session.
Stimuli and Procedure
We used 240 unique ShapeNet meshes from 10 object categories to create the
120 match-to-sample shape pairs in our task. We selected 24 objects from
each category and allocated them evenly between the same-category (target
and distractor from same object category) and diﬀerent-category conditions,
pairing each shape with another from the same category or a diﬀerent cate-
gory as appropriate. Pairings were sampled randomly without replacement. We
thus obtained 6 same-category and 6 diﬀerent-category pairs for each object
category, with no duplicate shapes across trials.
We designed a visual matching experiment based on the object-under-cloth
task. The experiment assigned participants to either the occluded or unoc-
cluded conditions as well as one of three conditions varying presentation time
lengths, for a between-subject design with 2 occlusion × 3 presentation time
= 6 conditions. In the 1- and 2-second conditions, the target and test items
were displayed for the indicated period of time and the unlimited time condi-
tion let participants view the items for as long as they wished, i.e. until their
response. Images appeared and disappeared simultaneously.
The spatial organization of the display diﬀered slightly by occlusion con-
dition. In the unoccluded condition, the two test images were placed side by
side, below the target item; for the occluded condition, the test images were
placed side by side but above the target.
Participants completed 10 practice trials before moving on to the 120 exper-
imental trials. Participants were provided with running feedback, seeing their
average task performance at every 5th trial throughout the experiment except
during the practice block (the performance feedback calculation excluded
practice trial accuracy).
Split-Half Correlations
To estimate the data noise ceiling, we used bootstrapped split-half correlations.
We sampled 1000 random splits of our participants in each occlusion condition

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Shape perception integrates intuitive physics and analysis-by-synthesis
29
(only considering the unlimited presentation time condition), each split divid-
ing the participants into two groups of equal size. (Participants were sampled
without replacement for each partition.) For a single division (one random
split) of participants, we computed the average accuracy of each split-half on
each trial, then correlated the group accuracies across all trials. (In essence,
we used the responses of one split of participants to model the responses of
the other half.) We did the same for each of the 1000 random splits, yielding
1000 bootstrap estimates of the behavioral noise ceiling and allowing us to
assess their average value and spread. But because this procedure eﬀectively
halved our participant number, our split-half correlations likely underestimate
the true noise ceiling.
