Towards the Next Generation of Retinal Neuroprosthesis: Visual Computation with Spikes
Zhaofei Yua,b, Jian K. Liuc,∗, Shanshan Jiaa,b, Yichen Zhanga,b, Yajing Zhenga,b, Yonghong Tiana,b, Tiejun Huanga,b
aNational Engineering Laboratory for Video Technology, School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
bPeng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
c Centre for Systems Neuroscience, Department of Neuroscience, Psychology and Behaviour, University of Leicester, Leicester, UK
Abstract
Neuroprosthesis, as one type of precision medicine device, is aiming for manipulating neuronal signals of the brain in a closed-loop
fashion, together with receiving stimulus from the environment and controlling some part of our brain/body. In terms of vision,
incoming information can be processed by the brain in millisecond interval. The retina computes visual scenes and then sends its
output as neuronal spikes to the cortex for further computation. Therefore, the neuronal signal of interest for retinal neuroprosthesis
is spike. Closed-loop computation in neuroprosthesis includes two stages: encoding stimulus to neuronal signal, and decoding it
into stimulus. Here we review some of the recent progress about visual computation models that use spikes for analyzing natural
scenes, including static images and dynamic movies. We hypothesize that for a better understanding of computational principles
in the retina, one needs a hypercircuit view of the retina, in which diﬀerent functional network motifs revealed in the cortex
neuronal network should be taken into consideration for the retina. Diﬀerent building blocks of the retina, including a diversity
of cell types and synaptic connections, either chemical synapses or electrical synapses (gap junctions), make the retina an ideal
neuronal network to adapt the computational techniques developed in artiﬁcial intelligence for modeling of encoding/decoding
visual scenes. Altogether, one needs a systems approach of visual computation with spikes to advance the next generation of retinal
neuroprosthesis as an artiﬁcial visual system.
Keywords: Visual Coding, Retina, Neuroprosthesis, Brain-machine Interface, Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Deep Learning, Spiking
Neural Network, Probabilistic Graphical Model
1. Introduction
The concept of precision medicine has been proposed for a
few years. Mostly, it has been referred to customize healthcare
to individual patient. Nowadays, the advancements of artiﬁ-
cial intelligence techniques, including both hardware and soft-
ware/algorithm, make the process of healthcare more precise
for each individual patient such that the communication be-
tween healthcare device/service and patient is speciﬁcally de-
signed and justiﬁed.
Neuroprosthesis is such a precise medicine device. As a way
of therapy besides traditional pharmacological treatment, it usu-
ally has a direct interaction with neuronal activity, in particular,
neuronal spikes, for each individual brain [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
9]. It consists of a series of devices that could substitute some
part of our body and/or brain, such as motor, sensory and cogni-
tive modality that has been damaged. As the brain is the central
hub to control and exchange information used by our motor,
sensory and cognitive behavior, the performance of neuropros-
thesis has to rely on how to better analyze the neuronal signal
used by neuroprosthesis. Therefore, besides the development of
neuroprosthesis hardware, better algorithms are the core feature
of neuroprosthesis for better performance [6, 10, 11].
∗Corresponding author.

Motor neuroprosthesis has a long history with intensive stud-
ies, in particular with the recent techniques where cortical neu-
ronal spikes can be well recorded and used to control neuro-
prosthesis [6]. In term of sensory neuroprosthesis, cochlear im-
plants are severed as the most widely used neuroprosthesis, and
have a fair good performance for helping hearing loss, although
there are many remaining questions about how to improve its
performance in a noisy environment and its eﬀect on neuronal
activity of downstream auditory cortex [11, 12]. However, in
contrast to the intensive computational modeling of cochlear
implants [11], retinal neuroprosthesis is much less well studied,
and has a much worse performance for restoring the eyesight,
although a few types of retinal neuroprosthesis are being used
in clinical trials [13, 14].
The retina consists of three layers of neurons with pho-
toreceptors, bipolar cells, and ganglion cells together with in-
hibitory horizontal and amacrine cells in between. Photorecep-
tors receive the incoming light signal encoded natural environ-
ment and transform it into the electrical activity that is modu-
lated by horizontal cells. Then these activities are sent to bipo-
lar cells and amacrine cells to further processing. In the end,
all of these signals go to the output side of the retina, where
retinal ganglion cells, as the only output neurons, produce a se-
quence of action potentials or spikes, which are transmitted via
the optic nerve to various downstream brain regions. Essen-
tially, all the visual information about our environment, both in
Preprint submitted to
January 14, 2020
arXiv:2001.04064v1  [q-bio.NC]  13 Jan 2020

space and time, is encoded by these spatiotemporal patterns of
spikes from ganglion cells.
Many types of eye diseases are caused by neuronal degener-
ation of photoreceptors, whereas the outputs of the retina, gan-
glion cells, remain healthy. One type of therapy would be to
develop an advanced retinal prosthesis to directly stimulate gan-
glion cells with an array of electrodes. Retinal neuroprosthesis
also has a relatively long history of research [15]. However,
much eﬀort is dedicated to material design of retinal neuropros-
thesis hardware [13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18]. Recently, it has been
suggested that employing better neural coding algorithms were
able to improve the performance of retinal neuroprosthesis [10],
where it was shown that on top of neuroprosthesis, reconstruc-
tion of visual scenes can be signiﬁcantly improved by adding
an encoder converting input images into spiking codes used by
retinal ganglion cells, then using these codes to drive transduc-
ers, such as electrodes, optogenetic stimulators, or other com-
ponents for vision restoration.
Therefore, one needs better computational models to advance
the performance of retinal neuroprosthesis. Comparing to other
neuroprostheses where stimulus signals are relatively simple,
retinal neuroprostheses deal with dynamical visual scenes in
space and time with higher order correlations.
Low perfor-
mance is mainly due to a major diﬃculty that there is no clear
understanding of how ganglion cells encode rich visual scenes.
Much of our knowledge has been documented through exper-
iments with simple artiﬁcial stimuli, such as white noise im-
ages, bars, and gratings, etc. It remains unclear how our retina
processes complex natural images with its neuronal underpin-
nings. In recent years, artiﬁcial intelligence has seen remark-
able progress in analyzing complex visual scenes, including
natural images and movies. Thus, now it is possible to develop
novel functional artiﬁcial intelligence models to study the en-
coding and decoding of natural scenes by analyzing retinal gan-
glion cell spiking responses.
In this paper, we review some of the recent progress on this
topic. Most of the studies on visual coding can be roughly clas-
siﬁed into two streams. The ﬁrst and traditional stream can be
named as feature-based modeling approach, where visual fea-
tures or ﬁlters can be aligned with some biophysical properties,
such as receptive ﬁeld, of the retinal neurons. The second and
relative new stream can be named as sampling-based modeling
approach, where statistics of visual scenes, such as pixels, are
formulated by some probabilistic models. We review some of
the core ideas emerged from both approaches for analysis of vi-
sual scenes with the utility of neural spikes with the aim for the
next generation of retinal neuroprosthesis where computational
modelling plays an essential role.
The organization of this review is as follows.
Sec. 2 gives an introduction of the biological underpinnings
of the retina with a focus on its inner neuronal circuit. We em-
phasize that the retinal circuit carries out rich computations that
are beyond the dynamics of single cells of the retina.
In Sec. 3, in contrast to the view that the retina is a simple
neural network, we hypothesize that the retina is highly com-
plex and comparable to some aspects of the cortex with diﬀer-
ent network motifs for specialized computations to extract vi-
sual feature. In particular, we outline three views of the retinal
neuronal circuit as feedforward, recurrent and winner-take-all
network structures. For each of these three viewpoints, we pro-
vide some evidence and recent results that ﬁt into the proposed
framework.
In Sec. 4, feature-based modeling approach is discussed,
where the models of encoding and decoding visual scenes based
on feature extraction by the retina are reviewed. For encod-
ing, we ﬁrst summarize biophysical models that directly ana-
lyze and ﬁt neuronal spikes to obtain some neuronal properties
such as receptive ﬁeld of the neuron. Then we review some en-
coding models based on artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs) that
use recent state-of-the-art machine learning techniques to ad-
dress complex natural scenes. For decoding, however, one has
to rely on statistical and machine learning models aiming for
reconstruction of visual scenes from neuronal spikes. We re-
view some of these decoders with an emphasis on how they can
be used for retinal neuroprosthesis to get a better performance
for both static images and dynamical videos.
In Sec. 5, sampling-based modeling approach is discussed,
where we give an overview of the retinal circuitry in which vi-
sual computation can be implemented by probabilistic graph
models and spiking neuronal networks, such that diﬀerent func-
tional networks can conduct visual computations observed in
the retina. We ﬁrst introduce the basis of neural computation
with spikes. Some modeling frameworks about neuronal spikes
and spiking neural networks (SNNs) are discussed with a sam-
pling perspective. We then propose that studying of the retinal
computation should go beyond the classical description of dy-
namics of neurons and neural networks by taking into account
probabilistic inference. We review some of the recent results
about how to implement probabilistic inference with SNNs.
Traditionally, these approaches are applied to theoretical stud-
ies of the visual cortex. Here we demonstrate that how one can
use these similar computational approaches for the retinal com-
putation.
Finally, Sec.5 concludes the paper with discussion for some
possible research directions in the future.
2. Visual computation in neuronal circuit of the retina
Fig. 1 shows a typical setup of the retinal neuronal circuit.
Roughly, there are three layers of networks consisted of a few
types of neurons. Following the information ﬂow of optical vi-
sual scenes, photoreceptors convert the light with a wide spec-
trum of intensities, from dim to bright, and colors, from red,
green to blue, into electrical signals that are then modulated by
inhibitory horizontal cells. Next, these signals are transferred
to excitatory bipolar cells that carry out complex computations.
The outputs of bipolar cells are mostly viewed as graded sig-
nals, however, the recent evidence suggests that bipolar cells
could generate some fast spiking events [19]. Then, inhibitory
amacrine cells modulate these outputs in diﬀerent ways to make
computations more eﬃcient, speciﬁc and diverse [20]. At the
ﬁnal stage of the retina, the signals pass to the ganglion cells
for ﬁnal processing. In the end, ganglion cells send their spikes
to the thalamus and cortex for higher cognition.
2

Fig. 1. Illustration of the retinal neuronal circuit. Visual scenes are converted by photoreceptors at the ﬁrst layer, where rods encode
the dim light, and cones encode color. Then the signals, after modulated by horizontal cells, send to bipolar cells at the second
layer. The outputs are sent to the third layer consisted of amacrine cells and ganglion cells for further processing. Final signals of
the retina are the spikes of ganglion cells transferred to the cortex. Besides chemical synapses between cells, massive gap junctions
exist between diﬀerent and same types of cells, e.g. ganglion-ganglion cells.
Each type of neuron in the retina has a large variation of
morphology, for example, it has been suggested that in the
mouse retina, there are about 14 types of bipolar cells [21, 22],
40 types of amacrine cells [23], and 30 types of ganglion
cells [24]. Besides neurons, one unique feature of any neu-
ronal circuitry is the connections between neurons. Typically,
connections between neurons in the retina are formed by vari-
ous types of chemical synapses. However, there are a massive
number of electrical synaptic connections, or gap junctions,
between diﬀerent types of cells and within the same type of
cells [25, 26, 27, 28]. It remains unclear what is the functional
role of these gap junctions [25]. We hypothesize that gap junc-
tions have a functional role of recurrent connections to enhance
visual computation in the retina, which will be discussed in later
sections.
In the ﬁeld of the retinal research, most of the studies are
based on the traditional view that neurons in the retina have
static receptive ﬁelds that are considered as spatiotemporal ﬁl-
ters to extract local features from visual scenes. We also know
that the retina has many levels of complexities in the infor-
mation processing, from photoreceptors, bipolar cells, to gan-
glion cells. In addition, the functional role of modulation of in-
hibitory horizontal and amacrine cells are still unclear [20, 29].
Perhaps, the only relative well-understood example is the com-
putation of direction selectivity in the retina [30, 31, 32, 33].
The retinal ganglion cells are the only output of the retina,
but their activities are tightly coupled and highly interactive
with the rest of the retina. These interactions not only make
the retinal circuitry complicated in its structure, but also make
the underlying computation much richer for visual processing.
Therefore, the retina should be considered smarter than what
scientists believed [34]. These observations lead us to rethink
the functional and structural properties of the retina. Given such
a complexity of neurons and neuronal circuits in the retina, we
propose that the computations of visual scenes carried by the
retina need to go beyond the view that the retina is just like a
feedforward network making the information go through. Like
the cortical cortex, the retina also has lateral inhibition and re-
current connections (e.g. gap junctions), which make the retina
inherit various motifs of neural networks for speciﬁc compu-
tation of extracting diﬀerent features of visual scenes, just like
the visual processing occurred in the visual cortex [35, 36, 37].
It should be noted that compared to the visual cortex, the de-
tailed understanding of computation and function of the retina
for visual processing has just emerged in recent several decades.
Nowadays, the retinal computation of visual scenes by its neu-
rons and neuronal circuits is also reﬁned at many diﬀerent lev-
els, for details, see recent reviews on neuroscience advance-
ments on the retina [20, 21, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 34].
3

3. Computational framework for the retina
Diﬀerent pieces of neuroscience experimental evidence from
the retinal circuit seems to be hard to unify from the viewpoint
of biology [38]. Here we instead hypothesize that one has to
study the computation carried out by the retinal circuit with a
combination of diverse neural network structure motifs. Such
an as-yet-to-emerge computational framework could beneﬁt our
understanding of visual computation by utilizing emerged ma-
chine learning techniques in recent years [39]. When looking
at the complete overview of the retinal neuronal circuitry as
in Fig. 1, it seems rather complicated. After extracting some
features of network structures, there are some simple network
motifs emerged. Here we only focus on three types of network
structures: feedforward, recurrent and winner-take-all networks
as illustrated in Fig. 2, and hypothesize that they play diﬀerent
functional roles in visual computation of the retina. However,
the retina is more than a hybrid of these three network motifs,
but consists of multiple types of networks to form a hypercir-
cuit [38], where more computational features can be extracted
with the advancement of experimental and computational tech-
niques. Such a hypercircuit view provides the biological basis
for a potential uniﬁed framework of the retinal computation,
although how these diﬀerent networks work together more eﬃ-
ciently for visual computation is still an open question.
3.1. Feedforward network
Feedforward network is the most classical view of the retina
as the direction of the visual information ﬂow as in Fig. 2(A-
B). Feedforward information ﬂow of the light goes through
the retina by three major types of cells, photoreceptors, bipo-
lar cells and ganglion cells. The other two types of inhibitory
cells play a modulation role, which has been ignored simply in
this viewpoint. The biological basis of this view can be seen
from the fovea where excitatory cells play a major role, but in-
hibitions are little [40]. In the fovea, there is a direct cascade
processing from photoreceptors, to bipolar cells, and then gan-
glion cells as outputs.
The advantage of feedforward network has been demon-
strated by the advancement of ANNs in recent years, in par-
ticular, some breakthroughs have been made in the framework
of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [39]. A simple
CNN with three layers as in the retina is shown in Fig. 2(C),
where a convolutional ﬁlter plays a role of the receptive ﬁeld
of retinal cell. A cascade processing of visual inputs is com-
puted by the receptive ﬁeld of each individual neuron in the
retina. The pooling of computation from the previous layer
passes to a neuron in the next layer. Recent studies highlight
the similarity between the structure of CNNs and retinal neural
circuitry [41, 42], which will be discussed in later sections.
3.2. Recurrent network
Recurrent network has been seen as a major type in the cor-
tical cortex. The dynamics of recurrent network [43, 44, 45],
together with the diversity of synaptic dynamics and plastici-
ties [46, 47], are important for understanding the brain’s func-
tion. Here we hypothesize that recurrent connections are also
important for the retina. The formation of recurrent connec-
tions in the retina is mainly produced by a massive number
of gap junctions as in Fig. 2(A). Unlike chemical synapses,
gap junctions are bidirectional or symmetric. Within and be-
tween all types of cells in the retina, gap junctions are used to
form short connections between neighboring cells. However,
the functional role of these gap junctions remains unclear [25].
From the computational viewpoint, recurrent connections
formed by gap junctions make the retinal circuit like a prob-
abilistic graphical model (PGM) of undirected Markov ran-
dom ﬁeld (MRF) as in Fig. 2(B-C). PGM provides a powerful
formalism for multivariate statistical modeling by combining
graph theory and probability theory [48]. It has been widely
used in computer vision and computational neuroscience. In
contrast to MRF, there is another type of PGM that is mainly
referred to Bayesian network, in which the connections have
a direction between nodes.
Fig. 2(C) shows one type of
Bayesian network, termed hidden Markov model (HMM). In
recent years, much eﬀort has been dedicated to implement these
PGMs by SNNs, which setup an insightful connection between
artiﬁcial machine computation by PGMs and neural computa-
tion observed in the brain, as well as visual computation in the
retina.
3.3. Winner-take-all network
Finally, we hypothesize that the retinal circuit has a compu-
tational network unit as winner-take-all (WTA) motif. In the
cortical cortex, WTA circuit has been suggested as a powerful
computational network motif to implement normalization [49],
visual attention [50], classiﬁcation [51], and others [52].
In the retina, there are two types of inhibitory neurons sit-
ting in the ﬁrst two layers. Horizontal cells target photorecep-
tors and relay the light information to bipolar cells. Amacrine
cells modulate the signals between bipolar cell terminals and
ganglion cell dendrites. In both types of cells, there are some
speciﬁc subtypes that are wide-ﬁled or polyaxonal such that
they spread action potentials over a long distance greater than 1
mm [38]. From the computational viewpoint, this hypercircuit
feature of the retina plays a similar functional role as a WTA
network motif. The recent study shows that MRF can be im-
plemented by a network of WTA circuit, which suggest that the
WTA could be the minimal unit of probabilistic inference for
visual computation [53].
3.4. Rich computation with network motifs
Above we brieﬂy reviewed the retinal circuitry and pointed
out three basic neural network motifs that play a role as units for
complex computations conducted in the retina. However, there
are more diﬀerent network motifs suggested in cortical micro-
circuits [37], and these motifs are also suggested to involved
in the retinal computation to form the retinal hypecircuit [38].
Such a hypercircuit view of the retina makes most of the meth-
ods, which are developed for studying visual processing in the
cortex, transfer to investigate the retinal computation that em-
bed rich dynamics beyond the traditional view of the retina [34].
In particular, quite a few visual functions have been found to be
4

Fig. 2.
Illustration of diﬀerent computational network motifs. (A) Part of retinal circuity shows diﬀerent network motif as
feedforward, recurrent and winner-take-all (WTA) subnetwork. (B) Abstract representation of diﬀerent types of neural networks
used by modeling, where stimulus is ﬁrst represented by the activities of aﬀerent neurons, and then feed into a network of excitatory
and/or inhibitory neurons for computation. Shadowed networks indicate the same motifs. (C) Abstract computation speciﬁcally
used by certain typical ANNs, such as convolutional neural networks (ConvNNs), Markov random ﬁelds (MRFs) and hidden
Markov models (HMMs). Note ANNs can use one or mixed computational network motifs shown in (B).
implemented by some certain types of network mechanisms in
the retina, see Ref. [34] for a detailed discussion.
Recent computational advancements in the ﬁeld of ANN
make many breakthroughs on visual tasks. For instance, deep
CNN is a hierarchical network modeling of visual computa-
tion from the retina to inferior temporal part of the cortex [54].
These feature-based models take advantages of the receptive
ﬁeld to capture visual features. However, CNN models suﬀer a
few disadvantages for visual computation, for instance, the ar-
chitecture of CNN is largely lacking design principles, which
may be enhanced by biological neural networks in the brain,
including the retina [55].
On the other hands, it has been suggested that one needs a
hierarchical Bayesian inference framework to understand vi-
sual computation [56].
In such a sampling-based modeling
approach, statistical computation of visual scenes can be for-
mulated by various types of probabilistic models, where dif-
ferent types of network motifs can implement certain compu-
tations [57]. Not only in higher part of the cortex, but also
in the visual cortex, there are numerous computational tech-
niques in Bayesian models suitable for visual processing of the
retina [56].
However, these two approaches are not completely separate,
and in fact, there are more close interactions between them [55].
We will explain these ideas by using the retina as a model sys-
tem in below sections: feature-based approach will be discussed
in Sec.4, and sampling-based approach will be discussed in
Sec.5.
4. Encoding and decoding models of the retina
Neural coding is one of the central questions for systems neu-
roscience [58, 59, 60]. In particular, for visual coding, it is to
5

understand how visual scenes are represented by neuronal spik-
ing activities, and in turn, how to decode neuronal spiking activ-
ities to represent the given visual information. The retina serves
as a useful system to study these questions.
4.1. Biophysical encoding model
For understanding the encoding principles of the retina, quite
a few models are developed based on biophysical properties of
neurons and neuronal circuits in the retina, which have been re-
viewed recently [63]. Here we brieﬂy review some approaches.
The starting point for looking at retinal neuronal computa-
tion is to ﬁnd the receptive ﬁelds (RFs) of neurons. The clas-
sical approach to mapping the neuronal RF is to patch a sin-
gle cell and then vary the size of a light spot to obtain the RF
structure as a diﬀerence-of-Gaussian ﬁlter with center excita-
tion and surround inhibition. Later on, a systematic experi-
mental method was developed by using multielectrode array to
record a population of retinal ganglion cells, in which one can
manipulate light stimulation with various types of optical im-
ages, including simple bars, spots, gratings, white noise, and
complex well-controlled images and movies. In particular, one
can analyze the spike trains of individual neurons when record-
ing a large population at one time with white noise stimulus.
A simple reverse correlation technique, termed spike-triggered
average (STA) [64], can obtain the RF of every recorded gan-
glion cell. An extension of STA to covariance analysis, termed
spike-triggered covariance, serves as a powerful tool for ana-
lyzing the 2nd order dynamics of the retinal neurons [65, 66].
With the receptive ﬁeld mapped from each neuron, a simple
and useful analysis is based on a linear-nonlinear (LN) model
to simulate the cascade processing of light information. There
are two stages in the LN model [67, 68]. The ﬁrst stage is a
linear spatiotemporal ﬁlter encoding the way of integrating in-
puts, which represents the sensitive area of the cell, i.e., the
characteristic of the receptive ﬁeld. The second stage is a non-
linear transformation to convert the output of the linear ﬁlter to
a ﬁring rate. Both properties of the LN model can be easily es-
timated from the spikes with white noise stimulus [66]. Other-
wise, for complicated stimulus signals rather than white noise,
one has to use other methods, such as maximum likelihood es-
timation [67] and maximally informative dimensions [69], to
estimate the model components when there are enough data.
Until now, quite a few models are developed to reﬁne the
building blocks of LN model to advance the model to be more
powerful, such as linear-nonlinear Poisson model [65], where
after nonlinear operation, a Poisson process is used to deter-
mine whether a spike would be generated; generalized lin-
ear model [70], where several more components are included,
such as a spike history ﬁlter for adaptation, and a coupling
ﬁlter for inﬂuence of nearby neurons. Recently, the models
with a few components of subunits to mimic upstream non-
linear components are emphasized, such as nonlinear input
model [71], where a few upstream nonlinear ﬁlters are included
with the assumption that the input of the neuron is correlated;
spike-triggered covariance model [72, 73, 66], where covari-
ance of spike-triggered ensemble is analyzed with eigenvector
analysis to obtain a sequences of ﬁlters as a combination of
some parts of receptive ﬁeld; 2-layer linear-nonlinear network
model [74], where a cascade process is implemented by 2-layer
LN models; spike-triggered non-negative matrix factorization
(STNMF) model [75], where the orthogonality constraint used
in spike-triggered covariance is relaxed to obtain a sets of non-
orthogonal subunits shown as the bipolar cells in the retina. It
has been further shown that STNMF can recover various bio-
physical properties of upstream bipolar cells, including spa-
tial receptive ﬁelds, temporal ﬁlters, transferring nonlinearities,
synaptic connection weights from bipolar cells to ganglion cell.
In addition, a subset of spikes contributed by each bipolar cell
can also be teased apart from the whole spike train of one gan-
glion cell [61].
4.2. ANN-based encoding model
In recent years, ANNs, such as deep CNNs and probabilistic
graph models, make some breakthroughs for numerous prac-
tical tasks related to system identiﬁcation of visual informa-
tion [39]. For instance, with a large set of visual images col-
lected and well-labeled by speciﬁc tags, ANNs can outperform
the human-level performance for object recognition and classi-
ﬁcation [39]. Various techniques have been developed to visu-
alize the features of images learned by CNN. However, end-
to-end learning of complex natural images makes CNN not
very interpretable for the underlying network structure compo-
nents [77, 78].
Inspired by experimental observation in neuroscience [79,
55], a typical deep CNN has a hierarchical architecture with
many layers [80]. Out of these layers, there are some layers
having a bank of convolutional ﬁlters, such that each convolu-
tional ﬁlter is served as a feature detector to extract important
property of images [81, 82]. Therefore, after training with a
large set of images, these convolutional ﬁlters play a functional
role as neurons in our retina and other visual systems to en-
code complex statistical properties of natural images [59]. The
shapes of these ﬁlters are sparse and localized, and like recep-
tive ﬁelds of visual neurons.
Therefore, it is not trivial to use similar the ANN-based ap-
proache to investigate the central question of neuronal cod-
ing in neuroscience [83, 54]. In particular, for visual coding,
it has been widely accepted that the ventral visual pathway
in the brain is a path starting from the retina, lateral genicu-
late nucleus, then layered visual cortex to reach inferior tem-
poral part of the cortex. This visual pathway has been sug-
gested as the “what pathway” for recognition and identiﬁca-
tion of visual objects. When CNN is used to model experi-
mental neuroscience data recorded in neurons of inferior tem-
poral cortex in monkeys, neuronal response can be predicted
very well [84, 85, 86, 54]. Therefore, it is possible to relate the
biological underpinnings of visual processing in the brain with
those network structure components used in CNN. However,
it is not straightforward to interpret this relationship since the
pathway from the retina to inferior temporal cortex is compli-
cated [54]. One possible and easier way is to use CNN to model
the early visual system of the brain, in particular, the retina as
introduced above, in which neuronal organization is relatively
simple.
6

Fig. 3. Encoding visual scenes by simpliﬁed biophysical model with CNN approach. (A) Simpliﬁcation of a retinal circuitry to a
biophysical model. (Top) Feedforward network represented as part of retina circuitry receiving incoming visual scenes and sending
out spike trains from ganglion cells. (Middle) Minimal network with one ganglion cell and ﬁve bipolar cells. (Bottom) Biophysical
model with ﬁve subunits representing ﬁve bipolar cells, where each has a linear ﬁlter as the receptive ﬁeld, and a nonlinearity. The
outputs of ﬁve subunits are pooled and rectiﬁed by another output nonlinearity. The ﬁnal output can be sampled to give a spike
train. (B) Representative CNN model trained with images as input and spikes as output. Here there are two convolutional layers and
one dense layer. (C) After training, the CNN model shows the same receptive ﬁeld as the biophysical model for modeled ganglion
cell. (D) Convolutional ﬁlters after training resemble the receptive ﬁelds used by the biophysical model of bipolar cells in (A). (A)
is adapted from Ref. [61]. (B-D) are adapted from Ref. [41, 62].
Indeed, a few studies take this approach by using CNNs and
their variations to earlier visual systems in the brain, such as
the retina [41, 42, 87, 88, 62], V1 [89, 90, 91, 92, 93], and
V2 [94]. Most of these studies are driven by the goal that the
better performance of neural response can be archived by us-
ing either feedforward and recurrent neural networks (or both).
These new approaches increase the complexity level of sys-
tem identiﬁcation, compared to conventional linear/nonlinear
models [71]. Some of these studies also try to look into the
detail of network component after learning to see if and how
it is comparable to the biological structure of neuronal net-
works [41, 42, 93].
Fig. 3 shows a typical setup of CNN modeling approach for
the retina. To understand the ﬁne structure of the receptive ﬁeld
in the retinal circuit, this is important to understand the ﬁlters
leaned by CNNs. In contrast to the studies where a population
of retinal ganglion cells are used [42, 93, 95], one can sim-
plify the model from a complicated retinal circuit to a simple
network model as in Fig. 3(A), which makes the modeling eas-
ier to reﬁne the structure components at the single cell level of
the retina. Indeed, it is found that CNNs can learn their inter-
nal structure components to match the biological neurons of the
retina [42, 62], as illustrated in Fig. 3 (D).
Given that the retina has a relatively clear and simple cir-
cuit, and the eyes have (almost) no feedback connection from
the cortical cortex, it is a suitable model system as a feedfor-
ward neural network, similar to the principle of CNN. Certainly,
the contribution from the inhibitory neurons, such as horizon-
tal cells and amacrine cells, play a role for the function of the
retina. In this sense, the potential neural networks with lateral
inhibition and/or recurrent units are desirable [87, 95].
4.3. Decoding visual scenes from retinal spikes
From the viewpoint of retinal neuroprosthesis, an ideal en-
coder model is able to deliver precise stimulation to electrodes
with given visual scenes. For this, one has to close the loop
to ﬁnd an ideal decoder model that can readout and reconstruct
stimulus of visual scenes from neuronal responses.
Reconstruction of visual scenes has been studied over many
years.
The neuronal signals of interest can be fMRI hu-
man brain activities [96, 97, 98, 99], neuronal spikes in the
7

Image
RGC population
RGC spikes
Spike-Image Decoder
Dense 
(# RGC)
Conv filter
Dense 
(512)
 Dense 
(# Pixel)
Decoder
RGC spikes
Image-Image autoencoder
Spike-Image converter
End
End
Spike-Image Decoder
Image
Decoded image
Neuron #
1 s
Neuron #
Intermediate image
Fig. 4.
Decoding visual scenes from neuronal spikes. (Top) Workﬂow of decoding visual scenes. Here a salamander swimming
video was presented to a salamander retina to get a population of ganglion cells ﬁred with a sequence of spikes. A population of
spike trains is used to train a decoder, spike-image decoder, to reconstruct the same video. Receptive ﬁelds of ganglion cells are
mapped onto the image. Each colored circle is an outline of receptive ﬁeld. (Bottom) Spike-image decoder is an end-to-end decoder
with two stages: spike-image converter used to map a population of spikes to a pixel-level preliminary image, and image-image
autoencoder for mapping every pixel to the target pixels in the desired images. Note that there is no unique architecture of spike-
image decoder, and the state-of-art model could be adopted and optimized. Exact preliminary images depend on the loss functions
used for training. Details of the decoding process can be found in Ref. [76] and online (see Sec. 5).
retina [100, 101, 102, 103] and lateral geniculate nucleus [104],
neuronal calcium imaging data in V1 [105]. However, the de-
coding performance of current methods is rather low for natural
scenes, either static natural images or dynamical movies. One
particularly interesting example of the movies reconstructed
from fMRI data can be found from Ref. [98].
For the retinal neuroprosthesis, one would expect to decode
visual scenes by using spiking responses of a population of gan-
glion cells. Decoding of visual scenes is possible when there
are enough retinal ganglion cells available as shown in a recent
study with simulated retinal ganglion cells [101]. However, it is
unclear whether one can use experimental data to achieve this
aim. One can name this decoding approach as a spike-image
decoder that performs an end-to-end training process from neu-
ronal spikes to visual scenes.
Recently, we developed such a decoder with a model of deep
learning neural network that can achieve a much better reso-
lution than previous studies for reconstructing natural visual
scenes, including both static images and dynamic videos, from
spike trains of a population of retinal ganglion cells recorded
simultaneously [76].
The workﬂow of the spike-image decoder is illustrated in
Fig. 4. With a setup of multi-electrode array, a large population
of the retinal ganglion cells can be recorded simultaneously, and
their spikes can be extracted. Then, a spike-image converter is
used to map spikes of every ganglion cell to images at the pixel
level. After that, one can apply autoencoder deep learning neu-
ral network to transfer/enhance spike-based images to original
stimulus images. Essentially, this approach has two stages with
one as spike-image converter and the other as image-image au-
toencoder. Most of the previous studies focused on the ﬁrst
stage, which is the traditional decoder to be optimized by some
statistical models and/or ANN-based models in either linear or
nonlinear fashion [96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104]. A
recent study trained a separate CNN autoencoder as the second
stage to enhance the quality of images [101]. Instead, we found
a better quality can be achieved by the end-to-end training pro-
cess with both stages of spike-to-image converter and image-to-
image autoencoder together. However, the detailed architecture
of networks used in these two stages could be optimized to an
even better quality with other possible deep learning neural net-
works.
5. Modeling the retina with SNNs and PGMs
SNNs are thought as the third generation of ANN models,
which use neuronal spikes for computation as in the brain [108].
Together with neuronal and synaptic states, the importance of
spike timing is also considered in SNNs. It has been proved
that SNNs are computationally more powerful than other ANNs
8

A
ix
jx
i
j
MRF
1
iz
2
iz
k
iz
K
iz
l
jz
1
jz
2
jz
L
jz
WTA
x
x
CNN
Photoreceptor net
Gap junction
C
Input
Output
Noisy Image
Photoreceptors
Denoised Image
B
1x
2x
3x
4x
5x
6x
7x
8x
9x
D
MRF
Noisy Image
Recurrent Neural Net
Denoised Image
Fig. 5.
Implementation of noise reduction computation with the retinal photoreceptors, probabilistic graph model and spiking
neural network. (A) A network of rod photoreceptors connected by gap junctions. (B) A graph of Markov random ﬁeld (MRF)
represented by a network of spiking neurons with subnetworks as winner-take-all (WTA) circuits. Each variable of MRF is rep-
resented by one WTA neural network. (C) Noisy images can be denoised by photoreceptor network, then enhanced by CNN. (D)
Noisy images can be denoised by MRF implemented by a recurrent spiking neuron network without enhancement. (A) and (C) are
adapted from Ref. [106]. (B) is adapted from Ref. [53]. (D) is adapted from Ref. [107].
with the same number of neurons [108]. In recent years, SNNs
have been widely studied in a number of research areas [109,
110, 111]. In particular, recent studies show that SNNs can be
combined with a deep architecture of multiple layers to obtain
the similar or better performance as ANNs [112, 113, 114, 115,
116]. In addition, the spiking feature of SNNs is particularly
important for the next generation of neuromorphic computer
chips [117, 118].
The computational capability of a single neuron is limited.
However, when a population of neurons are connected together
to form a network, their computational ability can be greatly
expanded. In terms of the language of graphs [119], a SNN can
be denoted as a graph G = (V, E), of which V represents the set
of neurons and E ⊂V ×V represents the set of synapses. Given
this equivalence between graphs and neural networks, a dif-
ferent approach termed probabilistic graphical models (PGMs),
has also been intensively studied over recent years. The idea of
PGM is in that, traditionally, both ANNs and SNNs are doing
modeling as a deterministic dynamical system, which has been
demonstrated by the classical Hodgkin-Huxley model [120].
However, the computational principles used in the brain seem
to go beyond this viewpoint [57].
There is an increasing volume of neuroscience evidence that
humans and monkeys (other animals as well) can represent
probabilities and implement probabilistic computation [121,
122, 123], and the viewpoint of the probabilistic brain is in-
creasingly recognized [124]. Therefore, the network of spiking
neurons has been used to implement probabilistic inference at
the neural circuit level [124]. The combination of SNNs with
probabilistic computation shows an increasing research interest
for both understanding the principles of brain computation and
solving practical problems with these brain-inspired principles.
Traditionally, probabilistic inference studied in the frame-
work of PGM is a combination model of probability theory
and graph theory.
The core idea of PGMs is taking advan-
tage of a graph to represent the joint distribution among a set
of variables, of which each node corresponds to a variable and
each edge corresponds to a direct probabilistic interaction be-
9

tween two variables. With the beneﬁt of a graph structure, a
complex distribution over a high-dimensional space can be fac-
torized into a product of low-dimensional local potential func-
tions. PGMs can be divided into directed graphical models,
such as Bayesian network, and undirected graphical models,
such as Markov random ﬁelds. Bayesian networks can rep-
resent causality between variables, so they are often used to
model the process of cognition and perception. While Markov
random ﬁelds can represent a joint distribution by a product of
local potential functions.
Implementing PGMs by SNNs is to explain how neuronal
spikes can implement probabilistic inference.
Inference in
SNNs includes two main questions. 1.) Probabilistic coding:
how neural activities of a single cell or a population of cells
(like membrane potential and spikes) encode probability dis-
tribution. 2.) Probabilistic inference: how the dynamics of
a network of spiking neurons approximate the inference with
probabilistic coding.
Obviously, probabilistic coding is the precondition of prob-
abilistic inference. According to the way of expressing prob-
ability, probabilistic codes can be divided into three basic
types: 1) those that encode the probability of each variable
in each state, such as probability code [125], log-probability
code [126, 127], and log-likelihood ratio code [128, 129], 2)
those that encode the parameters of a distribution, such as prob-
abilistic population code that takes advantage of neural vari-
ability [130, 131, 132], that is, neural activities in response to
a constant stimulus have a large variability, which suggests that
population activities of neurons can encode distributions auto-
matically, 3) those that consider neural activities as sampling
from a distribution [133, 134], which has been suggested by
numerous experiments [135, 136, 137, 138].
According to these coding principles, there are diﬀerent ways
to implement inference with a network of neurons: 1) imple-
menting inference with neural dynamics that has equations sim-
ilar to the inference equations of some probabilistic graphical
models over the time course [126, 127, 129, 139, 140, 141].
This approach is mainly suitable for small-scale SNNs; 2)
inference with neural variational approximations that is suit-
able to describe the dynamics of a large-scale SNN directly
[53, 56, 142, 143, 144, 145, 146, 147, 148, 149]; 3) inference
with probabilistic population coding and some neural plausible
operations, including summation, multiplication, linear com-
bination and normalization [150, 151, 152, 153, 154]; 4) in-
ference with neural sampling over time where the noise, such
as stochastic neural response found in experimental observa-
tions [155, 156], is the key for neural sampling and infer-
ence [157, 158, 159, 160, 161]. Similarly, one can do the sam-
pling by using a large number of neurons to sample from a dis-
tribution at the same time [154, 162, 163, 164], as it is found
that the states of neurons in some areas of the brain follow spe-
cial distributions [165, 166].
Although the above studies are mostly conducted in an ab-
stract way for neural computation of the cortex, including the
visual cortex. Here we suggest that these computational tech-
niques can be transferred to study the retinal computation.
Fig. 5 shows some examples in the retina where there is a simi-
larity at the network level between a network of photoreceptors
connected by gap junctions (Fig. 5(A)), a Markov random ﬁeld
model (Fig. 5(B)), and an implementation of MRF by a net-
work of spiking neurons consisted of clusters of winner-take-
all microcircuits (Fig. 5(B)). As illustrated in Fig. 2, massive
gap junctions play a functional role of recurrent connections be-
tween retinal neurons. A recent study shows that a network of
rod photoreceptors with gap junctions can denoise images that
can be further enhanced by an additional CNN as in Fig. 5(C).
It is found that this CNN with photoreceptors included, com-
paring to other traditional CNNs, can achieve state-of-the-art
performance for denoising [106]. Similarly, PGM has also been
used to denoise images [167]. Recently, it is shown that PGMs
can be implemented by SNNs for various types of computa-
tions [53, 164, 168, 169, 170, 171], thus, when using SNNs for
denoising, similar performance can be achieved [107], as illus-
trated in Fig. 5(D).
Probabilistic graphical models have been intensively stud-
ied and used for visual coding, but mostly for the cortical pro-
cess [56]. Here these results suggest that one can study visual
computation in the retina by combing several approaches into
a systematical framework, including classical PGMs, nontrivial
retinal circuit structures, in particular, gap junctions, and recent
eﬀorts about the implementation of PGMs by SNNs. Future
work is needed to study this framework with more inspirations
from the rich network structure of the retina, including recur-
rent neural network, winner-take-all circuit, and feedforward
neural network, even other ubiquitous motifs of cortical micro-
circuits [37].
Discussion
Neuroprosthesis is a promising medical device within the
framework of precision medicine. With directly talking to the
brain of each individual patient, neuroprosthesis needs to be ad-
vanced with better computational algorithms for neuronal sig-
nal, besides better hardware designs. For the computational ca-
pability of the retinal neuroprosthesis, the major diﬃculty is in
that one has to track the complexity of spatiotemporal visual
scenes.
In contrast to other neuroprostheses, where incoming signals
are in a low dimensional space, such as moving trajectory of
body arms/legs in 3D space, or auditory signal in a 1D fre-
quency space, our visual scenes are more complex with infor-
mation in a spatiotemporal fashion. Recent advancements of
computer vision make some breakthroughs for analyzing these
complex natural scenes, which make a wave of artiﬁcial intelli-
gence up to a high attitude than ever before.
On the other hand, with experimental advancements in neu-
roscience, one can collect a large population of neurons si-
multaneously.
In particular, in the retina, a population of
spike trains from hundreds of retinal ganglion cells can be
obtained with well-controlled visual scenes, such as images
and movies [172]. The newest technique can record several
thousands of neurons simultaneously [173, 174, 175].
This
opens the gate for studying the encoding and decoding of visual
scenes by using enough spikes to achieve a superb resolution.
10

Out of the current approaches for retinal neuroprosthesis, the
implants with electrodes are the mainstream and have been used
in clinical trials. However, there are very limited computational
models embedded into the retinal prosthesis [10, 13, 176]. With
an encoder embedded, it is possible to process incoming visual
scenes to better trigger ganglion cells [10, 13]. The beneﬁt of
decoding models is to justify the spiking patterns produced by
the targeted downstream neurons. Ideally, electrical stimulation
should be able to close to those desired patterns of retinal neu-
ral activity in a prosthesis. To compare the similarity between
spiking patterns, the traditional way focuses on how to compute
the distance between two spike trains in general [177, 178], and
in the context of the retinal prosthesis [179]. Another way of
doing this is to using decoding models for the purpose of better
performance of neuroprosthesis [180, 101, 10]. Ideally, sim-
ilar to the other neuroprostheses, where a closed-loop device
can be employed to decode neuronal signal to control stimu-
lus, the signal delivered by a retinal prosthesis should be able to
reconstruct the original stimuli, i.e., dynamic visual scenes pro-
jected into the retina. Thus, one can use a decoding model to
reconstruct visual scenes from the spiking patterns of the retinal
ganglion cells [10, 101]. Such a direct measure of the precision
of spiking patterns with the given decoding model could play
a functional role of controlling electrical stimulation patterns
generated by the retinal neuroprosthesis, which is the goal of a
better and adjustable neuroprosthesis.
Here we only focused on the computational modelling issue
of one type of retinal neuroprosthsis with electrodes embedded.
Certainly, for retinal neuroprosthsis, as an engineering system,
there are many parallel diﬃcult issues, such as advanced mate-
rials, power designing, communication eﬃciency, and other re-
lated hardware issues, which have been covered by many well-
written reviews [16, 18, 13, 15]. One should note that there
are diﬀerent types of visual implants, including those with light
retinal stimulation such as optogenetics and chemical photo-
switches, as well as implants in other parts, beyond the retina, of
the brain. The computational issues raised in this paper are also
relevant to the general visual prosthesis. Besides these artiﬁcial
visual implants, another line of researches focuses on retinal re-
pair by biological manipulation of stem cells, such as induced
pluripotent stem cells [181, 182, 183], where understanding the
computational mechanisms of biological neurons and neuronal
circuits is more relevant to encoding visual scenes. For which,
the potential decoding models may need more eﬀorts to include
the biological principles found in the retina [34].
Taken together with all these advancements of neuroscience
experiment and prosthesis engineering, now it is time to ad-
vance our understanding of visual coding by using the retinal
spiking data and ANN-based models to get better computa-
tional algorithms for improving the performance of retinal neu-
roprosthesis. Here we reviewed some of the recent progress on
developing novel functional artiﬁcial intelligence models for vi-
sual computation. Feature-based modelling approach, such as
deep CNN, has made signiﬁcant progresses on analysis of com-
plex visual scenes. For some particular visual tasks, these mod-
els can outperform the human [39]. However, the eﬃciency,
generalization ability, and adaption or transfer learning between
diﬀerent tasks, of well-trained models are still far from human
performance [55].
Sampling-based modelling with neuronal
spikes emerges as a new approach, which takes advantage of
many factors of the neuronal system of the brain [57], such as
noise at the level of single neurons and synapses [161, 158, 52].
With the generic beneﬁt of pixel representation of visual scenes,
sampling models can be naturally used for various types of vi-
sual computations [167]. However, the eﬃciency of learning
algorithms of sampling model is still far from the ﬂexibility
of the neuron system of the brain [184]. Nevertheless, these
two approaches could be combined by utilizing both advantages
of feature and sampling for visual computation. For this, one
needs to consider the retina as a neuronal network where visual
computation can be done by diﬀerent functional network struc-
tures. The future work is needed to combine various network
motifs into a hybrid network, in which diﬀerent visual informa-
tion can be extracted, processed, and computed. Such hybrid or
hypercircuit networks have been explored only in very recent
years so far, in particular, WTA network motif has been shown
as a functional module in more complex hypercircuit network
model for various types of computations [52, 53, 111, 185].
One expects that there will be more studies align this line in
future.
The modelling framework mentioned in this paper is not lim-
ited to the application of the retina, but could be used to other
visual systems in the brain, and to other artiﬁcial visual sys-
tems. The main feature of these algorithms is to make use of
neural spikes. Advancements of recent artiﬁcial intelligence
computing align with the development of the next generation
of neuromorphic chips and devices, where the new data for-
mat is processed as spikes or events [186, 187, 188, 189, 190].
Therefore, the methods can be applied for neuromorphic visual
cameras with spike or event signals as well. One can use these
computational retinal models to simulate a population of spikes
for encoding and decoding of any given visual scenes, includ-
ing static natural images, dynamic videos, even real-time videos
captured by standard frame-based camera [76]. Taken neuro-
morphic hardware and event/spiking computing algorithm to-
gether, the next generation of computational vision can develop
a better system for artiﬁcial vision beyond the purpose of reti-
nal neuroprosthesis. Therefore, we believe that rich interactions
between artiﬁcial intelligence, computer vision, meromorphic
computing, neuroscience, bioengineering, and medicine, will
be important for advancing our understanding of the brain, and
developing the next generation of retinal neuroprosthesis for ar-
tiﬁcial vision system. The algorithm part of the artiﬁcial eye, in-
cluding encoding and decoding models of natural visual scenes,
will be in particular crucial for such a systems-level approach.
Data availability
Data presented in Fig. 4 are publicly available online:
Retinal experimental data demonstrated are available at
dx.doi.org/10.5061/dryad.4ch10. Reconstruction examples are
available at https://sites.google.com/site/jiankliu.
11
