Causal Reasoning from Meta-reinforcement Learning
Ishita Dasgupta∗1,4 , Jane Wang1,
Silvia Chiappa1, Jovana Mitrovic1, Pedro Ortega1,
David Raposo1, Edward Hughes1, Peter Battaglia1,
Matthew Botvinick1,3, Zeb Kurth-Nelson1,2
1DeepMind, UK
2MPS-UCL Centre for Computational Psychiatry, UCL, UK
3Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit, UCL, UK
4Department of Physics and Center for Brain Science, Harvard University, USA
Abstract
Discovering and exploiting the causal structure in
the environment is a crucial challenge for intelligent
agents. Here we explore whether causal reasoning
can
emerge
via
meta-reinforcement
learning.
We train a recurrent network with model-free
reinforcement learning to solve a range of problems
that each contain causal structure. We find that
the trained agent can perform causal reasoning in
novel situations in order to obtain rewards. The
agent can select informative interventions, draw
causal inferences from observational data, and make
counterfactual predictions. Although established
formal causal reasoning algorithms also exist, in this
paper we show that such reasoning can arise from
model-free reinforcement learning, and suggest that
causal reasoning in complex settings may benefit
from the more end-to-end learning-based approaches
presented here. This work also offers new strategies
for structured exploration in reinforcement learning,
by providing agents with the ability to perform—and
interpret—experiments.
1. Introduction
Many machine learning algorithms are rooted in discovering
patterns of correlation in data. While this has been sufficient to
excel in several areas (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Cho et al., 2014),
sometimes the problems we are interested in are intrinsically
causal. Answering questions such as “Does smoking cause
cancer?”
or “Was this person denied a job due to racial
discrimination?” or “Did this marketing campaign cause sales
to go up?” require an ability to reason about causes and effects.
Causal reasoning may be an essential component of natural

intelligence and is present in human babies, rats, and even birds
(Leslie, 1982; Gopnik et al., 2001; 2004; Blaisdell et al., 2006;
Lagnado et al., 2013).
There is a rich literature on formal approaches for defining and
performing causal reasoning (Pearl, 2000; Spirtes et al., 2000;
Dawid, 2007; Pearl et al., 2016). We investigate whether such
reasoning can be achieved by meta-learning. The approach of
meta-learning is to learn the learning (or inference/estimation)
procedure itself, directly from data. Analogous (Grant et al.,
2018) models that learn causal structure directly from the
environment, rather than having a pre-conceived formal theory,
have also been implicated in human intelligence (Goodman
et al., 2011).
We specifically adopt the “meta-reinforcement learning”
method introduced previously (Duan et al., 2016; Wang et al.,
2016), in which a recurrent neural network (RNN)-based
agent is trained with model-free reinforcement learning (RL).
Through training on a large family of structured tasks, the
RNN becomes a learning algorithm which generalizes to new
tasks drawn from a similar distribution. In our case, we train on
a distribution of tasks that are each underpinned by a different
causal structure. We focus on abstract tasks that best isolate
the question of interest: whether meta-learning can produce an
agent capable of causal reasoning, when no notion of causality
is explicitly given to the agent.
Meta-learning offers advantages of scalability by amortizing
computations and, by learning end-to-end, the algorithm has
the potential to find the internal representations of causal struc-
ture best suited for the types of causal inference required
(Andrychowicz et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2016; Finn et al., 2017).
We chose to focus on the RL approach because we are interested
in agents that can learn about causes and effects not only from
passive observations but also from active interactions with the
environment (Hyttinen et al., 2013; Shanmugam et al., 2015).
1
arXiv:1901.08162v1  [cs.LG]  23 Jan 2019

G
A
E
H
p(A)
p(E|A)
p(H|A,E)
(a)
G→E=e
A
E
H
p(A)
δ(E−e)
p(H|A,E)
(b)
Figure 1. (a): A CBN G with a confounder for the effect of exercise (E)
on heath (H) given by age (A). (b): Intervened CBN G→E=e resulting
from modifying G by replacing p(E|A) with a delta distribution δ(E−
e) and leaving the remaining conditional distributions p(H|E,A) and
p(A) unaltered.
2. Problem Specification and Approach
We examine three distinct data settings – observational,
interventional, and counterfactual – which test different kinds
of reasoning.
• In the observational setting (Experiment 1), the agent can
only obtain passive observations from the environment.
This type of data allows an agent to infer correlations
(associative reasoning) and, depending on the structure of
the environment, causal effects (cause-effect reasoning).
• In the interventional setting (Experiment 2), the agent can
act in the environment by setting the values of some vari-
ables and observing the consequences on other variables.
This type of data facilitates estimating causal effects.
• In the counterfactual setting (Experiment 3), the agent
first has an opportunity to learn about the causal structure
of the environment through interventions. At the last step
of the episode, it must answer a counterfactual question
of the form “What would have happened if a different
intervention had been made in the previous timestep?”.
Next we formalize these three settings and the patterns
of reasoning possible in each, using the graphical model
framework (Pearl, 2000; Spirtes et al., 2000; Dawid, 2007).
Random variables will be denoted by capital letters (e.g., E)
and their values by small letters (e.g., e).
2.1. Causal Reasoning
Causal relationships among random variables can be expressed
using causal Bayesian networks (CBNs) (see the Supple-
mentary Material). A CBN is a directed acyclic graphical
model that captures both independence and causal relations.
Each node Xi corresponds to a random variable, and the
joint distribution p(X1,...,XN) is given by the product of
conditional distributions of each node Xi given its parent nodes
pa(Xi), i.e. p(X1:N ≡X1,...,XN)=QN
i=1p(Xi|pa(Xi)).
Edges carry causal semantics: if there exists a directed path
from Xi to Xj, then Xi is a potential cause of Xj. Directed
paths are also called causal paths. The causal effect of Xi on
Xj is the conditional distribution of Xj given Xi restricted to
only causal paths.
An example of CBN G is given in Fig. 1a, where E represents
hours of exercise in a week, H cardiac health, and A age. The
causal effect of E on H is the conditional distribution restricted
to the path E →H, i.e. excluding the path E ←A→H. The
variable A is called a confounder, as it confounds the causal
effect with non-causal statistical influence. Simply observing
cardiac health conditioning on exercise level from p(H|E)
(associative reasoning) cannot answer if change in exercise
levels cause changes in cardiac health (cause-effect reasoning),
since there is always the possibility that correlation between
the two is because of the common confounder of age.
Cause-effect Reasoning. The causal effect of E = e can be
seen as the conditional distribution p→E=e(H|E=e)1 on the
intervened CBN G→E=e resulting from replacing p(E|A) with
a delta distribution δ(E−e) (thereby removing the link from
A to E) and leaving the remaining conditional distributions
p(H|E,A) and p(A) unaltered (Fig. 1b). The rules of do-
calculus (Pearl, 2000; Pearl et al., 2016) tell us how to compute
p→E=e(H|E = e) using observations from G. In this case
p→E=e(H|E =e)=P
Ap(H|E =e,A)p(A)2. Therefore, do-
calculus enables us to reason in the intervened graph G→E=e
even if our observations are from G. This is the scenario
captured by our observational data setting outlined above.
Such inferences are always possible if the confounders are
observed, but in the presence of unobserved confounders, for
many CBN structures the only way to compute causal effects
is by collecting observations directly from the intervened graph,
e.g. from G→E=e by fixing the value of the variable E = e
and observing the remaining variables—we call this process
performing an actual intervention in the environment. In our
interventional data setting, outlined above, the agent has access
to such interventions.
Counterfactual Reasoning. Cause-effect reasoning can be
used to correctly answer predictive questions of the type
“Does exercising improve cardiac health?” by accounting for
causal structure and confounding. However, it cannot answer
retrospective questions about what would have happened. For
example, given an individual i who has died of a heart attack,
this method would not be able to answer questions of the type
“What would the cardiac health of this individual have been
had she done more exercise?”. This type of question requires
reasoning about a counterfactual world (that did not happen).
To do this, we can first use the observations from the factual
world and knowledge about the CBN to get an estimate of
1In the causality literature, this distribution would most often be
indicated with p(H|do(E=e)). We prefer to use p→E=e(H|E=e)
to highlight that intervening on E results in changing the original
distribution p, by structurally altering the CBN.
2Notice that conditioning on E=e would instead give p(H|E=
e)=P
Ap(H|E=e,A)p(A|E=e).

the specific latent randomness in the makeup of individual i
(for example information about this specific patient’s blood
pressure and other variables as inferred by her having had
a heart attack). Then, we can use this estimate to compute
cardiac health under intervention on exercise. This procedure
is explained in more detail in the Supplementary Material.
2.2. Meta-learning
Meta-learning refers to a broad range of approaches in which
aspects of the learning algorithm itself are learned from the
data. Many individual components of deep learning algorithms
have been successfully meta-learned, including the optimizer
(Andrychowicz et al., 2016), initial parameter settings (Finn
et al., 2017), a metric space (Vinyals et al., 2016), and use of
external memory (Santoro et al., 2016).
Following the approach of (Duan et al., 2016; Wang et al.,
2016), we parameterize the entire learning algorithm as a
recurrent neural network (RNN), and we train the weights of
the RNN with model-free reinforcement learning (RL). The
RNN is trained on a broad distribution of problems which each
require learning. When trained in this way, the RNN is able to
implement a learning algorithm capable of efficiently solving
novel learning problems in or near the training distribution (see
the Supplementary Material for further details).
Learning the weights of the RNN by model-free RL can be
thought of as the “outer loop” of learning. The outer loop shapes
the weights of the RNN into an “inner loop” learning algorithm.
This inner loop algorithm plays out in the activation dynamics
of the RNN and can continue learning even when the weights
of the network are frozen. The inner loop algorithm can also
have very different properties from the outer loop algorithm
used to train it. For example, in previous work this approach
was used to negotiate the exploration-exploitation tradeoff in
multi-armed bandits (Duan et al., 2016) and learn algorithms
which dynamically adjust their own learning rates (Wang et al.,
2016; 2018). In the present work we explore the possibility of
obtaining a causally-aware inner-loop learning algorithm.
3. Task Setup and Agent Architecture
In our experiments, in each episode the agent interacted with
a different CBN G, defined over a set of N variables. The
structure of G was drawn randomly from the space of possible
acyclic graphs under the constraints given in the next subsection.
Each episode consisted of T steps, which were divided into
two phases: an information phase and a quiz phase. The
information phase, corresponding to the first T −1 steps,
allowed the agent to collect information by interacting with
or passively observing samples from G. The agent could
potentially use this information to infer the connectivity and
weights of G. The quiz phase, corresponding to the final step T,
required the agent to exploit the causal knowledge it collected
in the information phase, to select the node with the highest
value under a random external intervention.
Causal Graphs, Observations, and Actions
We generated all graphs on N = 5 nodes, with edges only
in the upper triangular of the adjacency matrix (this guaran-
tees that all the graphs obtained are acyclic). Edge weights
wji were uniformly sampled from {−1,0,1}. This yielded
3N(N−1)/2=59049 unique graphs. These can be divided into
equivalence classes: sets of graphs that are structurally identical
but differ in the permutation of the node labels. Our held-out
test set consisted of 12 random graphs plus all other graphs in
the equivalence classes of these 12. Thus, all graphs in the test
set had never been seen (and no equivalent graphs had been
seen) during training. There were 408 total graphs in the test set.
Each node, Xi∈R, was a Gaussian random variable. Parentless
nodes had distribution N(µ=0.0,σ =0.1). A node Xi with
parents pa(Xi) had conditional distribution p(Xi|pa(Xi)) =
N(µ=P
jwjiXj,σ=0.1), where Xj ∈pa(Xi)3.
A root node of G was always hidden (unobservable), to allow
for the presence of an unobserved confounder and the agent
could therefore only observe the values of the other 4 nodes.
The concatenated values of the nodes, vt, and and a one-hot
vector indicating the external intervention during the quiz
phase, mt, (explained below) formed the observation vector
provided to the agent at step t, ot=[vt,mt].
In both phases, on each step t, the agent could choose to take 1
of 2(N−1) actions, the first N−1 of which were information
actions, and the second of which were quiz actions. Both
information and quiz actions were associated with selecting
the N−1 observable nodes, but could only be legally used in
the appropriate phase of the task. If used in the wrong phase,
a penalty was applied and the action produced no effect.
Information Phase. In the information phase, an information
action at=i caused an intervention on the i-th node, setting the
value of Xat =Xi =5 (the value 5 was chosen to be outside
the likely range of sampled observations, to facilitate learning
the causal graph). The node values vt were then obtained
by sampling from p→Xi=5(X1:N\i|Xi = 5) (where X1:N\i
indicates the set of all nodes except Xi), namely from the inter-
vened CBN G→Xat=5 resulting from removing the incoming
edges to Xat from G, and using the intervened value Xat =5
for conditioning its children’s values. If a quiz action was
chosen during the information phase, it was ignored; namely,
the node values were sampled from G as if no intervention had
been made, and the agent was given a penalty of rt =−10 in
order to encourage it to take quiz actions during the quiz phase.
There was no other reward during the information phase.
3We also tested graphs with non-linear causal effects, and larger
graphs of size N = 6 (see the Supplementary Material).

The default length an episode for fixed to be T = N = 5,
resulting in this phase being fixed to a length of T −1=4. This
was because in the noise-free limit, a minimum of N −1=4
interventions, one on each observable node, are required in
general to resolve the causal structure and score perfectly on
the test phase.
Quiz Phase. In the quiz phase, one non-hidden node Xj was
selected at random to be intervened on by the environment.
Its value was set to −5. We chose −5 to disallow the agent
from memorizing the results of interventions in the information
phase (which were fixed to +5) in order to perform well on the
quiz phase. The agent was informed which node received this
external intervention via the one-hot vector mt as part of the
observation from the the final pre-quiz phase timestep, T −1.
For steps t<T −1, mt was the zero vector. The agent’s reward
on this step was the sampled value of the node it selected
during the quiz phase. In other words, rT =Xi=XaT −(N−1)
if the action selected was a quiz action (otherwise, the agent
was given a penalty of rT =−10).
Active vs Random Agents. Our agents had to perform two
distinct tasks during the information phase: a) actively choose
which nodes to set values on, and b) infer the CBN from its
observations. We refer to this setup as the “active” condition.
To better understand the role of (a), we include comparisons
with a baseline agent in the “random” condition, whose policy
is to choose randomly which observable node it will set values
for, at each step of the information phase.
Two Kinds of Learning. The “inner loop” of learning (see
Section 2.2) occurs within each episode where the agent is
learning from the evidence it gathers during the information
phase in order to perform well in the quiz phase. The same
agent then enters a new episode, where it has to repeat the task
on a different CBN. Test performance is reported on CBNs that
the agent has never previously seen, after all the weights of the
RNN have been fixed. Hence, the only transfer from training
to test (or the “outer loop” of learning) is the ability to discover
causal dependencies based on observations in the information
phase, and to perform causal inference in the quiz phase.
Agent Architecture and Training
We used a long short-term memory (LSTM) network (Hochre-
iter and Schmidhuber, 1997) (with 192 hidden units) that, at
each time-step t, receives a concatenated vector containing
[ot,at−1,rt−1] as input, where ot is the observation4, at−1 is
the previous action (as a one-hot vector) and rt−1 the reward
(as a single real-value)5.
4’Observation’ ot refers to the reinforcement learning term, i.e. the
input from the environment to the agent. This is distinct from observa-
tions in the causal sense (referred to as observational data) i.e. samples
from a causal structure where no interventions have been carried out.
5These are both set to zero for the first step in an episode.
The outputs, calculated as linear projections of the LSTM’s
hidden state, are a set of policy logits (with dimensionality
equal to the number of available actions), plus a scalar baseline.
The policy logits are transformed by a softmax function, and
then sampled to give a selected action.
Learning was by asynchronous advantage actor-critic (Mnih
et al., 2016). In this framework, the loss function consists
of three terms – the policy gradient, the baseline cost and
an entropy cost. The baseline cost was weighted by 0.05
relative to the policy gradient cost. The weighting of the
entropy cost was annealed over the course of training from
0.25 to 0. Optimization was done by RMSProp with ϵ=10−5,
momentum = 0.9 and decay = 0.95.
Learning rate was
annealed from 9×10−6 to 0, with a discount of 0.93. Unless
otherwise stated, training was done for 1 × 107 steps using
batched environments with a batch size of 1024.
For all experiments, after training, the agent was tested with
the learning rate set to zero, on a held-out test set.
4. Experiments
Our three experiments (observational, interventional, and
counterfactual data settings) differed in the properties of the
vt that was observed by the agent during the information
phase, and thereby limited the extent of causal reasoning
possible within each data setting. Our measure of performance
is the reward earned in the quiz phase for held-out CBNs.
Choosing a random node in the quiz phase results in a reward
of −5/4 = −1.25, since one node (the externally intervened
node) always has value −5 and the others have on average 0
value. By learning to simply avoid the externally intervened
node, the agent can earn on average 0 reward. Consistently
picking the node with the highest value in the quiz phase
requires the agent to perform causal reasoning. For each agent,
we took the average reward earned across 1632 episodes (408
held-out test CBNs, with 4 possible external interventions). We
trained 8 copies of each agent and reported the average reward
earned by these, with error bars showing 95% confidence
intervals. The p values based on the appropriate t-test are
provided in cases where the compared values are close.
4.1. Experiment 1: Observational Setting
In Experiment 1, the agent could neither intervene to set the
value of variables in the environment, nor observe any external
interventions. In other words, it only received observations
from G, not G→Xj (where Xj is a node that has been intervened
on). This limits the extent of causal inference possible. In this
experiment, we tested five agents, four of which were learned:
“Observational”, “Long Observational”, “Active Conditional”,
“Random Conditional”,
and the “Optimal Associative
Baseline” (not learned). We also ran two other standard RL
baselines—see the Supplementary Material for details.

-3.3
-0.8
-1.4
-5.0
-5.0
0.0
-2.5
-2.5
Cond. (Orphan)
Assoc.(Orphan)
Cond. (Parent)
Assoc. (Parent)
   Active-Cond.
Optimal-Assoc.
Obs.
Long-Obs.
Avg. Reward
0.0
1.0
Avg. Reward
0.0
1.0
2.0
(a)
(b)
(c)
Optimal-Assoc. Agent
Active-Cond. Agent
Figure 2. Experiment 1. Agents do cause-effect reasoning from observational data. a) Average reward earned by the agents tested in this
experiment. See main text for details. b) Performance split by the presence or absence of at least one parent (Parent and Orphan respectively) on
the externally intervened node. c) Quiz phase for a test CBN. Green (red) edges indicate a weight of +1 (−1). Black represents the intervened
node, green (red) nodes indicate a positive (negative) value at that node, white indicates a zero value. The blue circles indicate the agent’s choice.
Left panel: The undirected version of G and the nodes taking the mean values prescribed by p(X1:N\j|Xj =−5), including backward inference
to the intervened node’s parent. We see that the Optimal Associative Baseline’s choice is consistent with maximizing these (incorrect) node values.
Right panel: G→Xj=−5 and the nodes taking the mean values prescribed by p→Xj=−5(X1:N\j|Xj =−5). We see that the Active-Conditional
Agent’s choice is consistent with maximizing these (correct) node values.
Observational Agents: In the information phase, the actions
of the agent were ignored6, and the observational agent always
received the values of the observable nodes as sampled from
the joint distribution associated with G. In addition to the
default T =5 episode length, we also trained this agent with
4× longer episode length (Long Observational Agent), to
measure performance increase with more observational data.
Conditional Agents: The information phase actions corre-
sponded to observing a world in which the selected node Xj
is equal to Xj =5, and the remaining nodes are sampled from
the conditional distribution p(X1:N\j|Xj = 5). This differs
from intervening on the variable Xj by setting it to the value
Xj =5, since here we take a conditional sample from G rather
than from G→Xj=5 (or from p→Xj=5(X1:N\j|Xj = 5)), and
inference about the corresponding node’s parents is possible.
Therefore, this agent still has access to only observational
data, as with the observational agents. However, on average
it receives more diagnostic information about the relation
between the random variables in G, since it can observe
samples where a node takes a value far outside the likely range
of sampled observations. We run active and random versions
of this agent as described in Section 3.
Optimal Associative Baseline: This baseline receives the true
joint distribution p(X1:N) implied by the CBN in that episode
and therefore has full knowledge of the correlation structure of
the environment7. It can therefore do exact associative reason-
ing of the form p(Xj|Xi=x), but cannot do any cause-effect
reasoning of the form p→Xi=x(Xj|Xi=x). In the quiz phase,
this baseline chooses the node that has the maximum value
according to the true p(Xj|Xi=x) in that episode, where Xi
is the node externally intervened upon, and x = −5. This is
the best possible performance using only associative reasoning.
6These agents also did not receive the out-of-phase action penalties
during the information phase since their actions are totally ignored.
7Notice that the agent does not know the graphical structure, i.e. it
does not know which nodes are parents of which other nodes.
Results
We focus on two questions in this experiment.
(i) Most centrally, do the agents learn to perform cause-effect
reasoning using observational data? The Optimal Associative
Baseline tracks the greatest reward that can be achieved using
only knowledge of correlations – without causal knowledge.
Compared to this baseline, the Active-Conditional Agent
(which is allowed to select highly informative observations)
earns significantly more reward (p = 6×10−5, Fig. 2a). To
better understand why the agent outperforms the associative
baseline, we divided episodes according to whether or not the
node that was intervened on in the quiz phase has a parent
(Fig. 2b). If the intervened node Xj has no parents, then
G=G→Xj, and cause-effect reasoning has no advantage over
associative reasoning. Indeed, the Active-Conditional Agent
performs better than the Optimal Associative Baseline only
when the intervened node has parents (hatched bars in Fig. 2b).
We also show the quiz phase for an example test CBN in Fig. 2c,
where the Optimal Associative Baseline chooses according to
the node values predicted by G, whereas the Active-Conditional
Agent chooses according the node values predicted by G→Xj.
Random
Active
Figure 4. Active and Random Condi-
tional Agents
These analyses allow
us to conclude that
the agent can perform
cause-effect reasoning,
using
observational
data alone – analogous
to the formal use of
do-calculus.
(ii) Do
the agents learn to select useful observations? We find that the
Active-Conditional Agent’s performance is significantly greater
than the Random-Conditional Agent (Fig. 4). This indicates
that the agent has learned to choose useful data to observe.
For completeness we also included agents that received uncon-
ditional observations from G, i.e. the Observational Agents
(’Obs’ and ’Long-Obs’ in Fig. 2a). As expected, these agents

Active-Int.
Optimal Assoc.
Optimal C-E
Active-Cond.
0.0
1.0
Cond. (Unconf.)
Int. (Unconf.)
Cond. (Conf.)
Int. (Conf.)
0.0
1.1
(a)
(b)
(c)
Active-Cond. Agent
Active-Int. Agent
Avg. Reward
Avg. Reward
Figure 3. Experiment 2. Agents do cause-effect reasoning from interventional data. a) Average reward earned by the agents tested in this
experiment. See main text for details. b) Performance split by the presence or absence of unobserved confounders (abbreviated as Conf. and
Unconf. respectively) on the externally intervened node. c) Quiz phase for a test CBN. See Fig. 2 for a legend. Here, the left panel shows the
full G and the nodes taking the mean values prescribed by p(X1:N\j|Xj = −5). We see that the Active-Cond Agent’s choice is consistent
with choosing based on these (incorrect) node values. The right panel shows G→Xj=−5 and the nodes taking the mean values prescribed by
p→Xj=−5(X1:N\j|Xj =−5). We see that the Active-Int. Agent’s choice is consistent with maximizing on these (correct) node value.
performed worse than the Active-Conditional Agent, because
they received less diagnostic information during the information
phase. However, they were still able to acquire some informa-
tion from unconditional samples, and also made use of the
increased information available from longer episodes.
4.2. Experiment 2: Interventional Setting
In Experiment 2, the agent receives interventional data in the in-
formation phase – it can choose to intervene on any observable
node, Xj, and observe a sample from the resulting graph G→Xj.
As discussed in Section 2.1, access to interventional data per-
mits cause-effect reasoning even in the presence of unobserved
confounders, a feat which is in general impossible with access
only to observational data. In this experiment, we test three new
agents, two of which were learned: “Active Interventional”,
“Random Interventional”, and “Optimal Cause-Effect Baseline”
(not learned).
Interventional Agents: The information phase actions corre-
spond to performing an intervention on the selected node Xj
and sampling from G→Xj (see Section 3 for details). We run
active and random versions of this agent as described in Sec-
tion 3.
Optimal Cause-Effect Baseline: This baseline receives the
true CBN, G. In the quiz phase, it chooses the node that has
the maximum value according to G→Xj, where Xj is the node
externally intervened upon. This is the maximum possible
performance on this task.
Results
We focus on two questions in this experiment.
(i) Do our agents learn to perform cause-effect reasoning from
interventional data? The Active-Interventional Agent’s per-
formance is marginally better than the Active-Conditional
Agent (p = 0.06, Fig. 3a).
To better highlight the cru-
cial role of interventional data in doing cause-effect reason-
ing, we compare the agent performances split by whether
the node that was intervened on in the quiz phase of the
episode had unobserved confounders with other variables in
the graph (Fig. 3b). In confounded cases, as described in
Section 2.1, cause-effect reasoning is impossible with only
observational data. We see that the performance of the Active-
Interventional Agent is significantly higher (p = 10−5) than
that of the Active-Conditional Agent in the confounded cases.
This indicates that the Active-Interventional Agent (that had
access to interventional data) is able to perform additional
cause-effect reasoning in the presence of confounders that
the Active-Conditional Agent (that had access to only ob-
servational data) cannot do. This is highlighted by Fig. 3c,
which shows the quiz phase for an example CBN, where the
Active-Conditional Agent is unable to resolve the unobserved
confounder, but the Active-Interventional Agent is able to.
Random
Active
Figure 5. Active and Random Interven-
tional Agents
(ii) Do our agents
learn to make useful
interventions?
The
Active-Interventional
Agent’s performance
is significantly greater
than
the
Random-
Interventional Agent’s
(Fig. 5). This indicates that when the agent is allowed to choose
its actions, it makes tailored, non-random choices about the
interventions it makes and the data it wants to observe.
4.3. Experiment 3: Counterfactual Setting
In Experiment 3, the agent was again allowed to make in-
terventions as in Experiment 2, but in this case the quiz
phase task entailed answering a counterfactual question. We
explain here what a counterfactual question in this domain
looks like. Assume Xi = P
j wjiXj + ϵi where ϵi is dis-
tributed as N(0.0, 0.1) (giving the conditional distribution
p(Xi|pa(Xi))=N(P
jwjiXj,0.1) as described in Section 3).
After observing the nodes X2:N (X1 is hidden) in the CBN in
one sample, we can infer this latent randomness ϵi for each
observable node Xi (i.e. abduction as described in the Sup-

Active-Int.
0.0
1.0
2.0
Active-CF
Optimal C-E
0.0
1.0
CF (Dist.)
Int. (Dist.)
CF (Deg.)
Int. (Deg.)
(a)
(b)
(c)
Passive-Int. Agent
Passive-CF Agent
Avg. Reward
Avg. Reward
Optimal CF
Figure 6. Experiment 3. Agents do counterfactual reasoning. a) Average reward earned by the agents tested in this experiment. See main
text for details. b) Performance split by if the maximum node value in the quiz phase is degenerate (Deg.) or distinct (Dist.). c) Quiz phase
for an example test-CBN. See Fig. 2 for a legend. Here, the left panel shows G→Xj=−5 and the nodes taking the mean values prescribed by
p→Xj=−5(X1:N\j|Xj =−5). We see that the Active-Int. Agent’s choice is consistent with maximizing on these node values, where it makes a
random choice between two nodes with the same value. The right panel panel shows G→Xj=−5 and the nodes taking the exact values prescribed
by the means of p→Xj=−5(X1:N\j|Xj = −5), combined with the specific randomness inferred from the previous time step. As a result of
accounting for the randomness, the two previously degenerate maximum values are now distinct. We see that the Active-CF. agent’s choice is
consistent with maximizing on these node values.
plementary Material) and answer counterfactual questions like
“What would the values of the nodes be, had Xi instead taken
on a different value than what we observed?”, for any of the ob-
servable nodes Xi. We test three new agents, two of which are
learned: “Active Counterfactual”, “Random Counterfactual”,
and “Optimal Counterfactual Baseline” (not learned).
Counterfactual Agents: This agent is exactly analogous to the
Interventional agent, with the addition that the latent random-
ness in the last information phase step t = T −1 (where say
some Xp=+5), is stored and the same randomness is used in
the quiz phase step t=T (where say some Xf =−5). While
the question our agents have had to answer correctly so far in
order to maximize their reward in the quiz phase was “Which
of the nodes X2:N will have the highest value when Xf is set
to −5?”, in this setting, we ask “Which of the nodes X2:N
would have had the highest value in the last step of the infor-
mation phase, if instead of having the intervention Xp =+5,
we had the intervention Xf =−5?”. We run active and random
versions of this agent as described in Section 3.
Optimal Counterfactual Baseline: This baseline receives the
true CBN and does exact abduction of the latent randomness
based on observations from the penultimate step of the infor-
mation phase, and combines this correctly with the appropriate
interventional inference on the true CBN in the quiz phase.
Results
We focus on two key questions in this experiment.
(i) Do our agents learn to do counterfactual inference? The
Active-Counterfactual Agent achieves higher reward than the
Active-Interventional Agent (p = 2×10−5).
To evaluate
whether this difference results from the agent’s use of abduction
(see the Supplementary Material for details), we split the test
set into two groups, depending on whether or not the decision
for which node will have the highest value in the quiz phase is
affected by the latent randomness, i.e. whether or not the node
with the maximum value in the quiz phase changes if the noise
is resampled. This is most prevalent in cases where the maxi-
mum expected reward is degenerate, i.e. where several nodes
give the same maximum reward (denoted by hatched bars in
Figure 6b). Here, agents with no access to the randomness have
no basis for choosing one over the other, but different noise sam-
ples can give rise to significant differences in the actual values
that these degenerate nodes have. We see indeed that there is no
difference in the rewards received by the Active-Counterfactual
and Active-Interventional Agents in the cases where the max-
imum values are distinct, however the Active-Counterfactual
Agent significantly outperforms the Active-Interventional
Agent in cases where there are degenerate maximum values.
Random
Active
Figure 7. Active and Random Counter-
factual Agents
(ii) Do our agents
learn to make useful
interventions in the
service
of
a
coun-
terfactual task?
The
Active-Counterfactual
Agent’s performance
is significantly greater
than the Random-Counterfactual Agent’s (Fig. 5).
This
indicates that when the agent is allowed to choose its actions, it
makes tailored, non-random choices about the interventions it
makes and the data it wants to observe – even in the service of
a counterfactual objective.
5. Summary of Results
In this paper we used the meta-learning to train a recurrent net-
work – using model-free reinforcement learning – to implement
an algorithm capable of causal reasoning. Agents trained in
this manner performed causal reasoning in three data settings:
observational, interventional, and counterfactual. Crucially, our
approach did not require explicit encoding of formal principles
of causal inference. Rather, by optimizing an agent to perform
a task that depended on causal structure, the agent learned im-

plicit strategies to generate and use different kinds of available
data for causal reasoning, including drawing causal inferences
from passive observation, actively intervening, and making
counterfactual predictions, all on held out causal CBNs that the
agents had never previously seen.
A consistent result in all three data settings was that our agents
learned to perform good experiment design or active learning.
That is, they learned a non-random data collection policy where
they actively chose which nodes to intervene (or condition) on
in the information phase, and thus could control the kinds of
data they saw, leading to higher performance in the quiz phase
than that from an agent with a random data collection policy.
Below, we summarize the other keys results from each of the
three experiments.
In Section 4.1 and Fig. 2, we showed that agents learned to per-
form do-calculus. In Fig. 2a we saw that, the trained agent with
access to only observational data received more reward than the
highest possible reward achievable without causal knowledge.
We further observed in Fig. 2b that this performance increase
occurred selectively in cases where do-calculus made a predic-
tion distinguishable from the predictions based on correlations –
i.e. where the externally intervened node had a parent, meaning
that the intervention resulted in a different graph.
In Section 4.2 and Fig. 3, we showed that agents learned to
resolve unobserved confounders using interventions (which
is impossible with only observational data). In Fig. 3b we
saw that agents with access to interventional data performed
better than agents with access to only observational data only in
cases where the intervened node shared an unobserved parent
(a confounder) with other variables in the graph.
In Section 4.3 and Fig. 6, we showed that agents learned to
use counterfactuals. In Fig. 6a we saw that agents with ad-
ditional access to the specific randomness in the test phase
performed better than agents with access to only interventional
data. In Fig. 6b, we found that the increased performance was
observed only in cases where the maximum mean value in the
graph was degenerate, and optimal choice was affected by the
latent randomness – i.e. where multiple nodes had the same
value on average and the specific randomness could be used to
distinguish their actual values in that specific case.
6. Discussion and Future Work
To our knowledge, this is the first direct demonstration
that causal reasoning can arise out of model-free reinforce-
ment learning. Our paper lays the groundwork for a meta-
reinforcement learning approach to causal reasoning that poten-
tially offers several advantages over formal methods for causal
inference in complex real world settings.
First, traditional formal approaches usually decouple the prob-
lems of causal induction (inferring the structure of the underly-
ing model from data) and causal inference (estimating causal
effects based on a known model). Despite advances in both (Or-
tega and Stocker, 2015; Lattimore et al., 2016; Bramley et al.,
2017; Forney et al., 2017; Sen et al., 2017; Parida et al., 2018),
inducing models is expensive and typically requires simplifying
assumptions. When induction and inference are decoupled,
the assumptions used at the induction step are not fully opti-
mized for the inference that will be performed downstream. By
contrast, our model learns to perform induction and inference
end-to-end, and can potentially find representations of causal
structure best tuned for the required causal inferences. Meta-
learning can sometimes even leverage structure in the problem
domain that may be too complex to specify when inducing a
model (Duan et al., 2016; Santoro et al., 2016; Wang et al.,
2016), allowing more efficient and accurate causal reasoning
than would be possible without representing and exploiting this
structure.
Second, since both the induction and inference steps are costly,
formal methods can be very slow at run-time when faced with
a new query. Meta-learning shifts most of the compute burden
from inference time to training time. This is advantageous when
training time is ample but fast answers are needed at run-time.
Finally, by using an RL framework, our agents can learn to take
actions that produce useful information—i.e. perform active
learning. Our agents’ active intervention policy performed
significantly better than a random intervention policy, which
demonstrates the promise of learning an experimentation policy
end-to-end with the causal reasoning built on the resulting
observations.
Our work focused on a simple domain because our aim was to
test in the most direct way possible whether causal reasoning
can emerge from meta-learning. Follow-up work should focus
on scaling up our approach to larger environments, with more
complex causal structure and a more diverse range of tasks. This
opens up possibilities for agents that perform active experiments
to support structured exploration in RL, and learning optimal
experiment design in complex domains where large numbers of
random interventions are prohibitive. The results here are a first
step in this direction, obtained using relatively standard deep
RL components – our approach will likely benefit from more
advanced architectures (e.g. Hester et al., 2017; Hessel et al.,
2018; Espeholt et al., 2018) that allow us to train on longer more
complex episodes, as well as models which are more explicitly
compositional (e.g. Andreas et al., 2016; Battaglia et al., 2018)
or have richer semantics (e.g. Ganin et al., 2018) that can more
explicitly leverage symmetries in the environment and improve
generalization and training efficiency.
7. Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the following people for helpful
discussions and comments: Neil Rabinowitz, Neil Bramley,

Tobias Gerstenberg, Andrea Tacchetti, Victor Bapst, Samuel
Gershman.
