AutoCarto Six Retrospective 
Barry Wellar
190
27
Big Data: How Geo-information Helped Shape 
the Future of Data Engineering 
Robert Jeansoulin 
CNRS senior researcher, Université Paris-Est Marne-la-Vallée 
Laboratoire d’informatique, Institut Gaspard Monge 
(On leave, as: Science Advisor at French General Consulate in Quebec) 

ABSTRACT. Very large data sets are the common rule in automated mapping, GIS, 
remote sensing, and what we can name geo-information. Indeed, in 1983 Landsat was 
already delivering gigabytes of data, and other sensors were in orbit or ready for launch, 
and a tantamount of cartographic data was being digitized. The retrospective paper re-
visits several issues that geo-information sciences had to face from the early stages on, 
including: structure  ( to bring some structure to the data registered from a sampled 
signal, metadata);  processing  (huge amounts of data for big computers and fast 
algorithms);  uncertainty (the kinds of errors, their quantification); consistency (when 
merging different sources of data is logically allowed, and meaningful); ontologies
(clear and agreed shared definitions, if any kind of decision should be based upon 
them). All these issues are the background of Internet queries, and the underlying 
technology has been shaped during those years when geo-information engineering 
emerged.
KEYWORDS. Automated mapping, remote sensing, GIS, big data, machine learning, 
data quality, geo-information, knowledge systems, ontologies, exploratory data analysis.
A. Title of AutoCarto Six paper.
Automatic cartography of agricultural zones by means of multi-temporal segmentation of 
remote sensing images.
B. Reason for paper?  
In 1983, working on the above title, the purpose of my then sponsor1 was to prepare the 
launch of satellite SPOT and the forthcoming commercialization of its products, with a 
focus on vegetation monitoring. 
It may look unbelievable today, but we were not equipped with image-capable screens, 
only alphanumeric consoles: everything had to be printed for being displayed. However, 
data were there, big matrices of data, that couldn’t be turned easily into images. 
1 Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales, Département de Traitement de l’image, Toulouse, France. 

AutoCarto Six Retrospective 
Barry Wellar
191
Therefore, we were forced to crunch data, failing to be able to look at them! The amount 
of images that a satellite such as Landsat was able to harvest was phenomenal: 
gigabytes, terabytes of pixels: we were using the super computers of that time. 
Dealing with “big data” before the term was popularized? The armory of mathematical 
tools also was almost there: principal component analysis, multi-dimensional 
correlation, template matching, and so on. We may say that in remote sensing, in 
photogrammetric engineering, in geographical information systems, or for short in geo-
information (or geomatics), we pioneered what today is termed “big data”.
This paper browses the principal issues that the geo-information science had to face 
from the early stages on. First challenge: to bring structure to the data registered from a 
sampled signal, what eventually gave metadata and the ability to merge images into 
large retrieval systems in the Internet. Other challenges involved: processing (such 
huge amounts of data required big computers and fast algorithms); data uncertainty (the 
description of the kind of errors, and their quantification was necessary from the very 
beginning); data consistency (as soon as we started merging different sources of data, it 
became mandatory to question if and how far we were allowed to merge them. In 
French we say, Mariage de la carpe et du lapin, (Carp and rabbit wedding).
Finally, ontology questions are addressed, because the comparison of geo-data, piled 
up for several decades, all around the globe, imposes clearer definition on what they 
are data of or what they represent, what comparison can be made, what real evolution 
or differences they measure, and what kind of decision can we base upon them. 
Today, these same longstanding issues and questions continue to be raised in the 
context of big data. 
C. Data structure: From ancillary data to metadata. 
Remote sensing imagery inaugurated the use of metadata as soon as the first images 
had to be registered, overlaid, and when different sensors were used. 
Basically we have only two kinds of data: words and numbers. And if we have a 
number, we do need words too: if 24, 24 what? Natural or physical sciences deal with 
numbers, with signal or image processing, with geometry, time series, etc. But text 
processing is the main approach in big data: "In principio erat Verbum", the very first 
words of the Gospel of John. The two didn’t fit well 30 years ago, but nowadays the 
difference is not so drastic. 
Noticeably, today, is the widespread use of metadata. I do remember that we didn't use 
the word metadata but “ancillary data”, to name the data associated with remote 
sensing imagery: for instance the ground resolution, wavelengths, etc. (see below). The 
name change denotes an upgrade for something secondary (ancillary) to a more 
important role (meta). The way we consider data has evolved as well. 
For instance: pixel data. A pixel is the approximation of a ground surface, from which we 
measure a reflected (or emitted) radiometry within a certain wavelength range, 

AutoCarto Six Retrospective 
Barry Wellar
192
integrating diffraction effect, absorption, etc. As many of us did, I spent a lot of time 
modeling these effects, filtering them to improve the data from a status of "raw data" to 
a status of "corrected data". Also, pixels aren’t processed one by one, but as a 
statistical variable that receives class membership or geometrical properties (e.g. border 
pixel). These properties must be described and registered into some structure: a 
“processed image” has a lot of such attached information (metadata). 
Libraries were confronted by the metadata issue and developed MARC in the sixties, a 
markup language to which HTML owes a lot. An important next step was the Dublin 
Core (DCMI) in 1995. In automated cartography, one big question was, How to 
introduce the topology in the data vector representation? It’s implicit from the geometry, 
but the burden of re-computing it is much too heavy. Then, in the 1990s several NGOs2
were working on what became ISO 19101: 2002 Geographic Information Reference 
model.
For instance, Table 1 represents the geometry and the topology of a set of land parcels 
and allows determining that the union of #2 and #3 forms a single hole into #1. 
Table 1. A relational representation of the (polygon-arc-node) topology schema. 
#
Coordinates (or vertices) 
contains 
is in 
touches 
has hole 
… more … 
1

2;3 
- 
- 
1 
… 
2

- 
1 
3 
0 
… 
3

- 
1 
2 
0 
… 
The content of such tables is described in the ISO reference model: the polygon-arc-
node model, with all topology relationships. Moreover, semantics and rules can be 
added too (See F, Data consistency.). 
In big data, there are trillions of sparse, scattered, unrelated docs (unstructured) 
anywhere on the Internet, and the goal of so-called "robots" is to attach structure (the 
indexing process) and try to rank them in response to a single request (querying the 
Internet), or to a complex and multi-morphed request (data analytics). 
The concept of unstructured data wasn't in use 30 years ago. Relational databases 
were just on the rise (and still are embedded in most data engineering). The term semi-
structured data appeared in 1995 in the community of database specialists, and XML 
was first established in 1997 (built upon the SGML of the late 1980s). 
Hence, there are reasons to consider that data processing of signal and image is one of 
the many precursors of today’s big data. 
D. Data processing: From data analysis to data mining. 
Signal processing has been a field of experimentation of innovative statistical, 
stochastic, or data transformation approaches, as well as intensive computational 
2 National geographic offices, such as Ordnance Survey, IGN Geomatics Canada, USGS, etc. 

AutoCarto Six Retrospective 
Barry Wellar
193
methods and efficient algorithms for the processing of very large data sets. Exploratory 
data analysis (EDA) is linked with Tukey and Fourier analysis and similar approaches, 
developed mainly in the field of signal processing. The term is outdated now, but it 
certainly contributed to foster research in high-end computing. Let’s recall for instance 
the hierarchical classification algorithms used for pixel classification in Landsat images 
(Jeansoulin 1981), and the use of more sophisticated approaches for unsupervised 
classification, such as the “dynamic clusters” (Diday 1973). Figure 1 illustrates the 
basics of the process. 
Figure 1. Hierarchical clustering example (sometimes referred to as phylogenetic tree). 
Here: a new node
must be created
Three classes were built from pixel radio
metries coupled with soil data and farming
practices (Alpilles-Reseda experiment)
The descending operation tries to split the data domain into relevant sub-classes at 
each level, leading to a tree structure (See section G, Ontologies.). It is then applied to 
field parcels according to their median or average pixel value (Olioso 1998). 
The expression data mining traces back to the 1990s, familiar to database scientists, 
and mainly as an operational approach of machine learning whose foundations are 
linked to the Turing machine: the field was more theoretical, between logics and 
computing languages, lambda-calculus. Support vector machine (SVM) algorithms were 
developed as non-probabilistic binary linear classifier (Vapnik 1995). 
Nowadays, these terms have been more or less wrapped up in the successive 
buzzwords of business intelligence, data analytics, and big data. In spite of other 
differences, the fact is that the mainstream shifted from signal processing to the world of 
Internet and e-commerce.
But, looking deep into the algorithms it can be seen that: the geo-processing legacy is 
there. From a computational point of view (supercomputer and huge data storage), or 

AutoCarto Six Retrospective 
Barry Wellar
194
with respect to the underlying exploratory approaches, geo-processing research has 
contributed to paving the way. 
E. Data uncertainty: From precision to quality indicators. 
Geo-information deals with the “real world”: without arguing about philosophical truth, it 
deals at least with a same and single “world” which can be modeled and measured by 
different means, at different scales, from multiple viewpoints, etc., and everything has to 
be logically consistent.  
Therefore, geo-processing talks not only about a particular aspect of reality, but also 
about a consistent framework for this reality. 
At first, measurements quality was focused on precision: What particular location on 
Earth does a particular pixel represent? What is the real radiometric contribution of this 
location actually represented in the pixel value? Image registration, and sensor fusion, 
were the first and most difficult tasks at the time. Soon after that, confidence involving 
data classification was the big issue, e.g., How much wheat is the USSR really 
harvesting?
Questions of that nature were investigated by relatively the same amount of computing 

When it became easier to merge remote sensing imagery and geographical databases, 
much more complex questions were at hand. The gain in ground resolution enabled us 
to reach new terrain: from the large rectangular crops of the Mid-West to small 
vineyards in Provence, and now to urban roof gardens. Sociology is no longer some 
weird science taught to hippies, but a science we can have trans-disciplinary talks with, 
as we did with agronomy. 
The challenge about quality is no solely longer about data precision (though still 
important), but also about consistency: Are we talking about the same thing when 
merging different data?
Geo-processing has extensively investigated the question of quality, with the result that 
a number of quality indicators have been designed, and the quality domain has been 
structured by international consensus. 
Since the 1990s, geo-information specialists met in consortia such as OGC, and 
eventually established an ISO Technical Committee (ISO TC211) to discuss and publish 
standards for geo-information (geomatics): data models and data quality information 
were among the most specific outcomes: ISO 19101: “reference model”, and ISO 
19113: “quality principles” were finally issued in 2002, reflecting common ground 
between the various national geographic organizations (see Table 2).
The national statistics agencies were closely working with these specialists, because 
the same quality issues are important for the countries and for international comparison 
as well. International bodies such as UNESCO, OECD, and Eurostat have also been 

AutoCarto Six Retrospective 
Barry Wellar
195
aware of the same issue for many years, but the automation of cartography was 
probably among the very first pioneers. 
Table 2. The actual consensus about metadata for quality in ISO19113:2002. 


Completeness (omission, 
commission, logical consistency) 
Presence of features, their attributes and relationships 
(absence or excess of data, adherence to rules of the data structure) 
Conceptual consistency 
Adherence to rules of the conceptual schema, to value domains, etc. 
Topological consistency 
Correctness of explicit topology, closeness to respective position of features 
Positional accuracy 
Accuracy in absolute point positioning, gridded data positioning 
Temporal consistency 
Accuracy of temporal attributes and their relationships 
Thematic accuracy 
Accuracy of quantitative attributes, class correctness 
F. Data consistency: Uncertain but rational knowledge. 
Understanding the many causes of data uncertainty sheds light on the many 
approximations made all along the process of gathering and measuring even the 
simplest datum: for instance, ground temperature. 
Considering that data are always somewhat inexact, and considering that data always 
depend on a model imperfectly representing a reduced aspect of reality, it is important 
to provide guidelines or constraints. Every time we can provide some constraints we 
can confront the data, and issue a warning for each detected conflict. 
Figure 2 is a snapshot of a successful experiment developed during the FP5 European 
project REVIG!S3: how to revise – by logical means and tools – very uncertain flood 
data using direction of water flow as constraints (Jeansoulin  and Wilson  2002). 
In big data, the prediction of the annual flu wave by looking through Internet “medical 
queries” has got a lot of media attention.
It isn’t necessarily a convincing example, but the archetypical “analytics” story is IBM 
Watson, when it overcomes two Jeopardy champions, in 2011. The DeepQA project 
behind Watson is making intense use of geo-information reasoning for answering 
questions such as “They’re the two states you could be reentering if you’re crossing 
Florida’s northern border" (Ferrucci 2010). 
Mereotopology, region connectedness calculus (RCC) or Allen’s interval algebra [Allen 
1983], developed in the 1980s, are extensively used today for constraining queries and 
making answers more narrow and efficient.
3 REVIGIS project involved universities of Marseilles, Leicester, Keele, Technical Vienna, Pisa, Twente 
(ITC), Laval. 

AutoCarto Six Retrospective 
Barry Wellar
196
Figure 2. Integrating data and constraints: flow direction information and estimated 
water heights must comply or be “revised”. 
Figure 3 gives the lattice the 8 possible such algebras (Euzenat 1997). 
 Figure 3. Lattice of 8 mereotopology algebras. 
Description. Each node gives the 
number of allowed relations per 
algebra (from 2 to 13); and the axis 
have the following effects: 
contact introduces arc (bold) 
relations,
parts explodes the equivalence
relation Eq, 
order unwraps the graph around a 
symmetry axis (Allen 1983). 
Reasoning under constraints marries well with stochastic reasoning, as with Bayes 
networks (Cavarroc 2004). In Figure 4, the network (1) is the direct application of the 
Pearl algorithm on data (pixel data of two images 1995 and 1996, plus terrain data 
(altitude, pedology, etc.); the constrained network (2) accepts some additional 
constraints in the algorithm (e.g. slope doesn’t impact the upstream/downstream rank in 
the valley, or landcover is not a cause for area); the constrained network is used to build 
a prediction (3) for the following year, from the land use in 1995 (separate data set). 

AutoCarto Six Retrospective 
Barry Wellar
197
Figure 4. Bayes networks used in prediction mode.
slope
pedology
landuse96
shape
area
altitude
landuse95
rank
index
Formal
causes:
terrain,
soil …
Material
causes:
farming
…
Efficient
causes:
legacy,
year …
shape
area
altitude
rank
index
slope
landuse95
pedology
landuse96
(1) Initial, unconstrained network
(2) With added constraints
(3) Prediction
G. Ontologies: Data are acts, not facts. 
Geo scientists are still classifying and zoning, but much more attention is turned to the 
meaning of the process, the interpretability of the result, and the ability to use it within a 
decision process. Moreover, geo-information also raised the question of what is in data, 
common agreement, external quality, data usability, etc., which are different aspects of 
a more general question often summarized into the word “ontologies” (plural!), and the 
subsequent problem of “ontology alignment” (Gruber 1994; Halevy 2005). 
Here again, the terminology has been brought to public attention by the wide spread of 
the Internet and the mainstream studies following it, but, here again, geo-information 
was developing its research when questioning the problems of global data quality, of 
managing different quality levels for different types of information, and geomatics was 
among the first to provide a systematic and comprehensive approach, with the above-
mentioned ISO 191xx series of standards, in particular in 2002 with ISO 19150  
(“ontologies”), and ISO 19157 (“data quality”). Deviller and Jeansoulin (2006) regroup a 
good part of this research on ontologies and quality, in particular the notion of external 

AutoCarto Six Retrospective 
Barry Wellar
198
quality (quality for the user) which is illustrated in Figure 5, where the quality defined by 
the producer of geo-data is internal (referring to its own specification) rather than 
external (quality as a fitness for use). 
Figure 5. The internal versus external quality issue. 
"Universe of 
discourse" 
Understanding 
of the reality 
Reality 
Producers 
Users
Product Ontology:
specifications, 
data scheme, 
metadata (incl. internal quality) 
Problem Ontology:
Goal of decision making, 
features and phenomena, 
expected quality
geo-
sémantical 
space
Let’s develop an example of ontologies alignment with agricultural data. Given 2 graphs 
representing two different surveys of the same region (Pham 2004), the observations at
the same locations (parcels) will differ according to their ontologies, and we can build a 
Galois lattice summing up the fusion of information. 
In Figure 6, the conflated graph contains all the different nodes of both initial graphs, 
plus some additional mandatory nodes (yellow), minimal addition for a consistent fusion, 
and whose labels are a consensus between the two original ontologies, e.g. “(grass; 
herbaceous)”. This consensus between the two ontologies is minimal, in that it is much 
more efficient and meaningful than the mere cross-product of the two ontologies. 
Therefore, ontologies are not made solely for Internet applications or e-business, but 
also for addressing real world queries: “What there is”, or “The nature of being”, as 
discussed by the philosopher W. O. Quine and others with an interest in ontology as a 
branch of philosophy which deals with the science of what is, what exists, and 
associated concerns. These fundamental questions have confronted geo-information 
scientists since the beginning of their work. 

AutoCarto Six Retrospective 
Barry Wellar
199
Figure 6. Consensus graph for the fusion of the two ontologies.
H. Conclusion. 
Some 30 years ago, the conjunction of the multiplication of remote sensing imagery 
(Landsat 1976, then SPOT), the early stages of desktop image processing, the 
automation of the cartographic processing, and a rapidly increasing computing power – 
doubling every two years according to Moore’s law, version 2 – offered an opportunity to 
collect, merge, and process an enormous amount of data, an amount larger than that 
ever collected and processed by machines.
The engineers and researchers involved in geo-information were, consequently, on the 
leading edge for the development of tools and methods that eventually are part of what 
today is termed big data. 
Finally, in closing, a tribute. 
It is appropriate to recognize the expertise that geo-information specialists have 
developed in data engineering. Decision-makers are increasingly relying on numbers to 
prepare and make their decisions. However, it appears that few of them are aware of 
the way these numbers are produced, that is, data are the result of many small 
decision-making processes at all stages. Data are not Facts, but Acts.
From the signal to the semantics of information, the science of geo-information has 
confronted, and been confronted by, a very large range of issues, and has brought its 
contribution to many data models, and many algorithms.
Dealing on an everyday basis with data and models, but dealing basically with the real 
world, the geo-information scientist must continue to seek out the right tools and 
representations, and thereby continue to pioneer advances in data engineering. 

AutoCarto Six Retrospective 
Barry Wellar
200
I. References. 
Allen, J.1983. Maintaining knowledge about temporal intervals. In Communications of 
the ACM. 26 November: 832–843. 
Cavarroc, M.-A., B. Salem, and R.  Jeansoulin. 2004. Modeling landuse changes using 
Bayesian networks. 22nd IASTED Intl. Conf. Artificial Intelligence and 
Applications, Innsbruck, Austria. 
Cortes, C., and V. Vapnik. 1995. Support-vector networks. Machine Learning, 20, 1995. 
http://www.springerlink.com/content/k238jx04hm87j80g/ 
Degenne, P., D. Lo Seen, D. Parigot, R. Forax, A.Tran, L.  Ait, A. Lahcen, O.Curé, and 
R.  Jeansoulin. 2009. Design of a domain specific language for modelling 
processes. Ecological Modelling, 220(24): 3527-3535. 
Devillers, R. and R. Jeansoulin. 2006. Fundamentals of Spatial Data Quality. ISTE 
Publishing Company, London UK. 
Diday, E. 1973. The dynamic clusters method in nonhierarchical clustering. International
Journal of Computer & Information Sciences, March 1973, Volume 2, Issue 1, pp 
61-88.
Edwards, G., and R. Jeansoulin. 2004. Data fusion: From a logic perspective with a 
view to implementation. International Journal of Geographical Information 
Science, 18(4):303-307. 
Euzenat, J., B. Christian, R. Jeansoulin, J. Revault, and S. Schwer, 1997. 
Raisonnement spatial et temporel. Bulletin de l’Association Française pour 
l’Intelligence Artificielle, Vol.2: 2-13. 
Ferrucci, D., et al. 2010. Building Watson: An overview of the DeepQA Project. AI
Magazine 31(3) 59-79. (see: http://www.aaai.org/Magazine/Watson/watson.php)
Goodchild, M. 2010. Twenty years of progress: GIScience in 2010. Journal of Spatial 
Information Science (1); 3–20. 
Gruber, T and G. Olsen. 1994. An ontology for engineering mathematics. Proceedings
of the Fourth International Conference on Principles of Knowledge 
Representation and Reasoning: 258–269. 
Halevy, A. 2005. Why your data don’t mix? ACM Queue 3(8). (retrieved at: 
http://homes.cs.washington.edu/~alon/files/acmq.pdf )
Jeansoulin, R., O. Papini, H. Prade, and S. Schockaert, 2010. Methods for Handling 
Imperfect Spatial Information. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 

AutoCarto Six Retrospective 
Barry Wellar
201
Jeansoulin, R. and N. Wilson. 2002. Quality of geographic information: Ontological 
approach and artificial intelligence tools in the Revigis project. EC-GI& GIS 
Workshop. 12. 
Jeansoulin, R., Y. Fontaine, and W. Frei.1981. Multitemporal segmentation by means of 
fuzzy sets. 7th LARS Symposium on Machine Processing of Remotely Sensed 
Data, with Special Emphasis on Range, Forest, and Wetlands Assessment.
Purdue University: 336-340. 
Moore, E.G. 1975. Progress in Digital Integrated Electronics. IEEE. 
Olioso, A., et al. 1998. Spatial aspects in the Alpilles-ReSeDA project. Scaling and 
Modeling in Forestry: Application in Remote Sensing and GIS. D Marceau, ed. 
Université de Montréal: 92–102. 
Pham, T.T., V Phan-Luong, and R. Jeansoulin, 2004. Data quality based fusion: 
Application to the land cover. 7th International Conference on Information Fusion
(FUSION '04).
