On Algorithmic Decision Procedures in Emergency Response
Systems in Smart and Connected Communities
Geoffrey Pettet
Vanderbilt University
Nashville, TN

Ayan Mukhopadhyay
Stanford University
Palo Alto, CA

Mykel Kochenderfer
Stanford University
Palo Alto, CA

Yevgeniy Vorobeychik
Washington University
St Louis, MO

Abhishek Dubey
Vanderbilt University
Nashville, TN

ABSTRACT
Emergency Response Management (ERM) is a critical problem faced
by communities across the globe. Despite this, it is common for ERM
systems to follow myopic decision policies in the real world. Prin-
cipled approaches to aid ERM decision-making under uncertainty
have been explored but have failed to be accepted into real systems.
We identify a key issue impeding their adoption — algorithmic
approaches to emergency response focus on reactive, post-incident
dispatching actions, i.e. optimally dispatching a responder after in-
cidents occur. However, the critical nature of emergency response
dictates that when an incident occurs, first responders always dis-
patch the closest available responder to the incident. We argue that
the crucial period of planning for ERM systems is not post-incident,
but between incidents. This is not a trivial planning problem — a
major challenge with dynamically balancing the spatial distribu-
tion of responders is the complexity of the problem. An orthogonal
problem in ERM systems is planning under limited communication,
which is particularly important in disaster scenarios that affect
communication networks. We address both problems by proposing
two partially decentralized multi-agent planning algorithms that
utilize heuristics and exploit the structure of the dispatch problem.
We evaluate our proposed approach using real-world data, and find
that in several contexts, dynamic re-balancing the spatial distribu-
tion of emergency responders reduces both the average response
time as well as its variance.
KEYWORDS
Emergency Response Management; Monte Carlo Tree Search; De-
centralized Algorithms; Smart and Connected Communities
ACM Reference Format:
Geoffrey Pettet, Ayan Mukhopadhyay, Mykel Kochenderfer, Yevgeniy Vorob-
eychik, and Abhishek Dubey. 2020. On Algorithmic Decision Procedures in
Emergency Response Systems in Smart and Connected Communities. In
Proc. of the 19th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Mul-
tiagent Systems (AAMAS 2020), Auckland, New Zealand, May 9–13, 2020,
IFAAMAS, 9 pages.
Proc. of the 19th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems
(AAMAS 2020), B. An, N. Yorke-Smith, A. El Fallah Seghrouchni, G. Sukthankar (eds.), May
9–13, 2020, Auckland, New Zealand. © 2020 International Foundation for Autonomous
Agents and Multiagent Systems (www.ifaamas.org). All rights reserved.
1
INTRODUCTION
Emergency response management (ERM) is a critical problem faced
by communities across the globe. First responders must attend to
many incidents dispersed across space and time using limited re-
sources. ERM can be decomposed into the following sub-problems
— forecasting, planning, and dispatching. Although these have been
examined independently, planning and dispatch decisions are de-
pendent on accurate incident forecasting. Therefore, it is imper-
ative that principled approaches are designed to tackle all three
sub-problems. However, it is fairly common for ERM systems to fol-
low myopic and straight-forward decision policies. For decades, the
most common dispatching approach was to send the closest avail-
able responder to the incident (in time or space), after which the
responder would return to its base or be reassigned. Such methods
do not necessarily minimize expected response times [15]. As cities
grow, population density, traffic dynamics and the sheer frequency
of incidents make such methods stale and inaccurate. We systemat-
ically investigate the nuances of algorithmic approaches to ERM
and describe how principled decision-making can aid emergency
response.
Naturally, algorithmic approaches to emergency response typi-
cally combine a data-driven forecasting model to predict incidents
with a decision-making process that provides dispatch recommenda-
tions. Canonical approaches towards modeling the decision process
involve using a Continuous-Time Markov Decision Process (CT-
MDP)[11] or a Semi-Markovian Process (SMDP)[16], which are
solved through dynamic programming. While the SMDP model
provides a more accurate representation of ERM dynamics, it does
not scale well for dynamic urban environments[13]. The trade-off
between optimality and computational time has also been investi-
gated by the use of Monte-Carlo based methods[13].
Despite such algorithmic progress and attention in recent years
from the AI community[4, 13, 16, 18, 19, 22], there are still issues
that impede the adoption of principled algorithmic approaches. We
argue that a major problem lies in the very focus of most algo-
rithmic approaches. Most ERM systems seek to perform decision-
making after incidents occur. While such approaches guarantee
optimality in the long run (with respect to response times), they
de-prioritize response to some incidents. Our conversations with
first-responders[6] revealed two crucial insights about this problem:
1) it is almost impossible to gauge the severity of an incident from
arXiv:2001.07362v3  [cs.AI]  12 Mar 2020

a call for assistance and de-prioritize immediate response in antici-
pation of higher future rewards, and 2) Computer-Aided Dispatch
systems (CAD)[21] typically enable a human agent to dispatch a
responder in the span of 5-10 seconds. These insights explain why
the closest responder is usually dispatched to an incident; it is too
risky to de-prioritize incidents of unknown severity.
We raise an important conceptual question about algorithmic
approaches to emergency response - is it feasible to optimize over
dispatch decisions once an incident has happened? In this paper
we argue that the crucial, practical period of principled decision-
making is between incidents. This avoids the potential consequences
of explicitly choosing to de-prioritize response to an incident to
achieve future gain, but accommodates the scope of principled
decision-making. Most ERM systems do not exploit the scope of
dynamically rebalancing the spatial distribution of responders ac-
cording to the need of the hour. This problem is challenging since
optimizing responder distribution and response as a multi-objective
optimization problem is usually computationally infeasible. Indeed,
even Monte-Carlo based methods have previously been used with
a restricted action space (only responding to incidents) to achieve
acceptable computational latency[13]. We address this challenge
by proposing two efficient algorithmic approaches to optimize over
the spatial distribution of responders dynamically.
The second set of problems that impedes the adoption of algorith-
mic decision-making in ERM is related to resilience and efficiency.
Data processing and decision-making for algorithmic dispatching
usually occur in a centralized manner (typically at a central data
processing center), which is then communicated to responders.
ERM, however, clearly evolves in a multi-agent setting, in which
the agents have the capacity to perform independent computa-
tion (most modern ambulances are equipped with laptops). In an
extremely time-critical setting, especially during communication
breakdowns often caused by disasters, it is crucial that such comput-
ing abilities are used, and distributed and parallelized algorithmic
frameworks are designed. Also, centralized decision-making sys-
tems treat all agents as part of a monolithic object or state. This
is redundant, as agents often operate independently (for example,
an ambulance in one part of the city is usually not affected by an
incident in a completely different or distant part). In this paper,
we argue that decentralized planning could identify and utilize
structure in the problem and save vital computational time.
Contributions: We focus on two problems in this paper (1) de-
signing an approach that can accommodate rebalancing of resources
to ensure efficient response, and (2) designing the ability for an
emergency response system to be equipped to deal with scenar-
ios that require decentralized planning with very limited commu-
nication. To this end, we start by modeling the problem of op-
timal response as a Multi-Agent Semi-Markov Decision Process
(M-SMDP)[2, 9]. Then, we describe a novel algorithmic approach
based on Multi-Agent Monte-Carlo Tree Search (M-MCTS)[3] that
facilitates parallelized planning to dynamically rebalance the spatial
distribution of responders. Our approach utilizes the computation
capacity of each individual agent to create a partially decentralized
approach to planning. Finally, we evaluate our framework using
real-world data from Nashville, TN. We find that these approaches
Table 1: Notation lookup table
Symbol
Definition
Λ
Set of agents
D
Set of depots
C(d)
Capacity of depot d
G
Set of cells
S
State space
A
Action space
P
State transition function
T
Temporal transition distribution
α
Discount factor
ρ(s, a)
Reward function given action a taken in state s
A
Joint agent action space
T
Termination scheme
st
Particular state at time t
I t
Set of cell indices waiting to be serviced
Rt
Set of agent states at time t
pt
j
Position of agent j
дt
j
Destination of agent j
ut
j
Current status of agent j
si, sj
Individual states
tij
Transition time between states si, sj
ta
Time between incidents
ts
Time to service an incident
tb
Time to a balance step
r
Reward
tr
Incident response time (the time between incident
awareness and first agent’s arrival on scene)
σ
Action recommendation set
µ
Mean agent service time
cd
Number of agents at depot d
υд
Incident rate at cell д
υd
д
The fraction of cell д’s incident rate shared by depot d
ϒ
Set of occupied depots and their split incident rates
πϒ
Utility of ϒ
th
Time since beginning of planning horizon
tr (s, a)
Response time to an incident given action a in state s
ϕk (s, a)
Distance traveled by agent k while balancing
ψ
Exogenous parameter balancing response time
and distance traveled
RoI
Radius of Influence of a cell (used in queue based rebalancing policy).
maintain system fairness while decreasing the average and vari-
ance of incident response times when compared to the standard
procedure.
Outline: Through the rest of the paper, we describe the over-
all problem of emergency response and explain the algorithmic
framework. We begin by providing a brief background regarding
how ERM pipeline can be modeled technically, and how theoretical
approaches to solution work in such situations. Then, we describe
our algorithmic framework in detail, and finally, evaluate our frame-
work using incident and response data from Nashville, TN. Table 1
can be used as a reference for the symbols we use.
2
SYSTEM MODEL
Our goal is to develop an approach for emergency responder place-
ment and incident response in a dynamic, continuous-time and
stochastic environment. We begin with several assumptions on
the problem structure and information provided a-priori. First, we
assume that we are given a spatial map broken up into a finite col-
lection of equally-sized cells G, and that we are given an exogenous
spatial-temporal model of incident arrival in continuous time over
this collection of cells (we describe one such model later). Second,
we assume that for each spatial cell, the temporal distribution of
incidents is homogeneous. Our third assumption is that emergency
responders are allowed to be housed in a set of fixed and exoge-
nously specified collection of depots D. Depots are essentially a
subset of cells that responders can wait in, and are analogous to
2

fire-stations in the real-world. Each depot d ∈D has a fixed capac-
ity C(d) of responders it can accommodate at a time. We assume
that when an incident happens, a free responder (if available) is
dispatched to the site of the incident. Once dispatched, the time to
service consists of two parts: 1) time taken to travel to the scene of
the incident, and 2) time taken to attend to the incident. If no free
responders are available, then the incident enters a waiting queue.
2.1
Incident Arrival
An important component of a decision-theoretic framework to
aid emergency response is the understanding of when and where
incidents occur. While our algorithmic framework can work with
any forecasting model, we briefly describe the one that we choose to
use: a continuous-time forecasting model based on survival analysis.
It has recently shown state-of-the-art performance in prediction
performance for a variety of spatial-temporal incidents (crimes,
traffic accidents etc.)[15, 17, 18]. Formally, the model represents a
probability distribution over inter-arrival times between incidents,
conditional on a set of features, and can be represented as
ft (T = t|γ(w))
where ft is a probability distribution for a continuous random
variable T representing the inter-arrival time, which typically de-
pends on covariatesw via the functionγ. The model parameters can
be estimated by the principled procedure of Maximum Likelihood
Estimation (MLE) [10].
2.2
Decision-Making Process
The evolution of incident arrival and emergency response occur
in continuous-time, and can be cohesively represented as a Semi-
Markov Decision Process (SMDP) [16]. An SMDP system can be
described by the tuple (S,A, P,T, ρ(i,a),α) where S is a finite state
space, A is the set of actions, P is the state transition function with
pij(a) being the probability with which the process transitions from
state i to state j when action a is taken, T denotes the temporal
transition with t(i, j,a) representing a distribution over the time
spent during the transition from state i to state j under action a, ρ
represents the reward function, and α is the discount factor.
To adapt this formulation to a multiagent setting, we model
the evolution of incidents and responders together in a Multi-
Agent SMDP (MSMDP)[20], which can be represented as the tuple
(Λ,S, A, P,T, ρ(i,a),α, T), where Λ is a finite collection of agents
and λj ∈Λ denotes the jth agent. The action space of the jth agent
is represented by Aj, and A = Îm
i=1 Aj represents the joint ac-
tion space. We assume that the agents are cooperative and work
to maximize the overall utility of the system. The components S, ρ
and P are defined as in a standard SMDP. T represents a termina-
tion scheme; note that since agents each take different actions that
could take different times to complete, they may not all terminate
at the same time. An overview of such schemes can be found in
prior literature [20]. We focus on asynchronous termination, where
actions for a particular agent are chosen as and when the agent
completes it’s last assigned action. Next, we define the important
components of the decision process in detail.
States: A state at time t is represented by st which consists of a
tuple (It,Rt ), where It is a collection of cell indices that are waiting
to be serviced, ordered according to the relative times of incident
occurrence. Rt corresponds to information about the set of agents
at time t with |Rt | = |Λ|. Each entry rt
j ∈Rt is a set {pt
j ,дt
j ,ut
j },
where pt
j is the position of responder λj, дt
j is the destination cell
that it is traveling to (which can be its current position), and ut
j is
used to encode its current status (busy or available), all observed
at the state of our world at time t. For the sake of convenience, we
abuse notation slightly and refer to an arbitrary state simply by s
and use the notation si and sj to refer to multiple states. We point
out that our model revolves around states with specific events that
provide the scope of decision-making. Specifically, decisions need
to be taken when incidents occur, when responders finish servicing
and while rebalancing the distribution of responders. We also make
the assumption that no two events can occur simultaneously in our
world. In case such a scenario arises, since the world evolves in
continuous time, we can add an arbitrarily small time interval to
segregate the two events and create two separate states.
Actions: Actions in our world correspond to directing the re-
sponders to a valid cell to either respond to an incident or wait.
Valid locations include cells with pending incidents or any depot
that has capacity to accommodate additional responders. For a spe-
cific agent λi, valid actions for a specific state si are denoted by
Ai(si) (some actions are naturally invalid, for example, if an agent is
at cell k in the current state, any action not originating from cell k
is unavailable to the agent). Actions can be broadly divided into two
categories - responding and rebalancing. Responding actions refer
to an agent actually going to the scene of an incident to service it.
But agents could also be directed to wait at certain depots based
on the likelihood of future incidents in the proximity of the said
depot. We refer to such actions as rebalancing. Finally, we reiterate
that the joint valid action space of all the agents and a particular
instantiation of it are defined by A and a respectively, and that of
a specific agent λj by Aj and aj.
Transitions: Having described the evolution of our world, we
now look at both the transition time between states, as well as the
probability of observing a state, given the last state and action taken.
We define the former first, denoting the time between two states si
and sj by the random variable tij. There are four random variables
of interest in this context. We denote the time between incidents
by the random variable ta, the time to service an incident by ts,
the time taken for a balancing step as tb and the time taken for a
responder to reach the scene of an incident by tr . We overload these
notations for convenience later. Specifically, we model ta using a
survival model described in section 2.1. We model the service times
(ts) by learning an exponential distribution from service times using
historical emergency response data, and we model rebalancing time
(tb) simply by the time taken by an agent to move to the directed
cell.
We refrain from focusing on the transition function P, as our
algorithmic framework only needs a generative model of the world
and not explicit estimates of state transition probabilities.
Rewards: Rewards in SMDP usually have two components: a
lump sum instantaneous reward for taking actions, and a continu-
ous time reward as the process evolves. Our system only involves
the former, which we denote by ρ(s,a), for taking action a in state
s. We define the exact reward function in section 3.3.
3

2.3
Problem Definition
Given state s and an agent set Λ, the problem is to determine an
action recommendation set σ = {a1, ...,am}, s.t. ai ∈Ai(s), that
maximizes the expected reward. The ith entry in σ contains a valid
action for the ith agent.
Sovling this problem directly is hard due to its intractable state
space. Further, the state transition functions are unknown and diffi-
cult to model in closed form, which is typical of urban scenarios
where incidents and responders are modeled cohesively [16]. Fi-
nally, we have to consider the following practical constraints and
limitations.
• Temporal constraints — emergency response systems can afford
minimum latency ( 5-10 seconds in practice).
• Capacity constraints — each depot has a fixed agent capacity.
• Uniform severity constraint — all incidents must be responded
to ‘promptly’, without making a judgement about its severity
based on a report or a call.
• Wear and Tear — The overall distance agents travel should be
controlled to limit vehicle wear and tear.
• Limited Communication - ERM systems must be equipped to
deal with disaster situations, where communication is limited.
The temporal and uniform severity constraints make it difficult to
justify implementing dispatch policies other than greedy; in order
to improve upon greedy dispatch, some ‘good’ myopic rewards
must be sacrificed for an increase in expected future rewards. Since
it is very hard to predict the severity of an incident pre-dispatch,
the decision process cannot determine if this sacrifice is acceptable.
Therefore, in this work we focus on inter-incident planning while
maintaining greedy dispatch decisions when an incident is reported.
This approach gives the decision-maker more flexibility, as it can
proactively position resources rather than reacting to incidents.
Our problem then becomes how to distribute responders between
incidents such that the greedy dispatching rewards are maximized.
3
REBALANCING APPROACH TO ERM
3.1
Problem Complexity
Dynamic rebalancing’s flexibility comes with an increase in com-
plexity. Consider an example city with |Λ| responders (i.e. agents)
and |D| locations where responders could be stationed (called de-
pots) that each can hold one responder. When making a dispatch
decision at the time of an incident, a decision maker has at most
|Λ| possible choices: which responder to dispatch. If instead it is
re-assigning responders across depots, there are significantly more
choices. For example, with |Λ| = 20 and |D| = 30, there are 20 dis-
patching choices per incident, but P(|D|, |Λ|) =
|D |!
(|D |−|Λ|)! = 30!
10! =
7.31 × 1025 possible assignments. This will only increase if depots
have higher responder capacities.
Approaching the problem from this perspective requires solu-
tions that can cope with this large complexity. One possible ap-
proach is to directly solve the SMDP model. Although the state
transition probabilities are unknown, one can estimate the tran-
sition function by embedding learning into policy iteration[16].
This approach is unsuitable for rebalancing, as it is too slow even
for the dispatch problem. A centralized MCTS approach suffers
from the same shortcoming, barely satisfies the computational la-
tency constraints in case of the dispatch problem[14]. Instead, we
seek to exploit meaningful heuristics to propose computationally
feasible rebalancing strategies. We begin by presenting our first
approach, which focuses on using historical frequencies of incident
occurrence across cells to assign responders.
3.2
Multi-Server Queue Based Rebalancing
One way to address the complexity of rebalancing is by considering
an informed heuristic. A natural heuristic for ERM rebalancing is
incident rate — each depot can be assigned responders based on the
total rate of incidents it serves. Ultimately, our goal is to find a rebal-
ancing strategy that minimizes expected response times. As a result,
we first estimate the response time given a specific assignment of re-
sponders. Such a scenario can be modeled as a multi-server M/M/c
queue [8]. For a given cell and depot, the response time for an
M/M/c queue can be represented as
responseTime(cd,υ, µ) = ω(cd,υ/µ)
cd µ −υ
+ 1
µ
where ω(cd,υ/µ) =
1
1 + (1 −
υ
cd µ )(
cd !
(cdq)c ) Ícd −1
k=0
(cdq)k
k!
(1)
where µ = E(ts) is the mean service time of responders, cd is the
number of responders stationed at the depot, υ denotes the rate
of incident occurrence at the concerned cell, and q = υ
cµ is server
utilization. The standard M/M/c model above needs slight adjust-
ment to account for the fact that incidents at a cell д can potentially
be serviced by any depot, which are located at different distances
from д. Therefore, we consider a multi-class queue formulation in
which a cell’s incident rate is split among each depot. Since depots
closer to a cell д are more likely to service its incidents, we split
д’s incident arrival rate such that the fraction of rate incurred by a
depot is inversely proportional to the distance to д.
The following system of linear equations can be used to split the
arrival rate of a cell д among depots D.
Õ
d ∈D
υd
д = υд
(2a)
dist(ed,д)υ e
d
д = dist(di,д)υdi
д
∀di ∈D\ed
(2b)
where the variable υdд is the fraction of arrival rate of cell д that
is shared by depot d, dist(d,д) denotes the distance between depot
d and cell д, and ed is the depot closest to д. Equation 2a ensures
that the split rates for each cell д ∈G sum to its actual arrival rate
υд, and equation 2b ensures that the weighted υ’s are inversely
proportional to the relative distances between the depots and the
cell. For convenience, we refer to the entire set of split rates by ϒ.
The split rates ϒ provide a foundation for a responder rebal-
ancing approach, given a few considerations. First, we might not
have enough responders to meet the total demand based on ϒ. Sec-
ondly, the problem of evaluating response times in the context of
emergency response is different than the standard M/M/c queue
formulation, since travel times are not memoryless, and must be
modeled explicitly. To address these issues, we design a scoring
mechanism for evaluating a specific allocation of responders to
4

Algorithm 1: Iterative Greedy Action Selection
1 INPUT: number of agents |Λ|, depots D, depot capacities C, grid rates
υд∀д ∈G;
2 final_depot_occupancy := Hash {d : 0} ∀d ∈D ;
3 do
4
candidate_depots := Set ∅;
5
candidate_scores := Hash ∅;
6
for d ∈D do
7
if final_depot_occupancy[d] < C(d) then
8
temp_occ := final_depot_occupancy;
9
temp_occ[d] + = 1;
10
find ϒd by solving system of linear equations {2a, 2b} given
temp_occ;
11
πϒd :=
Í
d∈D
Í
д∈G 1(d, Λ){responseTime(temp_occ[d], υd
д, µ) +
travelTime(d, д)};
12
candidate_depots := candidate_depots ∪d;
13
candidate_scores := candidate_scores ∪{d : πϒd }
14
best_depot := argmin πϒd
∀d ∈candidate_depots;
15
final_depot_occupancy[best_depot] + = 1;
16 while sum(final_depot_occupancy) < |Λ|;
17 return chosenDepots;
depots for a given ϒ. We denote this score by πϒ. Using ϒ, a respon-
der allocation can be scored by summing each depot d’s expected
response time based on the queuing model (calculated using equa-
tion 1) and the overall time taken by responders to complete the
rebalancing:
πϒ =
Õ
d ∈D
Õ
д∈G
1(d, Λ){responseTime(cd,υd
д, µ) + travelTime(d,д)}
(3)
where 1(d, Λ) is an indicator function which set to 1 only if depot
d has at least one responder, and the functions responseTime and
travelTime are used to denote the expected response time of a depot
and travel times needed by agents to respond to incidents. The goal
of an assignment method is then to find a responder allocation
that minimizes this heuristic score. To minimize the total score we
employ an iterative greedy approach, shown in algorithm 1. Once
the best depots are found, responders are assigned to them based
on their current distance from the depots.
The approach dramatically decreases the computational complex-
ity of rebalancing compared to a brute force search. The complexity
for solving the system of linear equations {2a, 2b} is O(|Λ|3), as
there are at most |Λ| depots that could have a resource allocated.
The rates are split for each cell д ∈G and new depot under consid-
eration d during each iteration of the greedy search in algorithm 1,
which is repeated |Λ| times to place each responder. This gives the
overall algorithm a complexity of O(|G||D||Λ|5). Taking the same
example given above with |Λ| = 20 and |D| = 30 and assuming
|G| = 900 (based on our geographic area of interest and patrol areas
chosen by local emergency responders), the complexity is 1 × 1015
times less than a brute force search.
While this approach is not inherently decentralized, each agent
can perform these computations and take actions themselves, re-
quiring minimal coordination. While straightforward and tractable,
there are a few potential downsides to this approach. First, this
policy does not take into account the internal state of the system.
For example, a responder might be on its way to respond to an
incident, thereby rendering it unavailable for rebalancing. Secondly,
it assumes that historical rates of incident arrival can be used to
optimize responder placement for the future, thereby not consider-
ing how future states of the system affect a particular rebalancing
configuration. To address these issues, we propose a decentralized
Monte-Carlo Tree Search algorithm.
3.3
Decentralized MCTS Approach
Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) is a simulation-based search al-
gorithm that has been widely used in game playing scenarios.
MCTS based algorithms evaluate actions by sampling from a
large number of possible scenarios. The evaluations are stored in a
search tree, which is used to explore promising actions. Typically,
exploration policy is dictated by a principled approach like UCT[12].
A standard MCTS-based approach is not suitable for our problem
due to the sheer size of the state-space in consideration coupled
with the low latency that ERM systems can afford. Instead, we focus
on a decentralized multi-agent MCTS (MMCTS) approach explored
by Claes et. al [3] for multi-robot task allocation during warehouse
commissioning. In MMCTS individual agents build separate trees
focused on their own actions, rather than having one monolithic,
centralized tree. This dramatically reduces the search space: in our
case, at each evaluation step of a Monte-Carlo based approach,
using a decentralized multi-agent search reduces the total number
of choices from the number of permutations P(|D|, |Λ|) =
|D |!
(|D |−|Λ|)!
to only the number of depots |D|.
To realize MMCTS for an ERM domain, some extensions need
to be made to standard UCT [7]. While an agent is building its own
tree, it must model other agents’ behavior. Since this estimation
is required at every step of every simulation by each agent, find-
ing a model that strikes a balance between computation time and
accuracy of predicted actions is vital.
There are also global constraints on the system which mandate
agents maintain a minimal degree of coordination. For example,
the number of resources assigned to a depot cannot be higher than
its capacity. We take this into account by adding a filtering step to
the decision process. Similar to Map-Reduce [5], each agent sends
their evaluated actions to a central planner which makes the final
decisions while satisfying global system constraints.
Next, we describe the architecture of our decentralized MMCTS
based algorithm.
• Reward Structure: At the core of an MCTS approach is an eval-
uation function that measures the reward of taking an action in
a given state. For a state s in the tree of agent λj, we design the
reward ρ of taking an action a in s as
ρ(s,a) =


ρs−1 −αth (tr (s,a)),
if responding to an incident
ρs−1 −αthψ
Í
λk ∈Λ(ϕk (s,a))
|Λ|
,
if balancing at s
(4a)
where ρs−1 refers to the total accumulated reward at the parent
of state s in the tree, α is the discount factor for future rewards,
and th the time since the beginning of the planning horizon t0.
The evaluation function is split into cases reflecting the separate
incident dispatch and balancing steps in our solution approach.
5

Algorithm 2: Decision Process
1 INPUT: state s, time limit tlim;
2 I := Sample Incidents(s)
3 E := I + rebalancing events
4 ranked action set e
A := ∅;
5 for Agent λj ∈Λ do
6
e
A[λj] := MMCTS(s, λj, E, tlim);
7 recommended actions σ := CentralizedActionFilter(s, e
A);
8 apply σ to s;
9 Return s;
In a dispatch step, the reward is updated with the discounted
response time to the incident tr (s,a). In a balancing step, we
update the reward by the average distance traveled by the agents
(we denote the distance traveled by agent λk while balancing
due to action a in s by ϕk(s,a)). ψ is an exogenous parameter
that balances the trade-off between response time and distance
traveled for balancing, and is set by the user depending on their
priorities. Distance is not included during dispatch actions, as
we always send the closest agent.
• Evaluating other agents’ actions: Agents must have an accu-
rate yet computationally cheap model of other agents’ behavior;
we explore two such possible policies — (1) a naive policy that
other agents will not rebalance, remaining at their current depot
(referred to as Static Agent Policy), and (2) an informed policy,
which is in the form of the Queue Rebalancing Policy described
in the section 3.2. These are used to select actions for the other
agents Λ\{λi } when building agent λi’s search tree, and are rep-
resented by the ActionSelection(available agents, state) function
in line 5 of algorithm 4.
• Rollout: When working outside the MMCTS tree, i.e. rolling
out a state, a fast heuristic is used to estimate the score of a
given action. We use greedy dispatch without balancing as our
heuristic.
• Action Filtering: The dispatching domain has several global
constraints to adhere to, including ensuring that an incident is
serviced if agents are available and that depots are not filled
over capacity. To meet these constraints, we propose a filtering
step be added to the MMCTS workflow, similar to Map-Reduce.
Once each individual agent has scored and ranked each possible
action, these are sent to a centralized filter that chooses the final
actions for each agent to maximize utility without breaking any
constraints.
Another way global constraints affect the workflow is that the
set of valid actions for an agent when they build their search tree
may not be the same as the valid actions when it comes time for
them to make a decision. For example, consider two agents λ1 and
λ2; if agent λ1 moves to a station and fills it to capacity, then agent
λ2 cannot move to that station. To address this, we have agents
evaluate every action they could possibly take when expanding
nodes in the tree, even if those actions would cause an invalid state.
As the filter assigns actions to other agents, some of these actions
can become valid.
4
INTEGRATION FRAMEWORK
To realize an online ERM decision support system requires a frame-
work of interconnected processes. Our integration framework is
Algorithm 3: MMCTS
1 INPUT: state s, agent λj, sampled events E, time limit tlim;
2 create root of search tree at s;
3 do
4
select most promising node n from tree using UCB1;
5
childNode := Expand(n, λj, next event e ∈E after state(n));
6
rc := Rollout(childNode);
7
back-propagate(child, rc )
8 while within time limit tlim;
9 return actions λj could take ranked by average reward
Algorithm 4: Expand
1 INPUT: Search Tree Node n, agent λj, next important event e;
2 if e is balancing step then
3
select un-explored action a ∈Aj ;
4
λj takes action a;
5
actions available to other agents are updated
ActionSelection(Λ\{unavailable agents}, state(n));
6 else if e is an incident then
7
dispatch nearest agent to incident
8 create new child node nc from selected actions;
9 update the child’s reward based on the response times (if any) and agent
balancing movement
10 update nc to the time of the next event e, fast forwarding the state;
11 return nc ;
Algorithm 5: Centralized Action Filter
1 INPUT: state s, ranked actions e
A;
2 Λavail := agents(s) do
3
candidate_actions := ∅;
4
for Agent λj ∈Λavail do
5
candidate_actions[λj] := valid action aj ∈e
A[λj] with highest
reward ρ(s, a);
6
find agent λj with highest scored action aj ∈candidate_actions;
7
λj takes action aj;
8
update actions available to other agents accordingly;
9
remove λj from Λavail ;
10 while there are unassigned agents;
built on our prior modular ERM pipeline work[13]. It includes the
following components:
• A traffic routing model to support routing requests.
• A model of the environment and how it changes over time,
which is used by the incident prediction model.
• A model of the spatio-temporal distribution of incidents.
• A decision process that makes dispatching recommendations
based on the current state of the environment, responder loca-
tions, and future incident distributions.
This framework is a natural choice as it decouples the decision
process (our focus in this work) from other components. As it was
designed for the centralized, post-incident dispatching approach,
we make necessary changes to adapt it to our needs. The underlying
discrete event simulation was generalized to accept events other
than incident occurrence, such as periodic balancing events. The
decision process was also extended to handle distributed, multi-
agent approaches. An overview of the extended framework can be
seen in figure 1.
In our experiments we use a Euclidean distance based router,
and the incident prediction model outlined in section 2. Due to
6

Figure 1: Extended Decentralized ERM Framework Overview
the framework’s modularity, these components can be replaced
without affecting the decision process.
Incident Prediction Model: While the broader approach of
rebalancing the spatial distribution of responders is flexible enough
to work with any modular incident forecasting model, we provide
a brief evaluation of forecasting using survival analysis. To this
end, we generate forecasts 4 hours into the future at intervals
of every half an hour for the entire test set, and then repeat the
procedure 5 times to reduce variance and increase our confidence in
the forecasts. Finally, we create a heatmap (average of all forecasted
rates in the test set) to visualize the performance of the model
in comparison to actual incidents (see figure 2). The forecasting
models captures the high and low density areas fairly accurately,
as well as the spatial spread of the incidents.
4.1
Experimental Design
We perform our evaluation on data from Nashville, TN, a major
metropolitan area of USA, with a population of approximately
700,000. The depot locations are based on actual ambulance stations
obtained from the city. Traffic accident data was obtained from
the Tennessee Department of Transportation, and includes the
location and time of each incident. The incident prediction model
was trained on 35858 incidents occurring between 1-1-2018 and
1-1-2019, and we evaluated the decision processes on 2728 incidents
occurring in the month of January, 2019.
Experimental Configuration and Assumptions: We limit
the capacity of each depot to 1 in our experiments. This is motivated
by two factors — first, it encourages responders to be geographi-
cally spread out to respond quickly to incidents occurring in any
region of the city, and it models the usage of ad-hoc stations by
responders, which are often temporary parking spots. While the
responder service times to incidents are assumed to be exponential
in the real world, we set them to a constant for these experiments.
This ensures that the experiments across different methods and
parameters are directly comparable. If deployed, however, proper
service time distributions should be learned and sampled from for
each ERM system. We set the total number of responders to 26,
which is the actual number of responders in Nashville. We split
the geographic area into 900, 1x1 mile square cells. This choice
was a consequence of the fact that a similar granularity of dis-
cretization is followed by local authorities. To smooth out model
noise, each agent evaluates 5 sampled incident chains from the
generative model and averages the scores for each action across
the playouts. The standard UCB1 [1] algorithm is used to select the
most promising node during MCTS iterations. Finally, we augment
the queue based rebalancing policy by adding a radius of influence
Figure 2: Heatmaps comparing average incident rates for the fore-
casting model (left) with actual incidents in Nashville, TN (right)
.
(RoI) for each cell. Only depots within a cell’s RoI are considered
when splitting its rate to encourage even agent distribution and
reduce computation time.
5
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
We now discuss the results of the experiments for the two policies.
5.1
Queue Based Rebalancing Policy
We first compare the queue based rebalancing policy described
in section 3.2 to the baseline policy of no rebalancing. In these
experiments rebalancing occurred every half hour, and the incident
rates υ were average historical rates from the training data. We
tested several values (in miles) for the depots’ RoI, and compared
the distributions of response times (figure 3a) and the rebalancing
distance traveled by each responder (figure 3b).
Our first observation is that increasing the RoI does not neces-
sarily increase performance; there is an optimal zone around RoI=3,
implying that encouraging responders to spread out is beneficial.
We also see that while Q-3’s median and 1st quartile response times
remained fairly consistent with the baseline, the upper quartiles
are reduced. This decreases the response time’s mean and variance,
making the system more fair to all incidents. We also observe that
Q-2 and Q-3’s responders traveled less than 1 mile on average each
balancing step.
5.2
MMCTS Rebalancing
To determine the potential of the MMCTS rebalancing approach, we
first compare the two agent action models described in section 3.3
(Static Agent Policy and Queue Rebalancing Policy) using an oracle,
which has complete information regarding future incidents (this
assumption takes the errors of the prediction model out of compar-
ison and enables us to observe the best results that we can obtain) .
We present the results for the response time distributions in figure
3c and the average responder distance traveled per rebalancing step
in figure 3d.
Our first observation is that the MMCTS approach has high
potential. Using an oracle, it is able to significantly decrease the
response time distribution compared to the queue based policy
above. This is not surprising given that a standard MCTS algorithm
given perfect information should perform well given adequate time,
but it demonstrates that the MMCTS extensions of independent
7

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Response times (Minutes)
BASE
Q-1
Q-2
Q-3
Q-4
Q-5
(a)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Distance Moved (Miles)
Q-1
Q-2
Q-3
Q-4
Q-5
(b)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Response times (Minutes)
BASE
MR-1
MR-2
(c)
1
2
3
4
5
Distance Moved (Miles)
MR-1
MR-2
(d)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Response times (Minutes)
BASE
M-1
M-2
M-3
M-4
M-5
M-6
(e)
2
4
6
8
10
Distance Moved (Miles)
M-1
M-2
M-3
M-4
M-5
M-6
(f)
Figure 3: a) The response time distributions for each queue rebalancing policy experiment. b) Distribution of average miles traveled by each
responder at each balancing step in the queue rebalancing policy experiments. The baseline approach has no rebalancing, so it is excluded. c)
The response time distributions for each MMCTS experiment using an oracle. d) Distributions of average miles traveled by each responder
at each balancing step of the MMCTS experiments using an oracle. e) The response time distributions for each MMCTS parameter search
experiment. f) Distributions of average miles traveled by each responder at each balancing step of the MMCTS parameter search experiment.
action evaluation for each agent and action filtering are valid. Sec-
ondly, we see that MR-1 (using a static agent policy) outperforms
MR-2 (using the queue rebalancing policy). Last, we observe that
responders traveled between 2 and 4 miles on average each during
balancing step in these experiments, which is significantly higher
than the queuing approach.
Next, we examine a more the practical approach using the inci-
dent prediction model based on survival analysis. Since the static
agent policy performed better in the oracle experiments, we use
it for these experiments. There are several hyper-parameters that
can affect the performance of the algorithm, including (1) MCTS
Iteration Limit (2) Rebalancing Period - the amount of time be-
tween rebalancing steps (3) Distance Weight in Reward Function
ψ - this represents the importance of distance traveled for rewards
(4) Look-ahead Horizon for MCTS.
We vary these parameters to see their effect on the system (see
table 2). We present the response time distributions of MMCTS
using the incident model in figure 3e, and the average responder
distance traveled per rebalancing step in figure 3f. We observe that
different parameter choices lead to different performance character-
istics. For example, we see that changing the distance weight has
a large impact on the distance responders travel; users with tight
budgets for responder movement and maintenance will want to
pay close attention to this parameter. Comparing the queue based
policy with MMCTS, we see that both improve the response time
distributions compared to the baseline. MMCTS is more config-
urable, but is also more sensitive to poor hyper-parameter choices.
With proper hyper-parameter choices, both fulfil the constraints
discussed in section 2.3 by having quick dispatching decisions, al-
lowing for limited communication, and allowing users to control
for distance traveled (i.e. wear and tear).
6
CONCLUSION
Principled approaches to Emergency Response Management (ERM)
decision making have been explored, but have failed to be imple-
mented into real systems. We have identified that a key issue with
these approaches is that they focus on post-incident decision mak-
ing. We argue that due to fairness constraints, planning should
occur between incidents. We define a decision theoretic model for
such planning, and implement both a heuristic search using queuing
theory and a Multi Agent Monte Carlo Tree Search planner. We find
Table 2: Outline of the experimental runs performed and their cor-
responding hyper-parameter choices. (∗When not indicated, param-
eters are set to values of M-1, the MMCTS Baseline in the table.)
Identifier
Description
Hyper-Parameter Choices
BASE
Greedy Baseline Without Rebalancing
N/A
Q-1
Queue Based Rebalancing Policy with RoI of 1
RoI = 1
Q-2
Queue Based Rebalancing Policy with RoI of 2
RoI = 2
Q-3
Queue Based Rebalancing Policy with RoI of 3
RoI = 3
Q-4
Queue Based Rebalancing Policy with RoI of 4
RoI = 4
Q-5
Queue Based Rebalancing Policy with RoI of 5
RoI = 5
MR-1
MMCTS - using an oracle for future incidents
and a Static Agent Policy
Same as MMCTS Baseline M-1
MR-2
MMCTS - using an oracle for future incidents
and a Queue Rebalancing Policy
Same as MMCTS Baseline M-1
M-1
MMCTS - Baseline
The foundation for the parameter search.
Each parameter varies independently while
other parameters retain these values.
(All M-* experiments use generated incident
chains and a Static Agent Policy)
MCTS Iteration Limit = 250
Lookahead Horizon = 120 min
Reward Distance Weight ψ = 10
Reward Discount Factor = 0.99995
Rebalance Period = 60 min
M-2
MMCTS - Iteration Limit of 100
MCTS Iteration Limit = 100*
M-3
MMCTS - Iteration Limit of 500
MCTS Iteration Limit = 500*
M-4
MMCTS - Reward Distance Weight ψ of 0
Reward Distance Weight ψ = 0*
M-5
MMCTS - Reward Distance Weight ψ of 100
Reward Distance Weight ψ = 100*
M-6
MMCTS - Rebalance Period of 30 minutes;
Lookahead Horizon of 30 minutes
Lookahead Horizon = 30 min
Rebalance Period = 30min*
that these approaches maintain system fairness while decreasing
the average response time to incidents.
While the focus of this work is in the ERM domain, there are
important takeaways for general agent-based systems: (1) Planning
performance is dependent on the quality of the underlying event
prediction models. (2) It is imperative to understand the needs and
constraints for a target domain when designing a planning approach
for it to be accepted in practice. (3) The computational capacity of
“agents” has evolved in recent decades, and should be used to create
decentralized planning approaches. Given these takeaways, we will
explore the applicability of this framework to other domains where
planning occurs over a spatial-temporally evolving process.
Acknowledgement: This work is sponsored by the National
Science Foundation ( CNS-1640624, IIS-1814958, IIS-1905558), the
Tennessee Department of Transportation and the Center for Auto-
motive Research at Stanford (CARS). We thank our partners from
Metro Nashville Fire Department, and Metro Nashville Information
Technology Services in this work. We would also like to thank
Hendrik Baier (CWI) for insights and helpful discussions regarding
the paper. We also thank Sayyed Mohsen Vazirizade (Vanderbilt)
for his help in reviewing the manuscript and providing important
feedback.
8
