This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which 
this version may no longer be accessible. 
 
Abstract— The 3rd generation partnership project (3GPP) 
radio access network (RAN) plenary recently approved a work 
package for its Release 18, representing a major evolution and 
branded as the first release of 5G Advanced. The work package 
includes diverse study or work items that will significantly boost 
5G performance and address a wide variety of new use cases. In 
particular, 3GPP Release 18 will embrace artificial intelligence 
and machine learning technologies to provide data-driven, 
intelligent network solutions. This article provides an overview of 
the 5G Advanced evolution in 3GPP Release 18, which is 
anticipated to trigger a paradigm shift and have a profound 
impact on future wireless networks. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The 3rd generation partnership project (3GPP) completed the 
first release of the fifth-generation (5G) of mobile 
communications in its Release-15 in June 2018, which laid the 
basis for commercial 5G deployments worldwide [1]. Since 
then, 3GPP has been working on evolving 5G technology in its 
Releases 16 and 17 to improve performance further and address 
new use cases [2]. 3GPP recently approved the work package 
for its Release 18, which will mark the start of 5G Advanced 
evolution. In this article, we provide an overview of the 5G 
Advanced evolution in 3GPP Release 18. 
Figure 1 shows 3GPP’s 5G evolution roadmap from 5G to 
5G Advanced. In Release 15, 3GPP specified a new 5G air 
interface, known as New Radio (NR), aiming to address a 
variety of usage scenarios from enhanced mobile broadband 
(eMBB) 
to 
ultra-reliable 
low-latency 
communications 
(URLLC) to massive machine type communications (mMTC). 
NR supports both non-standalone (NSA) operation, which 
utilizes Long Term Evolution (LTE) for initial access and 
mobility handling, and standalone (SA) operation without 
relying on LTE. Key NR features include high-frequency 
operation and spectrum flexibility, ultra-lean design, forward 
compatibility, flexible duplex schemes, low-latency support, 
advanced antenna technologies, among others [3]. 
Release 16, the first step in the 5G evolution, introduces 
several major enhancements that improve existing features and 
address new use cases and deployment scenarios. Key 
improvements of existing features include multiple-input 
multiple-output (MIMO) and beamforming enhancements, 
enhanced support of dynamic spectrum sharing (DSS), reduced 
latency in dual connectivity (DC) and carrier aggregation (CA), 
and user equipment (UE) power saving. The main new use 
cases and deployment scenarios addressed in Release 16 
include enhanced support of industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) 
and URLLC, operation in unlicensed spectrum, vehicle-to-
Xingqin Lin 
Ericsson 

An Overview of 5G Advanced Evolution  
in 3GPP Release 18 
 
 
Figure 1: 3GPP’s 5G evolution roadmap from 5G to 5G Advanced (indicative). 

This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which 
this version may no longer be accessible. 
 
anything (V2X) communications, positioning services, and 
integrated access and backhaul (IAB). 3GPP’s submission to 
International Mobile Telecommunications-2020 (IMT-2020) 
contained Release 15 and Release 16 functionality. 
International Telecommunication Union Radiocommunication 
Sector (ITU-R) has approved the 3GPP’s submission as 5G 
technology in 2020. 
3GPP continues 5G evolution in its Release 17. Existing 
features, such as MIMO, DSS, UE power saving, coverage, 
positioning, and URLLC, are further enhanced. The main new 
use cases and deployment scenarios addressed in Release 17 
include support for reduced capability (RedCap) UE, operation 
in frequency bands beyond 52 GHz, multicast and broadcast 
service (MBS), and non-terrestrial networks (NTNs). It is worth 
noticing that Release 17 is the first time that 3GPP completes a 
full release of work all by electronic meetings.  
Release 18 will be the start of work on 5G Advanced. The 
discussion on the scope of Release 18 can be traced back to the 
3GPP radio access network (RAN) Release-18 workshop, 
which attracted more than 500 proposals. After a 6-month 
intense discussion, 3GPP approved its Release-18 package at 
the December 2021 RAN plenary meeting [4]. The package 
includes 27 diverse study or work items that will further boost 
network performance and address new use cases. In particular, 
the package features work on embracing artificial intelligence 
(AI) and machine learning (ML) technologies in the evolution 
of 5G Advanced. 
This article aims to provide an overview of the 5G Advanced 
evolution in 3GPP Release 18 at a level accessible to a general 
audience working in the wireless communications and 
networking communities. To make the scope of the 3GPP 
Release 18 package more easily digestible, we categorize the 
approved 27 items into five groups in this article and present 
them in Sections II, III, IV, V, and VI, respectively. Note that 
3GPP typically specifies features in a manner agnostic to 
specific services or use cases. The categorization in this article 
does not mean that a feature discussed in a particular group 
cannot be applied to the other groups; on the contrary, it is up 
to implementation and deployment to choose and combine the 
specified features. 
II. FURTHER ENHANCED 5G PERFORMANCE 
3GPP will continue to study and add functionality in Release 
18 to enhance 5G performance by working in the areas of 
network energy savings, coverage, mobility support, MIMO 
evolution, MBS, and positioning, as illustrated in Figure 2. 
The impetus for saving network energy has grown 
remarkedly as energy cost has become a significant part of 
network operating expenses (OPEX) [5]. Besides, reductions in 
network energy consumption are imperative for operators to 
ultimately achieve the sustainability objective of net zero to 
help combat climate change. 5G NR is significantly more 
energy efficient in terms of energy consumption per bit than the 
previous generations of mobile technologies. However, due to 
the increasingly dense deployment of 5G networks, massive 
MIMO, much larger bandwidths, and support of more 
frequency bands, 5G networks would lead to higher energy 
consumption if proper energy-saving measures are not applied. 
Therefore, 3GPP approves a study on network energy savings 
for NR in Release 18. The study aims to define a network 
energy consumption model for a base station (BS), develop an 
evaluation methodology, and identify key performance 
indicators (KPIs). The study will then investigate techniques to 
improve network energy savings in targeted deployment 
scenarios. 
Coverage is another key consideration for operators as it 
directly impacts service quality, capital expenditures (CAPEX), 
and OPEX in commercial deployments. Uplink coverage is 
often found to be the bottleneck in commercial deployments. In 
Release 17, 3GPP has added techniques to extend uplink 
coverage for the physical uplink shared channel (PUSCH) and 
physical uplink control channel (PUCCH). In Release 18, 3GPP 
plans to enhance the coverage of physical random access 
channel (PRACH) and study techniques to increase UE power 
 
Figure 2: An illustration of the key 3GPP Release-18 features that will further enhance 5G performance. 

This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which 
this version may no longer be accessible. 
 
limit for CA and DC and reduce maximum power reduction or 
peak-average-power ratio. In addition, dynamic switching 
between 
cyclic-prefix 
orthogonal 
frequency-division 
multiplexing (CP-OFDM) and discrete Fourier transform 
(DFT) spread OFDM (DFT-S-OFDM) in the uplink will be 
studied. 
Mobility support is a distinct feature of mobile networks 
which offers service continuity to moving UEs [6]. When a UE 
moves from the coverage area of one cell to another, a handover 
process is initiated to change the serving cell for the UE. The 
serving cell change is currently based on layer 3 (L3) 
measurements and radio resource control (RRC) signaling. To 
reduce the latency, overhead, and interruption time associated 
with L3-based mobility management, 3GPP Release 18 will 
introduce mechanisms and procedures for layer 1 (L1)/layer 2 
(L2) based inter-cell mobility. Another major area for Release-
18 mobility work is to enhance further the support of 
conditional handover. In conditional handover, UE receives a 
handover command with a condition from the network and does 
not apply the command until the condition is satisfied. 
MIMO evolution continues in 3GPP Release 18 [7]. It has 
been observed in commercial deployments that UE with 
medium or high mobility experiences significant performance 
loss in multi-user MIMO (MU-MIMO) scenarios, partially due 
to outdated channel state information (CSI). Potential CSI 
reporting enhancements will be explored to improve 
performance for UE with medium or high mobility. Also, the 
work will study a larger number of orthogonal demodulation 
reference signal (DMRS) ports for MU-MIMO. A unified TCI 
framework has been introduced in Release 17 for single 
transmission-reception point (TRP). 3GPP will extend the TCI 
framework to multi-TRP scenarios and study coherent joint 
transmission, two timing advances, and enhanced uplink power 
control for multi-TRP. To better support advanced UEs such as 
customer premise equipment (CPE), fixed wireless access 
(FWA) devices, and vehicular UEs, support of eight antenna 
ports in uplink and simultaneous multi-panel uplink 
transmission will be investigated. 
MBS is a feature dedicated to delivering multicast and 
broadcast services efficiently. Use case examples include TV 
broadcasting, live video, software updates, and public safety 
usages. 3GPP specified the basic support for MBS in Release 
17, enabling multicast transmission to UEs in RRC connected 
state and broadcast transmission to UEs in all RRC states. 3GPP 
Release 18 will extend the multicast support to UEs in RRC 
inactive state, introduce enhancements to enable UEs in RRC 
connected state to receive broadcast service and unicast service 
simultaneously, and study mechanisms to improve resource 
efficiency in RAN sharing scenarios.  
Positioning is a valuable service that can find applications in 
diverse 5G use cases. While Release-15 NR supported 
positioning, e.g., by using LTE positioning in NSA operation, 
Release-16 NR much enhanced the positioning support with a 
range of positioning methods, including both downlink-based 
and uplink-based positioning. Release-17 NR introduced 
additional enhancements to reduce latency for time-critical use 
cases such as remote control, deliver positioning accuracy down 
to the level of 20-30 cm for use cases such as factory 
automation, and improve integrity protection of the location 
information. 3GPP Release 18 will investigate solutions to 
further improve accuracy, integrity, and power efficiency in 
positioning, study sidelink positioning, and investigate 
positioning support for RedCap devices. 
III. FLEXIBLE SPECTRUM USE 
Spectrum is a scarce resource that needs to be used efficiently 
to achieve the highest societal benefit. 3GPP Release 18 will 
introduce further enhancements to enable more flexible and 
efficient spectrum use for 5G deployments in various scenarios 
with different spectrum allocations. The main enabling features 
are illustrated in Figure 3 and described below. 
 
 
Figure 3: An illustration of the main 3GPP Release-18 features that will enable more flexible spectrum use in 5G deployments. 

This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which 
this version may no longer be accessible. 
 
The minimum channel bandwidth supported by the current 
5G NR specifications is 5 MHz. There are, however, growing 
interests in deploying NR in a dedicated spectrum with less than 
5 MHz bandwidth available for NR. For example, railway 
communication in Europe, currently based on the global system 
for mobile communications-railway (GSM-R), will be migrated 
to the future railway mobile communication system (FRMCS) 
by using the harmonized 900 MHz spectrum block (2 x 5.6 
MHz frequency division duplex (FDD)) [8]. However, FRMCS 
will need to co-exist with the legacy GSM-R for about ten years 
from 2025 onwards. Keeping the GSM-R system operational 
will require a portion of the spectrum block reserved for the 
legacy system, making the spectrum available to NR 
deployment for FRMCS less than 5 MHz. In Release 18, 3GPP 
will introduce necessary changes to NR to support deployments 
in spectrum allocations less than 5 MHz. 
DSS is a crucial 5G feature that enables a BS to use a shared 
spectrum to provide connectivity to both LTE UE and NR UE. 
This facilitates the migration of the spectrum from LTE to NR. 
In DSS, the physical downlink control channel (PDCCH) 
capacity is a bottleneck, because NR PDCCH and LTE PDCCH 
need to share the first three OFDM symbols within a slot and 
NR PDCCH cannot use symbols overlapping with LTE cell-
specific reference signal (CRS). In Release 18, 3GPP will study 
the possibility of allowing NR PDCCH to be transmitted in 
symbols overlapping with LTE CRS to increase the PDCCH 
capacity for DSS. Also, the feature of configuring UE with 
multiple LTE CRS rate matching patterns in multi-TRP will be 
made available to single TRP scenario to help mitigate inter-
cell interference. 
In general, it is expected that more and more spectrum bands 
used by the previous generations of mobile networks will be re-
farmed to be used for 5G Advanced. The available spectrum 
blocks will likely be fragmented and scattered in different 
frequencies. Aiming to efficiently utilize all the available 
spectrum blocks flexibly, 3GPP Release 18 will introduce a 
functionality that allows a single downlink control information 
(DCI) to schedule multiple physical downlink shared channels 
(PDSCHs) or PUSCHs across carriers and study enhancements 
for multi-carrier uplink operation. 
Time division duplex (TDD) is widely used in commercial 
5G deployments. Downlink and uplink can use the entire 
frequency spectrum in TDD, but the time domain resource is 
divided between downlink and uplink. NR supports TDD with 
semi-statically configured uplink/downlink configuration and 
dynamic TDD. If the time domain resource designated to uplink 
is limited, network performance such as coverage, capacity, and 
latency may be impacted. To enable more flexible spectrum 
use, 3GPP Release 18 will study the feasibility of allowing the 
co-existence of downlink and uplink at the same time within a 
conventional TDD band. In other words, the duplex will 
become a mix of TDD and FDD. From a practical standpoint, 
since full duplex is not mature enough for commercial 
deployments, the study will restrict its scope to subband non-
overlapping full duplex at the 5G Node B (gNB) side. In other 
words, a conventional TDD band is divided into non-
overlapping subbands: some are designated for uplink while 
others are designated for downlink. But half duplex is kept at 
the UE side. Besides, 3GPP Release 18 will study cross link 
interference (CLI) handling to better support dynamic TDD in 
commercial deployments. 
IV. DIVERSE 5G DEVICES 
5G needs to serve diverse devices across eMBB, URLLC, 
and mMTC usage scenarios. 3GPP Release 18 will continue to 
study and introduce tailored functionalities to enhance and 
expand 5G capability to serve not only smartphones but also 
other diverse 5G devices, such as extended reality (XR) and 
cloud gaming devices, low-complexity UEs, vehicular devices, 
and uncrewed aerial vehicles (UAVs), as illustrated in Figure 4. 
A. 5G Consumer Devices  
A smartphone typically supports both 3GPP radio access 
technologies (RATs), e.g., LTE and NR, and non-3GPP RATs, 
e.g., WiFi. The coexistence of a 3GPP RAT and non-3GPP 
RATs may lead to interference and cause an internal issue in 
 
Figure 4: An illustration of the main 3GPP Release-18 features that will expand 5G capability to serve diverse devices. 

This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which 
this version may no longer be accessible. 
 
the device. In-device coexistence (IDC) is a feature that allows 
UE to indicate to its serving gNB that there is such a coexistence 
issue in the UE. The gNB can utilize the indicated information 
to restrict radio resource usage to help resolve the UE’s internal 
issue. The current IDC solution in NR has limited functionality. 
3GPP Release 18 will enhance the feature by allowing UE to 
indicate the affected frequencies with finer granularity and its 
preferred TDD pattern. 
A multi-subscriber identity module (SIM) phone can be 
equipped with two independent SIM cards. When the UE is 
only connected to one network (e.g., network A) using one SIM 
card, the UE’s hardware resources can be dedicated to the 
communication with network A. Once the UE starts to connect 
to another network (e.g., network B) using the other SIM card, 
some of the hardware resources need to be used for 
communication with network B, but this is not known to 
network A. 3GPP Release 18 will enable the multi-SIM UE to 
indicate its preferred capability restriction to network A when 
the UE needs to communicate with network B. 
5G connected XR and cloud gaming devices are anticipated 
to proliferate in years to come. In Release 17, 3GPP has 
conducted an evaluation study on XR to assess their 
performance when connected by 5G. In Release 18, 3GPP will 
study enhancements to better support XR and cloud gaming 
devices in NR networks. The traffic generated in XR and cloud 
gaming use cases is often quasi-periodic and requires high data 
rates and bounded latency simultaneously. To efficiently serve 
such type of traffic, 3GPP will investigate resource allocation 
and scheduling mechanisms that can improve capacity for XR 
and cloud gaming devices. Since many XR and cloud gaming 
devices have limited battery power, Release 18 will also study 
UE power-saving techniques to accommodate XR and cloud 
gaming service characteristics. Besides, 3GPP will investigate 
how to make RAN more XR-aware, including identifying what 
application information is beneficial for RAN to be aware of 
and how to utilize the information in RAN to handle XR and 
cloud gaming traffic. 
B. 5G Devices for Verticals 
While serving high-end eMBB devices is vital in 5G NR 
networks, there have been growing interests in providing 5G 
connectivity to RedCap devices [9]. Use cases include 
industrial sensors, video surveillance, and wearables, which 
require low UE complexity and low UE power consumption. 
3GPP Release 17 has established a basic framework for 
supporting RedCap devices in NR networks. Built on the 
Release-17 
foundation, 
3GPP 
Release-18 
will 
study 
enhancements to support RedCap devices of even lower 
complexity, targeting UE bandwidth reduction to 5 MHz and 
peak data rate reduction to 10 Mbps in the frequency range 1 
(FR1). 
Devices such as industrial sensors and wearables have small 
form-factor and are power sensitive. UE power consumption 
depends on the configuration of discontinuous reception (DRX) 
cycle, e.g., paging cycle for UE in idle mode, because UE needs 
to wake up once per DRX cycle. When there is no signaling or 
data traffic, UE would wake up in vain and waste power. 
Therefore, it is beneficial to wake up UE when it is triggered. 
Specifically, UE can be equipped with a separate receiver with 
ultra-low power consumption, which can monitor a wake-up 
signal. Upon detecting the wake-up signal, UE can trigger its 
main communication radio from OFF state or deep sleep mode 
to become active. 3GPP Release 18 will study low-power wake-
up receiver architectures, the design of a wake-up signal, and 
procedure and protocol changes to support the wake-up receiver 
and signal. 
In many scenarios, low-power devices only need to support 
infrequent, small data transmissions. Transmitting such small 
data in RRC connected mode would lead to signaling overhead 
and delay. To reduce signaling overhead and latency, 3GPP 
Release 17 introduced support for mobile originated small data 
transmission in RRC inactive mode. In Release 18, 3GPP will 
introduce a similar feature to support mobile terminated small 
data transmission in RRC inactive mode. 
3GPP continues to add functionality in Release 18 to enhance 
sidelink communication to support vehicular devices used in 
V2X services [10]. One evolution objective is to increase 
sidelink data rate by adding the CA feature in sidelink 
communication, extending sidelink operation to unlicensed 
spectrum, and enhancing sidelink support in the frequency 
range 2 (FR2). Besides, 3GPP will study mechanisms to support 
LTE V2X and NR V2X devices co-existing in the same 
frequency channel.  
In addition to enhancing support for V2X devices on the 
ground, 3GPP Release 18 will introduce 5G NR support for 
devices onboard aerial vehicles, i.e., UAVs, whose applications 
are proliferating across many industries. 3GPP has introduced 
4G LTE support for UAVs back in Release 15, including 
enhanced measurement reports, reporting of UAV height, 
location and speed, flight path reporting, and signaling support 
for subscription-based aerial UE identification [11]. These 
features will be introduced into 5G NR specifications as 
appropriate. Besides, the work will study enhancements for 
broadcasting UAV identification and signaling to indicate UAV 
beamforming capabilities. 
V. EVOLVED NETWORK TOPOLOGY 
Coverage is crucial for operators to provide competitive 
mobile services to their customers. Deploying full-stack BSs in 
coverage holes is a common way to improve network coverage. 
Still, it may not always be possible due to, e.g., lack of 
backhaul, economically not viable, among others. This calls for 
flexible network topology by increasing the resiliency of the 
split next-generation RAN (NG-RAN) architecture, exploiting 
diverse nodes such as IAB nodes, radio frequency (RF) 
repeaters, and relays, and integration with NTNs. The key 
enabling features are illustrated in Figure 5 and described 
below. 
NG-RAN – the RAN for 5G – supports splitting a gNB into 
two parts: a centralized unit (CU) and one or more distributed 
units (DUs) [12]. The gNB-CU can be further split into two 
parts: a control plane (CP) part and one or more user plane (UP) 
parts. The logical gNB-CU-CP hosts the RRC and the CP part 
of the packet data convergence protocol (PDCP) of the gNB-
CU. Failures at the gNB-CU-CP may disrupt its connected 
gNB-CU-UPs and gNB-DUs, which in turn can impact the 
served UEs. To enhance the resiliency of gNB-CU-CP, 3GPP 

This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which 
this version may no longer be accessible. 
 
Release 18 will study and identify gNB-CU-CP failure 
scenarios. 
IAB is a wireless backhaul solution based on NR. It serves as 
an alternative to fiber backhaul and thus can facilitate the 
deployment of mobile networks. An IAB node may consist of 
two parts: mobile-termination (MT) and DU. The MT connects 
the IAB node to its donor node, while the DU part can serve 
UEs and connect to other IAB nodes to create multi-hop 
wireless backhauling. 3GPP Release 18 continues to enhance 
NR-based IAB, focusing on the scenario where mobile IAB 
nodes are mounted on vehicles and provide 5G connectivity to 
UEs. To support mobile IAB nodes, the work will specify 
topology adaptation procedures, mobility enhancements for 
IAB nodes and the associated UEs, and interference mitigation. 
RF repeaters can help extend network coverage and have 
been used in commercial deployments. However, they have 
limited functionality as they simply amplify and forward the 
signals they receive. 3GPP Release 18 will study NR network-
controlled repeater, which not only can amplify and forward the 
received signals but also can receive side control information 
from the gNB. The examples of side control information 
include beamforming information, TDD configuration, power 
control information, among others. The study will identify 
which side control information is necessary, investigate needed 
L1/L2 signaling, and look into how to identify and authorize 
such network-controlled repeaters. 
Network coverage can also be extended by using a UE as a 
sidelink relay. The sidelink relay can be either a UE-to-network 
relay, where the relay UE connects a remote UE to the network, 
or a UE-to-UE relay, where the relay UE connects a first remote 
UE to a second remote UE. In Release 17, 3GPP specified basic 
functionality support for UE-to-network relay. 3GPP Release 
18 will enhance the support of UE-to-network relay, add 
support for UE-to-UE relay, and study multi-path support 
where a UE is connected to a gNB using one direct path and 
one indirect path via a sidelink relay. 
NTNs utilize satellites or high-altitude platforms (e.g., 
airplanes, balloons, and airships) to offer connectivity services 
[13]. They can complement terrestrial networks by providing 
coverage in remote areas where terrestrial coverage is 
unavailable. In Release 17, 3GPP has introduced a set of basic 
features to enable NR operation over NTNs in FR1. 3GPP 
Release 18 will enhance NR operation over NTNs by improving 
coverage for handheld terminals, studying deployment above 
10 GHz, investigating regulatory requirements for network-
verified UE location, and addressing mobility and service 
continuity between a terrestrial network and an NTN as well as 
between different NTNs. 
VI. DATA DRIVEN AND AI-POWERED 5G 
5G networks are becoming increasingly complex while 
generating humongous data. It is crucial to be data-driven and 
leverage AI techniques to manage the 5G networks efficiently. 
3GPP Release 18 will not only enhance existing data collection 
features but also examine how AI techniques can improve air 
interface functions [14]. 
In Release 17, 3GPP conducted a study on AI-enabled NG-
RAN. The study investigated high-level principles, functional 
framework, potential use cases, and associated solutions for AI-
enabled RAN intelligence [15]. 3GPP Release 18 will specify 
data collection enhancements and signaling support for a set of 
selective AI-based use cases, including network energy saving, 
load balancing, and mobility optimization. 
3GPP Release 18 will also enhance NR data collection within 
the scope of the self-organizing network (SON)/minimization 
of drive testing (MDT). SON automates RAN planning, 
configuration, management, optimization, and healing, thereby 
minimizing human intervention. MDT enables operators to 
configure normal UEs to collect and report measurement data 
to reduce traditional drive tests. The Release-18 work will 
address SON features leftover from Release 17 and data 
collection for random access channel (RACH) optimization. 
 
 
Figure 5: An illustration of the key 3GPP Release-18 features that will enable a more flexible 5G network topology. 

This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which 
this version may no longer be accessible. 
 
Besides data collection of radio-related measurement and 
information, the 5G NR quality of experience (QoE) 
management framework enables measurement data collection 
at the application layer. QoE reflects the user’s satisfaction 
level with a service provided by mobile networks. A QoE report 
contains data of QoE metrics collected at the application layer. 
Examples of QoE metrics in multimedia telephony service for 
internet protocol multimedia subsystem (IMS) include frame 
rate, jitter duration, round-trip time, average codec bit rate, 
among others. In Release 17, 3GPP specified basic mechanisms 
for NR QoE management. 3GPP Release 18 will enhance the 
NR QoE framework to support new types of 5G services, such 
as XR, cloud gaming, and MBS. 
3GPP Release 18 will study AI/ML for NR air interface to 
enhance performance or reduce complexity/overhead. The 
study will establish a common AI/ML framework, identify 
areas where AI/ML can improve air interface functions, 
investigate how to describe and characterize AI/ML models, 
evaluate AI/ML techniques to understand their gains and 
complexity, and assess standardization impact. To achieve 
these objectives, 3GPP will focus on a set of selective use cases, 
including CSI feedback, beam management, and positioning. 
The study is expected to pave the way for other use cases 
leveraging AI/ML techniques in the air interface.  
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
Since 3GPP completed the first release of 5G in its Release 
15, the 5G evolution has progressed swiftly in 3GPP Releases 
16 and 17. 3GPP Release 18 – the first release of 5G Advanced 
– represents the next major evolution of 5G technologies. As 
overviewed in this article, 3GPP Release 18 will further 
enhance 5G performance, introduce features to enable more 
flexible and efficient spectrum use, advance the support of 
diverse devices, evolve network topology to facilitate different 
deployments, and provide data-driven, intelligent network 
solutions. Table 1 summarizes the 3GPP Release-18 package 
discussed in this article. 
While we are just embarking on the evolution journey of 5G 
Advanced, research on the sixth-generation (6G) of mobile 
communications is ramping up. The 6G standardization is 
expected to start in 3GPP around 2025. We anticipate that the 
innovative works conducted in 5G Advanced, such as 
embracing AI and ML technologies, will trigger a paradigm 
shift, lay a strong foundation for 6G design, and create a 
profound impact on future wireless networks.
