M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 1
Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias
The ethics of algorithms in archives, libraries and society
dr.ir. Martijn van Otterlo
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, The Netherlands
http://martijnvanotterlo.nl

“We must bring together a collection of machines which simultaneously or sequentially can
perform the following operations: (1) The transformation of sound into writing; (2) The 
reproduction of this writing in as many copies as are useful; (3) The creation of documents 
in such a way that each item of information has its own identity and, in its relationships 
with those items comprising any collection, can be retrieved as necessary; (4) A 
Classification number assigned to each item of information; the perforation of documents 
correlated with these numbers; (5) Automatic classification and filing of documents; (6) 
Automatic retrieval of documents for consultation and presented either direct to the 
enquirer or via machine enabling written additions to be made to them; (7) Mechanical 
manipulation at will of all the listed items of information in order to obtain new 
combinations of facts, new relationships of ideas, and new operations carried out with the 
help of numbers. The technology fulfilling these seven requirements would indeed be a 
mechanical, collective brain” –- 
Paul Otlet in 1934, quoted by Rayward, W.Boyd (1992:91).
Abstract
In the age of algorithms, I focus on the question of how to ensure algorithms that will take over many of our 
familiar archival and library tasks, will behave according to human ethical norms that have evolved over 
many years. I start by characterizing physical archives in the context of related institutions such as libraries 
and museums. In this setting I analyze how ethical principles, in particular about access to information, have 
been formalized and communicated in the form of ethical codes, or: codes of conducts. After that I describe 
two main developments: digitalization, in which physical aspects of the world are turned into digital data, 
and algorithmization, in which intelligent computer programs turn this data into predictions and decisions. 
Both affect interactions that were once physical but now digital. In this new setting I survey and analyze the 
ethical aspects of algorithms and how they shape a vision on the future of archivists and librarians, in the 
form of algorithmic documentalists, or: codementalists. Finally I outline a general research strategy, called 
IntERMEeDIUM, to obtain algorithms that obey are human ethical values encoded in code of ethics.
Keywords
ethics, information access, archives, algorithms, big data, digitalization, code of conduct, intellectual privacy,
machine learning, artificial intelligence
(1) Introduction1
In 2016 the smartphone augmented reality game Pokemon Go2 became a hype. Looking through the phone
creatures (the Pokemons) can be seen (projected onto the camera image) and virtually caught. Pokemon
hunting became a very popular activity worldwide. April3 2017 still featured 5 million active players per day
(and 65 million per month), the game was downloaded more than 650 million times, and revenues were high.
The transformative effects on society were profound. For example, all players together had taken 144 billion
steps4 while playing, because of the game. That is, the game scatters Pokemons over particular areas on the
globe, and players will have to go there, physically, to catch them. Some people have traveled thousands of
1 All hyperlinks in the footnotes were last accessed October 2017.
2 http://www.pokemon.com/us/pokemon-video-games/pokemon-go/
3 http://expandedramblings.com/index.php/pokemon-go-statistics/
4 https://games.slashdot.org/story/16/10/11/2110219/pokemon-go-could-add-283-million-years-to-users-
lives-says-study

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 2
kilometers5. Companies can even buy more Pokemons in some areas, for example to physically lure6
potential customers to a shopping area. In the Netherlands, one particular beach area, which effectively
became known as PokeDuin7 (where Duin is Dutch for “dune”) was flooded by players, annoying the local
population.
Pokemon-Go shows us is that a relatively small simple digital game, or: an algorithm, can influence the
physical world globally. Such effects are characteristic of the digital world, where everything is connected
and scales of time and distance are profoundly changed. In this new, digital world, there is a need for
understanding such changes, e.g. developing algorithmic literacy, and overall, rethinking the ethics of new
and old patterns. For Pokemon Go ethical8 questions arise such as “is it ok to lure thousands of people to
PokeDuin?” and “would it be good to increase the physical activity of people?”, which in the latter case
could help to fight obesity. Ethical reasoning is practical reasoning about “good” and “bad”, while keeping
an eye on “for whom” something is good or bad. 
Our digital world causes many such ethical issues, and companies such as Google, Facebook, Twitter and
Instagram influence this world. Digital innovations in big data, the internet-of-things, smartphones, profiling
(van Otterlo, 2013) and the internet all connect “us” (the humans) with a growing body of data and
knowledge. Intelligent algorithms are now mediating most of our interactions with this body of knowledge,
but also interactions among ourselves and have unlimited means to manipulate us (van Otterlo, 2014a). More
specifically,  they monitor  and  determine  the  growth  of  the  body  of  knowledge,  they  generate  data
themselves, and they determine the content and breadth of the view we (the humans) get of the world.
Algorithms are thus becoming the ultimate  curators and  gatekeepers in our quest for knowledge (van
Otterlo, 2016a). This has profound implications for how we deal with knowledge, what knowledge actually
is, and who gets access to which kinds of knowledge. Archivists and librarians have long been the human
gatekeepers, but increasingly so they are assisted, rivaled, or even replaced by intelligent, and even adaptive,
algorithms. This raises, quite naturally, a flood of new, interesting ethical questions.
Access to lots of information has been the dream of many visionairs, especially in the last century. Joseph
Licklider (1965) predicted more than fifty years ago that humans by the year 2000 would invest in a kind of
intermedium9 which would provide access to the so-called procognitive net, containing all knowledge. Paul
Otlet  envisioned  various  automated  ways  to  do  knowledge  classification  and  retrieval,  and  laid  the
foundation for the modern internet with his Mundaneum and universal decimal classification. In 1945
Vannevar Bush introduced the “Memex”, resembling Otlet's “Mundotheque” (introduced around the same
time), a machine in the form of a regular desk that used microfilm as the storage medium for collections of
text, and which could provide access to knowledge. Otlet's version was more related to H.G Wells “World
Brain” in the sense that it focused on “networked” knowledge, and targeted film, photographs and radio in
addition to text. Wells, building on ideas on information retrieval in his early “A Modern Utopia” from 1905,
introduced his World Brain in 1939 in a series of lectures, as an idea to make the whole human memory
accessible to every individual. More recently Wilfred Lancaster wrote (1982, pp33-34, quoting  Schiller
1977): “Ultimately, the signs point to a technology offering search capability at home or office terminals
without the aid of librarian intermediaries who perform the searches.” All these, and many more pioneers
(see Borner (2010) and Wright (2014) for extensive overviews), envisioned forms of technology that would
connect each individual to “all” knowledge, in the form of some “world encyclopedia” and would make this
knowledge retrievable by technology. In essence, our current world, with Google, Wikipedia, Twitter and
smartphones, exhibits all that they were looking for.
The enthusiasm of these pioneers in “universally accessible” knowledge is echoed in today's Silicon Valley's
technology push. Every day comes with new services, new technologies, new apps and new algorithms in the
form of artificial intelligence (AI) (Nilsson, 2010). That each person on earth, in principle, has access to the
5 http://www.bild.de/lifestyle/2017/viral/dieser-mann-hat-ein-jahr-pokemon-durchgespielt-52281362.bild.html
6 http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3686473/Pokemon-Gos-digital-popularity-warping-real-life.html
7 https://tweakers.net/nieuws/115495/den-haag-schakelt-advocaat-in-om-minder-pokemon-af-te-
dwingen.html
8 https://www.wired.com/2016/08/ethics-ar-pokemon-go/
9 In his words: “a capital investment in their intellectual Cadillac”.

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 3
world's knowledge through a smartphone was just a start. Soon, intelligent algorithms will take over many
other tasks that have to do with the acquisition, organization, interpretation and use of the vast amount of
information on the internet, and the ever growing heap of big data. What Silicon Valley and pioneers such as
Otlet and Licklider also have in common, at least until very recently, is that their focus was on the
possibilities of novel technologies, and not on possible (unintended) consequences. Despite some attention to
privacy issues, only really starting in the age of databases (see Warner and Stone, 1970) often such topics
were ignored. For example the book by Lancaster (1982) only mentions it once, and sets it aside as a minor
issue. Today, however, privacy and security get more attention (e.g. hacking and spying), but as we have
shown in the Pokemon Go example, digital technology, and especially intelligent algorithms, has much
broader implications, especially when algorithms determine access to information (van Otterlo 2016a).
Some recent ethical challenges with access are fake news, Pariser's (2011) filter bubbles, where algorithms
reinforce people's biases, and censorship. As an example, Facebook's policy to allow or disallow particular
content, essentially implementing a form of censorship10, raises many ethical issues given their 2 billion user
base. Recently some of it has been disclosed11 but generally it is unclear who decides upon them. Facebook is
also active in detecting utterances related to terrorism12, Google aims to tackle fake news by classifying13
news sources and marking them, effectively implementing a “soft” version of censorship, and Twitter
targets14  “hatespeech”, thereby implementing language (and possibly thought) monitoring on the fly. These
are just a couple of examples of “access control” by private entities with ethical consequences which were
not foreseen by the earlier mentioned pioneers. Big technology companies are starting to recognize the
ethical15 issues, even causing  Google to revive  Wiener's16 idea  of  an emergency button17 to turn off
autonomous systems.
Adding to the story on the tension between the “old”, physical world and the “new” digital world in the
context of access, we can look at Facebook's idea to predict18 potential suicides. This is a delicate issue, since
Facebook's “action repertoire” potentially includes prohibiting someone to access particular information, but
also invoking a person's social network. Imagine getting a message about your friend saying “Facebook's
algorithm has analyzed your friend's posts for the last weeks and it has determined that with 0.63 probability
he is likely to commit suicide, with medium confidence. Can you keep an eye on him?” Here, Facebook's role
as “guardian” of a social network dominates and it utilizes the data it has on users to provide such ethically-
heavy services. In essence, it could make predictions of which users themselves are not even aware, for
example people who don't know that they have a depression (Otterlo 2013). A completely different take on
this was investigated by Juznic19 et al. (2001). They used a “mystery shopper” tactic to investigate how
librarians in physical libraries would react to “inappropriate” information requests by patrons, for example
10 http://fortune.com/2017/05/22/facebook-censorship-transparency/
11 https://www.theguardian.com/news/2017/may/21/revealed-facebook-internal-rulebook-sex-terrorism-
violence
12 http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2017/06/16/facebook-using-artificial-intelligence-combat-terrorist-
propaganda/
13 https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/apr/07/google-to-display-fact-checking-labels-to-show-if-
news-is-true-or-false
14 https://www.forbes.com/sites/kalevleetaru/2017/02/17/how-twitters-new-censorship-tools-are-the-
pandoras-box-moving-us-towards-the-end-of-free-speech/
15 https://www.wired.com/2016/09/google-facebook-microsoft-tackle-ethics-ai/
16 Wiener was, however, sceptical: "Again and again I have heard the statement that learning machines 
cannot subject us to any new dangers, because we can turn them off when we feel like it.  But can we? To 
turn a machine off effectively, we must be in possession of information as to whether the danger point has 
come. The mere fact that we have made the machine does not guarantee that we shall have the proper 
information to do this." (N. Wiener (1948, 1961): Cybernetics, or control and communication in the animal 
and the machine).
17 http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-3624671/Google-s-AI-team-developing-big-red-button-
switch-systems-pose-threat.html
18 https://www.wired.com/2017/03/artificial-intelligence-learning-predict-prevent-suicide/
19 Thanks to Prof. Juznic for pointing me to this paper after my invited talk on ethics and libraries at the 9th 
International Conference on Qualitative and Quantitative Methods in Libraries (QQML) in June 2017 in 
Limerick, Ireland.

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 4
about necrophilia and photographs of dead people, but also very specific questions on “finding information
on committing suicide”. Interestingly, most librarians were not shocked at all by the request and treated it as
a pure information request. Quoting the authors: “Our conclusion was that the librarians in public libraries
satisfied the need for information as much as they felt inclined to do so, and this was not affected by
judgments about the ethical status of the required item of information.” One key aspect here is that whereas
Facebook judges people and undertakes particular actions according to that judgment, the librarians in the
latter research kept to their professional standards and focused on a bias-free, judgment-free information
provision. Here we see a crucial difference between an old (human) and new (machine) information provider,
with different views on what it means to provide access to information, but also a difference between
opportunities offered in our data age.
In  this text  I explore  ethical implications  of  a gradual, but unstoppable shift  from human-populated
information-providing professions such as in libraries and archives towards situations where intelligent
algorithms are quickly taking over many tasks of information gathering, selecting, archiving, describing and
providing access. Before this  algorithmic turn ethical issues were dealt with by humans, and the main
question in this text is how to ensure that human values and norms are maintained in current and future
algorithmic developments. Some of the material in this text is derived from the recent course 20 I developed
on the ethics of algorithms, and recent work (e.g. van Otterlo 2013,2014,2016a,2016b).
Outline and contributions. First in the next section I discuss an archetypical archival practice and I connect
it to similar information professions such as libraries and museums. I focus on the physical aspects and how
they relate to access by users. In Section 3 I discuss the ethical issues related to access, as well as ways to
formalize ethical guidelines in so-called  codes of conduct which are sets of principles which  human
professionals should obey to be a good, professional archivist or librarian. Many codes exist, influenced by
the profession, by norms and values in society at a particular time, and especially by advances in technology.
Whereas Sections 2 and 3 mainly focus on concepts of the traditional, physical world, Section 4 moves to the
digital world. It first defines a novel view on how  digitalization affects virtually all aspects of life.
Digitalization's core outcome is the so-called  big data representing all our interactions, conversations,
purchases, etc. I will discuss the digitalization of archives and libraries in particular, and review core ideas. A
second concept defined in this section is algorithmization: the rise of intelligent algorithms that analyze big
data to find patterns, e.g. to identify customer groups, or to decide upon important issues. Algorithmization
also  implies  replacing  (core  duties  of)  human  professionals  by  algorithms.  Digitalization  and
algorithmization together represent the core mechanisms of a new view on huge transformations in society,
and in professions such as archives and libraries. Section 5 then discusses old and new ethical challenges of
algorithms, focused at a novel core taxonomy – based on agency and autonomy –  which structures the space
of algorithms effectively.  I survey the novel field of ethics of algorithms and connect to core operations of
archives and libraries. In Section 6 I develop the novel IntERMeDIUM research strategy to ensure future
algorithmic information professionals, which I will call  codementalists, will behave according to human
values contained in codes of ethics, and Section 7 concludes the text.
(2) Gatekeepers in Physical Settings
Here I first deal with the physical world of archives and libraries. The next section describes ethical aspects,
i.e. how to arrange for “proper” or “fair” access.
(2.1) The Physical-Analog World
As explained in the introduction, this text is about the transformation of archival and library practices, and
society in general, to the digital age, and its consequences. To describe a transformation, I first need to
introduce the starting point: the  physical-analog world. Another reason for that is that it is familiar to
humans: we have been raised with the perception and manipulation of our surrounding physical world.
Abstract mathematical ideas and complex technical procedures are often, and for many people, difficult to
grasp. However, if we can have a look at something, and play around with objects, we often understand
complex items like machines, (board) games and utensils quickly. In previous work (van Otterlo, 2016a) I
utilized  “libraryness”, which exploits our familiarity with physical-analog library buildings, books and
processes. This concept can induce a metaphor for how intelligent algorithms can be seen as a librarian in a
20 http://martijnvanotterlo.nl/teaching.html

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 5
giant digital library, providing an intuitive setting to understand complex intelligent software systems.
Physical  worlds  can  also  provide  understanding  of  other  physical  worlds  using  analogies.  Peekhaus
describes21 so-called “seed libraries” in the United States, which are public libraries that maintain various
seeds of plants and vegetables, instead of books. Each patron can take some seeds, plant them, grow a crop
and later extract new seeds and return these later. This allows a community to form based on the sharing and
growing of vegetables. This novel concept sounds interesting, but only by making an analogy with a known
situation – in this case a traditional library – one gets to see its novelty. Namely, in terms of traditional
libraries, it amounts to taking a book, keeping it with you for one or two years, in the mean time using it to
write a new book (or several new books) yourself, burning the book you borrowed, and giving one or several
of your new books to the library. Now that sounds interesting indeed! 
Physical worlds require physical actions, dependent on time and space, which induce constraints on the types
of things that can be done. For example, rearranging 25.000 physical books in a personal library amounts to
serious physical work whereas the same operations on an e-book library would be much easier. Especially
for  books  and  libraries,  physical  aspects  are  important.  These  include  architectural  aspects,  location,
functional spaces, social spaces (e.g a coffee room), furniture and shelves (Edwards, 2009). For hundreds of
years, until very recently, books and libraries were always physical: pages, paper, bricks, shelves, etc. The
interaction with books is embodied, and thus highly related to physical, sensory experiences in terms of taste,
sound and smell, but also the haptics of reading and writing, note-taking, and the emotional value of physical
books. Reading, writing and handling of books relies on sequential access to pages, on the visual nature of
page design, on the embodied aspects of handwriting, and more. Technology is redefining what it means to
read  (Baron,  2015). Piper (2012):   “Things ask  us  to do certain  things  with them.  Things are  not
unconditional. […] They (books, mvo) still shape our access to what we read and how we construct our
mental universes through them.”
Overall, the physical nature of archives and libraries is important and intuitive. First, our brains have evolved
dealing with the physicality of the world and have shaped our understanding of, and interaction with, the
world. Second, the physical world also shapes our actions: it puts restrictions on the things we can do. Third,
many aspects of libraries and archives have been physical for most of the time in our human existence, and
only very recently things are rapidly changing, transformed by technology, and it is to be seen what we gain
and lose (Baron 2015, Piper 2012, van Otterlo 2016, and the rest of this text). 
(2.2) Museums, Archives and Libraries
There are several institutions in our society that collect, maintain, and provide access to, information. These
institutions are known as museums, libraries and archives (Kirchhoff et al., 2008): physical places where
“interesting” items are stored, or  preserved, for society as a whole, or more private groups such as
companies. Typical professions in each of them are historians, librarians, and archivists. Most people will
know some differences between these three kinds of “memory institutions”22. 
Most cities in the world features many museums which maintain and display a (themed) collection of items.
Items in a museum collection are not typically used or taken by visitors, but they can be looked at and the
museum provides additional information through signs, tours and other means. The main purpose of a
museum is to provide a place where people can learn about a particular topic, or merely enjoy the collection,
such as with art. Many museums ask for an entrance fee but do not typically restrict access for particular
21 See “An exploratory study of seed libraries in the United States” (abstract presented at QQML2016). 
http://www.isast.org/images/e-_Book_of_Abstracts_final_2016_v9.pdf (p60)
22 Kirchhoff et al. (2008, p252) cites Lorcan Dempsey (2000) as follows: “Archives, libraries and museums 
are memory institutions: they organize the European cultural and intellectual record. Their collections contain
the memory of peoples, communities, institutions and individuals, the scientific and cultural heritage, and the 
products throughout time of our imagination, craft and learning. They join us to our ancestors and are our 
legacy to future generations. They are used by the child, the scholar, and the citizen, by the business 
person, the tourist and the learner. These in turn are creating the heritage of our future. Memory institutions 
contribute directly and indirectly to prosperity through support for learning, commerce, tourism, and personal 
fullfilment.” 

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 6
groups.
 
A library (Manguel 2006; Palfrey 2015; Crawford 2015), equally familiar to most people, is something very
different. Libraries come in two main kinds: public libraries and academic libraries. A public library is a
public place, centered around a usually large  book collection from which users – or in library language,
patrons – can take items and use them there or at home for a while. Public libraries also provide many other
things23, such as working spaces for students, internet access for the public, and typically they organize
activities to aid a local community. Academic libraries are different, in that they are mainly supporting a
university, which determines their collection but also its use. The physical place of the university library
functions as a kind of public space (Aabø and Audunson, 2012) too, typically filled by students with laptops,
but the collection is often predominantly digital. Modern universities are much focused on data and digital
services and digital access to resources rendering the librarian more of a data broker. Both types of libraries
have in common that their physical collections can be browsed by visitors who can take items and use them,
without access restrictions. Often libraries have so-called special collections for which there are restrictions
on who can access, use, take or even touch specific items. For example, a library may feature a collection of
incunables – books printed before 1501 in Europe – which are very delicate. Access to such books may be
required since the physical, original copy may show characteristics which get lost in digital reproductions,
but special permission is then required to protect the book.
Archives, the third type of memory institution, are maybe the lesser known of the three. Archives are similar
to the special collections with forms of restricted access, and similar to museums which feature any type of
items, not just books. Morris (2009:4): “Archives are records, regardless of format, created or received by a
person or organization during the conduct of affairs and preserved because they contain information of
continuing value.” In addition,  archive can refer to the physical building or to the  agency or  program
responsible. There are many types24 of archives, typically preserving materials for governments, but also
individuals or private corporations, for example to keep historical records to serve the needs of company
staff members and to advance business goals. In an organization, “archive” is usually the “non-current
records”. Examples of records are policies and procedures, meeting minutes, annual reports, correspondence,
photographs and audiovisual materials. In archives for individuals (or families) the records are called
“manuscripts”, “personal papers” or “family papers”. Archives are often regulated by law; for example
companies are legally required to keep their financial records for reporting purposes.
An interesting physical archive is the Lego vault25 at Billund26 in Denmark where the headquarters of the
Lego company27 is. This vault contains all Lego sets ever being put on the consumer market, all present as
the well-known (unopened!) carton boxes, on movable archival shelves, ordered by theme, by year and so
on. These sets physically carry “information of continuing value”, since they represent a history28 of the core
outcome of the company's innovative29 activities: Lego sets. Access is highly restricted and maintenance is
governed by the Lego vault archivist. Physical constraints on the space are severe and new space needs to be
found to accommodate all new30 sets. The Lego vault is an exciting phenomenon, but it is only one part of a
larger  company  archive  that  also  consists  of  letters,  financial  statements,  internal  and  external
communications, advertising materials and much more. One may wonder why my own Lego collection,
which is neatly organized into hundreds of categories, or a Lego factory31 warehouse, where millions of
pieces are stored in a huge inventory, are Lego archives too. An important aspect of archives is that context is
everything: they reflect the lives of or activities of the record creator, and records are created “during a
23 Public libraries in the Netherlands have a rich history of reorganization (see Keizer, 2017).
24 https://www2.archivists.org/usingarchives/typesofarchives
25 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EgFvzpB6BsQ by the makers of the website beyond-the-brick.
26 http://www.minibillund.nl/ is a Dutch store and Lego museum (or archive) in Wagenberg.
27 http://www.lego.com
28 http://www.brickshelf.com/gallery/hmillington/Misc/LEGOLife/legolife.jpg in which the administrator of the 
well-known Lego resource site http://
 
 brickset.com visits the Lego vault in Billund.
29 http://www.wired.co.uk/article/building-success
30 2016 features more than 800 sets (https://brickset.com/sets/year-2016)
31 https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gallery/2014/aug/29/inside-the-lego-factory-in-billund-denmark-
in-pictures

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 7
conduct of affairs”. Inventories and personal collections typically are not archives in the formal sense, since
they do not contain “information of continuing value”. Of course, the bricks have value, but are not
preserved for long-term reference, nor have historical value in that context.
Museums, archives and libraries are distinct, yet also very similar: they all professionally maintain an
information collection  and take on the role of  gatekeeper to that information. Some argue that they will
converge to a unified institute, especially in digital developments (Kirchhoff et al., 2008; Zastrow, 2013).
“The avalanche of born-digital records, digitization projects, digital curation in special collections and new
fields such as digital humanities has finally brought about an intersection of these various disciplines.”
(Zastrow 2013:16). Others, such as Clement et al. (2013:113) state similar ideas (quoting Jerome McGann):
“Libraries and museums – let's call them archives.”, and quoting Marlene Manoff (on page 112):  “as
libraries, museums and archives increasingly make their materials online in formats that include sound,
images and multimedia, as well as text, it no longer makes sense to distinguish them on the basis of the
objects they collect.”  Especially in North-America, such convergence can also be seen in the rise of the “i-
schools32“ which promote an interdisciplinary approach for information management. 
(2.3) Core Archival Processes
To make things more tangible, let us now look at some of the core33 processes when working with archives,
and mark some34,35 differences with the more familiar libraries. 
A first set of operations in the archive36 is about the selection of materials, i.e. what gets into an archive in
the first place. In a typical archive, records come from an organisation as outcome or part of company
processes in the  acquisition phase, whereas for libraries new entries come mainly from new, published
books. Continuously archivists evaluate records for permanent value, appraising them for  disposal or
retention. They serve as historians for the organization that creates the records, preserve and protect the
records for ongoing use, and ensure legal compliance regarding retention periods and accessibility of
records. Through appraisal, archivists determine which records belong in the archives, based on their long-
term administrative, legal, fiscal, and research value. Through  acquisition, archives obtain those records
which meet the appraisal criteria. Through accessioning, the archivist takes physical control of records by
transferring them to the archives repository and begins establishing intellectual control. Archives can hold
both published and unpublished materials, in any format. Destroyed records can never be recovered37, since
archives often contain unique, physical items. For librarians this is less of a problem since they typically deal
with (bulk-)published materials which can be reproduced when needed. In the Lego vault, acquisition would
amount to getting all new Lego, and appraisal would, in this case, only throw away duplicate sets.
A second set of processes involves the  maintenance of the archive. Simply put, it deals with all the
processes of placing, ordering, and physically keeping the records in a physical space.  Provenance is a
fundamental principle of archives, referring to the individual, family, or organization that created or received
the items in a collection. The principle of provenance (or: the respect des fonds) dictates that records of
different origins (provenance) be kept separate to preserve their  context. In the Lego vault, sets from
particular lines, or years, get their own place on the shelves. The order38, or physical arrangement of the
records in the physical archive is important39, and puts severe constraints on how to layout the collection of
32 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Information_school
33 https://www2.archivists.org/node/14804
34 https://www.quora.com/How-would-you-explain-the-difference-between-a-librarian-and-an-archivist
35 https://www2.archivists.org/usingarchives/whatarearchives
36 https://www2.archivists.org/about-archives
37 Piper (2012:20): “Scholars of the future will no doubt troll libraries to locate 'lost' print editions of 
undigitized texts, just like their print predecessors scoured libraries for lost manuscripts.”
38 One idea to make the ordering of books easier is to have strict maximum number of books in a library. 
Perec (1985:148-155) sets it at 361, but he also notes that (p152) "Disorder in a library is not serious in itself;
it ranks with 'Which drawer did I put my socks in?'. We always think we shall know instinctively where we 
have put such and such a book. And even if we don't know, it will never be difficult to go rapidly along all the 
shelves.". While I think, or maybe even know, this holds for small, personal libraries, it is generally not true.
39 Habeat Librarius et registrum omnium librorum ordinatum secundum facultates et 
auctores, reponeatque eos separatim et ordinate cum signaturis per scripturam 

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 8
records over the physical space. Even for libraries, with only books as “records”, ordering is not simple40.
Preservation  even gives records "new life" after the "death" of their original medium by migration of
records  from one  medium to  another,  e.g.,  photocopying  to  alkaline-buffered  paper,  microfilming  or
digitizing records, or periodic re-copying of film-based or digital records. The  arrangement  of items in
libraries is predetermined based on subject classification (e.g. Dewey decimal), but there is still a challenge
to map this knowledge classification scheme onto the physical space (i.e. floor plan of the library). In
archives it is determined by provenance, original order and other types determined  organically by the
archivist based on deep knowledge about the originating organisation. The final arrangement of materials
will usually be alphabetical or chronological within record groups or series, showing the hierarchical
relationship of each fond (creating office or individual) to the institution's other fonds. Overall, whereas in
libraries the ordering of items is quite standard, the one in archives has to be determined by the archivist.
The third set of operations aids in  finding things. The  description41 of the contents of the archive in a
catalogue is important for the actual use of the archive, which also requires a reference system detailing
where items from the catalog can be found in the physical space. What is characteristic for archives (and not
for libraries) is that content is often only described at an aggregate level: for example there could be a box
containing tax records of year 2016 with no detailed description of the individual items in that box.
Librarians are used to work with secondary resources (books, serials) which can be described by call number
and cataloging information inherent in the book itself or available through bibliographic databases such as
WorldCat. They can often download the bibliographic information and therefore the cataloging (in the
original sense) is not much part of the daily work. Archival materials are acquired without descriptive call
numbers or assigned object headings and titles. Archivists create an accession record – noting the records'
date, title, bulk, condition, transferring office or donor, conservation needs, and access restrictions – when
records come into the archives. Archives are difficult to catalog in traditional library systems; they typically
feature unique, rare, valuable, frequently agile, and difficult-to-decipher materials. Full record description is
one of the most complex and challenging archival tasks. It involves knowing what the item is, what it means
in the archive as a whole, and knowing in advance how people will/may search for it.
Summarizing, physical archival processes concern three things: 1) selecting (and discarding) which items
belong in the archive, 2)  ordering and physically arranging the records in a physical layout, and 3)
describing and documenting which records exist and where they are. Compared to libraries, archives are
more idiosyncratic and require more creativity and more work mainly because of the variety of materials and
because orderings and descriptions sometimes need to grow organically, locally, as opposed to library
systems which are more standard, dealing solely with books, and of which catalogues can be shared among
institutions. The trend in libraries is to let users interact more and more without any help of a librarian 42
whereas in archives the archivist is still the main contact person, or the main gatekeeper, to the archive. 
(2.4) Access
Physical access to archives and libraries has always appealed to our imagination, in fiction, poetry and film
(Crawford 2015). Exciting stories like43 Indiana Jones revolve around the idea of finding a lost archive and
applicatis Eco (1980, p84) “The librarian requires a catalogue of all books, ordered by sciences and 
authors, and he needs to place all books individually and orderly, accompanied by written marks." (the 
author's translation).
40 Perec (1985:152-153), Edwards (2009:106-111) and Petroski (in the appendix "Order, order") list many 
options for shelving books and ordering them by their characteristics.
41 https://www2.archivists.org/usingarchives/appendix
42 See also the discussion on “retail libraries” in (van Otterlo, 2016b).
43 See also the three Librarian movies (2004) (http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0412915/) and (2006) 
(http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0455596/) and (2008) (http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1146438/) about the librarian of
an imaginary archive containing things like Noah's Ark and Pandora's Box. Furthermore the Indiana Jones 
movie series (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indiana_Jones) features many archeological treasure hunts. Other
popular hunts in archives and libraries can be found in "National treasure" 
(http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0368891/) and its sequel "Book of secrets" 
(http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0465234/), and of course Name of the Rose 
(http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0091605/). Yet another series of movies centered around the idea of libraries and
archives are: The Da Vinci Code (http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0382625/), Angels and Demons 

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 9
retrieving a valuable item. The nicest example of such a physical hunt for a book appears in Umberto Eco's
(1980)  Name  of  the  Rose,  in  which  the  narrator,  Adso,  assists  William of  Baskerville  in  a  murder
investigation in a medieval Abbey. At one point44, they find the entrance to the secret library in the forbidden
tower of the abbey, by pressing the eyes of a skull on a tomb stone. Adso and William enter the library,
impressed by all the books they find, and go look for the only remaining copy of Aristotle's Second Book of
Poetics on Comedy, which seems somehow related to the murders. William: "Do you realise, we are in one
of the greatest libraries in the whole world!" William thinks that the reason why the library was kept hidden
was the difficult issue of the content of the library, advanced knowledge coming from basically pagan
thinkers, and no easy match with Christianity. Adso says: “How are we going to find the books we are
looking for?” William: “In time!” Seeing all these books impresses the men, but they also feel that they
should be accessible to everyone. William: “No one should be forbidden to consult these books!” But, the
sheer amount of books makes them prepare for search. William: “How many more rooms? How many more
books?” In the end, William and Adso go even deeper into the labyrinth of the library and finally find Jorge
von Burgos, the blind45 librarian, who beat them getting into this part of the library. (Eco, 1988:421): “if
anyone wanted to know the location of an ancient, forgotten book, he did not ask Malachi, but Jorge.
Malachi kept the catalogue and went up into the library, but Jorge knew what each title meant.” Jorge: “You
have discovered much about the abbey, but the short route to the library is not among them.” By finding
Jorge, William and Adso finally find Aristotle's book, which is on humour, a topic deemed unfit for the
library by Jorge. The book has poisonous pages and is the murder weapon. The core of this story is about
access to knowledge in the physical manifestation of a library or an archive. The complex labyrinth, the evil
librarian Jorge, and the absence of a catalogue system made for heavy, deliberate physical access control
mechanisms that tried to prevent Adso and William from finding the book (or even the library itself). 
In another text46 Eco describes a (second) hostile library, now to ironically point out 18 guidelines for how
(not) to run a library properly. Some of these include: books should not carry any information about the
category they belong to, there should be ridiculous restrictions on what can be borrowed and when, the
information desk should be inaccessible, and you should not be able to find the book you were reading today,
tomorrow again. Overall, (guideline H): “The librarian should consider the reader as an enemy, a slacker
(otherwise he would be working) and a potential thief.” Both Eco's libraries instate mostly physical barriers
to access. Restricting access in libraries and archives can have many reasons. Since materials in archival
collections are often unique, the archivists in charge of caring for those materials strive to preserve them for
use today, and for future generations of researchers. Archives have specific guidelines on how people may
use collections to protect the materials from physical damage and theft, keeping them and their content
accessible for posterity. In general, a difference between libraries and archives is that plain access usually is
more restricted for the latter. Libraries feature  open stacks from which users can take items themselves;
archives feature mainly closed stacks and prevent unrestricted circulation of records. Most archives will also
limit photocopying, photographing, or scanning of archival documents to ensure preservation and security
and respect copyright law.
Abstracting a bit away from physical book hunts and hostile librarians, access to archives can be seen in two
different ways. One, the one which we have seen most so far, is related to control and security. It is targeted
at restricting and controlling the (type of) access a user has to particular records, to the catalogue, or even to
the knowledge of where (parts of) the archive is. Some archives also require users to provide identification
and register the records requested. These data could be permanently retained in case of theft or misuse of
items and for the archives' statistics. Maintaining statistics of use and records of visits is important for reports
(http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0808151/), and Inferno (http://www.imdb.com/title/tt3062096/). A good 
advertisement for archives comes from the Millennium Series 
(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Millennium_(novel_series)) where the mystery is solved after many hours of 
labour in the company archives.
44 In 1986 a movie based on the book came out, with Sean Connery in the role of William of Baskerville; 
here I base some of the text on both the movie and the book.
45 This is an obvious reference to Jorge Luis Borges, the blind librarian, see (Manguel, 2006:248-249). 
Borges was the blind librarian of the National Library of Argentina for years (the third blind librarian in there). 
Borges acknowledged the irony of God giving him both all these books, as well as darkness.
46 In “De Bibliotheca” (1981); Dutch translation (“De bibliotheek”) by Martine Vosmaer (1988:12-16).

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 10
and publicity, as well as for evaluations and planning future policies. Controlling access makes the archivist
literally a gatekeeper47 who (physically) determines which parts of the archive the user is allowed to see and
use. The first type of access deals with why users should not get (full) access to the archive. The second type
of access control relates more to the role archivists (and librarians) take on professionally: a service-oriented
role in connecting users with the contents of the archive. For example, a user could go to an archivist (or
librarian) with a particular query, and the archivist would then help the user with finding the right parts of the
archive. Furthermore, archivists could also play an active role in pointing users to other sources that could be
of interest. This relates to the broader topic of promotion: to let the public know your archive exists and to
promote its use. The “statistics of use” which may be gathered may also be used for benefit for the user,
something that was recognized early on in the  mechanisation of libraries; quoting Don. R. Swanson in
(Markuson, 1963:13-14): “Any user could then readily recover anything which he (or any other person he
names) has used previously. One could ask for “the red book which I checked out last week” or perhaps 'the
set of 15 books on automation which I used last fall'. An entire 'private demand library' could be rapidly
constructable”.  A big difference between librarians and archivists is that since the latter are much more
involved in the selection, classification, description and arrangement tasks, users will stay more dependent
on them, especially for the second kind of access. Overall, all actions in the archive (or library) have an
influence on its use: collections, access policies and the archivist's service provision determine whether the
user finds what he or she needs.
Much of this discussion so far, especially the second form of access control, comes back to the visionary
information scientists introduced in the first section: Otlet, Wells, Licklider, Lancaster, Garfield and others.
Their ideas about access traced back to the famous library of Alexandria 48,49. Over two millennia ago, the
Ptolemites attempted to create a complete corpus of Greek literature (and some other languages). The library
that held this collection, the famous library of Alexandria, can possibly be considered the first  universal
library (White 2008; Nerdinger 2011b). The medium in Alexandria was scrolls, later this became books, and
nowadays we have digital records in some “cloud”. Universal access means: being able to access all sources
of knowledge available. The term “universal library” originates from Conrad Gessner (16th century, see
Wright 2014) who gathered lots of sources, ranging from personal notes to parts of books, and rearranged
them into new books among which the “Bibliotheca Universalis”.  
If universal access is desired, then in the purely physical world this means that physical copies of all books
need to be assembled at the same geographical location. Technology and new media can help to loosen this
constraint, something that has been realized in library mechanisation (Markuson, 1963), the electronic library
(Lancaster, 1982) and the digital age (the rest of this text); Torres-Vargas (2005:156): “In our time, due to
the appearance of modern information and communications technologies, universal access has begun to
seem like a realisable goal”. She contrasts Otlet50 (a social scientist and founder51 of thinking about feasible
universal access, and documentation and information science) and Wells (a writer in a scientific context), and
shows that where Otlet aimed at a centralization of everything in his Mundaneum (copies of all the books in
the world, and a universal bibliography), Well's (1937) idea of a a permanent World Encyclopedia was based
47 See Bozdag (2013) for additional pointers to the literature on gatekeepers, a phenomenon studied 
extensively in Media studies and journalism, see also (Granka, 2010).
48 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Library_of_Alexandria
49 Gooding and Terras (2017) survey the typical use of Babel and Alexandria as metaphors for the digital 
library.
50 Otlet created the Mundaneum, a physical manifestation of the idea of universal libraries and universal 
access. Otlet is a fascinating figure in documentation (information science) with key contributions such as the
Mundaneum, the universal Dewey decimal system (UDC), the Universal Book (similar to Gessner's work) 
and other things such as the universal atlas, the World Palace, and the utopian dream of a World City and 
ideas on the League of Nations. Pointers for further information: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mundaneum 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_Otlet and Wright (2014), Borner (2010), Boyd Rayward (1992, 2010). 
51 Torres-Vargas (2008:159): “In addition to his efforts to create bibliographical institutions like those 
mentioned above, Otlet also wrote such important works as his Traite´ de Documentation, the masterpiece 
he published in 1934, which has been described by Rayward (1990) as a masterly exercise in synthesis, the 
first modern, systematic discussion of the general problems of organising information and one of the first 
manuals of information science. This essay formally coined the term 'documentation' to refer to the discipline
involving the storage and retrieval of information.”  

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 11
on a network of connected institutions, more related to Licklider's (1965) ideas. Otlet's vast collection would
be represented in the RBU (Repertoire Bibliographique Universel) that would allow identification but not
access. The creation of an RBU  reflects the age-old dream of recording everything that has ever been
published anywhere in the world. Otlet's system was designed for documents, whereas Wells' was designed
for information intended for the researcher. Wells’ objective was not centralisation, but the extensive
distribution of  information.  Torres-Vargas (2005, 156):  “Wells claimed that the encyclopedia should be
organised in such a way that it did not depend on a single location, but was a kind of network. It could be
mentally centralised, but not physically, and could therefore be duplicated.” In addition, his ideas are not
based on physical possession of documents, and it can therefore be observed that the World Brain is closely
related to the universal access conceived today with the use of networks and other information technologies.
A related idea by Bush, the “Memex”52, brings in (just like Otlet's Mundotheque) a physical desk from which
a user can obtain access to books stored on microfilms. However, it was envisioned as a relatively stand-
alone system, whereas Otlet's Mundotheque was a more networked idea, just like Wells'.
One conclusion of this section on physical archives (and libraries) must be that archivists and librarians have
a powerful role as a gatekeeper to information. More than the librarian is the archivist involved in the
selection, arrangement and  description of the materials but (because of that) also in the  access to the
materials. In physical archives the user is dependent on the archivist to find the things related to his
information needs. With such great powers comes great responsibility. Therefore, the in the next section I
will look at the ethical dimensions.
(3) Ethical Aspects of Information Access
The previous section has dealt with physical access to physical archives and libraries by physical users. I
have emphasized the physical aspects to make a clear distinction with our modern, digital world. Access in
the physical world has a clear meaning, and also obstacles to that same access can be visualized in the same
way. In Eco's library access can be controlled by maze-like buildings, by hidden doors, and by evil librarians
making the physical search difficult or dangerous. The conditions under which such  access control is
enforced are deliberately chosen. Debating whether such choices are “good” or “bad” is the domain of ethics.
In this section I will illustrate several specific ethical aspects in the archival profession, which shares many
features with the library profession.
(3.1) Ethics
Eco's librarian Jorge's moral values (believing that laughter was sinful) made it appropriate to poison the
book such that anyone who would read it would die a quick but painful death. Taking practical action based
on moral values is the domain of ethics (Laudon 1995; Baggini and Fosl 2007; Baase 2013; Kizza 2013).
According to Kizza (2013:3)  Morality  is  “a set of rules for right conduct, a system used to modify and
regulate our behavior.”  It naturally has close ties to law since when a society deems certain moral values to
be important, it can formalize such values in a law and set behavior that will uphold those values as a norm.
Ethics typically is concerned with analysis of such norm-setting processes. Classic ethical questions are:
“should we clone humans?”,  “is it sometimes allowed to kill people?” and  “should we provide a base
income in case robots take over most jobs?”. 
As Laudon defines it (1995:34): “Ethics is about the decision making and actions of free human beings.
When faced with alternative courses of action or alternative goals to pursue, ethics helps us to make the
correct decision. Ethics helps provide answers to questions like 'What should I do? What should we do?
What goals should we pursue? What laws should we have? What collective behavior should we all pursue?'
52 (Loftus, 1956) “Describes in detail a mechanized private file and library which is referred to as “Memex”. 
In order that this mythical device might have a name, the author coined one at random. A “Memex” is a 
device in which the research worker may store all his books, records and communications. Information 
stored in this mythical machine can be consulted with extraordinary speed and flexibility. Since the mind 
operates on the principle of association of ideas, the author believs that information should be stored 
mechanically in the same manner. The “Memex” is so designed to make this possible.” Note that there are 
different versions about the origins of the name. The Dutch Wiki page refers to “Memory Extender” whereas 
the US Wiki page talks about “Memory Index”.

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 12
Ethics is concerned with practical decision making and human behavior in the broadest context.” To make it
even simpler (Laudon 1995:34): “Ethics is, above all, about what is good and what is evil, and how we come
to make such judgments”. I would summarize it as: if there are options what to do, then ethics is concerned
with practical reasoning about “good” and “bad” actions. Eco's librarian had multiple options, including the
option to proactively give the book to Adso and William, and so we can compare his chosen option to this
one and evaluate which one is better. Of course, this is according to our moral values. This already shows an
important dimension: for whom is something good or bad, and by who's standards? 
The field of ethics has many subfields dealing with subtle and specialized issues. Many of them are now
applied or updated to computing and digital technology (Kizza 2013; Baase 2013). Here it suffices to look at
four main schools of ethics (see Laudon 1995) induced from two dimensions: 1) rules vs. consequences and
2) individual (micro-level) vs. collective (macro-level). The first dimension looks at where the moral values
come from. For rule-based theories, the values come from outside, for example a religion. Rules simply say
“one must do X when Y” or “one is forbidden to do W when Z”. A rule-based decision in traffic would be not
to drive through a red light just because the rule say you are not allowed to do that. A consequentialist on the
other hand, would look at the actual consequences and would, for example at night when the streets are
completely empty, drive through a red light when appropriate. The second dimension looks at “for whom”
the values or consequences have an influence (and “where” the moral authority is located). Individual-based
theories look purely from the standpoint of an individual, whereas collective-based theories will look at (all)
members of a community. The combination of the 2 dimensions results in the four main ethical schools of
thought. The rule-based collective ethics is well-known, with typical scholars such as Socrates, Plato and
Kant. The latter introduced the “reductio ad absurdum” to test whether something is ethical: “shall I throw
my litter on the ground? No, because if everybody would do that, it would become a mess!” Individual rule-
based ethics is typically associated with intuitions and religious belief whereas individual consequentialist
ethics is more ego-centric and has more in common with neo-liberal, economic theories such as by Adam
(“the  invisible  hand”)  Smith  and  Ayn  Rand.  Making  decisions  according  to  this  school  amounts  to
optimizing self-interest. The fourth, and probably most intuitive and widely used, school holds the collective
consequentialists. Here, ethical decisions are made according to “the best balance between all interests of all
stakeholders in decision making situation”, implementing John Stuart Mill's utilitarianism, which (Laudon
1995):  “advised us to take the actions that provided the greatest pleasure for the greatest number”.
Utilitarianism looks at possible consequences of a decision and values the  outcomes. By comparing all
outcomes for all stakeholders (and possibly weighting), one can optimize what is best 53 for all. Many real-life
compromises are based on utilitarian principles. A main difference between rule-based and consequentialist
ethics is that in the former the behavior is directly prescribed, whereas in the latter reasoning is needed to
calculate the best decision based on the (predicted or perceived) consequences. 
As an example, the Dutch national security agency has announced that it is trying to hack 54 the widely used
Whatsapp-messenger service, in order to listen into conversations of (suspected) criminals and terrorists.
Thus, the consequences of this would be that society becomes more safe (positive consequence for the
society at large), and terrorists would go to jail (negative consequence for a very small group). However, it
would also be a serious breach of privacy for all normal citizens who use Whatsapp (negative consequence
for a large subpopulation). Typically politicians now need to weigh the various consequences, the amount of
53 One very good way to look at ethical dilemmas is to cast them into a scenario (Wright et al. 2014). That is,
even though scientific and governmental reports can help to assess the impact and dangers of developments
– such as new technologies – it often helps to also consider a more narrative account in the form of a 
scenario or fiction novel. Famous books such as Brave New World by Aldous Huxley and 1984 by George 
Orwell have caused generations to think deeply about technology, surveillance and the organization of 
society. Eco's story about the library too is a good scenario for archival ethics, and it can also be used to 
understand contemporary developments in algorithms (van Otterlo, 2016a). With a scenario, other ways 
become available to look at the degree of impact, the degree of uncertainty and new points of view, for a 
particular development. As Wright at al. say (2014:325): “We subscribe to the dictum of scenario guru Peter 
Schwartz who defines scenarios as “a tool for ordering one's perceptions about alternative future 
environments in which one's decisions might be played out… Concretely, they resemble a set of stories.” By 
identifying stakeholders, applications, risks, drivers and technologies, one can try to imagine the various 
consequences of new developments.
54 http://www.telegraaf.nl/binnenland/27257015/__AIVD_kraakt_WhatsApp__.html

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 13
people per consequence, and the relative importance of them (e.g. negative consequences for terrorists are
valued very low). Often such issues are resolved through law. For example, there are privacy laws protecting
citizens from such hack-plans, but the same law can also make exceptions when national security is at stake. 
Note that ethical frameworks are not the definite answer to many problems; they only define a particular way
of balancing moral values and behavior. In addition, there is something called bounded ethical rationality
(Laudon 1995): it is impossible to assume that all necessary information is available, or can even be
overseen, when making decisions. Also the tension between the individual and the collective is a factor: how
to behave morally in evil societies? 
(3.2) Ethics of Archival Practices
Now let us turn to how ethics applies to archival
practices.  Any relation between any of the five main
components of archival practices – the archive, the
user, the archivist, the donor organisation and the
people  occuring  as  a  subject  in  the  archive  –  is
subject to choices, and ethical decisions. As we have
seen in the previous paragraph, ethical analysis of
each of these relations may be done from various
viewpoints (one of the five individuals or any sub-
collective) and also in terms of consequences versus rules. One possible rule could be that the archivist
should provide anyone with access to the archive, but what if there is an expensive fragile vase? That
requires some physical and ethical balance. The archivist plays a pivotal role in all ethical issues, but is
sometimes overridden by (ego-centric) stakeholders such as the archive's donor organization and users.
Ethical challenges have always existed. A typical object of ethical study in this domain is privacy (Garoogian
1991, Svensson et al. 2016, van Otterlo 2013). Several other ethical dilemmas are about access (see next
section) but plenty others arise between archive stakeholders. For example, Preisig (2014) mentions that
unlimited freedom of expression collides with protection from defamation: archives may contain information
that, when published freely, could cause harm to individuals (rendering a conflict with the owner or the
subject of the archival matter). Ferguson et al. (2016) introduce a long list of 86 real-world ethical cases and
cluster them by dilemma. Similar to Preisig et al's (2014) dilemma is the “privacy versus potential harm to
individuals” but  also  included  are  “privacy  versus  organisational  ethos  or  requirements” –  where
obligations to core customers were in conflict with the organisational interests, for example when a professor
requests reading records of a student suspected of plagiarism  – and “ethics versus law” – where librarians or
archivists have a conflict between their ethical convictions and what they see as “unjust laws”. An example
of the latter was where the government instructed librarians not to buy books from a specific country.  
The example of the student's reading records also hits the core aspect of privacy, but in a way that is typical
for  archives  and  libraries:  the  confidentiality  of  reading  records,  and  especially  intellectual  privacy
(Garoogian, 1991; Richards, 2012,2015; Rubel, 2014; van Otterlo, 2016a). The right of an individual to
access and read whatever he wants  without interference or monitoring is a fundamental requirement for
intellectual growth, freedom of thought, and especially  autonomy. When reading records are no longer
confidential, people may behave differently because of social norms, oppression, or surveillance. Libraries
(and archives) have always55 protected this right, and various solutions exist (e.g. anonymity, confidentiality,
privacy policies and so on) but overall it is about  principles and how to let information flow freely in
democratic societies without too much surveillance and control. 
(3.3) The Ethics of Access
55 This topic has a long history, but recently some interesting developments have happened. A group of four 
librarians fought a gag order by the FBI in which (under the Patriot Act) they had to hand over library records,
and not even talk about it. They are called the Connecticut Four (
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Connecticut_Four) and this happened more than ten years ago. Recently they 
got reunited again to fight the same issues now again https://americanlibrariesmagazine.org/blogs/the-
scoop/connecticut-four-librarians-fbi-overreach/

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 14
Access is the most important issue with ethical repercussions in archival practice. Preisig et al. (2014:11):
“Librarians, archivists and other information workers had to face ethical conflicts and ethical dilemmas
long before digital media and the Internet started to reshape the whole information sphere. Francis Bacon's
aphorism knowledge is power (scientia potentia est) refers to the fact that limited access to information and
restricted education were are prerequisites of ruling elites in pre- and non-democratic societies.” Danielson
(1989:53): “Providing fair access to archives may appear to be a fundamentally simple operation, until one
examines specific cases.” It often comes down to balancing many interests of stakeholders, ranging from
overzealous researchers who want to gain access to legitimately privileged papers, to archivists who disagree
with institutional policies, and to donors who have difficulty relinquishing control over their papers. Access
problems can also come as an indirect consequence of other constraints. Danielson (1989:53): “Due to the
sheer volume of paper being generated, searches for specific documents become complicated and time
consuming. The consistency of reference assistance, which can significantly reduce searching time and the
attendant expense, becomes an access question.”  Danielson distinguishes three distinct cases concerning
access where the mechanisms of the competing demands of stakeholders can be observed. 
The first concerns the access to restricted collections. Often there is a tension between standard archival
procedures and sensitivities of donors. A simple solution is to be rather binary (open versus closed) in the
access policy. One could be dogmatic about universal and equal access, and even promote use of records for
that part of the archive that can be open. For all other parts of the archive that are sensitive or restricted, there
should not be access by anyone (with a strict end date of that policy). The tension here is between freedom of
information, and the privacy of the records, and people affected by the information contained. For example
the famous Ludwig Witgenstein was homosexual, according to his biographer, which seemed to be withheld
by the trustees of his archive containing letters. Archivists who try to retain a passive role here might get
drawn into the role of mediators in the end, according to Danielson (1989, p55). 
The second set of ethical issues concerns  access to open collections and opening sensitive materials.
Consequences can be simple or grow to national political proportions, for example when dealing with
documents from potential war crimes. It is here that access policies can actually be indirectly influential in
politics as well. Two types of access problems play a role here. One is legal: sometimes restrictions must first
be lifted to obtain access. The second is “labour”: to find particular knowledge in large56 archives requires a
lot of money and time, which most scholars cannot really afford. Both result, from the viewpoint of a user, in
a lack of sufficient access.  Furthermore, Danielson (1989, p59):  “Given, then, the undeniable tendency
toward greater candor and wider access, and given the role of the archivist as arbiter in disputes over open
information versus confidentiality, what are the obstacles that inhibit the development of clear standards for
access policy? One obvious hindrance is backlash. … Just as individuals are responding to a candid society
with a renewed sense of privacy, so too are institutions showing a heightened awareness of security. …
Bureaucracies have become increasingly sensitive to leaks57 of information”. 
The third set of issues concerns equal intellectual access, which points to particular kinds of fairness. In
large archives it costs lots of work and money to find interesting things. One idea to help users is to inform
them when researchers are after similar items. Practically it is questionable whether this works. Danielson
(1989) describes several hypothetical examples related to ethics. For example, do professors get priority over
the access to sources just because they are better researchers? Do fees for copy services influence the access,
56 An interesting case here is the one on Cybersyn, the socialist big-data-avant-la-lettre project from the 
seventies in Chile, which was extensively described by Eden Medina in her fascinating book “Cybernetic 
Revolutionaries” from 2011. In 2014 Evgeny Morozov wrote a piece in the New Yorker on the exact same 
project (http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2014/10/13/planning-machine). This created some controversy 
because some people accused Morozov of plagiarism, and quite interestingly, his rebuttal consisted of 
showing photographs of his own extensive search efforts in the archives of Stafford Beer (the main person in
the Cybersyn project). The issue was never fully resolved (http://leevinsel.com/blog/2014/10/11/an-
unresolved-issue-evgeny-morozov-the-new-yorker-and-the-perils-of-highbrow-journalism). 
57 This seems similar to the increased attention to privacy issues in the library world (in the Netherlands) 
because of new laws about data leaks and responsibility 
(https://autoriteitpersoonsgegevens.nl/nl/onderwerpen/beveiliging/meldplicht-datalekken). Dutch library 
service organisations have just begun discussing this topic with the field 
(https://www.stichtingspn.nl/informatiebeveiligingprivacy).

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 15
and should profit and non-profit making patrons pay the same fees? Should the judgment about the quality of
a researcher make a difference when prioritizing access to particular still unpublished sources? And should
ethical decisions be made when a journalist (who has a much faster publication medium) asks for the same
information the archivist knows a researcher is working on? These are difficult issues in which the role of the
archivist, as gatekeeper, as a service and as a human is important.
Ferguson et al. (2016) tackles similar issues as Danielson but is based on a large empirical (interview-based)
study in archives and libraries. They also focus on how professionals experience ethical dilemmas and which
tools are available to assist them. Ferguson lists (among others) five dilemmas where access to information
comes into conflict with another important value. The first is censorship. For example, archives can contain
materials about groups of people which some people might see as offensive, so a balance is needed between
publishing information and protecting groups. The second is privacy: access to information and records of
that access could be in conflict if the latter need to be shared, for example with authorities. The third
dilemma concerns access and  intellectual property. The example that is mentioned here is translating
something  into  braille  without  copyright  compliance.  The  fourth  conflicting  value  consists  of  social
obligations. This one is personal for the archivist: should he or she work (partially) for free in the context of
budget  costs,  just  to  maintain  the  level  of  service?  The  last  one  concerns  organisational  ethos  or
requirements. Here the specific case was about making university theses publicly available (with pressure for
“open access”) even though this might jeopardise publication of the results. 
The ethics of access is about ethical issues that arise when looking at tensions between the right to
information  (and  access  to  that  information)  and  other  values  in  the  information  domain.  Releasing
information to patrons may harm other stakeholders such as people occurring in the information in the
archive, or the donor institution. Access may also be unevenly distributed, which creates unfairness and
unequal access to information. Overall, it is the archivist who usually needs to deal with the ethical
dilemmas: all of them involved the archivist either as a decision-maker or at least a mediator. 
(3.4) Human Professional Values and Codes of Ethics
Given the many ethical dilemmas in accessing archives, the big question is how do archivist know how to
make the right choices? Several scholars all point to the use of so-called “code-of-ethics” to formalize the
values and behaviors of archivists in ethical dilemmas. A code of ethics formalizes rules, guidelines, canons,
advisories and more for the members of a particular profession. A very early example of such a code are the
ten commandments58 of the Christian bible. They provide clear statements about not to worship other gods,
not to kill, and not to lie. For people belonging to the religion, these are solid rules that should be obeyed,
although in general most of them make a lot of sense for any individual. Another well-known example are
Asimov's three laws59 of robotics, which should be obeyed by any robot, and specify that i) a robot cannot
harm a human, ii) robots need to obey the orders of the humans, and iii) a robot must protect its own
existence as long as it does not conflict with the first two rules. Another influential code is the universal
declaration of human rights which deals with fundamental ethics of human life. In previous work (van
Otterlo 2014b) I analyzed this code and found several necessary alterations needed for the digital age.
Recently much more interest in such issues has risen, due to advances in AI and robotics (Van Est, R. and
Gerritsen, J. 2017). Yet another example, one that is more close to the archivist profession, is the code of
ethics (ACM 1992) for the Association of Computing Machinery which contains general items such as “be
fair and take actions not to discriminate” (1.4) and “give proper credit for intellectual property” (1.6). Such
statements clearly express a desired behavior for members of the ACM. Codes of ethics can help to find
ethical solutions in the sense that they formalize what is important in a profession. Codes can (Kizza
2016:27) take the form of i) principles (acting as guidelines), ii) public policies (stating norms or “acceptable
behavior” in a society or a group, iii) codes of conduct (which may include ethical principles) and iv) legal
instruments (which enforce good conduct through courts). Usually codes of ethics are used by high-visibility
institutions and big corporations60, but in principle any profession could define one. The main objectives of a
58 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ten_Commandments
59 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Three_Laws_of_Robotics
60 See for example one by IKEA 
(http://www.ikea.com/ms/en_JP/about_ikea/our_responsibility/iway/index.html), by Sony 
(https://www.sony.net/SonyInfo/csr_report/compliance/index3.html) and McDonalds 

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 16
code of ethics are five-fold:
•
Disciplinary: with discipline a group or profession can enforce professionalism and the integrity of
its members. Possibly there are penalties for members that do no behave according to the code.
•
Advisory: a code can help members by offering advice when difficult ethical decisions need to be
made, professionally.
•
Educational: a code can educate new members and show them the do and don'ts of the profession.
Equally so, codes can educate experienced members, by polishing and refreshing their ethical
knowledge in the profession.
•
Inspirational: codes of ethics can also (indirectly) inspire members to “do the right thing”.
•
Publicity: The first four objectives are  internal usages in which the code is used to affect (the
behavior of) members of the profession. This last objective is external and shows the outside world
that a profession has a strong code of ethics and is therefore trustworthy since its members adhere to
a certain baseline of values and moral behavior.
A general distinction between different codes of ethics is whether they are prescriptive or aspirational. The
former more directly prescribe the do's and don'ts, generally written as  imperatives. Aspirational ones
formalize  ideal results that should be targeted, without necessarily telling the professional how to reach
them. This resembles the difference between rule-based and consequentialist ethical reasoning. Ethical codes
should not be seen as universal laws: at most they provide good guidelines but much of the practical
decision-making is still up to the professional. Ferguson et al. (2016) note that codes of ethics are an
important source of information for archivists, yet not always sufficient, especially not when there are
conflicts  between rules and values. Ethical codes, especially when when they have consequences when
misbehaving, cause fewer discipline problems among members (Kizza 2016:50).
Archival codes of ethics have a history. The first archivists code dates from 1955, from the Society of
American Archivists (SAA). It (SAA 1955) is fairly compact and states, among others, things like: 
“The Archivist should endeavour to promote access to records to the fullest extent consistent with the public
interest, but he should carefully observe any proper restrictions on the use of records”.
Similar statement come from the universal declaration on archives (ICA-DL 2011):
“Archives are made accessible to everyone, while respecting the pertinent laws and the rights of individuals,
creators, owners and users”.
“The Archivist should respond courteously and with a spirit of helpfulness to reference requests.”
“The Archivist should not profit from any commercial exploitation of the records in his custody.”
The first two deal with the same ethical issues I discussed in the previous sections, but the third resonates a
worry that was expressed before that. Torres-Vargas (2005, 158) “One of the risks identified by Wells was the
publication of the World Encyclopedia by a commercial publisher, with overriding financial interests.”
The 1992 version (SAA 1992) extended the previous code (with an intermediate version in 1980) and added
commentaries to explain the parts. It also added a text explaining the objectives of the code, such as the ones
discussed above. The text on access now includes:
“It is not sufficient for archivists to hold and preserve materials: they also facilitate the use of their
collections and make them known.”
This amounts to the preservation, use and publicity aspects of the archive. It also contains:
“Archivists endeavour to inform users of parallel research by others using the same materials, and, if the
individuals concerned agree, supply each name to the other party.”
This refers to a dilemma I have discussed earlier in this section.
The final commentary of the code states something about potential conflicts:
“When there are apparent conflicts between such goals and either the policies of some institutions or the
practices of some archivists, all interested parties should refer to this code of ethics and the judgment of
experienced archivists.”
In a subsequent version (SAA 2005) all commentary was removed, apparently because it was deemed less
useful and the SAA might be subject to legal liability. The most recent version however, (SAA 2012) is
conceptually very different. In this version there are two main components. One is the code of ethics as
before, but the other is an explicit statement of the core values of the archival profession. According to the
introduction paragraph, the latter represents what the archivists  believe while the former represents a
framework for the archivists' behavior. This division in values in behavior is intuitive and could be a way to
(http://corporate.mcdonalds.com/mcd/investors/corporate-governance/codes-of-conduct.html)

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 17
solve some of the ethical dilemmas I discussed before. The values drive the behaviors, but if values are
stated separately, they may be useful input for a utilitarian analysis of a particular ethical dilemma. Core
values in the document are about access and use, accountability, preservation and more. For access it
emphasizes that access to records is essential in personal, academic, business and government settings, and
use of records should be welcomed. Later in the code of ethics itself this value is translated61 into “minimize
restrictions and maximize ease of access”.
A Dutch version was issued by the Dutch royal association for archivists (KVAN 1997) and although it
maintains a different structure, it captures the same kind of values. Related codes exists for libraries, such as
the professional charter for librarians in public libraries (PL 1993), and codes by the American library
organization (ALA 2008) and the International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions (IFLA
2012). As explained before, libraries do have different activities, but the core values are shared with
archivists, which can be seen in the similarities with library values concerning access. Libraries often
explicitly state that they promote information literacy though (IFLA 2012). In addition, libraries often want
to state that “if certain information is against the personal view or conviction of the librarian, this will not
influence the evaluation of the information.”, making explicit that they do not judge upon information
requests  – something that relates to the mystery shopper case I described in the introduction. In addition,
like I have described earlier, archives, libraries and museums are similar if we look at the preservation and
provision of cultural information. The ICOM (2013) code of ethics for museums therefore is very similar,
and highly related, to archival codes. Instead of values, the code first states principles after which a detailed
set of guidelines is given, ranging from access to acquisition policies. Occasionally separate codes are made
with respect to specific aspects such as privacy62, for example as was done recently by IFLA in 2015.
One main issue with codes of conduct is that guidelines can be  non-committal. The difference between
prescriptive and aspirational version is large, but still the real dilemmas are caused when multiple values or
rules conflict in a practical setting where the archivist needs to make a decision. Several authors do see the
benefit of codes of ethics (Preisig et al. 2014; Cox 2008; Ferguson et al. 2014; Danielson 1989) but they also
stress these shortcomings, and call for balance between various influences. As another solution, Morris63
calls for an enforceable code of ethics, just like legal and medical professions are governed by codes of
ethics which carry the force of the law. Violations are subject to sanctions including loss of license and civil
and criminal liabilities. Enforceable codes are desirable because they would raise professionalism, and be
way to earn the trust of the public to maintain the role of “guardians of the archive”. One issue that needs to
be resolved still is whether the SAA would be the regulating body or someone else. Overall, enforceable
codes would require more consensus on the exact set of ethical values and rules, thereby removing some of
the decision freedom of the individual archivist.
Formalizing ethical codes, core values and guidelines has one main purpose: to formalize  how humans
should behave, in this case in the archival profession. This is all about human values and human behavior.
Ethical  codes  appeal  to  human  values,  human  emotions,  and  human  practical  decision  making.  By
formalizing it in a code it has become  transparent and can be communicated to peers, users, donor
organisations and the general public. 
(4) Transformation to the Digital World
The physical world I have described in the previous sections, together with all ethical norms and systems that
have evolved, are in transition. The digital era is here and slowly digitalizes all that was once physical. In
addition, algorithms will intelligently, and omnipotently govern all interactions that were once physical. The
new norms that are needed in this new world are the topic of the next section. Here I will first describe the
transformation by algorithms in society at large, and in archival and library contexts in particular.
(4.1) Digitalization and Algorithmization
Despite digital technology being around for decades, digitalization is currently a hot topic in business and
technology. The transformation of products, manufacturing, marketing and customer relations through digital
61 Which sounds very much like a Utilitarian maximization.
62 https://www.ifla.org/node/9803
63 http://slanynews.blogspot.nl/2010/09/enforceable-code-of-ethics-why.html

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 18
technologies comes with huge expectations for new commercial opportunities. One of the biggest hype terms
for the current decennium64 seems to be big data. Everywhere around us everything is turned into data which
is thought to be good for health, for the economy,  for personal well-being, for the advancement of
knowledge, and so on (Viktor Mayer-Schoenberger 2013). The main promise is that if we gather and use lots
of data about anything, we will understand it better, make better predictions about a domain, and be better in
optimizing our policies and strategies. For example, by gathering lots of patient data, and by building
statistical models to predict diseases, and by experimenting with novel treatments based on the insights of
data, we will be able to cure more diseases. A major point made by many people is that the age of big data
allows one to throw65 away typical “hypothesis-driven” science, which works top-down, and to adopt a more
bottom-up strategy, which starts with the data and tries to find patterns in there and then generalizes. 
For many people the age of big data seems rather new, but that is not entirely true (and see also (boyd and
Crawford, 2011) for some general critique on big data). Technical fields such as computer science and
mathematics have always been doing big data research, but the main new things are developments (van
Otterlo and Feldberg, 2016) in hardware and (open) software, and the growth of data in general, that make
large-scale data processing possible, for anyone. Big data “avant-la-lettre” can for example be found in the
Cybersyn project in Chile in the seventies which was aimed at controlling the economy of a complete
country, something which sounds like modern “smart city”66 endeavours. Cybersyn was based on cybernetics
(Pickering 2010), a precursor to modern AI. Medina (2015) brilliantly contrasts Cybersyn with modern big
data enthusiasm and describes five lessons to be learnt from this old project, emphasizing the sociotechnical
aspects, contrasting that with  technological determinism.   Data has always67 been gathered since it was
technically possible, but the scale of today is indeed huge.
Modern data-driven directions can be seen as a new68 machine age, an industrial revolution (see also Floridi,
2014). After the rationalization of both human labour and cognitive labour, we now enter a new phase where
much of our society gets turned into data, and processed by autonomous, artificial entities that will take over
a lot of activities from humans. Predictions of where this will end are plenty, and a fairly cautious one is
given by Butler (2016) who identifies  drivers,  and  enablers,  such as increasing computing power and
computation speed. 
The datafication of our world is a huge development, and slowly scientific literature is created in which its
consequences are studied (see (van Otterlo 2013,2014a,2014b,2016a,2016b) and cited literature). For this
text, it is important to look at  how we get from a purely-physical world to an increasingly more digital
version, and what the consequences are for our society in general, but more specifically for the physical
archives and archivists I have introduced in the previous sections. 
In the figure, each blue square in the blue area represents an object, each green triangle a document and each
red circle a person. Traditionally, all relations and interactions between any of these groups was physical as I
have described before.  In our modern age, all such interactions are becoming digitalized step-by-step and
produce data entering the red area. If we consider shopping, long ago, one could go to a store, fit some jeans,
pay them and no one but the sales person (and the customer) would have a faint memory of who just bought
which jeans. Nowadays, traces of security cameras, online search behavior on the store's website, WiFi-
tracking in the store, and the final payment, all generate a data trace of all interactions with the store and its
products. A major consequence of that digitalization process is that a permanent memory of all those specific
interactions is stored in a  cloud and can never be forgotten. In addition often this data is generated and
governed by private entities. For example, Facebook governs a lot of our social interactions on the their
64 The start of this direction was only roughly ten years ago
The Petabyte Age https://www.wired.com/2008/06/pb-intro/ (Mitchell 2009)
Mining Our Reality http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~tom/pubs/Science2009_perspective.pdf (Anderson 2008)
65 This phenomenon is called “the end of theory” since it breaks with standard scientific methodology. 
66 See for example Barcelona (http://www.smartcityexpo.com/barcelona) and other cities.
67 See for example East-Germany's Stasi and the great movie about it http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0405094/
68 See the Rathenau Report on “Working in the Robot Society (2015) https://www.rathenau.nl/nl/node/766
The Rathenau Insitute publishes many reports on the digital society and its implications, see 
https://www.rathenau.nl/nl/publicaties

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 19
platform and keeps data about us, Google gathers everything that people do with its search engine, and
Twitter keeps score of all our quick interactions via Tweets. This data is to some extent owned by these
companies (see also Waller (2009)), and whereas a long time ago interactions were physical, and no trace
was kept, these modern platforms are aimed at gathering as much data as possible of all our interactions, and
aimed at  retrieval of that data (of all users combined) for purposes such as  profit and  surveillance. Big
companies govern not only our information behavior through social networks and search engines, but they
also govern our entertainment activities (e.g. Netflix), our love life (e.g. Tinder, OkCupid), our museum
visits (see Meermanno69 for an example), our interpersonal communication (e.g. Gmail, Twitter, WhatsApp),
and more.
A good example of this transformation from the physical world to the digital comes from  photography.
Vivian Maier70 was a fantastic street photographer of the old, non-digital world. Her film-work was
discovered by John Maloof, who bought some of her stuff in a sale and found many undeveloped film roles.
She herself had not seen thousands of her own photos, and they existed only as unique physical objects
which were almost thrown away, had it not been for Maloof. Contemporary photography is so much
different. Kai Man Wong71 is a photography expert and vlogger who makes movies for Youtube. Everything
he does with a camera, or about cameras, is digital. His photos, his movies, his Twitter account in which he
announces new videos, his editing tools on his laptop for movies and photos: all digital. Even without him
actively pursuing it, a giant archive is being created, in real-time, as a memory of all this (inter)actions, by all
these big corporations that make Youtube, cloud storage, Twitter, online video editing software, and so on.
Digitalization of Maiers work has now inserted her in our collective digital memory, but how many
undiscovered photographers of the physical world are truly forgotten? Once physical objects are destroyed,
they seize to exist, unless they are drawn into our digital memory.
Another good example concerns reading. So-called e-readers have made it much easier to bring virtually
unlimited numbers of books on your holiday trip, in contrast to a long time ago when only a handful of
physical books would fit your luggage. However, new technologies require serious rethinking of codes which
were  devised  in  an  age  dominated  by print  (Ferguson  et  al. 2016).  Digital  books  have  many more
consequences than just the direct ones of carrying capacity. The digitalization of reading activities creates
digital traces of reading, browsing, times, length and places of reading activities, markups, sharing, book
69 The Dutch book museum Meermanno (https://www.meermanno.nl/) recently featured the Conn3ct 
exposition (http://conn3ct.media/), in which the physical was contrasted with the digital. Visitors were given 
an RFID card with which they could interact with the collection in various ways. Information contributed by 
visitors was shared with other visitors through various screens, displaying information like “You chose 
answer X to this question… 68 percent of all visitors today chose that answer”, thereby engaging the public 
in new, digital ways by utilizing the physical aspects of the museum.
70 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vivian_Maier
71 https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCknMR7NOY6ZKcVbyzOxQPhw

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 20
finishing and much more. Such traces can for example be used in new business models for the publication of
books and royalty payments to authors, all based on exact data how “well” a book is read or received by the
general public. One can for example pay an author based on how many pages are actually read72. This may
raise questions about fairness in digital book prices. Besides that, already the “having” of a book changes
with digitalization. For example, a PDF file containing the text of a book could be considered a local copy
that the user “owns” as a property, but more in general, digital copies of books on e-readers should be viewed
as a  “right to access”73 in the same way people have access to entertainment on NetFlix and Spotify.
Because of this, digital books are again more like physical libraries or archives: the user gets (temporary)
access to an item based on prior payment or an ongoing subscription. An explicit demonstration of this was
when Amazon (accidentally?) revoked access to several books – ironically Orwell's 198474 was one of them –
which affected many readers, while reading the book. Digitalization here changes property into access, with
extra consequences being that all aspects of that access will be monitored. Baron (2015) describes two tests
to distinguish between the physical and beyond (the digital). One is the  ownership test which asks for
whether one can actually own something, like a book, and put a mark on it (for example, an ex libris stamp).
The other one is the autograph test which is similar and asks for whether one can bring a copy of a book to a
signing session to obtain an autograph (for example of the author) on the physical copy. It goes without
saying that modern e-books fail both tests; Baron (2015:133) quotes Michael Dirda:  “E-books resemble
motel rooms – bland and efficient. Books are home – real physical things you can love and cherish.”
Another aspect of the digitalization of reading that goes beyond monitoring and tracking is social reading,
which relates to all (digital) ways to share reading activities with other people. Winget (2013) describes four
categories: talking to a friend about a book, discussing a book online, formal book clubs, and engaging in
discussions in the margin. According to Winget, scholarly work on social reading is limited so far, yet
practically many systems now support social reading. For example sites like GoodReads, and hardware like
Amazon's Kindle and the Kobo e-reader, allow users to indirectly "communicate" by making notes in books
which can get shared. For example Kindle features popular highlights which are passages in a text that got
highlighted by at least a couple of people. Such frictionless sharing (Richards 2012) brings us new ethical
challenges. For example, is my reading experience different if I know that “80 percent of all readers does
not finish the book”? Do readers get a biased view when they receive the popular highlights before forming
their own opinion? Are people aware that their markups of highlights can be shared instantaneously with
many other readers? All these aspects severely the impact (intellectual) privacy of the reader.
Privacy is a pressing item in (social) reading (Lynch 2017). In the physical library, privacy is well-defined in
the same intuitive terms most people talk about privacy. Sommer (1969, p45): "Few places make as strict a
demand upon the physical setting to guarantee privacy as the library reading area. It is one of the few places
where interaction between people is actively discouraged." However, the complete opposite is now starting
to become the norm because of all the sharing many internet platform encourage, including social reading
platforms, including Twitter and FaceBook where people can broadcast what they are reading and what they
are thinking of it. Not long ago, reading records were (in essence like any thing people now share openly on
FaceBook) very confidential75 and librarians were very aware of that. The Patriot act and related regulation
have now made those records more vulnerable76, but with developments such as social reading it seems like a
lost case. For example, when buying at Amazon you give away what you buy, but with e-reading on the
Kindle there seems not to be any way to read without being tracked, or Baron (2015, p150) “with e-books all
privacy bets are off”. As Alter (2012) writes: "Your e-book is reading you."
72 There are many opportunities and incentives for book publishers and sellers to create systems in which 
quantified aspects of “reading” are coupled to (monetary reward for) “writing”. Amazon's new way of paying 
can be based on the data obtained from their Kindle e-reader  (http://fortune.com/2015/06/24/amazon-kindle-
authors/).
73 This falls under the digital rights management (DRM) technologies 
(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_rights_management)
74 https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2009/jul/17/amazon-kindle-1984
75 https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/05/nsa-surveillance-librarians-privacy
http://www.ala.org/advocacy/advleg/federallegislation/theusapatriotact
76 http://www.npr.org/news/specials/patriotact/patriotactdeal.html

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 21
In recent analysis on privacy and social reading Jones and Janes (2012) take Nissenbaum's  contextual
integrity framework and derive recommendations in the context of legal frameworks. Richards (2012, 2015)
on the other hand, points to the perils of social reading and sees the intuitive hazard for what he calls
intellectual privacy: the idea that for some ideas people need to know that they are not being watched. It
resembles the typical Panopticon77 style of privacy concern where people change their behavior if only they
know that they might be watched. Basically, frictionless sharing, i.e. where all information is automatically
shared and disclosed, is actually completely not frictionless from a privacy point of view. Note that not all
sharing is bad; in fact, discussions about books can be beneficial to all parties. The problem is that one needs
to be able to select and read in complete privacy if wanted, and that becomes harder each day. Lynch's (2017)
recent study of reader privacy contains many of these elements and features case studies in student-textbook
interaction tracking and government interests in reading habits.
In contrast to what many people think, data is not the most important entity in our digital world. Data is only
a consumable for the entities that really change our world: algorithms. Algorithms are computer programs
that autonomously utilize data in order to do something. This can be sorting names in a database, computing
navigation instructions, but also organizing Facebook's news feed, analyzing people's e-book reading habits,
and  recognizing  faces  from  an  Instagram  photo  feed.  The  term  algorithm78 stands  for  any  finite
procedure/recipe, with well-defined instructions and which is effective in solving a problem. Algorithms can
exist outside the digital world: a detailed recipe can be considered an algorithm too, and so can instructions
for setting a breakfast table, provided that the individual steps are clear enough. In this text I focus on digital
algorithms, which increasingly become more complex, intelligent and adaptive. The algorithmization is the
process of carrying out increasing numbers of tasks in society using algorithms. The main field studying and
creating such algorithms is a subfield of computer science: AI. 
AI79 (McCarthy, 2007; Russell and Norvig, 2009; Poole and Mackworth, 2010; Nilsson, 2010) as a field is
more than 60 years young and has a past in cybernetics (Pickering 2010). AI has been developing intelligent
algorithms for a long time, but in recent years its progression has exploded, under the influence of an
enormous growth of the tech industry, a wide-spread availability of data and computing power and several
breakthrough technologies such as reinforcement learning (Wiering and van Otterlo 2012) and deep learning.
Some earlier success of AI may have involved  deception in order to create an  illusion  of intelligence
(Sharkey and Sharkey, 2006) but lately AI has shown impressive progress on a number of domains such as
computer vision, natural language understanding, and robotics. The core of AI is coming up with intelligent
systems that  in some way exhibit observable behavior for which some form of intelligence is required.
Traditionally this was about reasoning, planning, and mathematical problem solving, but in the current data
age, it is about learning. The subfield of AI called machine learning (ML) (Flach, 2012; Domingos 2012,
2015) specifically focuses on using data to learn how a particular task should be performed, which can range
from baking cookies80 to driving autonomous cars by learning from popular computer games81. AI is rapidly
becoming the driver for innovation82.
77 https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/23/panopticon-digital-surveillance-jeremy-bentham
78 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Algorithm
79 Science, special issue on how A.I. is transforming science  
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/357/6346/
80 http://www.wired.co.uk/article/google-vizier-black-box-optimisation-machine-learning-cookies
81 https://www.technologyreview.com/s/602317/self-driving-cars-can-learn-a-lot-by-playing-grand-theft-auto/
82 Goverments, universities and large companies are assessing the sudden rise of the powerful technology 
of A.I. See for example the report from the field itself (Stone et al, 2016) and some other examples such as:
Andrew C. Scott José R. Solórzano  Jonathan D. Moyer Barry B. Hughes (2017) Modeling Artificial 
Intelligence and Exploring its Impact, working paper, Pardee Center for International Futures 
http://pardee.du.edu/sites/default/files/ArtificialIntelligenceIntegratedPaper_V6_clean.pdf
Executive Office of the President National Science and Technology Council Committee on Technology (2016)
Preparing for the Future of Artificial Intelligence (2016) 
https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/files/whitehouse_files/microsites/ostp/NSTC/preparing_fo
r_the_future_of_ai.pdf
Jacques Bughin, Eric Hazan, Sree Ramaswamy, Michael Chui, Tera Allas, Peter Dahlström, Nicolaus Henke,
Monica Trench (2017) Artificial Intelligence: The Next Digital Frontier, discussion paper, McKinsey Global 
Institute.

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 22
The most promising development in recent years are the accomplishments of the British company Deepmind
(now part of Google/Alphabet). Metz (2016) describes how an adaptive, intelligent computer program called
AlphaGo managed  to  beat  the  human
champion in the game of  Go  (a board
game  with  a  much  higher  complexity
than  chess,  of  which  the  human
champion  Gary  Kasparov  was  already
beaten  in  1997  by  IBM's  DeepBlue
computer).  The  program  learns  from
existing  games,  and  adaptively  trains
itself  to  become  better.  The  general
structure of the approach lends itself to
many  other  situations,  for  example  to
control popular, computer games such as
Starcraft-283, but it could also manage a
city, or maybe in the end, the world itself.
The transformation into a digital society
can  thus  be  characterized  by  the  two
interrelating  developments  I  have
discussed  in  the  previous  two
subsections:  digitalization,  which turns once-physical interactions into digital  data, and  algorithmization,
which amounts to increasing analysis and utilization of that data by algorithms. Together they characterize
two dimensions with which the transformation to a digitalized world can be characterized as also shown in
the figure. The first dimension, digitalization, represents the process of making physical interactions digital
and is depicted on the X-axis. The more to the right, the more aspects of society have been digitalized. For
example, traditional libraries and archives are positioned far to the left, whereas our banking and financial
systems has become increasingly digital and can be found further to the right. Relatively novel developments
in digitalization are the internet of things (IOT) (Ng and Wakenshaw, 2017) and robots. IOT makes ordinary
things such as speakers and refrigerators “smart” and digital by letting them communicate with other
devices, and creates sensor-based environments84 where physical actions of humans can be tracked using
cameras and other types of sensors. IOT represents an advanced step which digitalizes even more aspects of
the physical world. Robots on the other hand, represent a completely new step in which new smart, digital
“entities” are introduced in the physical world that interact in human-like or other ways. The  physical
presence of robots raises many new issues compared to digital databases.
The second dimension, algorithmization, concerns employing algorithms to utilize data for various purposes.
Note that algorithmization is partially dependent on digitalization: more data means more opportunities to
analyse it. However, algorithmization also has its own dynamics; advances in the algorithmic state-of-the-art
can create entirely novel technologies that in themselves may also cause more data to be produced. For
example face recognition is85 now widely used on social networks such as Facebook, which results in more
(meta-)data about photos and with that more detailed knowledge about social relations. Currently so-called
deep learning is an enabler for many novel applications such as image recognition and various prediction
tasks but possibly in the near future quantum computing will cause an even bigger revolution in terms of
algorithmic  capabilities. The Y-axis order can be qualified in terms of “how advanced” the algorithms
http://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/McKinsey/Industries/Advanced%20Electronics/Our%20Insights/How
%20artificial%20intelligence%20can%20deliver%20real%20value%20to%20companies/MGI-Artificial-
Intelligence-Discussion-paper.ashx
83 https://deepmind.com/blog/deepmind-and-blizzard-release-starcraft-ii-ai-research-environment/
84 See for example BLIIPS project which deals with a sensor-based, brick-and-mortar public library (van 
Otterlo, 2016b/2017; van Otterlo and Warnaar 2017) and also other instore tracking technologies such as the
Amazon Go supermarket where all purchases are detected using sensors and automatically deducted from 
one's credit card (see further https://www.amazon.com/b?node=16008589011).
85 https://www.theverge.com/2017/3/15/14937982/facezam-facial-recognition-facebook-photos-privacy

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 23
employed are. For example, a simple Excel-based computation of customer data characteristics will end up
lower on the Y-axis than a care robot running around in a hospital. However, a more precise ordering of
algorithms is to look at their autonomy, or level of agency. Compared to a simple Excel-sheet executed by a
human operator, the care robot or a fully automated trading algorithm has more agency: they gather data,
analyze it and, most importantly, act upon that data without much interference of human operators. 
(4.2) Digitalized Archives and Libraries
The influence of digitalization and algorithmization in the archival and library domain are potentially huge.
Equally so, our current digital age contains many “rival” information providing services on the internet.
“Can libraries actually deliver different vehicles for serendipitous discovery if everyone is getting from A to
B using a search engine?”86 But, as Zastrow notes (2013:17): “Although rarely discussed in the professional
literature  anymore,  easy  access  to  full-text  online  sources  has  created  a  kind  of  McLibrary”.  The
International Federation of Library Associations (IFLA) recently published a trend report on five major
transformations in society (that could affect libraries). Trend 1 is that “new technologies will both expand
and limit who has access to information”, Trend 3 that “the boundaries of privacy and data protection will
be  redefined” and  Trend  5  says  that  “the  global  information  economy  will  be  transformed  by  new
technologies”. Archives and libraries in the digital world face changes because of a changing role in the
landscape with new providers of (digital) information such as Google and Wikipedia, but also because their
collections are being digitalized and their core operations will be algorithmized. 
Much has been written about the “future of the library” or archive for that matter, for example by Licklider
(1965) and Lancaster (1982). Logan and McLuhan (2016) identify principled  laws of the medium which
describe how the medium, for example electricity or digital, has an impact on how aspects are changed,
gained or lost when that medium is changed. Other recent texts have argued for why libraries are still highly
relevant in our digital age (Herring, 2014; Palfrey, 2015) while others have defended the physical books87 In
general, libraries and archives (to some extent) have always struggled with their exact role, especially in the
transformation to our digital age, with the novel aspects of born-digital records and books, and with the loss
of being an information providing monopolist (see also Anderson 2011:212) now that Google and co have
appeared. Both Kallberg (2012) and Clement (2013) have investigated how the archival profession changes
in our digital age, and how archivists think about that transformation. Paulus (2011) shows that the lifecycle
of information of archives and libraries changes, and that, for example, a transformation is happening in
which libraries return to an ancient and medieval model of the library as a site of both production and
preservation. Cox (2007): “At last, archives have a real opportunity to abandon the role of gatekeeper and
invite user participation, interaction, and knowledge–sharing.”. He continues “ What would happen if we
could engage our users in defining and describing archival content and in communicating it to others? Is it
possible that the analog archives tradition can learn from the movement of social media and social design?
Some of the opportunities include diminishing the role of the archivist as gatekeeper, promoting participation
and collaboration among users, and enriching the archives itself by tapping into the specialized and diverse
knowledge of researchers”. Overall, digitalization (and algorithmization as a second step) has an impact on
the meaning, role in society, and functioning, of libraries and archives, and with that, the role of the librarian
and archivist, see for example the atlas for new librarianship (Lankes 2011).
The future of the library has many parallels with the development of information technology such as the
internet. Terms such as “web 2.0” or “web 3.0” can be mapped to developments in libraries, and archives.
Both Noh (2015) and Kwanya et al. (2012) describe several stages leading up to “library 4.0”, which is
where “technology will become one with users' lives” (Noh 2015). Currently we are in the “3.0.” phase in
line with “web 3.0.” where data and analysis is performed through AI, and where all knowledge becomes
connected by the semantic web. Before, stage “2.0.” was defined by the “social web” (for humans, whereas
the semantic web is for machines) and stage “1.0” for desktop PCs and the World Wide Web (WWW). The
main conditions for constructing the “web 4.0.”, and with that libraries and archives in that stage, are
ubiquity  (digital and offline become blurred),  identity (protocols know who  you  are) and  connection
86 The International Federation of Library Associations (IFLA) published a trend report in 2013, with an 
update in 2016, on on several big developments, see https://trends.ifla.org/
87 See for example the interesting debate between Umberto Eco and Jean-Claude Carriere in “N'esperez 
pas vous debarrasser de livres” (“This is not the end of the book”) from 2009.

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 24
(everything is continuously connected). Noh (2015): “However, library 4.0. must not only include software-
based approaches, but also other technology such as makerspaces, Google Glass, context-aware technology,
digitalization of contents, big data, cloud computing and augmented reality.”
Other developments can be found in the core operations: 1) selecting (and discarding) which items belong in
the archive, 2) ordering and physically arranging the records in a physical layout, and 3) describing and
documenting which records exist and where they are. Recently,  scholars have looked at how digital
technologies (both data and algorithms) can have an impact on these core operations and beyond. Both
Fernandez (2016) and van Otterlo (2016b, 2017) describe how AI can be employed to do, for example, book
recommendations based on access to items and user data: (Fernandez, 2016:21): “So, when Amazon's AI
makes a recommendation that you might like a particular author based on the last book you purchased, it is
drawn not only knowledge about you, but also from information minder from the millions of other users.” AI
can be used for many things, ranging from retrieval of sources to personal assistants implementing virtual
reference desks, and to optimizing various library and archival processes. In principle, all of the core archival
processes can be automated but currently digitalization has only gotten so far, and algorithmization still has
to start really. And again, since archives are more idiosyncratic (than libraries) in terms of how they select,
order and catalogue, chances are that it will take longer before algorithmization takes over here. Zastrow
(2013:18):  “The idiosyncratic and contextualized world of archives necessitates communication with the
archivist.  Because  archival  collections  are  not  composed  of  discrete,  individually  cataloged  items,
disintermediation does a disservice to our scholars.”
When it comes to digitalization, libraries and archives are in transformation.  Collections are constantly
being digitalized to provide more wider public access to information, for example through the American
project Digital Public Library of America (DPLA88) and the European counterpart Europeana89. These digital
initiatives unlock massive amounts of archival data such as books, photographs and various documents.
Initiatives such as the Google Books project are similar in terms of technology, but have different goals.
Google Books90 has a long history of battles91,92,93 between a tech giant wanting to unlock all books written
by mankind, for everyone, and author organizations that think that Google does not have the right to do that
in this way. The ethical issues of access here are severe, since Google may want to push the idea being a
universal librarian but many think this role should not be pursued by a commercial entity whose business
model is based on advertisements, algorithmic rankings, and competition between information sources.
Instead, many argue, such projects should be governed by a public institution, which is one of the reasons
projects such as Europeana and DPLA were founded. In general, making collections and catalogues digital is
something that is happening for decades already, long before the big data age. Also, public libraries have
been logging user transactions for a long time and have created large databases that can be used for
collection analysis and optimization, but also increasingly so for targeted marketing 94 purposes and more (see
Allison 2013). Novel developments in the Netherlands are initiatives like a national collection plan95 and the
ongoing  construction  of  a  nationwide database  (NBC+96)  of  all  transactions,  user  records  and  book
88 http://dp.la
89 http://www.europeana.eu
90 http://books.google.com
91 https://www.wired.com/2017/04/how-google-book-search-got-lost/
92 https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2017/04/the-tragedy-of-google-books/523320/
93  See https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2015/10/fair-use-transformative-leval-google-
books/411058/ and https://www.wired.com/2017/04/how-google-book-search-got-lost/
94 See the (Dutch) report on customer groups and profiles, and how to approach different groups in the 
customer base of public libraries 
(http://www.debibliotheken.nl/fileadmin/documenten/vereniging/2008_de-klant-is-
koningin_handboek_openbare_bibliotheken.pdf). Nowadays, public libraries themselves are utilizing their
data assets to improve various library services.
95 See the (Dutch) report "Gezamenlijk collectieplan Beleidskader collectiebeleid voor het netwerk van 
openbare bibliotheekvoorzieningen" (December 2016) on the formation of a nation-wide collection for 
public libraries. (https://www.kb.nl/sites/default/files/docs/191216_gez._collectieplan_definitief.pdf)
96 See the NBC+ (National public library catalogue) which contains the full collection of all Dutch public 
libraries, and in augmented with a data warehouse storing transaction and patron records for a large 
percentage of libraries. This creates one big database with core information about the public library in the

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 25
information in public libraries. So far, only public access to the collection information has been arranged.
However, the full database will eventually be useful for algorithmic innovations such as  recommender
systems computing personalized book suggestions for individual patrons. 
A novel way of digitalization is to digitalize interactions that were purely physical until very recently. Cox
(2007) makes the case for “machines in the archive”, such as photocopiers97 and (personal) cameras with
which users can digitalize materials themselves. The BLIIPS98 project (van Otterlo 2016b) represents an
effort to make the public library more intelligent through AI. One of the goals is to use sensors to digitalize
physical actions such as moving around through the building and interacting with the physical collection
(e.g. scanning a book cover to look up information in the catalog). The approach makes use of users'
smartphones, and makes some library services such as looking up a book context-aware: based on the current
location of the user, the smartphone can provide real-time navigation, similar to Google Maps, but now
indoors (van Otterlo and Warnaar 2017). The overall goal is to make the physical library behave like Google:
you type in a search query and the system will lead you to the book. BLIIPS is based on a combination of
ideas coming from digitalization, AI, retail strategies (e.g. customer journeys) and experimentation based on
data science, and is aimed at creating a physical library laboratory in which algorithms can optimize library
services based on data. Several similar approaches target the interplay between physical and digital worlds in
libraries, such as in the fused library (Buchanan 2010), blurred boundaries (Walsh 2011) and location-based
recommendations (Hahn, 2011). Other efforts in libraries have been focused mainly on  conversational
agents which can act as guide or tutor to assist users in query formulation, or as a general avatar representing
desk personnel (Liu 2011; Talley 2016).
Digitalization will go hand in hand with centralization (gathering more data sources and combining them)
and opening up on the internet (providing access for many people). Ethical challenges already start here,
since deciding whether to digitalize anything in the first place (and discarding a possibly unique original)
amounts to an ethically loaden decision. The Google Books project exemplified the ethical problems with
privacy and copyright when digitalizing and unlocking and also projects like BLIIPS show that very easily
ethical challenges related to monitoring, surveillance (Hellman, 2015) and experimentation pop up when
digitalizing people's private, physical interactions. In the next section I will address general ethical issues
when algorithms come into play.
(5) The Ethics of Algorithms
In this section I turn to the ethical implications of algorithmization. This can include old ethical dilemmas in
a new, digital world, or new ones raised by algorithms. This section features two different types of
taxonomies to identify ethical issues with algorithms.
(5.1) Algorithms are Biased Codes
As I discussed previously, algorithmization takes over many tasks in society that were once physical. This
creates opportunities for  technological innovation, ranging from simple database operations to robotic
surgery.  People  often  associate  with  algorithms  properties  such  as  infallible,  trustworthy,  exact,  and
especially:  objective. Because computer-based algorithms are based on  mathematics (logic and statistics)
people tend to think that because of that algorithms are objective and fair, since they can compute the best
answers given the data. While some of this may be true, in general algorithms are far from objective: they
are heavily biased (Bozdag 2013; van Otterlo, 2013) Consider for example (part of) a simple algorithm for a
bank, specifying that “IF sex = female AND age > 60 THEN decision = no-life-insurance-policy”. Now this
algorithm is perfectly mathematical, and exact, and it thoroughly computes from personal data whether
somebody is eligible for a life insurance policy. However, from a human point of view, it is far from
“objective”, or “fair” since it discriminates against women above 60 years old. Its decisions are biased and it
discriminates, in plain sight. To make things worse, we can also imagine a second algorithm which is
specified as “IF f(sex) * g(age) > 3.78 THEN decision = no-life-insurance-policy”, and let us assume it
makes exactly the same decisions as the first. A problem here is that this algorithm discriminates too, but it is
Netherlands (https://www.kb.nl/ob/digitale-infrastructuur/nationale-bibliotheekcatalogus-nbc).
97 This also connects back to Eco's “restrictions” described earlier on being able to photocopy in a hostile 
library, but also to the ethical challenges concerning fairness when photocopying costs money.
98 http://martijnvanotterlo.nl/bliips.html

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 26
hard to see from its description because we do not know what the functions f() and g() do, and also not why
there is a threshold of exactly 3.78. Maybe these aspects have been learned from data which would require
us to have a look at the data and learning process to form an opinion about the algorithm's objectiveness. 
To analyze bias, one can take formal notions and look at how bias can be computed99 from an algorithm, or
how it affects adaptive processes such as ML (and the bias-variance trade-off, see Flach 2012, van Otterlo
2013),  or  how  bias  affects  many parts  of  information  providing  services  (Bozdag  2013).  A simpler
illustration of the role of bias, and how it relates to choices or  intentions of the creators, was given by
Birkbak  and  Carlsen  (2016a).  They  take  as  a  starting  point  the  main  intentions  of  algorithms  as
communicated by Google (“organize the world's information and make it universally accessible and
useful”), Facebook (“to give people the power to share and make the world more open and connected”) and
Twitter (“create a global conversation”). They operationalize these by constructing algorithms that use these
intentions on a retrieval task: to rank a small set of scientific documents. First, Google's operationalization of
the ranking algorithm prioritizes the amount of citations, because this mimics Google's PageRank algorithm
that considers items more popular if more sources refer to it. The Facebook version prioritizes citations from
co-authors, since its algorithm makes likes (citations) from friends (co-authors) more important. Finally, the
Twitter version prioritizes citations (retweets) from non-friends (non co-authors). They then show how such
built-in (ethical) values (bias) create  different rankings of the same  documents.  Birkbak and Carlsen
(2016a:32): “This was achieved by paying attention not only to how the algorithms work, but also how these
calculative devices justify themselves as part of their framing the problem that they claim to be solving.” The
key point of the research is that intentions induce choices, and choices get implemented as bias in code, and
that this bias has profound consequences for how the same kind of (ranking) algorithm behaves. In general,
algorithms are biased in many ways Bozdag (2013), for example by the data, by learning procedures, by
programmers who make choices, by technological constraints and many other reasons. This immediately
requires us to form an opinion about algorithms and whether they do the right thing, which again brings us
back to ethical reasoning and consequences.
Ethical concerns about algorithms are a relatively new phenomenon and field of study. In the general media
considerable attention is given to the topic in recent years. Open expressions of concerns by scientists such
as Stephen Hawking and entrepreneurs such as Elon Musk and Bill Gates warn100 for the unforeseen
consequences of widespread use of AI. A letter101 of concern with  “research priorities for robust and
beneficial AI”  was quickly signed by more than 8000 researchers and practitioners. Individual top AI
researchers speak out, such as Tom Dietterich102. Big tech companies such as Google, Amazon, IBM and
Microsoft announced that they are forming an alliance103 which  “aims to set societal and ethical best
practice for AI research”. Various academic initiatives arise around the broad topic of “societal implications
of algorithms”, such as the newly founded ethics center104 at Carnegie Mellon University (CMU). Numerous
recent scientific papers warn for the many old and new ethical dilemmas that will arise when artificially
intelligent algorithms are being employed throughout society (Mittelstadt et al. 2016). 
In previous work (van Otterlo 2014a) I drew105 on Walden Two, the fiction novel by the psychologist B.F.
Skinner, to address the dangers of a behaviorally conditioned society that arises because of technological
capabilities of algorithmization. A related warning came from Zuboff (2015) who defines the “Big Other” as
a metaphor to point to the combined logic of capitalism, surveillance and digital technologies such as AI.
Morozov106 sees similar patterns of information capitalism undermining our human democracy. Shanahan
99 https://arxiv.org/pdf/1702.05437.pdf
100http://observer.com/2015/08/stephen-hawking-elon-musk-and-bill-gates-warn-about-artificial-intelligence/
101https://futureoflife.org/ai-open-letter/
102https://academic.oup.com/nsr/article/doi/10.1093/nsr/nwx045/3789514/Machine-learning-challenges-and-
impact-an
103https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/28/google-facebook-amazon-ibm-microsoft-
partnership-on-ai-tech-firms
104https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/02/technology/new-research-center-to-explore-ethics-of-artificial-
intelligence.html?mcubz=1
105See (in Dutch) this article for more “surveillance metaphors”: https://decorrespondent.nl/1237/zo-kunnen-
we-beter-over-surveillance-praten/41215603-67a22001
106 (In German) http://www.sueddeutsche.de/digital/alphabet-google-wird-allmaechtig-die-politik-schaut-

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 27
(2015) tells a parable107 of several AI systems working together and against each other in the society of the
future108, and makes clear that  multiple superintelligent systems will make ethical challenges even more
serious. These examples go beyond relatively simpler issues such as privacy and data protection, and see the
potential influence of algorithms on society as a whole, with profound implications for democracy and free
will. Many examples show that algorithms are not infallible, objective or trustworthy. For example, Google's
search algorithm tagged109 (photos of) black people as “gorillas”, showing either a bias in data or learning
procedures, or errors in the application of the tagging algorithm. Autonomously driving cars constantly make
mistakes110 or are not yet fully capable of driving in our complex, physical world. Even IBM's Watson
algorithm, that won the typical “human” game Jeopardy, makes mistakes111 too. Another related case is when
algorithms are deliberately used for the wrong purposes. A good example is the fraud with testing software
for cars running diesel fuel in recent years, the so-called Dieselgate112. Other examples where simple
algorithms have large consequences are the mentioned Pokemon game, and the problems of tourists flooding
big cities throughout the world because of the (algorithmic) services like AirBnB113 and Uber114.
With new, digital technologies, legal developments are often too slow to capture a shift in moral values and
novel possibilities, and creepy things arise (Tene and Polonetsky (2014): “In certain cases, creepy behavior
pushes against traditional social norms; in others it exposes a rift between the norms of engineers and
marketing professionals and those of the public at large; and in yet others, social norms have yet to evolve to
mediate a novel situation.” An example is the “girls-around-me”115 app which uses FourSquare data to find,
literally, the girls that are known to have checked in in your immediate surroundings. Nothing illegal is being
done, although certainly the limits of decency and privacy are reached. Equally creepy are modern toys with
sensor technology. The Cayla116 doll caused some debate since it can communicate with children, send their
data (voice, things said, possibly video capture) to the manufacturers' servers, and in addition, it can say
anything to a child through a microphone. Apart from possible hacks, “connected” dolls are creepy because
they invade the privacy of intimate family life, without doing anything illegal. Similar things can be said
about smart-TVs and cell-phones that are connected too and equipped with many sensors. 
(5.2) A Taxonomy for the Ethics of Algorithms
As said, algorithms are not objective. Inside the code of an algorithmic system many decisions have been
made which influence how the algorithm works, how it uses data, how it selects data, how it computes
decisions, and how decisions affect the real world and real people. This also entails that ethical values are
built into these algorithms, knowingly or unknowingly. A large literature is being formed around the ethics of
algorithms in recent years (see for pointers: Lichocki et al. 2011, van Otterlo 2013,2014a,2014b,2016a,
Medina 2015, Mittelstadt et al. 2016). The previous sections show that a huge diversity of examples of
algorithmization exists, and also that there are many types of algorithms, ranging from simple sorting
algorithms to the control structures of a superintelligent robot. Algorithms can be used for various operations
on data, such as classification or prediction. Determining the actual (and potential) impact of such operations
is difficult, for example because algorithms often operate in a larger context and because algorithms may
hilflos-zu-1.3579711
107This story has many relations with a the current TV series “Person of Interest” 
http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1839578/
108Predictions about the future (of technology) are notoriously hard. An interesting case are the predictions 
of the science fiction writer Asimov about our time, which are remarkably accurate, see:  
http://www.bbc.com/news/technology-27069716 and http://www.wired.co.uk/article/asimov-2014-
technology-predictions
109https://www.theverge.com/2015/7/1/8880363/google-apologizes-photos-app-tags-two-black-people-
gorillas
110https://phys.org/news/2016-09-dutch-police-probe-fatal-tesla.html
111 http://blog.chron.com/techblog/2011/02/jeopardy-watsons-more-interesting-when-it-fails/
112https://www.cleanenergywire.org/factsheets/dieselgate-timeline-germanys-car-emissions-fraud-scandal
113http://www.politico.eu/article/amsterdam-tourism-airbnb-crime-netherlands/
114https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/oct/06/the-airbnb-effect-amsterdam-fairbnb-property-prices-
communities
115https://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/03/30/girls-around-me-ios-app-takes-creepy-to-a-new-level/?
mcubz=1
116https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/17/technology/cayla-talking-doll-hackers.html?mcubz=1

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 28
also adapt their functioning over a longer period. To better predict what are the possible implications of a
particular type of algorithm, we need to look at the core dimensions of how they operate on data, in a non-
technical way. In the following I will discuss two possible taxonomies that are useful for studying the impact,
or ethics, of algorithms. The first is based on the map presented by Mittelstadt et al. (2016) which contains
concerns about how algorithms transform data into decisions, which are then coupled with typical ethical
issues. The second, discussed afterwards, is based on algorithm capabilities, and is complementary to the
first and comes from a course I developed on this topic.
One useful way to order the ethical implications of algorithms is to look at how algorithms operate
(Mittelstadt et al. 2016). In the figure I summarize the taxonomy; the blue area denotes the core operations of
an algorithm: 1) it turns data into evidence which can be a probabilistic prediction, a yes-no decision, or
some other conclusion, and 2) it uses the evidence to trigger and motivate an action based on the data. For
example, an algorithm for bank loans could take personal data of someone and produce a credit-score of 12,
which then could trigger an action to approve a particular mortgage. Because this action is taken in a large
decision making context (e.g. bank regulations, a human operator, possible other decisions that are related,
etc.) 3) the  apportionment of responsibility (i.e. who is responsible for the overall  algorithmic decision
making) can be quite complicated. These three items form the basis of three types of  concerns about
algorithmic decision making: Epistemic concerns are about the transformation of data into evidence, and
unfold in three forms. First, evidence may be inconclusive meaning that it may be probable, but inevitably
uncertain. For example, when an algorithm predicts that I am a terrorist with 43.4 percent probability, how
“exact” is that? Second, evidence may be inscrutable which means that the relation with the underlying data
is not accessible for inspection, or incomprehensible. A good example are no-fly lists for suspected terrorists.
Third, evidence can be misguided because the underlying data is incomplete or unreliable. Another type of
concern is normative and is about (the consequences of) actions. One is that outcomes can be unfair, for
example that they are discriminatory. Another normative concern is that algorithms can have transformative
effects, which go beyond the issues when turning data into evidence, and are about how their operations
fundamentally change how we perceive and understand the world. An example is profiling, which can
reontologize the world and which can cause many changes in, for example, shopping and web use. A last
concern is traceability, which is about the fact it can be hard to find out exactly how and why harm was
done by an algorithmic decision. As a consequence, attributing responsibility is hard too. 
These six concerns lead to a map of seven types of typical patterns of how algorithms cause new ethical
challenges. First, inconclusive evidence may lead to unjustified actions, for example when someone is
targeted as a terrorist on the basis of uncertain predictions. This can also be due to the use of (statistical)
information of populations, applied to a particular individual. Second, inscrutable evidence may lead to
opacity, meaning that actions based on such information cannot be contested, which also points to a power
imbalance between the affected and the owner of the algorithm. Overall, comprehensibility of algorithmic

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 29
decision making is often hard to ensure not only because details are often secret, but also because it is
difficult to convey the full meaning of complex, statistical models in human-understandable form. A typical
term for this incomprehensibility is saying that algorithms are black boxes. Third, misguided evidence may
lead to bias. For example, if data is not representative then statistical algorithms will inevitably have a bias
towards those that  are  represented in the data. Fourth,  unfair outcomes may lead to discrimination. For
example,  when  an  algorithm pays  attention  to  particular  attributes of  people  in  a  database,  it  may
discriminate  indirectly,  very  similar  to  redlining117.  Similarly,  personalization algorithms  segment
populations such that only some groups get particular opportunities or information. Fifth,  transformative
effects may lead to challenges for autonomy. Personalization and filtering algorithms, and the resulting
“filter bubbles” (Pariser 2011), may cause (e.g. for advertising revenue) that it is profitable to only show
particular websites in the search results of particular individuals. This may withhold vital information that
individuals  need  for  decisions,  and  therefore  has  an  impact  of  the  individual's  autonomy. Sixth,
transformative effects may also lead to challenges for informational privacy. This is probably the most
well-known ethical challenge and deals with many cases where users are not in control anymore of data
about themselves. Last, traceability may lead to moral responsibility, which refers to the challenge of
attributing responsibility when it is difficult to pinpoint the exact decision in the black boxes that algorithms
are. In addition, moral responsibility may also refer to the ability to, simply said, blame the algorithm itself,
which also requires attributing moral values to the algorithm and a capability to act upon them.
(5.3) The Ethics of Agency in Algorithms
A second taxonomy that I use is based the level of agency, or autonomy, we can attribute to an algorithm. In
this taxonomy we simply look at  what the algorithm can do, often in
human-understandable form. This results in broad classes, see the figure, of
algorithms that are partially ordered by “how complex” their operations are
in human terms. Agency can be defined as the capacity, condition, or state
of acting or of exerting power. The combination of the two taxonomies is
useful to identify potential ethical challenges in the archival practice.
(5.3.1) Algorithms that Infer
The first type consists of algorithms that reason, infer and search. These
algorithms can be quite complex in what they do, but they all compute
answers based on data  as it is. The more complex they are, the more
information they can extract from that data. Typical examples are database query algorithms, search engines
on the web, and various algorithms for the interpretation of sound, text and images. The capabilities of
algorithms to extract information from large amounts of data is vastly expanding every day, but is not new,
and so is not the general threat to  privacy. Long before the infamous "don't be evil"-slogan by Google,
Warner and Stone (1970:146) already warned us to "not be naive about it":  "Anyone who has entered into a
hire-purchase transaction, or any form of credit purchase, should nowadays expect both the personal data
he supplied in his application, and the information about his reliability in making the repayments, to be
widely available." Furthermore, Warner and Stone (1970:137): "At present we achieve some privacy because
Big Brother has trouble scanning all his files at once. But, to the distress of the National Council for Civil
Liberties and some computer engineers, there is a risk that computers may now make the bureaucrat's dream
a reality and supply a complete dossier at the flick of a switch. There are such obvious medical advantages
in this that it is likely to come about unless the public shows unusual vigilance."  Warner and Stone
(1970:148) also note that "Threats to privacy which are not commonly known or recognized as such thus
already exist.... When all the records are computerized, and that proverbial 'press of a button' will release
them, who can doubt that there will be greater and ever greater leakage and abuse?" An additional problem
is that privacy is often not well understood, and people often display differences between  intentions (or,
values) and  behavior.  Acquisti  et  al.  (2015)  performed  many  experiments  with  people  in  physical
environments to test how much information people would share. It turns out that people show ambiguous
privacy behavior because of the uncertainty in many situations, because of context switches (e.g. when
mixing offline and online social situations), and because of outside manipulations (by companies and
governments that are making profit with highly sophisticated tricks to lure people into giving up their
privacy, using nudges, incentives or misleading information). Quoting the authors (p514): “Insights from the
117https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Redlining

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 30
social and behavioral empirical research on privacy reviewed here suggest that policy approaches that rely
exclusively on informing or “empowering” the individual are unlikely to provide adequate protection
against  the  risks  posed  by  recent  information  technologies.  Consider  transparency  and  control,  two
principles conceived as necessary conditions for privacy protection. The research we highlighted shows that
they may provide insufficient protections and even backfire when used apart from other principles of privacy
protection.” 
Algorithms nowadays, as opposed to the database era Warner and Stone talk about, do not only employ pre-
defined database-items, but can interpret increasingly more formats that were once only possible for humans
to understand, such as  images,  sounds, and  text. For example, Google translate118 now handles many
languages quickly and efficiently and Google's algorithms can even deliver some “amazingly mournful”
poetry119. More semantic understanding of text, for example spatial120 expressions like “the book is on the
table next to the plant” are being understood by algorithms. Generally, algorithms also become more
sophisticated by incorporating knowledge about the world (e.g. by reading Wikipedia pages automatically) or
by employing how-to knowledge121, all typically in the area of the semantic web122. Lately, in the wake of
deep  learning,  lots  of  progress  has  been  made  in  interpreting  visual information.  For  example  in
recognizing123 what is on a picture in terms of objects and their relations, but also in evaluating the
aesthetics124 of a picture. The familiar Capcha puzzles125 on the web highlight the importance of human
visual recognition skills, but computers are quickly catching up. Also the generation of visual information,
such as 3D models of faces126 from pictures, and full augmented reality in which IKEA127 furniture can be
placed virtually in your own living room, real-time, are state-of-the-art examples. Google even helps its self-
driving cars to recognize kids in Halloween128 costumes as pedestrians as a visual skill. These recognition
skills are entering the public space, such as cameras in billboards129, recognizing types of people for
marketing purposes. In terms of sound, algorithms are already better than humans in certain tasks such as
speech recognition130 and lip reading131 and, for example, Skype conversations can now be translated on-the-
fly132. General data science examples are abundant: for example Facebook can employ their data to infer133
when people get into love relations. Still, algorithms have a long way to go to master all human-like skills of
interpretation. For example,  deep understanding of texts is still difficult, since it relies on commonsense
reasoning and relevance, a concept that is not yet understood fully. Take the question “Could a crocodile run
a steeplechase?”. The answer should be that it is impossible with short legs, but this requires quite a bit of
reasoning over relevant knowledge. Also so-called Winograd134 schemes are easy for humans, but not for
algorithms. Let us take the sentence “The city councilmen refused the demonstrators a permit because they
[feared/advocated] violence”. Depending on the verb chosen, the “they” refers to a different group, but such
inferences are hard for (statistical) algorithms still. On the other hand, two decades ago McCartney and
Anderson (1996) managed to formalize the logic of Roadrunner cartoons, which shows that in the end
118 https://translate.google.com/?hl=nl
119 http://www.wired.co.uk/article/google-artificial-intelligence-poetry
120 https://www.wordseye.com/
121 http://www.wikihow.com/Main-Page
122 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semantic_Web
123 https://www.theverge.com/2017/6/15/15807096/google-mobile-ai-mobilenets-neural-networks
124 https://petapixel.com/2016/10/08/keegan-online-photo-coach-critiques-photos/
125 https://www.google.com/recaptcha/intro/android.html
http://www.captcha.net/
126 https://petapixel.com/2017/09/20/ai-tool-creates-3d-portrait-single-photo/
127 IKEA augmented reality https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UudV1VdFtuQ
128 http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-3301013/Google-teaches-self-driving-cars-drive-slowly-
children-dressed-up.html
129 https://www.iamexpat.nl/lifestyle/lifestyle-news/hidden-cameras-dutch-advertisement-billboards-ns-train-
stations-can-see-you
130 https://www.technologyreview.com/s/544651/baidus-deep-learning-system-rivals-people-at-speech-
recognition/
131 https://www.technologyreview.com/s/602949/ai-has-beaten-humans-at-lip-reading/
132 https://futurism.com/skype-can-now-translate-your-voice-calls-into-10-different-languages-in-real-time/
133 https://www.facebook.com/notes/facebook-data-science/the-formation-of-love/10152064609253859/
134 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Winograd_Schema_Challenge

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 31
nothing will be impossible. The ethics of interpretation algorithms carries all  epistemic  and normative
concerns about data, evidence and actions. However, now that even images and text can be understood, and
linked with other data (for example faces with text and recent Twitter behavior), the reach of algorithms, and
with that the impact of such algorithms especially on privacy, has become much more severe. 
A second type of inference algorithm is search. Algorithms such as Google's PageRank and Hummingbird135
lookup billions of queries each day. And with the sketched advances in semantics and understanding texts
and images, Google uses knowledge from many sources including Google Books136 to aid its search
algorithm. In fact, Google builds its own knowledge graph to make understand the queries its get better in
terms of semantics (Vanderbilt 2013; Metz 2016). For example, the word “Ajax” can mean a soccer club, a
programming language, or a Greek god. According to the motto  “things not strings”, the context of use
(information about the user, about previous searches, about difference in interest in the terms) can determine
which one Google thinks is best, and which determines the specific search results. A simultaneous trend is
that search engines more and more try to give answers instead of just links to webpages. One can now ask
Google “how high is the Eiffel tower” and it will directly give the correct answer. Search engines also use
increasing amounts of knowledge about the world and the user in the ranking of search results, but similar
algorithms are used for Instagram feeds, or Facebook news feeds (Edgerank, see Birkbak and Carlsen
2016b). However, many users are not aware of the amount of bias in a search engine algorithm ranking their
results (Bozdag, 2013). The automated calculation of this relevance ranking is on the one hand necessary for
users in a world overloaded with information, and on the other hand always in danger of flattening the world
to a point where the user is unable to be affected by it. Filtering information can also quickly become a
(transformative) threat to autonomy because the search engine determines which information a user gets to
see, and which not (van Otterlo 2016a). Also modern forms of fake news and censorship discussed in the
introduction fall under this problem. And similar to how the search algorithm can be heavily biased, so can
be the indexing process, which happens constantly when webcrawlers explore the internet to find material on
webpages. The choice for when and where to do this indexing also defines what can be found (or is never to
be found137) by typing in a search query, something which triggers all of the epistemic concerns about the
underlying data. Much research has been devoted to this enormous power search engines have when it comes
to information daily intake by people (Granka 2010, van Otterlo 2016a, Anthes 2016). Search engines are
key gatekeepers in our society and influence the minds of billions of people everyday, usually without much
oversight or democratic control, which has profound implications for  autonomy  again. They have been
shown to be capable of influencing elections because of this (Anthes 2016, and see the  search engine
manipulation effect (SME)138), which is a serious ethical problem. The fact that these algorithms in addition,
want to answer questions is even more ethically challenging. For example, it is nice to directly give the result
of "35 pounds in euros" or "opening hours of Albert Heijn in Nijmegen", but I would not like a search engine
to (try) to answer questions like "is it ok for Israel to close down the Palestinian areas?" or "is there a
God?". Going in this direction can be called, in analogy with big data, big knowledge (van Otterlo 2016a).
Next to search engines, other platforms are influential in similar gatekeeping ways; for example Facebook is
the primary news source139 for many people. Finally, because all information  empires  such as Facebook,
Google and Twitter are commercial entities may mean that information about the data, or the specifics of
algorithms, are company secrets. This, in turn, raises issues with opacity and inscrutable evidence, misguided
evidence (and biased search results), but also with transparency and traceability of the overall algorithm. 
Answering queries is an important issue outside the search engine community too. So-called conversational
agents are algorithms designed to communicate with humans, in human-understandable form through text
and speech. One form are the social bots (Ferrara et al. 2016) found on the internet, on social networks and
in internet forums. Social bots can influence discussion on forums, they can act as genuine users on a
135 http://searchengineland.com/library/google/hummingbird-google
136 https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/28/google-swallows-11000-novels-to-improve-ais-
conversation
137 https://www.theguardian.com/technology/right-to-be-forgotten
138 https://algorithmwatch.org/en/watching-the-watchers-epstein-and-robertsons-search-engine-
manipulation-effect/
139 https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/15/facebooks-news-publishers-reuters-institute-for-the-
study-of-journalism

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 32
platform such as Twitter (e.g. following other people, and reacting to posts) and so on. An ethical issue is that
bots could be used for malicious purposes, such as steering a debate towards a particular outcome, or
providing false support for election candidates. This raises threats for autonomy again as a transformative
effect. Finding out which users are actual social bots is easier when a bot is clearly misbehaving such as
Microsoft's Tay140, but is generally a tricky141 problem since it amounts to classifying it solely from its
language use and electronic behavior, which will become more and more human-like since algorithms'
capabilities are growing. A second type of conversational agent are the voice-controlled assistants142 such as
Home, Cortana, Siri, Alexa and several others. Such assistants can perform tasks like keeping keeping and
creating shopping list, and answering questions. The main difference with search engines is that assistants
will always answer the question because giving a list of links instead is impossible through speech, thereby
aggravating the ethical problems concerning autonomy of the user. In addition, more information of the user
is used (e.g. speech) which raises privacy issues again. Assistants like these are rapidly spreading through
society, especially in China143, and have already appeared144 in legal145 situations (as a “witness”).
(5.3.2) Algorithms that Learn
The second class of algorithms goes beyond the first and can learn, and find generalized patterns in the
data. These  inductive algorithms perform statistical inference to derive patterns, models, rules, profiles,
clusters and other aggregated knowledge fragments that allow for statistical predictions of properties that
may not be explicitly in the data. Examples include algorithms that learn to classify images, and profiling
algorithms. Overall, these are typically adaptive versions of the inference algorithms we have discussed, i.e.
search engines typically adapt over time, and algorithms that interpret text, images and sound are often
trained on such data. Applications range from predicting sounds for video146, to training self-driving cars
using video game data147, even to predicting social security numbers148.
Once algorithms start to learn (see Flach, 2012; Domingos 2012, 2015; Jones 2014; Jordan and Mitchell
2015) from data, many epistemic concerns come into play since the interplay with the data determines the
algorithm's actions. Especially inconclusive evidence plays an important role since adaptive models are
typically statistical models with uncertain outcomes. The bias comes in the form of a choice for a model
class for which typically parameters are learned from data (van Otterlo 2013). In addition, bias is emergent
(Bozdag 2013), in the sense that it is caused by the data and can change over time when the data distribution
changes. Most powerful contemporary learning algorithms, such as deep learning149,150, are purely statistical
algorithms and very much like black boxes, which entails they are intransparent and the evidence they
produce inscrutable (with some exceptions151). Other types of models are more  declarative and more
amenable to understanding and explaining decisions.
A typical area for ML is profiling and personalization, in which algorithms learn from user data how to adapt
services,  search  results  or  recommendations  to  individual's  tastes  (van  Otterlo  2013).  De  Hert  and
Lammerant (2016:146): “In general, a profile is a set of characteristics, features and attributes with which a
person or a group can be discerned from another person or group.” Facebook's news feeds but also Netflix's
recommendations are driven by such algorithms, determining the user's choices and therefore affecting his
autonomy of choice. An alternative is to let the user create his own profile by stating his preferences
explicitly. If profiles are learned from data, algorithms typically learn statistical models from many users and
140 https://www.theverge.com/2016/3/24/11297050/tay-microsoft-chatbot-racist
141 As a matter of fact, it becomes similar to a Turing test (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turing_test)
142 http://www.businessinsider.com/siri-vs-google-assistant-cortana-alexa-2016-11?
international=true&r=US&IR=T
143 https://www.technologyreview.com/s/608841/why-500-million-people-in-china-are-talking-to-this-ai/
144 See also the hilarious Southpark episode on these assistants: http://www.ibtimes.com/south-park-
season-premiere-sets-amazon-echo-google-home-speakers-2590169
145 https://www.wired.com/2017/02/murder-case-tests-alexas-devotion-privacy/
146 https://www.engadget.com/2016/06/13/machines-can-generate-sound-effects-that-fool-humans/
147 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JGAIfWG2MQQ
148 https://www.wired.com/2009/07/predictingssn/
149 https://www.wired.com/2017/04/googles-dueling-neural-networks-spar-get-smarter-no-humans-required/
150 https://machinelearningmastery.com/inspirational-applications-deep-learning/
151 http://www.sciencemag.org/news/2017/07/how-ai-detectives-are-cracking-open-black-box-deep-learning

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 33
apply them to a single user. This may render inconclusive evidence which may be right on average but not
for that single individual. Personalization algorithms do social grouping which create opaque contexts in
which a person is stereotyped by how the algorithm sees that person, without sharing that knowledge. This
induces many concerns related to privacy and discrimination, but also on autonomy. And although profiling
algorithms are typically not concerned with exact identities (but: categories) it is a myth that anonymity is
guaranteed when enough about a person is known, as has the famous AOL152 case shown. A new privacy risk
of profiling algorithms is that they can also reveal  new knowledge (van Otterlo 2013). For example,
algorithms can predict whether a person is gay or muslim from his Facebook like's (Kosinski et al. 2013) or
whether a person is extravert based on language use (Schwartz et al. 2013). Computers can often predict
personality traits better than colleagues, friends and family (Youyou et al. 2015) and eventually such traits
may just be interpreted from a photo153. Such algorithms obviously have effects on privacy, but certainly also
transformative effects related to autonomy. Moreover, all these data-related aspects raise issues on whether
the data is  representative, about which data was used for learning and how possible outcomes of the
algorithm can be evaluated. Traceability in adaptive algorithms is an even more challenging problem.
In general, adaptive algorithms move society into a direction which can be characterized as  “the end of
code” (Tanz 2016). In the near future, increasingly many algorithmic decision making tasks will be learned
from data,  instead  of  hardcoded  by programmers.  Algorithmic  models  will  be  only  partially  set  up
(programmed) after which learning procedures fill in all the details. This has consequences for people, who
will more often be assigned the role of supervisor, parent, or trainer, instead of designer or programmer. This
has ethical consequences on a global scale, far more reaching than is contained in the 6 individual ethical
concerns, since it will change how people work and how society functions. Technically, many interesting
problems need to be solved too in order for human-algorithm teaching becomes feasible on a large scale154.
(5.3.3.) Algorithms that Optimize
The third class of algorithms consists of algorithms that optimize, incorporate feedback, and experiment.
These typically employ  reward functions  that represent what are  good outcomes,  which can be, for
example, a sale in a webshop, or obtaining a new member on a social network. Reward functions tell an
algorithm what is important to focus on. In general, algorithms do not deal with exact rewards, but rather
compute expected rewards since there is a lot of uncertainty in any optimization problem. An example would
be five throws with 2 dice: I do not know exactly which numbers I will get, but I can say that the expected
total number of eyes will be more than 20. Optimization algorithms will then, based on all that is known
about statistical aspects and based on all data about a problem, compute the best expected solution. Note that
this combines aspects of  reasoning and  learning  algorithms discussed previously. Earlier in this text I
mentioned Deepmind's AlphaGo program which beat the best human player in the board game Go. AlphaGo
is a typical example of an optimization program that combines reasoning, learning and optimization, based
on the reinforcement learning paradigm (see Wiering and van Otterlo 2012), a subfield of ML for solving
multi-step decision task with uncertainty. Reinforcement learning has a long tradition (see Menace155 for an
early example, and the origins in behavioral psychology and Skinnerboxes156) in AI, although recently
interest has risen much (Krakovsky 2016).
The optimization setting features different kinds of rewards. In addition to taking the algorithm's point of
view (e.g. sales, new members) we can also take the viewpoint of users. Take the Pokemon example from the
beginning, in which the algorithm tries to optimize the rewards it gets by people playing the game and
spending money. It does this, among other things, by rewarding users by giving them interesting creatures in
a particular environment or by giving them other opportunities and items. This will manipulate (or: nudge157)
152 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AOL_search_data_leak
153 https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/sep/12/artificial-intelligence-face-recognition-michal-
kosinski
154 (MLIS 2015) http://proceedings.mlr.press/v43/
 (MLIS 2014) http://www.aaai.org/Library/Workshops/ws14-07.php
 (MLIS 2013) http://dblp.org/db/conf/ijcai/mlis2013
155 http://chalkdustmagazine.com/features/menace-machine-educable-noughts-crosses-engine/
156 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operant_conditioning_chamber
157 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Behavioural_Insights_Team

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 34
the players in the right direction where the algorithm wants them since they help to optimize its expected
rewards (or more precisely, that of the maker, Niantic Labs). This double optimization (algorithm rewards,
and human behavior through rewards given to humans) is the basis for the manipulation of people's behavior.
Most ethical concerns described matter in the case of optimization, but most prominent are transformative
aspects. By optimizing over many users, final solutions are bound to be good on average, in a similar way as
with learning algorithms. Optimal solutions for a viral marketing campaign could send mailings to clearly
uninterested users, which would not be much of a problem, but it could also – in the case of a search engine
– deprive particular users of particular content or advertisements. Even worse, it could nudge such users'
behavior in the wrong direction, just for the sake of global optimization, which would also make the
algorithm discriminating and unfair.
In addition, optimization algorithms typically iterate the optimizations by experimenting with particular
decisions, through  interactions with  the problem. A good example  are algorithms  that  determine  the
advertisements on the web: they can “try out” (experiment) with various advertisements for individual users,
and use the feedback (clicking behavior) of individuals to optimize advertisement placings. So, instead of a
one-pass optimization, it becomes an experimentation loop in which data is collected, decisions are made,
feedback and new is collected, and so on. In AI, this is a common technique. For example, the  Robot
Scientist158 is a system that can autonomously do experiments (on yeast): inventing hypotheses, gathering
data  and  testing  hypotheses,  analyses,  and  so  on.  Other  physical  examples  are  in  robotics  where
experimentation is used to let a robot find out how interaction with physical objects works (Moldovan et al.
2012) and in IoT where experimentation is envisioned to explore how to optimize the number of books
checked out in a public library (van Otterlo 2016b). Most experimentation happens in online worlds though
since the marginal costs are small. Platforms with large user bases are ideal laboratories for experimentation.
For example, Netflix (Gomez-Uribe and Hunt 2015) experiments with user suggestions to optimize their
rewards which are related to how much is being watched. They combine personalized suggestions with fairly
random ones, just to see “what happens”. Facebook does many experiments with users, often without them
knowing it. For example, they changed peoples moods and voting behaviors for millions of people at once 159.
Some creative counter-moves have been performed, for example Warzel (2016) showed what happens if you
follow all suggestions by Facebook, and Honan (2014) did a hilarious Facebook experiment by “liking”
everything that is available. Both experiments showed the influence algorithm has on what one gets to see on
Facebook, but they also show how “brittle” the algorithms are when the user displays extreme behavior.
Experimentation with data and algorithms nowadays happens for supermarket prizes, on the energy market,
with airline tickets, website variants (Google A/B-testing) and for many other things.
A typical outcome of optimization is a  ranking  (e.g. viable options, users, documents). Often based on
feedback, for example given by customers, an overall score can be computed and compared against scores of
others. In the ranked society in which we now live everything gets ranked, with examples such as Yelp,
Amazon, Facebook (likes), Tripadvisor, Tinder (swiping), OkCupid, all to find “the best” restaurant, lover,
holiday trip, or book. Also in our work life, ranking and scoring becomes the norm (called:  workplace
monitoring160). The ultimate example is China's 2020 plan (Chin and Wong 2016) to rank everyone in society
to find out “how good a citizen are you”. Scores are computed from many things ranging from school results
to behavior on social media, to credit score, and combined into one overall score. The higher that score, the
more privileges the citizen gets (from easier car rental and bank loans, to visa to other countries). 
There are many ethical issues concerning optimization and experimentation. All concerns fire in this case.
Again the most prominent ones are transformative effects on autonomy. By letting algorithms manipulate our
information  environment, by letting  them nudge us with  rewards,  and by being  ranked,  people  lose
autonomy. Furthermore, they will resist, and try to find out how they are being manipulated and try to figure
out how to beat the system, with examples how Uber drivers try to get the best rides by trying to figure out
how the Uber algorithm manages them (Lee et al. 2015) or how people try to rationalize Facebook algorithm
decisions about news feeds when (deliberately manipulated) information does not seem to make sense
(Eslami et al. 2015). Being ranked or manipulated by algorithms is one thing, but suddenly changing
158 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robot_Scientist
159 https://www.wired.com/2017/05/welcome-next-phase-facebook-backlash/
160 https://harpers.org/archive/2015/03/the-spy-who-fired-me/

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 35
rankings  and  rules  trigger  concerns  about  fairness and  traceability of  the  system,  with  examples  of
Instagram's new ordering161 algorithm freaking people out, and restaurant ranking sites' new rules creating
unfair practices162. Puschmann and Bozdag (2014) discuss many issues (pro and con) in experimentation and
stress the ubiquity and that they are often also beneficial for individuals. Overall, there are two main ethical
issues that play a role here. One is the fact that in many cases we do not know, or do not want, that we are
involved in algorithmic management or experiments: do we need new forms of  informed consent  in the
digital world? A second issue is the reward function: who defines it and who, thus, has the ultimate power of
deciding what is good, and what is bad, in a utilitarian sense. 
(5.3.4.) Physical Manifestations
A fourth class of algorithms concerns  physical manifestations such as  robots and  sensors (internet-of-
things). These algorithms go beyond the digital world and have physical presence in our physical world. This
also means that they can perform physical action which may jeopardize human safety.
A first manifestation is the  internet-of-things (Ng and Wakenshaw 2017) in which many appliances and
gadgets get connected and where increasingly so sensors are being placed everywhere, creating data traces of
once physical activities. The programmable world (Wasik 2013) will feature all digital (and intelligent) items
around us as being one giant computer (or: algorithm) that can assist us and manipulate us. For example, if
your car and refrigerator and microwave could work together, they could – with the right predictions on the
weather, your driving mood and speed, and possible traffic jams – have your diner perfectly cooked and
warm the moment you get home from work. The ubiquity of such sensor-abundant systems comes with
opportunities, but also with threats (see also van Otterlo 2016b and examples in there). The strongest one is
that ubiquity means that it happens without being noticeable, such that loss of autonomy or privacy may
come without warning. Since sensors are meant to gather data, and devices with agency to act upon that data,
all mentioned concerns apply. In very limited time, devices all over the world will communicate more
information than we humans, which has consequences.
A similar big development will be physical robots in our society. The word “robot” comes from the Chech
word163 “robotnik” which refers to serf, farmer, “boring work” and “hard labour”. The difference between
very early (AI) robots like Shakey164 and the very modern, naturally walking, animal-like robots by Boston
Dynamics165 is huge but the core ingredients are the same: a physical manifestation of an algorithm able to
act. Or more precisely: “a robot is a constructed system that displays both physical and mental agency, but
is not alive in the biological sense” (Richards and Smart 2016). There are many types of robots currently,
ranging from simulations, to humanoids and mobile manipulators166, which are mobile robots that have arms
and hands to carry out action on objects around them. For the latter, research activity is high in recent years
(e.g. see Moldovan et al. 2012) because they are useful for various applications ranging from manufacturing
to healthcare and to companion robots. In the library setting, several manipulation-capable robots have
already been employed (Bdiwi and Suchy 2012; Li et al. 2013). Note that currently only very few robots are
actually in people's homes, and the ones that are, are vacuum cleaners167. 
The promise (and safe assumption) in robotics is that one day they will be part of our daily 168 lives, but many
technical advances are still needed to make it so. However, we can start to think about ethical consequences
(Lichocki et al. 2011)  before that happens. Steinert (2014) frames the ethics of robots into four main169
categories: robots as tools (or instruments), robots as recipients of moral behavior, robots as moral actors,
161 https://socialmediaweek.org/blog/2017/07/lurkers-on-top/
162 https://www.trouw.nl/home/horeca-klaagt-over-vals-spel-bij-iens~ae080a6b/
163 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/R.U.R.
164 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shakey_the_robot
165 https://www.bostondynamics.com/
166 http://www.mobilemanipulation.org/
167 http://www.irobot.com/For-the-Home/Vacuuming/Roomba.aspx
168 Many good movies exist about how that would look like (See: I Robot, the Bicentennial man, A.I., and 
Robot and Frank, for some examples). An excellent, fairly realistic, series is “Real Humans” 
(http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2180271/)
169 The article also includes a fifth type which refers to the influence of robots on ethics itself (meta-ethics).

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 36
and robots  as part of society. The difference between the first and the latter two is mainly one of
responsibility. If we see robots as (possibly harmful) tools they are on par with knives and chainsaws, and
even if we act morally towards them because we generally “feel” for them (which happens often in the
interaction  with  humans,  such  as  with  office  robots170,  but  also  with  simple171 robots)  they are  still
“machines” with human operators who are responsible when something happens. In other words, we should
not fall into the android fallacy which is about our default reaction to attribute too many (mental) capabilities
to robots that look like “us” (Smart and Richards 2016). Such robots can, however, trigger other novel ethical
dilemmas through their appearance and how life-like172 (or even human-like173) they are. Only if we really
enter the phase in which robots become moral actors (the third type) we also need to think about the ethical
implications of agents which are not human (and presumably very smart, see the next section). Naturally, the
internet-of-things and robotics will blend into one giant computerized system around us humans.
The introduction of increasing numbers of robotic agent in society (the fourth type) will also have socio-
economic consequences we can only partially imagine. Most obviously for work which will174 increasingly
being taken (or not175) over by robots (Ford 2013) and will require new ways to distribute income over
humans. Jobs that can be broken down into predictable, routine-like tasks are in danger, including lawyers,
paralegals, journalism and retail. It is hard to predict which jobs will stay “human” and which not, and also
which new jobs (e.g. robot trainer) will arise. Apart from the job market, robots are expected to have
profound (ethical) impact on many aspects of society, such law enforcement (Sharkey 2009) and military
operations, sex and relations or even robot prostitution (Richardson 2016), autonomous cars and traffic
(Kirkpatrick 2015), elderly care and healthcare, and many other fields.
(5.3.5.) Superintelligence
The fifth class of algorithms goes beyond the algorithms as we know them now (digital or in physical form)
all the way to  superintelligent  algorithms, which surpass our human-level intelligence. Once we have
reached that point, questions of conscience and moral decisions and with that responsibility of algorithms
will play a role. Most of this discussion falls beyond the scope of this text. A general remark is that the more
intelligent, autonomous or conscience an algorithm will become, the more moral values will be attributed to
it, and the more ethical reasoning and behavior will be expected of it. However, as (Richards and Smart
2016) elegantly show using the android fallacy it will take still a long time before robots are even capable of
deserving that. According to many scholars, a so-called (technological) singularity (Vinge, 1993; Shanahan
2015) will come, which is176 “the hypothesis that the invention of artificial superintelligence will abruptly
trigger runaway technological growth, resulting in unfathomable changes to human civilization”. For some
already the point of getting algorithms to become “smarter” than humans (whatever that may mean) will
trigger an explosion of unstoppable AI growth that could dominate the human race entirely even. Ethical
concerns about such algorithms are discussed by Bostrom and Yudkowsky (2011) and many other people,
like Kurzweil177. Many straightforward ethical concerns are about whether machines will overpower us,
whether they still need “us”, and what it  means to be human in a society dominated by machines (see
Shanahan 2015 for some pointers). Such concerns about unbounded AI systems can trigger old ideas of the
“emergency button” as discussed in the first section. A very interesting contribution to this discussion was
given by Hugo de Garis178 who thinks that the main coming battle will not be between humans and AI, but
between humans who want to develop superintelligent AI and people who oppose it.
(6) Towards the Ethical Codementalist
In the previous sections I have sketched how digitalization and algorithms can cause various ethical
170 http://snackbot.org/about-public.html
171 http://www.mykeepon.com/
172 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uncanny_valley
173 https://www.wired.com/2017/04/robots-arent-human-make/
174 https://www.wired.com/brandlab/2015/04/rise-machines-future-lots-robots-jobs-humans/
175 https://www.wired.com/2017/08/robots-will-not-take-your-job/
176 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Technological_singularity
177 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Singularity_Is_Near
178 https://www.forbes.com/2009/06/18/cosmist-terran-cyborgist-opinions-contributors-artificial-intelligence-
09-hugo-de-garis.html

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 37
challenges. The superintelligence aspect, where AI can spin out of control relative to our human interests, is
one that triggers existential fears. Such AI can be seen as a technology that can profoundly change the world.
It reminds of concerns when another such technology was in its initial phases: nuclear technology. Albert
Einstein warned president Roosevelt in 1939 in a letter179 for the consequences if  some other nation
(Germany) would obtain the technology for powerful bombs and suggested to start a nuclear program in the
United States. The current explosion in AI technology may very well trigger a similar arms race. But before
worrying about superintelligence, we should be concerned about the many ethical challenges of not-yet-
fully-superintelligent  algorithms.  Some  functionalities  of  AI  systems  will  appear  superintelligent  (for
example having access to billions of databases in an instant) though. Human-level and superintelligent
beings are not just a theoretical exercise, but something to start thinking about. 
In this section, I want to deal with the implications of algorithms slowly taking over professions such as of
the archivist or the librarian, by sketching a constructive approach to ensure humanly ethical behavior in
such systems. What if we would bring the pioneer's dreams from last century, such as Otlet's Mundotheque,
or Bush's Memex, or Wells' World Brain to the AI age, and what would it take for these systems to satisfy
human  ethical  requirements?  In  order  to  make  things  more  general,  I  invoke  Otlet's  concept  of  a
documentalist, a profession covering many aspects of librarians, archivists and other information workers.
(Wright:97): “It would call for a new breed of professional, what Otlet called a "documentalist." Unlike the
traditional librarian - whose task consisted primarily of collecting, archiving, and curating books - the
documentalist would play a far more active role in analyzing and dstributing recorded knowledge. Applying
Otlet's monographic principle and following the cataloging rules of the UDC, the documentalist would
collect, analyze, and summarize documents from multiple sources, then disseminate them into a larger
apparatus of recorded knowledge.”  In the remainder of this section I will appeal to documentalists to
represent archivists, librarians and the like.
(6.1) The Documentalist Singularity
It took ages to get permission, but yesterday evening I finally got THE mail. I consider myself lucky, since I
really needed access to the archives to finish my article. Other people would ask why would an assistant
professor in technology ethics would like to see those old-fashioned paper documents about the introduction
of Mindbook, the company that grew out of the long gone Facebook corporation. Since, their summaries are
already on Archipedia. Who is interested in paper documents anymore? Well I am. I never felt comfortable
with all this digital.. eh stuff.. anyway. People are physical, and they like physical things. Well.. at least that's
my opinion. And besides… I don't trust Archipedia; they have appeared in so many algorithmic trials for
information manipulation, but they always use their right-to-silence and nobody is been able to crack their
summarization code. I need to take a look myself. I enter the red building next to the rocket station and turn
right after getting through the bio-scanner. Paul, a robot from the CODEMENTALIST-5000 series is waiting
at the desk. His emotional module can use an update, I catch myself thinking. I only get a nod and a metallic
“hello, how can I help you?”, so much unlike the newer models that can really lighten your day with their
big smiles and warm voices. I answer the way I am supposed to do, with a clear question and context:
“Hello Paul, I'd like to see all documents containing discussions on the use of advanced mind models,
especially whole brain simulations, of Facebook users prior to the formation of Mindbook. I also would like
to look at pictures and footage of the meetings that include people from the legal department, and can you
please provide me with additional CV information of these people? Thank you.”  Paul knew from prior
contact that I would be coming to the archive myself; otherwise he would have downloaded the interpreted
documents, or DOC-INTERPRETs as they call them here, to my communicator. Now he only sends the
requested CVs and projects an interactive map of the archive a floor below which will guide me to the right
boxes. Since Paul scans and stores all items (including photos and a shallow semantic analysis of texts), and
organizes them in the physical space, he knows where I have to go. At least, that is what I have to believe
since there is no way of knowing what is in the complete archive. While going downstairs, I sense excitement
from my side on how optimized and effective my routing past all the right boxes, 16 in total, is. Five more
boxes are off limits for me though. It turns out another researcher has a similar research question in
parallel, and his (or her?) combined scientific h-index and social media coverage is so much higher than
mine. Also, according to an analysis of the planned social activities in our agendas, and our biophysical
energy levels in combination with the predicted moist weather in the next weeks, Paul estimates that I will
179 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Einstein%E2%80%93Szil%C3%A1rd_letter

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 38
not put enough hours in my analysis of the documents and my writing anyway. Sure… I need to stop eating
snacks and boost my metabolism… but come on… who does Paul think he is? My doctor? According to Paul
the overall estimated impact of the other researcher publishing the material alone is higher when I do not
interfere. I have no other option than to accept, but I don't think it's fair. Archival robots such as Paul are
built to optimize their impact since they too get ranked. Of course, everyone gets ranked, and so are archival
robots. Paul needs to optimize the use and costs of the archive while at the same time striking a balance
between preventing possible negative impact on the donor organization Mindbook, and stimulating positive
impact from researchers and journalists publishing the right kind of information, again according to
Mindbook. Oh well… the rest of the day I look at the documents, trying to find what I am looking for. The
surveillance-sensors watch my every move while interacting with the documents, which helps them to further
optimize the archive, so they say. Well..they sure also use them for the projected advertisements that are
appearing on the electronic walls for me. Hey… yes indeed… I do need a snack… my hands are trembling….
How did they know? Oh… never mind.
Based on the previous sections, this scenario seems plausible. A robotic documentalist, or codementalist as I
call it, represents a modern version of the pioneers' dreams (Memex, Mundotheque) described in the
beginning of this text. “Codementalist” combines the characteristics of the documentalist with “code”, the
substrate of algorithms. It remains to be seen how the future will turn out, how far off this scenario is, and
how long human documentalists work together with codementalists. What we can say is that algorithmic
technology will have a huge impact on practice, and on ethics. Ferguson et al. (2016:549): “It seems likely
that, when considered in the abstract, new technologies do not appear to change ethical principles; however,
when actually experienced in the workplace, they do substantially change the factors the … professional has
to weigh up.” 
In terms of digitalization, we can assume everything will be digitalized: the collection and all interactions
between users, documentalist and collection. Access will be easier, but also less privacy-friendly. In addition,
an abundance of data will be available on users, with links to other users, the collection and any piece of
information available through digital means. This also means that performance reports, on collection use and
reach, storage efficiency and services can be monitored in real-time and evaluated and optimized when
needed. Rankings of users, documentalists and codementalist s will be kept on many scales. For example,
archival behavior can be benchmarked, but also users can be compared to aid in ethical dilemmas of fair
access. Inspired by China's 2020 ranked society, one can ask “how good an documentalist are you?” and
connect that to privileges or wages for documentalist.
Due to algorithmization many possibilities arise to connect (potential) users to collections, to personalize
user interactions and to optimize various aspects ranging from space usage (for physical parts of the
collection) to advanced retrieval methods based on complex user demands. Codementalist s could also come
up  with  new  “business  models”,  for  example  by sending  personalized  advertisements  for  parts  of  a
collection, or by assembling user-targeted image aggregations and summaries for particular topics the user is
(presumed to be) working on. In principle, one could try to turn typical marketing around, and try to find the
most probable person interested in this particular collection. 
These are just some opportunities. Many others await and Section 5 showed each comes with their own set of
ethical challenges for individual users and society. It is not a matter if all this will happen, but when. I define
the coming  documentalist singularity as the moment when all core documentalist's activities will be
replaced by an codementalist. Note that I am not talking about a general superintelligence, but a more
specific singularity for the documentalist profession. Just like in autonomous cars, we can talk about various
levels180 of autonomous codementalist: some will only maintain digital archives, some will have a robot body
(for physical collections), and some may only function as an assistant of a human documentalist. The main
point I want to make is that since “we”, as humans” are creating these codementalist, we may study their
ethical implications before, during and after creation, but maybe much better is to try to create them such
that we can ensure that they will behave according to our own moral values. How can we do that?
(6.2) Some Solutions
180 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Autonomous_car#Levels_of_driving_automation

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 39
Algorithmic versions of virtually all current professions will appear, eventually. The basic, human, question
is how to ensure that all these algorithms respect our human values and for this we should not rely on
corporations. For example, the founders of Google, Brin and Page, promised at the start never to show adds
with search results (broken in 2002). Google would never combine data from different sources (Youtube,
calendar, gmail; broken in 2014). Google would not automatically combine data gathered by its Doubleclick
company with other data  – users needed to give permission (broken in June 2016). Examples for other
services exist and do illustrate self-regulation will not be the final solution.
Current literature on ethics of algorithms often deals with how to (legally) govern algorithms in such a way
that they behave appropriately (e.g. Etzioni and Etzioni 2016; van der Sloot et al. 2016). Diakopolous (2016)
discusses several general ways to ensure accountability in algorithmic decision making and comes up with
an algorithmic transparency standard which calls for human involvement and transparency about the data
and (inference in) the models used. Although very desirable, and very often mentioned in other literature (see
van Otterlo 2013), from the previous sections we can say that this will not be easy in most cases. For starters
because private companies will not disclose all their software secrets (for example Facebook and Google do
not disclose their exact ranking methods), and even if they would do, it would be hard to convey the meaning
of enormous, and technical, models to the individual user who is affected by an algorithmic decision.
Diakopoulous (2016) addresses this by calling for the design of effective user experiences for transparency
information, visualization to succinctly communicate the workings of an algorithm,  and  developing ML
methods that can be explained in ways that humans can readily understand. Probably the most effective way
he proposes is to make algorithmic presence known to the user at all times.
A challenge is that so far algorithms are largely unregulated. However, there are laws and rules for data,
such as the data protection act (DPA; Dutch: AVG181) from 1998. The DPA can be used when, for example,
data is gathered in one place, say license plates scanned for checking parking permits, and used in another,
for example to check where somebody has been with his lease car to see whether he drives more than
allowed with that car. In that case data is used for a different purpose than when gathered and this is
protected by law. Another example would be a loss of a USB-stick containing patient files from a hospital; in
that case an even more protected set of personal data, namely medical data, is lost, which would amount to a
severe privacy violation. In the Netherlands since 2016 it is required by law to report 182 any data leak. In
Europe, new legislation is now being developed as an extension183 to the DPA in the form of the general data
protection regulation (GDPR184) which will cover several forms of algorithmic decision making. Individuals
will have the right to be informed about it, the right to access (and erase) their acquired data, the right to let
their data be transferred to another service provider, and several rights in relation to algorithmic decision
making and profiling in particular. Whether the GDPR will be effective will depend on its practical
application in difficult cases (see the discussion in Mittelstadt et al. 2016).
Outside the law, many other solution have been proposed, such as methodologies where protections are
built-in (such as privacy-by-design, and transparency-enabling technologies) or where (data) protection is
ensured by technologies based on encryption and novel technologies such as blockchain. Individual users can
often protect their privacy to some extent by using software or services from companies that are privacy-
friendly or more transparent, e.g. the privacy-friendly  Duckduckgo search engine,  Whatsapp alternatives
such as  Signal or  Telegram, or services that guarantee data encryption such as on the  iPhone. Yet other
solutions to deal with power imbalances between big corporations and individuals propose to monetize data:
trade privacy for monetary rewards. Tene and Polonetsky (2014) propose several solutions that ask for
transparency and new (social) norms for technology (such as Facebook sharing behaviors). They are also
against targeting the superuser: assuming that all users can just protect themselves. A solution shared by
many is data minimization (see e.g. Medina 2015): only gather data that is really necessary, which is often in
conflict with companies' business models. Another set of solutions is obfuscation (Brunton and Nissenbaum
2013) in which users deliberately sabotage algorithmic systems, by for example submitting random search
181 https://www.autoriteitpersoonsgegevens.nl/nl/onderwerpen/europese-privacywetgeving/algemene-
verordening-gegevensbescherming
182 https://autoriteitpersoonsgegevens.nl/nl/onderwerpen/beveiliging/meldplicht-datalekken
183 https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/data-protection-reform/overview-of-the-gdpr/
184 General Dat Protection Regulation (GDPR) http://www.eugdpr.org/more-resources-1.html

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 40
queries mixed with genuine queries to prevent the search engine from profiling the user reliably.
Another way to tackle the ethical issues of algorithms is to employ AI itself. That is, one can utilize the same
power of algorithms to deal with ethical issues. For example, recent advances in ML remove discriminatory
biases by adapting training methods, or implement  privacy-aware  techniques. Other developments are
algorithms that use the same kind of ML techniques as search engines do for profiling, to counter the search
engine by generating maximally confusing search queries. In addition to the many specialized algorithms
now being developed, Etzioni and Etzioni (2016) propose general, so-called AI Guardians to help us cope
with the government algorithms. Since AI systems more and more become opaque (black box), adaptive
(using ML) and autonomous, it becomes undoable for humans to check what they are doing. AI systems can
do that for us, at higher speeds, with much more processing power, and working 24/7.  AI guardians are
oversight systems using AI technology, and come in various sorts:  interrogators and auditors  which can
investigate or audit after e.g. a drone crash, or when unwanted things happen in very large software systems
such as Google or Facebook. AI guardians can also monitor ungoing processes, or even enforce compliance
with the law. A special type is the  ethics bot which is concerned with ensuring that the operational AI
systems obey ethical norms. These norms can be set by the individual, but can also come from a community.
An ethics bot could guide another operational AI system, for example to ensure an autonomous car is not
driving fast, or that a financial AI system only invests in socially responsible corporations. Ethics bots will
also have to  learn the moral preferences of their individual, either by explicit wishes or from observed
behavior. The idea of using AI to derive what we can call machine ethics (Anderson and Anderson 2007), to
ensure moral behavior of AI is something I will take further here.
(6.3) Learning to Behave Well
The most prominent AI area of this moment is ML. A promising idea is to let systems learn how to behave
appropriately. One can imagine a codementalist watching a human documentalist doing his or her job and
learning instantly what is the right way to act. Would it be that simple?
Let us look at a domain where machine ethics is a hot topic: autonomous cars (Kirkpatrick 2015; Goodall
2016; Bonnefon et al. 2016; Sütfeld et al. 2017). Autonomous cars are excellent examples where moral
reasoning is require in physical worlds with matters of life and death. In case the car AI predicts an
upcoming accident in the instant, it needs to decide quickly: kill the passenger by running into a wall, or kill
the pedestrian (with child) by avoiding the wall. More extremely, the car AI could estimate life expectancies
from appearance combined with statistical databases to make decisions even more finegrained. There are
many good arguments why such situations will occur (Goodall, 2014) and somewhere in the car's software
such decisions will be represented. ML is used to learn many technical aspects of driving itself, ranging from
learning to recognize pedestrians to learning to take over other cars. However, learning how to drive morally
is a different problem, but could in principle be learned from good examples too.
Since humans are currently the only drivers on our roads, it makes sense to investigate how they look at such
problems. Bonnefon et al. (2016) shows that humans typically approve of utilitarian cars which look at the
possible outcomes and choose the “best” moral decision. However, they also show that people prefer cars
that would protect them as a driver, and would react negatively to government regulations that would
prescribe general utilitarian decisions (where the driver could be sacrificed too). Sütfeld et al. (2017) go even
further and put people in simulated driving (in virtual reality) experiments to see which decisions they would
make when confronted with accidents involving people from different ages, balls, pylons, trash cans, dogs
and more. Their findings show that a simple one-dimensional “value-of-life” scale (to compare the utility of
objects) works. Another finding is that human decision-making becomes less consistent with time pressure.
This suggests that for clear choice problems between “victims” human moral behavior could be learned from
examples. There are many technical ways to do that. As an example consider the system by Moldovan et al.
(2012) in which a robot needs to learn, from humans, how to perform a skill such as “reorganize a shelf with
objects”. At first, the robot starts playing with objects to see how they behave when being manipulated by
the robot's hands. In this phase, the robot experiments by trying out different actions and seeing their results,
and learns the dynamics of the physical world. In a second phase, the robot is shown by a human how to
reorganize several objects on a shelf. By observing the human and the effects on the objects, it learns which

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 41
configurations of objects are desired by the human. In the final phase then, when faced with a new problem,
the robot utilizes all this knowledge and optimizes his course of action to reach a desired goal state. Different
phases may require learning different things: exactly replicating actions, replicating demonstrated outcomes,
or obtaining a generalized model of general characteristics of “good” outcomes. An codementalist could
learn the literal actions to reorganize parts of the collection, or it could try to learn general principles185
which are reflected in the demonstrations of an documentalist such that it could reorganize other parts of the
collection too. 
An alternative to acquire imitation behavior is to learn the underlying reward function according to which the
original behavior was generated. If that reward function is obtained, one can simply behave towards results
that have a high value, instead of learning the exact action for each situation. Since moral values can,
assumably, be equated to reward values, it gives an opportunity to learn moral behavior from observing a
demonstrator. The technical term for this type of learning is inverse reinforcement learning (Wiering and van
Otterlo 2012; Abel et al. 2016) which is based on solid theories for behavior learning. For specialized tasks,
especially in robotics, many successful applications exist. This could form the basis for AI systems that act in
alignment with human goals and values, which is an interesting option for ethical codementalist. The core
challenge then is how to learn these human values, sometimes framed as the value learning problem (Soares
2015), or value alignment (Taylor et al. 2017), currently a hot topic in ethics and ML. The challenges is that
human values are typically difficult to learn, since they can be based on complex mental processes, can be
working on multiple timescales, can be difficult to put on one scale (although the autonomous car study
suggests that sometimes that is possible), can involve both intuition and reasoning and may involve
signaling to establish trust (Kuipers 2016). Furthermore they require ontological agreement between human
and machine: do they see the world in the same way? Many of these problems are shared with technical AI
work (e.g. computer vision) but for use in ethical systems much more work is needed. Taylor et al. (2017) list
8 grand directions to work on, all aiming at new ML technologies which can, for example, i) learn human
values, ii) signal human operators when there is ambiguity in the data, iii) aid a human overseer, iv) optimize
“mildly” (not trying too hard when goals have been “pretty well” achieved) and many more.   
Reward functions are important, but not the final answer. AI systems can often find non-human ways to
achieve the human values. Shanahan (2015:210) describes an AI tasked with maximizing the production of
paperclips in a small manufacturing company, which seems like a simple reward function. However, this
superintelligent AI ends up colonizing the whole planet for resources for making ever more paperclips which
is not aligned with the original, simpler, intention of the task. Similarly, a police AI tasked with bringing
down crime rates could just come up with a solution in which all citizens need to stay in their homes forever.
AI systems can often, just like evolution186, come up with surprising solutions to maximize a reward function
and this is another opportunity to be not aligned with human values. A general problem with any adaptive
ethical algorithm is that it can always diverge to unethical behavior over time.
(6.4) Making Intentions Explicit
The value learning problem is difficult for many reasons. In addition, any type of purely statistical learning
procedure faces other difficulties related to opacity and the limited possibilities to employ knowledge one
might have about a domain. In the previous section I have tacitly assumed that everything is learned from
scratch, which is not optimal if domain knowledge is available. Take again the robot example from
Moldovan et al. (2012), where part of the learning task is about learning statistics about object interactions.
Here, additional knowledge can be added to make the learning task simpler. For example, one can specify
that one is only interested in how an action on one object changes the distance between that and another into
far, medium or close. Such prior knowledge specifies a bias on the learning process and makes it relatively
easier but also more biased. Other types of knowledge for this task could be that green objects are typically
185 The real challenge is often generalization: ”We’re always learning from experience by seeing some 
examples and then applying them to situations that we’ve never seen before. A single frightening growl or 
bark may lead a baby to fear all dogs of similar size – or, even animals of every kind. How do we make 
generalizations from fragmentary bits of evidence? A dog of mine was once hit by a car, and it never went 
down the same street again – but it never stopped chasing cars on other streets.” (Minsky, 1985, Society of 
Mind, Section 19.8). 
186 See the intriguing experiments by Karl Sims:  http://www.karlsims.com/evolved-virtual-creatures.html

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 42
heavy, and  one cannot place an object on a ball-shaped object. Various ML systems exist where this
knowledge bias is declarative, meaning that the knowledge is specified in a special language or database
and where this knowledge can be analyzed, processed, injected into a problem, and most importantly,
extracted  after  learning.  In  addition,  such  methods  support  reasoning over  that  knowledge.  Many
knowledge-rich ML methods exist for use in behavior learning contexts (see van Otterlo 2009, 2013) such
as the codementalist profession we are looking at. Furthermore, some declarative ML methods have been
employed for ethical reasoning in AI (Anderson and Anderson 2007) and other ethical studies (van Otterlo
2014a).
A key issue is ontological: if we would like to employ declarative knowledge from humans, it should be at
the right level and meanings should mean the “same” for the AI and for humans. To bridge AI and human
(cognitive) thinking, the rational agent view is a suitable common view. In AI, a rational agent is “one that
acts so as to achieve the best outcome or, when there is uncertainty, the best expected outcome” (Russell and
Norvig 2009). In cognitive science we can take the intentional stance view introduced by Daniel Dennett
(2013). Whereas taking a physical stance (in which we can predict phenomena in terms of physical laws,
such as a swing) or a design stance (in which we can predict that an alarm clock will go off at a certain time),
the intentional stance sees entities as  rational agents having  mental notions such as  beliefs,  goals and
desires. Using this viewpoint, we assume the agent takes into account such beliefs and desires to govern its
behavior. For people this is the most intuitive form of description of other people's behavior. But it is also
common to use it to talk about algorithms: I can say that Google believes I like Lego and therefore it desires
to feed me advertisements about it and sets a goal to prioritize websites referring to Lego. I can also say that
Google believes that I want pizza when I enter “food” as a query since it knows from my profile that that is
my favorite food. Dennett (2013:78):  "Anything that is usefully and voluminously predictable from the
intentional stance is, by definition, an intentional system, and as we will see, many fascinating and
complicated things that don't have brains or eyes or ears or hands, and hence really don't have minds, are
nevertheless intentional systems." Codementalists can now be seen as “code-mentalists”, emphasizing their
mental, cognitive abilities.
Unifying human behavior and AI in terms of rational agents allows me to get to the main idea of this section.
Our goal is to have codementalists learn ethical behavior from humans. In the previous section I briefly
explored the challenges  when  learning  purely from observation, from scratch. However,  here  I have
highlighted the benefits of knowledge-rich learning methods, where the learning process is biased (guided)
by prior knowledge about the domain. What could be better declarative, human knowledge about ethical
values in the documentalist domain than the previously discussed code of ethics from section 3? Indeed,
these hold general consensus ideas on how a documentalist should behave ethically, dealing with issues such
as privacy, access, and fair use of the archive or library. In addition, they are full of intentional descriptions,
see for example:  “The Archivist should endeavour to promote access to records to the fullest extent
consistent with the public interest, but he should carefully observe any proper restrictions on the use of
records”. This is clearly a bias on how the documentalist should behave and it contains a goal, a desire and
several (implicit) beliefs. Codes of ethics are solid knowledge bases of the most important ethical guidelines
for the profession, and typically they are defined to be transparent, human-readable and public, in contrast to
the typical black boxes ML delivers. Using codes of ethics as a knowledge bias in adaptive documentalists
that learn ethical behavior is natural, since it merely translates (through the rational agent connection) an
ethical code that was designed as a bias for human behavior, and uses that as a guide or constraint.
Translating codes of ethics into knowledge biases in adaptive documentalists opens up many additional
opportunities. Imagine a documentalist has been equipped with the SAA (1995) code of ethics. Learning then
amounts to  finetuning within the boundaries given by the code. The rule above only mentions “promote
access” as a  goal, but in practice  the  agent  needs  to  fill  specifics in from observed behavior  by a
documentalist.  In  addition,  this  approach  supports  ethical  reasoning,  for  example  to  resolve  ethical
dilemmas, when various interests need to be balanced. Learning the value of items mentioned (such as the
privacy of users, and freedom of information) can give the means to perform utilitarian (in AI called:
decision-theoretic) calculations on what is the right behavior in the current context. The code of ethics puts
restrictions on which general actions are required for particular situations, and ML fills in the details left

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 43
open by the code. Users could choose187 some particular behavioral settings themselves (e.g. Contissa et al.
2017), or such individual preferences could be learned from data.  Additional knowledge that could be used
as a bias are laws the codementalist should live by (for example privacy laws such as the DPA; see Goodall
2014 for some criticism though). My approach also allows for enforceable codes of ethics (as introduced in
section 3), by providing the possibility to proof compliance with the code, as well as qualifications on how
and why particular dilemmas were resolved in a certain way. Such computational ethics can be supported by
logics of ethics (see Anderson and Anderson 2007 for pointers) as have been developed in AI but which, so
far, often lacked statistical capabilities or ML. A final interesting aspect is that the natural distinction of the
SAA (2012)  between  archivist  beliefs (values)  and  behavior can  easily be  incorporated:  beliefs  are
represented by a bias on the value system, whereas the behavior part biases the codementalist's action policy
directly. Interestingly, this is a current topic of study in AI too. Littman et al. (2017) recently introduced a
specification  methodology  where  both  reward-based  specifications  of  tasks  as  well  as  general  goal
descriptions can be used.
(6.5) Research Strategy for Ethical Codementalists: The IntERMeDIUM approach
As a synthesis of the preceding ideas on learning, codes and intentional agents, I propose a research strategy,
called IntERMeDIUM, with the goal to develop ethical codementalists in the (near) future. IntERMeDIUM
refers to what Licklider wrote about (see the first section) as the link between humans and knowledge. To
unite human and machine ethics, I propose to see the code of ethics as a moral contract between human and
machine. The acronym covers the main directions on which to focus research efforts on:
•
Intentional: The bridge between humans  and machines consists of the right ontology of the
(physical)  world  and  the  right  level  of  description:  beliefs,  desires,  intentions  and  goals.
Codementalists should be understood as rational agents.
•
Executable: The beliefs and desires of the codementalists need to be embedded as code that can be
executed. Instead of asking code of ethics to be enforceable by punishing bad behavior after the fact,
executable codes of ethics are biased by the code to ensure the right ethical behavior. Anderson and
Anderson (2007:16): “Ethics must be made computable in order to make it clear exactly how agents
ought to behave in ethical dilemmas”.
•
Reward-based: Codementalists' ethical reasoning is based on the human values in the documentalist
domain.  The core values  come  from the  code  of ethics used to  bias the agent. In  addition,
codementalists  finetune their ethical behavior over time by adjusting relative values using data,
feedback and experience. Experience from human documentalists is vital here, since they typically
solved ethical dilemmas that arose thus far.
•
Moral: The focus of codementalist implementations is on the moral dimension. Other skills will be
developed in other, general AI research, and includes perception, mobile manipulation, reasoning
with uncertainty, language interpretation and more.
•
Declarative: All ethical bias in the codementalist is declarative knowledge and can be inspected at
all times. Ethical inferences in specific circumstances can be  explained  in human-understandable
terms. Anderson and Anderson (2007:17): “What is critical in the explicit ethical agent distinction in
our view, lies not only in who is making the ethical judgments (the machine versus the human
programmer) but also in the ability to justify ethical judgments that only an explicit representation of
ethical principles allows.”  Ethical bias and learned ethical knowledge can be  shared with other
codementalists and general  model checking procedures can be employed to evaluate reasoning
effectiveness and correctness. Laws and regulations, such as the GDPR, can be implemented in the
declarative bias to further bias the behavior of the documentalists towards legal compliance.
•
Inductive: The  codementalist is a  learning agent. All knowledge that can not be injected as a
declarative bias needs to be learned from experience or obtained from other codementalists or
archivists. The codementalist's knowledge will typically not be complete, and learning should be
continuing and life-long. Advanced ML needs to be implemented that allow for the codementalist
asking human documentalists for advice in various ways.
•
Utilitarian: Codementalists are  utilitarian (collective consequentialist) moral reasoning agents.
Protection  of the  rights of  individuals  is ensured  by demanding that all values and decision
procedures are declarative, open for inspection and transparent. 
187 https://www.newscientist.com/article/2150330-driverless-cars-could-let-you-choose-who-survives-in-a-
crash/

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 44
•
Machine: The  codementalist is a  machine. The slow migration from human documentalists to
codementalists requires that we should shift focus from humans to machines for the main operational
aspects of archives, libraries and other information domains.
Based on what I have described up to here, the IntERMeDIUM is a viable, general strategy to ensure that
codementalists of the future will work according to human ethical principles. Naturally many details need to
be sorted out, for example on the exact translation from codes of ethics to declarative bias for AI systems,
inspired by other work in e.g. medical (Anderson and Anderson (2007) and autonomous driving (Goodall,
2014 ) domains. In addition, technical challenges await concerning the specifics of the learning setting in
which the codementalist will acquire its ethical values. Nevertheless, based on rapid progress in AI we can
assume all such issues are  solvable  in principle.  Codementalist evolution will hopefully be a smooth,
progressive188 development where the codementalist learns how to behave ethically in a human society.
What remains are several big issues and questions to start thinking about. Codementalist are not yet here, but
they are coming. Key issues and questions are:
•
Appraisal - from documents to machine behavior:  The documentalist profession will change
drastically. Human documentalists will become trainers (or, coaches, or parents) of codementalists.
How will they learn these new skills and how will they be evaluated? How many trainers are needed
if codementalist skills can be copied? What is the perfect  curriculum for codementalists? Will
codementalists  stay a  separate  profession,  or  will  they merge  with  other  information  service
machines?
•
The ethics of choosing THE code of ethics: The core of IntERMeDIUM is to inject ethical codes
into machines. Out of the many possible versions, which should we pick? And who decides upon
that? Documentalists, committees of experts, programmers, or more general democratic methods?
For this to work, we may also need to investigate more which kinds of values hold in profession such
as archivists and librarians.
•
How good a codementalist are you? How will codementalists be evaluated? And how to evaluate
ethical performance anyway? Maybe we can evaluate codementalists by the “ability to participate
in our culture” (Forbus, 2016).
•
Codementalist are persons too: depending on how codementalists and humans work and learn
together in the future, important matters of responsibilities need to be arranged, and preferably be
injected in the moral code. Depending on how sophisticated codementalists become, we may even
need to think about giving them rights.
•
Who approves codementalists? Depending on the impact of codementalists on daily life of people,
we may need regulations concerning their use, similar to regulations concerning autonomous cars. In
analogy with medicine, we may need to think about formal approval procedures, as a kind of “FDA
for algorithms” (Tutt 2017).
•
Lifelong learning: When documentalist practices will be changed drastically with the introduction
of codementalists, ethical codes may need to be updated to reflect new social norms between humans
and machines. Who decides when that time comes, and who decides what is to be changed? What to
do when the time comes codementalists can do without human guidance, such as with the recent
advances189 in Deepmind's AlphaGo? Maybe employing codementalists also requires us to rethink
ethical  concepts  over  time  (see  Steinert  2014  about  meta-ethics).  And  how  to  deal  with
codementalists going rogue (Pistono and Yampolskiy 2016)?
•
Codementalist business: How to deal with commercial codementalists? Will they be different from
other types? Under which circumstances can codementalists incorporate business opportunities in
their ethical reasoning? 
In addition, many issues are raised by the simple fact that codementalists are algorithms; thus all (ethical)
concerns in this text apply. The IntERMeDIUM tries to cope with many of them by starting from a wealth of
human experience contained in archival codes of ethics.
(7) Conclusions
In this text I have sketched a development with which the archival and library world will need to deal: the
inevitable move from human documentalists to machine codementalists. I made several contributions along
188 See for inspiration the movie Bicentennial Man (http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0182789/)
189 https://www.theverge.com/2017/10/18/16495548/deepmind-ai-go-alphago-zero-self-taught

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 45
the way. In section 2 I described how ideas developed in the physical world can help us understand what
archives and access to information are. In section 3 I surveyed ethical thinking in archives and showed that
codes of ethics are a useful tool to formalize and communicate professional norms. In section 4 I have
introduced a novel view on the digitalization of our society with an important role for algorithms. Section 5
surveyed the novel research area of ethics of algorithms and here I developed a new taxonomy based on
capabilities of algorithms. Ultimately, I used all these developments to develop a strategy for obtaining
digital codementalists that are capable of ethical reasoning and acting according to human norms established
in professional codes of ethics. The main contribution of the text is a well-founded view on how the
documentalist practice will change in our digital age, and how ethical issues that come along with that
change can be handled using the same kind of digital technology using codes of ethics as a moral contract
between humans and machines. 
Future research directions are plenty: both ethical and technical challenges await, and the previous section
has already listed the main issues. Overall, technical sciences related to AI are required to further pursue how
to encode or formalize linguistically vague and uncertain texts such as codes of ethics to executable, logical
specifications. Legal and social scholars are required to analyze the status of transparent, logical and
declarative  specifications  in  relation  to  matters  such  as  liability,  understandability and  responsibility.
Furthermore, much more research is needed on the implications for the human society and humanity, but also
on what it means to be human in an increasingly algorithmic, and robotic, society. The original dreams of
Otlet, Bush, Wells and others of providing humans with universal access to knowledge and information are
now being implemented through machines that increasingly so decide autonomously under what conditions
this is happening. Keeping our human values a part of these conditions is very important.

M. van. Otterlo – Gatekeeping Algorithms with Human Ethical Bias – page 46
