472 
ROHANIMANESH & MAHADEVAN 
UAI2001 
Decision-Theoretic Planning with Concurrent Temporally Extended 
Actions 
Khashayar Rohanimanesh 
Department of Computer Science 
Michigan State University 
East Lansing, MI 48824-1226 

Abstract 
We investigate a model for planning un­
der uncertainty with temporally extended ac­
tions, where multiple actions can be taken 
concurrently at each decision epoch. 
Our 
model is based on the options framework, and 
combines it with factored state space mod­
els, where the set of options can be parti­
tioned into classes that affect disjoint state 
variables. 
We show that the set of deci­
sion epochs for concurrent options defines a 
semi-Markov decision process, if the underly­
ing temporally extended actions being paral­
lelized are restricted to Markov options. This 
property allows us to use SMDP algorithms 
for computing the value function over concur­
rent options. The concurrent options model 
allows overlapping execution of options in or­
der to achieve higher performance or in or­
der to perform a complex task. We describe 
a simple experiment using a navigation task 
which illustrates how concurrent options re­
sults in a more optimal plan when compared 
to the case when only one option is taken at 
a time. 
1 
Introduction 
In our everyday life, our brain is constantly planning 
and executing concurrent (parallel) behaviors. For ex­
ample, when we are driving, in parallel we visually 
search for road signs, while we may be talking to a 
passenger. Or when walking toward our car in a park­
ing lot or our office, we may simultaneously reach for 
our keys, while continuing to talk on a cell-phone and 
navigating through the environment. Parallel execu­
tion of behaviors is sometimes useful in performing a 
task more quickly (e.g., the parking lot example). In 
other situations, the nature of the task requires that 
Sridhar Mahadevan 
Department of Computer Science 
Michigan State University 
East Lansing, MI 48824-1226 

multiple behaviors run concurrently and cooperatively 
in order to perform the task (in the driving example, 
we have to both look at the road and navigate the car 
simultaneously). In this paper, we investigate a model 
for planning with concurrent behaviors. We adopt the 
theoretical framework of options (Sutton et al., 1999) 
to model temporally extended actions, since it is both 
a well-developed rigorous framework that addresses 
planning under uncertainty with temporally extended 
actions, and it allows looking inside behaviors to im­
prove composition of temporally extended actions. 
Previous work on decision-theoretic concurrent plan­
ning seems to be largely restricted to work focusing on 
combining primitive actions, ranging from planning in 
multi-dimensional vector action spaces (Cichosz, 1995) 
to planning with multiple simultaneous MDPs (Singh 
& Cohn, 1998), where the composite state space is the 
cross product of the state spaces of each individual 
MDP and the action set is a proper subset of a multi­
dimensional primitive action space. In these models, 
each decision epoch is fixed and equal to single step ex­
ecution. Our work differs in that we address planning 
with a set of parallel temporally extended actions that 
may not terminate at the same time, which makes the 
problem more challenging. We also exploit the fact 
that in many real world problems, the set of options 
can be factored into those that affect disjoint state 
variables. This factoring greatly reduces the complex­
ity of planning with multi-dimensional composite state 
and action spaces (Boutilier et al., to appear). 
In this paper, we address planning with a set of con­
current options, assuming that they do not compete 
for a shared resource (in the parking lot example, the 
option of reaching for the car key and the option of 
walking affect differer.t portions of the composite state 
space). We present a navigation task involving mov­
ing through rooms using keys to open locked doors 
to illustrate how the concurrent options model facili­
tates faster planning. Our experiments show that the 
concurrent options model improves performance com-

UAI2001 
ROHANIMANESH & MAHADEVAN 
473 
pared to the sequential case when only one behavior 
at a time can be executed. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section 
2, we will briefly overview the option framework. In 
section 3 we define the concurrent options model in 
detail. In section 4 we will present a computational 
problem and the performance results of planning using 
the concurrent options model. Section 5 outlines some 
problems for future research. 
2 
Options 
Options are a generalization of primitive actions that 
include temporally extended courses of action in the 
context of reinforcement learning (Sutton et al., 1999). 
Options consist of three components: 
a policy 1r 
: 
S x A---t [0, 1] , a termination condition /3: S ---t [0, 1], 
and an initiation set I ƾ S, where I denotes the set 
of states s E S in which the option can be initiated. 
Note that we can restrict the scope of application of a 
particular option by controlling the initiation set and 
the termination condition. For any state s, if option 
1r is taken, then primitive actions are selected based 
on rr until it terminates according to {3. An option 0 
is a Markov option if its policy, initiation set and ter­
mination condition depend stochastically only on the 
current state s E S. Given a set of options 0, let 0, 
denote the set of options in 0 that are available in each 
states E S according to their initiation set. 08 resem­
bles A8 in the standard reinforcement learning frame­
work, in which As denotes the set of primitive (single 
step) actions. Similarly, we introduce policies over op­
tions. For a decision epoch £4, the Markov policy over 
options J.L : S x 0 ƿ [0, 1] selects an option Ot E 0, 
according to the probability distribution J.L(Bt, .). The 
option Ot is then initiated in St until it terminates at 
a random time t + k in some state St+A: according to 
the termination condition, and the process repeats in 
St+k. For an option o E 0, and for any state s E S, let 
c:(o, s, t) denote the event of o being initiated in state 
s at time t. The total discounted reward accrued by 
executing option o in any state s E S is defined as: 
ru = E{rt+t + 1rt+2 + ... + lk-1rt+k I c:(o, 8, t)} 
where t + k is the random time at which o terminates. 
Also let p0(s, s', k) denote the probability that the op­
tion o is initiated in state 8 and terminates in states' 
after k steps. Then 
00 
Pvs' = LPo(s, s',k)lk 
k=l 
Given the reward and state transition model of option 
o, we can write the Bellman equation for the value of 
a general policy p. as : 
vw(s) = L J.L(s, o) [rx + LPxs' vƯ(s')] 
oEO. 
s1 
Similarly we can write the "option-value" Bellman 
equation for the value of an option o in state s as 
Qw(8,o) = ry + LPzs' L J.L(s',d)QP.(8',o') 
s' 
o1EO.r 
and the corresponding optimal Bellman equations are 
as follows: 
V0(s) =max [rv + LPs' Y0{s')] 
oEO. 
s' 
Q(:,(s,o)=r{+LP{s' 
max Q"(s',o') 
8, 
o'EO••+• 
We can use synchronous value iteration (SVI) to com­
pute V0(s) and Q0(s,o), which iterates the following 
step for every state 8 E S: 
Alternatively, if the option model is unknown, we can 
estimate Q0(s,o) using SMDP Q-learning, by doing 
sample backups after the termination of each option 
o, which transitions from state s to s' in k steps with 
cumulative discounted reward r: 
Q(8, o) +-Q(s, o)+ 
a: [r+')'lc max Q(s',o') -Q(s,o)] 
o'EO,r 
3 
Concurrent Options 
Definition: Let o =< I, 11, {3 > be an option with 
state space So governed by the set of state variables 
Wo = { wƬ, wƭ, ... , wƮ,,}. Let ip0 C W0 denote the sub­
set of state variables that evolve by some other pro­
cesses (e.g. other options) and independent of o, and 
let f2o = Wo - 'Po denote the subset of state variables 
that evolve solely based on the option o. There is 
no explicit restriction on the initiation set, policy and 
termination condition with respect to the state space 
Sa. We refer to the class of options with this property 
as partially-factored options. As an example, consider 
the task of delivering parts to a set of machines in a 
factory environment. The agent has to load up a part 
from the inventory load station and deliver it to a par­
ticular machine. We may define the options deliver­
part and load-part with the set of state variables W = 

474 
ROHANIMANESH & MAHADEVAN 
UAI 2001 
Wdeliver_part 
= 
W1aad_part 
= {position, part _ready} 
denoting the position of the agent and whether or 
not a part is available at the inventory load station, 
respectively. 
We may also define an inventory op­
tion with state variable Winventor11 
= {part..ready}, 
which is set or reset whenever a part is ready to 
load, or not available. 
It is clear from this exam­
ple that even though the initiation set, policy and 
the termination condition of the options deliver-part 
and load-part are defined over the whole state space 
spanned by W, the execution of these options has 
no effect on the state variable part-ready that is con­
trolled by some other option (e.g. inventory option). 
In this example rpdeliver-vart 
= rpload-vart ;:::: {part­
ready}, and Sldeliver_part 
= flload_part = {position}. 
Also !pinventOTll ;:::: 0 and Oinventorll 
= {part..ready}. 
Two options Oi and Oj are called coherent if (1) they are 
both partially-factored options, and (2) Oo; n Oo; = 0 
(this condition is required to ensure that these two op­
tions will not affect the same portion of the state space 
so that they can safely run in parallel). In the above 
example, deliver-part and inventory options are coher­
ent, but deliver-part and load-part options are not co­
herent, since the state variable position is controlled by 
both deliver-part and load-part options. Now, assume 
0 is a set of available options and { Ct, C2, ... , Cn} are 
n classes of options that partition 0 into n disjoint 
classes such that any two options belonging to differ­
ent classes are coherent (can run in parallel), and any 
two options within the same class are not coherent 
(they control shared state variables and cannot run 
in parallel). Clearly any set of options generated by 
drawing each option from a separate class can safely 
be run in parallel (for the above example, we can de­
fine two classes of options with this property: C1 = 
{deliver ..part, load ..part} and c2 ;:::: {inventory}). 
Given the above definitions, we can define the Con­
current Options model as a 4-tuple (S, A, P, R): 
State space: The state space represented by S is 
spanned by the set of state variables in the union of 
Wa sets (o E 0): 
S = U So and W = U Wo 
oEO 
oEO 
It is also simple to verify that: 
(8) 
(9) 
Let Sno denote the sub-space in Sa that is spanned by 
00• Note that for every option o, Sno is a sub-space 
of S0 and Sa is a sub-space of S. For every option 
o E 0 let &oJs0} return a vector whose elements are 
the current value of each state variable in 00 for a given 
state So E S0, and let Bo" (s) return a vector whose 
elements are the current value of each state variable in 
00 for a given state s E S. Also, let 90(s) return the 
current S0 E S0• It is simple to verify that 
Vo E 0, &n"(s0) =Beds) 
(10) 
Based on equation 9, a sample state vector 8 E S can 
be represented by 
8 = (Bo"1 (s) : Bno2 (s): ... :Boo,. (8)) 
(11) 
where ':' is the concatenation operator. We will use 
this notation to explain the other components of the 
model. 
Actions: For every states E S, a set of one or more 
options, each belonging to a different class can be ini­
tiated concurrently, therefore: 
\Is E S,O(s) s; cl X c2 X ... X Cn 
(12) 
A concurrent option o E 6 ( s) consists of a set of 
m (1 $ m $ n) options that can be initiated in 
parallel. 
We represent a concurrent option by o = 
(o1, 02, ... ,om) and call it a multi-option (to distinguish 
them from regular options), and also represent the set 
of available options in state s by O(s). We also need 
to define the event of termination of a multi-option o. 
When multi-option o is executed in state 8, a set of m 
options Oi E o are initiated. Each option oi will termi­
nate at some random time t0,. We can define the event 
of termination for a multi-option based on either of the 
following events: (I) when any of the options Oi E o 
terminates according to /3i(s), multi-option o is de­
clared terminated and the rest of the options that are 
not terminated at that point in time, are interrupted, 
or (2) when all of the options are terminated. Prom 
now on, we use Tl to refer to the first definition of 
the termination event, and T2 to refer to the second 
definition of the termination event. Mathematically, 
Tl and T2 can be defined as: 
Tl ::: min{ to; II $ i $ m} 
T2 := max{ t0, II $ i $ m} 
Transition Probabilities: We now define the state 
transition probabilities based on the termination event 
explained above. Let P:8, denote the probability that 
multi-option o:;:::. ( o1, 02, ... , Om) is initiated in state s, 
and terminates in state s'. Based on Tl, it denotes 
the probability that every option Oi E iJ is initiated in 
state s, and when at least one of them terminates (ac­
cording to its /3i function), the state of the system is 
s'. Based on T2, it denotes the probability that every 
option Oi E o is initiated in state s, and when all of 
them terminate (according to its {3, function), the state 
of the system is s'. For each option o,, the transition 

-; 
UAI2001 
ROHANIMANESH & MAHADEYAN 
475 
probability when only that option is initiated is well 
defined and is part of the option model. When more 
than one option is initiated simultaneously, the tran­
sition probability of the multi-option o is computed as 
follows. Let P0(s, s', k) denote the the probability that 
multi-option o is initiated in state s, and terminates 
in state s' after k steps. Then: 
00 
-
""
-
I
 
k 
P%,, = ƽ P0(s, s , k)'Y 
k=l 
(13) 
Now, let e(s, s', k) denote the probability that multi­
option o is initiated in state s, and after k steps tran­
sitions to state s'. We can compute P0(s,s',k) based 
on J0( s, s', k), for either of the termination events ex­
plained above: 
Termination condition I (Tl): It can be viewed as 
the probability of initiating the multi-option o in state 
s, running it for k steps without any of the options 
being terminated until step k, and at least one of the 
options terminates at step k: 
m 
P0(s,s',k)=e(s,s',k) (1- ITC1-:i(s'))) (14) 
i=l 
The second term on the right hand side in equation 14 
denotes the probability that at least one of the options 
terminates in state s' according to its termination con­
dition :i· 
Termination condition II (T2): For this case, for 
any k, we have to include every possible permutation 
of termination of m options {ol>D-l•···,om} within k 
steps. It can be computed based on the following re­
current equation: ( l0(s, su, i) l 
P0(s,s',k) = t  L 
TioEo'io(Bu) 
•=lƽCoƾES 
X 
po-o' (su, s', k- i) 
(15) 
The first summation runs over all intermediate steps 
i :::; k at which no termination happens. 
The sec­
ond summation comprises every subset d of the multi­
option o that terminates at step i, and the third sum­
mation runs over every possible intermediate state in 
which d terminates in i ::::; k steps. The first term in­
side the summation denotes the transition probability 
that the multi-option o initiated in state s transitions 
to the intermediate state Su after i steps; the second 
term denotes the probability that all of the options 
o E d (where dis a subset of the original multi-option 
0) terminate at the intermediate state Sui and the third 
term denotes the k - i steps transition probability of 
the rest of the options (o- d). The following equa­
tion denotes the stopping criterion for the recurrent 
equation 15: 
P0(s, s', 1) = ecs, 8', 1) IT mocs') 
(16) 
oEo 
in which eo(s, s',1) denotes the single step transition 
probability. 
Now, for every option o,, eo; (si. sn, 1) 
(where Bi, si E S;) denotes the single step transition 
probability that the option Oi is executed in state Si 
for only one step and the next state is s', assuming 
that no other option is initiated. Since each option Os 
affects the state space through the set of state vari­
ables in Oo; (and flo; sets are disjoint), we can define 
the Jo; ( Si, Bi, 1) in terms of Oo,. Using equation 10 We 
get: 
eo; (si, s:, 1) = C; (Ono, (s), On., (s'), 1) 
(17) 
Using equation 11, we can rewrite the single step tran­
sition probability1 of a multi-option o: 
ecs, s', 1) = P0((&n.1 (s) : &o.2 (s) : ... : On .... (s )), 
(Oo"1 (s') : Oo"2 (s') : ... : Ono,. (s')), 
1) 
(18) 
Thus, using equation 17 we get: 
m 
e0(8, s'' 1) ::;;; IT ei Woo; {s), 8no; (i), 1) 
i=l 
(19) 
m 
= II eo; csi, so, 1) 
i=l 
Therefore, the single step transition probability of a 
multi-option o from state s to state s' is the product 
of single step transition probabilities of each individ­
ual option o E ofrom state s to state s', since through 
single step execution of every option o E iJ in state 
s, each option will control a disjoint set of state vari­
ables that mutually contributes to the formation of 
state s
' through their n sets, which is independent 
of the single-step execution of the other options that 
are running in parallel. Having defined the single step 
transition probability (equation 19), we can recursively 
define the k-step transition probability: 
( ecs,s3,k -1) l 
ecs,s',k)= L 
n:.(1;:i(Bj)) 
s;ES 
X 
ecsj, s', 1) 
(20) 
1Note that in this representation, for clarity, we have 
omitted those state variables that are not covered by the 
union of Oo sets (Vo E 0). In such cases, we ca.n explicitly 
list those state variables, since they remain unchanged. 

476 
ROHANIMANESH & MAHADEVAN 
UAI2001 
in which the first term on the right hand side denotes 
the probability of executing multi-option o (initiated 
in state 8) for k -1 steps and ending up in state 8 i, the 
second term denotes the probability that none of the 
options Oi E o terminate at state SJ and the last term 
denotes the probability that the option is initiated in 
state 8J and executed for a single step, and ended up 
in state 81• Based on equations 13, 14, 15, 17, 19 and 
20, we can compute Pfs,, for all s,s' E Sand for all 
oE O(s). 
Reward function: For any state s E S and for any 
multi-option oE O(s), it can be defined as: 
where t + k is the random time at which multi-option 
o terminates. 
State value function: For any Markov policy Ji., the 
state value function can be written 
Vl(8) = E{rt+l + ')'rt+2 + ... + 1"'-1rt+11:+ 
1"'Vm'(st+11:) I e(J.i.,s,t)} 
= 2.: J.l.(o,8) [R9 + 2.: Pfs,vl(8')] 
oEO(s) 
s'ES 
where k is the duration of multi-option o according to 
the termination event explained above. 
Multi-option value of o under Markov policy J.l.: 
Ql(s, 0) = E{rt+l + ')'rt+2 + ... + 1"'-1rtH+ 
1"'V14(8t+A:) I t:(o,s,t)} 
= E{rt+t + 1rt+2 + ••• + ')'11:-lrt+A:+ 
1"' 
L 
J.I.(Bt+k,d)Q14(8tH,d) I e(o,s,t)} 
o1eO(s•+•) 
= R: + 2: Pfs, E J.l.(s',d)Q!J(s',d) 
•'ES 
OieO(s') 
where k is the duration of multi-option o according to 
the termination condition explained above. It has been 
shown earlier that the set of Markov options defines a 
semi-Markov decision process (SMDP) (Sutton et al., 
1999). It is natural to conjecture whether this result 
carries over to multi-options. We show that this is 
indeed the case, with the assumptions discussed above. 
Theorem (MDP + Concurrent 
Options 
= 
SMDP): For any MDP, and any set of concurrent 
Markov options defined on that MDP, the decision 
process that selects only among multi-options, and 
executes each one until its termination according to 
the multi-option termination condition, forms a semi­
Markov decision process. 
Proof: (Sketch) For a decision process to be a SMDP, 
it is required to define (1) set of states, (2) set of ac­
tions, (3) an expected cumulative discounted reward 
defined for every pair of state and action and ( 4) a well 
defined joint distribution of the next state and next de­
cision epoch. In the concurrent options model, we have 
defined the set of states and the set of actions are the 
multi-options. The expected cumulative discounted 
reward and joint distributions of the next state and 
next decision epoch have been defined in terms of the 
underlying MDP. The policy and termination condi­
tion for every option that belongs to a multi-option, 
and the termination condition for a multi-option have 
also been defined. 
4 
Experimental Results 
In this section we present a simple computational ex­
ample that illustrates planning with concurrent op­
tions. We adopt the rooms example from (Sutton et al., 
1999) and we add doors in each of the four hallways 
(Figure 1). 
ƫ0 
IO 
·-·
----
·-, 
·-
priaKd ....... 
(up,dowo,loftoodripo) 
l'•nlOIIJ.uftiÔDS 
li'IIXMR-tlapprilaitiftÓ 
Uf' 
loft+-
....  
.Ƽ(Goal) 
/ 
I mulli-Np llfiW:pdoa. 
opdoaa 
(tutli!IC.bd.x!or'slhlllwaJÕJ) 
3 .lliXhulic prblti we adioal: 
(&ft-..,_,..,. __ ...!,.....·IU>) 
lmuld....,.,...._..,_...., 
Drop ....  31Ò ., ""-
Figure 1: The rooms example with locked doors. 
The agent cannot pass through locked (closed) doors 
unless it is holding the key. The state of the environ­
ment for this example consists of three state variables: 
position of the agent in the environment (represented 
by cells), state of the doors, and the state of the key. 
At any state, the agent can select actions from the set 
of navigation actions or the set of key related actions. 
Navigation actions comprises four stochastic primitive 
actions: up, down, left and right (Figure 1). Each nav­
igation action with probability 9/10 causes the agent 
to move one cell in the corresponding direction, and 
with probability 1/10, moves the agent in one of the 

UAI2001 
ROHANIMANESH & MAHADEVAN 
477 
other three directions, each with probability 1/30. In 
either case, if the movement would take the agent into 
a wall, or a closed door when the agent is not hold­
ing the key, then the agent will remain in the same 
cell. We have also defined a room-nop primitive ac­
tion that does not change the position of the agent 
(with probability 1). In each of the four rooms, we 
define two hallway Markov options (multi-step) that 
take the agent from anywhere within the room to one 
of the two hallway cells leading out of the room. 
Figure 2 shows the policy for one of the hallway op­
tions. The termination condition j3(.) for hallway op­
tions is zero for states inside the room, except for the 
cell next to the target hallway cell (shaded cell in the 
Figure 2), in which the termination condition also de­
pends on the state of the door in the target hallway, 
and also whether or not the agent is holding the key. 
In this cell, the termination condition is zero if either 
the door is open, or the door is closed and the agent is 
holding the key, otherwise the hallway option will ter­
minate with probability 1. Assume that the agent is 
currently executing the hallway option and its current 
location is the cell adjacent to the target hallway, and 
also the door in the target hallway is locked. Then if 
the agent is holding the key, it continues executing the 
hallway option which will unlock the door and takes 
the agent to the target hall way, based on the stochastic 
process explained above. Once the agent exits the hall­
way, the door within that hallway changes its state to 
locked and closes again. The initiation set of the hall­
way option comprises all the states within the room 
plus the non-target hallway state leading into room. 
Note that for the cell next to the target hallway, the 
option can be initiated if either the door is open, or 
the door is closed and the agent is holding the key. 
Figure 3 shows the states of the key process. Note that 
only at state six is the key ready to unlock doors (i.e. 
the agent is holding the key). There are eleven states 
defined for the key process and the agent can select one 
of three primitive actions, get-key that is defined over 
states S0 through S5, key-nop that is defined on all 
key states and putback-key that is defined only at state 
S6. Primitive action key-nop has a stochastic effect in 
that the agent may drop the key with probability 3/10 
once taken at state S6 and with probability 7/10 will 
not change the state of the key process. If the agent 
drops the key, the key state transitions to state s7. If 
the key-nop action is taken at states So through S5 
and 87 through slO, it will not change the state of 
the key process. The agent will advance the state of 
the process when action get-key is executed, or will 
reset the state of the process to S0 if action putback­
key is executed. We also provide a multi-step pickup­
key Markov option (on top of the get-key primitive 
Hall1n11 opllon can M lakon 
Hall1n11 opllon cannol M lakon 
>56 
( 
& 
14/ 
"3 
Figure 2: The policy associated with one of the hallway 
options. This figure also shows that the option can be 
taken at any cell within that room. In the shaded cell 
that is adjacent to the target hallway, the option can 
be taken if either the door is open, or the agent is 
holding the key at that cell. The option terminates in 
the target hallway and also in the shaded cell if the 
door is closed and the agent does is not holding the 
key. 
action). 
Pickup-key option's policy 1r advances key 
state (with probability 1) until the key is ready (state 
S6)· The termination condition /3(.) for pickup-key 
option is 1 for state 56, and zero for rest of the states. 
Its initiation set comprises all of the key states except 
state S5. Note that, if the agent drops the key, it 
will take more steps to pick it up (10 steps). This is 
to encourage the agent to put back the key, once it 
reaches state 56. 
Primitive action "get-key" 
Primitive action "key-nop" 
Primitive action "putback-key" 
·---- · -
Multi-step option "pickup-key" 7·. 8 
-[---
Figure 3: Representation of the key pickup option. At 
state 85, agent is holding the key. 
Figure 4 shows the evolution of the state of the envi­
ronment when hallway options and key options run in 
parallel. Note that these options share the "key state" 
state variable, but they affect disjoint subspaces of the 
state space (e.g. hallway options will only control "po­
sition" and the "doors state" variables and key options 

478 
ROHANIMANESH & MAHADEVAN 
UAI 2001 
will only affect the "key state" variable). 
Figure 4: Evolution of states in the room navigation 
task. Initiation set, policy and termination probabili­
ties of each option may share state variables with other 
parallel options (hallway options and pickup-key op­
tions share the "key state" variable), but each will 
affect mutually disjoint sets of state variables (hall­
way options control the position and the door state 
variables, and key option only controls the key state 
variable). 
Using the notation developed in section 3, we define 
two 
classes 
of 
options: 
cl 
= {hallwayo, hallwayb ... , hallway7, room_nop}2 
(eight hallway options and one room-nop option) and 
C2 
= {pickup...key,key-nop,putback...keyp. For any 
hallway option, the set of state variables WMvigation = 
{position,doors...state, key..state} (where doors_state 
specifies the state of each door) and for the 
key option Wƿ:e11 
{key...state}. 
Note that 
!"lnavigation 
= {position, doors ..state} and nkey 
= 
{key ...state}. 
Based on equation 8, the state 
space of the overall process is spanned by the set 
of state variables W 
= 
Wnavigation U Wkev 
= 
{position, doors..state, key ..state}. The multi-options 
are members of the set Ct X c2. Since only two hallway 
options can be taken in each room plus the room-nop 
option, and three key options can be taken in any cell 
within each room, a maximum of 9 multi-options can 
be defined in every state. 
In order to evaluate the concurrent options framework, 
we compare its performance (for both definitions of 
the termination event) for the rooms example with 
the standard options framework. Note that in stan­
dard options framework, only one option can be taken 
at a time. Based on the concurrent options theorem 
in the previous section, we can apply SMDP-based Q-
2Note that even though hallway options of different 
rooms also control disjoint sub-spaces of the state space, we 
put them in the same class since based on their initiation 
set, they can not run in parallel. 
3Note that room-nop, key-nop and putback-key are prim­
itive actions, 
but they are special case of single-step 
options. 
learning. Each multi-option is viewed as an indivisi­
ble, opaque unit of action (although intra-multi-option 
methods could also be developed). When multi-option 
o is initiated in state s, it transitions to state s' in 
which multi-option o terminates according to the ter­
mination condition defined for multi-options. We can 
use SMDP Q-learning method (Bradtke & Duff, 1995; 
Sutton et a!., 1999) to update the multi-option-value 
function Q(s, 0) after each decision epoch where the 
multi-option o is taken in some state s and terminates 
ins': 
Q(s, 0) +-Q(s, 0)+ 
a [r + --/ ƻmƼ Q(s', d) -Q(s, 0)] 
o'EO(a') 
where k denotes the number of time steps since initia­
tion of the multi-option oat state s and its termination 
at state s', and r denotes the cumulative discounted 
reward over this period. For a fixed position as the 
starting point (upper left corner cell) and a fixed goal 
(hallway H3) in Figure 1, we used both frameworks 
in order to learn the policy to navigate from start­
ing position to the target. For any primitive action, 
a reward of -1 is provided as the single step reward 
in order to learn a policy that optimizes the time for 
performing the task. Figure 5 shows the median of 
time (in terms of number of primitive actions taken 
until success) where for trial n, it is the median of all 
trials from 1 to n. This figure shows that the con­
current options framework based on the either of the 
termination events, learns a more optimal policy than 
the standard options framework. Moreover, the policy 
learned based on T2 is also more optimal than the pol­
icy learned by Tl. One justification for this result is 
the SMDP process based on T2 allows less parallelism 
and hence less stochasticity during learning. This fig­
ure also shows that the standard options framework, 
converges faster compared to the concurrent options 
framework based on T1, but eventually, the concur­
rent options framework learns a better policy. Also in 
Figure 1, the small solid rectangles within cells repre­
sent the approximate location that the "pickup-key" 
option is initiated as the agent moves toward hallway 
HO and the goal. With the policy learned using se­
quential execution of options, the agent navigates to 
the cell adjacent to the target hallway with the locked 
door using the corresponding hallway option, then it 
initiates the pickup-key option and waits in that cell 
for 6 steps until the key state advances to state s6 at 
which point the key is ready to use. By overlapping 
execution of the hallway option and pick-up key op­
tion, the agent minimizes the time in order to reach 
the goal. 

UAI2001 
ROHANIMANESH & MAHADEVAN 
479 
<II 
"iii 
Ʃ --
c: 
tiS 
'0 
<ll 
::::!: 
60 rt-Ʒ--.-----.-----.-Ƹ--ƹƺ--ƻ--
Concurrent Options: T2 
---­
50 
40 
30 
20 
1 0 
0 
. 
-
-
- -----"Ð-- - - ·j - - - ---
Standard Options 
·----Y---­
Concurre5t Option6: T1 
--
• --
-
-
:·
··
·
--
-
! 
----r 
: 
. 
. 
. 
• 
! 
! 
! 
Ñ 
! 
ƪ --:--:=-)j-ƨ-=-=:- !+12"#--$%:-&.:'t(-)='--$*-:-+-;-:,- .-:-$<-.t.0.:-/ 
. 
' 
..... t*J15,-"W.lJ.-ll.'li·-!1;. --·!·*****"·······-·-
tit 
• 
.....
.
...
..
.
. -- -
........ ,_, , ,,, ___ 
.... . . -
i_ 
0 
10000 
20000 
! 
i 
! . .. 
--- - -"'"'""; ..... Z---- · ............. ƶ ..... .. . ........... Ƶ ·-······ 
i 
30000 
40000 
50000 
Trial 
Figure 5: Performance of standard options and con­
current options framework using SMDP Q-learning in 
rooms example. The horizontal axis represents the 
number of trials, and the vertical axis shows the me­
dian of number of steps until success across trials. T1 
and T2 denote the first and second definitions of the 
termination event, respectively. 
5 
Discussion and Future Work 
In this paper we introduced the concurrent options 
model, which formalizes planning under uncertainty 
with parallel temporally extended actions where each 
action affects mutually disjoint subspaces of the en­
vironment state space. The key assumption that is 
required for a set of options to be safely run con­
currently is that they are Markov. This restriction 
is necessary in order to have well defined termination 
condition and state prediction (transition probabili­
ties). Consider the counter-example of a semi-Markov 
navigation option where the agent moves around the 
perimeter of a room twice before deciding to exit the 
room. For the key option to be invoked in parallel 
with this semi-Markov option, the agent would have 
to know how long the exit-room option had been run­
ning (information not available in the current decision 
epoch). We provided a simple computational experi­
ment which shows that planning with concurrent op­
tions is more effective than when only one option is ex­
ecuted at a time. There is a clear connection between 
the model of concurrent options proposed in this paper 
to work on factored MOPs (Boutilier & Goldszmidt, 
1995; Boutilier et al., to appear; Dean & Givan, 1997; 
Koller & Parr, 1999). Our approach relies on factoring 
the set of state variables using sets of behaviors that do 
not conflict. However, we do not use compact models 
of actions, such as dynamic Bayesian nets. One imme-
diate problem for future research is to investigate how 
to represent options using DBNs, which would then 
facilitate compact representations of multi-options as 
well. Compact representations of options would also 
provide for a form of value function approximation, 
an issue that we have ignored in this paper. There are 
many interesting directions for further research: (1) 
Planning and learning with concurrent options when 
semi-Markov options are also included (in addition to 
Markov options). (2) Investigate learning of factored 
value functions for policies in multi-options (Koller & 
Parr, 1999). (3) Alleviate the coherency constraint in­
troduced in section 3 to include cases when options 
can also modify shared state variables. (4) Finally, we 
should investigate the termination of a multi-option 
when interrupting a multi-option has higher value than 
continuing the multi-option (Sutton et al., 1999).
