Eﬃcient Hill-Climber for Multi-Objective
Pseudo-Boolean Optimization
Francisco Chicano1, Darrell Whitley2, and Renato Tin´os3
1 Dept. de Lenguajes y Ciencias de la Computaci´on, University of M´alaga, Spain

2 Dept. of Computer Science, Colorado State University, Fort Collins CO, USA

3 Department of Computing and Mathematics, University of S˜ao Paulo, Brazil

Abstract. Local search algorithms and iterated local search algorithms
are a basic technique. Local search can be a stand along search methods,
but it can also be hybridized with evolutionary algorithms. Recently, it
has been shown that it is possible to identify improving moves in Ham-
ming neighborhoods for k-bounded pseudo-Boolean optimization prob-
lems in constant time. This means that local search does not need to
enumerate neighborhoods to ﬁnd improving moves. It also means that
evolutionary algorithms do not need to use random mutation as a oper-
ator, except perhaps as a way to escape local optima. In this paper, we
show how improving moves can be identiﬁed in constant time for mul-
tiobjective problems that are expressed as k-bounded pseudo-Boolean
functions. In particular, multiobjective forms of NK Landscapes and Mk
Landscapes are considered.
Keywords: Hamming Ball Hill Climber, Delta Evaluation, Multi-Objective
Optimization, Local Search
1
Introduction
Local search and iterated local search algorithms [8] start at an initial solution
and then search for an improving move based on a notion of a neighborhood
of solutions that are adjacent to the current solution. This paper will consider
k-bounded pseudo-Boolean functions, where the Hamming distance 1 neighbor-
hood is the most commonly used local search neighborhood.
Recently, it has been shown that the location of improving moves can be cal-
culated in constant time for the Hamming distance 1 “bit ﬂip” neighborhood [16].
This has implications for both local search algorithms as well as simple evolu-
tionary algorithms such as the (1+1) Evolution Strategy. Since we can calculate
the location of improving moves, we do not need to enumerate neighborhoods
to discover improving moves.
Chicano et al. [3] generalize this result to present a local search algorithm
that explore the solutions contained in a Hamming ball of radius r around a
arXiv:1601.07596v1  [cs.AI]  27 Jan 2016

2
F. Chicano, D. Whitley and R. Tin´os
solution in constant time. This means that evolutionary algorithms need not
use mutation to ﬁnd improving moves; either mutation should be used to make
larger moves (that ﬂip more than r bits), or mutation should be used to enable a
form of restarts. It can also makes crossover more important. Goldman et al. [6]
combined local search that automatically calculates the location of improving
moves in constant time with recombination to achieve globally optimal results
on relatively large Adjacent NK Landscape problems (e.g. 10,000 variables).
Whitley [15] has introduced the notion of Mk Landspaces to replace NK
Landscapes. Mk Landscapes are k-bounded pseudo-Boolean optimization prob-
lems composed of a linear combination of M subfunctions, where each subfunc-
tion is a pseudo-Boolean optimization problem deﬁned over k variables. This
deﬁnition is general enough to include NK landscapes, MAX-kSAT, as well as
spin glass problems.
In this paper, we extend these related concepts to multi-objective optimiza-
tion. We deﬁne a class of multi-objective Mk Landscapes and show how these
generalize over previous deﬁnitions of multi-objective NK Landscapes. We also
show how exact methods can be used to select improving moves in constant time.
In the multi-objective space, the notion of an “improving move” is complex be-
cause improvement can be improvement in all objectives, or improvement in only
part of the objectives. When there are improvement in all objectives, then clearly
the improvement should be accepted. However, when there are improvement in
only a subset of objectives, it is less clear what moves should be accepted because
it is possible for search algorithms to cycle and to visit previously discovered so-
lutions. Methods are proposed that allow the identiﬁcation of improving moves
in constant time for multi-objective optimization. Methods are also proposed to
prevent local search algorithms from cycling and thus repeatedly revisiting pre-
viously discovered solutions. The results of this work could also be introduced in
existing local search algorithms for multi-objective optimization, like Anytime
Pareto Local Search [5].
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section we intro-
duce Multi-objective pseudo-Boolean optimization problems. Section 3 deﬁnes
the “Scores” of a solution. The Score vector tracks changes in the evaluation
function and makes it possible to track the locations of improving moves. An
algorithm is introduced to track multiple Scores and to eﬃciently update them
for multi-objective optimization. Section 4 considers how to address the prob-
lems of selecting improving moves in a multi-objective search space when the
move only improves some, but not all, of the objectives. Section 5 empirically
evaluates the proposed algorithms. Section 6 summarizes the conclusions and
outline the potential for future work.
2
Multi-Objective Pseudo-Boolean Optimization
In this paper we consider pseudo-Boolean vector functions with k-bounded epis-
tasis, where the component functions are embedded landscapes [7] or Mk Land-

Eﬃcient Hill-Climber for Multi-Objective Pseudo-Boolean Optimization
3
scapes [15]. We will extend the concept of Mk Landscapes to the multi-objective
domain and, thus, we will base our nomenclature in that of Whitley [15].
Deﬁnition 1 (Vector Mk Landscape). Given two constants k and d, a vec-
tor Mk Landscape f : Bn →Rd is a d-dimensional vector pseudo-Boolean func-
tion deﬁned over Bn whose components are Mk Landscapes. That is, each com-
ponent fi can be written as a sum of mi subfunctions, each one depending at
most on k input variables4:
fi(x) =
mi
X
l=1
f (l)
i (x)
for 1 ≤i ≤d,
(1)
where the subfunctions f (l)
i
depend only on k components of x.
This deﬁnition generalizes that of Aguirre and Tanaka [1] for MNK Land-
scapes. In Figure 1(a) we show a vector Mk Landscape with d = 2 dimensions.
The ﬁrst objective function, f1, can be written as the sum of 5 subfunctions,
f (1)
1
to f (5)
1 . The second objective function, f2, can be writte as the sum of 3
subfunctions, f (1)
2
to f (3)
2 . All the subfunctions depend at most on k = 2 vari-
ables.
It could seem that the previous class of functions is restrictive because each
subfunction depends on a bounded number of variables. However, every com-
pressible pseudo-Boolean function can be transformed in polynomial time into
a quadratic pseudo-Boolean function (with k = 2) [12].
A useful tool for the forthcoming analysis is the co-ocurrence graph [4] G =
(V, E), where V is the set of Boolean variables and E contains all the pairs
of variables (xj1, xj2) that co-occur in a subfunction f (l)
i
for any 1 ≤i ≤d
and 1 ≤l ≤mi (both variables are arguments of the subfunction). In other
terms, two variables xj1 and xj2 co-occur if there exists a subfunction mask wi,l
where the j1-th and j2-th bits are 1. In Figure 1 we show the subfunctions of
a vector Mk Landscape with 2-bounded epistasis and its corresponding variable
co-occurrence graph.
We will consider, without loss of generality, that all the objectives (compo-
nents of the vector function) are to be maximized. Next, we include the deﬁnition
of some standard multi-objective concepts to make the paper self-contained.
Deﬁnition 2 (Dominance). Given a vector function f : Bn →Rd, we say
that solution x ∈Bn dominates solution y ∈Bn, denoted with x ≻f y, if and
only if fi(x) ≥fi(y) for all 1 ≤i ≤d and there exists j ∈{1, 2, . . . , d} such that
fj(x) > fj(y). When the vector function is clear from the context, we will use ≻
instead of ≻f.
Deﬁnition 3 (Pareto Optimal Set and Pareto Front). Given a vector
function f : Bn →Rd, the Pareto Optimal Set is the set of solutions P that are
4 In general, we will use boldface to denote vectors in Rd, as f, but we will use normal
weight for vectors in Bn, like x.

4
F. Chicano, D. Whitley and R. Tin´os
x1
x2
x3
x4
x5
f (1)
1
f (2)
1
f (3)
1
f (4)
1
f (5)
1
f (1)
2
f (2)
2
f (3)
2
(a) Vector Mk Landscape
x1
x2
x3
x4
x5
(b) Co-occurrence graph
Fig. 1. A vector Mk Landscape with k = 2, n = 5 variables and d = 2 dimensions
(top) and its corresponding co-occurrence graph (bottom).
not dominated by any other solution in Bn. That is:
P = {x ∈Bn|∄y ∈Bn, y ≻x} .
(2)
The Pareto Front is the image by f of the Pareto Optimal Set: PF = f(P).
Deﬁnition 4 (Set of Non-dominated Solutions). Given a vector function
f : Bn →Rd, we say that a set X ⊆Bn is a set of non-dominated solutions when
there is no pair of solutions x, y ∈X where y ≻x, that is, ∀x ∈X, ∄y ∈X, y ≻x.
Deﬁnition 5 (Local Optimum [11]). Given a vector function f : Bn →Rd,
and a neighborhood function N : Bn →2Bn, we say that solution x is a local
optimum if it is not dominated by any other solution in its neighborhood: ∄y ∈
N(x), y ≻x.
3
Moves in a Hamming Ball
We can characterize a move in Bn by a binary string v ∈Bn having 1 in all
the bits that change in the solution. Following [3] we will extend the concept of
Score5 to vector functions.
Deﬁnition 6 (Score). For v, x ∈Bn, and a vector function f : Bn →Rd, we
denote the Score of x with respect to move v as Sv(x), deﬁned as follows:
Sv(x) = f(x ⊕v) −f(x),
(3)
where ⊕denotes the exclusive OR bitwise operation (sum in Z2).
5 What we call Score here is also named ∆-evaluation by other authors [13].

Eﬃcient Hill-Climber for Multi-Objective Pseudo-Boolean Optimization
5
The Score Sv(x) is the change in the vector function when we move from
solution x to solution x⊕v, that is obtained by ﬂipping in x all the bits that are
1 in v. Our goal is to eﬃciently decide where to move from the current solution.
If possible, we want to apply improving moves to our current solution. While the
concept of “improving” move is clear in the single-objective case (an improving
move is one that increases the value of the objective function), in multi-objective
optimization any of the d component functions could be improving, disimproving
or neutral. Thus, we need to be more clear in this context, and deﬁne what we
mean by “improving” move. It is useful to deﬁne two kinds of improving moves:
the weak improving moves and the strong improving moves. The reason for this
distinction will be clear in Section 4.
Deﬁnition 7 (Strong and Weak Improving Moves). Given a solution x ∈
Bn, a move v ∈Bn and a vector function f : Bn →Rd, we say that move v is a
weak improving move if there exists i ∈{1, 2, . . . , d} such that fi(x⊕v) > fi(x).
We say that move v is a strong improving move if it is a weak improving move
and for all j ∈{1, 2, . . . , d} fj(x ⊕v) ≥fj(x).
Using our deﬁnition of Score, we can say that a move v is a weak improving
move if there exists a j ∈{1, 2, . . . , d} for which Sj,v(x) > 0. It is a strong
improving move if Si,v(x) ≥0 for all i ∈{1, 2, . . . , d} and there exists a j ∈
{1, 2, . . . , d} for which Sj,v(x) > 0.
From Deﬁnition 7 it can be noticed that if v is a strong improving move in
x then x ⊕v ≻x, that is, the concept of strong improving move coincides with
that of dominance. It can also be noticed that in the single-objective case, d = 1,
both concepts are the same. Strong improving moves are clearly desirable, since
they cannot be disimproving for any objective and they will improve at least
one. Weak improving moves, on the other hand, improve at least one objective
but could disimprove other ones.
In particular, if v is a weak, but not strong, improving move in solution x,
then it will improve at least one objective, say i-th, and disimprove at least
another one, say j-th. If this move is taken, in the new solution, x ⊕v, the same
move v will be again a weak, but not strong, improving move. However, now
v will improve (at least) the j-th objective and will disimprove (at least) i-th.
Taking v again in x ⊕v will lead to x, and the algorithm cycles. Thus, any
hill climber taking weak improving moves should include a mechanism to avoid
cycling.
Scores are introduced in order to eﬃciently identify where the (weak or
strong) improving moves are. For this purpose, we can have a data structure
where all the improving moves can be accessed in constant time. As the search
progresses the Score values change and they also move in the data structure to
keep improving moves separated from the rest. A na¨ıve approach to track all im-
proving moves in a Hamming Ball of radius r around a solution would require to
store all possible Scores for moves v with |v| ≤r, where |v| denotes the number
of 1 bits in v.
If we naively use equation (3) to explicitly update the scores, we will have
to evaluate all Pr
i=1
 n
i

= O(nr) neighbors in the Hamming ball. Instead, if

6
F. Chicano, D. Whitley and R. Tin´os
the objective function is a vector Mk Landscape fulﬁlling some requirements
described in Theorem 1, we can design an eﬃcient next improvement hill climber
for the radius r neighborhood that only stores a linear number of Scores and
requires a constant time to update them.
3.1
Scores Update
Using the fact that each component fi of the objective vector function is an Mk
Landscape, we can write:
Si,v(x) =
mi
X
l=1

f (l)
i (x ⊕v) −f (l)
i (x)

=
mi
X
l=1
S(l)
i,v(x),
(4)
where we use S(l)
i,v to represent the score of the subfunction f (l)
i
for move v. Let
us deﬁne wi,l ∈Bn as the binary string such that the j-th element of wi,l is 1
if and only if f (l)
i
depends on variable xj. The vector wi,l can be considered as
a mask that characterizes the variables that aﬀect f (l)
i . Since f (l)
i
has bounded
epistasis k, the number of ones in wi,l, denoted with |wi,l|, is at most k. By the
deﬁnition of wi,l, the next equalities immediately follow.
f (l)
i (x ⊕v) = f (l)
i (x)
for all v ∈Bn with v ∧wi,l = 0,
(5)
S(l)
i,v(x) =
(
0
if wi,l ∧v = 0,
S(l)
i,v∧wi,l(x) otherwise.
(6)
Equation (6) claims that if none of the variables that change in the move
characterized by v is an argument of f (l)
i
the Score of this subfunction is zero,
since the value of this subfunction will not change from f (l)
i (x) to f (l)
i (x ⊕v).
On the other hand, if f (l)
i
depends on variables that change, we only need to
consider for the evaluation of S(l)
i,v(x) the changed variables that aﬀect f (l)
i . These
variables are characterized by the mask vector v ∧wi,l. With the help of (6) we
can re-write (4):
Si,v(x) =
mi
X
l=1
wi,l∧v̸=0
S(l)
i,v∧wi,l(x).
(7)
Equation (7) simply says that we don’t have to consider all the subfunctions
to compute a Score. This can reduce the run time to compute the scores from
scratch.
During the search, instead of computing the Scores using (7) after every move,
it is more eﬃcient in time to store the Scores Sv(x) of the current solution x in
memory and update only those that are aﬀected by the move.
In the following, and abusing of notation, given a move v ∈Bn we will also
use v to represent the set of variables that will be ﬂipped in the move (in addition
to the binary string).

Eﬃcient Hill-Climber for Multi-Objective Pseudo-Boolean Optimization
7
For each of the Scores to update, the change related to subfunction f (l)
i
can be computed with the help of S(l)
i,v(x ⊕t) = f (l)
i (x ⊕t ⊕v) −f (l)
i (x ⊕t) and
S(l)
i,v(x) = f (l)
i (x⊕v)−f (l)
i (x). The component Si,v will be updated by subtracting
S(l)
i,v(x) and adding S(l)
i,v(x⊕t). This procedure is shown in Algorithm 1, where the
term Si,v represents the i-th component of the Score of move v stored in memory
and M r is the set of moves whose scores are stored. In the worst (and na¨ıve)
case M r is the set of all strings v with at most r ones, M r = {v|1 ≤|v| ≤r},
and |M r| = O(nr). However, we will prove in Section 3.2 that, for some vector
Mk Landscapes, we only need to store O(n) Scores to identify improving moves
in a ball of radius r.
Algorithm 1 Eﬃcient algorithm for Scores update
Input: S, x, t
1: for (i, l) such that wi,l ∧t ̸= 0 do
2:
for v ∈M r such that wi,l ∧v ̸= 0 do
3:
Si,v ←Si,v + f (l)
i (x ⊕t ⊕v) −f (l)
i (x ⊕t)
−f (l)
i (x ⊕v) + f (l)
i (x)
4:
end for
5: end for
3.2
Scores Decomposition
Some scores can be written as a sum of other scores. The beneﬁt of such a
decomposition is that we do not really need to store all the scores in memory to
have complete information of the inﬂuence that the moves in a Hamming ball of
radius r have on the objective function f. The co-occurrence graph has a main
role in identifying the moves whose Scores are fundamental to recover all the
improving moves in the Hamming ball.
Let us denote with G[v] the subgraph of G induced by v, that is, the subgraph
containing only the vertices in v and the edges of E between vertices in v.
Proposition 1 (Score decomposition). Let v1, v2 ∈Bn be two moves such
that v1∩v2 = ∅and variables in v1 do not co-occur with variables in v2. In terms
of the co-occurrence graph this implies that there is no edge between a variable
in v1 and a variable in v2 and, thus, G[v1 ∪v2] = G[v1] ∪G[v2]. Then the score
function Sv1∪v2(x) can be written as:
Sv1∪v2(x) = Sv1(x) + Sv2(x)
(8)

8
F. Chicano, D. Whitley and R. Tin´os
Proof. Using (7) we can write:
Si,v1∪v2(x) =
mi
X
l=1
wi,l∧(v1∨v2)̸=0
S(l)
i,(v1∨v2)∧wi,l(x)
=
mi
X
l=1
(wi,l∧v1)∨(wi,l∧v2)̸=0
S(l)
i,(v1∧wi,l)∨(v2∧wi,l)(x).
Since variables in v1 do not co-occur with variables in v2, there is no wi,l
such that v1 ∧wi,l ̸= 0 and v2 ∧wi,l ̸= 0 at the same time. Then we can write:
Si,v1∪v2(x) =
mi
X
l=1
wi,l∧v1̸=0
S(l)
i,v1∧wi,l(x) +
mi
X
l=1
wi,l∧v2̸=0
S(l)
i,v2∧wi,l(x) = Si,v1(x) + Si,v2(x),
and the result follows.
⊓⊔
For example, in the vector Mk Landscape of Figure 1 the scoring function
S1,3,4 can be written as the sum of the scoring functions S1 and S3,4, where we
used i1, i2, ... to denote the binary string having 1 in positions i1, i2, . . ., and the
rest set to 0.
A consequence of Proposition 1 is that we only need to store scores for moves
v where G[v] is a connected subgraph. If G[v] is not a connected subgraph, then
there are sets of variables v1 and v2 such that v = v1 ∪v2 and v1 ∩v2 = ∅and,
applying Proposition 1 we have Sv(x) = Sv1(x) + Sv2(x). Thus, we can recover
all the scores in the Hamming ball of radius r from the ones for moves v where
1 ≤|v| ≤r and G[v] is connected. In the following we will assume that the set
M r of Algorithm 1 is:
M r = {v ∈Bn|1 ≤|v| ≤r and G[v] is connected} .
(9)
3.3
Memory and Time Complexity of Scores Update
We will now address the question of how many of these Scores exist and what
is the cost in time of updating them after a move.
Lemma 1. Let f : Bn →Rd be a vector Mk Landscape where each Boolean
variable appears in at most c subfunctions f (l)
i . Then, the number of connected
subgraphs with size no greater than r of the co-occurrence graph G containing a
given variable xj is O((3ck)r).
Proof. For each connected subgraph of G containing xj we can ﬁnd a spanning
tree with xj at the root. The degree of any node in G is bounded by ck, since
each variable appears at most in c subfunctions and each subfunction depends
at most on k variables. Given a tree of l nodes with xj at the root, we have
to assign variables to the rest of the nodes in such a way that two connected

Eﬃcient Hill-Climber for Multi-Objective Pseudo-Boolean Optimization
9
nodes have variables that are adjacent in G. The ways in which we can do this
is bounded by (ck)l−1. We have to repeat the same operation for all the possible
rooted trees of size no greater than r. If Tl is the number of rooted trees with l
vertices, then the number of connected subgraphs of G containing xj and with
size no greater than r nodes is bounded by
r
X
l=1
Tl(ck)l−1 ≤
r
X
l=1
3l(ck)l−1 ≤3(3ck)r,
(10)
where we used the result in [10] for the asymptotic behaviour of Tl:
lim
l→∞
Tl
Tl−1
≈2.955765.
(11)
⊓⊔
Lemma 1 provides a bound for the number of moves in M r that contains
an arbitrary variable xj. In eﬀect, the connected subgraphs in G containing xj
corresponds to the moves in M r that ﬂip variable xj. An important consequence
is given by the following theorem.
Theorem 1. Let f : Bn →Rd be a vector Mk Landscape where each Boolean
variable appears in at most c subfunctions. Then, the number of connected sub-
graphs of G of size no greater than r is O(n(3ck)r), which is linear in n if c is
independent of n. This is the cardinality of M r given in (9).
Proof. The set of connected subgraphs of G with size no greater than r is the
union of connected subgraphs of G of size no greater than r that contains each
of the n variables. According to Lemma 1 the cardinality of this set must be
O(n(3ck)r).
⊓⊔
The next Theorem bounds the time required to update the scores.
Theorem 2. Let f : Bn →Rd be a vector Mk Landscape where each Boolean
variable appears in at most c subfunctions f (l)
i . The time required to update the
Scores using Algorithm 1 is O(b(k)|t|(3ck)r+1) where b(k) is a bound on the time
required to evaluate any subfunction f (l)
i .
Proof. Since each variable appears in at most c subfunctions, the number of
subfunctions containing at least one of the bits in t is at most c|t|, and this
is the number of times that the body of the outer loop starting in Line 1 of
Algorithm 1 is executed. Once the outer loop has ﬁxed a pair (i, l), the number
of moves v ∈M r with wi,l ∧v ̸= 0 is the number of moves v ∈M r that contains
a variable in wi,l. Since |wi,l| ≤k and using Lemma 1, this number of moves is
O(k(3ck)r). Line 3 of the algorithm is, thus, executed O(|t|ck(3ck)r) times, and
considering the bound on the time to evaluate the subfunctions, b(k) the result
follows.
⊓⊔

10
F. Chicano, D. Whitley and R. Tin´os
Since |t| ≤r, the time required to update the Scores is Θ(1) if c does not
depend on n. Observe that if c is O(1), then the number of subfunctions of the
vector Mk Landscape is m = Pd
i=1 mi = O(n). On the on the hand, if every
variable appears in at least one subfunction (otherwise the variable could be
removed), m = Ω(n). Thus, a consequence of c = O(1) is that m = Θ(n).
4
Multi-Objective Hamming-Ball Hill Climber
We have seen that, under the hypothesis of Theorem 1, a linear number of Scores
can provide information of all the Scores in a Hamming ball of radius r around a
solution. However, we need to sum some of the scores to get complete information
of where all the improving moves are, and this is not more eﬃcient than exploring
the Hamming ball. In order to eﬃciently identify improving moves we have to
discard some of them. In particular, we will discard all the improving moves
whose scores are not stored in memory. In [3] the authors proved for the single-
objective case that if none of the O(n) stored scores is improving, then it cannot
exist an improving move in the Hamming ball of radius r around the current
solution. Although not all the improving moves can be identiﬁed, it is possible
to identify local optima in constant time when the hill climber reaches them.
This is a desirable property for any hill climber. We will prove in the following
that this result can be adapted to the multi-objective case.
If one of the scores stored indicates a strong improving move, then it is clear
that the hill climber is not in a local optima, and it can take the move to improve
the current solution. However, if only weak improving moves can be found in
the Scores store, it is not possible to certify that the hill climber reached a local
optima. The reason is that two weak improving moves taken together could give
a strong improving move in the Hamming ball. For example, let us say that we
are exploring a Hamming ball of radius r = 2, variables x1 and x2 do not co-
occur in a two-dimensional vector function, and S1 = (−1, 3) and S2 = (3, −1).
Moves 1 and 2 are weak improving moves, but the move S1,2 = S1 + S2 = (2, 2)
is a strong improving move. We should not miss that strong improving move
during our exploration.
To discover all strong improving moves in the Hamming ball we have to con-
sider weak improving moves. But we saw in Section 3 that taking weak improving
moves is dangerous because they could make the algorithm to cycle. One very
simple and eﬀective mechanism to avoid cycling is to classify weak improving
moves according to a weighted sum of their score components.
Deﬁnition 8 (w-improving move and w-score). Let f : Bn →Rd be a
vector Mk Landscape, and w ∈Rd a d-dimensional weight vector. We say that
a move v ∈Bn is w-improving for solution x if w · Sv(x) > 0, where · denotes
the dot product of vectors. We call w · Sv(x) the w-score of move v for solution
x.
Proposition 2. Let f : Bn →Rd be a vector Mk Landscape, and w ∈Rd a
d-dimensional weight vector with wi > 0 for 1 ≤i ≤d. If there exists a strong

Eﬃcient Hill-Climber for Multi-Objective Pseudo-Boolean Optimization
11
improving move in a ball of radius r around solution x, then there exists v ∈M r
such that w · Sv > 0.
Proof. Let us say that v is a strong improving move in the Hamming ball of
radius r. Then there exist moves v1, v2, . . . vj ∈M r such that Sv = Pj
l=1 Svl.
Since v is strong improving and all wi > 0, we have w · Sv = Pj
l=1 w · Svl > 0.
There must be a vl with 1 ≤l ≤j such that w · Svl > 0.
⊓⊔
Proposition 2 ensures that we will not miss any strong improving move in
the Hamming ball if we take the weak improving moves with an improving
w-score. Thus, our proposed Hill Climber, shown in Algorithm 2, will select
strong improving moves in ﬁrst place (Line 4) and w-improving moves when
no strong improving moves are available (Line 6). In this last case, we should
report the value of solution x, since it could be a non-dominated solution (Line 7).
The algorithm will stop when no w-improving move is available. In this case, a
local optima has been reached, and we should report this ﬁnal (locally optimal)
solution (Line 12). The algorithm cannot cycle, since only w-improving moves
are selected, and this means that an improvement is required in the direction
of w. A cycle would require to take a w-disimproving move at some step of the
climb.
Algorithm 2 Multi-objective Hamming-Ball Hill Climber.
Input: scores vector S, weight vector w, initial solution x
Output: local optimum in x (and potentially non-dominated intermediate solutions)
1: S ←computeScores(x);
2: while w · Sv > 0 for some v ∈M r do
3:
if there is a strong improving move v ∈M r then
4:
t ←selectStrongImprovingMove(S);
5:
else
6:
t ←selectWImprovingMove(S);
7:
report(x);
8:
end if
9:
updateScores(S,x,t);
10:
x ←x ⊕t;
11: end while
12: report(x);
The procedure report in Algorithm 2 should add the reported solution to
an external set of non-dominated solutions. This set should be managed by the
high-level algorithm invoking the Hamming Ball Hill Climber.
For an eﬃcient implementation of Algorithm 2, the scores stored in memory
can be classiﬁed in three categories, each one stored in a diﬀerent bucket: strong
improving moves, w-improving moves that are not strong improving moves, and
the rest. The scores can be moved from one of the buckets to the other as they
are updated. The move from one bucket to another requires constant time, and

12
F. Chicano, D. Whitley and R. Tin´os
thus, the expected time per move in Algorithm 2 is Θ(1), excluding the time
required by report. This implementation corresponds to a next improvement
hill climber. An approximate form of best improvement hill climber could also
be implemented following the guidelines in [14].
The weight vector w in the hill climber determines a direction to explore
in the objective space. The use of w to select the weak improving moves is
equivalent to consider improving moves of the single-objective function w · f.
However, there are two main reasons why it is more convenient to update and
deal with the vector scores S rather than using scalar scores S of w · f. First,
using vector scores we can identify strong improving moves stored in memory,
while using scalar scores of w · f it is not possible to distinguish between weak
and strong improving moves. And second, it is possible to change w during the
search without re-computing all the scores. The only operation to do after a
change of w is a re-classiﬁcation of the moves that are not strong improving6.
Regarding the selection of improving moves in selectStrongImprovingMove
and selectWImprovingMove, our implementation selects always a random one
with the lowest Hamming distance to the current solution, that is, the move t
with the lowest value of |t|. As stated by Theorem 2, such moves are faster, in
principle, than other more distant moves, since the time required for updating
the Scores is proportional to |t|.
5
Experimental Results
We implemented a simple Multi-Start Hill Climber algorithm to measure the
runtime speedup of the proposed Multi-Objective Hamming Ball Hill Climber of
Algorithm 2. The algorithm iterates a loop where a solution and a weight vector
are randomly generated and Algorithm 2 is executed starting on them. The
algorithm keeps a set of non-dominated solutions, that is potentially updated
whenever Algorithm 2 reports a solution. The loop stops when a given time limit
is reached. In our experiments shown here this time limit was 1 minute. The
machine used in all the experiments has an Intel Core 2 Quad CPU (Q9400) at
2,7 GHz, 3GB of memory and Ubuntu 14.04 LTS. Only one core of the Processor
is used. The algorithm was implemented in Java 1.6.
To test the algorithm we have focused on MNK-Landscapes [1]. An MNK-
Landscape is a vector Mk Landscape where all mi = N for all 1 ≤i ≤d and each
subfunction f (l)
i
depends on xi and other K more variables (thus, k = K+1). The
subfunctions f (l)
i
are randomly generated using real values between 0 and 1. In
order to avoid inaccuracy problems with ﬂoating point arithmetic, instead of real
numbers we use integer number between 0 and q−1 and the sum of subfunctions
are not divided by N. That is, each component fi is an NKq-Landscape [2].
We also focused on the adjacent model of NKq-Landscape. In this model the
6 Distinguishing the weak, but not strong, improving moves from the strong disim-
proving moves in the implementation would reduce the runtime here, since only weak
improving moves need to be re-classiﬁed.

Eﬃcient Hill-Climber for Multi-Objective Pseudo-Boolean Optimization
13
variables each f (l)
i
depends on are consecutive, that is, xi, xi+1, . . . , xi+K. This
ensures that the number of subfunctions a given variable appears in is bounded
by a constant, in particular, K + 1, and Theorems 2 and 1 apply.
5.1
Runtime
There are two procedures in the hill climber that requires Ω(n) time. The ﬁrst
one is a problem-dependent initialization procedure, where the scores to be stored
in memory are determined. This procedure is run only once in one run of the
multi-start algorithm. In our experiments this time varies from 284 to 5,377
milliseconds.
The second procedure is a solution-dependent initialization of the hill climber
starting from random solution and weight vector. This procedure is run once in
each iteration of the multi-start hill climber loop, and can have an important
impact on algorithm runtime, especially when there are no many moves during
the execution of Algorithm 2. On the other hand, as the search progresses and
the non-dominated set of solutions grows, the procedure to update it could also
require a non-negligible run time that depends on the number of solutions in the
non-dominated set, which could be proportional to the number of moves done
during the search.
In Figure 2 we show the average time per move in microseconds (µs) for the
Multi-Start Hill Climber solving MNK-Landscapes where N varies from 10, 000
to 100, 000, q = 100, K = 3, the dimensions are d = 2 and d = 3, and the
exploration radius r varies from 1 to 3. We performed 30 independent runs of
the algorithm for each conﬁguration, and the results are the average of these 30
runs. To compute the average, we excluded the time required by the problem-
dependent initialization procedure.
We can observe that moves are done very fast (tens to hundreds of mi-
croseconds). This is especially surprising if we consider the number of solutions
“explored” in a neighborhood. For N = 100, 000 and r = 3 the neighborhood
contains around 166 trillion solutions that are explored in around 1 millisec-
ond. For all values of r and d the increase in the average time per move is very
slow (if any) when N grows. This slight growth in the average run time is due
to the solution-dependent initialization and the non-dominated set update, and
contrasts with the theoretically Ω(nr) time required by a black box algorithm.
As we could expect, the value of r has a great inﬂuence in the average time
per move. In fact, the time is exponential in r. Regarding the memory required
to store the Scores, we have already seen that it is Θ(n). In the particular case
of the MNK-Landscapes with an adjacent interaction model and r ≤N/K , it
is not hard to conclude that the exact number of scores is N(Kr −1)/(K −1),
which is linear in N.
5.2
Quality of the Solutions
In a second experiment we want to check if a large value of r leads to better
solutions. This highly depends on the algorithm that includes the hill climber.

14
F. Chicano, D. Whitley and R. Tin´os
 0
 100
 200
 300
 400
 500
 600
 700
 800
 900
 1000
 1100
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Average time per move (microseconds)
N (number of variables in thousands)
r=1, d=2
r=1, d=3
r=2, d=2
r=2, d=3
r=3, d=2
r=3, d=3
Fig. 2. Average time per move in µs for the Multi-Start Hill Climber based on Algo-
rithm 2 for a MNK-Landscape with d = 2, 3, K = 3, q = 100, N = 10, 000 to 100, 000
and r = 1 to 3.
In our case, since the algorithm is a multi-start hill climber, we would expect
an improvement in solution quality as we increase r. But at the same time,
the average time per move is increased. Thus, there must be a value of r at
which the time is so large that lower values for the radius can lead to the same
solution quality. In Figure 3 we show the 50%-empirical attainment surfaces of
the fronts obtained in the 30 independent runs of the multi-start hill climber
for N = 10, 000, d = 2, q = 100 and r varying from 1 to 3. The 50%-empirical
attainment surface (50%-EAS) limits the region in the objective space that is
dominated by half the runs of the algorithm. It generalizes the concept of median
to the multi-objective case (see [9] for more details).
We can see in Figure 3 that the 50%-EAS obtained for r = 2 completely
dominates the one obtained for r = 1, and the 50%-EAS for r = 3 dominates
that of r = 2. That is, increasing r we obtained better approximated Pareto
fronts, even of the time per move is increased. This means that less moves are
done int he given time limit (1 minute) but they are more eﬀective.

Eﬃcient Hill-Climber for Multi-Objective Pseudo-Boolean Optimization
15
 600000
 610000
 620000
 630000
 640000
 650000
 660000
 670000
 610000
 630000
 650000
f2
f1
r=1
r=2
r=3
Fig. 3. 50%-empirical attainment surfaces of the 30 independent runs of the Multi-
Start Hill Climber based on Algorithm 2 for a MNK-Landscape with d = 2, K = 3,
q = 100, N = 10, 000 and r = 1 to 3.
6
Conclusions and Future Work
We proposed in this paper a hill climber based on an eﬃcient mechanism to
identify improving moves in a Hamming ball of radius r around a solution of
a k-bounded pseudo-Boolean multi-objective optimization problem. With this
paper we contribute to an active line of research, sometimes called, Gray-Box
optimization [6], that suggests the use of as much information of the problems
as possible to provide better search methods, in contrast to the Black-Box opti-
mization.
Our proposed hill climber performs each move in bounded constant time if the
variables of the problem appears in at most a constant number of subfunctions. In
practice, the experiments on adjacent MNK-Landscapes show that when K =
3 and d = 2, the average time per move varies from tenths to hundreds of
microseconds when the exploration radius r grows from 1 to 3. This number is
independent of n despite the fact that the hill climber is considering a Hamming
Ball of radius r with up to Θ(nr) solutions.
Further work is needed to integrate this hill climber in a higher-level algo-
rithm including mechanisms to escape from plateaus and local optima. On the

16
F. Chicano, D. Whitley and R. Tin´os
other hand, one important limitation of our hill climber is that is does not take
into account constraints in the search space. Constraint management and the
combination with other components to build an eﬃcient search algorithm seem
two promising and challenging directions to work in the near future.
