arXiv:1901.07879v2  [cs.ET]  29 Mar 2019
Physical reservoir computing built by spintronic devices for temporal information
processing
Wencong Jiang∗, Lina Chen∗, Kaiyuan Zhou, Liyuan Li, Qingwei Fu, Youwei Du, and R.H. Liu†
National Laboratory of Solid State Microstructures, School of Physics and Collaborative Innovation
Center of Advanced Microstructures, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China
Spintronic nanodevices have ultrafast nonlinear dynamic and recurrence behaviors on a nanosec-
ond scale that promises to enable spintronic reservoir computing (RC) system. Here two physical RC
systems based on a single magnetic skyrmion memristor (MSM) and 24 spin-torque nano-oscillators
(STNOs) were proposed and modeled to process image classiﬁcation task and nonlinear dynamic
system prediction, respectively. Based on our micromagnetic simulation results on the nonlinear
responses of MSM and STNO with current pulses stimulation, the handwritten digits recognition
task domesticates that an RC system using one single MSM has the outstanding performance on
image classiﬁcation. In addition, the complex unknown nonlinear dynamic problems can also be
well solved by a physical RC system consisted of 24 STNOs conﬁrmed in a second-order nonlinear
dynamic system and NARMA10 tasks. The capability of both high accuracy and fast information
processing promises to enable one type of brain-like chip based on spintronics for various artiﬁcial
intelligence tasks.
PACS numbers: 85.75.F+, 07.05.Mh, 75.60.Ch
I. INTRODUCTION
The deep neural network recently achieved signiﬁcant
success and widespread inﬂuence in applications of arti-
ﬁcial intelligence (AI), e.g., medical diagnosis, intelligent
machines, entertainment, the game of Go[1–3]. Neuro-
morphic computing - a new non-von Neumann comput-
ing paradigm inspired by how the human brain works
that could improve the performance and power eﬃciency
for the future of AI exponentially, has attracted consid-
erable attention recently[4–6]. In neuromorphic comput-
ing, hardware implementations of neural networks are
becoming a dominant approach to reach the energy eﬃ-
ciency of the human brain.
Reservoir computing (RC), as a paradigm is well-
suited to hardware implementations due to the ﬁxed
nature of the weights between neurons in the reservoir
model itself, has been studied intensively in theory and
experiments[4–9]. RC only requires the reservoir model
should have two properties: suﬃciently complex dynam-
ics and fading memory eﬀects[4–6]. Since the connections
among nodes of reservoir network can be hidden and ran-
dom ﬁxed, the weights inside the reservoir does not need
to be trained, only the weights of the last linear output
layer need to be modulated or trained[5, 6], RC is very
suitable or natural to build a physical reservoir based on
the actual physical devices with complex dynamics and
short-term memory behaviors[7]. Therefore, the physical
reservoir has great advantages on neuromorphic comput-
ing, for unlike software-based reservoir it does not need
∗These authors contributed equally to this work

colossal computing resource to built and ﬁne-tune the dy-
namic states due to connections among nodes of reservoir
network intrinsically encoded in actual physical devices.
In recent years, a variety of physical devices have
been proposed to build reservoir neural network, such as
phase-change memories[10], memristors[8, 11–13], spin-
tronic devices [9, 14], optoelectronics[15, 16] etc., of-
fering new opportunities for neuromorphic computing
and AI in hardware design.
Spintronics is an emerg-
ing technology that exploits electronic charge, the in-
trinsic spin of the electron and its associated magnetic
moment in solid-state devices. Very recently, spin torque
(ST) memristor and nano-oscillator devices are proposed
and found having huge potential applications in multi-
bit data storage and logic and development of artiﬁ-
cial synaptic devices[9, 14, 17]. Magnetic memristor en-
codes information based upon spin torque driven mag-
netic domain wall (such as skrymion[18–21]) motion.
Spin-torque nano-oscillator (STNO), owning the com-
plex non-linear dynamics and relaxation characteristics
(short-term memory) from magnetization precession with
microwave-frequency caused by spin torque eﬀect, can
perform high-speed data processing based on its mag-
netic dynamics and magnetoresistance eﬀect (MR)[22–
24].
Since the complex magnetic dynamics and both
high-speed store and process information ability, the
spintronic device is an attractive candidate to develop
eﬃcient neuromorphic computing systems (non-von Neu-
mann computing) for highly data-centric artiﬁcial intelli-
gence related applications [25–27]. Here, we propose two
spintronic devices: magnetic skyrmion memristor (MSM)
and STNO to build physical RC system for neuromorphic
computing and demonstrate that they have the outstand-
ing performance on temporal information processing in-
cluding image classiﬁcation and nonlinear dynamics sys-

2
tem prediction based on our micromagnetic simulation
results.
II. MODELLING AND SIMULATING PHYSICAL
RESERVOIRS
A. Magnetic skyrmion memristor
To construct a physical RC system for neuromorphic
computing using actual devices, the reservoir should sat-
isfy enough variations and the echo property meaning the
current state should be able to feel the inﬂuence of its
history[5]. Both complex nonlinear dynamics and short-
term memory properties make spintronic nanodevices as
an outstanding candidate to construct a physical reser-
voir.
Since micromagnetic simulation currently recog-
nized as an indispensable tool in the ﬁeld of magnetism
research, the nonlinear dynamics and memory properties
of spin-torque nanodevices are obtained through solv-
ing the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert (LLG) equation using
the OOMMF code[28].
Fig.
1(a) shows the structure
schematic of the magnetic skyrmion memristor based on
the dumbbell shape ferromagnetic Pt(10 nm)/Co(1 nm)
bilayer with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA).
To further enhance the nonlinear behavior of skyrmion
motion, the dumbbell shape of 60 × 200 nm with 30
nm center width is selected, as shown in the inset of
Fig. 1(c). The material parameters used in the simula-
tions are the exchange stiﬀness A = 15 pJ/m, the satura-
tion magnetization Ms = 580 kA/m, the perpendicular
anisotropy Ku = 0.7 MJ/m3, the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya
interaction(DMI) D = 2.9 mJ/m3, the Gilbert damping
constant α = 0.3, and the spin Hall angle P = 0.1. The
cell size of 2 nm × 2 nm × 1 nm is used in the simula-
tions. The Oersted ﬁeld and the distribution of current
density are numerically calculated by COMSOL[29]. A
single skyrmion is ﬁrst created at the position x = 30 nm
from the left edge of the strip, then moves along strip
under current-driving. Figure 1(b) shows an example of
the current-driven motion of skyrmion under an ac con-
tinual square current pulse with an amplitude of ±16 µA
and pulse width of 14 ns. Fig. 1(c) shows that skyrmion
exhibits a non-uniform motion with a strong movement
velocity dependence on its current position x under the
driving currents. The spin torque driving non-uniform
motion of skyrmion is caused by the nonlinear change re-
pulsive force on skyrmion from dipole ﬁeld, non-uniform
demagnetizing ﬁeld, and current-induced spin torques,
and further enhanced by non-uniform distribution of cur-
rent density on dumbbell shape strip of Pt/Co.
The
current-driven non-uniform motion of skyrmion causes a
nonlinear dependence of the position x on amplitude and
pulse width of the current I. The current pulse I and x
are deﬁned as the input and output of physical reservoir
discussed below, respectively. The variations and non-
linear properties are beneﬁcial to build a well physical
reservoir that will be proved by the handwritten digits
recognition task below.
B. Spin torque nano-oscillator
Fig. 1(d) shows the block diagram of signal detection
and schematic of the modeling STNO consisted of two
magnetic layers (ﬁxed and free) and one barrier layer.
The material parameters used in the simulations are the
exchange stiﬀness A = 13 pJ/m, the saturation magneti-
zation Ms = 800 kA/m, the Gilbert damping constant α
= 0.01, and the spin polarization P = 0.4. The cell size of
5 nm × 5 nm × 5 nm is used in the simulations. The Oer-
sted ﬁeld is also considered in the simulation. The stable
magnetization oscillation is obtained at current I varying
from 0.01 to 0.40 mA with a free external ﬁeld. Figure
1(e) shows an example of the time dependence of the
normalized x-component of magnetization mx/m of the
free layer on a square current pulse of 0.2 mA and 50 ns.
The magnetization oscillation shows a current dependent
relaxation matching process with a relaxation time τ(I)
after sharply switching current pulse. Fig. 1(f) shows
that the maximum envelope of mx/m procession motion
has a nonlinear dependence on the amplitude of the cur-
rent I. The current pulse I and mx/m are deﬁned as the
input and output of physical reservoir discussed below,
respectively.
III. RESULTS OF PHYSICAL RESERVOIR
SYSTEMS
A. Handwritten digits recognition
A reservoir computing system consists of three essen-
tial layers: an input layer, the reservoir, and a readout
layer[5, 6]. In the input layer, the original signals need
to do such identity or bias transformations and be trans-
formed to the ﬁnal input vectors, also called as the pre-
processing of signals. As the reservoir layer, the physical
reservoir is no need to be trained due to the ﬁxed nature
of the weights between neurons in the reservoir itself.
The readout layer must be suﬃciently powerful to map
the output vectors from the reservoir to desired output
results with a good wight obtained via training. Here,
we use handwritten digits recognition as an example to
illustrate a physical RC system and its computing pro-
cedure at Fig.2. The Mixed National Institute of Stan-
dards and Technology (MNIST) database is a standard
machine learning dataset[30]. The original handwritten
digit image in MNIST with 28×28 pixels is the greyscale
image. To simplify the input data, the original greyscale
image was ﬁrst converted into a black and white two-
value image with the same pixels, then transformed into

3
Figure 1: Nonlinear dynamics of magnetic skyrmion memristor (MSM) and spin torque nano-oscillator (STNO) under current
pulse stimulation. (a) Structure schematic of a MSM consisted of the dumbbell shape ferromagnetic Pt(10)/Co(1) bilayer and
Au electrodes. (b) The position x (left axis) of skyrmion under an ac continual square current pulse stimulation (right axis).
(c) Time dependent position x at diﬀerent dc driving currents, as labeled. Inset: the position x of skyrmion was deﬁned in
the dumbbell Pt/Co bilayer. (d) Schematic of a vortex-type STNO and blockdiagram. (e) The response of the normalized
x-component of magnetization mx (left axis) under an square current pulse (right axis) with an amplitude of 0.2 mA and pulse
width of 50 ns. (f) Dependence of the maximum envelope of mx/m procession motion at steady state on the input current I.
Figure 2: Process ﬂow diagram of handwritten digit recogni-
tion using an MSM-based RC system. (a) Signal preprocess-
ing in the input layer: the digit image was ﬁrst converted to
a 196 by 4 matrix, and each row of the matrix was encoded
by a 4-bits current pulse, and in time order was fed into the
MSM of RC system. (b) Reservoir: A vector consisted of 196
skyrmion positions x was obtained after signal processing by
an MSM-based reservoir because only the last position x was
recorded after each 4-bits current pulse. (c) A linear read-
out layer: The recognition result was acquired after linearly
mapping the reservoir states to a trained readout function.
a 196 × 4 matrix, and each row of matrix as a unit was
encoded by a 4-bits current pulse with speciﬁc value oﬀset
(or bias), as an input vector. After the transformation,
the two-dimensional image are converted in row-wise (or
column-wise) operation into temporal input to the reser-
voir [Fig.2(a)]. It should be noted that only last position
x needs to be recorded after each 4-bits current pulse.
Therefore, the temporal input with 196 vectors (each vec-
tor including four current pulses) is separately fed into
the MSM reservoir, and which generates an output vec-
Figure 3: Results of handwritten digit recognition using a RC
system with one signal MSM. (a) Handwritten digit recogni-
tion rates is presented in the plane of the desired outputs and
the predicted values with using current pulses of 20 µA and
10 ns. (b) Pseudocolor mapping of the recognition accuracy
rates in the plane of current pulse amplitude I and width ∆t.
tor p(x) including 196 positions of skyrmion [Fig.2(b)].
Finial, the recognition result was produced by linearly
mapping the output vector presenting the reservoir state
to a trained readout layer[Fig.2(c)].
The handwritten digits dataset is extensively studied
in testing new neural networks. The handwritten digits
recognition is chosen as a test task to evaluate the perfor-
mance of our RC system built using one single MSM. As
mentioned before, a handwritten digit image with 28×28
pixels is ﬁrst converted to a temporal input including 196
time-series sequence streams, and each stream consists of
4-bits binary current pulse where the binary digits 0 (-
20 µA, 10 ns) and 1 (20 µA, 10 ns) correspond to the

4
black and white pixel of image respectively. In principle,
the position state of the MSM will be changed after ap-
plying a current pulse, and a 4-bits current pulse stream
can represent 24 diﬀerent current states and then gen-
erates corresponding 24 memristor states (positions x)
after stimulation. Similar to the prior memristors-based
RC system for pattern recognition[8], we take the same
approach that the temporal input is separately fed to an
MSM in 4 current pulses as a stream and only last posi-
tion x of skyrmion is recorded after each stream stimu-
lation [See Fig.S2 in SM][32]. Besides, MSM is refreshed
to the initial state before feeding the next stream with
4-bits pulse. The MSM refresh operation aims to make
us be able to deal with ten thousands of images based on
24 independent the simulation results for each amplitude
or width of a pulse. It should be pointed out that the
refresh operation is not necessary for the practical appli-
cation of MSM-based RS system in pattern recognition.
Therefore, the temporal input taking a speciﬁc feature
of handwritten digit image is represented as a position x
feature vector with 196 elements in the reservoir, which
can be used to perform pattern recognition through the
readout layer after training.
In the readout layer, the output feature vector with
196 elements is linear all connection with the ten output
results (digits 0-9). The readout layer does all the learn-
ing and training using gradient descent method[31] with
the sigmoid function to ﬁnd the optimal weight matrix of
196×10 and ten bias values. The readout function was
achieved by using Python software[32]. Fifty thousand
images from the MNIST data set was used for the out-
put layer training. An optimal weight matrix and ten
bias values are found and ﬁxed after training, and an-
other set of samples consisting of 10000 images not used
in the training set, are used to test image recognition
accuracy.
The recognition results obtained from the RC sys-
tem with an MSM vs. the desired outputs are shown
at Fig.3(a). It should be noted that nonlinear dynamics
and memory behaviors of magnetic skyrmion memristor
strongly depend on applied current, discussed early in
Fig.1(c), which should have signiﬁcate inﬂuence on pat-
tern recognition.
To get the optimal operating condi-
tions for pattern recognition, classiﬁcation of handwrit-
ten digit images is performed systematically in a wide
range of the amplitude I and pulse width ∆t of current.
As can be seen in Fig.3(b), the better accuracy of pat-
tern recognition is located at the diagonal area of the
I-∆t plane, indicating when skyrmion locates at near the
center of dumbbell stripe, the MSM has a better current-
induced dynamic variation and fading memory meaning
the coming position x of skyrmion depends on the past
and present x. The best recognition accuracy of 87.6%
is achieved at applied current with amplitude I = 20 µA
and width ∆t = 10 ns, comparable to other results 88%
on simulation of an one-layer neural network with 7850
parameters[31]. The recognition rate can be much im-
proved if the diversity (variable states) of the reservoir
is further increased by adding more diﬀerent MSMs for
reservoir or using more than one diﬀerent pulse width,
commonly used in prior RC systems[8].
B. Solving unknown complex nonlinear dynamic
systems
Figure 4: Process ﬂow diagram of solving unknown nonlinear
dynamic systems using a RC system with 24 STNOs. The
theoretical output signal y(k) is obtained by putting uniform
random input signal u(k) to the original nonlinear dynamic
system described by Eq.(1) (or Eq.(2)) in text (upper panel).
For neuromorphic processing, the same random input signal
was encoded by 24 diﬀerent current pulse streams, and then
were separately fed to 24 STNOs of the RC system. The 24
output curves generated from 24 STNOs of RC system were
summed as a predicted output yp(k) by linear superposition
with 24 factors (wi = 1,...24) (down panel).
In pattern classiﬁcation, an spatial pattern is ﬁrst
partitioned by row-wise (or column-wise) into tempo-
ral (time sequence) signals to the reservoir. In fact, the
reservoir computing system is more natural and suitable
to deal with time series system[4–6], such as reproduc-
ing nonlinear dynamics of an unknown complex system
and speech recognition[7–9]. Based on the nonlinear dy-
namics of MSM and STNO, discussed early in Fig.1 and
Fig.3S in Supplemental Materials (SM)[32], STNO has
more current-dependent dynamics diversity than MSM.
In addition, STNO device has been intensively studied
in experiment and theory for decades and has a standard
preparation process to be achieved in both academic and
industry[22]. Below, we use both of a second-order non-
linear dynamic system and a Nonlinear Auto-Regressive
Moving Average equation of order 10 driven by white
noise (NARMA10) to test our physical RC system con-
sisted of 24 STNOs.
B1. Solving a second-order nonlinear dynamic task
Nonlinear systems are ubiquitous in the real world.
Second-order nonlinear dynamic systems are widely used

5
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
0.2
0.3
0.2
0.3
0.4
 Theoretical value of second order nonlinear system 
 Prodicted value
 
Test process
k
(b)
y(k)
Training process
y(k)
(a)
Figure 5: The second order nonlinear dynamic system de-
scribed in Eq.(1). (a) Theoretical output (black solid circle)
vs the reconstructed output from the RC system (red circle)
in training phase. (b) Same as (a) in test phase.
to model systems across the science and engineering, es-
pecially in the electrical system because they are the
simplest type of dynamic system to exhibit oscillations
such as mass-spring-damper systems and RLC circuits.
In addition, many true higher-order systems may be ap-
proximated as second-order to facilitate analysis. To di-
rectly compare with the RC system bases on metal-oxide
memristors[8], the same second-order nonlinear dynamic
system in the prior study is chose to test our physical
RC system. The nonlinear dynamic system generates an
output y(k) following a second-order nonlinear transfer
function deﬁned as follows:
y(k) = 0.4 ∗y(k −1) + 0.4 ∗y(k −1)y(k −2)
+0.6 ∗u(k)3 + 0.1
(1)
The Eq.(1) shows the output y(k) depends on both
of the past two outputs y(k −1), y(k −2) and the cur-
rent input u(k) and the relationship between y(k) and
u(k) is implicit and hidden. To deal with this kind of
nonlinear problems, it needs an RC system with enough
varieties as well as a fading memory. As shown in Fig. 1,
STNO exhibiting complex nonlinear dynamics and good
short-term memory (relaxation time τ ∼25 ns) is ex-
pected to have outstanding performance in solving non-
linear problems[32]. Figure 4 illustrates the process ﬂow
diagram of the STNOs-based RC system dealing with
dynamic time-series data. The reservoir consists of 24
STNOs including three diﬀerent diameters (240, 270 and
300 nm). The same uniform random time-series input se-
quence with a length of 800 points used in the theoretical
Eq.(1) (or Eq.(2)) was ﬁrstly scaled to 24 current pulses
sequences to stimulate 24 STNOs of RC system [See Ta-
ble.I in SM][32]. To increase the diversity of reservoir,
24 input current pulse sequences with 13 diﬀerent ampli-
tudes or pulse widths are used to stimulate 24 STNOs
separately and generated 24 independent output curves
including 800 time-series dynamic states in each curve
from 24 STNOs of RC system [See Fig.S6 in SM][32].
As the same as the handwritten digits recognition, we
still chose to implement a linear regression using gradi-
ent descent to ﬁnd 24 weighed factors (wi = 1,...24) and
one bias value during the training process (See detail in
SM[32]).
Fig.5(a) shows the simulation output reconstructed
from the RC system after training and the theoretical
output from the training sequence, indicating the RC
system with 24 STNOs can correctly solve the nonlin-
ear dynamic problem, with a normalized mean squared
error (NMSE) of 1.17 ∗10−3 in training phase. To verify
the physical STNOs-based RC system has indeed solved
the second-nonlinear dynamic transfer function, a new
random sequence independent with the training sequence
as input to test the RC system. The result of Fig.5(b)
demonstrates that the system still successfully predict
the expected dynamic output for the new random se-
quence using the same weight matrix, with a similar
NMSE of 1.31 ∗10−3. Now it is safe to say that the RC
system has solved the second-nonlinear dynamic trans-
fer function after training an 800-long history time-series
data. Moreover, the RC system with 24 STNOs has bet-
ter performance than the RC system with 90 metal-oxide
memristors (NMSE ≃3.13 ∗10−3) in prior reports[8]
B2. Solving NARMA10 nonlinear dynamic task
To further explore the capabilities of the STNO-based
RC system in solving dynamic nonlinear problems and
analyzing time series data, NARMA10 as another non-
linear dynamic system was chose to test our RC system.
The NARMA10 model is widely used to simulate time
series and as a benchmark in the reservoir computing
community[7].
The NARMA10 model is given by the
recurrence formula as following:
y(k) = 0.3 ∗y(k −1) + 0.05 ∗y(k −1)
10
X
i=1
y(k −i)
+1.5 ∗u(k −1)u(k −10) + 0.1
(2)
where u(k) is a sequence of random inputs with a uni-
form distribution between 0 and 0.5. Comparing to the
second-order nonlinear dynamic problem described by
Eq.(1), the NARMA10 has more complex and distinc-
tive nonlinear dynamic features because its output y(k)
not only depends on the past ten outputs y(k −1), ...
and y(k −10) but also is related to the cross term of the
past inputs u(k −1) and u(k −10). The same RC sys-
tem with 24 STNOs used in the second-order task still
can well capture the most of nonlinear dynamic feature
of NARMA10 after training an 800-long history time-
series data. Fig.6 shows that the outputs reconstructed
from the RC system after training process well match

6
the theoretical outputs.
The performance is evaluated
by the normalized root mean square error (NRMSE) be-
tween predicted output and theoretical output. NRMSE
is 0.128 (or 0.123) in the test phase (training phase),
which is better than NRMSE≃0.15 in a digital reservoir
of 400 nodes (400 parameters needed to train)[7].
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
0.3
0.6
0.9
0.3
0.6
0.9
 
Test process
k
(b)
y(k)
Training process
y(k)
 Theoretical value of NARMA10
 Prodicted value
(a)
Figure 6: NARMA10 task described in Eq.(2). (a) Theoret-
ical output (black solid circle) vs the reconstructed output
from the RC system (red circle) in training phase. (b) Same
as (a) in test phase.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
Based on the complex nonlinear dynamic and re-
currence behaviors of spintronic nanodevices, we pro-
posed two physical reservoir computing systems based
on magnetic skyrmion memristor and spin-torque nano-
oscillator, respectively. Since the nonlinear magnetic dy-
namics of spin-torque nanodevices can be very well de-
scribed and captured by numerically solving the LLG
equation using micromagnetic simulation software, ie.,
OOMMF, the physical RC system based ST devices can
be analyzed through micromagnetic simulation. The per-
formance on temporal information processing of both
of physical RC system using an MSM and using 24
STNOs (indeed three diﬀerent STNOs) are evaluated
through performing handwritten digits recognition and
solving second-order nonlinear dynamic problems and
NARMA10, and the three tasks have been widely used
at the benchmark in the reservoir computing community.
Our results demonstrated that the RC system with
only one MSM could achieve a comparable accuracy
87.6% of pattern recognition as the reservoir with 88
metal-oxides memristors, meanwhile the information pro-
cessing using MSM-based RC system has more than 1000
times fast than metal-oxides memristor-based RC sys-
tem due to magnetization dynamics at the nanosecond
time scale compared to the motion of ions at the millisec-
ond time scale[8, 11, 12]. Furthermore, compared to the
previous reports, second-order and NARMA10 nonlinear
system tasks demonstrated STNOs-based RC system had
outstanding performance in solving unknown and com-
plex nonlinear dynamic problems.
It should be noted
that physical RC system is robust to the actual device de-
fects and deviation (in fact, certain diversity is necessary)
due to the ﬁxed nature of the weights between neurons in
the reservoir itself. Our simulation results indicate that
spin-torque nanodevices are very suitable to build var-
ious physical reservoirs or construct an artiﬁcial neural
network for neuromorphic computing, and provide some
ideas and strategies for experimentally building physical
reservoir computing system.
