First-Order Problem Solving through Neural MCTS based
Reinforcement Learning
Ruiyang Xu
Khoury College of Computer Sciences
Northeastern University, Boston

Prashank Kadam
Khoury College of Computer Sciences
Northeastern University, Boston

Karl Lieberherr
Khoury College of Computer Sciences
Northeastern University, Boston

ABSTRACT
The formal semantics of an interpreted first-order logic (FOL) state-
ment can be given in Tarskian Semantics or a basically equivalent
Game Semantics. The latter maps the statement and the interpreta-
tion into a two-player semantic game. Many combinatorial prob-
lems can be described using interpreted FOL statements and can
be mapped into a semantic game. Therefore, learning to play a
semantic game perfectly leads to the solution of a specific instance
of a combinatorial problem. We adapt the AlphaZero algorithm so
that it becomes better at learning to play semantic games that have
different characteristics than Go and Chess. We propose a general
framework, Persephone, to map the FOL description of a combina-
torial problem to a semantic game so that it can be solved through
a neural MCTS based reinforcement learning algorithm. Our goal
for Persephone is to make it tabula-rasa, mapping a problem stated
in interpreted FOL to a solution without human intervention.
KEYWORDS
Semantic Game, Reinforcement Learning, Neural MCTS
ACM Reference Format:
Ruiyang Xu, Prashank Kadam, and Karl Lieberherr. 2021. First-Order Prob-
lem Solving through Neural MCTS based Reinforcement Learning. In Proc.
of the 20th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent
Systems (AAMAS 2021), London, UK, May 3–7, 2021, IFAAMAS, 9 pages.
1
INTRODUCTION
Recent success from AlphaZero [29] sheds light on solving com-
binatorial games through combining deep RL with Monte Carlo
Tree Searching (MCTS). It is known that conventional model-free
RL performs poorly on those problems, that is because a combi-
natorial problem usually implies a large state space with sparse
rewards, which causes sample efficiency a challenge to those algo-
rithms. Nevertheless, neural MCTS can largely increase the sample
efficiency and improve the performance of solving those problems.
Since the first proposal of neural MCTS [2, 28], people have
seen a remarkable performance of the algorithm on gameplay and
tried to improve this algorithm in various ways. For instance, Alp-
haZero [29] uses self-play to generate learning data, which makes
it becomes self-supervised learning. However, the power of Alp-
haZero is limited to conventional board games. Later, MuZero [24]
extended this idea to model-based RL, which makes the algorithm
able to play Atari games. At the theoretical level, Grill et al. [12]
Proc. of the 20th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems
(AAMAS 2021), U. Endriss, A. Nowé, F. Dignum, A. Lomuscio (eds.), May 3–7, 2021, London,
UK. © 2021 International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems
(www.ifaamas.org). All rights reserved.
pointed out that MCTS itself is some kind of regularized policy opti-
mization, which perfectly explained the mysterious PUCT heuristic
appeared in the AlphaZero paper. Furthermore, based on their the-
ory, they proposed an optimal heuristic and proved that one has
a better performance than AlphaZero’s. Their research reveals a
deep connection between neural MCTS and RL, which has also
been noticed by other researchers, like in [14] where the author
uses a single Q-value network to replace the value and policy net-
work in AlphaZero. The policy is dynamically computed from the
Q-values through a softmax operator. Performance improvement
has also been seen in this variant. Likewise, Guo et al. [9] use a
three-headed neural network (i.e., policy, value, and Q-value) to
increase the learning efficiency on Hex. Moreover, recently, Gold-
waser et al. [11] adapted neural MCTS to general game playing
[10], however, their current framework can only handle turn-based
two-player zero-sum symmetric games.
Neural MCTS’s ability to handle games with large state space
and sparse reward motivates us to extend its application to another
domain, solving combinatorial problems. We should mention that
applying RL to solving combinatorial problems has been studied
for a period of time [5, 7, 17, 19, 22, 30]. In this paper, unlike other
methods, we propose a framework, Persephone, which solves FOL-
expressible combinatorial problems (first-order problems in short)
through a logic semantic-based gamification. We also point out a
close connection between neural MCTS and RL to use concepts in
RL to improve the algorithm. Specifically, our main contributions
are 1. we proposed a framework to map first-order problems to
multi-agent MDPs so that solutions can be learned through neu-
ral MCTS based RL. 2. We define symmetry and asymmetry for
extended form games and exploit the asymmetry in our network
designs. 3. We propose using warm-start MCTS, different policy
learning strategies, and asymmetric neural network structures to
increase the performance. 4. We carry out experiments on different
designs and verify the best configuration. Our experimental results
show that using asymmetric designs helps increase performance
on asymmetric semantic games.
2
PRELIMINARY
2.1
Neural MCTS
MCTS has been applied to solving combinatorial games for a long
time [6], while recently, combining deep neural networks with
MCTS showed success in improving solver competence in many
practical combinatorial games. The concept of neural MCTS was
proposed independently in Expert Iteration [2] and AlphaZero [29].
In a nutshell, neural MCTS uses the neural network as policy and
value approximators. During each learning iteration, it carries out
arXiv:2101.04167v1  [cs.AI]  11 Jan 2021

multiple rounds of self-plays. Each self-play runs several MCTS
simulations to estimate an empirical policy at each state, then sam-
ple from that policy, take a move, and continue. After each round of
self-play, the game’s outcome is backed up to all states in the game
trajectory. Those game trajectories generated during self-play are
then be stored in a replay buffer, which is used to train the neural
network.
In self-play, for a given state, the neural MCTS runs a given
number of simulations on a game tree ,rooted at that state, to
generate an empirical policy. Each simulation, guided by the policy
and value networks, passes through 4 phases:
(1) SELECT: At the beginning of each iteration, the algorithm
selects a path from the root (current game state) to a leaf
(either a terminal state or an unvisited state) according to
an upper confidence boundary (UCB, [3, 4, 18]). Specifically,
suppose the root is 𝑠0. The UCB determines a serial of states
{𝑠0,𝑠1, ...,𝑠𝑙} by the following process:
𝑎𝑖= arg max
𝑎
"
𝑄(𝑠𝑖,𝑎) + 𝑐𝜋𝜃(𝑠𝑖,𝑎)
√︁Í
𝑎′ 𝑁(𝑠𝑖,𝑎′)
𝑁(𝑠𝑖,𝑎) + 1
#
𝑠𝑖+1 = move(𝑠𝑖,𝑎𝑖)
(1)
It has been proved in [12] that selecting simulation actions
using Eq.1 is equivalent to optimize the empirical policy
ˆ𝜋(𝑠,𝑎) =
1 + 𝑁(𝑠,𝑎)
|𝐴| + Í
𝑎′ 𝑁(𝑠,𝑎′)
where |𝐴| is the size of current action space, so that it ap-
proximate to the solution of the following regularized policy
optimization problem:
𝜋∗= arg max
𝜋
h
𝑄𝑇(𝑠, ·)𝜋(𝑠, ·) −𝜆𝐾𝐿[𝜋𝜃(𝑠, ·), 𝜋(𝑠, ·)]
i
𝜆=
√︁Í
𝑎′ 𝑁(𝑠𝑖,𝑎′)
|𝐴| + Í
𝑎′ 𝑁(𝑠,𝑎′)
(2)
That also means that MCTS simulation is an regularized
policy optimization [12], and as long as the value network
is accurate, the MCTS simulation will optimize the output
policy so that it maximize the action value output while
minimize the change to the policy network.
(2) EXPAND: Once the selected phase ends at an unvisited state
𝑠𝑙, the state will be fully expanded and marked as visited. All
its child nodes will be considered as leaf nodes during next
iteration of selection.
(3) ROLL-OUT: The roll-out is carried out for every child of
the expanded leaf node 𝑠𝑙. Starting from any child of 𝑠𝑙, the
algorithm will use the value network to estimate the result
of the game, the value is then backed up to each node in the
next phase.
(4) BACKUP: This is the last phase of an iteration in which
the algorithm updates the statistics for each node in the
selected states {𝑠0,𝑠1, ...,𝑠𝑙} from the first phase. To illustrate
this process, suppose the selected states and corresponding
actions are
{(𝑠0,𝑎0), (𝑠1,𝑎1), ...(𝑠𝑙−1,𝑎𝑙−1), (𝑠𝑙, _)}
Let 𝑉𝜃(𝑠𝑖) be the estimated value for child 𝑠𝑖. We want to
update the Q-value so that it equals to the averaged cumula-
tive reward over each accessing of the underlying state, i.e.,
𝑄(𝑠,𝑎) =
Í𝑁(𝑠,𝑎)
𝑖=1
Í
𝑡𝑟𝑖
𝑡
𝑁(𝑠,𝑎)
. To rewrite this updating rule in an
iterative form, for each (𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡) pair, we have:
𝑁(𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡) ←𝑁(𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡) + 1
𝑄(𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡) ←𝑄(𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡) + 𝑉𝜃(𝑠𝑟) −𝑄(𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡)
𝑁(𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡)
(3)
Such a process will be carried out for all of the roll-out
outcomes from the last phase.
Once the given number of iterations has been reached, the algorithm
returns the empirical policy ˆ𝜋(𝑠) for the current state 𝑠. After the
MCTS simulation, the action is then sampled from the ˆ𝜋(𝑠), and
the game moves to the next state. In this way, for each self-play
iteration, MCTS samples each player’s states and actions alternately
until the game ends, which generates a trajectory for the current
self-play. After a given number of self-plays, all trajectories will be
stored into a replay buffer so that it can be used to train and update
the neural networks.
2.2
Game-theoretic Semantics
Game semantics is an approach that rebuilds the logical concepts
of game-theoretic concepts. For instance, in the propositional logic,
each formula is interpreted as a game between two players. The
Proponent is in charge of all the "OR" operators, while the Opponent
takes over all the "AND" operators. The game runs recursively on
the computational order of the operators. During each move of the
game, the current operator owner will choose one of its sides as a
subformula, and the game will then continue in that subformula.
The game will end when a primitive proposition is achieved, and the
Proponent wins the game if the formula evaluates to true; otherwise,
the Opponent wins.
Hintikka refined the game semantics and extended it to the
model-based first-order logic. To be specific, using Hintikka’s game-
theoretic semantics approach [16], one can map any first-order
logic formula (with models) into object picking and fact testing. A
winning strategy for the Proponent/Opponent exists if the underly-
ing logic formula is true/false. Under the game-theoretic semantics,
a semantic game is represented as a tuple (⟨Ψ, 𝑀⟩, P, OP), where
the underlying formula is Ψ interpreted by the model 𝑀. 𝑃and
𝑂𝑃denote the game role, namely, who is playing as the Propo-
nent/Opponent. There are 6 types for any first-order logic formula
(Tbl.1):
(1) For universally quantified formulas, the Opponent takes a
move by providing a legal value 𝑥0 for the quantified variable
𝑥. The game continues with a subformula where all the
appearances of 𝑥are replaced with the particular assignment
𝑥0.
(2) For existentially quantified formulas, the Proponent takes a
move by providing a legal value 𝑥0 for the quantified variable
𝑥. The game continues with a subformula where all the
appearances of 𝑥are replaced with the particular assignment
𝑥0.

(3) For conjunctive formulas, the Opponent takes a move by
picking either side of the subformula from the original for-
mula.
(4) For disjunctive formulas, the Proponent takes a move by
picking either side of the subformula from the original for-
mula.
(5) For negated formulas, no moves will happen, while the two
players will switch roles.
(6) For primitive propositions, the true value will be evaluated
directly within the given model 𝑀. This situation is also an
indication of the end of the game, where the player who
currently plays Proponent wins if the formula evaluates to
true; otherwise, the current Opponent player wins.
Proposition 𝜑
Operation
Subgame
∀𝑥: Ψ(𝑥)
OP picks 𝑥0
(⟨Ψ[𝑥/𝑥0], 𝑀⟩, P, OP)
Ψ ∧𝜒
OP picks 𝜃∈{Ψ, 𝜒}
(⟨𝜃, 𝑀⟩, P, OP)
∃𝑥: Ψ(𝑥)
P picks 𝑥0
(⟨Ψ[𝑥/𝑥0], 𝑀⟩, P, OP)
Ψ∨𝜒
P picks 𝜃∈{Ψ, 𝜒}
(⟨𝜃, 𝑀⟩, P, OP)
¬Ψ
N/A
(⟨Ψ, 𝑀⟩, OP, P)
𝜑
N/A
N/A
Table 1: The mapping between a formula ⟨𝜑, 𝑀⟩and the cor-
responding semantic game (⟨𝜑, 𝑀⟩, P, OP). In this table, OP
stands for Opponent, and P stands for Proponent. M is the
model of the formula, which defines all non-logical symbols
in the formula. The game ends at an atomic proposition 𝜑. It
is to be noted that the negation switches the role of the two
players; namely, strategies for P in a game for ¬Ψ are strate-
gies for OP in the game for Ψ.
2.3
Asymmetric Extensive Form Games
In this section, following the definition given by [15, 27], we extend
the concept of the asymmetric game from normal form game to
the two-player extensive form game using first-order logic. The
asymmetry of an asymmetric game is mainly reflected in two as-
pects: 1. The players’ actions space is asymmetric. Namely, players
with different game roles have different action spaces. 2. the final
objective of the game roles are asymmetric. Generally speaking,
any two-player extensive form game can be abstractly described as
the following:
𝐺(𝑆, 𝑃) =


True, if P wins
False, if P loses
∃𝑚∈A𝑆
𝑃: ¬𝐺(T (𝑆,𝑚), ¬𝑃)
where 𝐺(𝑆, 𝑃) is a predicate that claims that, given a game state
parameter 𝑆, the current player 𝑃will win the game. In a nontrivial
case, the current player will pick up the action from the action space
A𝑆
𝑃and claim that after taking this action through the transition
operator T (𝑆,𝑚), the other player cannot win the game. It is to be
noted that the action space is parameterized on the current state
and player, which is consistent with any game definition.
Definition 2.1. Given the space of all possible legal game states 𝔖
the space of all possible legal actions 𝔄, an extensive form game is
symmetric if there exist two involutions 𝜑: 𝔄→𝔄and𝜓: 𝔖→𝔖
such that we have the following holds:
∀𝑚∈𝔄: 𝜑(𝑚) ∈𝔄∧𝜑(𝜑(𝑚)) = 𝑚
∀𝑆∈𝔖: 𝜓(𝑆) ∈𝔖∧𝜓(𝜓(𝑆)) = 𝑆
∀𝑚∈A𝑆
𝑃: 𝜑(𝑚) ∈A𝜓(𝑆)
¬𝑃
∀𝑆∈𝔖: 𝐺(𝜓(𝑆), ¬𝑃) = 𝐺(𝑆, 𝑃)
(4)
Using the definition above, one can easily judge whether a given
extensive form game is symmetric or asymmetric. For instance,
Chess is considered symmetric because one can find 𝜓and 𝜑both
to be a ’flipping’ operator, which makes the current board upside
down. That means the White player can move by pretending to be
a Black player by rotating the board 180 degrees and flipping the
color. On the other hand, Fox and Geese is asymmetric, because one
cannot find any involution 𝜑between Fox player’s action space and
Geese player’s action space such that𝜓(𝑆) is a legal state in𝔖. It can
also be inferred that all impartial games (hence all Nim games) are
symmetric because, by definition, all players share the same action
space, so the mappings here can just be identical. Nevertheless,
partisan games can either be symmetric or asymmetric based on
the game definition.
The semantic games we are dealing with are considered asym-
metric in general because the two roles’ action space would be
different due to different domains for quantified variables. Such an
asymmetry introduces an intrinsic imbalance once the two players
play against each other, which causes the game to be easier for
one player but harder for the other one. The asymmetric games
become a challenge for the original AlphaZero algorithm designed
for symmetric board games, like Chess and Go. As a result, Alp-
haZero can learn on a consistent action space, objective, and player
role using the color-flipping trick. The symmetric games make it
possible only to learn a single policy that applies to both players.
However, separate policies have to be learned for an asymmetric
game, adding another layer of complexity to the learning algorithm.
3
METHODOLOGY
3.1
Overview of Persephone
In this section, we propose a general framework, Persephone, to
solve FOL-expressible combinatorial problems. Through game-theoretic
semantics, the framework transforms the FOL description of the
target problem into a two-player semantic game. The transformed
two-player semantic game can then be modeled with Two-player
MDPs. After that, a neural MCTS algorithm will be applied to play
and learning the game. The algorithm will finally converge to an
optimal strategy for the Proponent player if the original problem
has an optimal solution. Otherwise, the Opponent player will learn
the counter strategy to demonstrate the falsehood of the original
problem (Fig. 1).
Two-player MDPs can be viewed as extensions of MDPs [20],
which, in case of semantic games, can be represented as a tuple
⟨S𝑃, A𝑃, S𝑂𝑃, A𝑂𝑃, R, T,𝛾⟩where: S1 and S2 are state spaces for
each players, and A1 and A2 are action spaces.
• S𝑃and S𝑂𝑃are state spaces for each players, which contains
all possible states in a decision problem. In terms of the

semantic game, they contain all possible legal game states
for each players respectively.
• A𝑃and A𝑂𝑃are action space for each player, which con-
tains all possible actions in a decision problem. In terms of
the semantic game, it contains all possible legal moves for
each players respectively.
• transition function T defines the dynamic from one state to
another. In a semantic game, we have a transition function
T : S𝑃/𝑂𝑃× A𝑃/𝑂𝑃→S𝑃∪𝑆𝑂𝑃. It is to be noted that a
feature of the semantic game is that, depending on the step-
wise evaluation of the FOL formula and game-theoretical
semantics, the next state can either belong to the same player
or change to another player.
• Rewards R(𝑠,𝑎,𝑠′), which defines the reward after taking
action 𝑎in state 𝑠and moving to state 𝑠′. In a semantic game,
since the outcome of the game is unknown until the game
ends, the rewards are sparse. In other words, we have the
following reward function (suppose 𝑠∈S𝑃/𝑂𝑃)
R(𝑠,𝑎,𝑠′) =


𝑒𝑣𝑎𝑙(𝑠′), if 𝑠′is terminal and 𝑠′ ∈S𝑃/𝑂𝑃
−𝑒𝑣𝑎𝑙(𝑠′), if 𝑠′is terminal and 𝑠′ ∈S𝑂𝑃/𝑃
0, otherwise
𝑒𝑣𝑎𝑙(𝑠) =
(
1, if 𝑠evaluates to True
−1, if 𝑠evaluates to False
• Reward discount factor 𝛾∈(0, 1], which weighs the impor-
tance of future rewards. Typically, the farther the distance of
a reward from the current state, the less effective the reward
brings to the current decision. In our semantic games, since
the reward is sparse, 𝛾is set to 1.
Since there are two players, solving these MDPs means finding two
policies 𝜋𝑃and 𝜋𝑂𝑃such that a Nash equilibrium can be established.
As a result, once the learning converged, one of the player can
always win the game while the other one is forced to lose the game.
Figure 1: The Persephone Framework.
3.2
Implementation Details
3.2.1
State Representation. The entrance of a semantic game is
always a predicate, which can be viewed as a tree. Once evaluating
this predicate step-wisely, each node is either a logic operator or
a predicate. A predicate indicates a leaf node for the current tree,
but also an entrance to another tree. Persephone uses a preorder
traversal to identify each node, and hence to vectorize the tree
structure uniquely. For instance,
𝐻𝑆𝑅(𝑘,𝑞,𝑛) := ∃𝑚∈[1,𝑛) : 𝐻𝑆𝑅(𝑘−1,𝑞−1,𝑚)∧𝐻𝑆𝑅(𝑘,𝑞−1,𝑛−𝑚)
can be represented as:
Exists
And
PRED_1
PRED_2
The corresponding preorder index is [Exist:0, And:1, PRED_1:2,
PRED_2:3], which means Persephone can use a length-four vector
to completely record what happened during a game played on this
tree. All it needs is storing the action taken on each node to the
corresponding position in the vector. For the given instance above,
suppose we choose 𝑚= 5 and then take the left branch (marked as
0 in action space) of the “And" formula, we will end up with a vector
[5,0,-1,-1] at PRED_1, where -1 is the default value for null actions.
After combining the input parameters and the identification of the
predicate, a complete state representation has the form:
[𝑃𝑅𝐸𝐷_𝐼𝐷, 𝑃𝐴𝑅𝐴𝑀_𝐿𝐼𝑆𝑇,𝑇𝑅𝐸𝐸_𝑃𝑅𝐸𝑂𝑅𝐷𝐸𝑅]
Backing to the previous example, suppose 𝑘= 𝑞= 4 and 𝑛= 16, we
have:
[𝑃𝑅𝐸𝐷_𝐼𝐷, 4, 4, 16, 5, 0, −1, −1]
when the game stops at 𝑃𝑅𝐸𝐷_1 : 𝐻𝑆𝑅(4 −1, 4 −1, 5).
3.2.2
Warm-start MCTS. It is known that MCTS cannot handle
large action space because of the sample efficiency problem. To be
specific, think of a game tree with a significant branching factor
while the winning leaf nodes are incredibly sparse. In this case,
MCTS can find the winning strategy if and only if it can traverse
as many paths as possible, which requires a large number of MCTS
simulations. The number of simulations soon becomes intractable
when the action space increases. To mitigate this issue, We applied
the warmstart trick.
The idea is quite simple: in the original design of neural MCTS,
the search tree is always re-initialized before each MCTS simulation
session. That means MCTS has to recount the visiting count for
each node from the beginning. When the action space increases,
such recounting makes it impossible to locate the optimal path with
a relatively small number of simulations. Therefore, we propose to
use a warm-start MCTS to accelerate the simulation process. The
warm-start mainly contains the following two components:
(1) Keeping counting info: after each MCTS simulation session,
we will keep the node’s counting 𝑁(𝑠,𝑎) in the search tree
and reuse it in the next iteration of the simulation session.
We will see in the experiment that a substantial learning
speed improvement by merely applying this trick.

(2) Q-value injection: inspired by the idea from SAVE [14], where
the author proposes a variant of neural MCTS which only
learns the Q-values and uses a softmax operator to recover
the policy from the learned Q-values. We inject the predicted
Q-values into the search tree nodes as priors, and our ex-
periment shows that it will make the learning process more
stable.
3.2.3
Policy Learning. The neural MCTS can be viewed as an Actor-
Critic (AC) algorithm [13]. The self-play phase works like an actor
which optimized empirical policy ˆ𝜋in the direction suggested by
the value network, the Critic, then samples game trajectories from
the optimized empirical policy ˆ𝜋. In the training phase, the Actor
will update the policy network towards the empirical policy ˆ𝜋;
meanwhile, the Critic will update the value network using the
reward signal from the sampled trajectories.
An AC interpretation of neural MCTS makes alternative policy
learning approaches becomes feasible. Specifically, in the original
AlphaZero implementation, policy network is updated through a
cross entropy method (CEM,[21]), where the policy loss is defined
as:
L(𝜃) = −
∑︁
𝑡
ˆ𝜋(𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡)𝑙𝑜𝑔𝜋𝜃(𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡)
However, further research in policy gradient suggests that using
more sophisticated methods like TRPO and PPO can improve the
stability of the learning process [25, 26]. Therefore, we also imple-
mented the PPO policy update as alternatives. In our experiment,
we mainly focus on the following two PPO policy loss variants:
L𝐶𝐿𝐼𝑃(𝜃) = E𝑡[min(𝑟(𝜃)𝐴(𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡), clip(𝑟(𝜃)𝐴(𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡), 1 −𝜖, 1 + 𝜖))]
L𝐾𝐿(𝜃) = E𝑡[𝑟(𝜃)𝐴(𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡) −𝛽𝐾𝐿[ ˆ𝜋, 𝜋𝜃]]
(5)
where the ratio 𝑟(𝜃) = 𝜋𝜃(𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡)
ˆ𝜋(𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡) is the importance weights, and
𝐴(𝑠,𝑎) is the advantage term, which is defined as:
𝐴(𝑠,𝑎) =
(
−𝑉𝜃(𝑠) −𝑟, if T (𝑠,𝑎) ends the game with reward 𝑟
−𝑉𝜃(T (𝑠,𝑎)) −𝑉𝜃(𝑠), otherwise
(6)
when the next player is not the current player. And
𝐴(𝑠,𝑎) =
(
−𝑉𝜃(𝑠) + 𝑟, if T (𝑠,𝑎) ends the game with reward 𝑟
𝑉𝜃(T (𝑠,𝑎)) −𝑉𝜃(𝑠), otherwise
(7)
when the next player is the current player.
3.2.4
Multiple Neural Networks. There are mainly two reasons
why we consider multiple neural networks in our implementation:
(1) As we have mentioned earlier that a semantic game can be
an asymmetric extensive form game, which means the two
players learns different value and policy networks. Therefore,
it is useful to know whether to use separate neural networks
for each player would be helpful on their learning efficiency.
For instance, in the 𝐻𝑆𝑅(𝑘,𝑞,𝑛) semantic game, the Propo-
nent player has a policy of size 𝑛while the Opponent only
needs to choose from two actions. In [30], the author shows
a behavior asymmetry on playing those games, which might
indicate a performance improving if the two players learn
on different neural networks.
(2) As suggested in [1], the author shows experimentally that
separate value and policy networks can generally increase
the learning performance. Even though AlphaZero is prone
to integrate the two into one neural network, it might be a
bad idea because the training signal can interfere with each
other and cause the learning process to become unstable.
In our experiment, we also test this idea and justify the
observation in [1].
4
EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
4.1
Experiment Setup
4.1.1
Target Problem. We test our idea on the HSR problem, which
has been introduced and also used as experimental subjects in [30].
𝐻𝑆𝑅(𝑘,𝑞,𝑛) basically defines a stress testing problem, where one,
given 𝑘jars and 𝑞test chances, throwing jars from a specific rung
of a given ladder with height 𝑛to locate the highest safe rung. If
𝑛is appropriately large, then one can locate the highest safe rung
with at most 𝑘jars and 𝑞test times; otherwise, if 𝑛is too big, then
there is no way to locate the highest safe rung. This problem can
be described with the following FOL:
𝐻𝑆𝑅(𝑘,𝑞,𝑛) =


True, if 𝑛= 1
False, if 𝑛> 1 ∧(𝑘= 0 ∨𝑞= 0)
∃𝑚∈[1,𝑛) : 𝐻𝑆𝑅(𝑘−1,𝑞−1,𝑚)
∧𝐻𝑆𝑅(𝑘,𝑞−1,𝑛−𝑚), otherwise
Moreover, we perform our experiment mainly on 𝐻𝑆𝑅(7, 7, 128) in
the following context, if we do not specify other instances.
4.1.2
Neural Network Setup.
• For the single neural network, we use a two-head MLP for
both policy and value network. The shared layers has shape
[1024, 1024, 1024, 512], with ReLu activation. Them, for the
policy head, it has shape [|𝐴|𝑚𝑎𝑥] (where |𝐴|𝑚𝑎𝑥is the
maximum size of action space), with Softmax activation. For
the value head, it has shape [1], with Tanh activation.
• For the separated policy and value neural networks, we just
split the shared layers into a different neural network, so
that they are independent with each other.
• For the separated player neural network, to respect the
game’s asymmetry, we use [1024, 1024, 1024, 512] for the
Proponent network, while [256, 256, 256, 128] for the Oppo-
nent network. It is to be noted that separate player networks
is independent of separate policy/value networks, which
means one can have separated player networks while each
player still uses a single neural network or uses a separated
policy/value networks.
4.1.3
Experimental Configurations. Since there are multiple imple-
mentations to compare, we define each implementation setup here
for later usage.
• AZ: the original implementation of AlphaZero.
• CE: the keep-counting-info warm-start variant of AZ.
• CE_Sep: the separate policy/value network variant of CE.

• CE_Q_Sep: the full warm-start (i.e., keeping-counting-info
and Q-value injection) variant of CE_Sep.
• PPO_CLIP_Sep: the separate policy/value network with PPO
policy learning, which uses the L𝐶𝐿𝐼𝑃loss.
• PPO_KL_Sep: the separate policy/value network with PPO
policy learning, which uses the L𝐾𝐿loss.
• PPO_KL_Sep_2NN: the separate player network variant of
PPO_KL_Sep.
4.1.4
Hyperparameters.
• Learning rate to 0.001 with Adam optimizer.
• The mini-batch size is set to 64.
• Training epochs is set to 10.
• Number of MCTS simulation is set to 25.
• number of self-play is set to 100.
• Replay buffer limit is set to 20 iterations.
• 𝛽for L𝐾𝐿is 1.
• 𝜖for L𝐶𝐿𝐼𝑃is 0.2.
4.2
Evaluation Methodology
The evaluation phase is like the self-play phase, where the players
optimize their moves through an MCTS simulation to play against
each other. However, instead of using the same neural networks
for both players, we use the newly trained policy/value networks
to play against the networks from the last iteration. Specifically,
we first run a given number (in our experiment, it is 20) of games
between the Proponent, who uses the newly trained networks, and
the Opponent, who uses the previously trained networks; then we
run the same number of games between the Proponent, who uses
the previously trained networks, and the Opponent, who uses the
newly trained networks.
We then use fault counting to measure the performance of each
game. The concept of fault counting is based on the correctness
measurement in [30], where the action is correct if it preserves a
winning position:
• Proponent’s correctness: Given (𝑘,𝑞,𝑛), correct actions exist
only if𝑛≤𝑁(𝑘,𝑞). In this case, all testing points in the range
[𝑛−𝑁(𝑘,𝑞−1), 𝑁(𝑘−1,𝑞−1)] are acceptable. Otherwise,
there is no corrective action.
• Opponent’s correctness: Given (𝑞,𝑘,𝑛,𝑚), When𝑛> 𝑁(𝑘,𝑞),
any action is regarded as correct if 𝑁(𝑘−1,𝑞−1) ≤𝑚≤
𝑛−𝑁(𝑘,𝑞−1), otherwise, the OP should take “not break” if
𝑚> 𝑛−𝑁(𝑘,𝑞−1) and “break’ if 𝑚< 𝑁(𝑘−1,𝑞−1); when
𝑛≤𝑁(𝑘,𝑞), the OP should take the action “not break” if𝑚<
𝑛−𝑁(𝑘,𝑞−1) and take action “break” if 𝑚> 𝑁(𝑘−1,𝑞−1).
Otherwise, there is no corrective action.
Fault counting then counts when a player makes a mistake that
there is a move to keep the winning position, but the player chooses
an incorrect one. If the player makes a mistake, while the opponent
player catches that mistake by moving to a winning position, we
increase the fault counting by one for the player who makes that
mistake. It is to be noted that a player can lose the game without
making any fault. That is because the player is in a losing position,
and there is no corrective action to take. In other words, if a player
is forced to lose, then he should not be blamed for losing that game.
The learning is considered to be converged if both newly trained
and previously trained networks show zero faults for a certain
number (in our experiment, 5) of consecutive learning iterations. In
our experiment, we measure the fault counting and the number of
iterations needed before convergence for each configuration, along
with the loss curve, we can evaluate the performance of different
configuration.
4.3
Results and Discussion
4.3.1
Does keep-counting-info help? In this experiment, we mea-
sure the performance of AZ and CE. We set the maximum number of
iteration to 100 and then measure the number of iterations needed
before fault counting first time arrives 0 for both of the players. We
run the experiment for 15 times, and it has been shown in Fig.2 that
CE converges in 35 iterations, while AZ never converges, given the
hyperparameters we have mentioned in the previous section. The
experimental result justified that merely adding keep-counting-info
warm-start can already improve the efficiency significantly.
Figure 2: Number of iterations needs before the first time
both of the players got 0 faults. It can be seen that without
keep-counting-info, AZ even cannot find the optimal policy
by any chance. Actually, AZ can find the optimal policy only
when we increase MCTS simulation times to 100, which is
four times larger than the current value.
4.3.2
Does separate policy/value networks help? In this experi-
ment, we measure the performance of CE and CE_Sep. We set
the maximum number of iteration to 100 and then measure the
fault-counting after each iteration. We run the experiment 15 times,
and found that CE can be unstable compared to CE_Sep (as shown
in Fig.3 and Fig.4). This verified the observation from [1], where the
author also recommended to use a separated policy/value neural
network. We think those spikes are due to interfered target signals
in a layer-shared neural network, where value signal and policy
signal interfere with each other inevitably but unnecessarily.
4.3.3
Does Q-value injection/PPO/separated player networks help?
Since keep-counting-info and separate policy/value networks are
essential for efficiency and stability, we always apply these two
configurations in the rest of our experiment. In this experiment,
we measure the average number of iterations need before conver-
gence for CE_Sep, CE_Q_Sep, PPO_CLIP_Sep, PPO_KL_Sep, and

Figure 3: The fault-counting measurement from one of the
15 experiments on CE. We only show one experiment be-
cause of page limits, but all 15 experiments have a similar
curve where spikes appear after convergence, which signi-
fies unstable learning.
Figure 4: The fault-counting measurement from one of the
15 experiments on CE_Sep. Because of page limits, we only
show one experiment, but all 15 experiments have a similar
curve where no spike appears after convergence, which is a
sign of stable learning.
PPO_KL_Sep_2NN. We run 20 experiments on each configuration
and plot the Box and Whisker graph for each of them (see Fig.5).
Our experiment provides us several meaningful results:
(1) Q-value injection helps increase the efficiency of the algo-
rithm. It can be seen from the graph that CE_Q_Sep aver-
agely locates the optimal policy faster than CE_Sep. That
is because Q-values from the value network accelerates the
search process of MCTS, which helps it evaluate the UCB
formula unbiased. As a result, we assume Q-value injection
in the rest of our experiments.
(2) Using L𝐾𝐿is much better than using L𝐶𝐿𝐼𝑃. As shown in
the graph, PPO_CLIP_Sep has a higher average value and a
larger variance than PPO_KL_Sep. We think this might be
due to the fact of reward sparsity in semantic games, which
will cause the advantage to become very small hence provide
less information to update the policy network for L𝐶𝐿𝐼𝑃. On
the other hand, L𝐾𝐿has a KL regularization term, which
works like cross-entropy and provides more information for
learning the policy network.
(3) It seems that separate player neural networks perform slightly
worse than using the same policy/value network for both
of the players. It is to be noted that PPO_KL_Sep_2NN runs
much faster than PPO_KL_Sep because of the smaller net-
work size for the Opponent player. It takes averagely 10s to
finish one training epoch for PPO_KL_Sep, while only 2s for
PPO_KL_Sep_2NN. Therefore, even though
PPO_KL_Sep_2NN needs averagely 2 to 3 more iterations
to find the optimal strategy, it still takes less time than
PPO_KL_Sep, which means separate player neural networks
do increase efficiency.
Figure 5: The Box and Whisker graph for the number of it-
erations needed before convergence for different configura-
tions.
To further investigate the behavior of different configurations,
we also plot the loss curve for both policy and value network for
each configuration (Fig. 6). CE’s value loss curve shows that it drops
much faster than other configurations, which means that the value
network might quickly converge to local optimal at the beginning
of learning. Hence it takes a longer time to jump out of the local
optimal and lower the efficiency. Another fact to notice is that the
policy loss of Opponent’s networks in the PPO_KL_Q_Sep_2NN
configuration converges earlier than Proponent’s networks, which
means the separated player networks captures the asymmetry prop-
erly in this semantic game.
4.4
Performance Scoring
It is to be noted that HSR is a special problem for which the ground-
truth is already known. However, in general, for most combinatorial
problems, the ground-truth is unknown, requiring us to figure
out an alternative to measure the performance. In this additional
experiment, we use two performance scoring techniques, Elo-rating
[8] and 𝛼-Rank [23], to score the Proponent player per each learning
iteration. Performance scoring allows us to measure a player’s
performance simply through the game results or the pay-off table
from the competition with other player instances. For Elo-rating,

Figure 6: The loss curve for different configurations. No-
tice that we did not plot PPO_CLIP_Q_Sep, because the loss
curve of L𝐶𝐿𝐼𝑃behaves differently, which makes it incom-
parable to the rest of the loss curves.
we run a competition between the two players after each training
iteration and compute their score; For 𝛼-Rank, we have to store all
player instances after each iteration and run a competition among
different players from different training iterations to generate a
pay-off table, then we run the 𝛼-Rank algorithm to get the score.
In order to generate the pay-off table more efficiently, we run the
scoring process on two relatively smaller instances: 𝐻𝑆𝑅(3, 3, 8)
(Fig.7) and 𝐻𝑆𝑅(4, 4, 16) (Fig.8). We can see a clear phase transition
where the algorithm jumps from a low score to a high score, which
indicates an optimal strategy has been found.
5
CONCLUSION
This paper proposed a framework, Persephone, to efficiently map a
first-order problem to a two-player semantic game and then play
and learn an optimal game strategy through a neural MCTS based
RL algorithm. The optimal learned strategy can then be mapped
back to an optimal solution for the original problem. We also in-
troduced a formal definition for symmetric/asymmetric extended
form games, which motivates us to investigate asymmetric neu-
ral network designs. We proposed several variants to the vanilla
Figure 7: For 𝐻𝑆𝑅(3, 3, 8), the convergence happened very
quickly when the instance is small. The 𝛼-Rank score also
shows a very similar pattern. A further checking on the
fault-counting metric confirmed that both players have con-
verged to 0 faults.
Figure 8: For 𝐻𝑆𝑅(4, 4, 16), the Elo-rating starts at 600 and
drops until iteration 4, after the fourth iteration the increase
in the Elo-rating is almost linear up to iteration 7 after
which there is a huge jump of around 550 points to iteration
8 and a 220 point jump to iteration 9 stays constant at around
1420 thereafter. The 𝛼-Rank score for this experiment stays
constant at 0.02 for the first 7 steps and again shoots to 0.97
at iteration 8 and remains constant at 0.99 thereafter.
AlphaZero algorithm, such as using different policy learning strate-
gies, warm-start, separate policy/value networks, separate player
networks, and carried out experiments on different configurations.
The experimental results can be measured either through ground-
truth based metrics, like fault-counting in our case or through
performance scoring techniques like Elo-rating and 𝛼-Rank. Our
experimental results show that a KL-divergence regularized PPO

policy learning with warm-start MCTS and separated neural net-
works perform the best, which justified our improvements to the
original AlphaZero algorithm.
