arXiv:1004.4734v1  [cs.AI]  27 Apr 2010
URPDM2010
On the comparison of plans:
Proposition of an instability measure
for dynamic machine scheduling
Martin Josef Geiger
Helmut Schmidt University, Logistics Management Department,
Holstenhofweg 85, 22041 Hamburg, Germany,

ABSTRACT. On the basis of an analysis of previous research, we present a generalized approach
for measuring the diﬀerence of plans with an exemplary application to machine scheduling. Our work
is motivated by the need for such measures, which are used in dynamic scheduling and planning situ-
ations. In this context, quantitative approaches are needed for the assessment of the robustness and
stability of schedules.
Obviously, any ‘robustness’ or ‘stability’ of plans has to be deﬁned w. r. t. the particular situation and
the requirements of the human decision maker.
Besides the proposition of an instability measure,
we therefore discuss possibilities of obtaining meaningful information from the decision maker for the
implementation of the introduced approach.
KEYWORDS. Robust scheduling; dynamic scheduling; rescheduling; stability measure.
1
Scheduling in dynamic environments
Planning and scheduling generally considers a set of activities (operations) for which (i) assignments
to resources, such as machines, and (ii) deﬁnition of starting times must be found, thus deﬁning a
schedule x for a given problem. While the assignment of operations to machines is often given by
technical side constraints, the processing order on the machines, and thus the precise starting times
of the jobs is determined by the planning procedure/ algorithm. W. r. t. the terminology used in ma-
chine scheduling, operations, denoted as Ojk, are often grouped into ‘jobs’ Jj = {Oj1, . . . , Ojoj}, and
precedence constraints among the operations belonging to a particular job implement the technical
requirements of processing.
Besides these general, static considerations, practical problems of scheduling in manufacturing envi-
ronments are in most cases of dynamic nature. In these situations, a schedule needs to be found that
is modiﬁed during the actual execution, adapting to the dynamically changing conditions.
Changes of relevance to the scheduling are referred to as rescheduling factors (Dutta, 1990). Along with
these issues come modiﬁcations of the relevant data and the characteristics of the problem. Depending
on the changes and on the initial schedule xt at time t, a revision of xt might be necessary.
Such dynamic adaptations raise stability and robustness issues. Obviously, an impact on the orga-
nization has to be expected when making changes to once deﬁned and committed plans. Therefore,
quantitative approaches of measuring the diﬀerence of plans, and thus the robustness of schedules, are
needed for such practical applications.
Rescheduling factors
Changes to the machine environment are the most commonly discussed factors of dynamic scheduling in
the literature. Machine failures are reported to play a role in dynamic situations (Abumaizar and Svestka,
1

URPDM2010
1997). Besides the machines failures due to technical problems, Church and Uzsoy (1992) report the
possibility of operator absenteeism which may lead to an unavailability of the machine.
Job related rescheduling factors comprise the arrival of new jobs, and especially rush jobs (Jain and Elmaraghy,
1997). Besides, the cancelation of jobs is another source of dynamics in scheduling. In the case of
deﬁned due date, changes may also address the due dates (Fang and Xi, 1997).
In addition to the basic data of the problem, preferences of the decision maker and priorities of jobs
may change over time, an example being unexpectedly arriving rush orders which implicitly reduce
the relative importance of known jobs from the previous planning period (Jain and Elmaraghy, 1997).
Classiﬁcation of solution approaches
Common to all dynamic scheduling concepts is the distinction between an initial scheduling and a re-
curring schedule adaptation phase. Two aspects of schedules play an important role when dynamically
revising schedules, utility and stability. While the term utility refers to the quality of the schedule,
expressed by the objective function(s), the stability measures the changes of an initial schedule com-
pared to a revised schedule. The goal of any rescheduling concept is the maximization of both the
achieved utility as well as the stability. However these two are often of conﬂicting nature, they lead to
a situation where a tradeoﬀbetween the two aspects has to be made.
The general treatment of dynamic scheduling problems can be broadly classiﬁed into three categories:
on-line scheduling, predictive-reactive and robust scheduling (Aytug et al., 2005).
On-line approaches make assignment and sequencing decision on the job ﬂoor in real time (Mehta and Uzsoy,
1999), e. g. by the means of dispatching rules (Haupt, 1989). While this concept is highly ﬂexible, a
drawback lies in the missing predictability of the schedules’ performance as the precise production
schedule is only available after the operations have been assigned to the resources.
Predictive-reactive approaches introduce a two-step-process by ﬁrst constructing an initial schedule
which is then to be modiﬁed given dynamic changes of the problem. Here, an important question
is the appropriate schedule adaptation to the changed circumstances, taking into consideration both
utility and stability. Potential changes in the manufacturing environment are however not anticipated
or integrated into the scheduling procedure.
Concepts of robust scheduling try to anticipate possible changes and sources of disturbances when
proposing a schedule for the problem at hand. While at a ﬁrst glimpse this concept seems overall
promising, knowledge about possible changes has to be available or at least sensible assumptions have
to be made. One possibility is the consideration of a range of scenarios (Kouvelis et al., 2000).
2
Stability of schedules
Stability measures
Besides the evaluation of schedules with respect to known and initially deﬁned optimality criteria
(T’kindt and Billaut, 2002), the stability of a schedule plays a role in the context of dynamic scheduling.
Various stability measures have been proposed in order to express transition between two schedules in
a quantitative way. Common to all is the proposition of a cost function based on the operations and/or
jobs of the problem. Associated with changing starting times is a negative impact which is penalized
in a quantitative way. The idea behind this can be seen in resulting adaptations that have to be made
in the manufacturing environment, resulting in costs.
Most approaches go back to the early proposal of Wu et al. (1993). Here, the diﬀerence between two
schedules is computed as the sum of the absolute diﬀerences of starting times of all operations, given
in Expression 1. Stability is therefore independent from whether operations start earlier or later than
initially planned. The stability stab is expressed depending on the initial schedule x with starting
2

URPDM2010
times sjk and the revised schedule x′ with starting times s′
jk of operations Ojk.
stab(x, x′) =
X
|sjk −s′
jk|
(1)
The stability measure of Wu et al. (1993) comes with the implicit assumption, that a discrimination
between operations being shifted forward or backward in time has an equal impact on the stability.
It therefore is only applicable in situations in which this assumption holds.
In many production
situations however, a diﬀerence between delayed operations and earlier executed operations can be
observed. Delaying operations does not necessarily result in a higher organizational overhead, but it
has an obvious eﬀect on the completion of the jobs, and is in this sense already captured by other
optimality criteria. An earlier execution of operations however often results in a considerable eﬀort.
For example, the required material and tools have to be made available, computerized numerical control
(CNC) programs need to be completed upon start of production, etc.
In the work of Lin et al. (1994), only operations with earlier starting times are considered in the
proposed stability measure. This implies that delays do not aﬀect the schedules stability while earlier
starting times do, see Expression (2).
stab(x, x′) =
X
max(0, sjk −s′
jk)
(2)
To some extent, the approach of Lin et al. (1994) can be seen as an answer to the criticism mentioned
above with regard to the work of Wu et al. (1993). The stability measure is therefore suitable for
manufacturing environments where only earlier executions of operations present a relevant change to
the production plan.
The approaches of Wu et al. (1993) and Lin et al. (1994) are combined in the work presented by
Rangsaritratsanee et al. (2004) into the deﬁnition of an overall cost function. As a result, a more general
way of measuring the stability of schedules is derived, making it possible to individually discriminate
between the eﬀect of earlier and later scheduled operations.
As opposed to starting times of operations, Cowling and Johansson (2002) propose a combination of
start and completion times of the entire job, leading to an overall cost function. In a later work of
Cowling et al. (2004), only the completion times Cj of jobs are relevant for the proposed stability
measure. As in this stability measure it is not the operations that are considered but the completion of
the job as a whole, this concept diﬀers signiﬁcantly from other approaches of measuring the stability
of schedules. Its use can be seen in manufacturing environments where changes of the completion of
the jobs are more important than the operations themselves.
The approach of Watatani and Fujii (1992), later also used by Iima (2005), is based on the sequences
of the operations.
Here, schedules x and x′ are considered to be diﬀerent if the sequences of the
operations diﬀer. This is the case for operations Ojk, Olo for which sjk < slo ∧s′
jk > s′
lo. This measure
is useful when changing the sequence of operations is diﬃcult with respect to the organization of the
manufacturing environment and therefore results in a necessary organizational eﬀort.
An example
of such a production situation would be a ﬂow-oriented manufacturing environment where jobs are
transported in a ﬁxed sequence, e. g. by means of a belt.
Changes to the sequence through jobs
overtaking others impose problems here.
Stability measures are implemented in rescheduling strategies either in a predictive-reactive way, where
the problem is treated as a multi-objective optimization problem maximizing both utility and stability,
or in concepts of robust scheduling, where they are used to compute a quantitative measure for a
schedule robustness with respect to changes of the manufacturing situation.
3

URPDM2010
Critical analysis
Stability of schedules is always measured by comparison of an initial production schedule x with a
revised schedule x′.
Various characteristics of the schedules x, x′ may diﬀer from each other.
In
particular, the following aspects have to be considered to be the basis for a further analysis.
1. Diﬀerent starting times of operations, along with diﬀerent completion times of the jobs.
2. Diﬀerent operation sequences.
3. Diﬀerent machine assignments of operations.
Consequently, approaches measuring the stability of schedules are based on either one characteristic
or combine several characteristics to an overall stability measure.
Stability measures express the diﬀerence in a quantitative way, given an overall idea of how ‘diﬀerent’
schedules are. Existing approaches deﬁne stability with respect to starting time changes of operations
(Cowling et al., 2004; Cowling and Johansson, 2002; Lin et al., 1994; Rangsaritratsanee et al., 2004;
Wu et al., 1993) or changes of operation sequences (Iima, 2005). A distinction between earlier and
later starting operations is sometimes made (Lin et al., 1994). This expressed the fact that on one
hand an earlier execution is critical in the sense of schedule stability, while on the other hand a later
execution does not lead to problems for the organization.
The diﬀerence between schedules is of particular importance as changes of the production planning have
an organizational impact, e. g. on required material, suppliers, etc. A stability measure of schedules
therefore should express the impact of the changes on the organization.
Reviewing existing approaches of schedule stability, one can observe that they do not take into con-
sideration the inﬂuence of the point in time when the changes occur. While the absolute deviation
of the starting times from the initially scheduled sjk plays a role, it is not further analyzed whether
the changes appear close to the actual rescheduling moment or at the end of the planning horizon. In
many real world applications of scheduling, immediate changes will however have a diﬀerent impact
compared to changes happening in e. g. several weeks. The reason behind this can be seen in the time
needed to implement the changes made to the production schedule. Communication with suppliers
and customers requires time.
3
Proposition of a novel approach
A generalized instability measure
To overcome the limitations described in the previous section, we propose a novel approach measuring
the instability of schedules. A measure for instability is deﬁned in such a way that larger values refer to
a larger instability. This is in contrast to approaches found in the literature, which wrongly denote the
measures as measures of stability, although the computed values increase with increasing instability.
The concept is based on starting times of operations, and measures instability of schedules analyzing
two aspects:
1. The size of the deviation of the starting times.
2. The point of time, when the deviation occurs.
The ﬁrst aspect, the size of the deviation of the starting times, can easily be measured by comparing
the starting times sjk and s′
jk of the operations. Expression (3) computes their absolute diﬀerence,
comparing the initial schedule x and the revised one x′.
∆jk = |s′
jk −sjk|
(3)
4

URPDM2010
The second aspect, the point of time when the deviation occurs, can be determined as follows. The
exact time when a schedule has to be modiﬁed, is denoted with t0. The relative impact of starting time
changes may be expressed depending on how close either the initially planned start sjk or the revised
start s′
jk of the operation Ojk is scheduled. Expression (4) measures the closeness of the operation Ojk
to the start of the planning horizon.
distjk = min(sjk −t0, s′
jk −t0) = min(sjk, s′
jk) −t0
(4)
The impact of the closeness distjk may then be expressed as a (monotonic) decreasing function
imp(distjk). Operations Ojk being close to the start of the current planning horizon, and thus having
a small distjk, receive a high impact value imp(distjk), while the impact decreases with increasing
distance to the moment of rescheduling.
A possible way of computing the impact imp(distjk) is given in Expression (5).
imp(distjk) = Idistjk
(5)
On obtaining statements from the decision maker
The parameter I has to be chosen such that it reﬂects the length of the planning horizon. The actual
value of the parameter I could be obtained from the decision maker, by considering how the relative
impact of an operation at the end of the scheduling horizon relates to the impact at the very beginning,
expressed by parameter pc. For example, the decision maker is enabled to express that changes at the
end of the planning horizon have an impact of 30% of changes at the beginning of the horizon, therefore
pc = 0.3.
With the percentage at the end of the planning horizon pc and the length of the planning horizon T,
I may be computed as given in Expression (6). A value of I < 1 has been chosen to show a decreasing
impact over time.
I =
T√pc
(6)
In practice, it might be diﬃcult for the decision maker to state the exact percentage of the impact at
the end of the planning horizon. An alternative way for obtaining I could be to refer to another period
with which the planner is more familiar. From a practical planner’s perspective, such a period could
be a (working) week, or a similar time span being used as a time pattern in planning. The decision
maker is then asked about the decrease of the impact within this period, denoted by dec. With a
decrease of e. g. 20%, dec = 0.2 and the length of a week of ﬁve working days, I is computed as given
in Expression (7).
I =
5√
1 −dec
(7)
In comparison to Expression (6), the alternative way of computing I in Expression (7) only diﬀers
with respect to the statement of the decision maker. While in (6) the decision maker has to state the
impact at the end of the planning horizon directly, it is indirectly computed in (7) using the decrease
dec over an arbitrary period.
It should be noticed that the impact asymptotically approaches zero without ever reaching it. There-
fore, the impact of starting time changes decreases over time but always stays positive.
5

URPDM2010
Overall formula
A computation of the total impact of the starting time changes and therefore the instability instab(x, x′)
combines the relative importance of the impact with the size of the change. Expression (8) gives the
precise formula.
instab(x, x′) =
X
j
X
k
imp(distjk)∆jk =
X
j
X
k

Imin(sjk,s′
jk)−t0
|s′
jk −sjk|

(8)
In brief this means that combinations of values sjk, s′
jk close to t0 and big changes of the starting
times |sjk −s′
jk| lead to a high impact. On the other hand, small changes of sjk to s′
jk and changes
occurring towards the end of the planning horizon do not contribute as much to the impact measure.
It becomes clear that the required eﬀort for computing Expression (8) increases with the number of
operations. Also, the exponential component adds to the running time of of the formula. For a practical
application, e. g. in a metaheuristic approach employing local search, where numerous evaluations of
Expression (8) are required, a closer look at the running time behavior of our approach will become
necessary.
4
Discussion and conclusions
An approach to measure the instability of schedules in a dynamic manufacturing environment has
been presented.
The concept integrates two aspects into a single measure, namely the diﬀerence
of starting times and the signiﬁcance of the changes depending on when they occur.
As a result,
the concept generalizes approaches known from literature by providing the possibility of assigning a
relative importance of the changes.
The proposed instability measure is more general, yet it includes the special case of Wu et al. (1993)
for a chosen value of I = 1. In any other case however, the determination of an appropriate I requires
considerable more information compared to existing approaches.
Small values of I lead to a fast
decrease of the impact, while large values tend to discriminate less between the changes.
Given the possibility to collect information about the relative importance of the changes as described,
the approach may reﬂect the actual practical situation of dynamic scheduling in manufacturing envi-
ronments more closely. Future research will therefore focus on the evaluation of the applicability of the
approach in dynamic machine scheduling situations. Such an attempt could be experimentally-driven,
investigating the obtained results when making use of the proposed measure, e. g. for an exemplary
dynamic job-shop- or ﬂow-shop scheduling environment. Diﬀerent rescheduling factors should be ex-
amined, and the impact of well-chosen rescheduling reasons (disturbances) on the obtained schedule
should be studied. This also implies an experimental comparison of the proposed measure to approaches
known from the literature.
