Dyna-H: a heuristic planning reinforcement learning algorithm applied to role-playing
game strategy decision systems
Matilde Santos, Jos´e Antonio Mart´ın H.∗, Victoria L´opez, Guillermo Botella
Computer Architectures and Automation, Complutense University of Madrid, Spain.
Abstract
In a Role-Playing Game, ﬁnding optimal trajectories is one of the most important tasks. In fact, the strategy decision system
becomes a key component of a game engine. Determining the way in which decisions are taken (online, batch or simulated) and
the consumed resources in decision making (e.g. execution time, memory) will inﬂuence, in mayor degree, the game performance.
When classical search algorithms such as A∗can be used, they are the very ﬁrst option. Nevertheless, such methods rely on precise
and complete models of the search space, and there are many interesting scenarios where their application is not possible. Then,
model free methods for sequential decision making under uncertainty are the best choice. In this paper, we propose a heuristic
planning strategy to incorporate the ability of heuristic-search in path-ﬁnding into a Dyna agent. The proposed Dyna-H algorithm,
as A∗does, selects branches more likely to produce outcomes than other branches. Besides, it has the advantages of being a model-
free online reinforcement learning algorithm. The proposal was evaluated against the one-step Q-Learning and Dyna-Q algorithms
obtaining excellent experimental results: Dyna-H signiﬁcatively overcomes both methods in all experiments. We suggest also, a
functional analogy between the proposed sampling from worst trajectories heuristic and the role of dreams (e.g. nightmares) in
human behavior.
Keywords: Decision-making; Path-ﬁnding; Heuristic-search; A-star; Reinforcement-learning
1. Introduction
Decision support systems (DSS) are computer-based infor-
mation systems that support business or any other organiza-
tional decision-making activities. DSSs help to make decisions,
which may be rapidly changing and not easily speciﬁed in ad-
vance. DSSs include knowledge-based systems. The impor-
tance of making a good decision in any business is evident. In
a dynamic environment, decision processes not only need to be
well designed but they must adapt rapidly to changes in the en-
vironment. Existing work on decision making has centered on
the concepts of rational and boundedly rational decision pro-
cesses. Recent works include a third model of decision, based
on the use of heuristics.
In the last years, there has been an increasing interest in the
issues of cost-sensitive learning and decision making, in a vari-
ety of applications, in order to maximize the total beneﬁts over
time. A number of approaches have been developed that are
eﬀective at optimizing cost-sensitive decisions (Lopez et al.,
2010; Iglesias et al., 2008), some of them based on a synergy
between diﬀerent intelligent techniques and other ﬁelds that to-
gether comprise what is called knowledge engineering (Lu and
Ruan, 2007).
∗address: Facultad de Inform´atica, Universidad Complutense de Madrid,
C. Prof. Jos´e Garc´ıa Santesmases, s/n., 28040, Madrid, (Spain). Tel.: +34
91.394.7620, Fax: +34 91.394.7510

In any decision making strategy, an agent seeks to achieve
a goal, despite uncertainty about its environment. The agent’s
actions inﬂuence the future state of the environment, thereby af-
fecting the options and possible alternatives at later times. Cor-
rect choice requires taking into account indirect, delayed con-
sequences of actions, and thus may include foresight or plan-
ning (Sutton and Barto, 1998).
Among all the decisions involved in computer-games, the
most common is probably path-ﬁnding, i.e., looking for a good
route or path for moving an entity from here to there. The en-
tity can be a single person, a vehicle, or a combat unit; the genre
can be an action game, a simulator, a role-playing game, or a
strategy game. The main focus of this research is to compute
collision-free shortest-paths as quickly as possible. Although
path-ﬁnding is not trivial, there are some well-established, solid
algorithms that have been applied, some of them more eﬃcient
than others (Bayili and Polat, 2011; Alvarez et al., 2010).
In this paper we use, as the case study, the Role-Playing
Games (RPG) scenario, where the player selects a target point
(t) from its current position and the entity (e) is automatically
taken to t without interacting with the system, avoiding ob-
stacles and optimizing the trajectory. This automatic process
can be carried out by diﬀerent approaches (Karamouzas and
Overmars, 2008). Most of the searching strategies proposed in
the literature are included in the wide area of machine learn-
ing (Alpaydin, 2004; Mitchell, 1997). When classical search
algorithms such as A∗can be used, they are the very ﬁrst choice
for computing optimal solutions. Nevertheless, these methods
Preprint submitted to Knowledge-Based Systems
November 26, 2024
arXiv:1101.4003v3  [cs.AI]  30 Jul 2011

can be computationally demanding, especially for very large
environments. For instance, A∗based algorithms usually de-
mands quite high execution time since the decisions rely on a
exhaustive planning strategy. Even more, such methods depend
heavily on precise and complete models of the environment,
e.g. the game arena. So, there are many interesting scenarios
where they cannot be applied. Therefore, model free methods
for sequential decision making problems under uncertainty are
well suited to these cases since the incremental nature of its
learning mechanisms and the direct action selection mechanism
of its decision making procedures make it possible to use them
in real-time applications.
Many other applications of these learning strategies can be
found in the literature. Without being exhaustive, some recent
paradigmatic examples can be cited. The airline ticket purchas-
ing problem (Gilmore, 2008), where author uses diﬀerent tech-
niques to acquire a ﬂight ticket at the lowest cost. MALADY: A
Machine Learning-Based Autonomous Decision-Making Sys-
tem for Sensor Networks (Krishnamurthy et al., 2009), where
sensor networks are able to learn and make decisions in real
time. Muse et al. (2006) present a system for visual robotic
docking using an omnidirectional camera coupled with the ac-
tor critic reinforcement learning algorithm. In this case, a net-
work trained via reinforcement allows the robot to turn to and
approach a table to pick an object. Janssens et al. (2007) present
an application of reinforcement learning (Q-learning) that sim-
ulates time and location information for a given sequence of
travel activities. Even in a diﬀerent ﬁeld such as education we
can ﬁnd some interesting applications (Iglesias et al., 2009). In
this paper the process of learning pedagogical policies accord-
ing to the students needs ﬁts an RL problem. Kaelbling et al.
(1996) and Busoniu et al. (2008) have written surveys on rein-
forcement learning and its applications. A heuristic method can
use searching trees. However, instead of generating all possi-
ble solution branches, a heuristic selects branches more likely
to produce successful outcomes than other branches. It is se-
lective at each decision point. This paper is an extension of a
previous one on path-ﬁnding for RPGs (Alvarez et al., 2010).
In this article, we introduce a novel algorithm that includes
a heuristic planning module (sampling from the worst trajec-
tories) and a function H (the a priori knowledge injected to
the system) that can contain any kind of information that ex-
press how bad is taking an action at a particular situation, for
example, the Euclidean distance between a goal state and the
current state. The proposed Dyna-H algorithm is based on the
well-known Dyna architecture (Sutton, 1991; Sutton and Barto,
1998).
Grid world like environments treated as Markov sequen-
tial decision problems are used nowadays in many research
works to evaluate and show the behavior of standard algorithms
against new proposed ones. The results obtained in this test
cases are easily generalizable to other problems, such as robot
navigation, and, in general, any sequential decision problem.
In this particular case, to an informed (i.e. knowledge-based)
sequential decision problem. The proposed method, the one-
step Q-learning and Dyna-Q algorithms have been applied to
the same problem and compared in terms of learning rate.
The structure of the paper is as follows. In section 2, the
strategies that are going to be applied and compared are brieﬂy
described and the novel proposal is introduced. The experimen-
tal scenario is described in Section 3. Results obtained by the
diﬀerent algorithms are discussed in Section 4. The last section
(5) is devoted to the conclusions and further work.
2. Search, Reinforcement learning and Planning
The algorithms that are going to be compared are brieﬂy de-
scribed in this section. A new algorithm based on the Dyna
architecture (Sutton, 1991; Sutton and Barto, 1998), that com-
bines heuristic on-line search and Q-Learning is presented.
We focus on solving path planning problems for homogeneous
agents in homogeneous environments.
2.1. Heuristic search, the A∗algorithm
The predominant state-space planning methods in artiﬁcial
intelligence are collectively known as heuristic search. Unlike
other planning methods, heuristic search is not concerned with
changing the approximate, value function, but only with im-
proving the actions selection given the current value function.
In heuristic search, for each state encountered, a large tree
of possible alternatives is considered. The approximate value
function is applied to the leaf nodes, and then backed up at the
previous state towards the root. The backing up in the search
tree is just the same as in the max-backups. This backing up
stops at the state-action nodes of the current state. Once the
backed-up values of these nodes are computed, the best of them
is chosen as the current action, and the rest of the values are
discarded. In conventional heuristic search no eﬀort is made
to save the backed-up values and the value function, once de-
signed, never changes as a result of the search. However, it
would be reasonable to allow the value function to be improved
over time, using either the backed-up values computed during
the heuristic search or by any other method.
Heuristic methods such as A∗based algorithms have been
widely applied. Actually, in the game development commu-
nity, the most popular path-planning is to divide the environ-
ment into a grid that can be explored using these A∗based al-
gorithms. This approach works very well in computer games
as it always retrieves the shortest path, if exists. This heuristic
search ranks each node by an estimate of the best route through
that node. It combines the tracking of the previous path length
of Dijkstra’s algorithm (Dijkstra, 1959), with the heuristic esti-
mate of the remaining path from best-ﬁrst search. Since some
nodes may be processed more than once, in order to ﬁnd bet-
ter paths later, it is necessary to keep track of them in a list.
Adding this heuristic score to the nodes stored in Dijkstras pri-
ority queue, the number of nodes visited during the search can
be eﬀectively pruned down.
A∗has a couple of interesting properties. It is guaranteed to
ﬁnd the shortest path, as long as the heuristic estimate is admis-
sible. That is, it is never greater than the remaining distance to
the goal. It makes the most eﬃcient use of the heuristic func-
tion: no search that uses the same heuristic function and ﬁnds
2

optimal paths will expand fewer nodes than A∗, not counting
tie-breaking among nodes of equal cost. A∗turns out to be very
ﬂexible in practice.
2.2. Reinforcement Learning (RL)
Reinforcement Learning (Kaelbling et al., 1996; Sutton and
Barto, 1998) goes back to the very ﬁrst stages of Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence and Machine Learning, and it has several applications in
the Intelligent Knowledge Engineering Systems domain. They
have been also successfully applied to game playing (Littman,
1994).
Under a constrained environment, the learning agent can per-
ceive a set S of distinct states, which are normally characterized
by a number of dimensions, and it has a set A of possible actions
at each state. Reinforcement learning tasks are generally dis-
crete. At each time step t, the agent observes the current state st
and chooses a possible action at, which leads to the succeeding
state st+1 = d(st, at). Then, the environment generates a reward
r(st, at). These rewards can be positive, zero or negative and can
have a delay. In other words, some actions and their state transi-
tions may bring low rewards in short term, while they will lead
to state-action pairs with a much higher reward later. On the
contrary, an action in a given state may receive an immediate
high reward, whereas it makes the agent enter into a path where
the following actions have very low or even negative rewards.
Therefore, the task of the agent is to learn a policy π : S →A,
to achieve the maximum accumulative reward over time.
Reinforcement learning agents are connected to the environ-
ment by perceptions and actions. On each step of the interaction
with the environment, the agent receives as input the current
state and the value of that state. This value is the reward. The
agent records the reward signal and updates the policy based on
the information received about the reward so far.
Q-Learning (Watkins and Dayan, 1992) is a popular method
of model-free reinforcement learning. It can also be viewed as
a method of asynchronous dynamic programming (DP) (Bell-
man, 1957; Bellman and Dreyfus, 1962). Reinforcement Learn-
ing provides agents with the capability of learning from inter-
actions with the environment, to act optimally in Markovian
domains by experiencing the consequences of actions, without
requiring them to receive or build maps (models) of the do-
mains (Grzes and Kudenko, 2010).
Learning proceeds similarly to Sutton’s method of temporal
diﬀerences (TD) (Sutton and Barto, 1998): an agent tries an ac-
tion at a particular state, and evaluates its consequences in terms
of the immediate reward or penalty it receives and its estimate
of the value of the state to which is taken. By trying all actions
in all states repeatedly, it learns which ones are the best overall,
judged by long-term discounted cumulative reward (Tesauro,
1992).
A probabilistic approach is commonly used in Q-learning.
A straightforward strategy is the ϵ-greedy method, where the
probability of making a random choice is handled by the pa-
rameter ϵ.
In every step, with probability 1 −ϵ, the agent
fully exploits the information stored in the Q-values, and with
probability ϵ the agent chooses a random action in order to ex-
plore the state space. In the exploration mode, the ϵ-greedy
value function 
model 
experience 
planning 
acting 
model learning 
direct learning 
Figure 1: Information ﬂow in the Dyna architecture
Algorithm 1 Dyna-Q algorithm, as proposed by Sutton (1991).
1: Initialize Q(s, a), Model(s, a) ∀s ∈S, a ∈A
2: repeat {for each episode}
3:
s ←current(non terminal) state
4:
a ←ϵ-greedy(s, Q)
5:
execute a; observe s′ and r
6:
Q(s, a) ←Q(s, a) + α[r + γ maxa′ Q(s′, a′) −Q(s, a)]
7:
Model(s, a) ←s′, r
8:
for i = 1 to N do
9:
s ←random previously observed state
10:
a ←random action previously taken in s
11:
s′, r ←Model(s, a)
12:
Q(s, a) ←Q(s, a) + α[r + γ maxa′ Q(s′, a′) −Q(s, a)]
13:
end for
14: until s′ is terminal
method assumes equal selection probabilities for any possible
action, whereas the chance of selecting a better action may be
increased by taking the current value distribution between al-
ternatives such as in the soft-max methods (Sutton and Barto,
1998).
2.3. The Dyna architecture
Planning is usually referred to any computational process
that takes a model as input and produces or improves a policy
to interact with the modeled environment. Although there are
diﬀerent approaches, state-space planning is mainly a search
through the state space for an optimal path. Actions cause tran-
sitions from one state to another, and value functions are com-
puted over states.
In on-line planning, new information is gained from the in-
teraction with the environment and may change the model.
If decision-making and model-learning are both computation-
intensive processes, it may be necessary to divide the available
computational resources between them. Dyna (Sutton, 1991),
is a reinforcement learning architecture that easily integrates
incremental reinforcement learning and on-line planning.
The possible relationship between experience, model and
values for Dyna-Q are described in ﬁgure 1. Each arrow shows
a relationship of inﬂuence. Note how experience can improve
the model and therefore the value function, either directly or
indirectly. It is the latter, which is sometimes called indirect
3

reinforcement learning, which is involved in planning. In algo-
rithm 1, where Dyna-Q is described, Model(s, a) denotes the
contents of the model (predicted next state and reward, respec-
tively) for state-action pair (s, a). Direct reinforcement learn-
ing, model-learning, and planning are implemented by steps 6,
7 and 8, respectively. If steps 7 and 8 were omitted, the remain-
ing algorithm would be one-step tabular Q-learning.
Dyna-Q includes all of these processes: planning, acting,
model-learning, and direct RL, continually.
The planning
method is the random-sample one-step Q-planning. The di-
rect RL method is the one-step Q-learning. The model-learning
method is table-based and assumes the world is deterministic.
After each transition, the model records the prediction that will
deterministically follow. Thus, if the model is queried with a
state-action pair that has been experienced before, it simply re-
turns the last-observed next state and next reward as its predic-
tion. During planning, the algorithm randomly samples only of
state-action pairs that have been previously experienced. Con-
ceptually, planning, acting, model-learning, and direct RL oc-
cur simultaneously and in parallel in Dyna agents (Sutton and
Barto, 1998).
3. A heuristic planning reinforcement learning algorithm
based on the Dyna architecture
Here we propose a heuristic planning strategy to incorporate
into a Dyna agent the advantages of a particular heuristic, in
order to ﬁnd the shortest paths in grid like environments, e.g.
RPGs. A heuristic search method, as a search method after all,
can be deﬁned in terms of traversing a search tree. However,
instead of generating all possible solution branches, a heuristic
method selects branches more likely to produce successful out-
comes than others. It is selective at each decision point. The
proposed method incorporates the ability of heuristic search,
e.g. A∗, to focus on speciﬁc search subtrees in order to make the
searching more eﬃcient. At the same time, the method learns
online as any other common reinforcement learning algorithm
and does not requieres a complete model of the environment
before staring to search.
3.1. Sampling from the worst trajectories (the nightmares
metaphor)
Contrary to intuition, the proposed sampling strategy con-
sist in using a learned model of the environment and travel-
ing across it using the worst trajectories with respect to some
heuristic index (e.g. a priori knowledge of the domain), receiv-
ing thus the worst rewards. However, this lead the algorithm
to ﬁnd the solution faster that using any other a priori better
approach.
Sampling from “bad” trajectories using simulated experience
has a very interesting analogous in human behavior: night-
mares. This analogy suggests that such strategy can be con-
sidered as an interesting candidate hypothesis about the role of
nightmares in human behavior, assigning thus a speciﬁc func-
tion to this behavior: a tool used by our brain to reorganize
some goal oriented behaviors using the resting time to learn
based on imagination (simulated experience).
Furthermore,
Figure 9 (in section 4) show diﬀerent trajectories using this
sampling strategy. As can be seen, these trajectories present
some discontinuities (abrupt jumps) and also pass through the
walls, i.e. violates the physical laws; things that are very com-
mon in dreams.
The analogous heuristic, in this case, to the H function,
could be associated with the so called value-systems, which
shape human behavior (Edelman, 1987; Sporns et al., 2000). In-
deed, there is a growing body of research about value-systems
in robotics and autonomous agents in order to design robots
with adaptive, lifelong learning behavior, because this values-
systems are a way for robots to behave autonomously through
spontaneous, self-generated activity (Merrick, 2010). In con-
nection with autonomous agents many kinds of diﬀerent value-
systems, based on some aspects of human behavior related to
motivation, e.g. curiosity driven, intrinsic motivated, novelty
detection, have been proposed. However, it seems that there
is (up to our knowledge) no publication along this line of re-
search relating the study of dreams and value-systems with the
Reinforcement Learning and Planning ﬁeld.
3.2. The Dyna-H algorithm
In RPGs and grid world like environments in general, it is
common to use the Euclidian or city-clock distance functions as
an eﬀective heuristic. In this case study, the euclidian distance
is used for the heuristic (H) planning module. However, in
general, H(s, a) represents a general function that gives a guess
about how bad is to take action a in state s, e.g. the euclidian
distance between the state s′ and the goal position (1).
H(s, a) = ||s′ −goal||2,
(1)
where the s′ state is the result of the model query:
s′ =
Model(s, a).
Hence, given the heuristic H, the heuristic action ha is de-
ﬁned as:
ha(s, H) = argmax
a
H(s, a),
(2)
where ha(s, H) is the worst action following (H), e.g. the ac-
tion that yields the higher distance from the goal. Algorithm 2
describes the steps of this strategy.
4. Experimental scenario
The Dyna-H heuristic planning algorithm have been eval-
uated and compared in terms of learning rate to the one-step
S
G
moving directions
Figure 2: The experimental scenario, starting point (S ), goal (G), obstacles
(gray), and a sample trajectory.
4

Algorithm 2 The proposed Dyna-H heuristic planning algo-
rithm
1: Initialize Q(s, a), Model(s, a) ∀s ∈S, a ∈A
2: repeat {for each episode}
3:
s ←current(non terminal) state
4:
a ←ϵ-greedy(s, Q)
5:
execute a; observe s′ and r
6:
Q(s, a) ←Q(s, a) + α[r + γ maxa′ Q(s′, a′) −Q(s, a)]
7:
Model(s, a) ←s′, r
8:
for i = 1 to N do
9:
a ←ha(s, H)
10:
if s, a < Model then
11:
s ←random previously observed state
12:
a ←random action previously taken in s
13:
end if
14:
s′, r ←Model(s, a)
15:
Q(s, a) ←Q(s, a) + α[r + γ maxa′ Q(s′, a′) −Q(s, a)]
16:
s ←s′
17:
end for
18: until s′ is terminal
Q-Learning and Dyna-Q algorithms for the same problem.
The experiment consists of searching for optimal paths, i.e.,
the shortest path with the lowest cost between two states. To
study this problem in the context of reinforcement learning, we
assume that it is a Markov decision process, where there is a
set of possible states and a set of actions. A typical problem
in path-ﬁnding is obstacle avoidance. The simplest approach
to this problem is to ignore obstacles until jumping into them.
This approach is simpler because it makes few demands: all
that it needs is the relative position of the entity and its goal,
and whether the immediate vicinity is blocked. For many game
situations, this is good enough. But there are scenarios where
the only intelligent approach would be to plan the entire route
in advance.
In this paper, the playing space is represented with square
tiles as a 39×36 grid (ﬁgure 2). The obstacles are walls that are
set randomly (in gray). The state is the tile or position where
the entity is located. Neighboring states would vary depending
on the game and the local situation. The cost of going from one
position to another can represent many things: in this case it
is computed as the simple distance between the two positions,
which in RL terminology is equivalent to set r = −1 for all non-
terminal state transitions, minimizing thus the total distance,
i.e. ﬁnding an optimal path. The grid is represented as a two
dimensional matrix of 39 rows and 36 columns. This matrix
establishes the communication between nodes or states; each
node can be related up to four neighbors, depending on the type
of each node, i.e. up (↑), down (↓), left (←) and right (→).
5. Experimental Results
Figures 3 to 10 show the results of the simulations. As ex-
plained before, we have compared the performance of three
algorithms: one-step Q-Learning (ﬁgures 3 and 6), Dyna-Q
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
500
1000
1500
2000
episode
steps
Figure 3: Average learning curve over 30 runs for the one-step tabular Q-
Learning algorithm
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
episode
steps
Figure 4: Average learning curve over 30 runs for the Dyna-Q model with
random sample with 10 planning steps
(ﬁgures 4 and 7) and the proposed heuristic planning Dyna-H
algorithm (ﬁgures 5 and 8).
As in Dyna maze (Sutton and Barto, 1998), all the tests were
based on the one-step Q-Learning algorithm with a set of ﬁxed
parameters. The initial action values are zero, i.e. Q(s, a) = 0,
the step-size parameter is α = 0.1, and the exploration param-
eter was ﬁxed to ϵ = 0.1.
When selecting greedily among
actions, ties were broken randomly. For each algorithm, the
learning curve shows the number of steps taken by the agent in
each episode, averaged over 30 runs, each run consisting on a
randomly generated labyrinth except from the staring (1, 4) and
goal (28, 34) positions that remained constant during all exper-
iments. Each random labyrinth was obtained using the same
probability distribution (normal with µ = 0, σ = 0.3) for every
square tile of the grid, as shown in (4).
φ(x) = N(µ = 0, σ2 = 0.32),
(3)
tiletype = sgn (abs (Round (φ(x)))) ;
(4)
where tiletype
=
1 means that there is an obstacle and
tiletype = 1 indicates a free tile.
5

10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
episodes
steps
Figure 5: Average learning curve over 30 runs for the proposed Dyna-H heuris-
tic planning algorithm with 10 planning steps
S
G
Figure 6: Trajectory describing the best path found by the one-step Q-Learning
algorithm after 100 episodes for the ﬁrst experiment.
S
G
 
Figure 7: Trajectory describing the best path found by the Dyna-Q planning
algorithm (10 planning steps) after 100 episodes for the ﬁrst experiment.
S
G
Figure 8: Trajectory describing the best path found by the proposed Dyna-H
heuristic planning algorithm (10 planning steps) after 100 episodes for the ﬁrst
experiment.
For each diﬀerent algorithm, the initial seed for the random
number generator was held constant, hence, all are evaluated
on the same set of 30 diﬀerent grid conﬁgurations. For Dyna-Q
and Dyna-H, the number of planning steps was ﬁxed to 10. All
experiments ran for up to 100 episodes.
Figure 3 shows the learning curve of the one-step Q-Learning
algorithm. As it can bee seen, this is the slowest method and
thus it serves as a standard for comparisons. The Q-Learning
agent presents a very slow convergence curve and in fact it
never found the optimal policy. It started with 2000 steps and
showed a constant policy improvement during the 100 episodes,
ending with approximately 1400 time steps. In ﬁgure 6 the best
path found by the one-step Q-Learning algorithm is shown.
Figure 4 shows the learning rate of the Dyna-Q algorithm.
As expected, the Dyna agent improved the learning curve re-
garding the on-step Q-Learning algorithm. The Dyna-Q agent
presents a “reasonable” convergence curve. However, it never
found the optimal policy. It started with 2000 steps and showed
a high policy improvement up to episode 40, were the agent
continued improving but with a slower rate, almost constant
(linear like) factor during the remaining 60 episodes, ending
the learning with around 400 time steps. Although it presents
a good behavior, it could not found the optimal trajectory dur-
ing the simulation time. Next we present some examples of the
kind of solution trajectories generated by each algorithm. These
solutions corresponds to the ﬁrst experiment of each algorithm
evaluation. In ﬁgure 7 the best path found by Dyna-Q algorithm
is shown.
Figure 5 shows the behavior of the proposed heuristic plan-
ning algorithm. As it is possible to see, the heuristic-planning
agent improved a lot regarding the learning curve in comparison
to the other algorithms. It presents an exponential convergence
until the optimal policy is found. It started with 1600 steps and
reduced them drastically up to episode 10, where it reaches the
optimum (80 steps per episode). This means a high improve-
ment both in the learning speed and the quality of the policy
found. In ﬁgure 8 the best path found by Dyna-H algorithm is
6

Figure 9: Several sampling trajectories produced by the heuristic sampling for consecutive time steps during one episode
7

10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
Episodes
Steps per episode
 
 
Q−Learning
Dyna−Q (random sample)
Heuristic planning
Figure 10: Comparison of the average learning curve over 30 runs for Q-Learning, Dyna-Q (random sample with 10 planning steps) and the proposed Dyna-H
heuristic planning algorithm (with 10 planning steps)
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Episodes
Steps per episode
 
 
N=1
N=5
N=10
N=25
Figure 11: Average learning rates (over 30 runs) of the proposed Dyna-H heuristic planning algorithm for diﬀerent numbers of planning steps, N = 1, 5, 10 and 25
shown. It can be seen that the generated path is very close to
the optimal path.
Figure 9 shows several examples of the trajectories generated
by the heuristic sampling planning procedure. The trajectories
shown are all taken from the ﬁrst episode of the ﬁrst experiment
of the Dyna-H algorithm and represent successive time steps of
the episode. In these images, it is possible to appreciate clearly
that the trajectories generated by the heuristic sampling strategy
are almost the worst or very bad with respect to the solution, i.e.
sampling from the worst trajectories, as deﬁned by the Dyna-H
algorithm and that using these trajectories the algorithm learns
extremely well.
In ﬁgure 10, the average learning curves of the three algo-
rithms are shown. The diﬀerence in terms of learning rate ex-
hibited by the Dyna-H algorithm is evident.
As Sutton and Barto (1998) comment, in the short term,
sampling according to, for instance, the on-policy distribution
helps to focus on states that are close descendants of the initial
state. On the other hand, in the long run, focusing on the on-
policy distribution may make the convergence worse because
the most visited states have already their correct values. Sam-
pling them is useless, whereas sampling other states may ac-
tually help. This can be the reason why the exhaustive, unfo-
cused approach, works better in the long run, at least for small
problems. Although it may seem the same case, the proposed
planning process does exactly the contrary to what would be an
optimal policy (the policy to which the on-policy distribution
should converge), focusing on apparently not very promising
branches. However, by sampling from the worst trajectories,
the learned policy converge quickly to the optimal one.
In ﬁgure 11 an analysis of the convergence of the proposed
Dyna-H algorithm, for diﬀerent numbers of planning steps N
is shown. The proposed heuristic planning algorithm have been
tested for N = 1, 5, 10 and 25 planning steps. For N = 1,
the algorithm converges in a few steps, around the 7th episode.
However, it converges to a local suboptimal solution around 370
steps per episode. For N = 5, the algorithm also converges in
around 7 episodes but it converges to a suboptimal solution that
is signiﬁcantly better than for the previous case, reaching an
average of 250 steps per episodes. The cases of N = 10 and
N = 25 show an identical convergence pattern as the N = 5
case but they reach better optimal policies.
It is quite signiﬁcant that the case N = 1 presents the
same convergence rate than much higher planning rates, but it
ﬁnds much worse policies. However, dealing with problems
where the system should save computational resources, it can
achieve a good compromise between optimality and computa-
tional time. The learning curves for N = 5 up to N = 25 are
identical, being the only diﬀerence the optimality of the policy
reached, that is, the length of the path from the initial node to
the goal. Again, this behavior is quite interesting since it indi-
cates that the trade oﬀbetween optimality and computational
resources can be directly controller by tuning the number of
planning steps.
8

6. Conclusions and further work
In this paper we have presented a novel reinforcement
learning-planning algorithm, Dyna-H, that integrates planning
and learning into an online algorithm based on the well known
Dyna architecture. The proposed method involves heuristic in
the planning module. It incorporates the ability of A∗to focus
on speciﬁc search subtrees in order to make the search more
eﬃcient by taking advantage of the heuristic. Besides, it is a
model free strategy that can be applied to sequential decision
making problems under uncertainty.
A scenario to compare three learning algorithms:
Q-
Learning, Dyna-Q and the proposed Dyna-H, has been de-
signed. The results (learning rate and convergence and pol-
icy found) obtained by all these methods have been shown and
discussed. The new algorithm gives the best trajectories and
the number of steps is reduced in more than the 90% with
the Dyna-H strategy. From this results, we can conclude that
the proposed Dyna-H heuristic planning algorithm is an eﬀec-
tive strategy in path-ﬁnding problems and therefore for Role-
Playing Games.
Since the main diﬀerence between Dyna-Q and the proposed
Dyna-H method is the use of a heuristic that guides the plan-
ning process when exploring the model, it makes sense to con-
clude that, under some well deﬁned scenarios such as informed
search methods, random sampling can be improved signiﬁca-
tively.
We expect the successful application of the proposed algo-
rithm to many related problems.
Further work should include the application of the proposed
heuristic planning algorithm to diﬀerent domains, for example,
stochastic environments such as capture games for chaotic mov-
ing targets.
Software
An open-source MatlabT M implementation of the Dyna-H
algorithm can be obtained from the following direction: http:
//www.dacya.ucm.es/jam/downloads/Dyna-H.rar
Acknowledgments. This work is partially supported by Span-
ish Project DPI2009-14552-C02-01.
