International Journal on Soft Computing ( IJSC ), Vol.2,  No.1,  February 2011 
DOI : 10.5121/ijsc.2011.2102                                                                                                         12 
A HYBRID MODEL FOR BANKRUPTCY 
PREDICTION USING GENETIC 
ALGORITHM, FUZZY C-MEANS AND MARS  
1A.Martin  2V.Gayathri 3G.Saranya 4P.Gayathri 5Dr.Prasanna Venkatesan 
1Research scholar, Dept. of Banking Technology, Pondicherry University, Pondicherry, 
India. 
 

2,3,4Student of IT, Sri Manakula Vinayagar Engineering College, Pondicherry, India. 

5Associate Professor, Dept. of Banking Technology, Pondicherry University, 
Pondicherry, India. 

ABSTRACT 
 
Bankruptcy prediction is very important for all the organization since it affects the economy and rise many 
social problems with high costs. There are large number of techniques have been developed to predict the 
bankruptcy, which helps the decision makers such as investors and financial analysts. One of the 
bankruptcy prediction models is the hybrid model using Fuzzy C-means clustering and MARS, which uses 
static ratios taken from the bank financial statements for prediction, which has its own theoretical 
advantages. The performance of existing bankruptcy model can be improved by selecting the best features 
dynamically depend on the nature of the firm. This dynamic selection can be accomplished by Genetic 
Algorithm and it improves the performance of prediction model. . 
KEYWORDS 
 Bankruptcy prediction, financial ratio models, Genetic Algorithm, Fuzzy c-means Clustering, MARS. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Bankruptcy prediction remains a concern for the various stakeholders in a firm, owners, 
managers, investors, creditors and business partners, as well as government institutions 
responsible for maintaining the stability of financial markets and general economic prosperity. 
Analysis of the financial position of the firm is very useful for the banking and financial industry, 
such a task for credit risk assessment. The insight of both practitioners and researchers, 
originating with the papers of Beaver (1967) [12] and Altman (1968) [13], was that firms with 
certain financial structures have a greater probability of default, and eventual bankruptcy, than 
other types of firms.  

International Journal on Soft Computing ( IJSC ), Vol.2,  No.1,  February 2011 
13 
 
Many models have been proposed then; particularly key cash flow and debt ratios appear to be 
important predictors of forth coming bankruptcy. Some of these proposals have been applied by 
lending institutions for credit scoring purposes. These models have quite heterogeneous 
characteristics but most of them share the common feature of relying on multivariate techniques 
whose input variables are mainly financial descriptors of the credit applicant. Alternative 
approaches have developed scoring models based on market information and group decision 
analysis. However, the alternative approaches do not significantly outperform models based on 
multivariate techniques. During recent years researchers have paid special attention to non-
parametrical and hybrid approaches. Non-parametrical techniques are suitable for bankruptcy 
prediction tasks due to the specific features of financial information (i.e. non-normality and 
heteroskedasticity). Hybrid approaches combine several classification methods and achieve 
greater accuracy than individual models. In the present research we propose a strategy for the 
construction of a hybrid model which is based on the sequential application of genetic algorithm, 
fuzzy c-means clustering and Multivariate Adaptive Regression Splines (MARS) [6]. The 
classification nature of these techniques is very much suitable for the field of finance. Most of the 
approaches that exist use a particular financial ratio model commonly like Altman, Ohlson, 
Zmijewski, etc. Using Genetic algorithm we can choose the financial ratio set dynamically by 
considering features such as accuracy in prediction, suitability of bankruptcy model for an 
industry, Number of ratios used for prediction, suitability of classification model and  that can 
increase the accuracy of the prediction. An advantage of Genetic Algorithm is that it is capable of 
extracting optimal rules that can be integrated to any system [3]. There are many features for a 
firm to undergo bankruptcy. Type I and Type II errors are the errors of misclassifying a bankrupt 
firm as healthy, and misclassifying a healthy firm as bankrupt, respectively [7]. 
 
2. PRIOR RESEARCH 
 
There are many Classification techniques are used to predict bankruptcy. These 
classification techniques are broadly classified into single classification and hybrid model. 
2.1 Single Classification Model 
2.1.1 Fuzzy Rule Based Model 
The earliest applications of fuzzy set theory are knowledge based systems whose core is a set of 
fuzzy `if-then' rules [9]. Most of these systems derive these fuzzy `if-then' rules from human 
experts. The generation of fuzzy if-then rules from numerical data involves (i) the fuzzy partition 
of a pattern space into fuzzy subspaces and (ii) the determination of fuzzy if-then rules for each 
fuzzy partition [9, 17]. The performance of such a classification system depends on the choice of 
a fuzzy partition. The fuzzy classifier produced average classification rate of 88.3%, 33.3%, 
79.2% and 89.2% respectively for two, three, four and five partitions of the input space. Even 
though, the case of five partitions yielded highest average classification rate, the average Type-I 
error is higher compared to the case of two partitions. The average Type I error for two partitions 
is zero, which is a remarkable result. This means that all the bankrupt banks are classified 
correctly [8]. 
 

International Journal on Soft Computing ( IJSC ), Vol.2,  No.1,  February 2011 
14 
 
2.1.2 Neural Network 
 
Back-Propagation Neural Network model is the most popular methodology in the neural 
networking. This model considers corporate factors and different sample matches but also uses 
financial ratios within different periods to construct Back-Propagation Neural Network models.  
There are three layers in neural network, the first layer—input layer, the second—hidden layer 
and the third layer—output layer. The hidden layer can be one or more layers, but we adopted the 
typical three-layer architecture in this study. The transfer function was sigmoid function [5] as 
f(t)=1/(1+e-t). 
 
The neurons of input layer were predictors. The outputs of neurons in output layer were the 
output of BPNN. There are links to connect the neurons of each layer. Every link has a relative 
weight to represent the importance of input information. The algorithm of BPNN is to input data 
from input layer into hidden layer where data were transferred by the log sigmoid function, and 
then output into output layer. BPNN uses sample data for its prediction taken from open market 
of listed companies in Taiwan electronic industries for the effect of prediction correctness for 
one-year prior of crisis [5]. 
Training data selection and Building BPNN model— design an experiment with three different 
periods, one-year, two-year and three-year prior crisis, to test which period has the lowest type I 
error and type II error at the same time. The experimental results presented to apply health 
prediction pattern and crisis prediction pattern on a company which may not know its financial 
tendency (health or crisis) can get a 73.67% correctness future prediction if it had predicted 
outcome [5]. 
2.2 Hybrid Model 
2.2.1 Neuro-Fuzzy Model 
The process of making credit-risk evaluation decision is complex and unstructured. Neural 
networks are known to perform reasonably well compared to alternate methods for this problem. 
However, a drawback of using neural networks for credit-risk evaluation decision is that once a 
decision is made, it is extremely difficult to explain the rationale behind that decision. 
Researchers have developed methods using neural network to extract rules, which are then used 
to explain the reasoning behind a given neural network output. These rules do not capture the 
learned knowledge well enough. Neuro-fuzzy systems have been recently developed utilizing the 
desirable properties of both fuzzy systems as well as neural networks. These Neuro-fuzzy systems 
can be used to develop fuzzy rules naturally. In this model, we analyze the beneficial aspects of 
using both Neuro-fuzzy systems as well as neural networks for credit-risk evaluation decisions 
[10]. 
As a result, Neural networks performed somewhat better than Neuro-fuzzy systems in terms of 
classification accuracy, on both training as well as testing of data. This result is not surprising 
given the various approximations that are made while dealing with fuzzification / defuzzification 
and also the approximations that are made in fuzzy arithmetic, while learning the rules in the 
Neuro-fuzzy system [10]. 
2.2.2 Genetic, Fuzzy and Neural networks Model 

International Journal on Soft Computing ( IJSC ), Vol.2,  No.1,  February 2011 
15 
 
Neural network is good for non-linear data with learning capacity. Its disadvantage is black box 
approach (after training difficult to trace how they work).Fuzzy Neural Network adds rules to 
Neural Network that overcome black box but learning capacity is reduced. Genetic Fuzzy Neural 
Network is proposed to avoid black box approach and to improve learning efficiency [4]. 
The total misclassification rate of NNs model is 4.17%, while the total misclassification rate of 
GFNN model is 1.67%. Specially, the type 1 error rate of the NNs model is 10.00%, while the 
type 1 error rate of GFNN is only 3.33%. It is clearly shown that the accuracy of bankruptcy 
prediction of GFNN model is much better than the NNs model [4]. 
3. OUR APPROACH 
A strategy has been proposed for the construction of a hybrid model which is based on the 
sequential application of fuzzy clustering and Multivariate Adaptive Regression Spines (MARS). 
The reason for the choice of these techniques is that they are suited to the field of finance. Firstly, 
the use of clustering techniques is motivated by the existence of different failing processes. As 
failing firms may have dissimilar financial features. Secondly, MARS is a flexible procedure, 
which models relationships that are nearly additive or involve interactions with fewer variables. 
As a small number of latent factors are capable of representing a great percentage of the 
information contained in the annual accounts of firms, MARS is also suitable for the bankruptcy 
prediction problem [6]. 
 
Most of the bankruptcy prediction techniques use static financial ratios models for its prediction 
which will not use for all type of firms since most of the firms have different attributes. So these 
techniques will not be suitable for all types of firms. In our proposed work, we use Genetic 
algorithm to select an optimal model dynamically for the prediction which will improve the 
performance. The selected model is used to cluster the data using Fuzzy c-means Clustering and 
regression technique MARS is used to predict whether bankrupt or not.  
3.1 Genetic Algorithm 
Genetic Algorithms are general-purpose search and optimization procedures. They are inspired by 
the biological evolution principle of survival of the fittest.  The genetic algorithm (GA) is 
a search heuristic that mimics the process of natural evolution. This heuristic is routinely used to 
generate useful solutions to optimization and search problems. Genetic algorithms belong to the 
larger class of evolutionary algorithms (EA), which generate solutions to optimization problems 
using techniques inspired by natural evolution, such as inheritance, mutation, selection, and 
crossover in Figure 4. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Steps in Genetic Algorithm to find best optimal solution [15] 

International Journal on Soft Computing ( IJSC ), Vol.2,  No.1,  February 2011 
16 
 
 
GAs does not deal directly with the parameters of the problem to be solved. They work with 
codes which represent the problem and produce codes which represent the solution. A typical 
genetic algorithm requires: 
1. A genetic representation of the solution domain, 
2. A fitness function to evaluate the solution domain. 
3. GAs were reported to have achieved great success because of their ability to exploit 
accumulated information about an initially unknown search space leading to moving 
subsequent searches into more useful subspaces. GAs is also flexible tools and can be 
used in combination with other techniques including fuzzy logic and neural networks 
[15]. 
 
3.2 Fuzzy c-means Clustering 
 
The Fuzzy c-means algorithm is a method of clustering which allows one piece of data to belong 
to two or more clusters. This method was developed by Dunn (1973) [2] and improved by Bezdek 
(1981) [18]. It is frequently used in pattern recognition. Under the Fuzzy c-means approach, each 
given datum does not belong exclusively to a well defined cluster, but it can be placed in a middle 
way. This belonging to more than one cluster is represented by probability coefficients. This 
method is based on minimization of the following objective function 
2
1
1
.
N
C
ij
i
j
i
j
J
u
x
c
=
=
=
−
∑∑
 

International Journal on Soft Computing ( IJSC ), Vol.2,  No.1,  February 2011 
17 
 
Where 
iju   is the probability of membership of the company 
ix to the jth cluster; 
ix , the ith 
company; 
jc , the coordinates of the jth center of the cluster; 
represents the Euclid norm; N, 
the number of companies in the database; C is the total number of clusters considered. Fuzzy 
partitioning is carried out by an iterative optimization of the objective function with the update of 
membership 
iju and the cluster centers 
jc , by: 
2
1
1
ij
C
i
j
k
i
k
u
x
c
x
c
−
=


−




−


∑
 
1
1
.
N
i j
i
i
j
N
i j
i
u
x
c
u
=
=
= ∑
∑
 
As already mentioned, in the Fuzzy c-means algorithm, each given datum does not belong to a 
well defined cluster, but it can be placed in a middle way. This belonging to more than one cluster 
is represented by the probability coefficients. So, the company 
ix has a probability 
iju  of 
belonging to cluster j, 
1
1
C
ij
j
u
=
=
∑
 
3.3 Multivariate Adaptive Regression Splines (MARS) model 
 
 
As stated earlier Multivariate Adaptive Regression Splines (MARS) is a multivariate 
nonparametric regression technique developed by Friedman (1991) [17]. Its main purpose is to 
predict the values of a continuous dependent variable, 
(
)
1
y
n
=
×
r
from a set of independent 
explanatory variables, 
(
)
X n
p
×
r
. The MARS model can be represented as: 
(
)
y
f
X
e
=
+
r
r
r
 
where er  is an error vector of dimension (
)1
n×
. 
MARS can be considered as a generalisation of classification and regression trees (CART) 
(Hastie, Tibshirani, & Friedman, 2003) [19], and is able to overcome some limitations of CART. 
MARS does not require any priori assumptions about the underlying functional relationship 
between dependent and independent variables. Instead, this relation is covered from a set of 
coefficients and piecewise polynomials of degree q (basis functions) that are entirely driven from 
the regression data (
)
.
X y
r r . 

International Journal on Soft Computing ( IJSC ), Vol.2,  No.1,  February 2011 
18 
 
4. DYNAMIC FEATURE SELECTION USING GENETIC 
ALGORITHM 
4.1 Various Feature models 
For the bankruptcy prediction, there are 5 models used popularly for all the techniques. In this 
model, we are going to use all the 5 models as different features and going to select the best 
prediction model by using Genetic Algorithm [1]. 
4.1.1 Altman Model 
A predictive model created by Edward Altman in the 1960s. This model combines five different 
financial ratios to determine the likelihood of bankruptcy amongst companies. The Altman [1968] 
[12] study is used as the standard for comparison for subsequent bankruptcy classification studies 
using discriminant analysis. The ratios are:  
Z = 0.012X1 + 0.014X2 + 0.033X3 + 0.006X4 + 0.999X5. 
Where 
X1 = Net working capital/total assets 
X2 = Retained earnings/total assets 
X3 = Earnings before interest and taxes/total assets. 
X4 = Market value of equity/book value of total liabilities. 
X5 = Sales/total assets. 
Figure 5. Set A Altman Model 
 
where Set A represents the Altman Model 
4.1.2 Ohlson Model 
Ohlson employed logistic regression to predict company failure [10], to overcome the limitations 
of Altman. This model consists of the following ratios: 
Z = 1/ [1 exp - (a [b.sub.1] TLTA [b.sub.2] WCTA [b.sub.3] CLCA [b.sub.4] OENEG [b.sub.5] 
NITA [b.sub.6] FUTL [b.sub.7] INTWO [b.sub.8] CHIN)] 
Where,  
 

International Journal on Soft Computing ( IJSC ), Vol.2,  No.1,  February 2011 
19 
 
Z = the probability of bankruptcy for a firm 
TLTA = Total liabilities divided by total assets. 
WCTA = Working capital divided by total assets. 
CLCA = Current liabilities divided by current assets. 
OENEG = 1 If total liabilities exceed total assets, 0 otherwise. 
NITA = Net income divided by total assets. 
FUTL = Funds provided by operations (income from operation after depreciation) divided by total 
liabilities. 
INTWO = 1 If net income was negative for the last 2 years, 0 otherwise. 
CHIN = (NIt _ NIt_1)/ (|NIt| + |NIt_1|), where NIt is net income for the most recent period. The 
denominator acts as a level indicator. The variable is thus intended to measure the relative change in net 
income. 
 
Figure 6. Set B Ohlson Model 
 
 
where Set B represents the Ohlson Model 
4.1.3 Zmijeswski Model 
This model is used to predict bankruptcy using probit model [15]. It consists of 3 ratios as: 
  
NITL = Net income divided / total liabilities. 
TLTA = Total liabilities divided / total assets. 
CACL = Current assets divided / current liabilities.  
Figure 7. Set C Zmijeswski Model 
 
where Set C represents the Zmijeswki Model 
 

International Journal on Soft Computing ( IJSC ), Vol.2,  No.1,  February 2011 
20 
 
4.1.4 Shumway Model 
Shumway improved on the basic bankruptcy models by combining market ratios along with the 
traditional financial ratios [13]. This model is defined as follows: 
Z = 1/ [1 exp - (a [b.sub.1] NITA [b.sub.2] TLTA [b.sub.3] ERR [b.sub.4] SDR)] 
Where 
Z = the probability of bankruptcy for a firm 
NITA = Net income/total assets 
TLTA = Total liabilities/total assets 
ERR = Excess rate of return (i.e., a firm's rate of return minus the market's rate of return) 
SDR = Standard deviation of residual returns (Residual return = a firm's realized rate of return - its 
expected rate of return) 
Figure 8.  Set D Shumway Model 
 
where Set D represents the Shumway Model 
Table 1 Summary of empirical models and variables employed 
Model 
Variable
Ratios 
Multiple – Discriminant analysis 
Altman (1968) 
X1 
Net working capital / total assets 
X2 
Retained earnings/total assets 
X3 
Earnings before interest and taxes/total assets 
X4 
Market value of equity/book value of total 
liabilities. 
X5 
Sales/total assets 
Logit model 
Ohlson (1980) 
TLTA 
Total liabilities divided by total assets 
WCTA 
Working capital divided by total assets 
CLCA 
Current liabilities divided by current assets 
NITA 
Net income divided by total assets 
FUTL 
Funds provided by operations (income from 
operation after depreciation) divided by total 
liabilities 
Probit model 
NITL 
Net income divided by total liabilities. 

International Journal on Soft Computing ( IJSC ), Vol.2,  No.1,  February 2011 
21 
 
Zmijewski (1984) 
TLTA 
Total liabilities divided by total assets. 
CACL 
Current assets divided by current liabilities. 
Hazard model 
Shumway (2001) 
NITL 
Net income divided by total liabilities. 
TLTA 
Total liabilities divided by total assets. 
4.3 Results 
 
4.3.1 Database 
 The data sets are taken with the help of Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy Pvt. Ltd. 
The Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy is an independent economic think-tank 
headquartered in Mumbai, India. It provides information solutions in the form of databases and 
research reports. CMIE has built the largest database on the Indian economy and companies. 
Prowess is a database of large and medium Indian firms. It contains detailed information on 
over 25,346 firms. From that software we were taken three types of banks as successful banks, 
recovered banks and failed banks as a training data.  
The data in Microsoft Excel Sheet is stored according to the models mentioned above, by 
referring their respective ratios. The various feature models are analyzed by comparing their 
ratios and by using Genetic Algorithm, the models which have same ratio that of others will form 
another model. From the Fig.9 we have created a new set E which is the union of set B, C and D.  
Figure 9. Set E Forming a new model 
 
 
 
 
 
 
where Set E represents the new model which is the optimal model for predicting bankruptcy 
formed using Genetic algorithm. 
The intersection of set E consists of a ratio which is common to the other sets as B, C & D. Using 
this new set, Genetic Algorithm predicts the bankruptcy with higher performance than the other 
classification models. 
  
By using genetic algorithm the best model can be chosen and that result is used to create cluster 
by using Fuzzy c-means algorithm using MATLAB7.0. The result will be as like as in the Figure 
10 with three clusters as Bankrupt, non bankrupt and may/may not bankrupt. 
 

International Journal on Soft Computing ( IJSC ), Vol.2,  No.1,  February 2011 
22 
 
Figure 10. Data Clustering for Bankruptcy Prediction models 
 
  
 
 
 From these clusters, finally MARS model is used to classify the organization as bankrupt or not 
bankrupt from the test data. 
5. CONCLUSION 
This paper conceptualizes the hybrid model of genetic algorithm, Fuzzy c-means algorithm, 
MARS for prediction of bankruptcy. It also addresses the issues in the fuzzy cluster creation for 
bankruptcy prediction models and also provides the solution using genetic algorithm to select the 
bankruptcy model dynamically. In this model, Genetic algorithm selects the best ratio set by considering 
the various factors of the given firm, so the resultant cluster formed is good. Since MARS can be 
considered as a Classification techniques, it does not require functional relationship between dependent and 
independent variable. The results of fuzzy clustering can be integrated with MARS. This hybrid model is 
performs well compared to static Bankruptcy Models.
