arXiv:1602.04364v1  [cs.LG]  13 Feb 2016
Look, Listen and Learn - A Multimodal LSTM for Speaker Identiﬁcation
Jimmy Ren1 Yongtao Hu2 Yu-Wing Tai1 Chuan Wang2 Li Xu1 Wenxiu Sun1 Qiong Yan1
SenseTime Group Limited1

The University of Hong Kong2

Project page: http://www.deeplearning.cc/mmlstm
Abstract
Speaker identiﬁcation refers to the task of localizing the
face of a person who has the same identity as the on-
going voice in a video. This task not only requires col-
lective perception over both visual and auditory signals,
the robustness to handle severe quality degradations and
unconstrained content variations are also indispensable.
In this paper, we describe a novel multimodal Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) architecture which seam-
lessly uniﬁes both visual and auditory modalities from
the beginning of each sequence input. The key idea
is to extend the conventional LSTM by not only shar-
ing weights across time steps, but also sharing weights
across modalities. We show that modeling the temporal
dependency across face and voice can signiﬁcantly im-
prove the robustness to content quality degradations and
variations. We also found that our multimodal LSTM is
robustness to distractors, namely the non-speaking iden-
tities. We applied our multimodal LSTM to The Big
Bang Theory dataset and showed that our system out-
performs the state-of-the-art systems in speaker identi-
ﬁcation with lower false alarm rate and higher recogni-
tion accuracy.
Speaker identiﬁcation is one of the most important building
blocks in many intelligent video processing systems such as
video conferencing, video summarization and video surveil-
lance, etc. It aims to localize the face of the speaker asso-
ciated with the ongoing voices. To achieve this task, col-
lective perception over both visual and auditory signals is
indispensable.
In the past few years, we observe the rapid ad-
vances
in
face
recognition
and
speech
recognition
respectively by using Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNN)
(Schroff, Kalenichenko, and Philbin 2015;
Sun et al. 2014a)
and
Recurrent
Neural
Net-
works
(RNN)
(Graves, Mohamed, and Hinton 2013;
Hannun et al. 2014). Notwithstanding the recent ground
breaking results in processing facial and auditory data,
speaker identiﬁcation (ﬁgure 1b) remains challenging for
the following reasons. First, severe quality degradations
(e.g. blur and occlusion) and unconstrained content varia-
tions (e.g. illumination and expression) in real-life videos
Copyright c⃝2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Figure 1: (a) Face sequence with different kinds of degrada-
tions and variations. Using the previous CNN methods can-
not recognize the speakers correctly. In contrast, the speak-
ers can be successfully recognized by our LSTM in both
single-modal and multimodal settings. (b) Our multimodal
LSTM is robust to both image degradation and distrac-
tors. Yellow bounding boxes are the speakers. Red bounding
boxes are the non-speakers, the distractors.
are not uncommon. These effects signiﬁcantly degrade
the performance of many existing CNN based methods.
Second, the state-of-the-art convolutional network based
face model is trained with still images. Its application
in sequential data as well as its connection to recurrent
networks is less explored and it is not straightforward to
extend CNN based methods to the multimodal learning
setting. Third, a practical system should be robust enough
to reject distractors, the faces of non-speaking persons
indicated by the red bounding boxes in ﬁgure 1b, which
adds additional challenges to the task.
Despite the rich potential of both CNN and RNN for
facial and auditory data, it is still unclear if these two

networks can be simultaneously and effectively adopted
in the context of multimodal learning. In this paper, we
proposed a novel multimodal Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997), a specialized
type of Recurrent Neural Network, to address this prob-
lem. We show that modeling temporal dependency for fa-
cial sequences by LSTM performs much better than CNN
based methods in terms of robustness to image degradations.
More importantly, by sharing weights not only across time
steps but also across different modalities, we can seamlessly
unify both visual and auditory modalities from the begin-
ning of each sequence input, which signiﬁcantly improves
the robustness to distractors. This is because the cross-modal
shared weights can learn to capture temporal correlation be-
tween face and voice sequences. Note that our multimodal
LSTM did not assume the the random variables from dif-
ferent modal are correlated. Instead, our multimodal LSTM
is capable to learn such correlation if there is any temporal
correlation across different modal in their sequences. In the
speaker identiﬁcation task, we believe such temporal corre-
lation exists in the respective face and voice sequences. In
this work, we assume the face of the speaker appears in a
video when they speak, and there is only one speaker at the
same time during the voice over. Multiple speakers in the
same video clip can be identiﬁed as far as their speaks do
not overlap.
To our knowledge, our paper is the ﬁrst attempt in model-
ing long-term dependencies over multimodal high-level fea-
tures which demonstrates robustness to both distractors and
image degradation. We applied our model to The Big Bang
Theory dataset and showed that our system outperformed
the state-of-the-art systems in recognition accuracy and with
lower false alarm rate.
The contributions of this paper are as follows.
• We proposed a novel LSTM architecture which enables
multimodal learning of sequence data in a uniﬁed model.
Both temporal dependency within each modality and tem-
poral correlation across modalities can be automatically
learned from data.
• We empirically showed that cross-modality weight shar-
ing in LSTM simultaneously improves the precision of
classiﬁcation and the robustness to distractors.
• We successfully applied our method in a real-world mul-
timodal classiﬁcation task and the resulting system out-
performed the state-of-the-art. The dataset and our imple-
mentations are both publicly available.
Related Work
Many recent studies have reported the success of using
deep CNN in face related tasks. The pioneering work
by (Taigman et al. 2014) proposed a very deep CNN ar-
chitecture together with an alignment technique to per-
form face veriﬁcation which achieved near human-level
performance. Inspired by GoogLeNet (Szegedy et al. 2015),
Sun et al. 2014b used a very deep CNN network with
multiple levels of supervision, which surpassed human-
level face veriﬁcation performance in the LFW dataset
(Huang and Learned-Miller 2013). The recent advance in
this ﬁeld (Schroff, Kalenichenko, and Philbin 2015) pushed
the performance even further. In face detection, the state-
of-the-art results were also achieved by CNN based mod-
els (Yang et al. 2015; Li et al. 2015). For other face related
tasks such as face landmark detection and face attribute
recognition (Zhang et al. 2015a; Zhang et al. 2015b), CNN
based models were also widely adopted.
The revived interest on RNN is mainly attributed
to
its
recent
success
in
many
practical
applica-
tions
such
as
language
modeling
(Kiros et al. 2015),
speech
recognition
(Chorowski et al. 2015;
Graves, Mohamed, and Hinton 2013),
machine
transla-
tion
(Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014;
Jean et al. 2015),
conversation modeling (Shang, Lu, and Li 2015) to name
a few. Among many variants of RNNs, LSTM is arguably
one of the most widely used model. LSTM is a type of
RNN in which the memory cells are carefully designed to
store useful information to model long term dependency
in
sequential
data
(Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997).
Other than supervised learning, LSTM is also used in
recent work in image generation (Theis and Bethge 2015;
Gregor et al. 2015), demonstrating its capability of model-
ing statistical dependencies of imagery data.
In terms of the sequence learning problem across multiple
modalities, LSTM based models were actively used in re-
cent image caption generation studies (Donahue et al. 2015;
Karpathy and Li 2015;
Xu et al. 2015).
One
common
characteristic of these techniques is that CNN was used
to extract the feature sequences in an image and LSTM
was used to generate the corresponding text sequences.
Our paper is related to this group of studies in a way that
more than one modalities are involved in the learning
process. However, our goal is not to generate sequences
in an alternative domain but to collectively learn useful
knowledge from sequence data of multiple domains.
Perhaps the most closely related previous studies to our
work are from (Srivastava and Salakhutdinov 2012) and
(Ngiam et al. 2011). Unlike these papers, we focused on
high-level multimodal learning which explicitly models
the temporal correlation of high-level features rather
than raw inputs between different modalities. This not
only provided a channel to effectively transfer the recent
success of deep CNN to the multimodal learning context,
the resulting efﬁcient implementation can be directly
adopted in video processing as well. We also investigated
the robustness to distractors and input quality which
is not considered in the previous studies. The closely
related papers in multimedia speaker identiﬁcation are
(Bauml, Tapaswi, and Stiefelhagen 2013;
Hu et al. 2015),
and
(Tapaswi, B¨auml, and Stiefelhagen 2012).
However,
they did not explicitly model face sequences and the
interplay between face and voice sequences.
LSTM - Single VS. Multi-Modal
Single Modal LSTM
A regular LSTM network contains
a number of memory cells within which the multiplicative
gate units and the self-recurrent units are the two fundamen-
tal building blocks (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997). For
a brief revision, equations (1), (3) and (5) formally describe






	

	
	


		











Figure 2: Memory Cell of Single-modal LSTM.
the memory input, the forget gate and the recurrent units of a
regular LSTM in the forward pass. The input gate it and the
output gate ot in a regular LSTM resemble the forget gate in
the forward pass. Figure 2 shows a pictorial illustration of a
regular LSTM model.
gt = ϕ(Wxg ∗Xt + Whg ∗ht−1 + bg),
(1)
it = σ(Wxi ∗Xt + Whi ∗ht−1 + bi),
(2)
ft = σ(Wxf ∗Xt + Whf ∗ht−1 + bf),
(3)
ot = σ(Wxo ∗Xt + Who ∗ht−1 + bo),
(4)
Ct = ft ⊙Ct−1 + it ⊙gt,
(5)
yt = softmax(Wy ∗ht).
(6)
In (1) and (3), X is an input sequence where Xt is an el-
ement of the sequence at time t, ht−1 is the output of the
memory cell at time t −1. Wxg, Wxf, Whg, Whf are dis-
tinct weight matrices, and bg and bf are bias terms respec-
tively. ϕ and σ are nonlinear functions where ϕ denotes a
tanh function and σ denotes a sigmoid function. In (5), ⊙
denotes an element-wise multiplication, it is the input gate
at the time step t, and Ct−1 is the memory unit at the time
step t−1. The memory unit at time step t is therefore gener-
ated by the collective gating of the input gate and the forget
gate. In equation (6), the memory cell output of the current
time step is multiplied by Wy and then transformed by the
softmax function to compute the model output yt at time t.
Generally speaking, the reason that LSTM is able to
model long-term dependencies in sequential data is because
Ct at each time step can selectively “remember” (store) or
“forget” (erase) past information which is modelled by the
multiplicative gating operation. More importantly, the strat-
egy to open or to close the gates is data driven which is au-
tomatically learned from training data. This information is
captured by the trainable weights W, including Whf, Wxf
and so on, rather than hand-crafted. Because W are shared
across time steps, this endows LSTM the power to explicitly
model temporal relationships over the entire sequence.
Simple extensions of Single Modal LSTM
In order to
deal with data from different domains, perhaps the most
straightforward method is to incorporate them into a sin-
gle network by concatenating the data directly to produce
a bigger X. However, this approach is problematic because
the multimodal property of the inputs are completely ig-
nored and the model does not have any explicit mechanism
to model the correlation across modalites. Though some cor-
relations may be weakly captured by the trained weights, a
critical weakness is that it is incapable to handle distractors.
In particular, when the face of a person A is combined with
the voice of a person B, the model is confused and would fail
to generate a meaningful label. Although it may be possible
to put all the distractors to a single class and let the model
to distinguish the speaker and the distractors automatically,
this method performs much worse than our solution in prac-
tice. The major difﬁculty is that distractors share too many
features with regular examples when organize the inputs in
this way.
Another solution is to treat data from different do-
mains completely independent. Namely, we can use multi-
ple LSTMs in parallel and then merge the output labels at
the highest layer using a voting mechanism. The advantage
of this approach is that the two separate memory units can
be trained to store useful information explicitly for each do-
main. But the weakness is that the interaction across modal-
ities only happens at the highest level during the labelling
process. The cross-model correlation is therefore very dif-
ﬁcult, if not entirely impossible, to be encoded into the
weights through the learning process. Thus, the robustness
to distractors relies heavily on the voting stage where some
of the temporal correlations may have already been washed
out in the independent forward pass.
Multimodal LSTM
Compared with the straightforward
solutions, we want to develop a new multimodal LSTM
which can explicitly model the long-term dependencies both
within the same modality and across modalities in a single
multimodal LSTM. Instead of merging input data at pre-
processing stage, or merging labels at post-processing stage,
our key idea is to selectively share weights across different
modalities during the forward pass. This is similar to the
weight sharing in time domain in regular LSTM, but we do
not share memory units for each modality within the mem-
ory cell. The modiﬁcations are illustrated in ﬁgure 3 and for-
mally expressed in the following equations.
gs
t = ϕ(Ws
xg ∗Xs
t + Whg ∗hs
t−1 + bs
g), s = 1 to n, (7)
is
t = σ(Ws
xi ∗Xs
t + Whi ∗hs
t−1 + bs
i), s = 1 to n,
(8)
f s
t = σ(Ws
xf ∗Xs
t + Whf ∗hs
t−1 + bs
f), s = 1 to n, (9)
os
t = σ(Ws
xo ∗Xs
t + Who ∗hs
t−1 + bs
o), s = 1 to n,(10)
Cs
t = f s
t ⊙Cs
t−1 + is
t ⊙gs
t , s = 1 to n,
(11)
hs
t = os
t ⊙ϕ(Cs
t ), s = 1 to n,
(12)
ys
t = softmax(Wy ∗hs
t), s = 1 to n.
(13)
Keeping the gating mechanism the same as the regular
LSTM, the equations from (7) to (13) describe a new cross-
modal weight sharing scheme in the memory cell. The super-
script s indexes each modality in the input sequences. n is
the total number of modalities in input data, where n = 2 in
the speaker identiﬁcation task. The model is general enough
to deal with the tasks with n > 2. Xs
t is the input sequence



	
	
	

		
  
















  


  
   


  
   


  
   

Figure 3: Memory Cell of Multimodal LSTM.
at time t for modality s. Therefore, the weights with super-
script s (e.g. Ws
xg) are NOT shared across modalities but
only across time steps, the other weights without the super-
script (e.g. Whg) are shared across both modalities and time
steps. Speciﬁcally, the weights associated with the inputs
Xs
t are not shared across modalities. The reasons are two-
fold. First, we would like to learn a specialized mapping,
separately for each modality, from its input space to a new
space, where multimodal learning is ensured by the shared
weights. Second, specialized weights are preferred to recon-
cile the dimension difference between different modalities,
which avoids a complex implementation.
Along with the transform associated with Xs
t , the out-
put of the memory cell from the previous time step hs
t−1
also need to go through a transform in producing gs
t as well
as all other gates. The weights to perform this transform,
Whg, Whi, Whf and Who are shared across the modali-
ties. With these new weight deﬁnitions, the separately trans-
formed data by the four Ws is essentially interconnected
from gs
t all the way to the memory cell output hs
t.
The key insight is that while it is preferable for each
modality to have its own information ﬂow because it enables
a more focused learning objective with which it is easier to
learn the long-term temporal dependency within the modal-
ity, we also make such objective correlated and essentially
constrained by what happens in the rest of the modalities.
More speciﬁcally, in forming the forget gate f s
t for s = 1,
it not only relates to hs=1
t−1 but also constrained by hs=2
t−1, ... ,
hs=n
t−1 because Whf is shared among them. Provided that the
weights Whg, Whi, Whf and Who are also shared across
time steps, they play the vital role of capturing the temporal
correlation across different modalities.
Another important property of the proposed model is that
the memory unit C is NOT shared among modalities. The ra-
tionale is that the weights have the job to capture intramodal
as well as intermodal relationships, therefore placing them
in a single memory unit provides much less ﬂexibility on
what can be stored or forgotten. Given all the gates are
formed in a multimodal fashion, the insight of such design
is that we should not hand-craft the decision on what in-
tramodal/intermodal relationships should be stored or for-
gotten but to give the model enough ﬂexibility to learn it
from data. The bias terms are not shared across modalities
neither to increase this ﬂexibility.
Likewise, the network output at each time step ys
t does
not relate to its own modality. Whether we should use Wy
or Ws
y to transform hs
t before sending the outputs to the
softmax function is not a straightforward decision. We resort
to our experiment to address this issue.
High-Level Feature VS. Raw Inputs
One of the most
important reasons why CNN is attractive is because it is
an end to end feature learning process. Previous studies
(Razavian et al. 2014; Oquab et al. 2014) have discovered
that a successful CNN for a classiﬁcation task also produces
high-level features which are general enough to be used in
a variety of tasks. This ﬁnding inspired a few recent work
on image captioning (Xu et al. 2015; Karpathy and Li 2015)
where the high-level CNN features over an image sequence
were extracted, and a RNN is learned on top of the extracted
CNN features to perform more sophisticated tasks. Such ap-
proach is very effective to bridge the effort and success in
CNN to the ﬁeld of sequence modeling. We would like to
extend this type of attempt to multimodal sequence learn-
ing.
Implementation
In order to maximize the ﬂexibility of
our investigation and efﬁciently work with different vari-
ants of network architecture and working environments (e.g.
Linux and Windows), we did not implement the multimodal
LSTM using any third-party deep learning packages. In-
stead, we used MATLAB and its GPU functions in the paral-
lel computing toolbox to build our own LSTM from scratch.
Our implementation is vectorized (Ren and Xu 2015) and
very efﬁcient in training both single-modal and multimodal
LSTM described in this paper.
Experiments
Three experiments were carefully designed to test the ro-
bustness and the applicability of our proposed model.
Dataset overview
We chose the TV-series The Big
Bang Theory (BBT) as our data source. It has been shown
that the speaker identiﬁcation task over BBT is a very
challenging multimodal learning problem due to various
kinds of image degradation and the high variations on faces
in
the
videos
(Bauml, Tapaswi, and Stiefelhagen 2013;
Hu et al. 2015;
Tapaswi, B¨auml, and Stiefelhagen 2012).
During data collection, we ran face detection and extracted
all the faces in six episodes in the ﬁrst season and another
six episodes in the second season of BBT. We manually
annotated the faces for the ﬁve leading characters, i.e.
Sheldon, Leonard, Howard, Raj and Penny. In total, we
have more than 310,000 consecutively annotated face
images for the ﬁve characters. For audio data, we utilized
the pre-annotated subtitles and only extracted the audio
segments corresponding to speeches. Data from the second
season was used in training and data from the ﬁrst season
was used in testing for all the experiments reported below.
Feature extraction
To ensure the usability of the resulting
system, we adopted 0.5 second as the time window of all the

sequence data including both face and audio. For feature ex-
traction for faces, we adopted a CNN architecture resem-
bles the one in (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012)
and trained a classiﬁer using the data reported in the next
section. The activations of the last fully connected layer was
used as the high-level feature for face. We also run prin-
ciple component analysis (PCA) on all the extracted face
features to reduce the dimensionality to the level compa-
rable to audio features. By keeping 85% of the principle
components, we obtained a 53-dimension feature vector for
each face in the video. The video is 24 frames per second,
therefore there are 12 consecutive faces within each face se-
quence. For audio, we used the mel-frequency cepstral coef-
ﬁcients (MFCC) features (Sahidullah and Saha 2012). Fol-
lowing (Hu et al. 2015) we extracted the 25d MFCC features
in a sliding window of 20 milliseconds with stride of 10 mil-
liseconds, thus gives us 25×49 MFCC features.
LSTM for Face Sequences
Our ﬁrst task is to investigate the extend to which modeling
temporal dependency of high-level CNN features improves
the robustness to quality degradation and face variation. The
reasons that we would like to investigate this manner is two-
fold. First, though it was showed that RNN can be success-
fully used in speech recognition to improve the robustness
to noise (Graves, Mohamed, and Hinton 2013), it was not
clear from the literature whether similar principle applies for
high-level image features. On the other hand, we would like
to clearly measure the extend to which this approach works
for faces because this is an important cornerstone for the rest
of the experiments.
Data
Only face data in the aforementioned data set was
used in the experiment. We randomly sampled 40,000 face
sequences from the training face images and another 40,000
face sequences in the test face images. Note that each se-
quence was extracted according to the temporal order in the
data, however, we did not guarantee the sequence are strictly
from one subtitle segment. This injected more variations in
the sequence.
Procedure and Results
Three methods were compared in
this experiment. The ﬁrst method was to use a CNN to di-
rectly classify each frame in the sequence. This CNN is the
same one as used in the feature extraction for our LSTM. In
our setting, the CNN will output 12 labels (12 probability
distributions) for each face sequence. Then the output prob-
abilities were averaged to compute the ﬁnal label for this
sequence. The second method used the same CNN to ex-
tract features for each frame and reduced the dimensionality
using PCA as described in the last section. Then we used
a SVM with RBF kernel to classify each feature followed
by the same averaging processing before outputting the la-
bel. We used the single-modal LSTM (see ﬁgure 2) with one
hidden memory cell layer to train a sequential classiﬁer. The
dimensionality of the hidden layer activation is 512. In our
setting, this LSTM contains 12 time steps with 12 identical
supervision signals (labels). During the testing, we only look
at the last output in the whole output sequence.
Table 1: Face sequence classiﬁcation accuracy of different
algorithms.
ALGORITHMS
ACCURACY (%)
CNN
92.33
CNN+SVM
92.42
LSTM
95.61
The results were reported in table 1. We can see that the
two CNN alone approaches delivered very similar results,
acknowledging the high representative powerful of the CNN
features reported in the previous studies. The accuracy of the
CNN+SVM approach slightly outperformed the CNN alone
approach. This is reasonable because SVM with RBF kernel
may classify the data better than the last layer of CNN. The
performance of LSTM is signiﬁcantly higher than the other
two. By looking at the correctly classiﬁed face sequences
which were failed in the other two methods, we can see that
the LSTM is more robust to a number of image degradations
and variations. This is illustrated in ﬁgure 1a.
Comparison among Multimodal LSTMs
By the results from the ﬁrst experiment, there is a reason to
believe that performing multimodal learning of face and au-
dio in temporal domain, if do it correctly, has the potential
to perform better in speaker identiﬁcation task. Therefore,
the aim of the second experiment was to examine the extend
to which the multimodal LSTM beneﬁts the speaker identi-
ﬁcation performance. Multiple aforementioned multimodal
LSTM solutions were tested and compared in this experi-
ment. See the result session for details.
Data
In the training process, the face data from the pre-
vious experiment was used. One problem is that each face
sequence has only 12 time steps which is inconsistent with
the 49 time steps in audio sequences. To circumvent this in-
consistency, we simply duplicated faces evenly within the
49 time steps. The combinations of face sequences and au-
dio sequences for each identity were randomly paired by the
training program during the runtime to maximize the diver-
sity of the training set. For test set of this task, the combina-
tions were however pre-generated. We randomly generated
250,000 correctly paired combinations and 250,000 distrac-
tors (ill-paired combinations).
Procedure and Results
During the comparison, one base-
line method and three alternative multimodal LSTM meth-
ods were used. In the baseline method, we separately trained
a single-modal LSTM only for audio using the same au-
dio data in this experiment. We carefully tuned many hy-
per parameters, making sure it performed as well as we can
achieve. We used it to classify the audio sequence. For face
sequence, we used the CNN+SVM approach from the last
experiment. Therefore, we shall have 49 proposals for au-
dio labels and another 49 labels for face label proposals. We
then looked at the number of labels agreed within these two
groups of labels. A threshold m is set to distinguish the sam-
ple between distractors and normal samples. For instance, if
m = 10 then the whole multimodal sequence will be clas-
siﬁed to distractors if there are more than 10 label proposals

false positive rate
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
0.11
true positive rate
0.74
0.76
0.78
0.8
0.82
0.84
0.86
0.88
0.9
0.92
0.94
ROC Curve
CNN face + LSTM audio
Multimodal LSTM (no cross-modal weight sharing)
Multimodal LSTM (half cross-modal weight sharing)
Multimodal LSTM (full cross-modal weight sharing)
Figure 4: Multimodal Long Short-Term Memory.
temporally disagreed with each other. Otherwise, the multi-
modal sequence will be classiﬁed by averaging the propos-
als. Note that this distractor rejection procedure was used in
all the compared methods in this experiment. The threshold
m is tuned to generate various dots in the ROC curve.
The ﬁrst multimodal solution does not share any weights
across the two modality resulting in two separate single-
modal LSTMs. We called it “no cross-modal weight shar-
ing”. The second solution used the weight sharing scheme
introduced previously, but did not share Wy across the
modality. Formally, equation (13) should be re-written as
ys
t = softmax(Ws
y ∗hs
t), s = 1 to n.
(14)
We called this solution “half cross-modal weight shar-
ing”. The third solution completely followed the equation
(7) to (13), named “full cross-modal weight sharing”.
As shown in ﬁgure 4, the performance difference is
clear. It was expected that the baseline method performed
less competitive. However, having isolated Wy for each
modality performed worse than the naive combination of
two single-model LSTMs. On the other hand, with the
full weight sharing, multimodal LSTM signiﬁcantly outper-
forms all other methods.
Discussion
The false alarm rate was largely increased by
not sharing Wy across modalities. The role of Wy is to
transform the memory cell outputs at each time step to the
desirable labels. By sharing this transform across the modal-
ity, we can generate more consistent labels for normally
paired samples and increased the robustness to distractors.
Our experiments showed that this behavior can be automat-
ically captured by the shared Wy.
Speaker Identiﬁcation in The Big Bang Theory
The last experiment is to apply our method in real-life videos
and compare the performance with previous studies.
Data
To
compare
with
other
speaker
identiﬁcation
methods, we evaluated the winning multimodal LSTM
from the previous experiment in The Big Bang The-
ory S01E03, as in (Bauml, Tapaswi, and Stiefelhagen 2013;
Tapaswi, B¨auml, and Stiefelhagen 2012; Hu et al. 2015).
Table 2: Speaker naming accuracy of different algorithms
(%) in terms of different voting time window (s).
Time window (s)
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Bauml et al. 2013
-
-
-
-
77.81
-
Tapaswi et al. 2012
-
-
-
-
80.80
-
Hu et al. 2015
74.93
77.24
79.35
82.12
82.81
83.42
Ours
86.59
89.00
90.45
90.84
91.17
91.38
Procedure and Results
We applied our model to video
with the time window of 0.5 second and stride of 0.25 sec-
ond (e.g. 0s-0.5s, 0.25s-0.75s...). Unlike the controlled set-
ting in the second experiment, the number of distractors in
videos varies for each scene. In some cases, there are only
distractors in a scene. The evaluation criteria should be more
sophisticated. We followed (Hu et al. 2015) to calculate the
accuracy of speaker identiﬁcation to ensure a fair compar-
ison. Speciﬁcally, speaker identiﬁcation is considered suc-
cessful if a) the speaker is in the scene and the system cor-
rectly recognized him/her and correctly rejected all the dis-
tractors, or b) the speaker is not in the scene and the system
correctly rejected all the distractors in the scene.
Time window more than 0.5 second was also tested to en-
able a more systematic comparison. We achieved this by fur-
ther voting within this larger time window. For instance, by
having 50% overlapping of 0.5 second windows in the larger
window of 2.0 seconds, we will have seven 0.5 second-sized
small windows to vote for the ﬁnal labels.
Our speaker identiﬁcation results are reported in table 2.
We compared our method against the state-of-the-art sys-
tems. Note that, in (Bauml, Tapaswi, and Stiefelhagen 2013;
Tapaswi, B¨auml, and Stiefelhagen 2012), as both of them
examined the face tracks within the time window speciﬁed
by the subtitle/transcript segments, they can be viewed as
voting on the range of subtitle/transcript segments. As the
average time of subtitle/transcript segments in the evalua-
tion video is 2.5s, they are equivalent to our method when
evaluated in the voting window of such size. We applied the
same voting strategy as in (Hu et al. 2015) under different
time window setup. As can be seen from the results, our
method outperformed the previous works by a signiﬁcant
margin.
Conclusion
In this paper, we have introduced a new multimodal LSTM
and have applied it to the speaker identiﬁcation task. The key
idea is to utilize the cross-modality weight sharing to capture
correlation of two or more temporally coherent modalities.
As demonstrated in our experiments, our proposed multi-
modal LSTM is robust against image degradation and dis-
tractors, and has outperformed state-of-the-art techniques in
speaker identiﬁcation. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst at-
tempt in modeling long-term dependencies over multimodal
high-level features. We believe our multimodal LSTM is
also useful to other applications not limited to the speaker
identiﬁcation task.
