arXiv:1503.02009v1  [cs.OH]  5 Mar 2015
Towards an intelligent VNS heuristic for the
k-labelled spanning forest problem
Sergio Consoli1, Jos´e Andr´es Moreno P´erez2, and Nenad Mladenovi´c3
1 ISTC/STLab, National Research Council (CNR), Catania, Italy
2 Department of Computing Engineering, Universidad de La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain
3 School of Computing & Mathematics, Brunel University, London, United Kingdom

In a currently ongoing project, we investigate a new possibility for solving
the k-labelled spanning forest (kLSF) problem by an intelligent Variable Neigh-
bourhood Search (Int-VNS) metaheuristic. In the kLSF problem we are given an
undirected input graph G = (V, E, L) where V is the set of nodes, E the set of
edges, that are labelled on the set L of labels, and an integer positive value ¯k, and
the aim is to ﬁnd a spanning forest G∗= (V, E∗, L∗) of the input graph having
the minimum number of connected components, i.e. min|Comp(G∗)|, and the
upper bound ¯k on the number of labels to use, |L∗| ≤¯k. The problem is related
to the minimum labelling spanning tree (MLST) problem [1], whose goal is to get
the spanning tree of the input graph with the minimum number of labels, and has
several applications in the real-world, where one aims to ensure connectivity by
means of homogeneous connections. The kLSF problem was recently introduced
in [2] along with the proof of its NP-hardness; therefore any practical solution
approach requires heuristics [2, 3]. In particular our aim is to present an intelli-
gent VNS which is aimed to achieve further improvements for the kLSF problem.
This approach is derived from the promising strategy recently proposed in [4] for
the MLST problem, and integrates the basic VNS for the kLSF problem in [3]
with other complementary approaches from machine learning, statistics and ex-
perimental algorithmics, in order to produce high-quality performance and to
completely automate the resulting strategy.
The ﬁrst extension that we introduce is a local search mechanism that is
inserted at top of the basic VNS. The resulting local search method is re-
ferred to as Complementary Variable Neighbourhood Search (Co-VNS) [4]. Given
a labelled graph G = (V, E, L) with n vertices, m edges, and ℓlabels, Co-
VNS replaces iteratively each incumbent solution L∗= (l1, l2, ..., lℓ), where,
∀i = 1, . . . , |L|, li = 1 if label i ∈L∗, li = 0 otherwise, with another solution
selected from the complementary space of L∗, referred to as Cospace, deﬁned
as the set of all the labels that are not contained in L∗, that is L∆L∗. The
iterative process of extraction of a new solution from the complementary space
of the current solution helps to escape the algorithm from possible traps in lo-
cal minima, since the complementary solution lies in a very diﬀerent zone of
the search space with respect to the incumbent solution. Successively, the basic
VNS [3] is applied in order to improve the resulting solution. At the starting
point of VNS, it is required to deﬁne a suitable neighbourhood structure of size
qmax. The simplest and most common choice is a structure in which the neigh-

2
Consoli et al.
bourhoods have increasing cardinality: |N1(·)| < |N2(·)| < ... < |Nqmax(·)|. In
order to impose a neighbourhood structure on the solution space S, comprising
all possible solutions, we deﬁne the distance between any two such solutions
L1, L2 ∈S, as the Hamming distance: ρ(L1, L2) = |L1∆L2| = Pℓ
i=1 λi, where
λi = 1 if label i is included in one of the solutions but not in the other, and 0
otherwise, ∀i = 1, ..., ℓ. In order to construct the neighbourhood of a solution
L∗, the algorithm ﬁrst proceeds with the deletion of labels from L∗. In other
words, given a solution L∗, its qth neighbourhood, Nq(C), consists of all the
diﬀerent sets obtained from L∗by removing q labels, where q ←1, 2, ..., qmax. In
order to seek further improvements and to automate on-line the search process,
Co-VNS has been modiﬁed by including a probability-based local search with
a self-tuning parameters setting, resulting in the intelligent VNS metaheuristic
that we propose.
The probability-based local search is obtained by introducing a probabilistic
choice on the next label to be added into incomplete solutions. By allowing worse
components to be added to incomplete solutions, this probabilistic constructive
heuristic produces a further increase on the diversiﬁcation of the optimization
process. The construction criterion is as follows. The procedure starts from an
initial solution and iteratively selects at random a candidate move. If this move
leads to a solution having a better objective function value than the current solu-
tion, then this move is accepted unconditionally; otherwise the move is accepted
with a probability that depends on the deterioration, ∆, of the objective function
value. This construction criterion takes inspiration from Simulated Annealing:
the acceptance probability of a worse component into a partial solution is eval-
uated according to the Boltzmann function exp(−∆/T ), where the parameter
T , referred to as temperature, controls the dynamics of the function. Initially
the value of T is large, so allowing many worse moves to be accepted, and is
gradually reduced by the following geometric cooling law: Tj+1 = α · Tj, where
T0 = |BestL| and α = 1/|BestL| ∈[0, 1], with BestL being the current best so-
lution and |BestL| its number of labels. This cooling schedule does not requires
any intervention from the user regarding the setting of its parameters, as it is
guided automatically by the best solution BestL. Therefore the whole process
is able to react in response to the search algorithm’s behavior and to adapt its
setting on-line according to the instance of the problem under evaluation.
The achieved optimization strategy seems to be highly promising for the
kLSF problem. Ongoing investigation will consist in a statistical comparison of
the resulting strategy against the best kLSF algorithms in the literature, in order
to quantify and qualify the improvements obtained by the proposed Int-VNS.
