1
Sub-mW Keyword Spotting on an MCU: Analog
Binary Feature Extraction and Binary Neural Networks
Gianmarco Cerutti, Lukas Cavigelli, Renzo Andri, Michele Magno, Elisabetta Farella, Luca Benini
Abstract—Keyword spotting (KWS) is a crucial function en-
abling the interaction with the many ubiquitous smart devices in
our surroundings, either activating them through wake-word or
directly as a human-computer interface. For many applications,
KWS is the entry point for our interactions with the device and,
thus, an always-on workload. Many smart devices are mobile
and their battery lifetime is heavily impacted by continuously
running services. KWS and similar always-on services are thus
the focus when optimizing the overall power consumption.
This work addresses KWS energy-efﬁciency on low-cost mi-
crocontroller units (MCUs). We combine analog binary feature
extraction with binary neural networks. By replacing the digital
preprocessing with the proposed analog front-end, we show that
the energy required for data acquisition and preprocessing can
be reduced by 29×, cutting its share from a dominating 85% to
a mere 16% of the overall energy consumption for our reference
KWS application.
Experimental evaluations on the Speech Commands Dataset
show that the proposed system outperforms state-of-the-art
accuracy and energy efﬁciency, respectively, by 1% and 4.3×
on a 10-class dataset while providing a compelling accuracy-
energy trade-off including a 2% accuracy drop for a 71× energy
reduction.
Index Terms—Keyword spotting, quantization, binary neural
networks, deep learning, feature extraction.
I. INTRODUCTION
Keyword spotting has become increasingly popular over the
last few years with the wide-spread adoption in commercial
products such as the “Ok, Google” and “Hey, Siri” commands
used to wake up a smartphone and following up with a
more complicated voice command [1], the call for “Alexa”
to activate Amazon’s smart home devices, as well as many
different keywords to activate recent cars’ driver assistance
systems. A key property of all these applications is their
always-on nature and the high accuracy requirements, which
are essential for the user experience. As voice command
interfaces penetrate extremely cost-sensitive markets, such as
toys and home-automation, keyword spotting is ported to low-
cost MCU devices, with tight constraints in memory and
computational power.
State-of-the-art keyword spotting methods rely on deep
neural networks (DNNs) as an essential part of the processing
pipeline. DNNs are known for their high compute effort and
often have memory requirements in the megabyte to gigabyte
Gianmarco Cerutti and Elisabetta Farella are with ICT-irst Fondazione

Lukas Cavigelli and Renzo Andri are with Huawei Technologies, Com-

range, making it a natural choice to off-load their compute
workload to cloud services in data centers rather than running
on power- and memory-constrained devices [2]. This implies
continuously sending a stream of audio data to a remote system
and thus comes with many drawbacks: privacy concerns [3],
short battery lifetimes due to energy cost of data transmission
[4], communication infrastructure and cloud computing service
cost, availability in areas of poor connectivity, and a high
latency [5].
These obstacles can be overcome by processing the data
directly on the device where the sensor data is collected,
avoiding transmitting the data entirely, or sending out only
the essential information as part of an alert [6]–[8]. This
requires a carefully designed system, combining the latest
methods on constructing efﬁcient and compact DNN models
considering constraints on the compute effort and memory
requirements with the latest DNN deployment methods for
efﬁcient inference to keep the energy spent on computing
minimal for long battery life.
Many methods have been proposed in pursuit of efﬁcient
DNN inference, when targeting MCU devices, from neural
architecture search to knowledge distillation and novel efﬁcient
building blocks for DNNs. A particularly successful method
to bring keyword spotting to embedded devices has been the
training of extremely quantized DNNs known as binary neural
networks (BNNs), where the large compute workload perform-
ing multiply-add operations in convolution layers decays to
XNOR and popcount operations, and a data word in memory
can hold a vector of weight or feature map values. This
has shown success in many applications, including keyword
spotting [9]. Multiply-accumulate operations are dominating
the compute effort of neural networks, thus measuring the
throughput of a system in terms of GMAC/s and its en-
ergy efﬁciency with GMAC/s/W has been widely adopted as
a network-agnostic performance metric. Nevertheless, when
quantizing neural networks to few-bit operands, MAC oper-
ations become signiﬁcantly simpler, and larger networks are
required to compensate the accuracy drop. The energy efﬁ-
ciency in the form of energy per classiﬁcation and throughput
measured as classiﬁcations per seconds are considered more
representative metrics for real world performance assessment
[10].
A complete keyword spotting system consists of many
components. With a strongly optimized classiﬁer, classiﬁcation
computation energy drops from being the dominant contributor
to third place after data acquisition (microphone, analog ﬁl-
tering, analog-to-digital conversion) and pre-processing (com-
putation of Mel spectrograms). Audio classiﬁcation systems
are often based on the regular sampling of microphone inputs
arXiv:2201.03386v1  [cs.SD]  10 Jan 2022

2
with frequencies ranging from 16 kHz to 192 kHz in order
to preserve the spectral information from the audio stream
as much as possible [11], [12]. The sampling rate dictates
a lower bound on continuous power consumption. However,
successful classiﬁcation requires only suitable features and not
necessarily the entire raw data stream. The overall energy
efﬁciency can thus be improved by a sensor or acquisition
block that returns only the relevant features for classiﬁcation.
In this paper, we combine a binary neural network for
efﬁcient classiﬁcation on MCUs with an optimized feature
extractor in the analog domain leading directly to binary
time-frequency features, eliminating the need for digital pre-
processing and analog-to-digital conversion. We use an active
ﬁlter bank followed by envelope detectors and comparator
circuits to indicate activity in each of the frequency bands.
The resulting digital signals are then used as interrupts for the
MCU, signaling any change of the active frequency bands.
This allows putting the MCU in sleep mode most of the time,
further lowering the continuous power usage by following the
event-based acquisition paradigm. Our contributions can be
summarized as follows:
• We combine a power-optimized analog front end with
direct binary feature extraction suitable for keyword
spotting.
• We implement and characterize all components of the
keyword spotting system, including: analog front-end
with interrupt-based wake-up, data acquisition, pre-
processing, and optimized BNN inference, implemented
on a low-power multi-core RISC-V-based MCU.
• We explore the impact of various degrees of freedom
in our analog front end, speciﬁcally the ﬁlter bank size
and ﬁlter properties, and the resulting impact on the ﬁnal
classiﬁcation accuracy.
• We thoroughly analyze the trade-offs between accuracy
and energy efﬁciency, including sweeps of the ﬁlter bank
properties as well as the BNN size.
• We compare the proposed system in-depth with state-of-
the-art methods, showing how it can be parametrized to
span the entire energy-accuracy Pareto front.
II. RELATED WORK
Deep neural networks are the state-of-the-art technique for
audio and speech processing. Their speciﬁc type varies from
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for extracting keywords
and phonemes from spectrogram-like inputs [13] to recurrent
neural networks (RNNs) such as LSTMs and GRUs [14], [15],
spiking neural networks (SNNs) [16], temporal convolution
networks (TCNs) [17], and ultimately attention-based models
with large embeddings [18] as the tasks move from analyzing
sounds to understanding entire sentences with wide contexts.
A. Size-Optimized & Quantized DNNs
Keyword spotting systems are typically mobile edge de-
vices, where the data is processed on the device to keep the
energy cost acceptable and overcome the privacy concerns of
the users that would come with the transmission of their data
to the cloud. A lot of research has thus been conducted in
the direction of optimizing the DNN models to ﬁt the device
constraints, either by manually exploring various DNN models
speciﬁcally for keyword spotting, or through more general
research on how to ﬁnd compute-efﬁcient DNNs.
A typical approach to coping with resource constraints is
to reduce the model size to ﬁt these devices. For example,
the authors of [13] test different architectures to explore the
consequence of changing the size of different layers. On the
same path, Tucker et al. [19] investigated the use of low-rank
weight matrices and knowledge distillation. However, they try
to increase the performance without changing the model size.
An additional level of optimization relies on changing how
numbers are represented. Deep learning frameworks train
neural networks using 32-bit ﬂoating-point weights and acti-
vations. Researchers have tried to reduce numerical precision
to save memory, reduce internal data bandwidth, and simplify
the compute operations. This process, called quantization, aims
to reduce the storage and computational costs of the inference
task [20]. On the other hand, the performance of the network in
terms of accuracy can degrade. If properly trained, the weight-
quantized networks can achieve an accuracy close to the
ﬂoating-point original models, also on complex classiﬁcation
tasks [21], [22]. Zhou et al. [23] present a technique for
lossless weight quantization down to 2 bits. This approach
saves memory and bandwidth, but keeping activations in full-
precision always requires ﬂoating-point computations and 32
bit for each activation. Unfortunately, activations are more
sensitive to quantization in terms of accuracy drop. The
approximation of the activations is quasi-lossless down to
8 bit [24], and it allows the hardware to parallelize four
computations over a 32-bit register.
As an extreme case of quantization, binary neural networks
(BNNs) reduce the precision of both weights and neuron acti-
vations to a single-bit [25], [26]. BNNs work well on simple
tasks like MNIST, CIFAR-10, and SVHN without impacting
the accuracy [27], but are showing worse performance on
challenging datasets such as ImageNet with a drop of around
12% [28], [29]. BNNs provide major beneﬁts for computation.
Binarization reduces the amount of memory required for both
the weights and the intermediate results, ﬁtting 32 values into a
single 32 bit word. Further, such a vectorized representation in
memory can be used directly to compute 32 MAC operations
with just two light-weight instructions—the multiplication
simpliﬁes to a bit-wise XNOR operation, and the summing
of the 32 values can be done with a popcount instruction.
B. KWS Applications & Implementations
Focusing on always-on keyword spotting, the authors of [30]
reduce the power consumption with multiple stages that wake
up a more complex system. The ﬁrst stage comprises a tiny
and power-efﬁcient detector that executes on a DSP. Upon
trigger, it delegates the ﬁnal detection decision to a second,
much larger, and more accurate detector.
Keyword spotting is not limited to high-end consumer de-
vices: many interesting applications belong to the IoT domain,
where the end nodes are typically MCU-based sensor devices
with even more limited resources than a mobile phone. A

3
wireless sensor node needs to have a compact form factor
and very low cost. This requirement also limits the battery’s
size, thus setting the bound for the power consumption to a
few milliwatts.
Pioneers of edge computing for keyword spotting [24]
manage to implement a keyword spotting model on a cortex
M4 based MCU: they explore a different kind of models,
and they reach the state of the art accuracy even in memory-
constrained devices. Moreover, they present an implementation
with 8-bit quantization for weights and activations to use
SIMD instruction and parallelize four operations in just one
instruction. Following this trend, Justice et al. [31] proposed
a 3-bit quantization for the weights while keeping 16 bits for
the activations. They also present a recurrent unit for keyword
spotting, demonstrating its effectiveness in execution time and
memory footprint. Here, they use a Cortex M0 MCU with
a memory size of 32 kB. The authors of [9] build on top of
[32] by going down to 1-bit weights and activations for audio
event detection, and they demonstrate that thanks to BNN, the
system achieves an efﬁciency of 31.3 GMAC/s/W thanks to
parallelization over eight cores and an optimized Instruction
Set Architecture.
All these implementations achieve acceptable accuracy and
small memory footprint for their models, but they do not focus
on the overall system’s power consumption. In fact, the micro-
phone itself, its ampliﬁcation circuitry, and the communication
between the MCU and the sensor are a relevant part of the
energy used for keyword spotting or audio event detection.
Cerutti et al. [33] present an edge-computing system for sound
event detection, and they conclude that the system uses more
than 60% of the power budget for sensor reading and feature
extraction, and only the remaining part is for classiﬁcation.
To improve data acquisition efﬁciency, a vast amount of
research prototypes try to mimic human perception, creating
a time-frequency representation of the microphone output,
an approach known as silicon cochlea. [34]–[39]. Promising
features in this approach are event-based processing and
avoidance of traditional Nyquist sampling. In [38], [40], the
authors design a custom chip for voice activity detection which
integrates both the feature extractor as well as the neural
network. The audio signal passes through a bank of hardware
ﬁlters, and sequentially, an integrator generates a set of spikes
according to the power present in the speciﬁc frequency band.
Voice activity detection is generally more manageable than a
multi-class classiﬁcation like keyword spotting. Thus, they can
get a reasonable accuracy with only a 3-layer neural network
with 48 inputs and 4.6 kB of parameters.
C. Integrated KWS SoCs
We focus primarily on a full system implementation
based on commercially available components. However, fully-
integrated implementations can massively reduce the power
requirements and some innovative, state-of-the-art KWS sys-
tem concepts are introduced the following works.
With Vocell [41], Giraldo et al. propose a system for KWS
and speaker veriﬁcation, integrating the AFE and a cascade of
a sound detector, feature extractor, KWS classiﬁer, and speaker
veriﬁcation units into a single SoC. Its average measured
power consumption varies from 6.5 µW (90% silence) to
18.3 µW (continuously running), uses 16 µW on average for
500 ms in KWS-mode with extreme voltage scaling (0.6 V
for AFE, 0.3 V for logic), and it achieves 90.87% accuracy
for KWS on the Google Speech Commands dataset with 12
classes.
In the most recent work of Giraldo et al., they present a
temporal convolutional network (TCN) accelerator achieving
close-to-SoA performance of 93.3% on the GSCD task requir-
ing 1.5 INT8-MOp at 8µW power consumption. [42]. Shan et
al. [43] show the smallest power numbers, proposing an accel-
erator for MFCC, binarized depthwise-separable convolutions
consuming 510 nW, but on a very simple dataset (1 or 2 words
of GSCD). Chong et al. present another MFCC and LSTM
accelerator, by exploiting weight-stationary paradigm, small
FFT sizes, rectangular Mel ﬁlters, and highly-pruned LSTM
model (89%), they achieve 2.5µW at 400 kHz and 0.6 V supply
(excluding microphone, ADC, I/O power) at 90.6% accuracy
on a 10-class GSCD [44].
H. Fuketa [45] addresses the same issue, the energy cost of
ADCs, and proposes to move the pre-processing to the analog
domain. They replace the ADC+MFCC front-end with a
ﬁlter bank of 10 band-pass switched-capacitor ﬁlters, followed
by an analog maximum sampling circuit (100 Hz), a tiny
convolutional neural network layer to convert 2 samples (20
values) to a 64-value vector at 50 Hz that is then binarized by
comparators and ﬁnally processed by binary time-delay neural
network (TDNN) in digital domain. They achieve an 88.8%
accuracy when trained on a subset of only 3 classes (‘yes’,
‘no’, silence) of the Google Speech Commands dataset, while
using merely 0.25 µW for the entire simulated circuit (from
AFE to classiﬁcation result).
M. Yang et al. [46] also propose to move pre-processing
to the analog domain where they pass the signal through a
low-noise ampliﬁer, a 16-channel bandpass ﬁlter followed by
clipping ampliﬁer, a half-wave rectiﬁer, and an integrate-and-
ﬁre encoder for ADC. Not aiming at high linearity in the
AFE allows them to further reduce the power consumption
to 53 nW.
All the above works would require extensive qualiﬁcation
work and design margins to become mature for high-yield
mass production, and in addition they do not consider the
extra overhead linked to system integration (chip I/O, external
power supplies, ...). In this paper, we follow a full-system ap-
proach based on commercial off-the-shelf components already
in mass production. We combine an ultra-low-power mixed-
signal feature extractor front-end derived from [47], with an
optimized binary neural network running on a parallel low-
power MCU. The front-end directly produces binary patterns
used to wake up the MCU and are then fed directly as input
to the binary neural network. This streamlined and energy-
efﬁcient interface between feature extraction and classiﬁcation
dramatically reduces power consumption while at the same
time achieving compelling accuracy compared to SoA, as
shown in Section V.

4
Fig. 1. Left: overall structure of the keyword spotting system. Center: schematic of the analog front end, divided in its three main blocks. Right: intermediate
signal in the circuit. From the top: the microphone output, the ﬁltered signal and the output of the active detector. In red the binary output after the comparator.
Fig. 2.
Picture of the system: acquisition board with the analog front end
(bottom left) and the GAPuino processor board with the Greenwaves GAP-8
8+1 core RISC-V processor (top right).
III. SENSOR AND BINARY FEATURE SAMPLING
Three key components deﬁne a keyword spotting system:
the sensing element, which converts the acoustic wave to
an electrical signal; the feature extractors, which pre-process
the data to obtain a more meaningful representation of the
input; and a classiﬁer, which performs classiﬁcation using the
previously generated features. In this paper, we exploit a low-
power analog front-end to convert the microphone data directly
to a binary signal, ready to be processed in a binary neural
network. The following sections detail the subsystems.
A. Analog Front-End
In the proposed approach, data acquisition and the follow-
ing feature extraction are performed using a low-power and
energy-efﬁcient analog front end, motivated by [47]. Figure 1
shows the circuit schematic of the front end employed in this
work. The analog signal processing allows the use of any ana-
log microphone; we use a low-noise MEMS from InvenSense
(ICS-40310), which consumes only 16 µA at 0.9 V. The analog
front end aims to extract frequency-time features, thus the next
step is ﬁltering the frequency bands of interest. The output of
the microphone is connected to a general impedance converter
(GIC), which uses the OPA379 operational ampliﬁer from
Texas Instruments. It features a gain-bandwidth product of
90 kHz and a current of 2.9 µA at 1.8 V. The conﬁguration
generates a band-pass ﬁlter with a center frequency and corner
frequency
fc =
1
2πRAC
BW = fc
RA
R1
.
(1)
The analog front end has an active envelope detector to keep
track of the temporal duration for which the frequency is
active. It also ampliﬁes the output of the GIC, following the
formula
G = R5
R4
.
(2)
Finally, the envelope passes through a comparator. The
LPV7215 consumes 580 nA at 1.8 V. The ﬁrst input is the
output of the envelope detector, the second is a predeﬁned
reference voltage.
To achieve a high classiﬁcation accuracy in a complex
task such as the keyword spotting, more than a single time-
frequency detector is required. Therefore the front-end need
to be tuned with the resistor and capacitors in the GIC to
select a different center frequency and bandwidth of the ﬁlter.
In the proposed system, the same microphone is connected
to all these ﬁlters. The next step is to choose the right ﬁlter
shape for further classiﬁcation: log-Mel spectrogram and the
following MFCC features are intensively used in sound-based
classiﬁcation systems [13], [24]. For this reason, we choose
corner frequencies equally-spaced in the Mel domain within
the selected range. We tuned the resistors as well to match
the bandwidth of Mel ﬁlters. Figure 3 shows the Mel ﬁlter
responses and the ﬁlter banks’ analog simulation. Even if the
analog ﬁlters do not have a triangular shape, they are a close
approximation. Table I shows power consumption for different
components and ﬁlter conﬁgurations for data acquisition and
preprocessing with the analog front end with the conventional
baseline approach. Overall, the data acquisition power can be
reduced by 28×.

5
Fig. 3. Frequency response (in blue) and Mel ﬁlter response when the analog
front end has 8 ﬁlters.
TABLE I
ANALOG FRONT END POWER CONSUMPTION COMPARED WITH
CONVENTIONAL DATA ACQUISITION AND PRE-PROCESSING
System Component
Energy
AFE with 64/16/8 ﬁlters
1248
306
153 µJ
- Microphone
288
72
36 µJ
- Single Time-Frequency Detector
15
15
15 µJ
MCU consumption during acquisition
291
168
131 µJ
Total Preprocessing (incl. everything)
1539
488
284 µJ
baseline: MEMS microphone with ADC
5400 µJ
baseline: SoA preprocessing (MFCC)
2640 µJ
B. Digital Sampling
The output of the analog front end contains two pieces
of information for each ﬁlter. It shows the ﬁlter pass-band
frequency component is present in the input data and how
long it lasts. The binary output corresponds to the speciﬁc
frequency band’s presence; the length of the pulse provides
the duration. For the following classiﬁcation part, we want to
save this information.
The microcontroller has each digital output of the Analog
Front End connected to a general purpose input-output (GPIO)
pins. In a silent situation, the microcontroller is in sleep mode.
When the ﬁrst interrupt arrives from one of the channels, the
microcontroller starts a timer. That will be considered time 0.
From now on, the microcontroller saves the time stamps of
each interrupt for all the channels.
After one second, the ﬁrmware starts the reconstruction of
the time-frequency representation from the collected data. As
in a spectrogram, we discretize the time axis in windows.
We ﬁll the time-frequency representation with a “1” if the
analog front-end output is high at least once inside the window
for each channel and each window. In this way, we directly
generate the binary image that will be the input of the binary
neural network.
The power consumption in this phase is mainly given by the
short interrupt service during which the microcontroller saves
the timestamp of the event. To estimate this power, we run
the ﬁrmware with a set of interrupt rate on real hardware and
we estimate the power consumption per interrupt. Finally, we
compute the number of interrupts in the simulations for each
different setup (8, 16 and 64 ﬁlters). The platform used for
this experiment is the STM32l476RG, and we conﬁgured the
low-power timer to run with a 32 kHz clock.
For the baseline directly sampling the audio signal, we
measured the power consumption of the data acquisition using
an SPH0645 MEMS microphone and the SAI peripheral. The
acquisition of 1 s of data requires 5.4 mJ using the MEMS
microphone, while with the analog front end with 8 ﬁlters the
energy consumption is 0.28 mJ, i.e. just 5.2% of the energy
consumed by using the standard microphone.
Fig. 4. Simulation of the AFE with 64 ﬁlters (left) and its binarized version
(right) of the keyword “right”. The 64 ﬁlters are equally spaced in the
logarithmic Mel domain between 50 and 7500 Hz.
IV. BINARY NEURAL NETWORK
A. Dataset and Binarization
To train and to evaluate the proposed system, we used the
Google Speech Commands V2 dataset, which contains 105k
speech samples of 35 words [48]. The neural network model
is trained to classify the processed audio in one of the 10
keywords: “Yes”, “No”, “Up”, “Down”,“Left”, “Right”, “On”,
“Off”, “Stop”, “Go”. In addition, there is a class “silence”
(i.e., no word spoken) and “unknown” word, which is a subset
of the utterances in the remaining 20 keywords. The train-
validation-step split has an 80:10:10, and it is done following
the recommendations of the dataset.
When considering the analog front end, each clip of the
dataset is converted in the AFE output. Meyer et al. demon-
strated the similarity between the AFE output and a binarized
spectrogram [47]. This similarity motivates us to use ﬁlters to
generate the binary features. From these features, we obtain the
maximum full-precision values of the spectrogram in windows
of 10 ms or 25 ms. The binarization thresholds (one for each
channel) are initialized with the single-channel average value.
The full-precision envelopes’ values are normalized using min-
max scaling, and the same min-max values are used to scale
the initial thresholds. The analog front end threshold can be
adapted to this optimal threshold by selecting the correspond-
ing resistor divider, which creates the desired voltage reference
for the comparator. We visualize the intermediate presentations
in Figure 4, both before and after binarization, the latter being
the input of the BNN.
B. Binary Convolution
Binary
neural
networks
(BNNs)
constrain
both
the
weights and inputs to I
∈
{−1, 1}nin×h×b and W
∈

6
{−1, 1}nout×nin×ky×kx. To avoid using two bits, we represent
−1 with 0, whereas the actual binary numbers are indicated
with a hat (i.e., ˆi = (i+1)/2). It turns out that multiplications
become xnor operations ¯⊕[26]. Formally the output ok of
an output channel k ∈{0, ..., nout −1} can be described as1:
ok = sgn
 nin−1
X
n=0
in ∗wk,n
!
= sgn
 nin−1
X
n=0
2

ˆin ∗ˆwk,n

−kykx
!
= sgn


nin−1
X
n=0
X
(∆x,∆y)
2

ˆiy+∆y,x+∆x
n
¯⊕ˆwk,n
∆y,∆x
−1


Whereas ∆y and ∆x are the relative ﬁlter tap positions (e.g.,
(∆y, ∆x) ∈{−1, 0, 1}2 for 3 × 3 ﬁlters). As calculating
single-bit operations on the microcontroller is not efﬁcient,
we pack several input channels into a 32-bit integer (e.g., the
feature map pixels at (y+∆y, x+∆x) in spatial dimension and
input channels 32n to (32(n + 1) −1) packed in ˆiy+∆y,x+∆x
32n:+32
),
while the Multiply Accumulates (MACs) can be implemented
with popcount and xnor operations.
Furthermore, as common embedded platforms like GAP8
do not have a built-in xnor operator, the xor operator ⊕is
used and the result is inverted. Therefore, the ﬁnal equation
for the output channel is ok =
sgn


nin
32 −1
X
n=0
X
(∆x,∆y)
32 −2popcnt

ˆiy+∆y,x+∆x
32n:+32
⊕ˆw∆y,∆x
k,32n:+32



C. Batch Normalization and Binarization
A batch normalization layer follows each binary convolu-
tional layer. As the output of binary layers are integer values,
and the signum function can be written as a comparison
function, the activation function is simpliﬁed to:
binAct(x) =



0,
if x · sgn(γ′) ≥
j
β′
γ′
k
1,
if x · sgn(γ′) <
j
β′
γ′
k .
(3)
whereas γ′ is the scaling factor, and β′ is the bias based on the
batch normalization parameters. While exporting the model,
we compute the integer threshold value ⌊β′
γ′ ⌋in advance. In
inference, one sign comparison and one threshold comparison
have to be calculated for each activation value.
D. Last Layer and Prediction
In the last layer, the ﬁxed-point values from the last binary
layer are convolved with the ﬁxed-point weights, and N output
channels are calculated, where N is the number of classes.
Finally, the network performs an average pooling over the
whole image giving N predictions for each class.
E. Network Architectures
To investigate the trade-off in terms of accuracy and power
consumption, we trained several networks with the same
structure as Table II but with a variable number of ﬁlters for
each layer. In particular, we have chosen a base vector, and
1For simplicity, we omit the bias and the scaling factor in the formula.
TABLE II
NEURAL NETWORK ARCHITECTURE: THE BASE VECTOR IS MULTIPLIED
BY DIFFERENT VALUES TO CHANGE THE CHANNEL COUNT
Layer
Kernel Size
Stride
Base Vector
1. Conv Layer
3 × 3
2
1
2. Conv Layer
3 × 3
1
2
3. Conv Layer
3 × 3
2
2
4. Conv Layer
3 × 3
1
3
5. Conv Layer
1 × 1
1
3
6. Conv Layer
1 × 1
1
-
then we have multiplied it by a scaling factor. To fully exploit
the beneﬁts of parallelization over 32 numbers, the minimum
number of ﬁlters is 32. So we multiplied the base vector for
32, 64, and 128. Different is the case of full-precision neural
networks, where there is no reason to set a minimum number
of ﬁlters. Therefore, we have multiplied the base vector by
4, 8, 16, and 32. The last layer has to match the number of
classes, so it does not change with the scaling factor.
F. Microcontroller for BNN Inference
For the estimation of the power consumption, we took the
efﬁciency and throughput values from our previous work,
which are 31.3 GMAC/s/W and 1.5 GMAC/s respectively [9].
The reference platform for BNN execution is the GAP8
platform. GAP8 is a commercial processor, implemented from
the Parallel Ultra Low Power (PULP) open-source project2.
This processor has similar power requirements as the Cortex-
M family with up to 20 times higher computation performance
for machine learning applications, thanks to near-threshold
parallel computing [49]. Furthermore, it features RISC-V ISA
extensions for bit manipulation, effectively accelerating BNN
inference with a native popcount instruction.
V. RESULTS
This paper comprises two novel contributions: the use of
binary neural networks for keyword spotting and the combi-
nation with an analog front end that extracts time-frequency
binary features. About the former, we ﬁrst explore how the bi-
narization of weights and activations impacts the classiﬁcation
performance.
A. Effect of Model Binarization
First, we trained a well-established convolutional neural net-
work using standard log-Mel features as input to the network
in Table II. For the whole paper, it will be considered as a
reference for other results. We use windows of 25 ms and a hop
size of 10 ms to compute the spectrogram. We apply the Mel
transformation using 64 Mel-ﬁlters in the range between 50
and 7500 Hz, following the methodology described in Hershey
et al. [50]. The network is described in Table II and the number
of channels is obtained by multiplying the base vector by 64.
Moreover, the layers are here in full-precision and not binary
as depicted in the table. Between each convolution, there is
Batch Normalization and ReLU activation. We used the Adam
2https://www.pulp-platform.org

7
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
BNN binary input
BNN
Binary weights
Baseline
BNN binary input
BNN
Binary weights
Baseline
85.6
89.9
93.2
93.4
Accuracy [%]
Fig. 5.
Effect of binarization of Mel-based classiﬁer. The full-precision
baseline is compared with versions trained with binary weights (BWN), binary
weights and activations (BNN), and binary weights, activations and inputs
(BNN with binary inputs) using thresholds learned during the training process.
optimizer and a learning rate of 10−4 with a reduction of
a factor of ten when the training is not improving for 10
consecutive epochs.
Figure 5 shows the performance impact of using binary
numbers instead of full-precision ones. In detail, ﬁrst, we
binarize weights, activations, and input. In the ﬁrst three cases,
the ﬁrst layer has full-precision input and weights, but the ﬁrst
activation function already binarizes the data. In the last case,
with binary input, the Mel-spectrogram is compared with a
channel-wise trainable threshold, and the ﬁrst layer receives
the binary spectrogram as input. The thresholds are initialized
using the mean of each channel over the complete training set.
The second bar performs even better than the full-precision
weight version; most likely, the binarization of weights acts
as a regularization in this phase. Quantization of both weights
and activations instead signiﬁcantly decreases the accuracy.
Finally, the approach of quantizing the input data using a
threshold instead of a fully connected layer is the worst case,
but it is the most similar case to the actual use of the analog
front end.
B. Frequency Range Selection
Here we present the analysis that we have carried out to
choose the proper frequency range. From the recording setup,
we know that the frequency limit is between 50 and 8000 Hz.
Having these constraints in mind, we looked for the best
frequency range to select our corner frequencies for the ﬁlters.
Once the range is ﬁxed, we equally space the corner frequency
in the Mel domain. We limit the analysis to the solution with
eight ﬁlters.
Firstly, we used the full range of frequency; then, we
explored which components are more relevant, excluding alter-
natively low and high frequency. Finally, we tried to exclude
a smaller portion of the high and low spectrum.
Figure 6 shows different accuracy of the different bars.
Splitting the frequency range in low and high frequency and
check which gives most of the information brings to another
result: only the combination of high and low frequency gives
the most relevant information for classiﬁcation. The black
bars conﬁrm this trend: by enlarging the frequency range, the
102
103
104
Frequency [Hz]
53.9
64.8
73.9
74.6
76.3
Accuracy [%]
Fig. 6. Frequency range selection: each row corresponds to a model trained
using the 8 ﬁlters indicated with the accuracy noted on the left. Their corner
frequencies are equally spaced on the Mel scale. The highest-accuracy ﬁlter
bank used throughout the paper is highlighted in green with corner frequencies
50 Hz and 8 kHz. A higher color intensity corresponds to lower attenuation
of the signal at that frequency by the corresponding ﬁlter.
75
80
85
90
95
100
Accuracy [%]
10 1
100
101
102
Energy [mJ]
L
B
bin 8
bin 16
bin 32
bin 64
bin Mel
fp Mel
HelloEdge
EGRU
Fig. 7. Pareto curve for different features. Multiple dots for a single feature
represent a different neural network architecture, more speciﬁcally, different
number of channels in the convolutional layers. The different colors indicate
the HW implementation, particularly bin k, shows the implementation with k
analog ﬁlter banks. The best performing and lowest power AFE-based models
are marked with B and L respectively. The frequency range of the ﬁlter is the
one resulting the best from the analysis in Figure 6, from 50 Hz to 8 kHz.
performances increase. Thus, the best performance is given by
including the full frequency range.
C. Accuracy-Energy Trade-Off
In this section, we present how the trade-off between
power consumption and accuracy motivates the use of the
analog front end. Therefore, we tried different analog front-
end conﬁgurations, namely 8, 16, 32, and 64 ﬁlters. Figure 7
shows the Pareto curve for the keyword spotting task. Here dif-
ferent conﬁgurations are presented, including MFCC and AFE
features. The rightmost values are the network that uses full-
precision numbers, and they perform the best accuracy with
a power consumption of tens of mW. On their left, there are
the systems that include the analog front end and binarization

8
of weights ad activations. Here, the system achieves sub-mW
consumption with 80% accuracy in the task, 4% less accuracy
than the solution from HelloEdge [24], which consumes more
than 10 mW.
The Pareto curve is divided into two clusters; below 85%
of accuracy, the use of the analog front end achieves better
performance with respect to full-precision MFCC based fea-
tures. The AFE does not reach a higher accuracy than 85%
because of loss of information in binarization. Therefore the
Mel-based full-precision network achieves the best accuracy
results. More interesting is the violet cluster, where the audio is
acquired in full-precision, and then Mel features are binarized.
None of the points belong to the Pareto curve because the
power consumption is too high due to the full-precision data
acquisition and pre-processing, and full-precision networks
with fewer parameters achieve the same accuracy performance
with less energy. This insight demonstrates that BNN are
particularly favourable with respect to full-precision networks
when the acquisition process can be optimized when producing
binary features. The analog front end is the enabling factor for
the use of BNN in low-power contexts.
D. Effect of Binarization on Different Classes
To better understand how the AFE and binarization affect
the various classes, Figure 8 shows the confusion matrix for
three different conﬁgurations. In the full precision system, the
only class that shows different behavior to the other classes is
the “unknown” class. It is the most challenging class because it
contains 25 different words, among them some that are similar
to the 10 target classes. As already shown in Figure 7, the
BNN-based classiﬁer with the binary AFE generally performs
slightly worse in exchange for the clearly reduced energy cost.
Interestingly, other than the “unknown” class, the errors are
clustered among speciﬁc pairs of keywords, such as “no”
and “go” or “down” and “no”. This could be taken into
consideration during the design of a user application, either
by avoiding very similar keywords, or by providing context—
certain circumstances might only permit a “yes” or “no”
answer, or we might expect a keyword indicating a direction.
E. Comparison with Related Work
This section presents a comparison between our results and
related work that uses the Google Speech Commands dataset
to evaluate the keyword spotting system’s performance. In
order to make a direct comparison, we selected works that
target microcontroller-based systems.
Table III presents the breakdown of the energy consumption
in terms of acquisition and processing. Among the models
using the analog front end, we selected the classiﬁers with the
lowest energy consumption and highest accuracy. As expected,
the lowest energy consumption solution uses 8 AFE ﬁlters,
while the highest accuracy uses 64 AFE ﬁlters. Our solution
shows a substantial reduction in energy for the acquisition.
At the same time, the best accuracy solution has a processing
power in a similar range than Hello Edge.
The total energy shows that our highest energy efﬁcient
solution has a power consumption of 1–2 orders of magnitude
less, thus enabling scenarios in which the energy budget is
below 1 mJ. We compare the accuracy with both, Hello Edge
and EGRU, where the ﬁrst maintains the standard evaluation
with the Google Speech Commands V2 dataset as described
in Section IV-A depicted in the dataset with 12 classes, and
the second uses spoken digits, thus 10 classes. We present
numbers for both cases, showing that for the high-accuracy
conﬁguration we outperform the accuracy of either while
maintaining a clearly reduced energy consumption. Even with
the lowest-power conﬁguration we can maintain a comparable
accuracy to EGRU while dramatically reducing the power.
We further show the importance of the low-power analog
feature extraction, with the full-precision data acquisition and
pre-processing alone taking 5.5 mJ while the low-power con-
ﬁguration with our AFE uses only 0.56 mJ in total including
classiﬁcation.
VI. DISCUSSION AND COMPARISON FOR VLSI
IMPLEMENTATION
We evaluated the proposed method using an implementation
without custom silicon. As summarized in Section II-C, fully-
integrated implementations can massively reduce the power
requirements. A direct comparison to these works is not
meaningful, as essential contributors to the power consumption
of a complete system are missing (power supply, clock gener-
ators, microphone, MCU & peripherals to operate actors), and
techniques such as extreme voltage scaling are incompatible
with product-grade devices that need to operate reliably for
several years. In order to enable a reasonable comparison, we
estimate the expected power when integrating the proposed
approach:
1) The AFE in [45] is very similar—analog-domain band-
pass ﬁltering of audio signals and comparator-based
conversion—and requires 0.14 µW for 10 frequency
bands. This includes some additional components that
would not be used in our case. We can thus estimate
0.11 µW for our 8-ch AFE and 0.89 µW for our 64-ch
AFE as an upper bound.
2) BNN inference is highly efﬁcient and could be done
with a specialized accelerator circuit such as CUTIE
[52] at 2 POp/s/W for ternary NNs on average for a full
network. For our BNN with 31.4 MOp/classiﬁcation, this
amounts to 15.7 nJ/classiﬁcation.
With no digital pre-processing required, we thus estimate
the overall energy efﬁciency at around 0.92 µW at a 2 Hz
classiﬁcation rate for the 64-ch conﬁguration with 86.0%
accuracy on 12 classes. Our approach can thus overcome the
accuracy/task complexity limitations (88% for 3 classes) of
Fuketa [45] while improving the energy efﬁciency over Vocell
[41] by 17× (0.92 µW v. 16 µW) at an accuracy drop of 4.9%,
or compared to Giraldo et al.’s TCN accelerator [42] 7.6×
(0.92 µW v. 7 µW) at an accuracy drop of 7.3%.
Our method could further be combined with Vocell’s multi-
stage approach to reduce power by skipping KWS classiﬁca-
tion when no sound is detected. This would allow to run our
method with a more area-efﬁcient BNN accelerator that is less
energy efﬁcient. Particularly in always-on applications where

9
Fig. 8. Confusion matrix of 1) the best-performing full-precision network, 2) the best performing solution with 64-ﬁlters AFE, and 3) the most energy efﬁcient
binary classiﬁer with 8-ﬁlters AFE. The misclassiﬁcations in (2), (3) remain few and primarily affect the most similar words (e.g., “go”, “down”, and “no”)
that could potentially be avoided in a user interface.
TABLE III
STATE-OF-THE-ART COMPARISON WITH FULLY-DIGITAL EMBEDDED KEYWORD SPOTTING SYSTEMS USING 12 KEYWORD CLASSES AND 10 CLASSES
FROM THE GOOGLE SPEECH COMMAND DATASET
Method
———————– Energy [mJ] ———————–
————- Accuracy [%] ————-
Acquisition + pre-proc.
processing
total (improv.)
12 classes
10 classes
Hello Edge [24]
5.48 mJ
5.04 mJ
10.52 mJ
(3.8×)
84.6%
(ref.)
–
DS-CNN [51]
5.48 mJ
5.57 mJ
11.05 mJ
(3.4×)
94.0% (+9.4%)
–
EGRU [31]
5.48 mJ
34.52 mJ
40.00 mJ
(ref.)
–
87.8%
(ref.)
Our work (64-ch AFE, best acc.)
1.54 mJ
7.82 mJ
9.36 mJ
(4.3×)
86.0% (+1.4%)
88.8% (+1.0%)
Our work (8-ch AFE, lowest power)
0.28 mJ
0.27 mJ
0.56 mJ (71.4×)
76.3% (−8.3%)
85.8% (−2.0%)
more than 90% of the time no sound is detected, thus a circuit
combining these approaches avoids the large permanent power
contribution of the ADC and could lead to a highly efﬁcient
and tiny circuit with a sufﬁciently simple sound detector based
on binary features. The full integration is left for future work.
VII. CONCLUSION
We have explored the combination of analog binary feature
extraction with a binarized neural network for energy-efﬁcient
keyword spotting on MCUs. This mix allows us to avoid that
our energy cost is dominated by the data acquisition, leading
to an efﬁciency gain of 4.6× compared to previous work
[31] while even slightly increasing the accuracy (+1%). The
elimination of most of the data acquisition energy allows us
to further advance into the extremely low energy domain by
trading off accuracy against energy as we adjust the BNN
model complexity, i.e., a 71× reduction in overall energy cost
at a small accuracy drop of 2%.
Previous approaches relying on the conventional ADC +
preprocessing ﬂow such as Hello Edge [24] and EGRU, [31]
even with an extremely optimized DNN model or hardware
accelerator, will have an upper limit on the energy efﬁciency
due to the data acquisition and pre-processing overhead. Our
proposed system architecture with a binarizing AFE provides
a method to overcome this fundamental limitation.
VIII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work has been supported by the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under grant
agreement no. 957337. This paper reﬂects only the authors’
views and the European Commission cannot be held respon-
sible for any use which may be made of the information
contained therein.
