arXiv:1105.0650v1  [cs.AI]  3 May 2011
Under consideration for publication in Theory and Practice of Logic Programming
1
Transition Systems for Model Generators — A
Unifying Approach
YULIYA LIERLER and MIROSLAW TRUSZCZYNSKI
Department of Computer Science, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40506-0633, USA

submitted 1 January 2003; revised 1 January 2003; accepted 1 January 2003
Abstract
A fundamental task for propositional logic is to compute models of propositional formulas. Programs
developed for this task are called satisﬁability solvers. We show that transition systems introduced
by Nieuwenhuis, Oliveras, and Tinelli to model and analyze satisﬁability solvers can be adapted
for solvers developed for two other propositional formalisms: logic programming under the answer-
set semantics, and the logic PC(ID). We show that in each case the task of computing models can
be seen as “satisﬁability modulo answer-set programming,” where the goal is to ﬁnd a model of a
theory that also is an answer set of a certain program. The unifying perspective we develop shows,
in particular, that solvers CLASP and MINISAT(ID) are closely related despite being developed for
different formalisms, one for answer-set programming and the latter for the logic PC(ID).
1 Introduction
A fundamental reasoning task for propositional logic is to compute models of propositional
formulas or determine that no models exist. Programs developed for this task are commonly
called model generators or satisﬁability (SAT) solvers. In the paper we show that transition
systems introduced by Nieuwenhuis et al. (2006) to model and analyze SAT solvers can
be adapted for the analysis and comparison of solvers developed for other propositional
formalisms. The two formalisms we focus on are logic programming with the answer-set
semantics and the logic PC(ID).
Davis-Putnam-Logemann-Loveland (DPLL) procedure is a well-known method that ex-
haustively explores interpretations to generate models of a propositional formula. Most
modern SAT solvers are based on variations of the DPLL procedure. Usually these varia-
tions are speciﬁed by pseudocode. Nieuwenhuis et al. (2006) proposed an alternative ap-
proach based on the notion of a transition system that describes “states of computation”
and allowed transitions between them. In this way, it deﬁnes a directed graph such that ev-
ery execution of the DPLL procedure corresponds to a path in the graph. This abstract way
of presenting DPLL-based algorithms simpliﬁes the analysis of their correctness and facil-
itates studies of their properties — instead of reasoning about pseudocode constructs, we
reason about properties of a graph. For instance, by proving that the graph corresponding to
a DPLL-based algorithm is ﬁnite and acyclic we show that the algorithm always terminates.
Answer-set programming (ASP) (Marek and Truszczy´nski 1999; Niemel¨a 1999) is a
declarative programming formalism based on the answer-set semantics of logic programs
(Gelfond and Lifschitz 1988). Generating answer sets of propositional programs is the

2
Y. Lierler and M. Truszczynski
key step in computation with ASP. The logic FO(ID), introduced by Denecker (2000) is
another formalism for declarative programming and knowledge representation. As in the
case of ASP, most automated reasoning tasks in the logic FO(ID) reduce to reasoning in
its propositional core, the logic PC(ID) (Mari¨en et al. 2008), where generating models is
again the key.
In this paper, we show that both computing answer sets of programs and computing mod-
els of PC(ID) theories can be considered as testing satisﬁability modulo theories (SMT),
where the objective is to ﬁnd a model of a set of clauses that is also an answer set of a cer-
tain program. We refer to this computational problem as satisﬁability modulo answer-set
programming and denote it by SM(ASP). We identify the propositional formalism cap-
turing SM(ASP) — we use the same term to refer to it — and show that it is a common
generalization of ASP and PC(ID). We deﬁne a simple transition system for SM(ASP) and
show that it can be used as an abstract representation of the solver SMODELS1 (Niemel¨a
and Simons 2000), an alternative to a similar characterization of SMODELS obtained earlier
by Lierler (2011). We then deﬁne another more elaborate transition system for SM(ASP)
that captures such features of backtracking search as backjumping and learning. We use
this transition system to obtain abstract characterizations of the algorithms implemented
by the ASP solvers CMODELS2 (Giunchiglia et al. 2004) and CLASP3 (Gebser et al. 2007),
and the PC(ID) solver MINISAT(ID)4 (Mari¨en et al. 2008). Finally, we brieﬂy mention the
possibility to regard the introduced transition systems as proof systems. In that setting,
transition systems could be used for comparing the solvers they represent in terms of the
complexity of the corresponding proof systems.
Our results provide a uniform correctness proof for a broad class of solvers that can be
modeled by the transition system for SM(ASP), clarify essential computational principles
behind ASP and PC(ID) solvers, and offer insights into how they relate to each other. In
particular, our results yield the ﬁrst abstract representation of CLASP in terms of transition
systems (up to now CLASP has been typically speciﬁed in pseudocode), and show that at
the abstract level, CLASP and MINISAT(ID) are strikingly closely related.
This last point is noteworthy as the two solvers were developed for different proposi-
tional formalisms. MINISAT(ID) was developed speciﬁcally for the logic PC(ID), where
there is no concept of an answer set. The semantics is a natural extension of the notion
of a model of a propositional theory to the setting when a theory consists of propositional
clauses and deﬁnitions. Deﬁnitions are written as logic programs but they are interpreted
by the well-founded semantics and not by the answer-set semantics. There is no indica-
tion in the literature that CLASP or MINISAT(ID) were inﬂuenced by each other. The two
solvers were developed independently and for differently motivated formalisms. It is then
of substantial interest that at the level of solving they are closely related.
1 http://www.tcs.hut.fi/Software/smodels/ .
2 http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/tag/cmodels .
3 http://www.cs.uni-potsdam.de/clasp/ .
4 http://dtai.cs.kuleuven.be/krr/software/minisatid .

Transition Systems for Model Generators — A Unifying Approach
3
2 Preliminaries
We now review the abstract transition system framework proposed for the DPLL procedure
by Nieuwenhuis et al. (2006), and introduce some necessary terminology concerning logic
programs and the logic PC(ID).
Abstract DPLL. Most state-of-the-art SAT solvers are based on variations of the DPLL
procedure (Davis et al. 1962). Nieuwenhuis et al. (2006) described DPLL by means of a
transition system that can be viewed as an abstract representation of the underlying DPLL
computation. In this section we review the abstract DPLL in the form convenient for our
purposes, following the presentation proposed by Lierler (2011).
For a set A of atoms, a record relative to A is an ordered set M of literals over A ,
some possibly annotated by ∆, which marks them as decision literals. A state relative to A
is either a distinguished state FailState or a record relative to A . For instance, the states
relative to a singleton set {a} are
FailState, /0, a, ¬a, a∆, ¬a∆, a¬a, a∆¬a,
a¬a∆, a∆¬a∆, ¬aa, ¬a∆a, ¬aa∆, ¬a∆a∆.
Frequently, we consider M as a set of literals, ignoring both the annotations and the order
among its elements. If neither a literal l nor its dual, written l, occurs in M, then l is unas-
signed by M. We say that M is inconsistent if both an atom a and its negation ¬a occur in
it. For instance, states b∆¬b and ba¬b are inconsistent.
If C is a disjunction (conjunction) of literals then by C we understand the conjunction
(disjunction) of the duals of the literals occurring in C. In some situations, we will identify
disjunctions and conjunctions of literals with the sets of these literals.
In this paper, a clause is a non-empty disjunction of literals and a CNF formula is a
conjunction (alternatively, a set) of clauses. Each CNF formula F determines its DPLL
graph DPF. The set of nodes of DPF consists of the states relative to the set of atoms
occurring in F. The edges of the graph DPF are speciﬁed by four transition rules:
Unit Propagate:
M =⇒Ml
if C ∨l ∈F and C ⊆M
Decide:
M =⇒Ml∆
if l is unassigned by M
Fail:
M =⇒FailState
if
 M is inconsistent, and
M contains no decision literals
Backtrack:
Pl∆Q =⇒Pl
if
 Pl∆Q is inconsistent, and
Q contains no decision literals.
A node (state) in the graph is terminal if no edge originates in it. The following proposition
gathers key properties of the graph DPF.
Proposition 1
For any CNF formula F,
(a) graph DPF is ﬁnite and acyclic,
(b) any terminal state of DPF other than FailState is a model of F,
(c) FailState is reachable from /0 in DPF if and only if F is unsatisﬁable.

4
Y. Lierler and M. Truszczynski
Thus, to decide the satisﬁability of a CNF formula F it is enough to ﬁnd a path leading
from node /0 to a terminal node M. If M = FailState, F is unsatisﬁable. Otherwise, F is
satisﬁable and M is a model of F.
For instance, let F = {a ∨b,¬a ∨c}. Below we show a path in DPF with every edge
annotated by the name of the transition rule that gives rise to this edge in the graph:
/0
Decide
=⇒
a∆
Unit Propagate
=⇒
a∆c
Decide
=⇒
a∆cb∆.
The state a∆cb∆is terminal. Thus, Proposition 1(b) asserts that F is satisﬁable and {a,c,b}
is a model of F.
Logic Programs. A (propositional) logic program is a ﬁnite set of rules of the form
a0 ←a1,...,al,not al+1,...,not am,not not am+1,...,not not an,
(1)
where a0 is an atom or ⊥and each ai, 1 ≤i ≤n, is an atom.5 If a0 is an atom then a rule (1)
is weakly normal. If, in addition, n = m then it is normal. Programs consisting of weakly
normal (normal, respectively) rules only are called weakly normal (normal, respectively).
If Π is a program, by At(Π) we denote the set of atoms that occur in Π.
The expression a0 is the head of the rule. If a0 = ⊥we say that the head of the rule is
empty and we often omit ⊥from the notation. In such case we require that n > 0. We call
a rule with the empty head a constraint. We write Head(Π) for the set of nonempty heads
of rules in a program Π.
We call the expression a1,...,al,not al+1,...,not am, not not am+1,...,not not an in a
rule (1) the body of the rule and often view it as the set of all elements that occur in it.
If a is an atom, we set s(a) = s(not not a) = a, and s(not a) = ¬a, and we deﬁne s(B) =
{s(l) | l ∈B}. More directly,
s(B) = {a1,...,al,¬al+1,...,¬am,am+1,...,an}.
We also frequently identify the body B of (1) with the conjunction of elements in s(B):
a1 ∧···∧al ∧¬al+1 ∧···∧¬am ∧am+1 ∧···∧an.
By Bodies(Π,a) we denote the set of the bodies of all rules of Π with the head a (including
the empty body). If B is the body of (1), we write Bpos for the positive part of the body, that
is, Bpos = {a1,...al}.
We often interpret a rule (1) as a propositional clause
a0 ∨¬a1 ∨...∨¬al ∨al+1 ∨...∨am ∨¬am+1 ∨...∨¬an
(2)
(in the case when the rule is a constraint, a0 is absent in (2)). Given a program Π, we
write Πcl for the set of clauses (2) corresponding to all rules in Π.
This version of the language of logic programs is a special case of programs with nested
expressions (Lifschitz et al. 1999). It is essential for our approach as it yields an alternative
deﬁnition of the logic PC(ID), which facilitates connecting it to ASP. We assume that the
reader is familiar with the deﬁnition of an answer set of a logic program and refer to the
paper by Lifschitz et al. (1999) for details.
5 In the paper, we do not use the term literal for expressions a, not a and not not a. We reserve the term literal
exclusively for propositional literals a and ¬a.

Transition Systems for Model Generators — A Unifying Approach
5
Well-Founded Semantics and the Logic PC(ID). Let M be a set of (propositional) literals.
By M we understand the set of the duals of the literals in M. A set U of atoms occurring
in a program Π is unfounded on a consistent set M of literals with respect to Π if for
every a ∈U and every B ∈Bodies(Π,a), M ∩s(B) ̸= /0 or U ∩Bpos ̸= /0. For every program
Π and for every consistent set M of literals, the union of sets that are unfounded on M
with respect to Π is also unfounded on M with respect to Π. Thus, under the assumptions
above, there exists the greatest unfounded set on M with respect to Π. We denote this set
by GUS(M,Π).
For every weakly normal program Π we deﬁne an operator WΠ on a set M of literals as
follows
WΠ(M) =
(
M ∪{a | a ←B ∈Π and s(B) ⊆M} ∪GUS(M,Π)
if M is consistent
At(Π)∪At(Π)
otherwise.
By Wﬁx
Π (M) we denote a ﬁxpoint of the operator WΠ over a set M of literals. One can show
that it always exists since WΠ is not only monotone but also increasing (for any set M of
literals, M ⊆WΠ(M)). The least ﬁxpoint of WΠ, Wﬁx
Π (/0), is consistent and yields the well-
founded model of Π, which in general is three-valued. It is also written as lfp(WΠ). These
deﬁnitions and properties were initially introduced for normal programs only (Van Gelder
et al. 1991). They extend to programs in our syntax in a straightforward way, no changes
in statements or arguments are needed (Lee 2005).
Let Π be a program and A a set of atoms. An atom a is open with respect to Π and A
if a ∈A\ Head(Π). We denote the set of atoms that are open with respect to Π and A by
OΠ
A . By ΠA we denote the logic program Π extended with the rules a ←not not a for each
atom a ∈OΠ
A . For instance, let Π be a program
a ←b, not c
b.
(3)
Then, Π{c} is
c ←not not c
a ←b, not c
b.
We are ready to introduce the logic PC(ID) (Denecker 2000). A PC(ID) theory is a
pair (F,Π), where F is a set of clauses and Π is a weakly normal logic program. For a
PC(ID) theory (F,Π), by Πo we denote ΠAt(F∪Π) and by OΠ we denote OΠ
At(F∪Π) (where
At(F ∪Π) stands for the set of atoms that occur in F and Π). Moreover, for a set M of
literals and a set A of atoms, by MA we denote the set of those literals in M whose atoms
occur in A. A set M of literals is complete over the set At of atoms if every atom in At
occurs (possibly negated) in M and no other atoms occur in M.
Deﬁnition 1
Let (F,Π) be a PC(ID) theory. A consistent and complete (over At(F∪Π)) set M of literals
is called a model of (F,Π) if
(i) M is a model of F, and
(ii) M = Wﬁx
Πo(MOΠ).

6
Y. Lierler and M. Truszczynski
For instance, let F be a clause b ∨¬c and Π be program (3). The PC(ID) theory (F,Π)
has two models {b,¬c,a} and {b,c, ¬a}. We note that although sets {¬b,¬c,a} and
{¬b,¬c,¬a} satisfy the condition (i), that is, are models of F, they do not satisfy the
condition (ii) and therefore are not models of (F,Π).
The introduced deﬁnition of a PC(ID) theory differs from the original one (Denecker
2000). Speciﬁcally, for us the second component of a PC(ID) theory is a weakly normal
program rather than a set of normal programs (deﬁnitions). Still, the two formalisms are
closely related.
Proposition 2
For a PC(ID) theory (F,Π) such that Π is a normal program, M is a model of (F,Π) if and
only if M is a model of (F,{Π}) according to the deﬁnition in (Denecker 2000).
As the restriction to a single program in PC(ID) theories is not essential (Mari¨en et al.
2008), Proposition 2 shows that our deﬁnition of the logic PC(ID) can be regarded as a
slight generalization of the original one (more general programs can appear as deﬁnitions
in PC(ID) theories).
3 Satisﬁability Modulo ASP: a unifying framework for ASP and PC(ID) solvers
For a theory T the satisﬁability modulo theory (SMT) problem is: given a formula F,
determine whether F is T-satisﬁable, that is, whether there exists a model of F that is also
a model of T. We refer the reader to (Nieuwenhuis et al. 2006) for an introduction to SMT.
Typically, a theory T that deﬁnes a speciﬁc SMT problem is a ﬁrst-order formula. The
SMT problem that we consider here is different. The theory T is a logic program under the
(slightly modiﬁed) answer-set semantics. We show that the resulting version of the SMT
problem can be regarded as a joint extension of ASP and PC(ID).
We start by describing the modiﬁcation of the answer-set semantics that we have in
mind.
Deﬁnition 2
Given a logic program Π, a set X of atoms is an input answer set of Π if X is an answer set
of Π∪(X \ Head(Π)).
Informally, the atoms of X that cannot possibly be deﬁned by Π as they do not belong to
Head(Π) serve as “input” to Π. A set X is an input answer set of Π if it is an answer set of
the program Π extended with these “input” atoms from X. Input answer sets are related to
stable models of a propositional logic program module (Oikarinen and Janhunen 2006).
For instance, let us consider program (3). Then, sets {b,c}, {a,b} are input answer sets
of the program whereas set {a,b,c} is not.
There are two important cases when input answer sets of a program are closely related
to answer sets of the program.
Proposition 3
For a logic program Π and a set X of atoms:
(a) X ⊆Head(Π) and X is an input answer set of Π if and only if X is an answer set
of Π.

Transition Systems for Model Generators — A Unifying Approach
7
(b) If (X \ Head(Π)) ∩At(Π) = /0, then X is an input answer set of Π if and only if
X ∩Head(Π) is an answer set of Π.
We now introduce a propositional formalism that we call satisﬁability modulo ASP and
denote by SM(ASP). Later in the paper we show that SM(ASP) can be viewed as a common
generalization of both ASP and PC(ID). Theories of SM(ASP) are pairs [F,Π], where F
is a set of clauses and Π is a program. In the deﬁnition below and in the remainder of the
paper, for a set M of literals we write M+ to denote the set of atoms (non-negated literals)
in M. For instance, {a,¬b}+ = {a}.
Deﬁnition 3
For an SM(ASP) theory [F,Π], a consistent and complete (over At(F∪Π)) set M of literals
is a model of [F,Π] if M is a model of F and M+ is an input answer set of Π.
For instance, let F be a clause b∨¬c and Π be program (3). The SM(ASP) theory [F,Π]
has two models {b,¬c,a} and {b,c,¬a}.
The problem of ﬁnding models of pairs [F,Π] can be regarded as an SMT problem in
which, given a formula F and a program Π, the goal is to ﬁnd a model of F that is (its
representation by the set of its true atoms, to be precise) an input answer set of Π. This
observation motivated our choice of the name for the formalism.
As for PC(ID) theories, also for an SM(ASP) theory [F,Π] we write Πo for the pro-
gram ΠAt(Π∪F). We have the following simple observation.
Proposition 4
A set M of literals is a model of an SM(ASP) theory [F,Π] if and only if M is a model of
an SM(ASP) theory [F,Πo].
It is evident that a set M of literals is a model of F if and only if M is a model of [F, /0].
Thus, SM(ASP) allows us to express the propositional satisﬁability problem. We now show
that the SM(ASP) formalism captures ASP. Let Π be a program. We say that a set F of
clauses is Π-safe if
1. F |= ¬a, for every a ∈OΠ
At(Π), and
2. for every answer set X of Π there is a model M of F such that X = M+ ∩Head(Π).
Proposition 5
Let Π be a program. For every Π-safe set F of clauses, a set X of atoms is an answer set
of Π if and only if X = M+ ∩At(Π), for some model M of [F,Π].
This result shows that for an appropriately chosen theory F, answer sets of a program Π
can be derived in a direct way from models of an SM(ASP) theory [F,Π]. There are several
possible choices for F that satisfy the requirement of Π-safety. One of them is the Clark’s
completion of Π (Clark 1978). We recall that the completion of a program Π consists of
clauses in Πcl and of the formulas that can be written as
¬a ∨
_
B∈Bodies(Π,a)
B
(4)
for every atom a in Π that is not a fact (that is, the set Bodies(Π,a) contains no empty
body). Formulas (4) can be clausiﬁed in a straightforward way by applying distributivity.

8
Y. Lierler and M. Truszczynski
The set of all the resulting clauses and of those in Πcl forms the clausiﬁed completion of
Π, which we will denote by Comp(Π).
The theory Comp(Π) does not involve any new atoms but it can be exponentially larger
than the completion formula before clausiﬁcation. We can avoid the exponential blow-
up by introducing new atoms. Namely, for each body B of a rule in Π with |B| > 1, we
introduce a fresh atom fB. If |B| = 1, then we deﬁne fB = s(l), where l is the only element
of B. By ED-Comp(Π), we denote the set of the following clauses:
1. all clauses in Πcl
2. all clauses ¬a ∨W
B∈Bodies(Π,a)fB, for every a ∈At(Π) such that a is not a fact in Π
and |Bodies(Π,a)| > 1
3. all clauses ¬a ∨s(l), where a ∈At(Π), Bodies(Π,a) = {B} and l ∈B,
4. all clauses ¬a, where |Bodies(Π,a)| = 0
5. all clauses obtained by clausifying in the obvious way formulas fB ↔B, where B ∈
Bodies(Π,a), for some atom a that is not a fact in Π and |Bodies(Π,a)| > 1.
Clearly, the restrictions of models of the theory ED-Comp(Π) to the original set of atoms
are precisely the models of Comp(Π) (and of the completion of Π). However, the size of
ED-Comp(Π) is linear in the size of Π. The theory ED-Comp(Π) has long been used in
answer-set computation. Answer set solvers such as CMODELS (Giunchiglia et al. 2004)
and CLASP (Gebser et al. 2007) start their computation by transforming the given pro-
gram Π into ED-Comp(Π).
For instance, let Π be program (3). The completion of Π is the formula
(a ∨¬b ∨c)∧b ∧¬c∧(¬a ∨(b ∧¬c)),
its clausiﬁed completion Comp(Π) is the formula
(a ∨¬b ∨c)∧(¬a ∨b)∧(¬a ∨¬c)∧b ∧¬c,
and, ﬁnally, ED-Comp(Π) is the formula
(a ∨¬b ∨c)∧(¬a ∨fb∧¬c)∧(fb∧¬c ∨¬b ∨c)∧
(¬fb∧¬c ∨b)∧(¬fb∧¬c ∨¬c)∧b ∧¬c.
We now have the following corollary from Proposition 5.
Corollary 1
For a logic program Π and a set X of atoms, the following conditions are equivalent:
(a) X is an answer set of Π,
(b) X = M+ for some model M of the SM(ASP) theory [{¬a | a ∈OΠ
At(Π)},Π],
(c) X = M+ for some model M of the SM(ASP) theory [Comp(Π),Π],
(d) X = M+ ∩At(Π) for some model M of the SM(ASP) theory [ED-Comp(Π),Π].
It is in this sense that ASP can be regarded as a fragment of SM(ASP). Answer sets of a
program Π can be described in terms of models of SM(ASP) theories. Moreover, answer-
set computation can be reduced in a straightforward way to the task of computing models
of SM(ASP) theories.

Transition Systems for Model Generators — A Unifying Approach
9
Remark 1
Corollary 1 speciﬁes three ways to describe answer sets of a program in terms of models
of SM(ASP) theories. This offers an interesting view into answer-set generation. The CNF
formulas appearing in the SM(ASP) theories in the conditions (b) - (d) make explicit some
of the “propositional satisﬁability inferences” that may be used when computing answer
sets. The condition (b) shows that when computing answer sets of a program, atoms not
occurring as heads can be inferred as false. The theory in (c) makes it clear that a much
broader class of inferences can be used, namely those that are based on the clauses of the
completion. The theory in (d) describes still additional inferences, as now, thanks to new
atoms, we can explicitly infer whether bodies of rules must evaluate to true or false. In
each case, some inferences needed for generating answer sets are still not captured by the
respective CNF theory and require a reference to the program Π. We note that it is possible
to express these “answer-set speciﬁc” inferences in terms of clauses corresponding to loop
formulas (Lin and Zhao 2004; Lee 2005). We do not consider this possibility in this paper.
Next, we show that SM(ASP) encompasses the logic PC(ID). The well-founded model M
of a program Π is total if it assigns all atoms occurring in Π. For a PC(ID) theory (F,Π), a
program Π is total on a model M of F if Wﬁx
Πo(MOΠ) is total. A program Π is total if Π is to-
tal on every model M of F. The PC(ID) theories (F,Π) where Π is total form an important
class of total PC(ID) theories.
There is a tight relation between models of a total PC(ID) theory (F,Π) and models of
an SM(ASP) theory [F,Π].
Proposition 6
For a total PC(ID) theory (F,Π) and a set M of literals over the set At(F ∪Π) of atoms, the
following conditions are equivalent:
(a) M is a model of (F,Π),
(b) M is a model of the SM(ASP) theory [F,Π],
(c) M is a model of the SM(ASP) theory [Comp(ΠAt(Π))∪F,Π],
(d) for some model M′ of the SM(ASP) theory [ED-Comp(ΠAt(Π))∪F,Π], M = M′ ∩
At(F ∩Π).
The conditions (b), (c), (d) state that the logic PC(ID) restricted to total theories can
be regarded as a fragment of the SM(ASP) formalism. The comments made in Remark 1
pertain also to generation of models in the logic PC(ID).
We now characterize models of SM(ASP) theories, and computations that lead to them,
in terms of transition systems. Later we discuss implications this characterization has for
ASP and PC(ID) solvers.
We deﬁne the transition graph SM(ASP)F,Π for an SM(ASP) theory [F,Π] as follows.
The set of nodes of the graph SM(ASP)F,Π consists of the states relative to At(F ∪Π).
There are ﬁve transition rules that characterize the edges of SM(ASP)F,Π. The transition
rules Unit Propagate, Decide, Fail, Backtrack of the graph DPF∪Πcl, and the transition rule
Unfounded:
M =⇒M¬a if a ∈U for a set U unfounded on M w.r.t. Πo.
The graph SM(ASP)F,Π can be used for deciding whether an SM(ASP) theory [F,Π] has
a model.

10
Y. Lierler and M. Truszczynski
Proposition 7
For any SM(ASP) theory [F,Π],
(a) graph SM(ASP)F,Π is ﬁnite and acyclic,
(b) for any terminal state M of SM(ASP)F,Π other than FailState, M is a model of [F,Π],
(c) FailState is reachable from /0 in SM(ASP)F,Π if and only if [F,Π] has no models.
Proposition 7 shows that algorithms that correctly ﬁnd a path in the graph SM(ASP)F,Π
from /0 to a terminal node can be regarded as SM(ASP) solvers. It also provides a proof of
correctness for every SM(ASP) solver that can be shown to work in this way.
One of the ways in which SM(ASP) encompasses ASP (speciﬁcally, Corollary 1(c)) is
closely related to the way the answer-set solver SMODELS works. We recall that to rep-
resent SMODELS Lierler (2011) proposed a graph SMΠ. We note that the rule Unfounded
above is closely related to the transition rule with the same name used in the deﬁnition of
SMΠ (Lierler 2011). In fact, if Π = Πo then these rules are identical.
Lierler (2011) observed that SMODELS as it is implemented never follows certain edges
in the graph SMΠ, and called such edges singular. Lierler (2011) denoted by SM−
Π the
graph obtained by removing from SMΠ all its singular edges and showed that SM−
Π is still
sufﬁcient to serve as an abstract model of a class of ASP solvers including SMODELS. The
concept of a singular edge extends literally to the case of the graph SM(ASP)F,Π. An edge
M =⇒M′ in the graph SM(ASP)F,Π is singular if:
1. the only transition rule justifying this edge is Unfounded, and
2. some edge M =⇒M′′ can be justiﬁed by a transition rule other than Unfounded or
Decide.
We deﬁne SM(ASP)−
F,Π as the graph obtained by removing all singular edges from SM(ASP)F,Π.
Proposition 8 below can be seen as an extension of Proposition 4 in (Lierler 2011) to non-
tight programs.
Proposition 8
For every program Π, the graphs SM−
Π and SM(ASP)−
Comp(Π),Π are equal.
It follows that the graph SM(ASP)−
Comp(Π),Π provides an abstract model of SMODELS.
We recall though that Comp(Π) can be exponentially larger than the completion formula
before clausiﬁcation. Using ASP speciﬁc propagation rules such as Backchain True and
All Rules Cancelled (Lierler 2011) allows SMODELS to avoid explicit representation of the
clausiﬁed completion and infer all the necessary transitions directly on the basis of the
program Π.
A similar relationship, in terms of pseudocode representations of SMODELS and DPLL,
is established in (Giunchiglia and Maratea 2005) for tight programs.
The answer-set solvers CMODELS, CLASP and the PC(ID) solver MINISAT(ID) cannot
be described in terms of the graph SM(ASP) nor its subgraphs. These solvers implement
such advanced features of SAT and SMT solvers as learning (forgetting), backjumping and
restarts (Nieuwenhuis et al. (2006) give a good overview of these techniques). In the next
section we extend the graph SM(ASP)F,Π with propagation rules that capture these tech-
niques. In the subsequent section, we discus how this new graph models solvers CMODELS,
CLASP, and MINISAT(ID). Then we provide insights into how they are related.

Transition Systems for Model Generators — A Unifying Approach
11
4 Backjumping and Learning for SM(ASP)
Nieuwenhuis et al. (2006, Section 2.4) deﬁned the DPLL System with Learning graph
that can be used to describe most of the modern SAT solvers, which typically implement
such sophisticated techniques as learning and backjumping. We demonstrate how to extend
these ﬁndings to capture SM(ASP) framework with learning and backjumping.
Let [F,Π] be an SM(ASP) theory and let G be a formula over At(F ∪Π). We say that
[F,Π] entails G, written F,Π |= G, if for every model M of [F,Π], M |= G.
For an SM(ASP) theory [F,Π], an augmented state relative to F and Π is either a dis-
tinguished state FailState or a pair M||Γ where M is a record relative to the set of atoms
occurring in F and Π, and Γ is a set of clauses over At(F ∪Π) such that F,Πo |= Γ.
We now deﬁne a graph SML(ASP)F,Π for an SM(ASP) theory [F,Π]. Its nodes are the
augmented states relative to F and Π. The rules Decide, Unfounded,and Fail of SM(ASP)F,Π
are extended to SML(ASP)F,Π as follows: M||Γ =⇒M′||Γ (M||Γ =⇒FailState, respec-
tively) is an edge in SML(ASP)F,Π justiﬁed by Decide or Unfounded (Fail, respectively) if
and only if M =⇒M′ (M =⇒FailState) is an edge in SM(ASP)F,Π justiﬁed by Decide or
Unfounded (Fail, respectively). The other transition rules of SML(ASP)F,Π follow:
Unit Propagate Learn:
M||Γ =⇒Ml||Γ if
 C ∨l ∈F ∪Πcl ∪Γ and
C ⊆M
Backjump:
Pl∆Q||Γ =⇒Pl′||Γ if
 Pl∆Q is inconsistent and
F,Πo |= l′ ∨P
Learn:
M||Γ =⇒M||C, Γ if
 every atom in C occurs in F and
F,Πo |= C.
We refer to the transition rules Unit Propagate Learn, Unfounded, Backjump, Decide, and
Fail of the graph SML(ASP)F,Π as basic. We say that a node in the graph is semi-terminal if
no rule other than Learn is applicable to it. We omit the word “augmented” before “state”
when this is clear from a context.
The graph SML(ASP)F,Π can be used for deciding whether an SM(ASP) theory [F,Π]
has a model.
Proposition 9
For any SM(ASP) theory [F,Π],
(a) every path in SML(ASP)F,Π contains only ﬁnitely many edges justiﬁed by basic tran-
sition rules,
(b) for any semi-terminal state M||Γ of SML(ASP)F,Π reachable from /0||/0, M is a model
of [F,Π],
(c) FailState is reachable from /0||/0 in SML(ASP)F,Π if and only if [F,Π] has no models.
On the one hand, Proposition 9 (a) asserts that if we construct a path from /0||/0 so that
basic transition rules periodically appear in it then some semi-terminal state is eventually
reached. On the other hand, parts (b) and (c) of Proposition 9 assert that as soon as a semi-
terminal state is reached the problem of deciding whether [F,Π] has a model is solved.
In other words, Proposition 9 shows that the graph SML(ASP)F,Π gives rise to a class of
correct algorithms for computing models of an SM(ASP) theory [F,Π]. It gives a proof

12
Y. Lierler and M. Truszczynski
of correctness to every SM(ASP) solver in this class and a proof of termination under the
assumption that basic transition rules periodically appear in a path constructed from /0||/0.
Nieuwenhuis et al. (2006) proposed the transition rules to model such techniques as
forgetting and restarts. The graph SML(ASP)F,Π can easily be extended with such rules.
5 Abstract CMODELS, CLASP and MINISAT(ID)
We can view a path in the graph SML(ASP)F,Π as a description of a process of search
for a model of an SM(ASP) theory [F,Π] by applying transition rules. Therefore, we can
characterize the algorithm of a solver that utilizes the transition rules of SML(ASP)F,Π
by describing a strategy for choosing a path in this graph. A strategy can be based, in
particular, on assigning priorities to transition rules of SML(ASP)F,Π, so that a solver never
applies a rule in a state if a rule with higher priority is applicable to the same state.
We use this approach to describe and compare the algorithms implemented in the solvers
CMODELS, CLASP and MINISAT(ID). We stress that we talk here about characterizing and
comparing algorithms and not their speciﬁc implementations in the solvers. We refer to
these algorithms as abstract CMODELS, CLASP and MINISAT(ID), respectively. Further-
more, we only discuss the abstract MINISAT(ID) for the case of the total PC(ID) theories
whereas the MINISAT(ID) system implements additional totality check propagation rule to
deal with the non-total theories. Given a program Π, abstract CMODELS and abstract CLASP
construct ﬁrst ED-Comp(Π). Afterwards, they search the graph SML(ASP)ED-Comp(Π),Π for
a path to a semi-terminal state. In other words, both algorithms, while in a node of the graph
SML(ASP)ED-Comp(Π),Π, progress by selecting one of the outgoing edges. By Proposition 9
and Corollary 1, each algorithm is indeed a method to compute answer sets of programs.
However, abstract CMODELS selects edges according to the priorities on the transition
rules of the graph that are set as follows:
Backjump,Fail ≫Unit Propagate ≫Decide ≫Unfounded,
while abstract CLASP uses a different prioritization:
Backjump,Fail ≫Unit Propagate ≫Unfounded ≫Decide.
The difference between the algorithms boils down to when the rule Unfounded is used.
We now describe the algorithm behind the PC(ID) solver MINISAT(ID) (Mari¨en et al.
2008) for total PC(ID) theories — the abstract MINISAT(ID). Speaking precisely, MINI-
SAT(ID) assumes that the program Π of the input PC(ID) theory (F,Π) is in the deﬁnitional
normal form (Mari¨en 2009). Therefore, in practice MINISAT(ID) is always used with a
simple preprocessor that converts programs into the deﬁnitional normal form. We will
assume here that this preprocessor is a part of MINISAT(ID). Under this assumption, given
a PC(ID) theory (F,Π), MINISAT(ID) can be described as constructing the completion
ED-Comp(Πo) (the new atoms are introduced by the preprocessor when it converts Π into
the deﬁnitional normal form, the completion part is performed by the MINISAT(ID) proper),
and then uses the transitions of the graph SML(ASP)ED-Comp(Πo)∪F,Πo to search for a path to
a semi-terminal state. In other words, the graph SML(ASP)ED-Comp(Πo)∪F,Πo represents the
abstract MINISAT(ID). The strategy used by the algorithm follows the prioritization:
Backjump,Fail ≫Unit Propagate ≫Unfounded ≫Decide.

Transition Systems for Model Generators — A Unifying Approach
13
By Propositions 4 and 6, the algorithm indeed computes models of total PC(ID) theories.
Systems CMODELS, CLASP, and MINISAT(ID) implement conﬂict-driven backjumping
and learning. They apply the transition rule Learn only when in a non-semi-terminal state
reached by an application of Backjump. Thus, the rule Learn does not differentiate the
algorithms and so we have not taken it into account when describing these algorithms.
6 PC(ID) Theories as Logic Programs with Constraints
For a clause C = ¬a1 ∨...∨¬al ∨al+1 ∨...∨am we write Cr to denote the corresponding
rule constraint
←a1,...,al,not al+1,...,not am.
For a set F of clauses, we deﬁne Fr = {Cr | C ∈F}. Finally, for a PC(ID) theory (F,Π) we
deﬁne a logic program π(F,Π) by setting
π(F,Π) = Πo ∪Fr.
The representation of a PC(ID) theory (F,Π) as π(F,Π) is similar to the translation of
FO(ID) theories into logic programs with variables given by Mari¨en et al. (2004). The
difference is in the way atoms are “opened.” We do it by means of rules of the form
a ←not not a, while Mari¨en et al. use pairs of rules a ←not a∗and a∗←not a.
There is a close relation between models of a PC(ID) theory (F,Π) and answer sets of a
program π(F,Π).
Proposition 10
For a total PC(ID) theory (F,Π) and a consistent and complete (over At(F ∪Π)) set M of
literals, M is a model of (F,Π) if and only if M+ is an answer set of π(F,Π).
A choice rule construct {a} (Niemel¨a and Simons 2000) of the LPARSE6 and GRINGO7
languages can be seen as an abbreviation for a rule a ←not not a (Ferraris and Lifschitz
2005). Thus, in view of Proposition 10, any answer set solver implementing language of
LPARSE or GRINGO is also a PC(ID) solver (an input total PC(ID) theory (F,Π) needs to
be translated into π(F,Π)).
The reduction implied by Proposition 10 by itself does not show how to relate par-
ticular solvers. However, we recall that abstract MINISAT(ID) is captured by the graph
SML(ASP)ED-Comp(Πo)∪F,Πo. Moreover, we have the following property.
Proposition 11
For a PC(ID) theory (F,Π), we have
SML(ASP)ED-Comp(π(F,Π)),π(F,Π) = SML(ASP)ED-Comp(Πo)∪F,Πo.
The graph SML(ASP)ED-Comp(π(F,Π)),π(F,Π) captures the way CLASP works on the program
π(F,Π). In addition, the MINISAT(ID) and CLASP algorithms use the same prioritization.
Thus, Proposition 11 implies that the abstract CLASP used as a PC(ID) solver coincides
with the abstract MINISAT(ID).
6 http://www.tcs.hut.fi/Software/smodels/ .
7 http://potassco.sourceforge.net/ .

14
Y. Lierler and M. Truszczynski
7 Related Work and Discussion
Lierler (2011) introduced the graphs SML and GTL that extended the graphs SM and GT (Lier-
ler 2011), respectively, with transition rules Backjump and Learn. The graph SML was
used to characterize the computation of such answer set solvers implementing learning as
SMODELScc8 (Ward and Schlipf 2004) and SUP9 (Lierler 2011) whereas the graph GTL was
used to characterize CMODELS. These graphs are strongly related to our graph SML(ASP)
but they are not appropriate for describing the computation behind answer set solver CLASP
or PC(ID) solver MINISAT(ID). The graph SML reﬂects only propagation steps based on a
program whereas CLASP and MINISAT(ID) proceed by considering both the program and
a propositional theory. The graph GTL, on the other hand, does not seem to provide a way
to imitate the behavior of the Unfounded rule in the SML(ASP) graph.
Giunchiglia and Maratea (2005) studied the relation between the answer set solver
SMODELS and the DPLL procedure for the case of tight programs by means of pseudocode
analysis. Giunchiglia et al (2008) continued this work by comparing answer set solvers
SMODELS, DLV10 (Eiter et al. 1997), and CMODELS via pseudocode. In this paper we use
a different approach to relate solvers that was proposed by Lierler (2011). That is, we use
graphs to represent the algorithms implemented by solvers, and study the structure of these
graphs to ﬁnd how the corresponding solvers are related. We use this method to state the
relation between the answer set solvers CMODELS, CLASP, and the PC(ID) solver MINI-
SAT(ID) designed for different knowledge representation formalisms.
Gebser and Schaub (2006) introduced a deductive system for describing inferences in-
volved in computing answer sets by tableaux methods. The abstract framework presented
in this paper can be viewed as a deductive system also, but a very different one. For in-
stance, we describe backtracking and backjumping by inference rule, while the Gebser-
Schaub system does not. Also the Gebser-Schaub system does not take learning into ac-
count. Accordingly, the derivations considered in this paper describe a search process,
while derivations in the Gebser-Schaub system do not. Further, the abstract framework dis-
cussed here does not have any inference rule similar to Cut; this is why its derivations are
paths rather than trees.
Mari¨en (2009) (Section 5.7) described a MINISAT(ID) transition system to model a
computation behind the PC(ID) solver MINISAT(ID). We recall that we modeled the ab-
stract MINISAT(ID) with the graph SML(ASP). The graphs SML(ASP) and MINISAT(ID)
are deﬁned using different sets of nodes and transition rules. For instance, SML(ASP) al-
lows states containing inconsistent sets of literals whereas the MINISAT(ID) graph consid-
ers consistent states only. Due to this difference the MINISAT(ID) graph requires multiple
versions of “backjump” and “fail” transition rules.
We used transition systems to characterize algorithms for computing answer sets of logic
programs and models of PC(ID) theories. These transition systems are also suitable for
formal comparison of the strength or power of reasoning methods given rules that specify
them. An approach to do so was proposed by Mari¨en (2009) (Section 5.7), who introduced
8 http://www.nku.edu/∼wardj1/Research/smodels cc.html .
9 http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/tag/sup .
10 http://www.dbai.tuwien.ac.at/proj/dlv/ .

Transition Systems for Model Generators — A Unifying Approach
15
the concept of decide-efﬁciency for such analysis. We outline below how standard concepts
of proof complexity (Cook et al. 1979) can be adapted to the setting of transition systems.
Let A be an inﬁnite set of atoms. We deﬁne a node over A to be a symbol FailState, or
a ﬁnite sequence of literals over A with annotations. For a propositional formalism F over
A , a proof procedure PF consists of graphs GT, where T ranges over all theories in F,
such that for every theory T (i) GT is composed of nodes over A and (ii) T is unsatisﬁable
if and only if there is a path p in GT from the empty (start) node to the FailState node. We
call each such path p a proof. We say that a proof system S is based on a proof procedure
PF if (i) S ⊆F ×R, where R denotes the set of all ﬁnite sequences of nodes over A , and
(ii) S(T,p) holds if and only if p is a proof in the graph GT in PF . Predicate S is indeed
a proof system in the sense of Cook (1979) because (i) S is polynomial-time computable,
and (ii) T is unsatisﬁable if and only if there exists a proof p such that S(T,p) holds.
In this sense, each of the graphs (transition systems) we introduced in this paper can
be regarded as a proof procedure for SM(ASP) (for those involving the rule Learn, under
additional assumptions to ensure the rule can be efﬁciently implemented). Thus, transition
systems determine proof systems. Consequently, they can be compared, as well as solvers
that they capture, in terms of the complexity of the corresponding proof systems.
8 Conclusions
In the paper, we proposed a formalism SM(ASP) that can be regarded as a common gener-
alization of (clausal) propositional logic, ASP, and the logic PC(ID). The formalism offers
an elegant satisﬁability modulo theories perspective on the latter two. We present sev-
eral characterizations of these formalisms in terms of SM(ASP) theories that differ in the
explicitly identiﬁed “satisﬁability” component. Next, we proposed transition systems for
SM(ASP) to provide abstract models of SM(ASP) model generators. The transition sys-
tems offer a clear and uniform framework for describing model generation algorithms in
SM(ASP). As SM(ASP) subsumes several propositional formalisms, such a uniform ap-
proach provides a general proof of correctness and termination that applies to a broad class
of model generators designed for these formalisms. It also allows us to describe in precise
mathematical terms relations between algorithms designed for reasoning with different
logics such as propositional logic, logic programming under answer-set semantics and the
logic PC(ID), the latter two studied in detail in the paper. For instance, our results im-
ply that at an abstract level of transition systems, CLASP and MINISAT(ID) are essentially
identical. Finally, we note that this work gives the ﬁrst description of CLASP in the abstract
framework rather than in pseudocode. Such high level view on state-of-the-art solvers in
different, yet, related propositional formalisms will further their understanding, and help
port advances in solver technology from one area to another.
