arXiv:1602.04435v1  [cs.AI]  14 Feb 2016
Random Forest Based Approach for Concept
Drift Handling
Aleksei V. Zhukov1,2
Denis N. Sidorov1,2 and Aoife M. Foley3
1 Energy Systems Institute SB RAS, Irkutsk, Russia

2 Irkutsk State University, Irkutsk, Russia

3 Queens University Belfast, Belfast, UK

Abstract. Concept drift has potential in smart grid analysis because
the socio-economic behaviour of consumers is not governed by the laws
of physics. Likewise there are also applications in wind power forecast-
ing. In this paper we present decision tree ensemble classiﬁcation method
based on the Random Forest algorithm for concept drift. The weighted
majority voting ensemble aggregation rule is employed based on the ideas
of Accuracy Weighted Ensemble (AWE) method. Base learner weight
in our case is computed for each sample evaluation using base learners
accuracy and intrinsic proximity measure of Random Forest. Our algo-
rithm exploits both temporal weighting of samples and ensemble pruning
as a forgetting strategy. We present results of empirical comparison of
our method with оriginal random forest with incorporated “replace-the-
looser” forgetting andother state-of-the-art concept-drﬁt classiﬁers like
AWE2.
Keywords: machine learning, decision tree, concept drift, ensemble learn-
ing, classiﬁcation, random forest.
1
Introduction
Ensemble methods of classiﬁcation (or, brieﬂy, ensembles) employ various learn-
ing algorithms to obtain better predictive accuracy comparing with individual
classiﬁers. Ensembles are much used in research and most of the research is de-
voted to stationary environments where the complete datasets are available for
learning classiﬁers and transfer functions of dynamical systems are not changing
as time goes on. For real world applications (e.g. in power engineering [1], [2])
learning algorithms are supposed to work in dynamic environments with data
continuously generated in the form of a stream on not necessarily equally spaced
time intervals. Data stream processing commonly relies on single scans of the
training data and implies restrictions on memory and time. Changes caused by
dynamic environments (e.g. consumer behaviour in future smart grids) can be

categorised into sudden or gradual concept drift subject to appearance of novel
classes in a stream and the rate of changing deﬁnitions of classes.
One of the most generally eﬀective ensemble classiﬁer is a Random Forest.
This algorithm employs bagging [13] and principles of the random subspace
method [14] to build a highly decorrelated ensemble of decision trees [16]. There
are some attempts [10] to adapt Random Forest to handling concept-drift, but
this approach is not fully discovered.
The objective of this paper is to propose a novel approach to classiﬁcation
to adapt to concept drifts. This novel classifcation method can be applied to
consumer behaviour in future smart grids to predict and classify the random
behaviour of humans when they interact with smart appliances in the home and
charging and discharging of electric vehicles. Likrwise in these methods can be
used to forecast windpower and indeed solar power.
We propose to compute the base learner weight for samples evaluation using
base learners accuracy and intrinsic proximity measure of random forest.
It is to be noted that concept drifting is related to non-stationary dynami-
cal systems modelling [4], where the completely supervised learning is employed
using a special set of input test signals. For more details concerning integral
dynamical models theory and applications refer to monograph [5] and its bibli-
ography.
This paper is organised into ﬁve sections. In Section 2, a brief review of
ensemble streaming classiﬁers based on random forest is given. Section 3 delivers
detailed presentation of proposed algorithm. In Section 4 experiments on both
machine learning and tracking tasks are provided. Finally, the paper concludes
with Section 5 where the main results are discussed.
2
Related Work
The use of drifting concepts for huge datasets analysis is not unfamiliar to the
machine learning and systems identiﬁcation communities [6]. In this work we
restrict ourselves to considering decision tree ensamble classiﬁcation methods
only.
Let us brieﬂy discuss methods most related to our proposal and employed
in the experiments. For a more detailed overview of the results in this area, in-
cluding online incremental ensembles, readers may refer to monograph [7] and
review [8]. Bayesian logistic regression was used in [9] to handle drifting con-
cepts in terms of dynamical programming. Concept drifting handling is close to
methodology of on-line random forest algorithm [10] where ideas from on-line
bagging, extremely randomised forests and on-line decision tree growing proce-
dure are employed. Accuracy Weighted Ensemble (AWE) approach was proposed
in [6]. The main idea is to train a new classiﬁer on each incoming dataset and
use it to evaluate all the existing classiﬁers in the ensemble. We incorporate this
idea in our approach.
A Massive Online Analysis (MOA) framework [11] is the one of the popular
benchmarks for testing online classiﬁcation, where clusterization and regression

algorithms are written in Java. Java software contains the state of the art clas-
siﬁers for concept drift handling such as SEA [20] and Online Bagging [22].
Analysis of ensemble methods with decision tree base learners is interesting
topic to be addressed in this paper. The recursive nature of decision trees makes
on-line learning a diﬃcult task due to the hard splitting rule, errors cannot be
corrected further down the tree.
3
Proximity Driven Streaming Random Forest
In paper [12] the authors clearly demonstrated that a classiﬁer ensemble can
outperform a single classiﬁer in the presence of concept drifts when the base
classiﬁers of the ensemble are adherence weighted to the error similar to current
testing samples. We propose another approach which exploits Random Forest
properties.
To produce a novel algorithm capable of handling concept drift the following
questions need to be answered:
– How to adapt original Random Forest for data streaming?
– How to deﬁne sample similarity metric?
– How to choose the base classiﬁer weighting function?
– How to choose forgetting strategy?
These questions are considered in the following subsections.
3.1
Streaming classiﬁer based on Random Forest
Methodologically ensemble approaches allow concept-drift to be handled in the
following ways: base classiﬁer adaptation, changing in training dataset (such
as Bootstrap [13] or RSM [14]), ensemble aggregation rule changing or chang-
ing in structure of an ensemble (pruning or growing). In this paper we propose
Proximity Driven Streaming Random Forest (PDSRF) which exploit combina-
tions of these approaches. Besides some methods are already incorporated to the
original Random Forest. Contrary to conventional algorithms we use weighted
majority voting as an aggregation rule of ensemble. This allows us to adapt the
entire classiﬁer by changing the weights of the base learners. In order to obtain
the classiﬁers weight estimation we should store samples. For this purpose we
use a sliding windows approach which is used in the periodicaly updated Ran-
dom Forest [15]. The length of this window is ﬁxed and can be estimated by
cross-validation. Random Forest [16] uses unpruned CART [17] trees and for N
instances and Mtry atributes chosen at each decision tree node average compu-
tational cost of ensemble building is O(T MtryNlog2N), where T is a number
of trees. It can be unsiﬃcient for online applications. To reduce the comlexity
we use the randomization approach proposed in Extremely Randomized Trees
[18]. In our implementation the split set consists of randomly generated splits
and the best one is choosen by minimization of the Gini-index measure. So that
O(T MtryNlogN) cost complexity can be achieved.

3.2
Sample similarity metric
We employ the assumption that the base classiﬁers make similar errors on sim-
ilar samples even under concept-drift. Conventional Random Forest exploy the
so called proximity measure. It uses a tree structure to obtain similarity in the
following way: if two diﬀerent sample are in the same terminal node, their prox-
imity will be increased by one. At the end, proximities are normalised by dividing
by the number of trees [16].
3.3
Base classiﬁer weighting function
Following the AWE approach proposed in [12] we use an error rate to produce
weights (1) of classiﬁers, where E is an new block testing error for i-th classiﬁer,
ε is a small parameter.
wi = 1/(E2 + ε)
(1)
3.4
Forgetting strategy
One of the main problems in concept-drifting learning is to select the proper for-
getting strategy and forgetting rate [8]. The classiﬁer should be adaptive enough
to handle changes. In this case diﬀerent strategies can be more appropriate to
diﬀerent types of drift (for example, sudden and gradual drifts). In this paper
we focus on gradual changes only.
We propose two diﬀerent ways to handle the concept-drift:
– temporal sample weighting,
– ensemble pruning technique.
Data forgetting through temporal sample weighting. We use sample
weighing to decrease the inﬂuence of old samlpes to learn the new trees (2).
wx(t) = exp(−αt)
(2)
where α is the sample weighting rate which can be selected in experiment by
cross-validation.
Knowledge forgetting through ensemble growing and pruning In this
part we apply the classic replace-the-looser approach [8] to discard trees with
high error on new block samples.

3.5
Algorithm
To predict the sample we Algorithm 1. First we use a stored window to ﬁnd
similar items using the speciﬁed similarity metric. Second we evaluate our current
ensemble on similar examples. Then we compute weights adherence to errors on
k similar samples.
On every chunk the algorithm tests all the trees to choose the poorest base
learner and replace it with new one trained on new block data. This process is
iterative while the ensemble error on new block samples is higher than a speciﬁed
threshold.
Input:
S: data stream chunks which sequentially produce training examples ⟨x, y⟩
Si: data stream chunks of blockSize
k: number of the nearest neighbours
W (E): Classiﬁer weighting function
Output: Class probability vector
nearest ←ﬁnd k nearest samples from cache using proximity metric.
for all xi ∈Si do
for all trees ci in ensemble do
Get average error Enearest
i
of ci on nearest samples Add weighted by (1)
base classiﬁer probability to class probability vector
end
end
return Probability Vector
Algorithm 1: PDSRF prediction algorithm
4
Experimental Evaluation
In this experiment, we evaluate our algorithm on various publicly available
datasets like CoverType [19], and compared it to the most popular concept-
drift classiﬁers. We compare our algorithm with SEA [20], Hoeﬀding Adaptive
tree [21], Online Bagging [22] and AWE [6] implemented in MOA [11]. Our algo-
rithm was implemented natively in C++ according to the same testing method-
ology. Extremely randomized trees is used as a base learner. With adherence
to this methodology classication accuracy was calculated using the data block
evaluation method, which exploits the test-then-train approach. The data block
evaluation method reads incoming samples without processing them, until they
form a data block of size d. Each new data block is ﬁrst used to test the existing
classiﬁer, then it updates the classiﬁer [23].
Proposed proximity driven streaming
random forest
was
tested with
blockSize = 300, windowSize = 1500, number of nearest neighbours is 20
and ensemble consists of 30 decision trees. In order to make the results more
interpreteble we also test оriginal random forest with incorporated “replace-the-
looser” forgetting.

Method
Mean accuracy
RF
0.54
PDSRF
0.63
AVE2(buﬀered)
0.81
Table 1. Cover type dataset mean accuracy results
4.1
Datasets
We follow the literature on adaptive ensemble classiﬁers and select the publicly
available benchmark datasets with concept drift. In this paper the proposed
method was tested on the cover type dataset from Jock A. Blackard, Colorado
State University [19]. Cover type dataset contains the forest cover type for 30×30
meter cells obtained from US Forest Service Region 2 Resource Information
System (RIS) data. It contains 581 012 instances and 54 attributes, and it has
been used as a benchmark in several papers on data stream classiﬁcation.
4.2
Results
The proposed approach shows results similar to the above mentioned AUE2 [24].
Next comparison (ref. Fig. 1) of the original random forest with incorporated
“replace-the-looser” forgetting and proposed proximity driven streaming random
forest are presented. In Table 1 the mean accuracy is shown.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Epochs
Test.error
Fig. 1. Original random forest with incorporated “replace-the-looser” (blue) and
PDSRF (red) accuracy.

Remark 1. For sake of space, we do not report the complete tests in this paper.
For more details are complete results of our approach evaluation readers may
refer to http://mmwind.github.io/pdsrf.
5
Discussion and Conclusions
In comparison to other concept-drift approaches like Online Random Forest and
the AWE, our approach needs more computational resources and thus more time
for both the training and prediction stages. But the proposed approach is highly
parallelisable and can be implemented using the GPGPU. It must be noted
that the proposed approach can be eﬃciently applied only to gradual concept
drifts. PDSRF is senisible to all the parameters changes and all of these param-
eters must be accurately tuned. As it shown the proposed approach signiﬁcantly
exceeds the original random forest with incorporated “replace-the-looser” forget-
ting. Although the presented results show that the accuracy is lower than AWE2,
the approach has some promising directions is that the Random Forest can be
used in unsupervised and allows to work with missing data, which is an issue
with smart grid datasets and wind power forecasting where telecommunications
signals and data recording is not 100% robust.s
Acknowledgment. This work is partly funded by the RSF grant No. 14-19-
00054.
