A General Framework for Development of the Cortex-like Visual
Object Recognition System: Waves of Spikes, Predictive Coding and
Universal Dictionary of Features
Sergey S. Tarasenko
Abstract—This study is focused on the development of the
cortex-like visual object recognition system. We propose a
general framework, which consists of three hierarchical levels
(modules). These modules functionally correspond to the V1,
V4 and IT areas. Both bottom-up and top-down connections
between the hierarchical levels V4 and IT are employed. The
higher the degree of matching between the input and the
preferred stimulus, the shorter the response time of the neuron.
Therefore information about a single stimulus is distributed in
time and is transmitted by the waves of spikes. The reciprocal
connections and waves of spikes implement predictive coding:
an initial hypothesis is generated on the basis of information
delivered by the ﬁrst wave of spikes and is tested with the
information carried by the consecutive waves. The development
is considered as extraction and accumulation of features in
V4 and objects in IT. Once stored a feature can be disposed,
if rarely activated. This cause update of feature repository.
Consequently, objects in IT are also updated. This illustrates the
growing process and dynamical change of topological structures
of V4, IT and connections between these areas.
I. INTRODUCTION
V
ISUAL object recognition systems have been broadly
discussed in numerous studies from various ﬁelds.
Originated from vision research, visual object recognition
systems are now subjects for interdisciplinary studies. At
present, this is the ﬁeld, where artiﬁcial intelligence (AI)
meets neuroscience.
One of the strongest recent trends is to create the systems,
which exhibit biologically plausible performance. This pur-
pose is achieved by tuning the parameters of the systems
to the neurophysiological data. On the other hand, their
architectures replicate the structure of the corresponding
cortical systems.
According to neurophysiological ﬁndings, the ventral vi-
sual stream (VVS) is the brain system responsible for visual
object recognition. The VVS includes the V1 area (primary
visual cortex), the V2, V3 and V4 areas and the IT area
(Inferior Temporal Cortex).
The VVS has a hierarchical bottom-up structure of visual
areas. Along the VVS in the anterior direction starting from
the primary visual cortex, the size of receptive ﬁelds (RFs) of
neurons increase. Simultaneously, the selectivity of neurons
decreases, i.e., if the V1 neurons are strictly tuned to a bar of
a single orientation and of a particular size, the V4 neurons
are tuned to various geometric forms and exhibit higher
S. Tarasenko is with Department of Intelligence Science and Technology,
Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto University, under JST ERATO Asada

degree of translation and scale invariance. Consequently, a
complexity and a size of visual features, recognized in the
consecutive areas along the ventral stream, increase.
Therefore, most visual object recognition systems, born
of a symbiosis of AI and neuroscience, have the functional
architecture that resembles the hierarchical structure of the
VVS. Although not all the visual areas of real VVS are
employed by the models, usually V1 and IT areas are used.
The area in-between is usually either V2 [17] or V4 [6].
Results of neurophysiological studies indicate that recog-
nition task in the VVS is performed extremely fast. The
processing time varies from 100-150ms for humans [22], and
it is even shorter for monkeys [23].
The extremely short processing time implies that no feed-
back (top-down) interaction occurs during visual processing.
Therefore many researchers attempted to model the feature
of high speed processing by implementing only feed-forward
connections [1], [6], [11]. Furthermore, rapid processing
implies that a single neuron at each level ﬁres only once,
producing a single spike[21](p. 716).
On the other hand, the bottom-up (feed-forward) and top-
down (feedback) processing circuits can be found throughout
the cortex. Therefore, application of only feed-forward pro-
cessing is a great simpliﬁcation. The reciprocal information
processing in the brain has been efﬁciently used in the
concept of predictive coding, which has been introduced in
[19], [20].
Most recently, a hierarchical network with reciprocal
(bottom-up and top-down) connections has been presented
[17]. This model employes propagation of waves of spikes
and uses reciprocal connections to implement predictive
coding.
Although, numerous models of the VVS have been pre-
sented, the matter of development of visual areas in VVS
was not broadly discussed. Several studies have addressed the
matter of development of orientation selectivity in primary
visual cortex V1 [2], [25], modular structures [24] and inter-
cortical development [3]. The key mechanism of structure
formation in developmental models is Hebbian learning [24],
while growth is implemented by growing Self-Organizing
Maps[3].
We consider development on the scale of the VVS as
extraction of new visual features in the V4 area and new
objects in IT. This is implemented by means of growing self-
organizing networks [5]. Nevertheless, growing structure is
not the only feature of the development. We also consider
arXiv:1102.2739v1  [cs.CV]  14 Feb 2011

Fig. 1.
Schematic representation of the system architecture. Please refer
text for detailes.
development to reﬂect the emergence of new connections
between V4 and IT due to inclusion of the new instances
(features in V4 and objects in IT).
Therefore, development is regarded as a process of grow-
ing and establishing new connections of both intra- and inter-
level types. In other words, development is the emergence
of new neurons and new connections within and between
hierarchical levels. The origin of development is based on
extraction of new visual features across all hierarchical
levels.
In this study, we introduce the framework to model
developmental processes in the cortex-like visual object
recognition system.
II. FUNCTIONAL ARCHITECTURE OF THE SYSTEM
This framework consists of three processing levels (mod-
ules). These levels correspond to the V1, V4, and IT areas of
the VVS. The V4 and IT levels can be also segregated into
layers. Both V4 and IT levels have layers of growing SOM
and Radial Basis Function (RBF) units. Meanwhile, the V4
level also has integrating layer. Each layer is a single neural
network. The schematic representation of the entire system,
including the connections between the levels (cortical areas)
and layers (networks inside the cortical areas), is presented
in Fig. 1.
The V1 level contains four distinct groups of neurons
(ﬁlter maps), which are mutually interconnected with in-
hibitory connection (round-head solid lines). After inhibition
the information from all four maps is integrated by the
layer of the V4 level. The output of this layer is Integrated
Orientation Map (IOM). The IOM is then sent to the V4
growing SOM layers by means of excitatory connections.
The excitatory connections are indicated by arrow-head solid
lines throughout the schema. After IOM is translated into
the Feature Map, it is sent V4 RBF units layer and to the
IT growing SOM layer. The IT RBF units layer receives
excitatory inputs from the IT growing SOM layer as well.
The IT RBF units layer sends modulatory (ampliﬁcation
of existing activation level) signals (marked with diamond-
head dashed lines) back to the V4 RBF units layer. The
feedback modulated (ampliﬁed) signal from the V4 RBF
Fig. 2.
Stimuli used in simulations.
units layer to IT RBF unit layer is marked with arrow-head
double solid line. The V4 and IT growing SOM layers serve
as repositories of visual features and objects, respectively.
During the development the collection of visual features is
changing. To update objects with valid features, interaction
between the V4 and IT growing SOM layers emerges. This
is indicated by double-end arrow-head dashed line.
The details of processing in each module, intra- and
inter- layer and level intractions are discussed in subsequent
sections.
For the purpose of simulation we use ten stimuli (objects)
presented in Fig. 2. The stimuli are 100 × 100 pixel pictures
of hands and cup. We use 11 black and white color gradations
from 0 (black) to 1 (white) with step 0.1 on the normalized
scale throughout the processing.
A. Processing in the V1 area
In this study, we employ Gabor ﬁlters, as described by eq.
(1), to model V1 simple cells:
F(x, y) = exp

−(x2
o+γ2y2
o)
2σ2

× cos
  2π
λ xo

xo = x cos θ + y sin θ
yo = −x sin θ + y cos θ
(1)
where θ is an orientation parameter, σ is a scale parameter,
and λ is a wave length parameter. The equations for the
Gabor ﬁlter in our study have been taken from [11].
We use a single value for the scale parameter: σ = 2.8,
which corresponds to 7 × 7 pixels RFs. The relationship
between scale and wavelength parameters are presented in
[10](p. 69).
The input (retinal image) is processed with Gabor ﬁlters of
four different orientations (0◦, 45◦, 90◦, and 135◦). Therefore
in the V1 area there are four distinct groups of neurons
with different orientations. The RFs of these cells ‘densely
cover’ the entire retinal image. Performance of each group is
implemented as convolution of the Gabor ﬁlter kernel with
the retinal image. The result of convolution is an orientation
map. Each orientation map contains the response of the
neurons selective for the same orientation, but situated at
different locations. To identify a particular orientation at each
location, we employ all-to-all lateral intra-layer inhibitory
connections to suppress the competing features in the V1
area [17].

Fig. 3.
Collection of prototypes Pi, {i = 1, ..., k} with growing self-
organizing maps, where k is a total number of features. Not all the
connection are shown.
Fig. 4.
The sample features (prototypes) collected by the gSOM from
the input image (Object 1) in Fig. 2. The orientations are indicated with
orientation bars. Each prototype is a 3 × 3 matrix of speciﬁed orientations.
The empty space indicates absence of any orientation detected.
B. Processing in the V4 area
We use three computational types of V4 neurons. Our
assumption of several types of neurons is supported by the
recently proposed models [6], [7].
Type I neurons integrate information from different orien-
tation maps (V 4INT ), resulting from mutual inhibition. The
IOM (output of the V 4INT neurons) is then processed to
extract complex visual features as combinations of different
orientations. To do so, the gSOM [5] is used. The neurons
in gSOM are the V4 type II neurons (V 4gSOM). The V4
neurons of type III are RBF-units [8]:
V 4RBF = exp(−βV 4||X −Pi||2)
(2)
where βV 4 is a tuning parameter, Pi is the center of the RBF
unit (prototype) and X is the current input of the RBF-
unit. A prototype is a visual feature (preferred stimulus) of
a certain V 4RBF neuron.
In terms of Gaussian RBF, parameter βV 4 is the inverted
doubled variance: βV 4 =
1
2V ar2 . On the other hand, variance
V ar2 of the Gaussian function is usually chosen as some
fraction of the distance from the origin to the object in the
feature space [4]. Such distance can be calculated as
distV 4 =
M
X
i=1
M
X
j=1
Θ2
ij,
(3)
where Θij is a particular orienation at a given location of a
visual feature, where M and N, are vertical and horizontal
...
...
...
28
32
...
...
0.8
1
...
...
2
10
...
...
1
0.4
...
...
...
Sample part of
Corresponding part of
Feature Map
Response Map
Fig. 5.
Sample part of Feature Map and corresponding part of Response
Map.
...
...
...
0
1
...
...
0
32
...
...
1
0
...
...
2
0
...
...
...
Sample First Wave
Sample First Wave
Response Map
Feature Map
Fig. 6.
First Wave Feature and Response Maps. Zero value in Feature Map
means absence of feature with unit activation at this location.
dimensions of the IOM, respectively. Θ can take one of four
integer values 1, 2, 3, or 4, which correspond to 0◦, 45◦, 90◦,
and 135◦orientation, respectively. The V ar2 is then taken
to be one tenth of the distV 4.
In our model, the RF size of V 4gSOM is 3 × 3 matrix
(RF-matrix) of the IOM elements. Concatenating the strings
of the RF-matrix, we obtain 9-dim vectors, which are used
as inputs to the gSOM network.
The information about the features is stored in synaptic
weights, therefore gSOM serves as feature repository. We do
not use any updates for synaptic weight vectors, but only
record the inputs that are sufﬁciently far from each other
(in terms of Euclidean distance between the 9-dim synaptic
vectors: if the distance between the input and V 4gSOM
neuron is greater than 0.1 distV 4, input is considered to be
distant enough).
Each V 4gSOM neuron plays a role of RBF-center (a
prototype) for V 4RBF . Therefore, if k is a total number of
V 4gSOM neurons, there are k different classes of V 4RBF
neurons. The V 4RBF neurons of a certain class cover densely
the IOM. The RF size of V 4RBF is identical to the RF size
of the V 4gSOM neurons. Thus, the total number of V 4RBF
neurons is then kL, where L is the total number of neurons
required to densely cover IOM.
The process of on-line visual feature extraction is illus-
trated in Fig. 3. Here sample RFs of gSOM neurons, densely
covering the IOM, are presented. The 3 × 3 features are
processed with gSOM, and a collection of distant enough
visual features is extracted. The sample features extracted
from the ﬁrst stimulus are presented in Fig. 4.
Processing the Integrated Orientation Map with V 4RBF
neurons: Feature and Response Maps. After the features
have been collected, the visual stimulus is represented as a
Response Map. To do so, we ﬁrst assemble the Feature Map
of the visual stimulus by ﬁnding the feature that best matches
at each spatial location on the IOM. Therefore, the Feature
Map is a m × n matrix, where m < M and n < N, are
vertical and horizontal dimensions, respectively. The Feature

Map contains numbers of corresponding prototypes that best
match the actual visual feature, presented at a particular
spatial location. Then the responses of V 4RBF neurons are
calculated. This way, we obtain the Response Map.
The Response Map is also m × n matrix, containing
responses of V 4RBF neurons at each location of the IOM.
The sample parts of the Feature and Response Maps are
presented in Fig. 5.
C. Waves of Spikes: Information Transfer from the V4 area
to the IT area
The neurons, whose preferred stimulus is closer to the
actual visual input, ﬁre faster [18]. Therefore, the neurons
with unit activation (response is 1 on the normalized scale)
ﬁre ﬁrst. Then the neurons with activation greater or equal
to 1-ϵ (ϵ = 0.1), excluding previously ﬁred neurons, will ﬁre
and so on. Thus, the neurons with the same activation level
form ‘waves of spikes’. Consequently, the original retinal
image is unfolded in a time domain. Thus, information about
the stimulus is carried by the sequence of waves of spikes.
To extract the the First Wave of Spikes, we eliminate from
the Feature Map the features that resulted in neural activation
levels less than 1 on the normalized scale. The resultant map
is called a First Wave Feature Map (Fig. 6). This map consists
only of the features that identically matched the actual visual
stimulus.
The waves of spikes corresponding to the ﬁrst stimulus
are presented in Fig. 7.
D. Processing in the IT area
Some of inferior temporal cortex neurons can be consid-
ered as RBF-units [12]. The IT area is also addressed as a
storage place of various objects and is suggested to have a
function of object recognition and classiﬁcation [15].
The objects in the IT area are obtained through every-
day visual experience. Therefore, the structure of IT changes
in time [15]. To model this change, we applied gSOM
to simulate the developmental activity of the IT area. The
ITgSOM neurons are the IT neurons of type I. The activity
of the gSOM network is similar to the V4 gSOM network.
The neurons of type II are ITRBF neurons. The ITgSOM
neurons store the objects themselves, while ITRBF neurons
perform matching between the object stored by the corre-
sponding ITgSOM neuron (preferred stimulus) and the actual
stimulus (input):
ITRBF = exp(−βIT ||X −Obji||2)
(4)
where βIT is a tuning parameter, Obji is the center of the
RBF-unit and X is the current input. The tuning parameter
βIT estimated in the same way as it is done for V 4RBF
neurons:
distIT =
m
X
i=1
n
X
j=1
Feat2
ij,
(5)
where Featij is a feature number at ij-th element of Feature
Map, m and n are dimensions of Feature Map, i = 1, ..., m
and j = 1, ..., n. We consider that βIT = (distIT )−1. For
Fig. 7.
The waves of spikes corresponding to the ﬁrst stimulus. In Original
Response Map and the First Wave of Spikes white color indicates unit (of
magnitude 1) response, while black color indicates zero responses. In the
Steps 1 to 10, white color indicates the neuronal signals that reached IT,
i.e., waves of spikes that reached IT. In each step, the cumulative amount of
spikes reached IT is indicated. For example, Step 6 illustrates the neurons,
whose neuronal signals have already reach IT, i.e., six waves of spikes have
arrived. Term ‘links’ means bottom-up inter-level connection between V4
and IT neurons.
instance, the absolute value of parameter βIT for ITRBF (1)
is ≈10−7. Here notation “(1)” indicates the number of the
object stored.
The recognition procedure depends on the threshold value
α, i.e., if activation of the ITRBF neuron is less then α,
the actual stimulus is considered to be different from the
corresponding object. We set α to 0.67 [9](p. 1690) on the
normalized scale. Therefore the threshold value α is used
for detection of new objects (novelty detection) and stored
objects’ recognition.
In general case, a stimulus processing should be based on
the predictive coding (see next section). However, to apply
predictive coding some objects should be already stored in IT.
Consider the Object 1 in Fig. 2. This object is regarded as the
very ﬁrst input to the system. Therefore, the representation
of the input image is stored by the ITgSOM(1) neuron as a
new object. This causes creation of an entire new class of
ITRBF (1) neurons. The RBF-units of a single class densely
cover the Feature Map and produce the ITRBF response grid.
Response of ITRBF neurons. Now, there is a single object
in IT. Here, we illustrate the response grids of ITRBF
neurons, densely covering the Feature Map, to the sequence

Fig. 8.
The RBF response grids to waves of spikes. Each grid represents
the responses of ITRBF neurons, which cover densely the Integrated
Orientation Map. The center of the RBF units is Hand 1 (Object 1). The
input on each step is the cumulative neuronal signals about Hand 1 delivered
by waves of spikes, arrived up to this step. The maximum response is
indicated by the black circle in each grid. The curve in the top-right corner
of each grid indicates the section of the grid in the XZ-plane with ﬁxed
value of Y -component. This ﬁxed value shows location of the maximum
response on the Y -axis. X and Y axis correspond to horizontal (n) and
vertical (m) dimensions, respectively, of the original retinal image. Z-axis
corresponds to the magnitude of RBF responses.
of waves of spike. The response grids are presented in Fig. 8.
E. Predictive Coding: Interaction between V4 and IT
Predictive coding is a widely discussed scientiﬁc paradigm
[19], [20]. It involves two stages. First, based on some
preliminary data about the stimulus, the Initial Hypothesis is
generated. Then additional information about the stimulus is
used to either conﬁrm or reject the Initial Hypothesis through
the process of Iterative Reﬁnement. Thus, formation of the
Initial Hypothesis and its Iterative Reﬁnement are two key
points of the predictive coding.
Selection of the Initial Hypothesis. Generation of the Initial
Hypothesis is based on the information delivered by the First
Wave of Spikes and the objects stored in IT. In this study, the
system stores 10 objects in IT (Fig. 2). The steps of the Initial
Hypothesis Generation are the following: 1) the response
grids for each type i of ITRBF (i), i = 1, ..., K, K is a total
number of objects stored, neurons are calculated; 2) maxi-
mum activation value maXi for each grid is identiﬁed; 3)
maximum value maX from maXi: maX = max
i {maXi};
and 4) identify the number of the object, which will be
considered as Initial Hypothesis: i∗= arg(maX). Steps 2
and 3 are based on the max-pooling operation performed
in IT [6]. The object contained by ITgSOM(i∗), where
i∗= arg(maX), is considered to be the initial hypothesis
for the presented stimulus. The Initial Hypothesis generation
procedure is presented in Fig. 9. Here K = 8, maX = 0.53
and i∗= 3.
Fig. 9.
Schema of Initial Hypothesis Generation. First the maXi
responses are compared to detect, which ITRBF (i) neurons has the
stongerst activation. Then the max value maX is choosen among the
maXi, i = 1, ..., K. Finally, the object corresponding to the maX value is
identiﬁed: i∗= arg(maX). Object i∗is considered as Initial Hypothesis.
Here K = 8, maX = 0.53 and i∗= 3.
Iterative Reﬁnement. The Initial Hypothesis is presented
in a form of a Feature Map of a certain object stored in
IT. When appropriate Feature Map is found, it is possible
to send modulatory signal from IT back to V4. The purpose
of this modulation is to amplify the activity of the neurons,
which are coherent with Initial Hypothesis.
For extraction of the coherent/identical elements (neurons),
the Feature Maps of the actual stimulus and the Initial Hy-
pothesis are compared element-wise. The identical elements
in both maps are localized. Thus, the neurons representing
identical visual features in both maps are detected. Among
the localized identical elements, the elements with activation
level 1 belong to the First Wave of Spikes. Therefore they
are excluded by means of inhibition. This is called to be
a matching procedure. The activation levels of remaining
identical elements in Feature Map are ampliﬁed by the top-
down modulatory signals from IT:
ALamp = AL + 1;
(6)
ALamp > 1 →ALamp = 1.
(7)
where AL is the activation level before the modulatory top-
down signal, and ALamp is the ampliﬁed activation level
after modulatory top-down signal.
It is possible that actual stimulus is one of the objects
already stored in IT or slightly damaged with noise. Then the
Initial Hypothesis has many common features with internal
representation of the stimulus distributed among the waves
of spikes. Therefore by means of modulation (ampliﬁcation),
the major amount of information will be instantly accumu-
lated by the Second Wave of Spikes, forming “Tsunami of
Spikes”. In this case, the signiﬁcant accelerating effect will
occur. We refer to such Initial Hypothesis as coherent. On

Fig. 10.
The absence of an acceleration effect on wave propagation when
coherent Initial Hypothesis does not exist. A. The response map of Initial
Hypothesis (Object 2). B. The First Wave of Spikes of a stimulus (Object
1). C. All identical elements (neurons). D. The neurons not participating
in the First Wave of Spikes with visual features identical to the ones of the
Initial Hypothesis.
Fig. 11. The presence of an acceleration effect on wave propagation when a
coherent Initial Hypothesis exists. A. The response map of Initial Hypothesis
(Object 1). B. The First Wave of Spikes of a stimulus (Object 1). C. All
identical elements (neurons). D. The neurons not participating in the First
Wave of Spikes with visual features identical to the ones of the Initial
Hypothesis.
the other hand, if the actual stimulus is not an object from IT,
then the Initial Hypothesis will have few identical neurons
with the waves of spikes produced by this stimulus. Conse-
quently, only some small amount of information distributed
among the waves of spikes will be shifted to the Second
Wave of Spikes, and no signiﬁcant accelerating effect will
take place. Such Initial Hypothesis as called an incoherent.
Suggest, considering only Objects 2 and 3. We suppose
that only Object 3 is stored in IT. In such a case, when Object
2 is presented as stimulus, there will be no accelerating
effect (Fig. 10), because the stimulus (Object 2) and RBF-
center (Object 3) have only few common features. On the
other hand, if Object 3 is used as a stimulus, the signiﬁcant
accelerating effect takes place (Fig. 11), because in such
a case both stimulus and RBF-center have many common
features. The numerical aspects of acceleration are illustrated
in Fig. 12.
Summarizing, we present algorithm of Iterative Reﬁne-
ment process as follows: 1) after the activation levels of
neurons have been modulated (ampliﬁed), the excitatory
waves of spikes is sent to IT; 2) the hypothesis generation
is repeated. The Initial Hypothesis is either conﬁrmed and
retained or rejected and changed; 3) the procedure of match-
ing identical elements is repeated; 4) and modulatory top-
Fig. 12.
The illutration of the Accelerating effect with waves of spikes
and RBF response grids. Top. The Original Response Map, the First Wave
of Spikes and the Second Wave of modulated (ampliﬁed) Spikes. Bottom.
The response grid of ITRBF (1) neurons to the First Wave of Spikes and
to the Second Wave of Spikes.
down signals are sent back to V4. The Iterative Reﬁnement
continues until all waves of spikes reach IT.
III. DEVELOPMENT: COLLECTING NEW FEATURES AND
STORING NEW OBJECTS
A. Towards universal dictionary of features
Development is characterized by the dynamical change in
topology of in intra- and inter-level connection. This changed
involves not only extraction of new features by means of
growing, but also disposal of existing rarely used features.
In this section we discuss a mechanism of disposal of existing
features.
The features are extracted on the basis of the distance. On
the other hand, during the processing of a particular stimulus,
some features can be found more often than the others.
To distinguish frequently used features, the counter vari-
able τ is used. Each time feature i is the best matching
feature, the counter τi is incremented by 1. Then the relative
frequency fri of activation for each feature is calculated:
fri =
τi
FP
i=1
τi
,
(8)
where i is a feature number, i = 1, ..., F, and F a total
number of features [5].
Finally, we dispose the features, which have relative fre-
quency less or equal to the chance level 1/F. We refer to
remaining features as to survived features. The process of

Fig. 13.
The ﬁlled bars indicate number of all originally extracted distant
enough features. The empty bars show the number of survived features with
relative frequency of activation greater than chance level. The features have
been extracted from ten objects. Each graph corresponds to processing of
a single object. The abscissa axis indicates a number of stimuli (objects)
features have survived. The ordinate axis shows the absolute number of
features. For the very ﬁrst stimulus, the number of features before disposal
is the number of originally extracted distant enough features. For the other
stimuli, the features before disposal include features, survived the previous
stimuli, and the new features, extracted from the current stimulus.
feature extraction and disposal is illustrated in Fig. 13. The
outburst at x = 1 on abscissa axis is explained by the great
number of originally extracted object speciﬁc features.
Among the features collected from ten objects, there
are features that have been extracted from the very ﬁrst
stimulus and survived throughout the objects. We illustrate
the evolution of number of such features in Fig. 14. The inlay
in Fig. 14 illustrates dynamics of survival rate.
The features survived all ten stimuli represent the col-
lection of features universal for all the objects. Therefore,
during development, extraction of universal feature intrinsic
for all stimuli and disposal of stimulus speciﬁc features. This
illustrates convergence of the collection of features to the
Universal Dictionary of Features1.
B. Dynamic structure of the inter-level connections between
the V4 and IT areas
The developmental process implies two major changes: 1)
the growth of number of features (in V4) and objects (in IT)
together; and 2) emergence of new connections between the
new neurons and the existing ones. From the very beginning
, the networks in the V4 and IT levels of the system are
empty. During the development, these networks are growing,
thus, causing the installation of new intra- and inter-level
connections. The new features are extracted and disposed
in V4. In the IT module, the new object is added if the
maX value after predictive coding is less than threshold α.
If accelerating effect takes place, the predictive coding is
terminated instantly. Therefore, emergence of both intra- and
inter-level connections in our system involves both the V4
and IT areas.
The process of feature disposal takes place after the infor-
mation about the Feature Map is send to the IT area by the
waves of spikes. Therefore, after the extraction, collection of
features in gSOM is updated, the Feature Maps of the objects
stored in IT should be updated as well. This is implemented
1Universality is understood from the point of view of the visual experience
represented by ten different objects
Fig. 14.
Evolution of number of features, extracted from the very ﬁrst
stimulus (object). The empty bars indicate number of features survived. The
ﬁlled bars show the number of features before disposal. For the very ﬁrst
stimulus, the number of features before disposal is the number of originally
extracted distant enough features. For the other stimuli, the features before
disposal are the features, which were extracted from the very ﬁrst stimulus
and survived all previous stimuli. The inlay illustrates dynamics of the
survival rate, calculated as ratio of number of survived features to the
number of features before disposal.
Fig. 15.
Development of the V4 and IT levels of the system. Left. At
some earlier stage of development, when few features (i in total) and objects
(2 in total) are collected, there are few neurons in gSOM and RBF layers.
Right. On the later stage of development, number of features grows up
to n > k, and number of objects increases up two k > 2. This causes
emergence of new numerous intra- and inter-level connections. The number
of connections increases drastically.
by means of substitution of previously used features for
the best matching survived features (marked by double-end
arrow-head dashed line in Fig. 1). This substitution process
takes place after the Predictive Coding. This process causes
reciprocal process of updating objects’ Feature Maps.
Therefore in the presented framework the developmental
process is illustrated from both aspects of structure change
(growing and disposal), which cause the dynamical change
in topology of intra- and inter-level connections.
The schema of development of the V4 and IT areas,
including intra- and inter-level connections, is presented in
Fig. 15.
IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
We have presented a framework to model development
of cortex-like visual object recognition system. This system
is bases on the neurophysiological principles of information
processing along the VVS. These are hierarchical organi-
zation of the visual object recognition system, propagation
of waves of spikes, reciprocal interaction of different hier-
archical levels, predictive coding and dynamic structure of

the visual features repository. Our model also inherits major
features of the RBF-units as a model of a single neuron in
V4 [8] and IT [12].
The novelty of our model is the application of growing
SOMs to model the processes of feature and object extraction
and storage in areas V4 and IT, respectively. We have
also implemented the processes of feature extraction and
feature disposal. The interplay of these processes allows to
simulate dynamical changes in the structure of visual feature
repository and consequent update of the objects.
We have illustrated the ability of our system to develop
over time by extracting new features and storing new objects.
We have shown that the predictive coding can speed up
the processing time by amplifying the neuronal responses.
This suggests the short processing time could be achieved
in architectures with reciprocal connections. The evolution
of the feature repository allows to illustrate a process of
formation of Universal Dictionary of Features.
Therefore, our framework is a successfully working system
of visual object recognition, capable of on-line development
from visual experience. The development of the system takes
place for each presented stimulus in two ways. First, on-line
extraction of features and objects allows to model emergence
of feature selectivity in V4 and object selectivity in IT.
Second, the interaction between the V4 and IT growing SOM
layers provides the system with ability of extracting only
the features found most frequently in various stimuli, thus,
collecting the universal features.
There are many aspects for the further extension of the
system: 1) the classiﬁcation ability of the neurons in the
Inferior Temporal cortex [12]; 2) emergence of modular
units like columnar structures [17]; 3) continuous topological
structure of object representation [9] etc. One of the possible
further extension beyond the visual domain is to make this
framework capable of operating with multimodal signals
and perform cross-modal integration. Moreover, the modular
structure of the system implies the ﬂexibility of the system’s
architecture. Therefore, this framework can be used as a
basis to test various biologically plausible conﬁgurations. For
example, it is possible to extend the system with V2 and/or
V3 areas without restrictions.
Furthermore, the capability of predictive coding makes this
framework to be applicable and extendable to model Dorsal
Visual Stream for motion recognition, Superior Temporal
Sulcus for biological motion recognition etc.
Moreover, this framework has a potential serve as a
platform to model large-scale cortical networks like Mirror
Neuron System.
V. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author would like to thank professor Toshio Inui, JST
ERATO Asada Synergistic Intelligence Project and Kyoto
University, Graduate School of Informatics, for valuable
comments and comprehensive discussions.
