Accelerating Deep Learning with Memcomputing
Haik Manukian1, Fabio L. Traversa2, Massimiliano Di Ventra1
Abstract
Restricted Boltzmann machines (RBMs) and their extensions, often called “deep-belief networks”, are powerful neural
networks that have found applications in the ﬁelds of machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence. The standard way
to training these models resorts to an iterative unsupervised procedure based on Gibbs sampling, called “contrastive
divergence”, and additional supervised tuning via back-propagation. However, this procedure has been shown not to
follow any gradient and can lead to suboptimal solutions. In this paper, we show an eﬃcient alternative to contrastive
divergence by means of simulations of digital memcomputing machines (DMMs) that compute the gradient of the log-
likelihood involved in unsupervised training. We test our approach on pattern recognition using a modiﬁed version of the
MNIST data set of hand-written numbers. DMMs sample very eﬀectively the vast phase space deﬁned by the probability
distribution of RBMs over the test sample inputs, and provide a very good approximation close to the optimum. This
eﬃcient search signiﬁcantly reduces the number of generative pretraining iterations necessary to achieve a given level
of accuracy in the MNIST data set, as well as a total performance gain over the traditional approaches. In fact, the
acceleration of the pretraining achieved by simulating DMMs is comparable to, in number of iterations, the recently
reported hardware application of the quantum annealing method on the same network and data set. Notably, however,
DMMs perform far better than the reported quantum annealing results in terms of quality of the training. Finally, we
also compare our method to recent advances in supervised training, like batch-normalization and rectiﬁers, that seem to
reduce the advantage of pretraining. We ﬁnd that the memcomputing method still maintains a quality advantage (> 1%
in accuracy, corresponding to a 20% reduction in error rate) over these approaches, despite the network pretrained with
memcomputing deﬁnes a more non-convex landscape using sigmoidal activation functions without batch-normalization.
Our approach is agnostic about the connectivity of the network. Therefore, it can be extended to train full Boltzmann
machines, and even deep networks at once.
Keywords:
Deep Learning, Restricted Boltzmann Machines, Memcomputing
1. Introduction
The progress in machine learning and big data driven
by successes in deep learning is diﬃcult to overstate. Deep
learning models (a subset of which are called “deep-belief
networks”) are artiﬁcial neural networks with a certain
amount of layers, n, with n > 2 [1]. They have proven
themselves to be very useful in a variety of applications,
from computer vision [2] and speech recognition [3] to
super-human performance in complex games[4], to name
just a few. While some of these models have existed for
some time [5], the dramatic increases in computational
power combined with advances in eﬀective training meth-
ods have pushed forward these ﬁelds considerably [6].
Successful training of deep-belief models relies heavily
on some variant of an iterative gradient-descent proce-
dure, called back-propagation, through the layers of the

1Department of Physics, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, CA 92093
2MemComputing, Inc., San Diego, CA, 92130 CA
network [7]. Since this optimization method uses only gra-
dient information, and the error landscapes of deep net-
works are highly non-convex [8], one would at best hope
to ﬁnd an appropriate local minimum.
However,
there
is
evidence
that
in
these
high-
dimensional non-convex settings, the issue is not getting
stuck in some local minima but rather at saddle points,
where the gradient also vanishes [9], hence making the
gradient-descent procedure of limited use.
A takeaway
from this is that a “good” initialization procedure for as-
signing the weights of the network, known as pretraining,
can then be highly advantageous.
One such deep-learning framework that can utilize this
pretraining procedure is the Restricted Boltzmann Ma-
chine (RBM) [5], and its extension, the Deep Belief Net-
work (DBN) [10].
These machines are a class of neu-
ral network models capable of unsupervised learning of a
parametrized probability distribution over inputs. They
can also be easily extended to the supervised learning
case by training an output layer using back-propagation
or other standard methods [1].
Training RBMs usually distinguishes between an unsu-
pervised pretraining, whose purpose is to initialize a good
arXiv:1801.00512v3  [cs.LG]  23 Oct 2018

set of weights, and the supervised procedure.
The cur-
rent most eﬀective technique for pretraining RBMs uti-
lizes an iterative sampling technique called contrastive di-
vergence (CD) [11]. Computing the exact gradient of the
log-likelihood is exponentially hard in the size of the RBM,
and so CD approximates it with a computationally friendly
sampling procedure.
While this procedure has brought
RBMs most of their success, CD suﬀers from the slow
mixing of Gibbs sampling, and is known not to follow the
gradient of any function [12].
Partly due to these shortcomings of pretraining with
CD, much research has gone into making the back-
propagation procedure more robust and less sensitive to
the initialization of weights and biases in the network.
This includes research into diﬀerent non-linear activation
functions (e.g., “rectiﬁers”) [13] to combat the vanishing
gradient problem and normalization techniques (such as
“batch-normalization”) [14] that make back-propagation
in deep networks more stable and less dependent on initial
conditions. In sum, these techniques make training deep
networks an easier (e.g., more convex) optimization prob-
lem for a gradient-based approach like back-propagation.
This, in turn, relegates the standard CD pretraining pro-
cedure’s usefulness to cases where the training set is sparse
[1], which is becoming an increasingly rare occurrence.
In parallel with this research into back-propagation, siz-
able eﬀort has been expended toward improving the power
of the pretraining procedure, including extensions of CD
[15, 16], CD done on memristive hardware [17], and more
recently, approaches based on quantum annealing that try
to recover the exact gradient [18] involved in pretraining.
Some of these methods are classical algorithms simulating
quantum sampling [19], and still others attempt to use a
hardware quantum device in contact with an environment
to take independent samples from its Boltzmann distribu-
tion for a more accurate gradient computation. For in-
stance, in a recent work, the state of the RBM has been
mapped onto a commercial quantum annealing processor
(a D-Wave machine), the latter used as a sampler of the
model distribution [20]. The results reported on a reduced
version of the well-known MNIST data set look promising
as compared to CD [20]. However, these approaches re-
quire expensive hardware, and cannot be scaled to larger
problems as of yet.
In the present paper, inspired by the theoretical un-
derpinnings [21, 22] and recent empirical demonstra-
tions [23, 24] of the advantages of a new computing
paradigm –memcomputing [25]– on a variety of combina-
torial/optimization problems, we seek to test its power
toward the computationally demanding problems in deep
learning.
Memcomputing [25] is a novel computing paradigm that
solves complex computational problems using processing
embedded in memory. It has been formalized by two of
us (FLT and MD) by introducing the concept of univer-
sal memcomputing machines[21]. In short, to perform a
computation, the task at hand is mapped to a continuous
dynamical system that employs highly-correlated states
[26] (in both space and time) of the machine to navigate
the phase space eﬃciently and ﬁnd the solution of a given
problem as mapped into the equilibrium states of the dy-
namical system.
In this paper, we employ a subset of these machines
called digital memcomputing machines (DMMs) and, more
speciﬁcally, their self-organizing circuit realizations [22,
27]. The distinctive feature of DMMs is their ability to
read and write the initial and ﬁnal states of the machine
digitally, namely requiring only ﬁnite precision. This fea-
ture makes them easily scalable as our modern computers.
From a practical point of view DMMs can be built with
standard circuit elements with and without memory [22].
These elements, however, are non-quantum.
Therefore,
the ordinary diﬀerential equations of the corresponding cir-
cuits can be eﬃciently simulated on our present computers.
Here, we will indeed employ only simulations of DMMs on
a single Xeon processor to train RBMs. These simulations
show already substantial advantages with respect to CD
and even quantum annealing, despite the latter is executed
on hardware. Of course, the hardware implementation of
DMMs applied to these problems would oﬀer even more
advantages since the simulation times will be replaced by
the actual physical time of the circuits to reach equilib-
rium. This would then oﬀer a realistic path to real-time
pretraining of deep-belief networks.
In order to compare directly with quantum annealing
results recently reported[20], we demonstrate the advan-
tage of our memcomputing approach by ﬁrst training on
a reduced MNIST data set as that used in Ref [20]. We
show that our method requires far less pretraining itera-
tions to achieve the same accuracy as CD, as well as an
overall accuracy gain over both CD and quantum anneal-
ing. We also train the RBMs on the reduced MNIST data
set without mini-batching, where the quantum annealing
results are not available. Also in this case, we ﬁnd both
a substantial reduction in pretraining iterations needed as
well as a higher level of accuracy of the memcomputing
approach over the traditional CD.
Our approach then seems to oﬀer many of the advan-
tages of quantum approaches. However, since it is based
on a completely classical system, it can be eﬃciently de-
ployed in software (as we demonstrate in this paper) as
well as easily implemented in hardware, and can be scaled
to full-size problems.
Finally, we investigate the role of recent advances in su-
pervised training by comparing accuracy obtained using
only back-propagation with batch-normalization and rec-
tiﬁers starting from a random initial condition versus the
back-propagation procedure initiated from a network pre-
trained with memcomputing, with sigmoidal activations
and without batch-normalization. Even without these ad-
vantages, namely operating on a more non-convex land-
scape, we ﬁnd the network pretrained with memcomput-
ing maintains an accuracy gain over state-of-the-art back-
propagation by more than 1% and a 20% reduction in
2

v1
v3
v2
v4
h1
h2
h3
o1
o2
o3
RBM
Output
layer
Figure 1: A sketch of an RBM with four visible nodes, three hid-
den nodes, and an output layer with three nodes.
The value of
each stochastic binary node is represented by vi, hi ∈{0, 1}, which
are sampled from the probabilities in Eqs. (7), (8).
The connec-
tions between the layers represent the weights, wij ∈R (biases not
shown).
Note the lack of connections between nodes in the same
layer, which distinguishes the RBM from a Boltzmann machine. The
RBM weights are trained separately from the output layer with gen-
erative pretraining, then tuned together via back-propogation (just
as in a feed-forward neural network).
error rate.
This gives further evidence to the fact that
memcomputing pretraining navigates to an advantageous
initial point in the non-convex loss surface of the deep net-
work.
2. RBMs and Contrastive Divergence
An RBM consists of m visible units, vj, j = 1 . . . m, each
fully connected to a layer of n hidden units, hi, i = 1 . . . n,
both usually taken to be binary variables. In the restricted
model, no intra-layer connections are allowed, see Fig. 1.
The connectivity structure of the RBM implies that,
given the hidden variables, each input node is conditionally
independent of all the others:
p(vi, vj|h) = p(vi|h)p(vj|h).
(1)
The joint probability is given by the Gibbs distribution,
p(v, h) = 1
Z e−E(v,h),
(2)
with an energy function
E(v, h) = −
X
i
X
j
wijhivj −
X
j
bjvj −
X
i
cihi,
(3)
where wij is the weight between the i-th hidden neuron
and the j-th visible neuron, and bj, ci are real numbers
indicating the “biases” of the neurons. The value, Z, is
a normalization constant, and is known in statistical me-
chanics as the partition function. Training an RBM then
amounts to ﬁnding a set of weights and biases that maxi-
mizes the likelihood (or equivalently minimizes the energy)
of the observed data.
A common approach to training RBMs for a supervised
task is to ﬁrst perform generative unsupervised learning
(pretraining) to initialize the weights and biases, then run
back-propagation over input-label pairs to ﬁne tune the
parameters of the network. The pretraining is framed as
a gradient ascent over the log-likelihood of the observed
data, which gives a particularly tidy form for the weight
updates from the n-th to the (n + 1)-th iteration:
∆wn+1
ij
= α∆wn
ij + ϵ[⟨vihj⟩DATA −⟨vihj⟩MODEL],
(4)
where α is called the “momentum” and ϵ is the “learning
rate”. A similar update procedure is applied to the biases:
∆bn+1
i
= α∆bn
i + ϵ[⟨vi⟩DATA −⟨vi⟩MODEL],
(5)
∆cn+1
j
= α∆cn
j + ϵ[⟨hj⟩DATA −⟨hj⟩MODEL].
(6)
This form of the weight updates is referred to as
“stochastic gradient optimization with momentum”. The
ﬁrst expectation value on the rhs of Eqs. (4), (5), and (6)
is taken with respect to the conditional probability dis-
tribution with the data ﬁxed at the visible layer.
This
is relatively easy to compute. Evaluation of the second
expectation on the rhs of Eqs. (4), (5), and (6) is expo-
nentially hard in the size of the network, since obtaining
independent samples from a high-dimensional model dis-
tribution easily becomes prohibitive with increasing size
[11]. This is the term that CD attempts to approximate.
The CD approach attempts to reconstruct the diﬃcult
expectation term with iterative Gibbs sampling.
This
works by sequentially sampling each layer given the sig-
moidal conditional probabilities, namely
p(hi = 1|v) = σ

X
j
wijvj + ci

,
(7)
for the visible layer, and similarly for the hidden layer
p(vj = 1|h) = σ
 X
i
wijhi + bj
!
,
(8)
with σ(x) = (1 + e−x)−1. The required expectation val-
ues are calculated with the resulting samples. In the limit
of inﬁnite sampling iterations, the expectation value is re-
covered. However, this convergence is slow and in practice
usually only one iteration, referred to CD-1, is used [28].
3. Eﬃcient Sampling with Memcomputing
3.1. The memcomputing approach to optimization
In this work, we propose the application of DMMs to the
accurate training of restricted Boltzmann machines. For-
mally, a DMM can be speciﬁed by the following tuple, [22]
DMM = (Z2, ∆, P, S, Σ, p0, s0, F)
(9)
3

Where ∆is the set of transition functions between states
of the machine,
δα : Zmα
2
\ F × P →Zm′
α
2
× P2 × S
(10)
Here mα represents the number of memprocessors read in
by δα and m′
α the number of memprocessors written by the
function. P is the set of arrays of pointers pα that identify
memprocessors called by δα, S is the collection of indices
α, Σ is a set of initial states, p0 an initial array of pointers,
s0 an initial index and F a set of ﬁnal or accepting states.
A practical realization of DMMs can be accomplished
using dynamical systems [22, 27]. In this paper, we employ
the representation that uses self-organizing logic circuits
(SOLCs), namely circuits that self-organize to satisfy the
appropriate logical propositions deﬁned by the problem at
hand. These circuits are fully speciﬁed by a set of coupled
ordinary diﬀerential equations representing the physical
system of electric components comprising the circuit,
˙y = G(y(t)),
(11)
where y describes the vector of all voltages, currents and
internal state variables (providing memory) in the circuit,
and G is the ﬂow vector ﬁeld that deﬁnes the laws of tem-
poral evolution of the circuit.
To solve a given computational problem within this
paradigm, ﬁrst a Boolean circuit is constructed that rep-
resents the given problem. The constituent classical logic
gates are then replaced with ones that self-organize [22].
The inputs to the problem can be speciﬁed via voltages
at terminals of the SOLC, whose equations of motion are
then integrated forward in time from a random initial con-
dition, according to the vector ﬂow ﬁeld F, to an equilib-
rium (ﬁxed) point of the system. Voltage terminals corre-
sponding to the solution of the problem can then be read
out.
Prima facie, the mapping of a discrete Boolean problem
into a continuous system of non-linear diﬀerential equa-
tions may not seem computationally advantageous. In this
case, however, the mapping to a SOLC results in a vector
ﬂow ﬁeld which has been shown to possess certain func-
tional and topological properties that give rise to dramatic
computational advantages [22, 27]. Namely, the resulting
dynamical systems do not exhibit chaos or periodic orbits
in the presence of solutions [29, 30], and employ highly
non-local (in both space and time) correlated states to eﬃ-
ciently explore the vast phase space of the problem [26, 31].
It is the latter property that truly distinguishes this ap-
proach from other, local, approaches to optimization.
3.2. From RBMs to a QUBO problem to a MAX-SAT
To employ these advantages within the training of
RBMs, we construct ﬁrst a reinterpretation of the RBM
pretraining that explicitly shows how it corresponds to an
NP-hard optimization problem, which we then tackle us-
ing DMMs in their SOLC representation. We ﬁrst observe
that to obtain a sample near most of the probability mass
35.5
36
36.5
37
37.5
38
38.5
39
39.5
40
Simulation Time (arbitrary units)
10
12
14
16
18
20
Total Weight
0
10
20
30
40
10
15
20
Figure 2: Plot of the total weight of a MAX-SAT clause as a function
of internal simulation time (not physical seconds) of a DMM. A lower
weight variable assignment corresponds directly to a higher proba-
bility assignment of the nodes of an RBM. If the simulation has not
changed assignments in some time, we restart with another random
(independent) initial condition. The inset shows the full simulation,
with all restarts. The main ﬁgure focuses on the last three restarts,
signiﬁed by the black box in the inset.
of the joint distribution, p(v, h) ∝e−E(v,h), one must ﬁnd
the minimum of the energy of the form Eq. (3), which
constitutes a quadratic unconstrained binary optimization
(QUBO) problem [32].
We can see this directly by considering the visible and
hidden nodes as one vector x = (v, h) and re-writing the
energy of an RBM conﬁguration as
E = −xT Qx,
(12)
where Q is the matrix
Q =
B
W
0
C

,
(13)
with B and C being the diagonal matrices representing the
biases bj and ci, respectively, while the matrix W contains
the weights.
We then employ a mapping from a general QUBO prob-
lem to a weighted maximum satisﬁability (weighted MAX-
SAT) problem, similar to [33], which is directly solved by
the DMM. The weighted MAX-SAT problem is to ﬁnd an
assignment of boolean variables that minimizes the total
weight of a given boolean expression written in conjunctive
normal form [32].
This problem is a well-known problem in the NP-hard
complexity class [32].
However, it was recently shown
in Ref. [23], that simulations of DMMs show dramatic
(exponential) speed-up over the state-of-the-art solvers,
when attempting to ﬁnd better approximations to hard
MAX-SAT instances beyond the inapproximability gap
[34]. We then use SOLCs appropriately designed to tackle
the MAX-SAT that originates from the RBM QUBO prob-
lem. The ordinary diﬀerential equations we solve can be
found in Ref. [22] appropriately adapted to deal with the
particular problem discussed in this paper.
4

MAXSAT
RBM
SOLC
QUBO
Weights specify
Maps to
Solved by
Computes model expectation
Computes 
model 
expectation 
for
Gradient
Updates weights of
Figure 3: A diagrammatic overview of the memcomputing-assisted
RBM training procedure described in this paper.
For each itera-
tion of pretraining, the set of weights of an RBM speciﬁes a QUBO
problem, which is converted into an equivalent weighted MAX-SAT
problem to be solved by a DMM in its SOLC representation. This
solution computes the model expectation term in the gradient (4),
which updates the weights of the model and the whole process begins
again, until convergence.
The approximation to the global optimum of the
weighted MAX-SAT problem given by memcomputing is
then mapped back to the original variables that represent
the states of the RBM nodes. Finally, we obtain an ap-
proximation to the “ground state” (lowest energy state) of
the RBM as a variable assignment, x∗, close to the peak
of the probability distribution, where ∇P(x∗) = 0. This
assignment is obtained by integration of the ordinary dif-
ferential equations that deﬁne the SOLC’s dynamics. In
doing so we collect an entire trajectory, x(t), that begins
at a random initial condition in the phase space of the
problem, and ends at the lowest energy conﬁguration of
the variables (see Fig. 2).
Since the problem we are tackling here is an optimiza-
tion one, we do not have any guarantee of ﬁnding the
global optimum. (This is in contract to a SAT problem
where we can guarantee DMMs do ﬁnd the solutions of
the problem corresponding to equilibrium points, if these
exist [22, 30, 29].) Therefore, there is an ambiguity about
what exactly constitutes the stopping time of the simula-
tion, since a priori, one cannot know that the simulation
has reached the global minimum.
We then perform a few “restarts” of the simulation (that
eﬀectively correspond to a change of the initial conditions)
and stop the simulation when the machine has not found
any better conﬁguration within that number of restarts.
The restarts are clearly seen in Fig.
2 as spikes in the
total weight of the boolean expression. In this work we
have employed 28 restarts, which is an over-kill since a
much smaller number would have given similar results.
The full trajectory, x(t), together with the above
“restarts” is plotted in Fig. 2. It is seen that this tra-
(a) 100 back-propagation iterations
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Pretraining Iterations
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Accuracy
Mem-QUBO
CD-1
(b) 200 back-propagation iterations
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Pretraining Iterations
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Accuracy
Mem-QUBO
CD-1
(c) 400 back-propagation iterations
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Pretraining Iterations
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Accuracy
Mem-QUBO
CD-1
Figure 4: Memcomputing (Mem-QUBO) accuracy on the test set
of the reduced MNIST problem versus contrastive divergence for
n = 100(a), 200(b), 400(c) iterations of back-propagation with mini-
batches of 100. The plots show average accuracy with ±σ/
√
N error
bars calculated across 10 DBNs trained on N = 10 diﬀerent parti-
tions of the training set. One can see a dramatic acceleration with
the memcomputing approach needing far less iterations to achieve
the same accuracy, as well as an overall performance gap (indicated
by a black arrow) that back-propagation cannot seem to overcome.
Note that some of the error bars for both Mem-QUBO and CD-
1 are very small on the reported scale for a number of pretraining
iterations larger than about 20.
jectory, in between restarts, spends most of its time in
“low-energy regions,” or equivalently areas of high proba-
bility. A time average, ⟨x(t)⟩, gives a good approximation
5

(a) 100 back-propagation iterations
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Pretraining iterations
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Accuracy
Mem-QUBO
CD-1
(b) 500 back-propagation iterations
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Pretraining iterations
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Accuracy
Mem-QUBO
CD-1
(c) 800 back-propagation iterations
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Pretraining iterations
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Accuracy
Mem-QUBO
CD-1
Figure 5: Mem-QUBO accuracy on the reduced MNIST test set vs.
CD-1 after n = 100(a), 500(b), 800(c) iterations of back-propagation
with no mini-batching. The resulting pretraining acceleration shown
by the memcomputing approach is denoted by the horizontal arrow.
A performance gap also appears, emphasized by the vertical arrow,
with Mem-QUBO obtaining a higher level of accuracy than CD-1,
even for the highest number of back-propagation iterations. No error
bars appear here since we have trained the full test set.
to the required expectations in the gradient calculation in
Eqs. (4), (5), and (6). In practice, even using the best as-
signment found, x∗, shows a great improvement over CD
in our experience. This is what we report in this paper.
Note also that a full trajectory, as the one shown in Fig. 2,
takes about 0.5 seconds on a single Xeon processor.
A
schematic of the full pre-training iteration procedure used
in this paper can be seen in the diagram in Fig. 3.
4. Results
As a testbed for the memcomputing advantage in deep
learning, and as a direct comparison to the quantum an-
nealing hardware approaches, we ﬁrst looked to the re-
duced MNIST data set as reported in [20] for quantum
annealing using a D-wave machine.
Therefore, we have
ﬁrst applied the same reduction to the full MNIST prob-
lem as given in that work, which consists of removing two
pixels around all 28 × 28 grayscale values in both the test
and training sets. Then each 4 × 4 block of pixels is re-
placed by their average values to give a 6×6 reduced image.
Finally, the four corner pixels are discarded resulting in a
total of 32 pixels representing each image.
We also trained the same-size DBN consisting of two
stacked RBMs each with 32 visible and hidden nodes,
training each RBM one at a time. We put both the CD-
1 and our Memcomputing-QUBO (Mem-Qubo) approach
through N = 1, · · · , 50 generative pretraining iterations
using no mini-batching.
For the memcomputing approach, we solve one QUBO
problem per pretraining iteration to compute the model
expectation value in Eqs. (4), (5), and (6). We pick out
the best variable assignment, x∗, which gives the ground
state of Eq. (3) as an eﬀective approximation of the re-
quired expectation. After generative training, an output
classiﬁcation layer with 10 nodes was added to the net-
work (see Fig. 1) and 1000 back-propagation iterations
were applied in both approaches using mini-batches of 100
samples to generate Fig. 4. For both pretraining and back-
propagation, our learning rate was set to ϵ = 0.1 and mo-
mentum parameters were α = 0.1 for the ﬁrst 5 iterations,
and α = 0.5 for the rest, same as in [20].
Accuracy on the test set versus CD-1 as a function
of the number of pretraining iterations is seen in Fig. 4.
The memcomputing method reaches a far better solution
faster, and maintains an advantage over CD even after
hundreds of back-propagation iterations. Interestingly, our
software approach is even competitive with the quantum
annealing method done in hardware [20] (cf. Fig. 4 with
Figs. 7, 8, and 9 in Ref. [20]). This is quite a remarkable
result, since we integrate a set of diﬀerential equations
of a classical system, in a scalable way, with comparable
sampling power to a physically-realized system that takes
advantage of quantum eﬀects to improve on CD.
Finally, we also trained the RBM on the reduced MNIST
data set without mini-batches.
We are not aware of
quantum-annealing results for the full data set, but we
can still compare with the CD approach. We follow a sim-
ilar procedure as discussed above. In this case, however,
no mini-batching was used for a more direct comparison
between the Gibbs sampling of CD and our memcomput-
ing approach. The results are shown in Fig. 5 for diﬀer-
ent numbers of back-propagation iterations. Even on the
6

full modiﬁed MNIST set, our memcomputing approach re-
quires a substantially lower number of pretraining itera-
tions to achieve a high accuracy and, additionally, shows
a higher level of accuracy over the traditional CD, even
after 800 back-propagation iterations.
5. The Role of Supervised Training
The computational diﬃculty of computing the exact
gradient update in pretraining, combined with the inac-
curacies of CD, has inspired research into methods which
reduce (or outright eliminate) the role of pretraining deep
models. These techniques include changes to the numerical
gradient procedure itself, like adaptive gradient estimation
[35], changes to the activation functions (e.g., the intro-
duction of rectiﬁers) to reduce gradient decay and enforce
sparsity [13], and techniques like batch normalization to
make back-propagation less sensitive to initial conditions
[14]. With these new updates, in many contexts, deep net-
works initialized from a random initial condition are found
to compete with networks pretrained with CD [13].
To complete our analysis we have then compared a
network pretrained with our memcomputing approach
to these back-propagation methods with no pretraining.
Both networks were trained with stochastic gradient de-
scent with momentum and the same learning rates and
momentum parameter we used in Section 3.
In Fig. 6, we see how these techniques fair against a net-
work pretrained with the memcomputing approach on the
reduced MNIST set. In the randomly initialized network,
we employ the batch-normalization procedure [14] coupled
with rectiﬁed linear units (ReLUs) [13]. As anticipated,
batch-normalization smooths out the role of initial condi-
tions, while rectiﬁers should render the energy landscape
deﬁned by Eq. (3) more convex. Therefore, combined they
indeed seem to provide an advantage compared to the net-
work trained with CD using sigmoidal functions [13]. In
fact, in experiments with batch normalization and ReLUs,
we did not ﬁnd any accuracy diﬀerence between a network
pre-trained with CD and a randomly initialized network,
and thus we omit plotting CD results in Fig. 6.
However, they are not enough to overcome the advan-
tages of our memcomputing approach. In fact, it is obvious
from Fig. 6 that the network pretrained with memcomput-
ing maintains an accuracy advantage (of more than 1% and
a 20% reduction in error rate) on the test set out to more
than a thousand back-propagation iterations.
It is key
to note that the network pretrained with memcomputing
contains sigmoidal activations compared to the rectiﬁers
in the network with no pretraining. Also, the pretrained
network was trained without any batch normalization pro-
cedure.
Therefore, considering all this, the pretrained network
should pose a more diﬃcult optimization problem for
stochastic gradient descent. Instead, we found an accu-
racy advantage of memcomputing throughout the course
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Backpropagation Iterations
0.75
0.775
0.8
0.825
0.85
0.875
0.9
0.925
0.95
0.975
1
y
Mem-QUBO+Sig
BN+ReLU
800
900
1000
0.92
0.93
0.94
0.95
0.96
Figure 6:
Accuracy on the reduced MNIST test set obtained on
a network pretrained with (blue curve) our approach Mem-QUBO
and sigmoidal activation functions (Sig) versus the same size net-
work with (red curve) no pretraining but with batch normalization
(BN) and rectiﬁed linear units (ReLU). Both networks were trained
with stochastic gradient descent with momentum and mini-batches of
100. The inset clearly shows an accuracy advantage of Mem-QUBO
greater than 1% and an error rate reduction of 20% throughout the
training.
of training. This points to the fact that with memcomput-
ing, the pretraining procedure is able to operate close to
the “true gradient” (Eqs. (4), (5), and (6)) during train-
ing, and in doing so, initializes the weights and biases of
the network in a advantageous way.
6. Conclusions
In this paper we have demonstrated how the memcom-
puting paradigm (and, in particular, its digital realiza-
tion [22]) can be applied toward the chief bottlenecks in
deep learning today. In this paper, we directly assisted
a popular algorithm to pretrain RBMs and DBNs, which
consists of gradient ascent on the log-likelihood. We have
shown that memcomputing can accelerate considerably the
pretraining of these networks toward better quality solu-
tions far better than what is currently done.
In fact, simulations of digital memcomputing machines
achieve accelerations of pretraining comparable to, in num-
ber of iterations, the hardware application of the quan-
tum annealing method, but with better quality.
In ad-
dition, unlike quantum computers, our approach can be
easily scaled on classical hardware to full size problems.
In fact, the method we employ to solve the MAX-SAT has
been shown to scale to tens of millions of variables (as op-
posed to only hundreds to thousands encountered in this
paper) [23]. We leave the study of other full size problems
for future work.
In addition, our memcomputing method retains an ad-
vantage also with respect to advances in supervised train-
ing, like batch-norming and rectiﬁers, that have been intro-
duced to eliminate the need of pretraining. We ﬁnd indeed,
that despite our pretraining done with sigmoidal functions,
hence on a more non-convex landscape than that provided
7

by rectiﬁers, we maintain an accuracy advantage greater
than 1% (and a 20% reduction in error rate) throughout
the training.
Finally, the form of the energy in Eq. (3) is quite general
and encompasses full DBNs. In this way, our method can
also be applied to pretraining entire deep-learning models
at once, potentially exploring parameter spaces that are
inaccessible by any other classical or quantum methods.
We leave this interesting line of research for future studies.
Acknowledgments – We thank Forrest Sheldon for use-
ful discussions and Yoshua Bengio for pointing out the
role of supervised training techniques.
H.M. acknowl-
edges support from a DoD-SMART fellowship. M.D. ac-
knowledges partial support from the Center for Mem-
ory and Recording Research at UCSD. All memcomput-
ing simulations reported in this paper have been done
using the Falcon c
⃝simulator of MemComputing, Inc.
(http://memcpu.com/).
