Formalising Hypothesis Virtues in Knowledge Graphs:
A General Theoretical Framework and its Validation in
Literature-Based Discovery Experiments$
V´ıt Nov´aˇceka

IDA Business Park, Lower Dangan, Galway, Ireland
Abstract
We introduce an approach to discovery informatics that uses so called knowl-
edge graphs as the essential representation structure. Knowledge graph is an
umbrella term that subsumes various approaches to tractable representation of
large volumes of loosely structured knowledge in a graph form. It has been
used primarily in the Web and Linked Open Data contexts, but is applicable
to any other area dealing with knowledge representation. In the perspective of
our approach motivated by the challenges of discovery informatics, knowledge
graphs correspond to hypotheses. We present a framework for formalising so
called hypothesis virtues within knowledge graphs. The framework is based on
a classic work in philosophy of science, and naturally progresses from mostly
informative foundational notions to actionable speciﬁcations of measures cor-
responding to particular virtues. These measures can consequently be used to
determine reﬁned sub-sets of knowledge graphs that have large relative potential
for making discoveries. We validate the proposed framework by experiments in
literature-based discovery. The experiments have demonstrated the utility of
our work and its superiority w.r.t. related approaches.
Keywords:
discovery informatics, hypotheses as knowledge graphs, hypothesis
virtue formalisation, automated knowledge graph construction, evolutionary
reﬁnement, literature-based discovery
1. Introduction
Ever since the dawn of computer age, researchers have been intrigued by
the possibility of automating the process of discovery [27].
Today, the ﬁeld
of discovery informatics is getting more relevant than ever before. The large
$This work has been supported by the “KI2NA” project funded by Fujitsu Laboratories,
Limited in collaboration with Insight, NUI Galway. We also greatly appreciate comments of
Pierre-Yves Vandenbussche who helped us to reﬁne the presentation of the article.

Preprint submitted to Elsevier
October 16, 2018
arXiv:1503.09137v2  [cs.AI]  28 Apr 2015

amounts of data that are being made openly available for anyone to explore
have an immense potential for making new discoveries, and solutions that would
enable this are highly sought after [15].
Knowledge graphs are one of the most universal ways of representing ac-
tionable, data-driven knowledge at large scale [8]. They represent knowledge as
relationships (edges) between items of interests (vertices), with the possibility
of adding additional annotations representing for instance multiple relationship
types (i.e., predicates). Such a representation has many advantages like uni-
versal applicability and a wealth of well-founded methods for analysing graph
structures. Yet the full potential of knowledge graphs for practical applications
in knowledge discovery is still largely to be explored [8].
The motivation of the presented work is two-fold. Firstly, we want to pro-
pose a general framework for deﬁning features of knowledge graphs that can
determine which parts of the graphs have highest potential for making discover-
ies. We believe that this can facilitate the process of semi-automated knowledge
discovery in domains that have a lot of data available in graph-like format, but
suﬀer from high redundancy and noise (e.g., World Wide Web, social networks
or biological pathway databases).
The second motivation is more practical.
In our previous work [30], we
addressed the problem of extracting simple knowledge graphs from biomedical
texts. The graphs were then used for so called machine-aided skim reading –
high-level navigation of a speciﬁc domain represented by a textual corpus which
was assumed to facilitate the discovery process. Indeed, even highly experienced
domain experts were able to discover new and relevant facts using the proto-
type system. However, the results also contained some noise and connections
that were correct, but rather obvious and/or uninteresting. This motivated the
validation experiments presented here, which demonstrate that our framework
for formalising hypothesis virtues can tackle the problems of noise, redundancy
and obviousness in knowledge graphs automatically extracted from texts.
Our approach consists of formalising features applicable to ranking knowl-
edge graphs (or their partitions) based on their potential for making discoveries.
This can be used for instance for decomposing knowledge graphs into atomic
subgraphs and consequent construction of a graph that has higher “discovery
potential” than the original one. The formalisation is based on widely accepted
hypothesis virtues studied in philosophy of science [36]. Examples of virtues
are refutability or generality – a good scientiﬁc hypothesis has to be falsiﬁable
and should also provide explanations of phenomena outside of its original scope.
We present general conditions for each of the virtues and proceed with deﬁn-
ing speciﬁc measures that conform to these conditions and can be eﬃciently
implemented.
The validation of the approach was performed in the context of literature-
based discovery [41]. We extracted knowledge graphs from two de facto standard
biomedical corpora traditionally used in evaluation of literature-based discovery
tools. For that we used a very simple and domain-agnostic method that extracts
statistically signiﬁcant co-occurrence relationships. We opted for such a solu-
tion to demonstrate the universal applicability of our approach. From these
2

basic graphs, we constructed reﬁned ones using a genetic algorithm that utilises
the hypothesis virtue measures in the ﬁtness function. The reﬁned graphs were
analysed according to the evaluation measures used in the literature-based dis-
covery ﬁeld and compared to related works. The results of the validation were
positive, as we outperformed the state of the art in most respects. Moreover,
we discovered relevant relationships that have not been covered by any related
automated system or manual study. This demonstrates the practical utility of
our approach.
Our main contributions are as follows. We have proposed a novel theoreti-
cal framework for extensible deﬁnition of measures that can be used to analyse
the discovery potential of knowledge graphs. We have deﬁned speciﬁc measures
applicable especially to reﬁnement of knowledge graphs automatically extracted
from texts. We have implemented an evolutionary method for reﬁnement of the
automatically extracted knowledge graphs that is applicable out-of-the-box to
any domain where English texts are available. We have demonstrated the prac-
tical relevance of the presented research by a successful experimental validation
in the ﬁeld of literature-based discovery. Last but not least, we have provided
a data package containing a prototype implementation of our approach, results
and other data necessary for the replication of our experiments.
The rest of the article is organised as follows. Section 2 presents the general
framework for formalising the hypothesis virtues in the context of knowledge
graphs. Section 3 then introduces actual measures that follow the general re-
quirements of the hypothesis virtue formalisations. Our approach is experimen-
tally validated in Section 4. The section describes the evolutionary reﬁnement
of knowledge graphs extracted from texts and elaborates on the experiments
in literature-based discovery. Related approaches are discussed in Section 5.
Finally, we conclude the article and outline our future work in Section 6.
2. Formalising Hypothesis Virtues
The foundations of the presented work are built on [36], a classic work in
philosophy of science. The work introduces ﬁve virtues of hypothesis: conser-
vatism, modesty, simplicity, generality and refutability. These virtues present a
comprehensive compilation of the philosophical treatments of discovery ranging
from antiquity to modern analytical philosophy, and have been frequently used
as a reference for determining quality of hypotheses in science.
According to [36], the virtue of conservatism reﬂects the fact that good
hypothesis usually makes rather conservative claims. This is to minimise the
risk of error by reaching too far from the state of the art in one step (even
though the combination of the particular conservative claims may go very far
after all, indeed). Modesty is related to conservatism – a hypothesis A is more
modest than A and B (since A and B entails A), and a more modest hypothesis
is considered better as it minimises the risk of wrong and/or redundant claims.
The simplicity virtue posits that a good hypothesis should simplify our view of
the world by making new claims about it, even though the claims themselves
may actually be quite complex. The generality virtue is related to the predictive
3

power of hypothesis – the more phenomena (that have perhaps not even been
considered originally) it can explain, the better it is. Finally, refutability means
that a hypothesis should be falsiﬁable in as obvious manner as possible. This
is a factor of utmost importance, as discussed in arguably the most inﬂuential
work on this topic [33].
In the following, we ﬁrst deﬁne the notions of hypotheses and their claims in
the context of knowledge graphs (Section 2.1) and then continue with formalising
the ﬁve virtues (Section 2.2).
2.1. Preliminaries
First we deﬁne a universe – a general knowledge graph within which partic-
ular hypotheses may be deﬁned.
Deﬁnition 1. A universe graph U is a tuple (VU, EU, ΛV , ΛE) where VU is a set
of vertices, EU ⊆VU ×VU is a set of edges and ΛV , ΛE are sets of labeling maps
(i.e., morphisms) that associate values with the universe vertices and edges,
respectively.
The labeling maps can, for instance, assign predicate types to edges in seman-
tic networks, assert vertex types like class or individual in ontology knowledge
graphs, or associate conﬁdence weights with edges of automatically extracted
knowledge graphs. Such a deﬁnition can accommodate a broad range of knowl-
edge graphs with varying levels of semantic complexity, while keeping the basic
structure still compatible with the analysis methods introduced here. The uni-
verse can be either directed or undirected. The experiments presented in this
article deal with an undirected universe and therefore we assume undirected
graphs in the following unless explicitly stated otherwise.
A hypothesis in a universe is deﬁned as follows.
Deﬁnition 2. A hypothesis H = (VH, EH, ΛH
V , ΛH
E ) is a subgraph of the uni-
verse U such that VH ⊆VU, EH ⊆EU and ∀λH
V ∈ΛH
V ∃λV ∈ΛV . λH
V ⊆
λV , ∀λH
E ∈ΛH
E ∃λE ∈ΛE. λH
E ⊆λE.
The second deﬁning condition of the hypothesis subgraph means that any spe-
ciﬁc labeling map employed by a hypothesis has to be subsumed by a map
deﬁned in the universe. This ensures that the universe is closed w.r.t. possible
interpretations of the hypotheses existing within it.
Most of the hypothesis virtues critically depend on what a claim of a hy-
pothesis is, and therefore we need to deﬁne that as well.
Deﬁnition 3. A claim of a hypothesis H is a simple (i.e., acyclic) path in the
graph H.
Such a deﬁnition presents arguably the most universal view on what a particular
knowledge graph may express.
No matter what the actual semantics of the
relationships in a hypothesis graph are, one can always study what they claim
at least in terms of connections of vertices by means of edges, i.e., paths (we
4

will use the terms path and claim interchangeably in the rest of the article).
This makes our approach applicable to any type of knowledge graph.
Note that one practical implication of the last deﬁnition is that we can
consider only connected graphs as hypotheses – if there is no path between two
vertices, no claim is being made about them and they should thus be parts of
diﬀerent hypotheses. This is partly related to the open/closed world assumption
dichotomy. The fact there is no connection between vertices does not mean no
such connection can exist, it only means nothing is known about it in the context
of the given knowledge graph.
The ﬁnal preliminary deﬁnition concerns all claims possibly made by a hy-
pothesis.
Deﬁnition 4. A claim set of a hypothesis H is the set Π(H) of all simple paths
in the corresponding graph. A claim volume of H is the size of its claim set,
i.e., |Π(H)|.
The claim volume can be very large and is hard to compute even for relatively
small graphs [47]. Also, it is not realistic to expect every possible path in a
knowledge graph to convey a meaningful claim.
Therefore in practice, it is
convenient to restrict the claim set to a more manageable size based on case-
speciﬁc heuristics. However, the maximal possible number of claims is apt as
a theoretical notion for describing general knowledge graphs without further
information about their domain and more complex semantics.
2.2. Formalising the Virtues
The following ﬁve sections present formalisations of the particular hypothe-
sis virtues using the preliminary notions introduced above. Note that we pro-
vide general guidelines for measuring the virtues ﬁrst, giving minimalistic set of
conditions the measures should satisfy. Detailed examples of speciﬁc measures
facilitating literature-based discovery are discussed in Sections 3 and 4.
2.2.1. Conservatism
Conservative claims should make small steps in a particular direction, how-
ever, the combination of the steps can potentially be quite radical (i.e., far-
reaching). The conservatism of a path in a hypothesis H can be measured by a
function f : Π(H) →R that satisﬁes the following conditions:
1. Assuming a metric δ : VU × VU →R on the vertices in the universe graph,
the function f applied to a path p = (v1, v2, . . . , v|p|) is negatively cor-
related1 with the g({δ(v1, v2), δ(v2, v3), . . . , δ(v|p|−1, v|p|)}) value, where
g : 2R →R is an aggregation function (e.g., sum, mimimum, maximum or
arithmetic mean).
1Here and in the following, we use broad notions of positive and negative correlation. They
are meant to generalise the respective notions of proportionality and inverse proportionality to
possibly non-linear, non-algebraic or statistical relationships that may be speciﬁc to particular
applications.
5

2. If radical claims are preferred, then there is an additional requirement for
f being positively correlated with the δ(v1, v|p|) value.
The conservatism of the whole hypothesis H is computed by aggregating
all path conservatism measures across the Π(H) set. The higher the aggregate
value, the larger the conservatism. Due to the complexity of enumerating the
Π(H) set, practical conservatism measures can target only a subset of all possible
paths. For instance, a set of shortest paths between all vertices in H w.r.t. the
δ edge labeling is a viable option as it is comparatively easier to compute and
already satisﬁes condition 1. if sum is used as an aggregation function.
2.2.2. Modesty
Let us refer by Hω to the complete graph corresponding to a hypothesis H
(i.e., a graph with an edge between any two vertices in VH). Then the modesty
of H can be deﬁned as
|Π(Hω)|
|Π(H)| .
This number reﬂects the ratio between all possible claims about the entities
covered by H and the actual number of claims being made. The higher the
ratio, the larger the modesty (a modest hypothesis minimises the number of
claims made in relation to the number of claims that can possibly be made).
As mentioned before, computing the number of all simple paths in a graph is
extremely diﬃcult in general. Therefore in practice, approximations of the mod-
esty measure are necessary. The approximations, however, should be monotonic
w.r.t. the ideal modesty measure: assuming f, g as the ideal and approximate
modesty measures, respectively, then g(H) > g(I) if and only if f(H) > f(I)
for any two hypotheses H, I.
2.2.3. Simplicity
For this virtue, we use the dual notion of complexity which has been exten-
sively studied in the context of graphs [25]. A good hypothesis should simplify
our view of the world despite of possibly being locally complex [36]. In order
to formalise this intuition, let us assume the simplicity of a graph is measured
by a function f : GU →R, where GU is a set of all graphs conceivable in the
universe U. The function f should satisfy these conditions:
1. Given a hypothesis graph H and a graph complexity measure c : GU →R,
f is positively correlated with the expression
c(U \ H)
c(U)
which reﬂects the universe simpliﬁcation rate w.r.t. to the hypothesis2.
2From here on, we use the set-theoretic operators for graphs as a convenience notation
for the operations applied on the corresponding vertex and edge sets in the actual tuple
representations of the graphs.
The labeling sets of the result are assumed to be ΛV , ΛE,
i.e., the universe ones, unless speciﬁed otherwise.
6

2. If locally complex hypotheses are preferred, then the function f is also
required to be positively correlated with the value c(H).
Strictly speaking, the rate in the ﬁrst condition should also be higher than 1
in order for the hypothesis to make the universe actually simpler, but practical
applications may relax that requirement and just rank the hypotheses based on
the measure.
2.2.4. Generality
Generality can be quantiﬁed as a number of explanations (i.e., claims) the
hypothesis H can provide for ‘out-of-scope’ phenomena (i.e., vertices) in the
U \ H graph. This can be expressed as
g({f(u)|u ∈VU \ VH}),
where the function g : 2R →R is an aggregation (like sum or arithmetic mean)
over all vertices that are out of the H scope. The function f : VU →R is required
to be positively correlated with the h({|{v|v ∈p∧v ∈VH}| | p ∈Πu(U)}) value,
where h : 2R →R is another aggregation function and Πu(U) is a set of all simple
paths in the universe U that start in the vertex u.
The generality deﬁnition reﬂects the basic intuition that the higher the num-
ber of H vertices on paths explaining phenomena outside of H, the higher the
generality of H. As the numbers of simple paths can be diﬃcult to compute
even if limited to paths starting in single nodes, approximations of this measure
are needed for implementations again. Similarly to the modesty condition, we
require the approximations to be monotonic w.r.t. the ideal generality measure.
2.2.5. Refutability
Refutability can be seen as a quantiﬁcation of: 1) the easiness with which
the claim volume |Π(H)| of a particular hypothesis graph H can be reduced;
2) the rate of the reduction. The atomic part of the process of refutation in
the context of knowledge graphs is an invalidation, i.e., removal, of a vertex.
Let us assume a decreasing ranking R : N →VU of the vertices in H based on
the number of simple paths that no longer exist in the graph after the vertex
removal. Then we can deﬁne a top-k refutability as
|Π(H)|
|Π(H)| + Pk
i=1 |Π(H/R(i))|
,
where H/R(i) is a graph resulting from removal of the ﬁrst vertex in the ranking
R from the graph H/R(i −1). We assert H/R(0) = H by deﬁnition. The lower
the number of paths still existing after removing the top vertex according to R,
the higher the refutability. The |Π(H)| expression is added to the denominator
to avoid potential division by zero, and also to normalise the measure value.
Note that for growing k values, the top-k refutability generally converges
to similar values for any given set of hypotheses as the measure is relative to
the total number of paths in the graph. Therefore it is practical to use the
7

measure with rather low k values, perhaps even as low as 1 which measures
the rate of refutability in a single vertex removal step. Additionally, the ideal
measure is diﬃcult to compute and approximations are required in practice
again. In particular, one can approximate the Π function in the vertex ranking
and refutability deﬁnition with one that is monotonic w.r.t. it.
3. Speciﬁc Virtue Measures
In this part, we introduce speciﬁc instances of hypothesis virtue measures
following the general formalisation presented before. First we give an example
of a universe and a couple of associated structures in Section 3.1. These will
be used for running examples illustrating the measure details in Section 3.2.
Finally, Section 3.3 describes how to use the measures in concert.
3.1. Sample Universe
The examples throughout this section are all based on an illustrative universe
graph U depicted in Figure 1. The graph features real-valued edge labels in the
1
2
 0.5
3
 1
 1
4
 0.5
6
 1
5
 0.5
 0.5
Figure 1: Sample universe graph U
(0, 1] interval that represent conﬁdence weights of the edges (the higher the label
the higher the expected degree of association between the corresponding ver-
tices). These edge labels are used when constructing several auxiliary resources
from the graph. There are no speciﬁc types of edges (i.e., predicates) in the
examples since in the experiments reported in this article, we focus only on one
type of relationship based on automatically extracted co-occurrence statements.
First of all, we need to deﬁne a metric on the vertices. The most straight-
forward option without any background knowledge on the graph is to use its
8

(weighted) adjacency matrix for constructing characteristic context vectors for
every vertex. The vectors can then be used for computing the actual metric.
The adjacency matrix AU of U is presented in Table 1. The context vector x
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
0
0.5
1
0
0
0
2
0.5
0
1
0.5
0
1
3
1
1
0
0
0
0
4
0
0.5
0
0
0.5
0.5
5
0
0
0
0.5
0
0
6
0
1
0
0.5
0
0
Table 1: Weighted adjacency matrix AU
for a vertex x is the row (or column, as the graph is undirected) corresponding
to x in the adjacency matrix AU. Using the context vectors, we can deﬁne the
Euclidean distance (i.e., a metric) on the vertices as δ(x, y) =
pPn
i=1(xi −yi)2
where xi, yi correspond to the i-th elements of the x, y context vectors, respec-
tively. The speciﬁc distances (up to 4-th decimal point) between the universe
vertices are given in Table 2.
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
0
1.3229
1.5
1.2247
1.2247
1.2247
2
1.3229
0
1.8708
1.5
1.5
1.8028
3
1.5
1.8708
0
1.3229
1.5
1.118
4
1.2247
1.5
1.3229
0
1
1
5
1.2247
1.5
1.5
1
0
1
6
1.2247
1.8028
1.118
1
1
0
Table 2: Distance matrix DU
The last auxiliary structure we will need in the following sections (namely
for deﬁning complexity measures) is clustering of the vertices in U. An example
of a possible clustering is given in Figure 2. It is an overlapping clustering that
1
2
3
4
5
6
A
B
C
Figure 2: Cluster structure of U
groups vertices with mutual distances below 1.5 (in the actual implementation
of our approach, we use more sophisticated clustering method as explained in
detail in Section 4.2.1). The clustering contains three clusters A : {1, 2}, B :
{1, 4, 5, 6}, C : {3, 4, 6}. Note that the clustering can either be computed from
9

the universe graph itself or provided externally (e.g., in the form of an ontology
that deﬁnes a taxonomy upon the graph vertices).
3.2. Measure Deﬁnitions
Having introduced the sample universe, we can continue with the speciﬁc
measure deﬁnitions which we use later on in the literature-based discovery ex-
periments.
3.2.1. Conservatism
Following the conditions provided in Section 2.2.1, we deﬁne a speciﬁc in-
stance of the hypothesis graph conservatism measure
C(H) =
1
|πs(H, δ)|
X
p∈πs(H,δ)
δ(v1, v|p|)
P|p|−1
i=1
δ(vi, vi+1)
,
where πs(H, δ) is a set of all shortest paths in H w.r.t. the Euclidean distance δ
and p = (v1, v2, . . . , v|p|) is a speciﬁc shortest path of length |p|. In other words,
the C measure is an arithmetic mean of the shortest path conservatism values
where the path conservatism is computed as a fraction of the distance between
the extreme vertices of the path and the path length3.
The measure satisﬁes the condition 1. from Section 2.2.1 as it already focuses
only on paths with minimal aggregate distance between the consecutive vertices
(assuming the sum aggregation). The condition 2. is satisﬁed as well. For any
path p, δ(v1, v|p|) ≤P|p|−1
i=1
δ(vi, vi+1).
The equality is achieved if and only
if the context vectors of the consecutive vertices represent points that lie in a
straight line, i.e., maximise the distance between the extreme vertices of the
path. Therefore the maximum value 1 of the path conservatism measures is
achieved exactly when the extreme distance is maximal.
Example 1. In Figure 3 there are three hypothesis graphs E, F, G that exist
in the universe U described in Section 3.1. The edges are annotated with the
Euclidean distance δ based on the vertex context vectors (see the examples in
Section 3.1 for details).
The numbers of all shortest paths for the hypothesis graphs E, F, G w.r.t. the
distance δ are 3, 3, 6, respectively. The conservatism measures of the hypotheses
are
C(E) = 1
3(1
1 + 1
2 + 1
1) = 0.83,
C(F) = 1
3(1.3229
1.3229 + 1.8708
1.8708 + 1.5
1.5) = 1,
C(G) = 1
6(1.5
1.5 + 1.8028
1.8028 + 1
1 + 1
1 + 1.5
2.5 + 1
2) = 0.85,
3Note that if there is only one shortest path guaranteed to exist between any pair of vertices
in the H graph, then |πs(H, δ)| =
 |VH|
2

as H is expected to be connected.
10

E
4
5
 1
6
 1
F
1
2
 1.3229
3
 1.5
 1.8708
G
2
4
 1.5
6
 1.8028
5
 1
 1
Figure 3: Sample hypothesis graphs E, F, G
therefore the hypotheses can be ranked in the
F ≻C G ≻C E
order from the most to the least conservative one4.
3.2.2. Modesty
As an approximation of the the ideal modesty measure presented in Sec-
tion 2.2.2, we use inverse density of the hypothesis graph
M(H) = |VH|(|VH| −1)
2|EH|
.
This function is much easier to compute than the ideal one and is monotonic
w.r.t. it. Since the enumerators of both functions are ﬁxed, we only need to
show that the number of edges is monotonic w.r.t. number of all simple paths in
a hypothesis graph. This is quite easy – increase in |EH| (i.e., adding an edge)
will cause |Π(H)| to grow as well since adding an edge will result in at least
one new simple path in H, the edge itself. Conversely, if the set Π(H) grows,
it means that edges had to be added to the H graph as it is the only way how
the overall number of paths can be increased.
Example 2. The number of edges in the E, F, G graphs from Example 1 is
2, 3, 4, respectively, while the maximum possible number of edges in the corre-
sponding complete graphs is 3, 3, 6. Therefore the modesty values are
M(E) = 3
2 = 1.5, M(F) = 3
3 = 1, M(G) = 6
4 = 1.5
4From here on, we use convenience ordering relations ≻X for ranking the hypotheses in a
decreasing order according to a speciﬁc measure X. E ≻X F if and only if X(E) > X(F).
11

and the modesty ranking of the hypotheses is
E ≻M F, G ≻M F.
3.2.3. Simplicity
As stated in Section 2.2.3, we use the dual notion of complexity for measur-
ing hypothesis simplicity. For the speciﬁc instance of the measure, we employ
Shannon’s entropy that has been frequently used for graph complexity [25]. To
deﬁne the entropy, we utilise the clustering of the hypothesis graph vertices
based on their context vectors. Let us assume a vertex labeling γ : VU →2L
where L is a set of cluster identiﬁers. Then we can deﬁne a cluster association
probability p(l, H) for a speciﬁc cluster l ∈L within a hypothesis H as
p(l, H) = |{v|v ∈VH ∧l ∈γ(v)}|
|VH|
.
It is a probability that a randomly selected vertex from H belongs to a cluster
l. If we conceive clusters as higher-level topics the hypothesis graph deals with,
then the probability reﬂects the distribution of the topics across the graph. The
p(l, H) values can be used for computing the cluster association entropy for a
hypothesis H as
E(H) = −
X
l∈L
p(l, H) log2 p(l, H).
It reﬂects the information value of the hypothesis’ cluster structure – the more
“unpredictably” distributed clusters, the higher the complexity and also the
information value. This conforms to an intuitive assumption that hypotheses
dealing with more topics representatively are more informative, i.e., complex.
We deﬁne two simplicity measures that employ the cluster association en-
tropy and satisfy the respective conditions introduced in Section 2.2.3
S1(H) = E(H), S2(H) = E(U \ H)
E(U)
.
We use both measures in the following to capture diﬀerent aspects of simplicity
simultaneously.
Example 3. In Figure 4 there are the three hypotheses graphs E, F, G and the
universe graph U depicted again, but this time with cluster annotations provided
as vertex labels. The cluster association probabilities for each graph are
p(A, U) = 1
3, p(B, U) = 2
3, p(C, U) = 1
2,
p(A, E) = 0, p(B, E) = 1, p(C, E) = 2
3,
p(A, F) = 2
3, p(B, F) = 1
3, p(C, F) = 1
3,
12

U
1: {A,B}
2: {A}
3: {C}
4: {B,C}
6: {B,C}
5: {B}
E
4: {B,C}
5: {B}
6: {B,C}
F
1: {A,B}
2: {A}
3: {C}
G
2: {A}
4: {B,C}
6: {B,C}
5: {B}
Figure 4: Sample hypothesis graphs E, F, G
p(A, G) = 1
4, p(B, G) = 3
4, p(C, G) = 1
4.
The entropies corresponding to these probabilities are
E(U) .= 1.4183, E(E) .= 0.39, E(F) .= 2.78, E(G) .= 1.3113,
E(U \ E) .= 2.78, E(U \ F) .= 0.39, E(U \ G) = 1.5.
The hypothesis F is the lowest-ranking no matter which function we use – it has
the lowest entropy and E(U \ F) < E(U), therefore it makes the universe more
complex. On the other hand, both E, G increase the simplicity of the universe.
If only local complexity of the acceptable hypotheses is relevant (measure S1),
then the ﬁnal ranking is
G ≻S1 E ≻S1 F
since E(G) > E(E). However, if the rate of simplifying the universe is more
important (measure S2), the ranking is
E ≻S2 G ≻S2 F
13

as
E(U \ E)
E(U)
.= 1.9601 > 1.0576 .= E(U \ G)
E(U)
.
3.2.4. Generality
To limit the potentially intractable number of paths in the ideal generality
formula introduced in Section 2.2.4, we apply two approximations in its spec-
iﬁcation. Firstly, we focus only on explanations for the universe vertices V H
A
that are immediately adjacent to the measured hypothesis H. The set of edges
that connect these vertices to H can then be deﬁned as EH
A = {(u, v)|(u, v) ∈
EU ∧(u ∈V H
A , v ∈VH ∨u ∈VH, v ∈V H
A )}. The second approximation consists
of focusing only on shortest paths w.r.t. the δ distance. The speciﬁc generality
measure is then deﬁned as
G(H) = |{p|p ∈πs(U, δ) ∧p1 ∈V H
A ∧p2, p3, . . . , p|p| ∈VH}|.
The measure corresponds to the number of shortest paths that start in an ad-
jacent vertex and connect it with vertices in the hypothesis graph H, thus pro-
viding an explanation for it using only H. As the graphs H are assumed to be
connected, the measure can further be simpliﬁed as G(H) = |EH
A |(1+(VH−1)) =
|EH
A ||VH| for graphs where only one shortest path exists between any two ver-
tices.
The G(H) measure uses sum aggregation as the g function present in the
general deﬁnition. The f function that leads to the presented deﬁnition of G(H)
returns zero for any vertex from the VU \VH set that is not immediately adjacent
to H. For other vertices, it returns the number of paths that provide explanation
for them in H. This number is positively correlated with the number of vertices
in VH as required in the general deﬁnition, since the number of paths leading
from a vertex to other vertices in a connected graph H is |VH| −1 (or more if
multiple shortest paths exist between some vertices).
The restriction to the immediately adjacent vertices leads to a narrowly
focused generality and helps to reduce combinatorial explosion resulting from
taking the whole universe graph into account. The shortest path approximation
is a reasonable limitation as these paths are more likely to be conservative
explanations. It is not strictly monotonic w.r.t. the ideal generality measure,
though. If the number of shortest paths increases, then the number of all paths
naturally has to be higher as well.
The other direction is less obvious, and
conditional. Assuming the number of all paths in a graph has increased, we
have to show that there also has to be more shortest paths. This is not true in
general – if edges between distant vertices are added, they may not contribute to
increasing the number of shortest paths. However, since the measure intuitively
captures the notion of generality in the context of knowledge graphs and is easy
to compute, we decided to relax the absolute monotonicity requirement for the
sake of practicality.
Example 4. The sets vertices adjacent to the E, F, G hypotheses are
V E
A = {2}, V F
A = {4, 6}, V G
A = {1, 3}
14

and the corresponding sets of connecting edges are
EE
A = EF
A = {(4, 2), (6, 2)}, EG
A = {(2, 1), (2, 3)}.
Since there is only one shortest path between any pair of vertices in our example,
the generality measures are
G(E) = |EE
A| · |VE| = 2 · 3 = 6, G(F) = |EF
A| · |VF | = 2 · 3 = 6,
G(G) = |EG
A| · |VG| = 2 · 4 = 8
and the resulting ranking is
G ≻G E, G ≻G F.
3.2.5. Refutability
Using the shortest paths approximation again, we deﬁne a speciﬁc refutabil-
ity measure as
Rk(H) =
|πs(H, δ)|
|πs(H, δ)| + Pk
i=1 |πs(H/R(i), δ)|
.
Similarly to Section 3.2.4, we consider only the shortest paths instead of all
simple ones, which makes the computation of the measure comparatively easier.
Such an approximation is unfortunately not strictly monotonic as shown be-
fore, however, we believe that the practicality and intuitiveness of the measure
outweighs the partial monotonicity violation.
For the ranking R of the vertices in the Rk(H) measure computation, we
use the betweenness centrality which is deﬁned as
cB(v, G) = |{p|p ∈πs(G, δ) ∧v ∈p}|
|πs(G, δ)|
,
where v is a vertex and G is a graph. In other words, betweenness centrality of a
vertex is the number of shortest paths passing though it divided by total number
of shortest paths. The ranking R ranks the vertices in a decreasing order based
on their betweenness centrality.
Such ranking generally does not mean that
removal of a high-ranking vertex results in a higher number of shortest paths
disappearing when compared to a removal of a lower-ranking vertex – if the
graph remains connected in both cases, the number of shortest paths in it will be
the same after removal of either node. However, removing a vertex with higher
betweenness centrality will result in relative increase of the remaining paths’
lengths. This can lead to a decrease of the graph conservatism and thus also to a
decrease of its overall value w.r.t. the hypothesis virtues. Consequently, making
a hypothesis weaker more quickly can be seen as refuting it more eﬃciently. We
believe that this justiﬁes the chosen ranking even though it means yet another
relaxation of the general requirements5.
5An alternative option that fully conforms to the requirements would employ simple paths
instead of shortest ones and vertex degree instead of betweenness centrality, however, such a
solution can easily become intractable.
15

Example 5. The sets of shortest paths w.r.t. the δ distance for the particular
hypothesis graphs are
πs(E, δ) = {(5, 4), (5, 4, 6), (4, 6)},
πs(F, δ) = {(2, 1), (2, 3), (1, 3)},
πs(G, δ) = {(2, 4), (2, 4, 5), (2, 6), (4, 5), (4, 6), (5, 4, 6)}.
The corresponding vertex betweenness centralities are then
cB(4, E) = 1, cB(5, E) = cB(6, E) = 0.6,
cB(1, F) = cB(2, F) = cB(3, F) = 0.6,
cB(2, G) = cB(5, G) = cB(6, G) = 0.5, cB(4, G) = 0.83.
The top-1 refutability measure for the hypothesis E can be computed as follows.
The centrality-based ranking of the vertices places 4 on the top, therefore we
remove it. The result is a disconnected graph consisting of isolated vertices 5, 6
where no path exists anymore. The top-1 refutability measure of E is thus
R(E, 1) =
3
3 + 0 = 1.
Similarly, the top-1 refutability measures for the remaining two hypotheses (with
arbitrary removal vertex selection for F due to uniform centrality ranking) are
R(F, 1) =
3
3 + 1 = 0.75, R(G, 1) =
6
6 + 1 = 0.857142.
The resulting refutability ranking of E, F, G is
E ≻R G ≻R F.
3.3. Combining the Measures
The speciﬁc measures deﬁned in the previous section can be used to rank
the hypothesis graphs independently of each other as shown in the examples.
However, practical applications will very often imply the necessity to compare
hypotheses along all the measures. Lacking any a priori information on which
measures may be more relevant for a particular application, we propose the
following way of ordering the hypothesis graphs.
Let H = {H1, H2, . . . , Hn} be the set of hypothesis graphs we wish to com-
pare according to a set of measures X = {X1, X2, . . . , Xm} of equal impor-
tance.
Then we can construct an edge-labeled directed ranking multigraph
R = (H, E ⊆H × H, λ : E →X). The multigraph’s vertices are the hypotheses
in H. The edge set and the labeling function is constructed from the speciﬁc
measure rankings so that (Hi, Hj) ∈E, λ(Hi, Hj) = Xk if and only if there is
16

a measure Xk such that Hi ≻Xk Hj. Using the ranking multigraph R, we can
deﬁne a combined ranking relation ≻on the set H × H as
Hi ≻Hj if and only if
do(Hi, R)
do(Hi, R) + di(Hi, R) >
do(Hj, R)
do(Hj, R) + di(Hj, R),
where di(Hx, R), do(Hx, R) is the in-degree and out-degree of the vertex Hx in
the multigraph R, respectively. In plain words, the combined ranking relation
≻orders the hypotheses based on the relative magnitude of their superiority
(out-degree) w.r.t. the speciﬁc ranking relations given by the measures.
Example 6. Figure 5 shows the ranking multigraph corresponding to Exam-
ples 1-5. A directed edge from vertex X to Y with a label Z means that X ≻Z Y .
F
G
 C
 M
 S2  G  R
E
 C
 S1
 G
 M  S1
 S2  R
Figure 5: Ranking multigraph for E, F, G
The in-degrees and out-degrees of E, F, G in the ranking graph are
di(E) = 3, do(E) = 4, di(F) = 6, do(F) = 1, di(G) = 3, do(G) = 7,
therefore
G ≻E ≻F
since
7
10 > 4
7 > 1
7.
4. Experimental Validation
In order to validate the proposed formalisation of hypothesis virtues in the
context of knowledge graphs, we chose to follow-up on our work presented in [30]
where we addressed automated extraction of conceptual networks from biomed-
ical literature. The work deals with extraction of co-occurrence and similarity
relationships from abstracts available on PubMed (c.f., http://www.ncbi.nlm.
17

nih.gov/pubmed) and consequent indexing, querying and navigation of the net-
works in a knowledge discovery scenario.
As we have shown in [30], the automatically extracted networks can already
provide useful insights even for experts in the ﬁeld, however, they still contain
some noise and irrelevant and/or obvious information. Tackling this challenge
has been the main practical motivation for the research presented in this article.
We believe we can use our approach to identify portions of the automatically
extracted graphs that can not only provide general overview of the domain with
less noise, but also isolate valid relationships that are surprising for experts.
This can ultimately lead to more eﬃcient machine-aided discovery applications.
In our validation experiments, we utilise the scenarios, data sets and eval-
uation methodologies elaborated within the ﬁeld of literature-based discovery
which we introduce in Section 4.1 below.
Section 4.2 is the methodological
core of this part. It presents an evolutionary approach to the reﬁnement of au-
tomatically extracted knowledge graphs using the hypothesis virtue measures.
Section 4.3 describes the data sets and methods we use for the experimental
evaluation. Finally, Section 4.4 discusses the results of the experiments.
Note that we have implemented our approach and the experiments reported
in this section using a Python prototype available under the GPL free software
license. The corresponding code, experimental data and results are available
at http://skimmr.org/hyperkraph/6. Detailed README documentation on
the implementation and data is provided as a part of the respective archives
hosted at the referenced URL.
4.1. Literature-Based Discovery
The ﬁeld of literature-based discovery is widely considered to stem from the
work [44]. Based on [44] and a follow-up article [45], the work [43] introduced
the notion of Swanson linking – connecting two pieces of knowledge in isolated
documents A and B using concepts from intermediate documents (C) that are
directly or indirectly related to A and B. Surveys of recent works addressing
this problem are provided in [7, 34, 41].
The application of our framework to reﬁning knowledge graphs automati-
cally extracted from literature is closely related to literature-based discovery.
Our goal is to generate a set of graphs that reﬂect relationships between terms
in literature and are optimised w.r.t. hypothesis virtues. Such a structure can
very straightforwardly facilitate the process of ﬁnding “interesting” links be-
tween isolated concepts via intermediates, which is the key problem of literature
discovery. Therefore we can use the standard approaches and man-made “gold
standard” discoveries from that ﬁeld to experimentally validate our approach in
an established application scenario.
6HYPERKRAPH is a general name we use for the ongoing implementation of prototypes
based on the presented research. It stands for HYPothEsis viRtues in Knowledge gRAPHs.
18

4.2. Evolutionary Reﬁnement of Automatically Extracted Knowledge Graphs
The basic assumption we use for validating our framework is that applying
the hypothesis virtue measures to reﬁning graphs extracted from literature will
facilitate literature-based discovery tasks better than the unreﬁned graphs. To
verify this, we have to tackle the graph reﬁnement ﬁrst. The key question is:
Given a knowledge graph based on statements automatically extracted from text,
how can we reﬁne it so that only the parts of the graph that have comparatively
high hypothesis virtue measures remain?
This is essentially an optimisation problem in which we know how to tell
whether a solution X is better than Y, but we do not know much about what
the actual solutions are and how the main knowledge graph is (or should be)
composed of them. Such problems can quite eﬃciently be tackled by evolution-
ary computing [9]. In the rest of this section, we describe a speciﬁc algorithm
for evolutionary reﬁnement of knowledge graphs.
4.2.1. Extracting a Universe Graph from Texts
Figure 6 presents the high-level overview of the graph extraction and reﬁne-
ment process. First we use our SKIMMR tool [30] to extract basic co-occurrence
statements from the input texts. The statements are in the shape of tuples
(t1, t2, wd, T), where t1, t2 are two terms that co-occur in an input text T and
wd is the weight of the co-occurrence based on the sentence distances of the
terms within T.
In the next step (M2 in Figure 6), we:
1. Use the basic statements to compute corpus-wide co-occurrence weights
using normalised point-wise mutual information.
2. Encode the terms in the statements using integer identiﬁers (to optimise
the memory usage in the consequent steps).
3. Build a fulltext index upon the lexical vertex labels for accessing them
during the evaluation (this mitigates the impact of spelling alternatives
and other irregularities in the automatically extracted names).
4. Initialise an undirected edge-labeled universe graph U with edges con-
structed from the corpus-wide statements.
The graph can possibly be
limited to edges with normalised point-wise mutual information weights
above a pre-deﬁned threshold.
5. Construct a context vector space for the U vertices based on their neigh-
bors and corresponding edge weights.
6. Use the vector space to compute the Euclidean distances between the
vertices.
Steps M3 and M4 in Figure 6 perform the K-means clustering of the universe
graph U in order to provide a vertex labeling γ that associates each vertex with
cluster(s) it belongs to (see Section 4.3.3 for details on the K-means settings in
19

D1: texts
M1: SKIMMR
D2: co-occurrence statements
M2: graph generator
D3: edge-labeled graph
M3: K-means module
M4: vertex annotator
D4: clustering
D5: edge- and vertex-labeled graph
M5: evolutionary module
D6: optimised graphs
Figure 6: High-level workﬂow of the graph construction and reﬁnement
20

D1: universe graph
M1: initialisation
D2: population
M2: mutation, crossover and validation
D3: expanded population
M3: ranking and trimming
D4: trimmed population
 IF NOT TERMINATING
Figure 7: Detailed workﬂow of the evolutionary reﬁnement
the particular experiments we conducted). At this moment, everything is ready
for optimising U according to the hypothesis virtue measures of its sub-graphs.
4.2.2. Evolutionary Graph Reﬁnement
The optimisation step in Figure 6 is performed using a genetic algorithm [9].
Its detailed workﬂow is presented in Figure 7. The genetic algorithm has the
following conﬁgurable parameters: 1. mutation and mating probabilities pm, pc
deﬁning how likely it is for an individual in a population to mutate and mate
(i.e., engage in a crossover with another individual); 2. number km deﬁning how
many times an individual can attempt to mate in a generation; 3. maximum
number of generations NG; 4. rate ρp of the standard deviation of the population
size – it sets the size of the population Pi to |Pi| = gauss(|Pi−1|, ρp|Pi−1|) where
gauss(µ, σ) returns a random number from the normal distribution with mean
µ and standard deviation σ, truncated to integer; 5. the mean and standard
deviation µi, σi for determining the sizes of the individuals in the initial popu-
lation. For speciﬁc values of the parameters and discussion of their inﬂuence on
the evolution process in our experiments, see Section 4.3.3.
The population is initialised (step M1 in Figure 7) by a repetitive random
21

selection of possibly overlapping stars of size gauss(µi, σi) from the graph U.
Stars consist of one “hub” vertex and a set of vertices “fanning out” of the hub
via immediate edges. They are a speciﬁc type of sub-graphs that can be used as
atomic graph construction blocks [25] and thus they are ﬁtting for the purpose
of population initialisation.
Step M2 in Figure 7 consists of applying the evolutionary operators on the
population and consequent validation of the newly added individuals which
discards disconnected ones. The mutation deletes or adds an edge from/to the
individual graph with equal probabilities. The crossover combines two parents
by randomly selecting half of the edges from each parent and combining them in
a new individual. All existing edge labels are copied in the process of creating
new individuals.
Step M3 in Figure 7 is essential for the optimisation – it computes the
hypothesis virtue measures of each individual in the expanded population and
then ranks the population according to the combined ranking ≻introduced in
Section 3.3. The population is then trimmed to a random size based on the
previous population size (computed using the ρp parameter).
Steps M2 and M3 are repeated until a termination condition is met. This
can either be reaching a pre-deﬁned number of generations NG, or achieving
some sort of population convergence.
4.3. Description of the Experiments
For the evaluation of our approach we chose two standard scenarios in
literature-based discovery based on the works [44, 45]. Details on the corre-
sponding data sets and experiments we performed using them are described in
the following sections.
4.3.1. Data Acquisition
We used two data sets in the experimental evaluation, both of which address
discovery of connections between previously isolated concepts (and correspond-
ing bodies of literature). One data set is based on [44] that explores the rela-
tionship between ﬁsh oil and Raynaud’s syndrome. The other data set is based
on similar study of previously neglected connections between migraine and mag-
nesium [45]. We refer to these two data sets and corresponding experiments as
to TR, TM, respectively.
The initial corpora of texts for the TR, TM experiments were obtained from
PubMed via queries compiled according to the speciﬁcations given in [44, 45].
Each of these works deﬁnes source and target terms ts, tt together with a set Ic
of intermediate terms that connect them. A query for the PubMed abstracts
corresponding to speciﬁc ts, tt, Ic is compiled as a disjunction of atomic conjunc-
tions
_
t∈{ts,tt},tc∈Ic
(t ∧tc)
The particular queries we used for obtaining the TR, TM corpora were
22

("raynaud" AND "blood") OR ("raynaud" AND "viscosity") OR
("raynaud" AND "platelet") OR ("raynaud" AND "vascular") OR
("raynaud" AND "reactivity") OR ("fish oil" AND "blood") OR
("fish oil" AND "viscosity") OR ("fish oil" AND "platelet") OR
("fish oil" AND "vascular") OR ("fish oil" AND "reactivity")
and
("migraine" AND "vasospasm") OR ("migraine" AND "spreading depres-
sion") OR ("migraine" AND "vascular reactivity") OR ("migraine"
AND "depolarization") OR ("migraine" AND "epilepsy") OR ("migraine"
AND "inflammation") OR ("migraine" AND "prostaglandins") OR
("migraine" AND "platelet aggregation") OR ("migraine" AND "sero-
tonin") OR ("migraine" AND "brain anoxia") OR ("migraine" AND "cal-
cium channel blockers") OR ("magnesium" AND "vasospasm") OR ("mag-
nesium" AND "spreading depression") OR ("magnesium" AND "vascular
reactivity") OR ("magnesium" AND "depolarization") OR ("magnesium"
AND "epilepsy") OR ("magnesium" AND "inflammation") OR ("magnesium"
AND "prostaglandins") OR ("magnesium" AND "platelet aggregation")
OR ("magnesium" AND "serotonin") OR ("magnesium" AND "brain ano-
xia") OR ("magnesium" AND "calcium channel blockers")
respectively. Note that the while the TM query exactly corresponds to the terms
given in [45], the TR query is relaxed to sub-terms as the exact query only yields
very few abstracts. The PubMed search was limited to articles indexed until
November, 1985 and August, 1987 for TR, TM, respectively, so that we can
compare ourselves to the ﬁndings of the original works which have served as a
de facto gold standard in the literature-based discovery ﬁeld [4].
The characteristics of the TR, TM corpora are summarised in Table 3. Number
Corpus
# of abstracts
# of tokens
# of base statements
TR
1,406
90,427
407,154
TM
3,611
319,810
1,534,685
Table 3: Basic statistics of the corpora
of tokens is a sum of the word-length of the documents in the corpus and num-
ber of base statements is the number of the base co-occurrence statements the
SKIMMR tool extracted from the corpus.
4.3.2. Graph Extraction
To generate knowledge graphs from the text corpora, we use the approach
introduced in Section 4.2. We construct the experimental graphs using only co-
occurrence statements with above-average positive normalised point-wise mu-
tual information scores.
This ﬁlters out statements with comparatively low
co-occurrence weight. We use the general SKIMMR version that extracts enti-
ties based on shallow parsing rather than domain-speciﬁc models (see https:
//github.com/vitnov/SKIMMR for details). This is to demonstrate the general-
ity of our work – if we show that our approach can deliver good results even in
23

quite a speciﬁc domain using basic and universally applicable initial text mining,
it indicates that it is likely to perform similarly well in any other domain.
The characteristics of the extracted graphs are provided in Tables 4 and 5.
The basic characteristics |VG|, |EG|, dnG, |CG|, |cmax
G
|, |cavg
G |, |cmed
G
| in Table 4 are
Graph
|VG|
|EG|
dnG
|CG|
|cmax
G
|
|cavg
G
|
|cmed
G
|
TR
16,714
181,140
1.297e-3
80
16,497
208.925
2
TM
52,681
635,705
4.581e-4
110
52,373
478.918
2
Table 4: Basic characteristics of the experimental graphs
the number of vertices, number of edges, graph density, number of connected
components, maximum, average and median component size in vertices, respec-
tively. The component-wise characteristics in Table 5 are computed as a weighed
arithmetic mean across all the components where the weight is the component
size in vertices. The characteristics rdG, dmG are the graph radius and diam-
Graph
rdG
dmG
trG
aspG
aspδ
G
TR
5.935
8.897
0.397
4.045
6.956
TM
5.971
8.954
0.259
3.964
7.702
Table 5: Component-wise characteristics of the experimental graphs
eter (minimum and maximum eccentricity, respectively, where eccentricity of
a vertex is its maximum distance to other vertices). The trG characteristics
is transitivity – the fraction of all possible triangles reﬂecting the tendency of
vertices in the graph to cluster together [39]. The characteristics aspG, aspδ
G
are average shortest path lengths in terms of edges and the distance labeling,
respectively. Additional characteristics of the graph is the degree distribution
depicted in Figure 8 (the plot is log-scaled in both x- and y-axis).
The extracted graphs both have one large connected component comprising
most of the vertices, complemented by other trivial components mostly con-
sisting of one edge.
The largest components exhibit so called “small-world”
property [48] – despite of being quite large and having small density, they have
relatively small diameters and average shortest paths. This observation is sup-
ported by two additional facts. The graphs have relatively high transitivity,
i.e., high tendency of vertices to cluster together which is typical for complex
small-world networks [39]. Also, the vertex degree distribution approximately
follows the power law as shown in Figure 8, which is characteristic for scale-free
networks [31]. This means that the extracted graphs have relatively densely
connected structure with many claims involving frequently repeated concepts,
which is largely caused by highly (co)occurring terms. This is perhaps not ideal
for making discoveries about as many previously disconnected phenomena as
possible, and we later show how our approach can remedy this problem.
4.3.3. Settings of the Clustering and Evolutionary Reﬁnement Algorithms
For the clustering, we use the K-means module of the scikit-learn pack-
age [32]. As the algorithm’s scalability to large numbers of samples and fea-
24

100
101
102
103
104
105
rank
100
101
102
103
degree
Degree rank plots
R
M
Figure 8: Degree distributions for the experimental graphs
tures is limited by available memory, we partition the set of context vectors
corresponding to the universe graph vertices to buckets of size 2, 000 and then
run the K-means algorithm on them with the parameter K set to 40.
The
partitioning is done by incremental random selection of 50 seed vectors from
the unpartitioned set, computing their centroid and then ﬁlling the partition
with the seeds plus up to 1, 950 unpartitioned vectors closest to the centroid.
We have experimented with diﬀerent settings of every parameter, however, we
found out that the resulting distributions of vectors into clusters are practically
invariant to the settings, with mean and median cluster sizes converging to the
same values no matter what the settings were.
The parameters of the evolutionary reﬁnement were
pm = 0.05, pc = 0.75, km = 5, NG = 50, ρp = 0.05, µi = 100, σi = 80.
The initial individual size parameters are only reﬂected in rare extreme cases as
the size of the random stars is much more dependent on the data set structure
in practice. For the other parameters, we applied values typically used by model
approaches presented in the evolutionary computing literature [9]. The number
of generations has been set well above a threshold after which the performance
of the corresponding populations starts to oscillate around similar evaluation
scores (see Section 4.4.1 for details).
The evolutionary reﬁnement with these parameters took 56m and 6h36m
for the TR, TM experiments, respectively, using a 2010 make laptop with 4-
core CPU, 8GB RAM and Ubuntu Linux 14.04 OS. The virtue measures (the
most demanding part) were computed using six parallel processes. The number
25

of processes can be easily adjusted to the computing power available, which
facilitates vertical scalability of the reﬁnement. Horizontal scalability is planned
for future versions of the prototype and consists of using a distributed processing
library instead of the native Python multiprocessing module.
4.3.4. Evaluation Methodology
We use several evaluation methods.
Part of them is based on a recent
work [4] which deﬁnes evidence-based and literature frequency-based evalua-
tion measures within the de facto standard literature-based discovery scenarios
elaborated in [44, 45]. The additional beneﬁt of using [4] as a primary reference
for the evaluation is that the authors compared results of several representa-
tive approaches to literature-based discovery. Thus we can interpret our results
within a broader context of the whole ﬁeld. In addition to the measures deﬁned
in [4], we perform qualitative evaluation of the actual contents of the results
and compare ourselves to related state of the art where applicable.
The evidence-based evaluation measures the capability of an approach to re-
discover the intermediate concepts linking the source and target in the corpus
as per discoveries made by human experts. It also measures the importance the
approach associates with the re-discovery. For an intermediate tc, the absolute
evidence-based evaluation measure directly corresponding to [4] is deﬁned as
evd(tc) = min
G∈Gc(rnk(G)),
where Gc = {G|ts, tt, tc ∈VG ∧∃p ∈Π(G).p = (ts, . . . , tc, . . . , tt)} is a set of
solution graphs that contain the source and target terms ts, tt linked by the
intermediate tc7. The function rnk : G →N is a ranking of all solution graphs
G = {G|ts, tt ∈VG} from the most to the least relevant where the relevance is
determined by the speciﬁc approach being evaluated.
We construct the sets of ranked solution graphs from the set of individuals in
a selected reﬁned generation by: 1. Creating a union graph from all population
individuals. 2. Generating a set of paths between the source and target term
vertices that also contain an intermediate vertex. 3. Ranking the paths using
their hypothesis virtue measures, i.e., the ≻relation, with the population union
graph as a universe. The step 2. can either compute all simple paths or all
shortest paths. In our experiments, we use the latter option due to tractability
issues. The conception of paths as solution graphs represents another design
choice consistent with the previous deﬁnitions – a path linking certain concepts
is the simplest way of claiming (and potentially also explaining) something about
them.
7Note that for mapping terms to vertices in the resulting knowledge graphs, we use the
fulltext index computed upon the lexical expressions corresponding to the graph vertices.
This is done when generating the universe graph, see Section 4.2.1 for details.
To get all
term manifestations in our automatically extracted knowledge graphs, we look up the term of
interest in the index and then manually prune the results to get all alternatives that refer to
the corresponding concept.
26

In addition to the absolute evd score, we compute the overall relative im-
portance of an intermediate term tc. This measure is deﬁned as a mean relative
inverse rank of the graphs that contain tc among all solutions, i.e.,
evdr(tc) =
1
|Gc|
X
G∈G
|G| −rnk(G) + 1
|G|
.
It eﬀectively measures the average relative relevance of the hypotheses linking
the source and target terms via tc – the more often the link is discovered in
high-ranking graphs, the higher the measure.
The second evaluation method proposed in [4] measures the frequency of the
discovered claims in the scientiﬁc literature. Similarly to our deﬁnition, a path
in the result graph is considered a claim in [4]. The literature frequency can be
used to deﬁne a measure of solution rarity as
rar(G) =
1
|πs(GI)|
X
p∈πs(GI)
fpm(QA(p)),
where GI = {G|G ∈G ∧∃tc ∈Ic, p ∈Π(G).p = (ts, . . . , tc, . . . , tt)} is a set of
solutions that contain an intermediate term, πs(GI) = S
G∈G πs(G) is the union
of shortest paths taken across GI, and fpm is the number of results returned by
PubMed for an association query QA(p). The query for a path (p1, p2, . . . , p|p|)
corresponds to the conjunction V
t∈p t of all terms in the path (with a publica-
tion time window limited according to the corresponding experimental corpus).
For instance, the path (ﬁsh oil, platelet aggregation, Raynaud’s syndrome) corre-
sponds to the PubMed query "fish oil" AND "platelet aggregation" AND
"Raynaud’s syndrome" AND ("0001/01/01"[PDAT] : "1985/11/30"[PDAT])
in the TR experiment. Finally, the rarity measure can be straightforwardly used
for deﬁning an interestingness measure [4] as a normalised inverse of the rarity
int(G) =
1
1 + rar(G).
The qualitative evaluation of the results is based on the sets of topics covered
by the particular solutions. A topic is informally deﬁned by potentially relevant
terms that lay on a path between source and target concepts in a solution.
Potentially relevant terms are those that refer to non-trivial concepts that may
elucidate the meaning of the particular path. Using the notion of topics, we
deﬁne the measures of topical density, relative topical relevance and relative
topical novelty, respectively, as
topd(G) = |Tunq(GI)|
|Tall(GI)| , topr(G) = |Trel(GI)|
|Tunq(GI)|, topn(G) = |Tnvl(GI)|
|Trel(GI)|
for a set G of all solution graphs. The sets Tunq(GI), Tall(GI), Trel(GI), Tnvl(GI)
are sets of unique, all, relevant and novel topics covered by the solution graphs
in G that contain an intermediate term.
27

The relevance of topics is determined by a review of the available scientiﬁc
literature. This tells us whether or not a given set of terms can provide a mean-
ingful and non-trivial explanation of the connection between the source and
target terms. More speciﬁcally, a topic is considered relevant if and only if the
following conditions are met simultaneously: 1. The terms in the topic refer to
features of a biomedically relevant relationship that can be traced in literature.
2. The relationship is associated with the corresponding target, source and in-
termediate terms. 3. The relationship is not trivial – it has to be a supported
by genuine discoveries presented in literature, not statements of obvious merely
occurring in articles.
A novel topic is one that is relevant and not covered by any single published
work in its whole. This can be determined using a publication search engine
such as PubMed, where we can check the number of results of a conjunctive
query involving all terms in the corresponding claim path. If the number of
results is zero, then the topic is unique.
We compute the topd, topr, topn scores for the initially extracted and re-
ﬁned graphs in both experiments, focusing on solutions involving correspond-
ing source, target and intermediate terms. Whenever applicable, we compare
the relevant topics we generated with the topics (re)discovered by related ap-
proaches.
4.4. Results and Discussion
We split this section into three parts – ﬁrst we explain the process of selection
of the reﬁned graphs to be evaluated, then we analyse properties of the selected
graphs, and ﬁnally we discuss the results of the evaluation.
4.4.1. Selection of the Reﬁned Graphs
Before analysing the actual results of the evolutionary reﬁnement, we have
to select the generation we will focus on. A natural criterion for that is the
performance of generations in terms of the evaluation measures. The relative
ranking of intermediate concepts (i.e., the evdr measure) is best suited for this
task as it tells us to which extent the generations tend to “consider” the interme-
diate connections important. Figure 9 shows how the mean evdr values for all
intermediates evolve throughout the generations for each experiment. The blue
and green lines represent the TR, TM experiments, respectively. The full lines
correspond to mean values taken across all intermediate terms (also marked by
the “star” character in the plot legend). The dashed lines are for mean values
omitting intermediates that are not present in the given generation (marked by
the “plus” character in the legend).
For the TR experiment, the generation 40 clearly performs best as it contains
solution graphs for each intermediate term and their mean relative ranking is
very high (within the top 20% of solutions). For the TM experiment, the situa-
tion is less clear. The best generation in terms of mean across all intermediate
terms is number 39, however, if one takes only the present intermediates into
account, the generations 35-38 all perform better. Yet we decided to further
28

0
10
20
30
40
50
generation
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
value
Relative intermediate ranks (mean values)
R*
M*
R+
M+
Figure 9: Mean relative intermediate ranks through generations
analyse the generation 39 as it covers three intermediates, while the generations
35-38 only cover two. From here on, we refer to the selected generations by the
T 40
R , T 39
M expressions, respectively.
Further support for selecting the generation to be analysed can be drawn
from the numbers of claims containing the source and target claims, and the
numbers of such claims that also contain an intermediate term. The evolution
of these values is depicted in Figure 10. Note that the ﬁgure’s y-axis is log-
scaled due to diﬀerent orders of magnitude of the displayed values. Similarly to
the previous ﬁgure, the blue and green lines represent the TR, TM experiments,
respectively. The full lines correspond to the total number of claims containing
the source and target term in a given generation (also marked by the “t” char-
acter in the plot legend). The dashed lines represent the fraction of the claims
that also contain an intermediate term (marked by the “r” character).
The total number of relevant claims is steadily decreasing up until approx-
imately 20-25th generation and then starts to oscillate. For the relative num-
ber of solutions with intermediates, similar trend can be seen after the 40-th
generation. This can be interpreted as an indication that the generations are
structurally stabilised then, at least for the evaluation data we work with.
4.4.2. Properties of the Reﬁned Graphs
Before we proceed with discussing the results, let us have a look at the
characteristics of the knowledge graphs corresponding to the generations we
selected for evaluation. Tables 6 and 7 present the same type of data like the
tables in Section 4.3.2. The extra rows with the ∆preﬁxes show the relative
29

0
10
20
30
40
50
generation
10-2
10-1
100
101
102
103
104
value
Claim numbers
Rt
Mt
Rr
Mr
Figure 10: Claim numbers through generations
diﬀerence between the reﬁned and initial graphs. The columns represent exactly
Graph
|VG|
|EG|
dnG
|CG|
|cmax
G
|
|cavg
G
|
|cmed
G
|
T 40
R
10,879
15,940
2.694e-4
81
10,670
134.309
2
∆TR
0.651
0.088
0.208
1.013
0.647
0.643
1
T 39
M
37,782
65,263
9.144e-5
129
37,431
292.884
2
∆TM
0.717
0.103
0.2
1.173
0.715
0.612
1
Table 6: Basic characteristics of the evolved experimental graphs
the same measures as in the tables in Section 4.3.2 – number of vertices, number
of edges, graph density, number of connected components, maximum, average
and median component size in nodes (|VG|, |EG|, dnG, |CG|, |cmax
G
|, |cavg
G |, |cmed
G
|),
and the graph radius, diameter, transitivity and average shortest path lengths in
terms of edges and the distance labeling (rdG, dmG, trG, aspG, aspδ
G). Figure 11
Graph
rdG
dmG
trG
aspG
aspδ
G
T 40
R
8.847
14.743
0.015
6.722
12.309
∆TR
1.491
1.657
0.038
1.662
1.77
T 39
M
7.936
13.885
0.014
6.349
13.721
∆TM
1.329
1.551
0.054
1.602
1.781
Table 7: Component-wise characteristics of the evolved experimental graphs
contains plots of the degree distribution in the reﬁned graphs.
The reﬁned graphs still contain about 65% and 72% of the original vertices
for the TR, TM experiments, respectively, however, the edges are much more
30

100
101
102
103
104
105
rank
100
101
102
103
degree
Degree rank plots
R
M
Figure 11: Degree distributions for the evolved experimental graphs
pruned, to about 9% and 10%, respectively. The graph density is thus lower,
too (at about 20%). The numbers of connected components do not change much.
This is only to be expected given the nature of the population preparation and
the tendency of the evolution process to preserve connectedness. The sizes of
the components are more or less proportional to the reduction of the vertex
number.
What is more interesting are the component-wise characteristics of the re-
ﬁned graphs summarised in Table 7. The radius, diameter and average shortest
path lengths are all increased by up to 78% and no less than 32%, despite of the
graphs getting smaller. The clustering coeﬃcient decreases quite radically – to
about 3.8% and 5.4% of the original value for the TR, TM experiments, respec-
tively. The vertex degree distribution still approximately follows the power law,
however, the curve is not as steep as for the original graphs. These combined
characteristics indicate that the reﬁned graphs exhibit the small world property
to much lower extent than the original ones. This means that they are struc-
turally more evenly organised and tend to have less vertices or vertex groups
that connect large portions of the graph through very few edges. A possible
consequence of this fact is lower redundancy and higher rate of non-obvious
connections in the reﬁned graphs. Indeed, the analysis of the data w.r.t. the
standard literature-based discovery application scenarios conﬁrms this, as we
show in the next section.
31

4.4.3. Performance of the Reﬁned Graphs
In this section, we ﬁrst discuss the performance of our experiments w.r.t. the
quantitative measures used by related approaches.
This is then followed by
qualitative analysis of the knowledge graphs we generated.
Table 8 lists the values of the evd measure for the TR data set. Our approach
(the N column) is compared to the works [4, 42, 49, 11, 16] in columns C, S, W,
G, H, respectively. For our approach, we list both evd, evdr values, while for
the others, only evd is present as they do not consider evdr. We also provide
|Gc|, i.e., the number of solution graphs with intermediates. The evd numbers
Intermediate
N
C [4]
S [42]
W [49]
G [11]
H [16]
evd
evdr
|Gc|
Blood Viscosity
5
0.98
1
15∗
2
Y
5
8
Platelet Aggregation
20
0.844
18
1
1
Y
6
17
Vascular Reactivity
73
0.615
4
-
1
Y
19
-
Table 8: Evidence-based evaluation – T 40
R data
correspond to the best rank of the result that contains given intermediate term.
The “-” character means the intermediate cannot be found in any result for that
approach. If there is “Y”, then the intermediate can be found in the results but
no ranking is provided. Finally, the results with “∗” in the C column indicate
that the intermediate can only be found indirectly by manually exploring a
broader context of the result [4].
Our approach ﬁnds all intermediate terms which makes its performance
equivalent to or better than the related approaches in this respect. Blood vis-
cosity and platelet aggregation are placed among the top 16% of the results
(out of 205 in the TR experiment) while vascular reactivity is considered to be
relatively less important intermediate.
Table 9 lists the same type of results as Table 8, only for the TM experiment
and slightly diﬀerent set of related works.
Note that the related works are
sometimes inconsistent in the exact wording of the intermediate terms, therefore
we only focused on nine out of eleven where we were able to clearly mash up
the diﬀerent alternatives of the term.
The quantitative results of our approach are sparser than in case of the TR
experiment. This has been caused mainly by the minimalistic, domain-agnostic
approach we chose, which resulted into relatively low coverage of the intermedi-
ate synonyms appearing in the data (the fulltext mapping could only discover
terms rather similar to the canonical intermediate form used as a query, while
many synonyms are quite dissimilar strings). All related approaches but one [11]
use term expansion and mapping using biomedical vocabularies like MeSH, and
some even use quite extensive manual interventions (see Section 5.4 for details).
Despite of these limitations, we re-discovered ﬁve out of nine intermediates. Out
of these, only three were discovered using a mature-enough generation of the
reﬁned knowledge graph, though.
For the intermediates we managed to ﬁnd, we achieved results comparable
to or better than the other approaches. For instance, three out of ﬁve related
32

Intermediate
N
C [4]
S [42]
W [49]
B [2]
G [11]
evd
evdr
|Gc|
Calcium Channel
Blockers
-
-
-
22
3
Y
10
1
Epilepsy39
23
0.628
7
9∗
-
Y
8
3
Brain Anoxia /
Hypoxia
-
-
-
-
5
-
6
77
Inﬂammation
-
-
-
3∗
2
Y
170
82
Platelet Aggregation /
Activity10
335
0.333
2
1∗
2
Y
2
8
Prostaglandins10
352
0.274
4
4
1
Y
42
27
Serotonin
-
-
-
1
1
Y
5
1
Cortical / Spreading
Depression39
58
0.468
3
-
6
-
45
-
Vascular Mechanism /
Reactivity39
7
0.945
1
9
1
Y
46
16
Table 9: Evidence-based evaluation – T 39
M , T 10
M data
approaches were not able to re-discover the cortical depression intermediate
which is considered very important in [45].
The overall results of the evidence-based evaluation are encouraging. In the
TR experiment, our approach performed better than [4, 16], worse than [42, 11]
and equally to [49]. In the TM experiment, we bettered [4, 49, 11] while [42, 2]
outperformed us8. In total, we did better than more than half of the related
approaches in terms of the intermediate ranking.
The rarity and interestingness measures for the two experiments are given in
Table 10. We can only compare ourselves to [4] as the measures were deﬁned and
Experiment
N
C [4]
rar(G)
int(G)
rar(G)
int(G)
T 40
R
6.722
0.13
0
1
T 39
M
0.367
0.732
0.56
0.64
Table 10: Claim frequency-based evaluation
used there for the ﬁrst time. The average results of our approach are lower than
in [4] for the TR experiment. However, the median rarity and interestingness of
the paths generated in our experiment is 0 and 1, respectively – only about one
third of the TR path associations have non-zero frequency on PubMed. This
means that two thirds of the claims generated by our approach have the same
performance in terms of rarity and interestingness as in [4]. The average results
of the TM experiment are better in our case. More than 98% of the TM claims
8Note that direct comparison of the ranking results is conceptually diﬃcult since the ap-
proaches generate rather varied forms of results, e.g., mere terms in [11] or oriented multi-
graphs in [4]. However, we can at least give this basic summary, which we corroborate by
analysing the actual contents of the results later on. We also further discuss the major com-
parative beneﬁts of our approach in Section 5.4.
33

have zero rarity which clearly outperforms [4].
Before we continue with the qualitative analysis of the results, let us get back
for a while to the structural properties of the reﬁned knowledge graphs. Table 11
gives average relative ranking of the vertices corresponding to the source, tar-
get and intermediate terms in the initially extracted and reﬁned graphs. The
rankings are based on the vertex degree and betweenness centrality measures
(from highest to lowest). These measures are typically used as an approxima-
tion of a vertex importance within a graph [39]. The importance of sources,
Terms
degree ranking
betw. centrality ranking
T 0
R
T 40
R
T 0
M
T 39
M
T 0
R
T 40
R
T 0
M
T 39
M
Source, target
0.522
0.609
0.541
0.708
0.537
0.592
0.656
0.736
Intermediates
0.563
0.729
0.557
0.57
0.678
0.699
0.584
0.575
Table 11: Degree-based ranking of the re-discovery terms
targets and intermediates in terms of degree is increased by the reﬁnement in
both experiments. The increase is largest for source and target terms in the TM
experiment and for the TR intermediates. The importance in terms of between-
ness centrality is increasing relatively less, with the TM intermediates actually
becoming slightly less important. These observations are consistent with the
evidence-based evaluation in the sense of “sensitivity” of the experimental data
sets towards the source, target and intermediate terms. The reﬁnement of the
TR graph clearly raises the importance of all vertices, especially the interme-
diates. Indeed, all the terms are present in relatively highly ranking claims of
the resulting T 40
R
graph. For the TM data set where only the importance of
the source and target vertices is markedly rising, the results are much sparser –
although the T 39
M graph contains many claims connecting the source and target,
there is relatively few intermediates from [45] present in these claims.
The qualitative analysis of the solution contents further elaborates on the
above observations about the initial and resulting graph structure. As speciﬁed
in Section 4.3.4, the analysis is based on the topics covered by the solution
graphs. These are terms that provide additional context for the intermediates
in the solutions. We provide comprehensive lists of the unique context topics in
Appendix A, together with references to supporting literature.
The contents of the Appendix A is summarised in Table 12 which contains
the topd, topr, topn score values for the initial and reﬁned knowledge graphs
in both experiments9. The table shows that our approach improves the quality
of the extracted knowledge graphs. The relative topical density topr (i.e., the
ratio of unique topics among the paths connecting source and target terms)
increases by about 27% and 122% for the TR, TM experiments, respectively.
9As we are not experts in the domains involved, we adopted a very conservative strategy
for determining the topic relevance. If we could not directly verify any particular relationship
between biomedical concepts present in the solution graphs using a review of published lit-
erature via PubMed, we asserted the corresponding solution irrelevant. We encourage more
knowledgeable readers to suggest possible updates of the detailed tables in Appendix A.
34

Score
TR
TM
T 0
R
T 40
R
T 0
M
T 39
M
topd
0.412
0.522
0.368
0.818
topr
0.571
0.75
0.607
0.889
topn
0.938
0.889
0.471
0.875
Table 12: Summary of the qualitative evaluation
The relevance topr increases by about 31% and 46% for TR, TM, respectively.
Finally, the relative topical novelty topn increases by about 86% for the TM
experiment. In case of the TR experiment, the measure is slightly lower for T 40
R
than for T 0
R, however, there is only one non-novel solution in both knowledge
graphs. The decrease in the relative topr value is caused by lower total number
of solutions in the reﬁned graph.
These results conﬁrm our assumption that the reﬁnement improves the qual-
ity of statements extracted from literature, at least in the context of two stan-
dard literature-based discovery scenarios. The improvement in quality is three-
fold. Firstly, the reﬁned knowledge graphs are less redundant (the topical den-
sity is higher). Secondly, there is markedly more relevant solutions in the results.
And thirdly, the reﬁned solutions are largely non-obvious (high topn measure).
Direct and exact comparison of our qualitative results to related state of
the art is unfortunately impossible due to the afore-mentioned diﬀerences in the
solution representations. However, we can at least discuss the commonalities
and diﬀerences informally. Figure 12 displays the hierarchy of topics covered
by the TR results. Each vertex in the hierarchy graph represents a part of the
topic.
The roots of the presented hierarchies are the intermediate concepts.
The vertices shared across multiple topics have normal outlines. Vertices that
complete the topics on the way from the root have bold outlines.
The impact of glyceryl trinitrate on vasodilation and consequently also on
blood ﬂow has been studied in the context of possible treatment of Raynaud’s
syndrome [19]. Our method reﬂects these ﬁndings in constructing a correspond-
ing connection between Raynaud’s syndrome and platelet aggregation which is
quite closely related to blood ﬂow [17]. Phosphatidylcholine, also a relatively
common vertex in the generated claims, refers to a class of phospholipids that is
closely related to metabolism of fatty acids, including those found in ﬁsh oils [1].
The vertices connected to phosphatidylcholine mediate the relationship between
ﬁsh oil and platelet aggregation in the solutions. The topic with ADP-induced
platelet aggregation [35] speciﬁes the type of platelet aggregation ﬁsh oils can
inﬂuence. The solutions concerned with anti-thrombotic eﬀect put this vertex
in connection with ﬁsh oils, possibly with an intermediate vertex referring to
myocardial infarction. This corresponds to the anti-thrombotic eﬀect of ﬁsh
oils demonstrated for instance in [52]. Finally, one of our solutions identiﬁed
a link between platelet aggregation and ﬁsh oils via their inﬂuence on levels of
plasma-beta thromboglobulin, a marker in ischemic heart disease [13].
The solution involving the vascular reactivity intermediate puts it in the
context of inﬂuence of ﬁsh oils on lower vascular resistance, as discussed for
35

platelet aggregation
blood flow,
glyceryl trinitrate
phosphatidylcholine
adp-induced
platelet aggregation
anti-thrombotic
effect
plasma-beta thromboglobulin,
ischemic heart disease,
initial decrease, platelet count
n-3
arachidonic acid,
docohexaenoic acid
precursor c18
myocardial
infarction
vascular reactivity
local cooling, digital systolic
pressure, less responsive,
haemodynamic profile
blood viscosity
plasma-beta thromboglobulin,
ischemic heart disease,
high level of plasma
fibrinogen, shear rate
Figure 12: Hierarchy of relevant topics in T 40
R
36

instance in [26]. The eﬀect of local cooling on the digital systolic pressure is
inherent to Raynaud’s syndrome but its connection to the vascular reactivity
discovered by our approach is more indirect. One branch of the solution in-
volving the blood viscosity intermediate revisits the relationship between ﬁsh
oils and ischemic heart disease observed in one of the claims containing platelet
aggregation. The other branch is new, though, and puts the blood viscosity in
relation with high levels of ﬁbrinogen in Raynaud’s syndrome patients [46].
When comparing the contents of the TR solutions with related state of the
art approaches, we can only refer to [4] and [44] as the other works generate
mere lists of possible intermediates without further context.
Many contexts
associated with the intermediates as possible explanations of the connections
are missing in the related works. Examples are blood ﬂow, glyceryl trinitrate,
ADP-induced platelet aggregation, phosphatidylcholine or plasma-beta throm-
boglobulin within ischemic heart disease. However, most of these connections
are rather explanatory and not essential in the scope of Raynaud’s syndrome de-
spite of being valid. In [4], many of the graphs involve epoprostenol (essentially
a prostaglandin) as a mediator of the inﬂuence of ﬁsh oils on platelet aggrega-
tion. This is consistent with [44] that establishes the connection between ﬁsh
oil and platelet aggregation as a result of increased level of prostaglandins. This
context is missing in our results that involve the intermediates, however, it is
present twice among the top-ten solutions (at ranks 4 and 8). Once it appears
in relation to the action of the drug indomethacin, and then also in relation
to luteolytic activity in women with Raynaud disease. These are potentially
interesting ﬁndings that extend the results produced by comparable state of the
art approaches.
Figure 13 displays the hierarchy of topics covered by the TM results. One
solution involving the epilepsy intermediate puts it in the context of magnesium
being used as a mechanism for management of reverberating brain waves [40].
These are associated with epilepsy and vertigo attacks and the solution sug-
gests that treatments for these conditions may be used for migraine as well.
Other claims related to epilepsy all share multifocal EEG abnormalities which
are characteristic for epilepsy [29]. Two diﬀerent types of claims were comple-
menting these ﬁndings – two solutions dealing with magnesium concentrations
in cerebrospinal ﬂuid in relation to migraine [37], and one solution related to
transmitter release and nerve stimulation. The solutions involving the cortical
spreading depression intermediate were all related to similar concepts as the
epilepsy ones. This is not surprising, since cortical spreading depression is quite
closely related to seizures [10].
Similarly to the TR experiment, we can only compare the contents of our
TM solutions to [4] and [45] which are the only works that provide context in
addition to the intermediates. The graphs presented in [4] for migraine and mag-
nesium are generally much sparser than those for Raynaud and ﬁsh oil (typically
containing only the source, target and intermediate node). Moreover, none of
the results discussed in the article in detail concern epilepsy or spreading depres-
sion. The work [45] conﬁrms close relationship between epilepsy and cortical
spreading depression which is consistent with a straightforward interpretation
37

epilepsy
multifocal EEG
abnormality
vertigo, convulsion
treatment, reverberation
increase in magnesium
concentration in csf
Merskey, cerebrospinal
fluid
transmitter release during
repetitive nerve activity,
nerve stimulation
magnesium sulfate
cortial spreading
depression
childhood epilepsy
with rolandic spike,
hemispehere
hemiplegia,
childhood
partial occipital
epilepsy, reverberation,
magnesium blockade
Figure 13: Hierarchy of relevant topics in T 39
M
38

of our results. Our solutions also managed to bring up the relationship between
magnesium and cerebrospinal ﬂuid in the context of epileptic attacks. In addi-
tion to that, our results appear to strongly associate migraine with multifocal
EEG abnormalities.
This is consistent with relationship between the abnor-
malities and headaches demonstrated for instance in [12].
Other potentially
interesting ﬁndings not covered by related works are vertigo, reverberation and
the relationship between migraine, cortical spreading depression and rolandic
epilepsy [50].
5. Related Work
We split this section into four thematic blocks that correspond to the main
theoretical and application-speciﬁc facets of our work. In particular, we review
the areas of: 1. automated discovery, 2. ontology learning, 3. discovery supported
by knowledge graphs, 4. literature-based discovery.
5.1. Automated Discovery
Research of ways how discoveries can be automated or facilitated by ma-
chines dates back to the dawn of the digital computer era.
The work [27]
provides a comprehensive analysis of the discovery process operationalised as
creative problem solving. It reviews several classic machine discovery systems
and the heuristics used by them, and also mentions several properties of worthy
discoveries like novelty and value. A more recent related work [18] reviews the
major approaches to studying the process of scientiﬁc discovery, provides an-
other survey of automated discovery systems and analyses additional features
of relevant discoveries, such as surprise. The works [21, 20] review still more
machine discovery systems and heuristics, and identify features like refutability
and simplicity as essential to discoveries. One of the most recent and relevant
works from this area is [23]. It builds on [27, 18] and introduces formalisations
of several discovery features. In particular, it models novelty and value using
metric spaces, and surprise using Bayesian probabilities.
Discovery features discussed in the referenced works conform to our virtue
deﬁnitions, although most of them do not provide a systematic formalisation,
only rather application-speciﬁc implementations. For instance, refutability and
simplicity as reviewed in [21] directly correspond to our virtues. Surprise and
novelty discussed in the other works can be modelled by putting emphasis on
radical claims as addressed by the conservatism virtue, only using diﬀerent dis-
tance metrics for each of the respective features. We believe that our approach
presents a new way to formalising discovery features that is consistent with re-
lated state of the art, but is more systematic, comprehensive and extensible. In
addition, we provide an actionable set of measures implemented in the context
of knowledge graphs. This enables universal applicability of our research, which
is not the case in most of the rather speciﬁc afore-mentioned approaches.
39

5.2. Ontology Learning
In the last ﬁfteen years, there has been a growing interest in exploring the
potential of automatically extracted graph structures for knowledge discovery.
Many of such approaches can be clustered under the umbrella of ontology learn-
ing [22] which aims at extracting complex statements from unstructured textual
resources. This is done using speciﬁcally tailored methods from AI disciplines
like natural language processing or machine learning.
As a recent survey [51] shows, the applicability of existing ontology learning
approaches to (semi)automated knowledge discovery is still quite limited. Many
of the techniques are dependent on manually curated resources.
They also
introduce a lot of assumptions during the extraction process (based on, for
instance, linguistic facts valid only in the context of a particular language or
discourse). This limits their universal applicability. Another problem is that
the more complex knowledge representation the learned ontologies use, the more
restrictive they are about their meaning.
This typically leads to brittleness
w.r.t. the often inherently vague and contextual nature of the knowledge they
represent. This can easily cause problems in machine-aided knowledge discovery
scenarios where we typically want to represent the knowledge implied by the
input data in as unbiased way as possible. Another practical limitation is that
most ontology learning system do not scale very well as reported in [51].
5.3. Discovery Supported by Knowledge Graphs
More recent works related to machine discovery using knowledge graphs
include [6, 8, 28] which contain also comprehensive reviews of prior similar
approaches. The approach elaborated in [6] presents methods for knowledge
discovery in RDF [24] data based on user-deﬁned query patterns and analytical
perspectives. Our approach complements [6] by oﬀering means for automated
analysis and reﬁnement of knowledge graphs using application-independent,
well-founded features.
Google’s Knowledge Vault [8] presents a web-scale approach to probabilistic
knowledge fusion that uses graphs represented in the RDF format. It tackles
the scalability vs. accuracy trade-oﬀof the manual and automatic approaches
to construction of knowledge graphs. This is done by reﬁning statements ex-
tracted from the web content using models learned from pre-existing highly ac-
curate knowledge bases like YAGO or Freebase. Additional details and broader
theoretical context of the approach introduced in [8] is given in [28], which of-
fers a comprehensive review of relational machine learning approaches in the
context of RDF-compatible knowledge graphs. The main advantage of our ap-
proach w.r.t. the works [8, 28] is that we are not critically dependent on the
background knowledge model. In addition, we present a complementary well-
founded approach to determining which relationships in automatically extracted
knowledge graphs are worth preservation. Having said that, the techniques re-
viewed in [28] can certainly provide valuable hints on future extensions of our
approach to graphs with oriented edges representing more than one type of
relationships (i.e., RDF graphs).
40

5.4. Literature-Based Discovery
As our approach has been validated by experiments in literature-based dis-
covery, we need to position ourselves within that ﬁeld as well.
Surveys of
related works (focusing mostly on the domain of life sciences) are provided
in [7, 34, 41]. The speciﬁc approaches we compare ourselves to are described
in [4, 2, 16, 49, 42, 11]. In most cases where we were able to directly compare
our results with the related works, our approach was at least as good as and
often better than the state of the art. In addition, we managed to hint at sev-
eral relevant insights that were not even discussed by the human expert in the
original studies [44, 45].
The most signiﬁcant advantages of our approach are, however, as follows.
1. It is absolutely automatic. The only manual action we performed was pruning
the fulltext search results when mapping terms to the corresponding vertices,
however, this is only required for the evaluation, not for the method itself.
2. There are no domain-speciﬁc dependencies and thus our work is readily ap-
plicable to any ﬁeld, not just the biomedical literature-based discovery. 3. We
produce extensive contextual information that can facilitate the interpretation
of the results and thus make the machine-aided discovery process more eﬃcient.
4. Our approach is based on theoretical foundations motivated by the state of
the art philosophical study of key features of scientiﬁc discoveries.
The works [42, 16, 49] all depend on rather extensive manual eﬀort (def-
inition of semantic types and discovery patterns, result pruning, etc.).
The
approaches [4, 2, 11] are automated, however, only [4] provides broader context
in order to elucidate the connections. Moreover, all works but [11] substantially
rely on an external domain-speciﬁc source of background knowledge and/or
domain-speciﬁc NLP tools, namely the MeSH and UMLS vocabularies [3] and
the tools SemRep [38] and BioMedLEE [5]. It is quite plausible to assume that
without these resources, the related approaches dependent on them would per-
form much less favourably when compared to our implementation. Last but
not least, all the related approaches lack the universally applicable theoretical
foundations presented as the core contribution of this article.
6. Conclusions and Future Work
We have presented a novel approach to discovery informatics that is based
on formalisation of hypothesis virtues in the context of knowledge graphs. We
have shown that the approach is naturally motivated, well-founded, extensible
and universally applicable. It can be used as a broader theoretical frame for
other approaches to machine discovery, as brieﬂy outlined in Section 5.
We
have delivered an implementation of the presented research and performed its
experimental validation using standard scenarios in literature-based discovery.
A successful comparison with related state of the art tools demonstrates the
practical relevance of our work.
In near future, we will extend the theoretical framework in order to address
directed multi-graphs with predicate edge labels and more complex semantics
41

associated with particular edge and vertex types. This will allow for straightfor-
ward application of our approach to more expressive knowledge graphs, such as
RDF [24] knowledge bases and ontologies in the Linked Open Data cloud [14].
Furthermore, we intend to continue demonstrating the universality of our frame-
work by using it in other experimental scenarios targeted by related works in
machine discovery. We also plan to explore the complex relationships between
speciﬁc measures and their inﬂuence on the properties of the evolutionary re-
ﬁnement process (e.g., convergence, optimality and completeness bounds). This
will lead to deeper understanding of the reﬁnement, and therefore also to more
eﬃcient implementations.
Finally, and perhaps most importantly, we would
like to use our approach in scenarios involving actual new discoveries, in direct
collaboration with corresponding domain experts.
