ECIL-MU: EMBEDDING BASED CLASS INCREMENTAL LEARNING AND MACHINE
UNLEARNING
Zhiwei Zuo1,3 , Zhuo Tang1,2*, Bin Wang1, Kenli Li1, Anwitaman Datta3
1 College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, Hunan University, China
2 Shenzhen Research Institute, Hunan University, China
3 School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
ABSTRACT
New categories may be introduced over time, or existing
categories may need to be reclassified.
Class incremen-
tal learning (CIL) is employed for the gradual acquisition
of knowledge about new categories while preserving in-
formation about previously learned ones in such dynamic
environments. It might also be necessary to also eliminate
the influence of related categories on the model to adapt to
reclassification. We thus introduce class-level machine un-
learning (MU) within CIL. Typically, MU methods tend to
be time-consuming and can potentially harm the model’s
performance.
A continuous stream of unlearning requests
could lead to catastrophic forgetting. To address these issues,
we propose a non-destructive eCIL-MU framework based on
embedding techniques to map data into vectors and then be
stored in vector databases. Our approach exploits the overlap
between CIL and MU tasks for acceleration. Experiments
demonstrate the capability of achieving unlearning effective-
ness and orders of magnitude (upto ∼278×) of acceleration.
Index Terms— Class Incremental Learning, Machine
Unlearning, Embedding, Vector Database, Privacy
1. INTRODUCTION
Machine learning models need to rapidly adapt to new
information. Class Incremental Learning (CIL) [1, 2, 3] is
crucial in this context. CIL enables models to learn multiple
tasks, sequentially adding new classes while retaining prior
knowledge. However, as data evolves, historical information
might lose relevance due to privacy, regulations, or chang-
ing insights. Take medical diagnosis with AI as an exam-
The work is supported by the National Key Research and Development
Program of China (2021ZD40303), the National Natural Science Foundation
of China (Grant Nos. 62225205, 92055213), Natural Science Foundation of
Hunan Province of China (2021JJ10023), the Science and Technology Pro-
gram of Changsha (kh2301011), Shenzhen Basic Research Project (Natural
Science Foundation) (JCYJ20210324140002006). Zhiwei Zuo did this work
while she was a visiting student at NTU Singapore, funded by CSC scholar-
ship.
This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright
may be transferred without notice, after which this version may no longer be
accessible.
ple. Imagine disease subcategories belonging to larger cate-
gories: x1, x2 ∈A1, y1, y2 ∈A2, and a diagnostic model
M capable of diagnosing them. Now, with z1, z2 ∈B and
A1 ∩B = A2 ∩B = ∅, M needs to learn B. Also, research
might reclassify y1 ∈A1 and y2 ∈B, rendering category A2
obsolete. To remain accurate, models must adopt CIL and un-
learn outdated categories. Machine Unlearning (MU) [4, 5, 6]
can help models eliminate the influence of outdated data.
To achieve CIL while unlearning classes, we integrate
CIL and MU. At this setting, a model is trained on multi-
ple tasks, learning new knowledge and unlearning certain
information.
Post-CIL, the model must preserve discrimi-
nation for all seen classes. Then, in MU tasks, the model
concentrates on unlearning specific classes. Notably, there
is non-overlapping of classes across tasks. This framework
enables learning new classes while removing outdated ones.
Existing machine unlearning methods fall into two cat-
egories:
model-agnostic and model-intrinsic approaches.
Model-agnostic methods consider distributed unlearning,
federated unlearning [7], and verifiable machine unlearning
[8]. Model-intrinsic approaches target specific models, such
as Graph Neural Networks [9], regression [10], and Bayesian
models [11]. Existing methods alter models to unlearning.
However, such operations give rise to several issues: fore-
most, modifying a model takes an amount of time and poten-
tially hurts the model’s performance, furthermore, frequent
changes to a model due to unlearning requests risk catas-
trophic forgetting [12], and finally, implementing unlearning
and incremental learning simultaneously is challenging.
We propose an embedding based Class Incremental
Learning and Machine Unlearning (eCIL-MU) framework
to address these issues.
We modify data rather than the
CIL-MU model leading to a non-destructive unlearning. Em-
ploying an embedding technique, we map training data into
vectors and utilize vector databases [13] for vectors storage
and unlearning.
Specifically, during a CIL task, we store
vectors in the DB-CIL, identify vectors linked to classes to be
unlearned in DB-CIL and then transfer them to the unlearn-
ing database DB-MU during MU process. Vectors migration
can be performed asynchronously, and the temporal overlap
arXiv:2401.02457v1  [cs.LG]  4 Jan 2024

Fig. 1: Training phase and inference phase of eCIL-MU
between CIL and MU allows model training acceleration.
With vector databases holding latent vectors, a vector fil-
ter decides whether input data fits DB-MU during inference
phase. For remaining classes, the model makes predictions as
usual but unlearning class data gets partly accurate outputs.
Four output strategies are considered for unlearning class
data: choose with probabilities uniformly at random, propor-
tional to the relative frequency of classes or inversely pro-
portional to distances, alternatively, deterministically shift to
nearest class.
Our main contributions are: 1. We propose the eCIL-MU
framework by integrating CIL and class-level MU, in doing
so, we modify data rather than the model. 2. We devise vec-
tor databases within the CIL-MU model for both learned and
unlearned classes. The transfers occurs from DB-CIL to DB-
MU based on cosine similarity ensuring effective migration.
It exploits an overlap between CIL and MU thereby achieving
acceleration. 3. We apply four distinct output strategies for
the unlearning during the inference phase, and find that using
the strategy shift-to-nearest-class achieves non-destructive ef-
fects, while also delaying catastrophic forgetting.
2. METHODOLOGY
2.1. Problem Formulation
Suppose the model receives a sequences of tasks T =
{T1, T2, . . . , Tn} over time, where each task Ti consists of
a set of input-output pairs Di = {(xi1, yi1), (xi2, yi2), . . . ,
(xim, yim)}, where yi ∩yi′ = ∅, for i ̸= i′. For each task Ti,
the model should produce a function fi : X →Y that maps
the input space X to the output space Y . The goal of CIL is to
learn a sequence F = {f1, f2, . . . , fn} such that the loss over
all tasks is minimized. The expected risk of CIL is defined as:
f ∗= arg min
f∈F
E(x,y)∼T
(1)
Crucially, when learning a new task Ti, the model should
preserve its performance on the previous tasks {T1, T2, . . . ,
Ti−1}, and catastrophic forgetting should be minimized or
ideally, eliminated. Additionally, the model needs to han-
dle a series of unlearning requests. Assuming the model has
learned all classes in C and the classes to be unlearned are
Cf, then the model should preserve its discrimination ability
for remaining classes Cr = C \ Cf.
2.2. eCIL-MU Process
Fig. 1 illustrates the training phase and inference phase of
eCIL-MU. For effectuating and validating our idea, we em-
ploy the pre-trained ResNet-50 as the embedding model Me
parameterized by w. For a given input data d, Me performs a
series of convolution and pooling operations to obtain vectors
vl that represents the d’s features, in which vl = fe(d; w), fe
denotes the entire network architecture of Me.
During the CIL process, the acquired vector V is stored
in the vector database DB-CIL:{vl}. For the MU process,
in relation to the vectors v corresponding to Cf, a matching
is conducted with the vectors in DB-CIL. We employ cosine
similarity to identify vectors within the same classes.
Upon computing the cosine similarity, we utilize the K-
nearest neighbor (KNN) [14] to identify the class of unlearn-
ing data and select the most similar vectors v with same class.
Subsequently, v is transferred from DB-CIL to DB-MU.
Meanwhile, we should consider the CIL process. Assume
the model is parameterized by θ, for newcoming data xi with
label yi, our objective function is to minimize the loss func-
tion L for Ti:
min
θ
L(yi, g(xi, θ))
(2)
where g(·) is the hypothesis function. As the performance
of neural nets models relies on weights, the forward pass and
back-propagation tends to prioritize updating weights for the
current task’s categories. This can result in a loss of grasp
over previously learned knowledge and even lead to catas-
trophic forgetting. Therefore, concerning CIL, it is neces-
sary to possess the capability both to acquire new knowledge
and to preserve existing knowledge. In order to solve this
stability-plasticity dilemma, we adopt the model SSRE [15]
employing main branch knowledge distillation to transfer in-
variant knowledge, achieved by oversampling (UPB) proto-
types with a batch size B:
PB = UPB(Prototype)
(3)
A structural reorganization strategy is used as side branch
that integrates structural expansion retaining old knowledge.
f t
e(d; θt) = f t−1
e
(d; bθt−1
e
⊕∆θt)
(4)
where bθ indicates fixed parameters and ⊕represents the
structural expansion operation. Here, zero-padding and linear
transformation are used to integrate the parameters from the
side branch with the model parameters.
As illustrated in Fig.1, during the inference phase, the
same embedding model Me is used as a filter before CIL-MU
model to determine whether the input data Din belongs to Cf.
To simplify, assuming the input vector vin = fe(Din; w) and
vectors in DB-MU vf, giving a threshold s, we have:
Din ∈Cf
s.t.
cos(vin, vf) ≥s
(5)

Fig. 2: Retraining from scratch and restoring and resuming
training are serial processes. In contrast, eCIL-MU enables
partial parallelization, allowing overlap once Me embeds Cf
or preceding CIL task ends.
For input data belonging to DB-CIL, we process it using
CIL-MU and output its predictions. Otherwise, we have de-
signed four output strategies and compare their effectiveness.
Uniform random:
Specifically, assuming the model has
learned a total of N classes, the output formula is as follows:
y = Randint(N)
(6)
Proportional to all classes: Assuming the number of each
class i is ni, then the probability of output being class i is:
p(i) =
ni
PN
j=1 nj
(7)
Sampling based on p values prioritizes classes with larger
counts, giving them higher selection probabilities than classes
with smaller counts.
Inversely proportional to distances: When the size of data
in DB-CIL become substantial, calculating distances becomes
complex, causing P ni data transfers from disk to memory.
To simplify, we approximate distances by computing the co-
sine similarity between vf and the centroids ci of each class.
The following formula calculates probabilities:
p(i) =
1
cos(vf, ci)
(8)
Shift to the nearest class: Using Eq.5 for filtering introduces
errors that result in certain vectors not being unlearned be-
ing incorrectly identified as unlearned vectors (seen Fig.4(a)).
These misidentified vectors are inhrently close to the Cf vec-
tors. We shift Cf to the nearest class to rectify these misclas-
sified classes and produce accurate outputs.
y = y ∼max(cos(vf, ci))
(9)
As shown in Fig.2, when employing the eCIL-MU frame-
work for MU tasks, once the embedding model completes the
extraction of input data features, the next CIL or MU task can
then be initiated. However, the subsequent CIL task must wait
until the previous CIL task concludes.
3. EXPERIMENT
Dataset: To demonstrate the performance of the proposed
eCIL-MU framework, we conduct experiments using the
CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 datasets [16]. CIFAR-10 consists
of 5,000 training images and 1,000 testing images across 10
classes, with each image sized at 32 × 32 pixels. CIFAR-100,
on the other hand, consists of 500 training images and 100
testing images for each of its 100 classes, also sized 32 × 32.
Settings: We employ ResNet18 as our backbone model to re-
implement SSRE [15]. Adam is used as optimizer with an
initial learning rate 1e-3 and decay rate 5e-4. Training epoch
is set to 100 and the batch size is 128. We utilize milvus to
store the vectors we constructed. During the vector match-
ing process, we set K=100 for KNN. The threshold s in Eq.5
is set to 0.77 since we aim to achieve relatively high values
for both true positive (TP) and true negative (TN) as well as
low values of false positive (FP) and true negative (TN) at the
corresponding s. All experiments are conducted in a single
NVIDIA Quadro p6000 GPU.
Baseline: Retraining from scratch as well as restoring and
resuming training are applied as baseline methods. For re-
training from scratch, assuming that the data corresponding
to the unlearning class exists within task Ti, we remove the
data of unlearning class from Ti and initiate the CIL process
anew. For restoring and resuming training, we save interme-
diate model Mi after each CIL. For MU, we restore from Mi,
which lacks any unlearning class information, and conduct
the CIL task using the remaining data.
Metrics: In the eCIL-MU framework, both CIL and MU
tasks are conducted. Hence, we need to measure the effects
of CIL and MU. We consider the accuracy concerning the re-
maining classes Cr, and the accuracy related to unlearning
classes Cf. Furthermore, as our method accommodates both
CIL and MU simultaneously, we obtain training time and as-
sess the acceleration compared to baseline methods, repre-
sented by the speedup ratio.
Fig. 3: t-SNEs of embedding vectors of CIFAR-10 mapped
by Me. Vectors in green belong to unlearning class, and will
be transferred from DB-CIL to DB-MU.
Experimental Results: Fig.3 illustrates the t-SNE visualiza-
tion after employing Me to embed the training data. The clus-
ter in green represents the class Ci to be unlearned. Utilizing
vector matching, such cluster can be identified and transferred
from the DB-CIL to the DB-MU. On the CIFAR-10, applying
KNN achieves an accuracy of 87%, which implies the vector
migration is reasonably precise.
For CIFAR-10, we initialize the model with 5 classes
to obtain model M0(T0), achieving a test accuracy(Acct) of
95.1%. The following tasks are performed on M0 sequen-
tially: MU-1(T1), CIL-1(T2), MU-1(T3), CIL-1(T4), where

(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 4: (a) shows the predicted Cf after filtering (via Eq.5).
Different symbols represent the ground-truth of these sam-
ples. Circles indicate classes in Cf, while others represent
classes in Cr. (b) represents potential predictions for samples
in (a) using various random methods. (c) illustrates predic-
tions under the strategy shift-to-the-nearest-class.
MU-1 represents unlearning one class and CIL-1 signifies
incremental learning one class.
Tab.1 shows the experimental results. The last method
CIL indicates that the model solely undergoes CIL tasks with-
out engaging in MU. For the first three strategies of our eCIL-
MU, similar results are obtained under the same task. Ide-
ally, the accuracy on Cf for uniform random output should be
around 20% and the accuracy on Cr should be around 80%.
From a theoretical perspective, after initializing M0, perform-
ing a MU-1 task (T1) to unlearn one class, with s = 0.77,
the testing results yield a recall (TP/(TP+FN)) of 0.9186 and
a specificity (TN/(FP+TN)) of 0.709. That is to say, after
T1, the accuracy on Cr should approximate recall ∗Acct =
87.35%. Moreover, due to the specificity of 0.709, 29.1% the
data in Cf are misclassified as Cr. These misclassified data
are predicted correctly with a confidence of 95.1%, leading
to an overall accuracy of approximately 41.85% on Cf. The
results in Tab.1 also corroborate this analysis.
Method
MU-1
CIL-1
MU-1
CIL-1
Time
Cr
Cf
Cr
Cf
Cr
Cf
Cr
Cf
Retrain
95.70
0
82.25
0
95.32
0
82.03
0
5916
Restore
95.70
0
82.12
0
95.70
0
81.70
0
3886
Random
83.73 41.30
70.10 33.80
65.95 43.15
58.82 36.55
1409
Proportional
83.43 41.80
69.98 35.50
65.93 43.55
58.76 36.20
1409
Inverse
83.27 40.40
69.70 33.10
65.25 40.65
58.52 35.38
1409
Nearest
94.45 27.00
79.82 21.70
79.57 32.90
72.04 27.05
1409
CIL
-
-
79.80
-
-
-
70.09
-
1390
Table 1: Accuracy (%) on Cr and Cf after CIL or MU tasks
in which several classes are learned or unlearned and the total
time taken (s). Higher accuracy on Cr and lower accuracy on
Cf indicate a better joint CIL-MU performance.
We see that the strategy shift-to-the-nearest-class outper-
forms others. The accuracy on Cr is significantly higher com-
pared to others (a highest difference of 14.32% after T3), ap-
proaching the results of CIL (no more than a 2% difference)
and the accuracy on Cf is much lower (a highest difference
of 14.8% after T1). As shown in Fig.4(b), under different ran-
dom strategies, some of the data belonging to Cf could still
be classified correctly (circles in the same position in Fig.4(a)
and Fig.4(b)). However in Fig.4(c), for the misclassified data,
shifting them to the nearest class results in their original labels
(stars and triangles enclosed by gray circles in Fig.4(c) and
4(a)). On the other hand, the truly unlearned classes, lacking
corresponding vectors in the DB-CIL, will inevitably be mis-
classified. Thus, leading to an increase in accuracy on Cr and
a decrease in accuracy on Cf. The comparable accuracy on
Cr to that achieved with CIL suggests that using a ‘shift-to-
nearest-class’ strategy during predictions helps offset errors
made during the filtering process.
For both retraining and restoring and resuming training,
their accuracy on Cf is 0 , as the model has not learned from
Cf. For the CIL model, with each CIL task, its accuracy tends
to decrease. This is also manifested in retraining and restoring
and resuming training, where their accuracy on Cr exhibits
periodic fluctuations in our setup.
As the model learns new classes, the declining accuracy in
CIL implies an inevitable occurrence of catastrophic forget-
ting. However, using the first three random output strategies
can further accelerate the process of catastrophic forgetting.
Employing the shift-to-the-nearest-class strategy allows the
model to maintain the same rate of catastrophic forgetting as
CIL, thereby ensuring the model’s robustness.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 5: (a): The time taken in log-scale (10y s) by each
method in various task scenarios, as well as the proportion
of CIL and MU task within the mixed CIL-MU. (b) illus-
trates the acceleration rates of restoring and resuming train-
ing, along with eCIL-MU, compared to retraining.
As shown in Fig.2, eCIL-MU allows partial overlap be-
tween CIL and MU tasks. The acceleration effect is illus-
trated by the time taken for each strategy in Tab.1. For further
illustration, we initialize CIL-50 using CIFAR-100 to obtain
M0 and test three following requests scenarios: 8 CIL tasks,
8 MU tasks, and a CIL-MU mix. Classes for unlearning in
the mixed setup were randomly chosen.
As shown in Fig.5(a), in scenarios with exclusively CIL
tasks, both restoring and resuming training, as well as eCIL-
MU take longer than retraining due to model saving or em-
bedding completion requirements.
In cases of exclusively
MU tasks, eCIL-MU is notably faster by avoiding constant
retraining or restoration. As depicted in Fig.5(b), it achieves
an acceleration of up to 278.48×. For mixed CIL and MU
tasks, time distribution varies based on their relative propor-
tions in the overall workload.
4. CONCLUSION
We combine Class Incremental Learning and Machine
Unlearning to propose a non-destructive framework eCIL-

MU, based on embedding techniques.
Utilizing vector
databases, it accomplishes CIL and MU tasks by modify-
ing data.
The overlap of CIL and MU accelerates model
training. We identify that a shift-to-the-nearest-class strategy
for unlearned classes enhances the model’s robustness.
5. REFERENCES
[1] David Lopez-Paz and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, “Gradient
episodic memory for continual learning,” Advances in
neural information processing systems, vol. 30, 2017.
[2] Sylvestre-Alvise Rebuffi, Alexander Kolesnikov, Georg
Sperl, and Christoph H Lampert,
“icarl: Incremental
classifier and representation learning,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2017, pp. 2001–2010.
[3] Yu
Wang,
Nicholas
J
Bryan,
Mark
Cartwright,
Juan Pablo Bello, and Justin Salamon, “Few-shot con-
tinual learning for audio classification,”
in ICASSP
2021-2021 IEEE International Conference on Acous-
tics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). IEEE,
2021, pp. 321–325.
[4] Alexander Warnecke, Lukas Pirch, Christian Wressneg-
ger, and Konrad Rieck, “Machine unlearning of features
and labels,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.11577, 2021.
[5] Lucas Bourtoule, Varun Chandrasekaran, Christopher A
Choquette-Choo, Hengrui Jia, Adelin Travers, Baiwu
Zhang, David Lie, and Nicolas Papernot, “Machine un-
learning,”
in 2021 IEEE Symposium on Security and
Privacy (SP). IEEE, 2021, pp. 141–159.
[6] Zhizhong Li and Derek Hoiem, “Learning without for-
getting,” IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and ma-
chine intelligence, vol. 40, no. 12, pp. 2935–2947, 2017.
[7] Yann Fraboni, Richard Vidal, Laetitia Kameni, and
Marco Lorenzi,
“Sequential informed federated un-
learning: Efficient and provable client unlearning in fed-
erated optimization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.11656,
2022.
[8] Xiangshan Gao, Xingjun Ma, Jingyi Wang, Youcheng
Sun, Bo Li, Shouling Ji, Peng Cheng, and Jiming Chen,
“Verifi: Towards verifiable federated unlearning,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2205.12709, 2022.
[9] Min Chen, Zhikun Zhang, Tianhao Wang, Michael
Backes, Mathias Humbert, and Yang Zhang,
“Graph
unlearning,” in Proceedings of the 2022 ACM SIGSAC
Conference on Computer and Communications Secu-
rity, 2022, pp. 499–513.
[10] Yinjun Wu, Val Tannen, and Susan B Davidson, “Priu:
A provenance-based approach for incrementally updat-
ing regression models,” in Proceedings of the 2020 ACM
SIGMOD International Conference on Management of
Data, 2020, pp. 447–462.
[11] Yizhou Chen, Shizhuo Zhang, and Bryan Kian Hsiang
Low,
“Near-optimal task selection for meta-learning
with mutual information and online variational bayesian
unlearning,”
in International Conference on Artifi-
cial Intelligence and Statistics. PMLR, 2022, pp. 9091–
9113.
[12] Christophe Dupuy, Jimit Majmudar, Jixuan Wang,
Tanya G Roosta, Rahul Gupta, Clement Chung, Jie
Ding, and Salman Avestimehr,
“Quantifying catas-
trophic forgetting in continual federated learning,” in
ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP).
IEEE, 2023, pp. 1–5.
[13] Rentong Guo, Xiaofan Luan, Long Xiang, Xiao Yan,
Xiaomeng Yi, Jigao Luo, Qianya Cheng, Weizhi Xu,
Jiarui Luo, Frank Liu, et al.,
“Manu: a cloud native
vector database management system,”
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2206.13843, 2022.
[14] Gongde Guo, Hui Wang, David Bell, Yaxin Bi, and
Kieran Greer, “Knn model-based approach in classifica-
tion,” in On The Move to Meaningful Internet Systems
2003: CoopIS, DOA, and ODBASE: OTM Confederated
International Conferences, CoopIS, DOA, and ODBASE
2003, Catania, Sicily, Italy, November 3-7, 2003. Pro-
ceedings. Springer, 2003, pp. 986–996.
[15] Kai Zhu, Wei Zhai, Yang Cao, Jiebo Luo, and Zheng-
Jun Zha, “Self-sustaining representation expansion for
non-exemplar class-incremental learning,” in Proceed-
ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, 2022, pp. 9296–9305.
[16] Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al.,
“Learning
multiple layers of features from tiny images,” 2009.
