Oil Price Trackers Inspired by Immune Memory 
 
William Wilson* , Phil Birkin* , and Uwe Aickelin* 
* School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham, UK 

 
Abstract 
 
We outline initial concepts for an immune inspired algorithm to evaluate and predict oil price time se- 
ries data. The proposed solution evolves a short term pool of trackers dynamically, with each member 
attempting to map trends and anticipate future price movements. Successful trackers feed into a long 
term memory pool that can generalise across repeating trend patterns. The resulting sequence of track- 
ers, ordered in time, can be used as a forecasting tool. Examination of the pool of evolving trackers 
also provides valuable insight into the properties of the crude oil market. 
 
1 Introduction 
 
The investigation of time series data to predict future 
information is a well studied area of research.  This 
paper proposes an immune inspired solution to this 
problem.  Inspiration for memory development was 
taken from the biological theory proposed by Dr Eric 
Bell.  The theory indicates the existence of two sep- 
arately identifiable memory populations (Bell, 2005), 
one long term and the other short term.  Their dif- 
fering characteristics make them ideal in recognising 
long and short term trends prevalent in time series 
data. These trends can then be sequenced for use in 
forecasting and prediction. 
 
 
2 Development of long and short 
term memory 
 
The flexible learning approach offered by the im- 
mune system is attractive as an inspiration for prob- 
lem solving. However without an adequate memory 
mechanism the knowledge gained from the learning 
process would be lost. Memory therefore represents 
a key contributing factor in the success of the im- 
mune system.  A difficulty arises in extracting im- 
mune memory properties however, because very lit- 
tle is still known about all the biological mechanisms 
underpinning memory development (Wilson and Gar- 
rett, 2004). Theories such as antigen persistence and 
long lived memory cells (Perelson and Weisbuch, 
1997), idiotypic networks, and homeostatic turnover 
of memory cells (Yates and Callard, 2001) have all at- 
tempted to explain the development and maintenance 
of immune memory but all have been contested. 
The attraction of the immune memory theory pro- 
 
posed by Dr Eric Bell is that it provides a simple, 
clear and logical explanation of memory cell develop- 
ment (Bell, 2005). This theory highlights the evolu- 
tion of two separate memory pools. The first is a short 
term memory pool containing short lived, highly pro- 
liferative,  activated cells that have experienced an 
antigen. The purpose of this pool is to drive the affin- 
ity maturation process to cope with the huge diver- 
sity of potential antigen mutations. The second pool 
consists of those short term memory cells that have 
evolved to homeostatically turnover to sustain knowl- 
edge of an antigen experience over the long term. 
This long term pool identifies and maintains knowl- 
edge of more generalised antigen trends. 
 
 
3 Analysis of oil price trends 
 
The price of WTI crude oil (a world marker price for 
oil price movements) was selected as the time series 
for investigation.  This data set was chosen because 
there is considerable economic, financial and govern- 
ment interest in investigating oil price forecasting due 
to its influence on so many other market sectors. In 
addition, oil prices have historically exhibited a num- 
ber of short and long term trend patterns which could 
map to our long and short term memory concepts, 
providing an ideal case study for this analysis. 
 
 
4 An immune inspired forecast- 
ing solution 
 
The  proposed solution comprises a  population of 
”trackers” that correspond to B cells from the im- 
mune system.  The trackers attempt to identify and 

 
 
record trends in the oil price data. Price data, as mea- 
sured by the change in price from one time period 
to the next, is encapsulated within an artificial anti- 
gen object and presented to the population of trackers. 
The antigens are constructed to show current and his- 
torical price movements over a particular period. In 
order to recognise price trends over time, each tracker 
is allocated a random length ”review period”.  This 
allows the tracker population to identify a variety of 
potential price movements over a range of time inter- 
vals. 
Following the traditional clonal selection approach 
(de Castro and Von Zuben, 2002), trackers attempt 
to bind to antigens, and undergo proliferation if suc- 
cessful. The resulting clones mutate in relation to the 
strength of the bind, with mutation taking one of three 
forms. One subset of clones has a random price value 
within their review periods mutated from its original 
value.  A second subset has their review period ex- 
tended by the addition of a randomly generated price 
movement to anticipate future potential price move- 
ments.  A third subset of clones has a random price 
value removed from their review period to allow them 
to attempt a better fit to previously experienced anti- 
gens. 
The degree proliferation is proportional to the 
strength of the bind and the length of the bound 
tracker. Initially trackers have relatively short review 
periods, to enable them to assess a wide variety of 
price trends. If successful, trackers proliferate and the 
review periods lengthen to anticipate additional price 
movements. Excessively long tracker review periods 
are prevented because trackers become more specific 
as they lengthen and are therefore less likely to bind. 
Without successful binds these trackers are likely to 
be removed via apoptosis. This leads to the evolution 
of a dynamic population of trackers. 
The population of  proliferating trackers can be 
seen to represent the short term memory of experi- 
enced price data, as knowledge of an identified price 
trend is carried forward through the generations of 
tracker clones. Interrogating the composition of this 
memory pool provides valuable insight into the dy- 
namics of the oil market. 
The process of filtering the short term memory 
pool to a long term memory subset is achieved 
through  development  of  the  ”‘tracker  sequence”’. 
The tracker sequence is a list of trackers, ordered in 
time, that best represents the data presented up to 
the current point in time.  Dominant tracker candi- 
dates, based on their degree of proliferation, are se- 
lected from the short term memory pool and trans- 
ferred to the tracker sequence for use as a source of 
long term memory.  Generalisations can be made in 
the tracker sequence for repeating patterns of track- 
ers to highlight recurring price trends.  The tracker 
sequence provides the forecasting mechanism in the 
system. When new price data becomes available the 
tracker sequence is examined to identify whether a 
previously identified trend is recurring again. 
 
 
5 Conclusion 
 
Inspiration was taken from the principles of mem- 
ory within the immune system to build a system that 
would identify trends within an oil price time series. 
This data showed evidence of short term price fluc- 
tuations as well as exhibiting underlying long term 
trends. Detailed inspiration was taken from the theory 
of immune memory proposed by Dr Eric Bell which 
identifies two forms of memory, short term and long 
term.  We indicate that these could in principle pro- 
vide a mechanism to identify and map the short and 
long term trends evident in the crude oil market which 
could then be used for forecasting.
