Exploration Of The Dendritic Cell Algorithm 
Using The Duration Calculus 
 
 
Feng Gu, Julie  Greensmith and Uwe Aickelin 
 
School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham 
Nottingham, NG8 1BB, UK 

 
 
Abstract. As one of the newest members  in Artificial  Immune Systems  
(AIS),  the Dendritic Cell Algorithm (DCA) has been applied  to a range 
of problems. These  applications mainly  belong  to  the  field of anomaly 
detection. However, real-time detection, a new challenge  to anomaly de- 
tection, requires  improvement on  the  real-time capability of the  DCA. 
To  assess  such  capability, formal  methods   in  the  research  of real-time 
systems  can  be  employed.  The  findings  of the  assessment can  provide 
guideline  for the  future development of the  algorithm. Therefore, in this 
paper we use an interval  logic based  method, named  the Duration Calcu- 
lus (DC),  to specify a simplified single-cell model of the  DCA.  Based  on 
the  DC specifications with further induction, we find that each individ-  
ual cell in the DCA  can perform  its function as a detector in real-time. 
Since  the DCA  can  be seen  as many  such  cells operating in parallel,  it 
is potentially  capable  of performing real-time detection.  However,  the 
analysis  process of the  standard DCA constricts its real-time capability. 
As a result, we conclude  that the  analysis process of the  standard DCA 
should be replaced by a real-time analysis  component, which can perform  
periodic  analysis  for the purpose  of real-time detection. 
 
 
1 Introduction 
 
Artificial  Immune  Systems  (AIS)  [3] are  computer systems  inspired  by  both 
theoretical immunology and observed immune functions,  principles  and models, 
which can be applied  to real world problems.  As the  natural immune system  is 
evolved to protect the body from a wealth of invading micro-organisms,  artificial 
immune  systems  are developed to provide the  same defensive properties  within 
a computing  context. One of these  immune inspired  algorithms  called the  Den- 
dritic  Cell Algorithm  (DCA)  [6] is based  on the  function  of the  dendritic cells 
of the  innate  immune  system.  An abstract model of the  behaviour  of natural 
dendritic cells is used as the  foundation of the  developed algorithm. Currently, 
the DCA has been applied  to numerous  problems,  including port  scan detection 
[6], Botnet  detection  [1] and  a classifier for robotic  security  [12]. They  refer to 
the field of anomaly  detection,  which  involves discriminating between  normal 
and  anomalous  data,  based  on the  knowledge of the  normal  data.  The  success 
of the  applications has  suggested  that the  DCA  shows not  only  good perfor- 
mance on detection  rate,  but also the ability to reduce the rate of false alarms in 

 
 
 
 
comparison  to other  systems  including  Self Organising  Maps  [7]. However, one 
problem  with  DCA has been pointed  out  in [9], that is, the  analysis  process of 
the algorithm is performed  offline rather than  online in real-time.  This results in 
the delays between when potential anomalies initially  appear  and when they are 
correctly  identified.  Such delays can be problematic for applications with strict 
time  constraints, as they  are  often  speed-critical. To  solve this  problem,  it  is 
desired  to improve the  real-time  capability of the  DCA,  in order  to develop an 
effective real-time  detection  system. 
A real-time  system  [14] is a reactive  system  which,  for certain  inputs,  has 
to compute  the corresponding outputs within  given time bounds  (real-time  cri- 
teria).  The  design of real-time  systems  generally  requires  high precision  due to 
their  particular application areas.  The  high precision  is achieved  by using for- 
mal methods  that are based  on the  mathematical models of the  systems  being 
designed. The formal methods  make it possible to specify the system properties 
at  different levels and  abstractions, as well as formally  verify the  specifications 
before  implementing. One  of the  formal  methods  for specifying real-time  sys- 
tems  is known  as the  Duration Calculus  (DC)  [17], which is a temporal  logic 
and  calculus  for describing  and  reasoning  about  the  properties  of a real-time 
system  over time  intervals.  The  DC can specify the  safety  properties, bounded 
responses and  duration properties  of a real-time  system,  which can be logically 
verified through proper induction. Unlike predicate  calculus [5] using time points 
to express time-depedent state  variables  or observables of the  specified system, 
the DC uses time intervals  with the focus on the implicit  semantics  level rather 
than  the  explicit  syntactic level. As a result,  it is more convenient and  concise 
to use the DC to specify patterns or behaviour  sequences of a real-time  system 
over time intervals,  compared  to predicate  calculus. 
The  real-time  capability of the  DCA should  be assessed before making  any 
improvement on the  algorithm. In other  words, it is essential  to identify  which 
properties  of the algorithm can satisfy the real-time  criteria,  and which cannot. 
For  this  purpose,  the  DC  is used  to  specify the  behaviours  of the  DCA  over 
particular time intervals.  First  of all, the DC specifications of the algorithm can 
be further  induced by applying available proof rules in the DC. The mathematical 
aspects of the algorithm that have not been discovered might be revealed through 
the induction. In addition, the DC specifications include the temporal  properties 
of the  algorithm, which  provide  the  insight of the  duration required  for each 
individual  behaviour.  The duration of each behaviour  can be compared  with the 
real-time  criteria,  to  evaluate  whether  a behaviour  can  be performed  in real- 
time  or not.  As a result,  we can  identify  the  properties  of the  algorithm that 
can satisfy the real-time  criteria  and those cannot  at the behavioural  level. The 
findings  can  be used as the  basis  for the  further  development of the  real-time 
detection  system  based on the DCA. 
The  aim  of this  paper  is to  use  the  DC  to  specify the  properties  of the 
DCA,  with  the  focus  on  the  development of an  effective  real-time   detection 
system.  As a result,  we would  be able  to  identify  the  properties  of the  DCA 
that can be inherited for future  development,  and those need improved.  Proper 

 
 
 
 
proof is included  in this  paper  to support  the  conclusions derived  from the  DC 
specifications. The paper is organised as follows: the DCA is briefly described in 
section  2; the  background information of the  DC is given in section  3; the  DC 
specifications of the single-cell model are given in section 4; the discussion of the 
analysis process of the DCA is provided in Section 5; finally the conclusions and 
future  work are drawn in Section 6. 
 
 
2 The Dendritic Cell  Algorithm 
 
2.1  Algorithm overview 
 
As previously  stated the  blueprint for the  DCA is the  function  of the  dendritic 
cells of the innate  immune system. Natural dendritic cells are capable of combin- 
ing a multitude of molecular information and then  interpret this information for 
the  adaptive  immune system,  to induce appropriate immune responses towards 
perceived threats. Signal and antigen are the two types of molecular information 
processed by dendritic cells. Signals are collected  from their  local environment 
and consist of indicators of the health  of the monitored  tissue. Denrditic cells ex- 
ist in one of three states  of maturation to perform their immune function. In their 
initial  immature state,  dendritic cells are exposed to a combination of signals. 
They can differentiate into either semimature or fully mature state  based on the 
concentrations of signals.  Additionally, during  their  immature phase  dendritic 
cells also collect debris in the  tissue  which are subsequently combined  with the 
molecular  environmental signals.  Some of the  debris  collected  are termed  anti- 
gens, and  are  proteins  originating from potential invading  entities.  Eventually 
dendritic cells combine evidence in the form of signals with the ‘suspect’ antigens 
to correctly instruct the adaptive  immune system to respond, or become tolerant 
to the  antigens  in question.  For  more detailed  information of natural dendritic 
cells, please refer to Lutz and Schuler [10]. 
The resulting  algorithm incorporates the state  transition pathway,  the envi- 
ronmental signal processing procedure,  and the correlation between signals and 
antigens. In the algorithm signals are represented as continuous real-number  val- 
ues and antigens are the categorical  values of possible categories.  The algorithm 
is based  on a multi-agent framework,  where  each  cell processes  its  own envi- 
ronmental signals  and  collects  antigens.  Diversity  is generated within  the  cell 
population through the application of a ‘migration  threshold’  - this value limits 
the number  of signal instances an individual  cell can process during  its lifespan. 
This  creates  a variable  time  window  effect, with  different cells processing  the 
signal and  antigen  input  streams over a range  of time  periods [13]. The  combi- 
nation  of signal/antigen correlation  and  the  dynamics  of a cell population are 
responsible for the detection  capabilities of the DCA. 
 
 
2.2  The single-cell model 
 
The  DCA consists  of a population of artificial  cells, each of which is capable  of 
performing a set of identical behaviours,  to accomplish its function as a detector. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
start 
 
 
 
 
data processing 
input 
 
 
 
 
antigen 
data 
type 
signal 
 
antigen sampling 
signal transformation 
 
 
 
 
 
temporal correlation 
 
 
 
 
no 
maturation 
 
 
yes 
 
 
information presenting 
output 
 
 
 
 
end 
 
 
Fig. 1. The  behavioural flowchart of the  single-cell model 

 
 
 
 
In order to understand the properties  of the algorithm, we start with describing 
a simplified single-cell model. A one-cell model is demonstrated in [13] for the 
purpose of analysing the effect of signal frequency. Whereas,  the single-cell model 
here is focused on the behavioural  level of the DCA from a temporal  perspective, 
rather than  a quantitative level. The flowchart  of the behaviours  involved in the 
single-cell model is displayed in Fig. 1. The time-dependent behaviours  of a cell 
are termed  ‘events’ in this paper, and they are performed by the cell in each state 
during  particular time  intervals.  The  state  and  event  mentioned  in this  paper 
are similar to those  defined in temporal  logic. Therefore,  states  must  hold over 
any subintervals  of an interval in which they hold, conversely events do not hold 
over any subintervals  of an interval  in which they  hold.  In other  words,  states 
can  be broken  down  over  multiple  subintervals  of an  interval,  whereas  events 
cannot.  The  states,  the  events  in each state,  and  the  relevant time  intervals  of 
the single-cell model are included  in the following description. 
 
–  Immature state: this  is the  initial  state  of the  cell, where the  cell is fed 
with  input  data  instances.  All the  input  data  instances  are handled  by the 
data processing event, to determine their types. If the type of a data  instance 
is ‘signal’, it is passed to the signals transformation event. Otherwise,  if the 
type of data  instance  is ‘antigen’, the data  instance  is passed to the antigen 
sampling event. In each iteration of the system,  only one signal instance  but 
multiple  antigen  instances  can be fed to the cell. The processed signals and 
sampled  antigens  are correlated by the  temporal  correlation event based  on 
their  time  stamps. The  cell keeps  performing  the  events  above  cyclically, 
until  the  migration threshold   is reached.  This  indicates  that the  cell has 
acquired  sufficient information for decision making. 
–  Matured state: once the  cell reaches  its  migration threshold, it  changes 
from immature state  to  either  semimature state  or fully mature state.  As 
same event is taken  place in both  semimature state  and  mature state,  they 
are  called  ‘matured   state’  in  this  paper.  Based  on  the  correlated  signals 
and antigens  by the temporal  correlation event, the cell makes a decision on 
whether  any potential anomalies appeared  within the input  data.  Such deci- 
sion is termed  ‘processed information’  that is presented  by the  information 
presenting  event  as the  output of the  cell. Up to this  point  one lifespan  of 
the  cell is finished,  and  then  the  cell is reinitialised  to  immature state  for 
new incoming data  instances. 
 
At the population level, the DCA can be seen as a systems in which multiple 
single-cell  models  are  executed  in  parallel.  The  output of each  matured cell 
is accumulated with  the  outputs of others  in  the  population by  the  analysis 
process of the algorithm. From the accumulated outputs of all matured cells, the 
analysis process produces the final detection  result in which the anomalies within 
the  input data  can be identified.  In the  standard DCA,  the  analysis  process is 
performed  after  all instances  of the  input  data  are processed. This  could make 
it difficult for the system  to satisfy the real-time  criteria  if the size of the input 
data  is large. The details  will be discussed in section 5. 

J
IJ
 
 
 
 
3 The Duration Calculus 
 
The  DC  was  firstly  introduced  by  Zhou  and  Hansen  [i6] as  an  extension  of 
the  Interval  Temporal  Logic [ii]. It uses continuous  time  for specifying desired 
properties  of a real-time  system  without considering  its  implementation. The 
specifications  are  presented  by  DC  formulas  which  express  the  behaviours  of 
time-dependent  variables  or  observables  of a  real-time  system  within  certain 
time intervals. In DC specifications, not only abstract high-level but also detailed 
low-level specifications  can be formulated according  to the selected  variables  or 
observables. This makes it possible to specify the system from different perspec- 
tives at various levels. There  are different versions of the DC [i7], including  the 
classic DC, the  extended  DC and  mean-value  calculus.  The  work in this  paper 
uses the classic DC, as it is sufficient for specifying the system  presented. 
In order to introduce  the DC, the syntax  defining the structure of DC speci- 
fications and the semantics  explaining  its meaning  are described in this section. 
The DC specifications often consist of three elements,  which are state  assertions, 
terms  and formulas.  Their  formal definitions  given in [i4] are as following. 
 
 
Definition 1.  state  assertions are Boolean combinations of basic properties  of 
state  variables,  as defined in i. 
 
(i) 
As a state  assertion,  the  Boolean value  of the  observable  of P  can be either  0 
or 1; It can have a state  variable  X  whose value is d of data  type D; There  are 
situations where P  does not hold; There  are also situations where the substates 
of P , P1   and  P2 , both  hold.  The semantics of a state assertion involves  the 
interpretation of time-dependent  variables  that occur  within  it.  Let I be  an 
interpretation, the semantics  of a state  assertion  P  is a function  defined in 2. 
 
 
(2) 
 
where 0  or 1  represents  the  Boolean value of P  at  t ∈ Time, which can be also 
written as I(P )(t). 
 
 
Definition 2.  terms  are expressions  that denote  real numbers  related  to time 
intervals,  as defined in 3. 
 
(3) 
                                                               (3)
 
The  expression  above  states  that giving  an  interval  l   during  which  the  state 
assertion  P  holds,  there  is a global  variable  x that is related  to  the  valuation 
a n-ary  function  f . The  semantics  of a term  depends  on the  interpretation of 
state  variables  of the  state  assertion,  the  valuation of the  global variables,  and 
the given time interval.  The semantics  of a term  θ is defined in 4. 
 
 
(4) 

J
I
V
 
 
 
 
where Val stands  for the  valuation (V ) of the  global variables,  and  Intvl is the 
given interval  which can be defined in 5. 
 
   
 
(5) 
 
θ (V , [b, e]).
 
So this term  can also be written as  
 
Definition 3.   formulas  describe  properties  of obervables  depending  on time 
intervals,  as defined in 6 
 
(6) 
This expression shows that there is a n-ary  predicate  with the terms of θ1 , ..., θn 
defined in the interval of l, during which F1  does not hold or F1  and F2   hold. 
The quantitative part  of the  expression  is separated by the  symbol of ‘•’. It  
states  that for all x, F1  holds in the interval of l, or there  are situations where 
F1  and F2   hold respectively in the subintervals  of l. The symbol ‘;’ is the chop 
operator  used for dividing  the  given time  interval  into  subintervals. The  
semantics  of a formula involves an interpretation of the state  variables,  a 
valuation of the global variables  and a given time interval, defined in 7. The 
relevant state  variables  and global variables  all appear  in the terms  of this 
formula. 
 
 
(7) 
 
where tt stands  for true and ff for false. It can also be written as 
F 
J 
 
(  , [b, e]), 
K 
which stands  for the  truth value of F  under  the interpretation I, the  valuation 
V , and the interval  [b, e]. 
 
 
4 
DC  specifications of the system 
 
Before going into the details  of the DC specifications,  we want to introduce  the 
notations that are used in this section,  listed as following. 
 
–  I : Time −→ {o, i} is the  Boolean observable  indicating that the  cell is in 
immature state. 
–  M : Time −→ {o, i} is the  Boolean observable  indicating  that the  cell is in 
matured state. 
–  Ei  : Time −→ {o, i} is the  Boolean observable  representing the  ith  event is 
being performed,  where i ∈ N. 
–  li  ∈ R is the duration time of Ei . 
–  la  ∈ R is the duration time of the analysis  process. 
–  b ∈ R is the  real-time  bound,  if a processed  is completed  within  b, then  it 
can be performed  in real-time,  and vice versa. 
–  r ∈ R is the duration of one iteration in the system. 
–  c ∈ R is the duration of one lifespan during  which the cell experiences both 
immature state  and matured state. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
–  m¯  ∈ N is the average number of processed signal instances within one lifespan 
of the cell. 
–  n¯ ∈ N is the average number of sampled antigen instances  within one lifespan 
of the cell. 
 
To be more specific, the definition  of each event Ei  is shown as follows. 
 
–  El  is the data  processing event with an interval  ll . 
–  E2   is the signal transformation event with an interval  l2 . 
–  E3   is the antigen  sampling event with an interval l3 . 
–  E4   is the temporal  correlation event with an interval  l4 . 
–  E5   is the information presenting  event with an interval  l5 . 
 
 
4.1  Specifications of the single-cell model 
 
According to the description  of the single-cell model in section 2, the cell 
performs a set of particular events  in each state.  So the  states  of a cell can be 
indicated by the  combination of whether  Ei  is being performed  (the  Boolean 
observable of Ei ), as shown in 8. 
 
l ::= o | i | ¬l | El  v (E2 A ¬E3 ) v (¬E2  A E3 ) v E4 
M ::= o | i | ¬M  | E5 
 
(8) 
 
In immature state  (l ), the  cell is fed with input  data  instances  whose type can 
be either  signal or antigen.  The  immature state  can be indicated  by El  holds, 
E2  A ¬E3  holds, ¬E2 A E3   holds, or E4   holds. Conversely, in matured state  (M 
), 
the cell presents  the processed information from correlated signals and antigens. 
The matured state  can be indicated  by E5   holds. 
The specifications in 8 can be expanded  by including the time interval of each 
event,  expressed  in the  form of formulas,  in which the  temporal  dependencies 
between events are included.  For example,  E2   or E3   depends on the completion 
of El , and only either of them can be performed  at one point; E4   depends on the 
completion  of E2    and  E3 , as the  temporal  correlation requires  both  processed 
signals and  sampled  antigens;  E5    is performed  as soon as the  cell changes  to 
matured state,  it is not  dependent on any other  events.  Two formulas  that are 
corresponding to the immature state  and matured state  of a cell are shown in 9. 
 
Fl  ::= El i | ¬E5  | (El  ; E2   A ¬E3 ) ; (El  ; ¬E2  A E3 ) ; E4 
F2   ::= EM i | ¬(El  v E2   v E3   v E4 ) | E5 
 
(9) 
 
 
where [ I] stands  for that I holds  almost  everywhere  within  the  time  interval 
constrained by formula Fl , and [M ] stands  for that M holds almost everywhere 
within  the time interval constrained by F2 . So in the interval constrained by Fl , 
it  is certain  that E5    does not  hold.  This  interval  can be divided  into  multiple 
subintervals  in which El , E2   ^ ¬E3 , ¬E2  ^ E3 , or E4    holds respectively. In the 
interval  constrained by F2 , none of El , E2 , E3    or E4    holds, but  only E5  
holds. 
So for instance,  the  overall  length  of the  time  interval  while Fl   and  F2   holds 
 
 
 

==
==
 
 
 
 
is six,  and  the  time  interval  of each  event  is equal  to  one,  Fig.  2 shows the 
interpretation of the two formulas. 
As the cell can process multiple  signal instances  and antigen instances  before 
it gets matured, some of the events can be performed  for more than  once within 
one lifespan  of the  cell. To  generalise  this,  the  average numbers  (m¯ and  n¯) of 
processed data  instances  are used. Therefore,  the pattern of ‘El  ; E2  A ¬E3 ’ ap- 
pears m¯  times, and the pattern of ‘El  ; ¬E2 A E3 ’ appears n¯ times. Additionally, 
E4    is performed  m¯ times,  as the  number  of performed  temporal  correlations  is 
equvalent  to the  number  of prossed  signal instances.  However, E5    is only per- 
formed  once, as it  is irrelevant  to  the  number  of processed  signal instances  or 
sampled  antigen  instances.  As a result,  the duration of a cell being in immature 
state  and  the  duration of a cell being  in matured state  can  be formalised  as 
in 10. The duration of one lifespan of the cell is defined as C = 
R  I + 
R  M . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(10) 
 
 
4.2  Evaluation  of the real-time capabability 
 
Based  on the  DC specifications  above, we conduct  a test  to examine  the  real- 
time capabability of an individual  cell of the DCA. If the cell completes  at least 
one cell cycle within  the given real-time  bound  ((), it suggests that the cell can 
perform its function  in real-time.  This test  is formalised as a requirement in 11. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
where E is the dual modal operator  of interval  logic, defined as EF holds in an 
interval of [(, e] only if F  holds in every subinterval  of [(, e]. The condition  of the 
Req is the left side of the logical connective  ‘==’, while the conclusion  is on the 
right side. If this requirement is satisfied, then  we conclude that each individual 
cell in the DCA is capable  of operating  in real-time. 
As mentioned  in section 2, a cell exists in either  immature state  or matured 
state,  and all the events within each state  should be performed  in each iteration. 
According to the definition, one system iteration is equal to the duration between 
two successive updates of signal instance.  In each iteration the cell processes one 
signal  instance  but  a number  of antigen  instances.  Therefore,  the  cumulative 
duration of El ,  E2     and  E4     should  not  be  greater  than   the  duration of  
one iteration, and  the  duration of E5    should  also not  be greater  than  the 
duration of one iteration. Such properties  can be formalised as two design 
decisions of the single-cell model shown in 12. 
 
Des-i   def E(EI 1 == 1l + 12 + 14 < r) 
 
(12) 
Des-2  def E(EM 1 == 15 < r) 
(11) 
 

 
 
 
 
The two design decisions are the extra  preconditions that determine whether  the 
system  can satisfy the real-time  criteria  or not,  as defined in Theorem 1. 
 
 
Theorem 1.  |= (Des-1 ^ Des-2) → Req 
It expresses that if both  design decisions Des-i  and Des-2 hold, the requirement 
Req can be satisfied. 
 
 
Proof: 
 
( > (m¯  + 1) · r 
{the cell exists in immature state  or matured state} 
EI 1 ; EM 1 
=={by formula 9} 
Z 
Z 
( I ) ; ( 
M ) 
 
=={by formula 10} 
Z 
Z 
( I = m¯ · (1l  + 12 ) + n¯ · (1l  + 13 ) + m¯ · 14 ) ; ( 
Z 
Z 
M = 15 ) 
==( I = m¯ (1l  + 12  + 14 ) + n¯(1l  + 13 )) ; ( 
M = 15 ) 
 
=={by Des-i  and Des-2} 
Z 
Z 
( I < m¯ · r) ; ( 
 
M < r) 
 
=={by the addition  rule of calculus} 
Z 
Z 
I + 
Z 
Z 
== 
I + 
 
M < m¯ · r + r = (m¯  + 1) · r 
 
M < ( 
 
Thus Req holds on every interval of ( ≥ (m¯ + 1) ·r, and Theorem 1 is proved. As 
the increase of iterations is not affected by the events for processing the antigen 
instances, the duration of these events is eliminated  in the induction above. 
Based on Theorem 1, as long as the real-time  bound is not smaller than  the 
duration of ‘(m¯  + 1) · r’, the  cell can at  least  complete  one lifespan.  According 
to  the  experiments  performed  in [9], the  value  of m¯ is normally  smaller  than 
10. Therefore,  the single-cell model can satisfy  the real-time  criteria  if the  real- 
time  bound  is not  less than  the  duration of 11 iterations, which can be easily 
satisfied in most applications. This suggests that a single cell in the DCA can be 
performed  in real-time.  As a consequence,  the  DCA can perform  all the  events 
except the analysis process in real-time,  since the algorithm employs a population 
of such cells that operate  in parallel. 
 

m¯
 
 
 
 
 
1 
E1 
0 
 
1 
E2 
0 
 
1 
E3 
0 
 
1 
E4 
0 
 
1 
E5 
0 
 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
 
 
 
Time 
 
 
Fig. 2.  Interpretation for E1 , E2 , E3 , E4 , and  E5 , and  the  whole  interval  is  
divided  into subintervals by the  events. 
 
 
 
5 Discussion of the analysis process 
 
The  DCA  also  involves  an  analysis  process  that produces  the  final detection 
result  from  the  accumulated outputs  of matured cells in  the  population.  As 
mentioned  before, the analysis process of the standard DCA is performed  offline 
after all the instances  of the input  data  are processed. In the case that the input 
data  consist  of m (m  ∈ N) signal instances,  by formula  10,   m lifespans  of the 
cell are required  to process the whole input  data.  To satisfy the real-time  bound, 
the  duration needed for the  standard DCA to get the  final detection  result  can 
be formalised  as in 13. 
 
m 
c ·  m¯ 
 
+ la  ≤ ( 
(13) 
As C, m¯ and  1a  are constants, whether  formula  13 can hold or not  is deter- 
mined by the quantity of m. The value of m is derived from the number of signal 
instances  contained  within  the  input  data.  As the  size of the  input  data  grows, 
the number  of signal instances  is getting  bigger and bigger. This can cause that 
the duration for getting the final detection  result  increases dramatically and ex- 
ceeds the real-time  bound.  Therefore,  as the size of the input  dataset increases, 
it  is becoming  more  and  more  difficult  for  the  standard DCA  to  satisfy  the 
real-time  criteria.  Therefore,  the  analysis  process of the  standard DCA  is the 
weakness of the algorithm in terms  of real-time  detection. 
In order to satisfy the real-time  criteria,  the analysis process of the standard 
DCA should be replaced  by a real-time  analysis  component that performs  peri- 
odic analysis  during  detection. This can be achieved by segmenting  the current 

 
 
 
 
output of the DCA, which is performed  in a variety  of ways, as suggested  in [8]. 
Segmentation involves slicing the output data  of the DCA into smaller segments 
with a view to generating  finer grained  results  and to perform analysis  in paral- 
lel with the detection  process. Segmentation can be performed  based on a fixed 
quantity of output data  items or alternatively on a basis of a fixed time period. 
As the  analysis  process is performed  within  each segment,  the  sub-duration  for 
each  segment to  produce  the  detection  result  is much  shorter  than  the  whole 
duration. It hightly possbile for the sub-duration to satisfy the real-time  bound. 
Moreover,  such  sub-duration can  be made  to  satisfy  the  real-time  bound,  by 
adjusting the segment size that determines the length of each sub-duration. Seg- 
mentation is the initial step of developing the real-time  analysis component,  and 
eventually  an approach  that can deal with the online dynamics  is required.  This 
approach  should  be able  to  adapt and  evolve during  detection, so that it  can 
deal with  the  new situations that have not  been previously  seen. This  leads to 
the future  work of dynamic  segmentation. 
 
 
6 Conclusions and future work 
 
In this  paper,  we used  the  DC specifications  to  formally  describe  a simplified 
single-cell model of the DCA. The temporal properties of the events performed by 
the  cell in each state  are included,  indicating  the  dependencies  between events. 
To  explore  the  real-time  capabability of the  DCA,  we conducted  a test  from 
which  Theorem 1  is derived.  The  conclusion  of  Theorem 1  suggests  that 
each cell of the  DCA  can operate  in real-time,  based  on the  single-cell model. 
As the  DCA  employs  a  population of such  cells that operate  in parallel,  the 
events functioning  detection  can be performed  in real-time.  Therefore,  the DCA 
is potentially  capable  of performing  real-time  detection. However, the  analysis 
process of the standard DCA is performed after all the instances of the input  data 
are processed. As a result, if the size of input  dataset grows, the duration required 
for the  algorithm to  produce  the  final detection result  increases  dramatically. 
This  make it more and  more difficult for the  algorithm to satisfy  the  real-time 
criteria.  Therefore,  in order  to  develop an  effective real-time  detection  system 
based on the DCA, the analysis process of the algorithm needs to be replaced by 
a real-time  analysis component,  which is capable of performing periodic analysis 
during detection. Preliminary work on segmentation has been done in [8], and the 
result  appears  promising.  Eventually  an adaptive  real-time  analysis  component 
that incorporates with dynamic  segmentation will be developed. 
The  DC  specifications  in this  paper  focus on  the  behavioural  level of the 
single-cell model without going into  any further  details,  which is sufficient  for 
the  scope of the  paper.  However, for future  work the  population level of DCA 
should also be covered  to better present the  algorithm. In addition, the  DC is 
mainly  used for specifying the  requirement of real-time  systems,  to design and 
implement real-time  systems,  other  formal  methods  are  also  required.  These 
methods  include  the  Timed  Automata [2] and  the  PLC  Automata [4], which 
can be used for modelling cyclic behaviours  of interacting objects  in real-time 

 
 
 
 
systems.  Therefore,  they  are  ideal  for formally  modelling the  systems  like the 
DCA that is based on multi-agent framework. Moreover, there are existing tools, 
such as UPPAAL  [15] and  so on, which facilitate  the  automatic verification of 
the systems  modelled in the Timed  Automata and PLC  Automata. As a result, 
the designed real-time  system can be formally verified before its implementation.
