56 
BOUTILIER ET AL. 
UAI2001 
UCP-Networks: A Directed Graphical Representation of Conditional Utilities 
Craig Boutilier 
Department of Computer Science 
University of Toronto 
Toronto, ON MSS 3H5 

Fahiem Bacchus 
Department of Computer Science 
University of Toronto 
Toronto, ON MSS 3H5 

Ronen I. Brafman 
Department of Computer Science 
Ben-Gurion University 
Beer Sheva, Israel 84105 

Abstract 
We propose a directed graphical representation of util­
ity functions, called UCP-networks, that combines as­
pects of two existing preference models: generalized 
additive models and CP-networks. The network de­
composes a utility function into a number of additive 
factors, with the directionality of the arcs reflecting 
conditional dependence in the underlying (qualitative) 
preference ordering under a ceteris paribus interpreta­
tion. The CP-semantics ensures that computing opti­
mization and dominance queries is very efficient. We 
also demonstrate the value of this representation in de­
cision making. Finally, we describe an interactive elic­
itation procedure that takes advantage of the linear na­
ture of the constraints on "tradeoff weights" imposed 
by a UCP-network. 
1 
Introduction 
Effective representations for preferences and utility func­
tions are critical to the success of many AI applications. 
A good preference or utility representation should capture 
statements that are natural for users to assess, or are easy 
to learn from data; it should offer the compact expression 
of preferences or utilities; and it should support effective 
inference. 
· 
A useful design stance for such representation is to exploit 
the structure of utility functions using notions from multi­
attribute utility theory, such as conditional preferential in­
dependence, mutual utility independence, etc. [10]. Re­
cent work has exploited such structure to develop graphical 
models: Bacchus and Grove [1, 2] propose an undirected 
network representation for (quantitative) utility that cap­
tures conditional additive utility independencies; Boutilier, 
Brafman, Hoos and Poole [3] propose a directed network 
representation for (qualitative) preference functions that 
captures conditional preference statements under a ceteris 
paribus (all else equal) assumption. La Mura and Shoham 
[II] describe a hybrid representation for combining both 
probabilistic and utility information in a Wldirected graph­
ical model representing expected utilities directly. 
In this paper, we propose a new directed network represen­
tation for utility functions that combines certain aspects of 
the first two of these approaches. The UCP-network for­
malism can be viewed as an extension of the CP-network 
model [3] that allows one to represent quantitative utility 
information rather than simple preference orderings. The 
formalism also utilizes the notion of generalized additive 
independence (GAl) [1]. By employing a directed graph, 
UCP-nets allow one to make more powerful statements that 
are often more natural and lead to more effective infer­
ences. In particular, we will show that dominance and op­
timization queries can be answered directly in UCP-nets. 
In addition, the formalism can be used in an interactive 
elicitation process to determine relevant parameters of the 
UCP model in a specific decision scenario. We propose a 
technique for elicitation-much like that proposed by Cha­
jewska, Koller, and Parr [4]-that exploits the linear con­
straints imposed by a partially-specified UCP-model to de­
termine an "optimal" sequence of queries. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 
provides necessary background. Section 3 describes UCP­
nets, their properties, and their relation to GAl decomposi­
tions of utility functions and CP-networks. Section 4 dis­
cusses the problem of optimization in the context of UCP­
nets, and shows the advantage of this representation tool. 
Section 5 explains how elicitation and optimization can be 
performed concurrently in order to recognize near-optimal 
choices with minimal questioning. We conclude in Sec­
tion 6 with a discussion of future work. 
2 
Background Concepts 
We begin with an outline of some relevant notions from 
multiattribute utility theory [10]. We assume a set of ac­
tions A is available to a decision maker, each action hav­
ing one of a number of possible outcomes. The set of all 
outcomes is designated 0. A preference ranking is a total 
preorder t over the set of outcomes: o 1 t o2 means that 
outcome 01 is equally or more preferred by the decision 
maker than o2. A utility function is a bounded, real-valued 
function u : 0 f-t R. A utility function u induces a pref­
erence ordering t such that 01 t 02 iffu(ot) Ā u(o2). A 
utility function also induces preferences over lotteries, or 
distributions over outcomes, where one lottery is preferred 
to another when its expected utility is greater. When actions 

UAI 2001 
BOUTILIER ET AL. 
57 
have uncertain outcomes, thereby generating a distribution 
over outcomes, preferences for actions can be equated with 
preferences for the corresponding lotteries [12]. 
One difficulty encountered in eliciting, representing, and 
reasoning with preferences and utilities is the size of 
the outcome space, which is generally determined by a 
set of variables. 
We assume a set of variables V 
= 
{X 1, . . .  , Xn} characterizing possible outcomes. 
Each 
variable X; has domain Dom(X;) = {xi , ... ,x. } . The 
set of outcomes is 0 = Dom(V) 
= Dom(X1) x · · · x 
Dom(Xn)· Thus direct assessment of a preference func­
tion is generally infeasible due to the exponential size of 
0. Fortunately, a preference function can be specified con­
cisely if it exhibits sufficient structure. We describe certain 
standard types of structure here (see [10] for further de­
tails). 
We denote a particular assignment of values to a set X Ĩ V 
as x, and the concatenation of two non-intersecting partial 
assignments by xy. If XU Y 
= V, xy is a complete 
outcome, and xy is a completion of the partial assignment 
x. Comp(x) denotes the set of completions ofx. 
A set of features X is preferentially independent of its com­
plement Y = V- X iff, for all x1, xz, y1, yz, we have 
X1Y1 ŀ X2Y1 iff X1Y2 ł XzYz 
We denote this as PI(X, Y). In other words, the structure 
of the preference relation over assignments to X, when all 
other features are held fixed, is the same no matter what 
values these other features take. If PI(X, Y) and X1Y Ł 
x2y for any assignment y to V- X, then we say that x1 
is preferred to x2 ceteris paribus. Thus, one can assess the 
relative preferences over assignments to X once, knowing 
these preferences do not change as other attributes vary. We 
define conditional preferential independence analogously. 
Let X, Y, and Z be nonempty sets that partition V. X 
and Y are conditionally preferentially independent given 
an assignment z to Z (denoted CPI(X, z, Y)) iff, for all 
XI,Xz,YI,Y2, we have 
In other words, the preferential independence of X andY 
holds when Z is assigned z. If we have CPI(X, z, Y) for 
all z E Dom(Z), then X andY are conditionally preferen­
tially independent given Z, denoted CPI(X, Z, Y). 
Decomposability of a preference function often allows one 
to identify the most preferred outcomes rather readily. Un­
fortunately, the ceteris paribus component of these defini­
tions means that the CPI statements are relatively weak. 
In particular, they do not imply a stance on specific value 
tradeoff's. For instance, suppose PI( A, B) and PI(B, A) 
so that the preferences for values of A and B can be as­
sessed separately, with a1 >- az and b1 >- bz. Clearly, a1b1 
is the most preferred outcome and a2b2 is the least; but if 
feasibility constraints make a 1 b1 impossible, we must be 
satisfied with one of a 1 b2 or a2 b1. With just preferential 
independence we cannot tell which is most preferred us­
ing these separate assessments. Stronger conditions (e.g., 
Figure 1: A CP-Network 
mutual preferential independence [ 1 0]) are required before 
such tradeoff's can be easily evaluated. 
CP-nets [3] are a graphical representation for structuring 
CPI statements. In particular, CP-nets are directed acyclic 
graphs whose nodes are the variables of V. We associate a 
conditional preference table (CPT) with each node X spec­
ifying a preference order over X's values given each in­
stantiation of its parents U, and require that CPI(X, U, Z) 
hold, where Z = V- (U U {X}). CP-nets structure these 
CPI statements so as to support useful inferences about the 
underlying preference order [3]. In Fig. 1 we see a CP-net 
defined over a set of four boolean variables, where, e.g., 
the CPT for C specifies that c is preferred to c when a and 
b hold. An important property of CP-nets is the induced 
importance it assigns to different variables: nodes "higher­
up" in the graph are more important than their descendants. 
Thus, it is more important to obtain preferred values for a 
node than for any one of its descendants. For example, in 
the CP-net above, we can see that abed (in which a less pre­
ferred value of C appears) is preferred to abed (in which a 
less preferred value of A appears). This property plays an 
important role in UCP-nets. 
Let X1, . . . , Xk be sets of not necessarily disjoint vari­
ables such that V 
= uiX;. X1, .. . ,Xk are generalized 
additive independent (GAl) for an underlying utility func­
tion u if, for any two probability distributions Pr1 and Pr2 
over Dom(V) that have the same marginals on each of the 
sets of variables Xi, u has the same expected value under 
Pr1 and Pr2• In other words, the expected value of u is not 
affected by correlations between the Xi. It depends only 
on the the marginal distributions over each the X i. 
It can be shown [1] that xl,.'. I xk are GAl iff u can be 
written as u(V) = L:=l J;(Xi). That is, u can be de­
composed into a sum of factors over each of these sets of 
variables. This property generalizes the standard definition 
of additive utility independence, which requires that the Xi 
partition V. For UCP-nets the ability to deal with overlap­
ping sets of variables is critical. 
3 
Adding Utilities to CP-Nets 
As noted above, the precision of a utility function (as op­
posed to a preference ordering) is often needed in decision 
making contexts where uncertainty is a factor. The rep­
resentation of utility functions should be natural, easy to 
elicit, compact (in typical cases), and support effective in­
ference. There are two basic types of queries with regard 

58 
BOUTILIER ET Al. 
UA12001 
Figure 2: A UCP-Network 
to outcomes one will often ask: 1 
(a) Dominance queries: does one outcome have higher 
utility than another (i.e., u(vt) :?: u(v2))? 
(b) Outcome optimization queries: what outcome has 
maximum utility given some partial assignment (i.e., 
what is arg max{u(v)
: v E Comp(x)})? 
GAl-models allow dominance testing to be performed very 
effectively: the utility of outcome v is readily determined 
by looking up the value /i(v) of each factor applied to v, 
and summing them to obtain u(v). In contrast, CP-nets 
do not allow straightforward dominance tests, generally re­
quiring reasonably sophisticated search techniques for all 
but the simplest network topologies. The relative attrac­
tiveness of the two approaches is, however, reversed when 
one considers optimization queries. In CP-nets, determin­
ing the (conditional) maximal outcome in a preference re­
lation is straightforward. In contrast , maximization in a 
GAl model requires the use of variable elimination [6, 13], 
whose complexity depends on the structure of the modeL 2 
We propose in this section a new network representation 
for utilities that combines aspects of both CP-nets and GAl 
models. The model is directed, like CP-nets, but prefer­
ences are quantified with utilities. The semantics is given 
by generalized additive independence along with the con­
straint that the directed influences reflect the ceteris paribus 
condition underlying CP-nets. By extending CP-nets with 
quantitative utility information, expressive power is en­
hanced and dominance queries become computationally ef­
ficient. By introducing directionality and a ceteris paribus 
semantics to the GAl model, we allow utility functions 
to be expressed more naturally, and permit optimization 
queries to be answered much more effectively. 
A UCP-net extends a CP-net by allowing quantification of 
nodes with conditional utility information. Semantically, 
we treat the different factors as generalized additive in­
dependent of one another. For example, the network in 
Fig. 1 can be extended with utility information by includ­
ing a factor for each family in the network, specifically, 
11 (A), h(B), h(A, B, C), and j4(C, D) (see Fig. 2). 
We interpret this network using GAl: u(A, B, C, D) 
= 
!I(A) + h(B) + h(A,B,C) + j4(C,D). Each of these 
factors is quantified by the (now quantitative) CPT ta­
bles in the network. For example, in Fig. 2 we have that 
1Queries regarding optimization with respect to actions are 
discussed in the next section. 
2GAI optimization can be effected using cost networks [7). 
h(a,b,c) = 0.6, while h(a,b,c) = 0.1. Thus, the CPT 
tables along with the GAJ interpretation provide a full spec­
ification of the utility function. For example, we have that 
u(a,b,c,d) 
= fi(a) + h(b) + h(a,b,c) + j4(c,d) = 
5 + 5 + 0.1 + 0.3 = 10.4. 
Notice however that the factors h and h are redundant in 
the sense that they refer to variables that are included in 
!J. Thus, this utility function could be represented more 
concisely using a GAl decomposition containing two fac­
tors: j4(C,D) and j5(A,B,C) 
= JI(A) + h(B) + 
h (A, B, C). The directionality of the utility-augmented 
CP-network, on the surface, seems to serve no purpose 
other than to break up the GAl-factors unnecessarily. 
However, we can use this directionality to represent CP 
conditions on the utility function u, and thus provide a sim­
ple and natural interpretation for the individual factors of u. 
In particular, we interpret the fact that A and B are parents 
ofC as asserting that CPJ(C, {A, B}, D), and thus the fac­
tor h(A, B, C) specifies the utility of C given A and B. 
The fact that each node is isolated from the rest of the net­
work given the values of its parents greatly simplifies utility 
assessment. Furthermore , this structure supports more ef­
ficient inference for certain queries than the standard GAl 
representation. 
Definition 1 Let u(X 1, . .. , Xn) be a utility function with 
induced preference relationĔ- A UCP-networkfor u is a 
DAG Gover X1, ... , Xn and a quantification (i.e., a set of 
factors /;(X;, Ui) where Ui are the parents of Xi) s.t.: 
(a) u(Xt, ... ,Xn) = Ldi(X;, U;) 
(b) The DAG G is a valid CP-network for Ŀ; i.e., >­
satisfies CPI(Xi, U;, Z;) for each X;, where Z; 
V- (U; u {Xi}) 
Condition (a) means that every UCP-net specifies a GAl 
decomposition of the underlying utility function u. How­
ever, the acyclic restriction means that not every GAl de­
composition can be represented in a UCP-net. For exam­
ple, the GAl decomposition u(A, B, C) = h (A, B, C) + 
h(C, B) would have to converted to the decomposition 
u(A,B,C) = h(A,B,C), where h = !I + /2, before 
it could be represented as a UCP-net. Nevertheless, there 
is a simple case where a GAl decomposition can easily be 
seen to be representable using a UCP-net topology. 
Proposition 1 If there exists a ordering of the variables 
such that under this ordering the last variable in every GAl 
factor is unique (i.e., no variable is last in more than one 
factor), then the GAl decomposition can be represented 
with a UCP-net topology. 
To construct the UCP-net in this case, for every factor we 
make every "last" variable a child and all of the prior vari­
ables its parents. 
Even if we can represent a GAl decomposition in a UCP­
net topology and we parameterize the net using the GAl 

UAI2001 
BOUTILIER ET AL. 
59 
Figure 3: The Domination Relation 
factors, the the result might not be a UCP-net, since the 
utility function might not satisfy the CP requirements of 
condition (b). For example, let u be a utility function over 
the boolean variables A and B with u(ab) = 9, u(ab) 
= 
1, u(ab) 
= 2 and u(iib) = 8. No UCP-net can represent 
u. To see this, first notice PI( A, B) fails to holds, since 
preferences for B depend on A. But we cannot make A a 
parent of B, since the preferences for A depend on B; nor 
can we make B a parent of A for a similar reason. 3 
This example shows that, for a fixed set of variables, UCP­
nets define a proper subset of all utility functions; but this 
subset has certain attractive computational properties as 
well as pragmatic advantages when it comes to elicitation. 
Given a UCP-network U for utility function u, verifying 
that it satisfies the CP-relationships among variables re­
quired by its definition can be accomplished by tests in­
volving the local neighborhoods of each node in the net­
work. 
Definition 2 Let X be a variable in a quantified DAG with 
parents U and children Y 
= {Y1, ... , Yn}, and let Z; 
be the parents of Y;, excluding X and any elements of 
U. Let Z 
= U Z;. Let U; be the subset of variables 
in U that are parents of Y; (the relationships among these 
variables is shown in Fig. 3). 
We say X dominates its 
children given u E Dom(V) if, for all x 1, x2 such that 
fx(x!, u) ;::: /x(x2, u), for all z E Dom(Z), and for all 
(y1, ... ,yn) E Dom(Y): 
fx(xl, u)- fx(x2, u);::: 
L jy, (y;, X2, u;, z;) - jy, (y;, x1, u;, z;) 
i 
X dominates its children if this holds for all u E Dom(V). 
Testing whether X dominates its children is a local test, in­
volving only the factor for variable X and those of its chil-
3The example above can be accommodated by clustering the 
dependent variables. That is, we can define a new variable C with 
Dom(C) = Dom(A) x Dom(B). In general, any utility function 
can be represented in a UCP-net by clustering appropriate sets of 
variables. This can be a reasonable approach if the clusters remain 
relatively small. It is also possible to generalize the definition of 
a UCP-net to allow cycles. This example could be represented by 
allowing A and B to be parents of one another. Cycles allow one 
to express a larger set of utility functions, but still do not permit all 
utility functions to be represented. They also may admit inconsis­
tency: certain network structures with cycles do not correspond 
to a consistent utility function satisfying the CP·constraints (an 
impossibility in acyclic graphs). We refer to [3] for details. 
dren. It requires that we check that, for each instantiation 
of X's children and the parents of its children, whether the 
decrease in local utility (i.e., in factor f x) dominates the 
(potential) increase it causes in the local utilities of its chil­
dren. 
With this definition, we can specify a straightforward nec­
essary and sufficient condition that ensures a DAG satisfies 
the CP conditions required by the definition of a UCP-net. 
Proposition 2 Let G be a DAG over {Xi} whose factors 
fi reflect the GAl-structure of utility function u. Then G is 
a UCP net iff each variable Xi dominates its children. 
Proof: We need only show that the CP-condition holds for 
X iff X dominates its children. 
Assume the same vari­
ables stand in relation to X as in the definition of domina­
tion above, and let W = V- (U U {X} U Y U Z) (i.e., 
all of the other variables in the network). X satisfies the 
CP-condition iff, for all x1, x2, u: x1 uyzw t x2uyzw 
implies x1u(yzw)' Ľ x2u(yzw)' for all (yzw)'. Now 
x1 uyzw t x2uyzw iffu(x1 uyzw) ľ u(x2uyzw), iff 
fx(x!, u)- !x(x2, u);::: 
L jy, (yi, x2, u;, zi) - jy, (yi, x1, u;, z;) 
since the only factors whose values can vary between these 
two terms are f x and the fy,. By definition this relation 
holds for all values of y and z (and trivially for all w) iff 
X dominates its children. <IIII 
Determining if a quantified network is in fact a UCP­
network requires a case-by-case analysis for each "ex­
tended family" in the network involving a number of tests 
exponential in the size of the extended families (by this we 
refer to a variable, its parents, its children, and its children's 
parents). Several stronger sufficient conditions exist that 
are easier to test. Here we present a particularly simple 
one. 
Proposition 3 Let G be a quantified DAG over the set of 
variables V. For each variable X let U be its set of parents 
in G. For X1, X2 E Dom(X), let 
Minspan(x1,x2) = 
min 
(lfx(xt,u)- fx(x2,u)l), 
uEDom(U) 
Minspan(X) = 
min 
Minspan(x1, x2). 
xl,x2EDom(X) 
Define Maxspan(X) analogously with max replacing min. 
Then G is a UCP-net if Minspan(X) ;::: Li Maxspan(Y;) 
where the Y; are the children of X. 
The values of Maxspan and Minspan can be computed for 
each variable X in 0 ( IDom (X) II f xI) time. Thus, this con­
dition can be checked in time polynomial in the number of 
network parameters. 
For purposes of elicitation and computation, it is often con­
venient to normalize utilities over the range [0, 1]. Simi­
larly, it is useful to normalize the individual factors of a 

60 
BOUTILIER ET AL. 
UAI2001 
UCP-net. In Section 5 we will consider a normalized vari­
ant of the UCP-net model in which the "rows" of each fac­
tor are normalized and "tradeoff' weights are used to cali­
brate them. Specifically: 
(a) For each variable X, with parents U and factor f x, 
and each u E Dom(U), we normalize the function 
fx(x, u) so that its values lie in the range [0, 1]. 
That is, we insist that minx fx(x, u) 
= 
0 and 
maxx fx(x, u) = 1. We denote the normalized func­
tion v x and call it the local value function for X given 
u. 
(b) For each X and instantiation of its parents u, we spec­
ify a multiplicative tradeoff weight 1r x, and an additive 
tradeoff weight a-x. 
The semantics of such a normalized UCP-net is as follows: 
the utility of any outcome is given by the sum of the terms 
(for each variable X) 7rxvx(x) +a-x, where x is the in­
stantiation of variable X and u is the instantiation of its 
parents. It is not hard to see, by the usual transformation 
results in utility theory, that every UCP-net has an equiva­
lent normalized representation. 
4 
Optimization Algorithms 
The two types of queries discussed above, dominance 
queries and optimization queries, can both be answered di­
rectly in UCP nets. Dominance queries can be answered 
trivially: determining whether u(vl) ;=: u(v2) for two 
complete outcomes simply requires that one extract and 
sum the values of each factor in the network and then com­
pare the sums. This can be done in time linear in the size of 
the network. Thus UCP-nets offer the advantages of other 
additive decompositions. In contrast, dominance testing in 
CP-nets is computationally difficult precisely because the 
tradeoffs between the (conditional) preference levels for 
different variables have not been specified. 
Outcome optimization queries can also be answered di­
rectly given a UCP-net, taking linear time in the network 
size. Given a partial instantiation z E Dom(Z), deter­
mining argmax{u(o) : o E Comp(z)) can be effected 
by a straightforward sweep through the network. 
Let 
X 1, ... , Xn be any topological ordering of the network 
variables excluding Z. We set Z = z, and instantiate each 
xi in turn to its maximal value given the instantiation of its 
parents. This procedure exploits the considerable power of 
the CP semantics to easily find an optimal outcome given 
certain observed evidence (or imposed constraints). 
Proposition 4 The forward sweep procedure constructs 
the optimaloutcomeargmax{u(v): v E Comp(z)}. 
Proof: Let v z be any outcome in the set of completions 
of z. Define a sequence of outcomes vi, 0 Ļ i ļ n, as 
follows: (a) Vo = Vz; (b) if xi 'it Z, Vj is constructed by 
setting the value of Xi to its most preferred value given the 
instantiation of its parents in v i-1, with all other variables 
retaining their values from Vi-1; (c) if Xi E Z, then 
vi = Vj-1. By construction, Vi t Yi-1· The last outcome 
v n is precisely that constructed by the forward sweep 
algorithm (assuming ties are broken in the same way as 
in the procedure). since v n t v z for any outcome v z 
consistent with the evidence, the forward sweep procedure 
yields an optimal outcome. <ill 
This algorithm illustrates the sharp contrast between UCP­
nets and GAl representations. Effective outcome optimiza­
tion in a GAl model requires that one use a dynamic pro­
gramming algorithm like variable elimination. As a conse­
quence, the complexity of such an algorithm-exponential 
in the induced tree width of the GAl model-depends crit­
ically on the "topology'' of the model and the ability to find 
good elimination orderings. 
Thus, UCP-nets offer a valuable restriction of GAl models 
and generalization of CP-nets. In particular, they impose 
restrictions on the relative strength of the GAl factors, and 
generalize CP-nets to allow for the representation of quan­
titative utilities. But we preserve the convenient graphical 
representation of CP-nets, and gain considerable computa­
tional benefits over both models. 
One of the main reasons to move from qualitative to quan­
titative preference models is to support decisions under 
(quantified) uncertainty. Naturally, given a decision prob­
lem and a fully specified UCP-network, determining an 
optimal course of action is (conceptually) straightforward. 
When the distributions induced by actions can be structured 
in a Bayes net, UCP-nets can be used to help structure the 
decision problem. Suppose that the distribution over vari­
ables V determined by an action a is represented as a Bayes 
net (possibly with a choice node if we wish to represent all 
actions) and the utility function over outcome space is de­
termined by a UCP-net.4 To compute the optimal action, 
we can construct an influence diagram by adding one utility 
variable Fi for each (nonconstant) factor f x, in the UCP­
network. Fi has as parents both X, and the parents of Xi 
in the UCP-net, and is quantified using factor f x, from the 
UCP-net. Variable elimination (e.g., Dechter's [6] MEU 
variant) can be used to determine the optimal action. 5 
This approach uses the GAl factorization of utilities af­
forded by the UCP-net, but not the CP-semantics. We can 
improve upon these ideas by noticing that our goa is to 
select the optimal action, not (necessarily) compute tts ex­
pected utility. In any GAl representation, we can bound 
the error associated with ignoring a utility variable Fi with 
parents U as follows. Let ei = m axu Fi{u)- minu Fi(u). 
The expected value EV(a) of any action a is given by 
L Pr(vla)(l: Fi(v)) = L(L Pr(vla)F,(v)) 
vEV 
i 
i 
vEV 
40ften utilities are elicited only over variables that are directly 
related to preferences. The variables in the Bayes net may include 
variables not contained in the UCP-net. 
50ne might also consider how expected utility networks [l l] 
might be used in this regard. 

--; 
UA12001 
BOUTILIER ET AL. 
61 
Let EV-i(a) be the expected value of action a with re­
spect to all utility variables except Fi. 
Then IEV(a) -
EV -i (a) I ::; e;. 
Thus if there is some a • such that 
EV-;(a*) - EV_;(a) ĺ €; for all a -::j:. a•, we know a• 
is optimal without having to compute the i'th term in the 
above summation. Analogous statements hold for ignoring 
any subset F of the utility variables, setting ep = LiEF ej. 
This suggests an incremental technique for computing 
an optimal (or near-optimal) action that exploits the CP­
semantics of a UCP-net. Let X 1, . . .  Xn be a topological 
ordering of the variables in the UCP-net. Our technique 
runs in (at most) n stages, where at stage k, we compute 
EV_{i>k}(a) for each action a. If for some a* we have 
EV_{i>k} (a*)-EV -{i>k} (a) 2: E{i>k} for all a -::j:. a*, we 
know a• is optimal and we can terminate without comput­
ing any further terms. Furthermore, we can remove from 
consideration at subsequent stages any action whose partial 
utility differs by more thane {i>k} from the (estimated) op­
timal action at this stage. The motivation for this approach 
lies in the fact that in a UCP network, variables near the top 
of the UCP-net have a larger impact on utility, and are thus 
more likely to lead to the separation of actions than factors 
lower in the net. For example, if action a has high probabil­
ity of making the most important variable X 1 take its most 
desired value, while action b is likely to ensure its least de­
sired value, we may be able to eliminate b from considera­
tion by just computing the first term of above summation. 
We can also terminate when the error associated with a* is 
below some threshold, even if it is not optimal. 
The computational benefits arise when one considers that 
computing EV -{i2":k} (a) requires one to do inference only 
on those variables that are relevant to predicting F _ { i>k}. 
Furthermore, at each each stage we need only compute the 
expected value with respect to the newly added utility vari­
able. In a problem with no evidence, for example, this can 
be accomplished by considering only ancestors of the vari­
ables F; in the Bayes net. An important issue with this iter­
ative procedure is how to minimize overall computation by 
reusing information computed in earlier iterations. This is 
plausible since (utility) factors generally overlap, and these 
factors generally have common influences. For example, if 
VE is used it might be possible to find variable orderings 
for each computation that facilitate the reuse of previous 
results---determining such orderings is an interesting algo­
rithmic question. 
5 
Elicitation with UCP-nets 
One of the key problems facing the use of decision­
theoretic models is the elicitation of preference informa­
tion. In this section we describe one possible procedure for 
exploiting the structure and semantics of a UCP-network 
to facilitate an incremental elicitation process. More pre­
cisely, given a specific decision scenario--i.e., a set of pos­
sible actions and the corresponding distributions over out­
comes they induce-and a set of constraints on the tradeoff 
weights of a normalized UCP-network, the regret of the 
best action can be computed as a simple linear optimiza-
tion problem. Given a specific set of questions that can 
be posed to the user, the (myopic) value of information for 
each question with respect its reduction of the minimax re­
gret can also be computed by solving a linear program. As 
such, an incremental procedure can be used to compute a 
greedy query plan that will ask just enough questions of the 
user to decide on a course of action whose regret is below 
some prespecified threshold (if this threshold is set to zero, 
then the optimal action will be recommended). 
To make this more precise, we define a decision scenario 
to be a set of actions A = a1, ... , an, where each action 
ai E A induces a distribution Pri(V) over outcomes. Let 
0; denote the support set for Pr; (i.e., the set of outcomes 
v for which Pri(V) > 0). We generally assume that Oi is 
small relative to Dom(V). 
As a starting point, we assume that we have been provided 
with a normalized UCP-network, whose structure and local 
value functions v x have been provided, but whose trade­
off weights 1Tx and ox remain unspecified. We feel that 
the elicitation of both structure and local value functions 
is something that users will often be able to provide with­
out too much difficulty. 
Structure elicitation, involving 
questions regarding the relative importance of different at­
tributes, as well as the dependence of these assessments on 
other attributes should not be especially onerous. Eliciting 
value function v x requires ordering a small number of val­
ues, given a specific parent context, and calibrating these 
value using (local) standard gambles, again, a relatively un­
problematic task. 
Although the structure and value functions are thus de­
termined, the tradeoff weights for the normalized UCP­
network remain unknown. The utility of any outcome v 
is a linear function of these weights: specifically, if v in­
stantiates each variable Xi to Xi and parent set U i to ui, 
then 
u(v) = "\'"" 7TU; VU; (x·) + (JUi 
L._... 
X; X; 
p 
X; 
i 
Let W be the set of possible instantiations of the tradeoff 
weights, and u(v, w) denote the utility ofv for a particular 
instantiation w E W. The expected value of any action a i 
is also a linear function of the tradeoff weights: 
EV(a;, w) = L Pri(v) u(v, w) 
vEO; 
Note that by assumption !Oil is relatively small, so this sum 
should contain only a small number of terms. 
We define the optimal action a:., with respect to an instan­
tiation w of the tradeoff weights to be 
a:_.= argmaxEV(a;, w) 
a; 
If the utility function were known to have weights w, a;, 
would be the correct choice of action. The regret of action 
ai with respect to w is 
R(a;, w) = EV(a;,, w) - EV(ai, w) 

62 
BOUTILIER ET AL. 
UAI2001 
i.e., the loss associated with executing ai instead of acting 
optimally. Let C be a subset of the set of possible instanti­
ations of the tradeoff weights, W. We define the maximum 
regret of action ai with respect to C to be 
Finally, we define the action a0 with minimax regret with 
respect to C: 
a0 = arg min MR(ai, C) 
a; 
The (minimax) regret level of weight set C is MMR( C) = 
MR(aC:, C). If the only information we have about a user's 
utility function is that it lies in the set C, then a0 is a 
reasonable choice of action. Specifically, without distribu­
tional information over the set of possible utility functions, 
choosing (or recommending) a c minimizes the worst case 
loss with respect to possible realizations of the utility func­
tion. 
If C is defined by a set of linear constraints on the weights, 
then a0 as well as MMR( C) can be computed using a set 
of linear programs. First note that we can compute 
for any pair of actions ai and ai using a linear program: 
we are maximizing a linear function of the weights sub­
ject to the linear constraints that define C. Solving O(n 2) 
such linear programs, one for each ordered pair of actions, 
allows us to identify the action a0 that achieves minimax 
regret and to determine the minimax regret level MMR( C). 
MMR( C) tells us how bad off we could be recommend­
ing a0. In particular if MMR(C) = MR(a0, C) = 0 then 
a0 dominates all other actions: it is at least as good as any 
other action for every feasible set of tradeoff weights. How­
ever, unless C is very refined (i.e., is defined by strong con­
straints), multiple actions will potentially be optimal (i.e., 
will be maximal in certain regions of weight space). To de­
termine which of these actions to recommend, we need to 
refine the constraints defining C further. 
C can contain a range of different linear constraints. One 
class of constraints in C is imposed by the structure of 
the network. In particular, each variable must dominate its 
children: this is a necessary condition in any UCP-net. Us­
ing the same notation for variable X's neighborhood as in 
Defn. 2, domination imposes the following linear constraint 
on the weights: for each u, z, y and pair x l> x2 E Dom(X) 
such that v  ( xt) 2 v  ( x2), we must have: 
Another class of constraints is the set of bounds that re­
strict each tradeoff weight 1r and u to a specific range. 
Such bounds are required in order to keep the LP problems 
we have proposed using bounded. Eliciting such bounds 
from the user is not a difficult task, as one can always start 
with very loose bounds. For example, the minimum and 
maximum utility of any possible outcome is a simple uni­
form bound on the tradeoff weights. Besides these required 
constraints, C could contain other nonstructurallinear con­
straints provided by the user, e.g., constraints on the rela­
tive magnitudes of different weights (reflecting degree of 
importance) or constraints on the relative expected utility 
of different actions in certain fixed contexts. 
If minimax regret is zero, or lies below some acceptable 
threshold, the action a0 can be recommended. Otherwise, 
questions can be asked of the user to help differentiate be­
tween possible actions. The solution to the above set of 
O(n2) linear programs can provide some guidance. For 
example, the linear program for solving MR(ai, C) also 
yields a solution to the dual problem. This solution pro­
vides a multiplicative factor associated with every inequal­
ity in C that tells us how much of a change we can produce 
in MR( ai, C) (in the neighborhood of the optimal solution) 
by modifying the inequality. Say that the k-th inequality is 
the upper bound 1r  ? 290, and that the value of the k-th 
variable in the dual solution is 100. This tells us that if we 
can get the user to tighten their upper bound on 1r Jl by 9 
units this might yield a 900 unit decrease in MR( a i, C). By 
examining the factors associated with the bounds imposed 
on the weights, those weights that have the most potential 
to influence MMR( C) could be identified. Furthermore, af­
ter we have queried the user and obtained an updated bound 
we need not resolve the linear programs from scratch to re­
compute the maximum regret of each action. There are 
many techniques in the LP literature on sensitivity analysis 
that can be employed to minimize the amount of computa­
tion that needs to be performed [5]. 
However, generally for realistic elicitation we cannot rely 
solely on the recommendations of the linear programs. In 
particular, sharpening the inequality recommended by the 
dual solution might not be an easy task for the user. The 
types of questions that can (reasonably) be asked will be 
domain dependent, and influenced by factors such as the 
complexity of the domain (e.g., if the number of attributes 
is manageable, asking a user to compare full outcomes may 
be acceptable, but otherwise not), the sophistication of the 
user, and the importance of the decision to be made. To 
address the general problem here, we will assume a (finite) 
set of possible questions Q = {q1, ... ,qk}, with each Qi 
having m possible responses r} , ... , rf' (we fix the num­
ber of responses simply to streamline the presentation). We 
suppose that every response adds an additional linear con­
straint to C (this subsumes the case of sharpening an ex­
isting constraint). Let C(d) denote the set of weights that 
satisfy C U { r{ } . Then asking a question q i and receiving 
a response r{ will reduce minimax regret by the amount 
MMR(C)- MMR(C(r{)). 
This suggests a querying strategy in which questions that 
have the ability to reduce minimax regret the most are 
asked first. In a certain sense, asking questions that reduce 

UAI2001 
BOUTI LIER ET AL. 
63 
minimax regret can be seen as a distribution-free analog 
of traditional value of information approaches to query­
ing. Specifically, the procedure we suggest strongly par­
allels the elicitation method proposed in [4], where a dis­
tribution over possible utility functions is used to guide 
the interactive elicitation process. In our distribution-free 
model, we cannot define the expected value of a ques­
tion, but instead use the worst-case response to define 
the minimal improvement we can obtain from some ques­
tion. 
The minimax improvement of question qi, Ml(q;) 
is mini MMR(C) - MMR(C(r{ )). The minimax optimal 
query with respect to C is that query with maximal im­
provement M/(qi) .6 We note that the improvement M/(qi) 
for any query must be nonnegative, since q; will always re­
duce the size of the feasible weight space, and generally 
will be nonzero. 
This suggests the following abstract elicitation strategy, 
which myopically attempts to improve minimax regret. 
Given a set of feasible weights C, the query q; with max­
imal improvement is asked, and response rf is obtained, 
resulting in a more refined weight space C(r{). Then 
MMR(C(rt )) is computed by solving the previously spec­
ified linear programs with the added constraint rf. Tech­
niques for sensitivity analysis can be utilized to minimize 
the work involved in doing these computation. This pro­
cess is repeated until one of two conditions is met: (a) 
the current weight space admits an action with regret less 
than some threshold r; or (b) no query has an improve­
ment score greater than the cost of that query. This latter 
condition is typically important in interactive elicitation: 
while one could ask many questions to narrow down a util­
ity function so that a (near) optimal decision can be made, 
one must account for the cost of these questions (e.g., the 
burden they impose on the user). 
Making this procedure concrete requires having a set of 
possible questions whose responses induce linear con­
straints on weight space. 
As pointed out above, such 
questions will in general be domain dependent. However, 
they might include asking the user to quantify the relative 
strengths of various tradeoff weights associated with a sin­
gle variable ax and 1r x. For example, asking the user for 
a value of k such that aþ1 ? kaÿ2 • Since this involves the 
outcomes of a common variable it should be relatively easy 
for the user to answer. Assessing relative tradeoff weights 
associated with different variables is a similar, albeit more 
difficult, question. Sharpening an upper or lower bound on 
a weight was addressed above. One more type of ques­
tion might be to ask the user which of actions a i or aj she 
would prefer in a specific context. The answer to this ques­
tion again imposes a linear constraint on weight space. 
This approach is very similar to that utilized in imprecisely 
specified multiattribute utility theory (ISMAUT) [9]. 
In 
such work, standard additive independent utility models are 
assumed and constraints on tradeoffs weights are used to 
6Queries can be ranked simply using their worst-case minimax 
regret, rather than their worst-case improvement, since the term 
MMR( C) is common to all queries and responses. 
determine if an optimal decision can be made. If no action 
dominates all others, further preferences are elicited. Our 
approach extends this basic viewpoint in a number of ways, 
including the utilization of richer utility models and a min­
imax regret model that supports decisions even when no 
action is dominant. ISMAUT does not generally describe 
means for generating queries automatically or making de­
cisions when no action is dominant. 
Our elicitation procedure has several drawbacks. 
The 
greedy nature of the algorithm means that sequences of 
questions that reduce regret may not be considered if the 
individual questions in the sequence do not. Circumvent­
ing this requires lookahead or some form of dynamic pro­
gramming. This problem is common to most value of in­
formation approaches (e.g., [4]). The use of minimax re­
gret to select actions should be viewed as reasonable in the 
absence of distributional information. However, selecting 
queries so that the worst response has maximal improve­
ment may not always be appropriate; and comparing this 
worst case improvement to the cost of the query may also 
be questioned, but other strategies are possible. 
We are currently exploring the use of distributions over 
weight space (i.e., over utility functions) to guide the elici­
tation process. In the abstract, such a model would be sim­
ilar to that of Chajewska, Koller, and Parr [4]. The dif­
ferences lie in the use of UCP-nets as the underlying util­
ity representation, and the use of dynamic programming to 
construct optimal query sequences (rather than using my­
opic value of information). Integrating this with linear op­
timization poses some interesting challenges. 
6 
Concluding Remarks 
We have proposed a new directed graphical model for rep­
resenting utility functions that combines appealing aspects 
of both CP-nets and GAl models. The UCP-net formal­
ism has a number of conceptual and computational advan­
tages over these models, providing leverage with respect 
to inference and elicitation. Clearly, practical experience 
and empirical studies are needed to gauge the ultimate ef­
fectiveness of UCP-nets. However, we are encouraged by 
the widespread use of additive models, and more recently, 
by the successful application of CP-nets to the problem of 
preference-based Web page content configuration [8]. 
We are currently in the process of implementing the inter­
active elicitation algorithm described in Section 5. Future 
research includes the inclusion of distributional informa­
tion over utility functions (or tradeoff weights), and devel­
oping algorithms that compute and use value of informa­
tion to construct optimal query plans. Another fundamental 
question pertains to determining optimal query plans when 
the query space is large or infinite, involving parameterized 
queries (e.g., standard gambles). We expect that the con­
siderable structure exhibited by the problem (e.g., the fact 
that the set of actions divides weight space W into a set 
of convex regions where each action is optimal) will allow 
optimization over each query type to be effected, without 
explicit enumeration of all instances. 

64 
BOUTILIER ET AL. 
UAI2001 
The investigation of the suggested optimization algorithms, 
specifically, empirical validation of the incremental vari­
able elimination approach to decision making described in 
Section 4, is a high priority.
