Published at 3rd Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents (CoLLAs), 2024
T-DGR: A TRAJECTORY-BASED
DEEP GENERATIVE REPLAY METHOD FOR
CONTINUAL LEARNING IN DECISION MAKING
William Yue
The University of Texas at Austin

Bo Liu
The University of Texas at Austin

Peter Stone
The University of Texas at Austin
Sony AI

ABSTRACT
Deep generative replay has emerged as a promising approach for continual learning in decision-
making tasks. This approach addresses the problem of catastrophic forgetting by leveraging the
generation of trajectories from previously encountered tasks to augment the current dataset. How-
ever, existing deep generative replay methods for continual learning rely on autoregressive models,
which suffer from compounding errors in the generated trajectories. In this paper, we propose a sim-
ple, scalable, and non-autoregressive method for continual learning in decision-making tasks using
a generative model that generates task samples conditioned on the trajectory timestep. We evaluate
our method on Continual World benchmarks and find that our approach achieves state-of-the-art
performance on the average success rate metric among continual learning methods.
1
INTRODUCTION
Continual learning, also known as lifelong learning, is a critical challenge in the advancement of general artificial
intelligence, as it enables models to learn from a continuous stream of data encompassing various tasks, rather than
having access to all data at once (Ring, 1994). However, a major challenge in continual learning is the phenomenon
of catastrophic forgetting, where previously learned skills are lost when attempting to learn new tasks (McCloskey &
Cohen, 1989).
To mitigate catastrophic forgetting, replay methods have been proposed, which involve saving data from previous tasks
and replaying it to the learner during the learning of future tasks. This approach mimics how humans actively prevent
forgetting by reviewing material for tests and replaying memories in dreams. However, storing data from previous
tasks requires significant storage space and becomes computationally infeasible as the number of tasks increases.
In the field of cognitive neuroscience, the Complementary Learning Systems theory offers insights into how the hu-
man brain manages memory. This theory suggests that the brain employs two complementary learning systems: a
fast-learning episodic system and a slow-learning semantic system (McClelland et al., 1995; Kumaran et al., 2016;
Mcclelland et al., 1995). The hippocampus serves as the episodic system, responsible for storing specific memories
of unique events, while the neocortex functions as the semantic system, extracting general knowledge from episodic
memories and organizing it into abstract representations (O’Reilly & Norman, 2002).
Drawing inspiration from the human brain, deep generative replay (DGR) addresses the catastrophic forgetting issue
in decision-making tasks by using a generative model as the hippocampus to generate trajectories from past tasks
and replay them to the learner which acts as the neocortex (Figure 2) (Shin et al., 2017). The time-series nature of
trajectories in decision-making tasks sets it apart from continual supervised learning, as each timestep of the trajectory
requires sufficient replay. In supervised learning, the learner’s performance is not significantly affected if it performs
poorly on a small subset of the data. However, in decision-making tasks, poor performance on any part of the trajectory
can severely impact the overall performance. Therefore, it is crucial to generate state-action pairs that accurately
represent the distribution found in trajectories. Furthermore, the high-dimensional distribution space of trajectories
makes it computationally infeasible to generate complete trajectories all at once.
Existing DGR methods adopt either the generation of individual state observations i.i.d. without considering the
temporal nature of trajectories or autoregressive trajectory generation. Autoregressive approaches generate the next
state(s) in a trajectory by modeling the conditional probability of the next state(s) given the previously generated
state(s). However, autoregressive methods suffer from compounding errors in the generated trajectories. On the other
1
arXiv:2401.02576v2  [cs.LG]  17 Jun 2024

Published at 3rd Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents (CoLLAs), 2024
Figure 1: The first row presents a comparison of three generative methods for imitating an agent’s movement in
a continuous 2D plane with Gaussian noise. The objective is to replicate the ground truth path, which transitions
from darker to lighter colors. The autoregressive method (CRIL) encounters a challenge at the first sharp turn as
nearby points move in opposing directions. Once the autoregressive method deviates off course, it never recovers and
compromises the remaining trajectory. In contrast, sampling individual state observations i.i.d. without considering
the temporal nature of trajectories (DGR) leads to a fragmented path with numerous gaps. Our proposed method
t-DGR samples individual state observations conditioned on the trajectory timestep. By doing so, t-DGR successfully
avoids the pitfalls of CRIL and DGR, ensuring a more accurate replication of the desired trajectory. The second row
illustrates how each method generates trajectory data. CRIL generates the next state observation conditioned on the
previous state observation. DGR, in contrast, does not attempt to generate a trajectory but generates individual state
observations i.i.d. On the other hand, t-DGR generates state observations conditioned on the trajectory timestep.
hand, generating individual state observations i.i.d. leads to a higher sample complexity compared to generating entire
trajectories, which becomes significant when replay time is limited (see Section 2.2).
To address the issues in current DGR methods, we propose a simple, scalable, and non-autoregressive trajectory-
based DGR method. We define a generated trajectory as temporally coherent if the transitions from one state to the
next appear realistic (refer to Section 3.4 for a formal definition). Given that imitation learning methods and many
reinforcement learning methods are trained on single transition samples (e.g. state-action pairs), we do not require
trajectories to exhibit temporal coherence. Instead, our focus is on ensuring an equal number of samples generated at
each timestep of the trajectory to accurately represent the distribution found in trajectories. To achieve equal sample
coverage at each timestep, we train our generator to produce state observations conditioned on the trajectory timestep,
and then sample from the generator conditioned on each timestep of the trajectory. The intuition behind our method is
illustrated in Figure 1.
To evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed method, t-DGR, we conducted experiments on the Continual World
benchmarks CW10 and CW20 (Wolczyk et al., 2021) using imitation learning. Our results indicate that t-DGR
achieves state-of-the-art performance in terms of average success rate when compared to other top continual learn-
ing methods.
2
RELATED WORK
This section provides an overview of existing continual learning methods, with a particular focus on pseudo-rehearsal
methods.
2

Published at 3rd Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents (CoLLAs), 2024
2.1
CONTINUAL LEARNING IN THE REAL WORLD
As the field of continual learning continues to grow, there is an increasing emphasis on developing methods that can
be effectively applied in real-world scenarios (Wang et al., 2024; Aljundi et al., 2019; Bang et al., 2021; Hsu et al.,
2019; van de Ven & Tolias, 2019). The concept of “General Continual Learning” was introduced by Buzzega et al.
(2020) to address certain properties of the real world that are often overlooked or ignored by existing continual learning
methods. Specifically, two important properties, bounded memory and blurry task boundaries, are emphasized in this
work. Bounded memory refers to the requirement that the memory footprint of a continual learning method should
remain bounded throughout the entire lifespan of the learning agent. This property is crucial to ensure practicality and
efficiency in real-world scenarios. Additionally, blurry task boundaries highlight the challenge of training on tasks
that are intertwined, without clear delineation of when one task ends and another begins. Many existing methods fail
to account for this characteristic, which is common in real-world learning scenarios. While there are other significant
properties associated with continual learning in the real world, this study focuses on the often-neglected aspects of
bounded memory and blurry task boundaries. By addressing these properties, we aim to develop methods that are
more robust and applicable in practical settings.
2.2
CONTINUAL LEARNING METHODS
Continual learning methods for decision-making tasks can be categorized into three main categories.
Regularization
Regularization methods in continual learning focus on incorporating constraints during model train-
ing to promote the retention of past knowledge. One simple approach is to include an L2 penalty in the loss function.
Elastic Weight Consolidation (EWC) builds upon this idea by assigning weights to parameters based on their impor-
tance for previous tasks using the Fisher information matrix (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017). MAS measures the sensitivity
of parameter changes on the model’s output, prioritizing the retention of parameters with a larger effect (Aljundi et al.,
2018). VCL leverages variational inference to minimize the Kullback-Leibler divergence between the current and
prior parameter distributions (Nguyen et al., 2018). Progress and Compress learns new tasks using a separate model
and subsequently distills this knowledge into the main model while safeguarding the previously acquired knowledge
(Schwarz et al., 2018). However, regularization methods may struggle with blurry task boundaries as they rely on
knowledge of task endpoints to apply regularization techniques effectively. In our experiments, EWC was chosen
as the representative regularization method based on its performance in the original Continual World experiments
(Wolczyk et al., 2021).
Architecture-based Methods
Architecture-based methods aim to maintain distinct sets of parameters for each task,
ensuring that future learning does not interfere with the knowledge acquired from previous tasks. Packnet (Mallya
& Lazebnik, 2018), UCL (Ahn et al., 2019), and AGS-CL (Jung et al., 2020) all safeguard previous task information
in a neural network by identifying important parameters and freeing up less important parameters for future learning.
Identification of important parameters can be done through iterative pruning (Packnet), parameter uncertainty (UCL),
and activation value (AGS-CL). However, a drawback of parameter isolation methods is that each task requires its own
set of parameters, which may eventually exhaust the available parameters for new tasks and necessitate a dynamically
expanding network without bounded memory (Yoon et al., 2018). Additionally, parameter isolation methods require
training on a single task at a time to prune and isolate parameters, preventing concurrent learning from multiple
interwoven tasks. In our experiments, PackNet was selected as the representative architecture-based method based on
its performance in the original Continual World experiments (Wolczyk et al., 2021).
Pseudo-rehearsal Methods
Pseudo-rehearsal methods mitigate the forgetting of previous tasks by generating syn-
thetic samples from past tasks and replaying them to the learner. Deep generative replay (DGR) (Figure 2) utilizes a
generative model, such as generative adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al., 2020), variational autoencoders (Kingma
& Welling), or diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015), to generate the synthetic samples. Orig-
inally, deep generative replay was proposed to address continual supervised learning problems, where the generator
only needed to generate single data point samples (Shin et al., 2017). However, in decision-making tasks, expert
demonstrations consist of trajectories (time-series) with a significantly higher-dimensional distribution space.
One existing DGR method generates individual state observations i.i.d. instead of entire trajectories. However, this
approach leads to a higher sample complexity compared to generating entire trajectories. The sample complexity
of generating enough individual state observations i.i.d. to cover every portion of the trajectory m times can be
described using the Double Dixie Cup problem (Newman, 1960). For trajectories of length n, it takes an average of
Θ(n log n + mn log log n) i.i.d. samples to ensure at least m samples for each timestep. In scenarios with limited
replay time (small m) and long trajectories (large n) the sample complexity can be approximated as Θ(n log n) using
3

Published at 3rd Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents (CoLLAs), 2024
Figure 2: The deep generative replay paradigm. The algorithm learns to generate trajectories from past tasks to
augment real trajectories from the current task in order to mitigate catastrophic forgetting. Both the generator and
policy model are updated with this augmented dataset.
the Coupon Collector’s problem (Myers & Wilf, 2006). The additional Θ(log n) factor reduces the likelihood of
achieving complete sample coverage of the trajectory when the number of replays or replay time is limited, especially
considering the computationally expensive nature of current generative methods. Furthermore, there is a risk that
the generator assigns different probabilities to each timestep of the trajectory, leading to a selective focus on certain
timesteps rather than equal representation across the trajectory.
Another existing DGR method is autoregressive trajectory generation. In the existing autoregressive method, CRIL,
a generator is used to generate samples of the initial state, and a dynamics model predicts the next state based on
the current state and action (Gao et al., 2021). However, even with a dynamics model accuracy of 99% and a 1%
probability of deviating from the desired trajectory, the probability of an autoregressively generated trajectory going
off course is 1 −0.99n, where n denotes the trajectory length. With a trajectory length of n = 200 (as used in our
experiments), the probability of an autoregressively generated trajectory going off course is 1 −0.99200 = 0.87. This
example demonstrates how the issue of compounding error leads to a high probability of failure, even with a highly
accurate dynamics model.
In our experiments, t-DGR is evaluated against all existing trajectory generation methods in pseudo-rehearsal ap-
proaches to assess how well t-DGR addresses the limitations of those methods.
3
BACKGROUND
This section introduces notation and the formulation of the continual imitation learning problem that we use in this
paper. Additionally, we provide a concise overview of diffusion probabilistic models used in our generative model
implementation.
3.1
IMITATION LEARNING
Imitation learning algorithms aim to learn a policy πθ parameterized by θ by imitating a set of expert demonstrations
D = {τi}i=1...M. Each trajectory τi consists of a sequence of state-action pairs {(sj, aj)}j=1...|τi| where |τi| is
the length of the trajectory. Each trajectory comes from a task T which is a Markov decision process that can be
represented as a tuple ⟨S, A, T, ρ0⟩with state space S, action space A, transition dynamics T : S × A × S →[0, 1],
and initial state distribution ρ0. Various algorithms exist for imitation learning, including behavioral cloning, GAIL
(Ho & Ermon, 2016), and inverse reinforcement learning (Ng & Russell, 2000). In this work, we use behavioral
cloning where the objective can be formulated as minimizing the loss function:
L(θ) = Es,a∼D


πθ(s) −a

2
2

(1)
where the state and action spaces are continuous.
3.2
CONTINUAL IMITATION LEARNING
In the basic formulation most common in the field today, continual imitation learning involves sequentially solving
multiple tasks T1, T2, . . . , TN. When solving for task Ti, the learner only gets data from task Ti and can not access data
for any other task. In a more general scenario, certain tasks may have overlapping boundaries, allowing the learner to
encounter training data from multiple tasks during certain phases of training. The learner receives a continuous stream
of training data in the form of trajectories τ1, τ2, τ3, . . . from the environment, where each trajectory τ corresponds to
one of the N tasks. However, the learner can only access a limited contiguous portion of this stream at any given time.
4

Published at 3rd Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents (CoLLAs), 2024
Let si be the success rate of task Ti after training on all N tasks. The continual imitation learning objective is defined
as maximizing the average success rate over all tasks:
S = 1
N
N
X
i=1
si
(2)
The primary issue that arises from the continual learning problem formulation is the problem of catastrophic forgetting
where previously learned skills are forgotten when training on a new task.
3.3
DIFFUSION PROBABILISTIC MODELS
Diffusion probabilistic models (Ho et al., 2020; Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015) generate data through a learned reverse
denoising diffusion process pθ(xt−1 | xt). The forward diffusion process q(xt | xt−1) gradually adds Gaussian noise
to an input x0 at each time step t, ultimately resulting in pure noise xT at t = T. The forward diffusion process is
defined as:
q(xt | xt−1) = N

xt;
p
1 −βtxt−1, βtI

(3)
where 0 < βt < 1 is defined by a known variance schedule. In our implementation, we adopted the cosine schedule
proposed by Nichol & Dhariwal (2021). For a sufficiently large time horizon T and a well-behaved variance schedule,
xT approximates an isotropic Gaussian distribution. If we had the reverse diffusion process p(xt−1 | xt), we could
sample xT ∼N(0, I) and obtain a sample from q(x0) by denoising xT with p(xt−1 | xt). However, computing
p(xt−1 | xt) is intractable as it necessitates knowledge of the distribution of all possible xt. Instead, we approximate
p(xt−1 | xt) using a neural network:
pθ(xt−1 | xt) = N (xt−1; µθ(xt, t), Σ(xt, t))
(4)
Since q and pθ can be viewed as a variational auto-encoder (Kingma & Welling), we can use the variational lower
bound to minimize the negative log-likelihood of the reverse process. We can express µθ(xt, t) from Equation 4 as:
µθ(xt, t) =
1
√αt

xt −
βt
√1 −αt
ϵθ(xt, t)

(5)
where αt = 1 −βt and αt = Qt
s=0 αs. The training loss can then be defined as:
L(θ) = Ex0,t,ϵ

∥ϵ −ϵθ(xt, t)∥2
(6)
Note that the timesteps t in the diffusion process differ from the trajectory timesteps t. Henceforth, we will refer only
to the trajectory timesteps t.
3.4
NOTATION
Deep generative replay involves training two models: a generator Gγ parameterized by γ and a learner πθ parameter-
ized by θ. We define G(i)
γ as the generator trained on tasks T1 . . . Ti and capable of generating data samples from tasks
T1 . . . Ti. Similarly, π(i)
θ
represents the learner trained on tasks T1 . . . Ti and able to solve tasks T1 . . . Ti.
A sequence of state observations (s1, s2, . . . , sn−1, sn) is temporally coherent if ∀1 ≤i < n, ∃a ∈A :
T(si, a, si+1) > ε, where 0 < ε < 1 is a small constant representing a threshold for negligible probabilities.
4
METHOD
Our proposed method, t-DGR, tackles the challenge of generating long trajectories by training a generator, denoted
as Gγ(j), which is conditioned on the trajectory timestep j to generate state observations. Pseudocode for t-DGR is
provided as Algorithm 1. The algorithm begins by initializing the task index, replay ratio, generator model, learner
model, and learning rates (Line 1). The replay ratio, denoted as 0 ≤r < 1, determines the percentage of training
samples seen by the learner that are generated. Upon receiving training data from the environment, t-DGR calculates
the number of trajectories to generate based on the replay ratio r (Lines 4-5). The variable L (Line 7) represents the
maximum length of trajectories observed so far.
To generate a trajectory τ of length L, t-DGR iterates over each timestep 1 ≤j ≤L (Line 9). At each timestep, t-DGR
generates the j-th state observation of the trajectory using the previous generator G(t−1)
γ
conditioned on timestep j
5

Published at 3rd Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents (CoLLAs), 2024
Algorithm 1 Trajectory-based Deep Generative Replay (t-DGR)
1: Initialize task index t = 0, replay ratio r, generator G(0)
γ , learner π(0)
θ , and learning rates λγ, λθ.
2: while new task available do
3:
t ←t + 1
4:
Initialize dataset D with trajectories from task t.
5:
n ←r∗|D|
1−r
▷number of trajectories to generate
6:
for i = 1 to n do
7:
L ←maximum trajectory length
8:
τ ←∅
▷initialize trajectory of length L
9:
for j = 1 to L do
10:
S ←G(t−1)
γ
(j)
▷generate states
11:
A ←π(t−1)
θ
(S)
▷label with actions
12:
τj ←(S, A)
▷add to trajectory
13:
end for
14:
D ←D ∪τ
▷add generated trajectory to D
15:
end for
16:
Update generator and learner using D
17:
γ(t) ←γ(t−1) −λγ∇γLG(t−1)(γ(t−1))
18:
θ(t) ←θ(t−1) −λθ∇θLπ(t−1)(θ(t−1))
19: end while
(Line 10), and then labels it with an action using the previous policy π(t−1)
θ
(Line 11). After generating all timesteps
in the trajectory τ, t-DGR adds it to the existing training dataset (Line 14). Note that the generated state observations
within a trajectory do not have temporal coherence, as each state observation is generated independently of other
timesteps. This approach is acceptable since our learner is trained on state-action pairs rather than full trajectories.
However, unlike generating state observations i.i.d., our method ensures equal coverage of every timestep during the
generative process, significantly reducing sample complexity.
Once t-DGR has augmented the training samples from the environment with our generated training samples, t-DGR
employs backpropagation to update both the generator and learner using the augmented dataset (Lines 16-18). The
t-DGR algorithm continues this process of generative replay throughout the agent’s lifetime, which can be infinite
(Line 2). Although we perform the generative process of t-DGR at task boundaries for ease of understanding, no part
of t-DGR is dependent on clear task boundaries.
Architecture
We employ a U-net (Ronneberger et al., 2015) trained on the loss specified in Equation 6 to implement
the generative diffusion model Gγ. Since we utilize proprioceptive observations in our experiments, πθ is implemented
with a multi-layer perceptron trained on the loss specified in Equation 1.
5
EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we outline the experimental setup and performance metrics employed to compare t-DGR with rep-
resentative methods, followed by an analysis of experimental results across different benchmarks and performance
metrics.
5.1
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
We evaluate our method on the Continual World benchmarks CW10 and CW20 (Wolczyk et al., 2021), along with
our own variant of CW10 called BB10 that evaluates the ability of methods to handle blurry task boundaries. CW10
consists of a sequence of 10 Meta-World (Yu et al., 2020) tasks, where each task involves a Sawyer arm manipulating
one or two objects in the Mujoco physics simulator. For computational efficiency, we provide the agents with pro-
prioceptive observations. Notably, the observation and action spaces are continuous and remain consistent across all
tasks. CW20 is an extension of CW10 with the tasks repeated twice. To our knowledge, Continual World is the only
standard continual learning benchmark for decision-making tasks. BB10 gives data to the learner in 10 sequential
buckets B1, . . . , B10. Data from task Ti from CW10 is split evenly between buckets Bi−1, Bi, and Bi+1, except for
6

Published at 3rd Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents (CoLLAs), 2024
the first and last task. Task T1 is evenly split between buckets B0 and B1, and task T10 is evenly split between buckets
B9 and B10.
In order to bound memory usage, task conditioning should utilize fixed-size embeddings like natural language task
embeddings, rather than maintaining a separate final neural network layer for each individual task. For simplicity, we
condition the model on the task with a one-hot vector as a proxy for natural language prompt embeddings. For BB10,
the model is still conditioned on the underlying task rather than the bucket. Additionally, we do not allow separate
biases for each task, as originally done in EWC (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017). Expert demonstrations for training are
acquired by gathering 100 trajectories per task using hand-designed policies from Meta-World, with each trajectory
limited to a maximum of 200 steps. Importantly, the learner model remains consistent across different methods and
benchmark evaluations. Moreover, we maintain a consistent replay ratio of r = 0.9 across all pseudo-rehearsal
methods.
We estimated the success rate S of a model by running each task 100 times. The metrics for each method were
computed using 5 seeds to create a 90% confidence interval. Further experimental details, such as hyperparameters,
model architecture, random seeds, and computational resources, are included in the appendix. This standardization
enables a fair and comprehensive comparison of our proposed approach with other existing methods.
5.2
METRICS
We evaluate our models using three metrics proposed by the Continual World benchmark (Wolczyk et al., 2021),
with the average success rate being the primary metric. Although the forward transfer and forgetting metrics are
not well-defined in a setting with blurry task boundaries, they are informative within the context of Continual World
benchmarks. As a reminder from Section 3.2, let N denote the number of tasks, and si represent the success rate of
the learner on task Ti. Additionally, let si(t) denote the success rate of the learner on task Ti after training on tasks T1
to Tt.
Average Success Rate
The average success rate, as given by Equation 2, serves as the primary evaluation metric for
continual learning methods.
Average Forward Transfer
We introduce a slightly modified metric for forward transfer that applies to a broader
range of continual learning problems beyond just continual reinforcement learning in the Continual World benchmark.
Let sref
i
represent the reference performance of a single-task experiment on task Ti. The forward transfer metric FTi
is computed as follows:
FTi = Di −Dref
i
1 −Dref
i
Di = si(i) + si(i −1)
2
Dref
i
= sref
i
2
The expressions for Di and Dref
i
serve as approximations of the integral of task Ti performance with respect to the
training duration for task Ti. The average forward transfer FT is then defined as the mean forward transfer over all
tasks, calculated as FT = 1
N
PN
i=1 FTi.
Average Forgetting
We measure forgetting using the metric Fi, which represents the amount of forgetting for task
i after all training has concluded. Fi is defined as the difference between the success rate on task Ti immediately after
training and the success rate on task Ti at the end of training.
Fi = si(i) −si(N)
The average forgetting F is then computed as the mean forgetting over all tasks, given by F = 1
N
PN
i=1 Fi.
5.3
BASELINES
We compare the following methods on the Continual World benchmark using average success rate as the primary
evaluation metric. Representative methods were chosen based on their success in the original Continual World ex-
periments, while DGR-based methods were selected to evaluate whether t-DGR addresses the limitations of existing
pseudo-rehearsal methods.
• Finetune: The policy is trained only on data from the current task.
• Multitask: The policy is trained on data from all tasks simultaneously.
7

Published at 3rd Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents (CoLLAs), 2024
• oEWC (Schwarz et al., 2018): A variation of EWC known as online Elastic Weight Consolidation (oEWC)
bounds the memory of EWC by employing a single penalty term for the previous model instead of individual
penalty terms for each task. This baseline is the representative regularization-based method.
• PackNet (Mallya & Lazebnik, 2018): This baseline is the representative parameter isolation method. Pack-
net safeguards previous task information in a neural network by iteratively pruning, freezing, and retraining
parts of the network.
• DGR (Shin et al., 2017): This baseline is a deep generative replay method that only generates individual
state observations i.i.d. and not entire trajectories.
• CRIL (Gao et al., 2021): This baseline is a deep generative replay method that trains a policy along with
a start state generator and a dynamics model that predicts the next state given the current state and action.
Trajectories are generated by using the dynamics model and policy to autoregressively generate next states
from a start state.
• t-DGR: Our proposed method.
Due to the inability of oEWC and PackNet to handle blurry task boundaries, we made several adjustments for CW20
and BB10. Since PackNet cannot continue training parameters for a task once they have been fixed, we treated the
second repetition of tasks in CW20 as distinct from the first iteration, resulting in PackNet being evaluated with
N = 20, while the other methods were evaluated with N = 10. As for BB10 and its blurry task boundaries, the
best approach we could adopt with oEWC and PackNet was to apply their regularization techniques at regular training
intervals rather than strictly at task boundaries. During evaluation, all tasks were assessed using the last fixed set of
parameters in the case of PackNet.
5.4
ABLATIONS
To evaluate the effect of generator architecture on pseudo-rehearsal methods, we included an ablation where the
diffusion models in pseudo-rehearsal methods are replaced with Wasserstein generative adversarial networks (GAN)
with gradient penalty (Gulrajani et al., 2017). To evaluate the effectiveness of diffusion models at generative replay,
we evaluated the quality of generated samples for past tasks at all stages of continual learning. Since we utilize
proprioceptive observations rather than RGB camera observations, there is no practical way to qualitatively evaluate the
generated samples. The proprioceptive observations are 39-dimensional, comprising 3D positions and quaternions of
objects, and the degree to which the robot gripper is open (Yu et al., 2020). These raw numbers cannot be qualitatively
evaluated like RGB images. Instead, we use the average diffusion loss as a quantitative proxy metric for generation
quality. When the generator model is learning task i, we compute the average diffusion loss for data samples from
tasks 1 to i −1. We then compare this average diffusion loss to the average diffusion loss when the generator model
first learned task i. The difference between the two provides an estimate of how much generative replay has degraded
the generation quality of previous tasks.
5.5
DISCUSSION
t-DGR emerges as the leading method, demonstrating the highest success rate on CW10 (Table 1a), CW20 (Table 1c),
and BB10 (Table 1b). Notably, PackNet’s performance on the second iteration of tasks in CW20 diminishes, highlight-
ing its limited capacity for continually accommodating new tasks. This limitation underscores the fact that PackNet
falls short of being a true lifelong learner, as it necessitates prior knowledge of the task count for appropriate parameter
capacity allocation. On the contrary, pseudo-rehearsal methods, such as t-DGR, exhibit improved performance with
the second iteration of tasks in CW20 due to an increased replay time. These findings emphasize the ability of DGR
methods to effectively leverage past knowledge, as evidenced by their superior forward transfer in both CW10 and
CW20.
BB10 (Table 1b) demonstrates that pseudo-rehearsal methods are mostly unaffected by blurry task boundaries, whereas
PackNet’s success rate experiences a significant drop-off. This discrepancy arises from the fact that PackNet’s regu-
larization technique does not work effectively with less clearly defined task boundaries.
In our experiments across CW10, CW20, and BB10, we observed that diffusion models outperform GANs as the
generator for pseudo-rehearsal methods. We hypothesize that the distributional shifts in continual learning exacerbate
instability issues with GAN training (Salimans et al., 2016; Brock et al., 2018; Miyato et al., 2018). The motiva-
tion behind CRIL as stated in the paper (Gao et al., 2021) is to alleviate the burden of trajectory generation from
the generator by transferring some of the generation complexity to a dynamics model. Our findings support this mo-
tivation when working with less capable generators (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021), as reducing the generator’s burden
8

Published at 3rd Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents (CoLLAs), 2024
(a) CW10
Method
Success Rate ↑
FT↑
Forgetting↓
Finetune
16.4 ±6.4
-3.0 ±6.0
78.8 ±7.6
Multitask
97.0 ±1.0
N/A
N/A
oEWC
18.6 ±5.3
-6.3 ±5.7
74.1 ±6.1
PackNet
81.4 ±3.7
-14.8 ±7.8
-0.1 ±1.2
DGR (gan)
21.2 ±3.7
-2.6 ±3.3
74.4 ±4.7
CRIL (gan)
24.0 ±4.4
0.3 ±4.5
72.0 ±5.4
t-DGR (gan)
17.4 ±4.4
0.1 ±3.1
79.8 ±4.2
DGR (diffusion)
75.0 ±5.8
-4.3 ±5.1
17.8 ±4.1
CRIL (diffusion)
28.4 ±10.6
-1.1 ±2.8
68.6 ±10.4
t-DGR (diffusion)
81.9 ±3.3
-0.3 ±4.9
14.4 ±2.5
(b) BB10
Method
Success Rate ↑
Finetune
21.7 ±2.6
Multitask
97.0 ±1.0
oEWC
21.8 ±1.7
PackNet
26.9 ±5.6
DGR (gan)
35.6 ±4.3
CRIL (gan)
37.5 ±4.7
t-DGR (gan)
28.3 ±3.9
DGR (diffusion)
75.3 ±4.4
CRIL (diffusion)
53.5 ±5.5
t-DGR (diffusion)
81.7 ±4.0
(c) CW20
Method
Success Rate ↑
FT↑
Forgetting↓
Finetune
14.2 ±4.0
-0.5 ±3.0
82.2 ±5.6
Multitask
97.0 ±1.0
N/A
N/A
oEWC
19.4 ±5.3
-2.8 ±4.1
75.2 ±7.5
PackNet
74.1 ±4.1
-20.4 ±3.4
-0.2 ±0.9
DGR (gan)
19.0 ±2.1
0.8 ±2.3
78.6 ±2.3
CRIL (gan)
26.7 ±6.5
-0.6 ±0.7
72.1 ±6.2
t-DGR (gan)
20.6 ±6.1
0.7 ±3.4
76.3 ±5.3
DGR (diffusion)
74.1 ±4.1
18.9 ±2.9
23.3 ±3.3
CRIL (diffusion)
50.8 ±4.4
4.4 ±4.9
46.1 ±5.4
t-DGR (diffusion)
83.9 ±3.0
30.6 ±4.5
14.6 ±2.9
(d) Replay Ratio
Ratio
t-DGR
DGR
0.5
63.2 ±2.6
52.8 ±2.9
0.6
66.3 ±4.4
56.9 ±4.5
0.7
70.8 ±4.1
62.5 ±3.6
0.8
75.0 ±6.9
69.2 ±4.9
0.9
81.9 ±3.3
75.0 ±5.8
Table 1: Tables (a), (b), and (c) present the results for Continual World 10, Blurry Boundaries 10, and Continual
World 20, respectively. The tables display the average success rate, forward transfer, and forgetting (if applicable)
with 90% confidence intervals using 5 random seeds. An up arrow indicates that higher values are better and a down
arrow indicates that smaller values are better. Table (d) compares the impact of replay amount on the average success
rate of t-DGR and DGR on CW10 with 90% confidence intervals obtained using 5 random seeds. The best results are
highlighted in bold.
consistently enhances performance of GAN-based pseudo-rehearsal methods across all benchmarks. Among pseudo-
rehearsal techniques, CRIL places the least demand on its generator, which only needs to produce the initial frame of a
trajectory. In contrast, DGR requires generation of every frame, and t-DGR, the most demanding, requires generation
of every frame along with the handling of trajectory timestep conditioning. Results from our GAN-based pseudo-
rehearsal experiments on CW10, CW20, and BB10 indicate that CRIL outperforms DGR, which in turn outperforms
t-DGR. However, experiments using a more capable diffusion generator (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) reveal a reversal
in performance ranking among these methods, suggesting that more capable generators diminish the need to offload
generation complexity from the main generator.
The diminishing performance gap between DGR and t-DGR as the replay ratio increases in Table 1d indicates that a
higher replay ratio reduces the likelihood of any portion of the trajectory being insufficiently covered when sampling
individual state observations i.i.d., thereby contributing to improved performance. This trend supports the theoretical
sample complexity of DGR derived in Section 2.2, as Θ(n log n + mn log log n) closely approximates the sample
complexity of t-DGR, Θ(mn), when the replay amount m →∞. However, while DGR can achieve comparable
performance to t-DGR with a high replay ratio, the availability of extensive replay time is often limited in many
real-world applications.
9

Published at 3rd Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents (CoLLAs), 2024
Recent studies have indicated that applying generative replay to diffusion models for image data leads to a collapse of
generation quality due to compounding errors in the generated synthetic data (Zajac et al., 2023; Masip et al., 2023;
Smith et al., 2023). However, our experiments reveal that when generating lower dimensional proprioceptive data,
the diffusion model is able to maintain generation quality. Although Figure 3 shows that generative replay degrades
generation quality of past tasks as the diffusion model learns new tasks, the success rates in Table 1 suggest that
this degradation in generation quality is not severe enough to impact the learner’s performance. Notably, generation
quality for past tasks appears to deteriorate in tasks 5 and 7 but improves in the subsequent task, suggesting that
the error compounding in diffusion models during generative replay might not be as severe as previously assumed,
particularly for lower-dimensional data.
Overall, t-DGR exhibits promising results, outperforming other methods in terms of success rate in all evaluations.
Notably, t-DGR achieves a significant improvement over existing pseudo-rehearsal methods on CW20 using a Welch t-
test with a significance level of p-value = 0.005. Its ability to handle blurry task boundaries, leverage past knowledge,
and make the most of replay opportunities position it as a state-of-the-art method for continual lifelong learning in
decision-making.
0.015
0.021
0.027
0.033
0.040
Task 1
Task 2
Task 3
Task 4
Task 5
Task 1
Task 2
Task 3
Task 4
Task 5
Task 6
Task 7
Task 8
Task 9
Task 10
0.015
0.021
0.027
0.033
0.040
Task 6
Task 1
Task 2
Task 3
Task 4
Task 5
Task 6
Task 7
Task 8
Task 9
Task 10
Task 7
Task 1
Task 2
Task 3
Task 4
Task 5
Task 6
Task 7
Task 8
Task 9
Task 10
Task 8
Task 1
Task 2
Task 3
Task 4
Task 5
Task 6
Task 7
Task 8
Task 9
Task 10
Task 9
Task 1
Task 2
Task 3
Task 4
Task 5
Task 6
Task 7
Task 8
Task 9
Task 10
Task 10
Training Task
L1 Diffusion Loss
Effect of Generative Replay on Diffusion Model
Figure 3: This table illustrates the ability of the diffusion model in t-DGR to generate past data as it continues to learn
additional tasks in CW10 through generative replay. The line plot for task i plots the average diffusion loss of the
diffusion model in future tasks on task i data. The loss is an L1 version of the diffusion training loss in Equation 6.
6
CONCLUSION
In conclusion, we have introduced t-DGR, a novel method for continual learning in decision-making tasks, which has
demonstrated state-of-the-art performance on the Continual World benchmarks. Our approach stands out due to its
simplicity, scalability, and non-autoregressive nature, positioning it as a solid foundation for future research in this
domain.
Importantly, t-DGR takes into account essential properties of the real world, including bounded memory and blurry
task boundaries. These considerations ensure that our method remains applicable and effective in real-world scenarios,
enabling its potential integration into practical applications.
Looking ahead, one potential avenue for future research is the refinement of the replay mechanism employed in t-
DGR. Rather than assigning equal weight to all past trajectories, a more selective approach could be explored. By
prioritizing certain memories over others and strategically determining when to replay memories to the learner, akin
to human learning processes, we could potentially enhance the performance and adaptability of our method.
10

Published at 3rd Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents (CoLLAs), 2024
