arXiv:1501.01678v1  [cs.SE]  7 Jan 2015
2015
1–3
LeoTask: a fast, ﬂexible and reliable framework for
computational research
Changwang Zhang 1,2,∗, Shi Zhou 1 and Benjamin M. Chain 3
1Department of Computer Science, 2Security Science Doctoral Research Training Centre, 3Division
of Infection and Immunity, University College London, UK
ABSTRACT
Summary: LeoTask is a Java library for computation-intensive and time-consuming research tasks. It automatically executes tasks in parallel
on multiple CPU cores on a computing facility. It uses a conﬁguration ﬁle to enable automatic exploration of parameter space and ﬂexible
aggregation of results, and therefore allows researchers to focus on programming the key logic of a computing task. It also supports reliable
recovery from interruptions, dynamic and cloneable networks, and integration with the plotting software Gnuplot.
Availability and implementation: The source code for LeoTask is freely available under FreeBSD License at https://github.com/mleoking/leotask.

Research tasks, especially in the ﬁeld of bioinformatics, are increasingly computationally intensive (1). Computational research (e.g.
simulations and data analysis) typically explores results over a large parameter space and often needs to repeat a task a number of times
to get an average result. Many complex computational tasks would last for days, or even weeks. As a result, they are prone to artiﬁcial (e.g.
a colleague sharing the same computing facility stops your program) or natural (e.g. power outage) interruptions.
To accelerate the research, it is imperative to conduct tasks in parallel, fully utilising the processing power of computing facilities (1).
Nowadays, computing facilities normally have multiple cores in their Central Processing Unit (CPU), and each of the cores can individually
conduct a processing task (2; 3). For example, a latest desktop computer can have 4 to 8 cores, while a computing sever can have more than
16 cores.
While there are built-in mechanisms for parallel task running in all major programming languages, the level of complexity often makes
these built-in mechanisms difﬁcult to use and time consuming to program with. For example, the built-in parallel running mechanism in Java
requires choosing the parts of the program that can be accessed by multiple tasks in parallel and the parts of the program that should be
accessed by only one task at a time. Such choices affect not only the speed of a program but also its accuracy, i.e. a wrong choice could end
up with a slow program and a program that gives wrong results.
Reliability is a critical but often overlooked feature of many computational programs and frameworks. A reliable program should be able
to recover and continue running from interruptions. Much effort is often needed to make a program reliable, especially if the program runs
in parallel.
Here we present a framework, LeoTask, to facilitate reliably conducting research tasks in parallel. It has the following combination of
features which would be attractive to the research community:
• Automatic & parallel parameter space exploration
LeoTask uses an intuitive conﬁguration ﬁle to specify the value ranges of task parameters. The framework will ﬁgure out all possible
combinations of values for all parameters and then run tasks with different parameter value combinations in parallel, i.e. LeoTask
automatically explores the parameter space. The framework maps and runs all the tasks to available processing cores of a computing
facility.
• Flexible & conﬁguration-based result aggregation
The conﬁguration ﬁle also sets when and how task results are aggregated. As shown in Figure 1, LeoTask has a default task ﬂow with
6 default time points for specifying when the results are collected. Applications using the framework can also use different task ﬂows
and deﬁne additional time points. The framework supports aggregating results conditioned on a set of parameters. For example, for a
task with parameter x1, x2 and result y. Given the value range of x1 and x2, the framework can aggregate y conditioned on the value of
x1, x2, value pair (x1, x2), or a any mathematical function of x1 and x2.
• Programming model focusing only on the key logic
∗to whom correspondence should be addressed
.
1

Zhang et al


	
			
	
		

	



	
	

	


	
	
	
	

	

Fig. 1. Default ﬂow and time points for a task. There are 6 default built-in time points for result collection: 1) before the start of a task, 2) before starting a
repeated run of a task, 3) before starting a step in a run, 4) after ﬁnishing a step in a run, 5) after ﬁnishing a repeated run of a task, 6) after ﬁnishing a task.
The framework separates the key logic of a task from other “bookkeeping” parts of the program, which include parameter setting,
result aggregation, result plotting etc. Users only need to program the key logic and use the conﬁguration ﬁle to set other “bookkeeping”
parts of a task. This facilitates sharing a program among a community where many end users only need to rerun a program with different
parameter values and different ways to aggregate results. The framework frees those end users from reading the program and they only
need to change a more intuitive conﬁguration ﬁle.
• Reliable & automatic interruption recovery.
LeoTask periodically writes the current state and results of the tasks to checkpoint ﬁles and can then recover and continue running
from a checkpoint ﬁle when necessary. To recover from an interruption and still guarantee the completeness and correctness of results,
a program has to track the tasks running in parallel. The framework handles these technique details automatically.
Considering that Java programs can run directly on all major computing facilities (with different operating systems), this feature
provides not only just reliability but also ﬂexibility for program running. The following scenario is possible for a program using LeoTask:
a user started the program in a laptop ﬁrst; after several hours he / she found that it was too slow, thus copied the program and a check
point ﬁle to a server A and continued running the program there; after another several hours, the running speed decreased on server A
because some other colleagues started to use server A and made it busy, so he / she copied the program and a check point ﬁle from sever
A to another unused server B and ﬁnished the remaining part of the program there.
• Dynamic & cloneable networks structures.
Network analysis is widely used in many research tasks especially in bioinformatic studies (4; 5). For example, there are transcription
networks (6), signalling networks (7), epidemic spreading networks (8), etc. LeoTask provides data structures to represent a node, a link,
a network, and a network set. A network consists of nodes and links. A network set includes multiple networks and they can overlap
(share nodes) with each other. All structures can be dynamic (9), supporting adding, deleting, and updating elements. The framework
also allows merging multiple networks.
LeoTask can create copies of a large network system including the states of each node, link, network, and network set. This enables
users to investigate many common scenarios that are previously time consuming to program. For example, a user can simulate an
epidemic spreading for the ﬁrst 10 minutes and make 5 copies of the current network system (preserving the states of networks, nodes,
and links) to test 5 different intervention strategies on these 5 copies in parallel so that the initial condition are random but at the same
time exactly the same for these different strategies tested.
• Integration with Gnuplot.
Gnuplot is a piece of widely-used open-source plotting software. LeoTask can output aggregated results directly as Gnuplot scripts
which can be processed by Gnuplot to produce publication-quality ﬁgures. In addition, LeoTask includes a unique hybrid programming
engine that compiles Gnuplot scripts and enables users to refer to values of Java objects or call Java functions within Gnuplot scripts.
2

LeoTask
The LeoTask framework has been used in epidemic spreading simulations (10), large dataset analysis (11), and HIV model parameter
ﬁtting from clinical records. An introduction illustrating how to use the framework in an example application is available from
https://github.com/mleoking/leotask/blob/master/leotask/introduction.pdf?raw=true.
We believe LeoTask’s combination of features makes it useful for a wide research community. We also welcome suggestions or directly
contributions to improve LeoTask and make it more widely available.
