Application of CACS approach for distributed logistic 
systems 
Sami AL-MAQTARI1, Habib ABDULRAB1, Eduard BABKIN1 2 
Abstract.  The article offers original approach which is called 
Controller Agent for Constraints Satisfaction (CACS). That 
approach combines multi-agent architecture with constraint 
solvers in the unified framework which expresses major features 
of Swarm Intelligence approach and replaces traditional 
stochastic adaptation of the swarm of the autonomous agents by 
constraint-driven adaptation. We describe major theoretic, 
methodological 
and 
software 
engineering 
principles 
of 
composition of constraints and agents in the framework of one 
multi-agent system, as well as application of our approach for 
modelling of particular logistic problem. 12 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Simultaneous rapid grow of logistics market in different regions 
of the world [1, 2], and its important role in modern economy 
require 
wide 
application 
of 
logistics 
information 
and 
management systems for coordinated planning and control. 
Distributed organizational structure and application of holonic 
management principles in modern organizations inevitably 
determine distributed and autonomous features of information 
systems supporting logistic operations [5]. In such kinds of the 
systems it is very difficult to apply usual centralized approaches 
and algorithms for decision support and optimization. 
Swarm Intelligence [3, 4] represents one of the interesting 
paradigm for maintaining self-organization and control in the 
distributed systems. One of the principal aspect of the swarm-
oriented distributed intelligent systems is presence of multiple 
intellectual and autonomous particles which interact with each 
other in some way. As it is started in [4]: ‖Swarm is a population 
of interacting elements that is able to optimize some global 
objectives thought collaborative search in space‖.  
Different projects offered approaches for practical application 
of Swarm Intelligence paradigm in the form of multi-agent 
systems [6, 28, 30]. Although some of them (i.e. [28]) offer a 
formal framework for declarative expression and analysis, 
researchers and practitioners still lack proper generic methods 
for engineering of the multi-agent systems which have such 
properties of Swarm Intelligence as emergent behavior, peer-to-
peer communication,  etc. 
Analysis of known logistic problems and algorithms shows 
that in the domain of applied logistics and optimization general 
principles of swarm-oriented organization may be realized using 
proper combination of multi-agent systems (MAS) and 
constraints satisfaction approach (CSP). So, in this research we 
                                                 

2 TAPRADESS Laboraotry, State University – Higher School of 

pursue the goal to offer a new mechanism of emergent multi-
agent behaviour for collaborative search of some feasible 
solution in accordance with certain inter-agent constraints. In 
terms of Swarm Intelligence research we replace stochastic 
adaptation of the swarm of the autonomous agents by constraint-
driven adaptation.  
In our research we try to satisfy such important requirements 
of Swarm Intelligence as self-organization and dynamic 
adaptation to evolving internal or external conditions. Existing 
approaches to combination of MAS and CSP like [16, 17, 32] do 
not provide much flexibility and support of dynamic 
modification of the combined structure of  agents and 
constraints. That’s why in this article we propose an original 
approach which offers a solution for dynamic modification of the 
combined structure of  agents and constraints. Our approach, 
which was called CACS (Controller Agent for Constraints 
Satisfaction), allows for joint exploitation of attractive features 
of the paradigm of multi-agent systems (MAS) and the paradigm 
of distributed constraint satisfaction (DCSP). 
This paper extends and combines our earlier work on joint 
application of MAS and DCSP paradigms [33, 34]. We describe 
major theoretic, methodological and software engineering 
principles of composition of constraints and agents in the 
framework of one multi-agent system, as well as application of 
our approach for modelling of particular logistic problem.  
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we give 
background information about MAS and DCSP for better 
understanding of scientific and technological foundations of our 
research. In Section 3 we describe main principles of CACS 
approach. Section 4 contains description of software architecture 
and implementation principles for software prototype which 
supports proposed CACS approach. The same section contains 
overview of used 3d party software platforms. Section 5 
describes proposed methodology of practical application of 
CACS during design and development of DSS. In Section 6 we 
give overview of the application in ship loading logistics based 
on CACS prototype. We discuss the achieved results and provide 
directions for future work in Section 7.  
2. FOUNDATIONS OF MAS AND DCSP  
Paradigm of swarm intelligence is very often and naturally 
implemented on the basis of multi-agent systems. These systems 
express major features of collective intelligence [7, 8, 9] and 
represent the model of problem in terms of autonomous entities 
that live in a common environment and who share certain 
resources. The interactions between these individual entities 
induce cognitive abilities of the whole. Despite multiple-domain-
oriented peculiarities majority of multi-agent systems has several 
significant common features:    

• A limited and local view: every entity has a partial and local 
knowledge of its environment. 
• A set of simple rules: each entity follows a set of simple rules. 
•  The interactions are manifold: each individual entity has a 
relationship with one or more other individuals in the group. 
•The emerging structure is useful to the community: different 
entities are a benefit to work (sometimes instinctively) and their 
performance is better than if they had been alone. 
From these points of view, the paradigm of multi-agent 
systems seek to simulate the coordination of autonomous entities 
called agents that represent individuals in their community.  An 
agent is an entity that can be viewed as perceiving and acting 
independently in its environment.  According to J. Ferber [10] 
"One agent called a physical or virtual: 
1) which can act in an environment, 
2) that can communicate directly with other agents, 
3) which is driven by a set of trends (in the form of individual 
objectives or function of satisfaction and even survival, it 
seeks to optimize),  
4) which has its own resources, 
5) which is able to collect (but limited) its environment,  
6) which has only a partial representation of this environment 
(and possibly none),  
7) has expertise and provides services, 
8) which may be repeated, 
9) whose behavior tends to meet its objectives, taking into 
account the resources and skills available to it and according 
to its perception, its representations and the communications 
it receives. " 
Given such definition of the agent, we can define a multi-
agent system as a set of agents located in a certain environment. 
They share some common resources, and they interact with each 
other either directly or indirectly (via their effects on the 
environment). They seek to achieve the goals of individual 
agents in the interest of all. The multi-agent systems have 
applications in the field of artificial intelligence, where they 
reduce the complexity of solving a problem by dividing the 
necessary knowledge into sub-units, involving an intelligent 
agent independent at each of these sub - sets and coordinating 
the activity of these agents [10]. 
Because general definitions of inter-agent interaction are too 
vague we need to apply more strict and formal conventions to 
express allowable methods of communication between agents. 
Paradigm of constraints satisfaction, particularly distributed 
constraints 
satisfactions, 
offers 
flexible 
and 
convenient 
foundations to do this. 
  The paradigm of constraints satisfaction provides a generic 
method for declarative description of complex constrained or 
optimization problems in terms of variables and constraints [12, 
13]. Formally, a Constraint Satisfaction Problem (CSP) is a triple 
(V, D, C) where:  
There is V = {v1, …, vn} is a set of n variables, 
a corresponding set D = {D(v1), …, D(vn)} of n domains from 
which each variable can take its values from, 
and C = {c1, …, cm} is a set of m constraints over the values of 
the variables in V. Each constraint ci = C(Vi) is a logical 
predicate over subset of variables Vi ⊆ V with an arbitrary arity 
k : ci (va, …, vk) 
that 
maps 
the 
Cartesian 
product 
D(va) × … × D(vk) to {0, 1}. As usual the value 1 means that the 
value combination for va, …, vk is allowed, and 0 otherwise. 
Constraints involving only two variables are called binary 
constraints [14]. A binary constraint between xi and xj can be 
denoted as cij. Although most of real world problems are 
represented by non-binary constraints, most of them can be 
transformed into binary ones using some techniques such as the 
dual graph method and hidden variable method [15]. Translating 
non-binary constraints into binary ones allows processing the 
CSP using efficient techniques adapted only for binary 
constraints. However, this translation implies normally an 
increase in number of constraints. 
A solution for a CSP is an assignment of values for each 
variable in V such that all the constraints in C are satisfied. A 
single solver supports the tasks of collecting all data of the 
problem: variables, domains and constraints. It treats all such 
information in a centralized manner.  
A Distributed Constraint Satisfaction Problem (DCSP) is a 
CSP where the variables are distributed among agents in a Multi-
Agent System and the agents are connected by relationships that 
represent constraints. DCSP is a suitable abstraction to solve 
constrained problems without global control during per—to-peer 
agent communication and cooperation [16]. A DCSP can be 
formalized as a combination of (V, D, C, A, ∂) described as 
follows: 
V, D, C are the same as explained for an original CSP, 
A = {a1, …, ap} is a set of p agents, 
and ∂ : V → A is a function used to map each variable vj to its 
owner agent ai. 
Each 
variable 
belongs 
to 
only 
one 
agent, 
i.e. 
∀ v1, …, vk ∈ Vi ⇔ ∂ (v1) = … = ∂ (vk) where Vi ⊂ V represents 
the subset of variables that belong to agent ai. These subsets are 
distinct, i.e. V1 ∩ … ∩ Vp = ∅ and the union of all subsets 
represents the set of all variables, i.e. V1 ∪ … ∪ Vp = V. The 
distribution of variables among agents divides the set of 
constraints C into two subsets according to the variables 
involved within the constraint. The first set is the one of intra-
agent constraints Cintra that represent the constraints over the 
variables 
owned 
by 
the 
same 
agent 
Cintra = {C(Vi) | ∂ (v1) = … = ∂ (vk), v1, …, vk ∈ Vi}. 
The second set is the one of inter-agent constraints Cinter that 
represents the constraints over the variables owned by two or 
more agents. Obviously, these two subsets are distinct 
Cintra ∩ Cinter = ∅ and complementary Cintra ∪ Cinter = C. 
The variables involved within inter-agent constraints Cinter are 
denoted as interface variables Vinterface. Assigning values to a 
variable in a constraint that belongs to Cinter has a direct effect on 
all the agents which have variables involved in the same 
constraint. The interface variables should take values before the 
rest of the variables in the system in order to satisfy the 
constraints inside Cinter firstly. Then, the satisfaction of internal 
constraints in Cintra becomes an internal problem that can be 
treated separately inside each agent independently of other 
agents. If the agent cannot find a solution for its intra-agent 
constraints, it fails and requests another value proposition for its 
interface variables. To simplify things, we will assume that there 
are no intra-agent constraints, i.e. Cintra = ∅. Therefore, all 
variables in V are interface variables V = Vinterface. 
Many techniques are used to solve DCSPs. In general the 
technique proposes a distributed algorithm which is executed by 

agents that communicate by sending and receiving messages. In 
general, the messages contain information about assignments of 
values to variables and rebuttals trust by employees who have no 
purpose compatible with their own variables. Mainly we mention 
the Asynchronous Backtracking (ABT) algorithm that was 
proposed by М. Yokoo [17] and some of its alternatives [18, 19, 
20]. These approaches are designed mainly for the treatment of 
non-binary constraints, however most systems of real constraints 
are non-binary. Only a few modifications, like [21], were 
proposed to handle non-binary constraints in the dynamic 
organization of agents. 
3. FUSION OF MAS AND DCSP IN CACS 
APPROACH  
In order to avoid shortcomings of known DSCP methods and 
propose new principles of combination between MAS and DCSP 
we developed several software engineering methods and 
algorithms which comprise a new approach for developing DSS. 
This approach was called Controller Agent for Constraints 
Satisfaction (CACS). Based on the ABT Algorithm of M. Yokoo 
[17] CACS approach introduces two types of agents in MAS: 
Variables’ Agent and Controller Agent. 
In one hand, a Variables’ Agent holds one variable or more. It 
chooses its values and proposes these values to Controller 
Agents. On the other hand, Controller Agent encapsulates inter-
agents constraints over these variables. Each Controller Agent 
holds one constraint or more and validates the propositions 
received from Variables’ Agents. 
 
Constraints
Agents
X1, X2
 X3
X7
X6
X4, X5
X2 + X7 < X1 
a)
 
 
Variables’ Agents
b)
Controller 
Agents
 
 
Figure 1. A constraint network example: a) without or b) with 
Controller Agent 
We can see in Figure 1 (a) an example of constraint network 
where Variables’ Agent are inter-connected by arcs which 
represent 
constraints. 
These 
inter-agent 
constraints 
are 
encapsulated in Figure 1 (b) by Controller Agents. The same 
network can be modified as in Figure 2 by grouping some inter-
agent constraints inside a controller agent. With this ability, we 
can change the scale of constraints grouping from total 
distribution to total centralization. The problem can vary from 
designating a controller agent for each constraint to total 
centralizing by gathering all constraints inside one central 
controller agents. 
 
Variables’ Agents
Controller 
Agents
 
 
Figure 2. Grouping constraints inside Controller Agents. 
 
For abbreviation purposes we will use the term VAgent to 
refer to Variables’ Agents and CAgent to refer to Controller 
Agents. In fact, these terms are used as the name of classes used 
in the implementation of the prototype. The complete DCSP is 
formulated in terms of VAgents and CAgents. The solution of 
the problem is seeking during communication between these 
types of agents. The proposed algorithm of communication is 
divided into two stages: (1) domain reducing stage and (2) value 
proposing and validating stage. These stages are explained as 
follows: 
A. Domain reducing stage 
This stage assures constraints consistence by preprocessing 
variables’ domains. The results are reduced domains by 
eliminating values that would be surly refused by them. This is 
done as follows: 
1. 
A VAgent sends information concerning the domain of its 
variable to all linked CAgents. The message takes the form 
of (variable, domain). 
2. 
After receiving the domains of all variables involved in its 
constraint, the CAgent uses consistency algorithms [22] in 
order to reduce these domains to new ones according to its 
local constraint(s). Then, the controller sends these domains 
back to their VAgents. 
3. 
Every VAgent receives the new domains sent by CAgents 
and combines them (by the intersection of received 
domains) in order to construct a new version of its variable 
domain. 
4. 
If any new version of a variable domain was empty then we 
can say that this DCSP is an over-constrained problem [23] 
where no solution can be found. In this case, the system 
signals that no solution was found (failure). As a 
prospective, another solution can be investigated by using 
constraints relaxation [23, 24],  in which a VAgent returns 

to an older version of the domain and reconstruct a new 
version after neglecting the domains sent by the CAgent 
that represents the soft constraints that the system may 
violate according to certain constraint hierarchy [23]. On 
the other hand, if all variables end with single-value 
domains then one solution is found. Otherwise, the domain 
reducing stage is repeated as long as we obtain a different 
new version of a variable domain. When domain reducing 
is no longer possible (no more change in variables’ 
domains), we can proceed to the next stage. 
The result of the domain reducing stage may be one of the 
three following kinds: 1) The domain of a variable is reduced to 
an empty field. Having at least one empty domain for a variable 
means the problem is over-constrained. If there is no solution 
that satisfies all the constraints and which contains a value for 
this variable. 2) The former is reduced to a new domain. This 
reduction may be the result of responses to a controller or more. 
This change must be propagated to other controllers. For this, the 
final stages must be repeated. 3) No change in the domain for 
this particular variable. In this case, we are faced with two 
situations: a) there are no changed domains at all. This means 
that the stage is over and we can proceed with the next stage. b) 
a change to succeed because of the spread of change in the 
domain of other variables. These variables can be linked directly 
or indirectly to the variable concerned. 
A. Value proposing and validating stage 
In this stage VAgents make their propositions of values to 
related CAgents to be tested. Value proposing can be considered 
as a domain information message in test mode. A test mode 
means that when a ―no-solution‖ situation occurs because of a 
proposition the system backtracks to the last state before that 
proposition. This proceeds as follows: 
1. 
From now on, every VAgent starts instantiating values for 
its variable according to the new domains. It sends this 
proposition to the related CAgents. 
2. 
The CAgent chooses the value received from the VAgent 
with the highest priorities. This value is considered as a 
domain with a single value. CAgent uses consistency 
algorithms as in the previous stage to reduce other 
variables’ domains. These new domains are sent to their 
VAgents to propagate domains change. This step may be 
viewed as a distributed form of forward checking in an 
enhanced backtracking algorithm. 
3. 
Like in the previous stage, if all variables end with single-
value domains then one solution is found. Unlikely, if the 
result of this propagation was an empty domain for any 
variable then the proposed value is rejected and another 
value is requested. If no more value can be proposed then 
system signals a no-solution situation to user. 
4. 
If the result of the domain propagation was some new 
reduced domains with more than one value then steps 1-3 
are repeated recursively with the value proposed by the 
VAgent that have the next priority. 
 
The second stage involves one of three situations: 1) The 
proposed value is rejected if the spread of this value gives an 
empty domain for one variable at least. The refusal of a value 
involves retraction of the former domain and demand for another 
value. 2) Otherwise, the proposed value is accepted and 
distributed among the agents. The proposal and validation of 
values for the other variables continue recursively. 3) If there are 
more values to be proposed for a variable, the value proposed by 
the agent who has a higher priority is denied. The algorithm ends 
in failure when the agent has more priority over proposals valid. 
Let’s consider an example of MAS where three variables x, y, 
z with original permitted domain {0, 1, 2} are distributed on 
three VAgents A1, A2 and A3, and two constraints exist: x ≠ y 
and x + y < z. These constraints are placed into two CAgents C1 
and C2. 
domain 
(x,{0, 1, 2})
x
{0, 1, 2}
A1
z
{0, 1, 2}
A3
y
{0, 1, 2}
A2
x ≠ y
C1
x + y < z
C2
domain 
(y,{0, 1, 2})
domain 
(z,{0, 1, 2})
 
 
x
{0, 1, 2}
A1
z
{0, 1, 2}
A3
y
{0, 1, 2}
A2
x ≠ y
C1
x + y < z
C2
domain 
(z,{1, 2})
domain 
(x,{0, 1})
domain 
(y,{0, 1})
domain 
(x,{0, 1})
domain 
(y,{0, 1})
 
 
Figure 3. Illustration of domain reducing stage of CACS. 
 
During the first stage of CACS (fig.3) three agents A1, A2 and 
A3 are sending the domain { 0, 1, 2} for the three variables x, y 
and z respectively agents C1 and C2. C1 tries to reduce the 
domains of x and y. Obviously, no change is possible. On the 
contrary, the agent C2 changes the domains of variables x and y 
in {0, 1} and the domain of z in {1, 2}. This change will be 
propagated to the agent C1 which returns the same domains for 
variables x and y (i.e. {0, 1}). The domain reducing stage 
finishes with the domain {0, 1} for the variables x and y and the 
{1, 2} for the variable z.  
 

ok? (x, 1)
ok? (y, 0)
ok? (z, 1)
x
{0, 1}
A1
z
{1, 2}
A3
y
{0, 1}
A2
x ≠ y
C1
x + y < z
C2
 
 
x
{0, 1}
A1
z
{1, 2}
{2}
A3
y
{0, 1}
{0}
A2
x ≠ y
C1
x + y < z
C2
domain 
(y,{0})
domain 
(z,{2})
 
 
Figure 4. Illustration of value proposing and validating stage of 
CACS. 
 
 
During the second stage (fig.4), algorithm will assign 
priorities to the agents A1, A2 and A3 according to their index. 
So the agent A1 will have the highest priority, and the agent A3 
will have the lowest priority. Suppose that the agent A1 proposes 
value 0 for the variable x to the agents C1 and C2. C1 treats this 
value as the domain {0} and reduces the domain of the variable 
y to {1}. The spread of this new domain reduces the domain of 
the variable z to {2}. A2 tries to offer as the value 0 for variable 
y. His proposal will be of lower priority than the agent A1 and 
will be refused because they are inconsistent. The same result is 
obtained for any other value. 
According to the results of the first and second stages, we can 
say that the CACS algorithm solves DCSP: 1) When the DCSP 
is over-constrained, we are faced with two different situations:  
Either the initial domains of the variables are inconsistent. This 
means that at the end of the first stage there is at least one empty 
domain of a variable. This involves termination of the algorithm 
and the declaration of a state of non-solution. Either the initial 
domains of the variables are consistent. 2) Where there is a 
unique solution of DCSP, we face two situations: The domains 
are consistent as long as there is a solution to the DCSP. If the 
first stage ends with single-vale domains, it means that the 
solution is found and the algorithm stops. Otherwise, in the 
second stage, the value proposed by a variable if it is not 
inconsistent with a value proposed by another agent with higher 
priority. The proposals of the agent with the highest priority are 
a priori accepted by all CAgents (it is necessary that this value is 
part of the final solution to be finally accepted). 3) When the 
DCSP is under-constrained, many solutions exist. The order of 
each proposed agent determines convergence towards any 
particular solution. In other words, the agents start the proposals 
by the most suitable for their purposes. For example, if an agent 
tries to minimize the value of its variable, it must begin 
proposing values from the minimum to the highest values. 
4.  SOFTWARE IMPLEMENTATION OF CACS  
To prove the proposed methods of constraints satisfaction based 
on two types of the agents we developed an object-oriented 
CACS software prototype which can be considered as a generic 
framework for distributed information syste4ms in logistics. As 
we can see from Figure 5, the developed CACS prototype uses 
hierarchical multiple-layer architecture.  
 
Application
Variables’ Agent
Controller Agent
Generic MAS  
interface 
CSP Implementation
MAS  Implementation
Real CSP Platform
(Choco)
Real MAS Platform
(JADE)
Generic CSP interface 
Variable
Constraint
 
Figure 5. Software architecture of CACS prototype. 
 
This architecture allows developing applications more 
flexibly by separating it into specialized layers. The very top 
layer is the application layer which is the implementation of a 
DCSP problem using the proposed system underneath it. From 
the application view point, the system is composed directly from 
the two principal types of agents: the CAgent and the VAgent. 
Both agents are inherited from CommonAgent class that defines 
some shared functionalities between both types of agents. The 
user can create the necessary VAgents according to its problem 
definition. He also creates the constraints and associates them to 
CAgents. 
The second layer is the intended system (CACS) where our 
two-stage interaction algorithm is implemented in accordance 
with previous definition. Figure 7 shows the interaction between 
agents during the domain reducing stage. The interaction 
protocol is a loop of repeated domain informing from the 
VAgents side to CAgents side and new domain proposing as 
response. This loop is repeated until no further domain reduction 

is possible (or an empty reduced domain is found which signify 
that there is no solution). 
Variabes' Agent(s)
Controller Agent(s)
Inform Domain
new Domain
Loop
 
Figure 6. Implementation of interaction during domain reducing 
stage 
 
The interaction between agents during value proposing stage 
is shown in Figure 6. as nest loops: the internal loop is similar to 
the domain reducing loop in Figure 6. Variables’ domains are 
reduced according to the proposed value in the external loop. In 
the external loop, values are proposed and evaluated after the 
domain reduction to be either accepted or rejected. The external 
loop continues until we obtain single value domains for all 
variables. 
Variabes' Agent(s)
Controller Agent(s)
Inform Domain
new Domain
Loop
Propose value
Loop
Reject Proposal
{empty domain
found or not}
Accept proposal
{OR}
 
Figure 7. Implementation of interaction during value proposing 
stage 
 
The system layer uses generic interfaces for both MAS and 
CSP platforms. This allows the system to use any existing MAS 
and CSP platforms by implementing these interfaces. At the 
same time this isolates the internal structure from the changes of 
choice of platforms. An intermediate layer between the system 
and the real MAS or CSP platform is necessary in order to 
separate the structure of the system from that of the real MAS 
and CSP platforms. This layer works as an adapter; it 
implements the generic platforms in the system layer using the 
real platforms. This implementation difficulty varies according 
to the MAS and CSP platforms used for the realization of the 
final system. 
The whole CACS prototype was developed in Java language. 
Due to the object oriented nature of Java language agents and the 
messages are represented by objects (Figure 8, 9). 
 
AgentRefInterface
CommonAgentInterface
VAgentInterface
CAgentInterface
AgentRef
VAgentRefInterface
CAgentRefInterface
CommonAgent
VAgent
CAgent
VAgentRef
CAgentRef
 
 
Figure 8. The hierarchy of the main components of agents 
(agents and reference to the agents). Rectangles with rounded 
corners represent interfaces; rectangles with sharp corners 
represent classes 
 
MathEntity
Info
VarValueInfo
DomainInfo
IntVarValueInfo
IntDomainInfo
RealDomainInfo
AcceptProposalInfo
VarValuePair
IntVarValuePair
StartInfo
VarInCAgentInfo
VarInfo
IntVarInfo
RealVarInfo
 
 
Figure 9. The hierarchy of agent messages. Rectangles with 
rounded corners represent interfaces; rectangles with sharp 
corners represent classes 
 
However, from the point of view of Multi-Agent System 
design, agents should not be referenced by a simple public 
reference that is accessible by any other object in the system. 
The reason for that is to prevent any direct access to the agent 
internal functionality. Normally, references to agents should be 
kept hidden by the MAS platform and communicating with an 
agent is made by messages that would be delivered by the 
system using the agent address. Mapping from agent address to 
its real reference is an internal functionality of the MAS 
platform. 
In order to be more generic, we distinguish in the prototype 
implementation between the agent and its reference. For this 
purpose, VAgentRef and CAgentRef classes have been designed. 
Both classes are inherited from the abstract AgentRef class. 
They are used as references to either variables’ agents or 
controller agents. When an instance of the class DCSP is used to 
create an instance of VAgent or a CAgent, it returns an instance 
of either VAgentRef or CAagentRef classes respectively 
according to created agent. In the same manner, a variable inside 

variables’ agents cannot be referred directly. In fact, a controller 
agent keeps a copy of that variable inside it and propagates any 
change on that variable to the owner agent. Instead of dealing 
with variables directly between agents, they deal with variables 
identifiers. A variables identifier is an instance of VID class. It is 
simply the name of the variables and the identifier of its owner 
agent. An instance of VAgentRef is used to create variables 
inside the corresponding VAgent. A variable creation process 
returns an instance of VID class identifying the created variable. 
Among additional features we added to our prototype a 
possibility to declaratively define a simple DCSP via the use of 
XML notation. The XML file that describes a DCSP problem 
should be built according to the following model (fig.10): 
 
«interface»
XMLAble
«interface»
DConstraint
Equal
NotEqual
LessThan
GreaterThan
Cumulative
AllDifferent
LessOrEqual
GreaterOrEqual
«interface»
Operand
Val
«interface»
DOperation
Add
Subtract
Sum
Product
Scalar
VID
VAgentXML
CAgentXML
 
Figure 10. The hierarchy of the main components of agents 
(agents and reference to the agents) 
 
The choice of multi-agent platforms and multi-solver 
constraints required a study and testing of several platforms. We 
reviewed our work over multiple platforms including JADE and 
Madkit and several constraints solvers as CHOCO, Cream and 
JCK. Finally we chose for the role of MAS JADE (Java Agent 
DEvelopment Framework)  multi-agent framework [25], and for 
CSP platform, we have chosen Choco [26, 28].  
JADE is a multi-agent framework compliant with the FIPA 
specifications [27] and is fully implemented in Java language. 
JADE was established by the laboratory TILAB Telecom Italia. 
JADE has three main modules (fig.11): DF (Directory 
Facilitator): provides a service of "yellow pages" to the platform; 
ACC (Agent Communication Channel) handles communication 
between agents; AMS (Agent Management System) oversees the 
registration of agents, authentication, access and use of the 
system. Each JADE agent is composed of a single thread of 
execution (thread). Each task agent is represented by an instance 
of class Behavior. Jade offers the possibility of agents' multi-
threaded, although the user leaves the responsibility for 
managing competition (except the timing of the messages file 
ACLs). 
 
Figure 11. Architecture II software platform JADE 
 
In order to implement a behavior, the developer must define 
one or more objects of class Behavior, the instantiate and add 
them to the thread of execution of the agent. Every object type 
has a Behavior method action () (which is the treatment to be 
performed by it) and a method done () (which checks if the 
treatment is completed). In detail, the scheduler executes the 
method action () of each object in the queue of the tasks of the 
agent. Once this is completed, the method done () is invoked. If 
the task has been completed then the Behavior object is removed 
from the queue. The scheduler is non-preemptive and does only 
one behavior at a time, one can consider the method action () as 
atomic. It is then necessary to take certain precautions during the 
implementation of the latter, to avoid endless loops or operations 
too long. The most classic program behavior is to describe it as a 
finite state machine. The current status of the agent is stored in 
local variables.  
Also JADE simplifies the implementation of multi-agent 
systems through a set of graphical tools that supports the 
debugging and deployment phases. 
Choco is a library for constraint satisfaction problems (CSP), 
constraint programming (CP) and explanation-based constraint 
solving (e-CP) [28]. It is built on an event-based propagation 
mechanism with backtrackable structures. Choco is implemented 
in Java and takes advantage of the principle of inheritance to 
allow the programmer to define its own types and constraints. 
This is achieved by using abstract classes (fig. 12): 
 
AbstractVar 
AbstractDomain 
CompositeConstraint 
BoolConstraint 
AbstractConstraint 
IntConstraint 
IntVar 
IntDomain 
object 
 
Figure 12. Hierarchy of constraints in Choco 
 
It permits the use of multiple solvers for different problems 
separately. This allows each CAgent to have its own solver. A 
distributed constraint problem is created as an instance of the 
class DCSP. This instance represents the problem to be solved 
and is used to create the different needed agents. 
Our prototype in its current state is composed of three main 
packages containing more than 80 classes and Java interfaces 
and approximately 4300 lines of code. 

5.  DESIGN METHODOLOGY IN CACS  
A specific methodology was designed to allow the user to 
develop 
distributed 
multi-agenty 
systems 
using 
Swarm 
Intelligence paradigm and CACS approach. In general this 
methodology consists of the following steps: 
1. 
Identify the key actors of the problem (VAgents). 
These actors are the entities of the system modeled. 
2. 
Determine the properties (variables) of these actors 
that are restricted by constraints with properties of 
other actors. 
3. 
Determine all the constraints of the problem. 
4. 
Classify constraints logically in separate groups. 
5. 
Specify a set of Controller Agents to monitor each 
group of constraints. 
To provide a developer with flexible practical methods of the 
design we offer two refinements of the general methodology: 
simple and complex. 
To prove the proposed methods of constraints satisfaction 
based on two types of the agents we developed an object-
oriented CACS software prototype which can be considered as a 
generic framework for distributed model-driven DSSs. As we 
can see from Figure 5, the developed CACS prototype uses 
hierarchical multiple-layer architecture. The following steps 
correspond to a given DCSP:  
6. 
Creation of the problem P. This is done by creating an 
instance of the class DCSP from the package dcsp.  
7. 
Creation of agents to control variables (specifically, 
their references) via the prolem P. using the method 
makeVAgent () to create a variable and method 
makeCAgent () to create a controller. 3) Creating 
variables distributed via agents which own variables. 
This 
is 
done 
through 
the 
method 
makeBoundedIntVar () which creates a variable with 
two upper and lower limits.  
8. 
Creation of constraints on variables.  
9. 
Addition of constraints to CAgents.  
10. Start the algorithm of resolution through the DCSP P. 
The use of the prototype can be demonstrated via the 
following simple example: 
V = {x, y, z} is the set of variables from the domain {1, …, 100} 
for all of them, C = {c1, c2, c3} is the set of constraints: 
c1 : x ≠ y, y ≠ z, x ≠ z (or alldifferent (x, y, z)) 
c2 : x ≥ y 
c3 : z ≥ y 
In order to model this problem using the proposed prototype 
the user should proceed as follows. We start by assigning 
variables to VAgents. In this example, agents v1, v2, and v3 own 
variables x, y, and z respectively. Note that the distribution of 
variables may be a problem dependant issue which means that 
the user chooses the owner agent of each variable according to 
the problem specifications. In the same manner, constraints also 
should be assigned to CAgents. In this example, we assign each 
constraint to a CAgent. 
1. 
Create a distributed problem p (an instance of DCSP class). 
This class will be used in order to create VAgents and 
CAgents and to start our CACS algorithm. 
DCSP p = new DCSP("example"); 
This creates a distributed problem with which agents, variables 
and constraints will be created. 
2. 
Use this instance to create both types of agents. This is done 
by calling makeVAgent() and makeCAgent() methods from 
the DCSP instance created in step 1 as follows: 
VAgentRef v1 = p.makeVAgent (“v1”); 
VAgentRef v2 = p.makeVAgent (“v2”); 
VAgentRef v3 = p.makeVAgent (“v3”); 
CAgentRef c1 = p.makeCAgent (“c1”); 
CAgentRef c2 = p.makeCAgent (“c2”); 
CAgentRef c3 = p.makeCAgent (“c3”); 
 
3. 
Create variables inside VAgents. In other word, assign 
variables 
to 
variables 
agents. 
The 
method 
makeBoundedIntVar() is used to achieve this as follows: 
VID x = v1.makeBoundedIntVar (“x”, 1, 100); 
VID y = v2.makeBoundedIntVar (“y”, 1, 100); 
VID z = v3.makeBoundedIntVar (“z”, 1, 100); 
 
4. 
Create the constraints and post them to CAgents. The 
constraints are created separately and posted to their owner 
agents using the method post(): 
c1.post(new AllDifferent(new VID[]{x,y,z})); 
c2.post(new GreaterOrEqual(x, y)); 
c3.post(new GreaterOrEqual (y, z)); 
 
5. 
Start the CACS algorithm  by calling solve() method from 
the DCSP instance: 
p.solve(); 
This last instruction initiates communication between the 
different agents in the system in accordance the algorithm 
described previously in Section 3. If an agent finds a value for its 
variable that corresponds to a solution then it will notify to this 
value. The solution will be the combination of all values from all 
agents. Otherwise, no-solution state is declared. 
Also the developer can express the structure of DCSP in 
declarative manner using XML. For instance, the problem 
described in previous sub-section can be written in XML as 
follows: 
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<!DOCTYPE dcsp SYSTEM "dcsp.dtd"> 
<dcsp> 
<name>example</name> 
<vagent><name>v1</name><var><name>x</name> 
  <inf>1</inf><sup>100</sup></var></vagent> 
v2 and v3 by the same manner 
<cagent> 
  <name>c1</name> 
  <constraint><alldiff> 
  
<vid><name>x</name><owner>v1</owner></vid> 
  
<vid><name>y</name><owner>v2</owner></vid> 
  
<vid><name>z</name><owner>v3</owner></vid> 
  </alldiff></constraint></cagent> 
c2 and c3 by the same manner 
</dcsp> 
 

6. CACS APPROACH IN TRANSPORT 
LOGISTICS  
We consider modern transportation problems as a natural 
candidate domain for evaluation of the proposed CACS 
approach. Although there is a lot of different centralized 
algorithms in this area we believe that multi-agent techniques 
can radically improve efficiency and fairness of negotiation 
between participants in the course of problem solving as well as 
improve reactivity of the logistics systems. Among different 
benefits of logistics management within the CACS framework 
we can point out such positive features as: better consideration 
of individual preferences and ability of their dynamical changes 
in the course of solving, early availability of partial solutions and 
inherently distributed structure of the system. 
In order to create solid foundations for application of Swarm 
Intelligence and CACS approach in transportation logistics we 
developed a distributed multi-agent application which mimics 
major features of modern ship loading problems, and evaluated 
its feasibility and performance.  Our  CACS application is based 
on a simplified ship loading scenario which was originally 
presented in studied in Chips constraint solver by Kay Chips 
(Kay 1997) and later was expressed in terms of Java-based 
Choco constraint solver by prof. A. Aggoun. 
 
Figure 13. Graphical representation of the original Kay’s ship 
loading problem (Kay 1997) 
 
In the discussed problem  a specific precedence function pred in 
defined over the loading items. For each of the items the number 
of workers needed for loading is specified. 
 
Figure 14. The feasible order of loading tasks (the loading plan) 
in accordance with the constraints given (Kay 1997) 
 
According to CACS methodology each loading task is 
realized as a separate Variable Agent in our CACS application. 
Variable Agent holds three specific variables. These variables 
determine start time of loading (ti
start), finish time of loading 
(ti
end) and predetermined loading duration (di) accordingly. 
All constraints of the considered problem are grouped inside 
Controller Agents. We recognize three different groups of 
Controller Agents according to the semantics of the constraints. 
The first group contains Controller Agents which hold duration 
constraints. The agent of that group  is responsible for verifying 
that the loading tasks are scheduled within the time frame. It 
means that for each task i the following constraint should be 
satisfied: ti
start + di  ti
end.  
The second group contains Controller Agents which are 
responsible for verifying that the loading plan satisfies 
precedence constraints given (like one on the fig. 13). Finally the 
third group contains Controller Agents which are responsible for 
verifying availability of the resources for the loading plan. 
Controller Agent of that kind holds cumulative constraint over 
the number of workers available for finishing the ship loading 
within the total time. 
That cumulative constraint may be expressed using current 
values of ti
start, and ti
end variables, as well predetermined 
workforce effort needed for each task wi. Given these values we 
can define the scheduling  matrix SC. 
 
SC = 
N
N
w
w
w
w
w
w
w
...
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
...
0
0
0
0
0
0
...
0
0
0
0
2
2
1
1
1
 
The element SCij is equal to wi iff at the time moment j the 
loading task i is performed, and it is equal to 0 in the opposite 
case. 
Using that matrix we may define the maximum number of 
workers needed at each moment of the time and the needed 
cumulative constraint: 
Persons
SC
N
i
ij
j
max
max
1
. 
With such problem interpretation we may completely 
describe it in terms of our CACS approach. The original 
structure of the agents is presented on Figure 15. 
 
tN
start,tN
end , dN
{0,1,..,maxT}
t1
start,t1
end , d1
{0,1,..,maxT}
t2
start,t2
end , d2
{0,1,..,maxT}
ti
start ,ti
end , di
{0,1,..,maxT}
cumulativeController
startEndController
∀i: ti
end  ≤ maxT
∀i: ti
end – ti
start  ≥ di
precedenceController
∀i: ti
end  ≤ TMax
 ti
start  ≥ t pred(i)
start 
i=2,3,..,N
 
Figure 15. Connected structure of Variable Agents (circle) and 
Constraint Agents (rectangle) for the ship loading problem 
 

Using the proposed methodology we designed the Java-based 
application that solves the ship loading problem. In that program 
at the first moment the ControllerAgents are created: 
  
CAgentRef startEndController = 
  dpb.makeCAgent("startEndController"); 
CAgentRef precendenceController = 
  dpb.makeCAgent("precendenceController"); 
CAgentRef cumulativeController = 
  dpb.makeCAgent("cumulativeController"); 
 
Then auxiliary VariableAgent is created which stores the total 
time of loading operations: 
VAgentRef general = dpb.makeVAgent("General"); 
VID generalEnd = general.createVar("General_End", 
  0, timeHorizon); 
 
After that in the cycle thirty-four VariableAgents are created 
which correspond to the loading tasks and store needed variables 
ti
start, ti
end and duration di. In the same cycle the duration 
constraints are created and attached to the corresponding 
ControllerAgent. 
 
for (int j = 0; j < nbTasks; j++) { 
taskAgents[j] = dpb.makeVAgent("task_agent_" + 
  (j + 1)); 
taskStarts[j] = taskAgents[j]. 
  createVar("Start", 0, timeHorizon); 
taskEnds[j] = taskAgents[j].createVar("End", 
  0, timeHorizon); 
taskDurations[j] = taskAgents[j]. 
  createVar("Duration", durations[j], 
  durations[j]); 
 
DOperation startEndOperation = new 
  Subtract(taskStarts[j], taskEnds[j]); 
DConstraint startEndConstraint = new 
  Equal(startEndOperation, taskDurations[j]); 
startEndController.post(startEndConstraint); 
 
DConstraint endConstraint = 
  new LessOrEqual(taskEnds[j], generalEnd); 
startEndController.post(endConstraint); 
} 
 
Finally the precedence constraint and cumulative constraint 
are determed and the process of solution search is started.  
 
With the given conditions in the result of application run the 
values of variables ti
start, ti
end will constitute a feasible solution ot 
the ship loading problem.  
7. CONCLUSIONS & FUTURE WORK   
In this article we proposed a new approach for combination of 
MAS and DCSP in multi-agent swarm systems. This approach 
called CACS (Controller-Agent for Solving Constraints) based 
on the use of a specific type of agents called Agent Controller 
and Variables’ Agent. We believe that proposed process of 
constraint satisfaction in the multi-agent system fits well the 
general principles of Swarm Intelligence. In particular, the stage 
of domain reduction in our algorithm  may be seen exchange of 
―rules, 
tips 
and believes 
about 
how 
to process 
the 
information [4]‖. 
Also in our approach we implemented a principal feature of 
Swarm systems, which is principal ability to modify multi-agent 
structure in response of various influencing factors. First of all, 
declarative manner of constraints based formalization of the 
problem allows for changing inter- and intra-agent behavior.  
Secondly, the composition of inter-agent constraints inside 
ControllerAgent may be changed during evolution of the system 
(as it shown on fig.1 and fig .2). 
In the proposed CACS architecture we see good opportunities 
for further moving towards to implementation of advanced 
swarm intelligence capabilities. Modern MAS platforms like 
JADE 
implement 
different 
peer-to-peer 
communication 
mechanisms for which direct correspondence may be found in 
computational biology. Given such mechanisms as foundation 
for reliable distributed inter-agent communication we will extend 
discussed algorithms of interaction between Controllers Agents 
and Variables Agents by adaptation framework. In such 
framework agents will be able to discover critical changes in 
MAS configuration (faults of agents, misbehavior, etc), negotiate 
responsibilities and change the roles accordingly in order to 
continue proper collective operations.    
   The model of distributed constraints satisfaction proposed 
in SACS also offers two main contributions in DCSP research. 
First, it is the possibility of a direct and easier dealing with non-
binary constraints without having to use methods of 
transformation of non-binary constraints to binary constraints. 
Second, CACS offers us the possibility to organize the 
constraints logically related groups. This grouping of constraints 
allows us to form sub-problems, each group is monitored and 
processed by a single controller. This also helps reduce the total 
number of Controller Agents needed.  
Non-binary constraints are more common in real problems 
than binary ones. Some methods are used in order to allow using 
binary constraint solving techniques on non-binary ones. 
Methods like hidden and dual transformation [14, 15] convert 
non-binary constraints into equivalent binary ones. Other 
methods are proposed in the DCSP domain in order to deal with 
non-binary constraints. I. Brito [21, 33,34] has proposed 
organizing agents involved in a non-binary dynamically in order 
to form a proper propose-validate sequence. Agents then follow 
that sequence to find a solution for that constraint. 
Our algorithm proposes another direct alternative. Any 
constraint is encapsulated inside a controller agent regardless 
this constraint is binary or non-binary. Agents involved in any 
constraint are not forced to follow any order in proposing values 
for their variables. 
The increase in number of agents is an inconvenience of our 
model. We can investigate the possibility of using a hybrid 
system of both, our model and a standard ABT model, in order 
to model a DCSP. In such hybrid system, binary constraints 
relate variables’ agents directly while non-binary constraints are 
encapsulated inside controller agents. The possibility of 
gathering constraints gives also the possibility of decreasing the 
number of agents. The user can group some constraints 
according to the modeled problem logic. 
To prove the feasibility of the proposed theoretical principles 
we implemented software prototype of CACS. It uses generic 
interfaces for integration with different third-party MAS-

platforms and CSP-solvers. In the final implementation we used 
the MAS platform JADE and the Choco CSP solver. Apart from 
direct Java programming of DCSP problems our prototype also 
provides an opportunity to describe the problem using XML 
facilitating the modeling of simple problems without the need to 
write and compile a Java program.  
Demonstrated applicability of CACS for solution of logistics 
problems opens opportunity for further progress in developing 
Swarm Intelligence applications. Following that direction we 
plan to continue in design of meta-communication protocol 
between ControllerAgents, which will permit define formal 
methods of re-composition of constraints inside different 
ControllerAgents during evolution of the system.  
Another interesting problem for CACS application comes 
from the domain of modern transportation systems. Here we 
wish to apply CACS approach for the ―transport on demand‖ 
challenge and solution of complex logistics problems in real 
conditions of modern warehouses. Also we are going to 
investigate ways to add optimization mechanism to the system 
similar to DPOP algorithm [34]. This will allow the user to 
adjust the Variables’ Agent value choosing according to a given 
optimizing mechanism. 
This work was partially supported by HSE grant # T3-61.1.
