Robot Dream
Alexander Tchitchigin1, Max Talanov2, Larisa Saﬁna3, and Manuel Mazzara4
1 Innopolis University, Russia,

Kazan Federal University, Russia,

2 Kazan Federal University, Russia,

3 Innopolis University, Russia,

4 Innopolis University, Russia,

Abstract. In this position paper we present a novel approach to neuro-
biologically plausible implementation of emotional reactions and behav-
iors for real-time autonomous robotic systems. The working metaphor we
use is the “day” and “night” phases of mammalian life. During the “day”
phase a robotic system stores the inbound information and is controlled
by the light-weight rule-based system in real time. In contrast to that,
during the “night” phase the stored information is been transferred to
the supercomputing system to update the realistic neural network: emo-
tional and behavioral strategies.
Keywords: robotics, spiking neural networks, artiﬁcial emotions, aﬀec-
tive computing
1
Introduction
Some time ago we have asked ourselves, “Why could emotional phenomena be
so important for robots and AI (artiﬁcial intelligence) systems?” As for humans:
emotional mechanisms manage processes like attention, resource allocation, goal
setting, etc. These mechanisms seems to be beneﬁcial for computational systems
in general and therefore for AI and robotic systems. Still these phenomena tend
to be “diﬃcult” for computational as well as AI and robotics researchers. To
implement all phenomena related to emotions we have decided to use simulation
of nerobiological processes.
Besides, without understanding and simulation of emotions the eﬀective AI–
human communication is almost impossible. Let’s review one real life example.
Imagine a concierge robot in a hotel, ﬁnishing checking in a fresh lodger, when a
man from room 317 rushes into concierge desk in a panic. “Water tap is broken
and it starts ﬂooding the whole ﬂoor!” Even in a case when it is optimal to
ﬁnish check-in ﬁrst, it is very likely that the new guest would wish a concierge to
switch immediately to arisen problem. That happens due to empathy between
arXiv:1603.03007v1  [cs.RO]  9 Mar 2016

human beings. If a robot does not understand emotions, it can not prioritize tasks
appropriately, which would damage client’s satisfaction and hotel’s reputation.
We could identify the main contribution of this paper as an approach that
allows to expand practical autonomous real-time control of a robotic platform
with realistic emotional appraisal and behavior based on spiking neural network
simulation and neuromodulation.
In section 2 we substantiate the need for neurobiologically plausible emo-
tional simulation and point out the mismatch between computational resources
available to current robotic systems and what is required for neuronal simula-
tion. In section 3 we introduce our concept how a robotic system execution can
be separated into “day” and “night” phases in order to bridge the gap between
a robotic system and supercomputer performing the simulation. In section 4 we
introduce the notion of “bisimulation” to answer the questions of learning and
mapping from realistic neural network to rules-based control system. Section 5
provides the information about the actual topics in the ﬁeld of aﬀecting compu-
tations, notable authors and research projects in this area. Finally we sum up
the ideas presented in the paper and discuss the arose questions with attention
to the steps we are going to take in order to resolve them in section 6.
2
The Problem
There are several cognitive architectures that implement emotion phenomena,
some of the most notable are listed in section 5. Rather than implementing the
emotional model in a computational system, we re-implemented the neurobio-
logical basis using simulation. This was done to create a biologically plausible
approach and to validate the results of our simulations from neurobiological
perspective. The other way around could not provide proper evidence that the
result could be regarded as emotional phenomenon. We used the model of basic
mechanisms of a mammalian brain via neuromodulation and their mapping to
basic aﬀective states [14, 26, 27, 28, 29]. We used the realistic spiking neural
networks with neuromodulation reconstructing all brain structures involved into
the pathways of neuromodulators of the “cube of emotions” by Hugo L¨ovheim
[14]. Unfortunately, current robotic systems usually do not have enough memory
and computational capacity to run realistic simulations of human brain activity.
For example, this is computational resources of rather advanced bipedal
robotic platform AR-601:
– CPU — 4th Gen Intel Core i7-4700EQ 4-Core 3.4GHz processor;
– System Memory — 1 x204-Pin DDR3L 1333MHz SO-DIMM up to 8 GB;
However the simulation of 1% of human brain required a cluster of 250 K-
supercomputers (each contains 96 computing nodes, each node contains a 2.0
GHz 8-core SPARC64 processor and 16 GB of memory) that was done by RIKEN
institute in 2013 and this simulation was slower than human brain in 1000 times
[12]. According to the estimates of the Human brain project the computational
capacity to simulate whole human brain should be 30 exaﬂop that is not feasible
at the moment.

3
Day phase and Night phase
To enable (soft) real-time behaviour from a robotic system it should run some
kind of traditional rule-based control system. We do not constrain type or archi-
tecture of this system, it might be some sort of Boolean expert system, fuzzy-logic
based or Bayesian-logic based system, possibly augmented with Deep-learning
pre-processing cascades for visual and/or audio input channels. In our approach
robot’s control system should not only produce appropriate reaction for input
stimulus but also record these stimuli for post-processing during “night phase”.
So we propose that robotic system records and stores all input signals for fur-
ther post-processing. It might store either raw inputs (video and audio streams
for example) or some higher-level aggregated form like Deep-learning cascade
output (if control system uses such pre-processing mechanisms). And when robot
“goes to sleep”, it transmits all new recorded inputs to the supercomputer over
some network connection. Actually robotic system might not “sleep all night
long”, it can stay active while supercomputer processes new information, we
assume only that the robot regularly “takes a break” to transmit recorded in-
formation and later to receive results and update rules of its control system.
Finally, the supercomputer runs realistic spiking neural network that simu-
lates brain regions involved into neuromodulation pathways. This network re-
ceives as an input actual signals recorded by robotic system in a raw or pre-
processed (aggregated) form. Then the network processes inputs in the simulated
time (which might be faster or slower than clock time depending on available
computational power), so we can infer emotional response of the system [24, 30]
from resulting neural activity and neuromodulators levels. From emotional re-
sponses of spiking neural network we generate updates to the rules of a control
system which are sent back to the robot.
4
Bisimulation
With the approach of simulating separately a reaction of realistic neural network
to input stimuli in order to infer an appropriate emotional response, two essential
questions arise. First of all, how are we going to train our spiking neural network
so it produces relevant and suitable emotional response, and after that how are
we going to understand what particular rules of robot’s control system we need
to update to accommodate emotional mismatch if any?
To answer both questions we propose an approach that we call bisimulation
by analogy with the notion in state transition systems. The idea is to simulta-
neously run both realistic neural network and a copy of robot’s control system
on the same input. This immediately gives an answer to the second question
as we can see which rules of the control system gets activated on current input
and what emotional response they imply so we can compare that with emotional
reaction inferred from spiking neural network and make necessary adjustments.
But we can use bisimulation to address the question of spiking neural net-
work training too. If we have a rule-based control system with reasonably good

emotional reactions we can use it as a source of reward stimuli for neural net-
work. So initially we start running both neural network and control system on
sample input and whenever control system produce positive emotional value of
the current stimulus, we increase dopamine level in neural network simulating
positive feedback (analogously to reward reaction (e.g. to feeding) in mammals).
Respectively when control system signals negative emotional value, we decrease
dopamine level in neural network.
After realistic neural network learns to mimic emotional responses of control
system it can evolve emotional reactions in unsupervised way as it happens in
mammals. From that point we can start adjusting emotional reactions of the
control system to ever improving ones of spiking neural network.
Speaking of adjusting the rules of a control system with respect to emotional
feedback from neural network we highlight several aspects of decision-making
that undergo inﬂuence of emotional state [1, 25]:
– decisive / less decisive
– speed of decision-making
– bias to positive or negative “thoughts”
– optimistic / conservative
– careful / risky
Let’s discuss how these traits could aﬀect a rules-based control system tak-
ing as an example NARS framework [31], based on non-axiomatic logic. NARS
system was speciﬁcally designed to work under bounded amount of knowledge,
computational resources and available memory. Therefore the system dynami-
cally redistributes resources among tasks and processes that are needed to be
performed according to assigned priorities and relevance. Hence NARS can spend
less resources on one task and get approximate answer and much more resources
on another task, which leads to obtaining a more precise solution.
Thus the most straightforward aspect to map is the speed of decision-making:
the more computational and memory resources we allocate to the whole NARS
system the faster it provides decisions to perform necessary actions and vice
versa. This could be implemented as some kind of CPU-boost in case of excite-
ment or fear emotional states. Furthermore we can say that NARS have built-in
“conservativeness handle”: parameter k in denominator of conﬁdence formula.
The higher the value of k, the more unconﬁdent the system about its knowledge,
the more eﬀort it will spend to ascertain a solution. We can model inclination of
the system to “positive” or “negative” “thoughts” adjusting relative priorities of
facts with and without logical negation. Also risky behavior could be modeled
by lowering the conﬁdence threshold of accepted actions.
Similar mapping for decision-making traits can be constructed for probabilis-
tic or fuzzy-logic based control systems, though in each particular case we have
to carefully consider available parameters and adjust the mapping according to
semantics and pragmatics of the control system we work with.

5
Related work
Starting from the late 90-es the interest to emotions and emotional represen-
tations in computational systems has been growing [3, 19, 22, 21]. This rise of
activity is based on understanding of the role of emotions in human intelligence
and consciousness that was indicated by several neuroscientists [7, 6, 18]. Start-
ing from the seminal book by Rosalind Picard, [20] (though we could mention
earlier attempts to implement emotions in the machines [4]), we could identify
two main directions in a new research ﬁeld of aﬀective computing: emotion recog-
nition and re-implementation of emotions in a computational system. There are
several cognitive architectures that are capable of the re-implementation of emo-
tional phenomena in diﬀerent extent, starting from SOAR [13] and ACT-R [11]
to modern BICA [23]. The interest in implementation of emotional mechanisms
is based on the role of emotional coloring in appraisal, decision making mecha-
nisms, and emotional behavior, indicated by Damasio in [5]. Our approach takes
a step further on the road for neurobiologically plausible model of emotions [30].
We have to mention other perspectives on emotional re-implementations in
a computational machines: Arbib and Fellous [8, 2] created the neurobiologi-
cal background for the direction to neurobiologically inspired cognitive archi-
tectures; the appraisal aspects are in focus of Marsella and Gratch research
[17, 16, 10] as well as in Lowe and Ziemke works [32, 15]. As the neuropsy-
chological basement for our cognitive architecture we used “Cube of emotions”
created by Hugo L¨ovheim [14]. It bridges the psychological and neurobiological
phenomena in one relatively easy to implement programmatically model based
on three-dimensional space of three neuromodulators: noradrenaline, serotonin,
dopamine, which is its main advantage from our perspective. For the implemen-
tation we used realistic neural network simulator NEST [9] recreating the neural
structures of the mammalian brain. As it was mentioned earlier in this paper,
the processing of the simulation took 4 hours of supercomputer’s processing time
to calculate 1000 milliseconds.
6
Conclusion
In our article we described an idea or approach for augmentation of autonomous
robotic systems with mechanisms of emotional revision and feedback. There
are many open questions: input formats for realistic neural network, emotional
revision thresholds and emotional equalizing (homeostasis) and so on. On the
one hand, diﬀerent answers to these questions allow adaptation of the approach
to a range of possible architectures of robots’ control systems. On the other hand,
even better solution would be a software framework implementing our approach
with several pluggable adapters to accommodate the most popular choices for
robots’ “brains”.
So our next step is to implement a proof-of-concept of proposed architec-
tural scheme for some simple autonomous robotic system. We are not going
to start with a concierge android right away. Our current idea is to develop

some sort of robotic vacuum cleaner prototype that does not even clean but
can bump into humans or pets and receive emotional feedback, for example be-
cause it is too noisy or because of incorrectly prioritized work tasks. To simplify
human feedback mechanism some remote control device could be used for exam-
ple with two buttons: for positive and negative feedback. Later we can employ
some audio-analysis system to infer emotional reaction from verbal commands
to robo-cleaner. Main research question here is to what extent these emotional
mechanisms can aﬀect robot’s behavior? And we hope to establish a foundation
for desired software framework.
