arXiv:1301.4739v1  [astro-ph.CO]  21 Jan 2013
A comparative study of optical/ultraviolet variability of
narrow-line Seyfert 1 and broad-line Seyfert 1 active galactic nuclei
Y. L. Ai1,2, W. Yuan3, H. Zhou4,5,6, T.G. Wang4,5, X.-B. Dong4,5, J. G. Wang2, H. L. Lu4,5

Received
;
accepted
To be submitted to The Astronomical Journal

2National Astronomical Observatories/Yunnan Observatory, Chinese Academy of Sci-
ences, Kunming, Yunnan, P.O. BOX 110, China
3National Astronomical Observatories, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100012,

4Key laboratory for Research in Galaxies and Cosmology, University of Science and Tech-
nology of China, Chinese Academy of Science, Hefei, Anhui 230026, China
5Department of Astronomy, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui
230026, China
6Polar Research Institute of China,451 Jinqiao Road, Pudong, Shanghai 200136, China

– 2 –
ABSTRACT
The ensemble optical/ultraviolet variability of narrow-line Seyfert 1 (NLS1)
type active galactic nuclei (AGNs) is investigated, based on a sample selected
from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) Stripe-82 region with multi-epoch
photometric scanning data.
As a comparison a control sample of broad-line
Seyfert 1 (BLS1) type AGNs is also incorporated. To quantify properly the in-
trinsic variation amplitudes and their uncertainties, a novel method of parametric
maximum-likelihood is introduced, that has, as we argued, certain virtues over
previously used methods. The majority of NLS1-type AGNs exhibit signiﬁcant
variability on timescales from about ten days to a few years with, however, on
average smaller amplitudes compared to BLS1-type AGNs.
About 20 NLS1-
type AGNs showing relatively large variations are presented, that may deserve
future monitoring observations, for instance, reverberation mapping. The av-
eraged structure functions of variability, constructed using the same maximum-
likelihood method, show remarkable similarity in shape for the two types of
AGNs on timescales longer than about 10 days, which can be approximated by a
power-law or an exponential function. This, along with other similar properties,
such as the wavelength-dependent variability, are indicative of a common dom-
inant mechanism responsible for the long-term optical/UV variability of both
NLS1- and BLS1-type AGNs. Towards the short timescales, however, there is
tentative evidence that the structure function of NLS1-type AGNs continues de-
clining, whereas that of BLS1-type AGNs ﬂattens with some residual variability
on timescales of days. If this can be conﬁrmed, it may suggest that an alter-
native mechanism, such as X-ray reprocessing, starts to become dominating in
BLS1-type AGNs, but not in NLS1-, on such timescales.

– 3 –
Subject headings: galaxies: active — galaxies: Seyfert — photometry: variability —
quasar: general

– 4 –
1.
Introduction
Variations of optical/ultraviolet (UV) luminosity on timescales from weeks to years
are characteristics of active galactic nuclei (AGNs), and the study of this phenomenon is
a powerful tool for constraining models of black hole accretion. Extensive observational
investigations in the past, albeit with mostly small samples, have revealed dependence
of the variability amplitude on various observed quantities such as wavelength, time-lag,
luminosity, and redshift (e.g., di Clemente et al. 1996; de Vries et al. 2005; Meusinger et al.
2011; Welsh et al. 2011), that was conﬁrmed by using vast quasars from the Sloan Digital
Sky Survey (SDSS) with repeated scans (Vanden Berk et al. 2004; Zuo et al. 2012). With
the advent of black hole mass estimation based on single-epoch spectroscopic data on AGN,
new correlations have been suggested of the variations with black hole mass (Wold et al.
2007; Bauer et al. 2009), and perhaps more fundamentally, with the Eddington ratio as
claimed independently by a few groups very recently (Wilhite et al. 2008; Ai et al. 2010;
MacLeod et al. 2010). The possible dependence of variability on the fundamental physical
parameters is remarkable, as it may provide new insights into the variability mechanisms.
For instance, such a dependence favors models of disc instability or variations in accretion
rate (e.g., Kawaguchi et al. 1998; Li & Cao 2008; Liu et al. 2008) over other models,
such as Poisson process (e.g., Terlevich et al. 1992; Torricelli-Ciamponi et al. 2000) and
gravitational microlensing (e.g., Hawkins 1993). However, the statistical signiﬁcance of
these results is not yet suﬃciently high, and further conﬁrmation is still needed.
While considerable progresses have been made in the past decades, previous variability
studies were focused mostly on AGNs of the broad-line Seyfert 1 (BLS1) type, including
quasars. Narrow-line Seyfert 1 (NLS1) type AGNs, as a subclass of broad emission-line
AGNs (BLAGNs) with extreme properties, have received little attention, however. This
may partly be ascribed to the small number of such objects known in the past. NLS1-type

– 5 –
AGNs are commonly deﬁned as having small widths of the optical permitted emission-lines
(FWHM(Hβ) ≲2000 km s−1, Osterbrock & Pogge 1985). In addition, NLS1-type AGNs
(see Komossa 2008 for a review) often show strong optical Fe II emission and weak
[O III] lines (Gaskell 1985; Goodrich 1989; V´eron-Cetty et al. 2001), a steep soft X-ray
spectral slope (Boller et al. 1996; Wang et al. 1996), and strong X-ray variability (Leighly
1999; Grupe 2004). Such extreme properties make them cluster at one extreme end
of the strongest AGNs correlation space, namely eigenvector 1 (EV1, Boroson & Green
1992; Sulentic et al. 2000, 2007), which is believed to be driven by the Eddington ratio
(Lbol/LEdd).
NLS1-type AGNs are commonly thought to have small black hole masses and thus
high accretion rates (at a substantial fraction of or close to the Eddington rate), as
argued extensively in the literatures (e.g., Mineshige et al. 2000; Sulentic et al. 2000;
Collin & Kawaguchi 2004; Grupe 2004). As such, their accretion is suggested to likely
proceed via the so-called slim disk where a signiﬁcant fraction of viscosity-generated photons
are trapped and advected into the black hole, rather than the standard Shakura-Sunyaev
thin disk (Abramowicz et al. 1988; Wang & Netzer 2003). As the accretion disk is
responsible for the UV/optical radiation in AGNs, diﬀerent variability patterns might be
anticipated for NLS1-, compared to normal BLS1-type AGNs.
There have been a few previous variability studies on NLS1-type AGNs, all of which
were monitoring programs on relatively short timescales (e.g. intra-night or days) for
individual objects or small samples (Young et al. 1999; Miller et al. 2000). The only one
NLS1 with long-term (more than ten years) extensive photometric monitoring is Ark 564
(Doroshenko et al. 2006), as far as we know, and it was found that the NLS1 has a low
variability amplitude. Based on monitoring results of a small sample, Klimek et al. (2004)
ﬁrst suggested that NLS1s, as a class, are less variable than non-NLS1s on long timescales

– 6 –
(weeks to years). This is consistent with the later suggested anti-correlation with Eddington
ratio, if NLS1-type AGNs have indeed high accretion rates.
In fact, the low black hole mass scenario of NLS1-type AGNs is yet subject to active
debates (see komossa 2008 for a review), albeit some favoring independent pieces of indirect
evidence, such as rapid X-ray variability (Gierli´nski et al. 2008; Ponti et al. 2010; Ai et al.
2011). One important question concerned is whether NLS1 AGNs conform the same relation
of the size of the broad line region (BLR) and luminosity as found in normal Seyferts
and quasars (Kaspi et al. 2000). The question arises as NLS1 AGNs with reverberation
mapping (RM) observations are rare, only limited to a few cases (Peterson et al. 2004;
Kaspi et al. 2005). This situation may partly be ascribed to the lack of known NLS1-type
AGNs with large variability. A search of more such objects would be essential for future
RM observations of NLS1 AGNs.
We have carried out a systematic study on the optical/UV variability of AGNs and
quasars using a large sample with multi-epoch scanning data available from the SDSS
Stripe-82, including both BLS1- and NLS1-type AGNs. As the ﬁrst results, various
correlations with AGN variability have been tested and presented in Ai et al. (2010). It
was found that the variability amplitude is signiﬁcantly correlated with the AGN EV1
parameters, particularly with Lbol/LEdd as the strongest, albeit large scatters (Ai et al.
2010). This is also manifested by the observed averagely smaller variations of NLS1- (having
higher Lbol/LEdd) compared to the BLS1-type AGNs. However, these results are based on
time-averaged variation amplitudes, and conﬁrmation by structure function analysis, that
is a more robust technique, is needed; moreover, the time-lag dependence can be explored,
that may shed light on the variability diﬀerence between the two types of AGNs.
This is the second paper of our variability study based on the same SDSS Stripe-82
samples, which focuses on the ensemble variability properties of NLS1-type AGNs. The

– 7 –
BLS1-type subsample is also analyzed in the same way as a control sample for comparison.
These mainly concern the demography of variable objects, wavelength dependence, and
variation of the spectral shapes, as well as the dependence on time-lag (structure function).
We also improve the measurement of variation amplitudes up on those in the ﬁrst paper (and
in the literature) by introducing the Maximum-likelihood method. In addition, we present
a full account of the data analysis, mainly photometric calibration and reliability check, for
which only a concise description was given in the ﬁrst paper given the limited length of a
letter. The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we describe the sample selection and
photometric data analysis, and in Section 3 the quantiﬁcation of variability. The results
are presented in Section 4, and their implications are discussed in Section 5, followed by a
summary in Section 6. We use a Λ-dominated cosmology with H0 = 70 km s−1 Mpc−1,
Ωm = 0.3, and ΩΛ = 0.7 throughout the paper.
2.
Sample and Data
2.1.
NLS1- and BLS1-type AGN samples
Our NLS1-type AGNs are actually taken from the sample of Zhou et al. (2006), which
was selected from the SDSS Data Release 3 catalogs. The procedures of the optical spectral
analysis and measurement of emission line parameters were described in detail in our
previous papers (Zhou et al. 2006; Dong et al. 2008). Only objects with redshifts z ≲0.8
were included to cover the Hβ and [O III] emission lines, with the broad component of Hα
or Hβ detected at > 10 σ conﬁdence level. We further select objects for variability study
using the following criteria:
• located within the SDSS Stripe-82 region (R.A. > 310◦or < 59◦and -1◦.25 > decl. <
1◦.25);

– 8 –
• classiﬁed as ‘STAR’ in all of the ﬁve bands by the SDSS photometric pipeline1 to
minimize possible contamination from host galaxy starlight;
• radio-quiet or not detected in the FIRST radio survey2, as constrained from the FIRST
(Faint Images of the Radio Sky at 20 cm survey, Becker et al. 1995) radio survey. This
is to eliminate possible ‘contamination’ from blazar-type jet emission, which originates
from a distinct (non-thermal) radiation process and is often variable (Zhou et al.
2003, 2007; Yuan et al. 2008; Abdo et al. 2009; Liu et al. 2010; Jiang et al. 2012).
The above selections result in 58 NLS1-type AGNs. For a comparative study we also
select a BLS1-type AGN sample in the Stripe-82 region, i.e., with the broad Hα or Hβ
linewidth (full width at half maximum, FWHM) greater than 2,200 km s−1, the dividing
line used to separate NLS1- and BLS1-type AGNs following our previous work (Zhou et
al. 2006, see also Gelbrod et al. 2009). The sample selections and spectral analysis are
performed in the same way as for NLS1-type AGNs above, and is described in Dong et al.
(2008). The same criteria as above are also applied to select star-like, radio-quiet objects.
Furthermore, To ensure that the two samples match each other on the redshift-luminosity
distribution, a subsample of the resulting BLS1-type AGNs is randomly extracted in a
way that they mimic the z −Mi distribution of the NLS1-type sample, where Mi is i-band
1The SDSS photometric pipeline diﬀerentiates resolved (‘GALAXY’) and unresolved
(‘STAR’) sources based on the diﬀerence between PSF- and model-magnitudes, and it was
found that a simple cutoﬀat 0.145 mag works at the 95% conﬁdence level for sources with
r ≤21 mag (Stoughton et al. 2002).
2Deﬁned as R1.4 < 1, where the radio-loudness R1.4 is deﬁned as the logarithm of the ﬂux
density ratio of radio emission at 1.4 GHz to the optical emission at the SDSS g-band.

– 9 –
absolute magnitude3. In this process we try to retain the size of the NLS1-type sample
(with only a few outliers discarded) and prune the BLS1-type sample with a BLS1-type
to NLS1-type ratio consistent with 2:1. This results in two ﬁnal working samples of 55
NLS1-type and 108 BLS1-type AGNs, which are statistically compatible with each other on
the redshift–luminosity plane (Figure 1). The 2-D Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (Press et al.
1992) yields a chance probability of 0.43 that the two samples have the same z −Mi
distribution.
The two working samples can be considered as optically and homogeneously selected,
with reliably measured continuum and emission line parameters (see Zhou et al. 2006;
Dong et al. 2008). They consist of mostly quasars with Mi < −23 mag and z ≃0.3–0.8.
All of the NLS1-type objects meet the conventional extra [O III]/Hβ< 3 criterion for
NLS1s (see zhou et al. 2006, for details). They also show, compared to the BLS1 sample,
other properties characteristic of NLS1s, e.g., stronger Fe II emission, smaller black hole
masses and higher Eddington ratios (Figure 2). The strength of the Fe II emission lines
is measured by the intensity ratios to Hβ, i.e., R4570≡Fe II(λλ4434 −4684)/Hβb (where
Fe II (λλ4434 −4684) denotes the Fe II multiplets ﬂux integrated over 4434–4684 ˚A, and
Hβb the ﬂux of the broad component of Hβ, see Zhou et al. 2006 for details). The black
hole masses, MBH, are estimated using the formalism given by Greene & Ho (2005) from
the broad Hβ FWHM and the 5100 ˚A luminosity (L5100), which are taken from Zhou et al.
(2006), or measured in the same way for the BLS1 sample. To calculate the Eddington
ratio, Lbol/LEdd, the bolometric luminosities are estimated as Lbol = 9L5100 (Elvis et al.
1994).
3A power law continuum fλ ∝λαλ with a slope of αλ = −1.5 is assumed in calculating the
i-band absolute magnitude. The observed magnitudes have been corrected for the Galactic
extinction (Schlegel et al. 1998).

– 10 –
2.2.
Data and photometric calibration
The SDSS imaged the sky in ﬁve broad photometric bands simultaneously, namely,
u, g, r, i and z (Gunn et al. 2006; Fukugita et al. 1996). The integration time is 54.1s in each
band and the limiting magnitude reaches ∼23 mag in the r band. The photometric system
is based on the AB-system with zero-point uncertainty of ∼0.02–0.03 mag (Smith et al.
2002; Fukugita et al. 1996; Ivezi´c et al. 2004). The astrometric accuracy is better than 0.′′1
for sources brighter than 20.5 mag in r band (Pier et al. 2003). We use the point-spread
function (PSF) magnitudes in this work.
The SDSS Stripe-82 survey covers the region from α = 59◦to 310◦and δ = −1.25◦
to 1.25◦. During the SDSS-I phase (∼2000–2005) the region was repeatedly observed
and the central part of the stripe has been scanned at a cadence of typically 10–20 times
(Adelman-McCarthy et al. 2007; Sesar et al. 2007). These observations were performed
under generally photometric conditions and the data were well calibrated using the
PHOTO software pipeline (Lupton et al. 2002). This region was later repeatedly scanned
over the course of three 3-month campaigns (Sep.–Nov.) in the successive three years
in 2005–2007, known as the SDSS Supernova (SN) Survey. In this work we use the
photometric data acquired during both the SDSS–I phase from Data Release 5 (DR5,
Adelman-McCarthy et al. 2007) and the SN survey during 2005 (SN-2005).
Observations in the SN survey were sometimes performed in non-photometric
conditions. At the time when this work was started only the un-calibrated source catalogs
were available. Thus possible photometric zero-point oﬀsets in the SN survey data need
to be determined, by calibrating against the DR5 magnitudes. To do this, we use stars in
the same ﬁelds as ‘standards’, assuming that the vast majority of stars do not vary. The
detailed procedures of re-calibration are described in Appendix A. The resulting overall
(systematic and statistical) photometric errors of the calibrated SN survey magnitudes

– 11 –
have a median of ≈0.03 mag for the g, r, and i bands, and ≈0.04 mag for the u and z
bands, which are comparable to those of the SDSS-I DR5 data. To check the reliability
of our photometric calibration, we examine the calibrated SN survey data of 14 Landolt
photometric standard stars (Landolt 1992) locating in Stripe-82; none of them is found to
show detectable variability.
3.
Quantiﬁcation of variations and their uncertainties
We construct light curves for each object in the ﬁve SDSS bands separately using the
DR5 and the re-calibrated SN-2005 Survey data. Objects observed in the same frames
observed at diﬀerent epochs are matched by using a matching radius of 1′′. To eliminate
eﬀects of observation condition, only frames with good image quality (ﬂagged as good or
acceptable) are used. For each object there are typically ∼27 observations (about 14 from
the SN-2005 survey) spanning ∼5 years. It should be noted that all sample objects have
similar sampling patterns, mostly being observed repeatedly in three months (Sep.–Nov.)
each year during 2000–2005.
First we use the chi-square method to test the signiﬁcance of variability for
individual objects against the null hypothesis of no variation. The statistic χ2 (e.g.,
Bevington & Robinson 1992) is deﬁned as
χ2 =
N
X
i=1
(mi −⟨m⟩)2
ξ2
i
,
(1)
where mi is the magnitude of the i-th measurement with error ξi (the overall error
including both statistical and systematic errors), and ⟨m⟩the weighted mean of a total of
N measurements. We consider a source to be variable only if the probability level against
the null hypothesis P < 0.1%.
The amplitude of variability of an object is commonly measured by the width of its

– 12 –
magnitude distribution. However, the magnitude distribution as observed does not represent
the intrinsic variability, but rather is broadened by the eﬀect of measurement errors. To
assess the intrinsic magnitude distribution, we ﬁrst take the common practice as used in the
literature (e.g., Vanden Berk et al. 2004; Sesar et al. 2007), by estimating the contribution
of measurement errors to the observed scatter (root-mean-square, rms) and then subtract
it from the latter (See Eq. B2 in Appendix B for a detailed account). This estimation is
most accurate when the magnitude uncertainties ξi have the same or very similar values.
However, this may not be the case for the SDSS SN survey data that taken under variance
of observing conditions. Moreover, for such estimation and its variants, it is diﬃcult to
quantify the uncertainties of the estimated intrinsic variability amplitudes.
Alternatively, we introduce a parametric maximum-likelihood method, in which the
intrinsic magnitude distribution of an object is parameterized as a Gaussian with a mean
⟨m⟩and a standard deviation σm; the standard deviation σm is used as a measure of the
amplitude of intrinsic variability. This method can take into account the uncertainty of
each individual measurement (assumed to be Gaussian distributed). Moreover, it can
also be used to quantify the conﬁdence intervals for interesting parameters, such as σm,
(Figure 3). The method had been used in a similar way in the literature to derive the
intrinsic distribution of observables which suﬀer from measurement uncertainties (e.g.,
Maccacaro et al. 1988). The description of this method and a comparison with the one
above are in Appendix B. The two methods are found to be in excellent agreement. Hence
in this paper we use the amplitudes derived from the maximum-likelihood method since
their conﬁdence intervals can be estimated for each object.

– 13 –
4.
Results
4.1.
Demography of Variability
Here we quantify the demography of the variability. We consider an object to be
variable if the χ2 null-variability probability P < 0.1%, which corresponds to χ2
ν ≥3 for a
degree of freedom of 27, roughly the mean number of data sampling of our objects. Table 1
lists the fraction of variable objects for both the NLS1- and BLS1-type AGN samples. We
ﬁnd that the vast majority of NLS1-type AGNs show variations on timescales of years
at the signiﬁcance level P < 0.1%. Most of the variable objects varied at a level, σm
> 0.05 mag, larger than the typical photometric errors. This is clearly demonstrated in
Figure 4, which shows the reduced chi-square versus the variability amplitude in the r band
as example. We can see that for NLS1-type AGNs the intrinsic variability amplitude σm
ranges from ∼0.25 mag down to a few per cent at χ2
ν = 3; the latter can be considered
as the sensitivity of the variability detection limited by the current data quality. As can
be seen, the optical/UV emission of NLS1-type AGNs are indeed variable on timescales of
years, with mean variability amplitudes around 0.07–0.11 mag, depending on bands.
The accumulative distributions of the variability amplitudes σm in the ﬁve SDSS bands
are shown in Figure 5. Several results can be inferred immediately. First, most of both the
NLS1- and BLS1-type AGNs are variable on timescales of years, and there is a large scatter,
stretching over about one order of magnitude, in the variability magnitude. Second, the
NLS1- tend to vary with smaller amplitude compared to the BLS1-type AGNs, and this
trend is most signiﬁcant in the blue bands. This result is in line with our previously found
correlations involving variability, i.e., the narrower line width, the stronger Fe II emission,
the higher Eddington ratio, and the smaller variability (Ai et al. 2010). Third, For both
NLS1- and BLS1-type objects the variations are larger in the bluer band than the redder
band; this is discussed in detail in Section 4.2.

– 14 –
Variable NLS1-type AGNs with relatively large amplitude are of particular interest
and suitable for future spectroscopic monitoring and reverberation mapping observations.
We list objects with r band σm> 0.1 mag in Table 2, including some of the continuum and
emission line parameters, as taken from Zhou et al. (2006). We note that most of these
are typical NLS1-type AGNs with strong Fe II emission. Their light curves are shown in
Figure 6.
4.2.
Wavelength dependence and spectra variability
Wavelength-dependent variability has long been found for BLAGN and QSO samples
(e.g., Vanden Berk et al. 2004). Here we examine this property for NLS1-type AGNs using
our large data set. Due to redshift, a given ﬁlter samples diﬀerent wavelength ranges for
objects with diﬀerent redshift. We approximate the derived amplitude σm for a ﬁlter band
as that at its eﬀective wavelength λ0. For an object of redshift z, λ0 corresponds to a
wavelength λ = λ0/(1 + z) in the object’s rest frame. Thus for each object the variability
σm at ﬁve rest-frame wavelengths are sampled corresponding to the ﬁve SDSS bands. we
divide the overall rest wavelength range sampled here, 1900∼7100 ˚A, into ﬁve bins of equal
bin-size in log λ4. The relationship of amplitude σm versus rest-frame eﬀective wavelength
λ is shown in Figure 7. The mean value and scatter (standard deviation) of the sigma
distribution in each wavelength bin is also overplotted. The result shows clearly a trend
of increasing variability amplitude moving towards short wavelength for NLS1-type AGNs,
similar to BLS1-type. It shows clearly that at a given wavelength NLS1-type AGNs have
systematically lower variation amplitudes compared to BLS1-type, albeit large scatters.
We test the signiﬁcance of the diﬀerences in the σm distributions between the two samples
4The rest wavelength bin, in ˚A, are 1900, 2500, 3300, 4200, 5500, 7100.

– 15 –
using the K-S test, yielding the chance probability for the same distribution as 1.2%, 9.7%,
2.9% for the shortest three wavelength bins, respectively.
The trend in Figure 7 is in statistical sense only, and it would be interesting to examine
whether it also holds for variability in individual objects. For each object, we estimate
the maximum magnitude diﬀerence over the entire light curve in the blue (u) and red (i)
bands, respectively, deﬁned as ∆m = mt2 −mt1, where t1 and t2 are the epochs of the two
observations and t2>t1. The result is shown in the left panel of Figure 8; the dotted line
indicats the 1:1 relationship where the variations in the two bands are identical in both the
sign and amplitude. Two conclusions can be inferred from the ﬁgure. First, ∆m in both the
blue and red bands always keep the same signs, meaning that the two bands vary (fading or
brightening) coordinately; That is to say, the optical/UV continuum level moving up and
down systematically, rather than seesawing around. Second, for all but a few objects the
variations in the blue are indeed larger than those in the red band. This suggests that, even
in individual AGNs, the brightness variation tends to go hand-in-hand with variation of
the continuum slope, with larger variability in blue than in red. This is the same for both
NLS1- and BLS1-type AGNs.
A direct consequence of such wavelength-dependent variability is that the optical/UV
continuum becomes redder (bluer) when the overall continuum level becomes fainter
(brighter). This can be demonstrated explicitly in the right panel of Figure 8, where the
changes in the color (∆(mu −mi)) are plotted against the changes of magnitude. As can
be seen, for all but a few objects, of both BLS1- and NLS1-type AGNs, the spectra redden
(∆(mu −mi) > 0) while objects fade away (∆m > 0), and vice verse. Furthermore, there is
a strong correlation between the change of color (∆(mu −mi)) and the change of magnitude
(rs=0.79, P ≤10−5, the Spearman rank correlation test). This implies that the larger
variation of the continuum level is, the more change of the spectral shape in general. We

– 16 –
note that, regarding the dependence of variability on wavelength and spectral shape, NLS1-
and BLS1-type AGNs show very similar behavior.
4.3.
Time dependence of variability
To characterize the dependence of variation on time lags, structure function is
widely used (see, e.g., Collier & Peterson 2001; Vanden Berk et al. 2004). In this paper
we construct the structure function with maximum-likelihood method, as described in
Section 3, to parameterize the intrinsic variability amplitude for the ensembles instead of
individuals. Firstly, for each object, we calculate the magnitude diﬀerence between any two
observations separated by an interval, ∆τ, in the object rest frame, ∆m = m(t)−m(t−∆τ).
The error of ∆m is estimated using error propagation. The combined data points for all
objects in the samples are then grouped into various bins according to time lags. The time
lag bins are divided in a way that there are at least 600 data points in each bin. In each
bin of time lag, the mean of the ∆m distribution is expected to be around zero for a large
number of data points, since objects brighten or dim randomly and evenly in the statistical
sense. The dispersion of ∆m distribution, in fact, reﬂects the degree of variations (at the
given time lag). We take the intrinsic dispersion of the ∆m distribution in each bin as a
measure of the ‘averaged’ amplitude of variability, i.e., the structure function. The intrinsic
dispersion can be obtain with the assumption that ∆m distribution in each bin can be
approximated by a Gaussian, which is veriﬁed in the majority of the time lag bins. The
uncertainties of the intrinsic dispersion can also be obtained at the same time. In this way
we construct the structure function with maximum-likelihood method.
We ﬁrst construct the structure function for NLS1-type and BLS1-type AGNs in
each SDSS photometric band, for the sake of easy comparisons with previous results of
BLAGNs and quasars. The derived structure functions are shown in Figure 9, in only g and

– 17 –
r bands for clarity. We ﬁnd that the variability amplitude of NLS1-type AGNs, similar to
BLS1-type, does increase with time lag from days to years in all of the SDSS bands. At
a given timescale, NLS1- have systematically lower variation amplitudes than BLS1-type
AGNs. A simple power law model is used to characterize the structure function at time
lags greater than 10 days,
SF(∆τ) =
 ∆τ
∆τ0
β
(2)
where ∆τ0 and β are to be determined. The ﬁtting results are given in Table 3 and Figure 9.
It can be seen that a power law model can represent the structure function reasonably well.
The inferred power law slopes for NLS1-type AGNs range from 0.32±0.02 to 0.40±0.01,
mostly consistent with those of the BLS1s within the uncertainties.
Considering the redshift eﬀect, a more physically meaningful approach is to construct
the structure function in rest-frame wavelength bins instead of in photometric bands. We
divide the whole rest wavelength range into ﬁve bins with equal bin-size in logarithm, as
described in Section 4.2. The constructed structure functions for both NLS1-type AGNs
and BLS1- in each bin are shown in Figure 10. As expected, the time lag dependence of
variability presents in all the bins. Wavelength dependence variability is also clearly present
in almost all of the time lag bins, which is consistent with what was found above and also
in previous work for BLAGNs. Again, the two types of AGNs show remarkable similarity
in the shape of their structure function on timescales longer than about 10 days.
On shorter timescales (below about 10 days), the structure functions of the two types
seem to diﬀer, however. The structure function of NLS1-type AGNs continues to drop,
whereas that of BLS1 seems to ﬂatten towards short time lags, with some residual variability
of several percent. This is the case for all the wavelength bins except for the shortest
wavelength, for which the photometric uncertainties are the largest. Also we note that
the wavelength-dependence eﬀect becomes weak or even vanishes on such timescales. This

– 18 –
may indicate a diﬀerent mechanism of variability starts to become dominating. However,
this is not the case for NLS1-type AGNs, of which the structure function continues to
drop towards short time lags. Given the sparse sampling of the data used here, further
conﬁrmation is needed to verify this trend.
The structure functions in various rest frame wavelength bins are also ﬁtted with a
power law model within the time lag range of greater than 10 days. The ﬁtted curves are
shown in Figure 11 for the bin of 2500-3300 ˚A as an example, and the results are given in
Table 3. Alternatively, an exponential model (MacLeod et al. 2010) is also used
SF(τ) = SF∞(1 −e−|∆t|/τ)1/2
(3)
where SF∞and τ, the time scales, are to be determined. With inferred SF∞we can
estimate the long-term standard deviation of the variability as 0.5(SF∞)2. It can be
seen that, although both the functions can approximate the observed structure functions
reasonably well (at τ >10 days), we note that the exponential function gives a somewhat
better description than the power law for the NLS1 sample, based on the χ2
ν statistic.
This may be ascribed to a possible ﬂattening of the structure function at the largest time
lags, which appears to be more signiﬁcant for the NLS1- than for BLS1-type AGNs (see
Figure 10, Figures 11). However, the time lags in the current data set are not long enough
to draw the conclusion. The inferred variability timescales are around one year and increase
towards shorter rest-frame wavelength bins. The values of SF∞, i.e., the maximum variation
amplitude at the longest possible time lags, as expected, are larger at shorter wavelength
than longer, and larger for BLS1- than NLS1-type AGNs in all the rest wavelength bins.

– 19 –
5.
Discussion
5.1.
Implications to the optical/UV variability of NLS1s
The similarities found between NLS1- and BLS1-type AGNs in most of the properties
of optical/UV variability, except for systematically smaller amplitudes of NLS1s, indicate
that their long-term variability must be driven by the same mechanism. Recently there
are compelling evidences that the variability is intrinsic to AGN activity, speciﬁcally the
detected correlations of optical/UV variabilities with BH masses and/or Eddington ratios,
as investigated in our previous study (Ai et al. 2010) and other research (Wold et al. 2007;
Wilhite et al. 2008; Bauer et al. 2009; Zuo et al. 2012). The variability we observed may
be caused by variations in the accretion rates [see Gaskell (2008) for a diﬀerent view,
however], or some kind of (local) disturbance and its propagation in the disk (Czerny
2006). Assuming the ﬁrst case, Li & Cao (2008) proposed a simple model of global change
of the disk structure due to variation in accretion rates based on the standard disk, which
explained the previously observed MBH and luminosity dependence of variability. In fact,
this model can also reproduce qualitatively an inverse amplitude–Lbol/LEdd relation (Li,
private communication), which is MBH–dependent, though a quantitative comparison with
our data is hampered due to the small sample size.
Let’s consider the case of local instability scenario. From the simple standard disk
model (Shakura & Sunyaev 1973), the emission at a given radius R is dominated by a local
blackbody with Teﬀpeaking at a wavelength λ, where
hc/λ ≃2.8kTeﬀ.
The radiation is balanced by the energy generated per unit disk area at the radius R,
σT 4
eﬀ≃3GMbh ˙M/(8πR3),
where
˙M is the mass accretion rate. Combining the two relations we ﬁnd the radius R

– 20 –
where the local blackbody emission is peaked at λ is, in units of the Schwarzschild radius
RSch, r ≡R/RSch ∼( ˙m/Mbh)1/3λ4/3, where ˙m the mass accretion rate in units of the
Eddington rate. This means that the scaled radius r, which dominates the emission in a
given bandpass, enlarges with increasing Eddington ratio. If the disturbance is generated
in the inner part of the disk and propagating outward, it would attenuate in the course of
propagation. This would account for the ensemble weaker variability of NLS1-type AGNs
compared to BLS1-type AGNs, since the radius r responsible for the emission in the same
bandpass is shifted further out as the Eddington ratio increases. On the contrary, if the
disturbance is generated in the outer disk and is propagating inward, the disturbance must
be ampliﬁed instead.
Reprocessing of the X-ray emissions, originating close to the central black hole and
known with strong and rapid variability, into the optical/UV bands also can cause the
optical/UV variability in AGNs (e.g., Czerny 2006; Gaskell 2008). Yet the multi-bands
variability correlation studies in individual AGNs indicate that the dominant mechanism
for the long-term AGN optical/UV variability can not be reprocessing of variable X-ray
emission (e.g., Ar´evalo et al. 2008, 2009). Our result about the statistically weaker
variability of NLS1- than BLS1-type AGNs in optical/UV bands supports the argument,
since NLS1-type AGNs often show strong X-ray variability on both short and long timescales
(e.g., Papadakis 2004). However, on timescales of less than 10 days, it is likely that in this
regime the X-ray reprocessing starts to take over and dominate the optical/UV variability,
as the relevant timescales involved in this process are generally very short (Czerny 2006).
We ﬁnd that the variability component at short-term timescales seems to behave
diﬀerently from the long-term one in that the wavelength-dependence is absent, or at least
weak. And the structure function of BLS1-type AGNs begins to ﬂatten at time lags less
than 10 days. Interestingly, this ﬂattening is not seen in the structure functions of NLS1s,

– 21 –
which remain declining in the power law form. The eﬀect of contaminations from emission
line variability is excluded since the emission lines are mostly not variable on timescales of
days (Vestergaard & Peterson 2005; Wilhite et al. 2005). We propose that such a diﬀerence
may be explained in terms of the X-ray reprocessing scenario. As suggested in Uttley
(2006), the interaction between optical/UV and X-ray variability maybe diﬀerent between
NLS1- and BLS1-type AGNs. The optical/UV emission regions for NLS1-type AGNs
are outer in the accretion disk compared to BLS1-, which subtend only a smaller solid
angle as seen from the X-ray sources; while in BLS1-type AGNs the optical/UV emissions
originate much closer to the X-ray emitting region, which means much tighter interactions
between X-ray and optical/UV emissions. Moreover, the X-ray emission in NLS1-type
AGNs appears to be generally weaker and softer than BLS1-type AGNs (see Komossa 2008,
and references therein), which may also lead to generally weaker optical emission from the
reprocessing process. Thus, the weakness or absence of this excess variation component
may also contribute, at least partly, to the overall lower variability amplitudes in NLS1-
compared to BLS1-type AGNs.
If the dominant mechanism for the long-term optical/UV variability is related to
accretion disk instability, we would expect that the characteristic variability timescales
inferred from structure function are diﬀerent between NLS1- and BLS1-type AGNs. The
typical physical timescales associated with the accretion disk scale with the black hole mass.
However, in our analysis the variability timescales inferred from the exponential ﬁts of the
structure function do not show statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the two types of
AGNs given their large uncertainties. This may be ascribed, at least partly, to the relatively
small range of black hole masses in our sample. We note that in the analysis of SDSS
Stripe-82 data for massive quasars, MacLeod et al. (2010) ﬁnd the characteristic timescale
correlates with the black hole mass with a power law index of 0.21±0.07. While AGNs with
relatively smaller black hole mass, such as the NLS1-type AGNs are not included in their

– 22 –
sample. The property of the characteristic timescales of AGN variability may be examined
by using large samples with a wider black hole mass range and monitored over longer
time spans than the currently available data, such as the upcoming Large Synoptic Survey
Telescope.
5.2.
Implication for the nature of NLS1-type AGNs
We have demonstrated that, on all timescales observed so far, NLS1-type AGNs
show systematically less optical/UV variations compared to BLS1-type AGNs. This is in
agreement with the dependence of the variability on the Eddington ratio for BLAGNs found
in our previous paper (Ai et al. 2010). In fact, as we argued, the optical/UV variability may
be considered as a new EV1 parameter, with NLS1s lying at one extreme end. This property
gives interesting insight into the nature of NLS1-type AGNs. Currently there are three
scenarios regarding the nature of NLS1-type AGNs. The widely accepted model invokes less
massive black holes accreting at high rates compared to BLS1s (e.g. Mineshige et al. 2000;
Sulentic et al. 2000; Wang & Netzer 2003). Alternatively, the narrow Balmer line width
can also be explained by a disk-like low-ionization BLR close to face-on (the “orientation
scenario”, e.g., Osterbrock & Pogge 1985, Collin & Kawaguchi 2004), or by a more distant
BLR compared to normal BLS1s with a similar black hole mass or nuclear luminosity
(“distant BLR scenario”, Wandel & Boller 1998). Although face-on inclination is found in
a small number of extreme radio-loud NLS1s showing blazar-like properties (Yuan et al.
2008, abdo et al. 2009, Gu & Chen 2010), comparative studies of radio properties between
NLS1 and BLS1 disfavor the orientation scenario in general (Zhou & Wang 2002; Komossa
et al. 2006; Zhou et al. 2006). Other lines of evidence, such as polarization properties
and correlations involving narrow-line luminosity, suggest that orientation at most plays a
secondary role in explaining NLS1 phenomenon (Komossa 2008 and references therein).

– 23 –
Neither the “orientation” nor “distant BLR” scenario can explain naturally the
extension of EV1 correlations involving variability. For the “distant BLR” scenario, it is
hard to link the size of the BLR to the optical/UV continuum variability, that is local
to the accretion disk. Also, since the optical continuum emission is believed to come
from an accretion disk, as long as the disk is directly seen, variability amplitude should
not be dependent on the orientation of the disk. Optical/UV variability may be caused
by obscuration by the outer part of the disk; however, a lack of periodic variability
corresponding to the disk rotation has ruled out this possibility. (e.g., Peterson & Bentz
2006; Wold et al. 2007). In comparison, the commonly accepted model for NLS1s with
smaller MBH and higher Lbol/LEdd is favored. Their weak variability ﬁts more naturally
into the scenario that variability amplitude is governed by Lbol/LEdd, as suggested in our
previous paper.
6.
Summary
We present the ensemble variability property of a sample of NLS1-type AGNs that
have multi-epoch photometric observations in the SDSS Stripe-82 region. For NLS1-type
AGNs the variability was hitherto poorly explored as a class due to both the limited sample
sizes and few data available. As a direct comparison a control sample of BLS1-type AGNs
is also compiled. We introduce a novel parametric parametric maximum-likelihood method
in variability studies, to quantify intrinsic variability amplitudes and, for the ﬁrst time,
their conﬁdence intervals, which improves upon the commonly adopted methods in the
literature. This method makes full use of the measurement error of each data point, and
has the advantage of being sensitive to low-level variations.
We ﬁnd that the majority of the NLS1-type AGNs are in fact variable on timescales
from about several days to a few years, e.g., more than 80% of the objects varied at

– 24 –
levels ≥0.05 mag (standard deviation) in the SDSS u and g bands. NLS1-type AGNs
have systematically smaller variability compared to BLS1-type AGNs. This is consistent
with the previously found anti-correlation of AGN variability with the Eddington ratio
(Wilhite et al. 2008; Ai et al. 2010; MacLeod et al. 2010). We present the light curves and
some of the key parameters for 22 NLS1-type AGNs that show relatively large variations
(standard deviation σ > 0.1 mag in the r-band), which may deserve further monitoring
observations. It is also found that, similar to BLS1-type AGNs (including quasars),
the optical/UV variability is wavelength–dependent—the shorter wavelength, the larger
variations. We derive, for the ﬁrst time, the ensemble structure function of variability for
NLS1-type AGNs that span nearly three orders of magnitudes in time lags (from a few days
to ∼103 days). The structure functions of NLS1- and BLS1-type AGNs show remarkably
similar proﬁles on time lags ≳10 days, with the former having smaller amplitude at a
given time lag. The structure function can be approximated by either a power law or an
exponential function, though the latter seems to give a better description for NLS1-type
AGNs. On time scales of ≲10 days, the variability amplitudes of BLS1-type AGNs remain
somewhat higher than those extrapolated from the power law structure function, indicating
the presence of some excess variations. However, this is not the case for NLS1s. We suggest
this excess variation component to be likely arising from reprocessing of the X-rays, which
might be more important in BLS1- than in NLS1-type AGNs.
In conclusion, NLS1- and BLS1-type AGNs share very similar properties of long-term
optical/UV variability in many ways, such as the wavelength and time lag dependence of
variability. This suggests that most likely the same physical mechanisms are at work to
produce the long-term optical/UV variability in both types, in spite of the possibly diﬀerent
modes of their accretion ﬂows. Future photometric monitoring programs for larger samples
of AGN spanning wide parameter ranges, with a large dynamic range of sampling rate, are
needed to address the questions related to the optical/UV variability, such as the behavior

– 25 –
at time lags less than a week and the characteristic variability timescales.
This work is supported by NSFC grants 11033007, 11103071, the National Basic
Research Program of (973 Program) 2009CB824800, 2007CB815405. Funding for the
SDSS and SDSS-II was provided by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the Participating
Institutions, the National Science Foundation, the U.S. Department of Energy, the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Japanese Monbukagakusho, the Max Planck
Society, and the Higher Education Funding Council for England. The SDSS Web Site is
http://www.sdss.org/. Yanli Ai acknowledges the support from the LAMOST Postdoctoral
Fellowship Program.

– 26 –
