Feature Level Fusion of Biometrics Cues: Human 
Identification with Doddington’s Caricature 
Dakshina Ranjan Kisku1, Phalguni Gupta2, Jamuna Kanta Sing3 
 
1 Department of Computer Science and Engineering,  
Dr. B. C. Roy Engineering College, Durgapur – 713206, India 
2 Department of Computer Science and Engineering,  
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur – 208016, India 
3 Department of Computer Science and Engineering,  
Jadavpur University, Kolkata – 700032, India 

Abstract. This paper presents a multimodal biometric system of fingerprint and 
ear biometrics. Scale Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT) descriptor based 
feature sets extracted from fingerprint and ear are fused. The fused set is 
encoded by K-medoids partitioning approach with less number of feature points 
in the set. K-medoids partition the whole dataset into clusters to minimize the 
error between data points belonging to the clusters and its center. Reduced 
feature set is used to match between two biometric sets. Matching scores are 
generated using wolf-lamb user-dependent feature weighting scheme introduced 
by Doddington. The technique is tested to exhibit its robust performance.  
Keywords: Multimodal Biometrics, Fingerprint, Ear, SIFT Features, K-
Medoids, Doddington’s Concept 
1   Introduction 
The multimodal biometric systems [1] are found to be extremely useful and exhibit 
robust performance over the unimodal biometric systems in terms of several 
constraints. The aim of any multimodal system [1] is to acquire multiple sources of 
information from different modalities and minimize the error prone effect of 
monomodal systems. The focus to multimodal systems is the fusion of various 
biometric modality data at the various information fusion levels [2] such as sensor, 
feature extraction, matching score, rank or decision levels. In [1], [9] there exist 
multimodal biometrics systems based on face and fingerprint, face and voice, 
signature and voice,  face and ear. However, the existence of any system through 
fusion of fingerprint [4] and ear [3] biometrics at feature extraction level is not known 
to the authors. Since, the fingerprint biometrics is widely used and the accuracy level 
of fingerprint system is high as compared to other biometric traits. Again, ear 
biometric is robust and effective to biometric applications. Further, ears [3] have 
several advantages over facial features such as uniform distributions of intensity and 
spatial resolution, and less variability with expressions and orientation of the face [5]. 

Unlike face recognition [5] with changing lightning and different pose of head 
positions, ear shape does not change over time and ageing. Further low effect of 
lighting conditions and spatial distribution of pixels has made ear biometrics an 
emerging authentication system. Fingerprints are established themselves as widely 
used and efficient biometric traits for verifying individuals. Design of a reliable 
fingerprint verification system depends on underlying constraints such as 
representation of fingerprint patterns, sensing fingerprints and matching algorithms.  
This paper presents a robust feature level fusion technique of fingerprint [4] and 
ear [3] biometrics. It uses Scale Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT) descriptor [6] to 
obtain features from the normalized fingerprint and ear. These features are fused to 
get one feature vector. To obtain the more discriminative reduced set of feature 
vector, PAM (Partitioning About Medoids) characterized K-medoids clustering 
approach [7] is applied to the concatenated feature set. Matching scores between 
features of database set and that of query set are obtained by K-nearest neighbor 
approach [6] and Euclidean distance metric [2]. The relevance of individual matchers 
towards more efficient and robust performance is determined by wolf and lamb 
factors as discussed in [8]. Both these factors can decrease the performance of any 
biometric system by accepting more and more imposters as false accept. This paper 
extends the notions of Doddington's weighting scheme [8] in the proposed feature 
level fusion by adaptive user weighting process. The performance of feature level 
fusion has been determined on a multimodal database containing fingerprint and ear 
images. The results show significant improvements over the individual matching 
performance of fingerprint and ear biometrics as well as an existing feature level 
fusion scheme [2] which have used SIFT as feature descriptor. 
Next section introduces SIFT descriptor for feature extraction. Extraction of SIFT 
features from fingerprint and ear images and fusion by concatenation of extracted 
SIFT features is presented in Section 3. In Section 4, PAM characterized K-medoids 
clustering approach is applied to the concatenated feature set to handle the curse of 
dimensionality. A matching score generation technique using reduced features sets 
obtained from gallery and probe samples is also described in this section. User-
dependent matcher weighting scheme using Doddington’s method with adaptive 
approach has been applied to the proposed feature level fusion in Section 5. Results 
have been analyzed in Section 6 and finally, concluding remarks are made in the last 
section. 
2   Description of SIFT Features       
SIFT descriptor [2], [6] has been successfully used for general object detection and 
matching. SIFT operator can be able to detect stable and invariant feature points in 
images. It is invariant to image rotation, scaling, partly illumination changes, and 3D 
projective transform. SIFT descriptor detects feature points efficiently through a 
staged filtering approach that identifies stable points in the Gaussian scale-space. This 
is achieved by four steps: (i) selection of candidates for feature points by searching 
peaks in the scale- space from a difference of Gaussian (DoG) function, (ii) 
localization of these points by using the measurement of their stability, (iii) 

assignment of orientations based on local image properties, and finally, (iv) 
calculation of the feature descriptors which represent local shape distortions and 
illumination changes. These steps can determine candidate locations and a detailed 
fitting is performed to the nearby data for the candidate location, edge response and 
peak magnitude. To achieve invariance to image rotation, a consistent orientation is 
assigned to each feature point based on local image properties. Histogram of 
orientations is formed from the gradient orientation at all sample points within a 
circular window of a feature point. Peaks in this histogram correspond to the 
dominant directions of each feature point. For illumination invariance, 8 orientation 
planes are defined. Finally, the gradient magnitude and the orientation are 
smoothened by applying a Gaussian filter and then sampled over a 4×4 grid with 8 
orientation planes. 
Each feature point [6] contains four types of information – spatial location (x, y), 
scale (s), orientation (θ) and keypoint descriptor (k). All these feature information are 
used. More formally, local image gradients are measured at the selected scale in the 
region around each keypoint. The measured gradients’ information is then 
transformed into a vector representation that contains a vector of 128 elements for 
each keypoints calculated over extracted keypoints. These keypoint descriptor vectors 
represent local shape distortions and illumination changes. 
3   Feature Extraction and Feature Level Fusion 
3.1   Preprocessing and SIFT Feature Extraction 
For fingerprint verification [4], three types of features are used: (i) global ridge and 
furrow structure forming a special pattern in the central region of the fingerprint, (ii) 
minutiae details associated with local ridge and furrow structure and (iii) correlation. 
However, minutiae based fingerprint systems [4] show higher accuracy as compared 
to other two types of systems. Local texture around minutiae points is more desirable 
and useful for good accuracy rather than the whole fingerprint image since global 
texture is sensitive to non-linear and non-repeatable deformation of such images. 
In the proposed method, SIFT features are extracted from the whole fingerprint 
image. On the other hand, ear biometric [3] has been newly introduced for identity 
verification and it is considered as one of the most reliable and invariant biometrics 
characteristics. SIFT descriptor is used to detect stable invariant points for general 
object recognition and it does not require generally any image to be preprocessed. 
However, in the proposed work, few preprocessing operations are performed on ear 
image to obtain better accuracy. In the first step, localization of ear image is done by 
detecting manually two points on ear image viz. Triangular Fossa and Antitragus [9]. 
Localization technique proposed in [9] has been used in this paper. In the next step 
fingerprint and ear images are normalized having adjustable gray level distribution. 
To make uniform distribution of gray levels, image intensity is measured in the 
central area and the distribution is adjusted accordingly. This is performed using 
adaptive histogram equalization technique. The proposed work uses the whole ear 

image for SIFT features extraction by making indifference it with the fingerprint 
texture. The use of SIFT descriptor not only increases the number of invariant SIFT 
points while feature extraction, but also increases the reliability of system by 
accumulating large number of points. Extraction of SIFT feature points can be 
controlled by local minima or maxima in a Gaussian scale space. The feature numbers 
can also be controlled by a set of parameters such as octaves and scales.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
         (a) Minutiae Points                                    (b) SIFT Feature Points 
Fig. 2. Minutiae and SIFT Feature Points of a Fingerprint. 
A fingerprint may contain thousand SIFT features. Figure 2 shows a typical 
fingerprint image from where 30 minutiae points and 2449 SIFT feature points have 
been detected. The number of SIFT feature points obtained from an ear may vary 
from hundreds to few thousands. An ear image is shown in Figure 3 from where 1154 
SIFT feature points are extracted.  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
              
 
 
 
                    (a) Ear image           (b) Detection of SIFT points   (c) SIFT points extraction 
Fig. 3. SIFT Feature Points of an Ear Image 
3.2   Feature Level Fusion of SIFT Keypoints 
Concatenation technique [2] is used to fuse SIFT features extracted from fingerprint 
and ear at the feature extraction level. Feature level fusion is difficult to achieve in 
practice because multiple modalities may have incompatible feature [1], [2] sets and 

the correspondence among different feature spaces may be unknown. The 
concatenated feature set exhibits better discrimination capability than the individual 
feature vectors obtained from fingerprint and ear biometrics separately. 
4   Feature Reduction and Matching 
4.1   Feature reduction 
PAM (Partitioning About Medoids) characterized K-medoids partitioning algorithm 
[7] is applied to the concatenated features set to obtain the reduced set of features 
which can provide more discriminative and meaningful reduced set of features. This 
clustering algorithm is an adaptive version of K-means clustering approach. It is used 
to partition dataset into some groups and minimizes the squared error between the 
points that belong to a cluster and a point designated as the center of the cluster. K-
medoids chooses data points as cluster centers (also called ‘medoids’). K-medoids 
clusters the dataset of n objects into k clusters. It is more robust to noise and outliers 
as compared to K-means clustering algorithm [7]. In the proposed method, K-medoids 
clustering algorithm is applied to the SIFT points set, which is formed by 
concatenation of SIFT features extracted from fingerprint and ear images. The 
redundant features are removed using K-medoids clustering technique and choosing 
the most proximate features as the representative of the set of similar features. A 
medoid can be defined as the object of a cluster, which means dissimilarity to all the 
objects in the cluster is minimal. The most generalization of K-medoids algorithm is 
the Partitioning Around Medoids (PAM) algorithm which can be given below.  
 
Step 1: Randomly select k number of points from the concatenated SIFT points set 
as the medoids. 
Step 2: Assign each SIFT feature point to the closest medoid and the closest 
medoid can be defined using a distance metric (Euclidean distance metric).  
Step 3: for each medoid i, i = 1, 2…k 
 
       for each non-medoid SIFT point j 
swap i and j and compute the total cost of the configuration   
Step 4: Select the configuration with the lowest cost  
 Step 5: Repeat Step 1 to Step 5 until there is no change in the medoid. 
4.2   Matching 
The optimal features are matched using the K-nearest neighbor approach [6] by 
computing distances from the optimal feature vector obtained from probe samples to 
all stored optimal features which are obtained from gallery sample and k – closest 
samples are selected. In the proposed experiment, by using K-NN, a set of best 
matched features are selected. This computation is made using spatial location (x, y), 
scale (s), orientation (θ) and keypoint descriptor (k) information of SIFT descriptor. 

Euclidean distance is used for distance computation. The number of best matched 
features denotes the matching score for a particular fingerprint-ear pair sample. The 
matching scores are normalized in the range [0-1] [1], [8]. 
5   Adaptive Weighting using Doddington’s Approach    
Reliability of each fused matching score can be increased by applying the proposed 
adaptive Doddington’s user-dependent user weighting scheme [8]. In order to 
decrease the number of false accepts in the proposed system, we extend the notion 
used for weighting the matchers by wolf-lamb concept introduced by Doddington. 
The authors in [8] have also used the Doddington’s concept for user weighting by 
weights the matchers in the fused biometric system. In the proposed system, we have 
computed the adaptive weights by making tan-hyperbolic weight for each matcher by 
assigning weights to individual matching scores. The proposed adaptive weighting 
scheme decreases the effect of imposter users rapidly while it is compared with the 
method discussed in [8]. The modified Doddington’s scheme is described as follows.  
Let the user-dependent fused match score for user p can be calculated as 
∑
=
∀
=
MS
ms
ms
p
ms
p
p
p
n
w
fs
1
,
 
(1)  
where MS denotes the total number of matching scores obtained from matching of 
probe and gallery samples and 
ms
p
w
represents the weight that can be assigned to the 
matching score 
ms
p
n
for user p. It is assumed that the fused scores carry the wolf-lamb 
properties together which are not easy to determine separately. Assumptions have 
been made by Doddington’s [8] that the users who are labeled as lambs can be 
imitated easily and wolves can imitate other users. Lambs and wolves – these two 
constraints can lead to false accepts while they degrade the performance of biometric 
systems. After computing weight 
ms
p
w
 for each matcher, we extend the notions for 
each weight to make it adaptive one. The adaptive weight notion can be obtained by 
taking tan-hyperbolic of computed weights. The range of 
ms
p
w
weight must be [0,1] 
and the sum of all weights should be 1. The objective of this adaptive weighting 
scheme is to reduce the lambness of matchers while feature level fusion of two or 
more biometric traits is formulated. The adaptive weight notation has been established 
by extending the usual notions used by [8] and by adopting the robust statistics 
method [8] as follows. 
)
tanh(
)
'
,...,
'
,...,
'
,
'
(
2
1
ms
p
MS
p
ms
p
p
p
w
w
w
w
w
W
=
 
(2) 
Now the Equation (1) can be re-written using Equation (2) as 

5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0.92
0.93
0.94
0.95
0.96
0.97
0.98
0.99
1
<--- Rank (k) --->
< ---Identifica tio n Pro ba bility  (C M C )--->
Cumulative Match Characteristics Curve
 
 
Ear Identification
Feature Level Multimodal Identification
Fingerprint Identification
    
∑
=
∀
=
MS
ms
ms
p
ms
p
p
p
n
w
fs
1
,
'
 
(3) 
6   Experimental Results 
The proposed technique is tested on IIT Kanpur multimodal database consisting of 
fingerprint and ear images acquired from 1550 subjects and each subject has provided 
2 fingerprints and 2 ear images. Fingerprint images are acquired using an optical 
sensor at 500 dpi and the ear images are obtained using a high resolution digital 
camera. After normalization of fingerprint and ear images, fingerprint images are 
downscaled to 200×200 pixels. This high resolution to fingerprint image may increase 
the number of SIFT features. On the other hand, the ear images are taken under 
controlled environment in different sessions. The ear viewpoints are consistently kept 
neutral and the ear images are downscaled to 200×140 pixels. The following protocol 
has been established for multimodal evaluation and testing. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4. Cumulative Match Characteristics Curves 
 
Training: One image per person from each modality i.e., fingerprint and ear is 
used enrollment in gallery database and which are further used for feature extraction 
and feature level fusion. Fused feature vector is then encoded and is saved as gallery 
vector and is used for identification and verification.  
Testing: Pair of fingerprint and ear images is used for testing. Imposter matching 
scores are generated by validating and testing the first client against itself and also 
against the remaining subjects. Fused feature vector is generated from a pair of 
fingerprint and ear images and is compared with the gallery feature vectors. 
Rank based method is adopted for exhibit the overall performance of the proposed 
feature level fusion. Matching is performed between a probe fused vector with itself 

encoded in the database and also with the rest of the encoded fused vectors in the 
database. The proposed multimodal system is able to identify the specific person from 
the entire database and ranks are found in terms matching probability obtained. The 
subjects are retrieved from database according to matching scores. The identification 
rate for the proposed system is obtained as 98.71% while that for fingerprint and ear 
biometrics are found to be 95.02% and 93.63% respectively, as shown in Figure 4.      
7   Conclusion 
This paper has presented a feature level fusion technique of fingerprint and ear 
biometrics for human identification. The technique has used SIFT descriptor for 
invariant features extraction from fingerprint and ear modalities and PAM 
characterized K-medoids algorithm for feature reduction. The reduced feature set 
reflects higher matching proximity with relevant information. Doddington’s user-
dependent weighting scheme has been adopted by extending the existing notions 
using adaptive weighting applied to the matching scores. The performance of the 
technique has been determined on a multimodal database containing fingerprint and 
ear images. The results show significant improvements on identification performance 
over the fingerprint and ear biometrics as well as the existing feature level fusion 
scheme [2] which have used SIFT as feature descriptor. The technique not only 
attains higher accuracy, but also reflects robustness towards identification of 
individuals.
