1
A Diffusion and Clustering-based Approach for
Finding Coherent Motions and Understanding
Crowd Scenes
Weiyao Lin, Yang Mi, Weiyue Wang, Jianxin Wu, Jingdong Wang, and Tao Mei
Abstract—This paper addresses the problem of detecting co-
herent motions in crowd scenes and presents its two applications
in crowd scene understanding: semantic region detection and
recurrent activity mining. It processes input motion ﬁelds (e.g.,
optical ﬂow ﬁelds) and produces a coherent motion ﬁled, named
as thermal energy ﬁeld. The thermal energy ﬁeld is able to
capture both motion correlation among particles and the motion
trends of individual particles which are helpful to discover co-
herency among them. We further introduce a two-step clustering
process to construct stable semantic regions from the extracted
time-varying coherent motions. These semantic regions can be
used to recognize pre-deﬁned activities in crowd scenes. Finally,
we introduce a cluster-and-merge process which automatically
discovers recurrent activities in crowd scenes by clustering and
merging the extracted coherent motions. Experiments on various
videos demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.
Index Terms—Coherent Motion Detection, Semantic Region
Construction, Recurrent Activity Mining
I. INTRODUCTION
Coherent motions, which represent coherent movements
of massive individual particles, are pervasive in natural and
social scenarios. Examples include trafﬁc ﬂows and parades
of people (cf. Figs 1a and 2a). Since coherent motions can
effectively decompose scenes into meaningful semantic parts
and facilitate the analysis of complex crowd scenes, they are
of increasing importance in crowd-scene understanding and
activity recognition [2], [3], [4], [5], [6].
In this paper, we address the problem of detecting coherent
motions in crowd scenes, and subsequently using them to
understand input scenes. More speciﬁcally, we focus on 1)
constructing an accurate coherent motion ﬁeld to ﬁnd coherent
motions, 2) ﬁnding stable semantic regions based on the
detected coherent motions and using them to recognize pre-
deﬁned activities (i.e., activities with labeled training data) in
a crowd scene, and 3) automatically mining recurrent activities
This paper is supported in part by the following grants: Chinese National
973 Grants (2013CB329603), National Science Foundation of China (No.
61471235, 61422203, 61425011, 61527804), and Microsoft Research Asia
Collaborative Research Award. The basic idea of this paper appeared in
our conference version [1]. In this version, we propose a new cluster-and-
merge process to mine recurrent activities in crowd scenes, carry out detailed
analysis, and present more performance results.
W. Lin, Y. Mi and W. Wang are with the Department of Electronic Engi-

J. Wu is with the National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,

(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 1.
(a) Example frame of a Marathon video sequence, the red curve is
the coherent motion region; (b) Input motion vector ﬁeld of (a); (c) Coherent
motion ﬁeld from (b) using the proposed approach (Best viewed in color).
in a crowd scene based on the detected coherent motions and
semantic regions.
First, constructing an accurate coherent motion ﬁeld is
crucial in detecting reliable coherent motions. In Fig. 1, (b)
is the input motion ﬁeld and (c) is the coherent motion ﬁeld
which is constructed from (b) using the proposed approach.
In (b), the motion vectors of particles at the beginning of the
Marathon queue are far different from those at the end, and
there are many inaccurate optical ﬂow vectors. Due to such
variations and input errors, it is difﬁcult to achieve satisfying
coherent motion detection results directly from (b). However,
by transferring (b) into a coherent motion ﬁeld where the
coherent motions among particles are suitably highlighted
in (c), coherent motion detection is greatly facilitated. Al-
though many algorithms have been proposed for coherent
motion detection [7], [8], [9], [2], this problem is not yet
effectively addressed. We argue that a good coherent motion
ﬁeld should effectively be able to 1) encode motion correlation
among particles, such that particles with high correlations can
be grouped into the same coherent region; and, 2) maintain
motion information of individual particles, such that activities
in crowd scenes can be effectively parsed by the extracted
coherent motion ﬁeld. Based on these intuitions, we propose a
thermal-diffusion-based approach, which can extract accurate
coherent motion ﬁelds.
Second, constructing meaningful semantic regions to de-
scribe activity patterns in a scene is also essential. Coherent
motions at different times may vary widely. In Fig. 2a, chang-
ing of trafﬁc lights will lead to different coherent motions.
Coherent motions alone may not effectively describe the
overall semantic patterns in a scene either. Therefore, semantic
regions need to be extracted from these time-varying coherent
arXiv:1602.04921v1  [cs.CV]  16 Feb 2016

2
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.
(a) Example time-varying coherent motions in a scene, where
different coherent motions are circled by curves with different color; (b)
Constructed semantic regions for the scene in (a); (c) Recurrent activities
for the scene in (a), where the arrows represent the major motion ﬂows in
each recurrent activity (Best viewed in color).
motions to achieve stable and meaningful semantic patterns,
as in Fig. 2b. However, most existing works only focus on
the detection of coherent motions at some speciﬁc time, while
the problem of handling time-varying coherent motions is less
studied. We proposed a two-step clustering process for this
purpose.
Third, mining recurrent activities is another important issue.
Many crowd scenes are composed of recurrent activities [10],
[11], [12]. For example, the scene in Fig. 2 is composed
of recurrent activities including vertical motion activities and
horizontal motion activities, as in Fig. 2c. Automatically
mining these recurrent activities is important in understanding
scene contents and their dynamics. Although many researches
have been done for parsing recurrent activities in low-crowd
scenes [13], [14], [15], [16], this issue is not well addressed in
crowd scene scenarios where reliable motion trajectories are
unavailable. We proposed a cluster-and-merge process, which
can effectively extract recurrent activities in crowd scenes.
Our contributions to crowd scene understanding and activity
recognition are summarized as follows.
1) We introduce a coarse-to-ﬁne thermal diffusion process
to transfer an input motion ﬁeld into a thermal energy
ﬁeld (TEF), which is a more accurate coherent motion
ﬁeld. TEF effectively encodes both motion correlation
among particles and motion trends of individual par-
ticles. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work that
introduces thermal diffusion to detect coherent motions
in crowd scenes. We also introduce a triangulation-
based scheme to effectively identify coherent motion
components from the TEF.
2) We present a two-step clustering scheme to ﬁnd semantic
regions according to the correlations among coherent
motions. The found semantic regions can effectively
catch activity patterns in a scene. Thus good perfor-
mance can be achieved when recognizing pre-deﬁned
crowd activities based on these semantic regions.
3) We propose a cluster-and-merge process to automatically
mine recurrent activities by clustering and merging the
coherent motions. The obtained recurrent activities can
accurately describe recurrent motion patterns in a crowd
scene.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section II reviews related works. Section III describes the
framework of the proposed approach. Sections IV to VI
describe the details of our proposed thermal diffusion process,
triangulation scheme, two-step clustering scheme, and cluster-
and-merge process. Section VII shows the experimental results
and Section VIII concludes the paper.
II. RELATED WORKS
Many works [17], [7], [8], [9], [2], [18], [19], [20], [21],
[22] have been proposed on coherent motion detection. Due to
the complex nature of crowd scenes, they are not yet mature
for accurate detection of coherent motion ﬁelds. Cremers and
Soatto [20] and Brox et al. [21] model the intensity varia-
tion of optical ﬂow by an objective functional minimization
scheme. These methods are only suitable for motions with
simple patterns and cannot effectively analyze complex crowd
patterns such as the circular ﬂow in Fig. 1a. Other works
introduce external spatial-temporal correlation traits to model
the motion coherency among particles [7], [8], [9]. Since these
methods model particle correlations in more precise ways,
they can achieve more satisfying results. However, most of
these methods only consider short-distance particle motion
correlation within a local region while neglecting long-distance
correlation among distant particles, they have limitations in
handling low-density or disconnected coherent motions where
the long-distance correlation is essential. Furthermore, without
the information from distant particles, these methods are
also less effective in identifying coherent motion regions in
the case when local coherent motion patterns are close to
their neighboring backgrounds. One example of this kind of
scenario is showcased in the region B in Fig. 1b.
There are also other works related to motion modeling.
One line of related works is advanced optical ﬂow estimation.
These methods try to improve the estimation accuracy of
the input motion ﬁeld by including global constraints over
particles [23], [24], [25], [26]. The focus of our approach is
different from these methods. We focus on enhancing the cor-
relation among coherent particles to facilitate coherent motion
detection. Thus, the motion vectors of coherent particles are
enhanced even if their actual motions are small, such as the
region B in Figs 1b and 1c. In contrast, advanced optical ﬂow
estimation methods focus on estimating the actual motion of
particles. They are still less capable of creating precise results
when applied to coherent motion detection.
The anisotropic diffusion based methods, used in image
segmentation, is also related to our work [27], [28], [29].
Our approach differs from these methods. First, our approach
not only embeds the motion correlation among particles, but
also suitably maintains the original motion information from
the input motion vector ﬁeld. Comparatively, the anisotropic-
diffusion-based methods are more focused on enhancing the
correlation among particles while neglecting the particles’
original information. As aforementioned, maintaining particle
motion information is important in parsing crowd scenes. More
importantly, due to the complex nature of crowd scenes, many
coherent region boundaries are vague, subtle and unrecog-
nizable. Simply applying the anisotropic-diffusion methods
cannot identify the ideal boundaries. The proposed thermal
diffusion process can achieve more satisfying results by mod-

3
eling the motion direction, strength, and spatial correlation
among particles.
Besides coherent motion detection, it is also important to
utilize coherent motions to recognize pre-deﬁned crowd activi-
ties. However, most existing coherent motion works only focus
on the extraction of coherent motions while the recognition
of crowd activities is much less studied. In [17], Ali and
Shah detected instability regions in a scene by comparing with
its normal coherent motions. However, they assume coherent
motions to be stable, while in practice, many coherent motions
may vary widely over time, making it difﬁcult to construct
stable normal coherent motions. Furthermore, besides the
works on coherent motion, there are also other works which
directly extract global features from the entire scene to rec-
ognize crowd activities [3], [30]. However, since they do not
consider the semantic region correlations inside the scene, they
have limitations in differentiating subtle differences among
activities. Although there are some works [4], [31] which
recognize crowd activities by segmenting scenes into semantic
regions, our approach differs from them. Our approach ﬁnds
the semantic regions by ﬁrst extracting global coherent motion
information, while these methods construct semantic regions
from the particles’ local features. As will be shown later,
information from the coherent motions can effectively enhance
the correlation among particles, resulting in more meaningful
semantic regions to facilitate activity recognition.
Furthermore, pre-deﬁning or labeling crowd activities re-
quires lots of human labors, making it desirable to automat-
ically discover activity patterns in a crowd video without
human intervention. In [15], Morris and Trivedi clustered
trajectories into groups and modeled the spatio-temporal dy-
namic patterns of each trajectory group by Hidden Markov
Models. Wang et al. [13] and Hu et al. [14] further introduced
Dirichlet processes to model the activity patterns of differ-
ent trajectory groups. However, since these methods extract
recurrent activities from motion trajectories, they are not
suitable for crowd scene scenarios where reliable trajectories
are difﬁcult to achieve. Besides using motion trajectories, other
researches tried to ﬁnd recurrent activities by extracting low-
level or short-term motion features. For example, Zhou et
al. [12] extracted fragments of trajectories (called tracklets)
and utilized a Latent Dirichlet Allocation topic model to infer
recurrent activities. Jagannadan et al. [11] and Emonet et al.
[10] extracted low-level motion ﬂows as motion descriptors
and introduced a Probabilistic Latent Sequential Motif (PLSM)
model to achieve recurrent activities. Although these methods
can be applied in crowd scenes, they still have limitations
in obtaining precise recurrent activity patterns under scenes
with complex motions. Our approach differs from the previous
methods in that 1) Our approach utilizes coherent motions
to discover recurrent activities. Since coherent motions can
effectively catch the local activity pattern in each frame, more
precise recurrent activities can be achieved by our approach,
2) Our approach also extracts ﬂow curves to describe and
visualize recurrent activities. Compared with the previous
methods which described recurrent activities by trajectory
clusters or probability densities, the ﬂow curves derived by our
approach can visualize recurrent activity patterns in a clearer
and more straightforward way.
III. OVERVIEW OF THE APPROACH
The framework of the proposed approach is shown in Fig. 3.
The optical ﬂow ﬁelds [17], [32] are ﬁrst extracted from input
videos. Secondly, the coarse-to-ﬁne thermal diffusion process
is applied to transfer the input motion ﬁelds into coherent
motion ﬁelds, i.e., thermal energy ﬁelds (TEFs). Thirdly, the
triangulation-based scheme is applied to identify coherent
motions. Fourthly, with the obtained coherent motions, the
two-step clustering scheme is performed to cluster coherent
motions from multiple TEFs and construct semantic regions
for the target scene. Finally, based on these semantic regions,
we can extract effective features to describe crowd activities in
the scene and recognize pre-deﬁned crowd activities accord-
ingly. At the same time, the cluster-and-merge process is also
applied based on the extracted coherent motions and semantic
regions to discover recurrent activities in the target scene.
These proposed techniques are described in the following
sections in detail.
IV. FINDING COHERENT MOTIONS
In order to ﬁnd accurate coherent motions, it is important
to construct a coherent motion ﬁeld to highlight the motion
correlation among particles while still maintaining the original
motion information. To achieve this requirement, we introduce
a thermal diffusion process to model particle correlations.
Given an input optical ﬂow ﬁeld, we view each particle (i.e.,
each pixel in a frame) as a “heat source” and it can diffuse
energies to inﬂuence other particles. By suitably modeling this
thermal diffusion process, precise correlation among particles
can be achieved. The formulation is motivated by the following
intuitions:
1) Particles farther from heat source should achieve fewer
thermal energies;
2) Particles residing in the motion direction of the heat
source particle should receive more thermal energies;
3) Heat source particles with larger motions should carry
more thermal energies.
A. Thermal Diffusion Process
Based on the above discussions, we borrow the idea from
physical thermal propagation [33] and model the thermal
diffusion process by Eq. 1:
∂EP,l
∂l
= k2
p
∂2EP,l
∂x2
+ ∂2EP,l
∂y2

+ FP
(1)
where EP,l = [Ex
P,l, Ey
P,l] is the thermal energy for the
particle at location P = (px, py) after performing thermal
diffusion for l seconds, FP = [f x
P, f y
P] is the input motion
vector for particle P, kp is the propagation coefﬁcient.
The ﬁrst term in Eq. 1 models the propagation of thermal
energies over free space such that the spatial correlation among
particles can be properly enhanced during thermal diffusion.
The second term FP can be viewed as the external force added
on the particle to affect its diffusion behavior, which preserves

4
Figure 3.
The ﬂowchart of the proposed approach (best viewed in color).
the original motion patterns. The inclusion of this term is one
of the major differences between the proposed approach and
the anisotropic-diffusion methods [29]. Without the FP term,
Eq. 1 can be solved by:
EP,l =
1
wh
X
Q∈I,Q̸=P
eP,l (Q)
(2)
where EP,l is the ﬁnal diffused thermal energy for particle P
after l seconds, I is the set of all particles in the frame, w and
h are width and height of the frame. The individual thermal
energy eP,l (Q) = [ex
P,l (Q) , ey
P,l (Q)] is diffused from the heat
source particle Q = (qx, qy) to particle P after l seconds,
deﬁned as:
eγ
P,l (Q) = uγ
Q · e
−kp
l
||P−Q||2
(3)
where γ ∈{x, y}, UQ = (ux
Q, uy
Q) is the current motion
pattern for the heat source particle Q and it is initialized by
UQ = FQ, ||P −Q|| is the distance between particles P and
Q. In this paper, we ﬁx l to be 1 to eliminate its effect.
However, when F in Eq. 1 is non-zero, it is difﬁcult to get
the exact solution for Eq. 1. So we introduce an additional term
e−kf |FQ·(P−Q)| to approximate the inﬂuence of FQ where kf
is a force propagation factor. Moreover, in order to prevent
unrelated particles from accepting too much heat from Q,
we restrict that only highly correlated particles will propagate
energies to each other. The ﬁnal individual thermal energy
from Q to P is:
eγ
P,l (Q) = uγ
Q × e−kp||P−Q||2 × e−kf |FQ·(P−Q)|
(4)
if cos(FP, FQ) ≥θc and is 0 if otherwise, where FP and
FQ are the input motion vectors of the current particle P and
the heat source particle Q, and cos(FP, FQ) is the cosine
similarity, θc is a threshold. In our experiments, kp, kf, and
θc are set to be 0.2, 0.8, 0.7, which are decided from the
experimental statistics.
From Eq. 2, we see that the diffused thermal energy EP
is the summation from all other particles, which encodes the
correlation among P and all other particles in the frame.
Furthermore, in Eq. 4, the ﬁrst term preserves the motion
pattern of the heat source. The second term considers the spa-
tial correlation between source and target particles. The third
term guarantees that particles along the motion direction of
the heat source receives more thermal energies. Furthermore,
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.
(a),(b): One input optical ﬂow ﬁeld and its thermal energy ﬁeld;
(c), (d): Individual thermal diffusion result by diffusing from a single heat
source particle A and B to the entire ﬁeld.
the cosine similarity cos(FP, FQ) is introduced in Eq. 4 such
that particle P will not accept energy from Q if their input
motion vectors are far different (or less-coherent) from each
other. That is, Eq. 4 successfully satisﬁes all the intuitions.
Fig. 4 shows one example of the thermal diffusion process,
which reveals that:
1) Comparing Figs 4b and 4a, the original motion in-
formation is indeed preseved in the TEF. Moreover,
TEF further strengthens particle motion coherency by
thermal diffusion, which integrates the inﬂuence among
particles. Coherent motions become more recognizable,
thus more accurate coherent motion extraction can be
achieved.
2) From Fig. 4c, we can see that the thermal energy for
each heat source particle is propagated in a sector shape.
Particles along the motion direction of the heat source (C
and D) receive more energies than particles outside the
motion direction (such as E). In Fig. 4d, since particles
on the lower side of the heat source B have small
(cosine) motion similarities with B, they do not accept
thermal energies.
B. The Coarse-to-Fine Scheme
Although Eqs 2 and 4 can effectively strengthen the co-
herency among particles, it is based on a single input motion
ﬁeld, and only short-term motion information is considered,
which is volatile and noisy. Thus, we propose a coarse-to-
ﬁne scheme to include long-term motion information. The

5
entire coarse-to-ﬁne thermal diffusion process is described in
Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Coarse-to-Fine Thermal Diffusion Process
1: T = Tmax
2: Calculate the input motion vector ﬁeld FP(T) with T-frame
intervals
3: UP = FP(T)
4: for n = 0 to Numitr do
5:
Use Eq. 2 to create the new thermal energy ﬁeld En
P based
on FP(T) and UP
6:
Normalize the vector magnitudes in En
P
7:
UP = En
P
8:
T = T −Tstep
9:
if T > 0 then
10:
Calculate FP(T) with the new T
11:
end if
12: end for
13: Output En
P
The long-term motion vector ﬁeld with a large frame
interval Tmax is ﬁrst calculated and used to create the thermal
energy ﬁeld. Then, the TEF is iteratively updated with shorter-
term motion vector ﬁelds, i.e., FP(T) with smaller T. Figs 5a
to 5d show the TEF results after different iteration numbers.
When more iterations are performed, more motion informa-
tion with different intervals will be included in the thermal
diffusion process. Thus, more precise results can be achieved
in the TEF, as in Fig. 5d. Fig. 1c shows another TEF result
after the entire coarse-to-ﬁne thermal diffusion scheme. We
ﬁnd that:
1) TEF is an enhanced version of the input motion where
particles’ energy directions in the TEF are similar to
their original motion directions. Besides, since TEF
include both the motion correlation among particles and
the short-/long-term motion information among frames,
coherent motions are effectively strengthened and high-
lighted in TEF.
2) As mentioned, input motion vectors may be disordered,
e.g., region A in Fig 1b. However, the thermal energies
from other particles can help recognize these disordered
motion vectors and make them coherent, e.g., Fig. 1c.
3) Input motion vectors may be extremely small due to
slow motion or occlusion by other objects (region B in
Fig. 1b and region C in Fig. 5b). It is very difﬁcult
to include these particles into the coherent region by
traditional methods [17], [7], [8], [9] because they are
close to the background motion vector. However, TEF
can strengthen these small motion vectors by diffusing
thermal energies from distant particles with larger mo-
tions.
C. Finding Coherent Motions through Triangulation
Coherent motion regions can be achieved by performing
segmentation on the TEF. We propose a triangulation-based
scheme as follows:
Step 1: Triangulation. In this step, we randomly sample
particles from the entire scene and apply the triangulation
process [34] to link the sampled particles. The block labeled
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.
(a),(b): An input video frame and its input motion vector ﬁeld;
(c),(d): TEF results of Algorithm 1 after 1 and 3 iterations, respectively
(Tmax=5 and Tstep=1).
as “triangulation” in Fig. 3 shows one triangulation result,
where red dots are the sampled particles and the lines are
links created by the triangulation process [34].
Step 2: Boundary detection. We ﬁrst obtain each triangu-
lation link weight by:
ω (P, Q) = ||EP −EQ||
||P −Q||
(5)
where P and Q are two connected particles, EP and EQ
are the thermal energy vectors of P and Q in the TEF. A
large weight will be assigned if the connected particles are
from different coherent motion regions (i.e., they have different
thermal energy vectors). Thus, by thresholding on the link
weights, we can ﬁnd links crossing the boundaries. The block
labeled as “detected region boundary” in Fig. 3 shows one
boundary detection result after step 2.
Step 3: Coherent motion segmentation. Then, coherent
motions can be easily segmented and we use the watershed
algorithm [35]. The ﬁnal coherent motions are shown in the
block named “detected coherent motions” in Fig. 3.
V. CONSTRUCTING SEMANTIC REGIONS
With the extracted coherent motions, accurate motion infor-
mation in a frame can be achieved. However, since coherent
motions vary over time, it is essential to construct semantic
regions from time-varying coherent motions to catch stable
semantic patterns inside a scene. For this purpose, we propose
a two-step clustering scheme. Assuming that in total M
coherent motions (Cm, m = 1, ..., M) from N TEFs extracted
at N times, the two-step clustering scheme is:
Step 1: Cluster coherent motion regions. The similarity
between two coherent motions Cm and Ck is computed as:
SC(Cm, Ck) = #{(P, Q)|P ∈Lm, Q ∈Lk,
cos(EP, EQ) · e−kp||P−Q||2 > θbp} (6)

6
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.
(a) Step 1: Coherent regions in the three TEFs have been assigned
different cluster labels by Step 1 and are displayed in different colors); (b)
Find semantic regions by clustering the cluster label vectors of the particles
(best viewed in color).
(a)
(b)
Figure 7. (a) Directly segmenting semantic regions according to the particles’
local features. (b) Segmenting semantic regions with the guidance of coherent
motion clusters.
where #{·} is the number of elements in a set. θbp is a
threshold which is set to be the same as θc in Eq. 4 in
our experiments. Furthermore, Lm and Lk are the sets of
“indicative particles” for Cm and Ck:
Lm = {P| cos(EP, VP) > θc, P is on the boundary of Cm}
Lk = {Q| cos(EQ, VQ) > θc, Q is on the boundary of Ck} (7)
where VP = [vx
P, vy
P] is the outer normal vector at P,
i.e., perpendicular to the boundary and pointing outward the
coherent motion region, θc is the same threshold as in the
condition for Eq. 4. That is, only particles which are on the
boundaries of the coherent motion region and whose thermal
energy vectors sharply point outward the region are selected
as the indicative particles. Thus, we can avoid noisy particles
and substantially reduce the required computations.
From Eq. 6, we can see that we ﬁrst extract the indicative
particles, then only utilize those high-correlation pairs, and the
total number of such pairs are the similarity value between two
coherent motions. It should be noted that the similarity will
be calculated between any coherent motion pairs even if they
belong to different TEFs.
Then, we construct a similarity graph for the M coherent
motions, and perform clustering [36] on this similarity graph
with the optimal number of clusters being determined auto-
matically, the cluster results are grouped coherent regions.
Step 2: Cluster to ﬁnd semantic regions. Each coherent
motion is assigned a cluster label in Step 1, as illustrated in
Fig. 6a. However, due to the variation of coherent motions
at different times, there exist many ambiguous particles. For
example, in Fig. 6a, the yellow cross particle belongs to
different coherent motion clusters in different TEFs. This
makes it difﬁcult to directly use the clustered coherent motion
results to construct reliable semantic regions. In order to
address this problem, we further propose to encode particles
in each TEF by the cluster labels of the particles’ afﬁliated
coherent motions. And by concatenating the cluster labels over
different TEFs, we can construct a “cluster label” vector for
each particle, as in Fig. 6a And with these label vectors, the
same spectral clustering process as Step 1 can be performed
on the particles to achieve the ﬁnal semantic regions, as in
Fig. 6b.
Comparing with previous semantic region segmentation
methods [4], [31] which perform clustering using local simi-
larity among particles, our scheme utilizes the guidance from
the global coherent motion clustering results to strengthen
the correlations among particles. For example, in Fig. 7a,
when directly segmenting the particles by their local features,
its accuracy may be limited due to similar distances among
particles. However, by utilizing cluster labels to encode the
particles, similarities among particles can be suitably enhanced
by the global coherent cluster information, as in Fig. 7b. Thus,
more precise segmentation results can be achieved.
A. Recognizing Pre-deﬁned Activities
Based on the constructed semantic regions, we are able
to recognize pre-deﬁned activities (i.e., activities with labeled
training data) in the scene. In this paper, we simply average
the TEF vectors in each semantic region and concatenate these
averaged TEF vectors as the ﬁnal feature vector for describing
the activity patterns in a TEF. Then, a linear support vector
machine (SVM) [37] is utilized to train and recognize pre-
deﬁned activities. Experimental results show that with accurate
TEF and precise semantic regions, we can achieve satisfying
results using this simple method.
B. Merging Disconnected Coherent Motions
Since TEF also includes long-distance correlations between
distant particles, by performing our clustering scheme, we
also have the advantage of effectively merging disconnected
coherent motions, which may be caused by the occlusion
from other objects or low density of the crowd. For examples,
the two disconnected blue regions in the right-most ﬁgure in
Fig. 6a are merged into the same cluster by our approach.
Note that this issue is not well studied in the existing coherent
motion research.
VI. MINING RECURRENT ACTIVITIES
With the extracted coherent motions and constructed seman-
tic regions, crowd activities can be recognized by constructing
and pre-labeling training data, as in Section V-A. However,
since pre-deﬁning or labeling crowd activities take lots of hu-
man labors, it is also desirable to automatically mine recurrent
activity patterns in a crowd scene without human intervention.
For this purpose, we propose a cluster-and-marge process
which includes three steps: frame-level clustering, coherent
motion merging, and ﬂow curve extraction.

7
Figure 8.
Example of matched and unmatched coherent motion region sets
(best viewed in color).
A. Frame-level Clustering
The frame-level clustering step clusters frames according
to the extracted coherent motions and semantic regions, such
that frames with the same recurrent activity pattern can be
organized into the same group. In this paper, we ﬁrst calculate
inter-frame similarities for all frame pairs and then utilize
spectral clustering [36] to cluster frames according to these
inter-frame similarities.
In order to calculate the inter-frame similarity between
frames t and t−τ, the similarities between all coherent motions
from frames t and t−τ are ﬁrst calculated using Eq. 6. Then,
the inter-frame similarity SF (t, t −τ) can be achieved from
these coherent motion similarities and the segmented semantic
regions. More speciﬁcally, we deﬁne SF (t, t −τ) as
SF (t, t −τ) = SF U (t, t −τ) · SF M (t, t −τ)
(8)
where SF M (t, t −τ) is the similarity for the matched co-
herent motion pairs between t and t −τ, SF U (t, t −τ) is
the similarity for the unmatched coherent motion regions in
frames t and t −τ. SF M (t, t −τ) and SF U (t, t −τ) can be
calculated by Eqs 9 and 10.
First, SF M (t, t −τ) is deﬁned as
SF M (t, t −τ) =
P
(Ct,i,Ct−τ,j)∈Ht,t−τ
λi,jSC (Ct,i, Ct−τ,j)
max{nt, nt−τ}
(9)
where SC (Ct,i, Ct−τ,j) is the similarity between coherent
motion regions Ct,i and Ct−τ,j, λi,j is the corresponding
weight. nt and nt−τ are the total number of coherent motion
regions in frames t and t−τ, respectively. Ht,t−τ is the set of
all matched coherent region pairs. In this paper, Ht,t−τ and
λi,j are calculated by the Hungarian algorithm [38] which
can achieve optimal coherent motion matching results based
on the input coherent motion similarities. Furthermore, in
order to exclude dissimilar coherent motion pairs from the
matching result, coherent motion pairs (Ct,i, Ct−τ,j) with
small similarity values SC (Ct,i, Ct−τ,j) will be deleted from
Ht,t−τ. Fig. 8 shows an example of the matched coherent
motion pairs.
The next term SF U (t, t −τ) is deﬁned as
SF U (t, t −τ) =
Y
Ct−τ,j∈Dt−τ
ε (Ct−τ,j) ·
Y
Ct,i∈Dt
ε (Ct,i)
(10)
Figure 9.
Motion ﬂows for two recurrent activities displayed over semantic
regions.
where Dt−τ and Dt are the sets of unmatched coherent
regions in frames t −τ and t, as shown in Fig. 8. ε (C) is the
unmatching cost for coherent motion region C:
ε (C) =
P
Rk,Rk∩C̸=∅
1
ρ (Rk)
#{Rk|Rk ∩C ̸= ∅}
(11)
where Rk is the k-th semantic region of the scene, the term
#{Rk|Rk ∩C ̸= ∅} represents the total number of semantic
regions that have overlap with the coherent motion region C.
ρ (Rk) is the importance cost measuring whether semantic
region Rk is important in distinguishing different recurrent
activities. For example, assuming that a scene includes two
recurrent activities, as in Fig. 9, it is obvious that the semantic
region R2 on the right should have larger importance cost
since the two recurrent activity patterns have different motion
ﬂows in R2. Comparatively, the semantic region R1 on the
left should have smaller importance cost since both recurrent
activity patterns have similar ﬂows in R1. Therefore, when
calculating the similarity between frames t and t −τ, if
there exists an unmatched coherent region C in R2, a large
importance cost ρ (R2) will be applied to reduce the inter-
frame similarity, indicating that frames t and t −τ have
different recurrent activity patterns. On the contrary, if there
exists an unmatched coherent region C in R1, the inter-frame
similarity will be less affected since a coherent region in R1 is
less indicative of the differences between recurrent activities.
For ρ (Rk), we ﬁrst perform a pre-clustering according to
the matched coherent motion similarities SF M (t, t −τ) which
roughly clusters frames into different recurrent activity groups.
Then a vector is constructed for each semantic region Rk:
[NumRk,G1, NumRk,G2, ..., NumRk,GZ] where NumRk,Gi
is the total number of coherent motions located in Rk in
the i-th pre-clustered recurrent activity group Gi, Z is the
total number of pre-clustered recurrent activity groups. Finally,
ρ (Rk) can be calculated by:
ρ (Rk) = eks·var{NumRk,G1,NumRk,G2,...,NumRk,GZ}
(12)
where var{·} is the variance operation, ks =
1
Numf 2 where
Numf is the total number of frames to be clustered. Accord-
ing to Eq. 12, if coherent motions appear evenly in Rk for
different recurrent activities, i.e., the variance is smaller, it
implies that Rk is less important in distinguishing different
recurrent activities. On the contrary, if the appearance time
of coherent motions in Rk has larger variation over different
pre-clustered recurrent activity groups, a large ρ (Rk) will
be achieved to increase the importance of Rk. The complete
process of frame-level clustering is illustrated in Algorithm 2.

8
Algorithm 2 Frame-level Clustering Process
Input: Coherent regions Ct,i extracted for each frame t, and
semantic regions Rk of the scene
Output: Recurrent activity groups including frames with similar
recurrent activity patterns
1: Calculate similarities SC (Ct,i, Ct−τ,j) between all coherent
motion regions from different frames
2: Calculate
SF M (t, t −τ)
for
all
frame
pairs
based
on
SC (Ct,i, Ct−τ,j)
3: Pre-cluster frames based on SF M (t, t −τ)
4: Calculate importance cost ρ (Rk) for all semantic regions based
on the pre-clustering result
5: Calculate SF U (t, t −τ) for all frame pairs according to the
unmatched coherent regions and ρ (Rk)
6: Calculate inter-frame similarities SF (t, t −τ) for all frame pairs
using SF M (t, t −τ) and SF U (t, t −τ)
7: With SF (t, t −τ), cluster frames into recurrent activity groups
8: Output the clustering result in line 9
B. Coherent Motion Merging
After frame-level clustering, frames are clustered into dif-
ferent recurrent activity groups. Thus, by parsing frames in
each recurrent activity group, complete motion patterns for
each recurrent activity can be estimated. In this paper, we
introduce a coherent motion merging step to merge similar
coherent motions from the same recurrent activity group for
achieving motion pattern regions. More speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst
apply the same operation as Step 1 in the two-step clustering
scheme (Section V) to cluster coherent motion regions inside
the same recurrent activity group. Then, coherent motions of
the same cluster are merged together to form a motion pattern
region. The merging process can be described by Eq. 13 and
Fig. 10.
EP,Ψj =
X
Cm∈Ψj
EP,Cm
#{Ψj}
(13)
if # {EP,Cm|EP,Cm ̸= [0, 0], Cm ∈Ψj}
#{Ψj}
> θmf, and it is
[0, 0] if otherwise, where Ψj the j-th coherent motion cluster.
EP,Ψj
=
h
E
x
P,Ψj, E
y
P,Ψj
i
is the merged motion vector
result for Ψj at particle P. Cm is a coherent motion region
belonging to coherent motion cluster Ψj. #{Ψj} is the total
number of coherent motion regions in cluster Ψj. θmf is
a threshold which is set as 0.4 in our experiments. EP,Cm
is the TEF thermal energy for Cm at particle P. Note that
EP,Cm is set to [0, 0] if P is outside the region of Cm. And
# {EP,Cm|EP,Cm ̸= [0, 0], Cm ∈Ψj} is the total number of
non-zero TEF thermal energies at particle P and belonging to
Ψj.
According to Eq. 13, the merged motion pattern region
RΨj = {EP,Ψj} for a coherent motion cluster Ψj is basically
the normalized summation over all coherent regions in Ψj.
Besides, we further introduce a threshold θmf to ﬁlter out
noisy or isolated particles which have low frequent motions
in the coherent motion cluster Ψj. An example of merged
motion pattern regions is shown in Fig. 10.
Figure 10.
Process of similar coherent motion merging. Frames t and t −τ
are from the same recurrent activity group, the green coherent motion regions
in frames t and t −τ belong to one coherent motion cluster, and the blue
coherent motion regions in frames t and t −τ belong to another coherent
motion cluster. (Best viewed in color.)
C. Flow Curve Extraction
The motion pattern regions achieved in the previous step can
represent the complete motion information for each recurrent
activity. However, since motion pattern regions may overlap
with each other and the contours of motion pattern regions may
also be irregular, it is necessary to extract ﬂow curves from
these motion pattern regions such that recurrent activities can
be more clearly described and visualized.
Our proposed ﬂow curve extraction process can be described
by Algorithm 3 and Fig. 11. According to Algorithm 3 and
Fig. 11, our approach ﬁrst sequentially cuts a motion pattern
region RΨj into sub-regions along the motion direction in
RΨj. Then the centroids of sub-regions are linked together
to achieve the output ﬂow curve. With the above process, the
extracted ﬂow curve can accurately catch the major motion
ﬂow of a motion pattern region. Furthermore, it should be
noted that in step 5 of Algorithm 3, if the line perpendicular
to the motion vector EPK+1,Ψj at PK+1 is intersecting with
a branched motion region (i.e., the motion region diverges
around PK+1), multiple Pmov,s points will be achieved and
the following ﬂow curve extraction process will be performed
on each Pmov,s respectively. In this way, we can properly
achieve branched ﬂow curves at the branch region.
VII. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Our approach is implemented by Matlab and the optical ﬂow
ﬁelds [32] are used as the input motion vector ﬁelds while each
pixel in the frame is viewed as a particle. In order to achieve
motion vector ﬁelds with T-frame intervals (T = 10 in our
experiments), the particle advection method [17] is used which
tracks the movement of each particle over T frames.
A. Results for Coherent Motion Detection
We perform experiments on a dataset including 30 different
crowd videos collected from the UCF dataset [17], the UCSD
dataset [39], the CUHK dataset [9], and our own collected set.
This dataset covers various real-world crowd scene scenarios
with both low- and high-density crowds and both rapid and
slow motion ﬂows. Some example frames of the dataset is
shown in Fig. 12.

9
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Figure 12.
Coherent motion extraction results. (a): Ground Truth, (b): Results of our approach, (c): Results of [17], (d): Results of [7], (e): Results of [8],
(f): Results of [9], (g): Results of [40], (h): Results of [28]. (Best viewed in color)
Algorithm 3 Flow Curve Extraction
Input: A motion pattern region RΨj merged from coherent region
cluster Ψj
Output: A ﬂow curve extracted from RΨj
1: Calculate the skeleton of RΨj [35]
2: Find the end point Ps of the skeleton which is on “backward”
position to all other end points, where the “backward” direction
is deﬁned as the reversed direction of the motion ﬂows in RΨj
3: PK = Ps, where PK is the current segmentation point
4: while PK+1 is inside RΨj do
5:
Pmov,s as the middle point of the line perpendicular to the
motion vector EPK,Ψj at PK
6:
for n=0 to Nummov {Nummov is the number of move-
ments} do
7:
Move from Pmov,s to Pmov,e by EPmov,s,Ψj, where
EPmov,s,Ψj is motion vector at Pmov,s in RΨj
8:
Pmov,s=Pmov,e
9:
end for
10:
PK+1= Pmov,s, where PK+1 is the next segmentation point
11:
Draw two straight lines perpendicular to the motion vectors
of at PK and PK+1, respectively
12:
Calculate the centroid of the sub-region segmented by the lines
in line 13
13:
PK = PK+1
14: end while
15: Sequentially link together all centroid points achieved by line 14
16: Smooth the linked curve by line 17
17: Output the curve by line 18
(a)
(b)
Figure 11.
Flow curve extraction process. Finding segmentation points, draw
straight lines to achieve sub-regions, and calculate centroids of each sub-
region; (b) Link centroids to achieve the extracted ﬂow curve. (Best viewed
in color.)
We compare our approach with four state-of-the-art co-
herent motion detection algorithms: The Lagrangian particle
dynamics approach [17], the local-translation domain segmen-
tation approach [7], the coherent-ﬁltering approach [8], and
the collectiveness measuring-based approach [9]. In order to

10
further demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach, we also
include the results of a general motion segmentation method
[40] and an anisotropic-diffusion-based image segmentation
method [28].
Qualitative comparison on coherent motion detection.
Fig. 12 compares the coherent motion detection results for
different methods. We include the manually labeled ground
truth results in the ﬁrst column. From Fig. 12, we can see that
our approach can achieve better coherent motion extraction
than the compared methods. For example, in sequence 1,
our approach can effectively extract the circle-shape coherent
motion. Comparatively, the method in [17] can only detect
part of the circle while the methods in [8] and [9] fail to work
since few reliable key points are extracted from this over-
crowded scene. For sequences 2 and 4 where multiple complex
motion ﬂows exist, our approach can still precisely detect the
small and less differentiable coherent motions, such as the
pink region on the bottom and the blue region on the top in
sequence 2 (a). The compared methods have low effectiveness
in identifying these regions due to the interference from the
neighboring motion regions. In sequences 3 and 6, since
motions on the top of the frame are extremely small and close
to the background, the compared methods fail to include these
particles into the coherent motion region. However, in our
approach, these small motions can be suitably strengthened
and included through the thermal diffusion process. Further-
more, the methods in [40] and [28] do not show satisfying
results, e.g., in sequences 5 and 6. This is because: (1)
the crowd scenes are extremely complicated such that the
extracted particle ﬂows or trajectories become unreliable, thus
making the general motion segmentation methods [40] difﬁcult
to create precise results; (2) Since many coherent region
boundaries in the crowd motion ﬁelds are rather vague and
unrecognizable, good boundaries cannot be easily achieved
without suitably utilizing the characteristics of the motion
vector ﬁelds. Thus, simply applying the existing anisotropic-
diffusion segmentation methods [28] cannot achieve satisfying
results.
Capability to handle disconnected coherent motions.
Sequences 5-8 in Fig. 12 compare the algorithms’ capability
in handling disconnected coherent motions. In sequence 7, we
manually block one part of the coherent motion region while
in sequences 5, 6, and 8, the red or green coherent motion
regions are disconnected due to occlusion by other objects or
low density. Since the disconnected regions are separated far
from each other, most compared methods wrongly segment
them into different coherent motion regions. However, with
our thermal diffusion process and two-step clustering scheme,
these regions can be successfully merged into one coherent
region.
Quantitative comparison. Table I compares the quanti-
tative results for different methods. In Table I, the aver-
age Particle Error Rates (PERs) and the average Coherent
Number Error (CNE) for all the sequences in our dataset
are compared to measure the overall accuracy of coherent
motion detection. PER is calculated by PER = # of Wrong
Particles / Total # of Particles. CNE is calculated by CNE =
Table I
AVERAGE PER AND CNE FOR ALL SEQUENCES IN THE DATASET.
Proposed [17]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[40] [28]
PER (%)
7.8
32.5 19.5 25.6 24.1 66.4 21.4
CNE
0.14
1.24 0.93 1.05 0.96 1.78 0.84
(a) kp = 0.2
(b) kp = 0.5
(c) kp = 0.7
(d) kf = 0.6
(e) kf = 0.9
Figure 13.
The coherent motion detection results of our approach under
different kp and kf values.
P
i |Numd(i) −Numgt(i)|
Σi1
where Numd(i) and Numgt(i)
are the numbers of detected and ground-truth coherent regions
for sequence i, respectively, Σi1 is the total number of
sequences.
Table I further demonstrates the effectiveness of our ap-
proach. In Table I, we can see that 1) Our approach can achieve
smaller coherent detection error rates than the other methods,
2) Our approach can accurately obtain the coherent region
numbers (close to the ground truth) while other methods often
over-segment or under-segment the coherent regions.
Effect of different parameter values. Finally, Fig. 13
shows the results of our approach under different parameter
values, i.e., kp and kf in Eqs 3 and 4. From Figs 13a to 13c, we
can see that kp mainly governs the thermal diffusion distance.
A small kp will make the thermal energies to be diffused
farther and thus can achieve larger coherent motion regions.
When kp increases, the extracted coherent motion region will
shrink. Furthermore, kf determines the directivity of thermal
diffusion. When kf increases, the diffused thermal energies
will concentrate more along the motion direction of the source
heat particles. On the contrary, when kf decreases, the thermal
energies will be propagated more uniformly to all directions
around the heat source particle. Thus, the boundaries will
shrink horizontally with larger kf, as in Fig. 13e. However,
note that in all examples in Fig. 13, our approach can always
suitably merge coherent regions together even when they
become disconnected when the parameter value changes.
B. Results for Semantic Region Construction and Pre-deﬁned
Activity Recognition
We perform experiments on two crowd videos in our dataset,
as the ﬁrst and second rows in Fig. 14. 400 video clips
are selected from each video with each clip including 20
frames. Four crowd activities are deﬁned for each video and
the example frames for the crowd activities are shown in
Fig. 14. Note that these videos are challenging in that: (1) the
crowd density in the scene varies frequently including both
high density as Fig. 14d and low density clips as Fig. 14c;
(2) The motion patterns are varying for different activities,
making it difﬁcult to construct meaningful and stable semantic
regions; (3) There are large numbers of irregular motions that
disturb the normal motion patterns (e.g., people running the
red lights or bicycle following irregular paths); (4) The number

11
(a) HD
(b) HP
(c) BT
(d) VP
(e) VL
(f) BT
(g) HP
(h) HU
(i) VR
(j) HU
(k) VP
(l) HD
(m) VB
Figure 14.
Example frames of the ground-truth activities in different videos.
First and second rows: videos in our dataset; Third row: video of QMUK
Junction dataset [41]. HD: Horizontal pass and down turn; HP: Horizontal
pass; BT: Both turn; VP: Vertical pass; VL: Vertical pass and left turn; HU:
Horizontal pass and up turn; VR: Vertical pass and right turn; VB: Vertical
pass and both turn.
of clips in the dataset is small, which increases the difﬁculty
of constructing reliable semantic regions. Moreover, in order
to further demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach, we
also perform experiments on a public QMUK Junction dataset
[41] where ﬁve crowd activities are deﬁned, as shown in the
third row of Fig. 14.
Accuracy on semantic region construction. For each
video in Fig. 14, we randomly select 200 video clips and
use them to construct the corresponding semantic regions.
Fig. 15 compares the results of four methods: (1) Our approach
(“Our”), (2) Directly cluster regions based on the particles’
TEF vectors (“Direct”, note that our approach differs from
this method by clustering over the cluster label vectors), (3)
Use [7] to achieve coherent motion regions and then apply
our two-step clustering scheme to construct semantic regions
(“[7]+Two-Step”, we show the results of [7] because in our
experiments, [7] has the best semantic region construction
results among the compared methods in Table I), (4) The
activity-based scene segmentation method in [4] (“[4]”). We
also show original scene images and plot all major activity
ﬂows to ease the comparison (“original scene”).
Fig. 15 shows that the methods utilizing “coherent motion
cluster label” information (“our” and “[7]+two-step”) create
more meaningful semantic regions than the other methods,
e.g., successfully identifying the horizontal motion regions in
the middle of the scene in Fig. 15b. This shows that our
cluster label features can effectively strengthen the correlation
among particles to facilitate semantic region construction.
Furthermore, comparing our approach with the “[7]+Two-
Step” method, it is obvious that the semantic regions by our
approach are more accurate (e.g., more precise semantic region
boundaries and more meaningful segmentations in the scene).
This further shows that more precise coherent motion detection
results can result in more accurate semantic region results.
Performances on recognizing pre-deﬁned activities. In
order to recognize the pre-deﬁned activities in Fig. 14, for
each video, we randomly select 200 video clips and construct
semantic regions by the methods in Fig. 15. After that, we
(a) Original
(b) Our
(c) Direct
(d) [7]
(e) [4]
(f) Original
(g) Our
(h) Direct
(i) [7]
(j) [4]
(k) Original
(l) Our
(m) Direct
(n) [7]
(o) [4]
Figure 15.
Constructed semantic regions of different methods for the videos
in Fig. 14. The caption “[7]” denotes the method “[7]+Two step”. (Best viewed
in color)
Table II
RECOGNITION ACCURACY OF DIFFERENT METHODS
Our
(%)
Our+
OF (%)
Direct
(%)
[7]+Two-
Step (%)
[4]
(%)
[3]
(%)
Fig. 14a video
92.2
87.75
77.0
89.5
79.2
67.0
Fig. 14e video
90.69
83.83
73.53
81.76
72.35
69.80
Fig. 14i video
93.58
91.03
83.42
88.32
84.83
82.69
derive features from the TEF and train SVM classiﬁers by the
method in Section V-A. Finally, we perform recognition on
the other 200 video clips in the same video. Besides, we also
include the results of two additional methods: (1) a state-of-
the-art dense-trajectory-based recognition method [3] (“Dense-
Traj”); (2) the method which uses our semantic regions but
uses the input motion ﬁeld (i.e., the optical ﬂows) to derive
the motion features in each semantic region (“Our+OF”). From
the recognition accuracy shown in Table II, we observe that:
1) Methods using more meaningful semantic regions (i.e.,
“our”, “our+OF”, and “[7]+Two step”) achieve better
results than other methods. This shows that suitable se-
mantic region construction can greatly facilitate activity
recognition.
2) Approaches using TEF (“Our”) achieve better results
than those using the input motion ﬁeld (“Our+OF”).
This demonstrates that compared with the input motion
ﬁled, our TEF can effectively improve the effectiveness
in representing the semantic regions’ motion patterns.
3) The dense-trajectory method [3] which extracts global
features does not achieve satisfying results. This is
because the global features still have limitations in
differentiating the subtle differences among activities.
This further implies the usefulness of semantic region
decomposition in analyzing crowd scenes.
C. Results for Recurrent Activity Mining
In this experiment, we use the same videos as in Fig. 14
for mining recurrent activities. For each video, we sample
one frame per second, then calculate coherent motions for
the sampled frames, and ﬁnally apply our cluster-and-merge
process to achieve recurrent activity patterns. Note that the
target for recurrent activity mining is to automatically discover

12
(a) Our
(b) Direct Clustering
(c) Pre-clustering
(d) Our
(e) Direct Clustering
(f) Pre-clustering
(g) Our
(h) Direct Clustering
(i) Pre-clustering
Figure 16.
The confusion matrix of clustering results. (The clustering results
in the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd rows correspond to the videos in the 1st, 2nd, and
3rd rows in Fig. 14, respectively)
recurrent activities from an input video without pre-deﬁning
activity types or pre-labeling training data. And ideally, good
activity mining approaches should achieve similar activity
patterns as the human-observed activity types in Fig. 14.
Performances on frame-level clustering. For each video,
we apply our frame-level clustering step to cluster the sampled
frames into four recurrent activity groups. Our clustering
results are compared with two methods: (1) Direct clustering.
Directly clustering based on the TEF difference between two
frames (i.e., use the summation of absolute thermal energy
differences between the co-located particles in two TEFs as the
inter-frame similarity). (2) Pre-clustering. Using the matched-
coherent-motion similarities SF M (t, t −τ) in Eq. 9 as the
inter-frame similarity for clustering.
Fig. 16 compares the clustering confusion matrixes of
different methods. From Fig. 16, we can see that since frames
of the same recurrent activity may contain different parts of
a complete activity ﬂow (e.g., Fig. 10), their TEFs may have
large differences. Therefore, directly using TEF difference for
clustering (i.e., direct TEF clustering) cannot achieve satis-
fying results. Comparatively, by including coherent motions
to evaluate inter-frame similarities (i.e., “pre-clustering” and
“our”), the clustering accuracy can be improved. However, the
pre-clustering method still have limitations in differentiating
similar recurrent activities, e.g., HP and HU in Figs 14g
and 14h. Comparatively, by introducing the importance cost of
semantic regions to measure the effects of unmatched coherent
motions, our frame-level clustering approach can have stronger
capability in differentiating similar recurrent activity patterns.
Performances on coherent motion merging and ﬂow
curve extraction. Fig. 17 shows the results of our coherent
motion merging and ﬂow curve extraction steps. Besides, we
also compare our approach with a state-of-the-art activity
mining method which utilizes a Probabilistic Latent Sequential
Motif (PLSM) model to discover recurrent activities [11],
which are shown as the last rows in Figs 17a, 17b, and 17c.
From Fig. 17, we can have the following observations:
1) The recurrent activities mined by our approach is similar
to the human-observed activity types in Fig. 14. This
demonstrates that our proposed cluster-and-merge pro-
cess can effectively discover desired activity types from
an input video.
2) Note that although the clustering result in our frame-
level clustering step is not 100 percentage accurate (as
in Fig. 16), the extracted ﬂow curves are less affected
by the wrongly clustered frames because: (i) The noisy
or isolated thermal energy vectors from the wrongly
clustered frames will be ﬁltered by the threshold θmf
in Eq. 13. (ii) The ﬂow curve extraction process will
further reduce the effects of wrong frames by dividing
sub-regions to derive ﬂow curves, as in Fig. 11a.
3) Comparing our approach with the PLSM-based method
[11], we can see that: (i) By introducing coherent
regions to measure inter-frame similarities and derive
motion pattern regions, our approach can achieve cleaner
activity ﬂows which are more coherent with the human-
observed activity types in Fig. 14. Comparatively, results
of the PLSM-based method still include noisy motion
patterns, e.g., the last column in Fig. 17b. (ii) Our ap-
proach can precisely differentiate motion ﬂows inside a
recurrent activity. However, the PLSM-based method has
limitations in differentiate motion ﬂows when they are
located close to each other, e.g., the second column in
Fig. 17a. (iii) The differences between similar recurrent
activities are clearly differentiated and visualized by our
approach, while they are less obvious in the results of the
PLSM-based method, e.g., the third and fourth columns
in Fig. 17b.
VIII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we study the problem of coherent motion
detection, semantic region construction, and recurrent activity
mining in crowd scenes. A thermal-diffusion-based algorithm
together with a two-step clustering scheme are introduced,
which can achieve more meaningful coherent motion and
semantic region results. Based on the extracted coherent
motions and semantic regions, a cluster-and-merge process
is further proposed which can effectively discover desirable
activity patterns from a crowd video. Experiments on various
videos show that our approach achieves the state-of-the-art
performance.
