Off-Policy Meta-Reinforcement Learning Based on Feature Embedding Spaces
Takahisa Imagawa,1 Takuya Hiraoka, 123 Yoshimasa Tsuruoka 14
1 National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology
2 NEC Central Research Laboratories
3 RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project
4 The University of Tokyo, Tokyo

Abstract
Meta-reinforcement learning (RL) addresses the problem of
sample inefﬁciency in deep RL by using experience obtained
in past tasks for a new task to be solved. However, most meta-
RL methods require partially or fully on-policy data, i.e., they
cannot reuse the data collected by past policies, which hin-
ders the improvement of sample efﬁciency. To alleviate this
problem, we propose a novel off-policy meta-RL method,
embedding learning and evaluation of uncertainty (ELUE).
An ELUE agent is characterized by the learning of a fea-
ture embedding space shared among tasks. It learns a belief
model over the embedding space and a belief-conditional pol-
icy and Q-function. Then, for a new task, it collects data by
the pretrained policy, and updates its belief based on the be-
lief model. Thanks to the belief update, the performance can
be improved with a small amount of data. In addition, it up-
dates the parameters of the neural networks to adjust the pre-
trained relationships when there are enough data. We demon-
strate that ELUE outperforms state-of-the-art meta RL meth-
ods through experiments on meta-RL benchmarks.
Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has shown superhuman
performance in several domains, such as computer games
and board games (Silver et al. 2017; Berner et al. 2019).
However, conventional DRL considers only learning for a
single task and does not reuse experience from past tasks.
This is a major reason for the sample inefﬁciency in conven-
tional DRL.
To overcome this problem, the concept of meta-learning
has been proposed (Schmidhuber, Zhao, and Wiering 1996).
Meta-learning is a class of methods for learning how to ef-
ﬁciently learn with a small amount of data on a new task by
utilizing previous experience. An instance of meta-learning
consists of two phases: meta-training and meta-testing. In
meta-training, the agent prepares itself for learning in meta-
testing by using some training tasks. In meta-testing, the
agent is evaluated on the basis of its performance on the
task to be solved. Although meta-learning aims to improve
sample efﬁciency in meta-testing, the sample efﬁciency in
meta-training is also important from the perspective of com-
putational cost (Mendonca et al. 2019; Rakelly et al. 2019).
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
One type of meta-learning methods is called gradient-
based meta-learning, and they include MAML (Finn,
Abbeel, and Levine 2017) and Reptile (Nichol, Achiam,
and Schulman 2018). These methods learn to reduce the
loss of the model whose parameters (e.g., weights of neu-
ral networks) are updated over several steps. Finn, Abbeel,
and Levine (2017) have shown that the sample efﬁciency
of MAML in meta-testing is improved compared with that
of naive pretraining methods. However, most reinforcement
learning (RL) applications of these methods work with on-
policy methods (Mendonca et al. 2019), which are less
sample efﬁcient than off-policy methods because on-policy
methods cannot reuse the data collected by old policies. In
addition, the performance of the learned initial parameters
in meta-testing can be very poor in some cases until the pa-
rameters are updated. For example, there are tasks where an
agent aims to reach a goal as fast as possible, and the tasks
differ in terms of goal positions. Let us assume that there
are two tasks whose goals are in opposite directions from
the initial position of the agent; then, the well-trained poli-
cies for the tasks require contradicting actions. Thus, in this
case, the performance is very poor before the parameters are
updated.
Another type of meta-learning methods is called context-
based meta-learning. PEARL (Rakelly et al. 2019) is a state-
of-the-art meta-RL method that belongs to this type. PEARL
learns how to infer task information in meta-training and
uses it in meta-testing. Because of this inference, PEARL
generally needs less data to improve its performance in
meta-testing than methods that update the parameters of
neural networks when the tasks in meta-training and meta-
testing are similar. In addition, the policy and Q-function
in PEARL are trained in an off-policy manner, which can
further improve its sample efﬁciency. Indeed, PEARL was
shown to be more sample efﬁcient than MAML (Rakelly
et al. 2019).
In this paper, we extend the idea of PEARL and propose a
novel meta-RL method, embedding learning and evaluation
of uncertainty (ELUE), which has the following features:
Off-policy embedding training
In PEARL, policy training is based on an off-policy
method, but the training for task embedding, which is
used for calculating distributions over tasks, depends on
what the current policy is, i.e., it is on-policy. By re-
arXiv:2101.01883v1  [cs.AI]  6 Jan 2021

moving the dependency on the current policy from the
task embedding learning, we propose a fully off-policy
method. Thanks to policy-independent embedding, the
training objective is expected to be stable, and the data
collected by past policies can be reused.
Policy and Q-function conditioned by beliefs over tasks
PEARL introduces distributions over tasks, i.e. beliefs,
but both its policy and Q-function depend on a task
variable sampled from the distribution. After the task
variable is sampled, the variable contains no information
on the uncertainty over the tasks. By contrast, ELUE
conditions the policy and Q-function on the belief over
tasks, which can be used to evaluate uncertainty. The use
of such policy and Q-function has been shown lead to
more precise exploration (Humplik et al. 2019; Zintgraf
et al. 2020). In addition, for learning these functions,
we apply the information bottleneck objective (Tishby,
Pereira, and Bialek 1999) for generalization, instead of
naively maximizing the cumulative reward.
Combination of belief and parameter update
PEARL does not update the parameters of the policy
and Q-function in meta-testing. When there are large
differences between the tasks in meta-training and in
meta-testing, the pretrained belief model, policy, and Q-
function may no longer be useful, and PEARL can fail to
improve the performance. To alleviate this drawback, our
method performs not only inference but also parameter
update.
We compare the sample efﬁciency of state-of-the-art meta-
RL methods and ELUE through experiments in the Meta-
World (Yu et al. 2019) environment and show that ELUE
performs better than those methods.
Preliminaries
Markov decision processes (MDPs) are models for rein-
forcement learning (RL) tasks. An MDP is deﬁned as a tuple
(S, A, T, R, ρ), where S and A are the state and the action
spaces respectively, R : S×A×R →[0, 1] is a reward func-
tion that determines the probability of the reward amount
and T : S × A × S →[0, 1] is a transition function that
determines the probability of the next state. ρ is the initial
state distribution. Let us denote the policy as π, which de-
termines the probability of choosing an action at each state.
The objective of RL is to maximize the expected cumulative
reward by changing the
We assume that each task in meta-training and meta-
testing can be represented by an MDP, where S and A are
the same among tasks. In addition, we consider tasks to be
the same when they differ only in ρ because the difference in
ρ does not change the optimal policy. Thus, a different task
means different T or R.
In our problem, it is assumed that the reward and the
transition function are not observable directly. We treat this
problem as a partially observable MDP (POMDP) and in-
troduce a probability over R and T, which is called a belief
(Humplik et al. 2019; Zintgraf et al. 2020). For clarity, let
us assume that R and T are parameterized by ϕ and denote
them as Rϕ and Tϕ. It is known that a POMDP can be trans-
formed into a belief MDP whose states are based on beliefs
and that the optimal policy of the belief MDP is also optimal
in the original POMDP (Kaelbling, Littman, and Cassandra
1998). We denote a history as ht := (s0, a0, r0, s1, . . . , st),
where sτ ∈S, aτ ∈A, rτ ∈R are the state, the action,
and the reward at time τ, respectively. In our problem, a be-
lief at time t is ˜bt(ϕ) := P(ϕ|ht), and the state of the be-
lief MDP at time t is s+
t
= (st,˜bt), which is often called
a hyper-state. The objective of our problem is maximizing
Eh∞[P∞
t=0 γtrt] by changing a policy that is conditioned on
a hyper-state, where γ is a discounted factor. In our problem,
the belief is updated by observations:
˜bt+1(ϕ) = P(ϕ|ht+1)
∝P(ϕ)
tY
τ=0
Rϕ(sτ, aτ, rτ)Tϕ(sτ, aτ, sτ+1)
(1)
∝P(ϕ|ht)Rϕ(st, at, rt)Tϕ(st, at, st+1).
(2)
However, in general, the exact calculation of this belief up-
date is intractable, so the existing methods approximate be-
liefs and avoid the direct calculation (Humplik et al. 2019;
Zintgraf et al. 2020; Igl et al. 2018; Kapturowski et al. 2019).
In the next section, we introduce the approximated belief
model, its update, and other parts of our method.
Method
In this section, we introduce our method, embedding learn-
ing and evaluation of uncertainty (ELUE), which learns how
to infer tasks and how to use beliefs based on embeddings of
task features. In addition, to alleviate the gap between meta-
training and testing, which may prevent improvements from
being made if only belief updating is done, it also adapts the
learned policy and Q-function to the meta-test task through
the updating of their parameters. A sketch of the architecture
of our networks is shown in Figure 1.
Learning Embedding
In meta-training, ELUE learns embeddings for task features.
In this section, we introduce its theoretical background.
We formulate the embedding learning problem as fol-
lows. There is a latent task variable z, whose density is p(z),
and let us assume that the reward rt and next state st+1 are
sampled from a parameterized model pφ(rt, st+1|st, at, z),
which is shared across tasks. If ht is observed frequently, a
reasonable model is expected to give ht a high density. Thus,
in proportion to the frequency of ht, maximizing the density,
log
R
p(s0) Qt−1
τ=0 pφ(rτ, sτ+1|sτ, aτ, z)π(aτ|hτ)p(z)dz
leads to a reasonable model. However, this objective
depends on the initial distribution and the current policy.
In terms of belief estimation, they do not contribute to the
belief as shown in proportional expression (1). Thus, instead
of the density, we consider the maximization of the ELBO
of the following value.
log
Z
t−1
Y
τ=0
pφ(rτ, sτ+1|sτ, aτ, z)p(z)dz
(3)

Figure 1: A sketch of the architecture of networks in ELUE.
The networks in the blue box are for the embedding, con-
sisting of an encoder (left) and decoders (right). The input
of the encoder is a set of ct = (st, at, rt, st+1) and it out-
puts the parameters of a Gaussian distribution, as introduced
in Equation (6). A part of the inputs of the decoders, z, is
sampled from the Gaussian distribution, and the decoders
predict rewards and next states. In the red box, there are net-
works for the policy, V-function, and Q-function, which are
trained in a similar way to soft actor-critic (Haarnoja et al.
2018). These networks are conditioned on a belief and use
the outputs of the encoder as the belief. Only the networks
in the red box are adapted in meta-testing, while all of the
networks are pretrained in meta-training.
We introduce a parameterized variational distribution qφ,
and the ELBO is:
log
Z
t−1
Y
τ=0
pφ(rτ, sτ+1|sτ, aτ, z)p(z)dz
(4)
≥Eqφ(z|ht)[
X
τ
log pφ(rτ, sτ+1|sτ, aτ, z)]
−DKL(qφ(z|ht)||p(z)).
(5)
We maximize this ELBO in a similar way to a conditional
variational autoencoder (Sohn, Lee, and Yan 2015), i.e., op-
timizing the parameters of encoder q and decoder p. The sum
of log-likelihoods in the ELBO is permutation-invariant in
terms of time t of tuple ct := (st, at, rt, st+1). We introduce
the following structure so that qφ(z|ht) is also permutation-
invariant, because the order of tuples can be ignored to esti-
mate the belief, as shown in expression (1).
As shown in Zaheer et al. (2017), a function q(X) is in-
variant to the permutation of instances in X, iff it can be
decomposed into the form g(P
x∈X f(x)). We follow this
fact and, instead of history-conditional posterior qφ(z|ht),
we use a posterior conditioned on a set of tuples,
qφ(z|c0:t−1) := N
 
z; gφ
 t−1
X
τ=0
fφ(cτ)
!!
,
(6)
where
N(·)
is
a
Gaussian
distribution,
and
gφ(Pt−1
τ=0 fφ(cτ)) outputs the parameters of the distribu-
tion. Note that qφ(z|c0:t−1) can be used as an approximated
belief over z, i.e., bt(z) and that it can be updated with low
computational cost.
Let us denote a replay buffer of tuples of task i as Di and
a set of sampled tuples ci
t1, ci
t2, . . . ci
tk from Di as ci
t1:k. We
deﬁne the loss of embedding, Lembed(φ), as
Ei,ci
t1:k [−Eqφ(z|ci
t1:k )[
X
cτ ∈ci
t1:k
log pφ(rτ, sτ+1|sτ, aτ, z)]
+ DKL(qφ(z|ci
t1:k)||p(z))].
(7)
Note that this loss function does not depend on the policy.
Thus, for the embedding training, we can reuse the data in
the replay buffer collected by past policies, the amount of
which is generally large.
This can contribute to the stability of the training objec-
tive. In our implementation, we use two decoders whose out-
puts are the probability of reward, pφ(rt|st, at, st+1, z), and
that of next state, pφ(st+1|st, at, z).
Learning Belief-Conditional Policy and Q-Function
The ELUE agent learns a belief-conditional policy and Q-
function in meta-training. Instead of simply maximizing the
cumulative reward by changing its belief-conditional policy,
the agent maximizes it with an additional information bottle-
neck (IB) objective for generalization (Tishby, Pereira, and
Bialek 1999). IB is a kind of regularization based on mu-
tual information. While conventional deep RL methods face
the problem of generalization (Zhang et al. 2018; Zhao et al.
2019; Cobbe et al. 2019), it has been shown that this prob-
lem can be alleviated by applying IB (Goyal et al. 2018; Igl
et al. 2019).
We applied the IB loss based on InfoBot (Goyal et al.
2018), which is an application of IB for reinforcement learn-
ing. In their method, it is assumed that goal information
is given explicitly for each task. In our case, goal infor-
mation is not given, so we use beliefs instead. We intro-
duce policy π which can be decomposed into the form
π(at|s+
t ) =
R
π1(wt|s+
t )π2(at|wt, st)dzt, where wt is an
additional variable for the IB objective. In addition, we add
mutual information I(wt;˜bt|st) as a penalty to the cumula-
tive reward, and the objective is
E
" ∞
X
t=0
γtrt
#
−β
∞
X
t=0
γtI(wt;˜bt|st)
(8)
=E
" ∞
X
t=0
γt

rt −βEwt

log p(wt|s+
t )
p(wt|st)
#
(9)
The
equation
is
derived
from
I(wt;˜bt|st)
=
E[log
p(wt,˜bt|st)
p(wt|st)p(˜bt|st)]
=
E[log p(wt|s+
t )
p(wt|st) ]. This mutual
information penalty is expected to help obtain a task-
independent yet useful representation as much as possible.
However, p(wt|st) in Equation (9) is difﬁcult to com-
pute because of the marginalization by ˜bt
(by ht).
We thus approximate it by a variational distribution
q
as in previous work (Alemi et al. 2017; Goyal

et al. 2018; Igl et al. 2019). For any random variables
X, Y, Z, I(X; Y |Z)
=
E[log p(X|Y,Z)
p(X|Z) ] and KL diver-
gence DKL(p(X|Z)||q(X|Z)) ≥0. Thus, I(X; Y |Z) ≤
E[log p(X|Y,Z)
q(X|Z) ]. By using the fact, a lower bound of (9) is
derived and it is
E
" ∞
X
t=0
γt

rt −βEwt

log p(wt|s+
t )
q(wt|st)
#
.
(10)
Although any q is allowed and Alemi et al. (2017) used a
Gaussian as q, for simplicity, we ﬁx q(wt|s+
t ) to be a uni-
form distribution. By removing a constant part, the objective
is
E
" ∞
X
t=0
γt{rt −βEwt[log p(wt|s+
t )]}
#
,
(11)
and ELUE maximizes this value.
This objective is a variant of the objective of soft actor-
critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al. 2018), which is one of the
most sample efﬁcient off-policy RL methods. We follow the
same way as SAC and update the policy, Q-function, and V-
function. Let us denote a belief conditioned on the tuple set
ci
t1:k−1 as bi and the belief updated from bi by an additional
tuple, ci
tk, as b′i. For simplicity, we abbreviate the subscript
tk in ci
tk and denote it as (si, ai, ri, s′i). ELUE minimizes
Lactor(θπ), LQ
critic(θQ), and LV
critic(θV ), which are respec-
tively,
Ei,ci
t1:k [Ew,a[β log πθπ(w|si, bi) −QθQ(si, bi, a)]],
(12)
Ei,ci
t1:k [(QθQ(si, bi, ai) −ˆQ(si, bi, ai))2], and
(13)
Ei,ci
t1:k
h
(VθV (si) −ˆV (si))2i
, where
(14)
ˆQ(si, bi, ai) = ri + γV¯θV
 s′i, b′i
,
(15)
ˆV (si) = Ew,a[QθQ(si, bi, a) −β log πθπ(w|si, bi)]
(16)
and ¯θV is a parameter vector that is updated by ¯θV ←(1 −
λ)¯θV +λθV . We show the procedures of our method in meta-
training in Algorithm 1. Our belief is based on the random
sampling of tuples. Because of that, this training depends
less on actual trajectories than training with naive trajectory-
based beliefs. This can be an advantage, as PEARL with a
naive trajectory-based encoder was not so effective as that
with an encoder based on sampled tuples (Rakelly et al.
2019).
In addition to the policy, we also apply IB to the Q-
function and V-function. To stablize the target values i.e. π
and Q in (16), V in (15), and Q in (12), we use the mean
values of the additional variables for IB for the V-function,
Q-function, and policy, instead of sampled variables in the
same way as Igl et al. (2019). This is expected to reduce
ﬂuctuations by introducing IB.
Here, we describe more details on the implementation of
our method. First, to reduce the computational cost, instead
of naively allocating one random sampled tuple set ci
t1:k−1
and belief conditioned on it bi to one additional tuple ci
tk,
we allocate the same tuple set to some additional tuples. Sec-
ond, to train the agent in a variety of situations in terms of the
amount of data necessary to infer a task, we randomly sam-
ple k, the number of tuples in ci
t1:k−1. Third, for π1(wt|s+
t )
and π2(at|wt, st), we use Gaussian distributions, and for
bounding actions, we use tanh as in SAC (Haarnoja et al.
2018).
Algorithm 1 Meta-training
1: A set of meta-training tasks, T is given
2: while not done do
3:
Sample tasks from T
4:
Initialize beliefs
5:
for i ∈the sampled tasks do
6:
for step in data collection steps do
7:
Gather data from task i by policy π(·|si, bi)
8:
Update belief bi and replay buffer Di
9:
end for
10:
end for
11:
for step in training steps do
12:
Make a set of tasks T ′ randomly from T
13:
Calculate Lembed for T , as in formula (7), and up-
date parameters to minimize Lembed
14:
Calculate Lactor and Lcritic for T ′, as in formu-
lae (12), (13), and (14), and update parameters to
minimize Lactor and Lcritic
15:
end for
16: end while
Adaptation in Meta-Test
In meta-testing, the ELUE agent collects data based on
the policy conditioned on a belief. The belief is updated at
every time step. After updating the belief enough times, our
method updates the parameters of neural networks to allevi-
ate the gap between tasks in meta-training and meta-testing.
Pseudo code is shown in Algorithm 2. In meta-testing, there
are differences in the parameter update in meta-training:
1) The parameters for embedding, φ, are ﬁxed to avoid
catastrophic forgetting (French 1999) about what it learned
in meta-training. Naive updating of the parameters about
Algorithm 2 Meta-testing
1: A meta-test task is given
2: while not done do
3:
for step in data collection steps do
4:
Gather data from meta-test task by policy π(a|s, b)
5:
Update belief b and replay buffer D
6:
end for
7:
for step in training steps do
8:
Calculate Lactor and Lcritic for the task, as in for-
mulae (12), (13), and (14) and update parameter to
minimize modiﬁed Lactor and Lcritic
9:
end for
10: end while

embedding in meta-testing leads to catastrophic forgetting
because the number of tasks in meta-testing is one, which
means that the decoder can reconstruct the reward and next
state without the latent task variable information, if the de-
coder is sufﬁciently trained in meta-testing. If the output of
the decoder is independent from the latent task variable, only
the second term of (7) is relevant to the learning of the en-
coder, which means that the encoder loss is minimized when
its output is the same as that of the prior, p(z). On the basis
of these considerations, we ﬁx φ in meta-testing.
2) After updating belief enough times, we ﬁx and copy
it for each neural network, and train it with the parameters
of each network by gradient descent. This expected to help
adaptation to the meta-test task by giving additional ﬂex-
ibility to task information processing. This update method
is inspired by semi-amortized variational autoencoder (Kim
et al. 2018), whose update method is a combination of infer-
ence and gradient descent. By combining gradient descent,
it showed better asymptotic performance.
Related Work
In this section, we review existing methods related to our
method and discuss the differences between them.
Our method is inspired by PEARL, but there are essential
differences. First, PEARL has no decoder, and the encoder
is trained to minimize the critic loss. It is a simple approach,
but its embedding can change depending on the current pol-
icy. The performance of PEARL was shown to degrade when
used with off-policy (i.e., not recent) data (Rakelly et al.
2019). Therefore, PEARL uses an additional buffer for re-
cent data to avoid the degradation; in contrast, our method
can train the embedding using old data and does not need
an additional buffer. Second, PEARL uses an encoder that
can be represented as qφ(z|ht) ∝Qt−1
τ=0 N(z; µτ, σ2
τ) ∝
N(z;
Pt−1
τ=0
µτ
σ2τ
Pt−1
τ=0
1
σ2τ
,
1
Pt−1
τ=0
1
σ2τ
), where µτ and σ2
τ, the mean and
variance of a Gaussian distribution, are the outputs of the
neural network, fφ(·). As discussed around Equation (6),
this is not a general form for encoder representation in terms
of permutation invariance among cτ, while our encoder is
represented in a general form. Third, PEARL’s policy and
Q-function, π(s, z) and Q(s, a, z), where z is sampled from
q(z|ht), are z-conditional, and z itself has no uncertainty in-
formation. In comparison, ours are belief-conditional, which
has uncertainty information. Fourth, PEARL only considers
inference in meta-testing, while our method considers the
updating of the parameters of neural networks.
There are other meta-learning methods based on infer-
ence; however, these methods are on-policy (Zintgraf et al.
2020; Humplik et al. 2019; Vuorio et al. 2019; Duan et al.
2016). Among these methods, VariBAD (Zintgraf et al.
2020) is the most related to our method. It considers em-
bedding just like ours and beliefs over the embedding space.
However, its sample efﬁciency is not as high as PEARL as
shown in Zintgraf et al. (2020). In addition, its encoder is
based on recurrent neural networks whose input is simply a
history. Moreover, it does not consider updating the param-
eters of neural networks in meta-testing.
As
for
off-policy
approaches,
guided
meta
policy
search (Mendonca et al. 2019) is introduced as an off-policy
meta-learning method. Their method is based on MAML.
In meta-training, it updates the parameters to imitate expert
trajectories (outer updates) after updates by policy gradients
(inner updates), which means that the inner updates and the
updates in meta-testing need on-policy data. In addition, it
is not based on inference. Lin et al. (2020) proposed an off-
policy method which uses a decoder and policy conditioned
the parameters of the decoder. The parameters corresponds
to a belief in our method and they are adapted to a meta-test
task by gradient descent. Their method is also not inference.
It is based on MAML-like parameter updates.
Experiments
In this section, we compare the sample efﬁciency of the
existing “context-based” methods (PEARL, variBAD, and
RL2 (Duan et al. 2016)) and our method. In the conven-
tional setting of meta-learning experiments, the tasks in
meta-testing and meta-training were in the same category
and the tasks differed only in goal positions or weights of
torso of the agent (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017; Rakelly
et al. 2019; Zintgraf et al. 2020; Vuorio et al. 2019). Our ex-
perimental settings include not only the conventional ones
but also settings where the types of tasks in meta-testing and
meta-training are different. The environment of the exper-
iments is Meta-World with MuJoCo 2.0. Meta-World is a
collection of Sawyer robot arm tasks, and there are 50 types
of tasks and several benchmarks. In a task of Meta-World,
each episode length is 150.
First, to examine the sample efﬁciency of our method,
we conducted experiments with the conventional settings.
We followed the ML1 benchmark scheme of Meta-World,
where the differences in tasks mean differences in goals
and the goals are sampled from the same distribution
in meta-training and meta-testing. We chose six types of
tasks, basket-ball, dial-turn, pick-place, reach, sweep-into,
window-open, that were chosen from the types of tasks of
the ML10 benchmark1 (descriptions of the types of tasks we
used are shown in Table 1 in appendices). For each run, 20
meta-training tasks were generated. We executed ﬁve runs
with different seeds and evaluated the average episode re-
ward at the ﬁrst episode in meta-testing. The results are
shown in Figure 2. The results show that ELUE achieved
higher performance than the other methods.
Second, to see the merits of our belief updates in meta-
testing, we examined the performance of ELUE and PEARL
in meta-testing with only inferences (i.e. belief updates in
ELUE, and posterior updates and sampling the task variable
in PEARL) and that of ELUE without any update of a belief,
i.e. keeping a belief being a prior (“NoBelUpdate”) for com-
parison. In the experiment, meta-trained networks at about
three million time steps in the ﬁrst experiment of pick-place
were used. The results are shown in Figure 3. The results
show that both methods only need small amounts of data
1The names of the types of tasks in the Meta-World paper are
different from those in the Meta-World implementation. We refer
to the names in the implementation.

(a) basket-ball
(b) dial-turn
(c) pick-place
(d) reach
(e) sweep-into
(f) window-open
Figure 2: The comparison of sample efﬁciency of each method in ML1 benchmarks. The vertical axis is the average rewards in
the ﬁrst episode in meta-testing and the horizontal axis is the number of time steps in meta-training.
to improve the performance. Especially, the performance of
ELUE was relatively high from the ﬁrst episode while that
of PEARL was low at ﬁrst and improved in the next episode.
Figure 3: The comparison of performance in meta-test of
pick-place on ML1 benchmark by inference. The vertical
axis is the average episode reward and the horizontal axis
is the number of episodes.
Third, to examine the sample efﬁciency in a set of di-
verse tasks, we conducted experiments, following the ML10
benchmark scheme, where the types of tasks in meta-
training and meta-testing were different. In the benchmark,
there are 15 types of tasks, ten for meta-training and ﬁve for
meta-testing. We evaluated the sample efﬁciency from two
perspectives: the performance in meta-testing in the early
stages like Figure 2 and their improvement as the amount of
data increases. For an experiment in the latter perspective,
we modiﬁed PEARL and variBAD to make them update the
parameters of neural networks in meta-testing, although the
original versions of them do not update the parameters. In
the experiment, meta-trainings were executed ﬁve times. For
each run, 40 tasks were generated. For each meta-training,
meta-tests were executed six times. The meta-tests were exe-
cuted for about two million steps. In the meta-tests, we used
meta-trained networks after 600 iterations (25 million time
steps) for ELUE and PEARL, 4000 iterations (32 million
time steps) for variBAD. To clarify the amount of improve-
ment with our method, we also executed a variant of ELUE
which learns policies from scratch in meta-testing without
using beliefs. The results are shown in Figure 4. The per-
formances of PEARL and ELUE slightly improved as time
steps in meta-training increased. As for the learning curves
of meta-testing, although the variance of the performance of
ELUE was large, ELUE outperformed the other methods on
average.
Fourth, to see the effectiveness of applying information
bottleneck to our method, we compared the performances
of variants of ELUE which was naively combined with
soft actor-critic. We changed the coefﬁcients of entropy in
soft-actor critic. The other hyper parameters were the same

(a) The ﬁrst episode rewards
(b) The Third episode rewards
(c) Learning curves
Figure 4: The comparison of sample efﬁciency of each method on ML10 benchmark. The vertical axis is the average episode
rewards in meta-testing. The horizontal axis is the number of time steps (a), (b) in meta-training and (c) in meta-testing.
among the variants. The results (Figure 5) show that ELUE
Figure 5: The comparison of variants of ELUE. The vertical
axis is the average episode rewards in meta-testing and the
horizontal axis is the number of time steps in meta-training.
was slightly better than the other variants. This implies that
information bottleneck objectives helped generalization of
learned policies as shown in Igl et al. (2019).
Fifth, to examine the effectiveness of our updating method
in meta-testing, we compared the performances of the differ-
ent update methods (“BelGrad”, “NoBelGrad” and “Infer-
ence”) in the ML10 benchmark. BelGrad means belief up-
dates by gradient descent after inference, which is used in
meta-test of ELUE. NoBelGrad means that gradient descent
updates are applied to not the belief but the parmeters of
neural networks. Inference means no gradient updates. No-
BelGrad and Inference were executed three times for each
meta-training. We used the same settings and the same meta-
trained networks in the experiment of Figure 4. The results
(Figure 6) show that the performance of Inference did not
improve as the amount of data increased, and that BelGrad
was better than NoBelGrad.
Figure 6: The comparison of updating method in meta-
testing. The vertical axis is the average episode rewards in
meta-testing and the horizontal axis is the number of time
steps in meta-testing. “BelGrad” is the same as “ELUE” in
Figure 4 (c).
Conclusion
We have proposed a novel off-policy meta-learning method,
ELUE, which learns the embeddings of task features, beliefs
over the embedding space, belief-conditional policies and
Q-functions. Because of the belief-conditional policies, the
performance can be improved by updating the beliefs, espe-
cially when the meta-test task is similar to the meta-training
tasks. ELUE also updates the parameters of neural networks
in meta-testing, which can alleviate the gap between tasks in
meta-testing and those in meta-training. In the experiments
with Meta-World benchmarks, we examined the sample ef-
ﬁciency of ELUE and existing methods in the two cases
where the tasks in meta-training and meta-testing were simi-
lar and diverse. The results show that ELUE outperforms the
other methods in both cases. We have also shown merits of
the belief-conditional policies and the parameter updates in
meta-testing.
