(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,  
Vol. 6, No. 3, 2009 
Web-Based Expert System for Civil Service 
Regulations:RCSES 
 
Mofreh A. Hogo* 
Electrical engineering Technology Dept., 
Higher Institution of Technology Benha, 
Benha University, Egypt.  
Khaled Fouad 
Central Lab. for Agricultural 
Expert Systems (CLAES) 
  
Fouad Mousa 
Business management Dept, 
Faculty of  commerce, 
Assuit university  
*the corresponding author,
 
 
Abstract— Internet and expert systems have offered new ways of 
sharing and distributing knowledge, but there is a lack of 
researches in the area of web-based expert systems. This paper 
introduces a development of a web-based expert system for the 
regulations of civil service in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia 
named as RCSES. It is the first time to develop such system 
(application of civil service regulations) as well the development 
of it using web-based approach. The proposed system considers 
17 regulations of the civil service system. The different phases of 
developing the RCSES system are presented, as knowledge 
acquiring and selection, ontology and knowledge representations 
using XML format. XML-Rule-based knowledge sources and the 
inference 
mechanisms 
were 
implemented 
using 
ASP.net 
technique. An interactive tool for entering the ontology and 
knowledge base, and the inferencing was built. It gives the ability 
to use, modify, update, and extend the existing knowledge base in 
an easy way. The knowledge was validated by experts in the 
domain of civil service regulations, and the proposed RCSES was 
tested, verified, and validated by different technical users and the 
developers’ staff. The RCSES system is compared with other 
related web based expert systems, that comparison proved the 
goodness, usability, and high performance of RCSES. 
Keywords- Knowledge base;Ontology; RCSES; and Civil 
regulation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
An expert system is a computer program that simulate the 
problem-solving behavior of a human, it is composed of a 
knowledge base (information, heuristics, etc.), inference 
engine (analyzes the knowledge base), and the end user 
interface (accepting inputs, generating outputs). The path that 
leads to the development of expert systems is different from 
that of conventional programming techniques. The concepts 
for expert system development come from the subject domain 
of artificial intelligence (AI), and require a departure from 
conventional 
computing 
practices 
and 
programming 
techniques. Expert systems (ES) emerged as a branch of 
artificial intelligence (AI), from the effort of researchers to 
develop computer programs that could reason as humans [1]. 
Many organizations have leveraged this technology to increase 
productivity and profits through better business decisions the 
work in [2-5] are one of most commercially successful 
branches of AI [6]. Although there have been reports of ES 
failures [7] and [8], surveys [9] and [10] show that many 
companies have remained enthusiastic proponents of the 
technology and continue to develop important and successful 
applications. Internet technology can change the way that an 
ES is developed and distributed. For the first time, knowledge 
on any subject can directly be delivered to users through a web 
based ES. Grove [11] provided some examples of web-based 
expert systems in industry, medicine, science and government 
and claimed that “there are now a large number of expert 
systems available on the Internet.” He argued that there are 
several factors that make the Internet, by contrast to 
standalone platforms, an ideal base for KBS (knowledge based 
system) delivery. These factors include: The Internet is readily 
accessible, web-browsers provide a common multimedia 
interface, 
several 
Internet-compatible 
tools 
for 
KBS 
development are available, Internet-based applications are 
inherently portable, and emerging protocols support co-
operation among KBS. He also identified several problems in 
the development of web-based KBS: Keeping up with rapid 
technological change to servers, interface components, 
inference engines, and various protocols; and reducing the 
potential delivery bottleneck caused by communication loads 
and a limited infrastructure Adams [12] pointed out that “there 
are numerous examples of expert systems on the web, but 
many of these systems are small, non-critical systems.” The 
most successful example is probably the web-based legal 
expert system reported by Bodine [13], who remarked that 
“Law firms are collecting hundreds of thousands of dollars in 
subscription fees from clients who use their question-and-
answer advisory services based on the web.”. Contrary to 
Grove and Adams, Huntington [14] stated that “there are not 
many ES on the web” due to the fact that the Internet was not 
created with applications such as expert systems in mind. As a 
result, the manner in which the web and web browsers 
interface made it difficult to perform the actions required by 
ES. Athappilly [15] reported a “dynamic web-based 
knowledge system for prototype development for extended 
enterprise.” He suggested that the use of emerging Internet 
7
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500

(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,  
Vol. 6, No. 3, 2009 
technology made the development of multifunctional AI 
systems relatively easy and less expensive, but that many users 
in the business arena were unaware of these technologies and 
their potential benefits. Consequently, the business community 
was not aware of the value or educated to deploy the potential 
available from these technologies in making their business 
more efficient and competitive. The goals of the work 
presented in this paper are: Firstly to develop a web-based 
expert system equipped with an integrated knowledge for the 
regulations of the civil service system in Saudi Arabia, 
secondly building a knowledge base regarding the rules and 
regulations of the civil services based XML technique. Thirdly 
to develop an easy and attractive interface for the user to deal 
with the system for the introduction of inputs (entering 
ontology and knowledge base, queries or conditions) and view 
the results easily.  
The overall structure of the proposed RCSES system consists 
of two main units the knowledge base builder unit and the 
RCSES interface unit. The knowledge base builder unit 
includes the ontology builder tool, morphological analyzer, 
and model builder tool. The expert system interface unit 
includes: data for the user selection, inference engine, the 
system results, and the reasoning engine. The final form of the 
proposed RCSES is presented too, with different web pages, 
the URL for the proposed work is: http://rcses.com.  
 
The rest of the paper is organized as: Section 2 introduces the 
knowledge acquisition and selection. Section 3 presents the 
knowledge representation of the civil service regulations 
including 
the 
Ontology 
and 
the 
Knowledge 
Rules 
representation. Section 4 introduces the RCSES system 
development stage. Section 5 introduces the results (system 
usability and testing). Section 6 is reserved for the comparison 
with other related web based expert systems. Finally section 7 
is reserved for the conclusion and future extensions. 
 
II. 
KNOWLEDGE ACQUISITION AND SELECTION 
A precise domain is required by an expert system, the domain 
must be compact and well organized. The quality of 
knowledge highly influences the quality of expert system. The 
knowledge base is the core component of any expert system; it 
contains knowledge acquired from the domain expert. 
Building the knowledge base with the help of domain expert is 
the responsibility of knowledge engineer. The first task of any 
expert system development is the knowledge acquisition; 
which is one of the most important phases in the expert system 
development life cycle. The process of knowledge acquisition 
is difficult especially in case if the knowledge engineer is 
unfamiliar with the domain. The goal of knowledge 
acquisition step is to obtain facts and rules from the domain 
expert so that the system can draw expert level conclusions. 
Knowledge acquisition is crucial for the success of an expert 
system and regarded as a bottleneck in the development of an 
expert system. The main reason for this bottleneck is 
communication difficulties between the knowledge engineer 
and the domain expert. Knowledge acquisition in the proposed 
RCSES was not a big problem; where the regulations of the 
civil service were selected from the web site of the ministry of 
the civil service then we use it as it is after the validation from 
the experts in the civil service domain.  
The source of the regulations is: http://www.mcs.gov.sa. The 
system is developed based on 17 regulations of the civil 
service system in Saudi Arabia. More details can be obtained 
from the web site of the proposed web-based expert system: 
http://rcses.com.  
III. 
THE KNOWLEDGE REPRESENTATION   
After the step of the domain identification and knowledge 
acquiring from a participating expert of civil service regulation 
documents, a model for representing the knowledge must be 
developed. Numerous techniques for handling information in 
the knowledge-base are available; however, most expert 
systems utilize rule-based approaches. The knowledge 
engineer, working with the expert, must try to define the 
possible best structure. Other commonly used approaches 
include decision trees, blackboard systems and object oriented 
programming. Knowledge representation has been defined as 
"A set of syntactic and semantic conventions that make it 
possible to describe things. The syntax of a representation 
specifies a set of rules for combining symbols to form 
Figure 1.  Knowledge structure. 
 
Knowledge 
Base 
Ontology 
 
Parent- Regulation name 
Child- Regulation Element 
Child- Regulation Element 
..........
Concept 
Concept 
Concept 
Concept 
Property
Property
………
Value
Value
...................
Model 
 
Rule 
..........
.............
...................
Model of Regulation 
Value
Property
Concept
Concept
.........................
Ontology 
Builder Tool 
Models 
Builder Tool 
Property
Property
Value
Value
Result 
Condition 
Value
Property
Concept
Concept
Result 
Condition 
Rule 
8
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500

(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,  
Vol. 6, No. 3, 2009 
expressions in the representation language. The semantics of a 
representation specify how expressions so constructed should 
be interpreted (i.e. how meaning can be derived from a form). 
In the proposed system RCSES, the knowledge representation 
methodology uses XML format. Where, two elements of 
knowledge, ontology and model rules are represented using 
XML format. The overall knowledge structure is shown in 
Fig.1. 
A. 
 Ontology Representation 
An ontology is defined as ‘‘formal, explicit speciﬁcation of a 
shared conceptualization’’. It represents the concepts and the 
relationships in a domain promoting interrelation with other 
models and automatic processing. Ontologies are considered 
to be a proper mechanism to encode information in modern 
knowledge-intensive applications, so they have become one of 
the most used knowledge representation formalism. They 
allow the enrichment of data with semantics, enabling 
automatic verification of data consistency and making easier 
knowledge base maintenance as well as the reuse of 
components. Ontology is a conceptualization of a domain into 
a human understandable, machine-readable format consisting 
of entries. The ontology entry has three layers: concepts, 
properties of concept and values of the properties.  
The proposed ontology structure is illustrated by a real 
example for the ontology structure in the proposed RCSES as 
shown in Fig. 2; which describes the structure of separation 
regulation in civil service system using XML format. The 
interpretation of the example as following: 
1. Node of “OntParent” represents regulation data and has attribute 
“ParentName” its value means the regulation name as: “ اﻟﺘﻌﯿﯿﻦ ﻓﻲ
 .”اﻟﻮظﺎﺋﻒ اﻟﻌﺎﻣﺔ
2. Child nodes “OntChild” represent the decision result for each part 
in regulation data and has attribute “ChildName” its value means 
the decision result of the regulation as: 
"
 اﻟﺘﻮظﯿﻒ ﻓﻲ وظﺎﺋﻒ اﻟﻤﺮﺗﺒﺔ اﻟﺴﺎدﺳﺔ ﺣﺘﻲ اﻟﻌﺎﺷﺮة
 - ﻣﺆﻗﺖ
 ."
3. Node “OntConcept” represents the concepts in the regulation, and 
has attribute “ConceptName” its value is the concept names in the 
selected part in the regulation as:" "اﻹﻋﻼن
4. Node “OntVal” represents the values in the selected part in the 
regulation, it has an attribute “ValueName”, which specifies the 
values of the OntVal, as "
 ﻻ
 ."ﯾﻮﺟﺪ إﻋﻼن","ﯾﻮﺟﺪ إﻋﻼن
The proposed system developed a tool to build the domain 
ontology, which is easy to use and dynamic one for the 
acquired knowledge.  
B. 
Rules of Knowledge Representation 
The knowledge can be formulated as shown in the following 
simple statements: IF the ‘traffic light’ is green THEN the 
action is go, as for example: IF the ‘traffic light’ is red THEN 
the action is stop. These statements represented in the IF-
THEN form are called production rules or just rules. The term 
‘rule’ in artificial intelligence, which is the most commonly 
type of knowledge representation, can be defined as IF-THEN  
 
<KSA_Civil_Ontology> 
<OntParent ParentName=" >"اﻟﺘﻌﯿﯿﻦ ﻓﻲ اﻟﻮظﺎﺋﻒ اﻟﻌﺎﻣﺔ
<OntChild ChildName="
 اﻟﺘﻮظﯿﻒ ﻓﻲ وظﺎﺋﻒ اﻟﻤﺮﺗﺒﺔ اﻟﺴﺎدﺳﺔ ﺣﺘﻲ اﻟﻌﺎﺷﺮة
 - ﻣﺆﻗﺖ
 >"
<OntConcept ConceptName=" >"اﻹﻋﻼن
<OntVal ValueName=" >/"ﯾﻮﺟﺪ إﻋﻼن
<OntVal ValueName=" >/"ﻻ ﯾﻮﺟﺪ إﻋﻼن
</OntConcept> 
</OntChild> 
<OntChild ChildName=" >"اﻟﺘﻮظﯿﻒ ﻓﻲ وظﺎﺋﻒ اﻟﻤﺮﺗﺒﺔ اﻟﺮاﺑﻌﺔ ﻋﺸﺮة ﻓﻤﺎ ﻓﻮق
<OntConcept ConceptName=" >"ﻗﺮار ﻣﻦ ﻣﺠﻠﺲ اﻟﻮزراء
<OntVal ValueName=" >/"ﯾﻮﺟﺪ ﻗﺮار
<OntVal ValueName=" >/"ﻻ ﯾﻮﺟﺪ ﻗﺮار
</OntConcept> 
</OntChild> 
</OntParent> 
</KSA_Civil_Ontology> 
 
Figure 2.  Sample of ontology structure in XML format. 
<KSA_Civil_Regulation> 
<Model ModelName=" >"إﻧﮭـﺎء اﻟﺨـﺪﻣﺔ
<Rule Name="R1" RegItem=" "إﻧﮭـﺎء اﻟﺨـﺪﻣﺔ ﺑﺎﻹﺳﺘﻘﺎﻟﺔNoTrueFinding="0"> 
<Finding Cpt=" "اﻹﺳﺘﻘﺎﻟﺔProp="Value" Val=" "ﺗﻘﺪﯾﻢ اﻻﺳﺘﻘﺎﻟﺔ وﻗﺒﻮﻟﮭﺎ
Equal="Yes" ExistInWM="No"/> 
</Rule> 
<Rule Name="R2" RegItem=" "إﻧﮭـﺎء اﻟﺨـﺪﻣﺔ ﺑﻄﻠﺐ اﻹﺣﺎﻟﺔ ﻋﻠﻰ اﻟﺘﻘﺎﻋﺪ
NoTrueFinding="0"> 
<Finding Cpt=" "طﻠﺐ اﻹﺣﺎﻟﺔ ﻋﻠﻰ اﻟﺘﻘﺎﻋﺪ ﻗﺒﻞ ﺑﻠﻮغ اﻟﺴﻦ اﻟﻨﻈﺎﻣﯿﺔProp="Value" 
Val=" "ﺗﻘﺪﯾﻢ اﻟﻄﻠﺐ ﻗﺒﻞ ﺑﻠﻮغ اﻟﺴﻦ اﻟﻨﻈﺎﻣﯿﺔ وﻗﺒﻮﻟﮫEqual="Yes" ExistInWM="No"/>
</Rule> 
</model> 
</ KSA_Civil_Regulation> 
 
Figure 3.  Sample of rules structure in XML format 
Figure 4.  Structure of the proposed system RCSES. 
The knowledge base builder tool
Morphological analyzer 
Ontology builder tool
Model builder tool 
Expert system interface 
Data of user selection
Inference engine 
System result 
 
Domain expert
User 
Reasoning engine 
 
Knowledge
 
Base 
9
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500

(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,  
Vol. 6, No. 3, 2009 
 
Figure 5.  (a): Inference engine block diagram. 
Figure 5.     (b): The algorithm for the inference engine. 
Use method “Load” to open the KB file 
Start
Check: do the values 
of model, rule, and 
finding exist? 
No 
Display Message, the 
values not exist 
Yes 
Create instance from class “XmlDocument”
End
  Use “CreateElement” method to create element 
of rule, and Finding 
Check if the model 
name is existed?
Yes 
Locate all nodes whose name of model  
Use “AppendChild” method for each element 
rule to create a child of the model 
Use “SetAttribute” method for each element 
rule to create a attribute of the rule 
Use method “Save” to save changes in XML file
Display KB in XML file 
Check if the rule names 
for model exist?
Yes 
Locate all nodes with the same model name
Check if the rule 
finding is existed?
No 
Yes 
10
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500

(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,  
Vol. 6, No. 3, 2009 
structure that relates given information or facts in the IF part 
to some action in the THEN part. A rule provides some 
description of how to solve a problem. Rules are relatively 
easy to create and understand. Any rule consists of two parts: 
the IF part, called the antecedent (premise or condition) and 
the THEN part called the consequent (conclusion or action). 
The basic syntax of a rule is: IF <antecedent>THEN 
<consequent>. The rules in XML format have a different 
structure with the previous meaning but in different format. 
Sample of rule built in the proposed RCSES is shown in Fig.3; 
it can be interpreted as following: 
1. 
<KSA_Civil_Regulation>; 
represents 
the 
total 
regulations’ in the domain of the civil regulations.  
2. The node of “Model” represents a regulation data and has 
attribute “ModelName” its value takes the regulation name as 
“ .”إﻧﮭـﺎء اﻟﺨـﺪﻣﺔ
3. The child nodes “Rule” represent the decision rule for each part 
in regulation; takes R1, R2,…and so on.  
4. The node attribute “RegItem” represents the consequent in the 
selected rule in the regulation.  
5. The node “Finding” represents antecedent in the rule. 
6. The condition equal to attribute “Cpt” value as concept, attribute 
“Prop” value as property, and attribute “Val” value as value. The 
condition for example equal to separation “ﺗﻘﺪﯾﻢ اﻻﺳﺘﻘﺎﻟﺔ =اﻻﺳﺘﻘﺎﻟﺔ
  .”وﻗﺒﻮﻟﮭﺎ
The proposed system RCSES, developed a tool component to 
build the domain model rules for the acquired knowledge in an 
efficient, easy, and dynamic way for changing and/or 
modifying the rules as required. 
IV. 
RCSES DEVELOPMENT  
The development of the proposed RCSES system includes the 
development of different sub-systems. Fig.4 shows the block 
diagram of the entire proposed system RCSES.  
 
The following section describes the different sub-systems in 
the proposed RCSES system as well as its functionality in the 
proposed system RCSES: 
1. 
The knowledge builder unit: Developed to enable the 
expert or knowledge engineer to enter and save domain 
ontology and domain rules in an efficient and easy way. 
2. 
 The morphological analyzer unit: Developed to  
check if the entered words or sentences in the domain model 
rules are found in the ontology stored in the knowledge base 
or not; to avoid the unwanted reasoning results or the results 
concluded due to the user inputs errors and mistakes. 
3. 
  Web page interface of the proposed RCSES system: 
For using purposes includes entering ontology, knowledge, 
and the use of the expert system by entering the questions 
and get the output results with reasoning too. 
4. 
 The entire control and operation of the system is 
done by the inference engine; that is developed using Visual 
Basic dot net (VB.NET); which handles the knowledge in 
format of XML to get the result from the XML file 
(Knowledge base) that stores the knowledge rules. Fig. 5 
shows the block diagram of inference engine. The main roles 
of the inference engine are summarized as: It applies the 
expert domain knowledge to what is known about the 
present situation to determine new information about the 
domain. The inference engine is the mechanism that 
connects the user inputs in the form of answers to the 
questions to the rules of knowledge base and further 
continues the session to come to conclusions. This process 
leads to the solution of the problem. The inference engine 
also identifies the rules of the knowledge base used to get 
decision from the system and also forms the decision tree. 
 A. Reasoning Mechanism 
The 
reasoning 
mechanism 
consists 
of 
three 
main 
components namely: working memory manager (WM 
manager), XML matcher, and result browser. Fig.5 (a) 
Figure 6. Home page of the proposed RCSES. 
Figure 7. Web page for entering the ontology & knowledge base. 
11
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500

(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,  
Vol. 6, No. 3, 2009 
depicts the main components of the reasoning mechanism, 
while Fig.5 (b) illustrates the inference engine flowchart.  
• 
WM Manager Component: The WM manager 
interacts with the user-friendly interface to get the concepts 
and its properties as well as the values of those properties by 
using communication model. The user-friendly interface 
permits the user to edit his complaints easily. This complaint 
is considered as a user finding. When the user selects 
concept, property, and value to be entered in the working 
memory, the WM manager creates an XSL query statement, 
which represents these findings. 
• 
XML Matcher Component: In this methodology the 
rule is succeeded when all its child nodes are existed in 
working memory. This is achieved when the attribute 
‘ExistInWM’of every child node is set to “Yes”. So, the 
matcher gets those succeeded rules by comparing the value 
of the attribute ‘NoTrueFindings’ of every parent node and 
the number of the child nodes in this rule and select the 
matched one. The succeeded rules are store in the result store 
for later use by display result component. 
• 
Result 
Browser 
Component: 
Result 
Browser 
component gets the value of the attribute disorder for every 
rule in the result store, and pass value to the user interface by 
using communication model to display it to the user. 
V. 
RESULTS OF THE PROPOSED SYSTEM RCSES 
The proposed RCSES was evaluated with different users, 
including “RCSES” developers’ staff, and technical people. 
The system is validated by experts in the field of Civil service 
regulations. Tests of the system were carried out by the 
developers to make sure the system would work correctly as 
well as the RCSES is web based expert system, another 
validation and evaluation for the RCSES will be carried out 
through the using through the web and the feedbacks from the 
users will be considered for any comments and modifications. 
This output results from the developed RCSES will be 
interpreted via three parts as: The home page (http\\www. 
rcses.com) of the system, the web page for ontology building 
and knowledge building of the civil service regulations, and 
the web pages of the using the RCSES as shown in Figures 
6,7,8, 9, and 10. Description of these units and sub-units of 
web pages are as following: 
• 
The home web page is illustrated in Fig.6, which 
represents the user and expert interface to the RCSES 
system.  
• 
The web page for the ontology and knowledge base 
builders is shown in Fig. 7; it assists the ability to the experts 
in entering the knowledge base ontology from the web page 
and the modification or extension of the knowledge base 
ontology. 
• 
The web page for the ontology builder is shown in 
Fig. 8(a), while Fig. 8(b) shows the web page for the 
knowledge base builder; it assists the ability to enter the 
knowledge base from the web page and the modification or 
extension of the knowledge base.  
• 
The web page for using the RCSES system that is 
shown in Fig. 9; it assists the ability to use the RCSES 
system, by entering the question (select the attributes, then 
selection the attributes values, continue until select all or the 
majority of the attributes then find the expected results and 
decisions. Finally you can see the reasoning; which can be 
viewed in form of HTML). 
• 
Samples from the use of the RCSES and the 
corresponding output results, and for more details about the 
use of the RCSES system visit the rcses.com, we presented a 
Case of Employing in the governmental jobs  اﻟﺘﻌﯿﯿﻦ ﻓﻲ اﻟﻮظﺎﺋﻒ
اﻟﻌﺎﻣﺔ
 "
 ," the steps for selecting the attributes and the 
conclusion inferred are illustrated through Figures 10(a..j); this 
case describes the all steps needed from the starting selecting 
the attributes, followed by the selection of the attributes vales, 
followed by the conclusion and the expected results, and the 
sure results. The system presented in this paper RCSES was 
not easy to be developed, but after the development it can be 
used by anyone with Internet access and a web browser easily. 
The web based ES made the evaluation and maintenance of 
“RCSES” easier than a conventional ES. There is no need to 
install the system in advance. It is easy to collect feedback. 
Visitors can be easily traced and analyzed, by collecting 
information, it was possible to profile the users and determine 
the value of the system. Compared with traditional ES 
development tools, the web design software simplifies the user 
interface design. XML-based user interfaces allow the 
incorporation of rich media elements. Hyperlinks provide an 
extra facility in enhancing ES explanation and help functions; 
users can access the relevant web site easily.  The WWW 
helps in acquiring the knowledge needed in constructing the 
knowledge base. Any knowledge updating and maintenance 
can be handled centrally. Useful links are incorporated to help 
the user understand and interpret the ES recommendations. 
The 

feedback 
forms 
and 
other 
Internet 
communication functions allow users to question and 
comment on the system.  
VI. 
COMPARISON WITH OTHER RELATED WBES  
The comparisons with other similar web based expert systems 
are carried from different points of views as following: 
1. KR: the Knowledge Representation,  
2. KBR: Knowledge Base Repository, 
3. KM: Knowledge Modification, 
4. KB: Knowledge Builder,  
5. IR: Inference Engine, 
 
6. EP: Execution Platform, 
7. PE: Programming Environment, 
8. RT: Response Time for results seen. 
 
From our searches of the literature and the presented 
comparison, there is no reporting on the topic, there is no any  
 
12
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500

(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,  
Vol. 6, No. 3, 2009 
Figure 8.  (a): Page for entering the ontology. 
Figure 8.  (b): Page for entering the Knowledge base. 
Figure 9. Using the RCSES system for questions and inferring. 
Figure 10. (a): Real example using RCSES step 1. 
 
Figure 10. (b): Real example using RCSES step 2. 
 
Figure 10. (c): Real example using RCSES step 3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500

(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,  
Vol. 6, No. 3, 2009 
Figure 10.  (f): Real example using RCSES step 6. 
 
Figure 10.  (e): Real example using RCSES step 5. 
Figure 10. (d): Real example using RCSES step 4. 
 
 
Figure 10. (g): Real example using RCSES step 7. 
Figure 10.  (h): Real example using RCSES step 8. 
Figure 10.  (j): Real example using RCSES step 9. 
 
14
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500

(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,  
Vol. 6, No. 3, 2009 
 
web-based ES on the civilian service regulations on the web. 
There also appears to be a lack of a general methodology for 
developing web-based expert systems.  The proposed system 
provides better performance as the KR was done by XML 
format as well as the XML ontology format, the homogeneity 
between the KR and the platform on the WEB so the 
performance is very high compared with other systems that 
needs a mediator to match between the knowledge 
representation methods and the web platform representation or 
to load the knowledge from any file or by executing a 
programs as presented in the comparison. The dynamic 
property for changing and modifying the Knowledge as 
needed in a fast and very easy way. 
VII. 
CONCLUSION 
The work presented in this paper tries to overcome the general 
lack of research in the area of web-based expert systems 
(WBES). The paper addressed the issues associated with the 
analysis, design, development, and use of web-based expert 
system for the regulations of the civil service system in the 
K.S.A “RCSES”. It is the first time to develop such system; 
which is web based, with the new methodology, the ontology,  
 
the knowledge representation, and the tools as well. The 
presented work introduces a comparison with other related 
WBES. The work considered 17 regulations for the civil 
service and its ability to modify or updating and the extending 
of the existing regulations. The “RCSES” was verified, and 
validated by different technical users and the developers as 
well to be usable in the real world governmental departments. 
The research provides benefits to the employees and the 
ability to solve the contradiction in the confused problems, as 
well as the providing for the suggested solutions. The 
developed RCSES is fully implemented to run on the web 
using ASP.net techniques as the main programming language, 
and 
a 
new 
server-side 
technology, 
XML-Rule-based 
knowledge sources and the inference mechanisms were 
implemented using ASP.net. The work presented in this paper 
can be extended to add another version of the system in 
English language, and to include the uncertainty using the 
fuzzy knowledge representation and inference too.  
 
Acknowledgment 
 
The authors wish to thank Taif University for the financial 
support of this research and the anonymous reviewers for their 
valuable comments. 
TABLE  I.  COMPARISON ANALYSIS WITH 6 RELATED WEB BASED EXPERT SYSTEMS. 
 
KR 
KBR 
KM 
KB 
IE 
EP 
PE 
RT to show result 
*****The proposed presented work: RCSES***** 
Rules were built 
in XML format 
 
XML 
Very easy to 
modify or change 
as required 
By  
a developed 
tool-
Knowledge 
Builder) 
backward 
chaining 
,depends on 
XML parser 
Web-Based 
.NET 
technology 
Fast 
1. Web-based weather expert system (WES) for Space Shuttle launch [16]
Rules are built in 
with Java 
program.
Boolean 
object 
Difficult, by 
programmer 
built in Java 
program 
Backward 
chaining 
technique
Web-Based 
Java servlet 
technology 
Need to download data as inputs 
2. Web-based expert system for advising on herbicide use in Great Britain [17] 
Prolog KB 
Prolog KB 
files 
Difficult, By 
programmer 
Prolog 
Prolog-based 
inference 
engine 
Web-Based 
Perl, and  
HTML 
Takes more time (reads KB files 
& construct HTML 
3. Dr. Wheat: A Web-based Expert System for Diagnosis of Diseases and Pests in Pakistani Wheat [18] 
Form of IF-THEN 
rules 
e2gLite 
knowledge 
base 
Little difficult, 
using  e2gLite 
shell 
e2gLite™ 
expert 
system shell 
Forward and 
backward     
chaining     
technique 
Web-Based 
JAVA 
Rather fast, because interface is 
built by java that processes the 
built knowledge 
4. A Novel Web based Expert System Architecture for On-line and Off-line Fault Diagnosis and Control (FDC) of Power System Equipment [19]
Form of 
production rules, 
Text files for 
if-else rules. 
 Upload the 
Knowledge base 
files in text 
format   
Developed 
Shell 
is developed 
using 
VB.NET 
Web-Based 
.NET 
technology 
Rather slow because it depends 
on saving data in data base and 
upload the knowledge base after 
each updating 
5. Web-based expert system for food dryer selection [20]
Rule-based 
knowledge 
Depends on 
three 
modules 
By  Developed 
ReSolver 
ReSolver KB 
backward 
chaining, by 
ReSolver 
inference  
mechanism 
Web-Based 
Java servlet 
technology 
Takes more times ,create the 
HTML forms for presenting 
intermediate and final results 
and help screens 
6.  Knowledge Representation and Reasoning Using XML [21] 
using the XML 
XML 
Very hard as 
building from 
start 
As text file 
represents 
XML format 
backward 
chaining 
,Depends on 
XML parser 
Client-side 
Visual basic 6.0 
with XML 
reducing the  response  time 
15
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500

(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,  
Vol. 6, No. 3, 2009
