D3BA: A Tool for Optimizing Business Processes
Using Non-Deterministic Planning
Tathagata Chakraborti and Yasaman Khazaeni
IBM Research AI, Cambridge MA USA

Business Process + Skills = Optimized Business Process
Abstract
This paper builds upon recent work in the declarative design
of dialogue agents and proposes an exciting new tool – D3BA
– Declarative Design for Digital Business Automation, built
to optimize business processes using the power of AI plan-
ning. The tool provides a powerful framework to build, op-
timize, and maintain complex business processes and opti-
mize them by composing with services that automate one or
more subtasks. We illustrate salient features of this composi-
tion technique, compare with other philosophies of composi-
tion, and highlight exciting opportunities for research in this
emerging ﬁeld of business process automation.
A business process is a collection of tasks which in a spe-
ciﬁc sequence meet some business goal, such as produce a
service or product for customers. People performing these
tasks are referred to as case workers. Figure 1 illustrates a
simple business process involving the approval of a trip re-
quest from an employee to present at a conference. The pro-
cess begins with a stage of information gathering from the
employee, followed by reviews by their manager and direc-
tor, ending with eventual acceptance or rejection.
In practice, the life cycle of a business process is rid-
dled with repetitive tasks, severe bottlenecks and hot spots
which impact the performance of the case worker, and qual-
ity of service. Recent advances in artiﬁcial intelligence can
be leveraged to signiﬁcantly revamp how we build and main-
tain business processes with the goal of improving the case
worker experience. Indeed the ability to inject manual busi-
ness processes with artiﬁcial intelligence and sophisticated
automation has received increased attention lately (Hull and
Nezhad 2016). For example, in the travel approval process
described above, there are stages where automation can be
used to speed up the workﬂow signiﬁcantly, such as during
the acquisition of information for the applicant. We want to
be able to determine how best to do this, where and when to
deploy automation, to maximize impact on the process and
reduce load on the individual caseworkers.
Business Processes and Planning
Business process management has been one of the most
actively researched areas when it comes to applications of
planning technologies. A fantastic guide to existing work
Figure 1: A snapshot of a simple travel authorization ap-
plication from IBM’s Business Process Management tool.
The different layers represent handovers between casework-
ers with different privileges. The boxes representing individ-
ual subtasks are connected through logic gates (AND, OR,
etc.) that control the overall workﬂow of the process.
and challenges at the intersection of planning and busi-
ness process management can be found in (Marrella 2017).
Salient problems addressed in this area include speciﬁcation
and construction of business processes in the form of plan-
ning problems (R-moreno et al. 2007), robustiﬁcation and
adaptation to failures (Jarvis et al. 1999), validation, veri-
ﬁcation, and monitoring of processes (de Leoni, Lanciano,
and Marrella 2018), and prediction and mitigation of risk
(Sohrabi et al. 2018). We address a somewhat overlooked
promise of this union – that of using planning to automate
and optimize business processes. Speciﬁcally, we want to
compose an existing process with “AI skills” or services so
as to generate an optimized process that is automated to the
extent possible. The motivation for this comes directly from
an extensive body of work under the umbrella of “web ser-
vice composition” (Papazoglou and Georgakopoulos 2003).
Web Service Composition
The problem of composing
web services ﬁnds a ready ally (Dong et al. 2004; Araghi
2012) in automated planning techniques since the latter in-
herently deals with the task of composing together actions
in the service of constructing a course of action or a plan.
arXiv:2001.02619v2  [cs.AI]  4 Feb 2020

There exists a rich variety of planning techniques, each with
their own assumptions and features, and it follows that com-
position techniques built on top of them also demonstrate
properties that can be traded of depending on the needs of
the deployment. We refer to (Rao and Su 2004) for a great
summary of work done in this area, while (Srivastava and
Koehler 2003; Sohrabi 2010) provides a very useful sum-
mary of many of the challenges involved.
Competing Philosophies: Head to Head
We begin with a very brief survey (to the extent possible
within the conﬁnes of a conference paper) of existing com-
position techniques and discuss their unique trade-offs. This
will aid in uniquely placing our tool among existing tech-
niques for web service composition – and by extension the
optimization of business processes using web services – for
clients trying to choose between competing technologies.
Classical & Multi-Agent Planning
Automated planning
offer a concise way of describing and maintaining process –
it is not surprising that the exploration of web service com-
position in planning literature begun with classical (deter-
ministic, fully observable) planning or compilations into it
(Hoffmann, Bertoli, and Pistore 2007). From the planning
point of view, sophisticated interaction between services can
be dealt with at the level of reasoning with capabilities of
multi-agent systems (Au, Kuter, and Nau 2008). A typical
feature of web services is the uncertain nature of their exe-
cution (Carman, Seraﬁni, and Traverso 2003) which can be
modeled in classical form and dealt with at execution time in
certain circumstances (Pistore, Traverso, and Bertoli 2005).
Non-deterministic / Probabilistic Planning
A more nat-
ural way of dealing with uncertainty is to reason about it
during planning itself. This can be done ofﬂine, by plan-
ning with a probability distribution (Hoffmann and Brafman
2006) or set (Muise, McIlraith, and Beck 2012) of possible
outcomes. As an example, consider calling an API that re-
turns employee information of a company. The call may re-
turn the information or hit a 404 error. A non-deterministic
planner will thus plan for both contingencies instead of wait-
ing till execution time to reason with the outcome. Of course,
a critical assumption here is that nothing changes between
planning to execution (Sohrabi and McIlraith 2010). Fur-
thermore, since the planning is done ofﬂine, dealing with
uncertainty in an open world becomes tricky.
Robust (Model-Lite) Planning
Theoretically, every do-
main is deterministic if you can model all the variables.
However, a complete model is rarely available, and incom-
pleteness can manifest itself in a different form of uncer-
tainty at the time of planning. Let’s go back to the example
of the API that returns employee information. Imagine that
the API can only be pinged from inside the company ﬁre-
wall, but this constraint is not part of the planner’s model.
This uncertainty will be resolved at the time of execution
(since the domain is deterministic, you will get the same out-
come every time you ping it) but the planner can account for
this uncertainty at planning time. This ﬂavor or planning,
referred to as “model-lite planning” (Kambhampati 2007)
was proposed especially keeping web service composition
in mind. Planning in this paradigm tries to maximize success
in the most number of possible models, i.e. the robustness
(Nguyen, Sreedharan, and Kambhampati 2017) of a plan.
In our running example, the planner would string together
API calls that can potentially provide the same information
in order to maximize chances of success (instead of contin-
gent solutions like non-deterministic planners). We will see
later, given the size of our compositions, stringing together
so many services is probably not a viable solution.
Replanning
Replanning offers a viable alternative to plan-
ning with uncertain outcomes upfront (Little and Thiebaux
2007). The replanning strategy, of course, varies largely
based on assumptions about the underlying domain as we
discussed above (Yoon, Fern, and Givan 2007) – e.g. in the
context of robust planning, doing the same action multiple
times will yield the same result since the underlying domain
is deterministic. The replanning strategy also depends on the
what properties of the new plan one wants to optimize – e.g.
whether it is desired that the new process is as close to the
older one as possible or it preserves key properties or com-
mitments (Talamadupula et al. 2013).
Replanning signiﬁcantly increases the runtime complex-
ity, but is necessary at the end of the day especially since
most models are not complete and will eventually require re-
planning even with the most carefully constructed plan deal-
ing with possible contingencies. In the context of business
processes, for example, replanning has been used in the past
for the adaptation task (Bucchiarone et al. 2011).
Hierarchical Planning
Hierarchical Task Networks or
HTNs based planners such as SHOP2 (Nau et al. 2003) pro-
vide a powerful and alternative framework for composition
of services. This includes unique features such as baking
in considerations of quality of service into the action the-
ory and the ability to sort preconditions to effect this. The
HTN framework has seen continued interest in the space of
web service composition tasks (Sirin et al. 2004) outside the
scope of more traditional planning mechanisms.
Action Languages
Action languages provide another in-
teresting alternative – in (Sohrabi, Prokoshyna, and McIl-
raith 2009) authors used Golog-based templating to repre-
sent preferences, while authors in (Marrella, Mecella, and
Sardina 2017; 2018) use it to address the adaptation task.
D3BA Value Proposition
Our tool D3BA brings the notion of web service composition
to the task of business process management (Marrella 2017).
The idea here is to be able to change, evolve, and optimize
a business process by injecting into it services that can per-
form speciﬁc computation, while at the same time provid-
ing the persona in charge of the process tools to manage it
easily. The speciﬁc notion of optimization we focus on is
that of maximizing automation in the composed process and
thus reduce the load on individual case workers. Of course,
if the automated components come with additional features
we can add those considerations (such as health, probability
of success, cost, etc.) into the optimization criterion.

Figure 2: Overview of the ﬂavor of declarative speciﬁcation adopted in D3WA and the construction of D3BA on top of it. Parts
of this image has been reproduced with permission from (Muise et al. 2020). Demo link: https://bit.ly/33RNMiR.
Thus D3BA comes with two main features:
(1) an interface to build, edit, visualize, and maintain com-
plex processes concisely using a declarative speciﬁcation
that allows exponential scale-up from the representation
to the realized process; and
(2) an interface to optimize the process by composing it with
services that can automated one or more parts of it while
still maintaining the features from (1).
In order to achieve this, we build on a substrate of non-
deterministic planning so as to be able to (a) compute the
composed process ofﬂine and allow the process manager to
analyse and edit it; while also (b) be able to plan for the in-
herent uncertain nature of execution with external services.
The tool also comes with its own inbuilt executor for the
generated process once it is deployed. This can be used to
optimize a part of a given business process or orchestrate
the entire life-cycle of the process.
With regard to past work at the intersection of non-
deterministic planning and declarative speciﬁcation of pro-
cesses, we would like to emphasize that our focus here
is not on the declarative aspect as a means to deﬁne a
process but as a means to facilitate a particular kind of
optimization (through composition with automation) and
also not on non-determinism as a means to handle uncer-
tainty (which comes for free) but as a means to facilitate
the user interaction for this optimization process. There
is indeed a lot of work (Pesic and Van der Aalst 2006;
Srivastava 2004) on how the declarative paradigm readily
translates to business process applications that require the
deﬁnition and composition of processes. That particular as-
pect of the problem is admittedly quite well explored but
only acts as a means to an end here.
The unique value proposition we are providing is the busi-
ness process + skills = optimized business process interac-
tion patterns with the human in the loop at design time (Mar-
rella and Lesp´erance 2017). The proposed interaction is a
very speciﬁc ﬂavor of human-in-the-loop composition that
allows the business process manager persona to take in a new
process or write a process in a declarative form, take in a cat-
alog of skills, and author optimized processes ofﬂine. This
is where the proposed framework built on non-deterministic
planning comes into form in being able to surface different
optimized compositions to the manager persona to edit, de-
bug, visualize, and personalize further. The declarative form
is necessary for this to happen (as well as account for the
fact that skill catalogs are independent of the process).
Background: D3WA
In AAAI 2019, Chakraborti et al. demonstrated D3WA – a
tool meant to bring down the effort and expertise required
to design sophisticated goal-directed conversational agents
e.g. for applications such as customer support. The state
of the art (Sreedhar 2018) in the design of such agents re-
quires the dialogue designer to either write down the en-
tire dialogue tree by hand (e.g. Google Dialogue Flow or
Watson Assistant) which becomes intractable pretty soon
or train end-to-end systems which provide no control over
their emerging behavior (Metz 2018) and are thus unus-
able in the enterprise scene. Instead, in (Muise et al. 2020;
Botea et al. 2019), the authors proposed a paradigm shift in
how such agents are built by conceiving a declarative way
of specifying them. In this paper, we extend their framework
for the purposes of the deﬁnition and composition of auto-
mated skills into business process speciﬁcations.
Anatomy of a Declarative Speciﬁcation
At the core of the declarative speciﬁcation (as shown in Fig-
ure 2 is a set of variables that model the state of the world
and actions that depend and operate on those variables to
deﬁne capabilities that an agent has to affect change to the

(a) Composition illustrating fallbacks to original process.
(b) Robustness.
(c) Personalization.
Figure 3: Examples illustrating salient properties of D3BA compositions, including (3a) fallback to equivalent services or (in
the worst case) to the original manual process; (3b) automated ﬁltering of relevant services + chaining of equivalent skills to
increase robustness of the composition; and ﬁnally (3c) easy personalization and management of the composed process.
world. In the context of a conversational agent, such actions
can be either speech actions that interact directly with the
end user, or internal actions such as logical inferences or
API calls. The latter, of course, is more relevant to our case.
Each action is deﬁned by a set of NEEDs or statuses of
variables which tells the agent when it can perform the ac-
tion (these become preconditions of actions available to the
planner in the backend), and a set of OUTCOMES (recall the
two outcomes in the example of an API call from before),
one of which might occur at execution time. Each outcome
produces a set of updates to the variables – these are com-
piled to the non-deterministic effects of the actions available
to the planner in the backend. A non-deterministic planner1
in the backend uses this speciﬁcation to plan all possible out-
comes ofﬂine and automatically generates the resulting dia-
logue tree (which would otherwise have had to be written
manually). This results in an exponential savings from the
size of the speciﬁcation to the complexity of the composed
agent, as shown in Figure 2. For more details on D3WA we
refer the reader to (Muise et al. 2020). In the following sec-
tion, we will describe how we adopt this platform for the
management and optimization of business processes.
D3BA: Process + Skills = Optimized Process
This section outlines the basics of the proposed composition
technique with illustrative examples. A video demonstration
can be viewed at https://bit.ly/33RNMiR.
Business Processes
The starting point of the composition
process is a business process written either inside D3BA it-
self, or an existing process imported from an outside source
(e.g. as in Figure 1), usually in the form of a ﬁnite state
1We use PRP (Muise, McIlraith, and Beck 2012) as the non-
deterministic planner and Hovor (Muise et al. 2019) as the execu-
tion engine. The intent classiﬁers that make up the determiners for
the action outcomes are based on Watson Assistant Beta features.
machine, a graph, a mind map, or a similar data structure.
Though the D3BA tool currently does not support the latter
yet, refer to (Sohrabi et al. 2018) how this translation is done
(note that this translation will lose the exponential savings
that can be gained from a declarative speciﬁcation).
The interface to specifying a process remains almost iden-
tical to D3WA. This is not surprising since a key aspect of
designing goal-oriented dialogue is the speciﬁcation of the
underlying process that must be maintained in conversation
(e.g. in customer support). The only difference is that cer-
tain types of actions, namely the API calls and the logic
actions, take more precedence over the speech actions. The
latter may or may not occur in a process at all but we keep
them around to facilitate a conversational interface to the
processes (as we will see later). These form a sufﬁcient set
of capabilities to represent any business process.
Skills
As we mentioned before, our goal is to augment ex-
isting business processes with automated components, so as
to optimize the overall task. We call these automated com-
ponents: skills. This notion of skills is consistent with skills
in Watson Assistant2 or Amazon Alexa 3 as a function that
can perform microtasks. We assume a catalog of skills4 ac-
cessible to the persona designing and managing the process,
which she can import and hit compose on the interface.
The skill speciﬁcation interface follows a similar structure
to that of a generic D3WA action but provides an even more
simpler abstraction to the outcome enumeration. It accepts
as NEEDs and GOTs the inputs and outputs of a service.
The declarative speciﬁcation of these skills, to be consumed
alongside that of the rest of the business process, is compiled
2Watson Assistant Skills: https://ibm.co/2LblJ70
3Amazon Alexa Skills: https://amzn.to/2ZH9Olp
4Once a new process has been composed, it can be packaged
into a new service and folded into the skill catalog. Such “complex
actions” have been explored before in (McIlraith and Fadel 2002).

internally from this abstract speciﬁcation by considering a
power set of the GOTs as the possible OUTCOMEs of in-
voking the service. The semantics of this compilation is that
by invoking the service the planner is expecting to get back
(n)one or more of the promised outputs.
Composition Technique
The inputs to the composition
step is thus a process and a set of skills and the output is
a optimized process wherein the original process has been
composed with skills wherever possible to maximize au-
tomation, as shown in Figure 3. Once the skills have been
compiled to the standard D3WA form the rest of the process
remains same as in D3WA. This means we get all the rest of
its features for free, including being able to visualize, debug,
and iterate on the composed process once it has been com-
puted. Speciﬁcally with regards to business process manage-
ment, we illustrate some key capabilities next.
The reason declarative works well in this setting is two-
fold: First, the sheer size of these composed processes, and
the need to be able to be ﬂexible with their management,
makes it imperative that they are not written and maintained
by hand. Furthermore, as we mentioned before, the source of
skills and processes may be different. The declarative frame-
work allows developers of either to develop without having
to worry about how they relate to each other. The planner
preforms an essential role in the background by providing a
powerful tool to stitch them together.
It is important to note that this composition task is quite
non-trivial. This is because, given a complex business pro-
cess and a large set of skills, it is computationally intractable
by a human being to ﬁgure out all the possible combinations
and ﬁnd the optimal ones among them. Further, the source
of the process and the skills may be different. For example,
a developer who is writing the skill may have no idea about
the business processes that their skill is eventually going to
be used in. Furthermore, the features of these skills, as well
as the process itself, change over time, making it essential
that the composition process is automated.
Features of Proposed Composition
Consider the travel application process again (see Figure 3).
On the left, we see a part of the travel approval business pro-
cess dealing with acquiring information from the applicant.
There are three back-and-forths with the employee, to ﬁgure
out the name of the conference, title of the presentation, and
estimated expenses, until this step of the process is complete.
Fallbacks
On the right of Figure 3a, we see the optimized
business process composed out of skills. These skills, for
example, may be able to come up with estimated expenses
given a conference5, or look up the paper title given the em-
ployee information6. In the optimized process, the added
ﬂows due to the automated skills are shown in blue, while
handovers from automation to the original process is high-
lighted in red. Notice that the four original back-and-forths
are still there, but two of them have been bypassed by the
skills and are only resorted to as fallbacks, if they fail. This
5Built on the Amadeus API: https://developers.amadeus.com/.
6Built on top of the (IBM internal) Author Workbench service.
number of skills
Base
5
10
15
20
size of composition (#edges)
23
134
209
370
1039
time to generate (secs)
-
0.02
0.24
3.10
19.48
Table 1: Average size of composed processes with respect to
number of skills over 5 randomly generated catalogs.
Figure 4: Challenge problem: meta-reasoning to improve an
existing process by searching in the space of models.
is noticeable in the dialogue in the inset, where the number
of interactions with the caseworker is reduced.
Robustness
These fallbacks need not be restricted to the
original process only. As shown in Figure 3b, our approach
ﬁgures out how to chain equivalent skills to maximize suc-
cess of the automated components. The composition tech-
nique allows this optimized process to grow exponentially
to increase the robustness of automation. This is an example
of how quickly the composition task (let alone the orchestra-
tion – i.e. execution and monitoring – of the process once it
is composed) can go out of hand for manual approaches even
for the small process used here for illustrative purposes.
Relevancy
An additional feature to note in Figure 3b is
that the catalog is quite larger than the set of skills ﬁnally
ﬁnding a role in the optimized process. Our approach ﬁgures
out which skills to use (and when and where) and which to
ignore from the skill catalog. In addition to the complexity
or chained composition demonstrated above, this too is often
beyond the scope of manual composition.
Customization
Finally, our approach also makes it very
easy to modify and personalize the composed process with
your own rules. In Figure 3c, for example, we have added
a rule to bypass the manager approval if the presentation is
going to happen at a particular conference. This is automat-
ically reﬂected again, in the newly composed process. This
ability to make small edits and effect large changes in the
process is a unique feature of declarative modeling.
Composition Complexity
Before we end, we would like to give a sense of the complex-
ity of the compositions. Table 1 illustrates the sizes (mea-
sured in edges to compare against the complexity of manual
build) of the composed processes and runtime with respect
to increasing size of the skill catalog. Clearly, while compo-
sition is intractable without automation even for small cata-
log sizes, the planner is quite fast (especially considering the
compositions are ofﬂine) in coming up with the solutions.

Challenge Problems
We end with a discussion of two key research challenges that
come out of the D3BA paradigm.
Meta-Reasoning on Business Processes
So far we have
concentrated only on improving existing processes using
skills. The improvements have been closed world, i.e. con-
ﬁned to the existing process, and underlying process or
model never changes. The promise of D3BA need not be
conﬁned to this. In fact, the planning community has re-
cently seen increased attention to the ability to search
and reason in the space of models (Keren et al. 2019;
Chakraborti et al. 2017). Such techniques can allow us
to evolve a process to maximize measurable performance
metrics such as risk (Muthusamy, Slominski, and Ishakian
2018). Recent work has take the ﬁrst steps (Narendra et al.
2019) towards evolving business processes to that effect.
Model space reasoning can be used to identify opportuni-
ties for improving a workﬂow by addressing hot-spots, bot-
tlenecks, and dead-ends in a process (Figure 4). Works on
process mining for planning speciﬁcations (De Giacomo et
al. 2016; 2017) can also provide powerful tools to his end.
Taxonomy and Knowledge Base
One of the assumptions
we made throughout this work was that the skill develop-
ers and the persona in charge of managing the business pro-
cess, though working independently, still have access to a
shared vocabulary or taxonomy to specify artifacts of their
processes or skills. Ideally, we would like to relax this and
instead be able to call to a knowledge base in the background
that can make a suitable mapping between the two speciﬁca-
tions. This knowledge can reside in an ontology in the back-
end or may, for example, come from meta information pro-
vided by the skill developer in the manifest ﬁle correspond-
ing to their skill. Existing approaches such as Embedded
Business AI Framework7 (EBA) has attempted to provide
a tight integration with skills and ontologies in the past, and
can potentially provide inspiration towards enabling more
sophisticated composition strategies in D3BA as well. The
now sunsetted project API Harmony8 can also provide valu-
able lessons on the representation and composition of di-
verse web services and skills. In the context of planning in
particular, authors in (Hoffmann, Bertoli, and Pistore 2007)
have previously attempted to leverage ontologies in the con-
text of web service composition, while works in business
process management (Hepp et al. 2005) has also proposed
similar solutions for this problem.
Looking Forward: Path to Deployment
In this paper, we demonstrated how non-deterministic plan-
ning can provide a powerful way of constructing, maintain-
ing, and optimizing business processes using AI microser-
vices. Going forward, we will be looking to integrate this
tooling into IBM’s Digital Business Autamation9 (DBA)
7Embedded Business AI Framework: https://www.eba.ai/
8API Harmony: https://apiharmony-open.mybluemix.net
9DBA: https://www.ibm.com/cloud/garage/architectures/dba
suite aimed to streamline business operations through au-
tomation. The larger effort towards this integration can be
read in (Rizk et al. 2017).
