Video In Sentences Out
Andrei Barbu,a∗Alexander Bridge,a Zachary Burchill,a Dan Coroian,a Sven Dickinson,b
Sanja Fidler,b Aaron Michaux,a Sam Mussman,a Siddharth Narayanaswamy,a Dhaval Salvi,c
Lara Schmidt,a Jiangnan Shangguan,a Jeffrey Mark Siskind,a Jarrell Waggoner,c Song Wang,c
Jinlian Wei,a Yifan Yin,a and Zhiqi Zhangc
aSchool of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA
bDepartment of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, CA
cDepartment of Computer Science & Engineering, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, USA
Abstract
We present a system that produces sentential de-
scriptions of video:
who did what to whom,
and where and how they did it. Action class is
rendered as a verb, participant objects as noun
phrases, properties of those objects as adjecti-
val modiﬁers in those noun phrases, spatial re-
lations between those participants as preposi-
tional phrases, and characteristics of the event
as prepositional-phrase adjuncts and adverbial
modiﬁers. Extracting the information needed to
render these linguistic entities requires an ap-
proach to event recognition that recovers object
tracks, the track-to-role assignments, and chang-
ing body posture.
1
Introduction
We present a system that produces sentential descriptions
of short video clips.
These sentences describe who did
what to whom, and where and how they did it. This sys-
tem not only describes the observed action as a verb, it also
describes the participant objects as noun phrases, proper-
ties of those objects as adjectival modiﬁers in those noun
phrases, the spatial relations between those participants as

Additional images and videos as well as all code and
datasets are available at http://engineering.purdue.
edu/˜qobi/arxiv2012b.
coordination: and
verbs:
approached, arrived, attached, bounced, buried, carried, caught,
chased, closed, collided, digging, dropped, entered, exchanged,
exited, fell, ﬂed, ﬂew, followed, gave, got, had, handed, hauled, held,
hit, jumped, kicked, left, lifted, moved, opened, passed, picked,
pushed, put, raised, ran, received, replaced, snatched, stopped,
threw, took, touched, turned, walked, went
nouns:
bag, ball, bench, bicycle, box, cage, car, cart, chair, dog, door,
ladder, left, mailbox, microwave, motorcycle, object, person, right,
skateboard, SUV, table, tripod, truck
adjectives:
big, black, blue, cardboard, crouched, green, narrow, other, pink,
prone, red, short, small, tall, teal, toy, upright, white, wide, yellow
prepositions: above, because, below, from, of, over, to, with
lexical PPs:
downward, leftward, rightward, upward
determiners: an, some, that, the
particles:
away, down, up
pronouns:
itself, something, themselves
adverbs:
quickly, slowly
auxiliary:
was
Table 1: The vocabulary used to generate sentential de-
scriptions of video.
prepositional phrases, and characteristics of the event as
prepositional-phrase adjuncts and adverbial modiﬁers. It
incorporates a vocabulary of 118 words: 1 coordination,
48 verbs, 24 nouns, 20 adjectives, 8 prepositions, 4 lexi-
cal prepositional phrases, 4 determiners, 3 particles, 3 pro-
nouns, 2 adverbs, and 1 auxiliary, as illustrated in Table 1.
Production of sentential descriptions requires recognizing
the primary action being performed, because such actions
are rendered as verbs and verbs serve as the central scaf-
folding for sentences. However, event recognition alone
is insufﬁcient to generate the remaining sentential compo-
nents. One must recognize object classes in order to render
nouns. But even object recognition alone is insufﬁcient to
generate meaningful sentences. One must determine the
roles that such objects play in the event. The agent, i.e. the
1
arXiv:1204.2742v1  [cs.CV]  12 Apr 2012

doer of the action, is typically rendered as the sentential
subject while the patient, i.e. the affected object, is typi-
cally rendered as the direct object. Detected objects that do
not play a role in the observed event, no matter how promi-
nent, should not be incorporated into the description. This
means that one cannot use common approaches to event
recognition, such as spatiotemporal bags of words (Laptev
et al., 2007; Niebles et al., 2008; Scovanner et al., 2007),
spatiotemporal volumes (Blank et al., 2005; Laptev et al.,
2008; Rodriguez et al., 2008), and tracked feature points
(Liu et al., 2009; Schuldt et al., 2004; Wang and Mori,
2009) that do not determine the class of participant ob-
jects and the roles that they play. Even combining such
approaches with an object detector would likely detect ob-
jects that don’t participate in the event and wouldn’t be able
to determine the roles that any detected objects play.
Producing elaborate sentential descriptions requires more
than just event recognition and object detection. Generat-
ing a noun phrase with an embedded prepositional phrase,
such as the person to the left of the bicycle, requires deter-
mining spatial relations between detected objects, as well
as knowing which of the two detected objects plays a role
in the overall event and which serves just to aid genera-
tion of a referring expression to help identify the event par-
ticipant. Generating a noun phrase with adjectival modi-
ﬁers, such as the red ball, not only requires determining
the properties, such as color, shape, and size, of the ob-
served objects, but also requires determining whether such
descriptions are necessary to help disambiguate the refer-
ent of a noun phrase. It would be awkward to generate a
noun phrase such as the big tall wide red toy cardboard
trash can when the trash can would sufﬁce. Moreover, one
must track the participants to determine the speed and di-
rection of their motion to generate adverbs such as slowly
and prepositional phrases such as leftward. Further, one
must track the identity of multiple instances of the same
object class to appropriately generate the distinction be-
tween Some person hit some other person and The person
hit themselves.
A common assumption in Linguistics (Jackendoff, 1983;
Pinker, 1989) is that verbs typically characterize the in-
teraction between event participants in terms of the gross
changing motion of these participants. Object class and
image characteristics of the participants are believed to be
largely irrelevant to determining the appropriate verb la-
bel for an action class. Participants simply ﬁll roles in the
spatiotemporal structure of the action class described by
a verb. For example, an event where one participant (the
agent) picks up another participant (the patient) consists of
a sequence of two sub-events, where during the ﬁrst sub-
event the agent moves towards the patient while the patient
is at rest and during the second sub-event the agent moves
together with the patient away from the original location
of the patient. While determining whether the agent is a
person or a cat, and whether the patient is a ball or a cup,
is necessary to generate the noun phrases incorporated into
the sentential description, such information is largely irrel-
evant to determining the verb describing the action. Simi-
larly, while determining the shapes, sizes, colors, textures,
etc. of the participants is necessary to generate adjectival
modiﬁers, such information is also largely irrelevant to de-
termining the verb. Common approaches to event recog-
nition, such as spatiotemporal bags of words, spatiotem-
poral volumes, and tracked feature points, often achieve
high accuracy because of correlation with image or video
properties exhibited by a particular corpus. These are of-
ten artefactual, not deﬁning properties of the verb meaning
(e.g. recognizing diving by correlation with blue since it
‘happens in a pool’ (Liu et al., 2009, p. 2002) or confusing
basketball and volleyball ‘because most of the time the [. . .]
sports use very similar courts’ (Ikizler-Cinibis and Sclaroff,
2010, p. 506)).
2
The mind’s eye corpus
Many existing video corpora used to evaluate event
recognition are ill-suited for evaluating sentential de-
scriptions. For example, the WEIZMANN dataset (Blank
et al., 2005) and the KTH dataset (Schuldt et al., 2004)
depict events with a single human participant, not ones
where people interact with other people or objects.
For these datasets,
the sentential descriptions would
contain no information other than the verb, e.g. The
person jumped. Moreover, such datasets, as well as the
SPORTS ACTIONS dataset (Rodriguez et al., 2008) and
the YOUTUBE dataset (Liu et al., 2009), often make
action-class distinctions that are irrelevant to the choice
of verb, e.g. wave1 vs. wave2, jump vs. pjump,
Golf-Swing-Back
vs.
Golf-Swing-Front
vs.
Golf-Swing-Side,
Kicking-Front
vs.
Kicking-Side,
Swing-Bench
vs.
Swing-SideAngle,
and
golf swing
vs.
tennis swing vs. swing Other datasets, such as
the BALLET dataset (Wang and Mori, 2009) and the
UCF50 dataset (Liu et al., 2009), depict larger-scale activi-
ties that bear activity-class names that are not well suited to
sentential description, e.g. Basketball, Billiards,
BreastStroke,
CleanAndJerk,
HorseRace,
HulaHoop, MilitaryParade, TaiChi, and YoYo.
The year-one (Y1) corpus produced by DARPA for the
Mind’s Eye program, however, was speciﬁcally designed
to evaluate sentential description. This corpus contains two
parts: the development corpus, C-D1, which we use solely
for training, and the evaluation corpus, C-E1, which we
use solely for testing.
Each of the above is further di-
vided into four sections to support the four task goals of
the Mind’s Eye program, namely recognition, description,
gap ﬁlling, and anomaly detection. In this paper, we use
only the recognition and description portions and apply our
2

entire sentential-description pipeline to the combination of
these portions. While portions of C-E1 overlap with C-D1,
in this paper we train our methods solely on C-D1 and test
our methods solely on the portion of C-E1 that does not
overlap with C-D1.
Moreover, a portion of the corpus was synthetically gener-
ated by a variety of means: computer graphics driven by
motion capture, pasting foregrounds extracted from green
screening onto different backgrounds, and intensity vari-
ation introduced by postprocessing.
In this paper, we
exclude all such synthetic video from our test corpus.
Our training set contains 3480 videos and our test set 749
videos.

range from 42 to 1727 frames in length, with an average
of 435 frames.
The videos nominally depict 48 distinct verbs as listed in
Table 1. However, the mapping from videos to verbs is not
one-to-one. Due to polysemy, a verb may describe more
than one action class, e.g. leaving an object on the table vs.
leaving the scene. Due to synonymy, an action class may
be described by more than one verb, e.g. lift vs. raise. An
event described by one verb may contain a component ac-
tion described by a different verb, e.g. picking up an object
vs. touching an object. Many of the events are described
by the combination of a verb with other constituents, e.g.
have a conversation vs. have a heart attack. And many
of the videos depict metaphoric extensions of verbs, e.g.
take a puff on a cigarette.
Because the mapping from
videos to verbs is subjective, the corpus comes labeled with
DARPA-collected human judgments in the form of a single
present/absent label associated with each video paired with
each of the 48 verbs, gathered using Amazon Mechanical
Turk. We use these labels for both training and testing as
described later.
3
Overall system architecture
The overall architecture of our system is depicted in Fig. 1.
We ﬁrst apply detectors (Felzenszwalb et al., 2010a,b) for
each object class on each frame of each video. These de-
tectors are biased to yield many false positives but few
false negatives. The Kanade-Lucas-Tomasi (KLT) (Shi and
Tomasi, 1994; Tomasi and Kanade, 1991) feature tracker
is then used to project each detection ﬁve frames forward
to augment the set of detections and further compensate
for false negatives in the raw detector output. A dynamic-
programming algorithm (Viterbi, 1971) is then used to se-
lect an optimal set of detections that is temporally coher-
ent with optical ﬂow, yielding a set of object tracks for
each video. These tracks are then smoothed and used to
compute a time-series of feature vectors for each video to
describe the relative and absolute motion of event partici-
pants. The person detections are then clustered based on
part displacements to derive a coarse measure of human
Figure 1: The overall architecture of our system for pro-
ducing sentential descriptions of video.
body posture in the form of a body-posture codebook. The
codebook indices of person detections are then added to the
feature vector. Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) are then
employed as time-series classiﬁers to yield verb labels for
each video (Siskind and Morris, 1996; Starner et al., 1998;
Wang and Mori, 2009; Xu et al., 2002, 2005), together with
the object tracks of the participants in the action described
by that verb along with the roles they play. These tracks are
then processed to produce nouns from object classes, ad-
jectives from object properties, prepositional phrases from
spatial relations, and adverbs and prepositional-phrase ad-
juncts from track properties. Together with the verbs, these
are then woven into grammatical sentences. We describe
each of the components of this system in detail below: the
object detector and tracker in Section 3.1, the body-posture
clustering and codebook in Section 3.2, the event classiﬁer
in Section 3.3, and the sentential-description component in
Section 3.4.
3.1
Object detection and tracking
We employ detection-based tracking as described in Sec-
tion 2 of a parallel submission (id: 568) In detection-based
tracking an object detector is applied to each frame of a
video to yield a set of candidate detections which are com-
posed into tracks by selecting a single candidate detection
from each frame that maximizes temporal coherency of the
3

track. Felzenszwalb et al. detectors are used for this pur-
pose. Detection-based tracking requires biasing the detec-
tor to have high recall at the expense of low precision to al-
low the tracker to select boxes to yield a temporally coher-
ent track. This is done by depressing the acceptance thresh-
olds. To prevent massive over-generation of false positives,
which would severely impact run time, we limit the number
of detections produced per-frame to 12.
Two practical issues arise when depressing acceptance
thresholds.
First, it is necessary to reduce the degree
of non-maximal suppression incorporated in the Felzen-
szwalb et al. detectors.
Second, with the star detector
(Felzenszwalb et al., 2010b), one can simply decrease the
single trained acceptance threshold to yield more detec-
tions with no increase in computational complexity. How-
ever, we prefer to use the star cascade detector (Felzen-
szwalb et al., 2010a) as it is far faster. With the star cas-
cade detector, though, one must also decrease the trained
root- and part-ﬁlter thresholds to get more detections. Do-
ing so, however, defeats the computational advantage of the
cascade and signiﬁcantly increases detection time. We thus
train a model for the star detector using the standard pro-
cedure on human-annotated training data, sample the top
detections produced by this model with a decreased accep-
tance threshold, and train a model for the star cascade de-
tector on these samples. This yields a model that is almost
as fast as one trained by the star cascade detector on the
original training samples but with the desired bias in ac-
ceptance threshold.
The Y1 corpus contains approximately 70 different object
classes that play a role in the depicted events. Many of
these, however, cannot be reliably detected with the Felzen-
szwalb et al. detectors that we use. We trained models for
25 object classes that can be reliably detected, as listed in
Table 2. These object classes account for over 90% of the
event participants. Person models were trained with ap-
proximately 2000 human-annotated positive samples from
C-D1 while nonperson models were trained with approxi-
mately 1000 such samples. For each positive training sam-
ple, two negative training samples were randomly gener-
ated from the same frame constrained to not overlap sub-
stantially with the positive samples. We trained three dis-
tinct person models to account for body-posture variation
and pool these when constructing person tracks. The de-
tection scores were normalized for such pooled detections
by a per-model offset computed as follows: A (50 bin) his-
togram was computed of the scores of the top detection in
each frame of a video. The offset is then taken to be the
minimum of the value that maximizes the between-class
variance (Otsu, 1979) when bipartitioning this histogram
and the trained acceptance threshold offset by a ﬁxed, but
small, amount (0.4).
We employed detection-based tracking for all 25 object
models on all 749 videos in our test set.
To prune the
large number of tracks thus produced, we discard all tracks
corresponding to certain object models on a per-video ba-
sis: those that exhibit high detection-score variance over
the frames in that video as well as those whose detection-
score distributions are neither unimodal nor bimodal. The
parameters governing such pruning were determined solely
on the training set. The tracks that remain after this pruning
still account for over 90% of the event participants.
3.2
Body-posture codebook
We recognize events using a combination of the motion of
the event participants and the changing body posture of the
human participants. Body-posture information is derived
using the part structure produced as a by-product of the
Felzenszwalb et al. detectors. While such information is
far noisier and less accurate than ﬁtting precise articulated
models (Andriluka et al., 2008; Bregler, 1997; Gavrila and
Davis, 1995; Sigal et al., 2010; Yang and Ramanan, 2011)
and appears unintelligible to the human eye, as shown in
Section 3.3, it sufﬁces to improve event-recognition accu-
racy. Such information can be extracted from a large unan-
notated corpus far more robustly than possible with precise
articulated models.
Body-posture information is derived from part structure
in two ways.
First, we compute a vector of part dis-
placements, each displacement as a vector from the de-
tection center to the part center, normalizing these vectors
to unit detection-box area. The time-series of feature vec-
tors is augmented to includes these part displacements and
a ﬁnite-difference approximation of their temporal deriva-
tives as continuous features for person detections.
Sec-
ond, we vector-quantize the part-displacement vector and
include the codebook index as a discrete feature for person
detections. Such pose features are included in the time-
series on a per-frame basis. The codebook is trained by
running each pose-speciﬁc person detector on the positive
human-annotated samples used to train that detector and
extract the resulting part-displacement vectors. We then
pool the part-displacement vectors from the three pose-
speciﬁc person models and employ hierarchical k-means
clustering using Euclidean distance to derive a codebook
of 49 clusters. Fig. 2 shows sample clusters from our code-
book. Codebook indices are derived using Euclidean dis-
tance from the means of these clusters.
3.3
Event classiﬁcation
Our tracker produces one or more tracks per object class
for each video. We convert such tracks into a time-series of
feature vectors. For each video, one track is taken to des-
ignate the agent and another track (if present) is taken to
designate the patient. During training, we manually spec-
ify the track-to-role mapping. During testing, we automat-
ically determine the track-to-role mapping by examining
4

(a)
bag7→bag
car7→car
door7→door
person7→person
suv7→SUV
bench7→bench
cardboard-box7→box
ladder7→ladder
person-crouch7→person
table7→table
bicycle7→bicycle
cart7→cart
mailbox7→mailbox
person-down7→person
toy-truck7→truck
big-ball7→ball
chair7→chair
microwave7→microwave
skateboard7→skateboard
tripod7→tripod
cage7→cage
dog7→dog
motorcycle7→motorcycle
small-ball7→ball
truck7→truck
(b)
cardboard-box7→cardboard
person7→upright
person-crouch7→crouched
person-down7→prone
toy-truck7→toy
(c)
big-ball7→big
small-ball7→small
Table 2: Trained models for object classes and their mappings to (a) nouns, (b) restrictive adjectives, and (c) size adjectives.
Figure 2: Sample clusters from our body-posture codebook.
all possible such mappings and selecting the one with the
highest likelihood (Siskind and Morris, 1996).
The feature vector encodes both the motion of the event
participants and the changing body posture of the human
participants. For each event participant in isolation we in-
corporate the following single-track features:
1. x and y coordinates of the detection-box center
2. detection-box aspect ratio and its temporal derivative
3. magnitude and direction of the velocity of the
detection-box center
4. magnitude and direction of the acceleration of the
detection-box center
5. normalized part displacements and their temporal
derivatives
6. object class (the object detector yielding the detection)
7. root-ﬁlter index
8. body-posture codebook index
The last three features are discrete; the remainder are con-
tinuous. For each pair of event participants we incorporate
the following track-pair features:
1. distance between the agent and patient detection-box
centers and its temporal derivative
2. orientation of the vector from agent detection-box
center to patient detection-box center
Our HMMs assume independent output distributions for
each feature. Discrete features are modeled with discrete
output distributions. Continuous features denoting linear
quantities are modeled with univariate Gaussian output dis-
tributions, while those denoting angular quantities are mod-
eled with von Mises output distributions.
For each of the 48 action classes, we train two HMMs on
two different sets of time-series of feature vectors, one con-
taining only single-track features for a single participant
and the other containing single-track features for two par-
ticipants along with the track-pair features. A training set
of between 16 and 200 videos was selected manually from
C-D1 for each of these 96 HMMs as positive examples de-
picting each of the 48 action classes. A given video could
potentially be included in the training sets for both the one-
track and two-track HMMs for the same action class and
even for HMMs for different action classes, if the video
was deemed to depict both action classes.
During testing, we generate present/absent judgments for
each video in the test set paired with each of the 48 action
classes. We do this by thresholding the likelihoods pro-
duced by the HMMs. By varying these thresholds, we can
produce an ROC curve for each action class, comparing
the resulting machine-generated present/absent judgments
with the Amazon Mechanical Turk judgments. When do-
ing so, we test videos for which our tracker produces two or
more tracks against only the two-track HMMs while we test
ones for which our tracker produces a single track against
only the one-track HMMs.
We performed three experiments, training 96 different 200-
state HMMs for each. Experiment I omitted all discrete
features and all body-posture related features.
Experi-
ment II omitted only the discrete features. Experiment III
omitted only the continuous body-posture related features.
ROC curves for each experiment are shown in Fig. 3, Fig. 4
and Fig. 5. Note that the incorporation of body-posture
information, either in the form of continuous normalized
part displacements or discrete codebook indices, improves
event-recognition accuracy, despite the fact that the part
displacements produced by the Felzenszwalb et al. detec-
tors are noisy and appear unintelligible to the human eye.
5

Figure 3: ROC curves for each of the 48 action classes for Experiment I omitting all discrete and body-posture-related
features.
6

Figure 4: ROC curves for each of the 48 action classes for Experiment II omitting only the discrete features.
7

Figure 5: ROC curves for each of the 48 action classes for Experiment III omitting only the continuous body-posture-
related.
8

3.4
Generating sentences
We produce a sentence from a detected action class to-
gether with the associated tracks using the templates from
Table 3. In these templates, words in italics denote ﬁxed
strings, words in bold indicate the action class, X and Y
denote subject and object noun phrases, and the categories
Adv, PPendo, and PPexo denote adverbs and prepositional-
phrase adjuncts to describe the subject motion. The pro-
cesses for generating these noun phrases, adverbs, and
prepositional-phrase adjuncts are described below. One-
track HMMs take that track to be the agent and thus the
subject. For two-track HMMs we choose the mapping from
tracks to roles that yields the higher likelihood and take the
agent track to be the subject and the patient track to be the
object except when the action class is either approached or
ﬂed, the agent is (mostly) stationary, and the patient moves
more than the agent.
Brackets in the templates denote optional entities.
Op-
tional entities containing Y are generated only for two-
track HMMs.
The criteria for generating optional ad-
verbs and prepositional phrases are described below. The
optional entity for received is generated when there is
a patient track whose category is mailbox, person,
person-crouch, or person-down.
We use adverbs to describe the velocity of the subject. For
some verbs, a velocity adverb would be awkward:
∗X slowly had Y
∗X had slowly Y
Furthermore, stylistic considerations dictate the syntactic
position of an optional adverb:
X jumped slowly over Y
X slowly jumped over Y
X slowly approached Y
∗X approached slowly Y
?X slowly fell
X fell slowly
The verb-phrase templates thus indicate whether an adverb
is allowed, and if so whether it occurs, preferentially, pre-
verbally or postverbally.
Adverbs are chosen subject to
three thresholds vaction class
1
, vaction class
2
, and vaction class
3
deter-
mined empirically on a per-action-class basis: We select
those frames from the subject track where the magnitude of
the velocity of the box-detection center is above vaction class
1
.
An optional adverb is generated by comparing the mag-
nitude of the average velocity v of the subject track box-
detection centers in these frames to the per-action-class
thresholds:
quickly
v > vaction class
2
slowly
vaction class
1
≤v ≤vaction class
3
We use prepositional-phrase adjuncts to describe the mo-
tion direction of the subject. Again, for some verbs, such
adjuncts would be awkward:
∗X had Y leftward
∗X had Y from the left
Moreover, for some verbs it is natural to describe the mo-
tion direction endogenously, from the perspective of the
subject, while for others it is more natural to describe the
motion direction exogenously, from the perspective of the
viewer:
X fell leftward
X fell from the left
X chased Y leftward
∗X chased Y from the left
∗X arrived leftward
X arrived from the left
The verb-phrase templates thus indicate whether an adjunct
is allowed, and if so whether it is preferentially endogenous
or exogenous. The choice of adjunct is determined from
the orientation of v, as computed above and depicted in
Fig. 6(a,b). We omit the adjunct when v < vaction class
1
.
We generate noun phrases X and Y to refer to event partic-
ipants according to the following grammar:
NP
→
themselves | itself | something | D A∗N [PP]
D
→
the | that | some
When instantiating a sentential template that has a required
object noun-phrase Y for a one-track HMM, we generate a
pronoun. A pronoun is also generated when the action class
is entered or exited and the patient class is not car, door,
suv, or truck. The anaphor themselves is generated if the
action class is attached or raised, the anaphor itself if the
action class is moved, and something otherwise.
As described below, we generate an optional prepositional
phrase for the subject noun phrase to describe the spatial
relation between the subject and the object. We choose the
determiner to handle coreference, generating the when a
noun phrase unambiguously refers to the agent or the pa-
tient due to the combination of head noun and any adjec-
tives,
The person jumped over the ball.
The red ball collided with the blue ball.
that for an object noun phrase that corefers to a track re-
ferred to in a prepositional phrase for the subject,
The person to the right of the car approached that car.
Some person to the right of some other person ap-
proached that other person.
and some otherwise:
Some car approached some other car.
We generate the head noun of a noun phrase from the ob-
ject class using the mapping in Table 2(a). Four different
kinds of adjectives are generated: color, shape, size, and
restrictive modiﬁers. An optional color adjective is gener-
ated based on the average HSV values in the eroded detec-
tion boxes for a track: black when V ≤0.2, white when
V ≥0.8, one of red, blue, green, yellow, teal, or pink
based on H, when S ≥0.7. An optional size adjective is
generated in two ways, one from the object class using the
mapping in Table 2(c), the other based on per-object-class
image statistics. For each object class, a mean object size
9

X [Adv] approached Y [PPexo]
X [Adv] entered Y [PPendo]
X had Y
X put Y down
X arrived [Adv] [PPexo]
X [Adv] exchanged an object with Y
X hit [something with] Y
X raised Y
X [Adv] attached an object to Y
X [Adv] exited Y [PPendo]
X held Y
X received [an object from]Y
X bounced [Adv] [PPendo]
X fell [Adv] [because of Y] [PPendo]
X jumped [Adv] [over Y] [PPendo]
X [Adv] replaced Y
X buried Y
X ﬂed [Adv] [from Y] [PPendo]
X [Adv] kicked Y [PPendo]
X ran [Adv] [to Y] [PPendo]
X [Adv] carried Y [PPendo]
X ﬂew [Adv] [PPendo]
X left [Adv] [PPendo]
X [Adv] snatched an object from Y
X caught Y [PPexo]
X [Adv] followed Y [PPendo]
X [Adv] lifted Y
X [Adv] stopped [Y]
X [Adv] chased Y [PPendo]
X got an object from Y
X [Adv] moved Y [PPendo]
X [Adv] took an object from Y
X closed Y
X gave an object to Y
X opened Y
X [Adv] threw Y [PPendo]
X [Adv] collided with Y [PPexo]
X went [Adv] away [PPendo]
X [Adv] passed Y [PPexo]
X touched Y
X was digging [with Y]
X handed Y an object
X picked Y up
X turned [PPendo]
X dropped Y
X [Adv] hauled Y [PPendo]
X [Adv] pushed Y [PPendo]
X walked [Adv] [to Y] [PPendo]
Table 3: Sentential templates for the action classes indicated in bold.
leftward and upward
upward
rightward and upward
leftward
X
o
e
y
O

8
&
/ rightward
leftward and downward
downward
rightward and downward
from above and to the left
&
from above

from the right
x
from the left
/ X
from the right
o
from below and to the left
8
from below
O
from below and to the right
f
above and to the left of Y
above Y
above and to the right of Y
to the left of Y
Y
o
e
y
O

8
&
/ to the right of Y
below and to the left of Y
below Y
below and to the right of Y
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 6: (a) Endogenous and (b) exogenous prepositional-phrase adjuncts to describe subject motion direction. (c) Prepo-
sitional phrases incorporated into subject noun phrases describing viewer-relative 2D spatial relations between the subject
X and the reference object Y.
¯aobject class is determined by averaging the detected-box ar-
eas over all tracks for that object class in the training set
used to train HMMs. An optional size adjective for a track
is generated by comparing the average detected-box area a
for that track to ¯aobject class:
big
a ≥βobject class¯aobject class
small
a ≤αobject class¯aobject class
The per-object-class cutoff ratios αobject class and βobject class
are computed to equally tripartition the distribution of per-
object-class mean object sizes on the training set.
Op-
tional shape adjectives are generated in a similar fashion.
Per-object-class mean aspect ratios ¯robject class are deter-
mined in addition to the per-object-class mean object sizes
¯aobject class. Optional shape adjectives for a track are gener-
ated by comparing the average detected-box aspect ratio r
and area a for that track to these means:
tall
r ≤0.7¯robject class ∧a ≥βobject class¯aobject class
short
r ≥1.3¯robject class ∧a ≤αobject class¯aobject class
narrow
r ≤0.7¯robject class ∧a ≤αobject class¯aobject class
wide
r ≥1.3¯robject class ∧a ≥βobject class¯aobject class
To avoid generating shape and size adjectives for unstable
tracks, they are only generated when the detection-score
variance and the detected aspect-ratio variance for the track
are below speciﬁed thresholds. Optional restrictive modi-
ﬁers are generated from the object class using the mapping
in Table 2(b). Person-pose adjectives are generated from
aggregate body-posture information for the track: object
class, normalized part displacements, and body-posture
codebook indices. We generate all applicable adjectives
except for color and person pose. Following the Gricean
Maxim of Quantity (Grice, 1975), we only generate color
and person-pose adjectives if needed to prevent coreference
of nonhuman event participants. Finally, we generate an
initial adjective other, as needed to prevent coreference.
Generating other does not allow generation of the deter-
miner the in place of that or some. We order any adjectives
generated so that other comes ﬁrst, followed by size, shape,
color, and restrictive modiﬁers, in that order.
For two-track HMMs where neither participant moves, a
prepositional phrase is generated for subject noun phrases
to describe the static 2D spatial relation between the subject
X and the reference object Y from the perspective of the
viewer, as shown in Fig. 6(c).
4
Experimental results
We used the HMMs generated for Experiment III to com-
pute likelihoods for each video in our test set paired with
each of the 48 action classes. For each video, we gener-
ated sentences corresponding to the three most-likely ac-
tion classes. Fig. 7 shows key frames from four videos
in our test set along with the sentence generated for the
most-likely action class. Human judges rated each video-
sentence pair to assess whether the sentence was true of the
video and whether it described a salient event depicted in
that video. 26.7% (601/2247) of the video-sentence pairs
10

were deemed to be true and 7.9% (178/2247) of the video-
sentence pairs were deemed to be salient. When restrict-
ing consideration to only the sentence corresponding to
the single most-likely action class for each video, 25.5%
(191/749) of the video-sentence pairs were deemed to be
true and 8.4% (63/749) of the video-sentence pairs were
deemed to be salient. Finally, for 49.4% (370/749) of the
videos at least one of the three generated sentences was
deemed true and for 18.4% (138/749) of the videos at least
one of the three generated sentences was deemed salient.
5
Conclusion
Integration of Language and Vision (Aloimonos et al.,
2011; Barzialy et al., 2003; Darrell et al., 2011; McKe-
vitt, 1994, 1995–1996) and recognition of action in video
(Blank et al., 2005; Laptev et al., 2008; Liu et al., 2009;
Rodriguez et al., 2008; Schuldt et al., 2004; Siskind and
Morris, 1996; Starner et al., 1998; Wang and Mori, 2009;
Xu et al., 2002, 2005) have been of considerable interest for
a long time. There has also been work on generating sen-
tential descriptions of static images (Farhadi et al., 2009;
Kulkarni et al., 2011; Yao et al., 2010). Yet we are un-
aware of any prior work that generates as rich sentential
video descriptions as we describe here. Producing such
rich descriptions requires determining event participants,
the mapping of such participants to roles in the event, and
their motion and properties. This is incompatible with com-
mon approaches to event recognition, such as spatiotem-
poral bags of words, spatiotemporal volumes, and tracked
feature points that cannot determine such information. The
approach presented here recovers the information needed
to generate rich sentential descriptions by using detection-
based tracking and a body-posture codebook. We demon-
strated the efﬁcacy of this approach on a corpus 749 videos.
