SQuINTing at VQA Models:
Introspecting VQA Models with Sub-Questions
Ramprasaath R. Selvaraju1∗
Purva Tendulkar1
Devi Parikh1
Eric Horvitz2
Marco Tulio Ribeiro2
Besmira Nushi2
Ece Kamar2
1Georgia Institute of Technology, 2Microsoft Research

Abstract
Existing VQA datasets contain questions with varying
levels of complexity.
While the majority of questions in
these datasets require perception for recognizing existence,
properties, and spatial relationships of entities, a signiﬁ-
cant portion of questions pose challenges that correspond to
reasoning tasks – tasks that can only be answered through
a synthesis of perception and knowledge about the world,
logic and / or reasoning. Analyzing performance across this
distinction allows us to notice when existing VQA models
have consistency issues; they answer the reasoning ques-
tions correctly but fail on associated low-level perception
questions. For example, in Figure 1, models answer the
complex reasoning question “Is the banana ripe enough to
eat?” correctly, but fail on the associated perception ques-
tion “Are the bananas mostly green or yellow?” indicating
that the model likely answered the reasoning question cor-
rectly but for the wrong reason. We quantify the extent to
which this phenomenon occurs by creating a new Reason-
ing split of the VQA dataset and collecting VQA-introspect,
a new dataset1 which consists of 238K new perception ques-
tions which serve as sub questions corresponding to the set
of perceptual tasks needed to effectively answer the complex
reasoning questions in the Reasoning split. Our evaluation
shows that state-of-the-art VQA models have comparable
performance in answering perception and reasoning ques-
tions, but suffer from consistency problems. To address this
shortcoming, we propose an approach called Sub-Question
Importance-aware Network Tuning (SQuINT), which en-
courages the model to attend to the same parts of the image
when answering the reasoning question and the perception
sub question.We show that SQuINT improves model consis-
tency by ∼5%, also marginally improving performance on
the Reasoning questions in VQA, while also displaying bet-
ter attention maps.
∗Research performed in part during an internship at Microsoft Research
1Our dataset can be found at aka.ms/vqa-introspect.
Figure 1: A potential reasoning failure: Current models answer the Rea-
soning question “Is the banana ripe enough to eat?” correctly with the
answer “Yes”. We might assume that doing so stems from perceiving rele-
vant concepts correctly – perceiving yellow bananas in this example. But
when asked “Are the bananas mostly green or yellow?”, the model answers
the question incorrectly with “Green” – indicating that the model possibly
answered the original Reasoning question for the wrong reasons even if
the answer was right. We quantify the extent to which this phenomenon
occurs in VQA and introduce a new dataset aimed at stimulating research
on well-grounded reasoning.
1. Introduction
Human cognition is thought to be compositional in na-
ture: the visual system recognizes multiple aspects of a
scene which are combined into shapes [7] and understand-
ings.
Likewise, complex linguistic expressions are built
from simpler ones [5]. Similarly, tasks like Visual Question
Answering (VQA) require models to perform inference at
multiple levels of abstraction. For example, to answer the
question, “Is the banana ripe enough to eat?” (Figure 1), a
VQA model has to be able to detect the bananas and extract
associated properties such as size and color (perception),
understand what the question is asking, and reason about
how these properties relate to known properties of edible
bananas (ripeness) and how they manifest (yellow versus
green in color). While “abstraction” is complex and spans
distinctions at multiple levels of detail, we focus on sepa-
rating questions into Perception and Reasoning questions.
Perception questions only require visual perception to rec-
ognize existence, physical properties or spatial relationships
among entities, such as “What color is the banana?” or
1
arXiv:2001.06927v2  [cs.CV]  16 Jun 2020

“What is to the left of the man?”, while Reasoning ques-
tions require the composition of multiple perceptual tasks
and knowledge that harnesses logic and prior knowledge
about the world, such as “Is the banana ripe enough to eat?”.
Current VQA datasets [3, 6, 16] contain a mixture of
Perception and Reasoning questions, which are consid-
ered equivalent for the purposes of evaluation and learn-
ing. Categorizing questions into Perception and Reason-
ing promises to promote a better assessment of visual per-
ception and higher-level reasoning capabilities of models,
rather than conﬂating these capabilities. Furthermore, we
believe it is useful to identify the Perception questions that
serve as subtasks in the compositional processes required to
answer the Reasoning question. By elucidating such “sub-
questions,” we can check whether the model is reasoning
appropriately or if it is relying on spurious shortcuts and bi-
ases in datasets [1]. For example, we should be cautious
about the model’s inferential ability if it simultaneously an-
swers “no” to “Are the bananas edible?” and “yellow” to
“What color are the bananas?”, even if the answer to the
former question is correct. The inconsistency between the
higher-level reasoning task and the lower-level perception
task that it builds upon suggests that the system has not
learned effectively how to answer the Reasoning question
and will not be able to generalize to same or closely related
Reasoning question with another image. The fact that these
sub-questions are in the same modality (i.e. questions with
associated answers) allows for the evaluation of any VQA
model, rather than only models that are trained to provide
justiﬁcations. It is this key observation that we use to de-
velop an evaluation methodology for Reasoning questions.
The dominant learning paradigm for teaching models to
answer VQA tasks assumes that models are given <image,
question, answer> triplets, with no additional annotation
on the relationship between the question and the composi-
tional steps required to arrive at the answer. As reasoning
questions become more complex, achieving good coverage
and generalization with methods used to date will likely re-
quire a prohibitive amount of data. Alternatively, we em-
ploy a hierarchical decomposition strategy, where we iden-
tify and link Reasoning questions with sets of appropriate
Perception sub-questions. Such an approach promises to
enable new efﬁciencies via compositional modeling, as well
as lead to improvements in the consistency of models for
answering Reasoning questions. Explicitly representing de-
pendencies between Reasoning tasks and the correspond-
ing Perception tasks also provides language-based ground-
ing for reasoning questions where visual grounding [14, 19]
may be insufﬁcient, e.g., highlighting that the banana is im-
portant for the question in Figure 1 does not tell the model
how it is important (i.e. that color is an important property
rather than size or shape). Again, the fact that such ground-
ing is in question-answer form (which models already have
to deal with) is an added beneﬁt. Such annotations allow
for attempts to enforce reasoning devoid of shortcuts that
do not generalize, or are not in line with human values and
business rules, even if accurate (e.g. racist behavior).
We propose a new split of the VQA dataset, contain-
ing only Reasoning questions (deﬁned previously).
Fur-
thermore, for questions in the split, we introduce VQA-
introspect, a new dataset of 238K associated Percep-
tion sub-questions which humans perceive as containing
the sub-questions needed to answer the original questions.
After validating the quality of the new dataset, we use it
to perform ﬁne-grained evaluation of state-of-the-art mod-
els, checking whether their reasoning is in line with their
perception.
We show that state-of-the-art VQA models
have similar accuracy in answering perception and reason-
ing tasks but have problems with consistency; in 28.14%
of the cases where models answer the reasoning question
correctly, they fail to answer the corresponding perception
sub-question, highlighting problems with consistency and
the risk that models may be learning to answer reasoning
questions through learning common answers and biases.
Finally, we introduce SQuINT – a generic modeling
approach that is inspired by the compositional learning
paradigm observed in humans. SQuINT incorporates VQA-
introspect annotations into learning with a new loss func-
tion that encourages image regions important for the sub-
questions to play a role in answering the main Reason-
ing questions. Empirical evaluations demonstrate that the
approach results in models that are more consistent across
Reasoning and associated Perception tasks with no major
loss of accuracy. We also ﬁnd that SQuINT improves model
attention maps for Reasoning questions, thus making mod-
els more trustworthy.
2. Related Work
Visual Question Answering [3], one of the most widely
studied vision-and-language problems, requires associating
image content with natural language questions and answers
(thus combining perception, language understanding, back-
ground knowledge and reasoning). However, it is possible
for models to do well on the task by exploiting language and
dataset biases, e.g. answering “yellow” to “What color is
the banana?” without regard for the image or by answering
“yes” to most yes-no questions [1, 12, 19, 21, 2]. This mo-
tivates additional forms of evaluation, e.g. checking if the
model can understand question rephrasings [20] or whether
it exhibits logical consistency [17, 15]. In this work, we
present a novel evaluation of questions that require reason-
ing capabilities, where we check for consistency between
how models answer higher level Reasoning questions and
how they answer corresponding Perception sub-questions.
A variety of datasets have been released with attention
annotations on the image pointing to regions that are impor-
tant to answer questions ([4, 10]), with corresponding work
2

on enforcing such grounding [18, 14, 19]. Our work is com-
plementary to these approaches, as we provide language-
based grounding (rather than visual), and further evalu-
ate the link between perception capabilities and how they
are composed by models for answering Reasoning tasks.
Closer to our work is the dataset of Lisa et al. [10], where
natural language justiﬁcations are associated with (ques-
tion, answer) pairs. However, most of the questions contem-
plated (like much of the VQA dataset) pertain to perception
questions (e.g. for the question-answer “What is the person
doing? Snowboarding”, the justiﬁcation is “...they are on a
snowboard ...”). Furthermore, it is hard to use natural lan-
guage justiﬁcations to evaluate models that do not generate
similar rationales (i.e. most SOTA models), or even coming
up with metrics for models that do. In contrast, our dataset
and evaluation is in the same modality (QA) that models are
already trained to handle.
3. Reasoning-VQA and VQA-introspect
In the ﬁrst part of this section, we present an analysis
of the common type of questions in the VQA dataset and
highlight the need for classifying them into Perception and
Reasoning questions. We then deﬁne Perception and Rea-
soning questions and describe our method for constructing
the Reasoning split. In the second part, we describe how
we create the new VQA-introspect dataset through collect-
ing sub-questions and answers for questions in our Reason-
ing split. Finally, we describe experiments conducted in
order to validate the quality of our collected data.
3.1. Perception vs. Reasoning
A common technique for ﬁner-grained evaluation of
VQA models is to group instances by answer type (yes/no,
number, other) or by the ﬁrst words of the question (what
color, how many, etc) [3]. While useful, such slices are
coarse and do not evaluate the model’s capabilities at differ-
ent points in the abstraction scale. For example, questions
like “Is this a banana?” and “Is this a healthy food?” start
with the same words and expect yes/no answers. While
both test if the model can do object recognition, the lat-
ter requires additional capabilities in connecting recognition
with prior knowledge about which food items are healthy
and which are not. This is not to say that Reasoning ques-
tions are inherently harder, but that they require both visual
understanding and an additional set of skills (logic, prior
knowledge, etc) while Perception questions deal mostly
with visual understanding. For example, the question “How
many round yellow objects are to the right of the smallest
square object in the image?” requires very complicated vi-
sual understanding, and is arguably harder than “Is the ba-
nana ripe enough to eat?”, which requires relatively simple
visual understanding (color of the bananas) and knowledge
about properties of ripe bananas. Regardless of difﬁculty,
categorizing questions as Perception or Reasoning is use-
ful for both detailed model evaluation based on capabili-
ties and also improving learning, as we demonstrate in later
sections. We now proceed to deﬁne these categories more
formally.
Perception : We deﬁne Perception questions as those which
can be answered by detecting and recognizing the existence,
physical properties and / or spatial relationships between
entities, recognizing text / symbols, simple activities and
/ or counting, and that do not require more than one hop
of reasoning or general commonsense knowledge beyond
what is visually present in the image. Some examples are:
“Is that a cat? ” (existence), “Is the ball shiny?” (physical
property), “What is next to the table?” (spatial relationship),
“What does the sign say?” (text / symbol recognition), “Are
the people looking at the camera?” (simple activity), etc.
We note that spatial relationship questions have been con-
sidered reasoning tasks in previous work [9] as they require
lower-level perception tasks in composition to be answered.
For our purposes it is useful to separate visual understand-
ing from other types of reasoning and knowledge, and thus
we classify such spatial relationships as Perception.
Reasoning :
We deﬁne Reasoning questions as non-
Perception questions which require the synthesis of percep-
tion with prior knowledge and / or reasoning in order to
be answered. For instance, “Is this room ﬁnished or be-
ing built?”, “At what time of the day would this meal be
served?”, “Does this water look fresh enough to drink?”,
“Is this a home or a hotel?”, “Are the giraffes in their natu-
ral habitat?” are all Reasoning questions.
Our analysis of the perception questions in the VQA
dataset revealed that most perception questions have distinct
patterns that can be identiﬁed with high precision regex-
based rules.
By handcrafting such rules (details can be
found in the Supplementary) and ﬁltering out perception
questions, we identify 18% of the VQA dataset as highly
likely to be Reasoning. To check the accuracy of our rules
and validate their coverage of Reasoning questions, we de-
signed a crowdsourcing task on Mechanical Turk that in-
structed workers to identify a given VQA question as Per-
ception or Reasoning, and to subsequently provide sub-
questions for the Reasoning questions, as described next.
89.25% of the times, at least 2 out of 3 workers classiﬁed
our resulting questions as reasoning questions demonstrat-
ing the high precision of the regex-based rules we created.
3.2. VQA-introspect data
Given the complexity of distinguishing between Percep-
tion / Reasoning and providing sub-questions for Reason-
ing questions, we ﬁrst train and ﬁlter workers on Amazon
Mechanical Turk (AMT) via qualiﬁcation rounds before we
rely on them to generate high-quality sub-questions.
Worker Training - We manually annotate 100 questions
3

from the VQA dataset as Perception and 100 as Reasoning
questions, to serve as examples. We ﬁrst teach crowdwork-
ers the difference between Perception and Reasoning ques-
tions by presenting deﬁnitions and showing several exam-
ples of each, along with explanations. Then, crowdworkers
are shown (question, answer) pairs and are asked to identify
if the given question is a Perception question or a Reason-
ing question 2. Finally, for Reasoning questions, we ask
workers to add all Perception questions and corresponding
answers (in short) that would be necessary to answer the
main question (details and interface can be found in the
Supplementary).
In this qualiﬁcation HIT, workers have
to make 6 Perception and Reasoning judgments, and they
qualify if they get 5 or more answers right.
We launched further pilot experiments for the crowd-
workers who passed the ﬁrst qualiﬁcation round, where we
manually evaluated the quality of their sub-questions based
on whether they were Perception questions grounded in the
image and sufﬁcient to answer the main question. Among
those 540 workers who passed the ﬁrst qualiﬁcation test,
144 were selected (via manual evaluation) as high-quality
workers, who ﬁnally qualiﬁed for attempting our main task.
Main task - In the main data collection, all VQA questions
identiﬁed as Reasoning by regex-rules and a random subset
of the questions identiﬁed as Perception were further judged
by workers (for validation purposes). We eliminated am-
biguous questions by further ﬁltering out questions where
there is high worker disagreement about the answer. We
required at least 8 out of 10 workers to agree with the ma-
jority answer for yes/no questions and 5 out of 10 for all
other questions. This labeling step left us with a Reasoning
split that corresponds to ∼13% of the VQA dataset.
At the next step. each <question, image> pair labeled as
Reasoning had sub questions generated by 3 unique workers
3. Removing duplicate question, answer pairs left on aver-
age 3.1 sub-questions per Reasoning question. Qualitative
examples from the resulting dataset are presented in Fig. 7.
The resulting train split of VQA-introspect contains
166927 sub questions for 55799 Reasoning questions in
VQAv2 train, and the val split of VQA-introspect con-
tains 71714 sub questions for 21677 Reasoning questions
in VQAv2 val. This Reasoning split is not exhaustive, but is
high precision (as demonstrated below) and contains ques-
tions that are not ambiguous, and thus is useful for evalua-
tion and learning.
3.3. Dataset Quality Validation
In order to conﬁrm that the sub-questions in VQA-
introspect are really Perception questions, we did a further
2We also add an “Invalid” category to ﬂag nonsensical questions or
those which can be answered without looking at the image
3A small number of workers displayed degraded performance after the
qualiﬁcation round, and were manually ﬁltered
round of evaluation with workers who passed the worker
qualiﬁcation task described in Section C but had not pro-
vided sub-questions for our main task. In this round, 87.8%
of sub-questions in VQA-introspect were judged to be Per-
ception questions by at least 2 out of 3 workers.
It is crucial for the semantics of VQA-introspect that the
sub-questions are tied to the original Reasoning question.
While verifying that the sub-questions are necessary to an-
swer the original question requires workers to think of all
possible ways the original question could be answered (and
is thus too hard), we devised an experiment to check if the
sub-questions provide at least sufﬁcient visual understand-
ing to answer the Reasoning question. In this experiment,
workers are shown the sub-questions with answers, and then
asked to answer the Reasoning question without seeing the
image, thus having to rely only on the visual knowledge
conveyed by the sub-questions. At least 2 out of 3 work-
ers were able to answer 89.3% of the Reasoning questions
correctly in this regime (95.4% of binary Reasoning ques-
tions). For comparison, when we asked workers to answer
Reasoning questions with no visual knowledge at all (no im-
age and no sub-questions), this accuracy was 52% (58% for
binary questions). These experiments give us conﬁdence
that the sub-questions in VQA-introspect are indeed Per-
ception questions that convey components of visual knowl-
edge which can be composed to answer the original Rea-
soning questions.
4. Dataset Analysis
The
distribution
of
questions
in
our
VQA-
introspect dataset is shown in Figure 3. It is interesting
to note that comparing these plots with those for the
VQA dataset [3] show that the VQA-introspect dataset
questions are more speciﬁc. For example, there are only 12
“why” questions in the dataset which tend to be reasoning
questions. Also, for “where” questions, a very common
answer in VQA was “outside” but answers are more
speciﬁc in our VQA-introspect dataset (e.g., “beach”,
“street”).
Figure 4 shows the distribution of question
lengths in the Perception and Reasoning splits of VQA and
in our VQA-introspect dataset. We see that most questions
range from 4 to 10 words.
Lengths of questions in the
Perception and Reasoning splits are quite similar, although
questions in VQA-introspect are slightly longer (the curve
is slightly shifted to the right), possibly on account of the
increase in speciﬁcity/detail of the questions.
One interesting question is whether the main question
and the sub-questions deal with the same concepts. In order
to explore this, we used noun chunks surrogates for con-
cepts 4, and measured how often there was any overlap in
concepts between the main question and the associated sub-
4Concepts are extracted with the Python spaCy library.
4

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Figure 2: Qualitative examples of Perception sub-questions in our VQA-introspect dataset for main questions in the Reasoning split of VQA. Main questions
are in orange and sub questions are in blue. A single worker may have provided more than one sub questions for the same (image, main question) pair. More
examples can be found in the Supplementary
Figure 3: Left: Distribution of questions by their ﬁrst four words. The arc length is proportional to the number of questions containing the word. White
areas are words with contributions too small to show, Right: Distribution of answers per question type
question. Noun-chunks are only a surrogate and may miss
semantic overlap otherwise present (e.g. through verb-noun
connections like “fenced” and “a fence” in Figure 7 (b),
sub-questions). With this caveat, we observe that there is
overlap only 24.18% of the time, indicating that Reason-
ing questions in our split often require knowledge about
concepts not explicitly mentioned in the corresponding Per-
ception questions. The lack of overlap indicates that models
cannot solely rely on visual perception in answering Rea-
soning tasks, but incorporating background knowledge and
common sense understanding is necessary. For example,
in the question “Is the airplane taking off or landing?”, the
concepts present are ‘airplane’ and ‘landing’, while for the
associated sub-question “Are the wheels out?”, the concept
5

Figure 4: Percentage of questions with different word lengths for the train
and val sub-questions of our VQA-introspect dataset.
is ‘wheels’. Though ‘wheels’ do not occur in the main ques-
tion, the concept is important, in that providing this ground-
ing might help the model explicitly associate the connection
between airplane wheels and take-offs / landings.
5. Fine grained evaluation of VQA Reasoning
VQA-introspect enables a more detailed evaluation of
the performance of current state-of-the-art models on Rea-
soning questions by checking whether correctness on these
questions is consistent with correctness on the associated
Perception sub-questions. It is important to notice that a
Perception failure (an incorrect answer to a sub-question)
may be due to a problem in the vision part of the model
or a grounding problem – the model in Figure 5 may know
that the banana is mostly yellow and use that information
to answer the ripeness question, while, at the same time,
fail to associate this knowledge with the word “yellow”, or
fail to understand what the sub-question is asking. While
grounding problems are not strictly visual perception fail-
ures, we still consider them Perception failures because
the goal of VQA is to answer natural language questions
about an image, and the sub-question being considered per-
tain to Perception knowledge as deﬁned previously. With
this caveat, there are four possible outcomes when evalu-
ating Reasoning questions with associated Perception sub-
questions, which we divide into four quadrants:
Q1: Both main & sub-questions correct (M S):
While we cannot claim that the model predicts the main
question correctly because of the sub-questions (e.g. the
bananas are ripe because they are mostly yellow), the
fact that it answers both correctly is consistent with good
reasoning, and should give us more conﬁdence in the
original prediction.
Q2: Main correct & sub-question incorrect (M S):
The Perception failure indicates that there might be a
reasoning failure.
While it is possible that the model
is composing other perception knowledge that was not
captured by the identiﬁed sub-questions (e.g. the bananas
are ripe because they have black spots on them), it is
also possible (and more likely) that the model is using a
spurious shortcut or was correct by random chance.
Q3: Main incorrect & sub-question correct (M S):
The Perception failure here indicates a clear reasoning
failure, as we validated that the sub-questions are sufﬁcient
to answer the main question. In this case, the model knows
that the bananas are mostly yellow and still thinks they
are not ripe enough, and thus it failed to make the “yellow
bananas are ripe” connection.
Q4: Both main & sub-question incorrect (M S):
While the model may not have the reasoning capabilities
to answer questions in this quadrant, the Perception failure
could explain the incorrect prediction.
In sum, Q2 and Q4 are deﬁnitely Perception failures, Q2
likely contains Reasoning failures, Q3 contains Reasoning
failures, and we cannot judge Reasoning in Q4.
As an example, we evaluate the Pythia model [11]
(SOTA as of 2018)5 along these quadrants (Table 1) for
the Reasoning split of VQA. The overall accuracy of the
model is 64.95%, while accuracy on Reasoning questions is
69.61%. We note that for 28.27% of the cases, the model
is inconsistent, i.e., it answered the main question correctly,
but got the sub question wrong. Further, we observe that
9.02% of the times the Pythia model gets all the sub ques-
tions wrong when the main question is right – i.e., it seems
to be severely wrong on its perception and using other paths
(shortcuts or biases) to get the Reasoning question right .
6. Improving learned models with VQA-
introspect
In this section, we consider how VQA-introspect can be
used to improve models that were trained on VQA datasets.
Our goal is to reduce the number of possible reasoning or
perception failures ( M S and M S ) without dimin-
ishing the original accuracy of the model.
6.1. Finetuning
The simplest way to incorporate VQA-introspect into a
learned model is to ﬁne-tune the model on it. We use the
averaged binary cross entropy loss for the main question
and the sub question as a loss function. Furthermore, to
avoid catastrophic forgetting [13] of the original VQA data
during ﬁnetuning, we augment every batch with randomly
sampled data from the original VQA dataset.
6.2.
Sub-Question
Importance-aware
Network
Tuning (SQuINT)
The intuition behind Sub-Question Importance-aware
Network Tuning (SQuINT) is that a model should attend
to the same regions in the image when answering the Rea-
soning questions as it attends to when answering the as-
sociated Perception sub-questions, since they capture the
5source: https://visualqa.org/roe_2018.html
6

Figure 5: Sub-Question Importance-aware Network Tuning (SQuINT) approach: Given an image, a Reasoning question like “What season is it?” and an
associated Perception sub-question like “Is there a Christmas tree pictured on a cell phone?”, we pass them through the Pythia architecture [11]. The loss
function customized for SQuINT is composed of three components: an attention loss that penalizes for the mismatch between attention for the main-question
and the attention for the sub-question based on an image embedding conditioned on sub-question and image features, a cross entropy loss for answer of
the main-question and a cross entropy loss for the answer of the sub-question. The loss function encourages the model to get the answers of both the
main-question and sub-question right simultaneously, while also encouraging the model to use the right attention regions for the reasoning task.
visual components required to answer the main question.
SQuINT does this by learning how to attend to sub-question
regions of interest and reasoning over them to answer the
main question. We now describe how to construct a loss
function that captures this intuition.
Attention loss - As described in Section 3, the sub-
questions in the dataset are simple perception questions ask-
ing about well-grounded objects/entities in the image. Cur-
rent well-performing models based on attention are gener-
ally good at visually grounding regions in the image when
asked about simple Perception questions, given that they
are trained on VQA datasets which contain large amounts
of Perception questions. In order to make the model look
at the associated sub-question regions while answering the
main question, we apply a Mean Squared Error (MSE) loss
over the the spatial and bounding box attention weights.
Cross Entropy loss - While the attention loss encourages
the model to look at the right regions given a complex Rea-
soning question, we need a loss that helps the model learn
to reason given the right regions. Hence we apply the regu-
lar Binary Cross Entropy loss on top of the answer predicted
for the Reasoning question given the sub-question attention.
In addition we also use the Binary Cross Entropy loss be-
tween the predicted and GT answer for the sub-question.
Total SQuINT loss - We jointly train with the attention
and cross entropy losses. Let Areas and Asub be the model
attention for the main reasoning question and the associ-
ated sub-question, and gtreas and gtsub be the ground-truth
answers for the main and sub-question respectively. Let
oreas|Asub be the predicted answer for the reasoning ques-
tion given the attention for the sub-question. The SQuINT
loss is formally deﬁned as:
LSQuINT = MSE(Areas, Asub)
+ λ1BCE(oreas|Asub, gtreas)
+ λ2BCE(osub, gtsub)
The ﬁrst term encourages the network to look at the same
regions for reasoning and associated perception questions,
while the second and third terms encourage the model to
give the right answers to the questions given the attention
regions. The loss is simple and can be applied as a modiﬁ-
cation to any model that uses attention.
7. Experiments
In this section, we perform ﬁne grained evaluation of
VQA reasoning as detailed in Section 5, using the SOTA
model Pythia [11] as a base model (although any model
that uses visual attention would sufﬁce). We trained the
base model on VQAv2, and evaluated the baseline and all
variants on the Reasoning split and corresponding VQA-
introspect val sub-questions6.
As detailed in Section 6,
Pythia + VQA-introspect data corresponds to ﬁnetun-
ing the base model on train VQA-introspect subquestions,
while Pythia + SQuINT ﬁnetunes Pythia model such that it
now attends to the same regions for main questions and as-
sociated sub-questions. In Table 1, we report the reasoning
breakdown detailed in Section 5. We also report a few addi-
tional metrics: Consistency refers to how often the model
predicts the sub-question correctly given that it answered
the main question correctly, while Consistency (balanced)
reports the same metric on a balanced version of the sub-
questions (to make sure models are not exploiting biases to
gain consistency). Attention Correlation refers to the cor-
relation between the attention embeddings of the main and
sub-question. Finally, we report Overall accuracy (on the
whole evaluation dataset), and accuracy on the Reasoning
split (Reasoning Accuracy). Note that our approach does
not require sub-questions at test time. We use λ1 = 0.1 and
λ2 = 1 with a learning rate of 0.01 in our experiments.
6Note that this is different from our CVPR camera-ready version where
the experiments were conducted on the previous version of the VQA-
introspect dataset with a different base model that was trained on VQAv1.
7

Consistency Metric
VQA Accuracy
Method
M S ↑
M S ↓
M S ↓
M S ↓
Consistency% ↑
Consistency% (balanced) ↑
Attn Corr ↑
Overall ↑
Reasoning ( M S + M S ) ↑
Pythia
50.05
19.73
17.40
12.83
71.73
75.67
0.71
64.95
69.61
Pythia + VQA-introspect data
53.21
16.62
19.40
10.77
76.20
74.58
0.71
64.60
69.64
Pythia + SQuINT
53.90
16.24
19.34
10.52
76.84
75.76
0.75
64.73
69.88
Table 1: Results on held out VQA-introspect val set for (1) Consistency metrics along the four quadrants described in Section 5 and Consistency and
Attention Correlation metrics as described in Section 5 (metrics), and (2) Overall and Reasoning accuracy. The Reasoning accuracy is obtained by only
looking at the number of times the main question is correct ( M S + M S ) ignoring repetitions of the main question due to multiple sub-questions.
(a)
(b)
Figure 6: Qualitative examples showing the model attention before and after applying SQuINT. (a) shows an image along with the reasoning question, ‘Is
the man airborne?’, for which the Pythia model looks at somewhat irrelevant regions and answers “No” incorrectly. Note how the same model correctly
looks at the feet to answer the easier sub-question, ‘Does the man have his feat on the ground?’. After applying SQuINT, which encourages the model to
use the perception based sub question attention while answering the reasoning question, it now looks at the feet and correctly answers the main question.
The results in Table 1 indicate that ﬁne-tuning on VQA-
introspect (using data augmentation or SQuINT), increases
consistency without hurting accuracy or Reasoning accu-
racy.
Correspondingly, our conﬁdence that it actually
learned the necessary concepts when it answered Reason-
ing questions correctly should increase.
The Attention Correlation numbers indicate that
SQuINT really is helping the model use the appropriate vi-
sual grounding (same for main-question as sub-questions)
at test time.
This effect does not seem to happen with
naive ﬁnetuning on VQA-introspect. We present qualita-
tive validation examples in Figure 6, where the base model
attends to irrelevant regions when answering the main ques-
tion (even though it answers correctly), while attending to
relevant regions when asked the sub-question. The model
ﬁnetuned on SQuINT, on the other hand, attends to regions
that are actually informative in both main and sub-questions
(notice that this is evaluation, and thus the model is not
aware of the sub-question when answering the main ques-
tion and vice versa). This is further indication that SQuINT
is helping the model reason in ways that will generalize
when it answers Reasoning questions correctly, rather than
use shortcuts.
8. Discussion and Future Work
The VQA task requires multiple capabilities in different
modalities and at different levels of abstraction. We intro-
duced a hard distinction between Perception and Reasoning
which we acknowledge is a simpliﬁcation of a continuous
and complex reality, albeit a useful one. In particular, link-
ing the perception components that are needed (in addition
to other forms of reasoning) to answer reasoning questions
opens up an array of possibilities for future work, in ad-
dition to improving evaluation of current work. We pro-
posed preliminary approaches that seem promising: ﬁne-
tuning on VQA-introspect and SQuINT both improve the
consistency of the SOTA model with no discernible loss in
accuracy, and SQuINT results in qualitatively better atten-
tion maps. We expect future work to use VQA-introspect
even more explicitly in the modeling approach, similar to
current work in explicitly composing visual knowledge to
improve visual reasoning [8]. In addition, similar efforts to
ours could be employed at different points in the abstraction
scale, e.g. further dividing complex Perception questions
into simpler components, or further dividing the Reasoning
part into different forms of background knowledge, logic,
etc. We consider such efforts crucial in the quest to evalu-
ate and train models that truly generalize, and hope VQA-
introspect spurs more research in that direction.
Acknowledgements. We are grateful to Dhruv Batra for provid-
ing very useful feedback on this work. The Georgia Tech effort
was supported in part by NSF, AFRL, DARPA, ONR YIPs, ARO
PECASE, Amazon. The views and conclusions contained herein
are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as neces-
sarily representing the ofﬁcial policies or endorsements, either ex-
pressed or implied, of the U.S. Government, or any sponsor.
8

Appendices
A. Introduction
This supplementary material is organized as follows. We ﬁrst
provide a sample of the kind of regex-based rules that we used
to arrive at reasoning questions. We then provide the interface
we designed for training and evaluating Mechanical turk workers
and the interface for collecting the main dataset. We then show
randomly sampled responses from workers.
B. Perception-VQA vs Reasoning-VQA
In the ﬁrst part of this section, we revisit our deﬁnition of Per-
ception and Reasoning questions and later we describe our rules
for constructing the Reasoning split.
B.1. Perception vs. Reasoning
Perception : As mentioned in section 3.1 of the main paper, we
deﬁne Perception questions as those which can be answered by de-
tecting and recognizing the existence, physical properties and / or
spatial relationships between entities, recognizing text / symbols,
simple activities and / or counting, and that do not require more
than one hop of reasoning or general commonsense knowledge
beyond what is visually present in the image. Some examples are:
“Is that a cat? ” (existence), “Is the ball shiny?” (physical prop-
erty), “What is next to the table?” (spatial relationship), “What
does the sign say?” (text / symbol recognition), “Are the people
looking at the camera?” (simple activity), etc.
Reasoning
:
We
deﬁne
Reasoning
questions
as
non-
Perception questions which require the synthesis of perception
with prior knowledge and / or reasoning in order to be answered.
For instance, “Is this room ﬁnished or being built?”, “At what
time of the day would this meal be served?”, “Does this water
look fresh enough to drink?”, “Is this a home or a hotel?”, “Are
the giraffes in their natural habitat?” are all Reasoning questions.
B.2. Rules
As mentioned in section 3.1 of the main paper, our analysis
of the perception questions in the VQA dataset revealed that most
perception questions have distinct patterns that can be identiﬁed
with high precision regex-based rules. In Table 2 we provide a
list of top-40 regex rules based on the percentage of data the rule
eliminated.
By hand-crafting such rules (as seen in Table 2) and ﬁltering
out perception questions, we identify 18% of the VQA dataset as
highly likely to be Reasoning.
B.3. Validating rules
To check the accuracy of our rules, we designed a crowdsourc-
ing task on Mechanical Turk that instructed workers to identify
a given VQA question as Perception or Reasoning, and to subse-
quently provide sub-questions for the Reasoning questions.
Validating Precision.
As mentioned in Section 3.1, 89.25% of
the times, 2 out of 3 trained workers classiﬁed our resulting ques-
tions as reasoning questions demonstrating the high precision of
the regex-based rules we created.
C. VQA-introspect
In this section, we describe how we collect sub-questions and
answers for questions in our Reasoning split.
Given the complexity of distinguishing between Perception /
Reasoning and providing sub-questions for Reasoning questions,
we ﬁrst train and ﬁlter workers on Amazon Mechanical Turk
(AMT) via qualiﬁcation rounds before we rely on them to gen-
erate high-quality sub-questions.
Worker Training - We manually annotate 100 questions from
the VQA dataset as Perception and 100 as Reasoning questions, to
serve as examples. We ﬁrst teach workers the difference between
Perception and Reasoning questions by deﬁning them and showing
several examples of each, along with explanations. Then, workers
are shown (question, answer) pairs and are asked to identify if
the given question is a Perception question or a Reasoning ques-
tion 7. Finally, for Reasoning questions, we ask workers to add
all Perception questions and corresponding answers (in short) that
would be necessary to answer the main question. In this quali-
ﬁcation HIT, workers have to make 6 Perception and Reasoning
judgments, and they qualify if they get 5 or more answers right.
This interface can be found here.
We launched further pilot experiments for the workers who
passed the ﬁrst qualiﬁcation round, where we manually evaluated
the quality of their sub-questions based on 2 criteria : (1) The sub-
questions should be Perception questions grounded in the image,
and 2) The sub-questions should be sufﬁcient to answer the main
Reasoning question. Among those 540 workers who passed the
ﬁrst qualiﬁcation test, 144 were selected (via manual evaluation)
as high-quality workers, which ﬁnally qualiﬁed for attempting our
main task.
Main task - In the main data collection, all VQA questions that
got identiﬁed as Reasoning by regex-rules (section B) and a ran-
dom subset of the questions identiﬁed as Perception were further
judged by workers (for validation purposes). We eliminated am-
biguous questions by further ﬁltering out questions where there is
high worker disagreement about the answer. We require at least
8 out of 10 workers to agree with the majority answer for yes/no
questions and 5 out of 10 for all other questions, which leaves us
with a split that corresponds to ∼13% of the VQA dataset. This
interface can be found here.
C.1. VQA-introspect
Each <question, image> pair labeled as Reasoning had sub
questions generated by by 3 unique workers 8. On average we
have 2.60 sub-questions per Reasoning question.
Randomly sampled qualitative examples from our collected
dataset are shown in Fig. 7.
7We also add an “Invalid” category to ﬂag nonsensical questions or
those which can be answered without looking at the image
8A small number of workers displayed degraded performance after the
qualiﬁcation round, and were manually ﬁltered
9

Rules
Amount of Data
Starts with
Contains
Not contains
Length
# questions
% data
How many
-
-
-
48656
10.96
-
color
-
-
47956
10.81
What is the
-
-
-
40988
9.24
What
on
-
-
29031
6.54
What
in
-
-
21876
4.93
Is there
-
-
-
16494
3.72
-
wear
[’appropriate’, ’acceptable’, ’etiquitte’]
-
15530
3.50
-
wearing
-
-
14940
3.37
Is this a
-
-
4
14814
3.34
Where
-
-
-
12409
2.80
-
old
-
-
11197
2.52
What kind of
-
-
-
11186
2.52
What are
-
-
-
10524
2.37
-
on?
-
-
9040
2.04
Are there
-
-
-
8665
1.95
What type of
-
-
-
7955
1.79
-
doing?
-
-
7288
1.64
-
holding
-
-
7137
1.61
-
low
-
-
6596
1.49
-
round?
-
-
6242
1.41
Do
have
-
-
6213
1.40
Is the
on the
-
-
5375
1.21
Are these
-
[’homemade’, ’healthy’, ’domesticated’, etc.]
3
5320
1.20
Is the
in the
[’wild’, ’mountain’, ’desert’, ’woods’, etc.]
-
5108
1.15
Does
have
-
-
5078
1.14
-
number
-
-
4477
1.01
What is this
-
-
-
3970
0.89
Is
ed?
[’overexposed?’, ’doctored?’, ’ventilated?’, etc.]
3
3940
0.88
Is
ing?
[’horrifying?’, ’relaxing?’, ’competing?’, etc.]
3
3870
0.88
Is
on
-
3
3622
0.82
Who
on
-
-
3563
0.80
-
shown?
-
-
3501
0.79
What sport
-
-
-
3412
0.77
-
sun
-
-
3260
0.73
-
see
-
-
3238
0.73
-
visible
-
-
3076
0.69
What
say?
-
-
3238
0.69
What
playing?
-
-
3076
0.69
Are the
in the
[’US’, ’wild’, ’team’, ’or’, etc.]
-
3010
0.68
What
playing?
-
-
3076
0.69
Are
on the
-
-
2932
0.66
Table 2: Our rules for eliminating perception questions. Length refers to the # words in the question. We show top-40 rules based on data eliminated.
10

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
Figure 7: Randomly sampled qualitative examples of Perception sub-questions in our VQA-introspect dataset for main questions in the Reasoning split of
VQA. Main questions are written in orange and sub questions are in blue. A single worker may have provided more than one sub questions for the same
(image, main question) pair.
11
