A (Simpliﬁed) Supreme Being Necessarily Exists, says the Computer:
Computationally Explored Variants of G¨odel’s Ontological Argument
Christoph Benzm¨uller
Freie Universit¨at Berlin

Abstract
An approach to universal (meta-)logical reasoning in classical
higher-order logic is employed to explore and study simpli-
ﬁcations of Kurt G¨odel’s modal ontological argument. Some
argument premises are modiﬁed, others are dropped, modal
collapse is avoided and validity is shown already in weak
modal logics K and T. Key to the gained simpliﬁcations of
G¨odel’s original theory is the exploitation of a link to the no-
tions of ﬁlter and ultraﬁlter in topology.
The paper illustrates how modern knowledge representation
and reasoning technology for quantiﬁed non-classical logics
can contribute new knowledge to other disciplines. The con-
tributed material is also well suited to support teaching of
non-trivial logic formalisms in classroom.
1
Introduction
Variants of Kurt G¨odel’s (1970), resp. Dana Scott’s (1972),
modal ontological argument have previously been stud-
ied and veriﬁed on the computer by Benzm¨uller and
Woltzenlogel-P. (2014; 2016) and Benzm¨uller and Fuen-
mayor (2020), and some previously unknown issues were
revealed in these works,1 and it was shown that logic KB,
instead of S5, is already sufﬁcient to derive from G¨odel’s
axioms that a supreme being necessarily exists.
In this paper simpliﬁed variants of G¨odel’s modal onto-
logical argument are explored and studied. Our simpliﬁca-
tions have been developed in interaction with the proof as-
sistant Isabelle/HOL (Nipkow, Paulson, and Wenzel 2002)
and by employing Benzm¨uller’s (2019; 2013) shallow se-
mantical embedding (SSE) approach as enabling technol-
ogy. This technology supports the reuse of automated the-
orem proving (ATP) and model ﬁnding tools for classical
higher-order logic (HOL) to represent and reason with a
wide range of non-classical logics and theories, including
higher-order modal logics (HOMLs) and G¨odel’s modal on-
tological argument, which are in the focus of this paper.
One of the new, simpliﬁed modal arguments is as follows.
The notion of being Godlike (G) is exactly as in G¨odel’s
1E.g., the theorem prover LEO-II detected that G¨odel’s
(1970) variant of the argument is inconsistent; this inconsistency
had, unknowingly, been ﬁxed in the variant of Scott (1972);
cf. (Benzm¨uller and Woltzenlogel Paleo 2016) for more details.
original work. Thus, a Godlike entity, by deﬁnition, pos-
sesses all positive properties (P is an uninterpreted constant
denoting positive properties):
G x
≡
∀Y.(P Y →Y x)
The three only axioms of the new theory which constrain
the interpretation of G¨odel’s positive properties (P) are:
A1’ Self-difference is not a positive property.2
¬P(λx.x ̸= x)
A2’ A property entailed or necessarily entailed by a positive
property is positive.
∀X Y. ((P X ∧(X ⊑Y ∨X ⇛Y )) →P Y )
A3 The conjunction of any collection of positive properties
is positive.3
∀Z.(Pos Z →∀X.(XdZ →P X))
Technical reading: if Z is any set of positive properties,
then the property X obtained by taking the conjunction of
the properties in Z is positive.
In these premises the following deﬁned symbols are used,
where ∀is a possibilist second-order quantiﬁer and where
∀E is an actualist ﬁrst-order quantiﬁer for individuals:
X ⊑Y
≡
∀Ez.(X z →Y z)
X ⇛Y
≡
2(X ⊑Y )
Pos Z
≡
∀X.(Z X →P X)
XdZ
≡
2∀Eu.(X u ↔(∀Y. Z Y →Y u))
From A1’, A2’ and A3 it follows, in a few argumenta-
tion steps in modal logic K, that a Godlike entity possibly
and necessarily exists. Modal collapse, which expresses that
2An alternative to A1’ would be: The empty property (λx.⊥) is
not a positive property.
3The third-order formalization of A3 as given here (Z is a third-
order variable ranging over sets of properties) has been proposed
by Anderson and Gettings (1996), see also Fitting (2002). Axiom
A3, together with the deﬁnition of G, implies that being Godlike is
a positive property. Since supporting this inference is the only role
this axiom plays in the argument, (P G) can be taken (and has been
taken; cf. Scott (1972)) as an alternative to our A3; cf. also Fig. 7.
arXiv:2001.04701v10  [cs.LO]  14 Jun 2020

there are no contingent truths and which thus eliminates the
possibility of alternative possible worlds, does not follow
from these axioms. Also monotheism is not implied. These
observations should render the new theory interesting to the-
oretical philosophy and theology.
Compare the above with G¨odel’s premises of the modal
ontological argument (in the consistent variant of Scott):
A1 One of a property or its complement is positive.
∀X.(¬(P X) ↔P(⇁X))
A2 A property necessarily entailed by a positive property is
positive.
∀X Y.((P X ∧(X ⇛Y )) →P Y )
A3 The conjunction of any collection of positive properties
is positive (or, alternatively, being Godlike is a positive
property).
∀Z.(Pos Z →∀X.(XdZ →P X))
A4 Any positive property is necessarily positive.
∀X.(P X →2(P X))
A5 Necessary existence (NE) is a positive property.
P NE
Furthermore, axiom B is added to ensure that we operate
in logic KB instead of just K.4 (Remember that logic S5 is
not needed.)
∀ϕ.(ϕ →23ϕ)
Essence (E) and necessary existence (NE) are deﬁned as
(all other deﬁnitions are as before):
E Y x
≡
Y x ∧∀Z.(Z x →(Y ⇛Z))
NE x
≡
∀Y.(E Y x →2∃E Y )
Informally: Property Y is an essence E of an entity x if, and
only if, (i) Y holds for x and (ii) Y necessarily entails every
property Z of x. Moreover, an entity x has the property
of necessary existence if, and only if, the essence of x is
necessarily instantiated.
Using G¨odel’s premises as stated it can be proved auto-
matically that a Godlike entity possibly and necessarily ex-
ists (Benzm¨uller and Woltzenlogel Paleo 2016). However,
modal collapse is still implied even in the weak logic KB.5
Benzm¨uller and Fuenmayor (2020) recently showed that
different modal ultraﬁlter properties can be deduced from
G¨odel’s premises.
These insights are key to the argu-
ment simpliﬁcations developed and studied in this paper: If
G¨odel’s premises entail that positive properties form a modal
ultraﬁlter, then why not turning things around, and start out
with an axiom U1 postulating ultraﬁlter properties for P?
4Symmetry of the accessibility relation r associated with modal
2-operator can be postulated alternatively in our meta-logical
framework.
5For more information on modal collapse (in logic S5) consult
Sobel (1987; 2004), Fitting (2002) and Kovaˇc (2012); see also the
references therein.
Then use U1 instead of other axioms for proving that a God-
like entity necessarily exists, and on the ﬂy explore what
further simpliﬁcations of the argument are triggered. This
research plan worked out and it led to simpliﬁed argument
variants as presented above and in the remainder.
The proof assistant Isabelle/HOL and its integrated ATP
systems have supported our exploration work surprisingly
well, despite the undecidability and high complexity of the
underlying logic setting. As usual, we here only present the
main steps of the exploration process, and various interest-
ing eureka or frustration steps in between are dropped.
The structure of this paper is as follows: An SSE of
HOML in HOL is introduced in Sect. 2. This section, parts
of which have been adapted from Kirchner et al. (2019), en-
sures that the paper is sufﬁciently self-contained; readers fa-
miliar with the SSE approach may simply skip it. Modal ﬁl-
ter and ultraﬁlter are deﬁned in Sect. 3. Section 4 recaps, in
some more detail, the G¨odel/Scott variant of the modal on-
tological argument from above. Subsequently, an ultraﬁlter-
based modal ontological argument is presented in Sect. 5.
This new argument is further simpliﬁed in Sect. 6, leading
to our proposal based on axioms A1’, A2’ and A3 as presented
before. Further simpliﬁcations and modiﬁcations are studied
in Sect. 7, and related work is discussed in Sect. 8.
Since we develop, explain and discuss our formal encod-
ings directly in Isabelle/HOL, some familiarity with this
proof assistant and its underlying logic HOL (Andrews
2002; Benzm¨uller and Andrews 2019) is assumed. The en-
tire sources6 of our formal encodings are presented and ex-
plained in detail in this paper.
The contributions of this paper are thus manifold. Besides
the novel variants of the modal ontological argument that
we contribute to metaphysics and theology, we demonstrate
how the SSE technique, in combination with higher-order
reasoning tools, can be employed in practical studies to ex-
plore such new knowledge. Moreover, we contribute useful
source encodings that can be reused and adapted to teach
quantiﬁed modal logics in interdisciplinary lecture courses.
2
Modeling HOML in HOL
Various SSEs of quantiﬁed non-classical logics in HOL
have been developed, studied and applied in related work,
cf. Benzm¨uller (2019) and Kirchner et al. (2019) and the
references therein. These contributions, among others, show
that the standard translation from propositional modal logic
to ﬁrst-order (FO) logic can be concisely modeled (i.e., em-
bedded) within HOL theorem provers, so that the modal op-
erator 2, for example, can be explicitly deﬁned by the λ-
term λϕ.λw.∀v.(Rwv →ϕv), where R denotes the acces-
sibility relation associated with 2. Then one can construct
FO formulas involving 2ϕ and use them to represent and
proof theorems. Thus, in an SSE, the target logic is inter-
nally represented using higher-order (HO) constructs in a
theorem proving system such as Isabelle/HOL. Benzm¨uller
6See [here], or logikey.org →Computational-Metaphysics.
The experiments reported in this paper were conducted on a stan-
dard notebook (2,5 GHz Intel Core i7, 16 GB memory).
2

and Paulson (2013) developed an SSE that captures quan-
tiﬁed extensions of modal logic.
For example, if ∀x.φx
is shorthand in HOL for Π(λx.φx), then 2∀xPx would
be represented as 2Π′(λx.λw.Pxw), where Π′ stands for
the λ-term λΦ.λw.Π(λx.Φxw), and the 2 gets resolved as
above.
To see how these expressions can be resolved to produce
the right representation, consider the following series of re-
ductions:
2∀xPx
≡
2Π′(λx.λw.Pxw)
≡
2((λΦ.λw.Π(λx.Φxw))(λx.λw.Pxw))
≡
2(λw.Π(λx.(λx.λw.Pxw)xw))
≡
2(λw.Π(λx.Pxw))
≡
(λϕ.λw.∀v.(Rwv →ϕv))(λw.Π(λx.Pxw))
≡
(λϕ.λw.Π(λv.Rwv →ϕv))(λw.Π(λx.Pxw))
≡
(λw.Π(λv.Rwv →(λw.Π(λx.Pxw))v))
≡
(λw.Π(λv.Rwv →Π(λx.Pxv)))
≡
(λw.∀v.Rwv →∀x.Pxv)
≡
(λw.∀vx.Rwv →Pxv)
Thus, we end up with a representation of 2∀xPx in HOL.
Of course, types are assigned to each (sub-)term of the HOL
language. We assign individual terms (such as variable x
above) the type e, and terms denoting worlds (such as vari-
able w above) the type i. From such base choices, all other
types in the above presentation can actually be inferred.
An explicit encoding of HOML in Isabelle/HOL, follow-
ing the above ideas, is presented in Fig. 1.7 In lines 4–5 the
base types i and e are declared (text passages in red are com-
ments). Note that HOL comes with an inbuilt base type bool,
the bivalent type of Booleans. No cardinality constraints
are associated with types i and e, except that they must be
non-empty. To keep our presentation concise, useful type
synonyms are introduced in lines 6–9. σ abbreviates the
type i⇒bool (⇒is the function type constructor in HOL),
and terms of type σ can be seen to represent world-lifted
propositions, i.e., truth-sets in Kripke’s modal relational se-
mantics (Garson 2018). The explicit transition from modal
propositions to terms (truth-sets) of type σ is a key aspect
of the SSE technique, and in the remainder of this article
we use phrases such as “world-lifted” or “σ-type” terms to
emphasize this conversion in the SSE approach. γ, which
stands for e⇒σ, is the type of world-lifted, intensional prop-
erties. µ and ν, which abbreviate σ⇒σ and σ⇒σ⇒σ, are
the types associated with unary and binary modal logic con-
nectives.
The modal logic connectives are deﬁned in lines 12–25.
In line 16, for example, the deﬁnition of the world-lifted
∨-connective of type ν is given; explicit type information
is presented after the ::-token for ‘c5’, which is the ASCII-
denominator for the (right-associative) inﬁx-operator ∨as
7In Isabelle/HOL explicit type information can often be omitted
due the system’s internal type inference mechanism. This feature
is exploited in our formalization to improve readability. However,
for new abbreviations and deﬁnitions, we often explicitly declare
the types of the freshly introduced symbols. This supports a better
intuitive understanding, and it also reduces the number of polymor-
phic terms in the formalization (heavy use of polymorphism may
generally lead to decreased proof automation performance).
Figure 1: SSE of HOML in HOL.
introduced in parenthesis shortly after. ϕσ ∨ψσ is then de-
ﬁned as abbreviation for the truth-set λw.(ϕσw) ∨(ψσw),
respectively. In the remainder we generally use bold-face
symbols for world-lifted connectives (such as ∨) in order to
rigorously distinguish them from their ordinary counterparts
(such as ∨) in meta-logic HOL.
Further modal logic connectives, such as ⊥, ⊤, ¬, →,
and ↔are introduced analogously. The operator ⇁, intro-
duced in lines 22–23, is inverting properties of types γ; this
operation occurs in G¨odel’s axiom A1. = and ̸= are deﬁned
3

in lines 24–25 as world-independent, syntactical equality.
The world-lifted modal 2-operator is introduced in lines
19–20; accessibility relation R is now synonymously named
r in inﬁx notation. The deﬁnition of 3 is analogous.
The world-lifted (polymorphic) possibilist quantiﬁer ∀as
discussed before is introduced in line 28–29. In line 30,
user-friendly binder-notation for ∀is additionally deﬁned.
Instead of distinguishing between ∀and Π′ as in our illus-
trating example, ∀-symbols are overloaded here. The intro-
duction of the possibilist ∃-quantiﬁer is analogous.
Additional actualist quantiﬁers, ∀E and ∃E, are intro-
duced in lines 36–42.
Their deﬁnition is guarded by an

codes whether an individual object actually “exists” at a par-
ticular world, or not. The actualist quantiﬁers are declared
non-polymorphic, and they support quantiﬁcation over indi-
viduals only. In the remainder we will indeed apply ∀and ∃
for different types in the type hierarchy of HOL, while ∀E
and ∃E exclusively quantify over individuals only.
Global validity of a world-lifted formula ψσ, denoted as
⌊ψ⌋, is introduced in line 45 as an abbreviation for ∀wi.ψw.
Consistency of the introduced concepts is conﬁrmed by
the model ﬁnder nitpick (Blanchette and Nipkow 2010) in
line 48. Since only abbreviations and no axioms have been
introduced so far, the consistency of the Isabelle/HOL theory
HOML as displayed in Fig. 1 is actually evident.
In line 49–52 it is studied whether instances of the Barcan
and the converse Barcan formulas are implied. As expected,
both principles are valid only for possibilist quantiﬁcation,
while they have countermodels for actualist quantiﬁcation.
Lines 54–55 declare some speciﬁc parameter settings for
some of the reasoning tools that we employ.
Theorem 1. The SSE of HOML in HOL is faithful (for K).
Proof. Analagous to Benzm¨uller and Paulson (2013).
Theory HOML thus models base logic K in HOL. Axiom
B, see above, can be postulated to arrive at logic KB.
3
Modal Filter and Ultraﬁlter
Theory MFilter, for “modal ﬁlter”, see Fig. 2, imports theory
HOML and adapts the topological notions of ﬁlter and ultra-
ﬁlter to our modal logic setting. For an introduction to the
notions of ﬁlter and ultraﬁlter see the literature, e.g., (Burris
and Sankappanavar 1981) or also (Odifreddi 2000).
Our notion of modal ultraﬁlter is introduced in lines
20–21 as a world-lifted characteristic function of type
(γ⇒σ)⇒σ. A modal ultraﬁlter is thus a world-dependent
set of intensions of γ-type properties; in other words, a σ-
subset of the σ-powerset of γ-type property extensions. A
modal ultraﬁlter φ is deﬁned as a modal ﬁlter satisfying an
additional maximality condition: ∀ϕ.ϕ ∈φ ∨(−1ϕ) ∈φ,
where ∈is elementhood of γ-type objects in σ-sets of γ-
type objects (see lines 3–4), and where −1 is the relative set
complement operation on sets of entities (line 11).
A modal ﬁlter φ, see lines 14–17, is required to
1. be large: U ∈φ, where U denotes the full set of γ-type
objects we start with,
Figure 2: Deﬁnition of ﬁlter and ultraﬁlter (for possible worlds).
2. exclude the empty set: ∅̸∈φ, where ∅is the world-lifted
empty set of γ-type objects,
3. be closed under supersets: ∀ϕ ψ.(ϕ ∈φ ∧ϕ ⊆ψ) →
ψ ∈φ (the world-lifted ⊆-relation is deﬁned in lines 7–
8), and
4. be closed under intersections: ∀ϕ ψ.(ϕ ∈φ∧ψ ∈φ) →
(ϕ ⊓ψ) ⊆φ (where ⊓is deﬁned in lines 9–10).
Benzm¨uller and Fuenmayor (2020) have studied two
different notions of modal ultraﬁlter (termed γ- and δ-
ultraﬁlter), which are deﬁned on intensions and extensions
of properties, respectively. This distinction is not needed in
this paper; what we call modal ultraﬁlter here corresponds
to their notion of γ-ultraﬁlter.
4
G¨odel/Scott Variant
We start out in Fig. 3 with the introduction of some basic
abbreviations and deﬁnitions for the G¨odel/Scott variant of
the modal ontological argument. This theory ﬁle, which is
termed BaseDefs and which imports HOML, is reused with-
out modiﬁcation also in all other variants as explored in this
paper later on. In line 4 the uninterpreted constant symbol
P, for “positive properties”, is declared; it has type γ⇒σ.
P thus denotes an intensional, world-depended concept. In
lines 7–11 abbreviations for the previously discussed rela-
tions and predicates ⊑, ⇛, d and Pos are introduced. In
lines 14–15, G¨odel’s notion of “being Godlike” (G) is de-
ﬁned, and in lines 18–21 the previously discussed deﬁnitions
for Essence (E) and Necessary Existence (NE) are given.
The full formalization of Scott’s variant of G¨odel’s argu-
ment is presented as theory ScottVariant in Fig. 4. This the-
ory imports and relies on the previously introduced notions
from theory ﬁles HOML, MFilter and BaseDefs.
The premises of G¨odel’s argument, as already discussed
4

Figure 3: Deﬁnitions for all variants discussed in the remainder.
earlier, are stated in lines 4–10. In line 12 a semantical coun-
terpart B’ (symmetry of the accessibility relation r associated
with the 2-operator) of the B axiom is proved.
An abstract level “proof net” for theorem T6, the neces-
sary existence of a Godlike entity, is presented in lines 15–
25. Following the literature, the proof goes as follows: From
A1 and A2 infer T1: positive properties are possibly exem-
pliﬁed. From A3 and the defn. of G obtain T2: being Godlike
is a positive property (Scott actually directly postulated T2).
Using T1 and T2 show T3: possibly a Godlike entity exists.
Next, use A1, A4, the defns. of G and E to infer T4: be-
ing Godlike is an essential property of any Godlike entity.
From this, A5, B’ and the defns. of G, and NE have T5: the
possible existence of a Godlike entity implies its necessary
existence. T5 and T3 then imply T6.
The ﬁve subproofs and their dependencies have been au-
tomatically proved using state-of-the-art ATP system inte-
grated with Isabelle/HOL via its sledgehammer tool; sledge-
hammer then identiﬁed and returned the abstract level proof
justiﬁcations as displayed here, e.g. “using T1 T2 by simp”.
The mentioned proof engines/tactics blast, metis, and simp
are trustworthy components of Isabelle/HOL’s, since they
internally reconstruct and check each (sub-)proof in the
proof assistants small and trusted proof kernel.
The smt
method, which relies on an external satisﬁability modulo
solver (CVC4 in our case), is less trusted, but we neverthe-
less use it here since it was the only Isabelle/HOL method
that was able to close this subproof in a single step (we want
to avoid displaying longer interactive proofs due to space re-
strictions). Using the defns. from Sect. 2, one can generally
reconstruct and verify all presented proofs with pen and pa-
per directly in meta-logic HOL. Moreover, reconstruction
of modal logic proofs from such proof nets within direct
proof calculi for quantiﬁed modal logics, cf. Kanckos and
Woltzenlogel-P. (2017) or Fitting (2002) is also possible.
The presented theory is consistent, which is conﬁrmed in
line 31 by model ﬁnder nitpick; nitpick reports a model con-
sisting of one world and one Godlike entity.
Figure 4: G¨odel’s modal ontological argument; Scott’s variant.
5

Figure 5: Ultraﬁlter variant.
Validity of modal collapse (MC) is conﬁrmed in lines 34–
42; a proof net displaying the proofs main idea is shown.
Most relevant for this paper is that the ATP systems were
able to quickly prove that G¨odel’s notion of positive proper-
ties P constitutes a modal ultraﬁlter, cf. lines 45–55. This
was key to the idea of taking the modal ultraﬁlter property
of P as an axiom U1 of the theory; see the next section.
In lines 57–60 some further relevant lemmata are proved.
And in line 62–70 we hint at a much simpler, alternative
proof argument: Take the set HF G of all supersets of G; it
follows from G¨odel’s theory that this set is a modal ﬁlter
(line 66) resp. modal ultraﬁlter (line 67), i.e., HF G is the
modal Hauptﬁlter of G. The necessary existence of a God-
like entity now becomes a simple corollary of this result (see
line 70, where T6Again is proved exclusively from F1). In
Sect. 7 we will later present an argument variant that is based
on this observation.8
5
Ultraﬁlter Variant
Taking U1 as an axiom for G¨odel’s theory in fact leads to a
signiﬁcant simpliﬁcation of the modal ontological argument;
this is shown in lines 10–17 of the theory ﬁle UFilterVari-
ant in Fig. 5: not only G¨odel’s axiom A1 can be dropped,
but also axioms A4 and A5, together with defns. E and NE.
Even logic KB can be given up, since K is now sufﬁcient for
verifying the proof argument.
The proof is similar to before: Use U1 and A2 to infer T1
(positive properties are possibly exempliﬁed). From A3 and
defn. of G have T2 (being Godlike is a positive property).
T1 and T2 imply T3 (a Godlike entity possibly exists). From
U1, A2, T2 and the defn. of G have T5 (possible existence of
a Godlike entity implies its necessary existence). Use T5 and
T3 to conclude T6 (necessary existence of a Godlike entity).
8Manfred Droste from the University of Leipzig pointed me to

Consistency of the theory is conﬁrmed in line 20; again a
model with one world and one Godlike entity is reported.
Most interestingly, modal collapse MC now has a simple
countermodel as nitpick informs us in line 23. This counter-
model consists of a single entity e1 and two worlds i1 and
i2 with accessibility relation r = {⟨i1, i1⟩, ⟨i2, i1⟩, ⟨i2, i2⟩}.
Trivially, formula Φ is such that Φ holds in i2 but not in i1,
which invalidates MC at world i2. e1 is the Godlike entity in
both worlds, i.e., G is the property that holds for e1 in i1 and
i2, which we may denote as λe.λw.e=e1 ∧(w=i1 ∨w=i2).
Using tuple notation we may write G = {⟨e1, ii⟩, ⟨e1, i2⟩}.
Remember that P, which is of type γ⇒σ, is an inten-
sional, world-depended concept. In our countermodel for
MC in line 23 the extension of P for world i1 has the above
G and λe.λw.e=e1 ∧w=i1 as its elements, while in world
i2 we have G and λe.λw.e=e1 ∧w=i2. Using tuple notation
we may note P as
{⟨{⟨e1, i1⟩, ⟨e1, i2⟩}, ii⟩, ⟨{⟨e1, i1⟩}, ii⟩,
⟨{⟨e1, i1⟩, ⟨e1, i2⟩}, i2⟩, ⟨{⟨e1, i2⟩}, i2⟩}
In order to verify that P is a modal ultraﬁlter we have to
check whether the respective modal ultraﬁlter conditions are
satisﬁed in both worlds. U ∈P in i1 and also in i2, since
both ⟨{⟨e1, i1⟩, ⟨e1, i2⟩}, i1⟩and ⟨{⟨e1, i1⟩, ⟨e1, i2⟩}, i2⟩are
in P; ∅̸∈P in i1 and also in i2, since both ⟨{}, i1⟩and
⟨{}, i2⟩are not in P. It is also easy to verify that P is closed
under supersets and intersection in both worlds.
Note that in our countermodel for MC, also G¨odel’s axiom
A4 is invalidated. Consider X = λe.λw.e=e1 ∧w=i2, i.e.,
X is true for e1 in i2, but false for e1 in i1. We have P X
in i2, but we do not have 2(P X) in i1, since P X does not
hold in i1, which is reachable in r from i2.
nitpick is capable of computing all partial modal ultraﬁl-
ters as part of its countermodel exploration: out of 512 can-
didates, nitpick identiﬁes 32 structures of form ⟨F, i⟩, for
i ∈{1, 2}, in which F satisﬁes the ultraﬁlter conditions in
the speciﬁed world i. An example for such an ⟨F, i⟩is
⟨{⟨{⟨e1, i1⟩}, ii⟩, ⟨{}, ii⟩,
⟨{⟨e1, i1⟩, ⟨e1, i2⟩}, i2⟩, ⟨{⟨e1, i2⟩}, i2⟩}, i2⟩
F is not a proper modal ultraﬁlter, since F fails to be an
ultraﬁlter in world i1.
6
Simpliﬁed Variant
What modal ultraﬁlters properties of P are actually needed
to support T6? Which ones can be dropped? Experiments
with our framework, as displayed in theory ﬁle SimpleVari-
ant in Fig. 6, conﬁrm that only the ﬁlter conditions from
Sect. 3 must be upheld for P; maximality can be dropped.
However, it is possible to merge ﬁlter condition 3 (closed
under supersets) for P with G¨odel’s A2 into axiom A2’ as
shown in line 6 of Fig. 6. Moreover, instead of requiring
that the empty set ∅= λx.⊥must not be a positive prop-
erty, we postulate that self-difference λx.x̸=x is not (line
5); note that self-difference is extensionally equal to ∅. Self-
identity and self-difference have been used frequently in the
history of the ontological argument, which is part of the mo-
6

Figure 6: Simpliﬁed variant.
tivation for this switch. As intended, ﬁlter condition 4 is now
implied by the theory (see theorem F1 proved in line 31), as
well as positiveness of self-identity (line 10). The essential
idea of the theory SimpleVariant in Fig. 6 is to show that it
actually sufﬁces, in combination with A3, to postulate that P
is a modal ﬁlter, and this is what our simpliﬁed axioms do.
From the deﬁnition of G and the axioms A1’, A2’ and A3
(lines 5–7) theorem T6 immediately follows: in line 13 sev-
eral theorem provers integrated with sledgehammer quickly
report a proof (≤1sec). Moreover, a more detailed and more
intuitive “proof net” is presented in lines 14–18; the proof
argument is analogous to what has been discussed before.
In lines 21–23, countermodels for modal collapse MC
(similar to the one discussed before) and for monotheism
MT are reported.
Further questions are answered experimentally (lines 26–
38): neither A1, nor A4 or A5, of the premises we dropped
from G¨odel’s theory are implied anymore, all have counter-
models. In lines 31–32 we see that P is still a ﬁlter, but
not an ultraﬁlter. Since some of these axioms, e.g. G¨odel’s
strong A1, have been discussed controversially in the history
of G¨odel’s argument, and since MC and MT are independent,
we have arrived at a philosophically and theologically po-
tentially relevant simpliﬁcation of G¨odel’s work.
7
Further Simpliﬁed Variants
Postulating T2 instead of A3
Instead of working with
third-order axiom A3 to infer T2 as in theory SimpleVariant,
Figure 7: Simpliﬁed variant with axiom T2.
Figure 8: Simpliﬁed variant with simple entailment in logic K.
we directly postulate T2 as an axiom in theory SimpleVari-
antPG; cf. the new axiom T2 in line 7 of in Fig. 7.
Theorem T6 can be proved essentially as before (lines 10–
15), and MC and MT still have countermodels (lines 20–22).
Simple Entailment in Axiom A2’
Instead of using a dis-
junction of simple entailment and necessary entailment in
axiom A2’ we may in fact only require simple entailment
in A2’; see axiom A2” (line 6) of the theory ﬁle SimpleVari-
antSE displayed in Fig. 8. Proofs for T6, the necessary exis-
tence of a Godlike entity, and also T7, existence of a Godlike
entity, can still be quickly found (lines 10–11).
However, after replacing A2’ by A2”, T3 (the possible ex-
istence of a Godlike entity) is no longer implied; see line 14.
As nitpick informs us, T3 now has an undesired counter-
model consisting of one single world that is not connected to
itself. By assuming modal axiom T (what is necessary true is
true in the given world) this countermodel can be eliminated
so that T3 is implied as desired (lines 16–18).
7

Figure 9: Simpliﬁed variant with simple entailment in logic T.
Simple Entailment in Logic T
The above discussion mo-
tivates a further alternative of the simpliﬁed modal ontolog-
ical argument; see theory ﬁle SimpleVariantSEinT in Fig. 9.
This argument is assuming modal logic T (which comes
with axiom T as discussed above), and, as before, it pos-
tulates axioms A1’ A2” and T2 (lines 5–7):
A1’ Self-difference is not a positive property.
A2” A property entailed by a positive property is positive.
T2 Being Godlike is a positive property.
One possible proof argument for T6 is as before; see lines
15–19. However, there is also a much simpler proof, see
lines 23–30, which we explain in more detail (this simple
proof is applicable to previous variants as well; it is also
key to proving T5 from A1’, A2’/A2” and T2/A3 in previous
variants, including the simpliﬁed variant in Fig. 6):9
L1 The existence of a non-exempliﬁed positive property
implies that self-difference is a positive property—This
follows from axiom A2”.
L2 There is no non-exempliﬁed positive property—From
L1 and axiom A1’.
T1’ Positive properties are exempliﬁed—Equivalent to L2.
T3’ A Godlike entity exists—FromT1’ and axiom T2.
L3 A Godlike entity possibly exists—From T3’ and T’ (con-
trapositive of axiom T); note that L3 is not needed to ob-
tain T6 in the next step; generally, axiom T (resp. its con-
trapositive T’) is only needed for deriving T3/L3.
9The existence of such an unintended derivation was already
hinted at by Fuenmayor and Benzm¨uller (2017, Footn. 11).
Figure 10: Hauptﬁltervariant.
T6 A Godlike entity necessarily exists—From T3’ by neces-
sitation.
Hauptﬁltervariant
Another drastically simpliﬁed variant
of the modal ontological argument is related to the obser-
vations discussed earlier at the end of Sec. 4. There it has
been shown that the set HF G, consisting of all supersets of
G, is a modal ﬁlter (so that HF G is the Hauptﬁlter of G); this
then directly implies the necessary existence of a Godlike
entity. A new variant based on this observation is presented
in theory ﬁle SimpleVariantHF in Fig. 10. Here the set of all
supersets HF G of property G (being Godlike) is postulated
to be a modal ﬁlter (axiom F1 in line 7).10 The existence and
necessary existence of a Godlike entity then directly follows
from F1, see lines 10–16. And as already observed before,
the possible existence of a Godlike entity is independent, but
can be enforced by postulating modal axiom T (lines 19–
24). Moreover, the theory is consistent (line 26) and neither
modal collapse nor monotheism are implied (lines 29–30).
8
Related Work
Fitting (2002) suggested to carefully distinguish between in-
tensions and extensions of positive properties in the con-
text of G¨odel’s modal ontological argument, and, in order
to do so within a single framework, he introduced a suf-
ﬁciently expressive HOML enhanced with means for the
explicit representation of intensional terms and their exten-
sions; cf. also the intensional operations used by Fuenmayor
10In fact, the only essential requirement that is enforced here is
that ∅is not in HF G, hence G cannot be identical to ∅.
8

and Benzm¨uller (2017; 2020) in their formal study of the
works of Fitting and Anderson (1990; 1996).
The application of computational methods to philosoph-
ical problems was initially limited to ﬁrst-order theorem
provers. Fitelson and Zalta (2007) used PROVER9 to ﬁnd
a proof of the theorems about situation and world theory
in (Zalta 1993) and they found an error in a theorem about
Plato’s Forms that was left as an exercise in (Pelletier and
Zalta 2000). Oppenheimer and Zalta (2011) discovered, us-
ing Prover9, that one of the three premises used in their
reconstruction of Anselm’s ontological argument (Oppen-
heimer and Zalta 1991) was sufﬁcient to derive the conclu-
sion. The ﬁrst-order conversion techniques that were devel-
oped and applied in these works are outlined in some detail
in related work by Alama, Oppenheimer and Zalta (2015).
More recent related work makes use of higher-order
proof assistants.
Besides the already mentioned work of
Benzm¨uller and colleagues, this includes Rushby’s (2018)
study on Anselm’s ontological argument in the PVS system
and Blumson’s (2017) related study in Isabelle/HOL.
The development of G¨odel’s ontological argument has re-
cently been addressed by Kanckos and Lethen (2019). They
discovered previously unknown variants of the argument in
G¨odel’s Nachlass, whose relation to the presented simpliﬁed
variants should be further investigated in future work.11
Related work also includes Odifreddi’s (2000) discussion
on ultraﬁlters, dictators and God, which I was pointed to by
a reviewer.
9
Discussion
The simpliﬁcations of G¨odel’s theory as presented are far
reaching. In fact, one may ask “Is this really what G¨odel had
in mind?”, or are there some technical issues, such as the
alternative proof in lines 22–30 from Fig. 9, that have been
ignored so far? Moreover, is the deﬁnition of property entail-
ment (⊑) really adequate in the context of the modal onto-
logical argument, or shouldn’t this deﬁnition be replaced by
concept containment, so that self-difference, resp. the empty
property, would no longer ⊑-entail any other property?12
Moreover, assuming that the simpliﬁed theory SimpleVari-
ant from Fig. 6 is indeed still in line with what G¨odel had in
mind, why not presenting the deﬁnitions and axioms using
an alternative wording, for example, as follows (where we
replace “positive property” by “rational/consistent property”
and “Godlike entity” by “maximally-rational entity”):

vealed the following: In particular version No. 2 of G¨odel’s argu-
ment as presented in (Kanckos and Lethen 2019) appears related,
though not equivalent, to our simpliﬁed versions. Version No. 2 –
which we have meanwhile formalized and veriﬁed in Isabelle/HOL
(cf. Fig. 11 in the appendix) – avoids the notions of essence and
necessary existence and associated deﬁnitions/axioms, just as our
simpliﬁed versions do. Moreover, their ﬁndings also suggest that
instead of axiom A1’ we may just postulate that a non-positive prop-
erty exists (and experiments conﬁrm this claim; A1’ is then implied).
However, I prefer axiom A1’.
12See also (Alama, Oppenheimer, and Zalta 2015) and (Fuen-
mayor and Benzm¨uller 2017, Footn. 11).
G An entity x is maximally-rational (G) iff it has all ratio-
nal/consistent properties.
A1’ Self-difference is not a rational/consistent property.
A2’ A property entailed or necessarily entailed by a ratio-
nal/consistent property is rational/consistent.
T2 Maximal-rationality is a rational/consistent property.
It follows: A maximally-rational entity necessarily exists.
It would still be possible, but not mandatory, to under-
stand a maximally-rational being also as a Godlike being.
Independent of this discussion we expect the Is-
abelle/HOL theory ﬁles we contributed to be useful for
teaching quantiﬁed modal logics in classroom, as previously
demonstrated by Wisniewski et al. (2016) in their awarded
lecture course on “Computational Metaphysics”. The de-
veloped corpus of example problems is furthermore suited
as a benchmark for other ambitious knowledge representa-
tion and reasoning projects in the KR community: Can the
alternative approaches encode such metaphysical argumants
as well? How about their proof automation capabilities and
how about model ﬁnding? For example, description logic or
argumentation theory, due to their limited expressivity, ap-
pear unsuited to support such ambitious applications, while
the techniques presented in this paper have meanwhile been
used successfully for the encoding and assessment of foun-
dational theories in metaphysics (Kirchner, Benzm¨uller, and
Zalta 2020) and mathematics (Benzm¨uller and Scott 2020;
Tiemens et al. 2020). Moreover, our problem set constitutes
an interesting benchmark for other HOL automated theorem
provers and should therefore be converted into TPTP THF
(Sutcliffe and Benzm¨uller 2010) representation and be used
in theorem prover competitions.
10
Conclusion
G¨odel’s modal ontological argument stands in prominent
tradition of western philosophy. It has its roots in the Proslo-
gion of Anselm of Canterbury and it has been picked up
in Descartes’ Fifth Meditation and in the works of Leibniz,
which in turn inspired and informed the work of G¨odel.
In this paper we have linked G¨odel’s theory to a suit-
ably adapted mathematical theory (modal ﬁlter and modal
ultraﬁlter), and subsequently we have developed simpliﬁed
modal ontological arguments which avoid some of G¨odel’s
axioms and consequences, including modal collapse, that
have led to criticism in the past. At the same time the of-
fered simpliﬁcations are very far reaching, eventually too
far. Anyhow, the insights that were presented in this paper
appear relevant to inform ongoing studies of the modal on-
tological argument in theoretical philosophy and theology.
We have in this paper applied modern symbolic AI tech-
niques to arrive at deep, explainable and veriﬁable models of
the metaphysical concepts we are interested in. In particu-
lar, we have illustrated how state of the art theorem proving
systems, in combination with latest knowledge representa-
tion and reasoning technology, can fruitfully be employed to
explore and contribute deep new knowledge to other disci-
plines.
9
