THE E-INTELLIGENCE 
SYSTEM 

 
 
ABSTRACT 
Electronic Intelligence (ELINT), often known as E-Intelligence, is intelligence obtained through 
the use of electronic sensors. Other than personal communications, ELINT intelligence is normally 
obtained. The goal is usually to determine a target's capabilities, such as the placement of radar. 
Active or passive sensors can be employed to collect data. A provided signal is analyzed and 
contrasted to collected data for recognized signal types. The information may be stored if the 
signal type is detected; if no match is found, it can be classed as new. ELINT collects and 
categorizes data. In a military setting (and others that have adopted the usage, such as business), 
intelligence is information that helps an organization make decisions that can provide them a 
strategic advantage over the competition. The term "intel" is frequently shortened. The two main 
subfields of signals intelligence (SIGINT) are ELINT and Communications Intelligence 
(COMINT). The terminologies are specified by the US Department of Defense, and the categories 
of data reviewed are used by intelligence communities throughout the world [1]. 
 
 
KEYWORDS  
Electronic Intelligence, Signal Intelligence, Electronic Warfare, Communications, Radar, 
Receivers 
 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
Electronic intelligence (ELINT) is information derived solely from electrical impulses and does 
not include speech or writing (which are considered COMINT). There are several primary 
branches to it. 
 
Technical ELINT (TechELINT) [2] explains the structure of the signal, its emission 
characteristics, its methods of operating, and the functions of the emitter and weapon system 
affiliations of emitters such as guidance messages and detection systems. Perhaps one TechELINT 
main goal is to collect signal characteristics that may be used to figure out an emitter's capabilities 
and as part of a bigger system, such as a land radar identifying airplane, improved radio, 
counteraction, or refute gear has been developed. The phrase "electronic warfare" encompasses 
the whole process, as well as countermeasures. 
 
Another key discipline is operating ELINT (OpELINT), which focuses on discovering particular 
ELINT targets and analysing system functioning trends. The "Electronic Order of Battle" is the 

name given to these outcomes (EOB). Another service given by OpELINT is threat evaluations, 
sometimes known as "tactical ELINT." On the battlefield, OpELINT intelligence tools aid military 
missions’ planners and local army generals. The gathering, analysis, and dissemination of foreign 
telemetry signals intelligence was a prior third key branch of ELINT (TELINT). 
 
Surveilling, analysing, and evaluating alien telemetry yields technological and espionage 
information, known as TELINT. Telemetry Intelligence was initially considered to be part of 
ELINT since TELINT (later termed FISINT — Foreign Instrumentation Signals Intelligence) 
operations are intimately tied to TechELINT processes. When foreign rockets 2 and space probes 
are being built and tested, TELINT is a crucial part of performance data. TELINT is capable of 
providing a wealth of operational data about international satellites and spaceships [2]. 
 
The Radar Systems are the centres of Electronic Intelligence's attention, as well as the analysis of 
their properties. Observation, gathering, advance detection, TWS, guidance systems tracking, GCI, 
and other types of combat system radar systems are all threats. 
 
Signal types include pulses, pulse Delta, CW, ICW, modern radars employing PC (pulse & 
frequency coding), frequency and PRI nimble radar systems, AM, FM, and others. 
 
 
Capability of the system 
 
• Computer-controlled and software-programmable system. 
• Accurate signal capture and data processing in a short amount of time. 
• Accurate signal analysis and presentation of emitter activity based on the operator's 
selection of criteria, Fingerprinting and emission recognition (pulse analysis- intra 
and inter). 
• Data library linkage and management, efficient radar location, and the ability to 
upload recorded data / processes data in near real time over a separate encrypted 
aerial data link. 
• GPS time stamping capability for all recorded data every 1 second. 
 
 
When used tactically, the Electronic Support Measure (ESM) package of a weapon system might 
include ELINT equipment, which allows for detection and passive geo-location. 
 
For a more in-depth signal study activity, a technical analysis is necessary (capture and analysis of 
material, as well as identification off-line). 
 
 
• Tactical Operations: The Military, Marine, and Air Wing all want to know where all 
opposing radars are and what they can do with them. The Radar Order of Battle is what it's 
called (ROB) [3]. 
 
 
For example, in order to determine how to neutralize enemy radars or take suitable counters 
over them, the Air Force must first understand how and where opponent radars are built. 
 
Figure 1 is an example of tactical presentation. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Figure 1: Theoretical Presentation of Tactical Data (ROB), Reproduced from [3] 
 
 
• Technological Operations: Instead, intel attempts to acquire all radar operating modes and 
spectra from adversary radars. Understanding how defensive systems function, detecting new 
radars and operating modes, and keeping track of new adversary electronic advances and 
equipment are all required [3]. 
 
Figure 2 is an example of a technological presentation. 
 
 
Figure 2: Theoretical Presentation of Technical Data 
Reproduced from [3] 
 

 
 
To back up the following many points of view  
 
• Locate and identify hostile radar in a defined area of interest (AOI) 
• Keep an eye on the whole electrical spectrum envelope 
• Keep a safe distance from enemy radar installations; 
• To achieve these operating criteria, in most ELINT systems, there are two kinds of receivers: 
• A Receiver with a Panoramic View (Wide Band Receiver, WBR is employed to keep an eye 
on the surroundings, and  
• A Selective Receiver is used to measure radar waveforms (Super Heterodyne Receiver, 
SHR). 
 
The result of the ELINT Technical Analysis is the formation of combat systems database systems 
for radars affiliated with armaments (lookup and monitoring radars) and rocket claimants, that are 
then retrieved into the task datasets of the EW self-protection systems of warfare systems to aid in 
the detection phase. 
 
 
II. HISTORY 
ELINT was born when the Allies and the Axis discovered and used radar during World War II. 
The British pioneered the earliest Allied ELINT activities, as recounted in Dr. R. V. Jones' book 
The Secret War. 
 
Since most German interceptors were used to attack Allies planes over Germany at the time, the 
US Army Fighter Aircrafts were extremely keen in ELINT. They wanted to learn all they could 
about radars, such as how to avoid, "block," or "fake" them. During the second World War, ELINT 
was employed efficiently by all US army divisions against German land transponders, as well as 
Japanese aerial, navy, and underwater interceptors [2]. 
 
In early 1943, a B-24 bomber flew an ELINT operation above Kiska Peninsula inside the Aleutians 
to survey the Japanese radars upon that island. ELINT devices were placed aboard several B-24 
bombers in 1944, and they have been used to spearhead the blocking of Nazi base radar systems 
across Europe. 
 
 
 
 

Figure 3: A traditional ELINT system 
Reproduced from [4] 
Soon after WWII, the United States Air Forces of European Union (USAFE) began an aggressive 
TechELINT and OpELINT programme, that included establishment of a robust and broad 
collaboration program with a number of NATO allies. The Army-Navy Electronics Evaluation 
Group (ANEEG) was established by the US Department of Defense in 1952, with a staff of roughly 
thirty individuals [2]. It was held at the Navy's Nebraska Avenue Naval Security Station (NSS). 
Despite its limited collecting capabilities, the ANEEG served as just a central analytical center for 
ELINT interception processing and interpretation, and a central figure for collaboration of tough 
ELINT analytic challenges. 
 
 
III. CURRENT STATE 
➢ Role in air warfare 
 
Radar intercept and knowledge of its locations and operating procedures is a common kind of 
ELINT. Attacking troops could be able to prevent radar coverage, or electronic warfare units may 
be able to disrupt radar systems or broadcast false signals if they are aware of their characteristics. 
A "soft kill" is when a military unit confuses a radar electronically, whereas a "hard kill" is when 
a military unit sends specialized missiles or bombs at radars. Radar homing guidance systems are 
included on several modern air-to-air missiles, which are designed to counter massive radars in the 
air [5]. 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Elements of Electronic Warfare 
Reproduced from [6] 
 
 
Air strikes may be designed to stay away from the most strongly fortified locations and wing on 
an avionics suite that will offer the airplane the best chance of avoiding incoming fire and jet 
sweeps if they know in which each ground missiles and generally pro cannon systems is stationed 
and what kind it is. It may also be used to disrupt or spoof an adversary's defence network (also 

electronic warfare). Electronic intelligence is critical for stealth operations; stealth aircraft cannot 
operate in complete darkness and must understand which places to avoid. Conventional aircraft, 
therefore, must be aware of their location to disable or dodge stationary or quasi missile defence 
systems. 
 
➢ UAV-Based ELINT 
 
 
The resurgence of more traditional threat scenarios, along with the downing of a Malaysia Airlines 
planes, using a BUK technology, have started to draw media awareness to what has long been a 
recurring theme in our community: The danger of radar-guided surface-to-air missiles (SAMs). 
The ability of the SAM threat to create Pro, Areas Rejection (A2AD) domes in distressing areas 
throughout the globe have put the hard Suppression of Enemy Air Defense (SEAD) aim and 
methods into sharp focus [7]. 
 
When preparing to suppress the systems that make up a complex anti air (IAD) system inside the 
A2AD sphere, we quickly realize that a thorough ISR operation will be required to create and 
maintain the digital command structure (EOB) and temperament of the elevated detectors and 
affiliated military hardware. 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Antenna array installation considerations 
Reproduced from [7] 
 
The primary ISR task will be to efficiently deploy signals intelligence (SIGINT) assets capable of 
acquiring both electronic and communications intelligence (COMINT) on IAD network elements. 
Historically, manned platforms were the domain of ELINT, particularly strategic ELINT, and this 
is still the case today. Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS) are increasingly being used for SIGINT 
missions (UASs). 
 
ELINT SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE APPROACH 
 
The structure and configuration of an ELINT-capable UAS as well as its aerial framework, also 
known as an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV), must always be established through a careful process 
that includes knowledge and feedback from subject matter experts (SMEs) and technicians to 
months of actual operations and maintenance ELINT system design skills. The UAS ELINT 

architecture process includes establishing needs and urgencies, defining the Concept of Operations 
(CONOPS), evaluating the risk, and a range of operation characteristics and situations. [7]. 
➢ Tactical Exploitation System-Forward (TESFWD) 
The intelligence (ELINT) capabilities of the TES-electronic FWD are well-known. For 
commanders, ELINT is essential because it offers intelligence on adversary radar and Electronics, 
Rocket, and Land Order of Battle. ELINT continues to give tactical information and indicators and 
alerts about danger nations' radar, ballistic, and land assault positions and intents. ELINT has 
assisted key wars in the past, including the Soviets and Operation Desert Shield, and will do so in 
the future. The risk of a high-intensity war still exists. In the future, ELINT will remain a few of 
the principal information specialties utilised for supporting significant military operations, just as 
it was during Operation Iraqi Freedom's planning and execution phase (OIF). 
Some radars are also shifting to higher frequencies, far into the millimetre-wave range, posing new 
challenges. Other radars operate in a heavily packed EM region around RF and around 6 GHz, 
making spotting changes much more challenging and indicating a pattern that is likely to worsen 
as cellular telephone services increase their range and, in some cases, overlap numerous services 
along the same wavelengths. [8]. 
ELINT receivers leverage consumer-market technologies to address all of these issues. These 
include host processors with high sampling frequencies, precision, and dubious dynamic range, as 
well as ADCs and DACs have fast sampling frequency, precision, and a wide dynamic range with 
no spurious signals (SFDR). 
 
➢ ELINT and ESM 
ESM is an ELINT technique that make use of a variety of electronic surveillance equipment, 
however the phrase is only used in tactical combat. Following WWII, the RDF was extended to 
include ELINT using radar bandwidths and frequencies lower communications networks, ending 
in the NATO ESM family, which comprises ships equipped with US AN/WLR-1—AN/WLR-6 
devices or aerial units. Electronic countermeasure is another name for EA (ECM). ESM offers data 
for electronic counter-countermeasures (ECCM), including detecting and modifying radar settings 
to prevent spoofing or jamming modes. 
 
➢ Sampling of Radar ESM and ELINT Receivers 
ELINT detectors aren't required to create split-second, survival decisions like radar warning 
receivers (RWRs), but it doesn't make their position any easier or one's layout somehow less 
complex. Since our last assessment two years ago, they've improved noticeably in terms of overall 
efficiency and their ability to stay up with the radars they are competing versus. 
The tasks that an ELINT receiver must perform have never been easy, but they have become 
significantly more challenging in recent years. The service life of a radar system is generally 
calculated in decades instead of years. As a result, an ESM or ELINT system should encompass 
an ever increasing roster of radars, both older and newer, whose profiles might change with passing 
time as upgrades, parts are changed, and their efficiency alters as emerging innovations are 
introduced. [9]. 
Various types of radars possess different electro - magnetic identities, therefore a missile defense 
systems radar would be different from one another, such as rocket seekers, or even radars with 

same type might very well change through one system toward the next. Furthermore, today's 
duplexer, multifunctional radars integrate complex signal modulation methods with harmonic 
mobility, intra pulse waveforms variations, odd waveform such as pseudo sound modulate, very 
quick side-lobe changes, digitized beamforming, and a slew of other deceptive tactics. 
 
 
 
Figure 6: High level block diagram of a radar ESM 
Reproduced from [10] 
 
With earlier ESM and ELINT sensors, low-probability-of-intercept radars systems, like those that 
employ "frequency modulated continuous-wave" and "frequency-modulated interrupted 
continuous-wave", are significantly more difficult to detect, much less identify and assess. So 
summary is that, despite detecting a radar is feasible, explaining it might be challenging at times. 
 
 
➢ ELINT for Meaconing 
 
 
Figure 7: Basic principle of GNSS meaconing 
Reproduced from [11] 
 

Analysing the characteristics of opponent satellite systems, such as broadcasting beacon, then 
retransmitting misleading information using a combination of electronic warfare and intelligence 
is known as meaconing. 
 
➢ Foreign Instrumentation Signals Intelligence  
 
FISINT is a subcategory of SIGINT that focuses on inhuman communications. Telemetry 
(TELINT), video data linkages, and tracking systems are examples of foreign instrumentation 
signals. TELINT is a key component of a country's technical verification system for weapons 
control. 
 
 
IV. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE SCOPE 
A current research effort is WolfPack, a ground-based cyber warfare system. A "pack" of "wolf" 
makes up WolfPack. Wolves are electronics monitoring nodes with the ability to locate and 
classify targets, and they can employ both ELINT and radiofrequency MASINT techniques.  
 
The wolves might be delivered by hand, artillery, or airdrop. WolfPack, as well as Distributed 
Suppression of Enemy Air Defenses (DSEAD), a development of SEAD, might be used in a new 
counter-ESM sub-discipline developed by the Air Force. If the Wolves are near to the target and 
have jammers or other ECM, they won't require much power to mask the signatures of allied 
ground soldiers on frequencies critical for communication or local detection. DSEAD is 
comparable to DSEAD, notwithstanding the fact that it operates at radar frequencies. It could be 
interesting to compare and contrast this counter-ELINT activity with electronic countermeasures 
[12]. 
 
The bulk of countries are spending inorganically since their SIGINT systems have not yet been 
built. The integration of COMINT and ELINT using a variety of platforms will be the main priority 
in the future years, with a focus on building policies and procedures to put the whole SIGINT 
system under one roof. 
 
In the United States and Europe, ELINT is becoming more important, and combining COMINT 
with ELINT is a growing field of technical and operational strategy. With escalating tensions in 
the South China Sea, the US is stepping up its efforts to develop maritime SIGINT. The US and 
NATO countries will witness a reduction in ground-based tactical SIGINT requirements once they 
return from the Afghanistan conflicts. In the future, electronic countermeasures such as space 
warfare and unmanned aerial aircraft will be utilized to combat wars. 
 
For SIGINT and electronic warfare, China is substantially investing in spacecraft and unmanned 
aerial vehicles (UUVs). Other nations have suffered enough as a result of China's actions in the 
South China Sea. Japan and India are establishing their own SIGINT strategy to counter China's 
aggressive efforts, which will include additional satellite projects, SIGINT aircraft, and marine 
SIGINT. As a result, demand for SIGINT in Asian markets will increase. 
 
By 2029, the SIGINT industry will have grown to $23.42 billion, increased from $15.75 billion in 
2021. Between 2023 and 2027, ground-based SIGINT, unmanned and space aerial systems, and 
marine SIGINT will account for the bulk of SIGINT deployments, resulting in considerable market 
growth. 

V. REFERENCES 
 
[1] ELINT (electronic intelligence). (n.d.). WhatIs. 
https://whatis.techtarget.com/definition/ELINT-electronic-
intelligence#:~:text=Electronic%20intelligence%20(ELINT)%20is%20intelligence,as%20the
%20location%20of%20radar.&text=Data%20gathered%20by%20ELINT%20is%20generally
%20classified 
[2] ELECTRONIC INTELLIGENCE (ELINT) AT NSA. (n.d.). National Security Agency. 
https://www.nsa.gov/portals/75/documents/about/cryptologic-heritage/historical-figures-
publications/publications/technology/ 
[3] Chinino, G. (n.d.). Electronic Intelligence (ELINT). Emsopedia. 
https://www.emsopedia.org/entries/electronic-intelligence-elint/ 
[4] Alparslan, A., & Yegin, K. (2016, August). A Fast ELINT Receiver Design. 1. 
[5] Wikipedia contributors. (2021, October 18). Signals intelligence. Wikipedia. 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Signals_intelligence#Electronic_signals_intelligence 
[6] Sameer, A. (2016, August). Cognitive Electronic Warfare System. Cognitive Radio Network, 
University of Babylon. https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.10939.62240 
[7] Gale, P. Michael. (2017). An Approach to UAV- Based ELINT. Journal of Electronic 
Defense, 40(12). https://www.jedonline.com/2020/05/20/an-approach-to-uav-based-elint-jed-
december-2017/ 
[8] Negron, Raul, Jr. TES SIGINT: A Conventional Warfare ELINT System Supporting an 
Unconventional COMINT Fight. (2010). Military Intelligence Professional Bulletin; Ft. 
Huachuca, 36(2). https://www.proquest.com/docview/1016489173 
[9] Holt, Ollie. A Sampling of Radar ESM and ELINT Receivers. (2015). Journal of Electronic 
Defense, 38(8). https://www.jedonline.com/2020/05/20/technology-survey-a-sampling-of-
radar-esm-and-elint-receivers-jed-december-2019/ 
[10] 
Radar ESM. (2015, March). [Block Diagram]. 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/273257599_1-s20-S0893608001000193-
main/figures 
[11] 
Zhang, J., Cui, X., Xu, H., Zhao, S., & Lu, M. (2019). Efficient signal separation method 
based on antenna arrays for GNSS meaconing. Tsinghua Science & Technology, 24(2). 
https://doi.org/10.26599/TST.2018.9010125 
[12] 
Wikipedia contributors. (2021a, August 23). Measurement and signature intelligence. 
Wikipedia. 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Measurement_and_signature_intelligence#Research_programs:
_Smart_Dust_and_WolfPack
