arXiv:1105.0288v1  [cs.AI]  2 May 2011
Under consideration for publication in Theory and Practice of Logic Programming
1
Splitting and Updating Hybrid Knowledge Bases
(Extended Version)
MARTIN SLOTA∗and JO ˜AO LEITE† and TERRANCE SWIFT
CENTRIA & Departamento de Inform´atica
Universidade Nova de Lisboa
2829-516 Caparica, Portugal
submitted 1 January 2003; revised 1 January 2003; accepted 1 January 2003
Abstract
Over the years, nonmonotonic rules have proven to be a very expressive and useful knowledge repre-
sentation paradigm. They have recently been used to complement the expressive power of Descrip-
tion Logics (DLs), leading to the study of integrative formal frameworks, generally referred to as
hybrid knowledge bases, where both DL axioms and rules can be used to represent knowledge. The
need to use these hybrid knowledge bases in dynamic domains has called for the development of up-
date operators, which, given the substantially different way Description Logics and rules are usually
updated, has turned out to be an extremely difﬁcult task.
In (Slota and Leite 2010b), a ﬁrst step towards addressing this problem was taken, and an update
operator for hybrid knowledge bases was proposed. Despite its signiﬁcance – not only for being
the ﬁrst update operator for hybrid knowledge bases in the literature, but also because it has some
applications – this operator was deﬁned for a restricted class of problems where only the ABox
was allowed to change, which considerably diminished its applicability. Many applications that use
hybrid knowledge bases in dynamic scenarios require both DL axioms and rules to be updated.
In this paper, motivated by real world applications, we introduce an update operator for a large
class of hybrid knowledge bases where both the DL component as well as the rule component are
allowed to dynamically change. We introduce splitting sequences and splitting theorem for hybrid
knowledge bases, use them to deﬁne a modular update semantics, investigate its basic properties, and
illustrate its use on a realistic example about cargo imports.
KEYWORDS: hybrid knowledge base, update, splitting theorem, ontology, logic program
1 Introduction
Increasingly many real world applications need to intelligently access and reason with large
amounts of dynamically changing, structured and highly interconnected information. The
family of Description Logics (DLs) (Baader et al. 2003), generally characterised as decid-
able fragments of ﬁrst-order logic, have become the established standard for representing
ontologies, i.e. for specifying concepts relevant to a particular domain of interest. DLs can
∗Supported by FCT Scholarship SFRH / BD / 38214 / 2007
† Partially supported by FCT Project ASPEN PTDC / EIA-CCO / 110921 / 2009

2
M. Slota and J. Leite and T. Swift
be seen as some of the most expressive formalisms based on Classical Logic for which
decidable reasoning procedures still exist.
On the other hand, nonmonotonic rules have also proven to be a very useful tool for
knowledge representation. They complement the expressive power of DLs, adding the pos-
sibility to reason with incomplete information using default negation, and offering natural
ways of expressing exceptions, integrity constraints and complex queries. Their formal un-
derpinning lies with declarative, well-understood semantics, the stable model semantics
(Gelfond and Lifschitz 1988) and its tractable approximation, the well-founded semantics
(Gelder et al. 1991), being the most prominent and widely accepted.
This has led to the need to integrate these distinct knowledge representation paradigms.
Over the last decade, there have been many proposals for integrating DLs with nonmono-
tonic rules (see (Hitzler and Parsia 2009) for a survey). One of the more mature proposals
is Hybrid MKNF Knowledge Bases (Motik and Rosati 2007) that allow predicates to be
deﬁned concurrently in both an ontology and a set of rules, while enjoying several impor-
tant properties. A tractable variant of this formalism, based on the well-founded seman-
tics, allows for a top-down querying procedure (Knorr et al. 2011), making the approach
amenable to practical applications that need to deal with large knowledge bases.
While such formalisms make it possible to seamlessly combine rules and ontologies in
a single uniﬁed framework, they do not take into account the highly dynamic character of
application areas where they are to be used. In (Slota and Leite 2010b) we made a ﬁrst step
towards a solution to this problem, addressing updates by deﬁning a change operation on
a knowledge base to record a change that occurred in the modelled world.
Update operators have ﬁrst been studied in the context of action theories and relational
databases with NULL values (Winslett 1988; Winslett 1990). The basic intuition behind
these operators is that the models of a knowledge base represent possible states of the
world and when a change in the world needs to be recorded, each of these possible worlds
should be modiﬁed as little as possible in order to arrive at a representation of the world
after the update. This means that, in each possible world, each propositional atom retains
its truth value as long as there is no update that directly requires it to change. In other
words, inertia is applied to the atoms of the underlying language. Later, these operators
were successfully applied to partially address updates of DL ontologies (Liu et al. 2006;
Giacomo et al. 2006).
But when updates were studied in the context of rules, most authors found atom iner-
tia unsatisfactory. One of the main reasons for this is the clash between atom inertia and
the property of support (Apt et al. 1988; Dix 1995), which lies at the heart of most logic
programming semantics. For instance, when updating a logic program P = { p ←q., q. }
by Q = { ∼q. },1 atom inertia dictates that p must stay true after the update because
the update itself does not in any way directly affect the truth value of p. Example 7 in
(Giacomo et al. 2006), where a similar update is performed on an analogical DL ontology,
shows that such a behaviour may be desirable. However, from a logic programming point
of view, one expects p to become false after the update. This is because when q ceases
being true, the reason for p to be true disappears as it is no longer supported by any rule.
1 The symbol ∼denotes default negation.

Splitting and Updating Hybrid Knowledge Bases (Extended Version)
3
These intuitions, together with a battery of intuitive examples (Leite and Pereira 1997;
Alferes et al. 2000), led to the introduction of the causal rejection principle (Leite and Pereira 1997)
and subsequently to several approaches to rule updates (Alferes et al. 2000; Eiter et al. 2002;
Leite 2003; Alferes et al. 2005) that are fundamentally different from classical update op-
erators. The basic unit of information to which inertia is applied is no longer an atom, but a
rule. This means that a rule stays in effect as long as it does not directly contradict a newer
rule. The truth values of atoms are not directly subject to inertia, but are used to determine
the set of rules that are overridden by newer rules, and are themselves determined by the
remaining rules.
However, the dichotomy between classical and rule updates goes far beyond the different
units of information to which inertia is applied. While classical updates are performed on
the models of a knowledge base, which renders them syntax-independent, the property of
support, being syntactic in its essence, forces rule update methods to refer to the syntactic
structure of underlying programs – the individual rules they contain and, in many cases,
also the heads and bodies of these rules. As we have shown in (Slota and Leite 2010a),
even when classical updates are applied to SE-models (Lifschitz et al. 2001; Turner 2003),
a monotonic semantics for logic programs that is more expressive than stable models, the
property of support is lost. On the other hand, applying rule updates to DL ontologies leads
to a range of technical difﬁculties. Some of them are caused by the fact that rule update
methods are speciﬁcally tailored towards identifying and resolving conﬂicts between pairs
of rules. DL axioms do not have a rule-like structure, and a group of pairwise consistent
axioms may enter in a conﬂict. Other difﬁculties stem from the fact that such a syntactic
approach can hardly exhibit behaviour similar to that of classical updates, where reasoning
by cases is inherent in updating each model of a knowledge base independently of all
others. Thus, no single method seems suitable for updating hybrid knowledge bases. A
general update operator for hybrid knowledge must somehow integrate these apparently
irreconcilable approaches to dealing with evolving knowledge.
In (Slota and Leite 2010b) we simpliﬁed this hard task by keeping rules static and allow-
ing the ontology component of a hybrid knowledge base to evolve. Despite the importance
of this ﬁrst step, the applicability of the operator is considerably diminished since typically
all parts of a knowledge base are subject to change. As an example, consider the following
scenario where both ontologies and rules are needed to assess the risk of imported cargo.
Example 1 (A Hybrid Knowledge Base for Cargo Imports)
The Customs service for any developed country assesses imported cargo for a variety of
risk factors including terrorism, narcotics, food and consumer safety, pest infestation, tar-
iff violations, and intellectual property rights.2 Assessing this risk, even at a preliminary
level, involves extensive knowledge about commodities, business entities, trade patterns,
government policies and trade agreements. Some of this knowledge may be external to
a given customs agency: for instance the broad classiﬁcation of commodities according
to the international Harmonized Tariff System (HTS), or international trade agreements.
Other knowledge may be internal to a customs agency, such as lists of suspected violators
or of importers who have a history of good compliance with regulations. While some of
2 The system described here is not intended to reﬂect the policies of any country or agency.

4
M. Slota and J. Leite and T. Swift
this knowledge is relatively stable, much of it changes rapidly. Changes are made not only
at a speciﬁc level, such as knowledge about the expected arrival date of a shipment; but at
a more general level as well. For instance, while the broad HTS code for tomatoes (0702)
does not change, the full classiﬁcation and tariffs for cherry tomatoes for import into the
US changes seasonally.
Figure 1 shows a simpliﬁed fragment K = ⟨O, P⟩of such a knowledge base. In this
fragment, a shipment has several attributes: the country of its origination, the commodity it
contains, its importer, and its producer. The ontology contains a geographic classiﬁcation,
along with information about producers who are located in various countries. It also con-
tains a classiﬁcation of commodities based on their harmonised tariff information (HTS
chapters, headings and codes, cf. http://www.usitc.gov/tata/hts). Tariff in-
formation is also present, based on the classiﬁcation of commodities. Finally, the ontology
contains (partial) information about three shipments: s1, s2 and s3. There is also a set
of rules indicating information about importers, and about whether to inspect a shipment
either to check for compliance of tariff information or for food safety issues.
In this paper, we deﬁne an update semantics for hybrid knowledge bases that can be
used to deal with scenarios such as the one described above. As a theoretical basis for
this operator, we ﬁrst establish a splitting theorem for Hybrid MKNF Knowledge Bases,
analogical to the splitting theorem for logic programs (Lifschitz and Turner 1994). The un-
derlying notions then serve us as theoretical ground for identifying a constrained class of
hybrid knowledge bases for which a plausible update semantics can be deﬁned by modu-
larly combining a classical and a rule update operator. We then examine basic properties
of this semantics, showing that it
• generalises Hybrid MKNF Knowledge Bases (Motik and Rosati 2007).
• generalises the classical minimal change update operator (Winslett 1990).
• generalises the reﬁned dynamic stable model semantics (Alferes et al. 2005).
• adheres to the principle of primacy of new information (Dalal 1988).
Finally, we demonstrate that it properly deals with nontrivial updates in scenarios such as
the one described in Example 1.
The rest of this document is structured as follows: We introduce the necessary theoretical
background in Sect. 2. Then, in Sect. 3, we establish the splitting theorem for Hybrid
MKNF Knowledge Bases, identify a constrained class of such knowledge bases and deﬁne
a plausible update operator for it. We also take a closer look at its properties and show how
it can be applied to deal with updates of the knowledge base introduced in Example 1. We
then discuss our results in Sect. 4 and point towards desirable future developments.3
2 Preliminaries
In this section we present the formal basis for our investigation. We introduce the unify-
ing semantic framework of Hybrid MKNF Knowledge Bases (Motik and Rosati 2007) that
3 At http://centria.di.fct.unl.pt/˜jleite/iclp11full.pdf the reader can ﬁnd an ex-
tended version of this paper with proofs.

Splitting and Updating Hybrid Knowledge Bases (Extended Version)
5
* * * O * * *
Commodity ≡(∃HTSCode.⊤)
EdibleVegetable ≡(∃HTSChapter. { ‘07’ })
CherryTomato ≡(∃HTSCode. { ‘07020020’ })
Tomato ≡(∃HTSHeading. { ‘0702’ })
GrapeTomato ≡(∃HTSCode. { ‘07020010’ })
Tomato ⊑EdibleVegetable
CherryTomato ⊑Tomato
GrapeTomato ⊑Tomato
CherryTomato ⊓Bulk ≡(∃TariﬀCharge. { $0 })
CherryTomato ⊓GrapeTomato ⊑⊥
GrapeTomato ⊓Bulk ≡(∃TariﬀCharge. { $40 })
Bulk ⊓Prepackaged ⊑⊥
CherryTomato ⊓Prepackaged ≡(∃TariﬀCharge. { $50 })
GrapeTomato ⊓Prepackaged ≡(∃TariﬀCharge. { $100 })
EURegisteredProducer ≡(∃RegisteredProducer.EUCountry)
LowRiskEUCommodity ≡(∃ExpeditableImporter.⊤) ⊓(∃CommodCountry.EUCountry)
⟨p1, portugal⟩: RegisteredProducer
⟨p2, slovakia⟩: RegisteredProducer
portugal : EUCountry
slovakia : EUCountry
⟨s1 , c1⟩: ShpmtCommod
⟨s1 , ‘07020020’⟩: ShpmtDeclHTSCode
⟨s1 , i1⟩: ShpmtImporter
c1 : CherryTomato
c1 : Bulk
⟨s2 , c2⟩: ShpmtCommod
⟨s2 , ‘07020020’⟩: ShpmtDeclHTSCode
⟨s2 , i2⟩: ShpmtImporter
c2 : CherryTomato
c2 : Prepackaged
⟨s2 , portugal⟩: ShpmtCountry
⟨s3 , c3⟩: ShpmtCommod
⟨s3 , ‘07020010’⟩: ShpmtDeclHTSCode
⟨s3 , i3⟩: ShpmtImporter
c3 : GrapeTomato
c3 : Bulk
⟨s3 , portugal⟩: ShpmtCountry
⟨s3 , p1⟩: ShpmtProducer
* * * P * * *
CommodCountry(C, Country) ←ShpmtCommod(S, C), ShpmtCountry(S, Country).
AdmissibleImporter(I) ←∼SuspectedBadGuy(I).
ExpeditableImporter(C, I) ←AdmissibleImporter(I), ApprovedImporterOf(I, C).
SuspectedBadGuy(i1).
ApprovedImporterOf(i2, C) ←EdibleVegetable(C).
ApprovedImporterOf(i3, C) ←GrapeTomato(C).
CompliantShpmt(S) ←ShpmtCommod(S, C), HTSCode(C, D), ShpmtDeclHTSCode(S, D).
RandomInspection(S) ←ShpmtCommod(S, C), Random(C).
PartialInspection(S) ←RandomInspection(S).
PartialInspection(S) ←ShpmtCommod(S, C), ∼LowRiskEUCommodity(C).
FullInspection(S) ←∼CompliantShpmt(S).
FullInspection(S) ←ShpmtCommod(S, C), Tomato(C), ShpmtCountry(S, slovakia).
Fig. 1. A Hybrid Knowledge Base for Cargo Imports
gives a semantics to a knowledge base composed of both DL axioms and rules. Since our
hybrid update operator is based on a modular combination a classical and a rule update op-
erator, we introduce a pair of such operators known from the literature and brieﬂy discuss
the choices we make.
MKNF. The logic of Minimal Knowledge and Negation as Failure (MKNF) (Lifschitz 1991)
forms the logical basis of Hybrid MKNF Knowledge Bases. It is an extension of ﬁrst-order
logic with two modal operators: K and not. We use the variant of this logic introduced
in (Motik and Rosati 2007). We assume a function-free ﬁrst-order syntax extended by the
mentioned modal operators in a natural way. An atom is a formula P(t1, t2, . . . , tn) where

6
M. Slota and J. Leite and T. Swift
P is a predicate symbol of arity n and ti are terms. An MKNF formula φ is a sentence if
it has no free variables; φ is ground if it does not contain variables; φ is subjective if all
atoms in φ occur within the scope of a modal operator; φ is ﬁrst-order if it does not contain
modal operators. By φ[t/x] we denote the formula obtained by simultaneously replacing in
φ all free occurrences of variable x by term t. A set of ﬁrst-order sentences is a ﬁrst-order
theory. We denote the set of all predicate symbols by P. Given a formula φ, we inductively
deﬁne the set of predicate symbols relevant to φ, denoted by pr(φ), as follows:
1◦If φ is an atom P(t1, t2, . . . , tn), then pr(φ) = { P };
2◦If φ is of the form ¬ψ, then pr(φ) = pr(ψ);
3◦If φ is of the form φ1 ∧φ2, then pr(φ) = pr(φ1) ∪pr(φ2);
4◦If φ is of the form ∃x : ψ, then pr(φ) = pr(ψ);
5◦If φ is of the form K ψ, then pr(φ) = pr(ψ);
6◦If φ is of the form not ψ, then pr(φ) = pr(ψ).
Given a set of formulae T , we deﬁne the set of predicate symbols relevant to T , denoted
by pr(T ), as follows:
pr(T ) =
[
φ∈T
pr(φ) .
As in (Motik and Rosati 2007), we only consider Herbrand interpretations in our se-
mantics. We adopt the standard names assumption, and apart from the constants used in
formulae, we assume our signature to contain a countably inﬁnite supply of constants.
The Herbrand Universe of such a signature is denoted by ∆. The set of all (Herbrand)
interpretations is denoted by I. An MKNF structure is a triple ⟨I, M, N⟩where I is an
interpretation and M, N are sets of Herbrand interpretations. The satisﬁability of a ground
atom p and of an MKNF sentence φ in ⟨I, M, N⟩is deﬁned as follows
⟨I, M, N⟩|= p iff I |= p
⟨I, M, N⟩|= ¬φ iff ⟨I, M, N⟩̸|= φ
⟨I, M, N⟩|= φ1 ∧φ2 iff ⟨I, M, N⟩|= φ1 and ⟨I, M, N⟩|= φ2
⟨I, M, N⟩|= ∃x : φ iff ⟨I, M, N⟩|= φ[c/x] for some c ∈∆
⟨I, M, N⟩|= K φ iff ⟨J, M, N⟩|= φ for all J ∈M
⟨I, M, N⟩|= not φ iff ⟨J, M, N⟩̸|= φ for some J ∈N
The symbols ∨, ∀and ⊂are interpreted as usual. The semantics of MKNF sentences is
summarised in the following deﬁnition:
Deﬁnition 2 (MKNF Interpretation and MKNF Model)
An MKNF interpretation is a nonempty set of Herbrand interpretations. We also deﬁne
M = 2I to be the set of all MKNF interpretations together with the empty set.
Let T be a set of MKNF sentences and M ∈M. We write M |= T if ⟨I, M, M⟩|= φ
for every φ ∈T and all I ∈M.4 Otherwise we write M ̸|= T .
4 Notice that if M is empty, this condition is vacuously satisﬁed for any formula φ, so any formula is true in
∅. For this reason, ∅is not considered an interpretation and only nonempty subsets of M can be models of
formulae.

Splitting and Updating Hybrid Knowledge Bases (Extended Version)
7
If there exists the greatest M ∈M such that M |= T , then we denote it by mod(T ).
For all other sets of formulae mod(T ) stays undeﬁned.
If M is an MKNF interpretation (i.e. M is nonempty and M ∈M), we say M is
• an S5 model of T if M |= T ;
• an MKNF model of T if M is an S5 model of T and for every MKNF interpretation
M ′ ⊋M there is some I′ ∈M ′ and some φ ∈T such that ⟨I′, M ′, M⟩̸|= φ.
We say a set of MKNF formulae T is MKNF satisﬁable if an MKNF model of T exists;
otherwise it is MKNF unsatisﬁable. The S5 (un)satisﬁability is deﬁned analogously by
considering S5 models instead of MKNF models. For a sentence φ, we write M |= φ
if and only if M |= { φ }; otherwise we write M ̸|= φ. Also, mod(φ), S5 models of φ,
MKNF models of φ, MKNF (un)satisﬁability and S5 (un)satisﬁability of φ are deﬁned as
mod({ φ }), S5 models of { φ }, MKNF models of { φ }, MKNF (un)satisﬁability of { φ }
and S5 (un)satisﬁability of { φ }, respectively.
Let U ⊆P be a set of predicate symbols, I, J ∈I and M, N ∈M. We deﬁne the
restriction of I to U as I[U] = { p ∈I | pr(p) ⊆U } and the restriction of M to U as
M [U] =

I[U]  I ∈M
	
. We say that I coincides with J on U if I[U] = J[U] and that M
coincides with N on U if M [U] = N [U].
Description Logics. Description Logics (Baader et al. 2003) are (usually) decidable frag-
ments of ﬁrst-order logic that are frequently used for knowledge representation and reason-
ing in applications. Throughout the paper we assume that some Description Logic is used
to describe an ontology, i.e. it is used to specify a shared conceptualisation of a domain of
interest. Basic building blocks of such a speciﬁcation are constants, representing objects
(or individuals), concepts, representing groups of objects, and roles, representing binary
relations between objects and properties of objects. Typically, an ontology is composed
of two distinguishable parts: a TBox specifying the required terminology, i.e. concept and
role deﬁnitions, and an ABox with assertions about constants.
Most Description Logics can be equivalently translated into function-free ﬁrst-order
logic, with constants represented by constant symbols, atomic concepts represented by
unary predicates and atomic roles represented by binary predicates. We assume that for
any DL axiom φ, ζ (φ) denotes such a translation of φ. We also deﬁne pr(φ) as pr(ζ (φ)).
Generalised Logic Programs. We consider ground logic programs for specifying non-
monotonic domain knowledge. The basic syntactic blocks of such programs are ground
atoms. A default literal is a ground atom preceded by ∼. A literal is either a ground atom
or a default literal. As a convention, due to the semantics of rule updates that we adopt
in what follows, double default negation is absorbed, so that ∼∼p denotes the atom p.
A rule r is an expression of the form L0 ←L1, L2, . . . , Lk where k is a natural num-
ber and L0, L1, . . . , Lk are literals. We say H(r) = L0 is the head of r and B(r) =
{ L1, L2, . . . , Ln } is the body of r. A rule r is a fact if its body is empty; r is positive if its
head is an atom. A generalised logic program (GLP) P is a set of rules. The set of predicate
symbols occurring in a literal L, set of literals B and a rule r is denoted by pr(L), pr(B)
and pr(r), respectively. An interpretation I is a stable model of a GLP P if I′ = least(P ∪
{ ∼p | p is an atom and p /∈I }), where I′ = I ∪{ not p | p is an atom and p /∈I } and
least(·) denotes the least model of the program obtained from the argument program by
replacing every default literal ∼p by a fresh atom not p.

8
M. Slota and J. Leite and T. Swift
Hybrid MKNF Knowledge Bases. A hybrid knowledge base is a pair ⟨O, P⟩where
O is an ontology and P is a generalised logic program. The semantics is assigned to a
hybrid knowledge base using a translation function π that translates both ontology ax-
ioms and rules into MKNF sentences. For any ontology O, ground atom p, set of liter-
als B, rule r, program P and hybrid knowledge base K = ⟨O, P⟩, we deﬁne: π(O) =
{ K ζ (φ) | φ ∈O }, π(p) = K p, π(∼p) = not p, π(B) = { π(L) | L ∈B }, π(r) =
(π(H(r)) ⊂V π(B(r))), π(P) = { π(r) | r ∈P } and π(K) = π(O)∪π(P). An MKNF
interpretation M is an S5 (MKNF) model of K if M is an S5 (MKNF) model of π(K).
As was shown in (Lifschitz 1991), the MKNF semantics generalises the stable model
semantics for logic programs (Gelfond and Lifschitz 1988) – for every logic program P,
the stable models of P directly correspond to MKNF models of π(P).
Classical Updates. As a basis for our update operator, we adopt an update semantics
called the minimal change update semantics (Winslett 1990) for updating ﬁrst-order theo-
ries. This update semantics offers a simple realisation of atom inertia, satisﬁes all Katsuno
and Mendelzon’s postulates for belief update (Katsuno and Mendelzon 1991), and it has
successfully been used to deal with ABox updates (Liu et al. 2006; Giacomo et al. 2006).
A notion of closeness between interpretations w.r.t. a ﬁxed interpretation I is used to
determine the result of an update. This closeness is based on the set of ground atoms
that are interpreted differently than in I. For a predicate symbol P and an interpretation
I, we denote the set { p ∈I | pr(p) = { P } } by I[P ]. Given interpretations I, J, J′, the
difference in the interpretation of P between I and J, written diﬀ(P, I, J), is the set
(I[P ]\J[P ])∪(J[P ]\I[P ]). We say that J is at least as close to I as J′, denoted by J ≤I J′,
if for every predicate symbol P it holds that diﬀ(P, I, J) is a subset of diﬀ(P, I, J′). We
also say that J is closer to I than J′, denoted by J <I J′, if J ≤I J′ and not J′ ≤I J.
The minimal change update semantics then keeps those models of the updating theory
that are the closest w.r.t. the relation ≤I to some model I of the original theory. Given
an interpretation I, sets of interpretations M, N, and ﬁrst-order theories T , U, we deﬁne:
I ⊕N = { J ∈N | ¬(∃J′ ∈N)(J′ <I J) }, M ⊕N = S
I∈M(I ⊕N), and mod(T ⊕
U) = mod(T ) ⊕mod(U). If mod(T ⊕U) is nonempty, we say it is the minimal change
update model of T ⊕U. This notion can be naturally generalised to allow for sequences of
updates. Formally, given a ﬁnite sequence of ﬁrst-order theories U = ⟨Ui⟩i<n, we deﬁne
mod(U) = (· · · ((mod(U0) ⊕mod(U1)) ⊕mod(U2)) ⊕· · · ) ⊕mod(Un−1). If mod(U) is
nonempty, we say it is the minimal change update model of U.
Rule Updates. There exists a variety of different approaches to rule change (Leite and Pereira 1997;
Alferes et al. 2000; Eiter et al. 2002; Sakama and Inoue 2003; Alferes et al. 2005; Zhang 2006;
Osorio and Cuevas 2007; Delgrande et al. 2007; Delgrande et al. 2008; Slota and Leite 2010a).
The more recent, purely semantic approaches (Delgrande et al. 2008; Slota and Leite 2010a)
are closely related to classical update operators such as Winslett’s operator presented
above. However, as indicated in (Slota and Leite 2010a), their main disadvantage is that
they violate the property of support that lies at the very heart of semantics of logic pro-
grams. Out of the approaches that do respect support, only the rule update semantics
presented in (Alferes et al. 2005; Zhang 2006) possess another important property: im-
munity to tautological and cyclic updates. We henceforth adopt the approach taken in
(Alferes et al. 2005) because, unlike in (Zhang 2006), it can be applied to any initial pro-

Splitting and Updating Hybrid Knowledge Bases (Extended Version)
9
gram, can easily be used to perform iterative updates and has a lower computational com-
plexity.
A dynamic logic program (DLP) is a ﬁnite sequence of GLPs. In order to deﬁne the
semantics for DLPs, based on causal rejection of rules, we deﬁne the notion of a conﬂict
between rules as follows: two rules r and r′ are conﬂicting, written r ⋊⋉r′, if H(r) =
∼H(r′). Given a DLP P = ⟨Pi⟩i<n and an interpretation I, we use ρ(P) to denote the
multiset of all rules appearing in members of P and introduce the following notation:
Rej (P, I) = { r | (∃i, j, r′)(r ∈Pi ∧r′ ∈Pj ∧i ≤j ∧r ⋊⋉r′ ∧I |= B(r′)) } ,
Def (P, I) = { ∼p | (¬∃r ∈ρ(P))(H(r) = p ∧I |= B(r)) } .
An interpretation I is a dynamic stable model of a DLP P if I′ = least([ρ(P)\Rej (P, I)]∪
Def (P, I)), where I′ and least(·) are as in the deﬁnition of a stable model.
3 Splitting and Updating Hybrid Knowledge Bases
Our general objective is to deﬁne an update semantics for ﬁnite sequences of hybrid knowl-
edge bases, where each component represents knowledge about a new state of the world.
Deﬁnition 3 (Dynamic Hybrid Knowledge Base)
A dynamic hybrid knowledge base is a ﬁnite sequence of hybrid knowledge bases.
In this paper we develop an update operator for a particular class of syntactically con-
strained hybrid knowledge bases. The purpose of the constraints we impose is to ensure
that the ontology and rules can be updated separately from one another, and the results can
then be combined to obtain a plausible update semantics for the whole hybrid knowledge
base. Formally, the update semantics we introduce generalises and modularly combines a
classical and a rule update operator.
In order to identify these constraints, we introduce the splitting theorem for Hybrid
MKNF Knowledge Bases in Subsect. 3.1. Based on it, we identify a constrained class
of dynamic hybrid knowledge bases and deﬁne an update operator for that class in Sub-
sect. 3.2. Finally, in Subsect 3.3 we examine basic properties of the operator and illustrate
how it can deal with updates to the hybrid knowledge base from Example 1.
3.1 Splitting Theorem
The splitting theorem for Logic Programs (Lifschitz and Turner 1994) is a generalisation
of the notion of program stratiﬁcation. Given a logic program P, a splitting set for P is
a set of atoms U such that the program can be divided in two subprograms, the bottom
and the top of P, such that rules in the bottom only contain atoms from U, and no atom
from U occurs in the head of any rule from the top. As a consequence, rules in the top
of P cannot inﬂuence the stable models of its bottom. The splitting theorem captures this
intuition, guaranteeing that each stable model of P is a union of a stable model X of the
bottom of P and of a stable model Y of a reduced version of the top of P where atoms
belonging to U are interpreted under X. This can be further generalised to sequences of
splitting sets that divide a program P into a sequence of layers. The splitting sequence

10
M. Slota and J. Leite and T. Swift
theorem then warrants that stable models of P consist of a union of stable models of each
of its layers after appropriate reductions.
In the following we generalise these notions to Hybrid MKNF Knowledge Bases (Motik and Rosati 2007).
The ﬁrst deﬁnition establishes the notion of a splitting set in this context.
Deﬁnition 4 (Splitting Set)
A splitting set for a hybrid knowledge base K = ⟨O, P⟩is any set of predicate symbols
U ⊆P such that
1. For every ontology axiom φ ∈O, if pr(φ) ∩U ̸= ∅, then pr(φ) ⊆U.
2. For every rule r ∈P, if pr(H(r)) ∩U ̸= ∅, then pr(r) ⊆U;
The set of ontology axioms φ ∈O such that pr(φ) ⊆U is called the bottom of O
relative to U and denoted by bU(O). The set of rules r ∈P such that pr(r) ⊆U is
called the bottom of P relative to U and denoted by bU(P). The hybrid knowledge base
bU(K) = ⟨bU(O), bU(P)⟩is called bottom of K relative to U.
The set tU(O) = O \ bU(O) is the top of O relative to U. The set tU(P) = P \ bU(P)
is the top of P relative to U. The hybrid knowledge base tU(K) = ⟨tU(O), tU(P)⟩is the
top of K relative to U.
Note that instead of deﬁning a splitting set as a set of atoms, as was done in the case
of propositional logic programs, we deﬁne it as a set of predicate symbols. By doing this,
the set of ground atoms with the same predicate symbol is considered either completely
included in a splitting set, or completely excluded from it. While this makes our approach
slightly less general than it could be if we considered each ground atom individually, we
believe the conceptual simplicity is worth this sacriﬁce. Also, since all TBox axioms are
universally quantiﬁed, in many cases we would end up adding or excluding the whole set
of ground atoms with the same predicate symbol anyway.
Next, we need to deﬁne the reduction that makes it possible to properly transfer infor-
mation from an MKNF model of the bottom of K, and use it to simplify the top of K.
Deﬁnition 5 (Splitting Set Reduct)
Let U be a splitting set for a hybrid knowledge base K = ⟨O, P⟩and X ∈M. The
splitting set reduct of K relative to U and X is a hybrid knowledge base eU(K, X) =
⟨tU(O), eU(P, X)⟩, where eU(P, X) consists of all rules r′ such that there exists a rule
r ∈tU(P) with the following properties: X |= π({ L ∈B(r) | pr(L) ⊆U }), H(r′) =
H(r), and B(r′) = { L ∈B(r) | pr(L) ⊆P \ U }.
This leads us to the notion of a solution to K w.r.t. a splitting set U.
Deﬁnition 6 (Solution w.r.t. a Splitting Set)
Let U be a splitting set for a hybrid knowledge base K. A solution to K w.r.t. U is a pair
of MKNF interpretations ⟨X, Y ⟩such that X is an MKNF model of bU(K) and Y is an
MKNF model of eU(K, X).
The splitting theorem now ensures that solutions to K w.r.t. any splitting set U are in one
to one correspondence with the MKNF models of K.

Splitting and Updating Hybrid Knowledge Bases (Extended Version)
11
Theorem 7 (Splitting Theorem for Hybrid MKNF Knowledge Bases)
Let U be a splitting set for a hybrid knowledge base K. Then M is an MKNF model of K
if and only if M = X ∩Y for some solution ⟨X, Y ⟩to K w.r.t. U.
Proof
See Appendix B, page 39.
This result makes it possible to characterise an MKNF model of a hybrid knowledge
base in terms of a pair of MKNF models of two layers inside it, such that, as far as the
MKNF semantics is concerned, the ﬁrst layer is independent of the second. If instead of a
single splitting set we consider a sequence of such sets, we can divide a hybrid knowledge
in a sequence of layers, keeping similar properties as in the case of a single splitting set.
Deﬁnition 8 (Splitting Sequence)
A splitting sequence for a hybrid knowledge base K is a monotone, continuous sequence
⟨Uα⟩α<µ of splitting sets for K such that S
α<µ Uα = P.
The ﬁrst layer of K relative to such a splitting sequence is the part of K that only contains
predicates from U0. Formally, this is exactly the hybrid knowledge base bU0(K). Further-
more, for every ordinal α + 1 < µ, the corresponding layer of K is the part of K that
contains predicates from Uα+1 \ Uα, and, in addition, predicate symbols from Uα are al-
lowed to appear in rule bodies. Given our notation this can be written as tUα(bUα+1(K)).
The following deﬁnition uses these observations and combines them with suitable reduc-
tions to introduce a solution w.r.t. a splitting sequence.
Deﬁnition 9 (Solution w.r.t. a Splitting Sequence)
Let U = ⟨Uα⟩α<µ be a splitting sequence for a hybrid knowledge base K. A solution to K
w.r.t. U is a sequence ⟨Xα⟩α<µ of MKNF interpretations such that
1. X0 is an MKNF model of bU0(K);
2. For any ordinal α such that α + 1 < µ, Xα+1 is an MKNF model of
eUα

bUα+1(K), T
η≤α Xη

;
3. For any limit ordinal α < µ, Xα = I.
The splitting sequence theorem now guarantees a one to one correspondence between
MKNF models and solutions w.r.t. a splitting sequence.
Theorem 10 (Splitting Sequence Theorem for Hybrid MKNF Knowledge Bases)
Let ⟨Uα⟩α<µ be a splitting sequence for a hybrid knowledge base K. Then M is an MKNF
model of K if and only if M = T
α<µ Xα for some solution ⟨Xα⟩α<µ to K w.r.t. ⟨Uα⟩α<µ.
Proof
See Appendix C, page 45.
A hybrid knowledge base can be split in a number of different ways. For example, ∅and
P are splitting sets for any hybrid knowledge base and sequences such as ⟨P⟩, ⟨∅, P⟩are
splitting sequences for any hybrid knowledge base. The following example shows a more
elaborate splitting sequence for the Cargo Import knowledge base.

12
M. Slota and J. Leite and T. Swift
Example 11 (Splitting the Cargo Import Knowledge Base)
Consider the hybrid knowledge base K = ⟨O, P⟩presented in Fig. 1. One of the nontrivial
splitting sequences for K is U = ⟨U0, U1, U2, U3, P⟩, where
U0 =
{ Commodity/1, EdibleVegetable/1, Tomato/1, CherryTomato/1, GrapeTomato/1,
HTSCode/2, HTSChapter/2, HTSHeading/2, Bulk/1, Prepackaged/1, TariﬀCharge/2,
ShpmtCommod/2, ShpmtImporter/2, ShpmtDeclHTSCode/2, ShpmtProducer/2,
ShpmtCountry/2 }
U1 = U0 ∪{ AdmissibleImporter/1, SuspectedBadGuy/1, ApprovedImporterOf/2 }
U2 = U1 ∪{ RegisteredProducer/2, EUCountry/1, EURegisteredProducer/1, CommodCountry/2,
ExpeditableImporter/2, LowRiskEUCommodity/1 }
U3 = U2 ∪{ CompliantShpmt/1, Random/1, RandomInspection/1, PartialInspection/1,
FullInspection/1 } .
This splitting sequence splits K in four layers. The ﬁrst layer contains all ontological
knowledge regarding commodity types as well as information about shipments. The sec-
ond layer contains rules that use information from the ﬁrst layer together with internal
records to classify importers. The third layer contains axioms with geographic classiﬁca-
tion, information about registered producers and, based on information about commodities
and importers from the ﬁrst two layers, it deﬁnes low risk commodities coming from the
European Union. The ﬁnal layer contains rules for deciding which shipments should be
inspected based on information from previous layers.
3.2 Update Operator
With the concepts and results related to splitting hybrid knowledge bases from the previous
subsection, we are now ready to examine the constraints under which a plausible modular
update semantics for a hybrid knowledge base can be deﬁned. Obviously, this is the case
with hybrid knowledge bases that contain either only ontology axioms, or only rules. We
call such knowledge bases basic, and deﬁne the dynamic MKNF model for basic dynamic
knowledge bases by referring to the classical and rule update semantics deﬁned in Sect. 2.
Deﬁnition 12 (Dynamic MKNF Model of a Basic Dynamic Hybrid Knowledge Base)
We say a hybrid knowledge base K = ⟨O, P⟩is O-based if P contains only positive
facts; P-based if O is empty; basic if it is either O-based or P-based. A dynamic hybrid
knowledge base K = ⟨Ki⟩i<n is O-based if for all i < n, Ki is O-based; P-based if for
all i < n, Ki is P-based; basic if it is either O-based or P-based.
An MKNF interpretation M is a dynamic MKNF model of a basic dynamic hybrid
knowledge base K = ⟨Ki⟩i<n, where Ki = ⟨Oi, Pi⟩, if either K is O-based and M
is the minimal change update model of ⟨ζ (Oi) ∪Pi⟩i<n, or K is P-based and M =
{ J ∈I | I ⊆J } for some dynamic stable model I of ⟨Pi⟩i<n.
As can be seen, our deﬁnition is slightly more general than described above, as in the
case of O-based knowledge bases it allows the program part to contain positive facts. This
amounts to the reasonable assumption that positive facts in a logic program carry the same
meaning as the corresponding ground ﬁrst-order atom. As will be seen in the following,
this allows us to extend the class of basic hybrid knowledge bases and deﬁne dynamic
MKNF models for it. To this end, we utilise the splitting-related concepts from the previous
subsection. Their natural generalisation for dynamic hybrid knowledge bases follows.

Splitting and Updating Hybrid Knowledge Bases (Extended Version)
13
Deﬁnition 13 (Splitting Set and Splitting Sequence)
A set of predicate symbols U is a splitting set for a dynamic hybrid knowledge base K =
⟨Ki⟩i<n if for all i < n, U is a splitting set for Ki.
The dynamic hybrid knowledge base ⟨bU(Ki)⟩i<n is called the bottom of K relative to
U and denoted by bU(K). The dynamic hybrid knowledge base ⟨tU(Ki)⟩i<n is called the
top of K relative to U and denoted by tU(K). Given some X ∈M, the dynamic hybrid
knowledge base ⟨eU(Ki, X)⟩i<n is called the splitting set reduct of K relative to U and X
and denoted by eU(K, X).
A sequence of sets of predicate symbols U is a splitting sequence for K if for all i < n,
U is a splitting sequence for Ki.
In the static case, given a splitting set U, the splitting set theorem guarantees that an
MKNF model M of a hybrid knowledge base K is an intersection of an MKNF model X
of bU(K) and of an MKNF model Y of eU(K, X). In the dynamic case, we can use this
correspondence to deﬁne a dynamic MKNF model. More speciﬁcally, we can say that M
is a dynamic MKNF model of a dynamic hybrid knowledge base K if M is an intersection
of a dynamic MKNF model X of bU(K) and of a dynamic MKNF model Y of eU(K, X).
For the deﬁnition to be sound, we need to guarantee that X and Y are deﬁned. In other
words, K has to be such that both bU(K) and eU(K, X) are basic. When we move to the
more general case of a splitting sequence U = ⟨Uα⟩α<µ, what we need to ensure is that
bU0(K) is basic and for any ordinal α such that α + 1 < µ, eUα(bUα+1(K), T
η<α Xη) is
also basic. A class of dynamic hybrid knowledge bases that satisﬁes these conditions can
be deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition 14 (Updatable Dynamic Hybrid Knowledge Base)
Let U be a set of predicate symbols. We say a hybrid knowledge base K is O-reducible
relative to U if all rules r from P are positive and pr(B(r)) ⊆U; P-reducible relative to
U if O is empty; reducible relative to U if it is either O-reducible or P-reducible relative
to U. A dynamic hybrid knowledge base K = ⟨Ki⟩i<n is O-reducible relative to U if for
all i < n, Ki is O-reducible relative to U; P-reducible relative to U if for all i < n, Ki is
P-reducible relative to U; reducible relative to U if it is either O-reducible or P-reducible
relative to U.
Let K be a (dynamic) hybrid knowledge base and U = ⟨Uα⟩α<µ be a splitting sequence
for K. We say U is update-enabling for K if bU0(K) is reducible relative to ∅and for any
α such that α + 1 < µ, the hybrid knowledge base tUα(bUα+1(K)) is reducible relative to
Uα. We say K is updatable if some update-enabling splitting sequence for K exists.
The following proposition now guarantees the property of updatable dynamic hybrid
knowledge bases that we discussed above.
Proposition 15 (Layers of an Updatable Dynamic Hybrid Knowledge Base are Basic)
Let U be an update-enabling splitting sequence for a dynamic hybrid knowledge base K
and X ∈M. Then bU0(K) is a basic dynamic hybrid knowledge base and for any ordinal
α such that α + 1 < µ, eUα(bUα+1(K), X) is also a basic dynamic hybrid knowledge base.
Proof

14
M. Slota and J. Leite and T. Swift
See Appendix F, page 56.
This result paves the way to the following deﬁnition of a solution to an updatable dy-
namic hybrid knowledge base together with the notion of a dynamic MKNF model w.r.t. an
updatable splitting sequence.
Deﬁnition 16 (Solution to an Updatable Dynamic Hybrid Knowledge Base)
Let U = ⟨Uα⟩α<µ be an update-enabling splitting sequence for a dynamic hybrid knowl-
edge base K. A solution to K w.r.t. U is a sequence of MKNF interpretations ⟨Xα⟩α<µ
such that
1. X0 is a dynamic MKNF model of bU0(K);
2. For any ordinal α such that α + 1 < µ, Xα+1 is a dynamic MKNF model of
eUα

bUα+1(K), T
η≤α Xη

;
3. For any limit ordinal α < µ, Xα = I.
We say that an MKNF interpretation M is a dynamic MKNF model of K w.r.t. U if M =
T
α<µ Xα for some solution ⟨Xα⟩α<µ to K w.r.t. U.
The last step required to deﬁne a dynamic MKNF model of an updatable dynamic hybrid
knowledge base, without the need to refer to a context of a particular splitting sequence,
is to ensure that Def. 12 of a dynamic MKNF model for basic dynamic hybrid knowledge
bases is properly generalised. The following proposition guarantees that the set of dynamic
MKNF models is independent of a particular update-enabling splitting sequence.
Proposition 17 (Solution Independence)
Let U, V be update-enabling splitting sequences for a dynamic hybrid knowledge base K.
Then M is a dynamic MKNF model of K w.r.t. U if and only if M is a dynamic MKNF
model of K w.r.t. V .
Proof
See Appendix F, page 60.
If K is a basic dynamic hybrid knowledge base, then it can be veriﬁed easily that dy-
namic MKNF models of K, as originally deﬁned in Def. 12, coincide with dynamic MKNF
models of K w.r.t. the splitting sequence ⟨P⟩. We obtain the following corollary:
Corollary 18 (Compatibility with Def. 12)
Let K be a basic dynamic hybrid knowledge base and U be a splitting sequence for K.
Then M is a dynamic MKNF model of K if and only if M is a dynamic MKNF model of
K w.r.t. U.
Proof
See Appendix F, page 63.
We can now safely introduce the dynamic MKNF model for any updatable dynamic
hybrid knowledge base as follows:
Deﬁnition 19 (Dynamic MKNF Model of Updatable Dynamic Hybrid Knowledge Base)
An MKNF interpretation M is a dynamic MKNF model of an updatable dynamic hybrid
knowledge base K if M is a dynamic MKNF model of K w.r.t. some update-enabling
splitting sequence for K.

Splitting and Updating Hybrid Knowledge Bases (Extended Version)
15
3.3 Properties and Use
The purpose of this section is to twofold. First, we establish the most basic properties of the
deﬁned update semantics, relating it to the static MKNF semantics and the adopted classi-
cal and rule update semantics and showing that it respects one of the most widely accepted
principles behind update semantics in general, the principle of primacy of new informa-
tion. Second, we illustrate its usefulness by considering updates of the hybrid knowledge
base presented in Example 1.
The ﬁrst result shows that our update semantics generalises the static MKNF semantics.
Theorem 20 (Generalisation of MKNF Models)
Let K be an updatable hybrid knowledge base and M be an MKNF interpretation. Then
M is a dynamic MKNF model of ⟨K⟩if and only if M is an MKNF model of K.
Proof
See Appendix F, page 63.
It also generalises the classical and rule update semantics it is based on.
Theorem 21 (Generalisation of Minimal Change Update Semantics)
Let ⟨Ki⟩i<n, where Ki = ⟨Oi, Pi⟩, be a dynamic hybrid knowledge base such that Pi is
empty for all i < n. Then M is a dynamic MKNF model of ⟨Ki⟩i<n if and only if M is
the minimal change update model of ⟨ζ (Oi)⟩i<n.
Proof
See Appendix F, page 63.
Theorem 22 (Generalisation of Dynamic Stable Model Semantics)
Let K = ⟨Ki⟩i<n, where Ki = ⟨Oi, Pi⟩, be a dynamic hybrid knowledge base such
that Oi is empty for all i < n. Then M is a dynamic MKNF model of K if and only if
M = { J ∈I | I ⊆J } for some dynamic stable model I of ⟨Pi⟩i<n.
Proof
See Appendix F, page 64.
Besides, the semantics respects the principle of primacy of new information (Dalal 1988).
Theorem 23 (Principle of Primacy of New Information)
Let K = ⟨Ki⟩i<n be an updatable dynamic hybrid knowledge base with n > 0 and M be
a dynamic MKNF model of K. Then M |= π(Kn−1).
Proof
See Appendix F, page 64.
The following example illustrates how the semantics can be used in the Cargo Imports
domain to incorporate new, conﬂicting information into a hybrid knowledge base.
Example 24 (Updating the Cargo Import Knowledge Base)
The hybrid knowledge base K in Fig. 1 has a single MKNF model M. We shortly sum-
marise what is entailed by this model. First, since the shipments s1, s2, s3 differ in the kind
of tomatoes and their packaging, each of them is associated a different tariff charge. The
HTS codes of commodities inside all three shipments match the declared HTS codes, so
CompliantShipment(si) is entailed for all i. The rules for importers imply that while both

16
M. Slota and J. Leite and T. Swift
* * * bU0(K) * * *
Commodity ≡(∃HTSCode.⊤)
EdibleVegetable ≡(∃HTSChapter. { ‘07’ })
CherryTomato ≡(∃HTSCode. { ‘07020020’ })
Tomato ≡(∃HTSHeading. { ‘0702’ })
GrapeTomato ≡(∃HTSCode. { ‘07020010’ })
Tomato ⊑EdibleVegetable
CherryTomato ⊑Tomato
GrapeTomato ⊑Tomato
CherryTomato ⊓Bulk ≡(∃TariﬀCharge. { $0 })
CherryTomato ⊓GrapeTomato ⊑⊥
GrapeTomato ⊓Bulk ≡(∃TariﬀCharge. { $40 })
Bulk ⊓Prepackaged ⊑⊥
CherryTomato ⊓Prepackaged ≡(∃TariﬀCharge. { $50 })
GrapeTomato ⊓Prepackaged ≡(∃TariﬀCharge. { $100 })
⟨s1 , c1⟩: ShpmtCommod
⟨s1 , ‘07020020’⟩: ShpmtDeclHTSCode
⟨s1 , i1⟩: ShpmtImporter
c1 : CherryTomato
c1 : Bulk
⟨s2 , c2⟩: ShpmtCommod
⟨s2 , ‘07020020’⟩: ShpmtDeclHTSCode
⟨s2 , i2⟩: ShpmtImporter
c2 : CherryTomato
c2 : Prepackaged
⟨s2 , portugal⟩: ShpmtCountry
⟨s3 , c3⟩: ShpmtCommod
⟨s3 , ‘07020010’⟩: ShpmtDeclHTSCode
⟨s3 , i3⟩: ShpmtImporter
c3 : GrapeTomato
c3 : Bulk
⟨s3 , portugal⟩: ShpmtCountry
⟨s3 , p1⟩: ShpmtProducer
* * * tU0(bU1(K)) * * *
AdmissibleImporter(I) ←∼SuspectedBadGuy(I).
SuspectedBadGuy(i1).
ApprovedImporterOf(i2, C) ←EdibleVegetable(C).
ApprovedImporterOf(i3, C) ←GrapeTomato(C).
* * * tU1(bU2(K)) * * *
CommodCountry(C, Country) ←ShpmtCommod(S, C), ShpmtCountry(S, Country).
ExpeditableImporter(C, I) ←AdmissibleImporter(I), ApprovedImporterOf(I, C).
EURegisteredProducer ≡(∃RegisteredProducer.EUCountry)
LowRiskEUCommodity ≡(∃ExpeditableImporter.⊤) ⊓(∃CommodCountry.EUCountry)
⟨p1, portugal⟩: RegisteredProducer
⟨p2, slovakia⟩: RegisteredProducer
portugal : EUCountry
slovakia : EUCountry
* * * tU2(bU3(K)) * * *
CompliantShpmt(S) ←ShpmtCommod(S, C), HTSCode(C, D), ShpmtDeclHTSCode(S, D).
RandomInspection(S) ←ShpmtCommod(S, C), Random(C).
PartialInspection(S) ←RandomInspection(S).
PartialInspection(S) ←ShpmtCommod(S, C), ∼LowRiskEUCommodity(C).
FullInspection(S) ←∼CompliantShpmt(S).
FullInspection(S) ←ShpmtCommod(S, C), Tomato(C), ShpmtCountry(S, slovakia).
Fig. 2. Layers of the Hybrid Knowledge Base for Cargo Imports
AdmissibleImporter(i2 ) and AdmissibleImporter(i3 ) are true, AdmissibleImporter(i1 ) is
not true because i1 is a suspected bad guy. It also follows that ApprovedImporterOf(i2, c2)
and ApprovedImporterOf(i3, c3) hold and because of that ExpeditableImporter(c2, i2)
and ExpeditableImporter(c3, i3) are also true. Both of these shipments come from a Eu-
ropean country, so c2 and c3 belong to LowRiskEUCommodity. But this is not true for c1
since there is no expeditable importer for it. Consequently, PartialInspection(s1) holds.

Splitting and Updating Hybrid Knowledge Bases (Extended Version)
17
* * * bU0(K′) * * *
Commodity ≡(∃HTSCode.⊤)
EdibleVegetable ≡(∃HTSChapter. { ‘07’ })
CherryTomato ≡(∃HTSCode. { ‘07020020’ })
Tomato ≡(∃HTSHeading. { ‘0702’ })
GrapeTomato ≡(∃HTSCode. { ‘07020010’ })
Tomato ⊑EdibleVegetable
CherryTomato ⊑Tomato
GrapeTomato ⊑Tomato
CherryTomato ⊓Bulk ≡(∃TariﬀCharge. { $0 })
CherryTomato ⊓GrapeTomato ⊑⊥
GrapeTomato ⊓Bulk ≡(∃TariﬀCharge. { $40 })
Bulk ⊓Prepackaged ⊑⊥
CherryTomato ⊓Prepackaged ≡(∃TariﬀCharge. { $50 })
GrapeTomato ⊓Prepackaged ≡(∃TariﬀCharge. { $100 })
c1 : GrapeTomato
* * * tU0(bU1(K′)) * * *
∼ApprovedImporterOf(i2, C) ←Tomato(C).
* * * tU1(bU2(K′)) * * *
EURegisteredProducer ≡(∃RegisteredProducer.EUCountry)
LowRiskEUCommodity ≡(∃ExpeditableImporter.⊤) ⊓(∃CommodCountry.EUCountry)
c3 : (¬LowRiskEUCommodity)
* * * tU2(bU3(K′)) * * *
∼PartialInspection(S) ←ShpmtProducer(S, P), EURegisteredProducer(P).
Fig. 3. Layers of the Update to the Hybrid Knowledge Base for Cargo Imports
We now consider an update caused by several independent events in order to illustrate
different aspects of our hybrid update semantics.
Suppose that during the partial inspection of s1, grape tomatoes are found instead of
cherry tomatoes. Second, we suppose that i2 is no longer an approved importer for any kind
of tomatoes due to a history of mis-ﬁling. Third, due to rat infestation on the boat with ship-
ment s3, c3 is no longer considered a low risk commodity. Finally, due to workload con-
straints, partial inspections for shipments with commodities from a producer registered in
a country of the European Union will be waived. These events lead to the following update
K′ = ⟨O′, P′⟩: where O′ contains c1 : GrapeTomato and c3 : (¬LowRiskEUCommodity)
as well as all TBox axioms from O,5 and P′ contains the following rules:6
∼ApprovedImporterOf(i2, C) ←Tomato(C).
∼PartialInspection(S) ←ShpmtProducer(S, P), EURegisteredProducer(P).
Note that the splitting sequence U deﬁned in Example 11 is update-enabling for the dy-
namic hybrid knowledge base ⟨K, K′⟩. The four nonempty layers of K are listed in Fig. 2.
The ﬁrst layer, bU0(K) contains only ontology axioms, and so is O-reducible relative to ∅.
The second and fourth layers (tU0(bU1(K)) and tU2(bU3(K))) contain only rules and so are
5 We reinclude all TBox axioms in O′ in order to keep them static throughout the example.
6 We assume that all rule variables are DL-safe and rules are grounded prior to applying our theory.

18
M. Slota and J. Leite and T. Swift
P-reducible relative to U0 and U2, respectively. Finally, the third layer tU1(bU2(K)) con-
tains a mixture of rules and ontology axioms, but all the rules are positive and all predicate
symbols of all rule body literals belong to U1, so the layer is O-reducible relative to U1.
The layers of the updating hybrid knowledge base K′ are shown in Fig. 3. It can be easily
veriﬁed that they satisfy the same reducibility criteria, so U is indeed an update-enabling
sequence for ⟨K, K′⟩. In order to arrive at a dynamic MKNF model of ⟨K, K′⟩with respect
to U, a dynamic MKNF model of each layer is computed separately and models of previous
layers serve to “import” information to the current layer.
In our case, we ﬁrst need to ﬁnd the minimal change update model X0 of the ﬁrst layer
of K updated by the ﬁrst layer of K′. Due to the TBox axioms, this results in c1 no longer
being a member of CherryTomato. The HTS code of c1 also changes to ‘07020010’. Note
that the conﬂict between old and new knowledge is properly resolved by the minimal
change update semantics.
Subsequently, the dynamic stable model semantics is used to ﬁnd the dynamic MKNF
model X1 of the second layer of K updated by the second layer of K′. The rule update
results in i2 no longer being an approved importer for c2. As before, the conﬂict that arose
is resolved by the rule update semantics.
Given the dynamic MKNF models of the ﬁrst two layers, the model of the third layer of
K is now different because i2 is no longer an expeditable importer of c2. As a consequence,
c2 is no longer a member of the concept LowRiskEUCommodity. Also, due to the update
of the third layer, c3 is also not a member of LowRiskEUCommodity. The conﬂicting
situation was again resolved by the minimal change update operator and results in the
dynamic MKNF model X2 of the third layer.
Finally, due to the changes in all three previous layers, the rules in the fourth layer now
imply that CompliantShpmt(s1) does not hold and, as a consequence, FullInspection(s1)
holds. Also, PartialInspection(s2) holds because c2 is not a low risk commodity. But even
though c3 is also not a low risk commodity, PartialInspection(s3) does not hold. This is
due to the rule update of the fourth layer according to which the inspection of s3 must be
waived because s3 comes from an EU registered producer.
4 Discussion
The class of updatable hybrid knowledge bases for which we deﬁned an update semantics
in the previous section is closely related to multi-context systems (Brewka and Eiter 2007).
Each layer of a hybrid knowledge base relative to a particular update-enabling splitting
sequence can be viewed as a context together with all its bridge rules. At the same time,
the constraints we impose guarantee that each such context either contains only rules, so
the context logic can be the stable model semantics, or it contains only DL axioms so that
ﬁrst-order logic can be used as its logic. On the other hand, different splitting sequences
induce different multi-context systems, though their overall semantics stays the same. We
believe that a further study of this close relationship may bring about new insights.
Another direction in which the proposed framework can be generalised is by letting
the ontology and rule update operators be given as parameters instead of using a ﬁxed

Splitting and Updating Hybrid Knowledge Bases (Extended Version)
19
pair.7 This seems to have even more appeal given the fact that no general consensus has
been reached in the community regarding the “right way” to perform rule updates, and
the situation with ontology update operators also seems to be similar. Although Winslett’s
operator has been used to deal with ABox updates (Liu et al. 2006; Giacomo et al. 2006),
its use for dealing with TBox updates has recently been criticised (Calvanese et al. 2010;
Slota and Leite 2010b) and a number of considerably different methods for dealing with
TBox evolution have been proposed (Qi et al. 2006; Qi and Du 2009; Yang et al. 2009;
Calvanese et al. 2010; Wang et al. 2010), many tailored to a speciﬁc Description Logic.
To sum up, the contribution of this paper is twofold. First, we generalised the splitting
theorems for Logic Programs (Lifschitz and Turner 1994) to the case of Hybrid MKNF
Knowledge Bases (Motik and Rosati 2007). This makes it possible to divide a hybrid knowl-
edge base into layers and guarantees that its overall semantics can be reconstructed from
the semantics of layers inside it. Second, we used the theorem and related notions to iden-
tify a class of hybrid knowledge bases for which we successfully deﬁned an update se-
mantics, based on a modular combination of a classical and a rule update semantics. We
showed that our semantics properly generalises the semantics it is based on, particularly
the static semantics of Hybrid MKNF Knowledge Bases (Motik and Rosati 2007), the clas-
sical minimal change update semantics (Winslett 1990), and the reﬁned dynamic stable
model semantics for rule updates (Alferes et al. 2005). We then illustrated on an example
motivated by a real world application how the deﬁned semantics deals with nontrivial up-
dates, automatically resolving conﬂicts and propagating new information across the hybrid
knowledge base.
