Neural Linear Bandits:
Overcoming Catastrophic Forgetting through
Likelihood Matching
Tom Zahavy
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technion Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel 3200003

Shie Mannor
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technion Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel 3200003

Abstract
We study neural-linear bandits for solving problems where both exploration and
representation learning play an important role. Neural-linear bandits leverage the
representation power of deep neural networks and combine it with efﬁcient explo-
ration mechanisms, designed for linear contextual bandits, on top of the last hidden
layer. Since the representation is being optimized during learning, information
regarding exploration with ”old” features is lost. Here, we propose the ﬁrst limited
memory neural-linear bandit that is resilient to this catastrophic forgetting phe-
nomenon. We perform simulations on a variety of real-world problems, including
regression, classiﬁcation, and sentiment analysis, and observe that our algorithm
achieves superior performance and shows resilience to catastrophic forgetting.
1
Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) can learn representations of data with multiple levels of abstraction
and have dramatically improved the state-of-the-art in speech recognition, visual object recognition,
object detection and many other domains such as drug discovery and genomics [LeCun et al., 2015,
Goodfellow et al., 2016]. Using DNNs for function approximation in reinforcement learning (RL)
enables the agent to generalize across states without domain-speciﬁc knowledge, and learn rich
domain representations from raw, high-dimensional inputs [Mnih et al., 2015, Silver et al., 2016].
Nevertheless, the question of how to perform efﬁcient exploration during the representation learning
phase is still an open problem. The ϵ-greedy policy [Langford and Zhang, 2008] is simple to
implement and widely used in practice [Mnih et al., 2015]. However, it is statistically suboptimal.
Optimism in the Face of Uncertainty [Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011, Auer, 2002, OFU], and Thompson
Sampling [Thompson, 1933, Agrawal and Goyal, 2013, TS] use conﬁdence sets to balance exploitation
and exploration. For DNNs, such conﬁdence sets may not be accurate enough to allow efﬁcient
exploration. For example, using dropout as a posterior approximation for exploration does not
concentrate with observed data [Osband et al., 2018] and was shown empirically to be insufﬁcient
[Riquelme et al., 2018]. Alternatively, pseudo-counts, a generalization of the number of visits, were
used as an exploration bonus [Bellemare et al., 2016, Pathak et al., 2017]. Inspired by tabular RL,
these ideas ignore the uncertainty in the value function approximation in each context. As a result,
they may lead to inefﬁcient conﬁdence sets [Osband et al., 2018].
Linear models, on the other hand, are considered more stable and provide accurate uncertainty
estimates but require substantial feature engineering to achieve good results. Additionally, they are
known to work in practice only with ”medium-sized” inputs (with around 1, 000 features) due to
numerical issues. A natural attempt at getting the best of both worlds is to learn a linear exploration
policy on top of the last hidden layer of a DNN, which we term the neural-linear approach. In
RL, this approach was shown to reﬁne the performance of DQNs [Levine et al., 2017] and improve
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:1901.08612v2  [cs.LG]  11 Aug 2019

Train DNN to predict rewards
Last Layer
Activations
Initial 
Layers
Last Layer 
Weights
r(t)
raw features b(t)
Φ(t)
1. Sample weight vectors from the uncertainty set
2. Act optimally with respect to the sampled weights
3. Store observed data in the replay buffer
Evaluate Φ(i) from b(i) usinf the current DNN 
for all i in the replay buffer
{b(i),a(i),r(i)} 
i=1,..,n
Explore/Exploit
Compute priors (µ0,Σ0) by matching the 
moments of the likelihood between the 
current features and those from the 
previous iteration
E
Construct a linear contextual 
bandit model (μ,Σ):
Evaluate features
Next 
iteration
Figure 1: Neural-Linear contextual Thompson sampling with limited memory.
exploration when combined with TS [Azizzadenesheli et al., 2018] and OFU [O’Donoghue et al.,
2018, Zahavy et al., 2018a]. For contextual bandits, Riquelme et al. (2018) showed that neural-linear
TS achieves superior performance on multiple data sets.
A practical challenge for neural-linear bandits is that the representation (the activations of the last
hidden layer) change after every optimization step, while the features are assumed to be ﬁxed over
time when used by linear contextual bandits. Riquelme et al. (2018) tackled this problem by storing
the entire data set in a memory buffer and computing new features for all the data after each DNN
learning phase. The authors also experimented with a bounded memory buffer, but observed a
signiﬁcant decrease in performance due to catastrophic forgetting [Kirkpatrick et al., 2017], i.e., a
loss of information from previous experience.
In this work, we propose a neural-linear bandit that uses TS on top of the last layer of a DNN (Fig. 1)1.
Key to our approach is a novel method to compute priors whenever the DNN features change that
makes our algorithm resilient to catastrophic forgetting. Speciﬁcally, we adjust the moments of the
likelihood of the reward estimation conditioned on new features to match the likelihood conditioned
on old features. We achieve this by solving a semi-deﬁnite program [Vandenberghe and Boyd, 1996,
SDP] to approximate the covariance and using the weights of the last layer as prior to the mean.
We present simulation results on several real-world and simulated data sets, including classiﬁcation
and regression, using Multi-Layered Perceptrons (MLPs). Our ﬁndings suggest that using our method
to approximate priors improves performance when memory is limited. Finally, we demonstrate that
our neural-linear bandit performs well in a sentiment analysis data set where the input is given in
natural language (of size R8k) and we use a Convolution Neural Network (CNNs). In this regime, it is
not feasible to use a linear method due to computational problems. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the ﬁrst neural-linear algorithm that is resilient to catastrophic forgetting due to limited memory.
2
Background
Algorithm 1 TS for linear contextual bandits
∀i ∈[1.., N], set Bi = Id, ˆµi = 0d, fi = 0d
for t = 1, 2, . . . , do
∀i ∈[1.., N], sample ˜µi from N( ˆµi, v2B−1
i
)
Play arm a(t) := arg maxi b(t)T ˜µi
Observe reward rt
Update: Ba(t) = Ba(t) + b(t)b(t)T
fa(t) = fa(t) + b(t)rt,
ˆµa(t) = B−1
a(t)fa(t)
end for
The stochastic, contextual (linear) multi-
armed bandit problem.
There are N arms
(actions). At time t a context vector b(t) ∈Rd,
is revealed. The history at time t is deﬁned to be
Ht−1 = {b(τ), a(τ), ra(τ)(τ), τ = 1, ..., t−1},
where a(τ) denotes the arm played at time
τ.
The contexts b(t) are assumed to be re-
alizable, i.e., the reward for arm i at time t
is generated from an (unknown) distribution
s.t.
E [ri(t)|b(t), Ht−1] = E [ri(t)|b(t)] =
b(t)T µi, where {µi ∈Rd}N
i=1 are ﬁxed but un-
known parameters. An algorithm for this prob-
lem needs to choose at every time t an arm a(t) to play, with the knowledge of history Ht−1 and
current context b(t). Let a∗(t) denote the optimal arm at time t, i.e. a∗(t) = arg maxib(t)T µi, and
1Image credits: bandit (bottom), Microsoft research; conﬁdence ellipsoid (right), OriginLab.
2

let ∆i(t) the difference between the mean rewards of the optimal arm and of arm i at time t, i.e.,
∆i(t) = b(t)T µa∗(t) −b(t)T µi. The objective is to minimize the total regret R(T) = PT
t=1 ∆a(t),
where the time horizon T is ﬁnite.
TS for linear contextual bandits. Thompson sampling is an algorithm for online decision problems
where actions are taken sequentially in a manner that must balance between exploiting what is known
to maximize immediate performance and investing to accumulate new information that may improve
future performance [Russo et al., 2018, Lattimore and Szepesv´ari, 2018]. For linear contextual
bandits, TS was introduced in [Agrawal and Goyal, 2013, Alg. 1].
Suppose that the likelihood of reward ri(t), given context b(t) and parameter µi, were given by
the pdf of Gaussian distribution N(b(t)T µi, ν2), and let Bi(t) = B0
i + Pt−1
τ=1 b(τ)b(τ)T 1i=a(τ),
ˆµi(t) = B−1
i
(t) Pt−1
τ=1 b(τ)ra(τ)(τ)1i=a(τ), where 1 is the indicator function. Given a Gaussian
prior for arm i at time t, N(ˆµi(t), v2B−1
i
(t)), the posterior distribution at time t + 1 is given by,
Pr(˜µi|ri(t)) ∼Pr(ri(t)|˜µi)Pr(˜µi) ∼N(ˆµi(t + 1), v2B−1
i
(t + 1)).
(1)
At each time step t, the algorithm generates samples {˜µi(t)}N
i=1 from the posterior distribution
N(ˆµi(t), v2B−1
i
(t)), plays the arm i that maximizes b(t)T µi(t) and updates the posterior. TS is
guaranteed to have a total regret at time T that is not larger than O(d3/2√
T), which is within a factor
of
√
d of the information-theoretic lower bound for this problem. It is also known to achieve excellent
empirical results [Lattimore and Szepesv´ari, 2018].
Although that TS is a Bayesian approach, the description of the algorithm and its analysis are prior-
free, i.e., the regret bounds will hold irrespective of whether or not the actual reward distribution
matches the Gaussian likelihood function used to derive this method [Agrawal and Goyal, 2013].
Bayesian Linear Regression.
A different mechanism, based on Bayesian Linear Regres-
sion, was proposed by Riquelme et al. [2018].
Here, the noise parameter ν (Alg. 1) is re-
placed with a prior belief that is being updated over time.
The prior for arm i at time t
is given by Pr(˜µi, ˜ν2
i ) = Pr(˜ν2
i )Pr(˜µi|˜ν2
i ), where Pr(˜ν2
i ) is an inverse-gamma distribution
Inv-Gamma(ai(t), bi(t)), and the conditional prior density Pr(˜µi|˜ν2
i ) is a normal distribution,
Pr(˜µi|˜ν2
i ) ∝N
 ˆµi(t), ˜ν2
i Bi(t)−1
. For Gaussian likelihood, the posterior distribution at time
τ = t + 1 is, Pr(˜νi) = Inv-Gamma (ai(τ), bi(τ)) and Pr(˜µi|˜νi) = N
 ˆµi(τ), ν2
i Bi(τ)−1
, where:
Bi(t) = B0
i +
t−1
X
τ=1
b(τ)b(τ)T 1i=a(τ), fi(t) =
Xt−1
τ=1 b(τ)ri(τ)1i=a(τ),
ˆµi(t) = Bi(t)−1
B0
i µ0
i + fi(t)

, ai(t) = a0
i + t
2,
R2
i (t) = R2
i (t −1) + r2
i
bi(t) = b0
i + 1
2

R2
i (t) + (µ0
i )TB0
i µ0
i −ˆµi(t)TBi(t)ˆµi(t)

.
(2)
The problem with this approach is that the marginal distribution of µi is heavy tailed (multi-variate
t-student distribution, see O’Hagan and Forster [2004], page 246, for derivation), and does not satisfy
the necessary concentration bounds for exploration in [Agrawal and Goyal, 2013, Abeille et al., 2017].
Thus, in order to analyze the regret of this approach, new analysis has to be derived, which we leave
to future work. Empirically, this update scheme was shown to convergence to the true posterior and
demonstrated excellent empirical performance [Riquelme et al., 2018]. This can be explained by the
fact that the mean of the noise parameter νi, given by Eνi =
bi(t)
ai(t)−1, is decreasing to zero with time,
which may compensate for the lack of shrinkage due to the heavy tail distribution.
3
Limited memory neural-linear TS
Our algorithm, as depicted in Fig. 1, is composed of four main components: (1) A DNN that takes a
raw context as an input and is trained to predict the reward of each arm; (2) An exploration mechanism
that uses the last layer activations of the DNN as features and performs linear TS on top of them; (3)
A memory buffer that stores previous experience; (4) A likelihood matching mechanism that uses the
memory buffer and the DNN to account for changes in representation. We now explain how each of
these components works; code can be found in (link), pseudo code in the supplementary material.
1. Representation. Our algorithm uses a DNN, denoted by D, that takes the raw context b(t) ∈Rd
as its input. The network has N outputs that correspond to the estimation of the reward of each arm;
given context b(t) ∈Rd, D(b(t))i denotes the estimation of the reward of the i-th arm.
3

Using a DNN to predict the reward of each arm allows our algorithm to learn a nonlinear representation
of the context. This representation is later used for exploration by performing linear TS on top of the
last hidden layer activations. We denote the activations of the last hidden layer of D applied to this
context as φ(t) = LastLayerActivations(D(b(t))), where φ(t) ∈Rg. The context b(t) represents
raw measurements that can be high dimensional (e.g., image or text), where the size of φ(t) is a
design parameter that we choose to be smaller (g < d). This makes contextual bandit algorithms
practical for such data sets. Moreover, φ(t) can potentially be linearly realizable (even if b(t) is not)
since a DNN is a global function approximator [Barron, 1993] and the last layer is linear.
1.1 Training. Every L iterations, we train D for P mini-batches. Training is performed by sampling
experience tuples {b(τ), a(τ), ra(τ)(τ)} from the replay buffer E (details below) and minimizing the
mean squared error (MSE),
||D(b(τ))a(τ) −ra(τ)(τ)||2
2,
(3)
where ra(τ) is the reward that was received at time τ after playing arm a(τ) and observing context
b(τ) (similar to Riquelme et al. [2018]). Notice that only the output of arm a(τ) is differentiated.
We emphasize that the DNN, including the last layer, are trained end-to-end to minimize Eq. (3).
2. Exploration. Since our algorithm is performing training in phases (every L steps), exploration is
performed using a ﬁxed representation φ (D has ﬁxed weights between training phases). At each time
step t, the agent observes a raw context b(t) and uses the DNN D to produces a feature vector φ(t).
The features φ(t) are used to perform linear TS, similar to Algorithm 1, but with two key differences.
First, we introduce a likelihood matching mechanism that accounts for changes in representation (see
4. below for more details). Second, we follow the Bayesian linear regression equations, as suggested
in [Riquelme et al., 2018], and perform TS while updating the posterior both for µ, the mean of the
estimate, and ν, its variance.
This is done in the following manner. We begin by sampling a weight vector ˜µi for each arm i ∈1..N,
from the posterior by following two steps. First, the variance ˜ν2
i is sampled from Inv-Gamma (ai, bi) .
Then, the weight vector ˜µi is sampled, from N
 ˆµi, ˜ν2
i (Φ0
i + Φi)−1
. Once we sampled a weight
vector for each arm, we choose to play arm a(t) = arg maxiφ(t)T ˜µi, and observe reward ra(t)(t).
This is followed by a posterior update step, based on Eq. (2):
Φa(t) = Φa(t) + φ(t)φ(t)T ,
fa(t) = fa(t) + φ(t)T rt,
R2
a(t) = R2
a(t) + ra(t)(t)2
(4)
ˆµa(t) = (Φa(t) + Φ0
a(t))−1(Φ0
a(t)µ0
a(t) + fa(t)),
aa(t) = aa(t) + 1
2,
ba(t) = b0,a(t) + 1
2

R2
a(t) + µT
0,a(t)Φ0,a(t)µ0,a(t) −ˆµa(t)(t)TΦa(t)(t)ˆµa(t)(t)

.
The exploration mechanism is responsible for choosing actions; it does not change the weights of
the DNN.
3.
Memory buffer.
After an action a(t) is played at time t, we store the experience tuple
{b(t), a(t), ra(t)(t)} in a ﬁnite memory buffer of size n that we denote by E. Once E is full,
we remove tuples from E in a round robin manner, i.e., we remove the ﬁrst tuple in E with a = a(t).
4. Likelihood matching. Before each learning phase, we evaluate the features of D on the replay
buffer. Let Ei be a subset of memory tuples in E at which arm i was played, and let ni be its size.
We denote by Ei
φold ∈Rni×g a matrix whose rows are feature vectors that were played by arm i.
After a learning phase is complete, we evaluate the new activations on the same replay buffer and
denote the equivalent set by Ei
φ ∈Rni×g.
Our approach is to summarize the knowledge that the algorithm has gained from exploring with
the features φold into priors on the new features Φ0
i , µ0
i . Once these priors are computed, we restart
the linear TS algorithm using the data that is currently available in the replay buffer. For each
arm i, let φi
j = (Ei
φ)j be the j-th row in Ei
φ and let rj be the corresponding reward, we set
Φi = Pni
j=1 φi
j(φi
j)T , fi = Pni
j=1(φi
j)T rj.
We now explain how we compute Φ0
i , µ0
i . We assume that all the representations that are produced by
the DNN are realizable,i.e., E[ri(t)|φ(t)] = φ(t)T µi = φold(t)T µold
i
= E[ri(t)|ψ(t)]. While the
realizability assumption is standard in the existing literature on contextual multi-armed bandits [Chu
et al., 2011, Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011, Agrawal and Goyal, 2013], it is quite strong and may not be
realistic in practice. We further discuss these assumptions in the discussion paragraph below and in
Section 5.
4

Notice that under the realizability assumption, the likelihood of the reward is invariant to the choice
of representation , i.e. N(φ(t)T µi, ν2) ∼N(φold(t)T µold
i
, ν2). For all i, deﬁne the estimator of the
reward as θi(t) = φ(t)T ˜µi(t), and its standard deviation st,i =
p
φ(t)T Φi(t)−1φ(t) (see [Agrawal
and Goyal, 2013] for derivation). By deﬁnition of ˜µi(t), marginal distribution of each θi(t) is
Gaussian with mean φi(t)T ˆµi(t) and standard deviation νist,i. The goal is to match the likelihood of
the reward estimation θi(t) given the new features to be the same as with the old features.
4.1 Approximation of the mean µ0
i : Recall that the realizability assumption implies a linear con-
nection between µold
i
, µ0
i , i.e., (µold
i
)T φold = (µ0
i )T φ, thus, we can solve a linear set of equations
and get a linear mapping from µ0
i to µold
i
:
(µ0
i )T = (µold
i
)T Ei
φold(Ei
φ)−1.
(5)
In addition to the realizability assumption, for Eq. (5) to hold the matrix Ei
φ must be invertible. In
practice, we found that a different solution that is based on using the DNN weights performed better.
Recall that the DNN is trained to minimize the MSE (Eq. (3)). Thus, given the new features φ, the
weights of the last layer of the DNN make a good prior for µ0
i . This approach was shown empirically
to make a good approximation [Levine et al., 2017], as the DNN was optimized online by observing
all the data (and is therefore not limited to the current replay buffer).
4.2 Approximation of the variance sj,i:. For each arm i, our algorithm receives as input the sets of
new and old features Ei
φ, Ei
φold; denote the elements in these sets by {φold
j , φj}ni
j=1. In addition, the
algorithm receives the correlation matrix Φold
i
. Notice that due the nature of our algorithm, Φold
i
holds
information on contexts that are not available in the replay buffer. The goal is to ﬁnd a correlation
matrix,Φ0
i , for the new features that will hold the same information on past context as Φold
i
. I.e., we
want to ﬁnd Φ0
i such that ∀i ∈[1..N], j ∈[1..ni] s2
j,i
.= (φold
j )T (Φold
i
)−1φold
j
= φT
j (Φ0
i )−1φj.
Using the cyclic property of the trace, this is equivalent to ﬁnding Φ0
i , s.t. ∀j ∈[1, .., ni], s2
j,i =
Trace
 (Φ0
i )−1φjφT
j

. Next, we deﬁne Xi to be a vector of size ni in the vector space of d × d
symetric matrices, with its j-th element Xj,i to be the matrix φjφT
j . Notice that (Φ0
i )−1 is constrained
to be semi positive deﬁnite (being a correlation matrix), thus, the solution can be found by solving an
SDP (Eq. (6)). Note that Trace(XT
j,i(Φ0
i )−1) is an inner product over the vector space of symmetric
matrices, known as the Frobenius inner product. Thus, the optimization problem is equivalent to a
linear regression problem in the vector space of PSD matrices. In practice, we use cvxpy [Diamond
and Boyd, 2016] to solve for all actions i ∈[1..N] :
minimize
(Φ0
i )−1
Xni
j=1 ||Trace(XT
j,i(Φ0
i )−1) −sj,i||2
subject to
(Φ0
i )−1 ⪰0.
(6)
Discussion. The correctness of our algorithm follows from the proof of [Agrawal and Goyal, 2013].
To see this, recall that we match the moments of the reward estimate θi(t) after every time that
the representation changes. Assuming that we solve Eq. (5) and Eq. (6) precisely, then the reward
estimation given the new features have precisely the same moments and distribution as with the old
features. Since the distribution of the estimate did not change, its concentration and anti-concentration
bounds do not change, and the proof in [Agrawal and Goyal, 2013] can be followed.
The problem is, that in general, we cannot guarantee to solve Eq. (5) and Eq. (6) exactly. We will soon
show that under the realizability assumption, in addition to an invertibility assumption, it is possible to
choose an analytical solution for the priors µ0, Φ0 that guarantees an exact solution. However, these
conditions may be too strong and not realistic. We describe this scenario to highlight the existence of
a scenario (and conditions) in which our algorithm is optimal; we hope to relax them in future work.
For simplicity, we consider a single arm. Assume that m past observations, which we denote
by Em
φold, were used to learn estimators (ˆµm)old, Φold
m using BLR (Eq. (2)). Due to the limited
memory, some of these measurements are not available in the replay buffer, and all of the information
regarding them is summarized in (ˆµm)old, Φold
m . In addition, we are given a replay buffer of size
n, that is used to produce (before and after the training) new and old feature matrices En
φold, En
φ.
We also denote by Rn the reward vector (using data from the replay buffer) and by Rm the reward
vector that corresponds to features Em
φold which is not available in the replay buffer. Recall that the
realizeability assumption implies that the features φ and φold are linear mappings of the raw context
b, i.e., φ = Aφb, φold = Aφoldb. Under the assumption that all the relevant matrices are invertible,
we use Eq. (5) to ﬁnd a prior for µ0, i.e., we set µT
0 = (ˆµold
m )T En
φold(En
φ)−1. In addition, for the
5

covariance matrix, we set (Φ0)−1 = (En
φ)−1En
φold(Φold
m )−1(En
φold)T ((En
φ)T )−1, which is a solution
to Eq. (6).
In addition, we get that if the relevant matrices are invertibele, then Φ0 = Φm, and that Φ0µ0 =
Em
φ Rm (see the supplementary for derivation). Plugging these estimates as priors in the Bayesian
linear regression equation we get the following solution for ˆµ :
ˆµ = (Φn + Φ0)−1(Φ0µ0 + En
φRn) = (Φn + Φm)−1(Em
φ Rm + En
φRn),
i.e., we got the linear regression solution for µ as if we were able to evaluate the new features φ on
the entire data, while having a ﬁnite memory buffer and changing features!
3.1
Computational complexity
Solving the SDP. Recall that the dimension of the last layer is g < d where d is the dimension of
the raw features, and the size of the buffer is n. Following this notation, when solving the SDP, we
optimize over matrices in Rg×g that are subject to n equality constraints.
We refer the reader to Vandenberghe and Boyd [1996] for an excellent survey on the complexity of
solving SDPs. Here, we will refer to interior-point methods. The number of iterations required to
solve an SDP to a given accuracy grows with problem size as O(g0.5). Each iteration involves solving
a least-squares problem of dimension g2. If, for example, this least-squares problem is solved with a
projected gradient descent method, then the time complexity for ﬁnding an ϵ−optimal solution is
g2/ϵ, and the computational complexity of each gradient step is ng2 (matrix-vector multiplications).
Vandenberghe & Boyd experimented with solving SDPs of different sizes and observed that it takes
almost the same amount of iterations to solve them. In addition, they found that SDP algorithms
converge much faster than the worst-case theoretical bounds. In our case, g, the size of the last layer,
was ﬁxed to be 50 in all the experiments. Thus, although the dimension of the raw features d varies in
size, the complexity stays the same. The dependence of the computational complexity on the buffer
size n is at most linear (CVXPY exploits sparsity structure of the matrix to enhance computations);
we didn’t encounter a signiﬁcant change in computation time when changing the buffer size in the
range of 200 −2000. It took us 10 −30 seconds on a standard ”MacBook Pro” to solve a single SDP.
Dependence on T. The full memory approach results in computational complexity of O(T 2) and
memory complexity of O(T) where T is the number of contexts seen by the algorithm. This is because
it is estimating the TS posterior using the complete data every time the representation changes. On the
other hand, the limited memory approach uses only the memory buffer to estimate the posterior but
additionally solves an SDP. This gives a memory complexity of O(1) and computational complexity
of O(T). Dependence on A. The computational complexity is linear in the number of actions (we
solve an SDP for each action). There is a large variety of problems where this is not an issue (as in
our experiments). However, if the problem of interest has many discrete actions, our approach may
not be useful.
4
Experiments
We begin this section by testing the resilience of our method to catastrophic forgetting. We present an
ablative analysis of our approach and show that the prior on the covariance is crucial. Then, we present
results for using MLPs on ten real-world data sets, including a high dimensional natural language data
on a task of sentiment analysis (all of these data sets are publicly available through the UCI Machine
Learning Repository). Additionally, in the supplementary material, we use synthetic data to test and
visualize the ability of our algorithm to learn nonlinear representations during exploration. In all the
experiments we used the same hyperparameters (as in [Riquelme et al., 2018]) for the model, and
the same network architecture (an MLP with a single hidden layer of size 50). The only exception is
with the text CNN (details below). The size of the memory buffer is set to be 100 per action.
4.1
Catastrophic forgetting
We use the Shuttle Statlog data set [Newman et al., 2008], a real world, nonlinear data set. Each
context is composed of 9 features of a space shuttle ﬂight, and the goal is to predict the state of the
radiator of the shuttle (the reward). There are k = 7 possible actions, and if the agent selects the right
action, then reward 1 is generated. Otherwise, the agent obtains no reward (r = 0).
We experimented with the following algorithms: (1) Linear TS [Agrawal and Goyal, 2013, Algo-
rithm 1] using the raw context as a feature, with an additional uncertainty in the variance [Riquelme
et al., 2018]. (2) Neural-Linear TS [Riquelme et al., 2018]. (3) Our neural-linear TS algorithm with
6

limited memory. (4) An ablative version of (3) that calculates the prior only for the mean, similar to
[Levine et al., 2017]. (5) An ablative version of (3) that does not use prior calculations. Algorithms
3-5 make an ablative analysis for the limited memory neural-linear approach. As we will see, adding
each one of the priors improves learning and exploration.
Fig. 2 shows the performance of each of the algorithms in this setup. We let each algorithm
run for 4000 steps (contexts) and average each algorithm over 10 runs. The x-axis corresponds
to the number of contexts seen so far, while the y-axis measures the instantaneous regret. All
the neural-linear methods retrained the DNN every L = 400 steps for P = 800 mini-batches.
Instantaneous regret
T
Alg1. Linear TS
Alg 2. Neural-Linear TS, full memory
Alg 3. Neural-Linear TS, finite memory (ours)
Alg 4. Neural-Linear TS, finite memory, only mean prior (ablative)
Alg 5. Neural-Linear TS, finite memory, no priors (ablative)
Figure 2: Catastrophic forgetting
First, we can see that the neural lin-
ear method (2nd row) outperforms the
linear one (1st row), suggesting that
this data set in nonlinear.
We can
also see that our approach to comput-
ing the priors allows the limited mem-
ory algorithm (3rd row) to perform
almost as good as the neural linear al-
gorithm without memory constraints
(2nd row).
In the last two rows we can see a
version of the limited memory neural
linear algorithm that does not calcu-
late the prior for the covariance matrix
(4th row), and a version that does not
compute priors at all (5th row). Both
of these algorithms suffer from ”catastrophic forgetting” due to limited memory. Intuitively, the
covariance matrix holds information regarding the number of contexts that were seen by the agent
and are used by the algorithm for exploration. When no such prior is available, the agent explores
sub-optimal arms from scratch every time the features are modiﬁed (every L = 400 steps, marked by
the x-ticks on the graph). Indeed, we observe ”peaks” in the regret curve for these algorithms (rows
4&5); this is signiﬁcantly reduced when we compute the prior on the covariance matrix (3rd row),
making the limited memory neural-linear bandit resilient to catastrophic forgetting.
4.2
Real world data
We evaluate our approach on several (10) real-world data sets; for each data set, we present the
cumulative reward achieved by the algorithms, detailed above, averaged over 50 runs. Each run was
performed for 5000 steps.
Linear vs. nonlinear data sets: The results are divided into two groups, linear and nonlinear data
sets. The separation was performed post hoc, based on the results achieved by the full memory
methods, i.e., the ﬁrst group consists of ﬁve data sets on which Linear TS (Algorithm 1) outperformed
Neural-Linear TS (Algorithm 2), and vice versa. We observed that most of the linear datasets
consisted of a small number of features that were mostly categorical (e.g., the mushroom data set has
22 categorical features that become 117 binary features). The DNN based methods performed better
when the features were dense and high dimensional.
Full memory
Limited memory, Neural-Linear
Name
d
A
Linear
Neural-Linear
Both Priors
µ Prior
No Prior
Linear Data Sets
Mushroom
117
2
11022 ± 774
10880 ± 853
10923 ± 839
9442 ± 1351
7613 ± 1670
Financial
21
8
4588 ± 587
4389 ± 584
4597 ± 597
4311 ± 598
4225 ± 594
Jester
32
8
14080 ± 2240
12819± 2135
9624 ± 2186
10996 ± 2013
11114 ± 2050
Adult
88
2
4066.1 ± 11.03
4010.0 ± 22.19
3943.0 ± 54.29
3839.5 ± 17.63
3608.2 ± 34.94
Covertype
54
7
3054 ± 557
2898 ± 545
2828 ± 593
2347 ± 615
2334 ± 603
Nonlinear Data Sets
Census
377
9
1791.5 ± 39.47
2135.5 ± 51.47
2023.16 ± 37.3
1873 ± 757
1943.83 ± 84.2
Statlog
9
7
4483 ± 353
4781 ± 274
4825 ± 305
4681 ± 285
4623 ± 276
Epileptic
178
5
1202.9 ± 34.68
1706.9 ± 41.26
1716.8 ± 60.44
1572.9 ± 48.66
1411.0 ± 33.43
Smartphones
561
6
3085.8 ± 24.64
3643.5 ± 64.89
2660.4 ± 84.72
3064.5 ± 55.06
2851.6 ± 58.77
Scania Trucks
170
2
4691.8 ± 7.23
4784.7 ± 6.05
4742.0 ± 33.0
4698.0 ± 13.06
4470.4 ± 37.9
Table 1: Cumulative reward of TS algorithms on 10 real world data sets. The context dim d and the
size of the action space A are reported for each data set. The mean result and standard deviation of
each algorithm is reported for 50 runs.
7

Linear data sets: Since there is no apriori reason to believe that real world data sets should be
linear, we were surprised that the linear method made a competitive baseline to DNNs. To investigate
this further, we experimented with the best reported MLP architecture for the covertype data set
(taken from Kaggle). Linear methods were reported (link) to achieve around 60% test accuracy.
This number is consistent with our reported cumulative reward (3000 out 5000). Similarly, DNNs
achieved around 60% accuracy, which indicates that the Covertype data set is indeed relatively linear.
However, when we measure the cumulative reward, the deep methods take initial time to learn, which
can explain the slightly worst score. One particular architecture (MLP with layers 54-500-800-7) was
reported to achieve 68%; however, we didn’t ﬁnd this architecture to yield better cumulative reward.
Similarly, for the Adult data set, linear and deep classiﬁers were reported to achieve similar results
(link) (around 84%), which is again equivalent to our cumulative reward of 4000 out of 5000. A
speciﬁc DNN was reported to achieve 90% test accuracy but did not yield improvement in cumulative
reward. These observations can be explained by the different loss function that we optimize or by the
partial observably of the bandit problem (bandit feedback). Alternatively, competitions tend to suffer
from overﬁtting in model selection (see the ”reusable holdout” paper for more details [Dwork et al.,
2015]). Regret, on the other hand, is less prune to model overﬁtting, because the model is evaluated
at each iteration, and because we shufﬂe the data at each run.
Limited memory: Looking at Table 1 we can see that on eight out of ten data sets, using the
prior computations (Algorithm 3), improved the performance of the limited memory Neural-Linear
algorithms. On four out of ten data sets (Mushroom, Financial, Statlog, Epileptic), Algorithm 3 even
outperformed the unlimited Neural-Linear algorithm (Algorithm 2).
Limited memory neural linear vs. linear: as linear TS is an online algorithm it can store all the
information on past experience using limited memory. Nevertheless, in four (out of ﬁve) of the
nonlinear data sets the limited memory TS (Algorithm 3) outperformed Linear TS (Algorithm 1).
Our ﬁndings suggest that when the data is indeed not linear, than neural-linear bandits beat the linear
method, even if they must perform with limited memory. In this case, computing priors improve the
performance and make the algorithm resilient to catastrophic forgetting.
4.3
Sentiment analysis from text using CNNs
We use the ”Amazon Reviews: Unlocked Mobile Phones” data set, which contains reviews of un-
locked mobile phones sold on ”Amazon.com”. The goal is to ﬁnd out the rating (1 to 5 stars) of
each review using only the text itself. We use our model with a Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) that is suited to NLP tasks [Kim, 2014, Zahavy et al., 2018b]. Speciﬁcally, the architec-
ture is a shallow word-level CNN that was demonstrated to provide state-of-the-art results on a
variety of classiﬁcation tasks by using word embeddings, while not being sensitive to hyperpa-
rameters [Zhang and Wallace, 2015]. We use the architecture with its default hyper-parameters
(Github) and standard pre-processing (e.g., we use random embeddings of size 128, and we trim
and pad each sentence to a length of 60). The only modiﬁcation we made was to add a linear
layer of size 50 to make the size of the last hidden layer consistent with our previous experiments.
ϵ−greedy
Neural-Linear
Neural-Linear
Limited Memory
2963.9 ± 68.5
3155.6 ± 34.9
3143.9 ± 33.5
Figure 3: Cumulative reward on Amazon review’s
Since the input is in R7k (60 × 128),
we did not include a linear baseline in
these experiments as it is impractical
to do linear algebra (e.g., calculate an
inverse) in this dimension. Instead,
we focused on comparing our ﬁnal
method with the full memory neural
linear TS and both prior computations with an ϵ−greedy baseline. We experimented with 10 values
of ϵ, ϵ ∈[0.1, 0.2, ..., 1] and report the results for the value that performed the best (0.1). Looking at
Fig. 3 we can see that the limited memory version performs almost as good as the full memory, and
better than the ϵ−greedy baseline.
5
Discussion
We presented a neural-linear contextual bandit algorithm that is resilient to catastrophic forgetting
and demonstrated its performance on several real-world data sets. Our algorithm showed comparable
results to a previous method that stores all the data in a replay buffer while enjoying better memory
and computational complexities (in order of T).
To design our algorithm, we assumed that all the representations that are produced by the DNN are
realizable. We emphasize that we did not claim that the DNN produces realizable features. Moreover,
the realizability assumption defeats the purpose of using neural networks – if we already found a
set of realizable features, there is no need for representation learning (other than for compression).
Nevertheless, we were able to show that on multiple real-world data sets, our algorithm presented
8

excellent performance while combining representation learning with exploration. Moreover, the
performance of our algorithm did not deteriorate due to the changes in the representation and the
limited memory. We hope to relax these assumptions in future work.
9
