REINFORCEMENT LEARNING FOR FLEXIBILITY DE-
SIGN PROBLEMS
Yehua Wei ∗
Duke University
Lei Zhang ∗
Fidelity Investments
Ruiyi Zhang
Duke University
Shijing Si
Duke University
Hao Zhang
Cornell University
Lawrence Carin
Duke University
ABSTRACT
Flexibility design problems are a class of problems that appear in strategic
decision-making across industries, where the objective is to design a (e.g., man-
ufacturing) network that affords ﬂexibility and adaptivity. The underlying com-
binatorial nature and stochastic objectives make ﬂexibility design problems chal-
lenging for standard optimization methods. In this paper, we develop a reinforce-
ment learning (RL) framework for ﬂexibility design problems. Speciﬁcally, we
carefully design mechanisms with noisy exploration and variance reduction to
ensure empirical success and show the unique advantage of RL in terms of fast-
adaptation. Empirical results show that the RL-based method consistently ﬁnds
better solutions compared to classical heuristics.
1
INTRODUCTION
Designing ﬂexibility networks (networks that afford the users ﬂexibility in their use) is an active and
important problem in Operations Research and Operations Management (Chou et al., 2008; Wang
et al., 2019). The concept of designing ﬂexibility networks originated in automotive manufacturing,
where ﬁrms considered the strategic decision of adding ﬂexibilities to enable manufacturing plants
to quickly shift production portfolios with little penalty in terms of time and cost (Jordan & Graves,
1995). Jordan & Graves (1995) observed that with a well designed ﬂexible manufacturing network,
ﬁrms can better handle uncertainties and signiﬁcantly reduce idling resources and unsatisﬁed de-
mands.
With the increasingly globalized social-media-driven economy, ﬁrms are facing an unprecedented
level of volatility and their ability to adapt to changing demands has become more critical than
ever. As a result, the problem of designing ﬂexibility networks has become a key strategic decision
across many different manufacturing and service industries, such as automotive, textile, electron-
ics, semiconductor, call centers, transportation, health care, and online retailing (Chou et al., 2008;
Simchi-Levi, 2010; Wang & Zhang, 2015; Asadpour et al., 2016; DeValve et al., 2018; Ledvina
et al., 2020). The universal theme in all of the application domains is that a ﬁrm has multiple re-
sources, is required to serve multiple types of uncertain demands, and needs to design a ﬂexibility
network that speciﬁes the set of resources that can serve each of its demand types. For example,
an auto-manufacturer owns multiple production plants (or production lines), produces a portfolio of
vehicle models, and faces stochastic demand for each of its vehicle models. The ﬁrm’s manufactur-
ing ﬂexibility, coined as process ﬂexibility in Jordan & Graves (1995), is the capability of quickly
switching the production at each of its plants between multiple types of vehicle models. As a result,
the ﬁrm needs to determine a ﬂexible network, where an arc (i, j) in the network represents that
plant i is capable of producing a vehicle model j (see Figure 1a for an example). In another exam-
ple, a logistics ﬁrm owns multiple distribution centers and serves multiple regions with stochastic
demand. To improve service quality and better utilize its distribution centers, the ﬁrm desires an
effective ﬂexible network with arcs connecting the distribution centers and regions, where each arc
represents an investment by the ﬁrm to enable delivery from a distribution center to a region.
∗Equal contribution. Code for RL implementation: https://github.com/zhlzhl/RL ﬂex design
1
arXiv:2101.00355v2  [cs.LG]  18 Jan 2021

(a) network for an auto-manufacturer
(b) generic network and its matrix representation
Figure 1: Examples of Flexibility Networks
In general, the ﬂexibility design problem (FDP) is difﬁcult to solve. It is a combinatorial optimiza-
tion problem with stochastic demand, that is already NP-hard even when the demand is determin-
istic. The stochastic nature of the FDP eliminates the possibility of ﬁnding the optimal solution
for medium-sized instances with m · n ≥50, where m and n denote the number of resources and
demand types, even when stochastic programming techniques such as Benders Decomposition are
applied (Feng et al., 2017). Therefore, researchers have mostly focused on ﬁnding general guidelines
and heuristics (Jordan & Graves, 1995; Chou et al., 2010; Simchi-Levi & Wei, 2012; Feng et al.,
2017). While the heuristics in literature are generally effective, in many applications, even a one
percent gain in a FDP solution is highly signiﬁcant (Jordan & Graves, 1995; Chou et al., 2010; Feng
et al., 2017) and this motivates us to investigate reinforcement learning (RL) as a new approach for
solving FDPs. In addition, FDPs fall into the class of two-stage mixed-integer stochastic programs,
which often arise in strategic-level business planning under uncertainty (see, e.g., Santoso et al.
(2005)). Therefore, RL’s success in FDPs can lead to future interest in applying RL to more strate-
gic planning problems in business. We believe that RL can be effectively applied in FDPs and more
strategic decision problems for two reasons. First, RL is designed to solve problems with stochastic
rewards, and the stochasticity of strategic planning problems may even help RL to explore more so-
lutions (Sutton et al., 2000). Secondly, the heuristics are mostly relied on, and therefore, constrained
by human intuitions, whereas RL algorithms with deep neural networks may uncover blind spots
and discover new designs, or better, new intuition altogether similar to the successful applications
of RL in Atari games and AlphaGo Zero (Silver et al., 2017).
In this paper, we develop an RL framework to solve a given FDP. We ﬁrst formulate an FDP as a
Markov Decision Process (MDP), and then optimize it via policy gradient. In this framework, we
design a speciﬁc MDP to take advantage of the structure possessed by FDPs. Further, a problem-
dependent method for estimating a stochastic objective, i.e., terminal rewards, is proposed. Em-
pirical results show that our proposed method consistently outperforms classical heuristics from
the literature. Furthermore, our framework incorporates fast-adaptation for similar problems under
different settings, and hence, avoids repeated computations as in classical heuristics.
2
FLEXIBILITY DESIGN PROBLEM
We present the formal formulation for the FDP. In an FDP, there are m resources (referred to as
supply nodes) and n demand types (referred to as demand nodes). The set of feasible solutions F
is all networks with no more than K arcs. Formally, each network F is represented by an m × n
matrix (see Figure 1b), implying that F = {F | F ∈{0, 1}mn, P
i∈[m],j∈[n] Fij ≤K}, where [m]
and [n] denote the set of integers from 1 to m and 1 to n, respectively.
The objective of FDP is to ﬁnd the ﬂexibility network F ∈F that maximizes the expected proﬁt
under stochastic demand. Denoting the random demand vector as d ∈Rn with distribution D, the
FDP can be deﬁned as
max
F∈F Ed∼D[P(d, F)] −
X
i,j
IijFij,
(1)
where Iij ≥0 is the cost of including arc (i, j) to the ﬂexibility network, while P(d, F) is the proﬁt
achieved by network F after the demand is revealed to be d. It is important to note here that the
decision on F is made prior to the observation of the demand, and thus, the decision is to create F
such that the expected proﬁt (over d ∼D) is optimized. We next deﬁne P(d, F).
Given parameter p ∈Rmn where pij represents the unit proﬁt of using one unit of resource i to
satisfy one demand type j and c ∈Rn where ci represents the capacity of resource i, the function
2

P(d, F) is deﬁned as the objective value of the following linear programming (LP) problem:
max
f∈Rmn
X
i,j
pijfij, s.t.
X
i∈[m]
fij ≤dj, ∀j ∈[n],
X
j∈[n]
fij ≤ci, ∀i ∈[m], 0 ≤fij ≤MijFij, ∀i, j,
where Mij is a large constant ensuring that the constraint fij ≤MijFij is nonbinding when Fij =
1. It is easy to check that it is sufﬁcient to set Mij = min{ci, dj} (see Feng et al. (2017) for
a discussion). Intuitively, the LP deﬁning P(d, F) solves the optimal resource allocation subject
to capacity for resource i being ci and demand for type j being dj, while only using arcs in F. In
general, the LP can be solved efﬁciently (in a fraction of a millisecond) by LP solvers such as Gurobi
(Gurobi Optimization, 2020), and we exploit this in our RL framework.
While P(d, F) is easy to compute, solving FDP deﬁned in equation 1 is difﬁcult. Even when d is
deterministic, FDP reduces to an NP-hard problem known as the ﬁxed charge transportation problem
(see, e.g., Agarwal & Aneja (2012)). For the FDP with stochastic d, FDP is signiﬁcantly more
difﬁcult than the typical NP-hard combinatorial optimization problems, such as travelling salesman
or vertex cover problems, because there is no known method for even computing the objective
function exactly except for some special cases (Chou et al., 2010). As a result, researchers mostly
resort to estimating the objective by repeatedly drawing samples of d. While the estimation is
accurate when the number of samples of d is large, it reformulates FDP as a mixed-integer linear
program (MILP) with a large number of variables and constraints, rendering most of the MILP
algorithms impractical in this context.
3
RELATED WORK
The research on designing ﬂexibility networks can be divided into three streams that often overlap
with each other: (i) extending its model and applications, (ii) conducting theoretical analysis, and
(iii) proposing methods to solve FDPs (see Chou et al. (2008); Wang et al. (2019) for more details).
The third stream of the literature is most related to our work. Due to the inherent complexity of the
FDP, researchers so far have focused on heuristics instead of exact algorithms. Even for the classical
ﬂexibility design problem (assuming pij = 1 and Iij = 0 for all i, j), the optimal solution of FDP
is not known except for very restrictive cases (D´esir et al., 2016). As a result, various heuristics
have been proposed for the classical FDP (Chou et al., 2010; 2011; Simchi-Levi & Wei, 2015).
However, while the classical FDP is important, it has been observed that arc costs (Iij) and different
unit proﬁts (pij) can be key determinants to the value of a ﬂexibility network (Van Mieghem, 1998;
Wang et al., 2019). For general FDPs, the most intuitive heuristic is perhaps the greedy heuristic,
which at each iteration, adds an arc with the highest performance improvement. The performance
guarantee on such heuristics without ﬁxed arc costs is derived in DeValve et al. (2021). Alternatively,
the heuristic proposed by Feng et al. (2017) solves a stochastic programming (SP) that relaxes the
integer constraint of FDP at each iteration, and uses the fractional solution to make a decision on
which arc to add. In addition, Chan et al. (2019) proposed a two-step procedure which ﬁrst trains a
neural net for predicting the expected proﬁt of ﬂexibility designs, then applies greedy-type heuristics
to optimize ﬂexibility designs based on the predictor.
Recently, there have been various activities in applying the recent advances in ML tools to solve
combinatorial optimization problems, such as the traveling salesman problem (TSP) (Bello et al.,
2016; Vinyals et al., 2015), vehicle routing problem (VRP) (Kool et al., 2018; Nazari et al., 2018),
min vertex cover problem, and max cut problem (Abe et al., 2019). Interested readers are referred
to Bengio et al. (2018) for a framework on how combinatorial problems can be solved using an
ML approach and for a survey of various combinatorial optimization problems that have been ad-
dressed using ML. To the best of our knowledge, FDPs do not possess the property that solutions
are naturally represented as a sequence of nodes, nor the property that the objective can be de-
composed into linear objectives of a feasible integer solution. Hence, it is not straightforward to
apply the existing RL works in combinatorial problems to FDPs. In addition, Neural Architecture
Search (NAS) (Baker et al., 2017a; Zoph & Le, 2017) shares some similarity to FDPs, where it
aims at automatically searching for a good neural architecture via reinforcement learning to yield
good performance on datasets such as CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100. Liu et al. (2018) imposed a spe-
ciﬁc structure as the prior knowledge to reduce the search space and Baker et al. (2017b) proposed
performance prediction for each individual architecture.
3

4
PROPOSED METHOD
We present a reinforcement learning framework for ﬂexibility designs. It is typically intractable
to perform supervised training since FDPs are NP-hard and the objective is stochastic. However,
reinforcement learning (RL) can provide a scalable and fast-adaptable solution based on the partial
observation from the performance of a speciﬁc FDP solution. We ﬁrst formulate a given FDP as a
ﬁnite-horizon RL problem, then introduce policy optimization, evaluation and fast adaptation.
4.1
FDPS AS REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
The FDP can be considered as an RL problem, with discrete actions, deterministic state transitions,
ﬁnite horizon and stochastic terminal rewards. For a given FDP deﬁned in equation 1, an agent
will sequentially select at most one arc at a step based on the current state for K discrete steps.
Accordingly, we can model the FDP as an MDP M = ⟨S, A, P, R⟩, where P : S × A × S 7→R is
the environment dynamic of the given FDP and R : S × A 7→R is the stochastic reward function
used to evaluate different arcs. We denote S as the state space, which in our setting is the set of
all ﬂexibility networks connecting supply and demand nodes, i.e., S = {F | F ∈{0, 1}mn}. We
denote A as the action space, and A = {(i, j) | i ∈[m], j ∈[n]}. Given state st = F, an action
a = (i, j) ∈A, the deterministic transition is given by st+1 = F∪(i, j), where F∪(i, j) represents
the network with all arcs of F and arc (i, j).
At each time step t, the agent observes the current ﬂexibility network st ∈S, chooses an action
at, then receives an immediate reward. The initial state, s0, is deﬁned as the matrix with all zeros,
i.e., the network with no arcs. The objective of RL is to maximize the expected return as deﬁned in
equation 2:
J(π) = Eτ∼pπ(τ)
" K
X
t=0
γtr(st, at)
#
, where r(st, at) =

I(st, at),
if t < K,
Ed∼D[P(d, st)],
if t = K, ,
(2)
where the trajectory τ = (s0, a0, . . . , aK−1, sK) is a sequence of states and actions, the trajectory
distribution pπ(τ) := QK
t=0 π(at|st)T(st+1|st, at), I(st, at) = −Iij if at is adding arc (i, j) to
st and (i, j) /∈st, and I(st, at) = 0 otherwise. The goal of an agent is to learn an optimal policy
that maximizes J(π).
Optimal Solution
Considering the designed rewards in equation 2, we have the Bellman equation
as follows:
Vπ(st) =

Eπ

I(st, at) + γVπ(st+1)

,
if t < K,
Ed∼D[P(d, st)],
if t = K.
(3)
Note that equation 3 has an optimal deterministic policy, and the optimal policy returns an optimal
solution for the FDP deﬁned in equation 1.
We next discuss sample-based estimation for Ed∼D[P(d, sK)], a quantity that is intractable to com-
pute exactly. As deﬁned in equation 3, all rewards are deterministic except the rewards obtained for
the last action. A straightforward way to estimate Ed∼D[P(d, sK)] is using Ωi.i.d. samples as
Ed∼D[P(d, sK)] ≈1
Ω
X
1≤ω≤Ω
P(dω, sK).
(4)
Intuitively, a higher value of Ωimplies less variance and gives better guidance for RL training, i.e.,
better sample efﬁciency. In Section 5.3, we show that the right choice of Ωis important to the perfor-
mance of the RL algorithm. When Ω= 1, the rewards are very noisy and the RL converges slowly
or even fails to converge. If Ωis too large, estimating Ed∼D[P(d, sK)] needs substantially more
time, considering P(dω, sK) is solved by the linear programming solver from Gurobi Optimizer
(Gurobi Optimization, 2020). It is interesting to see in numerical experiments that noisy rewards us-
ing a relatively small value of Ω(e.g., setting Ω= 50) can provide solutions that are similar or better
compared to solutions from setting Ω= 1000 in a similar number of training steps. The observation
that a small value of Ωis enough can be explained by the effectiveness of (noisy) exploration from
the literature (Fortunato et al., 2018; Plappert et al., 2018).
4

Variance Reduction for Reward Estimation
In addition to increasing Ω, we propose another
method for reducing the variance in the reward of the MDP. In this method, instead of using the
average proﬁt of sK with Ωsamples of demand as the estimation of the reward at the last step, we
replace it by the difference of the average proﬁts of F and the ﬂexibility network with all the possible
arcs. Formally, we deﬁne 1 as a m × n matrix with all ones. Then, we change the estimation to
1
Ω
X
1≤ω≤Ω
 P(dω, sK) −P(dω, 1)

.
(5)
This method reduces the variance of the reward for a ﬁxed value of Ωbecause the feasible sets of the
LP that deﬁnes P(d, sK) and P(d, 1) both increase with d, implying that P(dω, sK) and P(dω, 1)
are positively correlated for each ω. The ablation study in Section 5.3 shows the proposed variance
reduction method helps for sample efﬁciency in training.
4.2
LEARNING TO DESIGN VIA POLICY GRADIENT
We considered various RL algorithms for the MDP deﬁned in 4.1, including value-based meth-
ods (Mnih et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2015) and policy based method (Sutton et al., 2000; Schulman
et al., 2015; 2017). Based on empirical results, we combine the advantage of policy and value based
methods to learn a policy πθ. Because the immediate reward released by the environment is the
penalty of adding one arc except the terminal state sK, to encourage the agent to focus on achieving
better long-term rewards, we train a value network Vφ via minimizing the squared residual error:
JV (φ) = Eτ∼pπ(τ)

Vφ(st) −ˆVπ(st)
2
,
(6)
where ˆVπ(st) := PK
t′=t γt′−tr(st′, at′) is the discounted rewards-to-go. We further deﬁne the
advantage function Aπ(st, at) at step t as
Aπ(st, at) = Q(st, at) −Vφ(st) ,
(7)
where Q(st, at) := r(st, at) + Eτ∼pπ(τ)Vφ(st+1). The advantage function of a policy π describes
the gain in the expected return when choosing action at over randomly selecting an action according
to π(·|st). We would like to maximize the expected return in equation 2 via policy gradient:
∇θJ(πθ) = Eτ∼pπ(τ)
" K
X
t=0
Aπ(st, at)∇log πθ(st, at)
#
.
(8)
As the vanilla policy gradient is unstable, we use proximal policy optimization (PPO) with a clipped
advantage function. Details of our implementation are provided in appendix B.
Policy Evaluation and FDP solutions
Following the literature (Jordan & Graves, 1995), we de-
sign our evaluation to leverage the fact that P(d, F) can be computed quickly for a given d and
F. The performance of a network is estimated using the objective function of FDP through 5000
random demand samples. Please note that using a very large number of samples in training does not
provide better solution and results in a much longer training time. To reduce the training time, we
adopt an early stopping strategy when there is no performance increase for 48000 steps.
Meta-Learning with Fast Adaptation
The ability to obtain solutions efﬁciently for multiple FDP
instances is important in real-world applications. For example, a ﬁrm may need to solve a series of
FDP instances with different K, before making strategic decisions on how many arcs to have in its
ﬂexibility network. While we can apply the RL algorithm to train a different policy for each value
of K from scratch, this is usually inefﬁcient. Hence, we consider a model-agnostic meta-learning
(MAML) for fast adaption (Finn et al., 2017) to take advantage of the fact that FDP instances with
different K can be considered as similar tasks.
Solving FDP with different instances can be regarded as a set of tasks {Ti}. The tasks {Ti} share
the same deterministic transitions and similar solution spaces, and the difference between them is at
most how many arcs can be added. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst train a meta model πθ using the observations
from different tasks (K can be randomly selected). Then, we perform task-adaptation to adapt the
meta policy to a speciﬁc task, i.e., an FDP with a speciﬁc number of K arcs. Intuitively, through
pre-training across tasks of different K values, the meta-model learns arc-adding policies that are
5

generically effective for all the tasks, which eliminates the need for each individual task to train from
scratch. The ablation study in Section 5.3 shows that a meta-model can quickly adapt to a speciﬁc
FDP, signiﬁcantly reducing the training time. In contrast, fast adaptation is not available for many
classical heuristics, and the heuristics need to be performed for each task. When we have many
different FDPs to solve, our meta learner presents a signiﬁcant advantage in terms of efﬁciency and
performance as shown in Section 5.3.
5
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Algorithm 1 Meta-Learning for FDPs
1: Input: initialize parameters θ and φ
2: while not done do
3:
Sample batch of tasks Ti ∼p(T )
4:
for All Ti do
5:
Sample trajectories τTi = {(s0, a0, . . . , sKTi)}
with πθ.
6:
Update adapted parameters θTi and φTi with τTi.
7:
Sample
trajectories
τ
=
τ
∪
{(s0, a0, . . . , sKTi)} with πθTi.
8:
end for
9:
Update the meta-policy πθ and Vφ with τ.
10: end while
We report a series of experiments con-
ducted using the RL algorithm de-
scribed in Section 4, including com-
parison of the RL algorithm with other
heuristics under various scenarios and
ablation studies.
5.1
RL EXPERIMENT SETTINGS
The RL experiments are carried out on
a Linux computer with one GPU of
model NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080 Ti.
For all test cases, a three-layer Percep-
tron is used for both policy and value
networks, with hidden layer sizes 1024
and 128 which is selected from ranges
[256, 2048] and [64, 1024], respec-
tively. For each epoch, approximately
800 episodes of games are played to
collect trajectories for training. For the hyperparameters of the GAE, we select γ = 0.99 from
the range [0.97, 0.999] and λ = 0.999 from the range of [0.97, 1]. Default values are used for the
rest of hyperparameters of PPO, listed as below: clip ratio = 0.2, learning rate of π = 3e-4, learning
rate of the value function = 1e-3, train iterations for π = 80, train iterations for value function =80,
and target KL-divergence = 0.01. Finally, for each instance of the FDP, we perform training runs
with 12 different seeds, and use the trained policy network from each seed to extract 50 ﬂexibility
networks, producing a total of 600 ﬂexibility networks. Then, we choose the best network among
the 600 using a set of 5000 randomly generated demand samples.
We implement two heuristics from the literature to benchmark against the solutions from our RL
algorithm. In particular, we implement the greedy heuristic and the stochastic programming based
heuristic (referred to as the SP heuristic thereafter) proposed by Feng et al. (2017). The full details
for the heuristics are left in appendix A.
5.2
RL VS BENCHMARK HEURISTICS
We compare our RL algorithm against the two benchmark heuristics in four different scenarios.
For each scenario, we create seven FDP instances by setting K equal to {n, n + 3, . . . , n + 18}.
We pick these values of K because if K < n, then some of the demand nodes would not be
connected to any arcs, creating an impractical situation where some demand nodes are being ignored
completely. Also, based on the numerical study, the expected proﬁt for all three methods reaches a
plateau once K is above n + 18. In each FDP instance, the performance for all methods, deﬁned
as the expected proﬁt of the returned ﬂexibility networks, are evaluated using 10,000 new randomly
generated demand samples. As a benchmark, we compute an upper-bound on the optimal objective
by relaxing the integrality constraints and the constraint on K. Next, we describe our test scenarios.
Automotive Manufacturing Scenario
This scenario is motivated by an application for a large
auto-manufacturer described in Jordan & Graves (1995). In the scenario, there are 8 manufacturing
plants (represented by supply nodes), where each has a ﬁxed capacity, and 16 different vehicle
models (represented by demand nodes), where each has a stochastic demand. A unique feature in
6

16
19
22
25
28
31
34
K
1650
1700
1750
1800
1850
1900
Performance
Auto Manufacturing Scenario
10
13
16
19
22
25
28
K
450000
460000
470000
480000
490000
500000
Fashion Manufacturing Scenario
10
13
16
19
22
25
28
K
15000
16000
17000
18000
19000
Transportation Scenario A
10
13
16
19
22
25
28
K
28000
29000
30000
31000
32000
33000
Transportation Scenario B
Greedy Heuristic
SP Heuristic
RL (ours)
Upper-Bound
Figure 2: Comparison of RL with other heuristic methods over four test scenarios.
this scenario is that Iij = 0 and pij = 1 for each i ∈[m] and j ∈[n]. The goal in this scenario
is to ﬁnd the best production network (determining which the types of vehicle models that can be
produced at each plant) with K arcs that achieves the maximum expected proﬁt.
Fashion Manufacturing Scenario
This scenario is created based on an application for a fashion
manufacturer described in Chou et al. (2014) that extends the setting of Hammond & Raman (1996).
In this scenario, a sports fashion manufacturing ﬁrm has 10 manufacturing facilities (represented
by supply nodes) and produces 10 different styles of parkas (represented by supply nodes) with
stochastic demand. The goal of the ﬁrm in this scenario is to ﬁnd the best production network which
determines the styles of parkas that can be produced at each facility with K arcs that achieves the
maximum expected proﬁt. A unique feature in this scenario is that Iij = 0 but values of pij are
different for different pairs of i and j.
Transportation Scenarios
These two test scenarios are created based on an application for a trans-
portation ﬁrm, using publicly available testing instances on the ﬁxed charge transportation problem
(FCTP) maintained by Mittelmann (2019). In the transportation scenarios, a ﬁrm is required to ship
from origins with ﬁxed capacities to destinations with stochastic demand, and the goal is to identify
the best set of origin to destination routing network with at most K routes that achieves the maxi-
mum expected proﬁt. The two transportation scenarios we create are based on two FCTP instances
from Mittelmann (2019), which will be referred to as transportation scenario A and transportation
scenario B. In these two scenarios, values of both Iij and pij are positive and different for different
pairs of i and j.
Comparison Summary Across Test Scenarios
In Figure 2, we plot the performances of the
greedy heuristic, the SP heuristic, and the RL algorithm. Figure 2 demonstrates that the RL al-
gorithm consistently outperforms both the greedy and SP heuristics.1 In each of the four scenarios,
the RL algorithm is better than both benchmark heuristics in the average performance over differ-
ent values of K. In addition, for all 28 FDP instances across the four testing scenarios, the RL
algorithm is better than both benchmark heuristics in 25 of the instances, and only slightly under
performs the best benchmark heuristic in the other 3 instances. Therefore, our numerical compar-
isons demonstrate that the RL algorithm is more effective compared to the existing heuristics. The
exact performance values for the greedy heuristic, the SP heuristic, and the RL algorithm, can be
found in Tables 2 to 5 in appendix E. In addition, we plot the training curves by plotting the average
MDP return vs the number of training steps for all four testing scenarios (Figure 5 in appendix E). In
general, the average return increases (not necessarily at a decreasing rate) with the number of train-
ing steps, until it starts to plateau. Also, the number of training steps needed to converge increases
with K. This is because greater K implies a longer horizon in the MDP and larger solution space,
which requires a higher number of trajectories to ﬁnd a good policy.
It is important to point out that our current RL algorithm has longer computational times compared
to both the greedy and SP heuristics. For the test instances with m = n = 10, the greedy heuristic
takes approximately 6 × K seconds, the SP heuristic takes approximately 10 × K seconds, and the
RL algorithm takes about 300 × K seconds. Because FDPs arise in long-term strategic planning
problems, the computational time of RL is acceptable. For larger problems, however, the current
RL algorithm may be too slow. This motivates us to perform ablation studies investigating different
reward estimation and proposing meta-learning with fast adaption to reduce the training steps of RL.
1The performance is evaluated through the empirical average over 10,000 samples, and the standard errors
on the differences between the methods are less than 0.01% for all instances.
7

5.3
ABLATION STUDIES
We next present several ablation studies for the RL algorithm. All ablation studies are performed
under transportation scenario A, with K = 13 and K = 22. For each instance, we perform 12
training runs with different random seeds.
Using Different Reward Estimations
In the ﬁrst ablation study, we compare the RL algorithms
with or without the variance reduction (VR) method described in equation 5, for different values of
Ω. In Figure 3, we present the training curves for Ω∈{1, 20, 50} with or without the VR method, as
well as training curves without the VR method for Ω∈{1, 20, 50, 200, 1000}. We ﬁnd that Ω= 1
is not a good choice, as it takes many steps to converge and converges at a lower average return
compared to other choices of Ω. For other values of Ω, the average return after convergence are
similar, but they differ in the number of training steps required. In general, either increasing Ωor
adding the VR method reduces the number of training steps. Interestingly, holding everything else
equal, the reduction in training steps is smaller when Ωis large, and thus, there is little beneﬁt in
increasing Ωonce in the tested instances when Ωis above 50. In addition, holding everything else
equal, the reduction in train steps also increases with K. This is because a larger K implies more
steps in the MDP and larger solution space, and the training algorithm in such problems beneﬁts
more with smaller return variance.
Figure 3: Training curves with different values Ωwith and without VR.
Meta Learning with Fast Adaptation
In the next ablation study, we test the effectiveness of
meta-learning with fast adaptation. For this study, we learn a meta-model with different K with
ﬁrst-order MAML, either for 100 epochs (referred to as Meta100), or until convergence (referred to
as MetaConvg), and then use the trained parameters from the meta-models to perform adaption for
tasks with different values of K.
In Figure 4, we present the training curves for meta-learning and fast adaptation with both Meta100
initialization and MetaConvg initialization. We observe that meta-learning can signiﬁcantly reduce
the number of training steps during the fast adaption step, making it very efﬁcient when one needs
to solve FDP instances with different values of K. Interestingly, we also observe that Meta100 is
very much comparable to MetaConvg, implying that it is not necessary to pre-train the meta-model
to convergence, thus further reducing the total number of training steps.
Figure 4: Training curves for meta-training, and fast adaptions.
8

6
CONCLUSION
We have proposed a reinforcement learning framework for solving the ﬂexibility design problem, a
class of stochastic combinatorial optimization problems. We ﬁnd that RL is a promising approach
for solving FDP, and our RL algorithm consistently found better solutions compared to the bench-
mark heuristics. Finally, we believe that the ﬁndings of this paper suggest that an important future
direction is to apply RL algorithms to other two-stage stochastic combinatorial optimization prob-
lems, especially to those problems that arise from strategic planning under uncertainty.
