Font Identification in Historical Documents Using Active Learning 
Anshul Gupta1, Ricardo Gutierrez-Osuna1, Matthew Christy2, Richard Furuta1, Laura Mandell2 
1Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas A&M University 
 2Initiative for Digital Humanities, Media, and Culture, Texas A&M University  

 
 
 
Abstract 
 
Identifying the type of font (e.g., Roman, Blackletter) used 
in historical documents can help optical character 
recognition (OCR) systems produce more accurate text 
transcriptions. Towards this end, we present an active-
learning strategy that can significantly reduce the number of 
labeled samples needed to train a font classifier. Our 
approach extracts image-based features that exploit 
geometric differences between fonts at the word level, and 
combines them into a bag-of-word representation for each 
page in a document.  We evaluate six sampling strategies 
based on uncertainty, dissimilarity and diversity criteria, and 
test them on a database containing over 3,000 historical 
documents with Blackletter, Roman and Mixed fonts. Our 
results show that a combination of uncertainty and diversity 
achieves the highest predictive accuracy (89% of test cases 
correctly classified) while requiring only a small fraction of 
the data (17%) to be labeled. We discuss the implications of 
this result for mass digitization projects of historical 
documents.  
 Introduction 
Digitization provides easy access to most of the documents 
published in the modern era, from texts to images and vid-
eo. By comparison, printed historical documents—
everything from pamphlets to ballads to multi-volume po-
etry collections in the hand-press period (roughly 1475-
1800)—are difficult to access by all but the most devoted 
scholars. The need to create machine-searchable collec-
tions has accelerated work on Optical Character Recogni-
tion (OCR) of historical documents.  
OCR of historical documents is a challenging task, part-
ly due to the physical integrity of the documents and the 
quality of the scanned images, but also because of the font 
characteristics. Historical documents in the hand-press 
period have irregular fonts, and show large variations with-
in a single font class since the early printing processes had 
not been standardized. Blackletter (or Gothic) and Roman 
font classes are the two main font types used in early mod-
                                                 
 
ern printing, but these two font classes have evolved into 
multiple subclasses since the first printed book. Knowing 
the font type and characteristics for each document in a 
collection can substantially improve the performance of 
OCR systems (La Manna et al. 1999, Imani et al. 2011). In 
large collections, however, hand-tagging each individual 
document, page and text region according to its font be-
comes prohibitive. As an example, the Eighteenth Century 
Collections Online (ECCO) and Early English Books 
Online (EEBO) databases –two of the largest collections 
available—contain over 45 million pages.  
To address this problem, we present a font-identification 
system that can be used to automatically tag individual 
documents within a large collection according to their 
fonts1. Font identification is best formulated as a super-
vised classification problem, and as such it requires labeled 
data for model building. Classification models work best 
when they have sufficient labelled data that represent the 
diversity of exemplars in the corpus. In our case, however, 
obtaining large amounts of labeled data from a corpus of 
45 million page images, with varied font types, is a daunt-
ing task. For this reason, we propose an active-learning 
approach to optimize the hand labeling process. Active 
learning is a mixed-initiative paradigm where a machine 
learning (ML) algorithm and a human work together dur-
ing model building: the ML algorithm suggests a few high-
value unlabeled exemplars, these are passed to the human 
to obtain labels, the model is adapted based on these new-
ly-labeled exemplars, and the process is repeated until the 
model converges.  
The remaining parts of this document are organized as 
follows. First, we review the characteristics of historical 
fonts and how they may be exploited for automated classi-
fication. Next, we describe the proposed active-learning 
                                                 
1 This work is part of the Early Modern OCR Project (eMOP) at Texas 
A&M University (http://emop.tamu.edu), whose overarching goals are to 
produce accurate transcriptions for the ECCO/EEBO collections and 
create tools (dictionaries, workflows, and databases) that can be used for 
OCR'ing other collections of early modern texts at libraries and museums 
elsewhere. 

methodology, including the feature extraction process, the 
sampling strategies used to select informative unlabeled 
instances, and the classification model. Then, we present 
an experimental comparison on a database containing over 
3,000 documents with Roman and Blackletter fonts. Our 
results show that active learning can achieve a classifica-
tion accuracy of 89% on test data using a small fraction 
(17%) of the training corpus. The article concludes with a 
discussion of these results and directions for future work. 
Background and Related work 
Historical fonts and their characteristics 
Historical fonts can be broadly categorized in one of two 
categories: Blackletter or Roman. The name Blackletter 
refers to a highly ornamental script style of calligraphy that 
was widely used in Europe between the 12th and 17th centu-
ries. To make printed books look similar to hand-lettered, 
Johann Gutenberg created font sets based on Blackletter 
(or Gothic) style for the first printing press between 1439 
and 1455. Blackletter fonts have tall, narrow letters, with 
sharp, straight, angular lines. Characters typically do not 
connect with each other, especially in round letters (see 
Figure 1a-b). Finally, line strokes also drastically differ in 
thickness, and the between-letter spacing is very small, 
which makes text printed with this font quite difficult to 
read. 
Compared to Blackletter, Roman typefaces are signifi-
cantly less ornamental. The first Roman typefaces were 
designed around 1460 by Nicholas Jenson with the inten-
tion of making an easier-to-read font. Roman fonts take 
space proportional to their shape, put less emphasis on 
angled strokes, and possess serifs. They have curved 
strokes, which are also the thinnest parts of a character. In 
summary, angled strokes, between-letter spacing, and 
stroke width distribution provide information to discrimi-
nate between these two broad types of fonts. 
 
 
Figure 1: (a-b) Characteristics of Blackletter and Roman 
font; (c-d) Corresponding text snippets. 
Related work 
OCR systems are divided into three groups according to 
the number of fonts present in the document collection: 
mono-font, multi-font, and omni-font systems. As the 
name suggests, mono-font OCR systems deal with a single 
font; as a result, they tend to have high recognition accura-
cy. In contrast, omni-font OCR systems can recognize text 
printed in any font, but they generally show very poor 
recognition accuracy. Finally, multi-font OCR systems 
work on a set of fonts and can produce good results pro-
vided the font classes have good separability. 
OCR systems work well with modern documents, but 
not for historical documents. The fonts and layout of the 
historical documents vary substantially from one document 
to other, which makes training a single high-performance 
OCR engine difficult. Ait-Mohand et al. (2010) proposed 
an HMM-based multi-font OCR system that modifies its 
HMM model for each document to better recognize a spe-
cific font class. When tested on a dataset with 17 modern 
font classes, the authors reported a 98% recognition rate, 
which is very close to the recognition rates of single-font 
OCR systems (99%). An alternative to adapting a multi-
font OCR model is to train multiple mono-font OCR sys-
tems and direct documents to the respective OCR engine. 
This requires, however, that the font class of each docu-
ment be identified in advance.  
In an extensive literature survey, Ghosh et al. (2010) or-
ganize font recognition methodologies into two categories 
based on the extracted features: structure-based, and ap-
pearance-based. Structure-based methods extract the con-
nected components of characters, and analyze their shape 
and structure to recognize particular fonts. In contrast, ap-
pearance-based methods use features that can capture the 
visual appearance of the individual characters and the way 
they are grouped into words, lines and paragraphs. These 
two categories are further divided according to whether 
they operate at the document, page, paragraph, or word 
level. Rani et al. (2013) presented a character-level font 
identifier. Using Gabor and gradient features and an SVM-
classifier, they reported 99% average accuracy on a dataset 
with 19,000 images of characters and numerals from 17 
fonts for the English language, and 14 fonts for the Gur-
mukhi language.  
Whether they are used to classify documents, words, or 
characters, font identification systems incur a large cost to 
generate sufficient labeled data to train the classifier. Re-
cent studies, however, have shown that active learning can 
be very effective in reducing the large overhead of labeling 
data (Schohn et al. 2000, Fu et al. 2013).  Unsurprisingly, 
active learning has begun to garner attention in the docu-
ment analysis community. For example, Bouguelia et al. 
(2013) proposed a semi-supervised active learning algo-
rithm for stream-based classification of  documents into 
multiple classes, such as bank checks, medical receipts, 
invoices, or prescriptions. Compared to a model built with 
a fully labeled training dataset, active learning provided a 
2-3% precision boost while using on average only 36% of 
the labeled data. 
Horizontal 
serifs
Similar vertical
stroke width
(b)
(a)
Thick 
stroke
Thin stroke
Angled strokes
(d)
(c)

Methods 
Figure 2 illustrates the overall font-identification system. 
The process starts by selecting a set of seed training images 
from the ECCO/EEBO collection, which are then passed 
through an OCR system –in our case, the open-source Tes-
seract engine (Smith 2007). OCR outputs generally contain 
a number of noisy bounding boxes (BB) around non-
textual elements, such as pictures, decorative elements, or 
bleed through. These noisy BBs can be problematic for 
font-identification since they behave as outliers when 
computing features. For this reason, as a first step we apply 
a de-noising algorithm (Gupta et al. 2015) to eliminate 
noisy BBs and return only those likely to contain text.  
Once text BBs have been identified, they undergo an 
image preprocessing step that normalizes them by size (to 
a height of 400 pixels), filters out  salt-and-pepper noise 
(Gonzalez et al. 2007) and removes skew (Kavallieratou et 
al. 2002). Preprocessed word images are then passed to a 
feature extraction module, to be described in the next sec-
tion–see Table 1. The resulting feature vectors (from all the 
word images in a page) are then vector quantized and com-
bined into a bag-of-words feature (BoF) representation for 
the page. These BoFs become the input to the font classifi-
er. 
Starting with a small set of seed training images, we it-
eratively train the font classifier and then use it to select 
the most informative (yet unlabeled) documents for the 
human analyst to label next. This training-labeling process 
(active learning) is repeated until a performance criterion 
(e.g., a target precision/recall rate) is met. 
 
Figure 2: Steps for active learning based font 
identification.  
Word-level feature extraction  
As summarized in Table 1, we extract three kinds of 
features to capture font information at the word-image 
level: the stroke width of each letter, the density of slanted 
lines, and the visual appearance of the word. 
1. Average and IQR stroke width 
We characterize the stroke width by its trimmed mean and 
IQR (interquartile range) on each word image. Namely, we 
scan 10% of the rows (41 rows; middle row ± 20 rows) of 
each preprocessed word image, and locate transitions from 
background to foreground, and transitions from foreground 
to background –see green and red points in Figure 3a, 
respectively. Difference in their x-coordinates serves as an 
estimate of the stroke width. Since each row may have 
multiple such stroke widths, we store the count 𝐶𝑖 for each 
row, and then compute the maximum 𝐶𝑚𝑎𝑥. Next, we 
select rows where 𝐶𝑖= 𝐶𝑚𝑎𝑥, and calculate the trimmed 
mean and IQR over their respective stroke widths. Using 
these robust statistics and limiting the computation to rows 
with 𝐶𝑖= 𝐶𝑚𝑎𝑥 provides further immunity to outliers.  
2. Slant line density 
We estimate the number of slanted lines by applying the 
Canny edge detector (Gonzalez et al. 2007) to each word 
image, followed by the Hough transform (Illingworth et al. 
1988). We then compute the number of lines with slope in 
the range 45° ±  5° and −45° ±  5°, and divide it by the 
number of recognized characters in the word, which is 
available from the output of the OCR engine. This results 
in an estimate of the slant line density for a word image—
see Figure 3b. 
 
Figure 3: (a) Calculating mean and IQR character 
width; (b) Results from the Hough transform; green line 
segments indicate the detected angled straight lines. 
3. Zernike moments 
Finally, we capture the visual appearance of each word 
using Zernike Moments (ZMs) (Khotanzad et al. 1990). 
ZMs are the projection of the image onto an orthogonal 
basis known as the Zernike polynomials (ZPs): 
 
𝑍𝑚,𝑛= 𝑛+ 1
𝜋
 ∑∑𝐼(𝑥, 𝑦)𝑉𝑛𝑚
∗
𝑦
𝑥
 
(1) 
where 𝐼(𝑥, 𝑦) is the binary image, 𝑉𝑛𝑚
∗ are the ZPs, and 𝑚 
and 𝑛 are the order of the ZMs. Following Tahmasbi et al. 
(2011), we compute the magnitude of first 6 ZMs along 
with their transformations (a total of 15 features). 
 
Table 1: Features extracted from each word image 
Features 
Justification 
Average (trimmed) 
stroke width 
Roman fonts have smaller vertical 
stroke width than blackletter fonts 
IQR  
stroke width 
Captures drastic differences in 
stroke width, typical of black letters 
Slant line density 
Blackletters fonts are characterized 
by angled lines and serifs 
Zernike  
moments 
Captures the overall shape (visual 
appearance) of each font 
Page-level feature extraction: Bag-of-words model 
Bag-of-word features (BoFs) (Sivic et al. 2003) are widely 
used to capture semantic information in images. BoFs are 
Feature 
extraction
Select 
samples
Tag 
samples
Update 
classifier
TIFF
hOCR
De-noising
Preprocess
Extract word 
image features
Extract bag-of-
word features
OCR
Mid
Mid + 20
Mid - 20
(b)
(a)

usually extracted using small patches in the image, which 
in our case correspond to the word images. To obtain a 
BoF for each page, we apply k-means (k=20) to the distri-
bution of local features (across all training documents), 
vector quantize each word image, and compute the number 
of words assigned to each cluster. To achieve word-count 
invariance, we normalize each BoFs by the total number of 
words on the page.  
Active learning for font identification 
Active learning comprises of two parts: a base classifier 
and a sampling engine. The base classifier is trained on a 
small amount of labeled data (𝐿), and the sampling engine 
uses it to select a batch of the most informative instances 
(𝑋) from an unlabeled set (𝑈) for labelling. A human anno-
tator labels all instances in 𝑋, and these are added to 𝐿 to 
retrain the classifier. The entire process of training and 
sampling is repeated until convergence. 
 
Figure 4: (a) Example decision boundaries produced by 
logistic regression and LLP (Kobayashi et al. 2012). 
Filled markers represent labeled instances; (b) 
Illustration of the different active sampling criteria. 
1. Base classifier 
We use a modified label-propagation model proposed by 
Kobayashi et al. (2012) known as Logistic Label Propaga-
tion (LLP). In label propagation (LP), all training instances 
(labeled+unlabeled) are treated as nodes in a fully connect-
ed graph, and labels are propagated to unlabeled data 
points according to their proximity to the labeled data:  
𝑆𝑖𝑗= exp (−
||𝑋𝑖−𝑋𝑗||
2
𝜎2
) 
(2) 
where 𝑋𝑖 and 𝑋𝑗 are the features vectors for document 𝑖 
and 𝑗, respectively, and 𝜎 is the bandwidth hyper-
parameter. A major drawback of LP is its computational 
complexity during recall; LP must reconstruct the whole 
similarity matrix for new instances, and then re-estimate 
their class-posteriors to predict their labels. In contrast, 
LLP trains a logistic classifier in a semi-supervised fashion 
by adding to the logistic cost function a cost derived from 
the LP model, which shifts the decision boundary to ac-
count for the distribution of unlabeled data –see Figure 4a. 
2. Active sampling 
The performance of active learning depends heavily on the 
choice of sampling strategy (known as a query function) 
that selects the most informative instances for labeling. For 
this reason, our query function considers three separate 
criteria: 
a) Uncertainty. Following Settles (2012), unlabeled in-
stances are selected according to the classifier’s uncer-
tainty about their labels –see Figure 4b. In particular, 
we compute uncertainty for an unlabeled data point 𝑈𝑘 
as the entropy of its class-posterior distribution 
p(y|𝑈𝑘, 𝐿): 
𝐻(𝑦|𝑈𝑘, 𝐿) = −∑𝑝(𝑦|𝑈𝑘, 𝐿) log 𝑝(𝑦|𝑈𝑘, 𝐿)
𝑦
 
(3) 
where 𝐿 is the labeled data and 𝑦 is the label variable 
that ranges over all possible labeling of 𝑈𝑘. 
b) Dissimilarity to the labeled data. To promote explo-
ration, we also consider instances that lie in unex-
plored regions of feature space; see Figure 4b.  For 
each unlabeled instance (𝑈𝑘), we find the 5 most-
similar labeled instances (𝐿𝑛) based on LLP’s similari-
ty matrix (𝑆𝑛𝑘). Samples with highest dissimilarity 𝐷𝑘 
are selected for querying: 
𝐷𝑘= 1
5 ∑1 −𝑆𝑛𝑘
5
𝑛=1
 
 (4) 
c) Diversity. At each iteration, our sampling engine se-
lects a batch of 20 unlabeled instances. To prevent in-
stances within a batch from being too similar to each 
other, we incorporate a diversity metric that constructs 
the batch 𝑋 as follows:  
(1) Initialize 𝑋 with the unlabeled instance that has 
the largest score: 𝐻(𝑦|𝑈𝑘) + 𝐷𝑘 
(2) For each remaining unlabeled instance (𝑈𝑘), cal-
culate its diversity factor (𝐷′𝑘) as: 
𝐷′𝑘= 𝑚𝑖𝑛
𝑛(1 −𝑆𝑛𝑘) 
( 5) 
where 𝑆𝑛𝑘 is the similarity between 𝑈𝑘 and the 
𝑛𝑡ℎ sample already in 𝑋–see eq. (2) 
(3) Select sample 𝑈𝑘 with the largest combined score 
(𝐻(𝑦|𝑈𝑘) + 𝐷𝑘+ 𝐷′𝑘), and add it to 𝑋. 
(4) Repeat steps (2) and (3) above until 20 unlabeled 
instances have been selected. 
Results 
To evaluate the effectiveness of our font classifier, we de-
vised two experiments to evaluate our feature set (Table 1) 
and determine the best active learning query function. In a 
first experiment, we examined whether the proposed fea-
Feature space
Labeled
Unlabeled
1
2
Class 
DIV
UNC
DIS
(a)
(b)
Supervised logistic regression
Logistic label propagation

tures can discriminate between Blackletter and Roman 
fonts at the word level. In a second experiment, we evalu-
ated the complete system using six possible active sam-
pling strategies derived from combinations of three query 
criteria described in the previous section. For these exper-
iments, we created a dataset consisting of 3,272 document 
images from the ECCO/EEBO databases: 1,005 printed in 
Blackletter, 1,768 in Roman, and 498 with text in both 
fonts (Mixed). Each of these documents was hand labeled 
by domain experts on the eMOP team. 
Evaluating word-image features 
To compare the discriminatory power of the different 
word-level feature sets, we randomly selected 500 Black-
letter documents and 500 Roman documents, and extracted 
the 18 features shown in Table 1. We then trained a logistic 
regression classifier to predict the class label for each 
word. The threshold for the classifier output was selected 
by maximizing the accuracy through 5-fold cross-
validation. Results are summarized in Figure 5a. The slant 
angle density and character width (SLD-CW) feature set 
achieves 58% classification rate, whereas the ZM feature 
set achieves 81%. When the two feature sets are combined 
(ALL), classification performance improves modestly to 
84%. These results indicate that all the extracted features 
are important for font identification, and that they provide 
high between-class separability –even at the word level. 
 
 
Figure 5: (a) Cross-validated accuracy for classifiers 
trained using 18 features (ALL), Zernike moments (ZM), 
and slant line density and character width (SLD-CW); (b) 
Principal components analysis of the dataset using page-
level features (BoFs); each point represents a document. 
Evaluating the active learning system 
To evaluate the overall system, we randomly selected 600 
documents (200 per class) as a test set, and used the re-
maining 2,672 documents as the training set. From these, 
we randomly selected 3 labeled documents (one per class) 
as a seed-set (𝑋) to train the LLP font classifier; the re-
maining 2,669 documents became the unlabeled set (𝑈). 
After each step of training, the active learner selected a 
batch with the 20 most informative documents in 𝑈 (based 
on the scoring function), and queried their labels from an 
oracle2 that played the role of the human labeler. These 
newly-labeled documents were added to the training set 𝐿, 
the font classifier was retrained, and its performance was 
tested on the 600 instances in the test set. We repeated this 
process until all unlabeled data was consumed, recording 
the size of the labeled data set and classifier accuracy. For 
comparison, we included a baseline system that iteratively 
selected a random set of 20 documents. For evaluation 
purposes, the LLP bandwidth parameter was set to 300. 
Each experiment was repeated 20 times with a new set of 
random seeds to get a stable performance estimate. 
To ascertain the relative merit and degree of comple-
mentarity of the three selection criteria, we report perfor-
mance for each of them in isolation3 and for each of their 
linear combinations: 
𝑆1(𝑘)
=
𝐻(𝑦|𝑈𝑘, 𝐿)
𝑆2(𝑘)
=
𝐷𝑘
𝑆3(𝑘)
=
𝐻(𝑦|𝑈𝑘, 𝐿) + 𝐷𝑘
𝑆4(𝑘)
=
𝐷𝑘+ 𝐷𝑘
′
𝑆5(𝑘)
=
𝐻(𝑦|𝑈𝑘, 𝐿) + 𝐷𝑘
′
𝑆6(𝑘)
=
𝐻(𝑦|𝑈𝑘, 𝐿) + 𝐷𝑘
′ + 𝐷𝑘
 
where 𝐻(𝑦|𝑈𝑘, 𝐿) is the uncertainty measure, 𝐷𝑘
′  is the 
diversity factor, and 𝐷𝑘 is the dissimilarity measure. 
Learning curves for these scoring functions and the 
baseline random selection are shown in Figure 6a. The best 
performer is 𝑆5 (uncertainty+diversity), which requires 523 
labeled samples (17%) to achieve a maximum average test 
accuracy of 89%. The uncertainty criterion alone (𝑆1) also 
performs well, achieving a maximum test accuracy of 88% 
using 503 labeled samples.  
In a final analysis, we calculated the area under the 
curve (AUC) of each learning curve as a scalar perfor-
mance measure for each active sampling approach. Results 
are summarized in Figure 6b. Based on the AUC values, 
the uncertainty criterion performs marginally better than 
the sampling based on uncertainty+diversity. The remain-
ing sampling techniques, all of which use dissimilarity, 
perform notably worse. This may be attributed to the char-
acteristics of our dataset. As shown in Figure 5b, the distri-
bution of BoFs reveals a good degree of separability be-
tween Roman and Blackletter fonts, with some overlap 
with the Mixed class. This arrangement of data makes ex-
ploration less useful because most of the information is 
captured by instances at the class boundaries. As a result, 
active sampling strategies that involve exploration need 
more labeled data to reach a desired accuracy compared 
with a more exploitative technique that samples at the class 
boundaries. 
 
                                                 
2 The oracle in this case was the training dataset itself, which had been 
fully labeled in advance. 
3We do not consider Diversity in isolation because its primary use is to 
aid other sampling techniques to pick diverse unlabeled instances. 
(b)
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
 
PCA-1
 
PCA-2
Black
Roman
Mixed
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
ALL
ZM
SLD-CW
Accuracy
(a)

Figure 6: (a) Learning curves and (b) normalized AUC 
for different sampling techniques. Black line in (b) 
denotes random sampling. 
Discussion 
We have developed a font-identification system for histori-
cal documents that uses active learning to reduce the 
amount of labeled data required to train a classifier. The 
system extracts image-based features that capture differ-
ences between Blackletter and Roman font families at the 
letter and word levels. When tested on a dataset containing 
500 Blackletter documents and 500 Roman documents, the 
system achieves an 84% classification rate at the word lev-
el.  These features are then combined into a single feature 
vector for each document page through a bag-of-word fea-
tures (BoFs) representation, and then used to train logistic 
label propagation (LLP) model. 
We evaluated six different active sampling strategies 
based on uncertainty, dissimilarity and diversity criteria, 
and compared them against random active sampling. When 
tested on a document collection with over 3,000 documents 
(Blackletter, Roman and Mixed), our results show that a 
combined uncertainty+diversity criterion can achieve an 
89% classification accuracy on test using only a small frac-
tion (17%) of all the training instances. Further analysis 
(results not shown) reveals that most misclassification er-
rors (79%) occur for Mixed-font documents, with addition-
al errors arising due to italicized Roman fonts with slant 
line density similar to Blackletter, as well as thin Blacklet-
ter fonts with mean and IQR character width comparable to 
that of Roman fonts.  
Our work has focused on font identification but can be 
easily adapted to identify other problems in historical doc-
ument collections, such as bleed through, graphic content, 
musical scripts, and decorative page elements. Further 
work will also explore the development of graphical user 
interfaces and interactive machine learning strategies (e.g. 
Cueflik (Fogarty et al. 2008)) to allow scholars to tag, ex-
plore and understand large document collections more effi-
ciently.
