A Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning Approach for Efﬁcient Client Selection in
Federated Learning
Sai Qian Zhang1, Jieyu Lin2, Qi Zhang3
1Harvard University, 2University of Toronto, 3Microsoft
Abstract
Federated learning (FL) is a training technique that enables
client devices to jointly learn a shared model by aggregat-
ing locally-computed models without exposing their raw data.
While most of the existing work focuses on improving the FL
model accuracy, in this paper, we focus on the improving the
training efﬁciency, which is often a hurdle for adopting FL in
real-world applications. Speciﬁcally, we design an efﬁcient
FL framework which jointly optimizes model accuracy, pro-
cessing latency and communication efﬁciency, all of which
are primary design considerations for real implementation of
FL. Inspired by the recent success of Multi-Agent Reinforce-
ment Learning (MARL) in solving complex control problems,
we present FedMarl, an MARL-based FL framework which
performs efﬁcient run-time client selection. Experiments show
that FedMarl can signiﬁcantly improve model accuracy with
much lower processing latency and communication cost.
Introduction
The rapid adoption of Internet of Things (IoT) in recent years
has resulted in tremendous growth of data (e.g., text, image,
audio) generated on client devices. With the success of deep
neural networks (DNNs), there is a growing demand for ef-
ﬁciently training DNN models using the massive volume of
data generated from client devices. The traditional centralized
approach of gathering and training with all data at a central lo-
cation not only raises scalability challenges, but also exposes
data privacy concerns. To address these limitations, Feder-
ated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017) has been recently
proposed to allow client devices to jointly learn a shared
model by aggregating their local DNN weight updates with-
out exposing their raw data. At the beginning of each training
round, a central server selects a subset of client devices to
receive the current global model. Next, each client device
performs DNN training using its local dataset and sends its
weight update to the central server. The central server then
applies the weight updates received from client devices to the
global model, which will be used as the initial model for the
next training round. Unlike the centralized training scheme,
FL naturally addresses the scalability and privacy issues, and
hence is more applicable for real implementation.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Despite its advantages, training DNNs using FL still faces
several challenges. First, the underlying statistical heterogene-
ity leads to non-independent, identically distributed (non-IID)
training data, which can severely degrade FL convergence be-
havior (Zhao et al. 2018). Second, from the implementation
perspective, the heterogeneous computing and networking
resources on client devices can lead to the stragglers that will
signiﬁcantly slow down the FL training process. This prob-
lem is further exacerbated by the uneven distribution of client
data size, as a client with more data generally incurs higher
training latency. Lastly, FL training process often causes high
communication cost due to the iterative model updates be-
tween client devices and the central server. From the practical
perspective, an efﬁcient FL framework that can mitigate all
the three problems above is of paramount importance. While
numerous solutions have been proposed for accelerating the
FL convergence speed (Karimireddy et al. 2019; Li et al.
2020; Wang et al. 2020a; Yang, Fang, and Liu 2021), mini-
mizing the processing latency (Wang, Wei, and Zhou 2020;
Nishio and Yonetani 2019; Dhakal et al. 2019; Wang et al.
2020b), or reducing the communication overhead (Koneˇcn`y
et al. 2016; Singh et al. 2019; Luping, Wei, and Bo 2019;
Sattler et al. 2019), these heuristic solutions do not tackle
these problems jointly. Worse still, optimizing one of the
objectives might deteriorate the others. For instance, Scaf-
fold (Karimireddy et al. 2019) enables a better convergence
behavior by computing additional model gradients, resulting
in a large training latency.
To address this limitation, in this paper, we present a novel
FL framework which jointly alleviates the three problems
above, namely model accuracy, processing latency and com-
munication overhead. Designing such an optimal client se-
lection policy is challenging. This is due to the intractable
convergence behavior of the FL training with the non-IID
client data, the dynamic system performance on client de-
vices and the complicated interaction between these objec-
tives. More importantly, the signiﬁcance of each optimiza-
tion goal also varies across different scenarios. For example,
communication cost may be the primary target in scenarios
where network connection is costly, whereas minimizing total
processing time may become the key objective for a delay-
sensitive FL application. Therefore, the proposed solution
must balance and offset different design goals. Developing
such a hand-tuned heuristic solution for each combination of
arXiv:2201.02932v1  [cs.LG]  9 Jan 2022

MARL 
agents
Rewards
Environment
A
Actions
Trained
MARL 
agents
Actions
Environment
B
Figure 1: The MARL agents trained under one FL setting
(left) can perform well under different FL settings (right).
these goals requires substantial time and effort.
In this work, we leverage the recent advances in Multi-
Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL), and propose Fed-
Marl, an efﬁcient FL framework that performs optimal client
selection at run time. Although it is also possible to solve
this problem with conventional reinforcement learning ap-
proach (i.e. single-agent RL), the high dimensionality on
the action space for the RL agent will seriously degrade
the convergence speed of RL training, leading to a subopti-
mal performance. FedMarl exploits the device performance
statistics and training behaviors to produce efﬁcient client se-
lection decisions based on the designated objective imposed
by the application designers. To closely simulate the real
FL system operations, we perform extensive experiments to
collect the real traces on DNN training latencies and trans-
mission latencies over multiple mobile devices. We further
build an MARL environment using the collected traces for
the training of the MARL agents. Compared with the other
algorithms, FedMarl achieves the best model accuracy while
greatly reducing the processing latency and communication
cost by 1.7× and 2.2×, respectively. Furthermore, the evalua-
tion results show that the superior performance of the MARL
agents can translate to different FL settings without retraining
(Figure 1), which signiﬁcantly broadens the applicability of
the FedMarl.
Background and Related Work
Federated Learning
The
ﬁrst
FL
framework,
Federated
Averaging
(Fe-
dAvg) (McMahan et al. 2017), uses a central server to com-
municate with clients for decentralized training. Speciﬁcally,
given a total of K client devices, during each training round t,
a ﬁxed number of N (N ≤K) devices are randomly picked
by the central server. Each selected client n (1 ≤n ≤N)
contains local training data of size Dn. During the FL opera-
tion, each client device receives a copy of the global DNN
model W t
glb from the central server, performs E epochs of lo-
cal training using local surrogate of the global objective func-
tion Fn(.), and transmit the weight updates ∆W t
n back to the
central server. The central server then computes the weighted
average
P
n∈N Dn∆W t
n
P
n∈N Dn
and applies the change to W t
glb, gen-
erating the global weight W t+1
glb for the next training round.
Although FedAvg achieves superior performance on homoge-
neous clients with IID data, its performance degrades when
data distribution among client devices is non-IID (Zhao et al.
2018; Wang et al. 2020a). While multiple FL frameworks
were proposed to mitigate the impact of statistical diversity
by either controlling the divergence between the local model
0
2
4
6
8
10
Computational latency (sec)
Data size = 20
Data size = 40
Data size = 60
(a) Training latency of VGG6 on CIFAR-10
Amazon Fire 7 Tablet
Huawei-TAG-TL100
Google Pixel XL
Samsung Galaxy Tab
Nexus 5
iPhone8 Plus
iPad7
iPhone XR
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Communication latency (msec)
San Francisco Columbus
Richmond
Toronto
(b) Communication latency for VGG6
Download
Upload
Figure 2: (a) Processing and (b) communication latencies for
training VGG6 and CIFAR-10.
and global model (Li et al. 2020; Karimireddy et al. 2019), or
by training a personalized model for each client (Smith et al.
2017; Deng, Kamani, and Mahdavi 2020; Zhang et al. 2020),
none of these studies has considered system performance
objectives in their design.
To achieve optimal model performance with minimized
processing latency, in Wang, Wei, and Zhou (2020), the au-
thors proposed a FL framework to dynamically control the
optimal partitioning of the client data. In Nishio and Yonetani
(2019), the authors propose to mitigate the impact of strag-
glers by assigning higher priorities to faster clients devices.
Besides latency reduction, multiple solutions have been pro-
posed for improving FL communication efﬁciency. Most of
these studies reduce the communication cost by applying
ﬁltering algorithms or quantization techniques to eliminate
the unimportant weight updates (Koneˇcn`y et al. 2016; Lup-
ing, Wei, and Bo 2019; Lai et al. 2020; Fraboni et al. 2021;
Sattler et al. 2019; Reisizadeh et al. 2020), or compressing
the weight updates via sketching (Rothchild et al. 2020).
While these studies have achieved signiﬁcant performance
improvement on their corresponding objectives, none of them
can jointly optimize all the three objectives.
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
In cooperative MARL, a set of N agents are trained to
produce the optimal actions that lead to the maximum
team reward. Speciﬁcally, at each timestamp t, each agent
n(1 ≤n ≤N) observes its state st
n and selects an action
at
n based on st
n. After all the agents complete their actions,
the team receives a joint reward rt and proceeds to the next
state st+1
n
. The goal is to maximize the total expected dis-
counted reward R = PT
t=1 γtrt by selecting the optimal
agent actions, where γ ∈[0, 1] is the discount factor. Re-
cently, Value Decomposition Network (VDN) (Sunehag et al.
2017) has become a promising solution for jointly training
agents in cooperative MARL. In VDN, each agent n uses
a DNN to infer its action. This DNN implements the Q-
function Qθ
n(s, a) = E[Rt|st
n = s, at
n = a], where θ is
a parameter of the DNN and Rt = PT
i=t γiri is the to-
tal discounted team reward received at t. During MARL
execution, every agent n selects the action a∗with the
maximum Q-value (i.e., a∗= arg maxa Qθ
n(st
n, a)). To
train the VDN, a replay buffer is used to save the transi-
tion tuples

st
n, at
n, st+1
n
, rt

for each agent n. A joint Q-
function Qtot(.) is represented as the elementwise summa-
tion of all the individual Q-functions (i.e., Qtot(st, at) =
P
n Qθ
n(st
n, at
n)), where st = {st
n} and at = {at
n} are the

0
5
10
15
Training round
20
40
60
80
100
Test accuracy (%)
(a) Test accuracies of LeNet on MNIST
Ours
Random dropping
FedAvg
0
10
20
30
Training round
30
40
50
Test accuracy (%)
(b)Test accuracies of VGG6 on CIFAR-10
Our approach
Random dropping
FedAvg
Figure 3: Test accuracies of the three algorithms on (a) LeNet
and (b) VGG6.
states and actions collected from all agents n ∈N at timestep
t. The agent DNNs can be trained recursively by minimiz-
ing the loss L = Est,at,rt,st+1[yt −Qtot(st, at)]2, where
yt = rt + γ P
n maxaQθ′
n (st+1
n
, a) and θ′ represents the pa-
rameters of the target network, which are copied periodically
from θ during the training phase.
Motivation and Problem Deﬁnition
FL Processing Time Breakdown
To better understand the composition of the FL processing
time, we trace the processing time for training VGG6 (Si-
monyan and Zisserman 2014) by using CIFAR-10 (cif 2010)
dataset. To simulate resource heterogeneity, we use 8 dif-
ferent client devices, including iPhone8, iPhone XR, iPad2,
Huawei-TAG-TL100, Google Pixel XL, Nexus 5, Samsung
Galaxy Tab A 8.0 and Amazon Fire 7 Tablet. For each device,
we measure the time for performing 5 epochs of training with
different data size ranging from 20 to 60 samples. We devel-
oped our own DNN training implementation on the mobile
devices using the previous literature (TFt 2019; Cor 2020).
For the Android devices, the DNN models are ﬁrst built
with Keras and then converted to TensorFlow Lite format (tﬂ
2019) before running on the client device. For iOS devices,
we ﬁrst build the DNN models using PyTorch and convert the
resulting model to CoreML (cor 2020a) format with coreml-
tools (cor 2020b). We then perform the measurement 500
times and record the average latency. The measurement are
shown in Figure 2 (a). To measure the communication la-
tency between the central server and client devices, we use
a single-core Amazon EC2 p3.2xlarge instance located at
Portland (OR) to simulate the cloud server, and four virtual
machines (VMs) located at Richmond (VA), San Francisco
(CA), Columbus (OH), and Toronto (ON) to simulate the
client devices. Figure 2 (b) shows the average latency for
uploading and downloading VGG6 models over 500 mea-
surements.
We make the following observations from Figure 2. First,
the majority of processing time is spent on DNN training
on the client devices. For example, the communication la-
tency for uploading VGG6 is only 1.4s for the client device
in Richmond, whereas training VGG6 for ﬁve epochs on
Nexus 5 takes 8.9s with 60 training samples, which is 6.4×
higher than the communication latency. Second, the training
time varies signiﬁcantly across client devices. For instance,
training VGG6 with 60 samples for ﬁve epochs on Google
Pixel XL takes only 4.8s, which is 2× faster than on Nexus
5. Finally, uploading DNN models from client devices is
much slower than downloading DNN models from the cen-
tral server. For example, downloading VGG6 to the client
device in Columbus only takes 361ms, whereas uploading
the same DNN takes 1.68s (4.7× larger). Measurements on
LeNet and ResNet-18 show a similar trend.
FL Convergence under Non-IID Client Data
In this section, we study the inﬂuence of Non-IID data on
the FL convergence and possible solutions to mitigate its
impact. The unstable FL convergence behavior is triggered
by the inconsistency among the local objective functions
Fn(.), which is caused by the non-IID-ness in the client train-
ing data. One promising approach to alleviate the disparity
among local objective functions is to eliminate biased model
updates, which are outliers that can hurt overall convergence
rate. Previous literature has shown that excluding these out-
liers can signiﬁcantly accelerate the training process (Luping,
Wei, and Bo 2019; Duan, Li, and Lu 2021; Abay et al. 2020).
For example, CMFL (Luping, Wei, and Bo 2019) utilizes
the total number of sign differences between the local and
global model parameters to measure the bias of the local
model. However, this requires all the clients to ﬁrst ﬁnish
their local training to produce the local DNN weights, re-
sulting in high processing latency. Moreover, counting the
total sign differences will introduce additional computation
overhead and further deteriorates the processing latency. To
mitigate this issue, we measure the degree of bias using initial
training loss, which is the training loss after the ﬁrst epoch of
local training process at each client. Using initial training loss
as the indicator offers several advantages. First, the initial
training loss naturally reﬂects the degree of inconsistency
between the local client data and the global model, which
can be further used to estimate the degree of bias on the lo-
cal updates. Second, the initial training loss is produced as
an intermediate result without any additional computational
overhead. After the ﬁrst epoch, each client device reports its
initial training loss to the central server. The server collects
the losses and performs early rejection by halting the remain-
ing training process on the devices with high losses. Sending
the initial training losses to central server will not impair the
processing latency and communication cost, as the training
loss (a single scalar) is tiny compared to the DNN model.
Conversely, this approach will lower the processing latency
and communication overhead, because only a subset of the
clients need to complete their local training processes and
send their weight updates. For simplicity, we call the ﬁrst
epoch of the local training process the probing training, and
the initial training loss the probing loss. We compare our bias
estimation approach with two baseline approaches. The ﬁrst
approach eliminates the outliers by randomly dropping 50%
of the clients. The second approach implements FedAvg by
keeping all the devices in the local training process. For our
approach, at each training round, we reject half of the clients
with their probing loss higher than the average probing loss.
Figure 3 depicts the average test accuracies on LeNet and
VGG6. Our method achieves a higher convergence speed.
Speciﬁcally, our method obtains test accuracies of 98.7%
and 45.2% on MNIST and CIFAR-10, which are 1.3% and
2.8% higher than the other methods on average. The above

...
Client 
devices
Central 
server
MARL
Model 
Storage
...
Client 
device 
pool
Statistics
collection
1
2
3
6
5
7
4
Figure 4: FedMarl workﬂow, steps are shown in circles.
results demonstrate that the probing loss can be used as an
indicator of client selection for better FL accuracy under
non-IID setting.
Problem Formulation
We present the FL optimization problem formulation in this
section. Let Hc
t,n denote the local training time for client n ∈
N at round t ∈T. Also denote by Hu
t,n the communication
latency for uploading the local model from client n to the
central server. During each training round t, a subset of clients
will be early rejected by the central server, while the rest
clients will continue to ﬁnish their local training process.
Deﬁne Bt
n as the communication cost for sending updates
from client n to the central server at round t. Let at
n ∈{0, 1}
denote whether the client n is chosen to complete full local
training. The total processing latency Ht of a training round
t and the total communication cost Bt for round t can be
expressed as:
Ht = max
1≤n≤N(Hu
t,n + Hc
t,n)at
n and Bt =
X
n
Bt
nat
n (1)
Finally, let Acc(T) denote the test accuracy of the global
model on a global test dataset after the last training round T.
Our FL system optimization problem can be deﬁned as:
max
A E
h
w1Acc(T) −w2
X
t∈T
Ht −w3
X
t∈T
Bt
i
(2)
where A = [at
n] is a T × N matrix for client selection,
w1,w2,w3 are the importance of the objectives controlled by
the FL application designers. Our objective is to maximize
the accuracy of the global model while minimizing the total
processing latency and communication cost. The expectation
is taken over the stochasticity of DNN training.
FedMarl System Design
The FL optimization problem is difﬁcult to solve directly.
We instead model the problem as a MARL problem. In this
section, we present our problem formulation and FedMarl
system design.
MARL Agents Training Process
In FedMarl, each client device n relies on an MARL agent
at the central server to make its participation decision. Each
MARL agent contains a simple two-layer Multi-layer percep-
tron (MLP) that is cheap to implement. During the training
phase of MARL, each MARL agent takes its current state and
Device type
iPhone8, iPhoneXR, iPad2,
Huawei-TAG-TL100, Google Pixel XL, Nexus5,
Samsung Galaxy Tab A, Amazon Fire 7 Tablet
Data size
20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 45, 50, 55, 60
Location
Richmond (Virginia), San Francisco (California),
Columbus (Ohio), and Toronto (Ontario)
Table 1: Possible options for client device settings.
infers its action at
n. Based on the client selection pattern, the
central server computes the team reward by considering the
test accuracy improvement on the global model, total process-
ing latency and the communication cost. The MARL agents
are then trained with VDN to maximize the team reward.
Design of MARL Agent States
The state of each MARL
agent n consists of six components: the probing loss, the
processing latency of probing training, historical values on
communication latency, the communication cost from a client
device to server, the size of the local training dataset and
the current training round index. Let Lt
n denote the probing
loss of agent n in round t. At each round t, each agent ﬁrst
performs the probing training and sends Lt
n to the central
server. Lt
n is then examined by the corresponding MARL
agent in the central server to infer its degree of bias on the
local model updates. In addition, to infer the current training
latency and communication latency at client device n, each
MARL agent is provided with the historical probing training
latencies Hp
t,n = [Hp
t−∆Tp,n, ..., Hp
t,n] and communication
latencies Hu
t,n = [Hu
t−∆Tc,n, ..., Hu
t−1,n], where Hp
t,n and
Hu
t,n denote the latencies for probing training and model
uploading of agent n at training round t. ∆Tp and ∆Tc are
the sizes of the historical information. Finally, each MARL
agent n also involves the communication cost Bt
n, the local
data size Dn and training round index t in its input state. This
is because the individual communication cost contributes
to the total communication cost, and the training data size
affects training latency and model accuracy. The state vector
st
n of agent n at round t is deﬁned as:
st
n = [Lt
n, Hp
t,n, Hu
t,n, Bt
n, Dn, t]
(3)
To accelerate the training of VDN, we normalize each ele-
ment in the state vector to make them under the same scale. In
addition, this will improve the generalizability of the MARL
agents under different system conditions, as shown in the
evaluation section. Finally, all the MLPs in the MARL agents
share their weights in order to reduce the storage overhead
and prevent lazy agent problem (Jiang and Lu 2018).
Description on Agent Actions
Given the input state
shown in equation 3, each MARL agent n decides whether
the client device n should be terminated earlier. In particular,
the MARL agent produces a binary action at
n ∈[0, 1], where
at
n = 0 indicates the client device will be terminated after
the probing training, and vice versa.
Design of the Reward Function
To optimize the FL per-
formance described in Equation 2, the reward function should
reﬂect the changes in the test accuracy, processing latency

MNIST
CIFAR-10
F-MNIST
Shakespeare
FedMarl
96.91%
48.87%
96.14%
44.58%
FedAvg
94.40%
43.49%
94.70%
40.66%
HeteroFL
96.86%
47.74%
96.08%
43.98%
FedProx
95.85%
47.32%
95.73%
43.66%
FedProx-THS
94.43%
45.51%
94.80%
42.69%
FedNova
96.07%
47.97%
95.93%
44.10%
FedNova-THS
95.30%
44.88%
94.42%
42.41%
Oort
96.09%
48.11%
96.02%
44.05%
CS
95.89%
48.19%
96.14%
43.97%
Table 2: Accuracy performance of LeNet, VGG6, ResNet-18,
LSTM on their datasets. FedMarl achieves the best accuracies
across all the datasets.
and communication cost after executing client selection de-
cisions generated by the MARL agents. The reward rt at
training round t is deﬁned as:
rt = w1
h
U(Acc(t))−U(Acc(t−1))
i
−w2Ht−w3Bt (4)
Ht is the processing latency of round t and is deﬁned as:
Ht = max
1≤n≤N(Hp
t,n) +
max
n:1≤n≤N,atn=1(Hrest
t,n + Hu
t,n) (5)
Here, max1≤n≤N Hp
t,n represent the total time needed for
generating all the probing losses. The MARL agents utilize
these probing losses to select the client devices that will con-
tinue the local training and upload their model updates, which
needs an additional time of maxn:1≤n≤N,atn=1(Hrest
t,n
+
Hu
t,n), where Hrest
t,n
is the time required for client device
n to ﬁnish the local training process. Moreover, U(.) is a
utility function that ensures U(Acc(t)) can still alter moder-
ately even if Acc(t) improvement is small near the end of the
FL process. Bt is the total communication cost as deﬁned
in equation 1. The MARL agents are trained using VDN
described in background section.
FedMarl System Workﬂow
Figure 4 provides an overview of the FedMarl workﬂow.
The central server contains three building blocks: Model
storage block for storing and updating the global DNN model,
MARL block for executing the trained MARL agents and
generating the client selection decision, and the Statistics
collection block for gathering the client device statistics such
as processing latency and communication latency. At each
training round, N client devices are picked from the client
device pool with the criteria described in (Bonawitz et al.
2019) (step 1). The selected devices then receive a copy of
global DNN model from the Model storage block (step 2).
Next, the client devices perform the probing training and send
their probing losses to the MARL block (step 3). Meanwhile,
the client devices also transmit their probing training latencies
to the Statistics collection block (step 4). After receiving all
the probing losses from the clients, the MARL agents take
these losses together with the historical information from
the Statistics collection block (step 5) and produce the client
selection decisions at
n (step 6). The selected client devices
then perform the rest local training and deliver their model
updates to the Model storage block (step 7), which will apply
0
1
2
3
Total latency
MNIST
CIFAR10
F-MNIST Shakespeare
FedMarl
FedAvg
HeteroFL
FedProx
FedProx-THS
FedNova
FedNova-THS
Oort
CS
0
1
2
3
4
Total Bandwidth Consumption
MNIST
CIFAR10
F-MNIST Shakespeare
FedMarl
FedAvg
HeteroFL
FedProx
FedProx-THS
FedNova
FedNova-THS
Oort
CS
Figure 5: Comparison on (a) normalized total latency and (b)
normalized communication cost.
the weight updates to the global DNN model. Meanwhile, the
Statistics collection block also updates the existing statistics
on communication latency.
Theoretical Analysis
In this section, we present a theoretical analysis to show
the stability of FedMarl. The analysis is based on the work
in Zhao et al. (2018). Assume each client n ∈N contains
Dn non-IID local training data with underlying probability
Pn(.). Denote x and yx as the training data and its ground
truth label. Also denote fm(x, W) as the output probability
for input x to take label m by using DNN model f . We
further build a dataset by gathering all the Non-IID training
data from every client, and assume the aggregated dataset to
be IID approximately. Let P(m) denote the probability of
occurrence of label m in this aggregated IID dataset. Let V t,e
n
denote the local model weight of client n at local epoch e of
training round t, and V j
iid the trained DNN weights at epoch
j by conventional SGD using the aggregated IID dataset.
Theorem 1 offers a bound on ||W t
glb −V Et
iid ||, where W t
glb is
the global DNN model at central server after training round
t, V Et
iid is the trained DNN weights at epoch Et by using the
aggregated dataset with conventional SGD.
Theorem
1.
Assume
∇W Ex|yx=m log(fm(x, W))
is
σm-Lipschitz for each m
∈
M, assume at
n satisﬁes
P(m) = PN
n=1
Dnat
nPn(m)
PN
n=1 Dnatn +ϵt for a constant ϵt and ϵt ≤ϵ
∀t. We also assume that ||∇W Ex|yx=m log(fm(x, W))|| ≤
cmax
∀x, m, W.
Then
||W t
glb
−
V Et
iid ||
≤
PN
n=1 qt
n
h
(un)E||W t−1
glb
−V E(t−1)
iid
|| + ηϵNMcmax +
ηcmax
PM
m=1 ||Pn(m) −P(m)||(PE−1
j=1 (un)j)
i
, where
un = 1 + η PM
m=1 Pn(m)σm, qt
n =
Dnat
n
PN
n=1 Dnatn and η is
the learning rate.
Given the convergence of SGD, V Et
iid is bounded ∀t ∈T.
From the result of Theorem 1, we can see that W t
glb (model
weights of FedMarl) is also bounded. Therefore FedMarl will
converge. Proof is given in the supplementary materials.
Evaluation
We evaluate FedMarl using several popular DNN mod-
els, including LeNet (LeCun et al. 1998) on MNIST (mni
1998), VGG6 (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014) on CIFAR-
10 (cif 2010) and ResNet-18 (He et al. 2016) on Fashion
MNIST (fas 2015) for image classiﬁcation, LSTM (Hochre-
iter and Schmidhuber 1997) on Shakespeare dataset (sha

Source/Target
LeNet
VGG6
ResNet-18
LeNet
1.0 (1.0)
0.720 (0.798)
0.896 (0.930)
VGG6
0.906 (0.974)
0.803 (0.803)
0.859 (0.927)
ResNet-18
0.965 (0.989)
0.731 (0.792)
0.933 (0.933)
Table 3: Performance of the trained MARL agents across
different DNNs. All the results are normalized by the perfor-
mance of agents trained with LeNet and evaluated on itself.
Numbers in brackets show the performance after ﬁnetuning.
2017) for text prediction. To simulate device heterogeneity,
each client device is randomly assigned a device type, a lo-
cation and a training set size, as summarized in Table 1. We
collect training latency data over the above DNNs for each
device type under each data size, and measure the time for
sending each DNN model from the client devices at each
location to the central server, as described in the motivation
section. To simulate the non-IID training data at each client
device, we sort the training data by its label. For each client
device, 80% of its training data are from one random label,
the rest of the training data are sampled uniformly from the
remaining labels. The number of training data per device is
generated by the power law (Li et al. 2020). All client devices
adopt a uniform communication cost Bt
n = 1 ∀t, n. During
each training round, N = 10 client devices are randomly se-
lected from a pool of K = 100 devices. The training latency
and communication latency for each device are sampled from
the collected traces based on its device type, data size and lo-
cation. Each client device ﬁrst performs the probing training
and reports its probing loss to the central server. Based on
the feedback from the MARL agents, a subset of them will
continue their local training process for E = 5 epochs. The
number of training round T is set to T = 20 for VGG6, and
T = 15 for LeNet, ResNet-18 and LSTM, respectively. Each
MARL agent consists of a MLP of two layers with a hidden
layer of 256 neurons. For the reward function (equation 4),
we make w1 = 1.0, w2 = 0.2 and w3 = 0.1. The utility func-
tion is deﬁned to be U(x) = 10−
20
1+e0.35(1−x) for shaping the
test accuracy. The sizes of the historical information ∆Tp and
∆Tc are set to 3 and 5, respectively. We train the VDN with
300, 200, 300, 200 episodes for LeNet, VGG6, ResNet-18
and LSTM until convergence. To demonstrate the advantage
of the MARL over the single-agent RL, we also implement
the FedMarl with single-agent RL and compare their conver-
gence behaviors. We observe that MARL approach converges
at a much fast speed than single-RL approach under the same
training environment.
FedMarl Performance
We compare the performance of FedMarl with multiple ad-
vanced benchmark algorithms, including: FedNova (Wang
et al. 2020b), HeteroFL (Diao, Ding, and Tarokh 2020),
Oort (Lai et al. 2020), FedProx (Li et al. 2020), Clustered
Sampling (CS) (Fraboni et al. 2021) and FedAvg (McMa-
han et al. 2017). The clients perform local training for
E = 6 epochs in each training round. For FedProx, we
adopt the optimal proximal term µ for each DNN, which
gives µ = 1, 1, 0.1, 0.001 for LeNet, VGG6, ResNet-18 and
0
5
10
15
Training rounds
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
Normalized probing loss
Selected
Not Selected
0
5
10
15
Training rounds
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
Normalized processing latency
Selected
Not Selected
Figure 6: Decisions made by FedMarl. Each dot represent a
client device. The blue dot means the client is selected for
local training, the red dot means the client is early rejected.
LSTM, respectively. For FedNova, the fast client will per-
form more local training steps until the slowest client ﬁnishes
its training. The weight updates are then normalized based
on the total number of local training steps. For HeteroFL, we
adopt ﬁve computing complexity levels with a hidden chan-
nel shrinkage ratio of 0.5. For Oort, we set the exploitation
factor step window and straggler penalty to 0.1,5,2 for all the
tasks. For CS, we group the clients devices in the pool into
10 clusters, and one representative device is selected from
a single cluster per training round. In order to reduce the
total processing latency, we further consider a simple client
selection. Instead of performing the local training process on
all the N client devices, the new selection algorithm, called
Top-half Speed (THS), selects the bottom 50% of the client
devices with the lowest probing training latency during each
training round. By removing the straggler client devices, THS
can greatly lower the total processing latency and communi-
cation cost. We further apply THS on FedProx and FedNova,
producing two additional benchmark algorithms: FedProx-
THS and FedNova-THS. We perform the evaluation for 100
times and record the average performance for each algorithm.
All the local training are performed with SGD.
Table 2 and Figure 5 show the ﬁnal test accuracy, total
processing latencies and communication costs for all the
algorithms. In Figure 5, all values are normalized by the val-
ues of the FedMarl. FedAvg, FedProx and FedNova make
all the clients transmit their local updates, therefore there
is no reduction on processing latency and communication
cost. In contrast, Oort, CS, HeteroFL, FedProx-THS and
FedNova-THS enables only partial client to report their local
updates, which reduces the communication cost and process-
ing latency. We notice that FedMarl, HeteroFL and FedNova
outperform the rest algorithms on test accuracy, but FedMarl
achieves the optimal accuracy, processing latency and com-
munication cost at the same time.
Generalizability of the MARL Agents
In practice, FL system conﬁguration can vary over time. For
example, client devices may join and quit the FL application
over time, leading to a varying client pool size K. This may
require separate MARL agents to be trained for each system
conﬁguration, leading to a signiﬁcant MARL training cost.
Next, we employ the MARL agents trained with the default
settings described in the beginning of the evaluation section,
and evaluate their performances under different conditions.

0
0.5
1
1.5
Normalized Reward
Original
K=400
K=800
FedMarl
FedAvg
FeteroFL
FedProx
FedProx-THS
FedNova
FedNova-THS
Oort
CS
0
0.5
1
1.5
Normalized Reward
Original
E=7
E=10
FedMarl
FedAvg
FeteroFL
FedProx
FedProx-THS
FedNova
FedNova-THS
Oort
CS
0
0.5
1
1.5
Normalized Reward
Original
16 phone types
FedMarl
FedAvg
FeteroFL
FedProx
FedProx-THS
FedNova
FedNova-THS
Oort
CS
Figure 7: Performance of MARL agents under different system conﬁgurations. All the
results are normalized with the performance of FedMarl.
[w1, w2, w3]
LeNet
VGG6
ResNet-18
[1.0, 0.2, 0.1]
A: 98.15%
A: 46.05%
A: 98.43%
L: 1.0×
L:1.0×
L:1.0×
B: 1.0×
B:1.0×
B:1.0×
[1.0, 0.5, 0.3]
A: 97.88%
A: 45.28%
98.03%
L: 0.82×
L:0.80×
L:0.80×
B: 0.83×
B:0.78×
B:0.86×
Table 4: ’A’,’L’,’B’ denote the accu-
racy, latency and communication cost.
Evaluation under Different System Conditions
We ﬁrst
evaluate the FedMarl performance by varying the pool size
K. Speciﬁcally, we utilize the MARL agents trained with
K = 100 and evaluate the performance under K = 400 and
K = 800. Figure 7(a) depicts the total reward (deﬁned in
equation 4) of the algorithms on CIFAR-10. Remember that a
higher reward indicates a better overall performance in terms
of prediction accuracy, processing latency and bandwidth
consumption. It can be seen that FedMarl outperforms the
rest algorithms for each K. In particular, FedMarl achieves
a 1.36× and 1.32× higher total reward than the other algo-
rithms on average under K = 400 and K = 800, respec-
tively. Similarly, Figure 7(b) shows the performance of the
algorithms under different amount of epochs E for local train-
ing. FedMarl also obtains the best overall performance under
different E. Finally, we modify the FL system conﬁguration
by introducing new types of client devices. Speciﬁcally, in
additional to the eight devices shown in Table 1, we intro-
duce another six mobile devices to the device pool including
iPhone 12, iPhone 7, Samsung Galaxy S21, Google Pixel
5, Samsung A11, Huawei P20 pro. We collect the latency
traces for these new devices and evaluate the performances
of the algorithms using the new device pool on CIFAR-10
(Figure 7(c)). The results show that the superior performance
of the MARL agents can translate across different system set-
tings. This is because the MARL agents only take normalized
version of the inputs (equation 3) for generating the decisions,
making them independent of a speciﬁc system conﬁguration.
Evaluation across Different DNN Architectures and
Datasets
Next, we evaluate the generalizability of MARL
agents over different DNN architectures and datasets. In par-
ticular, we train the MARL agents with a source DNN ar-
chitecture (e.g., VGG6 on CIFAR-10), and evaluate their
performance using a target DNN (e.g., ResNet-18 on Fash-
ion MNIST). Table 3 shows the normalized rewards of the
MARL agents. We notice that the MARL agents achieve a
superior performance across different DNNs and datasets in
general. For example, the MARL agents trained on ResNet-
18 with Fashion MNIST can obtain a reward of 0.965 on
LeNet with MNIST, which is comparable with the perfor-
mance of the MARL agents trained with LeNet from scratch
(1.0). Additionally, by ﬁnetuning the MARL agents with 10
episodes on the target DNN (Numbers in the brackets in Ta-
ble 3), we notice further improvements on the reward. This
demonstrates that the trained MARL agents can generalize
to different DNN architectures and datasets.
Learned Strategy by the MARL Agents
In this section, we take a closer look at the strategies learnt
by the MARL agents. Figure 6 shows the decisions made
by the MARL agents during the FL process for LSTM. In
particular, we investigate how the client selection decisions
are affected by the probing losses (Figure 6 (a)) and the prob-
ing training latencies (Figure 6 (b)) of the clients. We make
the following observations. First, the MARL agents prefer
to select the clients with both low probing loss and training
latency. Second, the MARL agents occasionally select the
clients with low probing loss for the better FL convergence,
even though their latencies are high. For instance, the two
blue dots pointed by the arrows in Figure 6 represent a client
device with low probing loss and high processing latency.
The MARL agents apply the optimal criteria to achieve a
trade off between the training accuracy and total processing
latency objectives. Finally, relatively less number of clients
are picked in the early stage of the FL training than the
later stage. In Figure 6, 3 and 7 (out of 10) clients are se-
lected at the ﬁrst and last round, respectively. One reason is
that in the early stage of training, DNNs usually learn low-
complexity (lower-frequency) functional components before
learning more advanced features, with the former being more
robust to noises and perturbations (Xu et al. 2019; Rahaman
et al. 2019). Therefore it is possible to use less data to train
in the early stages, which further reduces processing latency
and communication cost.
Performance under Different Rewards
In this section, we investigate the impact of relative impor-
tance w1, w2, w3 in the reward function (equation 4) on the
performance of FedMarl. Speciﬁcally, besides the original
setting with [w1, w2, w3] = [1.0, 0.2, 0.1], we increase w2
from 0.2 to 0.5 and w3 from 0.1 to 0.3. This will force the
MARL agents to learn a client selection algorithm with a
lower processing latency and communication cost. As shown
in Table 4, we observe that increasing w2 and w3 will lead
to a lower total processing latency and communication cost
at the price of lower accuracy. This indicates that FedMarl
can adjust its behavior based on the relative importance of
the objectives, which enables the application designers to
customize the FedMarl based on their preferences.
Conclusion
In this work, we present FedMarl, an MARL-based FL frame-
work that makes intelligent client selection at run time. The
evaluation results show that FedMarl outperforms the bench-
mark algorithms in terms of model accuracy, processing la-
tency and communication cost under various FL conditions.
