A QUESTION-ENTAILMENT APPROACH
TO QUESTION ANSWERING
A PREPRINT
Asma Ben Abacha
Dina Demner-Fushman

Lister Hill Center, U.S. National Library of Medicine,
U.S. National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
January 25, 2019
ABSTRACT
One of the challenges in large-scale information retrieval (IR) is to develop ﬁne-grained and domain-
speciﬁc methods to answer natural language questions. Despite the availability of numerous sources
and datasets for answer retrieval, Question Answering (QA) remains a challenging problem due to
the difﬁculty of the question understanding and answer extraction tasks. One of the promising tracks
investigated in QA is to map new questions to formerly answered questions that are “similar”. In this
paper, we propose a novel QA approach based on Recognizing Question Entailment (RQE) and we
describe the QA system and resources that we built and evaluated on real medical questions. First,
we compare machine learning and deep learning methods for RQE using different kinds of datasets,
including textual inference, question similarity and entailment in both the open and clinical domains.
Second, we combine IR models with the best RQE method to select entailed questions and rank
the retrieved answers. To study the end-to-end QA approach, we built the MedQuAD collection
of 47,457 question-answer pairs from trusted medical sources, that we introduce and share in the
scope of this paper. Following the evaluation process used in TREC 2017 LiveQA, we ﬁnd that our
approach exceeds the best results of the medical task with a 29.8% increase over the best ofﬁcial
score. The evaluation results also support the relevance of question entailment for QA and highlight
the effectiveness of combining IR and RQE for future QA efforts. Our ﬁndings also show that relying
on a restricted set of reliable answer sources can bring a substantial improvement in medical QA.
Keywords Question Answering · Recognizing Question Entailment · Information Retrieval · Consumer Health
Questions · Question-Answer Dataset · Medical Domain
1
Introduction
With the availability of rich data on users’ locations, proﬁles and search history, personalization has become the leading
trend in large-scale information retrieval. However, efﬁciency through personalization is not yet the most suitable model
when tackling domain-speciﬁc searches. This is due to several factors, such as the lexical and semantic challenges
of domain-speciﬁc data that often include advanced argumentation and complex contextual information, the higher
sparseness of relevant information sources, and the more pronounced lack of similarities between users’ searches.
A recent study on expert search strategies among healthcare information professionals [44] showed that, for a given
search task, they spend an average of 60 minutes per collection or database, 3 minutes to examine the relevance of each
document, and 4 hours of total search time. When written in steps, their search strategy spans over 15 lines and can
reach up to 105 lines.
With the abundance of information sources in the medical domain, consumers are more and more faced with a
similar challenge, one that needs dedicated solutions that can adapt to the heterogeneity and speciﬁcs of health-related
information.
arXiv:1901.08079v1  [cs.CL]  23 Jan 2019

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 25, 2019
Dedicated Question Answering (QA) systems are one of the viable solutions to this problem as they are designed to
understand natural language questions without relying on external information on the users.
In the context of QA, the goal of Recognizing Question Entailment (RQE) is to retrieve answers to a premise question
(PQ) by retrieving inferred or entailed questions, called hypothesis questions (HQ) that already have associated
answers. Therefore, we deﬁne the entailment relation between two questions as: a question A entails a question B if
every answer to B is also a correct answer to A [4].
RQE is particularly relevant due to the increasing numbers of similar questions posted online [32] and its ability to
solve differently the challenging issues of question understanding and answer extraction. In addition to being used to
ﬁnd relevant answers, these resources can also be used in training models able to recognize inference relations and
similarity between questions.
Question similarity has recently attracted international challenges [35, 36] and several research efforts proposing a wide
range of approaches, including Logistic Regression, Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), Long Short Term Memory
cells (LSTMs), and Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [17, 43, 4, 30].
In this paper, we study question entailment in the medical domain and the effectiveness of the end-to-end RQE-based
QA approach by evaluating the relevance of the retrieved answers. Although entailment was attempted in QA before
[22, 38, 10], as far as we know, we are the ﬁrst to introduce and evaluate a full medical question answering approach
based on question entailment for free-text questions. Our contributions are:
1. A study of machine learning and deep learning approaches to RQE using different kinds of datasets, including
textual inference, question similarity and entailment in both the open and clinical domains.
2. A collection of 47,457 medical question-answer pairs with additional annotations, constructed from trusted
sources such as NIH websites. We make this resource publicly available1.
3. A new QA approach based on question entailment. Our approach uses IR models to retrieve question candidates
and the RQE model to identify entailed questions and return their answers.
4. An evaluation of the RQE-based QA system on TREC 2017 LiveQA medical questions [7]. Results showed
that our approach exceeds the best ofﬁcial score on the medical task using only the collection of 47K QA pairs
as answers source.
The next section is dedicated to related work on question answering, question similarity and entailment. In Section 3,
we present two machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) methods for RQE and compare their performance
using open-domain and clinical datasets. Section 4 describes the new collection of medical question-answer pairs. In
Section 5, we describe our RQE-based approach for QA. Section 6 presents our evaluation of the retrieved answers and
the results obtained on TREC 2017 LiveQA medical questions.
2
Background
In this section we deﬁne the RQE task and describe related work at the intersection of question answering, question
similarity and textual inference.
2.1
Task Deﬁnition
The deﬁnition of Recognizing Question Entailment (RQE) can have a signiﬁcant impact on QA results. In related
work, the meaning associated with Natural Language Inference (NLI) varies among different tasks and events. For
instance, Recognizing Textual Entailment (RTE) was addressed by the PASCAL challenge [13], where the entailment
relation has been assessed manually by human judges who selected relevant sentences "entailing" a set of hypotheses
from a list of documents returned by different Information Retrieval (IR) methods. In another deﬁnition, the Stanford
Natural Language Inference corpus SNLI [8], used three classiﬁcation labels for the relations between two sentences:
entailment, neutral and contradiction. For the entailment label, the annotators who built the corpus were presented with
an image and asked to write a caption “that is a deﬁnitely true description of the photo”. For the neutral label, they
were asked to provide a caption “that might be a true description of the label”. They were asked for a caption that “is
deﬁnitely a false description of the photo” for the contradiction label.
More recently, the multiNLI corpus [51] was shared in the scope of the RepEval 2017 shared task2 [37]. To build the
corpus, annotators were presented with a premise text and asked to write three sentences. One novel sentence, which is
1https://github.com/abachaa/MedQuAD
2https://repeval2017.github.io/shared
2

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 25, 2019
“necessarily true or appropriate in the same situations as the premise,” for the entailment label, a sentence, which is
“necessarily false or inappropriate whenever the premise is true,” for the contradiction label, and a last sentence, “where
neither condition applies,” for the neutral label.
Whereas these NLI deﬁnitions might be suitable for the broad topic of text understanding, their relation to practical
information retrieval or question answering systems is not straightforward.
In contrast, RQE has to be tailored to the question answering task. For instance, if the premise question is "looking for
cold medications for a 30 yo woman", a RQE approach should be able to consider the more general (less restricted)
question "looking for cold medications" as relevant, since its answers are relevant for the initial question, whereas
"looking for medications for a 30 yo woman" is a useless contextualization. The entailment relation we are seeking
in the QA context should include relevant and meaningful relaxations of contextual and semantic constraints (cf.
Section 3.1).
2.2
Related Work on Question Answering
Classical QA systems face two main challenges related to question analysis and answer extraction. Several QA
approaches were proposed in the literature for the open domain [14, 23] and the medical domain [3, 6, 52]. A variety of
methods were developed for question analysis, focus (topic) recognition and question type identiﬁcation [29, 5, 34, 33].
Similarly, many different approaches tackled document or passage retrieval and answer selection and (re)ranking
[50, 46, 47].
An alternative approach consists in ﬁnding similar questions or FAQs that are already answered [25, 49]. One of the
earliest question answering systems based on ﬁnding similar questions and re-using the existing answers was FAQ
FINDER [9]. Another system that complements the existing Q&A services of NetWellness3 is SimQ [32], which
allows retrieval of similar web-based consumer health questions. SimQ uses syntactic and semantic features to compute
similarity between questions, and UMLS [31] as a standardized semantic knowledge source. The system achieves
72.2% precision, 78.0% recall and 75.0% F-score on NetWellness questions. However, the method was evaluated only
on one question similarity dataset, and the retrieved answers were not evaluated.
The aim of the medical task at TREC 2017 LiveQA was to develop techniques for answering complex questions such
as consumer health questions, as well as to identify relevant answer sources that can comply with the sensitivity of
medical information retrieval.
The CMU-OAQA system [48] achieved the best performance of 0.637 average score on the medical task by using an
attentional encoder-decoder model for paraphrase identiﬁcation and answer ranking. The Quora question-similarity
dataset was used for training. The PRNA system [15] achieved the second best performance in the medical task with
0.49 average score using Wikipedia as the ﬁrst answer source and Yahoo and Google searches as secondary answer
sources. Each medical question was decomposed into several subquestions. To extract the answer from the selected text
passage, a bi-directional attention model trained on the SQUAD dataset was used.
Deep neural network models have been pushing the limits of performance achieved in QA related tasks using large
training datasets. The results obtained by CMU-OAQA and PRNA showed that large open-domain datasets were
beneﬁcial for the medical domain. However, the best system (CMU-OAQA) relying on the same training data obtained
a score of 1.139 on the LiveQA open-domain task.
While this gap in performance can be explained in part by the discrepancies between the medical test questions and the
open-domain questions, it also highlights the need for larger medical datasets to support deep learning approaches in
dealing with the linguistic complexity of consumer health questions and the challenge of ﬁnding correct and complete
answers.
Another technique was used by ECNU-ICA team [2] based on learning question similarity via two long short-term
memory (LSTM) networks applied to obtain the semantic representations of the questions. To construct a collection
of similar question pairs, they searched community question answering sites such as Yahoo! and Answers.com. In
contrast, the ECNU-ICA system achieved the best performance of 1.895 in the open-domain task but an average score
of only 0.402 in the medical task. As the ECNU-ICA approach also relied on a neural network for question matching,
this result shows that training attention-based decoder-encoder networks on the Quora dataset generalized better to the
medical domain than training LSTMs on similar questions from Yahoo! and Answers.com.
The CMU-LiveMedQA team [52] designed a speciﬁc system for the medical task. Using only the provided training
datasets and the assumption that each question contains only one focus, the CMU-LiveMedQA system obtained an
average score of 0.353. They used a convolutional neural network (CNN) model to classify a question into a restricted
3http://netwellness.org/
3

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 25, 2019
set of 10 question types and crawled "relevant" online web pages to ﬁnd the answers. However, the results were lower
than those achieved by the systems relying on ﬁnding similar answered questions. These results support the relevance
of similar question matching for the end-to-end QA task as a new way of approaching QA instead of the classical QA
approaches based on Question Analysis and Answer Retrieval.
2.3
Related Work on Question Similarity and Entailment
Several efforts focused on recognizing similar questions. Jeon et al. [24] showed that a retrieval model based on
translation probabilities learned from a question and answer archive can recognize semantically similar questions. Duan
et al. [18] proposed a dedicated language modeling approach for question search, using question topic (user’s interest)
and question focus (certain aspect of the topic).
Lately, these efforts were supported by a task on Question-Question similarity introduced in the community QA
challenge at SemEval (task 3B) [35]. Given a new question, the task focused on reranking all similar questions retrieved
by a search engine, assuming that the answers to the similar questions will be correct answers for the new question.
Different machine learning and deep learning approaches were tested in the scope of SemEval 2016 [35] and 2017 [36]
task 3B. The best performing system in 2017 achieved a MAP of 47.22% using supervised Logistic Regression that
combined different unsupervised similarity measures such as Cosine and Soft-Cosine [11]. The second best system
achieved 46.93% MAP with a learning-to-rank method using Logistic Regression and a rich set of features including
lexical and semantic features as well as embeddings generated by different neural networks (siamese, Bi-LSTM, GRU
and CNNs) [21]. In the scope of this challenge, a dataset was collected from Qatar Living forum for training. We refer
to this dataset as SemEval-cQA4.
In another effort, an answer-based deﬁnition of RQE was proposed and tested [4]. The authors introduced a dataset of
clinical questions and used a feature-based method that provided an Accuracy of 75% on consumer health questions. We
will call this dataset Clinical-QE5. Dos Santos et al. [17] proposed a new approach to retrieve semantically equivalent
questions combining a bag-of-words representation with a distributed vector representation created by a CNN and
user data collected from two Stack Exchange communities. Lei et al. [30] proposed a recurrent and convolutional
model (gated convolution) to map questions to their semantic representations. The models were pre-trained within an
encoder-decoder framework.
3
RQE Approaches and Experiments
The choice of two methods for our empirical study is motivated by the best performance achieved by Logistic
Regression in question-question similarity at SemEval 2017 (best system [11] and second best system [21]), and the
high performance achieved by neural networks on larger datasets such as SNLI [8, 28, 12, 20]. We ﬁrst deﬁne the RQE
task, then present the two approaches, and evaluate their performance on ﬁve different datasets.
3.1
Deﬁnition
In the context of QA, the goal of RQE is to retrieve answers to a new question by retrieving entailed questions with
associated answers. We therefore deﬁne question entailment as:
• a question A entails a question B if every answer to B is also a complete or partial answer to A.
We present below two examples of consumer health questions Ai and entailed questions Bi:
Example 1 (each answer to the entailed question B1 is a complete answer to A1):
• A1: What is the latest news on tennitis, or ringing in the ear, I am 75 years old and have had ringing in the ear
since my mid 5os. Thank you.
• B1: What is the latest research on Tinnitus?
Example 2 (each answer to the entailed question B2 is a partial answer to A2):
• A2: My mother has been diagnosed with Alzheimer’s, my father is not of the greatest health either and is the
main caregiver for my mother. My question is where do we start with attempting to help our parents w/ the
care giving and what sort of ﬁnancial options are there out there for people on ﬁxed incomes.
4http://alt.qcri.org/semeval2017/task3/index.php?id=data-and-tools
5https://github.com/abachaa/RQE_Data_AMIA2016
4

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 25, 2019
• B2: What resources are available for Alzheimer’s caregivers?
The inclusion of partial answers in the deﬁnition of question entailment also allows efﬁcient relaxation of the contextual
constraints of the original question A to retrieve relevant answers from entailed, but less restricted, questions.
3.2
Deep Learning Model
To recognize entailment between two questions PQ (premise) and HQ (hypothesis), we adapted the neural network
proposed by Bowman et al. [8]. Our DL model, presented in Figure 1, consists of three 600d ReLU layers, with a bottom
layer taking the concatenated sentence representations as input and a top layer feeding a softmax classiﬁer. The sentence
embedding model sums the Recurrent neural network (RNN) embeddings of its words. The word embeddings are ﬁrst
initialized with pretrained GloVe vectors. This adaptation provided the best performance in previous experiments with
RQE data.
Figure 1: Neural Network Architecture
GloVe6 is an unsupervised learning algorithm to generate vector representations for words [40]. Training is performed
on aggregated word co-occurrence statistics from a large corpus, and the resulting representations show interesting
linear substructures of the word vector space. We use the pretrained common crawl version with 840B tokens and 300d
vectors, which are not updated during training.
3.3
Logistic Regression Classiﬁer
In this feature-based approach, we use Logistic Regression to classify question pairs into entailment or no-entailment.
Logistic Regression achieved good results on this speciﬁc task and outperformed other statistical learning algorithms
such as SVM and Naive Bayes. In a preprocessing step, we remove stop words and perform word stemming using the
Porter algorithm [41] for all (PQ,HQ) pairs.
We use a list of nine features, selected after several experiments on RTE datasets [13]. We compute ﬁve similarity
measures between the pre-processed questions and use their values as features. We use Word Overlap, the Dice
coefﬁcient based on the number of common bigrams, Cosine, Levenshtein, and the Jaccard similarities. Our feature
list also includes the maximum and average values obtained with these measures and the question length ratio
(length(PQ)/length(HQ)). We compute a morphosyntactic feature indicating the number of common nouns and verbs
between PQ and HQ. TreeTagger [45] was used for POS tagging.
For RQE, we add an additional feature speciﬁc to the question type. We use a dictionary lookup to map triggers to the
question type (e.g. Treatment, Prognosis, Inheritance). Triggers are identiﬁed for each question type based on a manual
annotation of a set of medical questions (cf. Section 4.2). This feature has three possible values: 2 (Perfect match
between PQ type(s) and HQ type(s)), 1 (Overlap between PQ type(s) and HQ type(s)) and 0 (No common types).
6https://nlp.stanford.edu/projects/glove
5

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 25, 2019
3.4
Datasets Used for the RQE Study
3.4.1
Training Datasets
We evaluate the RQE methods (i.e. deep learning model and logistic regression classiﬁer) using two datasets of sentence
pairs (SNLI and multiNLI), and three datasets of question pairs (Quora, Clinical-QE, and SemEval-cQA).
The Stanford Natural Language Inference corpus (SNLI) [8] contains 569,037 sentence pairs written by humans
based on image captioning. The training set of the MultiNLI corpus [51] consists of 393,000 pairs of sentences from
ﬁve genres of written and spoken English (e.g. Travel, Government). Two other "matched" and "mismatched" sets
are also available for development (20,000 pairs). Both SNLI and multiNLI consider three types of relationships
between sentences: entailment, neutral and contradiction. We converted the contradiction and neutral labels to the same
non-entailment class.
The QUORA dataset of similar questions was recently published with 404,279 question pairs. We randomly selected
three distinct subsets (80%/10%/10%) for training (323,423 pairs), development (40,428 pairs) and test (40,428 pairs).
The clinical-QE dataset [4] contains 8,588 question pairs and was constructed using 4,655 clinical questions asked by
family doctors [19]. We randomly selected three distinct subsets (80%/10%/10%) for training (6,870 pairs), development
(859 pairs) and test (859 pairs).
The question similarity dataset of SemEval 2016 Task 3B (SemEval-cQA) [35] contains 3,869 question pairs and aims
to re-rank a list of related questions according to their similarity to the original question. The same dataset was used for
SemEval 2017 Task 3 [36].
3.4.2
RQE Test Dataset
To construct our test dataset, we used a publicly shared set of Consumer Health Questions (CHQs) received by the U.S.
National Library of Medicine (NLM), and annotated with named entities, question types, and focus [26, 27]. The CHQ
dataset consists of 1,721 consumer information requests manually annotated with subquestions, each identiﬁed by a
question type and a focus.
First, we selected automatically harvested FAQs, from U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH) websites, that share
both the same focus and the same question type with the CHQs. As FAQs are most often very short, we ﬁrst assume
that the CHQ entails the FAQ. Two sets of pairs were constructed: (i) positive pairs of CHQs and FAQs sharing at
least one common question type and the question focus, and (ii) negative pairs corresponding to a focus mismatch
or type mismatch. For each category of negative examples, we randomly selected the same number of pairs for a
balanced dataset. Then, we manually validated the constructed pairs and corrected the positive and negative labels when
needed. The ﬁnal RQE dataset contains 850 CHQ-FAQ pairs with 405 positive and 445 negative pairs. Table 1 presents
examples from the ﬁve training datasets (SNLI, MultiNLI, SemEval-cQA, Clinical-QE and Quora) and the new test
dataset of medical CHQ-FAQ pairs.
3.5
Results of RQE Approaches
In the ﬁrst experiment, we evaluated the DL and ML methods on SNLI, multi-NLI, Quora, and Clinical-QE. For the
datasets that did not have a development and test sets, we randomly selected two sets, each amounting to 10% of the
data, for test and development, and used the remaining 80% for training. For MultiNLI, we used the dev1-matched set
for validation and the dev2-mismatched set for testing.
Table 2 presents the results of the ﬁrst experiment. The DL model with GloVe word embeddings achieved better
results on three datasets, with 82.80% Accuracy on SNLI, 78.52% Accuracy on MultiNLI, and 83.62% Accuracy on
Quora. Logistic Regression achieved the best Accuracy of 98.60% on Clinical-RQE. We also performed a 10-fold
cross-validation on the full Clinical-QE data of 8,588 question pairs, which gave 98.61% Accuracy.
In the second experiment, we used these datasets for training only and compared their performance on our test set of
850 consumer health questions. Table 3 presents the results of this experiment. Logistic Regression trained on the
clinical-RQE data outperformed DL models trained on all datasets, with 73.18% Accuracy.
To validate further the performance of the LR method, we evaluated it on question similarity detection. A typical
approach to this task is to use an IR method to ﬁnd similar question candidates, then a more sophisticated method
to select and re-rank the similar questions. We followed a similar approach for this evaluation by combining the LR
method with the IR baseline provided in the context of SemEval-cQA. The hybrid method combines the score provided
by the Logistic Regression model and the reciprocal rank from the IR baseline using a weight-based combination:
6

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 25, 2019
Datasets
Type/Domain
#
pairs
Positive Examples (Entailment/Similarity)
SNLI (2015)
Inference
pairs
of
open-domain
sentences.
550,152
(train)
PS: A child in a light and dark green ensemble sits in a
chair in front of a typewriter looking off-camera. HS: A
child sitting in front of a desk.
MultiNLI
(2017)
Inference
pairs
of
open-domain
sentences.
392,702
(train)
PS: On the island of the Giudecca, you’ll ﬁnd another
of the great Palladio-designed churches (one of two in
Venice), the Redentore. HS: There are two church in
Venice that were designed by Palladio.
SemEval-
cQA (2016)
Similar
questions
from the Qatar Living
forum.
3,169
(train)
PQ: Books. Where can i donate books? HQ: english
books. Where to buy english books? Is there a public
library in doha? thanks
Clinical-QE
(2016)
Entailment pairs of
questions asked by
doctors.
8,588
PQ: Patient is reluctant to take medications so I have been
treating with smaller doses than I would with some other
patients. How do I control her hypertension and still get
her cooperation? HQ: Patient reluctant to take medication.
How to control hypertension and still get her cooperation?
Quora (2017)
Open-domain
ques-
tion similarity pairs.
404,279
PQ: I’ve been working out in the gym for the last three
months but I’m not successful in gaining weight. Should
I go for a mass gainer? Is it safe? HQ: I have been
working out from few months but I am unable to gain
mass/weight.Which mass gainer should I take?
New
Test
Data (CHQs)
Entailment
pairs
of consumer health
questions.
850
PQ: IHSS heart condition and WPW heart condition. Is
there any way you could send me information on both
these heart conditions? My son has to get tested for them
eventually and I would just like information to understand
the conditions of both of them more. HQ: What is Wolff-
Parkinson-White syndrome ?
Table 1: Description of training and test datasets.
Methods
Textual Datasets
Question Datasets
SNLI (2015)
MultiNLI
(2017)
Quora (2017)
Clinical-QE
(2016)
Neural Network (NN)
79.50
73.71
81.34
71.45
NN + GloVe embeddings
82.80
78.52
83.62
93.12
Logistic Regression + Features
75.91
67.88
67.79
98.60
Table 2: Accuracy (%) of Deep Learning and Machine Learning methods on four datasets SNLI, MultiNLI, Quora, and
Clinical-QE.
Hybridscore = LR_score + w ×
1
IR_rank
The weight w was set empirically through several tests on the cQA-2016 development set (w = 8.9). Table 4 presents
the results on the cQA-2016 and cQA-2017 test datasets. The hybrid method (LR+IR) provided the best results on
both datasets. On the 2016 test data, the LR+IR method outperformed the best system in all measures, with 80.57%
Accuracy and 77.47% MAP (ofﬁcial system ranking measure in SemEval-cQA). On the cQA-2017 test data, the LR+IR
method obtained 44.66% MAP and outperformed the cQA-2017 best system in Accuracy with 67.27%.
3.6
Discussion of RQE Results
When trained and tested on the same corpus, the DL model with GloVe embeddings gave the best results on three
datasets (SNLI, MultiNLI and Quora). Logistic Regression gave the best Accuracy on the Clinical-RQE dataset with
98.60%. When tested on our test set (850 medical CHQs-FAQs pairs), Logistic Regression trained on Clinical-QE gave
the best performance with 73.18% Accuracy.
The SNLI and multi-NLI models did not perform well when tested on medical RQE data. We performed additional
evaluations using the RTE-1, RTE-2 and RTE-3 open-domain datasets provided by the PASCAL challenge and the
results were similar. We have also tested the SemEval-cQA-2016 model and had a similar drop in performance on RQE
7

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 25, 2019
Methods
Training Datasets
SNLI
MultiNLI
Quora
Clinical-QE
Neural Network (NN)
48.94
54.59
52.35
48.71
NN + GloVe embeddings
49.41
54.82
52.82
57.18
Logistic Regression + Features
67.05
64.94
52.11
73.18
Table 3: Performance on 850 consumer health questions: Accuracy (%) of Machine Learning and Deep Learning
Methods.
Systems
Test Sets
Acc
P
R
F1
MAP
MRR
Hybrid
Method
(Logistic
Regression + Features + IR)
cQA-16-Test
80.57
70.29
72.10
71.19
77.47
83.79
cQA-B-2016 Best System [35]
cQA-16-Test
76.57
63.53
69.53
66.39
76.70
83.02
cQA-B-2016 IR Baseline [35]
cQA-16-Test
-
-
-
-
74.75
83.79
Hybrid
Method
(Logistic
Regression + Features + IR)
cQA-17-Test
67.27
33.68
79.14
47.25
44.66
48.08
cQA-B-2017 Best System [36]
cQA-17-Test
52.39
27.30
94.48
42.37
47.22
50.07
cQA-B-2017 IR Baseline [36]
cQA-17-Test
-
-
-
-
41.85
46.42
Table 4: Results (%) of the hybrid method (Logistic Regression + IR) on community QA datasets (cQA-Test 2016 and
cQA-Test 2017).
data. This could be explained by the different types of data leading to wrong internal conceptualizations of medical
terms and questions in the deep neural layers. This performance drop could also be caused by the complexity of the test
consumer health questions that are often composed of several subquestions, contain contextual information, and may
contain misspellings and ungrammatical sentences, which makes them more difﬁcult to process [42]. Another aspect is
the semantics of the task as discussed in Section 2.1. The deﬁnition of textual entailment in open-domain may not quite
apply to question entailment due to the strict semantics. Also the general textual entailment deﬁnitions refer only to the
premise and hypothesis, while the deﬁnition of RQE for question answering relies on the relationship between the sets
of answers of the compared questions.
4
Building a Medical QA Collection from Trusted Resources
A RQE-based QA system requires a collection of question-answer pairs to map new user questions to the existing
questions with an RQE approach, rank the retrieved questions, and present their answers to the user.
4.1
Method
To construct trusted medical question-answer pairs, we crawled websites from the National Institutes of Health7 (cf.
Section 4.3). Each web page describes a speciﬁc topic (e.g. name of a disease or a drug), and often includes synonyms
of the main topic that we extracted during the crawl.
We constructed hand-crafted patterns for each website to automatically generate the question-answer pairs based on the
document structure and the section titles. We also annotated each question with the associated focus (topic of the web
page) as well as the question type identiﬁed with the designed patterns (cf. Section 4.2).
To provide additional information about the questions that could be used for diverse IR and NLP tasks, we automatically
annotated the questions with the focus, its UMLS Concept Unique Identiﬁer (CUI) and Semantic Type. We combined
two methods to recognize named entities from the titles of the crawled articles and their associated UMLS CUIs: (i)
exact string matching to the UMLS Metathesaurus8, and (ii) MetaMap Lite9 [16]. We then used the UMLS Semantic
Network to retrieve the associated semantic types and groups.
7www.nih.gov
8We used the umls-2017AA version.
9https://metamap.nlm.nih.gov/MetaMapLite.shtml
8

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 25, 2019
4.2
Question Types
The question types were derived after the manual evaluation of 1,721 consumer health questions. Our taxonomy
includes 16 types about Diseases, 20 types about Drugs and one type (Information) for the other named entities such
as Procedures, Medical exams and Treatments. We describe below the considered question types and examples of
associated question patterns.
1. Question Types about Diseases (16): Information, Research (or Clinical Trial), Causes, Treatment, Prevention,
Diagnosis (Exams and Tests), Prognosis, Complications, Symptoms, Inheritance, Susceptibility, Genetic
changes, Frequency, Considerations, Contact a medical professional, Support Groups.
Examples:
• What research (or clinical trial) is being done for DISEASE?
• What is the outlook for DISEASE?
• How many people are affected by DISEASE?
• When to contact a medical professional about DISEASE?
• Who is at risk for DISEASE?
• Where to ﬁnd support for people with DISEASE?
2. Question Types About Drugs (20): Information, Interaction with medications, Interaction with food, Interaction
with herbs and supplements, Important warning, Special instructions, Brand names, How does it work, How
effective is it, Indication, Contraindication, Learn more, Side effects, Emergency or overdose, Severe reaction,
Forget a dose, Dietary, Why get vaccinated, Storage and disposal, Usage, Dose.
Examples:
• Are there interactions between DRUG and herbs and supplements?
• What important warning or information should I know about DRUG?
• Are there safety concerns or special precautions about DRUG?
• What is the action of DRUG and how does it work?
• Who should get DRUG and why is it prescribed?
• What to do in case of a severe reaction to DRUG?
3. Question Type for other medical entities (e.g. Procedure, Exam, Treatment): Information.
• What is Coronary Artery Bypass Surgery?
• What are Liver Function Tests?
4.3
Medical Resources
We used 12 trusted websites to construct a collection of question-answer pairs. For each website, we extracted the free
text of each article as well as the synonyms of the article focus (topic). These resources and their brief descriptions are
provided below:
1. National Cancer Institute (NCI) 10: We extracted free text from 116 articles on various cancer types (729
QA pairs). We manually restructured the content of the articles to generate complete answers (e.g. a full
answer about the treatment of all stages of a speciﬁc type of cancer). Figure 2 presents examples of QA pairs
generated from a NCI article.
2. Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center (GARD)11: This resource contains information about various
aspects of genetic/rare diseases. We extracted all disease question/answer pairs from 4,278 topics (5,394 QA
pairs).
3. Genetics Home Reference (GHR)12: This NLM resource contains consumer-oriented information about the
effects of genetic variation on human health. We extracted 1,099 articles about diseases from this resource
(5,430 QA pairs).
4. MedlinePlus Health Topics13: This portion of MedlinePlus contains information on symptoms, causes,
treatment and prevention for diseases, health conditions and wellness issues. We extracted the free texts in
summary sections of 981 articles (981 QA pairs).
10http://www.cancer.gov/types
11https://rarediseases.info.nih.gov/diseases
12https://ghr.nlm.nih.gov
13https://medlineplus.gov/healthtopics.html
9

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 25, 2019
Figure 2: Examples of QA pairs generated from an article about Langerhans Cell Histiocytosis (NCI).
5. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK) 14: We extracted text from 174
health information pages on diseases studied by this institute (1,192 QA pairs).
6. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS)15: We extracted free text from 277 informa-
tion pages on neurological and stroke-related diseases from this resource (1,104 QA pairs).
7. NIHSeniorHealth 16: This website contains health and wellness information for older adults. We extracted 71
articles from this resource (769 QA pairs).
8. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) 17: We extracted text from 135 articles on diseases, tests,
procedures, and other relevant topics on disorders of heart, lung, blood, and sleep (559 QA pairs).
14https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information
15https://www.ninds.nih.gov/Disorders/all-disorders
16https://nihseniorhealth.gov/
17https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/health-topics
10

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 25, 2019
Figure 3: Examples of QA pairs generated from an article about Acromegaly (A.D.A.M encyclopedia).
9. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) 18: We extracted text from 152 articles on diseases and
conditions (270 QA pairs).
10. MedlinePlus A.D.A.M. Medical Encyclopedia19: This resource contains 4,366 articles about conditions, tests,
and procedures. 17,348 QA pairs were extracted from this resource. Figure 3 presents examples of QA pairs
generated from A.D.A.M encyclopedia.
11. MedlinePlus Drugs20: We extracted free text from 1,316 articles about Drugs and generated 12,889 QA pairs.
12. MedlinePlus Herbs and Supplements21: We extracted free text from 99 articles and generated 792 QA pairs.
The ﬁnal collection contains 47,457 annotated question-answer pairs about Diseases, Drugs and other named entities
(e.g. Tests) extracted from these 12 trusted resources.
18https://www.cdc.gov/diseasesconditions/
19https://medlineplus.gov/encyclopedia.html
20https://medlineplus.gov/druginformation.html
21https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/herb_All.html
11

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 25, 2019
5
The Proposed Entailment-based QA System
Our goal is to generate a ranked list of answers for a given Premise Question PQ by ranking the recognized Hypothesis
Questions HQs. Based on the RQE experiments above (Section 3.5), we selected Logistic Regression trained on the
clinical-RQE dataset to recognize entailed questions and rank them with their classiﬁcation scores.
5.1
RQE-based QA Approach
Classifying the full QA collection for each test question is not feasible for real-time applications. Therefore, we ﬁrst
ﬁlter the questions with an IR method to retrieve candidate questions, then classify them as entailed (or not) by the
user/test question. Based on the positive results of the combination method tested on SemEval-cQA data (Section 3.5),
we adopted a combination method to merge the results obtained by the search engine and the RQE scores. The answers
are then combined from both methods and ranked using an aggregate score. Figure 4 presents the overall architecture of
the proposed QA system. We describe each module in more details next.
Figure 4: Overview of the RQE-based Question Answering System.
5.2
Finding Similar Question Candidates
For each premise question PQ, we use the Terrier search engine22 to retrieve N relevant question candidates {HQj, j ∈
[1, N]} and then apply the RQE classiﬁer to predict the labels for the pairs (PQ,HQj).
We indexed the questions of our QA collection without the associated answers. In order to improve the indexing and the
performance of question retrieval, we also indexed the synonyms of the question focus and the triggers of the question
type with each question. This choice allowed us to avoid the shortcomings of query expansion, including incorrect
or irrelevant synonyms and the increased execution time. The synonyms of the question focus (topic) were extracted
automatically from the QA collection. The triggers of each question type were deﬁned manually in the question types
taxonomy. Below are two examples of indexed questions from our QA collection, with the automatically added focus
synonyms and question type triggers:
1. What are the treatments for Torticollis?
• Focus: Torticollis. Question type: Treatment.
• Added focus synonyms: "Spasmodic torticollis, Wry neck, Loxia, Cervical dystonia". Added question
type triggers: "relieve, manage, cure, remedy, therapy".
2. What is the outlook for Legionnaire disease?
• Focus: Legionnaire disease. Question Type: Prognosis.
• Added focus synonyms: "Legionella pneumonia, Pontiac fever, Legionellosis". Added question type
triggers: "prognosis, life expectancy".
22http://terrier.org
12

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 25, 2019
The IR task consists of retrieving hypothesis questions HQj relevant to the submitted question PQ. As fusion of IR
result has shown good performance in different tracks in TREC, we merge the results of the TF-IDF weighting function
and the In-expB2 DFR model [39].
Let QLV = HQV
1 , HQV
2 , ..., HQV
N be the set of N questions retrieved by the ﬁrst IR model V and QLW = HQW
1 ,
HQW
2 , ..., HQW
N be the set of N questions retrieved by the second IR model W. We merge both sets by summing the
scores of each retrieved question HQj in both QLV and QLW lists, then we re-rank the hypothesis questions HQj.
5.3
Combining IR and RQE Methods
The IR models and the RQE Logistic Regression model bring different perspectives to the search for relevant candidate
questions. In particular, question entailment allows understanding the relations between the important terms, whereas
the traditional IR methods identify the important terms, but will not notice if the relations are opposite. Moreover, some
of the question types that the RQE classiﬁer learns will not be deemed important terms by traditional IR and the most
relevant questions will not be ranked at the top of the list.
Therefore, in our approach, when a question is submitted to the system, candidate questions are fetched using the IR
models, then the RQE classiﬁer is applied to ﬁlter out the non-entailed questions and re-rank the remaining candidates.
Speciﬁcally, we denote CL the list of question candidates {HQj, 1 ≤j ≤N} returned by the IR system. The premise
question PQ is then used to construct N question pairs {(PQ, HQj), 1 ≤j ≤N}. The RQE classiﬁer is then applied
to ﬁlter out the question pairs that are not entailed and re-rank the remaining pairs.
More precisely, let ELP Q = {HQ1, HQ2, . . . , HQk . . .} in CL be the list of selected candidate questions that have a
positive entailment relation with a given premise question PQ. We rank ELP Q by computing a hybrid score Hscorek
for each candidate question HQk taking into account the score of the IR system scorek(IR) and the score of the RQE
system scorek(RQE).
For each system S ∈{IR, RQE}, we normalize the associated score by dividing it by the maximum score among the
N candidate questions retrieved by S for PQ:
• HscoreP Q
k
= α ∗NormP Q
k
(IR) + β ∗NormP Q
k
(RQE)
• NormP Q
k
(S) =
scorek(S)
MaxP Q
N
(S)
(α = β = 0.5)
In our experiments, we ﬁxed the value of N to 100. This threshold value was selected as a safe value for this task for
the following reasons:
• Our collection of 47,457 question-answer pairs was collected from only 12 NIH institutes and is unlikely to
contain more than 100 occurrences of the same focus-type pair.
• Each question was indexed with additional annotations for the question focus, its synonyms and the question
type synonyms.
6
Evaluating RQE for Medical Question Answering
The objective of this evaluation is to study the effectiveness of RQE for Medical Question Answering, by comparing
the answers retrieved by the hybrid entailment-based approach, the IR method and the other QA systems participating
to the medical task at TREC 2017 LiveQA challenge (LiveQA-Med).
6.1
Evaluation Method
We developed an interface to perform the manual evaluation of the retrieved answers. Figure 5 presents the evaluation
interface showing, for each test question, the top-10 answers of the evaluated QA method and the reference answer(s)
used by LiveQA assessors to help judging the retrieved answers by the participating systems.
We used the test questions23 of the medical task at TREC-2017 LiveQA [7]. These questions are randomly selected
from the consumer health questions that the NLM receives daily from all over the world. The test questions cover
different medical entities and have a wide list of question types such as Comparison, Diagnosis, Ingredient, Side effects
and Tapering.
23https://github.com/abachaa/LiveQA_MedicalTask_TREC2017
13

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 25, 2019
Figure 5: Evaluation Interface: for each test question, the reference answers used by LiveQA assessors were provided to help judging the
retrieved answers.
For a relevant comparison, we used the same judgment scores as the LiveQA Track:
• Correct and Complete Answer (4)
• Correct but Incomplete (3)
• Incorrect but Related (2)
• Incorrect (1)
14

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 25, 2019
We evaluated the answers returned by the IR-based method and the hybrid QA method (IR+RQE) according to the
same reference answers used in LiveQA-Med. The answers were anonymized (the method names were blinded) and
presented to 3 assessors: a medical doctor (Assessor A), a medical librarian (B) and a researcher in medical informatics
(C). None of the assessors participated in the development of the QA methods. Assessors B and C evaluated 1,000
answers retrieved by each of the methods (IR and IR+RQE). Assessor A evaluated 2,000 answers from both methods.
Table 5 presents the inter-annotator agreement (IAA) through F1 score computed by considering one of the assessors as
reference. In the ﬁrst evaluation, we computed the True Positives (TP) and False Positives (FP) over all ratings and
the Precision and F1 score. As there are no negative labels (only true or false positives for each category), Recall is
100%. We also computed a partial IAA by grouping the "Correct and Complete Answer" and "Correct but Incomplete"
ratings (as Correct), and the "Incorrect but Related" and "Incorrect" ratings (as Incorrect). The average agreement on
distinguishing the Correct and Incorrect answers is 94.33% F1 score. Therefore, we used the evaluations performed by
assessor A for both methods. The ofﬁcial results of the TREC LiveQA track relied on one assessor per question as well.
Assessors
IAA
Partial IAA
P (%)
F1 (%)
P (%)
F1 (%)
A vs. B
80.80
89.38
90.13
94.81
A vs. C
77.92
87.59
88.42
93.85
Average
79.36
88.48
89.27
94.33
Table 5: Inter-Annotator Agreement (IAA) over all ratings in the manual evaluation of the retrieved answers. Partial
IAA over two ratings "Correct" and "Incorrect".
6.2
Evaluation of the ﬁrst retrieved answer
We computed the measures used by TREC LiveQA challenges [1, 7] to evaluate the ﬁrst retrieved answer for each test
question:
• avgScore(0-3): the average score over all questions, transferring 1-4 level grades to 0-3 scores. This is the
main score used to rank LiveQA runs.

by the system.
Measures
IR-based
System
IR+RQE
System
LiveQA’17
Best Results
LiveQA’17 Me-
dian Results
avgScore(0-3)
0.711
0.827
0.637
0.431

0.442
0.461
0.392
0.245

0.192
0.25
0.265
0.142

0.077
0.115
0.098
0.059

0.46
0.475
0.404
0.331

0.2
0.257
0.273
0.178

0.08
0.119
0.101
0.077

Evaluation of the ﬁrst retrieved answer for each question.
N.B. Evaluating the RQE System alone is not relevant as explained previously (Section 5.1).
Table 6 presents the average scores, success and precision results. The hybrid IR+RQE QA system achieved better
results than the IR-based system with 0.827 average score. It also achieved a higher score than the best results achieved
in the medical challenge at LiveQA’17. Evaluating the RQE system alone is not relevant, as applying RQE on the full
collection for each user question is not feasible for a real-time system because of the extended execution time.
6.3
Evaluation of the top ten answers
In this evaluation, we used Mean Average Precision (MAP) and Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR) which are commonly
used in QA to evaluate the top-10 answers for each question. We consider answers rated as “Correct and Complete
15

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 25, 2019
Answer” or “Correct but Incomplete” as correct answers, as the test questions contain multiple subquestions while each
answer in our QA collection can cover only one subquestion.
MAP is the mean of the Average Precision (AvgP) scores over all questions.
(1) MAP = 1
Q
Q
P
i=1
AvgPi
• Q is the number of questions. AvgPi is the AvgP of the ith question.
AvgP = 1
K
K
P
n=1
n
rankn
• K is the number of correct answers. rankn is the rank of nth correct answer.
MRR is the average of the reciprocal ranks for each question. The reciprocal rank of a question is the multiplicative
inverse of the rank of the ﬁrst correct answer.
(2) MRR = 1
Q
Q
P
i=1
1
ranki
• Q is the number of questions. ranki is the rank of the ﬁrst correct answer for the ith question.

Measures
IR-based System
IR+RQE System
Fully answered questions
29%
27%
Correctly answered questions
51%
54%

0.282
0.311

0.281
0.333
Table 7: Common Measures: MAP and MRR on LiveQA’17 Test Questions. Evaluation of top 10 answers for each
question.
6.4
Discussion of entailment-based QA for the medical domain
In our evaluation, we followed the same LiveQA guidelines with the highest possible rigor. In particular, we consulted
with NIST assessors who provided us with the paraphrases of the test questions that they used to judge the answers. Our
IAA on the answers rating was also high compared to related tasks, with an 88.5% F1 agreement with the exact four
categories and a 94.3% agreement when reducing the categories to two: “Correct” and “Incorrect” answers. Our results
show that RQE improves the overall performance and exceeds the best results in the medical LiveQA’17 challenge by a
factor of 29.8%. This performance improvement is particularly interesting as:
(a) Our answer source has only 47K question-answer pairs when LiveQA participating systems relied on much
larger collections, including the World Wide Web.
(b) Our system answered one subquestion at most when many LiveQA test questions had several subquestions.
The latter observation, (b), makes the hybrid IR+RQE approach even more promising as it gives it a large potential for
the improvement of answer completeness.
The former observation, (a), provides another interesting insight: restricting the answer source to only reliable collections
can actually improve the QA performance without losing coverage (i.e., our QA approach provided at least one answer
to each test question and obtained the best relevance score).
In another observation, the assessors reported that many of the returned answers had a correct question type but a wrong
focus, which indicates that including a focus recognition module to ﬁlter such wrong answers can improve further the
QA performance in terms of precision. Another aspect that was reported is the repetition of the same (or similar) answer
from different websites, which could be addressed by improving answer selection with inter-answer comparisons and
removal of near-duplicates. Also, half of the LiveQA test questions are about Drugs, when only two of our resources
are specialized in Drugs, among 12 sub-collections overall. Accordingly, the assessors noticed that the performance
16

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 25, 2019
of the QA systems was better on questions about diseases than on questions about drugs, which suggests a need for
extending our medical QA collection with more information about drugs and associated question types.
We also looked closely at the private websites used by the LiveQA-Med annotators to provide some of the reference
answers for the test questions. For instance, the ConsumerLab website was useful to answer a question about the
ingredients of a Drug (COENZYME Q10). Similarly, the eHealthMe website was used to answer a test question asking
about interactions between two drugs (Phentermine and Dicyclomine) when no information was found in DailyMed.
eHealthMe provides healthcare big data analysis and private research and studies including self-reported adverse drug
effects by patients.
But the question remains on the extent to which such big data and other private websites could be used to automatically
answer medical questions if information is otherwise unavailable. Unlike medical professionals, patients do not
necessarily have the knowledge and tools to validate such information. An alternative approach could be to put
limitations on medical QA systems in terms of the questions that can be answered (e.g. "What is my diagnosis for such
symptoms") and build classiﬁers to detect such questions and warn the users about the dangers of looking for their
answers online.
More generally, medical QA systems should follow some strict guidelines regarding the goal and background knowledge
and resources of each system in order to protect the consumers from misleading or harmful information. Such guidelines
could be based (i) on the source of the information such as health and medical information websites sponsored by the
U.S. government, not-for-proﬁt health or medical organizations, and medical university centers, or (ii) on conventions
such as the code of conduct of the HON Foundation (HONcode) that addresses the reliability and usefulness of medical
information on the Internet.
Our experiments show that limiting the number of answer sources with such guidelines is not only feasible, but it could
also enhance the performance of the QA system from an information retrieval perspective.
7
Conclusion
In this paper, we carried out an empirical study of machine learning and deep learning methods for Recognizing
Question Entailment in the medical domain using several datasets. We developed a RQE-based QA system to answer
new medical questions using existing question-answer pairs. We built and shared a collection of 47K medical question-
answer pairs24. Our QA approach outperformed the best results on TREC-2017 LiveQA medical test questions. The
proposed approach can be applied and adapted to open-domain as well as speciﬁc-domain QA. Deep learning models
achieved interesting results on open-domain and clinical datasets, but obtained a lower performance on consumer health
questions. We will continue investigating other network architectures including transfer learning, as well as creation of
a large collection of consumer health questions for training to improve the performance of DL models. Future work
also includes exploring integration of a Question Focus Recognition module to enhance candidate question retrieval,
and expanding our question-answer collection.
8
