What the Language You Tweet Says About Your Occupation
Tianran Hu, Haoyuan Xiao, and Jiebo Luo
Department of Computer Science
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14623

Thuy-vy Thi Nguyen
Department of Clinical and Social Sciences in Psychology
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14623

Abstract
Many aspects of people’s lives are proven to be deeply
connected to their jobs. In this paper, we ﬁrst investi-
gate the distinct characteristics of major occupation cat-
egories based on tweets. From multiple social media
platforms, we gather several types of user information.
From users’ LinkedIn webpages, we learn their proﬁ-
ciencies. To overcome the ambiguity of self-reported
information, a soft clustering approach is applied to ex-
tract occupations from crowd-sourced data. Eight job
categories are extracted, including Marketing, Admin-
istrator, Start-up, Editor, Software Engineer, Public Re-
lation, Ofﬁce Clerk, and Designer. Meanwhile, users’
posts on Twitter provide cues for understanding their
linguistic styles, interests, and personalities. Our results
suggest that people of different jobs have unique ten-
dencies in certain language styles and interests. Our re-
sults also clearly reveal distinctive levels in terms of Big
Five Traits for different jobs. Finally, a classiﬁer is built
to predict job types based on the features extracted from
tweets. A high accuracy indicates a strong discrimina-
tion power of language features for job prediction task.
Introduction
The recent statistics published by LinkedIn revealed that in-
creasing a number of US employers relies on personality
assessments as a way to screen their prospective employ-
ees (26% in 2001 to 57% in 20131). It appears that cer-
tain jobs are more likely to attract or ﬁt better with certain
people. While this hiring practice has been commonly used
by organizations, there has not been any research that di-
rectly looks at the connections between different job posi-
tions and the people that are in those positions. Indeed, many
studies on sociology and psychology suggest that many as-
pects of a person’s lives are deeply connected with their
jobs (Lindquist, Beilin, and Knuiman 1997; Strully 2009).
In this study, we looked at the connections between differ-
ent job positions and the characteristics of the people that
hold those positions, including the language that they use,
the topics that they are interested in, and their personalty
traits. Our ﬁndings suggested that jobs are more than just
Copyright c⃝2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1https://www.linkedin.com/pulse
what people do, but also who they are, and how they present
themselves to others.
To uncover the connections between jobs and the char-
acteristics of people who hold those jobs, the procedure in-
volves several steps. First, we need to separate people based
on their jobs. Categorizing people into job types is particu-
larly challenging because most jobs are less specialized but
instead might share some common responsibilities or duties.
Therefore, in this step, we rely on the skills that people have
to determine the job categories that they are more or less
likely to belong to. A soft clustering method is used to assign
a normalized weight to each job type for a person based on
her skills. In the next step, we also need to learn about each
person’s characteristics, such as her linguistic patterns, inter-
ests, personality traits, and so on. Achieving those two steps
allow us to compute the Pearson correlation coefﬁcients be-
tween people’s characteristics and their weights on different
job types. To achieve those two steps, we need to ﬁrst ﬁgure
out people’s skills, and then learn about their characteristics.
Social media posts have been proven an effective infor-
mation source in gaining knowledge of people (Silva et al.
2014; Schwartz et al. 2013). Individuals tend to use social
media sites as platforms for self-presentation (Schau and
Gilly 2003). Therefore, we extract rich information about
people’s characteristics from what they share online. We se-
lect Twitter data to support our study, because Twitter is
widely and effectively used in user proﬁling (Nguyen et al.
2013), and it is relatively easy to collect. For the linguis-
tic features, we apply closed vocabulary and open vocabu-
lary approaches described in (Schwartz et al. 2013) to ones’
tweets. The closed vocabulary approach uses a ﬁxed lexicon
to analyse text, while the open vocabulary approach does
not limit the vocabulary. In the former, we apply Linguis-
tic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) to extract 92 linguis-
tic features from tweets. In the latter, two types of linguis-
tic features are learned: representative words and phrases ,
and topics. Tweets also provide rich information on person-
alities (Schwartz et al. 2013). We apply the IBM Watson
Personality Insights service API to compute the personal-
ity traits from tweets. Personality is measured by Big Five
Traits, a widely examined theory of the ﬁve broad dimen-
sions describing human personality (Goldberg 1993). The
ﬁve dimensions are, Openness, Conscientiousness, Extraver-
sion, Agreeableness, and Neuroticism.
arXiv:1701.06233v1  [cs.CY]  22 Jan 2017

We take advantage of another social media – LinkedIn –
to collect the job information. LinkedIn users share their in-
dustries, career experiences, education status, interests, and
so on. A skill list is also displayed on a user’s LinkedIn page.
The listed skills are endorsed by the users who knows this
person. Each skill in the list is associated with the number
of votes this skill receives. Although we can learn LinkedIn
users’ industries from their proﬁles, this self-reported infor-
mation is usually imprecise and ambiguous. For example,
we manually check the proﬁles of all the professors in our
department. Some of them report the industry as “Computer
Science”, others ﬁll in “Higher Education” or “Research”.
To come up with more precise and accurate job categories,
we apply a soft clustering method to people’s skills endorsed
by others, and use a group of skills to describe a job. There
are three beneﬁts in doing this: 1) Skill is a concept of ﬁner
granularity than industry. 2) Skills of a person are voted by
the people who know the person. The crowdsourced data is
more accurate than the information provided by the person
him/herself. 3) Given the complex nature of today’s jobs, it
makes more sense not to restrict a person to only one occu-
pation. Instead, one individual can perform several responsi-
bilities and possess several skills that might possibly qualify
him or her for multiple job categories. For example, the job
of a product manger in an IT company could be described
with both “programmer” and “manager”.
To match LinkedIn and Twitter accounts of the same peo-
ple, we collect the users from about.me2. It is an integration
platform, which allows users to link multiple online iden-
tities, such as Twitter, LinkedIn, Facebook, and so on in
one proﬁle. We randomly sample about.me users, and retain
valid users who register both Twitter and LinkedIn accounts.
Interesting and signiﬁcant differences are uncovered
among people with different jobs in this study. The open vo-
cabulary approach provides more dimensions implying the
traits of jobs. For example, ofﬁce clerks talk more about
daily life than people of other jobs. According to our re-
sults, people with different jobs clearly have different inter-
ests. People who are doing public relation and writers show
strong interests in politics and social events. The divergences
of personalities are also found. For example, managers are
the most extroverted, while software engineers are the least.
Base on these observations, we build a classiﬁer to predict
jobs using the features extracted from tweets. A high accu-
racy (80%+) indicates that adequate personal trait informa-
tion is hidden in social media posts.
Our contributions are threefold:
• We propose an approach to categorize proﬁciencies by
softly grouping skills a person has, using skill informa-
tion gathered from LinkedIn.
• We uncover signiﬁcant and interesting divergences of lin-
guistic patterns, interests, and personalities among people
with different jobs.
• We build up an occupation classiﬁer with high accuracy
is built up based on features extracted from Twitter posts.
2about.me
Related Work
Studies of sociology and psychology reveal that many as-
pects of human life, such as health condition, lifestyle, per-
sonality, and so on, are deeply connected with their jobs.
The effects of work stress on long-term blood pressure is
studied in (Lindquist, Beilin, and Knuiman 1997). The pa-
per ﬁnds that it is the ways of dealing with work stress
rather than the stress itself that are signiﬁcantly related to
blood pressure. In (Strully 2009), the correlation between
employment status and health condition is studied. The au-
thors reported that employment status may impact certain
health outcomes. In addition, sickness absence, the use of
alcohol, and anxiety of reorganization are also proven to
be related to working life (Voss, Floderus, and Diderich-
sen 2004). Jobs also inﬂuence lifestyles. Payne et al. dis-
cussed the different lifestyles of employees in high-strain
jobs and low-strain jobs (Payne, Jones, and Harris 2002).
They found that people with high-strain jobs exercise far less
than those with low-strain jobs. The relationship between the
Big Five traits of personality and job criteria is investigated
in (Salgado 1997; Hurtz and Donovan 2000). The ﬁndings
indicate that Conscientiousness and Neuroticism are valid
predictors for job performance. (Judge, Heller, and Mount
2002) investigates job satisfaction and personality. The au-
thors found that, job satisfaction is positively correlated with
Extraversion, Agreeableness, and Conscientiousness, while
it is negatively correlated with Neuroticism. There is also
work focusing on speciﬁc job types. Perceived social sup-
port, job stress, health, and job satisfaction among nurses
are studied in (Bradley and Cartwright 2002). (Reichel and
Pizam 1984) compared the U.S. hospitality industry employ-
ees’ with other industries on work attributes, demograph-
ics, and class perceptions. The results show that the peo-
ple of this industry tend to be less satisﬁed with the job,
and take their work as unimportant elements in their self-
accomplishments.
Although much work has been done, previous work on
the relationship between human characteristics and jobs fo-
cuses on either employment and work status, or a single job
type. It is still not clear what divergences exist across various
jobs. Due to the inherent limits of transitional data collec-
tion methods, previous work of sociology and psychology
usually suffers from the problem of small sample size. In
our work, a large population is collectied from social media
platforms, and we compare multiple human characteristics
across jobs.
The psychological meaning of words is well studied in
Computer Science and Linguistics. Linguistic Inquiry and
Word Count (LIWC), as a computerized text method, is in-
troduced in (Tausczik and Pennebaker 2010). (Pennebaker
and King 1999) investigates the difference of individual lin-
guistic styles. This work reports the signiﬁcant difference
across their language patterns, and proves the effectiveness
of LIWC. Based on the linguistic features,
(Mairesse et
al. 2007) introduce an approach to recognizing personali-
ties from conversation. The boom of social media attracts a
lot of research that are based on this new data source. It is
shown that personalities can be recognized using people’s
social media network structures (Staiano et al. 2012), pro-

ﬁles (Quercia et al. 2011), and contents of posts (Qiu et al.
2012; Golbeck et al. 2011). (Vinciarelli and Mohammadi
2014) provide a nice survey on computing personality from
social media data. In this paper, we follow the approaches
described in (Schwartz et al. 2013) to extract linguistic pat-
terns. In their work, Schwartz et al. propose two approaches
to learning people’s language styles from social media texts.
They report signiﬁcant differences in language styles across
several features including genders, ages, and personalities.
Data Collection and Preprocessing
User Collection
We use about.me search API3 to collect users. The input of
this API is a name, and it returns the information of at most
100 users who has the same or a similar name. We gather
the 1,000 popular male and female ﬁrst names in the U.S,
and feed these 2,000 names to the API. The API returns
150K user proﬁles. We ﬁrst select the users who have both
LinkedIn and Twitter accounts. Following their Twitter ac-
counts, we download these users’ 3,000 most recent tweets
using Twitter search API4. We remove the users who do not
have enough English tweets (less than 2,000), to guarantee
the signiﬁcance of our results. We then collect the job infor-
mation through LinkedIn links. We also remove the people
who does not have a skill list on the LinkedIn page, because
we cannot categorize their jobs for them. Eventually, we end
up with 9,800 users in total.
Tweets Cleaning and Phrase Selection
Twokenizer5 is an NLP tool designed for tweets especially.
It detects abbreviations or slang (b4 for before, fb for Face-
book), misspellings or spelling variants (ﬁr for preposition
for), and emoticons (:), <3) in tweets. However, in prac-
tice Twokenizer usually fails in extracting Twitter ofﬁcial
emojis6, because these emojis concatenate with other words
in many cases. Therefore, we apply Twokenizer to separate
words from tweets, and we also use a ﬁxed emoji list to de-
tect all the ofﬁcial emojis. Terms that are too popular (used
by more than 95% users) and too unpopular (used by less
than 10% users) are removed.
We apply the same thresholds to phrases (2-grams and
3-grams). To avoid extracting simple word combinations in-
stead of meaningful phrases, we apply Point-wise Mutual
Information (PMI) to distinguish these two (Schwartz et al.
2013). PMI measures how more informative it is to take a
phrase as a whole compared with taking it as separate words.
It is formally deﬁned as follows:
pmi(phrase) = log
P(phrase)
Πt∈phraseP(t)
(1)
where t indicates the terms in the phrase, and P(phrase)
is the probability of observing the phrase. We ﬁlter out all
phrases with PMI value lower than 2* length, where length
3about.me/developer/api/docs/
4dev.twitter.com/overview/documentation
5http://www.cs.cmu.edu/ ark/TweetNLP
6http://apps.timwhitlock.info/emoji/tables
is the number of words in this phrase, and we consider these
phrases as uninformative.
However, it is infeasible to compute PMI for every phrase,
due to the large size of candidate set. We exploit the Apri-
ori property of phrases (Agrawal et al. 1996) to reduce the
candidate set. The apriori property states that if a set is
not frequent, then all the super sets are not frequent nei-
ther. In our case, for example, if “love you” is used by less
than 10% of the users, then “I love you” has to be used by
less than 10% of the users. In practice, we ﬁrst obtain all
the 1-gram terms using Twokenizer and emoji list, and re-
move the 1-gram terms that are used by less than 10% of the
users. We then combine 1-gram terms pairwise to generate
2-gram phrases. The same steps are applied in generating 3-
gram candidate set from 2-gram phrases. At last, we remove
words and phrases that are used by more than 95% of the
users from the candidate sets, and apply PMI to remove the
uninformative phrases. The preprocessing leaves us 18,082
words, 7,852 2-gram, and 10,903 3-gram phrases.
Job Categorization
Most LinkedIn users report their industries in the proﬁles,
such as “Marketing”, “Public Relation”, and “Web Design”.
However, these industry tags are not precise enough; and
some of them are even ambiguous. We observed many cases
where people with different industry tags actually work in
the same position. For example, a computer science pro-
fessor could report his/her industry as “Computer Science”,
“Higher education” or “Research”. To learn the real job a
person is doing, we utilize the skills a person has. A per-
son’s skills are endorsed by people who connect with this
person, and are listed in one’s linkedIn page. Besides a list
of endorsed skills, the number of endorsements of each skill
is also available.
We vectorize a person’s skill list into a ﬁxed order vector.
Each dimension represents a skill, and the values of elements
in a vector are the votes this person receives on the corre-
sponding skills. We feed the skill vectors to Latent Dirichlet
Allocation (LDA) model to generate a soft clustering of peo-
ple. Two matrices are learned using LDA. The topic matrix
describes the distribution of skills in each cluster. In other
words, clusters are linear combinations of skills. These clus-
ters are used as deﬁnitions of job in this study. The document
matrix describes the people’s weights on each job. There-
fore, each person is not limited to one job. These assigned
weights are used to calculate the correlations between jobs
and linguistic patterns, as well as personality traits. There
are three beneﬁts from categorizing jobs in this way. First,
comparing with a broad industry, it is more precise to de-
scribe proﬁciency with a set of skills. Second, as skills of a
person are voted by others, the crowdsourced data is more
accurate than the self-reported information. Third, soft clus-
tering solves the ambiguity in deﬁning one’s job. Taking the
example we used in introduction, now a product manger in
an IT company can be deﬁned as 30% “programmer” and
70% “manager”.
The number of clusters (topics) k is a crucial parameter
in LDA setting. We use perplexity to determine how many
topics are needed. Perplexity measures how good a language

Job Name
First Skill
Second Skill
Third Skill
Fourth Skill
Fifth Skill
1. Marketing
Digital MKTG
Social Media MKTG
Online MKTG
Digital Strategy
Advertising
2. Administrator
Public Speaking
Leadership
Fundraising
Event Planning
Coaching
3. Start-up
Start-ups
Entrepreneurship
Strategy
Business DEV
Management
4. Editer&Writer
Blogging
Editing
Journalism
Copy Editing
Storytelling
5. Software Engr
MySQL
CSS
JavaScript
PHP
jQuery
6. Ofﬁce Clerk
Microsoft Ofﬁce
Microsoft Excel
PowerPoint
Microsoft Word
Customer Service
7. Public Relation
Public Relations
Media Relations
Press Releases
Strategic COMM
Corporate COMM
8. Designer
Graphic Design
Web Design
Photography
Illustrator
Photoshop
Table 1: Extracted job categories using LDA. We list 5 most weighted skills of each job, and manually label them according
to the skills. “Engr”, “COMM”, “MKTG”, and “DEV” are short for Engineer, Communications, Marketing, and Development,
respectively.
model predicts unseen documents, and decreases monoton-
ically as the number of topics increases (Blei, Ng, and Jor-
dan 2003). We use 10-cross validation to test k from 2 to
100. Average perplexity drops fast as k increases from 2 to
20, and keeps almost unchanged as k goes above 20. There-
fore, we select number of cluster as 20. To guarantee that
each job covers a relatively large population, we remove the
jobs that contains less than 300 users. We end up with 8 jobs
after these processes. In Table 1, we list the 5 most heavily-
weighted skills for each job category and also manually as-
sign a label for each job category. The results are consistent
with common sense. Take the ﬁfth job “Software Engineer”
as an example, the skills associated with this job are mostly
programming languages (JavaScript), and tools (MySQL).
The remaining 7 jobs are Marketing, Administrator, Star-up,
Editor&Writer, Ofﬁce Clerk, Public Relation, and Designer.
Please note that we do not aim at ﬁnding out all the job
types, but focus on the divergences among people with dif-
ferent jobs. Therefore, we did not try to extract an exhaustive
or complete list of jobs in this study.
Closed Vocabulary Approach and Results
We ﬁrst used a ﬁxed lexicon (LIWC) to analyse the lin-
guistic patterns of different jobs. Since the vocabulary is
ﬁxed in the study, this approach is called closed vocabulary
approach in (Schwartz et al. 2013). Linguistic Inquiry and
Word Count (LIWC) is a computer program for language
analysis (Pennebaker and King 1999). LIWC2015 computes
a 92-Dimensional vector for a document based on a given
dictionary. The dimensions include: Sixltr (percentage of
words that longer than 6 letters), Anger (percentage of words
that indicates anger), and so on.
We combine all the tweets of a person as a single docu-
ment, and then calculate the LIWC features. Pearson Corre-
lation Coefﬁcients are computed to uncover the unique lan-
guage traits of different jobs. Due to the length limit, in Fig-
ure 1 we list 25 LIWC features, and their correlations with
each job. The p-value of these correlations are all smaller
than 10−4. Signiﬁcant and interesting correlations are ob-
served. We summarize them as follows (the terms in brack-
ets are the feature names of LIWC outputs):
• Marketing people talk a lot about money and afﬁliation
(money, afﬁliation), and they mention more about leisure
(leisure). Their emotional tone scale (tone) is high. A
Figure 1: 25 LIWC features, and their correlations with each
occupation.

higher emotional tone scale indicates more lively than
other people. Meanwhile, they talk less about religions
(relig), and show fewer negative emotions (negemo).
• For the administrators, they prefer to use ﬁrst-person plu-
ral, and mention more about power, insight and society.
On the other hand, this group of people use fewer swear
words (swear) and parentheses (Parenth) comparing with
people of other jobs.
• People in start-ups post a lot of contents about money and
work (work) in their tweets, while they do not use ﬁrst-
person singular much, and they do not express anger or
negative emotion much.
• As to the editors and writers, they use many words about
genders (female, male). Different from other jobs, people
with this job mention more about negative emotions.
• Software Engineers’ posts are more tentative (tentat),
and the usage of swear words is positively correlated
to the job. Not surprisingly, programmers mention less
about female and social. Likewise, Programmers’ power-
awareness (Clout, power) is relatively low.
• Ofﬁce clerks mention a lot about themselves (i) in their
tweets, and the usages of negations (negat), negative emo-
tions are higher. People doing this job post fewer analytic
tweets (Analytic) and long words (Sixltr), and they do not
talk much about work.
• People who are doing public relation tend to be more
future-focused (focusfuture). In other words, they like to
use words like will, may, and soon in their tweets. Same as
marketing people, this group of people’s emotional tone
scale is relatively high.
• Designers like to describe what they see, hear, and feel
(seen, percept) in tweets. Similar to programmers, they
have low power-awareness (Clout, power).
Open Vocabulary Approach
In addition to using a ﬁxed lexicon to analyse the lin-
guistic patterns of different jobs, in this section we dis-
cuss an approach leveraging all the words in ones’ posts.
This approach is called the Open Vocabulary Approach
in (Schwartz et al. 2013). We ﬁrst count the words and
phrases in a person’s tweet, then use TF-IDF to weight
all the terms based on their frequencies. Pearson Correla-
tion Coefﬁcients are computed between the people’s TF-IDF
weights of each term and their weights on each job. The pos-
itively correlated terms to a job are used more by the peo-
ple with the job. In other words, these terms are positively
distinguishing to this job. Oppositely, negatively correlated
terms to a job are used less often by the people with the
job, they are negatively distinguishing to this job. After this,
we aggregate each person’s tweets into a single document,
and feed the documents to LDA to extract 2,000 topics. We
then calculate the correlation between people’s weights on
the 2,000 topics and their weights on the 8 jobs. By doing
this, we ﬁnd the positively and negatively distinguishing top-
ics to a job. Because topics extracted from tweets are mean-
ingful combinations of words, we can learn more about the
interests and focusings across people with different jobs.
Results of Open Vocabulary Approach
We ﬁnd interesting differences across jobs. Each job has its
unique preference to words, phrase, and topics, suggesting
the divergences on working content, interests, and character-
istics of people with different jobs. Some topics are highly
positively correlated to one job, while highly negatively cor-
related to others. We plot these distinctive terms and topics
in the form of word cloud (Figure 2), due to the length limit,
we only plot two jobs. We summarize our results as follows.
Marketing
The positively correlated terms and topics in-
dicate that the most distinguishing contents to marketing
people are about the methods, platforms, and strategies of
marketing. Meanwhile, this group of people have less inter-
ests in politics, policy, and education.
The most positively correlated word is marketers, indi-
cating the occupation of this group of people. Since social
media is growing into a more and more important market-
ing platform, the correlation of social media is quite high.
Others words and phrases, such as your brand, targeting,
campaigns, marketing strategy, and lead generation, are also
extracted, implying the unique tweet contents of market-
ing people. To our surprise, many most negatively corre-
lated words and phrases to this job are about education, such
as paper, on campus, professor, and semester. Meanwhile,
some legal words, such as justice, evidence, civil, federal,
and violence, are also highly negatively correlated to the
people who have this job.
The most positively correlated topic is about mobile and
mobile advertising to this job (adroid, google, adwords,
brands, and ad). The following two topics are about data
analysis (analytics, infographics, data), and social media
platforms (twitter, pintrest, facebook, instagram), respec-
tively. The most negatively correlated topic is formed by
words about school and politics (inequality, racial, racism,
college, students), which aligns with the negatively corre-
lated words and phrases. The second most negatively related
topic is about politics (hillary, demdebate7, #sotu8) and so-
cial events (ebola, feminist).
Administrator
Administrators talk more about leading,
education, and religion in their tweets, while they do not
express negative emotions or use negations much. Compar-
ing with other jobs, these group of people are more careless
about techniques.
Administrators’ tweets are more invigorated. They use
many didactic words and phrases like make a difference,
courage, and honor. Vocabularies related to leading are also
frequently used. For example, words and phrase, such as
leaders, we must, and leadership have high positive correla-
tion scores. Meanwhile, administrators prefer to use phrases
related to unity such as we need to, we must, we are, how
do we. This agrees with our ﬁnding using closed vocabu-
lary approach about their preference for useing ﬁrst-person
plurals. There are many religious vocabularies highly cor-
related to them too, such as blessing, pray, and god’s. Dif-
ferent from marketing people, education vocabularies (stu-
7meaning: Democratic Party Presidential Debates
8meaning: State of the Union

(a) Word cloud for Editors&Writers
(b) Word cloud for Marketing
Figure 2: A word cloud illustration of highly correlated words, phrase, and topics of two occupations: Marketing and Edi-
tors&Writers. Positively correlated ones are plotted in blue (left), and the negative ones are in red (right). The big circle in the
middle contains the highly correlated words and phrases. Small surrounding circles represent topics, with each circle being a
topic. We select top 200 positively and negatively scores words and phrase, and for each topic we select the top 10 prevalent
words.
dents, youth, college) are positively correlated to this group
of people. A large percentage of most negatively correlated
words to managers is related to techniques, such as app, ver-
sion, iphone, ui, and interface.
The most positively correlated topic to this job is about
education and politics (inequality, racial, racism, college,
students). Interestingly, this topic is among the most nega-
tively correlated topics to marketing people. A topic about
religion (worship, jesus, bible, lord) also has high posi-
tive correlation with this job. This is consistent with the
fact that religious vocabularies are positively correlated. The
third most positively correlated topic is about education
(#edchat, #edtech, #education, tearchers, #edtechchat). The
most prevalent terms in this topic are usually attached with
hash-tag, indicating their interests on related discussion on
Twitter. The most negatively correlated topic is formed by
negation terms (dont, cant, :d), and negative emotion words,
such as jealous and bloody. The second topic is about pop-
ular mobile device (ios, apple’s, iphone), and sports (nﬂ,
nike, sports). The insulativity of managers from program-
ming skills is revealed by the third most negatively corre-
lated topic, consisting mainly of programming words (php,
js, api, github, jquery).
Start-up
Start-ups people share some likes and dislikes
with marketing people and mangers. Avoidance of using
self-denial expression is one of their unique features.
Almost all the highly positively correlated words and
phrases, such as founders, investors, growth, valuation, and
companies, are about running company, investment, and
business. Not surprisingly, silicon is also one of the most
positively correlated words. Like administrators, start-up
people dislike to use negating words (can’t, dont), but they
especially dislike self-denial. i can’t is the most negatively
correlated phrase to this group of people. This dislike of self-
denial is also reﬂected by the high negative correlation score
of i don’t know and i didn’t. she and her also do not appear
much in their tweets.
The most positively scored topic contains words like bit-
coin, tesla, crowdfunding, startups, inverstors, and so on.
The following two topics are also among the top positively
correlated topics of marketing people. These two topics are
about data analysis (analytics, infographics, data), and mo-
bile advertising (adroid, google, adwords, brands, and ad).
The overlapping indicates the similar concerns of people
with these two jobs. Same as administrators, the most neg-
atively scored topic of start-ups people is the one formed
by neglecting terms (dont, cant, :d), and negative emotion
words(jealous, bloody). The following two negative topics
mainly consist of emoticons, such as ;), ;-), and :(.
Editor & Writer
Editors and writers show more interest
in politics, as well as in social events. They also talk more
about reading and books. Comparing with the jobs we men-
tion above, this people with this job use more emoticons.
The four most positively correlated words to editors are
editors, journalist, writer, and reporter, clearly implying the
occupation of these people. In addtition to, the words closely
related to this job, such as headline, pulitzer, and newspaper.
We also observed many words related to social events like
murder, investigation, and police. The two most negatively
correlated type of words are: techniques words (interface,
setup, framework), and businesses words (management, cus-
tomer, business).
The topic that attracts the most attention from this group
is the one about politics (hillary, demdebate, #sotu) and so-
cial events (ebola, feminist). Please note that this topic is
also the one that attracts the least attention from market-
ing people. Editors also would like to talk about reading.
The second most positively scored topic is about #romance,
#thriller, #books, and #kindle, followed by the third emoti-
con topics (;), ;-), - -). The most unpopular topic to editors
is about analytics and techniques, words like data, analytics,
and mobile are among the representatives of this topic.
Software Engineer
Terms and topics indicate that soft-
ware engineers use way more technique terms than others,

while they tend to talk less about females and social life.
Software engineers mention a lot about techniques and
coding (web, ui, code, plugin). In fact, we could not ﬁnd a
word or phrase that is not about techniques among the top
200 most positively correlated. The most negatively corre-
lated word to software engineers is summer, followed by girl
and her. relationship is also a less often used word by them.
They also express less interest on excitements and celebra-
tions. For example, love this!, so excited, sunday, and gift
are all highly negatively scored. Moreover, their expressions
of compliment (thank you, cutest, so proud of) appear less
than people with other jobs.
The two most positively correlated topics, with no sur-
prise, are both about programming techniques. The repre-
sentative words of them are mainly about programming lan-
guages (php, java, python), and tools (github, photoshop,
api). The last topic among the top three positive topic is
about apple products (ios, apple, iphone) and sports (nike,
sports, nﬂ). The most negatively correlated topic to this job
is mixed by three types of words: marketing vocabularies
(marketing, advertising, #marketing), family vocabularies
(husband, dinner, family), and vocabularies of praising (fab-
ulous, angeles). The following two topics are formed by
Twitter ofﬁcial emojis (please refer to the supplementary
material for the illustration) and regular emoticons (<3, ;)),
respectively.
Ofﬁce Clerk
The most positively distinguishing words
and phrases of people with other jobs are related to their
job contents, such as vocabulary of programming languages
to software engineers, and vocabulary of reading and writ-
ing to editors. However, ofﬁce clerks’ most positively corre-
lated words have nothing to do with their job. They empha-
size life and family in their posts instead, and express strong
self-awareness. They tend to use more emojis and emoti-
cons, and their negative emotions are stronger than people
with other jobs. Negatively scored topics indicate that ofﬁce
clerks show less interest on business, and data analysis.
The most positively scored term to them is my life. Other
phrases related to daily life such as woke up, fall asleep, and
my hair are also highly scored. Words and phrases of self-
expression (i just want, i wish i, i hate) appear a lot in ofﬁce
clerk’s tweets. It is interesting that a lot of self-expression
portrayed among ofﬁce clerks are emotional. They mainly
express lack of motivation, negative emotions, unfulﬁlled
wants and wishes. Words such as semester, studying, and
homework get high positive scores, implying this group of
people’s strong interest in education. They have a mixed
negatively correlated vocabulary. The less usage of the fu-
ture of aligns with the low future-focused score we calcu-
lated using the closed vocabulary approach. Technique vo-
cabularies (web, online, app) also appear less in their tweets.
Moreover, their posts are less motivated. The terms like in-
teresting, creating, great all have high negative scores.
Contrary to software engineers, this group of people is
most positively related to the topic consisting of emojis.
Moreover, unlike administrators and star-ups people, the
topic formed by neglecting terms (dont, cant, :d), and nega-
tive emotion words (jealous and bloody) is the second most
positively scored topic. The third most popular topic of this
group is about entertainments (#nowplaying, photo, :p, al-
bum). As to the negatively correlated topics, the top three
are about analytics, mobile advertising, and business, re-
spectively. These topics are positively scored topics to ad-
ministrators, marketing people, and people from start-ups.
Public Relation
People doing public relation show more
interest in politics and social events. They also have strong
sense of time, according to the high usage of temporal words
in their tweets.
The ﬁve most positively distinguishing words and phrases
to this occupation are pr, #pr, pr pos, public relations, and
press releases, indicating the job content clearly. Not sur-
prisingly, words related to social events, such as anniver-
sary, super bowl, and crisis are more frequently used by
them. They particularly prefer temporal words and phrases,
such as a.m., p.m., of the year, monday. This is probably be-
cause time is a crucial factor in public relation. The high
positive score of exclamation mark (!) implies relatively
strong tone of their tweets. This group of people barely men-
tion words about techniques. The top 200 negatively scored
words of this job have a large overlapping with the top 200
most positively scored words of software engineers.
The two most positively correlated topics to this group
people are formed by politics and social events vocabular-
ies (hillary, demdebate, #boston, ebola), and emojis, respec-
tively. The third topic is about social media platforms (#so-
cialmedia, #facebook, #twitter, #pinterest, #instagram), in-
dicating the application of social medias in the ﬁeld of of
public relation. The most negatively scored topic is about
programming languages and tools, which agrees with the
negatively scored words and phrases.
Designer
Designers use more visual-related words and
compliment words, while they show less interest in business.
They also express special interest in New York City.
The three most positively correlated words to designers
are illustrator, designer, and graphic. Colors (blue, red,
black and white) and words related to graphic designing
(font, logo, icon) are more frequently mentioned by them.
The name of a community where designers and photogra-
phers share their works, behance, is also positively scored.
Compliment words like cute, nice, sweet are more frequently
used by designers than people with other jobs. According
to the most negatively correlated words, designers have less
interest in business (beneﬁts, inverstment, strategies), and
companies (ceo, colleagues, leadship).
The most concerned topic to designers is about their job
contents. The most representative words of this topic are ty-
pography, fonts, lettering. The second topic is mixed with
emoticons, and social media platform names. In the third
most positively scored topic, besides some emoticons, ex-
pressions about New York City (nyc, #ny, ny) are also highly
weighted. We believe this is because the city has special
meaning to designers. As to the negatively scored topics,
the tops three are about politics and social event (hillary,
demdebate, ebola, #sotu, feminist), marketing (seo9, #mar-
9meaning: Search Engine Optimization

Figure 3: Radar plots of Pearson correlation coefﬁcients between personality traits and each job, where O, C, E, A, N stands for
Openness, Conscientiousness, Extraversion, Agreeableness, and Neuroticism, respectively. All the correlations are signiﬁcant
with a p-value lower than 10−4.
keting, #contentmarketing), and business (startups, league,
silicon), respectively.
It is effective to learn personality from language
styles (Mairesse et al. 2007). Illuminated by the difference
of language styles existing across jobs, we expect to observe
distinctive personality traits. In the next section, we focus on
the divergences of personality of people with different jobs.
Personality Analysis
In this section, we study the personality features of the peo-
ple of different jobs. Previous work shows that people’s
personalities can be calculated from their tweets (Qiu et
al. 2012). We apply the IBM Watson Personality Insights
service API10 to compute the personality traits from ones’
tweets. The input is all the tweets of a person, and the ser-
vice analyzes the linguistic features to infer personality, in-
cluding Big Five, Needs, and Values. Due to the length limit,
we only discuss the Big Five Personality Traits in this paper.
Big Five is a widely examined theory of ﬁve broad dimen-
sions describing human personality (Goldberg 1993). The
ﬁve dimensions are:
• Openness: measures how open a person is to unusual
ideas, imagination, curiosity, and variety of experience.
In other words, a higher openness indicates a higher ac-
ceptance to new things and changes.
• Conscientiousness: reveals a person’s self-discipline. Peo-
ple of higher conscientiousness tend to act in an organized
and thoughtful way.
• Extraversion: indicates the extent to which a person
10www.ibm.com/smarterplanet/us/en/ibmwatson/
prefers or enjoys being in social situations or interactions
with the outside, and have company of others.
• Agreeableness: reﬂects if a person feels comfortable
about compromising. Higher agreeableness implies being
more cooperative toward others.
• Neuroticism: measures the instability of a person’s emo-
tions. It is usually easier for a person of higher neuroti-
cism to experience negative emotions.
Our results reveal clear distinctive levels of the Big Five
Traits of different jobs. In Figure 3 we report the Pearson
correlation coefﬁcients between personality traits and each
job in form of radar plot. All the correlations are signiﬁcant
with a p-value smaller than 10−4.
Among the 8 groups, people from start-ups are most open
to new things, with a positive correlation of 0.13 to Open-
ness. On the contrary, people of public relation are the most
conservative. The correlation to Openness of them is -0.12.
Software Engineers and marketing people are also open to
new things, while ofﬁce clerks and administrators people are
the opposite.
Marketing people, people of start-ups have higher consci-
entiousness levels. In other words, they show high motiva-
tions in their work. Ofﬁce clerks have the lowest conscien-
tiousness level. This agrees with our observation that ofﬁce
clerks post fewer content about their work. Moreover, soft-
ware engineers, editors and writers, and designers also show
a relatively low self-discipline.
Administrators are the most extroverted. A high positive
correlation (0.18) to Extraversion indicates their strong pref-
erence for being in social situations. By contrast, the high
negative correlation to Extraversion (-0.15) of software en-
gineers shows low preference for social situations.

Ofﬁce clerks are the most agreeable group of people. They
have a positive correlation to Agreeableness of 0.20. Admin-
istrators also have a high Agreeableness level (0.18). Soft-
ware engineers are the least agreeable. A negative correla-
tion of -0.13 shows their low willingness to compromise.
The people from start-ups have highest stability level of
emotion (-0.21 correlated to Neuroticism), followed by mar-
keting people (-0.11). By contrast, a 0.24 correlation to Neu-
roticism of ofﬁce clerks indicates they have relatively unsta-
ble emotions. Software Engineers and Designer also have
positve correlations.
Occupation Prediction
Motivated by the observations on the correlation between
human traits and occupations, we build a classiﬁer to predict
jobs based on features extracted from tweets. Each person is
assigned a normalized weight on each job. We label the per-
son with the job of the highest weight if the weight is larger
than 0.8. If none of the weights is larger than 0.8, we remove
the person from our data set. In each prediction task, we col-
lect the people from a job as positive data, and then sample
a equal number of people from other jobs as negative data.
We tried 4 sets of features: LIWC features, 2,000 tweets top-
ics, words and phrases, and all above. The values of words
and phrases features are the TF-IDF values calculated for
terms based on their frequencies in ones’ tweets. The values
of tweet topic features are the weights that each person is
assigned on the topics. We plot the results in Figure 4. The
results are evaluated using 5-cross validation.
Figure 4: Precisions and recalls of predicting 8 jobs using 4
sets of features. F-scores of using all features is also plotted.
The average F-score of all eight jobs is 0.78, indicating
the strong discrimination power of language features on job
prediction tasks.
Software engineers (precision = 87%, recall = 86%) and
Designers (precision = 82%, recall = 83%) have better
prediction results. This is because software engineers and
designers have more distinguishing language patterns and
unique interests. People with both jobs talk much more
about techniques, such as programming languages, online
tools, while these technique terms are seldom used by peo-
ple with other jobs. Because of the same reason, editors also
have a relatively high precision (81%) and recall (79%).
They mention a lot about reading and writing, and show
stronger interest in politics and social events. Ofﬁce clerks
have relatively low results (precision = 73%, recall = 73%).
This is because although these group of people have unique
preferences (strong self-awareness word like i, my, my life),
these features are also usually used by other people. Mar-
keting, Administrator, Start-up, and Public Relation, have
median performances, with precisions around 78% and re-
calls around 75%. This is because some language patterns
and interests are shared among these four jobs. For exam-
ple, people with these jobs are all interested in business,
companies, and marketing. The prediction results align with
the fact that Software Engineers and Designers are people
whose skills are more specialized, whereas Marketing, Ad-
ministrator, Start-up, and Public Relation require skills that
are less specialized but more holistic, especially for the case
of ofﬁce clerk.
Words and phrases related features have the best perfor-
mance among the three single type features. This is because
words and phrases are the most informative type of features
among three. They cover all the terms used in tweets with
the cost of high dimensions of features. The lexicon LIWC
uses is ﬁxed and relatively small, while topic features are
based on word clusters. Although these two types have fewer
dimensions, the information is also reduced. When combin-
ing the three together, we observe a small boost of perfor-
mance, especially on recall. This suggests that extra infor-
mation brought by LIWC and topics is helpful the in classi-
fying task.
Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper, we investigate the divergences across occupa-
tions. From multiple platforms, we gathered user informa-
tion of several aspects. To overcome the ambiguity and un-
certainty of self-reported information, a soft clustering ap-
proached was applied to extract occupations from crowd-
sourcing data. Linguistic styles were described using the
most positively and negatively correlated words and phrases
to people, while people’s’ interests are learned by extracting
signiﬁcant topics from their tweets. The Big Five Traits are
also inferred using the tweet texts. We used Person Correla-
tion Coefﬁcients to uncover the differences of above human
characteristics across jobs. The results indicate that people
with different jobs have unique preferences to certain lan-
guage styles and interests. Our results also reveal clear di-
vergent levels of the Big Five Traits of different jobs. A clas-
siﬁer was built to predict people’s job based on the features
extracted from tweets. A high accuracy indicates the strong
discrimination of language features on job prediction tasks.
Overall, our study has revealed interesting patterns of how
individuals’ characteristics and daily tweets are connected
to their job proﬁles. By showing the similarities and dis-
similarities between job categories based on those charac-
teristics and communication styles, our ﬁndings suggest that
some individuals can possess set of characteristics that ﬁt

with multiple jobs, while others might possess a set of char-
acteristics that are more unique to one speciﬁc type of job.
In the future, we would like to introduce more features to
categorize people into different job proﬁles, such as using
their job titles and looking into their employment histories.
We are also interested in extracting more human character-
istics, besides personality and use of language, from their
tweets; for examples, their life styles, habits, leisures. By
obtaining richer information from people’s online proﬁles, a
more comprehensive study could be performed to uncover
the deeper connection between people’s personal lives and
their jobs.
Acknowledgment
We would like to thank the support from the New York State
through the Goergen Institute for Data Science, as well as
Xerox Foundation.
