arXiv:1701.03037v1  [cs.AI]  10 Jan 2017
Towards Smart Proof Search for Isabelle
Yutaka Nagashima
Data61, CSIRO, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia

Abstract
Despite the recent progress in automatic theorem provers, proof engineers are still suﬀering from the
lack of powerful proof automation. In this position paper we ﬁrst report our proof strategy language
based on a meta-tool approach. Then, we propose an AI-based approach to drastically improve proof
automation for Isabelle, while identifying three major challenges we plan to address for this objective.
1
PSL and Meta-Tool Approach
In the last decade, we have seen the successful application of automated theorem provers to
assist interactive theorem proving. Despite the popularity of these so-called “hammer-style”
tools, their performance is still suﬀering from the gap between underlying logics [1].
To circumvent this problem, we introduced a proof strategy language, PSL [4], to Is-
abelle/HOL [5], taking a meta-tool approach.
A proof strategy is an abstract description
of how to attack proof obligations. Users write strategies in PSL based on their intuitions on
a conjecture. Using a strategy, PSL’s runtime system generates many invocations of Isabelle’s
native proof tools, called tactics. The runtime tries to ﬁnd out the appropriate combination of
tactics for each goal by trial-and-error. This way, PSL reduces the domain speciﬁc procedure
of interactive theorem proving to the well-known dynamic tree search problem. The meta-tool
language approach brought the following advantages:
• Domain speciﬁc procedures can be added as new sub-tools.
• Sub-tools (including Sledgehammer) can be improved independently of PSL.
• Generated eﬃcient-proof scripts are native Isabelle proofs.
We provided a default strategy, try hard. Our evaluation shows that PSL based on try -
hard signiﬁcantly outperforms Sledgehammer for many use cases [4]. However, PSL’s proof
search procedure is still mostly brute-force. For example, when PSL generates many tactics,
even though each of these is tailored for the proof goal utilizing the runtime information, it is
still the statically written strategy, try hard, that decides:
• what kind of tactics to generate,
• how to combine them, and
• in which order to apply generated tactics.
2
Meta-Tool Based Smart Proof Search
On a fundamental level, this lack of ﬂexibility stems from the procedural nature of Isabelle’s
tactic language, which describes how to prove conjectures in a step-by-step manner rather than
what to do with conjectures. However, a conventional declarative language would not be a good
solution either, since in many cases we cannot determine what to do with a given proof goal
with certainty. Our guess may or may not be right: given a proof goal, we cannot tell which
tactics to use until we complete the goal.

Probabilistic Declarative Proof Strategy Language.
We propose the development of a
probabilistic declarative proof strategy language (PDPSL), which allows for the description of
feasible tactics for arbitrary proof obligation. For example, when we apply a proof strategy,
str, written in PDPSL, to a proof search graph, pgraph, PDPSL’s runtime:
(1) picks up the most promising node in pgraph,
(2) applies the most promising tactic that has not been applied to that node yet, and
(3) adds the resultant node to pgraph, connecting them with a labelled edge representing the
tactic application and weight indicating how promising that tactic application is.
The runtime keeps applying this procedure until it reaches a solved state, in which the proof is
complete. This way, PDPSL executes a best-ﬁrst search at runtime.
The major challenge is the design of PDPSL. A strategy written in PDPSL is applied
repeatedly during a best-ﬁrst search against emerging proof obligations, and we cannot predict
how these intermediate goals look like prior to the search; therefore, weighting of tactics against
concrete proof goals is not good enough. PDPSL should only describe the meta-information on
proof goals and information in Isabelle’s standard library. Such meta-information includes:
• Which ITP mechanism was used to deﬁne constants that appear in the proof obligation?
• Does the conjecture involve recursive functions?
This may sound too restrictive; however, when proof engineers use ITPs, we often reason
on the meta level. For instance, Isabelle’s tutorial [5] introduces the following heuristics:
“Theorems about recursive functions are proved by induction.”
“The right-hand side of an equation should (in some sense) be simpler than the left-hand
side.”
These are independent of user-deﬁned formalisation.
Posterior Proof Attempt Evaluation.
Evaluating a proof goal to write promising tactics
is only half the story of typical interactive proof development. The other half is about evaluating
the results of tactic applications. We presume that posterior evaluations on tactic application
will improve proof search when combined with prior expectations on tactics described in PDPSL.
The main challenge is to ﬁnd a useful measure by:
• discovering (possibly multiple) useful measures that indicate progress in proof search, and
• investigating how to integrate these measures into the best-ﬁrst search of PDPSL.
Of course it is not possible to come up with a heuristic that is guaranteed to work for all
kinds of proof obligations. But when focusing on a particular problem domain such as systems
veriﬁcation, it is plausible to ﬁnd a useful measure to narrow the search space at runtime.
Reinforcement Learning of PDPSL using Large Proof Corpora.
PDPSL is primarily
for engineers to encode their intuitions. But at the next step, we plan to improve this hand-
written heuristics using reinforcement learning on the existing proof corpora.
The Isabelle
community has a repository of formal proofs, called the Archive of Formal Proofs (AFP) [3].
As of 2015, the size of the AFP is larger than one million lines of code. Additionally, the
seL4 project open-sourced roughly 400,000 lines of Isabelle proof script [2]. We speculate that
these large proof corpora will work as the basis for reinforcement learning of strategies written in
PDPSL. The lack of concrete information on proof obligations can be an advantage at this stage:
since PDPSL cannot describe concrete proof obligations, it is less likely to cause over-ﬁtting.
