UAI2001 
POUPART & BOUTILIER 
445 
Vector-space Analysis of Belief-state Approximation for POMDPs 
Pascal Poupart 
Department of Computer Science 
University of Toronto 
Toronto, ON MSS 3H5 

Abstract 
We propose a new approach to value-directed be­
lief state approximation for POMDPs. The value­
directed model allows one to choose approxima­
tion methods for belief state monitoring that have 
a small impact on decision quality. Using a vec­
tor space analysis of the problem, we devise two 
new search procedures for selecting an approxi­
mation scheme that have much better computa­
tional properties than existing methods. Though 
these provide looser error bounds, we show em­
pirically that they have a similar impact on deci­
sion quality in practice, and run up to two orders 
of magnitude more quickly. 
1 
Introduction 
Partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs) 
have attracted considerable attention as a model for 
decision-theoretic planning. Their generality allows one 
to seamlessly model sensor and action uncertainty, uncer­
tainty in the state of knowledge, and multiple objectives 
[ 1, 5]. Their computational intractability has, however, 
limited their practical applicability [ 11, 13]. 
An important approach to POMDPs involves constructing a 
value function for a belief state MDP offline, and maintain­
ing a belief state (or distribution over system states) online, 
which is used to implement an optimal policy [18]. Anum­
ber of approaches attacking the offline computational prob­
lems have been studied, including improved algorithms [6], 
the use of factored representations [2, 8], as well as numer­
ous approximation schemes [9]. Little work has focused on 
the online belief state monitoring problem. Because plan­
ning state spaces grow exponentially with the number of 
variables, maintaining an explicit distribution over states 
is generally impractical. Even when concise representa­
tions such as dynamic Bayes nets (DBNs) are used, moni­
toring is generally intractable, since the independencies ex­
ploited by DBNs vanish over time. Boyen and Koller [3] 
proposed projection schemes for approximate monitoring, 
Craig Boutilier 
Department of Computer Science 
University of Toronto 
Toronto, ON MSS 3H5 

essentially breaking weaker correlations among variables 
to ensure tractability. Poupart and Boutilier [15] proposed 
value-directed methods for approximation, allowing the an­
ticipated loss in expected utility guide the choice of approx­
imation scheme. 
In this paper we pursue the value-directed approach since 
its emphasis on minimizing impact on decision quality is 
a critical factor in devising useful approximations. We use 
the value function itself to determine which correlations can 
be "safely" ignored when monitoring one's belief state. We 
propose an alternative approach to choosing approximation 
schemes for monitoring in POMDPs that overcomes many 
of the computational bottlenecks of [15]. We introduce 
a vector space formulation of the approximation problem 
that allows one to construct approximation schemes with 
looser error bounds, but much more quickly. Despite the 
looser bounds, we show empirically that decision quality is 
rarely worse than that obtained using the more intensive ap­
proaches. Our methods work in time roughly on order of 
the time taken to solve a POMDP, and since they run of­
fline, they can be used with any POMDP technique that can 
currently be applied. Furthermore, these methods take ad­
vantage of the factored (DBN) representations to avoid state 
enumeration. The offline cost allows much faster (approxi­
mate) online policy implementation. Even in cases where 
a POMDP must be solved in a traditional "flat" fashion, 
we typically have the luxury of compiling a value function 
offline. Thus, even for large POMDPs, we might reason­
ably expect to have value function information (either exact 
or approximate) available to direct the monitoring process. 
The fact that one is able to produce a value function offline 
does not imply the ability to monitor the process exactly in 
a timely online fashion.1 Finally, our model offers a novel 
view of the approximation problem for belief state monitor­
ing for POMDPs. 
We briefly overview POMDPs and value-directed approx­
imation in Section 2. We present our vector space formu­
lation in Section 3 and provide some suggestive empirical 
1While techniques exist for generating finite-state controllers 
for POMDPs, there are still reasons for wanting to use value­
function-based approaches [14]. 

446 
POUPART & BOUTILIER 
UAI2001 
results in Section 4. 
2 
POMDPs and Belief State Monitoring 
The key components of a POMDP are: a finite state space 
S; a finite action space A; a finite observation space Z; and 
a reward function R : S -+ R. Actions induce stochastic 
state transitions with specified probabilities, and an agent is 
provided with noisy observations of the system state (with 
specified probabilities). A reward is received at each state 
and an agent's objective is to control the system through ju­
dicious choice of action to maximize the expected reward 
obtained over some horizon of interest. 
The rewards obtained over time by an agent adopting a spe­
cific course of action can be viewed as random variables 
R(t l. Our aim is to construct a policy that maximizes the ex­
pected sum of discounted rewards E{l::Ro 'l R(t)) (where 
1 is a discount factor less than one). An optimal course 
of action can be determined by considering the fully ob­
servable belief state MDP, where belief states (distributions 
over S) form states, and a policy 1r 
: B -+ A maps 
belief states into action choices. A key result of Sondik 
[18] showed that the value function V for a finite-horizon 
problem is piecewise-linear and convex and can be rep­
resented as a finite collection of a-vectors; for infinite­
horizon problems, a finite collection generally offers a good 
approximation. Specifically, one can generate a collection 
N of a-vectors, each of dimension lSI, such that V(b) :::;: 
maxaEI:< b ·a. In Figure 1 the value function is given by 
the upper surface of the five vectors shown. Each vector 
is associated with a specific (course of) action. For finite 
horizon PO MOPs, a set Nk is generated for each stage k of 
the process. Algorithms exist that construct efficient repre­
sentations of a-vectors, such as decision trees or algebraic 
decision diagrams (ADDs), when the POMDP is specified 
concisely using DBNs [2, 8]. 
Insight into the nature of PO MOP value functions can be 
gained by examining Monahan's [12] method for solving 
POMDPs. Monahan's algorithm proceeds by producing a 
sequence of k-stage-to-go value functions Vk, each repre­
sented by a set of a-vectors Nk. Each a E Nk denotes the 
value (as a function of the belief state) of executing a k-step 
conditional plan. More precisely, let the k-step observation 
strategies be the set Oft of mappings u 
: Z -+ Nk-1. 
Then each a-vector in Nk corresponds to the value of ex­
ecuting some action a followed by implementing some u E 
OS'; that is, it is the value of doing a, and executing the 
k - 1-step plan associated with the a-vector u(z) if z is 
observed. Using CP(a) to denote this plan, we have that 
CP(a) 
= (a;ifz;,CP(u(z;))'rlz;). We informally write 
this as (a; u). We write a ( (a; u)) to denote the a-vector re­
flecting the value of this plan. 
The implementation of a policy requires that one monitor 
belief state b over time so that it may be "plugged" into the 
value function (or N) to make a suitable action choice. Be-
Figure 1: The Switch Set Sw(o:3) of a3 
lief states can be maintained by standard Bayesian methods; 
but when lSI is large, the cost is prohibitive. This is espe­
cially true when S is determined by a set of variables X (and 
lSI :::: 0(2IXI)). In such cases, DBNs can be used to rep­
resent the dynamics ofPOMDPs and DBN inference tech­
niques that exploit conditional independence among vari­
ables can be applied to make monitoring more efficient. Un­
fortunately, as shown by Boyen and Koller [3}, in many 
problems most if not all variables of DBNs tend to become 
correlated over time so DBNs offer no significant savings. 
Boyen and Koller introduced projection schemes as a 
method to approximate belief states. Given variables X 
defining S, a projection is a set S of subsets of X with each 
variable in at least one subset. Correlations among vari­
ables within a subset are preserved while the subsets are as­
sumed to be independent. For instance, if X :::;: {A, B, C}, 
then projection S :::: { AB, C} approximates the exact be­
lief state b :::;: Pr(A,B,C) with b' 
:::: Pr(AB)Pr(C). 
The assumed independence allows more efficient monitor­
ing using DBNs: at most, one maintains marginals over 
each subset inS. 
The choice of projection scheme (or any other approx­
imation) can have a dramatic impact on decision qual­
ity in a PO MOP, since the approximate belief b' can lead 
to the choice of a suboptimal course of action. Poupart 
and Boutilier [15] propose a value-directed approximation 
framework allowing computation of bounds on the loss in 
expected utility for projection schemes, and search methods 
for choosing projections that tradeoff decision quality with 
monitoring efficiency. The techniques are computationally 
intensive (potentially requiring time quadratic in the solu­
tion time of the PO MOP); but this offline computation pro­
duces a projection scheme that improves online monitoring 
efficiency with minimal sacrifice in decision quality. We 
briefly outline this model. 
Assume a PO MOP has been solved giving the set 9 of a­
vectors with a E N. Let R(a) be the optimal region for 
a (i.e., the set of belief states b such that o: is maximal for 
b). Given a projection schemeS, the switch set Sw(a) is 

UAI2001 
POUPART & BOUTILIER 
447 
the set of c/ such that S(b) E R(a') for some b E R(a). 
Thus, S could induce one to believe a' has maximum value 
at the current belief state instead of a, thereby erroneously 
"switching to" the plan corresponding to a' from a by using 
S. Figure 1 illustrates a switch set Sw( a3) = { a1, a2, a4}. 
Switch sets can be computed by solving a nonlinear pro­
gram for each a EN. Linear programs (LPs) can be used to 
more effectively produce a superset of the switch set [15]. 
Given the switch sets (or supersets thereof), one can com­
pute an upper bound BS on the loss in expected value for a 
single approximation using S at k stages to go: 
BS = rnaxaeNä< maX(, maxa'ESú(a) b ·(a- a') 
When multistage approximations are applied, one can de­
vise an alternative set which is similar in spirit to the switch 
set. The alternative set Alt( a) is the set of all a-vectors cor­
responding to alternative plans that may be executed as a re­
sult of repeatedly approximating the belief state at all future 
time steps (see [15] for a precise definition). Alt(a) is con­
structed with a dynamic programming procedure similar to 
incremental pruning [ 6]. One can define an upper bound EQ 
on the loss in expected value due to successive belief state 
approximations using S for k stages to go: 
EP = rnaxaeNå< max, maxa'EAltû(a) b ·(a- a') 
These bounds can be extended to infinite-horizon problems. 
Given the bounds B and E, one can search for an "opti­
mal" projection scheme by looking for the projection that 
minimizes one of those bounds. The space of projection 
schemes is very large (factorial in the number of variables), 
but exhibits a nice lattice structure. Figure 2 illustrates the 
lattice of projection schemes when the state space is defined 
by the joint instantiation of variables A, B and C. Each 
point denotes a projection scheme, with "descendents" of 
any projection corresponding to more coarse-grained pro­
jections. As we move down the lattice, accuracy increases 
since the number of correlations among the variables pre­
served in our belief state is increased (hence, error bounds 
B and E monotonically decrease); but monitoring effi­
ciency decreases as we move downward for the same rea­
son. A number of search procedures can be used to traverse 
the lattice, using the error bounds to guide the search. For 
example, a simple (and incremental) greedy scheme is pro­
posed in [15]. The search is stopped when a suitable accu­
racy/efficiency tradeoff has been reached. 
3 
Vector Space Analysis 
We now provide a vector space analysis of belief state ap­
proximation by projection, showing in Section 3 .I that pro­
jections allow movement of belief state only in certain di­
rections (defining a subspace). This allows us to view a­
vectors as determining gradients of value in different direc­
tions: approximations whose directions give similar value 
gradients are less likely to cause switching (hence minimiz­
ing error). In Section 3.2 we use this to design faster switch 
,!-6,A,B,C) 
Figure 2: Lattice of Projection Schemes 
test algorithms than those described above, though yield­
ing looser bounds. In Section 3.3 we devise a new vector­
space search algorithm to find projections without directly 
trying to minimize these error bounds, instead relying on 
value gradient similarity. 
3.1 
Vector space formulation 
Given a projectionS over X, let b and b' = S(b) be points 
in belief space. Define d = b' - b to be the displacement 
vector from b to b'. Projection S determines a set of lin­
ear equations constraining b in terms of b'. For example, 
if X = {X, Y} and S = {X, Y} (i.e., S treats X, Y as 
independent), we have: 
d(xy) + d(xy) + d(xy) + d(xy) 
0 
d(xy) + d(xy) 
0 
d(xy) + d(xy) 
0 
Geometrically, we interpret each equation as a hyperplane; 
and their intersection (or solution space) is a line through 
the origin representing a one-dimensional (in this example) 
subspace. This subspace captures the set of all displace­
ment vectors resulting from the application of S (w.r.t. b'). 
Since all possible displacement vectors lie on the same line, 
they must all have the same direction (vectors with opposite 
orientation are assumed to have the same direction). 
To illustrate, let b(x) = 0.3 and b(y) = 0.4. The approxi­
mate belief state using S above gives: 
b'( xy) 
b'(xy) 
b'(xy) 
b' ( xfi) 
b(x )b(y) 
b(x)b(Y) 
b(x)b(y) 
b(x)b(ii) 
0.12 
0.18 
0.28 
0.42 
Figure 3 shows a three-dimensional belief space for belief 
states xy, xy, xy and xy.2 All belief states b with b(x) = 
2We omit dimension b(xy) as probabilities sum to 1. 

448 
POUPART & BOUTILIER 
UAI2001 
b(xy) 
b(xy)+b(xy)-0.4 
1 b(xyJ 
Figure 3: Solution space of possible exact belief states b 
0.3lie in a hyperplane, and similarly for b(y) = 0.4. T heir 
intersection is the set { b 
: b' = S (b)}, and all displace­
ment vectors forb' have the same direction. (For marginals 
other than 0.3 and 0.4, the hyperplanes and their intersec­
tion shift, but remain parallel). 
Let Ds be the displacement subspace spanned by the set 
of all displacement vectors induced by S: it is completely 
characterized by its marginals (elements) and it describes 
the directions of all displacements. 
In general, Ds is a 
(21XI - c)-dimensional subspace, where c is the number 
of constraints, since it is the solution space of c linearly 
independent equations, each corresponding to a constraint 
d( m) = 0. ( c is the number of subsets of variables con­
tained in some subset m E S, as above.) This is obvious 
when we re\\rrite the constraints as Vm · d = 0, where Vm 
is a boolean lSI-vector with l at states with all X E m true 
and 0 at states with some X E m false.3 In our example, 
we have: 
xy xfj xy xy 
V0 
( 
1 
1 
1 
1 
vx 
( 
1 
1 
0 
0 
Vy 
( 
1 
0 
1 
0 
Let DN be te 
.
subspace spanned by the vectors vm, m E S; 
the space D5 IS the null space of Ds (i.e., the set of vectors 
perpendicular to each vector in D s). 
3.2 
Vector space switch test 
We will see below that the subspaces Ds and DM allow 
a nice characterization of a new switch test. We first con­
sider a simple relaxation of the switch test of [15]. Recall 
from Section 2 that approximation S could induce an agent 
to switch from optimal vector a i to suboptimal vector a j if 
S(b) E R(aj) for some bE R(o:i). The idea behind the re­
laxed vector space (VS) switch test is to simply apply the 
same technique ignoring the presence of other a-vectors. 
The VS switch test asks whether there is some belief state b 
for whichb·a; > b·ajyetS(b)·ai < S(b)·aj. If so,we say 
3The 
generalization 
to 
nonboolean 
variables 
is 
straightforward. 
max 
x 
s.t. 
b·(a;-a;)>x 
b'· (ai -a;)# x 
b'(m') = b(m') 
Vm' Ŧ m, Vm E S 
L b(s) = 1 
b(sj ť 0 
\Is 
b'(s) ŧ 0 
\Is 
Table 1: Linear VS-switch test for projection schemes. This 
LP has a strictly positive objective value iff there is some 
bE R(a;) andb' E R(aj) such that b(m') = b'(m') for 
any subset m' of variables contained in some marginal m E 
s. 
O:j is in the VS-switch set of a;. This is equivalent to ask­
ing if frj E Sw(a;) when all vectors except these two are 
removed from l{. Note that the VS-switch set is a superset 
of the true switch set. 
Since the constraints relating bandS( b) are nonlinear, VS­
switch sets can be computed using nonlinear programs. We 
can define a simpler linear VS-switch test as in Table 1 
which produces a superset of the VS-switch set. This LP 
is a relaxation of the LP switch test [15}. 
Now define frij = a, - aj to be a vector representing the 
difference in expected value for executing a j instead of a;. 
We can show that the VS-switch test for a; and O:j is pos­
itive iff a;j ¢ D"§. Consider a;j as a gradient that mea­
sures the error induced by an approximation when it causes 
a switch from a; to a j. After an approximation, if this dif­
ference changes considerably, the agent is likely to choose 
the wrong maximizing o:-vector. Define the relative error, 
O;j, of this change in the relative assessment of a; with re­
spect to O:j as: 
O;j 
b(a;- aj)- S(b)(a,- O:j) 
d. a;j 
Here a;j can be viewed as a gradient since approxima­
tions corresponding to displacement vectors d parallel to 
a;i maximize the magnitude of d · O:ij. In general, the an­
gle between d and a;j is a good indicator of approximation 
error. In particular, if they are perpendicular, their dot prod­
uct is zero and the relative assessment of a; and aj remains 
unchanged, preventing any switch. By definition, the sub­
space Df is the set of vectors perpendicular to all displace­
ment vectors possibly induced by S, so when aij is a mem­
ber of D"§, all possible displacement vectors are perpendic­
ular to a;j and consequently there cannot be a switch from 
a; to a j. Thus a;j ¢ DO iff the VS-switch test is positive. 
This fact provides for a much more efficient method to com­
?ute switch sets than the LP of Table 1. We decompose O:ij 
m two orthogonal vectors corresponding to the projections 
of a;j onto DL and D s: 
a;j :::: proj( a;j, DN) + proj( O.ij, Ds) 

UAI2001 
POUPART & BOUTILIER 
449 
(where proJ(a, D) stands for the projection of a onto 
D). If a;J 
E Dv, then pro} ( a;i, Dw) 
= a;J and, 
consequently, proj(a;j, Ds) is the zero-vector; otherwise, 
proj(a;j,Ds) is nonzero. We can thus determine ifa;j E 
D-§ by measuring the length of pro j ( O:ij, D s). We have 
that IJproj(a;j, Ds)ll2 
0 when a;i 
E Dw, and 
llproj( a;j, Ds )ll2 > 0 when O:ij rf. D{ In particular, the 
squared length of proj(o:;j, Ds) can be computed by the 
following equation: 
llproj(a;j, Ds)llx = a;j · O:ij- L (a;j · vf 
(1) 
tJE'Df 
Here v-§ is some orthonormal basis spanning D-§. The 
spanning set of vectors Vm above can be used to generate 
several orthonormal bases using the Gram-Schmidt orthog­
onalization process and normalizing. We consider a spe­
cific orthonormal basis in particular-which we refer to as 
Vf-because of its factored representation. For problems 
involving binary variables, every vector in Vf consists of 
a sequence of 1 's and -1 's (before normalization). The un­
normalized basis vector iim associated with subset m has a 
1 in every component corresponding to a state with an even 
number of true variables in m and -1 in every component 
corresponding to a state with an odd number of true vari­
ables in m. For instance, projection S = { XY, Y Z} has 
six marginals (0, X ,  Y, Z, XY andY Z), yielding the fol­
lowing basis vectors:4 
iie 
) t v'§ 
vx 
= 
-1 
-1 
- 1  
-1 
) I JiSi 
iiy 
-1 
-1 
-1 
-1 
) I J§ 
iiz 
-1 
-1 
-1 
-1 
) I JiSi 
vxy 
= 
-1 
-1 
-1 
-1 
) I JiSi 
vyz = 
-1 
-1 
-1 
- 1  
) I JiSi 
With this orthonormal basis, we can implement VS-switch 
tests very effectively, without recourse to the LP in Table 1. 
We must simply compute Eq. 1 which requires O(c) dot 
products. If unstructured, each dot product requires 0 (IS I) 
elementary operations, for a total time ofO(ciSI). The use 
of factored representations such as ADDs considerably im­
proves this rwming time. Each basis vector has only two 
distinct values, and yields a very compact ADD representa­
tion. Assuming that the POMDP has been solved to pro­
duce ADD representations of the a-vectors, then the a;j 
will have compact representations, and the dot products will 
be computed very efficiently: often a small constant inde­
pendent of the size of the state space. Hence, for sufficiently 
structured POMDPs, the effective rwming time of a VS­
switch test is O(c). 
By comparison, solving the linear program of an LP-switch 
test [ 15] is polynomial in the number of constraints c and 
the size of the state space. Furthermore, ADDs do not pro­
vide as useful a speed up for LPs since the effective state 
4This definition can be generalized to non-binary variables. 
space is the intersection of the abstract state space of all the 
constraints. The price paid is that the B and E bounds com­
puted using the VS-switch test will generally be looser than 
that using the original LP test. As in Section 2, these bounds 
can be used to search the lattice of projection schemes for 
making appropriate time-decision quality tradeoffs. 
3.3 
Vector space search 
In this section we describe an alternative search method 
based on the relative error expression O;j. We do not com­
pute switch sets at all, nor attempt to minimize worst-case 
error bounds as above. This new vector-space (VS) search 
process instead seeks a projection S which defines a dis­
placement subspace D s that is as perpendicular as possible 
to all gradients O:ij. This is motivated by the observation 
that the more perpendicular the direction of an approxima­
tion with respect to a;j, the smaller the magnitude of J;j 
and, consequently, the less likely a switch will occur. Tech­
nically, this is done by minimizing the squared length of the 
projection of each gradient a;j on Ds (as in Eq. 1). 
The length of proj ( a;i, Ds) has a special interpretation: it 
corresponds to the greatest (absolute) relative error rate for 
an approximation in some direction d E Ds. The relative 
error rate corresponding to displacement vector dis the rel­
ative error induced by a unit displacement in the direction 
ofd: 
d 
lldll2 . Ojj 
Hence, by choosing a projectionS that minimizes Eq. 1, we 
are minimizing the (squared) worst relative error rate that 
may result from projection S. When ignoring the distance 
between the exact and approximate belief states, the rela­
tive error rate permits us to quantify how bad an approxi­
mation in some direction is likely to be. Each projection S 
constrains approximations to directions within the subspace 
Ds. The direction d E Ds with the highest (absolute) rel­
ative error rate has this worst relative error rate, which also 
happens to be llproj( O:ij, Ds) ll2· Thus, it is desirable to try 
to minimize Expression 1. 
Ideally we should choose an S that simultaneously mini­
mizes Eq. 1 for every gradient a;J (J i= i). In the absence of 
any prior information about the relative importance of each 
gradient, we suggest two simple schemes: (a) minimize the 
sum of squared lengths of each projection; or (b) minimize 
the squared length of the greatest projection: 
L llproj(a;j, Ds)llx 
j¢i 
= L(a;j. D'jj- 2::: v .  a;j) 
(2) 
#i 
tJEDt 
ùJ?' llproj(a;j, Ds)llx 
:Jr-• 

450 
POUPART & BOUTILIER 
UAI2001 
We refer to these schemes as the sum and the max error es­
timators, respectively, for projection schemes. Of course, 
many other schemes could be proposed. 
Given a vector o:; E 9. VS search uses either Eq. 2 or Eq. 3 
above to find a good projection S as follows. Starting at 
the root, we traverse the lattice of projection schemes (Fig­
ure 2) downward in a greedy manner. At each node, we pick 
the most promising child by minimizing Eq. 2 or Eq. 3 The 
computational complexity of a VS search is fairly low as it 
avoids LPs. Its running time is O(nc3JXI2ISI), since one 
good projection must be found for each of the I9 I regions 
R(o:). For each region, O(nc2) nodes in the lattice are tra­
versed, each requiring the evaluation ofEq. 2 or Eq. 3 which 
both take O(ci!XIISI) elementary operations. 
The VS search can also be streamlined. The constraints of a 
node S are essentially the same as the constraints of its par­
ent node S' with one extra constraint corresponding to the 
marginal m that labels the edge connecting the two nodes. 
Since there is one basis vector per constraint, the following 
equation holds: 
This means that both Eq. 2 and Eq. 3 can be computed in­
crementally as the lattice is traversed downward: 
I: Jlproj(o:;j, Ds)llV 
j#i 
= L jjproj(aij, Ds,)llV- Vm · o:;j 
jt.i 
øJi< jjproj(a;j, Ds)IJV 
J r- l 
= 
WJ;<]]proj(a;j,Ds,)JjV -vm ·O:;j 
Jr-> 
This incremental computation scheme for traversing the lat­
tice reduces the running time to O(nc2JXI2JSI) since only 
one dot product needs to be computed instead of one for 
each of the c constraints. This running time is significantly 
smaller thanO(nc2+ki9IISik) for the B-bound or E-bound 
greedy search with LP-switch tests used in [15]. As for 
the B-bound or E-bound greedy search with VS-switch 
tests, the running time O(nc3JXIJSI) is comparable. The 
VS search has an extra I9 I factor, but one less c factor. In 
practice, I9 I is usually larger than c, so the VS search is ac­
tually slower. Again, the upper bounds on running times 
are given in terms of lSI, but in practice, factored represen­
tations can drastically reduce the size of the effective state 
space for structured POMDPs. 
4 
Empirical Evaluation 
Three test problems were used to carry out the experiments. 
The first POMDP is essentially the coffee problem intro­
duced by Boutilier and Poole [2]. The second POMDP is a 
variation of the widget problem described by Draper, Hanks 
Problem 
State Space Size 
Size of !X 
Solution 
full 
effective 
max 
aver. 
time (s) 
Coffee 
32 
12 
102 
56 
47 
Widget 
32 
14 
205 
121 
397 
Pavement 
128 
85 
39 
16 
250 
Table 2: Solution statistics for the three test problems 
and Weld [7]. The third POMDP is inspired from the pave­
ment maintenance problem described by Puterman [ 17]. 
Since the analysis of the experiments doesn't require any 
specific domain knowledge, the reader is referred to [14] in 
which the full specification of those problems is given. 
Each of the three problems was solved using Hansen and 
Feng's [8] ADD implementation of incremental pruning 
(IP) to produce a set 9 of a-vectors using a compact ADD 
representation. 
Each problem is run to 15 stages (dis­
counted). Table 2 shows, for each problem, its full state 
space size, lSI, and its effective size, the largest intersec­
tion of abstract (ADD) states encountered during solution 
(specifically, the LP-dominance test in IP). The effective 
size is more relevant to solution time than jSj. We also 
show the solution time (in seconds) along with the average 
size of the sets !X over the fifteen stages and the maximum 
size set. 
Once solved, we searched for a good projection scheme for 
each POMDP by minimizing different error bounds and/or 
using different switch tests, as described above. Specifi­
cally, six algorithms are tested: the B-bound and E-bound 
search of [15], which computes switch sets using an LP 
and chooses a projection using either the B or E error 
bounds; the VS analogs of these procedures which com­
putes weaker VS-switch sets using the algebraic formula­
tion of Section 3.2; and the VS search methods (sum and 
max) of Section 3.3, which ignore these bounds, but instead 
try to minimize Eq. 2 or Eq. 3. All search algorithms per­
form a lattice search within the set of projection schemes 
that partition variables in disjoint subsets. Furthermore, as­
suming that marginals of at most two variables provide a 
suitable efficiency/accuracy tradeoff, the lattice is traversed 
until all children of a node correspond to projections with a 
marginal with 3 variables. This last node is the projection 
scheme returned by the search. 
We compare the time required to find a good projection us­
ing the different search procedures in Table 3. As expected, 
the running time is much less when using VS-switch tests 
(compared to LP-switch tests), since VS-switch tests do not 
require the solution of LPs. As for VS search algorithms, 
whether we minimize the sum of the relative error rates or 
their maximum, the running time is roughly the same and 
it is significantly faster than B-bound and E-bound search 
algorithms that use LP-switch tests, but a bit slower if VS 

UAI2001 
POUPART & BOUTILIER 
451 
Problem 
Solut. 
B-bd search 
E-bd search 
VS search 
time 
LP 
vs 
LP 
vs 
max sum 
Coffee 
47 
1019 
30 
4379 
2651 
151 
154 
widget 
397 
10142 
109 
89605 48695 
707 
703 
Pavement 
250 
345 
35 
841 
126 
97 
96 
Table 3: Search running time in seconds 
Error 
B-bd search 
E-bd search 
VS search 
LP 
vs 
LP 
vs 
max 
sum 
Single 
Aver. 0.0013 0.0063 0.0063 0.0063 0.0013 0.0014 
Approx B-bd 3.2840 5.9150 4.3910 5.9150 3.2840 3.2840 
Several Aver. 0.0144 0.0161 0.0161 0 .0161 0.0154 0.0107 
Approx E-bd 13.085 13.085 13.085 13.085 13.085 13.085 
Table 4: Coffee problem: error comparisons 
switch tests are used forB-bound search. This is because, 
on the one hand, the VS search does not solve LPs (com­
pared to LP-switch tests), but on the other hand, it has a 
stronger dependence on the number of a-vectors (compared 
to VS-switch tests). The time to search for good projections 
can be much worse than that of solving POMDPs (though 
this offline cost translates into online gains). In fact, only 
search procedures that avoid solving LPs scale effectively 
to larger problems. In some cases, these offer a decrease of 
up to two orders of magnitude. The running time ofVS pro­
cedures is roughly of the same order of magnitude as that of 
the POMDP solution procedures. 
We also compare the actual average error, as well as the for­
mal B and E error bounds, obtained when applying the pro­
jection schemes found by various search algorithms (Tables 
4, 5 and 6). The average error is the average loss incurred 
for 5000 random initial belief states generated from a uni­
form distribution. We see that the average error is essen­
tially the same whether the VS search procedure is used or 
some error bound is minimized. As a result, the dramatic 
computational savings associated with the VS procedures 
has effectively no impact on solution quality. Note that the 
B and E bounds are much larger than the average error 
observed because the bounds are concerned with the worst 
case scenario and, furthermore, they are not tight (supersets 
of the switch sets are really computed). 
5 
Concluding Remarks 
We have proposed a new approach to value-directed 
belief state approximation for POMDPs. Our vector space 
approach-using either VS-switch tests or direct VS 
search-offers significant computational benefits over the 
value-directed methods proposed by Poupart and Boutilier 
[15]. W hile the error bounds are looser, we have seen in 
practice that our new schemes perform as well as the others 
Error 
B-bd search 
E-bd search 
VS search 
LP 
vs 
LP 
vs 
max 
sum 
Single 
Aver. 0.0352 0.0352 0.0352 0.0352 0.0082 0.0081 
Approx B-bd 3.4080 3.6270 3.4080 3.6270 3.4080 3.4080 
Several Aver. 0.0509 0.0508 0.0508 0.0508 0.0519 0.0517 
Approx E-bd 8.3811 8.3811 8.3811 8.3811 8.3811 8.3811 
Table 5: Widget problem: error comparisons 
Error 
B-bd search 
E-bd search 
VS search 
LP 
vs 
LP 
vs 
max 
sum 
Single 
Aver. 0.0015 0.0015 0.0015 0.0015 0.0014 0.0014 
Approx B-bd 5.3860 5.6900 5.3860 5.6900 5.3680 5.6160 
Several Aver. 0.0066 0.0066 0.0066 0.0066 0.0071 0.0028 
Approx E-bd 23.218 35.392 23.498 35.392 23.874 24.384 
Table 6: Pavement problem: error comparisons 
with respect to solution quality; thus the computational 
savings are achieved with little impact on decision quality. 
Furthermore, the vector space model provides new insights 
into the belief state approximation problem and how 
approximation impacts decision quality. 
This novel view also gives us access to numerous tools from 
linear algebra to design approximation methods that could 
potentially offer better tradeoff's between decision quality 
and monitoring efficiency. 
For instance, it would be in­
teresting to investigate linear projectors since they allow 
the design of linear approximation methods by specifying 
(among other things) a displacement subspace Ds which 
could be made as perpendicular as possible to the gradi­
ent vectors aij. Linear projectors are well-studied approx­
imation methods with numerous properties and therefore 
they provide a promising alternative for improving value­
directed approximate belief state monitoring. 
The success and scalability of our methods strongly de­
pends on the structure and compactness of the a-vectors. 
Therefore, one could also analyze the dependency between 
the a-vector structure and the conditional independence 
structure of the transition and observation functions. From 
a linear algebra perspective, the a-vectors can be viewed as 
a discounted sum of reward vectors multiplied by transition 
and observation matrices. T hus compact and structured a­
vectors could arise when the reward vectors fall into a small 
invariant subspace of the transition and observation matri­
ces. A possible direction of research would then be to re­
late the conditional independence structure of the transition 
and observation functions with their eigenvalue and eigen­
vector properties since they define the invariant subspaces. 
This would allow us to better characterize the situations in 
which our approach is suitable. 
We are currently extending this approach, and its analysis, 

452 
POUPART & BOUTILIER 
UAI2001 
in a number of different directions. First, we motivated this 
work by focusing on infinite-horizon POMDPs, though our 
algorithms and analysis assume a finite set of a-vectors. Of­
ten one is forced to approximate the value function (e.g., by 
producing a finite set of vectors where an infinite set is re­
quired, or simply by reducing the number of vectors to keep 
it manageable in size). Our algorithms can be applied di­
rectly to approximate value functions, and we expect that 
the analysis can be extended with suitable modifications as 
well. We are also interested in applying the idea of value­
directed monitoring to other representations of value func­
tions and other forms of approximate monitoring. The use 
of grid-based value functions [ 4, 9, 1 0] provides a very at­
tractive method for producing approximate value functions 
for which approximate monitoring will generally be neces­
sary. We expect that information in grid-based value func­
tions can be used profitably to direct the choice of projection 
(or other approximation) schemes. The use of value infor­
mation to guide other belief state approximation methods is 
also of tremendous interest: we have recently developed a 
sampling (particle filtering) algorithm that is influenced by 
value function information [16]. Finally, if it is taken for 
granted that some form ofbelief state approximation will be 
used, one might attempt to solve the POMDP to account for 
this fact; that is, can we construct policies that are optimal 
subject to the resource constraints placed on the monitoring 
process? 
Acknowledgements: This research was supported by the 
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council and 
the Institute for Robotics and Intelligent Systems.
