arXiv:2001.00329v2  [cs.AI]  11 May 2020
On Consequentialism and Fairness
Dallas Card1
Noah A. Smith2,3
1 Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA
2 University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA
3 Allen Institute for AI, Seattle, Washington, USA
May 2020
Abstract
Recent work on fairness in machine learning has primarily emphasized how to deﬁne, quantify, and
encourage “fair” outcomes. Less attention has been paid, however, to the ethical foundations which un-
derlie such efforts. Among the ethical perspectives that should be taken into consideration is consequen-
tialism, the position that, roughly speaking, outcomes are all that matter. Although consequentialism
is not free from difﬁculties, and although it does not necessarily provide a tractable way of choosing
actions (because of the combined problems of uncertainty, subjectivity, and aggregation), it neverthe-
less provides a powerful foundation from which to critique the existing literature on machine learning
fairness. Moreover, it brings to the fore some of the tradeoffs involved, including the problem of who
counts, the pros and cons of using a policy, and the relative value of the distant future. In this paper
we provide a consequentialist critique of common deﬁnitions of fairness within machine learning, as
well as a machine learning perspective on consequentialism. We conclude with a broader discussion of
the issues of learning and randomization, which have important implications for the ethics of automated
decision making systems.
1
Introduction
In recent years, computer scientists have increasingly come to recognize that artiﬁcial intelligence (AI)
systems have the potential to create harmful consequences. Especially within machine learning, there have
been numerous efforts to formally characterize various notions of fairness and develop algorithms to satisfy
these criteria. However, most of this research has proceeded without any nuanced discussion of ethical
foundations. Partly as a response, there have been several recent calls to think more broadly about the
ethical implications of AI (Barabas et al., 2018; Hu and Chen, 2018a; Torresen, 2018; Green, 2019).
Among the most prominent approaches to ethics within philosophy is a highly inﬂuential position known
as consequentialism. Roughly speaking, the consequentialist believes that outcomes are all that matter, and
that people should therefore endeavour to act so as to produce the best consequences, based on an impartial
perspective as to what is best.
Although there are numerous difﬁculties with consequentialism in practice (see §4), it nevertheless pro-
vides a clear and principled foundation from which to critique proposals which fall short of its ideals. In
this paper, we analyze the literature on fairness within machine learning, and show how it largely depends
on assumptions which the consequentialist perspective reveals immediately to be problematic. In particular,
we make the following contributions:
1

• We provide an accessible overview of the main ideas of consequentialism (§3), as well as a discussion
of its difﬁculties (§4), with a special emphasis on computational limitations.
• We review the dominant ideas about fairness in the machine learning literature (§5), and provide the
ﬁrst critique of these ideas explicitly from the perspective of consequentialism (§6).
• We conclude with a broader discussion of the ethical issues raised by learning and randomization,
highlighting future direction for both AI and consequentialism (§7).
2
Motivating Examples
Before providing a formal description of consequentialism (§3), we will begin with a series of motivating
examples which illustrate some of the difﬁculties involved. We consider three variations on decisions about
lending money, a frequently-used example in discussions about fairness, and an area in which AI could have
signiﬁcant real-world consequences.
First, imagine being asked by a relative for a small personal loan. This would seem to be a relatively low-
stakes decision involving a simple tradeoff (e.g., ﬁnancial burden vs. familial strife). Although this decision
could in principle have massive long term consequences (perhaps the relative will start a business that will
have a large impact, etc.), it is the immediate consequences which will likely dominate the decision. On
the other hand, treating this as a simple yes-or-no decision fails to recognize the full range of possibilities.
A consequentialist might suggest that we consider all possible uses of the money, such as investing it, or
lending it to someone in even greater need. Whereas commonsense morality might direct us to favor our
relatives over strangers, the notion of impartiality inherent in consequentialism presents a challenge to this
perspective, thus raising the problem of demandingness (§4.4).
Second, consider a bank executive creating a policy to determine who will or will not be granted a loan.
This policy will affect not only would-be borrowers, but also the ﬁnancial health of the bank, its employees,
etc. In this case, the bank will likely be bound by various forms of regulation which will constrain the
policy. Even a decision maker with an impartial perspective will be bound by these laws (the breaking
of which might entail severe negative consequences). In addition, the bank might wish to create a policy
that will be perceived as fair, yet knowing the literature on machine learning fairness, they will know that
no policy will simultaneously satisfy all criteria that have been proposed (§5). Moreover, there may be a
tradeoff between short-term proﬁts and long-term success (§4.2).
Finally, consider a legislator trying to craft legislation that will govern the space of policies that banks are
allowed to use in determining who will get a loan. This is an even more high-level decision that could have
even more far reaching consequences. As a democratic society, we may hope that those in government will
work for the beneﬁt of all (though this hope may often be disappointed in practice), but it is unclear how even
a selﬂess legislator should balance all competing interests (§4.1). Moreover, even if there were consensus
on the desired outcome, determining the expected consequences of any particular governing policy will be
extremely difﬁcult, as banks will react to any such legislation, trying to maximize their own interests while
respecting the letter of the law, thus raising the problem of uncertainty (§4.3).
Although these scenarios are distinct, each of the issues raised applies to some extent in each case.
As we will discuss, work on fairness within machine learning has focused primarily on the intermediate,
institutional case, and has largely ignored the broader context. We will begin with an in-depth overview of
consequentialism that engages with these difﬁculties, and then show that it nevertheless provides a useful
critical perspective on conventional thinking about fairness within machine learning (§6).
2

3
Consequentialism Deﬁned
3.1
Overview
The literature on consequentialism is vast, including many nuances that will not concern us here. The most
well known expressions can be found in the writings of Jeremy Bentham (1970 [1781]) and John Stuart Mill
(1979 [1863]), later reﬁned by philosophers such as Henry Sidgwick (1967), Elizabeth Anscombe (1958),
Derek Parﬁt (1984), and Peter Singer (1993). The basic idea which uniﬁes all of this thinking is that only
the outcomes that result from our actions (i.e., the relative value of possible worlds that might exist in the
future) have moral relevance.
Before proceeding, it is helpful to consider three lenses through which we can make sense of an ethical
theory. First, we can consider a statement to be a claim about what would be objectively best, given some sort
of full knowledge and understanding of the universe. Second, we can think of an ethical theory as a proposed
guide for how someone should choose to act in a particular situation (which may only align partially with an
objective perspective, due to limited information). Third, although less conventional, we can think of ethics
as a way to interpret the actions taken by others. In the sense that “actions speak louder than words,” we can
treat people’s behavior as revealing of their view of what is morally correct (Greene and Haidt, 2002).
Although consequentialism is typically presented in a more abstract philosophical form (often illustrated
via thought experiments), we will begin with a concise mathematical formulation of the two most common
forms of consequentialism, known as act consequentialism and rule consequentialism. For the moment, we
will intentionally adopt the objective perspective, before returning to practical difﬁculties below.
3.2
Act Consequentialism
First, consider the proposal known as act consequentialism. This theory says, simply, that the best action
to take in any situation is the one that will produce the best outcomes (Smart and Williams, 1973; Railton,
1984). To be precise, let us deﬁne the set of possible actions, A, and an evaluation function v(·). According
to act consequentialism, the best action to take is the one that will lead to the consequences with the greatest
value, i.e.,
a∗= arg max
a∈A
v(ca),
(1)
where v(ca) computes the value of consequences, ca, which follow from taking action a. Importantly,
note that ca here represents not just the local or immediate consequences of a, but all consequences (Kagan,
1998). In other words, we can think of the decision as a branching point in the universe, and want to evaluate
how it will unfold based on the action that is taken at a particular moment in time (Portmore, 2011).
While Eq. 1 might seem tautological, it is by no means a universally agreed upon deﬁnition of what
is best. For example, many deontological theories posit that certain actions should never be permitted (or
that some might always be required), no matter what the consequences. In addition, there are some obvious
difﬁculties with Eq. 1, especially the question of how to deﬁne the evaluation function v(·). We will return
to this and other difﬁculties below (§4), but for the moment we will put them aside.
One might object that perhaps there is inherent randomness in the universe, leading to uncertainty about
ca. In that case, we can sensibly deﬁne the optimal action in terms of the expected value of all future
consequences, i.e.,
a∗= arg max
a∈A
Ep(c|a)[v(c)],
(2)
where p(c | a) represents the true probability (according to the universe) that consequences c will follow
from action a. That is, for each possible action, we would consider all possible outcomes which might
result from that action, and sum their values, weighted by the respective probabilities that they will occur,
recommending the action with the highest expected value.
3

To make the dependence on future consequences more explicit, it can be helpful to factor the expected
value into a summation over time, optionally with some sort of discounting. Although consequentialism
does not require that we factorize the value of the future in this way, it will prove convenient in further
elaboration of these ideas. For the sake of simplicity, we will assume that time can be discretized into ﬁnite
steps. A statement of act consequentialism using a simple geometric discounting factor would then be:
a∗= arg max
a∈A
∞
X
t=0
γt · Ep(st+1|a)[v(st+1)],
(3)
where p(st+1 | a) represents the probability that the universe will be in state s at time t + 1 if we take action
a at time t = 0, and 0 ≤γ ≤1 represents the discount factor. A discount factor of 0 means that only the
immediate consequences of an action are relevant, whereas a discount factor of 1 means that all times in the
future are valued equally.1
3.3
Rule Consequentialism
The main alternative to act consequentialism is a variant known as rule consequentialism (Harsanyi, 1977;
Hooker, 2002). As the name suggests, rule consequentialism is similar to act consequentialism, except that
rather than focusing on the best action in each unique situation, it suggests that we should act according to a
set of rules governing all situations, and adopt the set of rules which will lead to the best overall outcomes.2
Here, we will refer to a set of rules as a policy, and allow for the policy to be stochastic. In other
words, a policy, π, is a probability distribution over possible actions conditional on the present state s, i.e.,
π(s) ≜p(a | s). To make a decision, an action is sampled randomly from this distribution.3 Using the same
temporal factorization as above, we can formalize rule consequentialism as
π∗= arg max
π∈Π
Ep(st′+1|at′,st′)π(at′|st′)
" ∞
X
t=0
γt · v(st+1)
#
,
(4)
where Π represents the space of possible policies, and the expectation is now taken with respect to the
governing dynamics, in which actions are selected based on the state of the world, i.e. at ∼π(at | st), and
the next state depends on the current state of the world and the action taken, i.e., st+1 ∼p(st+1 | st, at).
While some have suggested that rule consequentialism is strictly inferior to act consequentialism, in
that it fails to treat each situation as unique (Railton, 1984), others have argued for it, citing the inability
of individuals to accurately determine the best action in each unique situation (Hooker, 2002), as well as
beneﬁts from coordination and incentives (Harsanyi, 1977). As noted by various papers (e.g., Abel et al.,
2016), Eq. 4 bears a striking resemblance to the problem of reinforcement learning.4 While this similarity
is provocative, we will defer discussion of it (and the more general question of learning) until section §7.
It is important to emphasize that the above formulation is a highly stylized discussion of morality, largely
divorced from reality, which tries to encapsulate a large body of philosophical writing put forward under the
name “consequentialism”. Thinking about what this formulation has to tell us about how individuals make
(or should make) choices requires further elaboration, which we revisit below (§4).
1One could similarly augment Eq. 3 to make any epistemic uncertainty about the evaluation function or discount factor explicit.
2In some cases, rule consequentialism is formulated as the problem of choosing the set of rules which, if internalized by the vast
majority of the community, would lead to the best consequences (Hooker, 2002).
3Most treatments of consequentialism assume that the rules determine a single correct action for each situation. However, the
formulation presented here is strictly more general; deterministic policies are those that assign all probability mass to a single action
for each state.
4Eq. 4 is equivalent to the standard formulation of a Markov decision process if we restrict ourselves to a ﬁnite set of states
s ∈S, actions a ∈A, transition probabilities p(st+1 | st, at), and discount factor γ.
4

3.4
Competing Ethical Frameworks
The primary contrasting proposals to consequentialism are a) deontology; and b) theories in the social
contract tradition. As mentioned above, deontological theories posit that there are certain restrictions or
requirements on action, a priori, which cannot be violated. For example, various religious traditions place
restrictions on lending money, or require a certain level of charitable giving. Using the framework estab-
lished above, we can describe deontological theories as constraints on the action space, A, or policy space,
Π (Kagan, 1998). While they may accord more with our commonsense notions of morality (see §4.4), de-
ontological theories are open to challenge because of their inability to justify the particular constraints they
specify, as well as the implication that they would fail to produce the best outcomes in certain scenarios
(Schefﬂer, 1994; Smart and Williams, 1973).
By contrast, social contract theories are more concerned with determining the rules, or ways of organiz-
ing society, that a group of free and reasonable people would agree to in an idealized deliberative scenario.5
Most famously in this tradition, John Rawls suggested that we should imagine people designing society
behind a “veil of ignorance”, not knowing what position they will hold in that society (Rawls, 1971). We
cannot possibly do justice to these other schools of thought in the space available, but we note that there is
value in thinking about sociotechnical systems from multiple ethical perspectives, and encourage others to
elaborate on these points.6
In this paper, we focus on consequentialism not because it is necessarily superior to the alternatives, but
because it is inﬂuential, and because it might seem, at ﬁrst glance, to have a natural afﬁnity with machine
learning and optimization. While there have been many papers providing brief summaries of various ethical
theories and their relevance to AI, we believe that a more in-depth treatment is required to fully unpack the
implications of each, and would encourage similar consideration of the above traditions, as well as virtue
ethics, feminist ethics, etc.
Before discussing the problems with consequentialism, it is useful to note that the formulation given
in Eq. 4 highlights three important matters about which reasonable people might disagree, with respect to
how we should act (alluded to in §2): we might disagree about the relative value of different outcomes (the
evaluation function, v(·)); we might disagree about the likely effects of different actions (the probability of
outcomes, p(st+1 | st, at)); and we might disagree about how much weight to place on the distant future
(the discount factor, γ).
4
Difﬁculties of Consequentialism
Even if one accepts the idea in Eq. 2—that the best action is the one that will produce the best outcome
in expectation, with no a priori restrictions on the action space, there are still numerous difﬁculties with
consequentialism, both theoretically and in practice.
4.1
Value
Perhaps the most vexing part of consequentialism is the evaluation function, v(·). Even if one had perfect
knowledge of how the universe would unfold conditional on each possible action, choosing the best action
would still require some sort of objective way of characterizing the relative value of each possible outcome.
Most writers on consequentialism agree that the speciﬁcation of value should be impartial, in that it should
5E.g., “An act is wrong if its performance under the circumstances would be disallowed by any set of principles for the general
regulation of behaviour that no one could reasonably reject as a basis for informed, unforced, general agreement” (Scanlon, 1998).
6For a review of how Rawls has been applied within information sciences, see Hoffmann (2017).
5

not give arbitrary priority to particular individuals (Singer, 1993; Kagan, 1998), but this is far from sufﬁcient
for resolving this difﬁculty.7
By far the most common way of simplifying the evaluation of outcomes, both within writings on con-
sequentialism and in decision theory, is to adopt the classic utilitarian perspective (Mill, 1979 [1863];
Smart and Williams, 1973). Although there are many variations, the most common statement of utilitarian-
ism is that the value of a state is equal to the sum of the well-being experienced by all individual entities.8
The most common social welfare function is thus
v(s) =
X
e∈E
we(s),
(5)
where E represents the set of entities under consideration, and we(s) measures the absolute well-being of
entity e in state s.9
Although utilitarianism is highly inﬂuential, there are fundamental difﬁculties with it. First, aggregating
well-being requires measuring individual welfare, but it is unclear that it can be measured in a way that
allows for fair comparisons, at least given current technology. Even if we restrict the set of morally relevant
entities to humans, issues of subjectivity, disposition, and self-reporting make it difﬁcult if not impossible
to meaningfully compare across individuals (Binmore, 2009).
Second, even if there were a satisfactory way of measuring individual well-being, there are computa-
tional difﬁculties involved in estimating these values for hypothetical worlds. Given that well-being could
depend on ﬁne-grained details of the state of the world, it is unclear what level of precision would be re-
quired of a model in order to evaluate well-being for each entity. Thus, even estimating the overall value of
a single state of the world might be infeasible, let alone a progression of them over time.
Third, any function which maps from the welfare of multiple entities to a single scalar will fail to
distinguish between dramatically different distributions. Using the sum, for example, will treat as equivalent
two states with the same total value, but with different levels of inequality (Parﬁt, 1984). While this failing is
not necessarily insurmountable, most solutions seem to undermine the inherent simplicity of the utilitarian
ideal.10
Fourth, others have challenged the ideal of impartiality on the grounds that it is subtly paternalist, em-
phasizes individual autonomy over relationships and care, and ignores existing relations of power (Friedman,
1991; Smart and Williams, 1973; Driver, 2005; Kittay, 2009). Undoubtedly, there is a long and troubling
history of otherwise enlightened philosophers presuming to know what is best for others, and being blind
to the harms of institutions such as colonialism, while believing that certain classes of people either don’t
count or are incapable of full rationality (Mills, 1987; Schultz and Varouxakis, 2005).
Ultimately, it seems inescapable to conclude that there is no universally acceptable evaluation function
for consequentialism. Rather, we must acknowledge that every action will entail an uneven distribution
of costs and beneﬁts. Even in the case where an action literally makes everyone better off, it will almost
certainly beneﬁt some more than others. As such, the most credible position is to view the idea of valuation
(utilitarian or otherwise) as inherently contested and political. While we might insist that an admissible
evaluation function conform to certain criteria, such as disinterestedness, or not being self-defeating (Parﬁt,
7Sidgwick (1967) writes, “I obtain the self-evident principle that the good of any one individual is of no more importance, from
the point of view (if I may say so) of the Universe, than the good of any other; unless, that is, there are special grounds for believing
that more good is likely to be realized in the one case than in the other.”
8The philosophical literature in some cases uses happiness or the satisfaction of preferences, rather than well-being, but this
distinction is not essential for our purposes.
9Note that using a separate value function for each entity accounts for variation in preferences, and allows for some entities to
“count” for more than others, as when the set of relevant entities includes animals, or all sentient beings (Kagan, 1998).
10For example, one could model well-being as a non-linear, increasing, concave (e.g. logarithmic) function of other attributes
such as wealth (i.e., diminishing marginal utility), which would encourage a more equal distribution of resources. Alternatively,
one could try to incorporate people’s suffering due to inequality into their value functions (de Lazari-Radek and Singer, 2017).
6

1984), we must also acknowledge that advocating for a particular notion of value as correct is fundamentally
a political act.
4.2
Temporal Discounting
Even if there were an unproblematic way of assessing the relative value of a state of the world, the extent to
which we should value the distant future is yet another point of potential disagreement. It is common (for
somewhat orthogonal reasons) to apply temporal discounting in economics, but it is not obvious that there
is any good reason to do so when it comes to moral value (Cowen and Parﬁt, 1992; Cowen, 2006). Just as
philosophers such as Peter Singer have argued that we should not discount the value of a human life simply
because a person happens to live far away (Singer, 1972), one could argue that the lives of those who will
live in the future should count for as much as the lives of people who are alive today.
Unfortunately, it is difﬁcult to avoid discounting in practice, as it becomes increasingly difﬁcult to predict
the consequences of our actions farther into the future. Even if we assume a ﬁnite action space, the number
of possible worlds to consider will grow exponentially over time. Moreover, because of the chaotic nature
of complex systems, even if we had complete knowledge of the causal structure of the universe, we would
be limited in our ability to predict the future by lack of precision in our knowledge about the present.
Despite these difﬁculties, consequentialism would suggest that we should, to the extent that we are able,
think not only about the immediate consequences of our actions, but about the longer-term consequences
as well (Cowen, 2006). Indeed, considering the political nature of valuation, we arguably bear even greater
responsibility for thinking about future generations than the present, given that those who have not yet been
born are unable to directly advocate for their interests.
4.3
Uncertainty
In practice, of course, we do not know with any certainty what the consequences of our actions will be,
especially over the long term. Again, from the perspective of determining the objectively morally correct
action, one might argue that all that matters is the (unknown) probability according to the universe. For
individual decision makers, however, any person’s ability to predict the future will be limited, and, indeed,
will likely vary across individuals. In other words, it is not just our uncertainty about consequences that is
a problem, but our uncertainty about our uncertainty: we don’t know how well or poorly our own model of
the universe matches the true likelihood of what will happen (Kagan, 1998; Cowen, 2006).
The subjective interpretation of consequentialism suggests that, regardless of what the actual conse-
quences may be, the morally correct thing for an individual to do is whatever they have reason to believe
will produce the best consequences (Kagan, 1998). This, however, is problematic for two reasons: ﬁrst, it
ignores the computational effort involved in trying to determine which action would be best (which is itself
a kind of action); and second, it seemingly absolves people from wrong-doing who happen to have a poor
model of the world.
Rule consequentialism arguably provides a (philosophical) solution for these problems, in that it involves
a direct mapping from states to actions, without requiring that each decision maker independently determine
the expected value of each possible action (Kagan, 1998; Hooker, 2002).11 It still has the problem, however,
of determining what policy is optimal, given our uncertainty about the world. Nevertheless, we should not
overstate the problem of uncertainty; we are not in a state of total ignorance, and in general, trying to help
people is likely to do more good than trying to harm them (de Lazari-Radek and Singer, 2017).
11To use a somewhat farcical example, we could imagine using a neural network to map from states to actions; the time to
compute what action to take would therefore be constant for any scenario.
7

4.4
Conﬂicts with Commonsense Morality
A ﬁnal set of arguments against consequentialism take the form of thought experiments in which conse-
quentialism (and utilitarianism in particular) would seemingly require us to take actions that violate our own
notions of commonsense morality. A particularly common example is the “trolley problem” and its variants,
in which it is asked whether or not it is correct to cause one person to die in order to save multiple others
(Foot, 1967; Greene, 2013).
We will not dwell on these thought experiments, except to note that many of the seeming conﬂicts from
this type of scenario vanish once we take a longer term view, or adopt a broader notion of value than a simple
sum over individuals. Killing one patient to save ﬁve might create greater aggregate well-being if we only
consider the immediate consequences. If we consider all consequences of such an action, however, it should
be obvious why we would not wish to adopt such a policy (Kagan, 1991).
It is worth commenting, however, on one particular conﬂict with commonsense morality, namely the
claim that consequentialism is, in some circumstances, excessively demanding. Given the present amount
of suffering in the world, and the diminishing marginal utility of wealth, taking consequentialism seriously
would seem to require that we sacriﬁce nearly all of our resources in an effort to improve the well-being
of the worst off (Smart and Williams, 1973; Driver, 2012). While to some extent this concern is mitigated
by the same logic as above (reducing ourselves to ruin would be less valuable over the long term than
sacriﬁcing a smaller but sustainable amount), we should take seriously the possibility that the best action
might not agree with our moral intuitions.
5
Fairness in Machine Learning
With the necessary background on consequentialism in place, we now review and summarize ideas about
fairness in machine learning. Note that “fairness” is arguably an ambiguous and overloaded term in general
usage; our focus here is on how it has been conceptualized and formalized within the machine learning
literature.12 In order to lay the foundation for a critical perspective on this literature, we ﬁrst summarize the
general framework that is commonly used for discussing fairness, and then summarize the most prominent
ways in which it has been deﬁned.13
The typical setup is to assume that there are two or more groups of individuals which are distinguished
by some “protected attribute”, A, such as race or gender. All other information about each individual is
represented by a feature vector, X. The purpose of the system is to make a prediction about each individual,
ˆY , which we will assume to be binary, for the sake of simplicity. Moreover, we will assume that the two
possible predictions (1 or 0) are asymmetric, such that one is in some sense preferable. Finally, we assume
that, for some individuals, we can observe the true outcome, Y . We will use X to refer to a set of individuals.
To make this more concrete, consider the case of deciding whether or not to approve a loan. An algo-
rithmic decision making system would take the applicant’s information (X and possibly A), and return a
prediction about whether or not the applicant will repay the loan, ˆY . For those applicants who are approved,
we can then check to see who actually pays it back on time (Y = 1) and who does not (Y = 0). Note,
however, that in this setup, we are unable to observe the outcome for those applicants who are denied a loan,
and thus cannot know what their outcome would have been in the counterfactual scenario.
The overriding concern in this literature is to make predictions that are highly accurate while respecting
some notion of fairness. Because reducing complex social constructs such as race and gender to simplistic
12Extensive discussion of the idea of fairness can be found in much of the philosophical and technical literature cited throughout.
In particular, we refer to the reader to Rawls (1958), Kagan (1998), and Binns (2018).
13While there is also some work on fairness in the unsupervised setting (e.g. Kleindessner et al., 2019; Benthall and Haynes,
2019), in this paper we focus on the supervised case.
8

categories is inherently problematic, as a running example we will instead use biological age as a hypo-
thetical protected attribute.14 Using the same notation as above, we would say that an automated system
instantiates a policy, π, in making a prediction for each applicant. Thus, for instance i, a threshold classiﬁer
would predict
ˆyi = arg max
y∈{0,1}
π(Y = y | X = xi, A = ai),
(6)
though we might equally consider a randomized predictor.
Much of the work in fairness has drawn inspiration from two legal doctrines: disparate treatment and
disparate impact (Ruggieri et al., 2010; Barocas and Selbst, 2016). Disparate treatment, roughly speaking,
says that two people should not be treated differently if they differ only in terms of a protected attribute.
For our running example, this would be equivalent to saying that one cannot deny someone a loan simply
because of their age.
Disparate impact, on the other hand, prohibits the adoption of policies that would have consequences
that are unevenly distributed according to the protected attribute, even if they are neutral on their face. Thus
a policy which denies loans to people with no credit history might have a disparate impact on younger
borrowers, and could therefore (hypothetically) be considered discriminatory.
While research in machine learning fairness is ongoing, most proposals can be classiﬁed into two types,
which to some extent map onto the two legal doctrines mentioned above. Some deﬁnitions are speciﬁed
without reference to outcomes (§5.1). Others are speciﬁed exclusively with regard to a particular set of
outcomes (which must be evaluated using real data; §5.2). We summarize the dominant proposals of each
type below.
5.1
Fairness Constraints Speciﬁed without Regard to Outcomes
The ﬁrst type of approach to fairness advocates constraints that are speciﬁed without reference to actual
effects. In a formal sense, we can think of these as placing restrictions, a priori, on the space of policies
which will be considered morally acceptable. We provide three examples of this type of approach below.
Fairness through unawareness: A commonsense but naive notion is to disallow policies which use the
protected attribute in making a prediction. Equivalently, this requires that for any x,
π(y | x, A = 0) = π(y | x, A = 1)
(7)
Although this seems like a strict translation of the prohibition against disparate treatment, it is generally
considered to be unhelpful (Hardt et al., 2016; Kleinberg et al., 2018). Due to correlations, it may be possi-
ble to infer the protected attribute from other features, hence prohibiting a single piece of information may
have no effect in practice.
Individual fairness: A more general application of the same idea argues that models must make similar
predictions for similar individuals (in terms of their representations, X) (Dwork et al., 2012). This proposal
was originally framed as being in the Rawlsian tradition, suggesting it should be a matter of public delib-
eration to determine who counts as similar. However, as has been noted, the effects of this framework are
highly dependent on the particular notion of similarity that is chosen (Green and Hu, 2018).
Randomization: A further way of avoiding disparate treatment is through randomization (Kroll et al.,
2017). The basic idea is that a policy should not look at the protected attribute or any other attribute when
making a decision, except perhaps to verify that some minimal criteria are met. For example, a policy might
assign 0 probability to instances that do not meet the criteria, and an equal probability to all others. Although
14Age is a particularly interesting example of a protected attribute, as it is explicitly used to discriminate in some domains (as in
restricting the right to vote), but afforded some protections in others (such as the U.S. Age Discrimination in Employment Act).
9

this is a severe limitation on the space of policies, we do see instances of it being used in practice, such as
in the U.S. Diversity Visa Lottery (Perry and Zarsky, 2015; Kroll et al., 2017).15
5.2
Fairness Constraints Speciﬁed in Terms of Outcomes
The other major approach to fairness in machine learning is to specify requirements on the actual outcomes
of a policy. In other words, while the above fairness criteria can be evaluated without data, the following
criteria can only be checked using an actual dataset. These notions of fairness are often justiﬁed in terms of
the doctrine of disparate impact – that is, policies should not be adopted which have adverse outcomes for
protected groups. Three examples are presented below:
Demographic/statistical parity: The notion of parity implies that the proportion of predicted labels
should be the same, or approximately the same for each group. For example, this might require that an equal
proportion of older and younger applicants would receive a loan. Formally, this requirement says that in
order to be acceptable, a policy must satisfy
P
i∈X I[ai = 0] · ˆyi
P
i∈X I[ai = 0]
=
P
j∈X I[aj = 1] · ˆyj
P
j∈X I[aj = 1]
,
(8)
where I[·] equals 1 if the condition holds (otherwise 0). Demographic parity is a strong statement about
what the consequences of a policy must be (in terms of a very focused set of short-term consequences).
Note, however, that enforcing this constraint may result in suboptimal outcomes from the perspective of
other criteria (Corbett-Davies et al., 2017).
Equality of odds/opportunity: Another outcome-based fairness criteria looks at the outcomes that
result from the policy, and compares the rates of true positives and/or false positives among a held-out
dataset (Hardt et al., 2016). Equal opportunity would require that, for example, an equal proportion of
applicants from each group who will pay back a loan are in fact approved. Formally,
P
i∈X I[ai = 0, yi = 1] · ˆyi
P
i∈X I[ai = 0, yi = 1]
=
P
j∈X I[aj = 1, yj = 1] · ˆyj
P
j∈X I[aj = 1, yj = 1]
,
(9)
Equality of odds is similar, except that is requires that rates of both true positives and false positives be the
same across groups.
Equal calibration: An alternative to equality of odds is to ask that the predictions be equally well
calibrated across groups. That is, if we bin the predicted probabilities into a set of bins, a well-calibrated
predictor should predict probabilities such that the proportion of instances that are correctly classiﬁed within
each bin is the same for all groups. In other words, equal calibration tries to ensure that
P
i∈X I[ai = 0, ˆpi ∈[b, c)] · yi
P
i∈X I[ai = 0, ˆpi ∈[b, c)]
=
P
j∈X I[aj = 1, ˆpj ∈[b, c)] · yj
P
j∈X I[aj = 1, ˆpj ∈[b, c)]
(10)
for each interval [b, c), where ˆpi = π(Y = 1 | xi, ai) according to the policy.
Note that whereas demographic parity only requires the set of predictions ( ˆY ) made for all individuals
in a dataset, equal opportunity and equal calibration also require that we know the true outcome (Y ) for all
such individuals, even those who are given a negative prediction. As a result, the latter two requirements
can only be properly veriﬁed on a dataset for which we can independently observe the true outcome (e.g.,
based on assigning treatment randomly).
15Additional examples of randomization include jury selection, military service, sortition in ancient Athenian government, and
which members of a ﬁring squad have guns with real bullets. Of course, as Kroll et al. (2017) point out, randomization is only fair
if the system cannot be manipulated by either applicants or decision makers.
10

As has been shown by multiple authors, certain fairness criteria will necessarily be in conﬂict with others,
under mild conditions, indicating that we will be unable to satisfy all simultaneously (Chouldechova, 2017;
Kleinberg et al., 2017).
6
A Consequentialist Perspective on Machine Learning Fairness
As previously mentioned, most fairness metrics have been proposed with only limited discussion of ethical
foundations. In this section, we provide commentary on the criteria described above from the perspective
of consequentialism. As a reminder, we are not suggesting that consequentialism provides the last word
on what is morally correct. Rather, we can think of consequentialism as providing one of several possible
ethical perspectives which should be considered.
First, consider the fairness proposals that are speciﬁed without regard to outcomes (§5.1). As mentioned
above, these can be seen as restrictions on the set of policies that are acceptable. By deﬁnition, these
constraints are not determined by the actual consequences of adopting them, nor do they possess an in-built
veriﬁcation mechanism to assess the nature of the consequences being produced. As such, these have more
of a deontological ﬂavor, reﬂecting a prior stipulation that similar people should be treated similarly, or that
everyone deserves an equal chance. For example, Eq. 7 speciﬁes precisely the constraint on the policy space
required by fairness through unawareness, and similarly for the other proposals. In principle, of course, these
criteria could have been developed with the expectation that using them would produce the best outcomes,
but it is far from obvious that this is the case.
By contrast, the fairness criteria speciﬁed explicitly in terms of outcomes (§5.2) might seem to be closer
to a form of consequentialism, given that they are evaluated by looking at actual impacts. However, upon
closer inspection we see that they imply a severely restricted form of consequentialism in terms of how they
think about value, time horizon, and who counts. In particular, while the proposals differ in terms of the
precise values that are being emphasized, all of these proposals have some features in common:
• they only evaluate outcomes in terms of the people who are the direct object of the decision being
made, not others who may be affected by these decisions;
• they only explicitly consider the immediate consequences of each decision, equivalent to using a
discount factor of 0;
• they presuppose that a particular function of the distribution of predictions and outcomes (e.g., cali-
bration) is the only value that is morally relevant.
Again, it is entirely possible that these constraints were developed with the intention of producing more
broadly beneﬁcial consequences over the long term. The point is that there is nothing in the constraints
themselves that points to or tries to verify this broader impact, despite the fact that they are evaluated in
terms of (a narrow set of) outcomes.
To make this concrete, consider again the case of trying to regulate algorithms which will be used by
banks in making loans. Requiring satisfaction of any of the above fairness constraints will alter the set of
loan applicants who are approved (and denied). While it is possible that some of these criteria might lead
to broadly beneﬁcial changes (e.g., demographic parity might enhance access to credit among those who
have been historically marginalized), from the perspective of consequentialism it insufﬁcient to evaluate the
outcome only in terms of the probabilities or labels assigned to each group. Rather, it is necessary to consider
the full range of consequences to individuals and society. In some cases, a loan might positively transform
a person’s life, or the life of their community, via mechanisms such as education and entrepreneurship. In
other cases, easier access to credit could lead to speculative borrowing and ﬁnancial ruin. For example,
while not directly related to concerns about fairness, the potentially devastating effects of lending policies
11

which ignore long-term and systemic effects can easily be seen in the aftermath of the subprime mortgage
crisis, which derived, in part, by perverse incentives and risky lending (Bianco, 2008).
Crafting effective ﬁnancial regulation is obviously extremely difﬁcult, and this is not meant to suggest
that any particular fairness constraint is likely to lead to disaster. Nevertheless, it is important to remember
that fairness criteria which are speciﬁed only in terms of a narrow set of short term metrics do not guarantee
positive outcomes beyond what they measure, and may in some cases lead to overall greater harm.
In sum, adopting a consequentialist perspective reveals numerous ways in which the existing proposals
for thinking about fairness in machine learning are fatally ﬂawed. While all have their merits, none have
been adequately justiﬁed in terms of their likely consequences, broadly considered. Moreover, most are
highly restricted in terms of the types of outcomes they take into consideration, and largely ignore broader
systemic effects of adopting a single policy.
It is, of course, understandable that most approaches to machine learning fairness have focused on a
priori constraints and tractable short term consequences. Avoiding negative consequences from new tech-
nologies is challenging in general, and many of the difﬁculties of consequentialism also apply directly to
machine learning, especially in social contexts (uncertainty about the future, lack of agreement about value,
etc.). Even in relatively controlled environments, it is easy to ﬁnd examples of undesirable outcomes result-
ing from ill-speciﬁed value functions, improper time horizons, and the kinds of computational difﬁculties
described in section §4 (Amodei et al., 2016).
Although consequentialism does not provide any easy answers about how to make AI systems more fair
or just, several important considerations follow from its tenets. First, consequentialism reminds us of the
need to consider outcomes broadly; technical systems are embedded in social contexts, and policies can
have widespread effects on communities, not merely those who are subject to classiﬁcation. Second, the
political nature of valuation means that a broad range of perspectives on what is desirable should be sought
out and considered, not for a reductive utilitarian calculus, but so as to be informed as to the diversity of
opinions. Third, the phenomenon of diminishing marginal utility suggests that efforts should be directed to
helping those who are worst off, rather than trying to make life better for the already well off, without, of
course, presuming to automatically know what is best for others. Fourth, while we might disagree about the
discount rate, the moral value of the future necessitates that we take downstream effects into account, rather
than only focusing on immediate consequences. Sweeping attempts at regulation, such as GDPR, may have
outsized effects here, as they will partially determine how we think about fairness going forward, and what
it is legitimate to measure. Finally, because it is particularly difﬁcult to predict consequences in the distant
future, a high standard should be required for any policy that would place a deﬁnite burden on the present
for a possible future gain.
7
Randomization and Learning
Before concluding, we will attempt to draw together a number of threads related to uncertainty, learning,
and randomization. As described earlier, most philosophical presentations of consequentialism are highly
abstract, without considering how one would practically determine what actions or rules are best. Given that
statistics and machine learning arose speciﬁcally to deal with the problem of uncertainty, it is natural to ask
whether there is any role for learning in consequentialism.
Indeed, an entire subﬁeld of machine learning exists precisely to deal with the problem of action selec-
tion in the face of uncertainty (so-called “bandit” problems, or reinforcement learning more broadly). As
noted in the introduction, the reinforcement learning objective explicitly encodes the goal of maximizing
some beneﬁt over the long term. Algorithms designed to optimize this objective typically rely initially on
random exploration to reduce uncertainty, thereby facilitating long-term “exploitation” of rewards.
Not surprisingly, a number of papers have proposed using similar strategies as a way of achieving fair
12

outcomes over the long-term. For example, Kroll et al. (2017) suggest that adding randomness to hiring
algorithms could help to debias them over time. Joseph et al. (2016b) consider the problem of learning a
policy for making loans, and present an algorithm to do so without violating a particular notion of fairness.16
Liu et al. (2017) extend this work, again trying to satisfy fairness in the contextual bandit setting. Mean-
while, Barabas et al. (2018) suggest using randomization to facilitate causal inference about the “social,
structural, and psychological drivers” of crime.
Randomization in decision making is a deep and important topic, and has been the focus of much past
work in ethics (Lockwood and Anscombe, 1983; Freedman, 1987; Bird et al., 2016; Haushofer et al., 2019).
As noted above, it can be a source of fairness, if we take “fair” to mean that everyone deserves an equal
chance. It may also be useful to prevent strategic manipulation of a system, and has a deﬁnite role in some
parts of American law (Perry and Zarsky, 2015; Kroll et al., 2017).
Although temporal discounting in consequentialism is typically discussed in terms of present versus
future value (e.g., helping people today versus investing in the future), a similar trade off applies to costly
experimentation for the purpose of reducing future uncertainty. Indeed, this sort of approach has been widely
adopted in industry in the form of A/B testing, as well as for adaptive trials in domains such as medicine
(Lai et al., 2015). Moreover, there is clearly something appealing about the idea that it should be morally
incumbent upon people to improve their understanding of the world over time, not merely to act on their
current understanding. However, randomization also raises a number of serious concerns.
First, as always, there is the problem of value, and the question of who gets to decide how to balance
present costs against future beneﬁts. Second, there are good reasons to think that such an approach is un-
likely to work in complex sociotechnical systems. Although reinforcement learning has been extraordinarily
successful in limited domains, such as game playing and online advertising, making reinforcement learning
tractable generally requires assuming the existence of a stable environment, a limited space of actions, a
clear reward signal, and a massive amount of training data. In most policy domains, we can expect to have
none of these. Third, there may be real costs associated with participation in such a process; while a bank
could conceivably choose to add randomness to a policy for granting loans (for the purpose of better learning
who is likely to pay them back), giving loans to people who cannot afford them could have severe negative
consequences for those individuals.
There are clearly some domains where randomization is widely used, and seems well justiﬁed, especially
from the perspective of consequentialism. The best example of this is clinical trials in medicine, which are
not only favored, but required. Medicine, however, is a special domain for several reasons: there is general
agreement about ends (saving lives and reducing suffering), there is good reason to think that ﬁndings will
generalize across people, and there is a well-established framework for experimentation, with safeguards in
place to protect the participants.
Where things get more complicated is using the same logic to establish the efﬁcacy of social interven-
tions, such as randomized trials in development economics. Although controlled experiments do provide
good evidence about whether an intervention was effective, it is less clear that the conclusions will general-
ize to different situations (Barrett and Carter, 2010).
Ultimately, while randomization can be an important tool in learning policies that promote long term
beneﬁts, especially in relatively static, generalizable domains, the limitations of both consequentialism and
of statistical learning theory mean that we should be highly skeptical of any attempt to use it as the basis for
creating policies or automated decision making systems to deal with complex social problems.
16In a companion paper, Joseph et al. (2016a) proclaim their approach to be Rawlsian, but this seems to miss the key point of
Rawls—namely, that we must account for inequalities due to circumstances (i.e., “regardless of their initial place in the social
system”; Rawls, 1958). Rather, the approach of Joseph et al. (2016b) merely says we should learn to give loans to people who will
best be able to pay them back.
13

8
Additional Related Work
Beyond the criteria mentioned in section §5, numerous other fairness metrics have been proposed, such
as procedural fairness (Grgi´c-Hlaˇca et al., 2016) and causal effects (Madras et al., 2018; Khademi et al.,
2019). Meanwhile, other papers have emphasized that simply satisfying a particular deﬁnition of fairness is
no guarantee of the broader outcomes people care about, such as justice (Hu and Chen, 2018a). Selbst et al.
(2019) discuss ﬁve common “traps” in thinking about sociotechnical systems, and Friedler et al. (2019)
demonstrate how outcomes differs depending on preprocessing and the choice of fairness metric.
Others have explored various types of consequences in particular settings, such as cost to the com-
munity in criminal justice (Corbett-Davies et al., 2017), runaway feedback loops in predictive policing
(Ensign et al., 2018), disparities in the labour market (Hu and Chen, 2018b), and the potential for strategic
manipulation of policies (Hu et al., 2019; Milli et al., 2019). Liu et al. (2018) demonstrate the importance of
modeling the delayed impact of adopting various fairness metrics, even when focused narrowly on outcomes
such as demographic parity. In a discussion of racial bias in the criminal justice system, Huq (2019) uses
broadly consequentialist logic, arguing that the systems should be evaluated in terms of costs and beneﬁts
to minority groups. For a discussion of Stoic philosophy in relation to AI, see Murray (2017). For surveys
discussing the intersection of ethics and AI more broadly, see Brundage (2014) and Yu et al. (2018). For a
book-length treatment of the subject, see Wallach and Allen (2008).
9
Conclusions
Consequentialism represents one of the most important pillars of ethical thinking in philosophy, including
(but not limited to) utilitarianism. In brief, the central tenet of consequentialism is that actions should be
evaluated in terms of the relative goodness of the expected outcomes, according to an impartial perspective
on what is best. Despite a number of serious problems that limit its practical application, including com-
putational problems involving value, uncertainty, and discounting, consequentialism still provides a useful
basis for thinking about the limitations of other normative frameworks.
Within the context of automated decision making, a consequentialist perspective underscores that merely
satisfying a particular fairness metric is no guarantee of ethical conduct. Rather, consequentialism requires
that we consider all possible options (including the possibility of not deploying an automated system), and
weigh the likely consequences that will result, considered broadly, including possible implications for the
long term future. Moreover, we must consider not only those who will be directly affected, but broader
impacts on communities, and systemic effects of replacing many human decision makers with a single
policy. While there are contexts in which it is reasonable, even required, to attempt to learn from the present
for the beneﬁt of the future, we should be skeptical of any randomization schemes which make unrealistic
assumptions about the generalizability of what can be learned from social systems.
The political nature of valuation means we are unlikely to ever have agreement on what outcomes are
best, and long term consequences will always remain to some extent unpredictable. Nevertheless, through
ongoing efforts to take into consideration a diverse set of perspectives on value, and systematic attempts to
learn from our experiences, we can strive to move towards policies which are likely to lead to a better world,
over both the short and long term future.
