FMGS: Foundation Model Embedded 3D Gaussian Splatting
for Holistic 3D Scene Understanding
Xingxing Zuo1, Pouya Samangouei1, Yunwen Zhou1, Yan Di1, Mingyang Li1
1Google.

Abstract
Precisely perceiving the geometric and semantic properties of real-world 3D objects is crucial for the
continued evolution of augmented reality and robotic applications. To this end, we present Founda-
tion Model Embedded Gaussian Splatting (FMGS), which incorporates vision-language embeddings
of foundation models into 3D Gaussian Splatting (GS). The key contribution of this work is an
efficient method to reconstruct and represent 3D vision-language models. This is achieved by distill-
ing feature maps generated from image-based foundation models into those rendered from our 3D
model. To ensure high-quality rendering and fast training, we introduce a novel scene representation
by integrating strengths from both GS and multi-resolution hash encodings (MHE). Our effective
training procedure also introduces a pixel alignment loss that makes the rendered feature distance of
same semantic entities close, following the pixel-level semantic boundaries. Our results demonstrate
remarkable multi-view semantic consistency, facilitating diverse downstream tasks, beating state-of-
the-art methods by 10.2 percent on open-vocabulary language-based object detection, despite that
we are 851× faster for inference. This research explores the intersection of vision, language, and 3D
scene representation, paving the way for enhanced scene understanding in uncontrolled real-world
environments. We plan to release the code on the [project page].
Keywords: Gaussian Splatting, Vision-Language Embeddings, Foundation Models, Open-Vocabulary
Semantics
1 Introduction
3D scene understanding is a critical task in var-
ious computer vision and robotics applications.
Yet, most existing methods primarily concentrate
on either 3D geometry and appearance estima-
tion [45, 38, 26] or 3D object detection and scene
segmentation trained on datasets with closed sets
of classes [15, 19, 41]. However, for an intelli-
gent agent to interact smoothly with the physical
world, merely understanding a subset of the space
characterized by pre-identified labels is insuffi-
cient. Inspired by the latest advancements in foun-
dation models (FMs) with impressive language
and vision semantics [44, 1], this paper endeavors
to develop a more natural 3D scene representa-
tion supporting open-world visual recognition and
understanding. It integrates both geometric and
open-vocabulary semantic information, facilitat-
ing easy querying for downstream tasks such as
object detection and semantic segmentation in
open-world scenarios.
1
arXiv:2401.01970v2  [cs.CV]  3 May 2024

In this paper, we utilize Gaussian Splat-
ting [26] as the backbone for reconstructing 3D
geometry and appearance, which has demon-
strated superior performance in terms of rendering
quality for novel-view image synthesis and train-
ing efficiency. To assist open-vocabulary 3D scene
understanding, we rely on pre-train 2D vision-
language CLIP [44] and lift the corresponding
information into 3D by a novel multi-view training
procedure. We note that, in research communi-
ties, the system that is most similar to us is
LEFR [27], which integrates implicit NERF [38]
based scene representation and CLIP embeddings.
Compared to LERF, our system develops a dif-
ferent architecture, provides a variety of technical
contributions ranging from high efficiency to 3D
consistent query, and obtains significantly better
results (approximately 10.2 percent in representa-
tive key metrics).
A straightforward approach to enhance 3D
Gaussian
Splatting
with
vision-language
FM
embeddings is to attach each Gaussian with a
learnable feature vector, which can be trained
through image rasterization to formulate loss
functions. However, maintaining high-quality ren-
dering with GS typically requires millions of
Gaussians
in
a
nominal
room-scale
environ-
ment. Employing per-Gaussian feature vectors
inevitably results in excessive memory consump-
tion and significantly slows down training, limiting
the practical applications of this system. Moti-
vated by iNGP [40], we model our system by
using 3D Gaussians together with multi-resolution
hash encoding (MHE) to distill the foundation
model embeddings. Specifically, to obtain the lan-
guage embedding from the Gaussians, we utilize
their mean values to query the MHE field at cor-
responding positions. Subsequently, this queried
MHE is processed through a Multi-Layer Per-
ceptron (MLP) to generate the output language
embedding.
In the training phase, we employ a supervision
mechanism on the MHE-based language FM CLIP
feature field using a hybrid feature map. This
map is derived from the average of multi-scale
image crops obtained from various viewpoints.
This approach enables the embedding to effec-
tively capture language features corresponding to
each scale ensuring a comprehensive representa-
tion. For instance, the embedding might represent
a ‘red book’ when viewed up-close, while depicting
a ‘library’ from a more distant perspective. It is
noteworthy that CLIP embeddings are designed to
encapsulate the overall concept presented in a 2D
image, exhibiting minimal variation across indi-
vidual pixels. Additionally, CLIP embeddings are
not perfectly multi-view consistent, i.e., when a
3D object observed by a moving camera via differ-
ent views, the difference between computed CLIP
embeddings across frames are not explicitly min-
imized. To solve the above-mentioned problems,
we rely on multi-view consistency training process
to ensure that 3D models, when rendered from
different image views, exhibit minimal variations.
Additionally, to allow pixel-aligned query expe-
rience, DINO [7] embeddings are used together
with CLIP embeddings similar to LERF [27]. By
carefully analyzing the properties in both CLIP
and DINO embeddings, we design an additional
pixel alignment loss to further improve the object
localization and scene understanding capabilities.
This loss is grounded in the dot product similar-
ity of CLIP/DINO features between the central
pixel and its surroundings, guiding the rendered
CLIP feature map to replicate the same similarity
pattern observed in the DINO feature map.
This research paves the way for enhanced
real-world applications, such as augmented reality
experiences where users can interact with objects
using natural language and robotic systems that
can navigate and manipulate environments based
on linguistic commands. By bridging the gap
between language and 3D representation, FMGS
opens up new possibilities for understanding and
interacting with our surroundings.
Our contributions can be summarized as fol-
lows:
• Novel semantic scene representation: We intro-
duce a novel approach combining 3D Gaus-
sians (parameterized by mean, covariance, opac-
ity, and spherical harmonics) for geometry
and appearance representation, with MHE for
efficient semantic embedding. This approach
addresses memory constraints in room-scale
scenes including millions of 3D Gaussians.
• Multi-view consistent language embeddings:
Our training process utilizes Gaussian-splatting
based rendering from multiple views, ensuring
consistency across 3D space in static scenarios.
2

Language embeddings remain invariant to view-
points, enforcing local proximity consistency
within Gaussian volumes.
• Addressing pixel misalignment: We address
pixel alignment challenges of CLIP features by
extracting and aggregating them at multiple
resolutions for a hybrid CLIP feature, which
is used for supervising the training. Regular-
ization with pixel-aligned DINO features and
a novel dot-product similarity loss enhances
spatial precision and object differentiation.
• State-of-the-art
performance:
Our
methods
demonstrate superior performance in open-
vocabulary semantic object localization, out-
performing existing state-of-the-art approaches
with quantitative and qualitative results by a
wide margin, despite being hundreds of times
faster.
2 Related Works
We review three main areas of related arti-
cles: 3D scene representation, open-vocabulary
object recognition and scene understanding, and
combined 3D scene representation and semantic
understanding.
3D Scene Representation
Scene representation in 3D can be roughly cate-
gorized by mesh based, voxel based, point based,
and implicit ones. Voxel based methods typi-
cally discretize 3D space into regular grid cell
elements where each grid cell corresponds to a
voxel. To estimate the dense 3d voxel cells, prob-
abilistic fusion methods were firstly [22] used and
researchers also developed end-to-end learn-able
methods [50], by using either depth sensors [22] or
monocular camera systems [59]. To visualize esti-
mated voxel fields, they are typically converted
into a mesh based representation. This enables
efficient rendering on modern computer graphics
systems. While alternative methods, such as those
using 3D meshes [47, 32], have achieved notable
success in various fields, their discrete scene rep-
resentation, whether voxel-based or mesh-based,
imposes limitations on the ability to achieve
photo-realistic reconstruction and rendering per-
formance.
Neural implicit representation, e.g., NeRF
series [38, 4, 5, 6], represent 3D scenes by fully-
connected neural networks, in which volume den-
sity and radiance can be queried by input position
and view direction vectors. To improve the train-
ing and rendering efficiency of NeRFs, 3D space
can be discretized by using MHE similar to the
concept used in voxel based methods [40]. Ten-
soRF [10] models radiance fields as 4D tensors,
factorizing them into compact low-rank tensor
components using CP decomposition and intro-
ducing novel vector-matrix (VM) decomposition
for improved rendering quality, reduced memory
footprint, and faster reconstruction.
Finally, point-based methods are originally
widely used for directly processing data from
depth sensors, for performing geometrical and
semantic computer vision tasks [42, 24]. Point-
NeRF [56] efficiently combines point cloud and
NeRF to achieve impressive fast view synthesis
results. Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (GS) has
been proposed to model points as 3D Gaussians
for scene representation [26], and achieved state-
of-the-art novel view synthesis rendering quality.
However, in [26], the number of Gaussians used
for scene representation can easily surpass one
million, which introduces strict memory and com-
putational requirements for downstream use cases.
Open-Vocabulary Object Detection and
Scene Understanding
Advancements in open-vocabulary object detec-
tion in 2D images have been made by leverag-
ing natural language prompts. LSeg [30] employs
a text encoder for semantic label embeddings
and a transformer-based image encoder for dense
pixel embeddings, using contrastive alignment to
achieve zero-shot image segmentation and gener-
alization to unseen categories. CRIS [55] leverages
CLIP for image segmentation, employing a vision-
language decoder to align text and pixel-level
features, and text-to-pixel contrastive learning to
enforce similarity between text and relevant pixel
features. CLIP-Seg [37] leverages CLIP as a back-
bone, employs a transformer-based decoder for
dense prediction, and generates image segmenta-
tion based on arbitrary text or image prompts.
OV-Seg [31] improves open-vocabulary seman-
tic segmentation by finetuning CLIP on masked
image regions and text descriptions from noisy
3

captions, achieving promising performance with-
out dataset adaptations.
Current approaches often employ region pro-
posal or mask prediction methods to guide open-
vocabulary classification models. OpenSeg [17]
employs mask representations to facilitate visual
grouping and align captions with predicted seg-
mentation masks for open-vocabulary image seg-
mentation. ViLD [21] advances open-vocabulary
object detection by distilling knowledge from a
pretrained image classification model (teacher)
into a two-stage detector (student), aligning
region embeddings of detected boxes with text
and image embeddings inferred by the teacher.
Detic [65] expands object detectors’ vocabulary
by training their classifiers on image classifica-
tion data, outperforming prior methods on open-
vocabulary and long-tail detection benchmarks,
achieving generalization to new datasets without
finetuning and enabling detectors trained on all
ImageNet classes. OVIR-3D [35] enables open-
vocabulary 3D object instance retrieval by fusing
text-aligned 2D region proposals into 3D space,
leveraging 2D datasets.
Open-vocabulary scene understanding has also
been explored by using point cloud as sensor
inputs. PointCLIP [63] aligns CLIP-encoded point
cloud with 3D category texts, transferring knowl-
edge from 2D to 3D recognition by projecting
point cloud into multi-view depth maps, using an
inter-view adapter for global feature extraction
and few-shot knowledge fusion. ULIP series [57,
58] learn a unified representation for images,
texts, and 3D point cloud by leveraging pre-
trained vision-language models and automatically
synthesized triplets, improving the performance
of various 3D backbones. Lu et al. [36] lever-
age pre-trained image and vision-language models
and cross-modal contrastive learning for open-
vocabulary 3D point cloud detection without 3D
annotations.
Combined 3D Scene Representation and
Semantic Understanding
Language has been incorporated into 3D scene
understanding in various ways. For the task of
visual question answering, systems like iQA [18],
ScanQA [3], and SimVQA [8] leverage 3D infor-
mation to answer queries about the environment.
For object recognition enhancement, language and
shape information can be combined to improve
object recognition, as seen in [14] and [52].
Inspired by the success of implicit neural
reconstruction [38, 4, 5], researchers also start to
explore incorporating language guidance into 3d
neural scene representation. LERF [27] enables
open-ended language queries in 3D by incorpo-
rating language embeddings from models, e.g.
CLIP, into NeRF. 3D-OVS [34] leverages pre-
trained CLIP and DINO models in a weakly
supervised manner, distilling multi-modal knowl-
edge and object reasoning into a neural radiance
field (NeRF) for segmentation task.
Tschernezki et al. [54] leverage a pre-trained
2D image feature extractor to train a 3D stu-
dent network, boosting performance in analyzing
multiple images forming a 3D scene. FFD [29]
tackles scene editing by distilling knowledge from
pre-trained 2D image feature extractors into a
3D feature field that guides local editing based
on user queries. VL-Fields [53], a neural implicit
spatial representation fusing scene geometry and
vision-language features, enables open-vocabulary
semantic queries without requiring prior object
class knowledge. FeatureNeRF [60] distills pre-
trained vision models (DINO, Latent Diffusion) to
learn generalizable NeRFs, leveraging neural ren-
dering for 2D-to-3D mapping and extracting deep
features from NeRF MLPs.
Additionally,
ConceptFusion
[23]
enables
open-set and multimodal reasoning in 3D scene
representations
by
fusing
foundation
model
features with SLAM and multi-view fusion. Con-
ceptGraphs [20] leverages 2D foundation models
and multi-view association to capture semantic
and spatial relationships for efficient task-driven
planning. OpenMask3D [51] aggregates per-mask
features using the multi-view fusion of CLIP-based
image embeddings guided by predicted class-
agnostic 3D instance masks. SA3D [9] enables 3D
segmentation of target objects in neural radiance
fields (NeRF) through one-shot manual prompt-
ing, leveraging density-guided inverse rendering,
cross-view self-prompting, and an iterative pro-
cess to project 2D segmentation masks onto
3D mask grids. PVLFF [12] generates a scene’s
feature field, combining vision-language and hier-
archical instance features through contrastive loss
from 2D instance segment proposals.
CLIP-Fields [48] learns a spatial mapping to
semantic embeddings via weak supervision from
4

web-trained language and vision models, enabling
tasks like object identification and robot navi-
gation without direct human labeling. GNFac-
tor [62], a multi-task robotic manipulation agent,
leverages a shared 3D voxel representation and
language-augmented neural fields for generalizable
visual behavior cloning.
Our work is close and directly comparable to
LERF [27] in terms of assumptions about infor-
mation available at training phase and query time.
For example, it does not assume a priori knowl-
edge of query categories at training time which is
assumed 3D-OVS [33].
Recently,
several
concurrent
works
have
emerged, investigating the distillation of seman-
tic features into GS scene representations [11,
16]. LEGaussians [49] introduces a method for
quantizing high-dimensional concatenated CLIP
and DINO features into compact ones to con-
serve memory, and attach to each individual
Gaussian. Langsplat [43] segments images by
SAM [28] and then inputs hierarchical seman-
tic segments into CLIP to extract semantic fea-
tures for the segments. To address memory con-
straints, Langsplat incorporates a scene-specific
language autoencoder to encode CLIP features
into lower dimensions, which are also attached
to each individual Gaussian. Feature 3DGS [64]
distills pixel-aligned features from 2D foundation
models, such as SAM [28] and LSeg [30], into
GS by associating each Gaussian with a learn-
able vector. However, this suffers from a loss
of semantic understanding capability, particularly
for long-tail semantics [27]. Different from all the
aforementioned methods, which attach semantic
features to each Gaussian, we propose to seam-
lessly integrate 3D Gaussian scene representation
together with MHE for efficient semantic encod-
ings. Notably, our method does not necessitate
additional scene-specific quantization or auto-
decoder steps, thereby preserving the semantic
features’ representation capability from founda-
tion models.
3 Background Methods
3.1 3D Gaussian Splatting
GS [26] represents an environment using a set of
3D Gaussians, each defined by a mean µ ∈R3, an
anisotropic covariance matrix Σ ∈R3×3, an alpha
value α ∈[0, 1] representing opacity, and spherical
harmonics coefficients (SH). Given a 3D position
x ∈R3, the probability density function of 3D
Gaussian is defined as:
G(x) = e−1
2 (x−µ)T Σ−1(x−µ)
(1)
where (·)T represents a transpose operation and
(·)−1 denotes matrix inversion. To render 3D
Gaussians in 2D, we project their mean positions
by point projection, and project their covariance
using the following equation:
Σ′ = JW Σ WT JT
(2)
where W ∈R3×3 is the viewing transformation
and J ∈R3×3 is the Jacobian of the affine approx-
imation of the projective transformation [66]. To
optimize covariance matrices, we use an equivalent
representation:
Σ = RSST RT
(3)
where R
∈
R3×3 and S
∈
R3×3 are rota-
tion and scaling matrices, respectively. GS also
includes spherical harmonics coefficients to model
the appearance of the scene. Gradients for all
parameters are derived explicitly to avoid over-
head during training.
Each Gaussian encodes the color c using spher-
ical harmonics, which gives a value depending
on the viewing directions. The α−blending point-
based rendering for a pixel color c is done by
blending N points in the depth order from front
to back:
c =
X
i∈N
ciαi
i−1
Y
j=1
(1 −αj),
(4)
where αi is given by a 2D Gaussian multiplied by
a learned per Gaussian opacity [61].
Note that although the image rendering model
is similar across NeRFs and GS, the rendering
algorithm is much more efficient in GS. NeRFs
need to march along the ray to integrate vol-
ume, however, GS rendering uses a point-based
α−blending approach. This allows GS to include
a real-time rendering solution that leverages GPU
sorting algorithms and draws inspiration from
tile-based rasterization. By using a 3D Gaus-
sian representation, anisotropic splatting can be
performed while respecting visibility order. This
is achieved through sorting and alpha-blending.
5

Additionally, a fast and accurate backward pass is
enabled by tracking the traversal of sorted splats.
3.2 Multi-resolution Hash Encoding
Representing a 3D feature field can have many
forms. A naive method is to attach a feature vec-
tor (or multiple) to each Gaussian, which can be
optimized along with other Gaussian parameters
(position, covariance, and so on). However, this is
extremely costly in terms of computational cost
and memory consumption especially when a large
number of Gaussians are generated for scene rep-
resentation. In fact, adding a 512×1 feature vector
per Gaussian will increase the number of opti-
mized parameters to be 9.83× under authentic GS
parameterization [26] (10 geometric parameters
and 48 spherical harmonic appearance parame-
ters per Gaussian) and 65.0× under simplified
GS parameterization [25] (4 geometric parameters
and 4 appearance parameters per Gaussian).
To mitigate this problem, we are motivated
by multi-resolution hash embedding (MHE) [40],
which provides efficient scene representation that
consists of two trainable components. The first
component first hashes a given position x ∈R3,
and then looks up into a trainable hash table for
the corresponding embedding. The second com-
ponent is an MLP that takes the corresponding
embeddings and makes predictions such as color
and density. The representation contains multiple
hash tables, one per each scale. Specifically, MHE
first encodes a given position q = MHEθ(x). To
do so, it contains a hash table with L levels. Each
level contains up to E feature vectors with dimen-
sionality D. Resolution of each level is determined
by Nl =

Nmin · bl
where Nmin is the coarsest
resolution, Nmax is the finest resolution, and b is
a growth factor.
To get q for a given position x, we query MHE
at all scales and concatenate the resulting fea-
tures. For each scale, we find the enclosing voxel
for x. Then, each corner entry of the voxel is
mapped into a feature vector with dimensional-
ity D according to the trainable hash table. MHE
trilinearly interpolates the queried corner entries
according to their relative position of x in its
hypercube for each level. This ensures the continu-
ity of the encoded input and its composition with
the neural network, avoiding grid-aligned disconti-
nuities and blocky appearance. After this mapping
is done, the features from all scales are concate-
nated to each other, and the auxiliary inputs
ψ ∈RK which results in a feature vector q of
size L × D + K. The resulting encoding then goes
to the second component which is an MLP net-
work, MLPΦ(q), produces the final output. This
architecture significantly reduces the number of
weights that are trained for each view while hav-
ing an O(1) GPU look up for hashing. Overall this
results in significant improvements in quality and
speed of training.
4 Method
Our method, i.e. Foundation Model Embedded
Gaussian Splatting (FMGS), leverages strengths
of both GS and MHE. We rely on GS for effi-
cient and accurate scene geometry representation
and on MHE for representing the scene’s language
content in a light-weighted manner. Given a set of
input images, we compute the corresponding cam-
era poses and 3D sparse visual points using an
off-the-shelf structure from motion system, e.g.,
COLMAP [46]. After that we train GS and acquire
3D Gaussians.
Subsequently, we train the feature embedding
field (MHE) in 3D by grounding 2D CLIP embed-
dings. This requires us to generate pixel-aligned
features on a set of calibrated input images. How-
ever, CLIP embeddings are global in nature and
not suitable for pixel-aligned feature extraction.
To overcome this challenge, we introduce a frame-
work to learn a volumetric language embedding
field that embeds over the 3D Gaussians. The
field effectively generate features that is the aver-
age CLIP features across all views that include
that 3D Gaussian. To supervise our dense fea-
ture field, we create a hybrid feature map based
on CLIP embeddings across multi-scale crops of
training views. Figure 1 provides an overview of
our training pipeline.
4.1 Feature Field Architecture
3D Gaussian Splatting produces millions of Gaus-
sians to enable high quality rendering of a room-
scale scene. This makes it very inefficient to have
one CLIP feature per Gaussian since these fea-
tures are high dimensional and keeping all of these
features in GPU memory is not feasible.
6

Fig. 1
FMGS Training pipeline: Left: Shows how FMGS’ feature field renders CLIP and DINO feature maps for
loss calculation. The feature field is a multi-resolution hash encoder (MHE) [40] that embeds semantic information into
3D Gaussians acquired from 3D Gaussian Splatting [26]. Right: Shows the target DINO feature map and hybrid CLIP
feature map from the foundation models. Note, for visualization simplicity, we only show a single-level MHE here but in
implementation we have used multiple levels and concatenate their encodings.
To this end, we parameterize our feature field
efficiently using MHE. For a given 3D Gaus-
sian G(x) with mean position x, we first encode
x to a feature vector q = MHEθ(x) where
θ is our multi-resolution hash table parameters.
We subsequently feed this output into an MLP,
which generates our language embedding ˆf
=
MLP CLIP
ϕ
(q), with ˆf belonging to RD. We also
normalize ˆf to make it a unit vector.
4.2 Embed the Foundation Models
We embed the semantic embeddings from founda-
tion models to our scene representation. Training
the semantic embedding has three aspects. First,
we use our scene representation to render a pre-
dicted feature map ˆF ∈RW ×H×D where W is the
width, H is the height, and D is the dimension
of the feature map. Second, we generate a tar-
get feature map F by feeding the view to a FM.
Finally we need to ensure that the predicted fea-
ture map is aligned with the corresponding target
pixels and follows the same object boundaries in
terms of feature similarity.
Hybrid CLIP Feature for Supervision
To supervise our feature field outputs, given a cal-
ibrated input image, we first rasterize the features
into a 2D feature map ˆF where the (i, j)th feature
is acquired by point-based α−blending:
ˆfi,j =
X
k∈N
ˆfkαk
i−1
Y
l=1
(1 −αl)
(5)
To generate our target CLIP feature map, denoted
as F, we initially pre-compute a multi-scale fea-
ture pyramid of CLIP embeddings, similar to the
approach used in LERF [27]. This involves feed-
ing image patches at various sizes into the CLIP
foundation model. However, in contrast to LERF,
which trains its scene representation by interpo-
lating embeddings from the pre-computed CLIP
feature pyramid at random scales, we rely on a
single hybrid CLIP feature map for training our
scene representation. We scale up the embeddings
of the smaller scales in the pre-computed CLIP
feature pyramid bilinearly to the largest scale fea-
ture map, and generate the hybrid feature map by
averaging them. We define our CLIP loss by the
following Huber loss:
LCLIP =
(
0.5|ˆF −F|2,
if |ˆF −F| < δ
δ · (|ˆF −F| −0.5 · δ),
otherwise
(6)
where δ is a hyperparameter, which is set to be
1.25 empirically. As seen in Figure 2 where we use
PCA to visualize feature maps following FFD [29],
we notice that the target CLIP feature map is
not fine-grained enough when embedding similar-
ities of neighboring pixels are considered. This
results in poor pixel-alignment gradient signals
on Gaussians that are not relevant semantically.
On the other hand, DINO [7] features give sharp
boundaries between objects [2] in terms of embed-
ding similarity, which can be used for additional
regularization.
7

Fig. 2 The features extracted from foundation models. The left three subfigures include the RGB image, extracted
DINO features from the foundation model, and the hybrid CLIP feature, which is an average of multi-scale CLIP feature
maps shown on the right. On the right, the shown seven CLIP feature maps are the extracted from an image pyramid at
multiple scales using the foundation model. The resolution of CLIP features decreases from left to right.
Fig. 3
FMGS Query pipeline: Top: Given a query view to localize a query, FMGS first renders the dense CLIP
feature map. Bottom: given an open-vocabulary query, FMGS generates a relevancy map highlighting the relevant part of
the rendered CLIP feature map to the query embedding. The highest relevant is colored as red while the lowest relevant
part is colored as blue. Note, for visualization simplicity, we show a single-level MHE in this figure while used multiple in
implementations.
Regularization with DINO Feature
To transfer the characteristic of DINO features
while maintaining the CLIP embedding seman-
tics, we (a) add a DINO feature field loss and (b)
define a pixel-alignment loss between the DINO
and CLIP feature fields. The DINO feature field
shares the same hash grid parameters as CLIP and
gives the same encoding q for a given x. Then the
DINO feature field outputs ˆd = MLP DINO
ψ
(q)
where ψ denotes the parameters of the MLP that
are not shared with MLP CLIP
ϕ
. This feature field
is supervised by passing the sampled image once
to the pre-trained DINO model without scaling,
yielding D ∈RW ×H×L where L is the DINO fea-
ture dimension. We then render ˆD using the same
approach as rendering ˆF. The DINO regulariza-
tion loss is as follows:
LDINO = | ˆD −D|2
(7)
Pixel-alignment with Dot Product
Similarity
We define a pixel-alignment loss by defining a ker-
nel around every pixel and enforce the dot prod-
uct similarity in normalized embedding spaces
(between DINO and CLIP) are consistent across
the center pixel and surrounding ones. We normal-
ize both rendered features to unit norm, and then
compute the loss:
Lpixel =
1
K2 −1
X
i∈P
X
j∈N(i),
j̸=i
|ˆdT
i ˆdj −ˆf T
i ˆfj|
(8)
where P denotes the set of all the pixels in the
image, and N(i) is the K ×K patch kernel around
the rendered feature at pixel i. This makes the
rendered CLIP feature follow the same similarity
pattern as the DINO feature. Note that we stop
the gradient back-propagation through the ren-
dered DINO features in this training loss, which
means MLP DINO
ψ
would not be affected by this
loss. Lpixel is also termed as “dotsim” loss for the
8

rest of the paper, since it is formulated by dot
product similarity.
Training Loss
Overall our total loss is
Ltotal = λLCLIP + (1 −λ)LDINO + γLpixel (9)
We take the mean reduction over all the pix-
els in the image plane when computing different
loss terms. We also empirically find out adding
Lpixel in later iterations during training produces
the best results. In Figure 4, we provide exam-
ples of features extracted from foundation models
for training and the rendered features generated
by our trained hybrid semantic scene representa-
tion. It is evident that the rendered feature maps
exhibit higher quality when compared to the raw
feature maps obtained directly from the founda-
tion models, owing to our training process enforces
multiple-view consistency.
4.3 Relevancy Score
At query time, when provided with a query
prompt and a viewing direction, FMGS gener-
ates a relevancy map that assigns high scores to
semantically relevant locations (see Figure 3). To
obtain this relevancy map, we first render the
feature map ˆF using our learned semantic fea-
ture field via GS rasterization. Then, we calculate
the CLIP embedding fquery corresponding to the
query prompt.
To obtain the dense relevancy map, we define
a set of canonical phrases with CLIP embed-
dings Fcan following the methodology similar to
[27]. Then, we compute pairwise softmax scores
based on the cosine similarity between the prompt
embedding and ˆfi,j, representing the ˆF at loca-
tion (i, j), as well as the canonical embeddings for
canonical phrases. We take the minimum value of
the softmax over all canonical prompts and deem
it the relevancy score r:
ri,j = min
n
exp(ˆf T
i,jfquery)
exp(ˆf T
i,jfquery) + exp(ˆf T
i,jf n
can)
, f n
can ∈Fcan
(10)
With the above definition, the relevancy score
is higher when a query embedding is closer to
the rendered feature than the canonical features.
We follow [27] and choose the following canonical
prompts: “object”, “stuff”, “things”, and “tex-
ture”. We also find that these work well for a
wide range of queries removing the need for tuning
these canonical terms. In Figure 4, we present rep-
resentative relevancy maps generated by matching
the query embedding with our rendered CLIP fea-
ture map and the target CLIP feature map from
the foundation model used in our training. It’s
evident that the relevancy map derived from our
rendered CLIP feature map overall exhibits finer
granularity and higher quality.
4.4 Implementation Details
Our approach employs a hash grid for repre-
senting language features, which is notably larger
than a typical RGB hash grid. This hash grid com-
prises 24 layers, spanning resolutions from 16 to
512, and possesses a hash table size of 220 with
an associated feature dimension of 8. The archi-
tecture of the CLIP and DINO MLP models used
for MLP CLIP
ϕ
and MLP DINO
ψ
aligns with that of
LERF [26]. Furthermore, we leverage the Open-
CLIP [13] ViT-B/16 model, which has undergone
training on the LAION-2B dataset. Notably, this
model operates with an image pyramid that varies
in scale from 0.05 to 0.5 of image size, encom-
passing a total of seven scales for pre-computing
CLIP feature pyramid. The pre-computed fea-
ture pyramid is subsequently processed by average
pooling to generate the final hybrid CLIP feature
for training our semantics embedded field.
Initially, we train the Vanilla Gaussian Splat-
ting scene representation [26] through a total num-
ber of 30K iterations, with approximately 10 min-
utes total time for a room-scale scene. It’s worth
noting that representing such a scene requires the
utilization of millions of Gaussians. Subsequently,
we maintain the frozen states of the geomet-
ric attributes and spherical harmonics associated
with these Gaussians throughout the subsequent
training process for semantic embedding fields.
To mitigate GPU memory constraints, we
strategically select approximately 40% of the
Gaussians based on criteria such as high opac-
ity values and a 2D radius of projected Gaussian
exceeding 2 pixels in at least one training view.
Only these selected Gaussians are involved in
the rendering process when we train the seman-
tic embeddings. For optimization, we employ the
9

Fig. 4 Features for Training and Rendered Views. Left: From left to right, the figures show the RGB image, the
rendered DINO feature map, the raw DINO feature map extracted for training, the rendered CLIP feature map, and the
raw CLIP feature map used for training. Right: We display the relevancy scores for the rendered and raw CLIP feature
maps with the text query ‘flower’, where the color bar indicates relevancy scores normalized within the 0-255 range. Notably,
querying the raw CLIP feature map is much inferior to querying the rendered CLIP feature map.
Fig. 5 Effect of dot product similarity (dotpsim) loss. From left to right: RGB image, rendered DINO feature
without dotpsim, rendered DINO feature with dotpsim, rendered CLIP without dotpsim, and rendered CLIP feature map
with dotpsim. The DINO feature maps do not have significant differences with or without dotpsim. From the CLIP feature
maps, we can see that objects can be further distinguished from each other and the background. Differences are highlighted
in the red boxes.
RAdam optimizer with a weight decay of 10−9. We
incorporate an exponential learning rate sched-
uler, which spans from an initial value of 5× 10−3
and gradually decreases to 4 × 10−3 over the
course of 4.2K training steps (after the initial
30K original GS training steps). In our training
regimen, all models initially undergo 2.5K steps
without the pixel alignment loss being enabled.
These training and testing procedures are exe-
cuted on an NVIDIA RTX A5000 GPU with 24GB
of GPU RAM. The semantic feature field train-
ing time with a total of 4.2K steps takes about
1.4 hours. During training, we use weighting fac-
tors to balance the CLIP loss (λ = 0.2) and the
pixel-alignment loss (γ = 0.01).
5 Experiments
Our hybrid semantic scene representation, FMGS,
seamlessly integrates the 3D Gaussians and multi-
resolution hashing encoding and supports both
photo-realistic
rendering
and
open-vocabulary
object detection. In this section, we carefully eval-
uate the performance of open-vocabulary object
detection (or localization) of our proposed method
in uncontrolled real-world scenarios. To showcase
the embedding quality of our method, we also
evaluate it out-of-the-box on the open-vocabulary
semantic segmentation task. We compare our
method to other SOTA approaches for each exper-
iment and show significant improvement over their
results.
5.1 Object Detection in the Wild
By distilling the language embeddings extracted
from off-the-shelf vision-language model, CLIP,
our FMGS is applicable for associating a wide
range of textual prompts with the relevant vision
clues. We test the open-vocabulary object under-
standing capability of our method by object
detection experiments.
Dataset: We use the same dataset as used
in the LERF [27] for object detection evaluation,
10

Fig. 6
Relevancy score for object detection. Left: The rendered RGB image at novel view from 5 scenes on LERF
dataset [27]. Right: Visualization of relevancy scores with the given text queries shown below the figures. We overlay them
on the RGB images.
Scene
FFD-LSeg [29] OWL-ViT [39] LERF [27] Ours
bouquet
50.0%
66.7%
83.3%
100.0 %
figurines
8.9%
38.5%
87.2%
89.7%
ramen
15.0%
92.5%
62.5%
90.0 %
teatime
28.1%
75.0%
96.9%
93.8%
kitchen
13.0%
42.6%
85.2%
92.6 %
Average Acc.
18.0%
54.8%
83.0%
93.2%
Inference FPS
-
-
0.1214
103.4
Table 1 Accuracy and runtime efficiency (Frames
Per Second, FPS) of object detection with open-
vocabulary queries. comparison between Feature Fields
Distillation [29] using LSeg [30] features (FFD-Lseg),
OWL-ViT [39], LERF [27] and Ours FMGS. We highlight
the best , second-best accuracy scores. Please find more
details on scenes and text queries for LERF dataset in [27].
for the purpose of fair comparison. It consists of
five labelled scenes with 2D bounding boxes of
objects associated with text prompts. There are
objects including both common and long-tail ones
with different sizes, and the queries for objects are
quite diverse, like ‘vase’, ‘eucalyptus’, ‘big white
crinkly flower’, ‘pikachu’, ‘twizzlers’, ‘spoon han-
dle’, ‘power outlet’, ‘waldo’, ‘stuffed bear’, ‘cookies
on a plate’, etc. The location of queried images
are labelled by bounding boxes in the test images,
which are rendered at novel views from trained
NeRF models of individual scenes. The scenes in
LERF dataset are collected by an iPhone, and
each scene comprise ∼200 images. The provided
poses of images from Ploycam app are with signifi-
cant noises in some scenes. Thus we regenerate the
poses of images by running COLMAP [46], which
also yields sparse 3D visual points serving as input
to initialize 3D Gaussians in our method. The
poses of the officially-provided test images are also
properly transferred to our COLMAP trajectory
by Sim(3) alignment between officially-provided
image poses and our COLMAP poses.
Evaluation Protocol: Following LERF [26],
the evaluation metric for object detection is the
accuracy rate. We redeem the query is a success
if the highest relevancy pixel locates inside the
target box. The relevancy score at each pixel is
obtained by matching the rendered CLIP feature
map with the language embedding of given text
query as described in Sec. 4.3.
Baselines: We compare against FFD-LSeg
that embeds pixel-aligned LSeg feature [30] into
NeRF (NeuralStudio ‘neurfacto’ implementation
11

Fig. 7
Object detection results. The left and right groups of figures illustrate the detection results for four open-
vocabulary queries, respectively. Each group comprises three subfigures: Left displays the ground-truth bounding boxes
(blue), our detected highest-relevancy pixel (green) and the one detected by LERF (red) [27]. Middle showcases our relevancy
score corresponding to the given text query. The text query is shown at the far left of each row. Right showcases LERF’s
relevancy score corresponding to the given text query. Our computed relevancy score is more focused on the target objects
linked to the query.
Methods
bed
sofa
lawn
room
bench
table
mIoU
mAP
mIoU
mAP
mIoU
mAP
mIoU
mAP
mIoU
mAP
mIoU
mAP
OV-Seg [31]
79.8
40.4
66.1
69.6
81.2
92.1
71.4
49.1
88.9
89.2
80.6
65.3
3D-OVS [33]
89.5
96.7
74.0
91.6
88.2
97.3
92.8
98.9
89.3
96.3
88.8
96.5
LERF [27]
33.5
25.6
28.1
45.6
49.8
82.0
26.3
49.1
55.2
79.5
31.1
33.3
Ours
38.0
50.1
56.6
82.0
64.9
90.5
57.0
85.3
62.1
84.1
63.6
85.3
Ours-Refined
80.6
85.5
90.8
97.4
92.6
98.5
87.9
97.8
84.5
94.8
89.4
97.2
Table 2
Segmentation Evaluation. We report the mIoU(↑) scores and the mAP(↑) scores of the following methods in
6 scenes of 3D-OVS dataset [33]. Note that 3D-OVS is a weakly supervised method, which knows the segmentation
annotations in training and specially designed for segmentation task. Our method and LERF are 3D method training
without any segmentation annotations, relying only on the relevancy between class query and the rendered CLIP features.
OV-Seg [31] is a supervised method for segmentation task. Our method and LERF are unsupervised methods, under
apple-to-apple comparison. We can further post-process and refine our 2D segmentation results by SAM [28] and get the
results shown as ‘Ours-Refined’.
by feature fields distillation method [29], OWL-
ViT [39] that is a 2D method based on Vision
Transformer encoder and fine-tuned for object
detection, LERF [27] that embeds CLIP and
DINO features into NeRF. The 3D methods,
FFD-LSeg and LERF, share the same evaluation
protocol as our FMGS. For the 2D method, OWL-
ViT, we regard it as a success if the center of the
predicted bounding box locates in the target box.
Evaluation Results: The quantitative evalu-
ation results on all sequences of LERF dataset are
presented in Table 1, and representative relevancy
score maps of the proposed method are shown in
Methods
bouquet figurines ramen teatime kitchen Average
Ours
100.0
89.7
90.0
93.8
92.6
93.2
W/O dotpsim
100.0
91.0
85.0
90.6
85.2
90.4
W/O hybrid CLIP
54.2
32.1
52.5
6.3
9.3
30.8
W/ LERF CLIP
91.7
70.5
72.5
72.5
87.0
78.8
W/O MHE
91.7
71.8
90.0
90.6
77.8
84.4
Table 3 Ablation study. Object detection comparison
between our full method, ours without dot product
similarity (dotpsim) loss, and ours without hybrid CLIP
features by averaging at multiple scales for supervision,
using single scale CLIP feature at the finest-resolution
instead, as well as ours with LERF CLIP at multiple
individual scales [27].
Figure 6. The detailed results demonstrate signif-
icant advantages of FMGS’s integration of lan-
guage embeddings in detecting objects associated
with long-tail prompts. While LSeg [30], trained
12

on a small dataset to learn pixel-aligned CLIP
features, exhibits diminished open-vocabulary lan-
guage understanding capabilities, the approach of
FFD-LSeg, which distills LSeg features into radi-
ance fields, struggles with comprehending long-tail
queries and consequently exhibits poorer perfor-
mance. In terms of open-vocabulary 2D detection,
Owl-ViT, which utilizes full-HD NeRF views and
selects bounding boxes based on the highest con-
fidence scores for text queries, outperforms FFD-
Lseg. However, when faced with long-tail queries,
Owl-ViT’s performance falls short in comparison
to the robust and versatile FMGS.
We also conducted a comparison with the clos-
est method, LERF, which distills DINO and CLIP
features into neural radiance fields represented
solely by MHEs. As depicted in Table 1, our
FMGS outperforms LERF significantly, achiev-
ing an accuracy improvement of 10.2 percent-
age points. Note that our tested LERF results,
obtained using the officially released code, slightly
surpasses those reported in the original paper [27].
In Figure 7, we present side-by-side compar-
isons with LERF [27]. The object detection results
are visualized, highlighting the superior quality
of the relevance map produced by our FMGS.
It notably focuses more on the queried target
objects, as opposed to LERF. This outcome stems
from our hybrid representation, which combines
3D Gaussians and MHEs for semantic scene rep-
resentation. The 3D Gaussians represent both the
geometry and appearance of the scene, naturally
dividing 3D structures of objects and the scene
into distinct Gaussian volumes. This partitioning
feature aids in distinguishing objects from each
other and from the background. In FMGS, we
assign an identical MHE embedding to a Gaussian
volume, further promoting semantic consistency
in local proximity. This, in turn, contributes to
the focusing of relevance on the target object.
Taking the query ‘Pikachu’ in Figure 7 as an
example, where ‘Pikachu’ is depicted on the side
of a paper bag. Even when observing from a
challenging viewpoint with almost no visibility
of ‘Pikachu’, FMGS successfully maintains high
relevance at the target location, due to its 3D
consistency and fine-grained scene understanding.
In contrast, LERF fails to detect ‘Pikachu’ and
mistakenly identifies a visually similar object.
Inference Runtime: Our FMGS, relying on
3D Gaussian Splatting rendering [26], excels in
efficiently rendering RGB images. We’ve imple-
mented our rendering method for CLIP and DINO
feature maps based on a CUDA implementation
of Gaussian Splatting rendering. Even when ren-
dering deep features with high dimensions, which
can significantly increase computation time, our
FMGS remains remarkably fast. It can render the
480 × 270 CLIP feature map, DINO feature map,
and RGB image jointly at an impressively high
rate of 103.4 FPS during inference, even with our
unoptimized implementation. In contrast, LERF
operates at a significantly slower pace, achieving
a mere 0.1214 FPS during inference (see Table 1).
This slowness stems from LERF’s need to per-
form a brute-force search for the best scales when
rendering CLIP features, spanning a range from 0
to 2 meters with 30 increments. Consequently, we
are 851.73 times faster than LERF in rendering
CLIP features, enabling efficient real-time open-
vocabulary queries after our scene representation
is trained.
5.2 Unsupervised Segmentation
In following experiments we use FMGS to segment
queries and evaluate their segmentation masks.
Note that our method is not delicately designed
for the segmentation task. We lack a dedicated
segmentation header for predicting segmentation
masks, nor do we explicitly partition the scene
at the object level. We have examined the open-
vocabulary language understanding capability of
FMGS in the object detection experiments dis-
cussed in the above section. Our primary objective
for doing this segmentation evaluation is to assess
the pixel-level accuracy of the rendered CLIP
features obtained from the trained scene repre-
sentation. Segmentation relies on matching these
rendered CLIP features to the embeddings of the
provided semantic labels.
Dataset: We conducted our segmentation
evaluation using the 3D-OVS dataset [33], which
consists of six scenes with labeled ground-truth
semantic segmentation masks for test image views.
These scenes are characterized by their clean-
liness, with clear backgrounds and well-defined
foreground objects. Each scene comprises approx-
imately 30 images with predefined poses and
sparse points computed using COLMAP [46]. The
13

Fig. 8
Semantic segmentation results. In the rows from top to bottom, we display RGB images, ground-truth (GT)
segmentation masks, our refined segmentation results, our segmentation results, and the segmentation results obtained by
LERF [27] scene representation. It’s essential to note that neither our method nor LERF was initially intended for the
segmentation task. Our primary aim is to evaluate the pixel accuracy of the relevance map computed from the rendered
CLIP features. We can further post-process and refine our 2D segmentation results by SAM [28] and get the results shown
as ‘Ours-Refined’.
dataset includes a variety of objects, including
many long-tail objects like ‘Gundam,’ ‘Pikachu,’
‘stapler’, and more. For further details about the
scenes and semantic labels, please refer to [33].
Evaluation Protocol: In terms of our evalu-
ation protocol, we rely on the annotated ground-
truth masks for the test views. These masks serve
as a reliable benchmark for both qualitative and
quantitative assessments of segmentation perfor-
mance. We calculate the mean Intersection over
Union (mIOU) scores and mean Average Preci-
sion (AP) metrics by comparing the segmentation
results with these ground-truth masks.
Baselines: We conduct a direct comparison of
our method with LERF [27]. To perform semantic
segmentation, we initially obtain relevancy scores
by computing the cosine similarity between the
rendered CLIP feature and the embeddings of all
class labels (this is different from the relevancy
score calculation with auxiliary canonical phrases
involved in Sec. 4.3.). These relevancy scores serve
as segmentation logits, and we subsequently apply
the softmax function to convert them into prob-
abilities. Each pixel is then assigned a semantic
class label corresponding to the maximum proba-
bility. Note that LERF [27] requires a scale factor
when rendering CLIP features, and we report the
best segmentation results that can be achieved by
LERF by selecting the best scales for each ray.
It’s also important to note that both LERF and
our method encounter challenges in discerning the
semantic labels of backgrounds when presented
with visibility-limited close views and lack of con-
text. Therefore, we have replaced the original
background labels, including ‘white sheet’, ‘wood
wall’, ‘grey sofa’, and ‘lime wall’, with a more gen-
eral label ‘background’ when testing LERF and
our method.
Additionally, for comprehensive reference, we
present results obtained using the dedicated 3D-
OVS method [33] for the segmentation task.
However, it is worth emphasizing that comparing
14

object detection methods like ours and LERF [27]
to 3D-OVS is not entirely equitable, as acknowl-
edged in the paper of 3D-OVS [33]. 3D-OVS [33]
has prior access to segmentation class labels and
distill class-related information into the radiance
field during training. In contrast, neither LERF
nor our methods have access to class labels dur-
ing scene representation training. Consequently,
the trained 3D-OVS scene representation can only
be effectively employed for querying the classes
known before training, and does not support arbi-
trary semantic queries beyond the trained classes.
Furthermore, we compare to a 2D ceiling approach
[31], OV-Seg, which is directly trained for open-
vocabulary semantic segmentation by fine-tuning
CLIP on masked image regions and text descrip-
tions. OV-Seg is supervised with mask-category
pairs, while ours and LERF are completely unsu-
pervised.
Evaluation
Results
The
segmentation
experiment results are presented in Table 2 and
Figure 8. Notably, our approach outperforms
LERF [27] by a significant margin across all cases.
This superior performance can be attributed to
the higher quality of our rendered CLIP feature
compared to the one produced by LERF. Our
method exhibits more concentrated high rele-
vancy around the queried objects, showcasing the
advantage of our semantic scene representation,
which maintains high semantic consistency in
local proximity. We refine our 2D segmentation
results using SAM [28] by assigning class labels to
SAM segments through a majority voting based
on pixel labels obtained from our method. The
refined result is displayed in the ‘Ours-Refined’
row of Table 2 and Figure 8.
5.3 Ablations
We conducted an ablation study on the object
detection task, as it serves as a key indicator
of our method’s open-vocabulary semantic under-
standing capabilities. The results are presented in
Table 3.
5.3.1 Hybrid CLIP feature
In this ablation study, we investigated using a
single scale of CLIP features at the finest scale
level, rather than our hybrid CLIP features,
which are obtained by averaging multiple-scale
CLIP features extracted from patches at differ-
ent resolutions. As demonstrated in Table 3, the
hybrid CLIP feature for supervision is greatly
important. The scene understanding capability
is severely compromised when employing only a
single-scale CLIP feature for supervision (denoted
as ‘W/O Hybrid CLIP’). The inferior perfor-
mance observed with the use of a single-scale CLIP
feature stems from its potential inadequacy in
capturing sufficient contextual information within
the image. By contrast, our hybrid CLIP feature
encompasses a significantly larger receptive field,
enhancing its contextual awareness.
To conduct a comprehensive analysis, we also
compare our method of using a single hybrid
CLIP supervision (‘Ours’) to the approach of
utilizing CLIP supervision at multiple individ-
ual scales, as proposed by LERF [27], which we
denote as ‘W/ LERF CLIP’. During its training,
randomly sampled scale factors are concatenated
with the intermediate MHE feature vector q (refer
to Sec. 4.1) to decode CLIP features at each
scale. At inference time, the optimal scale fac-
tors at each pixel location are determined by an
exhaustive search among 30 uniformly distributed
scales. The best scale factor is selected based on
its relevance score to the query. Consequently,
this approach is at least 30 times slower than
our method with a single hybrid CLIP supervi-
sion during inference. Despite its inefficiency, the
accuracy achieved by ‘ W/ LERF CLIP’ (78.8%)
significantly lags behind that of ‘Ours’ (93.2%),
as shown in Table 3, underscoring the efficacy and
superior efficiency of our proposed method. It is
worth noting that while it is plausible that ‘W/
LERF CLIP’ could achieve better performance
with much more training iterations, this aspect
falls beyond the scope of our current investigation.
5.3.2 Pixel-alignment loss
To assess the effectiveness of our proposed pixel
alignment loss, we conducted an ablation study by
training our semantic scene representation with-
out this loss. The impact of omitting the pixel
alignment loss on the accuracy of the object
detection task is shown in Table 3. Furthermore,
we provide qualitative results in Figure 5, which
indicates that CLIP features from a scene rep-
resentation trained with pixel-alignment loss are
15

better at distinguishing between different objects
and separating objects from the background.
5.3.3 Scene Representation
To evaluate the effectiveness of our hybrid scene
presentation, which integrates 3D Gaussians for
geometry and appearance representation along-
side MHE for efficient semantic embedding, we
compare it with a vanilla scene representation
method that solely employs Gaussians without
MHE by attaching semantic embeddings to each
Gaussian (‘W/O MHE’). Notably, for fair com-
parisons, we consider only the selected Gaussians
with sufficient opacity and 2D radius in the
vanilla method (as detailed in Sec. 4.4) identical
to our method (‘Ours’). These attached seman-
tic embeddings share the same dimensionality as
the intermediate MHE feature vector q in our
method (see Sec. 4.1). They are also decoded by
two MLPs, MLP CLIP
ϕ
and MLP DINO
ψ
, to obtain
CLIP and DINO features while rendering the
feature maps.
As indicated in Table 3, ‘W/O MHE’ achieves
an object detection accuracy of 84.4%, which is
inferior to ‘Ours’ with its hybrid scene represen-
tation. The superior performance of ‘Ours’ can
be attributed to its ability to render CLIP fea-
ture maps at a higher quality over ‘W/O MHE’.
Additionally, in terms of scene representation
complexity, the MHE component of our method
maintains a constant number of parameters across
the five scenes of the LERF dataset, whereas the
parameter count of the semantic embeddings in
‘W/O MHE’ varies with the number of Gaussians
and increases by 84.1%, 113.5%, 2.14%, 174.2%,
and 136.9% compared to ‘Ours’. This substantial
memory demand of ‘W/O MHE’ can pose even
greater challenges in large-scale scenarios.
6 Discussion and Limitations
When comparing FMGS to LERF[27], both meth-
ods distill Clip and Dino features from foundation
models into 3D scene representations. However,
their rendering algorithms and scene representa-
tions differ significantly. These distinctions lead
to rapid and high-quality language feature acqui-
sition using common hyperparameters, such as
the feature field architecture. An additional key
advantage of FMGS is that it employs the same
feature embedding for each Gaussian, regardless
of the viewing direction. This feature enables
direct 3D localization of vision-language queries.
It’s important to note that FMGS not only facili-
tates the localization of language queries in 3D but
also allows for finding a given image of the scene
using the 3D Gaussian embeddings. LERF, on the
other hand, does not offer such 3D localization
capabilities out of the box.
In terms of limitations, FMGS currently relies
heavily on the presence of high-quality and cal-
ibrated input images, a limitation shared with
NeRF-based approaches. Additionally, the per-
formance of FMGS is entirely contingent on the
quality of the base foundation models used for
training the feature fields. It is conceivable that a
model better suited for localizing language within
images could yield improved feature field quality.
Furthermore, to enhance performance in seman-
tic segmentation tasks, it is advisable to embed a
specialized segmentation foundation model, such
as SAM [28, 9], into our scene representation.
Unlike using SAM solely for post-refinement of our
2D segmentation results, directly distilling SAM
results into the 3D space offers the advantage
of enforcing multi-view consistency, potentially
leading to improved performance.
7 Conclusions
Foundation Model Embedded Gaussian Splat-
ting (FMGS) contributes to scene understanding
by seamlessly merging vision-language embed-
dings and 3D representation. This novel 3D scene
representation achieves multi-view semantic con-
sistency through self-supervised distillation and
pixel alignment of CLIP features. The resulting
feature embedded 3D Gaussians achieve state-of-
the-art performance in comparison to previous
methods. By bridging vision, language, and 3D,
FMGS paves the way for unprecedented object
comprehension in real-world environments, open-
ing exciting possibilities for augmented reality,
robotics, and beyond.
8 Acknowledgement
We are very grateful to Juan J. G´omez Rodr´ıguez
and Francis Engelmann for their advice and
insightful discussions about this work.
16
