LostNet: A smart way for lost and find 
Meihua Zhou1, Ivan Fung2, Li Yang1, Nan Wan1, Keke Di1 
Tingting Wang* 
1 School of Medical Information, Wannan Medical Collage, Wuhu City, China 

* School of Medical Information, Wannan Medical Collage, Wuhu City, China 

Abstract:  
Due to the enormous population growth of cities in recent years, objects are frequently lost 
and unclaimed on public transportation, in restaurants, or any other public areas. While 
services like Find My iPhone can easily identify lost electronic devices, more valuable 
objects cannot be tracked in an intelligent manner, making it impossible for administrators to 
reclaim a large number of lost and found items in a timely manner. We present a method that 
significantly reduces the complexity of searching by comparing previous images of lost and 
recovered things provided by the owner with photos taken when registered lost and found 
items are received. In this research, we will primarily design a photo matching network by 
combining the fine-tuning method of MobileNetv2 with CBAM Attention and using the 
Internet framework to develop an online lost and found image identification system. Our 
implementation gets a testing accuracy of 96.8% using only 665.12M GLFOPs and 3.5M 
training parameters. It can recognize practice images and can be run on a regular laptop. 
  
Keyword: artificial intelligence, lost and found, intelligent city 
 
Introduction: 
The population density and the quantity of lost objects are both rising in the areas where 
urban rail transit is located around the world at the present time; yet, the traditional manual 
search service is ineffective. In this situation, there is an immediate need to speed up the 
development of intelligent lost and found systems in order to lessen the difficulty that 
transportation operators face when it comes to lost and found management. Deep learning can 
be used to build recognition and classification models for lost and found items. This is a new 
method that can reduce reliance on manual labour, quickly and accurately identify categories, 
significantly reduce human service costs for transportation operators, and better practice 
green development strategies. 
The application of convolutional neural networks is widespread throughout many scientific 
subfields pertaining to image recognition and classification (Sun et al., 2021). It is not a 
passing fad that academics in a wide variety of fields have shifted their attention to the study 
and practical use of image recognition. In the realm of trash classification, a method for 

garbage image classification was devised. It was built on an enhanced version of MobileNet 
v2 and paired with transfer learning to increase the real-time performance and accuracy of 
garbage image classification models (Huang et al., 2021). 
 
Research Background: 
Many academics are also engaged in questioning the status quo in the many subfields that 
make up the area of applied image recognition. (Yang et al., 2015) attempting to identify 
plant leaves by the utilization of a hierarchical model that is based on CNN. A study on 
establishing the optimal size of the training data set that is required to achieve high 
classification accuracy with low variance in medical image classification systems is presented 
by Cho et al. (2015). (Purnama et al., 2019) offer a method for the classification and 
diagnosis of skin diseases that is suitable for use in teledermatology. 
 
It has also been demonstrated that transfer learning is beneficial in a variety of contexts. 
Convolutional neural networks are used in the methodology that Lee et al. (2016) propose as 
a fine-grained classification method for large-scale plankton databases. The implementation 
of transfer learning in CNN is one potential solution. (Liu et al., 2020) apply unsupervised 
transfer learning to CNN training to address these problems. Specifically, they transform 
similarity learning into deep ordinal classification with the assistance of several CNN experts 
who were pretrained over large-scale-labelled everyday image sets. These CNN experts 
jointly determine image similarities and provide pseudo labels for classification. (Purwar et 
al., 2020) make use of some models that are related to convolutional neural networks (CNNs) 
in order to identify mesangial hypercellularity in MEST-C. (Herzog et al., 2021) concentrate 
on the classification of MRI for the diagnosis of early and progressive dementia by utilizing 
transfer learning architectures that employ Convolutional Neural Networks-CNNs, as a base 
model, and fully connected layers of SoftMax functions or Support Vector Machines-SVMs. 
(Phankokkruad, 2021) propose the three CNN models for detecting lung cancer using 
VGG16, ResNet50V2, and DenseNet201 architectures. The proposed method is based on 
transfer learning. 
 
Methodology: 
In a procedure in which CNN is being used to address more and more components of the 
problem, the lost and found problem has not been solved in any intelligent method as of yet. 
As a result, we recommend taking a methodical approach by utilizing Mobilnet v2 and an 
intuitive graphical user interface (GUI). In this study, we build on earlier research to further 
investigate the detection and categorization of lost and discovered items, and we present an 
approach that combines perceptual hashing with MobileNet v2 transfer learning. 
In order to solve the relatively complex problems associated with the image dataset of lost 
and found items, we carried out extensive research, classified the most common items that are 
lost and found into ten categories using questionnaires and market research, and produced 
private dataset images using crawlers, real-world photography, and research examples. After 
that, the generated dataset is used to train the network and establish an intelligent recognition 

classification model for lost and found images. This model solves the problems of labor cost 
and time cost consumption that are associated with conventional methods and proposes an 
accurate and complete solution with scientific and accurate experimental data. 
I. 
Mobilenet v2 
An outstanding example of a good lightweight convolutional neural network is MobileNetV2 
(Sandler et al., 2018). The network creates a reverse residual and linear bottlenecks, both of 
which are helpful for feature extraction; the linear activation that is used in the final layer of 
the inverted residual structure prevents the loss of low-latitude information; and the 
traditional convolution is replaced by depth-separable convolution, which significantly 
reduces the amount of the model's calculations as well as the number of the parameters that it 
uses. It was developed specifically for pictures and has applications in image categorization 
as well as the development of generic features. 
Convolution on a depth-wise and point-wise scale are the two components that make up 
depth-separable convolution. The depth separable convolution algorithm is not the same as 
the standard convolution algorithm. During the process of convolution, each channel of the 
feature map is covered by exactly one convolution nucleus, and the total number of 
convolution nuclei is equal to the total number of channels. The following phrases can be 
used to describe depth convolution: 
𝑂𝑥,𝑦,𝑐= ∑
𝐾𝑤,ℎ,𝑐
𝑊,𝐻
𝑤,ℎ
⋅𝐼𝑥+𝑤,𝑦+ℎ,𝑐（formula1） 
In the equation presented above, the variable O stands for the output feature graph, c stands 
for the channel of the feature graph, x and y stand for the coordinates of the output feature 
graph on channel, K stands for the convolutional kernel with wide W and high H, I stand for 
the input feature graph, and w and h stand for the convolutional kernel weight element 
coordinates of channel. 
The primary difference between point-by-point and standard convolution is the size of the 
convolution kernel, which in point-by-point convolution is fixed at 1x1. The first step of 
depth separable convolution is to employ depth convolution to extract the characteristics of 
each channel. Next, point-by-point convolution is used to correlate the extracted channel 
characteristics. The depth separable convolution is intended to reduce the number of 
parameters and computations required by the conventional convolution. When compared to 
the total number of calculations involved in the traditional convolution, the results are as 
follows: 
𝑅1
𝑅2 =
𝐷𝑓2𝐷𝑘2𝐼+𝐷𝑓2𝐼𝑂
𝐷𝑓2𝐷𝑘2𝐼𝑂
=
1
𝑁+
1
𝐷𝑘2（formula2） 
In the formula 2 shown above: R1 and R2 represent the calculations of depth separable 
convolution and standard convolution, respectively; Df and Dk represent the height and width 
of the input feature matrix; I represent the depth of the input feature matrix; and O represents 
the depth of the output feature matrix. 
In the process of feature extraction, MobileNetV2 makes use of a depth detachable 
convolution with a size of 3x3, which means that the calculation cost is 1/9 of what it would 
be for a standard convolution. However, the reduction in accuracy is very minimal, which is 
also one of the most notable qualities of the model. 

Figure 1 presents the organizational structure of the MobileNetV2 network. It is primarily 
made up of three components: the front end is a convolutional neural network (CNN), which 
is constructed by several layers of convolution, and then the average pooling of 1,280 7x7 
blocks is utilized to generate 1,280 nerves. Element, which was afterwards completely 
coupled with one thousand neurons. 
 
Figure1 MobileNet v2 based classifier 
MobileNet v2 borrows ResNet's residual connection notion and uses it to suggest a reverse 
residual structure, as seen in the picture. The structure employs PW convolution to increase 
dimension, 3x3 DW convolution to extract channel characteristics, then PW convolution once 
again to decrease feature dimension. Notably, as seen in Figure 2, a residual link exists only 
when the step duration is 1. In the second situation, when the step size is 2, the series 
structure is employed directly, and the reverse residual structure is upgraded and then 
lowered, so that the network permits smaller input and output dimensions, hence decreasing 
the amount of computation and parameters of the network. Simultaneously, residual 
connection may increase the effectiveness of gradient propagation and deepen the network 
layer. 
 
Figure2 illustrative example in graphical form of the MobileNetV2 architecture. 
MobileNet v2 networks are well-suited for implementation on mobile terminals or embedded 
systems because to their small model size, cheap processing capacity, and high computation 

speed in comparison to more conventional convolutional neural networks. Moreover, it can 
keep up with the CPU's strict speed needs. 
II. 
Transfer learning 
It takes a significant amount of time and resources to train a deep neural network model on ea
ch job from the very beginning. The learning process is laborious and time consuming. In ord
er for the network to begin its learning process, it must first texture the outline. Subsequently,
 the network must extract the characteristics after increasing the number of network layers. H
owever, in the majority of instances, academics will use the information that they have gained
 in the past to apply to the current challenges that they face. Learning by transfer is the name 
given to this kind of information transmission (Zhuang et al., 2021). In the field of deep learn
ing, transfer learning is combined with it, and the pre-training weight obtained by the model i
n similar tasks is used. This is done to avoid model training from scratch, reduce the cost con
sumption caused by the network model due to new learning, accelerate the network converge
nce speed, and further improve the stability and generalization ability of the model (Song et a
l., 2021). 
The ImageNet data collection includes one thousand categories and encompasses one million 
two hundred thousand pictures. There is no shadow of a doubt that the utilization of pre-train
ed network models on such a massive data collection is capable of being successfully ported t
o a variety of picture categorization endeavors. 
In this study, transfer learning is carried out by pre-training a deep CNN model using a portio
n of the ImageNet dataset. This portion of the dataset contains image classification data. A cl
assifier was added to the pre-trained Mobilenet v2 model, and then it was used to download t
he private dataset and split it into 10 primary categories. The pre-trained model was imported 
via making use of the torch vision library, and samples from the private dataset were used for 
the training and testing of the model. By doing things this way, we were able to cut down on t
he time spent training the features extractor, which is what takes the most time for the majorit
y of models, and instead train the classifier directly. Because of this, the amount of money sp
ent on training has decreased. 
 
 
Figure3 transfer learning 
 

III. 
 Convolutional block attention module 
The Convolutional Block Attention Module, often known as CBAM, is a type of attention 
mechanism module that integrates Channel and Spatial. This module may be embedded into 
the Model module, trained end-to-end with Model, and only contributes a little amount of 
additional processing (Woo et al, 2018). Figure 4 demonstrates the Channel attention module 
in addition to the Spatial attention module. The Channel Attention Module is capable of 
taking an Intermediate Feature Map as an input and outputting both a 1-D Channel Attention 
Map and a 2-D Spatial Attention Map through the use of the CBAM. In order to aggregate 
the spatial information, the average pooling and maximum pooling methods are utilized. The 
approaches provide two descriptors, which are then passed to the same shared network in 
order to produce the channel attention map. The complete channel attention map can then be 
acquired by doing the following: 
𝑀𝑐(𝐹) = 𝜎(𝑀(𝑎(𝐹)) + 𝑀(𝑚(𝐹))) = 𝜎(𝑊1 (𝑊0 (𝐹avg)) + 𝑊1 (𝑊0 (𝐹max))) (formula 
3) 
The spatial attention module can highlight the information region and generate two 2D maps, 
which are then linked and convolved by a standard convolutional layer to produce a 2D 
spatial attention map. This map is produced after first averaging and maximum pooling along 
the channel to generate efficient feature descriptors. In conclusion, the formulation for the 
output of the spatial attention mapping is as follows: 
𝑀𝑠(𝐹) = 𝜎(𝑓(𝑓𝑐(𝐹avg，𝐹max))) (formula4) 
F is the input feature graph, is the sig-moid nonlinear activation function, M is the forward 
calculation function of multi-layer perceptron without bias, a and m are the mean and 
maximum pooling functions respectively, W0 and W1 are the weights of 2 linear layer, and 
Favg and Fmax are the mean and maximum pooling functions respectively. In the equation 
that was just presented, F represents the input feature graph, represents the sig-moid 
nonlinear. 
 
Figure4 Channel attention module and Spatial attention module  
It is necessary to arrange the Channel attention module and the Spatial attention module in a 
sequential fashion in order to generate the CBAM. This provides the model with the ability to 
concentrate on important features in both the channel and spatial dimensions while 
suppressing features that are not necessary. Figure 5 provides a high-level view of CBAM, 
while the following provides a concise summary of the complete calculating process: 

𝐹′ = 𝑀𝑐(𝐹) ⊗𝐹 (formula5) 
𝐹″ = 𝑀𝑠(𝐹′) ⊗𝐹 (formula6) 
It is necessary to arrange the Channel attention module and the Spatial attention module in a 
sequential fashion in order to generate the CBAM. This provides the model with the ability to 
concentrate on important features in both the channel and spatial dimensions while 
suppressing features that are not necessary. Figure 5 provides a high-level view of CBAM, 
while the following provides a concise summary of the complete calculating process: 
 
 
 
Figure5 The overview of CBAM 
This algorithm integrates the attention mechanism in the dimension of the channel and the 
space, strengthens the important features while suppressing the unimportant features, and 
further highlights the required features in order to improve the classification accuracy of the 
model. The CBAM structure is introduced in the first layer of the Mobilenet v2 network by 
this algorithm. Because CBAM is a lightweight module, it does not have a significant impact 
on the total number of model parameters, but it does improve emphasis on the model's 
primary features. This effectively guarantees that the benefits of a lightweight model will be 
realized. 
 
IV. 
Perceptual hash algorithm 
The perceptual hash algorithm (Samanta & Jain, 2021) begins by reducing the size of the 
picture and simplifying the colors. Next, it aggregates the decomposition frequency and 
trapezoidal shape of the picture by using the discrete cosine transformation method. After 
that, it reduces the DCT, keeps the 8*8 matrix in the upper right corner, calculates the 
average value of all 64 values, further reduces the DCT, and finally calculates the hash value. 
The algorithm creates a unique string that acts as a "fingerprint" for each image, and it then 
analyzes the results by contrasting the various "fingerprint" strings. When the result is closer, 
it indicates that the picture is more comparable. The advantage of using this approach is that 
regardless of whether the height, width, brightness, or color of the image is modified, the 
result value of the hash value will not remain intact. This allows one to prevent the impact 
that would be caused by the modest modification of the image. An online image 
identification system is constructed in this research using the perceptual hash method and the 
concept of searching for images using photos. 
V. 
Measurement 
There is currently no standardized dedicated data collection that can be used for the 
categorization of photos of lost and found items. The study of confidential data sets is the 

focus of this work. Using the results of the poll, streamline the complicated lost and found 
categories into the top 10 categories that are the easiest to lose track of, with a total of 10499 
photographs. In addition, in order to match the conditions of a practical application, we have 
not performed any pre-processing on the dataset. Directly scaling the collected lost and found 
data set pictures to the input size of the network model will directly lead to the loss of some 
information in the picture, or even direct distortion, and will ultimately directly affect the 
image classification effect and recognition accuracy. This is because the original image had 
an uneven quality and a high resolution. As a result, prior to the pre-training, this article 
automates the data set photos in batches by using the design action in Adobe Photoshop 
software. Additionally, the article standardizes the image resolution to 300 x 300, which 
helps to minimize the overall picture size. The data processing of the sample data has to be 
improved in this work in order to increase the capacity of the model to generalize its findings. 
The 10,499 common lost and lost photographs augmented by the data  were divided into the 
training set and validation set with 70% and validation set with 30%. 
Table 1. Sample distribution of the lost object Figure slice dataset used in 
this paper 
Class name 
Number of images 
bag 
1036 
book 
1067 
card 
1043 
earphone 
1025 
key 
1070 
lipstick 
1066 
Phone 
1068 
umbrella 
1045 
USBflashdisk 
1020 
vacuumcup 
1059 
 
 
Figure6 The data inside the dataset 

This article employs Accuracy, AgePrecision (AP), Recall, Precision, and Loss as model 
performance evaluation indicators in order to analyse the advantages and disadvantages of the 
model.  
Calculating values using typical complex matrix approaches like as accuracy, recall, and 
precision may be difficult. When it comes to image classification, the confusion matrix is 
most commonly employed to make a comparison between the classification and the actual 
measurement value. This allows for a more understandable and accurate description of the 
correctness of model categorization. The formula for the computation is as follows: 
Accuracy =
𝑇𝑁+𝑇𝑃
𝑇𝑁+𝐹𝑁+𝐹𝑃+𝑇𝑃（formula7） 
Recall =
𝑇𝑃
𝑇𝑃+𝐹𝑁（formula8） 
𝑃recision =
𝑇𝑃
𝑇𝑃+𝐹𝑃（formula9） 
The number of successfully predicted positive samples is denoted by the letter TP in the 
formula 7,8,9, the number of correctly anticipated negative samples is denoted by the letter 
TN. FN is for the number of samples that had errors predicted for them when they were 
positive, and FP stands for the number of samples that had errors predicted for them when 
they were negative. 
The performance of the model recognition accuracy of the selected model may be evaluated 
in an objective manner by using the average accuracy rate. The mathematical formula for the 
calculation is as follows: 
𝐴𝑃=
∑𝐸
1Accuracy
𝐸
（formula10） 
The term AP, which is utilized in the aforementioned formula 10, stands for the average 
accuracy of the model that was picked, while E stands for the total number of iterations, and 
Accuracy stands for the accuracy of each iteration of the model that was selected. 
The degree to which the model's predicted value and the actual value deviate from one 
another may be estimated using the loss value. If the loss value is lower, then the model's 
predicted result will be closer to the actual outcome. The formulae for the calculations are as 
follows: 
𝐿𝑂𝑆𝑆=
1
𝑁∑𝐿𝑖
𝑖
=
1
𝑁∑−∑
𝑦𝑖𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑔( 𝑝𝑖𝑐)
𝐾
𝑐=1
𝑖
（formula11） 
In the previous formula number 11, Loss is a numerical representation of the loss value 
associated with the model that was chosen, and K is the total number of categories. pic is the 
anticipated probability that sample I belongs to category c. If the category is the same as the 
category of sample I it has a value of 1, and otherwise, it has a value of 0. The cross-entropy 
loss function is a convex function, and it is possible to calculate the value that is best for the 
whole world.  
 

Experimental results: 
I. 
Training 
In the course of our research, we looked at the problem of lost-object picture categorization. 
In order to classify images, we made use of Convolutional block attention module in 
conjunction with the well-known framework MobileNet v2. We utilized this architecture 
(transfer learning) to speed up the learning process while also reducing the amount of time 
needed for training. In order to evaluate the effectiveness of transfer deep learning, we 
examined the outcomes of three different optimizer functions: the Adaptive Moment 
Estimation Algorithm (ADAM), the Root Mean Square Propagation (RMSprop), and the 
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithm. We noticed that the optimizer SGD function 
functioned in a better method and got an accuracy of 96.8 percent, while the loss detected 
was 0.0047. We figured this out by looking at the table. The results of the SGD function's 
performance are presented in the form of a linear graph of the accuracy and loss parameters 
in the figure. When compared to the other optimizers, SGD's training time for the model was 
significantly shorter, despite the fact that all other model parameters remained same. 
 
Table2. Comparative chart of results using optimizer function 
 
Components 
SGD 
RMSprop 
ADAM 
Accuracy/%  
96.8 
89.5 
94.7            
Loss  
0.0047 
0.0050 
0.0048 
Freeze Epoch 
50 
50 
50 
Freeze batch size 
32 
32 
32 
 UnFreeze Epoch 
400 
400 
400 
 Unfreeze batch size 
64 
64 
64 
Init lr 
1e-2 
1e-2 
1e-2 
Lr decay type 
cos 
cos 
cos 
 momentum 
0.9 
0.9 
0.9 
Execution Time/ minutes 
5.38 
14.28 
10.71 
 
 
Figure7a(left) Training and validation curve of the model 
Figure7b(right) the valuation index of different measure index 
 
It is abundantly evident, after reviewing the preceding explanation complete with graphs and 
table, that the optimizer function SGD performed far better than the performance of the other 
functions when applied to the issue of lost-object picture classification. 
EfficientNet, Inception v4, ViT-B. 32, DenseNet201, VGGNet19, ShuffleNet v2, ResNet152 
and MobileNet v3 were the eight transfer learning algorithm models of the same kind that 

were chosen at random for the purpose of doing a comparison study in order to test the 
efficiency and superiority of the research approach that was provided in this work.The 
optimal parameter values of the model convergence were selected as the respective 
parameters.This study's private data set is used to train and verify a total of nine models using 
these settings. The outcomes of the training are presented in Table 3. 
Table3. Results of the selected model training 
 
Figure8 The performance, accuracy and parameter amount compare of difference models 
The algorithm that is suggested in this article is transfer learning, which is based on the 
improved MobileNetv2. This can be seen in Table 3. The results of the experiments 
demonstrate that the method under study has an average accuracy of 96.2% when applied to 
Model 
Accura
cy/% 
AP/% 
Total 
parameters/M 
EfficientNet 
（Koonce et al，2021） 
93.9 
89.0 
66.348 
Inception v4 
（Szegedy et al，2017） 
89.5 
80.3 
41.158 
ViT-B/32 
（Dosovitskiy et al， 
2010） 
94.9 
94.3 
104.766 
DenseNet201 
（Huang et al， 
2017） 
95.9 
95.4 
20.014 
VGGNet19 
（SIMONYAN et al， 
2021） 
95.6 
94.7 
139.611 
ShuffleNet v2 
（Ma et al，2018） 
88.6 
82.3 
2.279 
ResNet152 
（He et al，2016） 
87.8 
81.9 
60.193 
MobileNet v3 
（Koonce et al，2021） 
95.7 
94.9 
5.483 
us 
96.8 
96.2 
3.505 

data sets that were self-built. This is a higher accuracy rate than EfficientNet, Inception v4, 
ViT-B. 32, DenseNet201, VGGNet19, ShuffleNet v2, ResNet152 and MobileNet v3 
correspondingly. 7.2%, 15.9%, 1.9%,0.8%,1.5%, 13.9%, 14.3% and 1.3% of the total 
learning was transferred from other models. The suggested technique has obtained the 
greatest accuracy rate in private data sets, which is 96.8%, along with strong generalization 
ability and resilience. When compared to the similar kind of transfer learning model that has 
been developed, this is how it stands out. In correlation with the information shown in Figure 
8, The ordinate in the figure shows the test accuracy, the abscissa represents GFLOPs, the 
circle colors reflect distinct transfer learning models, and the figure size denotes total 
parameters. The suggested method gets the maximum accuracy on private datasets, and it is 
robust and has a decent ability to generalize. When Figure 8 and Table 3 are considered 
together, a further complete evaluation of the performance of each model is carried out. This 
model is only second to MobileNet v3 and ShuffleNet v2, but it is worth recognizing that the 
Total parameters of the proposed model are almost half that of MobileNet v3 Total 
parameters, and the accuracy is higher than ShuffleNet v2 8.2%. MobileNet v3 and 
ShuffleNet v2 are the only models that are ahead of this model. In comprehensive 
comparison, the model that is being offered is a fantastic lightweight network, which 
provides the possibility that the model might be transplanted to mobile devices. 
 
 
Figure9a(left) Confusion matrix of the model 
Figure9b(right) ROC curve of the model 
We decided to combine the confusion matrix from the model single-picture test with the 
ROC curve for the study so that we could have a more in-depth look at the data. The 
confusion matrix is the method for measuring the accuracy of classification models that is the 
simplest and most straightforward. Calculating the confusion matrix of the suggested model 
requires using equation (7) and equation (9). This matrix represents the identification result of 
the different types of lost object photographs and is derived from these equations. The 
confusion matrix is shown in Figure 9a, with the rows representing the expected category for 
the item that was lost, and the columns representing the actual category for the object that 
was lost. Figure 9b illustrates the characteristic curves of the class 10 lost item categories for 
the enhanced MobileNetv2 transfer learning model. ROC stands for receiver operating 
characteristic. The fact that the curves for all ten classes are located in the top left corner is 
evidence that the model is accurate, and the fact that the area under the ROC curve for each 
class is equal to one further demonstrates the superiority and efficiency of the model that was 
provided. 
 
 

II. 
Inference 
In order to successfully apply the model to the actual world, it needs to be simple enough that 
it can be executed on most laptops. In order to accomplish this, we implement this model as 
well as a model that is very close to it on a regular computer that has a CPU, and we 
comprehensively consider the inference speed of the computer as the evaluation index. It 
takes the model 1.5 seconds to reason per picture on the CPU, which is significantly longer 
than the standard migration model of this type or even 1/16 of the EfficientNet's processing 
time. This can be seen in Figure 10a. Because it is such an exceptionally lightweight network, 
it is not hard to imagine that the concept will eventually be adapted to work with other mobile 
devices in the not too distant future. In light of this, we provide an engineering system that 
integrates the perceptual hashing method. 
 
This paper, which is based on the model training using the pytorch and torchvision machine 
learning frameworks, uses the Spring Boot framework as the back-end service of the web 
page in order to realize the online recognition of pictures. The front-end web page uses the 
Layui framework in order to port the trained model to the Web end in order to realize the 
online recognition of images that are uploaded by users. The steps involved in the online 
identification procedure are as follows: the user launches the browser, navigates to the 
system's website, navigates to the system's home page, clicks the button to upload the local 
image, the front end sends the POST request to the back end, and the image is transmitted to 
the back end. After the back end has received the picture that was uploaded by the user, it 
will first make a request to the trained and upgraded MobileNet v2 migration learning model 
for prediction and recognition, and it will then return a category. After it has determined the 
category, it will next submit a request to the database, asking it to deliver an array containing 
the picture address associated with the category it has just determined. After obtaining the 
address, the image is then downloaded by using the image address, and then the perceptual 
hash algorithm is used to compare the downloaded image to the image that was uploaded by 
the user. The alignment will return a number for the similarity error, and the array will be 
used to send the few photos that have the least significant value for the similarity error to the 
front end. Figure 10b depicts the engineering interface after the model has been applied to the 
situation. 
 
Figure10a(left) The speed of inference of each model in cpu 
Figure10b(right) The improved model is applied to the actual engineering interface diagram 
 

Concludes: 
This research presents a novel design plan in light of the difficulties that are associated 
with the management of urban traffic operators. Even while the method of merging 
convolutional neural networks with transfer learning has caused quite a stir in the world of 
image recognition, it is not widely utilized when it comes to the automatic recognition of 
photos that have been misplaced or found. This study offers a new technique of intelligent 
picture identification based on hash algorithm to give full play to the advantages of hash 
algorithm. The approach makes use of the concept of "search by map," and it is based on 
hash algorithm. Because there are a significant number of missing images in the library and a 
great number of feature points that have been extracted, the CBAM structure has been 
introduced in the first layer of the network. This has been done in order to integrate the 
attention mechanism in the dimension of channel and space in order to further highlight the 
required features, which will ultimately lead to an improvement in the classification accuracy 
of the model. Improved MobileNetv2 is used to establish a transfer learning training model to 
identify common lost objects. This is done in order to reduce the number of ways in which 
lost objects and database pictures can be compared to one another, thereby making it possible 
to search for objects in a more convenient manner. Extensive experimental arguments on 
photos taken from the loss-object dataset, employing a variety of transfer learning models. 
The findings indicate that the proposed model has a high recognition accuracy in the GFLOPs 
and Total parameters extremes, and the features derived by this model significantly beat those 
extracted by the other approaches when it comes to the classification job. In order to enhance 
the precision with which missing object categories may be identified, the proposed model is 
being developed and put into practice in the search sector. 
However, further solutions are required in order to further increase the accuracy of the 
model and the segmentation of the various kinds of lost object. In order to do this, the 
following stage will involve further subdividing each category so that it can be utilized in a 
wider variety of search circumstances. 
 
Acknowledgement: 
This work was supported by Provincial College Students' Innovation and Entrepreneurship 
Project Project for College Students [Grant numbers S202110368112]; University 
Humanities and Social Science Research Program of Anhui Province [Grant numbers 
SK2020A0380]; School level Project of Key Humanities and Social Sciences Research Base 
of Anhui Province, Center for Mental Health Education of College Students [Grant numbers 
SJD202001]; and School level Project of the Young and Middle-Aged Natural Science 
Foundation of Wannan Medical College[Grant numbers WK202115] 
 
Reference: 
A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “ImageNet classification with deep 
convolutional Neural Networks,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 60, no. 6, pp. 84–
90, 2017.  

D.-S. Huang, K.-H. Jo, J. Li, V. Gribova, V. Bevilacqua, and A. Hussain, Intelligent 
computing theories and application 17th International Conference, ICIC 2021, 
Shenzhen, China, August 12-15, 2021: Proceedings. Cham, Switchland: Springer, 
2021.  
F. Zhuang, Z. Qi, K. Duan, D. Xi, Y. Zhu, H. Zhu, H. Xiong, and Q. He, “A comprehensive 
survey on Transfer Learning,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 109, no. 1, pp. 43–76, 
2021.  
G.-W. Yang and H.-F. Jing, “Multiple convolutional neural network for feature extraction,” 
Intelligent Computing Theories and Methodologies, pp. 104–114, 2015.  
H. Lee, M. Park, and J. Kim, “Plankton classification on imbalanced large scale database via 
convolutional neural networks with transfer learning,” 2016 IEEE International 
Conference on Image Processing (ICIP), 2016.  
I. K. Purnama, A. K. Hernanda, A. A. Ratna, I. Nurtanio, A. N. Hidayati, M. H. Purnomo, S. 
M. Nugroho, and R. F. Rachmadi, “Disease classification based on dermoscopic skin 
images using convolutional neural network in Teledermatology System,” 2019 
International Conference on Computer Engineering, Network, and Intelligent 
Multimedia (CENIM), 2019.  
J. Cho, K. Lee, E. Shin, G. Choy, and S. Do, “How much data is needed to train a medical 
image deep learning system to achieve necessary high accuracy?,” arXiv.org, 07-Jan-
2016. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1511.06348. [Accessed: 20-Aug-2022].  
K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image recognition,” 
arXiv.org, 10-Dec-2015. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1512.03385. 
[Accessed: 20-Aug-2022].  
K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image 
recognition,” arXiv.org, 10-Apr-2015. [Online]. Available: 
https://arxiv.org/abs/1409.1556. [Accessed: 20-Aug-2022].  
M. Phankokkruad, “Ensemble transfer learning for lung cancer detection,” 2021 4th 
International Conference on Data Science and Information Technology, 2021.  
M. Sandler, A. Howard, M. Zhu, A. Zhmoginov, and L.-C. Chen, “MobileNetV2: Inverted 
residuals and linear bottlenecks,” 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and 
Pattern Recognition, 2018.  
M. Sandler, A. Howard, M. Zhu, A. Zhmoginov, and L.-C. Chen, “MobileNetV2: Inverted 
residuals and linear bottlenecks,” arXiv.org, 21-Mar-2019. [Online]. Available: 
https://arxiv.org/abs/1801.04381. [Accessed: 20-Aug-2022].  
N. J. Herzog and G. D. Magoulas, “Deep learning of brain asymmetry images and transfer 
learning for early diagnosis of dementia,” Proceedings of the International Neural 
Networks Society, pp. 57–70, 2021.  

P. Samanta and S. Jain, “Analysis of perceptual hashing algorithms in image manipulation 
detection,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 185, pp. 203–212, 2021.  
S. Purwar, R. Tripathi, A. W. Barwad, and A. K. Dinda, “Detection of mesangial 
hypercellularity of Mest-C score in immunoglobulin A-nephropathy using deep 
convolutional neural network,” Multimedia Tools and Applications, vol. 79, no. 37-38, 
pp. 27683–27703, 2020.  
W. Song, Y. Wang, and Wang, Image and graphics technologies and applications. 
Singapore: Springer Singapore, 2021.  
Y. Liu, L. Ding, C. Chen, and Y. Liu, “Similarity-based unsupervised deep transfer learning 
for remote sensing image retrieval,” IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote 
Sensing, vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 7872–7889, 2020.  
Z. Sun, X. Yuan, X. Fu, F. Zhou, and C. Zhang, “Multi-scale capsule attention network and 
joint distributed optimal transport for bearing fault diagnosis under different working 
loads,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 19, p. 6696, 2021.  
Woo S, Park J, Lee J Y, et al. Cbam: Convolutional block attention module[C]// 
Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV). 2018: 3-19. 
Weng L, Preneel B. A secure perceptual hash algorithm for image content 
authentication[C]//IFIP International Conference on Communications and Multimedia 
Security. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011: 108-121. 
Koonce B. EfficientNet[M]//Convolutional neural networks with swift for tensorflow. 
Apress, Berkeley, CA, 2021: 109-123. 
Szegedy C, Ioffe S, Vanhoucke V, et al. Inception-v4, inception-resnet and the impact of 
residual connections on learning[C]//Thirty-first AAAI conference on artificial 
intelligence. 2017. 
Dosovitskiy A, Beyer L, Kolesnikov A, et al. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers 
for image recognition at scale[J]. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929, 2020. 
Huang, G., Liu, Z., Van Der Maaten, L. & Weinberger, K. Q. Densely connected 
convolutional networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision 
and Pattern Recognition. 4700–4708 (2017). 
SIMONYAN K, ZISSERMAN  A. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale  image  
recognition  [EB/OL].  [2021-02- 22]. http://arxiv.org/abs/1409.1556.  
Ma N, Zhang X, Zheng H T, et al. Shufflenet v2: Practical guidelines for efficient cnn 
architecture design[C]//Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision 
(ECCV). 2018: 116-131. 
He K, Zhang X, Ren S, et al. Deep residual learning for image recognition[C]// 

Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2016: 770-
778. 
Koonce B. MobileNetV3[M]//Convolutional Neural Networks with Swift for Tensorflow. 
Apress, Berkeley, CA, 2021: 125-144.
