Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning as a Model of Human Task Interleaving
Christoph Gebhardt1, Antti Oulasvirta2, Otmar Hilliges1
ETH Z¨urich1, Aalto University2
Abstract
How do people decide how long to continue in a task, when
to switch, and to which other task? Understanding the mech-
anisms that underpin task interleaving is a long-standing goal
in the cognitive sciences. Prior work suggests greedy heuris-
tics and a policy maximizing the marginal rate of return.
However, it is unclear how such a strategy would allow for
adaptation to everyday environments that offer multiple tasks
with complex switch costs and delayed rewards. Here we
develop a hierarchical model of supervisory control driven
by reinforcement learning (RL). The supervisory level learns
to switch using task-speciﬁc approximate utility estimates,
which are computed on the lower level. A hierarchically op-
timal value function decomposition can be learned from ex-
perience, even in conditions with multiple tasks and arbitrary
and uncertain reward and cost structures. The model repro-
duces known empirical effects of task interleaving. It yields
better predictions of individual-level data than a myopic base-
line in a six-task problem (N=211). The results support hier-
archical RL as a plausible model of task interleaving.
Introduction
How long will you keep reading this paper before you re-

something else is a hallmark of cognitive functioning and
is intensely studied in the cognitive sciences (Altmann and
Trafton 2002; Brumby, Salvucci, and Howes 2009; Duggan,
Johnson, and Sørli 2013; Janssen and Brumby 2010; Jersild
1927; Monsell 2003; Norman and Shallice 1986; Oberauer
and Lewandowsky 2011; Payne, Duggan, and Neth 2007;
Wickens and McCarley 2008). In the corresponding deci-
sion problem, the task interleaving problem, an agent must
decide how to share its resources among a set of tasks over
some period of time. We here investigate sequential task in-
terleaving, where only one demanding task is processed at
a time.1 The agent can focus on a task, thus advancing it
and collecting its associated rewards. It can also switch to
another task, but this incurs a switch cost, the magnitude
Copyright c⃝2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1For models of concurrent multitasking that involves simulta-
neous resource-sharing, see (Brumby et al. 2018; Oberauer and
Lewandowsky 2011; Salvucci and Taatgen 2008).
Figure 1: Example of the task interleaving problem with two
tasks: Given a limited time window and N tasks with re-
ward/cost structures, an agent has to decide what to focus on
at any given time. Attending a task progresses its state and
collects the associated rewards, while switching to another
task incurs a cost. Shown are interleaving sequences (a-d)
generated by a hierarchical reinforcement learner. Discount
factors γ specify the length of the RL reward horizon.
of which depends on the agent’s current state (Jersild 1927;
Monsell 2003). Consider the two-task interleaving problem
shown in Figure 1: How would you interleave and how
would a rational agent behave? The general problem is non-
trivial: our everyday contexts offer large numbers of tasks
with complex and uncertain properties.
It is well-known that interleaving behavior is adaptive.
In particular, the timing of switches shows sensitivity to
in-task rewards (Horrey and Wickens 2006; Janssen and
Brumby 2015; Iani and Wickens 2007; Wickens and Mc-
Carley 2008) and to resumption costs (Altmann and Trafton
2002; Gutzwiller, Wickens, and Clegg 2019; Iqbal and
arXiv:2001.02122v1  [cs.AI]  4 Jan 2020

Bailey 2008), which are affected by skill-level (Janssen
and Brumby 2015) and memory recall demands (Altmann
and Trafton 2007; Oulasvirta and Saariluoma 2006). Task
switches tend to be pushed to boundaries between tasks
and subtasks, where switch costs are lower (Altmann and
Trafton 2002; Janssen, Brumby, and Garnett 2012; McFar-
lane and Latorella 2002). Previous models have shed light
on possible mechanisms underlying these effects: (i) Ac-
cording to a time-based switching heuristic, the least at-
tended task receives resources, to balance resource-sharing
among tasks (Salvucci and Taatgen 2008; Salvucci, Taatgen,
and Borst 2009), or in order to refresh it in memory (Ober-
auer and Lewandowsky 2011); (ii) According to a foraging-
based model, switching maximizes in-task reward (Payne,
Duggan, and Neth 2007; Duggan, Johnson, and Sørli 2013),
which is tractable for diminishing-returns reward functions
using the marginal value theorem; (iii) According to a multi-
attribute decision model, task switches are determined based
on task attractiveness, deﬁned by importance, interest, and
difﬁculty (Wickens, Gutzwiller, and Santamaria 2015).
While these models have enhanced our understanding of
interleaving, we still have an incomplete picture of mecha-
nisms underpinning adaptation. In order to fully explain hu-
man interleaving capabilities, we need to understand how in-
terleaving adapts to multiple tasks and complex reward/cost
structures, including delayed rewards. Examples with non-
diminishing rewards are easy to construct: in food prepara-
tion, the reward is collected only after cooking has ﬁnished.
In addition, we also need to explain people’s ability to inter-
leave tasks they have not experienced before.
Here we propose hierarchical reinforcement learning
(HRL) as a uniﬁed account of adaptive supervisory con-
trol in task interleaving. While there is extensive work on
HRL in machine learning, we develop it here speciﬁcally
as a model of human supervisory control that keeps track of
on-going tasks and decides which to share resources to (Nor-
man and Shallice 1986; Wickens and McCarley 2008). We
assume a two-level supervisory control system, where both
levels use RL to approximate utility based on experience.
RL in general is a plausible mechanism for utility approxi-
mation in conditions that are non-stationary, uncertain, and
where gratiﬁcations are delayed (Sutton and Barto 1998). In
task interleaving, it models how people estimate the value of
continuing in a task and can anticipate a high future reward
even if the immediate reward is low. Hierarchical RL ex-
tends this by employing temporal abstractions that describe
state transitions of variable durations.
Hierarchicality has cognitive appeal thanks to its com-
putational tractability. Selecting among higher-level actions
reduces the number of decisions required to solve a prob-
lem (Botvinick 2012). We demonstrate signiﬁcant decreases
in computational demands when compared to an equal but
ﬂat agent. But HRL is also aligned with neuroscientiﬁc ev-
idence, according to which the prefrontal cortex (PFC) is
organized hierarchically for supervisory control (Botvinick
2012; Frank and Badre 2011), with dopaminergic signaling
contributing to temporal-difference learning and PFC rep-
resenting currently active subroutines. As a consequence,
HRL has been applied to explain brain activity during com-
plex tasks (Botvinick, Niv, and Barto 2009; Rasmussen,
Voelker, and Eliasmith 2017; Balaguer et al. 2016). How-
ever, no related work considers hierarchically optimal prob-
lem decomposition of cognitive processes in task interleav-
ing. Hierarchical optimality is crucial in the case of task in-
terleaving, since rewards of the alternative tasks inﬂuence
the decision to continue the attended task.
This paper presents a novel computational implementa-
tion of HRL for task interleaving and assess it against a
rich set of empirical ﬁndings. The deﬁning assumption of
the model is a two-level hierarchical decomposition of the
RL problem. (i) On the lower – or task type – level, a state-
action-value-function is kept for each task type (e.g., writ-
ing, browsing) and updated with experience of each ongoing
task instance (e.g., writing task A, browsing task B, brows-
ing task C). (ii) On the higher – or task instance – level,
a pointer is kept to each on-going task instance. RL de-
cides the next task based on value estimates provided from
the lower level. This type–instance distinction permits tak-
ing decisions without previously experiencing the particular
task instance. By modeling task-type-level decisions with
a semi-Markov Decision Process (SMDP), we model how
people decide to switch at decision points rather than at a
ﬁxed sampling interval. In addition, the HRL-model allows
learning arbitrarily shaped reward- and cost functions.
We report evidence from simulations and empirical data.
The model reproduces known patterns of adaptive interleav-
ing and predicts individual-level behavior measured in a
challenging and realistic interleaving study with six tasks
(N=211). The HRL model was better or equal than a myopic
baseline model, which does not consider long-term rewards.
HRL also showed more human-like patterns, such as sensi-
tivity to subtask boundaries. We conclude that human inter-
leaving behavior appears better described by optimal plan-
ning under uncertainty than by a myopic strategy, and that
hierarchical decomposition is a plausible cognitive solution
to this planning problem.
Background
Markov and semi-Markov decision processes
The family of Markov decision processes (MDP) is a math-
ematical framework for decision-making in stochastic do-
mains (Kaelbling, Littman, and Cassandra 1998). An MDP
is a four-tuple (S, A, P, R), where S is a set of states, A a
set of actions, P state transition probability for going from a
state s to state s′ after performing action a (i.e., P(s′|s, a)),
and R the reward for action a in state s (i.e. R : S×A →R).
The expected discounted reward for action a in s and then
following policy π is known as the Q value: Qπ(s, a) =
Est[P∞
t=0 γtR(st, at)] where γ is a discount factor. Q val-
ues are related via the Bellman equation: Qπ(s, a)
=
P
s′ P(s′|s, a)[R(s′, s, a) + γQπ(s′, π(s′))]. The optimal
policy can then be computed as π∗= arg maxaQπ(s, a).
Classic MDPs assume a discrete step size. To model tem-
porally extended actions, semi-Markov decision processes
(SMDPs) are used. SMDPs represent snapshots of a sys-
tem at decision points where the time between transitions
can be of variable temporal length. An SMDP is a ﬁve-

tuple (S, A, P, R, F), where S, A, P, R describe an
MDP and F gives the probability of transition times for
each state-action pair. Its Bellman equation is: Qπ(s, a) =
P
s′,t F(t|s, a)P(s′|s, a)[R(s, a)+γtQπ(s′, π(s′))], where
t is the number of time units after the agent chooses action
a in state s and F(t|s, a) is the probability that the next de-
cision epoch occurs within t time units.
Hierarchical reinforcement learning
Hierarchical RL (HRL) is based on the observation that a
variable can be irrelevant to the optimal decision in a state
even if it affects the value of that state (Dietterich 1998). The
goal is to decompose a decision problem into subroutines,
encapsulating the internal decisions such that they are inde-
pendent of all external variables other than those passed as
arguments to the subroutine. There are two types of optimal-
ity of policies learned by HRL algorithms. A policy which
is optimal with respect to the non-decomposed problem
is called hierarchically optimal (Andre and Russell 2002;
Ghavamzadeh and Mahadevan 2002). A policy optimized
within its subroutine, ignoring the calling context, is called
recursively optimal (Dietterich 1998).
Computational Model of Task Interleaving
Task model:
We model tasks via the reward rT (s) and
cost cT (s) functions deﬁned over discrete states s (see Fig-
ure 2). The reward represents subjective attractiveness of
a state in a task (Norman and Shallice 1986; Wickens and
McCarley 2008). The cost represents overheads caused by a
switch to a task (Jersild 1927; Oberauer and Lewandowsky
2011; Oulasvirta and Saariluoma 2006). A state is a discrete
representation of progress within a task and the progress
is speciﬁc to a task type. For instance, in our reading task
model, progress is approximated by the position of the scroll
bar in a text box. Reward and cost functions can be arbi-
trarily shaped. This affords ﬂexibility to model tasks with
high interest (Horrey and Wickens 2006; Iani and Wickens
2007), tasks with substructures (Bailey and Konstan 2006;
Monk et al. 2004), and complex resumption costs (Rubin-
stein, Meyer, and Evans 2001; Bailey and Konstan 2006).
Figure 2: An exemplary task model for paper writing: re-
wards rT and costs cT over discrete states s.
Figure 3: A hierarchical decomposition of the task inter-
leaving problem: subroutines are triangles, rectangles are
composite actions and primitive actions are ovals. Root
chooses among all available task instances, e.g., Task11(s),
which in turn call the subroutine of their respective type,
e.g., TaskType1(s). A subroutine can either continue
Continue(s) or leave Leave(s) a task.
Hierarchical decomposition of task environments:
We
assume that interleaving requires generalization of an en-
countered task instance to its respective type. The environ-
ment of an agent can consist of multiple tasks, some of
which share the same type (i.e., multiple task instances of
type reading). Figure 3 shows the hierarchical decomposi-
tion of the problem. Rectangles represent composite actions
that can be performed to achieve their parent’s subroutine
or call a primitive action (ovals). Each subroutine (trian-
gle) is a separate SMDP. The problem is decomposed by
deﬁning a subroutine for each task type: TaskType1(s) to
TaskTypeN(s). A subroutine estimates the expected cu-
mulative reward of pursuing a task from a starting state
s until the state it expectedly leaves the task. At a given
state s, it can choose from the actions of either continuing
Continue(s) or leaving Leaving(s) the task. These actions
then call the respective action primitives: continue, leave.
The higher level routine Root, selects among all available
task instances, Task11(s) to TaskNN(s), the one which re-
turns the highest expected reward. When a task instance is
selected, it calls its respective task type subroutine passing
its in-task state s (e.g., Task11(s) calls TaskType1(s)).
Reward functions:
We deﬁne two reward functions. On
the task type level, the reward for proceeding with a subrou-
tine from its current state s with action a is:
Rt(s, a) =

−cT (s)
if a is leave
rT (s)
if a is continue ,
(1)
where cT (s) and rT (s) are the respective cost and reward
functions of the task. This covers cases in which the agent
gains a reward by pursuing a task (rT (s), a = continue).
It also captures human sensitivity to future costs (Altmann
and Trafton 2002; McFarlane and Latorella 2002), when de-
ciding to terminate task execution (−cT (s), a = leave).
Finally, it models the effect of decreasing reward as well
as increasing effort both increasing the probability of leav-
ing a task (Gutzwiller, Wickens, and Clegg 2019). On the
task instance level, we penalize state changes to model
reluctance to continue tasks that require excessive effort
to recall relevant knowledge (Altmann and Trafton 2007;

Oulasvirta and Saariluoma 2006). The respective reward
function is Rr(s) = −cT (z(s)), where s is the state on the
root-level, z(s) maps s to the state of its child’s SMDP, and
cT (s) is again the cost function of the task.
Hierarchical optimality:
We model task interleaving as a
hierarchically optimal RL problem. This captures the idea
that rewards of the alternative tasks inﬂuence the decision to
continue the attended task. Therefore, we implement hierar-
chical task interleaving using the three-part value function
decomposition proposed in (Andre and Russell 2002). The
Bellman equation of a task type subroutine considers the ex-
pected reward outside of this routine and is deﬁned as
Qπ
t (s, a) =
X
s′
Pt(s′|s, a)Rt(s, a)
(2)
+
X
SS(s′,t)
Ft(t|s, a)Pt(s′|s, a)γt
tQπ
t (s′, πt(s′))
+
X
EX(s′,t)
Ft(t|s, a)Pt(s′|s, a)γt
tQπ
r (p(s′), πr(p(s′))) ,
where s, a, s′, Pt, Ft, πt, and γt are the respective functions
or parameters of a task type level SMDP. πr is the optimal
policy on the root level, and p(s) maps from a state s to
the corresponding state in its parent’s SMDP. EX(s′, t) is a
function that returns the subset of next states s′ and transi-
tion times t that are exit states as deﬁned by the environment
of the subroutine. SS(s′, t) is a similar function that returns
s′ and t for all other states. Note that on the lower level of
the hierarchy the decision process is an SMDP rather than
an MDP. Hence, we model varying progress speed (action
times) per person and task type. Qπ
r is the Bellman equation
on the root-level of our HRL-model and is deﬁned as
Qπ
r (s, a) =
X
s′,t
Fr(t|s, a)Pr(s′|s, a)[Rr(s)
(3)
+ Qπ
t (z(s), πtype(z(s))) + γt
rQπ
r (s′, πr(s′))] ,
where s, a, Pr, Fr, πr, and γr are the respective functions or
parameters of the root level SMDP. z(s) is again the map-
ping function from root-level state to the state within its
child’s SMDP. State-action transition on the root level are
rewarded according to the expected reward values of the
subroutine Qπ
t (z(s), πt(z(s))) and penalized according to
Rr(s). The discount factor γt of Qπ
t (s, a) can be used to
model various degrees of executive control. A high exec-
utive control causes the agent to avoid switching to other
tasks in anticipation of high future rewards and low execu-
tive control to switch for immediate rewards (Wickens and
McCarley 2008). Using high respectively low values for γt
during training causes the agent to behave in a similar man-
ner. See Supplementary Material for model details.
Comparison with Flat RL
To test the plausibility of hierarchicality, we further com-
pared our model with a ﬂat RL implementation of the task
interleaving problem. For both models, we learn 100 poli-
cies for a ten task, six instance problem and the same
Figure 4: Learning curves of the ﬂat RL- and our HRL-
agent. Solid line denotes mean reward (y-axis) per episode
(x-axis), shaded area represents standard deviation.
simulated user. Figure 4 shows the learning curves of the
two methods. Both perform similarly in terms of attained
reward per episode. However, HRL converges faster than
ﬂat RL which is inline with prior work (Dietterich 1998;
Andre and Russell 2002; Ghavamzadeh and Mahadevan
2002). This is due to a signiﬁcant decrease in the num-
ber of states (43-fold for this example). This corroborates
HRL as a cognitively more tractable model (Botvinick 2012;
Frank and Badre 2011).
To ﬁnd model-neutral evidence for the hierarchical as-
sumption, we also analyzed the improvement of reward over
time in the participant data of our experiment (see next sec-
tion). Here, reward increases quickly with experience over
just three trials (1st trial: M 24.9 SD 12.4; 2nd: M 30.4 SD
11.5; 3rd: M 36.7 SD 11.1). This can be attributed to partic-
ipants ability, similarly as the HRL-agent, to generalize task
instances to task types, which enables faster learning of re-
ward estimates per task instance. Flat RL does not generalize
to task types, thus requires longer exposure.
Experiments
We report results from (i) simulations and (ii) an interleav-
ing study (N = 211). In all experiments, we trained the
agent for 250 episodes2, which was sufﬁcient for saturation
of reward. The HRL agent was trained using the discounted
reward HO-MAXQ algorithm (Andre and Russell 2002).
Simulations
We report simulation results showing how the model adapts
to changing cost/reward structures. To this end, the two-task
interleaving problem of Figure 1 is considered. The writ-
ing task Tw awards a high reward when completed. Switch-
ing away is costly, except upon completing a chapter. The
browsing task Tb, by contrast, offers a constant small re-
ward and switch costs are low. In the following examples,
the HRL agent was force to start with the writing task.
Cost and task boundaries:
In Figure 1 c), the agent only
switches to browsing after reaching a subtask boundary in
2We consider an episode ﬁnished when all tasks in the task en-
vironment are completed.

Figure 5: Task models of the four tasks used in the experiment: (a) Example of how task state is assigned to visible state on
display: passages of text in the reading task are assigned to the discrete states of its task model (column of numbers) over which
reward (green) and cost function (red) are speciﬁed. The row highlighted yellow provides the answer to a comprehension query
at the end. (b-e) show exemplary task models for (b) reading, (c) visual matching, (d) math, and (e) typing tasks.
writing, accurately modelling sensitivity to costs of resump-
tion (Altmann and Trafton 2002; Gutzwiller, Wickens, and
Clegg 2019; Iqbal and Bailey 2008).
Reward structure:
The HRL agent is sensitive to re-
wards (Horrey and Wickens 2006; Iani and Wickens 2007;
Norman and Shallice 1986; Wickens and McCarley 2008),
as shown by comparison of interleaving trajectories pro-
duced with different values of γ in Figure 1. For example,
when γ = 0, only immediate rewards are considered in RL,
and the agent immediately switches to browsing.
Level of supervisory control:
The discount factor γ ap-
proximates the level of executive control of individuals. Fig-
ure 1 d) illustrates the effect of high executive control: writ-
ing is performed uninterruptedly while inhibiting switches
to tasks with higher immediate but lower long-term gains.
Online interleaving study: Method
Novel experimental data was collected to assess how well
the model (i) generalizes to an unseen task environment and
(ii) if it can account for individual differences. Participants
practiced each task type separately prior to entering inter-
leaving trials. Six task instances were made available on a
browser view (see screen shots in Supp. Mat.). The reward
structure of each task was explained, and users had to decide
how to maximize points within a limited total time.
Participants:
218 participants completed the study. Ten
were recruited from our institutions, and the rest from Ama-
zon Mechanical Turk. Monetary fees were designed to meet
and surpass the US minimum wage requirements. A fee of
5 USD was awarded to all participants who completed the
trial, and an extra of 3 USD as a linear function of points at-
tained in the interleaving trials. We excluded 7 participants
who did not exhibit any task interleaving behavior.
Tasks:
Four realistic task types were used. (i) Reading in-
cluded snippets from an avalanche bulletin and two multi-
ple choice questions to measure comprehension. (ii) Typing
required transcribing six phrases displayed one at a time.
(iii) Math required solving equations with addition and sub-
traction operators. Difﬁculty was increased by adding more
terms. (iv) Visual matching consisted of six image lists, and
the participants had to click those showing airplanes. Difﬁ-
culty was controlled by decreasing the proportion of images
with airplanes. In-task rewards were designed to be realistic
and clear. For instance, in Visual Matching, rewards were
assigned per correctly identiﬁed airplanes. Participants were
told about the reward structures, and feedback on attained
rewards was provided.
Procedure:
After instructions, informed consent, and task
type speciﬁc practice, the participants were asked to solve
between two and ﬁve task interleaving trials. Every trial con-
tained six task instances, each sampled from a distribution
of its general type. The instances were made available in a
tabbed view. A tab had to be clicked to resume the instance.
Trial durations were sampled from a random distribution un-
known to the participant. The stated goal was to maximize
total points linked to monetary rewards. No task instance
was presented more than once to a participant. The average
task completion time was 39 minutes.
Model ﬁtting
Task models:
Figure 5 shows task models that we used in
the study. A mapping was created between what is shown on
the display and task state s. Figure 5 a) shows an example:
text paragraphs are mapped to the state of a reading model.
Cost functions were designed to be constant or increasing
linearly according to the designed difﬁculty in a task. For
example, in the Math task, costs increased with the number
of terms in an equation (see cTm in Figure 5 d). Rewards
were modeled based on the monetary reward, known to par-
ticipants. See Supp. Materials for more details.
Empirical parameters:
The model predicts individual
differences based on three types of idiosyncratic parameters:
(i) the discount factor 0.0 < γt < 1.0, (ii) a general switch
cost 0.0 < cP < 0.3, (iii) and a task speciﬁc scaling coef-
ﬁcient 0.0 < sP T < 1.0. Perceived switch cost, known to
affect switching (Janssen and Brumby 2015), is modeled per
task type as: cP T (s) = cP + sP T cT (s).

Figure 6: Means and 95% conﬁdence intervals for (a) attained rewards, (b) accuracy in predicting next task, (c) accuracy in
predicting leaving of a task, (d) accuracy in predicting continuing of a task, (e) error in predicting order of tasks (lower is better).
Inverse modeling method:
To ﬁt these to an individual’s
data, we used approximate Bayesian computation (ABC)
(Kangasr¨a¨asi¨o et al. 2017; Lintusaari et al. 2018). ABC is
a sample-efﬁcient and robust likelihood-free method for ﬁt-
ting simulator models to data. It yields a posterior distri-
bution for the likelihood of parameter values given data.
An aggregate index of interleaving similarity is the to-be-
minimized discrepancy function:
d(Ss, As, π) = −w

1 −1
Ns
X
s,a ∈Ss,As
1(a, π(s))

,
(4)
1(ap, aa) =

1
if ap = aa
0
else ,
where Ss is the set of states in which participants switched
tasks, As is the set of chosen actions (tasks) by the partici-
pant, Ns is the number of task switches by the participant, π
is the hierarchical policy of the agent, and w is a weight to
scale discrepancy values (see Supp. Materials for details).
Fitting procedure:
We held out the last trial of a partic-
ipant for testing and used the preceding interleaving trials
for parameter-ﬁtting. We run the above ﬁtting method to this
data for 60 iterations. In each, we trained the HRL agent ten
times using the same set of parameters in a task interleav-
ing environment matching that of the participant in question.
For the Gaussian Process proxy model in ABC, we used a
Matern-kernel parameterized for twice-differentiable func-
tions. On a commodity desktop machine (Intel Core i7 4GHz
CPU), learning a policy took on average 10.3 sec (SD 4.0),
and ﬁtting for full participant data took 103.8 min (SD 28.2).
The reported results come from the policy with lowest dis-
crepancy to data obtained in 15 repetitions of this procedure
with different weights (best: w = 100).
Baseline models
We compare the HRL model against two baselines: Ran-
dom chooses at each decision point of the SMDP at random
one of the available actions; Myopic chooses the task T that
provides the highest reward in its next state s′:
πm = arg maxT rT (s′
T ) −1(T, To)

cT (s′
T ) + cT (sTo)

,
1(T, To) =

0
if T = To
1
else ,
(5)
where s′
T is the next state of task T, sTo is the current state of
the ongoing task To, and cT is the respective task’s cost func-
tion. This baseline is a myopic version of the HRL model
which only considers the next state. To compare against
a strong model, it decides based on the true rewards and
costs of the next states. By contrast, HRL decides based
on learned estimates. We did not compare against marginal
rate of return (Duggan, Johnson, and Sørli 2013) or informa-
tion foraging models (Payne, Duggan, and Neth 2007) as in-
task states can have zero reward. Both models would switch
task in this case, rendering them weaker baselines than
Myopic. The multi-criteria model of (Wickens, Gutzwiller,
and Santamaria 2015) does not adapt to received task re-
wards and offers no implementation. Models of concur-
rent multitasking (i.e., (Oberauer and Lewandowsky 2011;
Salvucci and Taatgen 2008)) are not designed for sequential
task interleaving.
Results
Predictions of HRL were made for the held-out trial and
compared with human data. Analyzing base rates for contin-
uing versus leaving a task of the behavioral sample revealed
that task-continuation dominates events (= 0.95). For this
reason, we analyze the capability of models to predict if par-
ticipants leave or continue a task separately.
Reward:
HRL (M 36.7, SD 9.51) attained the highest re-
ward, followed by Myopic (M 34.65 SD 8.03), Participants
(M 33.18, SD 11.92) and Random (M 20.08, SD 8.52).
Choosing next task:
HRL showed highest accuracy in
predicting the next task of a participant (M 0.51, SD 0.27),
see Figure 6 b). It was followed by Myopic (M 0.41, SD
0.26) and Random (M 0.22, SD 0.21). There was a signiﬁ-
cant effect of model (H(2) = 127.9, p < 0.001).3 Post-hoc
pairwise comparisons (Tukey’s) indicated a signiﬁcant dif-
ference between the models: all p < 0.001.
Leaving a task:
HRL outperformed Myopic in predicting
when a participant would leave a task (HRL, M 0.85, SD
0.23; Myopic, M 0.75, SD 0.29). Random was the worst (M
0.5, SD 0.30, see Figure 6 c). There was a signiﬁcant effect
of model on accuracy (H(2) = 143.1, p < 0.001). Again,
pairwise comparisons revealed a signiﬁcant difference be-
tween all models (p < 0.001).
3We use Kruskal-Wallis for signiﬁcance-testing throughout.

Continuing a task:
HRL (M 0.86, SD 0.17) was bet-
ter than Myopic (M 0.73, SD 0.22) in predicting continu-
ation in a task (see Figure 6 d). Random was the worst (M
0.50, SD 0.07). These differences were signiﬁcant (H(2) =
327.0, p < 0.001). Pairwise comparisons indicated that sig-
niﬁcant differences hold between all conditions (p < 0.001).
Order of tasks:
HRL and Myopic were equally good in
predicting the order in which tasks are visited. To this end,
we deﬁned task order error as the sum of non-equal in-
stances between produced orders of tasks. A signiﬁcant om-
nibus effect of model was found (H(2) = 346.2, p <
0.001). Myopic had a smaller error (M 20.60, SD 29.43)
than HRL (M 26.21, SD 29.74). However, this difference
was not statistically signiﬁcant (p = 0.7). Random was the
worst (M 177.90, SD 113.19). HRL and Myopic had a sig-
niﬁcantly smaller error than Random (p < 0.001 for both).
State visitations:
We computed histograms of state vis-
itation frequencies per task type (Figure 7). As visual in-
spection conﬁrms, HRL had a superior histogram intersec-
tion (0.93) with Participants than Myopic (0.88) and Ran-
dom (0.81). The step-like patterns in the histograms of Par-
ticipants were reproduced by HRL, illustrating that its poli-
cies switched at the same subtask boundaries as participants
(e.g., see top-row in Figure 7).
Figure 7: State visitations: HRL shows better match with
state visitation patterns than Myopic and Random. y-axis
shows fraction of states visited aggregated over all trials.
Parameter ﬁtting
Table 1 reports the mean fraction of reproduced actions per
participant for each iteration of our model ﬁtting procedure.
Fractions are computed using the normalized sum of repro-
duced actions of Eq. 4. Results on training trials improve
with each iteration of the procedure and show that learned
parameters generalize to the held-out test trials.
The mean difference between the estimated parameters of
two runs of the ﬁtting procedure per participant are: γt (dis-
count factor) M 0.20, SD 0.23; cP (switch cost) M 0.09, SD
Trials
Iterations
Mean
Std. dev.
training
random
0.51
0.21
1
0.64
0.13
10
0.69
0.13
30
0.70
0.14
60
0.73
0.13
test
random
0.54
0.21
ﬁt
0.67
0.20
Table 1: Mean and standard deviation of fractions of repro-
duced actions of participants. Fractions are computed for ﬁt-
ted (test trial), random and inferred parameters after number
of iterations (training trial).
0.09; sP R (reading) M 0.32, SD 0.28; sP V (visual match-
ing) M 0.36, SD 0.28; sP M (math) M 0.33, SD 0.26; sP T
(typing) M 0.38, SD 0.34. The somewhat low reliability of
parameters can be explained by the fact that, in our task,
participants can achieve a high reward by two means: high
switch costs or high discount factor. While our model pa-
rameters are theoretically justiﬁed, reﬁning the model such
that parameter values can reliably be associated with behav-
ioral patterns is an interesting direction of future work.
Discussion
Understanding information processing in the brain requires
computational models that are capable of performing realis-
tic cognitive tasks by reference to neurobiologically plau-
sible component mechanisms (Kriegeskorte and Douglas
2018). Computational models that synthesize task perfor-
mance can expose interactions among cognitive components
and thereby subject theories to critical testing against hu-
man behavior. In this spirit, we have provided new evidence
for hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL) as a model of
task interleaving. The resemblance between simulated and
empirical data is very encouraging. Comparison against the
myopic baseline suggests that human interleaving is better
described as optimal planning under uncertainty than by a
myopic strategy. We have shown that hierarchically optimal
value decomposition is a tractable solution to the planning
problem that the supervisory control system faces. In partic-
ular, it (i) can achieve a high level of control via experience,
(ii) adapts to complex and delayed rewards/costs, avoiding
being dominated by immediate rewards, and (iii) can gener-
alize task type knowledge to instances not encountered pre-
viously. Moreover, only a small number of empirical param-
eters was needed for characterizing individual differences.
To support further research on the topic, we release our
code and data as open source. One exciting remaining ques-
tion is the relationship between HRL and heuristic strategies.
Our informal observations suggest that greedy behavior may
emerge at the extreme when the discount factor approaches
zero. Another promising direction concerns the role of mem-
ory. With time-bound mechanisms in place, such as loss of
activation, we might see the time-based switching heuris-
tic emerge. We model recall effort to be the sole source of
switch costs. For future work, it is interesting to extend cost
functions to account for other factors, e.g., cognitive load.
