Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 43 (2012) 571-620
Submitted 09/11; published 04/12
Reformulating the Situation Calculus and the Event
Calculus in the General Theory of Stable Models and in
Answer Set Programming
Joohyung Lee

Ravi Palla

School of Computing, Informatics,
and Decision Systems Engineering
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ 85287, USA
Abstract
Circumscription and logic programs under the stable model semantics are two well-
known nonmonotonic formalisms. The former has served as a basis of classical logic based
action formalisms, such as the situation calculus, the event calculus and temporal action
logics; the latter has served as a basis of a family of action languages, such as language A
and several of its descendants. Based on the discovery that circumscription and the stable
model semantics coincide on a class of canonical formulas, we reformulate the situation
calculus and the event calculus in the general theory of stable models. We also present a
translation that turns the reformulations further into answer set programs, so that eﬃcient
answer set solvers can be applied to compute the situation calculus and the event calculus.
1. Introduction
Circumscription (McCarthy, 1980, 1986) and logic programs under the stable model seman-
tics (Gelfond & Lifschitz, 1988) are two well-known nonmonotonic formalisms. As one of the
oldest nonmonotonic formalisms, circumscription has found many applications in common-
sense reasoning and model-based diagnoses (e.g., McCarthy, 1986; Shanahan, 1995; Besnard
& Cordier, 1994). The stable model semantics is the mathematical basis of Answer Set Pro-
gramming (ASP) (Marek & Truszczy´nski, 1999; Niemel¨a, 1999; Lifschitz, 2008), which is
being widely applied thanks to the availability of several eﬃcient implementations, known
as answer set solvers.
While the two nonmonotonic formalisms have been applied to overlapping classes of
problems, minimal model reasoning ensured by circumscription does not coincide with stable
model reasoning. Moreover, these formalisms have diﬀerent roots. While circumscription
is deﬁned in terms of translation into classical (second-order) logic, stable models proposed
by Gelfond and Lifschitz (1988) are deﬁned in terms of grounding and ﬁxpoints in the
style of Reiter’s default logic (Reiter, 1980). These diﬀerences in part account for the fact
that the two formalisms have formed rather disparate traditions in knowledge representation
research. In particular, in the area of temporal reasoning, the former has served as a basis of
classical logic based action calculi, such as the situation calculus (McCarthy & Hayes, 1969;
Reiter, 2001), the event calculus (Shanahan, 1995) and temporal action logics (Doherty,
c⃝2012 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

Lee & Palla
Gustafsson, Karlsson, & Kvarnstr¨om, 1998), whereas the latter has served as a basis of a
family of action languages, such as language A (Gelfond & Lifschitz, 1998) and several of its
descendants which can be translated into logic programs under the stable model semantics.
However, a recent generalization of the stable model semantics shed new light on the
relationship between circumscription and stable models. The ﬁrst-order stable model se-
mantics deﬁned by Ferraris, Lee and Lifschitz (2007, 2011) characterizes the stable models
of a ﬁrst-order sentence as the models (in the sense of ﬁrst-order logic) of the sentence
that satisfy the “stability” condition, expressed by a second-order formula that is similar
to the one used to deﬁne circumscription. Since logic programs are viewed as a special
class of ﬁrst-order sentences under the stable model semantics, this deﬁnition extends the
stable model semantics by Gelfond and Lifschitz (1988) to the full ﬁrst-order level without
limiting attention to Herbrand models. Essentially the same characterization was indepen-
dently given by Lin and Zhou (2011), via logic of knowledge and justiﬁed assumption (Lin
& Shoham, 1992). These deﬁnitions are also equivalent to the deﬁnition of Quantiﬁed Equi-
librium Logic given by Pearce and Valverde (2005), which is deﬁned in terms of the logic of
Here-and-There (Heyting, 1930).
The new deﬁnition of a stable model motivates us to investigate the relationship between
stable model reasoning and minimal model reasoning.
In particular, we focus on their
relationship in the area of temporal reasoning. We show how the situation calculus and the
event calculus can be reformulated in the ﬁrst-order stable model semantics, and further in
ASP. This is not only theoretically interesting, but also practically useful as it allows us to
leverage eﬃcient answer set solvers for computing circumscriptive action theories.
For this, we develop two technical results. First, we show that circumscription and the
ﬁrst-order stable model semantics coincide on the class of canonical formulas. This is the
largest syntactic class identiﬁed so far on which the two semantics coincide, and is general
enough to cover several circumscriptive action formalisms, such as the situation calculus,
the event calculus, and temporal action logics. The result allows us to reformulate those
action formalisms in the ﬁrst-order stable model semantics. While minimal model reasoning
sometimes leads to unintuitive results, those circumscriptive action formalisms are carefully
designed to avoid such cases, and our result implies that minimal model reasoning in those
action formalisms can also be viewed as stable model reasoning.
Second, we identify a class of almost universal formulas, which can be turned into the
syntax of a logic program while preserving stable models.
It turns out that the refor-
mulations of the situation calculus and the event calculus in the ﬁrst-order stable model
semantics fall into this class of formulas. We introduce system f2lp that turns formulas in
this class to logic programs, and, in conjunction with the result on canonical formulas, use
the combination of f2lp and answer set solvers to compute the situation calculus and the
event calculus.
Our work makes explicit the relationship between classical logic and logic program tra-
ditions in temporal reasoning.
Interestingly, the development of the event calculus has
spanned over both traditions. The original version of the event calculus (Kowalski & Ser-
got, 1986) was formulated in logic programs, but not under the stable model semantics (that
was the time before the invention of the stable model semantics). More extensive develop-
ments have been later carried out on the classical logic foundation via circumscription (e.g.,
Shanahan, 1995, 1997, 1999; Miller & Shanahan, 1999; Mueller, 2004), but the relation to
572

Reformulating the Situation Calculus and the Event Calculus
the logic program formulation remained implicit. Based on the reduction of circumscrip-
tion to completion, SAT-based event calculus systems were implemented, one by Shanahan
and Witkowski (2004) and another by Mueller (2004). The latter system is called the dec
reasoner,1 which outperforms the former thanks to a more eﬃcient and general compilation
method into propositional logic. While the system handles a large fragment of the event
calculus, it still cannot handle recursive and disjunctive axioms since completion cannot
be applied to such axioms. Our ASP-based approach on the other hand can handle the
full version of the event calculus under the assumption that the domain is given and ﬁnite.
Thanks to the eﬃciency of ASP solvers, our experiments indicate that the ASP-based event
calculus reasoner is signiﬁcantly faster than the dec reasoner (Appendix B).
Similar to the logic programming tradition of the event calculus, the situation calcu-
lus (McCarthy & Hayes, 1969; Reiter, 2001) can be implemented in Prolog, based on the
fact that Clark’s completion semantics accounts for deﬁnitional axioms. But unlike the
event calculus, to the best of our knowledge, eﬃcient propositional solvers have not been
applied to directly compute the models of situation calculus theories. In this paper, we
reformulate Lin’s causal action theories (1995) and Reiter’s basic action theories (2001) in
the ﬁrst-order stable model semantics and in ASP. For basic action theories, we also provide
an ASP-based encoding method that obtains Reiter’s successor state axioms from the eﬀect
axioms and the generic inertia axioms adopted in ASP, the idea of which is close to Reiter’s
frame default (1980).
The paper is organized as follows.
The next section reviews the deﬁnitions of cir-
cumscription and the ﬁrst-order stable model semantics, and presents the deﬁnition of a
canonical formula. Based on this, Sections 3 and 4 reformulate the event calculus and the
situation calculus in the ﬁrst-order stable model semantics. Section 5 shows a translation
that turns almost universal formulas into logic programs that can be accepted by ASP
solvers. Sections 6 and 7 use this result to turn the reformulations of the event calculus
and the situation calculus given in Sections 3 and 4 into the input language of ASP solvers.
Complete proofs are given in Appendix C.
2. Circumscription and First-Order Stable Model Semantics
We assume the following set of primitive propositional connectives and quantiﬁers:
⊥(falsity), ∧, ∨, →, ∀, ∃.
We understand ¬F as an abbreviation of F →⊥; symbol ⊤stands for ⊥→⊥, and F ↔G
stands for (F →G) ∧(G →F).
2.1 Review: Circumscription
Let p be a list of distinct predicate constants p1, . . . , pn, and let u be a list of distinct
predicate variables u1, . . . , un.
By u ≤p we denote the conjunction of the formulas
∀x(ui(x) →pi(x)) for all i = 1, . . . n, where x is a list of distinct object variables whose
length is the same as the arity of pi. Expression u < p stands for (u ≤p) ∧¬(p ≤u). For
1. http://decreasoner.sourceforge.net
573

Lee & Palla
instance, if p and q are unary predicate constants then (u, v) < (p, q) is
∀x(u(x) →p(x)) ∧∀x(v(x) →q(x)) ∧¬

∀x(p(x) →u(x)) ∧∀x(q(x) →v(x))

.
Circumscription is deﬁned in terms of the CIRC operator with minimized predicates.
For any ﬁrst-order formula F, expression CIRC[F; p] stands for the second-order formula
F ∧¬∃u((u < p) ∧F(u)),
where F(u) is the formula obtained from F by substituting ui for pi. When F is a sentence
(i.e., a formula with no free variables), intuitively, the models of CIRC[F; p] are the models
of F that are “minimal” on p.
The deﬁnition is straightforwardly extended to the case when F is a many-sorted ﬁrst-
order formula (Lifschitz, 1994, Section 2.4), which is the language that the event calculus
and the situation calculus are based on.
2.2 Review: First-Order Stable Model Semantics
This review follows the deﬁnition by Ferraris et al. (2011). There, the stable models are
deﬁned in terms of the SM operator, whose deﬁnition is similar to the CIRC operator in
the previous section. For any ﬁrst-order formula F and any ﬁnite list of predicate constants
p = (p1, . . . , pn), formula SM[F; p] is deﬁned as
F ∧¬∃u((u < p) ∧F ∗(u)),
where u is deﬁned the same as in CIRC[F; p], and F ∗(u) is deﬁned recursively as follows:
• pi(t)∗= ui(t) for any list t of terms;
• F ∗= F for any atomic formula F (including ⊥and equality) that does not contain
members of p;
• (F ∧G)∗= F ∗∧G∗;
• (F ∨G)∗= F ∗∨G∗;
• (F →G)∗= (F ∗→G∗) ∧(F →G);
• (∀xF)∗= ∀xF ∗;
• (∃xF)∗= ∃xF ∗.
The predicates in p are called intensional: these are the predicates that we “intend to
characterize” by F in terms of non-intensional predicates.2 When F is a sentence, the models
of the second-order sentence SM[F; p] are called the p-stable models of F: they are the
models of F that are “stable” on p. We will often simply write SM[F] in place of SM[F; p]
when p is the list of all predicate constants occurring in F. According to Lee, Lifschitz, and
2. Intensional predicates are analogous to output predicates in Datalog, and non-intensional predicates are
analogous to input predicates in Datalog (Lifschitz, 2011).
574

Reformulating the Situation Calculus and the Event Calculus
Palla (2008), answer sets are deﬁned as a special class of stable models as follows. By σ(F)
we denote the signature consisting of the object, function and predicate constants occurring
in F. If F contains at least one object constant, an Herbrand interpretation of σ(F) that
satisﬁes SM[F] is called an answer set of F. The answer sets of a logic program Π are deﬁned
as the answer sets of the FOL-representation of Π (i.e., the conjunction of the universal
closures of implications corresponding to the rules). For example, the FOL-representation
of the program
p(a)
q(b)
r(x) ←p(x), not q(x)
is
p(a) ∧q(b) ∧∀x(p(x) ∧¬q(x) →r(x))
(1)
and SM[F] is
p(a) ∧q(b) ∧∀x(p(x) ∧¬q(x) →r(x))
∧¬∃uvw(((u, v, w) < (p, q, r)) ∧u(a) ∧v(b)
∧∀x((u(x) ∧(¬v(x) ∧¬q(x)) →w(x)) ∧(p(x) ∧¬q(x) →r(x)))),
which is equivalent to the ﬁrst-order sentence
∀x(p(x) ↔x = a) ∧∀x(q(x) ↔x = b) ∧∀x(r(x) ↔(p(x) ∧¬q(x)))
(2)
(Ferraris et al., 2007, Example 3). The stable models of F are any ﬁrst-order models of (2).
The only answer set of F is the Herbrand model {p(a), q(b), r(a)}.
According to Ferraris et al. (2011), this deﬁnition of an answer set, when applied to the
syntax of logic programs, is equivalent to the traditional deﬁnition of an answer set that is
based on grounding and ﬁxpoints (Gelfond & Lifschitz, 1988).
Note that the deﬁnition of a stable model is more general than the deﬁnition of an
answer set in the following ways: stable models are not restricted to Herbrand models, the
underlying signature can be arbitrary, and the intensional predicates are not ﬁxed to the
list of predicate constants occurring in the formula. The last fact is not essential in view of
the following proposition. By pr(F) we denote the list of all predicate constants occurring
in F; by Choice(p) we denote the conjunction of “choice formulas” ∀x(p(x) ∨¬p(x)) for
all predicate constants p in p, where x is a list of distinct object variables; by False(p) we
denote the conjunction of ∀x¬p(x) for all predicate constants p in p. We sometimes identify
a list with the corresponding set when there is no confusion.
Proposition 1 Formula
SM[F; p] ↔SM[F ∧Choice(pr(F)\p) ∧False(p\pr(F))]
(3)
is logically valid.
Notice that the (implicit) intensional predicates on the right-hand side of (3) are those
in (pr(F) ∪p).
The Choice formula makes the predicates in (pr(F) \ p) to be exempt
from the stability checking. On the other hand, the False formula makes the predicates in
(p \ pr(F)) to be stabilized (i.e., to have empty extents), though they do not occur in F.
575

Lee & Palla
Ferraris et al. (2011) incorporate strong negation into the stable model semantics by
distinguishing between intensional predicates of two kinds, positive and negative.
Each
negative intensional predicate has the form ∼p, where p is a positive intensional predicate
and ‘∼’ is a symbol for strong negation. Syntactically ∼is not a logical connective, as
it can appear only as a part of a predicate constant. An interpretation of the underlying
signature is coherent if it satisﬁes the formula
¬∃x(p(x) ∧∼p(x)),
(4)
where x is a list of distinct object variables, for each negative predicate ∼p. We usually
consider coherent interpretations only. Intuitively, ∼p(t) represents that p(t) is false. This
is diﬀerent from ¬p(t) which represents that it is not known that p(t) is true. Similarly,
¬ ∼p(t) represents that it is not known that p(t) is false, and ¬¬p(t) represents that it is
not known that p(t) is not known to be true. Note that, unlike in ﬁrst-order logic, ¬¬p(t)
is diﬀerent from p(t). For instance, formula p(a) has only one answer set {p(a)} but ¬¬p(a)
has no answer sets.
Like the extension of circumscription to many-sorted ﬁrst-order sentences, the deﬁnition
of a stable model is straightforwardly extended to many-sorted ﬁrst-order sentences.
2.3 Equivalence of the Stable Model Semantics and Circumscription on
Canonical Formulas
Neither the stable model semantics nor circumscription is stronger than the other. For
example,
CIRC[∀x(p(x) ∨¬p(x)); p]
(5)
is equivalent to ∀x¬p(x), and
SM[∀x(p(x) ∨¬p(x)); p]
(6)
is equivalent to ⊤, so that (5) is stronger than (6). On the other hand,
CIRC[∀x(¬p(x) →q(x)); p, q]
(7)
is equivalent to ∀x(¬p(x) ↔q(x)), and
SM[∀x(¬p(x) →q(x)); p, q]
(8)
is equivalent to ∀x(¬p(x) ∧q(x)), so that (8) is stronger than (7).
In this section, we show that the two semantics coincide on a class of formulas called
canonical formulas, which we deﬁne below. We ﬁrst review the notions of positive, negative,
and strictly positive occurrences.
Deﬁnition 1 We say that an occurrence of a predicate constant, or any other subexpres-
sion, in a formula F is positive if the number of implications containing that occurrence in
the antecedent is even, and negative otherwise. (Recall that we treat ¬G as shorthand for
G →⊥.) We say that the occurrence is strictly positive if the number of implications in F
containing that occurrence in the antecedent is 0.
576

Reformulating the Situation Calculus and the Event Calculus
For example, in (1), both occurrences of q are positive, but only the ﬁrst one is strictly
positive.
Deﬁnition 2 We say that a formula F is canonical relative to a list p of predicate constants
if
• no occurrence of a predicate constant from p is in the antecedents of more than one
implication in F, and
• every occurrence of a predicate constant from p that is in the scope of a strictly positive
occurrence of ∃or ∨in F is strictly positive in F.
Example 1 The formula
∀x(¬p(x) →q(x))
(9)
that is shown above is not canonical relative to {p, q} since it does not satisfy the ﬁrst clause
of the deﬁnition (p occurs in the antecedents of two implications as ¬p(x) is shorthand for
p(x) →⊥). On the other hand, the formula is canonical relative to {q}. The formula
∀x(p(x) ∨¬p(x))
(10)
is not canonical relative to {p} since it does not satisfy the second clause (the second occur-
rence of p is in the scope of a strictly positive occurrence of ∨, but is not strictly positive in
(10)); the formula
p(a) ∧(∃x p(x) →∃x q(x))
(11)
is canonical relative to {p, q}, while
p(a, a) ∧∃x(p(x, a) →p(b, x))
(12)
is not canonical relative to {p, q} since it does not satisfy the second clause (the second
occurrence of p is in the scope of a strictly positive occurrence of ∃, but is not strictly
positive in formula (12)).
The following theorem states that, for any canonical formula, circumscription coincides
with the stable model semantics.
Theorem 1 For any canonical formula F relative to p,
CIRC[F; p] ↔SM[F; p]
(13)
is logically valid.
For instance, for formula (11), which is canonical relative to {p, q}, formulas CIRC[(11); p, q]
and SM[(11); p, q] are equivalent to each other. Also, any sentence F is clearly canonical
relative to ∅, so that CIRC[F; ∅] is equivalent to SM[F; ∅], which in turn is equivalent to F.
On the other hand, such equivalence may not necessarily hold for non-canonical formulas.
For instance, we observed that, for formula (10) that is not canonical relative to {p}, for-
mulas (5) and (6) are not equivalent to each other. For formula (9) that is not canonical
577

Lee & Palla
relative to {p, q}, formulas (7) and (8) are not equivalent to each other. We also observe
that formula (12) that is not canonical relative to {p, q}, CIRC[(12); p, q] is not equivalent
to SM[(12); p, q]: the Herbrand interpretation {p(a, a), p(b, a)} satisﬁes SM[(12); p, q], but
does not satisfy CIRC[(12); p, q].
Note that non-canonical formulas can often be equivalently rewritten as canonical for-
mulas. Since any equivalent transformation preserves the models of circumscription, Theo-
rem 1 can be applied to such non-canonical formulas, by ﬁrst rewriting them as canonical
formulas. For example, formula (9) is equivalent to
∀x(p(x) ∨q(x)),
(14)
which is canonical relative to {p, q}, so that CIRC[(9); p, q] is equivalent to SM[(14); p, q].
For another example, formula (10) is equivalent to
∀x(p(x) →p(x)),
(15)
which is canonical relative to {p}, so that CIRC[(10); p] is equivalent to SM[(15); p]. It
is clear that this treatment can be applied to any quantiﬁer-free formula (including any
propositional formula) because a quantiﬁer-free formula can be equivalently rewritten as a
canonical formula by ﬁrst rewriting it into a clausal normal form and then turning each
clause into the form C →D, where C is a conjunction of atoms and D is a disjunction of
atoms.3
Sections 3 and 4 use Theorem 1 to reformulate the event calculus and the situation
calculus in the ﬁrst-order stable model semantics.
3. Reformulating the Event Calculus in the General Theory of Stable
Models
In this section, we review the syntax of circumscriptive event calculus described in Chapter 2
of the book by Mueller (2006). Based on the observation that the syntax conforms to the
condition of canonicality, we present a few reformulations of the event calculus in the general
theory of stable models.
3.1 Review: Circumscriptive Event Calculus
We assume a many-sorted ﬁrst-order language, which contains an event sort, a ﬂuent sort,
and a timepoint sort. A ﬂuent term is a term whose sort is a ﬂuent; an event term and a
timepoint term are deﬁned similarly.
Deﬁnition 3 A condition is deﬁned recursively as follows:
• If τ1 and τ2 are terms, then comparisons τ1 < τ2, τ1 ≤τ2, τ1 ≥τ2, τ1 > τ2, τ1 = τ2,
τ1 ̸= τ2 are conditions;
3. It appears unlikely that knowledge has to be encoded in a non-canonical formula such as (12) that
cannot be easily turned into an equivalent canonical formula. c.f. “Guide to Axiomatizing Domains
in First-Order Logic” (http://cs.nyu.edu/faculty/davise/guide.html). It is not a surprise that all
circumscriptive action theories mentioned in this paper satisfy the canonicality assumption.
578

Reformulating the Situation Calculus and the Event Calculus
• If f is a ﬂuent term and t is a timepoint term, then HoldsAt(f, t) and ¬HoldsAt(f, t)
are conditions;
• If γ1 and γ2 are conditions, then γ1 ∧γ2 and γ1 ∨γ2 are conditions;
• If v is a variable and γ is a condition, then ∃vγ is a condition.
We will use e and ei to denote event terms, f and fi to denote ﬂuent terms, t and ti to
denote timepoint terms, and γ and γi to denote conditions.
In the event calculus, we circumscribe Initiates, Terminates, and Releases to minimize
unexpected eﬀects of events, circumscribe Happens to minimize unexpected events, and
circumscribe Abi (abnormality predicates) to minimize abnormalities. Formally, an event
calculus description is a circumscriptive theory deﬁned as
CIRC[Σ ; Initiates, Terminates, Releases] ∧CIRC[∆; Happens]
∧CIRC[Θ ; Ab1, . . . , Abn] ∧Ξ,
(16)
where
• Σ is a conjunction of universal closures of axioms of the form
γ →Initiates(e, f, t)
γ →Terminates(e, f, t)
γ →Releases(e, f, t)
γ ∧π1(e, f1, t) →π2(e, f2, t)
(“eﬀect constraint”)
γ ∧[¬]Happens(e1, t) ∧· · · ∧[¬]Happens(en, t) →Initiates(e, f, t)
γ ∧[¬]Happens(e1, t) ∧· · · ∧[¬]Happens(en, t) →Terminates(e, f, t),
where each of π1 and π2 is either Initiates or Terminates (‘[¬]’ means that ‘¬’ is
optional);
• ∆is a conjunction of universal closures of temporal ordering formulas (comparisons
between timepoint terms) and axioms of the form
γ →Happens(e, t)
σ(f, t) ∧π1(f1, t) ∧· · · ∧πn(fn, t) →Happens(e, t)
(“causal constraints”)
Happens(e, t) →Happens(e1, t) ∨· · · ∨Happens(en, t)
(“disjunctive event axiom”),
where σ is Started or Stopped and each πj (1 ≤j ≤n) is either Initiated or
Terminated;
• Θ is a conjunction of universal closures of cancellation axioms of the form
γ →Abi(..., t) ;
• Ξ is a conjunction of ﬁrst-order sentences (outside the scope of CIRC) including unique
name axioms, state constraints, event occurrence constraints, and the set of domain-
independent axioms in the event calculus, such as EC (for the continuous event cal-
culus) and DEC (for the discrete event calculus) (Mueller, 2006, Chapter 2). It also
579

Lee & Palla
includes the following deﬁnitions of the predicates used in the causal constraints in ∆:
Started(f, t)
def
↔(HoldsAt(f, t) ∨∃e(Happens(e, t) ∧Initiates(e, f, t)))
(CC1)
Stopped(f, t)
def
↔(¬HoldsAt(f, t) ∨∃e(Happens(e, t) ∧Terminates(e, f, t)))
(CC2)
Initiated(f, t)
def
↔(Started(f, t) ∧¬∃e(Happens(e, t) ∧Terminates(e, f, t)))
(CC3)
Terminated(f, t)
def
↔(Stopped(f, t) ∧¬∃e(Happens(e, t) ∧Initiates(e, f, t)))
(CC4).
Remark 1 The following facts are easy to check:
• Σ is canonical relative to {Initiates, Terminates, Releases};
• ∆is canonical relative to {Happens};
• Θ is canonical relative to {Ab1, . . . , Abn}.
These facts are used in the next section to reformulate the event calculus in the general
theory of stable models.
3.2 Reformulating the Event Calculus in the General Theory of Stable Models
Following Ferraris, Lee, Lifschitz, and Palla (2009), about a formula F we say that it
is negative on a list p of predicate constants if members of p have no strictly positive
occurrences in F.4 For example, formula (9) is negative on {p}, but is not negative on {p, q}.
A formula of the form ¬F (shorthand for F →⊥) is negative on any list of predicates.
We assume that Ξ was already equivalently rewritten so that Ξ is negative on {Initiates,
Terminates, Releases, Happens, Ab1, . . . , Abn}. This can be easily done by prepending ¬¬
to strictly positive occurrences of those predicates. The following theorem shows a few
equivalent reformulations of circumscriptive event calculus in the general theory of stable
models.
Theorem 2 For any event calculus description (16), the following theories are equivalent
to each other:5
(a) CIRC[Σ; I, T, R] ∧CIRC[∆; H] ∧CIRC[Θ; Ab1, . . . , Abn] ∧Ξ ;
(b) SM[Σ; I, T, R] ∧SM[∆; H] ∧SM[Θ; Ab1, . . . , Abn] ∧Ξ ;
(c) SM[Σ ∧∆∧Θ ∧Ξ; I, T, R, H, Ab1, . . . , Abn] ;
(d) SM[Σ ∧∆∧Θ ∧Ξ ∧Choice(pr(Σ ∧∆∧Θ ∧Ξ) \ {I, T, R, H, Ab1, . . . , Abn})] .
The equivalence between (a) and (b) is immediate from Theorem 1. The equivalence
between (b) and (c) can be shown using the splitting theorem by Ferraris et al. (2009).
The assumption that Ξ is negative on the intensional predicates is essential in showing that
4. Note that we distinguish between a formula being negative (on p) and an occurrence being negative
(Section 2.3).
5. For brevity, we abbreviate the names of circumscribed predicates.
580

Reformulating the Situation Calculus and the Event Calculus
equivalence (For more details, see the proof in Appendix C.4.). The equivalence between
(c) and (d) follows from Proposition 1 since
{I, T, R, H, Ab1, . . . , Abn} \ pr(Σ ∧∆∧Θ ∧Ξ)
is the empty set.6
4. Reformulating the Situation Calculus in the General Theory of Stable
Models
In this section, we review and reformulate two versions of the situation calculus—Lin’s
causal action theories (1995) and Reiter’s basic action theories (2001).
4.1 Review: Lin’s Causal Action Theories
We assume a many-sorted ﬁrst-order language which contains a situation sort, an action
sort, a ﬂuent sort, a truth value sort and an object sort. We understand expression P(x, s),
where P is a ﬂuent name, as shorthand for Holds(P(x), s). We do not consider functional
ﬂuents here for simplicity.
According to Lin (1995), a formula φ(s) is called a simple state formula about s if φ(s)
does not mention Poss, Caused or any situation term other than possibly the variable s.
We assume that a causal action theory D consists of a ﬁnite number of the following
sets of axioms. We often identify D with the conjunction of the universal closures of all
axioms in D. In the following, F, Fi are ﬂuent names, A is an action name, V , Vi are truth
values, s, s′ are situation variables, φ(s) is a simple state formula about s, symbols a, a′
are action variables, f is a variable of sort ﬂuent, v is a variable of sort truth value, and x,
xi, y, yi are lists of variables.
• Dcaused is a conjunction of axioms of the form
Poss(A(x), s) →(φ(s) →Caused(F(y), V, do(A(x), s))
(direct eﬀect axioms), and
φ(s) ∧Caused(F1(x1), V1, s) ∧· · · ∧Caused(Fn(xn), Vn, s) →Caused(F(x), V, s)
(indirect eﬀect axioms).
• Dposs is a conjunction of precondition axioms of the form
Poss(A(x), s) ↔φ(s).
(17)
• Drest is a conjunction of the following axioms:
– The basic axioms:
Caused(f, true, s) →Holds(f, s),
Caused(f, false, s) →¬Holds(f, s),
true ̸= false ∧∀v(v = true ∨v = false).
(18)
6. I, T, R, H occur in the domain independent axioms as part of Ξ.
581

Lee & Palla
– The unique name assumptions for ﬂuent names:
Fi(x) ̸= Fj(y),
(i ̸= j)
Fi(x) = Fi(y) →x = y.
(19)
Similarly for action names.
– The foundational axioms for the discrete situation calculus: 7
s ̸= do(a, s),
(20)
do(a, s) = do(a′, s′) →(a = a′ ∧s = s′),
(21)
∀p

p(S0) ∧∀a, s
 p(s) →p(do(a, s))

→∀s p(s)

.
(22)
– The frame axiom:
Poss(a, s) →(¬∃vCaused(f, v, do(a, s))
→(Holds(f, do(a, s)) ↔Holds(f, s))).
– Axioms for other domain knowledge: φ(s).
A causal action theory is deﬁned as
CIRC[Dcaused; Caused] ∧Dposs ∧Drest.
(23)
Remark 2 It is easy to check that Dcaused is canonical relative to Caused.
This fact is used in the next section to reformulate causal action theories in the general
theory of stable models.
4.2 Reformulating Causal Action Theories in the General Theory of Stable
Models
Let Dposs→be the conjunction of axioms φ(s) →Poss(A(x), s) for each axiom (17) in Dposs.
Instead of the second-order axiom (22), we consider the following ﬁrst-order formula Dsit,
which introduces a new intensional predicate constant Sit whose argument sort is situation.8
Sit(S0) ∧∀a, s(Sit(s) →Sit(do(a, s))) ∧¬∃s¬Sit(s).
(24)
In the following, D−
rest is the theory obtained from Drest by dropping (22).
Theorem 3 Given a causal action theory (23), the following theories are equivalent to each
other when we disregard the auxiliary predicate Sit:
(a) CIRC[Dcaused; Caused] ∧Dposs ∧Drest ;
(b) SM[Dcaused; Caused] ∧Dposs ∧D−
rest ∧SM[Dsit; Sit] ;
(c) SM[Dcaused; Caused] ∧SM[Dposs→; Poss] ∧D−
rest ∧SM[Dsit; Sit] ;
(d) SM[Dcaused ∧Dposs→∧D−
rest ∧Dsit; Caused, Poss, Sit] .
7. For simplicity we omit two other axioms regarding the partial-order among situations.
8. Suggested by Vladimir Lifschitz (personal communication).
582

Reformulating the Situation Calculus and the Event Calculus
4.3 Review: Reiter’s Basic Action Theories
As in causal action theories, we understand P(x, s), where P is a ﬂuent name, as shorthand
for Holds(P(x), s), and do not consider functional ﬂuents.
A basic action theory (BAT) is of the form
Σ ∪Dss ∪Dap ∪Duna ∪DS0 ,
(25)
where
• Σ is the conjunction of the foundational axioms (Section 4.1);
• Dss is a conjunction of successor state axioms of the form
F(x, do(a, s)) ↔ΦF (x, a, s),
where ΦF (x, a, s) is a formula that is uniform in s 9 and whose free variables are
among x, a, s;
• Dap is a conjunction of action precondition axioms of the form
Poss(A(x), s) ↔ΠA(x, s),
where ΠA(x, s) is a formula that is uniform in s and whose free variables are among x, s;
• Duna is the conjunction of unique name axioms for ﬂuents and actions;
• DS0 is a conjunction of ﬁrst-order formulas that are uniform in S0.
4.4 Reformulating Basic Action Theories in the General Theory of Stable
Models
Note that a BAT is a theory in ﬁrst-order logic.10 In view of the fact that any ﬁrst-order
logic sentence F is equivalent to SM[F; ∅], it is trivial to view a BAT as a ﬁrst-order theory
under the stable model semantics with the list of intensional predicates being empty.
In the rest of this section, we consider an alternative encoding of BAT in ASP, in which
we do not need to provide explicit successor state axioms Dss. Instead, the successor state
axioms are entailed by the eﬀect axioms and the generic inertia axioms adopted in ASP by
making intensional both the positive predicate Holds and the negative predicate ∼Holds
(Recall the deﬁnitions of positive and negative predicates in Section 2.2). In the following
we assume that the underlying signature contains both these predicates.
An ASP-style BAT is of the form
Σ ∪Deﬀect ∪Dprecond ∪Dinertia ∪Dexogenous0 ∪Duna ∪DS0,
(26)
where
• Σ, Duna and DS0 are deﬁned as before;
9. We refer the reader to the book by Reiter (2001) for the deﬁnition of a uniform formula.
10. For simplicity we disregard the second-order axiom (22).
583

Lee & Palla
• Deﬀect is a conjunction of axioms of the form
γ+
R(x, a, s) →Holds(R(x), do(a, s))
(27)
or
γ−
R(x, a, s) →∼Holds(R(x), do(a, s)),
(28)
where γ+
R(x, a, s) and γ−
R(x, a, s) are formulas that are uniform in s and whose free
variables are among x, a and s;
• Dprecond is a conjunction of axioms of the form
πA(x, s) →Poss(A(x), s),
(29)
where πA(x, s) is a formula that is uniform in s and whose free variables are among x, s;
• Dinertia is the conjunction of the axioms
Holds(R(x), s) ∧¬∼Holds(R(x), do(a, s)) →Holds(R(x), do(a, s)),
∼Holds(R(x), s) ∧¬Holds(R(x), do(a, s)) →∼Holds(R(x), do(a, s))
for all ﬂuent names R;
• Dexogenous0 is the conjunction of
Holds(R(x), S0)∨∼Holds(R(x), S0)
for all ﬂuent names R.
Note that axioms in Dinertia are typically used in answer set programming to represent
the common sense law of inertia (Lifschitz & Turner, 1999). Similarly, Dexogenous0 is used
to represent that the initial value of a ﬂuent is arbitrary.11
We will show how this ASP-style BAT is related to Reiter’s BAT. First, since we use
strong negation, it is convenient to deﬁne the following notions. Given the signature σ of
a BAT, σHolds is the signature obtained from σ by adding ∼Holds to σ. We say that an
interpretation I of σHolds is complete on Holds if it satisﬁes
∀y(Holds(y)∨∼Holds(y)),
where y is a list of distinct variables. Given an interpretation I of σHolds, expression I|σ
denotes the projection of I on σ.
Let Dss be the conjunction of successor state axioms
Holds(R(x), do(a, s)) ↔Γ+
R(x, a, s) ∨(Holds(R(x), s) ∧¬Γ−
R(x, a, s)),
where Γ+
R(x, a, s) is the disjunction of γ+
R(x, a, s) for all axioms (27) in Deﬀect, and Γ−
R(x, a, s)
is the disjunction of γ−
R(x, a, s) for all axioms (28) in Deﬀect. By Dap we denote the con-
junction of axioms Poss(A(x), s) ↔ΠA(x, s), where ΠA(x, s) is the disjunction of πA(x, s)
for all axioms (29) in Dprecond.
11. The axioms Dinertia and Dexogenous0 are also closely related to the translation of C+ into nonmonotonic
causal logic (Giunchiglia, Lee, Lifschitz, McCain, & Turner, 2004).
584

Reformulating the Situation Calculus and the Event Calculus
Theorem 4 Let T be a theory (26) of signature σHolds, and I a coherent interpretation of
σHolds that is complete on Holds. If I satisﬁes
¬∃x a s(Γ+
R(x, a, s) ∧Γ−
R(x, a, s))
for every ﬂuent name R, then I satisﬁes
SM[T; Poss, Holds, ∼Holds]
iﬀI|σ satisﬁes the BAT
Σ ∧Dss ∧Dap ∧Duna ∧DS0.
5. Translating Almost Universal Sentences into Logic Programs
Theorems 2—4 present reformulations of the situation calculus and the event calculus in the
general theory of stable models, which may contain nested quantiﬁers and connectives. On
the other hand, the input languages of ASP solvers are limited to simple rule forms, which
are analogous to clausal normal form in classical logic. Although any ﬁrst-order formula can
be rewritten in clausal normal form while preserving satisﬁability, such transformations do
not necessarily preserve stable models. This is due to the fact that the notion of equivalence
is “stronger” under the stable model semantics (Lifschitz, Pearce, & Valverde, 2001).
Deﬁnition 4 (Ferraris et al., 2011) A formula F is strongly equivalent to formula G if,
for any formula H containing F as a subformula (and possibly containing object, function
and predicate constants that do not occur in F, G), and for any list p of distinct predicate
constants, SM[H; p] is equivalent to SM[H′; p], where H′ is obtained from H by replacing
an occurrence of F by G.
In other words, replacing a subformula with another strongly equivalent subformula
does not change the stable models of the whole formula. While strongly equivalent theories
are classically equivalent (i.e., equivalent under classical logic), the converse does not hold.
Consequently, classically equivalent transformations do not necessarily preserve stable mod-
els. For instance, consider p and ¬¬p. When p is intensional, the former has stable models
and the latter does not.
It is known that every propositional formula can be rewritten as a logic program (Cabalar
& Ferraris, 2007; Cabalar, Pearce, & Valverde, 2005; Lee & Palla, 2007), and such trans-
lations can be extended to quantiﬁer-free formulas in a straightforward way (Section 5.1).
However, the method does not work in the presence of arbitrary quantiﬁers, because in the
target formalism (logic programs), all variables are implicitly universally quantiﬁed.
In this section, we present a translation that turns a certain class of sentences called
“almost universal” sentences into logic programs while preserving stable models. It turns
out that the reformulations of the situation calculus and the event calculus in Sections 3
and 4 belong to the class of almost universal sentences, so that we can use ASP solvers for
computing them.
585

Lee & Palla
5.1 Translating Quantiﬁer-Free Formulas into Logic Programs
Cabalar et al. (2005) deﬁne the following transformation that turns any propositional for-
mula under the stable model semantics into a logic program.
• Left side rules:
⊤∧F →G
7→
{F →G}
(L1)
⊥∧F →G
7→
∅
(L2)
¬¬F ∧G →H
7→
{G →¬F ∨H}
(L3)
(F ∨G) ∧H →K
7→
 F ∧H →K
G ∧H →K

(L4)
(F →G) ∧H →K
7→



¬F ∧H →K
G ∧H →K
H →F ∨¬G ∨K



(L5)
• Right side rules:
F →⊥∨G
7→
{F →G}
(R1)
F →⊤∨G
7→
∅
(R2)
F →¬¬G ∨H
7→
{¬G ∧F →H}
(R3)
F →(G ∧H) ∨K
7→
 F →G ∨K
F →H ∨K

(R4)
F →(G →H) ∨K
7→
 G ∧F →H ∨K
¬H ∧F →¬G ∨K

(R5)
Before applying this transformation to each formula on the lefthand side, we assume
that the formula is already written in negation normal form, in which negation is applied
to literals only, by using the following transformation:
• Negation normal form conversion:
¬⊤
7→
⊥
¬⊥
7→
⊤
¬¬¬F
7→
¬F
¬(F ∧G)
7→
¬F ∨¬G
¬(F ∨G)
7→
¬F ∧¬G
¬(F →G)
7→
¬¬F ∧¬G
According to Cabalar et al. (2005), successive application of the rewriting rules above
turn any propositional formula into a disjunctive logic program. This result can be simply
extended to turn any quantiﬁer-free formula into a logic program.
As noted by Cabalar et al. (2005), this translation may involve an exponential blowup in
size, and Theorem 1 from their paper shows that indeed there is no vocabulary-preserving
polynomial time algorithm to convert general propositional theories under the stable model
semantics into disjunctive logic programs. Alternatively, one can use another translation
from the same paper, which is linear in size but involves auxiliary atoms and is more
complex.
586

Reformulating the Situation Calculus and the Event Calculus
5.2 Quantiﬁer Elimination
We introduce a quantiﬁer elimination method that distinguishes between two kinds of oc-
currences of quantiﬁers: “singular” and “non-singular.” Any “non-singular” occurrence of
a quantiﬁer is easy to eliminate, while a “singular” occurrence is eliminated under a certain
syntactic condition.
Deﬁnition 5 We say that an occurrence of QxG in F is singular if
• Q is ∃, and the occurrence of QxG is positive in F, or
• Q is ∀, and the occurrence of QxG is negative in F.
For example, the occurrence of ∃x q(x) is singular in (11), but the occurrence of ∃x p(x) is
not.
Non-singular occurrences of quantiﬁers can be eliminated in view of the fact that every
ﬁrst-order sentence can be rewritten in prenex form. The prenex form conversion rules given
in Section 6.3.1 of Pearce and Valverde (2005) preserve strong equivalence, which leads to
the following theorem.12
Theorem 5
(Lee & Palla, 2007, Proposition 5)
Every ﬁrst-order formula is strongly
equivalent to a formula in prenex form.
The prenex form conversion turns a non-singular occurrence of a quantiﬁer into an
outermost ∀while preserving strong equivalence. Consequently, if a sentence contains no
singular occurrence of a quantiﬁer, then the above results can be used to turn the sentence
into a universal sentence and then into a set of ASP rules. However, in the presence of a
singular occurrence of a quantiﬁer, the prenex form conversion turns the occurrence into
an outermost ∃, which is not allowed in logic programs. Below we consider how to handle
such occurrences.
Obviously, if the Herbrand universe is ﬁnite, and if we are interested in Herbrand stable
models (i.e., answer sets) only, quantiﬁed formulas can be rewritten as multiple disjunctions
and conjunctions. We do not even need to consider turning the formula into prenex form.
For example, for a formula
r ∧¬∃x(p(x) ∧q(x)) →s
(30)
occurring in a theory whose signature contains {1, . . . , n} as the only object constants (and
no other function constants), if we replace ∃x(p(x) ∧q(x)) with multiple disjunctions and
then turn the resulting program with nested expressions into a usual disjunctive program
(Lifschitz, Tang, & Turner, 1999), 2n rules are generated.
For instance, if n = 3, the
12. Pearce and Valverde (2005) show that a sentence in QNc
5, the monotonic basis of Quantiﬁed Equilibrium
Logic, can be turned into prenex form, from which the result follows.
587

Lee & Palla
resulting logic program is
s ←r, not p(1), not p(2), not p(3)
s ←r, not p(1), not p(2), not q(3)
s ←r, not p(1), not q(2), not p(3)
s ←r, not p(1), not q(2), not q(3)
s ←r, not q(1), not p(2), not p(3)
s ←r, not q(1), not p(2), not q(3)
s ←r, not q(1), not q(2), not p(3)
s ←r, not q(1), not q(2), not q(3).
Also, the translation is not modular as it depends on the underlying domain; the multiple
disjunctions or conjunctions need to be updated when the domain changes. More impor-
tantly, this method is not applicable if the theory contains function constants of positive
arity, as its Herbrand universe is inﬁnite.
One may also consider introducing Skolem constants as in ﬁrst-order logic, presuming
that, for any sentence F and its “Skolem form” F ′, SM[F; p] is satisﬁable iﬀSM[F ′; p] is
satisﬁable. However, this idea does not work.13
Example 2 For formula
F = (∀x p(x) →q) ∧¬¬∃x(q ∧¬p(x)),
SM[F; q] is equivalent to the ﬁrst-order sentence
(q ↔∀x p(x)) ∧∃x(q ∧¬p(x)),
which is unsatisﬁable (the equivalence can be established using Theorems 3 and 11 from Fer-
raris et al., 2011). Formula F is strongly equivalent to its prenex form
∃x∃y
 (p(x) →q) ∧¬¬(q ∧¬p(y))

,
(31)
However, if we introduce new object constants a and b to replace the existentially quantiﬁed
variables as in
F ′ = (p(a) →q) ∧¬¬(q ∧¬p(b)),
formula SM[F ′; q] is equivalent to
(q ↔p(a)) ∧(q ∧¬p(b)),
which is satisﬁable.
Here we present a method of eliminating singular occurrences of quantiﬁers by introduc-
ing auxiliary predicates. Our idea is a generalization of the practice in logic programming
13. Pearce and Valverde (2005) show that Skolemization works with QNc
5, the monotonic basis of Quanti-
ﬁed Equilibrium Logic, but as our example shows, this does not imply that Skolemization works with
Quantiﬁed Equilibrium Logic.
588

Reformulating the Situation Calculus and the Event Calculus
that simulates negated existential quantiﬁcation in the body of a rule by introducing aux-
iliary predicates. For instance, in order to eliminate ∃in (30), we will introduce a new
predicate constant p′, and turn (30) into
(r ∧¬p′ →s) ∧∀x(p(x) ∧q(x) →p′),
(32)
which corresponds to the logic program
s ←r, not p′
p′ ←p(x), q(x).
(33)
The models of SM[(30); p, q, r, s] are the same as the stable models of (33) if we disregard
p′. This method does not involve grounding, so that the translation does not depend on
the domain and is not restricted to Herbrand models. The method is formally justiﬁed by
the following proposition.
Recall that a formula H is negative on p if members of p have no strictly positive
occurrences in H. Given a formula F, we say that an occurrence of a subformula G is
p-negated in F if it is contained in a subformula H of F that is negative on p.
Proposition 2 Let F be a sentence, let p be a ﬁnite list of distinct predicate constants,
and let q be a new predicate constant that does not occur in F. Consider any non-strictly
positive, p-negated occurrence of ∃yG(y, x) in F, where x is the list of all free variables of
∃yG(y, x). Let F ′ be the formula obtained from F by replacing that occurrence of ∃yG(y, x)
with q(x). Then
SM[F; p] ∧∀x(q(x) ↔∃yG(y, x))
is equivalent to
SM[F ′ ∧∀xy(G(y, x) →q(x)); p, q].
Proposition 2 tells us that SM[F; p] and SM[F ′ ∧∀xy(G(y, x) →q(x); p, q] have the
same models if we disregard the new predicate constant q. Notice that F ′ does not retain
the occurrence of ∃y.
Example 3 In formula (30), ∃x(p(x) ∧q(x)) is contained in a negative formula (relative
to any set of intensional predicates). In accordance with Proposition 2, SM[(30); p, q, r, s]
has the same models as SM[(32); p, q, r, s, p′] if we disregard p′.
Any singular, p-negated occurrence of a subformula ∀yG(y, x) can also be eliminated
using Proposition 2 by ﬁrst rewriting ∀yG(y, x) as ¬∃y¬G(y, x). Note that ∀yG(y, x) is
not strongly equivalent to ¬∃y¬G(y, x), and in general such a classically equivalent trans-
formation may not necessarily preserve stable models. However, the Theorem on Double
Negations (Ferraris et al., 2009, also reviewed in Appendix C) tells us that such a trans-
formation is ensured to preserve p-stable models if the replaced occurrence is p-negated in
the given formula.
Now we are ready to present our quantiﬁer elimination method, which applies to the
class of almost universal formulas.
589

Lee & Palla
Deﬁnition 6 We say that a formula F is almost universal relative to p if every singular
occurrence of QxG in F is p-negated in F.
For example, formula (30) is almost universal relative to any set of predicates because the
only singular occurrence of ∃x(p(x) ∧q(x)) in (30) is contained in ¬∃x(p(x) ∧q(x)), which
is negative on any list of predicates. Formula F in Example 2 is almost universal relative
to {q} because the singular occurrence of ∀x p(x) is contained in the formula itself, which is
negative on {q}, and the singular occurrence of ∃x(q∧¬p(x)) is contained in ¬∃x(q∧¬p(x)),
which is also negative on {q}.
The following procedure can be used to eliminate all (possibly nested) quantiﬁers in any
almost universal sentence.
Deﬁnition 7 (Translation elim-quantifiers) Given a formula F, ﬁrst prepend ¬¬ to
every maximal strictly positive occurrence of a formula of the form ∃yH(y, x),14 and then
repeat the following process until there are no occurrences of quantiﬁers remaining: Select
a maximal occurrence of a formula of the form QyG(y, x) in F, where Q is ∀or ∃, and x
is the list of all free variables in QyG(y, x).
(a) If the occurrence of QyG(y, x) in F is non-singular in F, then set F to be the formula
obtained from F by replacing the occurrence of QyG(y, x) with G(z, x), where z is a
new variable.
(b) Otherwise, if Q is ∃and the occurrence of QyG(y, x) in F is positive, then set F to
be
F ′ ∧(G(y, x) →pG(x)),
where pG is a new predicate constant and F ′ is the formula obtained from F by re-
placing the occurrence of QyG(y, x) with pG(x).
(c) Otherwise, if Q is ∀and the occurrence of QyG(y, x) in F is negative, then set F
to be the formula obtained from F by replacing the occurrence of QyG(y, x) with
¬∃y¬G(y, x).
We assume that the new predicate constants introduced by the translation do not belong
to the signature of the input formula F. It is clear that this process terminates, and yields
a formula that is quantiﬁer-free. Since the number of times step (b) is applied is no more
than the number of quantiﬁers in the input formula, and the new formulas added have the
size polynomial to the input formula, it follows that the size of the resulting quantiﬁer-free
formula is polynomial in the size of the input formula.
The following theorem tells us that any almost universal sentence F can be turned into
the form ∀xG, where G is a quantiﬁer-free formula. For any (second-order) sentences F
and G of some signature and any subset σ of that signature, we say that F is σ-equivalent
to G, denoted by F ⇔σ G, if the class of models of F restricted to σ is identical to the class
of models of G restricted to σ.
14. The maximality is understood here in terms of subformula relation. That is, we select a strictly positive
occurrence of a subformula of F of the form ∃yH(y, x) that is not contained in any other subformula of
F of the same form.
590

Reformulating the Situation Calculus and the Event Calculus
Theorem 6 Let F be a sentence of a signature σ, let F ′ be the universal closure of the
formula obtained from F by applying translation elim-quantifiers, and let q be the list
of new predicate constants introduced by the translation. If F is almost universal relative
to p, then SM[F; p] is σ-equivalent to SM[F ′; p, q].
The statement of the theorem becomes incorrect if we do not require F to be almost
universal relative to p. For instance, if elim-quantifiers is applied to ∃x p(x), it results
in ¬¬q ∧(p(x)→q). However, SM[∃x p(x); p] is not {p}-equivalent to
SM[∀x(¬¬q ∧(p(x)→q)); p, q]. The former is equivalent to saying that p is a singleton.
The latter is equivalent to q ∧∀x¬p(x) ∧(q ↔∃xp(x)), which is inconsistent.
5.3 f2lp: Computing Answer Sets of First-Order Formulas
Using translation elim-quantifiers deﬁned in the previous section, we introduce transla-
tion f2lp that turns an almost universal formula into a logic program. We assume that the
underlying signature contains ﬁnitely many predicate constants.
Deﬁnition 8 (Translation f2lp)
1. Given a formula F and a list of intensional pred-
icates p, apply translation elim-quantifiers (Deﬁnition 7) to F;
2. Add choice formulas (q(x) ∨¬q(x)) for all non-intensional predicates q.
3. Turn the resulting quantiﬁer-free formula into a logic program by applying the trans-
lation from Section 3 of the paper by Cabalar et al. (2005), which was also reviewed
in Section 5.1.
As explained in Section 5.1, due to the third step, this transformation may involve an
exponential blowup in size. One can obtain a polynomial translation by replacing Step 3
with an alternative translation given in Section 4 of the paper by Cabalar et al.
The following theorem asserts the correctness of the translation.
Theorem 7 Let F be a sentence of a signature σ, let p be a list of intensional predicates,
and let F ′ be the FOL representation of the program obtained from F by applying translation
f2lp with p as intensional predicates. If F is almost universal relative to p, then SM[F; p]
is σ-equivalent to
SM[F ′ ∧False(p \ pr(F ′))].
Example 4 Consider one of the domain independent axioms in the discrete event calculus
(DEC5 axiom):
HoldsAt(f, t) ∧¬ReleasedAt(f, t+1)∧
¬∃e(Happens(e, t) ∧Terminates(e, f, t)) →HoldsAt(f, t+1).
(34)
Step 1 of translation f2lp introduces the formula
Happens(e, t) ∧Terminates(e, f, t) →q(f, t),
and replaces (34) with
HoldsAt(f, t) ∧¬ReleasedAt(f, t+1) ∧¬q(f, t) →HoldsAt(f, t+1).
591

Lee & Palla
Step 3 turns these formulas into rules
q(f, t) ←Happens(e, t), Terminates(e, f, t)
HoldsAt(f, t+1) ←HoldsAt(f, t), not ReleasedAt(f, t+1), not q(f, t).
Turning the program obtained by applying translation f2lp into the input languages of
lparse 15 and gringo 16 requires minor rewriting, such as moving equality and negated
atoms in the head to the body 17 and adding domain predicates in the body for all variables
occurring in the rule in order to reduce the many-sorted signature into the non-sorted one.18
System f2lp is an implementation of translation f2lp, which turns a ﬁrst-order formula
into the languages of lparse and gringo. The system can be downloaded from its home
page
http://reasoning.eas.asu.edu/f2lp .
First-order formulas can be encoded in f2lp using the extended rule form F ←G, where
F and G are ﬁrst-order formulas that do not contain →. The ASCII representation of the
quantiﬁers and connectives are shown in the following table.
Symbol
¬
∼
∧
∨
←
⊥
⊤
∀xyz
∃xyz
ASCII
not
-
&
|
<-
false
true
![X,Y,Z]:
?[X,Y,Z]:
For example, formula (34) can be encoded in the input language of f2lp as
holdsAt(F,T+1) <- holdsAt(F,T) & not releasedAt(F,T+1) &
not ?[E]:(happens(E,T) & terminates(E,F,T)).
The usual lparse and gringo rules (which have the rule arrow ‘:-’) are also allowed
in f2lp. Such rules are simply copied to the output. The program returned by f2lp can
be passed to ASP grounders and solvers that accept lparse and gringo languages.
6. Computing the Event Calculus Using ASP Solvers
Using translation f2lp, we further turn the event calculus reformulation in Section 3.2 into
answer set programs. The following procedure describes the process.
Deﬁnition 9 (Translation ec2asp)
1. Given an event calculus description (16), rewrite
all the deﬁnitional axioms of the form
∀x(p(x) def
↔G)
(35)
in Ξ as ∀x(G¬¬ →p(x)), where G¬¬ is obtained from G by prepending ¬¬ to
all occurrences of intensional predicates Initiates, Terminates, Releases, Happens,
Ab1, . . . , Abn. Also prepend ¬¬ to the strictly positive occurrences of the intensional
predicates in the remaining axioms of Ξ. Let Ξ′ be the resulting formula obtained
from Ξ.
15. http://www.tcs.hut.fi/Software/smodels
16. http://potassco.sourceforge.net
17. For instance, (X=Y) | -q(X,Y) :- p(X,Y) is turned into :- X!=Y, {not q(X,Y)}0, p(X,Y).
18. Alternatively this can be done by declaring variables using the #domain directive in lparse and gringo
languages.
592

Reformulating the Situation Calculus and the Event Calculus
2. Apply translation f2lp on Σ ∧∆∧Θ ∧Ξ′ with the intensional predicates
{Initiates, Terminates, Releases, Happens, Ab1, . . . , Abn} ∪p,
where p is the set of all predicate constants p in (35) as considered in Step 1.
The following theorem states the correctness of the translation.
Theorem 8 Let T be an event calculus description (16) of signature σ that contains ﬁnitely
many predicate constants, let F be the FOL representation of the program obtained from T
by applying translation ec2asp. Then T is σ-equivalent to SM[F].
In view of the theorem, system f2lp can be used to compute event calculus descriptions
by a simple rewriting as stated in translation ec2asp.19 The system can be used in place
of the dec reasoner in many existing applications of the event calculus, such as in robotics,
security, video games, and web service composition, as listed in
http://decreasoner.sourceforge.net/csr/decapps.html .
The computational mechanism of the dec reasoner is similar to our method as it is
based on the reduction of event calculus reasoning to propositional satisﬁability and uses
eﬃcient SAT solvers for computation. However, our method has some advantages.
First, it is signiﬁcantly faster due to the eﬃcient grounding mechanisms implemented
in ASP systems. This is evidenced in some experiments reported in Appendix B.
Second, f2lp allows us to compute the full version of the event calculus, assuming that
the domain is given and ﬁnite. On the other hand, the reduction implemented in the dec
reasoner is based on completion, which is weaker than circumscription. This makes the
system unable to handle recursive axioms and disjunctive axioms, such as eﬀect constraints
and disjunctive event axioms (Section 3.1). For example, the dec reasoner does not allow
the following eﬀect constraints which describe the indirect eﬀects of an agent’s walking on
the objects that he is holding:
HoldsAt(Holding(a, o), t) ∧Initiates(e, InRoom(a, r), t)
→Initiates(e, InRoom(o, r), t)
HoldsAt(Holding(a, o), t) ∧Terminates(e, InRoom(a, r), t)
→Terminates(e, InRoom(o, r), t).
(36)
Third, we can enhance the event calculus reasoning by combining ASP rules with the
event calculus description.
In other words, the event calculus can be viewed as a high
level action formalism on top of ASP. We illustrate this using the example from the work
of Do˘ganda˘g, Ferraris, and Lifschitz (2004). There are 9 rooms and 12 doors as shown in
Figure 1. Initially the robot “Robby” is in the middle room and all the doors are closed.
The goal of the robot is to make all rooms accessible from each other. Figure 2 (File robby)
shows an encoding of the problem in the language of f2lp. Atom door(x, y) denotes that
there is a door between rooms x and y; open(x, y) denotes the event “Robby opening the door
19. Kim, Lee, and Palla (2009) presented a prototype of f2lp called ecasp that is tailored to the event
calculus computation.
593

Lee & Palla
Figure 1: Robby’s apartment in a 3 × 3 grid
between rooms x and y”; goto(x) denotes the event “Robby going to room x”; opened(x, y)
denotes that the door between x and y has been opened; inRoom(x) denotes that Robby
is in room x; accessible(x, y) denotes that y is accessible from x. Note that the rules
deﬁning the relation accessible are not part of event calculus axioms (Section 3.1). This
example illustrates an advantage of allowing ASP rules in event calculus descriptions.
The minimal number of steps to solve the given problem is 11. We can ﬁnd such a
plan using the combination of f2lp, gringo (grounder) and claspD (solver for disjunctive
programs) in the following way. 20
$ f2lp dec robby | gringo -c maxstep=11 | claspD
File dec is an f2lp encoding of the domain independent axioms in the Discrete Event
Calculus (The ﬁle is listed in Appendix A).21 The following is one of the plans found:
happens(open(5,8),0) happens(open(5,2),1) happens(open(5,4),2)
happens(goto(4),3) happens(open(4,1),4) happens(open(4,7),5)
happens(goto(5),6) happens(open(5,6),7) happens(goto(6),8)
happens(open(6,9),9) happens(open(6,3),10)
7. Computing the Situation Calculus Using ASP Solvers
Using translation f2lp, we further turn the situation calculus reformulations in Sections 4.2
and 4.4 into answer set programs.
7.1 Representing Causal Action Theories by Answer Set Programs
The following theorem shows how to turn causal action theories into answer set programs.
Theorem 9 Let D be a ﬁnite causal action theory (23) of signature σ that contains ﬁnitely
many predicate constants, and let F be the FOL representation of the program obtained by
applying translation f2lp on
Dcaused ∧Dposs→∧D−
rest ∧Dsit
(37)
with the intensional predicates {Caused, Poss, Sit}. Then D is σ-equivalent to SM[F].
20. One can use clingo instead of gringo and claspD if the output of f2lp is a nondisjunctive program.
21. The ﬁle is also available at http://reasoning.eas.asu.edu/f2lp, along with f2lp encodings of the
domain independent axioms in other versions of the event calculus.
594

Reformulating the Situation Calculus and the Event Calculus
% File ’robby’
% objects
step(0..maxstep).
astep(0..maxstep-1) :- maxstep > 0.
room(1..9).
% variables
#domain step(T).
#domain room(R).
#domain room(R1).
#domain room(R2).
% position of the doors
door(R1,R2) <- R1 >= 1 & R2 >=1 & R1 < 4 & R2 < 4 & R2 = R1+1.
door(R1,R2) <- R1 >= 4 & R2 >= 4 & R1 < 7 & R2 < 7 & R2 = R1+1.
door(R1,R2) <- R1 >= 7 & R2 >= 7 & R1 < 10 & R2 < 10 & R2 = R1+1.
door(R1,R2) <- R2 < 10 & R2 = R1+3.
door(R1,R2) <- door(R2,R1).
% fluents
fluent(opened(R,R1)) <- door(R1,R2).
fluent(inRoom(R)).
% F ranges over the fluents
#domain fluent(F).
% events
event(open(R,R1)) <- door(R,R1).
event(goto(R)).
% E and E1 range over the events
#domain event(E).
#domain event(E1).
% effect axioms
initiates(open(R,R1),opened(R,R1),T).
initiates(open(R,R1),opened(R1,R),T).
initiates(goto(R2),inRoom(R2),T)
<- holdsAt(opened(R1,R2),T) & holdsAt(inRoom(R1),T).
terminates(E,inRoom(R1),T)
<- holdsAt(inRoom(R1),T) & initiates(E,inRoom(R2),T).
% action precondition axioms
holdsAt(inRoom(R1),T) <- happens(open(R1,R2),T).
595

Lee & Palla
% event occurrence constraint
not happens(E1,T) <- happens(E,T) & E != E1.
% state constraint
not holdsAt(inRoom(R2),T) <- holdsAt(inRoom(R1),T) & R1 != R2.
% accessibility
accessible(R,R1,T) <- holdsAt(opened(R,R1),T).
accessible(R,R2,T) <- accessible(R,R1,T) & accessible(R1,R2,T).
% initial state
not holdsAt(opened(R1,R2),0).
holdsAt(inRoom(5),0).
% goal state
not not accessible(R,R1,maxstep).
% happens is exempt from minimization in order to find a plan.
{happens(E,T)} <- T < maxstep.
% all fluents are inertial
not releasedAt(F,0).
Figure 2: Robby in f2lp
Similar to the computation of the event calculus in Section 6, the Herbrand stable
models of (37) can be computed using f2lp and answer set solvers. The input to f2lp can
be simpliﬁed as we limit attention to Herbrand models. We can drop axioms (18)–(21) as
they are ensured by Herbrand models. Also, in order to ensure ﬁnite grounding, instead of
Dsit, we include the following set of rules Πsituation in the input to f2lp.
nesting(0,s0).
nesting(L+1,do(A,S)) <- nesting(L,S) & action(A) & L < maxdepth.
situation(S) <- nesting(L,S).
final(S) <- nesting(maxdepth,S).
Πsituation is used to generate ﬁnitely many situation terms whose depth is up to maxdepth,
the value that can be given as an option in invoking gringo. Using the splitting theorem
(Section C.1), it is not diﬃcult to check that if a program Π containing these rules has
no occurrence of predicate nesting in any other rules and has no occurrence of pred-
icate situation in the head of any other rules, then every answer set of Π contains
atoms situation(do(am, do(am−1, do(. . . , do(a1, s0))))) for all possible sequences of actions
a1, . . . , am for m = 0, . . . , maxdepth. Though this program does not satisfy syntactic condi-
tions, such as λ-restricted (Gebser, Schaub, & Thiele, 2007), ω-restricted (Syrj¨anen, 2004),
or ﬁnite domain programs (Calimeri, Cozza, Ianni, & Leone, 2008), that answer set solvers
usually impose in order to ensure ﬁnite grounding, the rules can still be ﬁnitely grounded
596

Reformulating the Situation Calculus and the Event Calculus
% File: suitcase
value(t).
value(f).
lock(l1).
lock(l2).
#domain value(V).
#domain lock(X).
fluent(up(X)).
fluent(open).
#domain fluent(F).
action(flip(X)).
#domain action(A).
depth(0..maxdepth).
#domain depth(L).
% defining the situation domain
nesting(0,s0).
nesting(L+1,do(A,S)) <- nesting(L,S) & L < maxdepth.
situation(S) <- nesting(L,S).
final(S) <- nesting(maxdepth,S).
% basic axioms
h(F,S) <- situation(S) & caused(F,t,S).
not h(F,S) <- situation(S) & caused(F,f,S).
% D_caused
caused(up(X),f,do(flip(X),S)) <-
situation(S) & not final(S) & poss(flip(X),S) & h(up(X),S).
caused(up(X),t,do(flip(X),S)) <-
situation(S) & not final(S) & poss(flip(X),S) & not h(up(X),S).
caused(open,t,S) <- situation(S) & h(up(l1),S) & h(up(l2),S).
% D_poss
poss(flip(X),S) <- situation(S).
% frame axioms
h(F,do(A,S)) <-
h(F,S) & situation(S) & not final(S) & poss(A,S)
& not ?[V]:caused(F,V,do(A,S)).
not h(F,do(A,S)) <-
not h(F,S) & situation(S) & not final(S) & poss(A,S)
& not ?[V]:caused(F,V,do(A,S)).
% h is non-intensional.
{h(F,S)} <- situation(S).
Figure 3: Lin’s Suitcase in the language of f2lp
597

Lee & Palla
by gringo Version 3.x, which does not check such syntactic conditions.22 It is not diﬃcult
to see why the program above leads to ﬁnite grounding since we provide an explicit upper
limit for the nesting depth of function do.
In addition to Πsituation, we use the following program Πexecutable in order to represent
the set of executable situations (Reiter, 2001):
executable(s0).
executable(do(A,S)) <- executable(S) & poss(A,S) & not final(S)
& situation(S) & action(A).
Figure 3 shows an encoding of Lin’s suitcase example (1995) in the language of f2lp
(h is used to represent Holds), which describes a suitcase that has two locks and a spring
loaded mechanism which will open the suitcase when both locks are up.
This example
illustrates how the ramiﬁcation problem is handled in causal action theories. Since we ﬁx
the domain of situations to be ﬁnite, we require that actions not be eﬀective in the ﬁnal
situations. This is done by introducing atom final(S).
Consider the simple temporal projection problem by Lin (1995). Initially the ﬁrst lock
is down and the second lock is up. What will happen if the ﬁrst lock is ﬂipped? Intuitively,
we expect both locks to be up and the suitcase to be open. We can automate the reasoning
by using the combination of f2lp, gringo and claspD. First, we add Πexecutable and the
following rules to the theory in Figure 3. In order to check if the theory entails that ﬂipping
the ﬁrst lock is executable, and that the suitcase is open after the action, we encode the
negation of these facts in the last rule.
% initial situation
<- h(up(l1),s0).
h(up(l2),s0).
% query
<- executable(do(flip(l1),s0)) & h(open,do(flip(l1),s0)).
We check the answer to the temporal projection problem by running the command:
$ f2lp suitcase | gringo -c maxdepth=1 | claspD
claspD returns no answer set as expected.
Now, consider a simple planning problem for opening the suitcase when both locks are
initially down. We add Πexecutable and the following rules to the theory in Figure 3. The
last rule encodes the goal.
% initial situation
<- h(up(l1),s0).
<- h(up(l2),s0).
<- h(open,s0).
% goal
<- not ?[S]: (executable(S) & h(open,S)).
When maxdepth is 1, the combined use of f2lp, gringo and claspD results in no
answer sets, and when maxdepth is 2, it ﬁnds the unique answer set that contains both
22. Similarly, system dlv-complex allows us to turn oﬀthe ﬁnite domain checking (option -nofdcheck).
That system was used in a conference paper (Lee & Palla, 2010) that this article is based on.
598

Reformulating the Situation Calculus and the Event Calculus
h(open, do(flip(l2), do(flip(l1), s0))) and h(open, do(flip(l1), do(flip(l2), s0))), each
of which encodes a plan.
In other words, the single answer set encodes multiple plans
in diﬀerent branches of the situation tree, which allows us to combine information about
the diﬀerent branches in one model. This is an instance of hypothetical reasoning that is
elegantly handled in the situation calculus due to its branching time structure. Belleghem,
Denecker, and Schreye (1997) note that the linear time structure of the event calculus is
limited to handle such hypothetical reasoning allowed in the situation calculus.
7.2 Representing Basic Action Theories by Answer Set Programs
Since a BAT T (not including the second-order axiom (22)) can be viewed as a ﬁrst-order
theory under the stable model semantics with the list of intensional predicates being empty,
it follows that f2lp can be used to turn T into a logic program. As before, we focus on
ASP-style BAT.
Theorem 10 Let T be a ASP-style BAT (26) of signature σ that contains ﬁnitely many
predicate constants, and let F be the FOL representation of the program obtained by ap-
plying translation f2lp on T with intensional predicates {Holds, ∼Holds, Poss}.
Then
SM[T; Holds, ∼Holds, Poss] is σ-equivalent to SM[F; σ(F) ∪{Poss}].
Figure 4 shows an encoding of the “broken object” example discussed by Reiter (1991).
Consider the simple projection problem of determining if an object o, which is next to
bomb b, is broken after the bomb explodes. We add Πexecutable and the following rules to
the theory in Figure 4.
% initial situation
not h(broken(o),s0) & h(fragile(o),s0) & h(nexto(b,o),s0).
not h(holding(p,o),s0) & not h(exploded(b),s0).
% query
<- executable(do(explode(b),s0)) & h(broken(o),do(explode(b),s0)).
The command
$ f2lp broken | gringo -c maxdepth=1 | claspD
returns no answer set as expected.
8. Related Work
Identifying a syntactic class of theories on which diﬀerent semantics coincide is important
in understanding the relationship between them. It is known that, for tight logic programs
and tight ﬁrst-order formulas, the stable model semantics coincides with the completion
semantics (Fages, 1994; Erdem & Lifschitz, 2003; Ferraris et al., 2011). This fact helps us
understand the relationship between the two semantics, and led to the design of the answer
set solver cmodels-1 23 that computes answer sets using completion. Likewise the class
of canonical formulas introduced here helps us understand the relationship between the
stable model semantics and circumscription. The class of canonical formulas is the largest
23. http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/tag/cmodels
599

Lee & Palla
% File: broken
% domains other than situations
person(p).
object(o).
bomb(b).
#domain person(R).
#domain object(Y).
#domain bomb(B).
fluent(holding(R,Y)).
fluent(nexto(B,Y)).
fluent(fragile(Y)).
fluent(broken(Y)).
fluent(exploded(B)).
action(drop(R,Y)).
action(explode(B)).
action(repair(R,Y)).
#domain fluent(F).
#domain action(A).
depth(0..maxdepth).
#domain depth(L).
% defining the situation domain
nesting(0,s0).
nesting(L+1,do(A,S)) <- nesting(L,S) & L < maxdepth.
situation(S) <- nesting(L,S).
final(S) <- nesting(maxdepth,S).
% Effect Axioms
h(broken(Y),do(drop(R,Y),S)) <- situation(S) & h(fragile(Y),S) & not final(S).
h(broken(Y),do(explode(B),S)) <- situation(S) & h(nexto(B,Y),S) & not final(S).
h(exploded(B),do(explode(B),S)) <- situation(S) & not final(S).
-h(broken(Y),do(repair(R,Y),S)) <- situation(S) & not final(S).
-h(holding(R,Y),do(drop(R,Y),S)) <- situation(S) & not final(S).
% Action precondition axioms
poss(drop(R,Y),S) <- h(holding(R,Y),S) & situation(S).
poss(explode(B),S) <- situation(S) & not h(exploded(B),S).
poss(repair(R,Y),S) <- situation(S) & h(broken(Y),S).
% inertial axioms
h(F,do(A,S)) <- h(F,S) & not -h(F,do(A,S)) & situation(S) & not final(S).
-h(F,do(A,S)) <- -h(F,S) & not h(F,do(A,S)) & situation(S) & not final(S).
% D_exogeneous_0
h(F,s0) | -h(F,s0).
% Consider only those interpretations that are complete on Holds
<- not h(F,S) & not -h(F,S) & situation(S).
Figure 4: Broken object example in the language of f2lp
600

Reformulating the Situation Calculus and the Event Calculus
syntactic class of ﬁrst-order formulas identiﬁed so far on which the stable models coincide
with the models of circumscription. In other words, minimal model reasoning and stable
model reasoning are indistinguishable on canonical formulas.
Proposition 8 from the work of Lee and Lin (2006) shows an embedding of proposi-
tional circumscription in logic programs under the stable model semantics. Our theorem
on canonical formulas is a generalization of this result to the ﬁrst-order case. Janhunen
and Oikarinen (2004) showed another embedding of propositional circumscription in logic
programs, and implemented the system circ2dlp,24 but their translation appears quite
diﬀerent from the one by Lee and Lin.
Zhang, Zhang, Ying, and Zhou (2011) show an embedding of ﬁrst-order circumscription
in ﬁrst-order stable model semantics. Theorem 3 from that paper is reproduced as follows.25
Theorem 11
(Zhang et al., 2011, Thm. 3) Let F be a formula in negation normal form
and let p be a ﬁnite list of predicate constants. Let F ¬¬ be the formula obtained from F
by replacing every p(t) by ¬¬p(t), and let F c be the formula obtained from F by replacing
every ¬p(t) by p(t) →Choice(p), where p is in p and t is a list of terms. Then CIRC[F; p]
is equivalent to SM[F ¬¬ ∧F c; p].
In comparison with Theorem 1, this theorem can be applied to characterize circum-
scription of arbitrary formulas in terms of stable models by ﬁrst rewriting the formulas into
negation normal form. While Theorem 1 is applicable to canonical formulas only, it does
not require any transformation, and the characterization is bidirectional in the sense that
it can be also viewed as a characterization of stable models in terms of circumscription.
Zhang et al. (2011) also introduce a translation that turns arbitrary ﬁrst-order formulas
into logic programs, but this work is limited to ﬁnite structures only. On the other hand,
our translation f2lp (Deﬁnition 8) works for almost universal formulas only, but is not
limited to ﬁnite structures.
The situation calculus and the event calculus are widely studied action formalisms,
and there are several papers that compare and relate them (e.g., Belleghem, Denecker, &
Schreye, 1995; Provetti, 1996; Belleghem et al., 1997; Kowalski & Sadri, 1997).
Prolog provides a natural implementation for basic action theories since deﬁnitional
axioms can be represented by Prolog rules according to the Clark’s theorem (Reiter, 2001,
Chapter 5). The Lloyd-Topor transformation that is used to turn formulas into Prolog rules
is similar to translation f2lp, but the diﬀerence is that the former preserves the completion
semantics and the latter preserves the stable model semantics.
Lin and Wang (1999) describe a language that can be used to represent a syntactically
restricted form of Lin’s causal situation calculus, called “clausal causal theories,” which does
not allow quantiﬁers. They show how to translate that language into answer set programs
with strong negation, the answer sets of which are then used to obtain fully instantiated
successor state axioms and action precondition axioms. This is quite diﬀerent from our
approach, which computes the propositional models of the full situation calculus theories
directly.
Kautz and Selman (1992) introduce linear encodings that are similar to a proposition-
alized version of the situation calculus (McCarthy & Hayes, 1969). Lin (2003) introduces
24. http://www.tcs.hut.fi/Software/circ2dlp
25. This is a bit simpler than the original statement because some redundancy is dropped.
601

Lee & Palla
an action description language and describes a procedure to compile an action domain in
that language into a complete set of successor state axioms, from which a STRIPS-like
description can be extracted. The soundness of the procedure is shown with respect to a
translation from action domain descriptions into Lin’s causal action theories. However, that
procedure is based on completion and as such cannot handle recursive axioms unlike our
approach.
Denecker and Ternovska (2007) present an inductive variant of the situation calculus
represented in ID-logic (Denecker & Ternovska, 2008)—classical logic extended with induc-
tive deﬁnitions. ID-logic and the ﬁrst-order stable model semantics appear to be closely
related, but the precise relationship between them has yet to be shown.
9. Conclusion
The ﬁrst-order stable model semantics is deﬁned similar to circumscription. This paper
takes advantage of that deﬁnition to identify a class of formulas on which minimal model
reasoning and stable model reasoning coincide, and uses this idea to reformulate the situ-
ation calculus and the event calculus in the ﬁrst-order stable model semantics. Together
with the translation that turns an almost universal sentence into a logic program, we show
that reasoning in the situation calculus and the event calculus can be reduced to computing
answer sets. We implemented system f2lp, a front-end to ASP solvers that allows us to
compute these circumscriptive action theories. The mathematical tool sets and the sys-
tem presented in this paper may also be useful in relating other circumscriptive theories
to logic programs. Also, the advances in ASP solvers may improve the computation of
circumscriptive theories.
