Running head: BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
1
BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE:
A GROUNDED PERSPECTIVE.
MARINA DUBOVA
Cognitive Science Program, Indiana University, 1101 E. 10th Street, Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
Author Note
Marina Dubova
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5264-0489
I have no known conflict of interest to disclose.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Marina Dubova,
Cognitive Science Program, Indiana University, 1101 E. 10th Street, Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
2
ABSTRACT
Modern Artificial Intelligence (AI) systems excel at diverse tasks, from image classification to
strategy games, even outperforming humans in many of these domains.
After making
astounding progress in language learning in the recent decade, AI systems, however, seem to
approach the ceiling that does not reflect important aspects of human communicative
capacities. Unlike human learners, communicative AI systems often fail to systematically
generalize to new data, suffer from sample inefficiency, fail to capture common-sense semantic
knowledge, and do not translate to real-world communicative situations. Cognitive Science
offers several insights on how AI could move forward from this point. This paper aims to: (1)
suggest that the dominant cognitively-inspired AI directions, based on nativist and symbolic
paradigms, lack necessary substantiation and concreteness to guide progress in modern AI, and
(2) articulate an alternative, “grounded”, perspective on AI advancement, inspired by Embodied,
Embedded, Extended, and Enactive Cognition (4E) research. I review results on 4E research
lines in Cognitive Science to distinguish the main aspects of naturalistic learning conditions
that play causal roles for human language development. I then use this analysis to propose a list
of concrete, implementable components for building “grounded” linguistic intelligence. These
components include embodying machines in a perception-action cycle, equipping agents with
active exploration mechanisms so they can build their own curriculum, allowing agents to
gradually develop motor abilities to promote piecemeal language development, and endowing
the agents with adaptive feedback from their physical and social environment. I hope that these
ideas can direct AI research towards building machines that develop human-like language
abilities through their experiences with the world.
Keywords: artificial intelligence, language acquisition, communication, cognitively-inspired AI,
embodied cognition

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
3
1. INTRODUCTION
The ability to acquire and use rich communicative systems (natural languages) is one of the
crucial achievements of human minds. Natural language acquisition is, arguably, an intellectual
capability that distinguishes us not only from other species, but also from machines. In this
paper, I argue that rich, controllable, adaptive, and multi-agent environmental settings are
crucial for language acquisition in humans. I use these insights to articulate a set of concrete
cognitively-inspired directions for building machines that can develop human-like language
abilities.
For decades, language has been one of the most challenging domains for AI to tackle. The
recent wave of end-to-end neural network systems led to an impressive progress in language
translation, analysis, and understanding. Despite this massive achievement, modern AI systems
have been argued to lack fundamental properties that are necessary to achieve human-level
performance in linguistic communication.
First, current state-of-the-art language models are not adapted to the open-ended
settings, which is a fundamental property of human communicative interactions. Marcus and
Davis (2019) argue that humans deal with completely novel situations on a day-to-day basis,
whereas AI models are rarely prepared for unboundedly new patterns of data. For example,
language models often fail to generalize to the examples that are outside of the distributions
that they were trained on (e.g. Mccoy, Min, & Linzen, 2020) and these models are typically not
equipped with the mechanisms to update their knowledge after the training period has passed
(as described in Moskvichev & Liu, 2021). These limitations challenge the models’ ability to
succeed in the tasks that involve interacting with humans in the naturalistic situations which
require constant adaptations of the communicating partners to each other and to the
continuously changing environment.

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
4
Second, most artificial language systems are trained on extremely large supervising
datasets (with the correct answers provided for examples), which are typically abstracted away
from any perceptual modality. Despite receiving massive amounts of supervising training data,
state-of-the-art artificial language systems often fail to generate good predictions for word and
sentence patterns that have not been well represented in the training data (e.g. Lake & Baroni,
2018; Barrett et al., 2018; Glockner, Shwartz, & Goldberg, 2018; McCoy, Min, & Linzen, 2020;
Gardner et al., 2020). In contrast, humans infer the meanings of new words and sentences from
the context and previous knowledge, and efficiently generate new composite meanings out of
the already learned ones in almost every communicative interaction.
Perhaps as a consequence of amodal learning, modern artificial language systems are often
incapable of capturing “common-sense” semantic knowledge, which includes numbers and
magnitudes, possible states of the world, causal relationships between entities in the
environment, and many other components (Marcus & Davis, 2019; Lake et al., 2017), which often
drive linguistic inferences in humans. For example, the state-of-the-art AI language models
GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) and GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), trained on 40GB and 45TB textual
data from the Internet respectively, produce syntactically sound sentences, but the contents of
these sentences sometimes make no sense to human readers. Consider these examples of
continuations suggested by GPT-2 (1) and GPT-3 (2) (in bold) noted by Marcus and Davis
(Marcus, 2020a; Marcus & Davis, 2020):
1) I have four plates and put one cookie on each. The total number of cookies is 24, 5 as a topping
and 2 as the filling
2) You are having a small dinner party. You want to serve dinner in the living room. The dining room
table is wider than the doorway, so to get it into the living room, you will have to remove the door.
You have a table saw, so you cut the door in half and remove the top half.

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
5
For decades, the dominant strategy in the AI community has been to use bigger models and
bigger data to cure these failures. For example, whereas GTP-2 had 1.5 billion adjustable
parameters and was trained on 10 billion tokens, the newer GPT-3 model has 175 billion
parameters and was trained on 499 billion tokens. While increasing the size of the model and
the size of training set led to improvements, it seems evident that this approach might not solve
the fundamental challenges of the language acquisition problem, as described below. As we will
see, taking a “grounded” cognition perspective on language learning requires taking a different
approach. Rather than focusing on bigger models and bigger data, I argue that researchers
should revise the fundamental properties of these datasets, models, and their training regimes
to allow agents to gradually develop language in rich, embodied, and adaptive conditions.
The increasing dissatisfaction with AI progress in the domain of language acquisition has
led engineers and theoreticians to look for guiding insights from theories and empirical studies
on the mechanisms of human learning. Below, I sketch out two most popular directions of
integrating cognitive science and AI (nativist and neuro-symbolic), and argue that these
approaches will ultimately fail to produce machines with human-like language abilities. I then
argue for a grounded (4E) perspective on cognitively-inspired language learning in AI.
Who this paper is for: this paper aims to provide guiding insights to AI researchers who strive
to develop systems with human-like language abilities. Even though human-like language
abilities are desirable for some applications of communicative AI, they are not needed in most
of them. Current state-of-the-art communicative AI models (e.g. GPT-2 and GPT-3) could serve
very well for most applications, and I am fascinated by how far language learning through
amodal and passive experiences has gone. This paper sketches out potential directions that
scientists and engineers could explore in order to produce the communicative systems that

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
6
share human conceptual knowledge, can participate in, and efficiently learn from the real-world
communicative interactions.
2. COGNITIVELY-INSPIRED AI: DIRECTIONS
In this section, I briefly review and critically evaluate the two proposed solutions for building
machines with human-like language abilities, which are largely inspired by nativist and
symbolic perspectives in Cognitive Science. Then, I introduce an alternative, grounded, view on
building human-like AI.
2.1. CORE KNOWLEDGE, LANGUAGE ACQUISITION DEVICE, AND THE BUILDING
BLOCKS OF HUMAN INTELLIGENCE
Cognitive
scientists
have long been interested in discovering the core cognitive
components that underlie human intelligence. Some researchers have attempted to discover
“innate” (unlearned) cognitive capabilities, whereas others have tried to isolate the components
that are the most essential for cognitive development while remaining agnostic about their
origins. The core knowledge framework has been one source of inspiration as researchers
attempt to build intelligent machines. According to this view, human and animal intelligence
builds on a collection of specialized, domain-specific systems for representing objects, actions,
number, space, and social agents (e.g. Spelke & Kinzler, 2006). Following these ideas, it has been
suggested that computer scientists should focus on either hardwiring innate components into
artificial brains or emphasizing the hypothesized “core” building blocks of intelligence during
model training (Lake et al., 2017; Marcus & Davis, 2019; Marcus, 2020b; Chollet, 2019). While
understanding the building blocks of intelligence can be insightful for organizing our
knowledge about human and animal cognition, I argue that this approach often lacks the

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
7
substantiation and concreteness needed for mechanistic understanding—the level at which we
must understand intelligence in order to engineer it in artificial systems.
First, core knowledge systems often lack strong empirical support in terms of whether they
are, in fact, innate. Abundant studies show that the hypothesized core abilities are present in
different species (e.g. primates and humans), early in development, and across cultures (see brief
review in Spelke & Kinzler, 2006). However, most of this evidence comes from infants and
animals weeks, months, or years after birth, which makes it difficult (if not impossible) to
determine whether those abilities are innate or learned. Indeed, there are now many
computational existence proofs showing that canonical core abilities—including object
perception,
face
recognition,
and
navigation
abilities—can
be
learned using generic,
domain-general learning mechanisms (e.g., Banino et al., 2018; O’Reilly, Wyatte, & Rohrlich,
2017; Yamins & DiCarlo, 2016). There is also evidence that this learning can happen rapidly. For
instance, deep predictive learning is a biologically-inspired framework in which learning
involves making predictions about what the senses will report at 100 ms intervals and adapting
synaptic weights to improve the prediction accuracy (O’Reilly et al., 2020). Predictive coding is
suggested to operate at a rate of ~10 times per second, allowing learning to accumulate rapidly
as newborn brains experience the world. Even a few hours of visual experience might be
sufficient to develop a “core” understanding of objects and their mechanical interactions. It is
therefore plausible that core knowledge systems are learned rapidly using domain-general
learning mechanisms, rather than being hardwired into the brain.
Second, the existence of causally important, high-level, and human-interpretable building
blocks that might not be innate (e.g. as suggested in Lake et al., 2017) is still hard to substantiate.
The weakest point of such proposals lies in the very assumption of the primary importance of
these capacities for further cognitive development. If the lower-level domain-general learning

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
8
mechanisms are proposed to underlie the emergence of these interpretable “building blocks”,
why should the building blocks, rather than the same lower-level adaptation mechanisms, be
primarily responsible for driving further achievements? This additional hypothesis of the causal
primacy of the learned high-level interpretable building blocks for the development of human
cognitive capacities is hard to empirically test without knowing all the details about how
developmental programs produce cognitive abilities. I suggest that, so far, there is not enough
empirical and computational evidence to assume that the essential causal drivers of cognitive
development are the high-level and psychologically-interpretable components.
Finally, hypothesized core systems and skills are difficult to incorporate into machines in
practice. Most of the postulated core components are only formulated verbally in high-level
psychological terms, which creates a gap between these psychological constructs and formal
artificial learning systems. Unfortunately, the high-level psychological constructs of the core
knowledge framework often struggle to translate to the lower-level language of modern
connectionist AI systems or suggest any formalization at all: often, the core systems theories
just postulate the existence of high-level capacities at organisms’ birth, without providing any
account on what form these capacities can possibly take. What is an appropriate formalization
of the innate number sense? How would core knowledge of objects, intuitive physics, or the
Language Acquisition Device be instantiated in a neural network? I suggest that the
verbally-formulated core systems which do not make clear predictions about the potential
architectural or algorithmic instantiations cannot successfully guide modern AI development.
The aforementioned criticisms do not, of course, undermine the general ideas of the
importance of innate constraints and biases for the development of learning systems. It is
widely appreciated by engineers and proponents of various paradigms in Cognitive Science that
all learning systems, including deep neural networks, need strong inductive biases and

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
9
constraints to learn efficiently. However, these inductive biases are likely to arise from
lower-level properties of the learning mechanisms, perceptual and motor systems that drive our
adaptation to the environment (see this perspective developed in Elman et al., 1996; Richards et
al., 2019). In my view, a focus on these factors, rather than a focus on core knowledge systems
per se, provides a more tractable approach for advancing Artificial Intelligence and for building
machines that learn like humans and other animals. I devote section 3.4 to a brief discussion of
the mechanisms that give rise to language learning constraints.
2.2. NEURO-SYMBOLISM: SYMBOLS ARE ALL WE NEED?
A second idea that gained popularity as a cognitively-inspired approach to AI is
neuro-symbolism. Symbolic models commonly correspond to largely pre-engineered solutions
to tasks which are achieved by hand-coding high-level representations and rules of their allowed
transformations. High-level entities (e.g. “circle” and “dog”), their properties (e.g. “red” and
“heavy”) and relations (e.g. “above” and “causes”) have typically served as pre-coded primitives
for symbolic models. For the classic symbolic models, the developers needed to conceive of and
pre-engineer most of the primitive representations and their operations that are necessary to
perform a given task. Eventually, it has been demonstrated that the models grounded in rich
environments can often successfully learn intelligent behaviors without any hardwired symbolic
representations (Brooks, 1991). Moreover, the common symbolic solutions, conceived without
the
real-world
in
mind,
typically
could
not
scale
to
the
naturalistic
situations.
Context-dependent biological minds achieve tractable and robust adaptive behavior by reacting
to their rich environments, rather than operating according to the context-free symbolic rules
(Dreyfus, 1972). These observations, combined with other criticisms, resulted in a decline of
interest in the symbolic AI.

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
10
Even though symbolic approaches are no longer the most efficient way to design learning
systems, many cognitive scientists have successfully argued that symbolic algorithms should be
combined with connectionist architectures to achieve the best, “human-like”, learning outcomes
(e.g. Marcus & Davis, 2019; Marcus, 2020b; Lamb et al., 2020). In particular, it has been argued
that
some
symbolic operations (such as compositional recombination of tokens) and
pre-engineered structured representations should be integrated with the parallel distributed
learning, resulting in the hybrid “neuro-symbolic” architectures. Cognitive Science, as
proposed, could guide the process of choosing the promising representations, representational
formats, and their operations.
The main strength of neuro-symbolic approach is its ability to design systems with
expertise. For example, the neuro-symbolic system for learning mathematics does not have to
start from scratch and learn how to perceptually tell apart ones from sevens. Numbers, signs,
and other potential primitives could be provided as symbolic inputs to the system, allowing it to
learn on these higher-level representations. Thus, this approach can lead to more tractable and
efficient
learning
for
many
applications.
Top-down
engineering
of
the
structured
representations, however, comes with its disadvantages. It is extremely hard to design the
representations that are compressed enough to facilitate the learning process and which also
retain all information that is useful for solving a given task. It can be illustrated with the
aforementioned example of math learning: the elimination of all perceptual information about
numbers would exempt the model from learning to process perceptual inputs, but it would also
preclude it from noticing the similarity between 10, 100, 1000, and so on. The more complex the
learning problem and the data are, the harder it becomes to choose efficient high-level
representations and operations.

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
11
The reliance of neuro-symbolic modeling on scientists’ insights could be particularly
misleading if the goal is to design systems with human-like learning abilities. It has been argued
that scientists’ intuitions are very limited and could not capture the iterative nature of human
learning which deals with the rich multimodal training data in multitask conditions over the
years of development (e.g. Brooks, 1991; McClelland et al., 2010; Chemero, 2011; Hasson,
Nastase, & Goldstein, 2020). The artificial neural network and robotic simulations demonstrate
that high-level pre-engineered solutions are typically very far from the solutions that learning
systems discover by themselves, even for the simplest learning problems. It turns out that there
are multiple shortcuts, available in the task-specific structure of complex environmental data,
motor and perceptual resources of the agents, that allow end-to-end learning systems, such as
humans, animals, and Deep Neural Networks, to solve cognitive problems without coming up
with the expected structured representations (Hasson, Nastase, & Goldstein, 2020; Geirhos et al.,
2020). For example, the artificial agents that learn to categorize a relation between sizes of two
consecutively presented objects sometimes end up encoding the object size with their body
position instead of memorizing it “internally” (i.e. through the neural network weights or
activations) (Williams, Beer, & Gasser, 2008).
Often, the solutions that are needed to capture useful patterns in rich datasets are much
more or much less nuanced than the ones anticipated by scientists. The quality of the learnt
shortcuts, however, is typically evaluated by how well the model performs on the intended
generalization domain (Geirhos et al., 2020). Thus, whenever the training domain is
representative of the target application domain (see section 3 for the discussion of essential
properties of naturalistic communication contexts), the learned shortcuts, no matter how
interpretable or anticipated they are, can be very adaptive (Hasson, Nastase, & Goldstein, 2020).
The observations of unexpected efficient shortcuts that the artificial and natural minds often

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
12
discover for achieving their goals question the validity of intuitive and interpretable
pre-engineered solutions and representations that cognitive scientists rely on when they adopt
the symbolic approach. While the symbolic or hybrid (neuro-symbolic) solutions might work
well for the artificial tasks, they might not be as efficient for solving real-world problems. I
suggest that relying too heavily on human intuitions about efficient representational structures
in AI might not be the best path towards building machines that develop human-like linguistic
intelligence.
Combining symbolic and neural approaches has recently resulted in many success-stories
from different domains. However, at least part of the success of these systems can be attributed
to the opportunity to pre-engineer the representational structure to fit the structure of the
training and evaluation tasks. For example, in a recent study, Adhikari et al. combined
structured graph-based representations and end-to-end learning to solve a large set of
text-games (Adhikari et al., 2020). This model outperformed the previous approaches by 24%,
which is a truly impressive result! However, a closer examination reveals that the states of the
used text-games adhere to the same dynamic graph-structure (entities, conditions, and their
relations) that was used in the model. Thus, the representational structure of the model fits the
structure of specific text-game benchmarks, allowing it to efficiently uncover the necessary
relationships to solve the task. I suggest that the generative structure of real-world observations
is a black-box that is far more complex than the tasks that are used to train and test
neuro-symbolic models. In fact, learning the task-relevant structure of different environments is
one of the essential skills that autonomous and adaptive biological systems need to master.
In this paper, my goal is to draw attention to the alternative, “bottom-up” approaches in
Cognitive Science, which focus on the properties of rich naturalistic learning conditions and on

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
13
the power of generic, “low-level”, end-to-end learning mechanisms that drive the development
of human cognitive capacities.
2.3. GROUNDED LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
Extended, Embodied, Embedded, and Enactive (4E) proposals approach the questions of
cognitive development from a different angle. The proponents of these paradigms focus on the
properties of natural learning settings, which are indispensable from the results of human and
animal cognitive development. A common methodological basis of the 4E research is bottom-up
theorizing and modeling: instead of relying on human intuition about how agents are able to
learn and execute new behaviors, the followers of this approach empirically test, simulate, and
analyze learning in naturalistic conditions to see what is “already provided” by these settings
alone, and how a learner achieves the rest (Gibson, 1979; Brooks, 1991; McClelland et al., 2010;
Chemero, 2011; Clark, 1998; Hasson, Nastase, & Goldstein 2020). Often, this approach leads to
discoveries that the supposedly complex intelligent behavior can arise from surprisingly
straightforward interactions of an agent and its environment (for review, see Cangelosi et al.,
2015; also, see section 3.1.2. for further discussion). Therefore, my further analysis of 4E
components for building linguistic intelligence mainly focuses on the necessary aspects of
simulation design, rather than on particular architectures or skills pertinent to a learner.
4E perspectives criticize the dominant AI research as being unable to capture properties of
the learning conditions that heavily guide the development of animal and human intelligence.
Most of these claims do not contradict the Parallel Distributed Processing paradigm for
modeling learning systems (McClelland et al., 1986), but rather shift the focus from searching for
more powerful architectures and bigger datasets to the crucial aspects of learning settings,
which are underrepresented among AI research practices. In the following sections, I articulate

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
14
the “core” aspects of real-world learning conditions and review evidence supporting their role in
language development. I also show how some of these principles have been applied in machine
learning simulations. Finally, I propose a list of concrete recommendations for incorporating
these “grounded” insights into AI practice.
This review is not first to propose a grounded perspective on AI: prominent scientists in the
fields of Embodied Cognition and Robotics have argued for similar changes in AI research
(Neisser, 1993; Brooks, 1991; Steels & Brooks, 1995; Smith & Gasser, 2005; Pezzulo et al., 2011,
2013). Moreover, the small yet prolific fields of Cognitive and Developmental Robotics have
instantiated these “grounded” principles in AI. Recently, the machine learning community has
seen a rise of proposals to “ground” language acquisition (McClelland et al., 2020; Baroni, 2020;
Tamari et al., 2020; Bisk et al., 2020; Gauthier & Mordatch, 2016; Kiela et al., 2016). These
proposals indicate a growing interest in 4E ideas for building communicative AI. However,
these proposals lack a comprehensive analysis of different aspects of “language grounding”,
which has been an area of extensive research in Cognitive Science for several decades. This
review complements these earlier contributions by putting the grounded perspective in the
context of other directions of Cognitively-Inspired AI, articulating a set of distinguishable
aspects of grounded language learning, reviewing empirical evidence for the role of these
different aspects in language acquisition and processing, and formulating a list of concrete
principles to accelerate the application of these insights in the common practice of AI research.
The field of AI needs clear understanding of what it actually means “to ground language” –
which, I hope, will be facilitated by this paper.
3. GROUNDED LANGUAGE LEARNING IN HUMANS AND AI

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
15
Which aspects of natural learning help humans acquire languages? In this section, I will try to
divide the elusive “language grounding” idea into concrete, distinguishable components and
evaluate
their
contribution
to
human
language
abilities.
I
integrate
evidence
from
computational
simulations
and
empirical
studies
of
human
language
learning
and
communication. This analysis then motivates a set of concrete principles for future AI research,
where each component can be applied independently from another, according to whether a
researcher is convinced by the presented evidence.
3.1. LANGUAGE IS ACQUIRED IN RICH MULTI-MODAL CONTEXTS
Human language acquisition, comprehension, and production are often situated in multimodal
perceptual contexts. Rich multimodal environments heavily guide these communication
processes, making the ambiguous clear, underspecified – obvious, individual – shared, and
computationally-complex – easily solvable.
3.1.1. MULTIMODAL COMMUNICATION IS REDUNDANT, ROBUST, AND ADAPTIVE
Multimodal contextual information helps to disambiguate noisy and underspecified
utterances,
assess
communicative
intentions,
and
track
partner’s
understanding.
Communicative information is transmitted through many different channels, rather than just
one, making it redundant and more robust to noise and variation. Human speech production in
multimodal contexts, in turn, is adapted to the redundant, non-verbally and contextually
augmented transmission, which makes it more likely to omit information that is present in the
scene or conveyed by communicative actions. Moreover, multimodal transmission opens up rich
potential for coordinating activity, which leverages understanding among individuals with
different prior experiences and capabilities.

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
16
Humans integrate multiple modalities to disambiguate linguistic information on the word,
sentence, and discourse levels (e.g. Henderson & Ferreira, 2013; Tanenhaus & Trueswell, 2006;
Eberhard et al., 1995; Spivey et al., 2002). For instance, during spoken-language comprehension,
listeners’ spontaneous eye-movements actively track potential referents, taking into account
visual contextual information when interpreting speech (e.g. Spivey et al., 2002). Other results
suggest
that
adults
integrate
this
multimodal
information
during
spoken-language
comprehension proactively, combining the visual and lexical information to anticipate the
lexical information that has not yet appeared (e.g. Kamide, Altmann, & Haywood, 2003; Altmann
& Kamide, 2007). For example, when human adults hear a sentence that starts with “the man has
drunk”, they are more likely to look at the empty instead of a full glass than when they hear a
sentence that starts with “the man will drink”. Child language acquisition and comprehension
also rely on contextual guidance. After three years of age, children begin showing some
predictive patterns of multimodal cue integration during speech processing that were found in
adults (e.g. Borovsky, Elman, & Fernald, 2012; Nation, Marshall, & Altmann, 2003; Snedeker &
Trueswell, 2004).
Moreover, a recent analysis of a massive longitudinal dataset of audio and
video recordings of one child for 3 years after birth found that the distinctiveness of the visual
contexts of a word’s usage is more predictive of its early production than its frequency in
caregiver’s speech (Roy et al., 2015). Thus, visual, motor, and auditory sources of information all
contribute to efficient human language learning and communication.
Spontaneous movements during naturalistic communicative interactions help people with
different background knowledge convey and comprehend meaning. The coordinated movement
patterns (e.g. eye movements, pointing, and gesturing) have been suggested to actively
manipulate the common ground by participants in dialogues (e.g. Clark & Brennan, 1991; Clark,
1996; Garrod & Pickering, 2009). For example, when the eye movements of both the speaker and

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
17
listener continuously indicate their current understanding, misunderstandings can be easily
tracked and fixed. A controlled experiment on speech production and comprehension with the
shared visual context demonstrated that the strength in which a speaker and listener’s eye
movements are coupled predicts the success of listener’s understanding (Richardson & Dale,
2005). A recent meta-analysis corroborates this idea by showing that spontaneous gesturing
enhances
listener’s
understanding
and
often
provides
some
novel,
non-redundant
communicative information (Hostetter, 2011). Thus, a great deal of information in naturalistic
communicative interactions is provided non-verbally: speakers continuously display their
intended meaning, while listeners respond by signaling their current understanding.
Similar multimodal coordination mechanisms guide early language learning. Children
benefit from gesture that accompanies their partner’s speech even more than adults (for
meta-analysis, see Hostetter, 2011). On the other side, gesture spontaneously appears in young
infants, and it was suggested to complement verbal information and indicate infant’s
understanding (e.g. Goldin-Meadow, Alibali, & Church, 1993; Iverson, 2010; Colonnesi et al.,
2010).
Thus,
the
“multi-channel”
nature
of
human
communication
underlies
successful
communicative interactions and linguistic inferences in many naturalistic situations (Fig.1).
Human speech, in turn, is adapted to the redundant transmission that characterizes naturalistic
communicative contexts, allowing much more variation and noise than machines, which operate
on amodal linguistic signals, can reliably process.
In contrast, most of the AI models used in language tasks are trained exclusively on amodal
textual excerpts. For example, the state-of-the-art models GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) and
GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) were trained on 40GB and 45TB of textual data from the Internet,
respectively. These models do not benefit from the redundancy of information that is

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
18
transmitted through multiple channels. More importantly, these kinds of models do not operate
over information sources that are often necessary to account for the variability of human speech
in multimodal contexts, and hence could be unreliable when applied in multimodal
communicative situations.
Figure 1. Cues in the naturalistic language learning environments support efficient meaning
disambiguation (left). The acquired concepts can then be perceptually simulated during
language understanding (right).
The figure uses materials from flaticon.com
3.1.2. DIRECT-FIT TO TASK-RELEVANT CONTEXTUAL INFORMATION
The “disambiguating” role of contextual information for language understanding likely
understates its importance: the contextual information is often a “primary”, rather than
“secondary”, source of information that is used for structured linguistic inferences. Both

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
19
empirical studies (partially reviewed in the previous section) and computational analyses
demonstrate that human communicative environments provide much more task-relevant
information than is often considered. However, for the cases of “higher-level” cognitive abilities,
such as language, the role of seemingly “irrelevant”, but in fact essential for human abilities,
cues in the environment is under-studied and, potentially, under-appreciated.
Robotic simulations demonstrate that artificial agents that can interact with their
environment often solve so-called “cognitive” tasks by finding simple “direct” perception-action
shortcuts. For example, agents confronted with the problem of shape categorization evolve a
solution that involves actively moving the body so that shape-diagnostic information can be
obtained directly from the sensors, rather than by building explicit shape-based internal
representations (Beer, 2003). This and other simulations (for a review, see Cangelosi et al., 2015)
demonstrate that models focused entirely on building and manipulating disembodied
representations to solve cognitive problems might be missing a variety of other solutions that
animals use for solving naturalistic tasks in rich environments. The natural solutions are often
quite different from the clever, internalized rules and structured representations that human
engineers come up with to solve the same problems (e.g. Brooks, 1991; Hasson, Nastase, &
Goldstein, 2020).
Even though much work in analyzing and quantitatively evaluating language-related
structure available in natural communicative environments remains to be done, some results
from other areas suggest the fruitfulness of this approach. First of all, it has been convincingly
demonstrated that “direct” perception can underlie seemingly “high-level” cognitive inferences,
such as determining agents’ intentions (e.g. by motion cues in Barrett et al., 2005). Secondly, rich
communicative information is often directly available in gaze direction, gesture, pointing, the
visual structure of the scene, and many other sources (e.g. Tomasello, 1992; Baldwin, 1995;

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
20
Gogate, Walker-Andrews, & Bahrick, 2001; also see the studies reviewed in the previous
subsection).
The contextual effects, described in these two subsections, demonstrate the richness of
information available to individuals participating in naturalistic communicative interactions.
Most of the aforementioned studies, however, are conducted in visual and auditory domains.
Contextual information from other modalities, such as touch, can also be integrated in this
process. Congenitally blind individuals might consistently use the structure available from
non-visual sources to disambiguate linguistic information. Some evidence suggests, however,
that blind children acquire language slower than sighted (Andersen, Dunlea, & Kekelis, 1993)
and deaf children (Preisler, 1995), indicating the importance of vision for human language
learning. On the other hand, the word co-occurrence structure captures many aspects of the
world (Landauer & Dumais, 1997), such as visual similarities between objects (e.g. animals) and
the associations between visual and non-visual features (e.g. color-adjective associations: “red is
aggressive”, “blue is cold”), allowing blind people to gradually pick up some information that is
unavailable to them by sense (Lewis, Zettersten, & Lupyan, 2019; van Paridon, Liu, & Lupyan,
2021).
In sum, when children learn language, they leverage the rich, natural, and interactive
communicative experiences provided in the world. These experiences include the child’s early
language environments and conversations with friends and family members. Of course, once a
person has acquired language, they can easily comprehend and transmit meaning in other
contexts, such as listening to a podcast or talking on the phone. This fact indicates that rich
multimodal communication settings are not necessary for understanding the acquired language,
but these settings may be necessary for the initial development of human language capacities,
which is always embedded in rich environments. As we will see in the next subsection, there is a

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
21
growing body of evidence suggesting that interiorization of perceptual experiences might take
place throughout development, enabling us to simulate multimodal perceptual contexts in order
to understand amodal and passive language (e.g., when reading a book or listening to a podcast).
Rich perceptual experiences accompanying communicative interactions during language
acquisition are proposed to be a necessary foundation for such change.
3.1.3. RICH PERCEPTUAL EXPERIENCE GROUNDS PERCEPTUAL SIMULATIONS FOR LANGUAGE
UNDERSTANDING
Many psychological and linguistic theories hypothesize that humans comprehend language
by perceptually simulating the respective scenes (Fig.1). This proposal has been developed in L.
Barsalou’s Theory of Perceptual Symbols (Barsalou, 1999) and in other views arguing for modal
simulations underlying language understanding (e.g. Zwaan & Radvansky, 1998; Glenberg &
Robertson, 1999; Grush, 2004; Gallese, 2008; Zwaan, 2016). The Perceptual Symbols theory
integrates symbolic processing with perception and action to explain many “high-level”
cognitive phenomena, including categorization and language. The main idea of perceptual
simulations is that symbolic operations, commonly considered to be a crucial component of
human thought, operate on modal (sensorimotor), rather than amodal, representations.
According to this proposal, the perceptual experiences (e.g. seeing a moving car) are stored in
frames consisting of distinguishable components (such as a wheel, window, and frame of a car).
The memories of the components are organized around similar frames and can be recombined
during language comprehension. In a similar way, motor simulations are suggested to play a
central role in language acquisition and processing (e.g. Glenberg & Robertson, 1999; Glenberg
& Gallese, 2012). In particular, it is argued that many utterances (e.g. verbal instructions,
descriptions of actions) can only be understood if they can be integrated in a simulation of a
sensible goal-directed action. Even though most perceptual simulation models of language

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
22
comprehension offer a conciliatory perspective between symbolic and embodied approaches
(Zwaan, 2014), they emphasize an essential role of perceptual and motor experiences as primary
units of language understanding.
Thus, language comprehension has been argued to involve reconstruction of modal events
from previous sensorimotor experiences. To infer meaning of a new utterance, a person is
suggested to simulate the perceptual and motor aspects of the respective scene. Importantly,
recombination of the word-part meanings happens in a way that “makes sense” given one’s
previous experiences with the world or affordances of the objects involved. For example, “blue
bus with yellow dots” can be understood as a bus with an unnaturally colored body, while the
wheels and windows maintain their typical colors.
The idea that language comprehension involves re-activation of perceptual, motor, and
emotional events is consistent with empirical work in psychology and neuroscience (for reviews,
see Pulvermüller, 2005; Fischer & Zwaan, 2008; Binder & Desai, 2011; but also Caramazza et al.,
2014). One such study found that the words referring to similar motor actions (e.g. playing a
piano and typing on a computer) prime each other in a lexical-decision task, even after
controlling for the visual similarity between these actions, suggesting that the motor
representation of an action is re-activated during respective word processing (Myung,
Blumstein, & Sedivy, 2006). The other study demonstrated that listening or reading about the
actions that are associated with different parts of the body (e.g. “kick”, “pick”, “lick”) leads to
rapid (130-170ms) activations in the respective parts of sensorimotor brain areas, which
somatotopically encode leg, hand, and mouth movements (Pulvermüller, Shtyrov, & Ilmoniemi,
2005). The follow-up TMS experiment has completed this evidence by showing that controlled
inhibition of the topographic brain regions associated with action production in different parts
of the body (leg or arm) leads to significantly slower response times in the word recognition test

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
23
for the words that were associated with the body part whose motor localization was actively
inhibited (Pulvermüller et al., 2005). In a recent computational study, De Deyne and colleagues
(2021) compared unimodal (linguistic) and multimodal (linguistic + visual + affective) semantic
models. Their analysis confirmed that the models that contain information from multiple
modalities are better predictors of human semantic similarity judgements than their
counterparts trained only on the linguistic information. Together, these results demonstrate that
the multimodal information is reliably re-activated by words and that this information
constitutes human semantic knowledge.
Tamari et al. (2020) have recently argued for the promise of applying the perceptual
simulation ideas for developing communicative AI. Similarly, Hamrick (2019) suggested that
model-based Reinforcement Learning algorithms essentially employ “simulation-based thought”
to learn effective policies. These models solve different tasks (e.g. playing ATARI games) by
learning to predict the future states of the environment and make decisions on the basis of these
expectations. The “internal models” of the environment that are used to make the state
predictions, in turn, can be used to simulate the outcomes of different actions in a given or
hypothetical situation, or to construct a respective perceptual scene for an utterance.
3.2. LANGUAGE IS ACQUIRED BY AUTONOMOUS AGENTS DETERMINING THEIR OWN
EXPERIENCES
Active embodied exploration in the environment lets human language learners determine
their learning data through efficient information-seeking mechanisms, tailored at one’s own
current progress. Because human children can choose how to explore the world at any moment,
language learning tends to proceed hierarchically: from simpler skills and patterns, more salient
objects, and more predictable aspects of the world to more difficult, allowing cognitive abilities

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
24
to gradually grow on top of each other (Vygotsky, 1964; Thelen & Smith, 1996; Di Paolo, Cuffari,
& De Jaegher, 2018).
3.2.1. DEVELOPING HUMANS CHOOSE THEIR OWN CURRICULUM FOR LANGUAGE LEARNING
Children and adults exploring in rich environments determine their own training data and
the sequence of its presentation (Fig.2). This opens multiple possibilities for structuring learning
with respect to an individual’s state of knowledge, needs, and cognitive characteristics at the
moment. These possibilities include spending more time actively exploring new rather than old
items, obtaining as many views of an object as needed to discriminate that object from already
learned ones, asking questions when something is unclear, generating caricature examples to
get feedback on the category’s diagnostic properties, as well as taking into account the
characteristics of one’s own memory, motor and perceptual systems when choosing the learning
strategies (Smith et al., 2018; Gureckis & Markant, 2012).

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
25
Figure 2. Active and passive learning. Humans can choose what to learn (left), while machines
passively receive the training examples (right).
The figure uses materials from the following sources:
Flaticon.com
Wikipedia contributors. (2021, February 12). Artificial intelligence. In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved 21:17, February 14,
2021, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Artificial_intelligence&oldid=1006429124
Wikipedia contributors. (2021, February 9). Human intelligence. In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved 21:35, February 14,
2021, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Human_intelligence&oldid=1005838764
Strong evidence for the importance of self-generated data for early word learning comes
from studies using head-mounted cameras in naturalistic learning conditions. In real life,
children actively manipulate objects, turning them around, moving them closer and farther away
from their eyes, and exploring them under different physical conditions. By moving and densely
sampling views of objects, infants can acquire the visual training data needed to build object
representations that are generalizable across contexts and viewpoints (Smith et al., 2018; Orhan,
Gupta, & Lake, 2020). This self-generated visual variability has been found to predict the success
of learning the object’s name (Slone, Smith, & Yu, 2019). Studies with adults demonstrate the
advantages of active learning as well (for review, see Gureckis & Markant, 2012). For example,
humans learn new categories more efficiently when they can actively query new examples
(Markant & Gureckis, 2010). These results suggest that active language learning is often more
efficient than passive learning because active learning allows agents to choose the most
informative data for their knowledge acquisition.
Recent work with embodied artificial agents provides a convincing demonstration of the
central role of active egocentric perception in language learning (Hill et al., 2019). The artificial
agents were trained in 2D and 3D worlds, and then tested on their ability to understand new
combinations of already learned concepts. When the agents were trained with a bounded

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
26
(egocentric) reference frame, the agents developed enhanced abilities to generalize their
semantic knowledge to novel situations. These agents that could move in the environment,
choosing their own perceptual inputs, performed better at compositional generalization than
the “passive agents”, who received the same set of training data but could not actively select a
bounded subset of inputs at each moment. This study highlights the importance of embodiment
and egocentric active learning for systematic compositional generalization of linguistic
knowledge.
Vast and open-ended information spaces of natural learning require powerful exploration
mechanisms
to guide search for useful data. Various information-, uncertainty-, and
novelty-based exploration mechanisms have been hypothesized to generate structured data for
early learning in human babies. The empirical data show that children generate observations by
actively searching for information in the environment and keeping track of their learning
returns. In particular, infants allocate their visual (Kidd, Piantadosi, & Aslin, 2012) and auditory
(Kidd, Piantadosi, & Aslin, 2014) attention to the stimuli of “optimal” complexity (neither too
predictable nor too surprising for them), which supports learning that is adapted to the current
state of their development. Evidence for preferential attention to more “learnable” linguistic
patterns has also been found in 17-month-old infants habituating to words generated with rules
of different complexity (Gerken, Balcomb, & Minton, 2011). Preliminary results from Zettersten’s
dissertation (2020) suggest that children prefer to request additional demonstrations for
infrequent or ambiguous word-object pairs, but these preferences might only emerge around 3
and 5 years of age (respectively) (see also Zettersten & Saffran, in press). The middle schoolers
and adults starting to learn the words of their second language also preferentially allocate their
studying time to medium-difficulty examples, which leads to the best results in this learning
problem (Metcalfe, 2002; Metcalfe & Kornell, 2003). Thus, familiar or too difficult objects, words,

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
27
or aspects of the environment receive less human attention and exploration time, while more
“learnable” items draw more attention. This adaptive allocation of learning time and resources
gradually changes with acquisition, making a path for new concepts and skills.
Overall, the existence of domain-general curiosity-driven exploration mechanisms in
humans is supported by a large body of empirical work in neuroscience and psychology (for
review, see Gottlieb et al., 2013; Kidd & Hayden, 2015; Schulz, 2012). These curiosity-driven
exploration mechanisms are hypothesized to guide gradual development of “high-level”
cognitive capacities, such as tool usage and language, and might be tightly connected to the
developmental programs that are optimized by evolutionary search (this perspective is outlined
in Oudeyer & Smith, 2016).
It would be hard to overestimate the role of individualized epistemic activity in organizing
human language learning. Adaptive exploration mechanisms pave a unique path for language
development
in
children
with
different
sensorimotor
and
cognitive
characteristics,
developmental states, and learning conditions (Thelen & Smith, 1996; Oudeyer, 2006; Di Paolo,
Cuffari, & De Jaegher, 2018).
Adaptive exploration in human babies has inspired simulations of language development in
the field of Cognitive Robotics (for review, see Oudeyer, Kachergis, & Schueller, 2019). For
example, Oudeyer and Kaplan (2006) conducted experiments of exploratory learning in an
autonomous curiosity-driven robot. The robot’s behavior resembled the developmental stages of
human babies. The robot first engaged in exploration of its body capacities (e.g., moving
individual actuators and observing the outcomes) until they became predictable. Then, the robot
started to explore affordances of the objects, by trying to bite or bash different toys and
discovering the consequences. After learning about the objects in the environment, the robot
started to play with the other, “speaking” robot. Notably, the speaking robot had its own

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
28
operation rules and, thus, was the most difficult to predictably control. The curious robot even
spontaneously started to babble in order to provoke the other robot’s responses. This simulation
suggests that some developmental transitions found in human babies’ behavior may naturally
arise from autonomous exploration driven by domain-general information-seeking objectives
(“curiosity”). Such robotic experiments serve as proofs-of-concept that the domain-general
curiosity-driven exploration can allow agents grounded in rich environments to independently
achieve
goals
of
increasing
complexity,
such
as locomotion, object recognition, and
communication.
The active learning strategies are particularly useful in cases when supervising feedback is
rare or expensive, but the unsupervised exploration is cheap (Settles, 2012). This perfectly
characterizes the problem of learning languages in multimodal social environments, where the
agent can endlessly explore objects and actions on their own, but requesting labels of these
entities either takes more time and is not always available. In this case, the learner is most
effective when they can make the best use of the limited supervising feedback (e.g. labels) by
requesting the information that has the highest expectancy of being useful given learner’s
knowledge and the structure of the environment. The benefits of active learning, however, have
yet to be fully integrated in the development of artificial systems for language learning (Fig.2).
Most of the state-of-the art models for language processing either sample their observations
randomly or choose the observations on the basis of pre-engineered curriculum rules (e.g. see
Devlin et al., 2019). I suggest that focusing on the active learning models could bring us closer to
building the agents that could effectively learn in rich communicative environments.

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
29
3.3. LANGUAGE ARISES AND IS MAINTAINED IN INTERACTION OF BODIES, BRAINS AND
ENVIRONMENTS
Humans acquire languages in adaptive and controllable environments. These environments
are full of other communicative agents, who adapt their signals to the learner’s current state of
knowledge and afford “requests” for help and clarification (e.g. by asking a question, looking
confused, not responding to verbal and non-verbal interactions). These and many other
learner-adaptive properties of human environments dramatically reorganize and scaffold human
language learning (Di Paolo, Cuffari, & De Jaegher, 2018; Hasson et al., 2012; Gogate,
Walker-Andrews, & Bahrick, 2001; Steels, 2000).
3.3.1. LANGUAGES ARE ACQUIRED THROUGH ADAPTIVE SOCIAL INTERACTIONS
Acquired communicative systems in animal and human groups develop through biologically
grounded social events. The adaptive properties of communicative social interactions shape
learning mechanisms that are needed for successful language acquisition, as both the feedback
and data samples are often adapted to the individual’s state of knowledge, goals, as well as their
sensorimotor and cognitive constraints.
Social interactions endow young human language learners with adaptive data and feedback.
In fact, humans demonstrate high sensitivity to adaptive multimodal social feedback and
communicative history from the earliest stages of development (Goldstein & Schwade, 2010). For
example, infants’ prelinguistic vocalizations are affected by interactive social feedback from
their caregivers (e.g. Goldstein, King, & West, 2003; Goldstein & Schwade, 2008), who provide
differential responses depending on the speech-like quality of infant’s signals (Gros-Louis et al.,
2006). At first, caregivers simplify phonetic and lexical structure of their vocalizations with
respect to the vocal maturity and phonetic level of the learners (e.g. Kuhl et al., 1997; Elmlinger,

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
30
Schwade, & Goldstein, 2019). Moreover, caregivers produce shorter utterances and more
repetitions when they talk to younger infants, gradually changing to producing less repetitive,
more syntactically rich and phonetically diverse speech as the child grows (for review, see
Soderstrom, 2007). On the prosodic level (e.g. reflecting intonation and rhythm), however,
infant-directed speech is less predictable than adult-directed speech, and thus potentially more
attractive to curiosity-driven babies (Räsänen, Kakouros, & Soderstrom, 2018; MacDonald et al.,
2020). Caregivers also promptly correct children’s incorrect utterances, providing immediate
supervising feedback on phonological, morphological, syntactic, and lexical levels. There is
evidence that this kind of language supervision declines as the child grows (Chouinard & Clark,
2003). Thus, it has been argued that caregivers provide adaptive vocalizations and feedback that
flexibly adjust to the learner’s development, thereby scaffolding early language learning (e.g.
Gogate, Walker-Andrews, & Bahrick, 2001; Hasson et al., 2012; Di Paolo, Cuffari, & De Jaegher,
2018).
Learner-specific data and feedback have been suggested to influence language acquisition
in sensory impaired children. For example, there is evidence that the caregivers of blind
children are less likely to talk about people and objects in the environment, unless the child is
actively interacting with them through touch. They also use more descriptions of the ongoing
child’s actions than caregivers of the sighted children, adapting to what is likely to be present in
the child’s experiences at a given moment (e.g. Andersen, Dunlea, & Kekelis, 1993). Likewise,
deaf mothers of children adapt their gestures to attract deaf infant’s attention using various
strategies, i.e., gesturing in the child’s field of view (so the child does not need to move her gaze),
as well as applying tactile signaling to indicate communicative intention, which decreases in
frequency as the child’s communicative capacities improve (Waxman & Spencer, 1997; Spencer &
Harris, 2006). Thus, the flexibility of human communication and language teaching may support

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
31
language learning in children with very different developmental starting points (Thelen & Smith,
1996).
Adaptive nature of human social interactions underlies successful conversations (Pickering
& Garrod, 2004; Garrod & Pickering, 2004; Dale et al., 2013). For instance, human auditory
perception quickly adapts to particular partner-specific speech, so that the words pronounced
by the familiar speakers are more intelligible (Nygaard & Pisoni, 1998), while the speech
production of participants in a conversation couples in terms of the speed, accent, phrases, and
the referent names that are used (e.g. Giles, 1973; Giles et al., 1987; Pickering & Garrod, 2004).
Similar language coupling has been shown between children and their caregivers: for example,
they dynamically “coordinate” their speech on syntactic level, so that both a child and a
caregiver tend to use the syntactic sequences (e.g. verb-pronoun) that match the ones being
heard (Dale & Spivey, 2006). Thus, our everyday communicative interactions are facilitated by the
mechanisms that adapt our language perception and production to every new partner.
AI systems, on the contrary, rarely learn to communicate from humans or from other
artificial agents. Even when humans are involved in evaluating the communicative attempts of
an artificial agent, these evaluations are rarely individualized, adaptive, or shaped by the
supervisor’s intuitions about the machine’s current state of knowledge and learning limitations.
These properties of natural language learning are even absent in multi-agent communicative
learning simulations: agents do not learn to “teach” each other, and the communicative
feedback typically comes uniquely from the environment (e.g. Lazaridou et al., 2018; Foerster et
al., 2016; Mordatch & Abbeel, 2018).
Some preliminary developments in social robotics, however, demonstrate the promise of
learning to communicate by interacting with humans (for a brief overview, see Broz et al., 2014).
For example, Lohan et al. (2012a) developed a robotic system that adaptively responds to human

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
32
teaching by following the tutor’s gaze and pointing in response to the tutor's object
demonstrations. The preliminary results showed that the adaptive social feedback from the
robot provokes particular type of teaching from human tutors: for example, when demonstrating
the patterns on objects to the robot, human tutors used at least two times more words teaching
the interactive robot in comparison to teaching the robot that does not follow their gaze and
points to the objects at random moments (Lohan et al., 2012b). I suggest that the benefits of
social language learning in AI should be further explored for building machines that are capable
of efficient communicative interactions with human partners.
3.3.2. LANGUAGE CAPABILITIES CAN BE PARTIALLY OUTSOURCED TO CONTROLLABLE
ENVIRONMENTS
We live in highly controllable environments. Thus, we have multiple opportunities to
outsource parts of our cognitive processing to the world, without having to perform all cognitive
operations internally (Clark, 1998; 1999; 2013). For example, we can easily do multiplication of
large numbers by writing simple calculations on paper, while most of us find it difficult to
perform these operations uniquely within our heads. Our notebooks operate as our external
memory, and our laptops with the Internet replace the need to remember all useful information;
this information can always be retrieved once we know how to use a search engine. In this
context, again, our brains are better viewed as effective manipulators of external tools and
artifacts, rather than as cognitive processors uniquely responsible for all the computations that
drive our behavior. Thus, human-like learning involves efficient interaction with tools and
devices, with no necessity to replicate their capacities.
Potential externalized strategies that children might employ for efficient language learning
have been understudied. However, after mastering language, a big part of our linguistic
knowledge can potentially exist “outside” of our body, always available for retrieval. For

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
33
example, we can look up the facts that we are not sure about, check the grammatical rules, and
request more examples of word usage in both linguistic or multimodal contexts from gadgets or
from other people. These resources are available for us almost all the time, and therefore, should
not be dismissed in their potential to restructure the linguistic knowledge that we assume
modern humans possess. In similar ways, these external resources might be important for
second language acquisition. In the absence of a constant “linguistic environment”, the ability to
find and use learning resources allows us to ask questions and request feedback to adjust our
language skills to the ever-changing linguistic climate. We can listen to the pronunciation of
phonemes, words, and intonations of native speakers, try to perceptually differentiate them,
imitate and get feedback from language-learning applications, watch videos with contextualized
native speech and subtitles at comfortable speed, look for translations of unknown words and
phrases, choosing learning materials which fit our current knowledge and limitations. When
human mentors and conversational partners are not always available, the books and Internet
become powerful replacements, allowing learners to search for important information in a
variety of new ways.
Modern AI work on language, however, is predominantly focused on training machines in a
"learning vacuum”. AI systems are typically trained to produce amodal responses, matching
given inputs to desired outputs. In these passive pattern-matching problems, there is no history
of interactions between an agent and its environment. Often, there is no environment in the
first place. Such conditions put machines at a disadvantage: unlike humans, communicative AI
systems don’t operate in environments that could potentially extend what they can do by
providing ways to use and exploit external resources for their learning.
In contrast, when artificial learning systems can continuously interact with their
environment, they often spontaneously restructure the surroundings to support their goals. In

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
34
these cases, the agents learn to manipulate objects or other agents to get what they need. For
instance, in a recent multi-agent reinforcement learning simulation, agents learned to play
competitive games in virtual environments with several controllable elements. In the
hide-and-seek game, the hiding team learned to use cubic objects to lock themselves in confined
spaces, so the seekers could not reach them and win. Then, the seekers learned to use the
objects as steps to jump through the walls to counteract the hiders’ strategy (Baker et al., 2019).
These tool use strategies were not pre-programmed and were not directly related to rewards: the
agents could benefit from tools only when they appropriately use them, often in ways that the
engineers did not expect at the beginning of simulations. These experiments demonstrate that
artificial agents can spontaneously start using tools when the learning environments contain
elements that the agents can control.
Some recent developments in robotics take inspiration from human ability to leverage
external resources to support lifelong learning. For example, Mancini et al. (2019) describe the
“open-world” image classification system that successfully deals with the situations when the
new types of objects continue to appear after the initial training. When the system recognizes a
novel class of objects, it tries to mine similar images with their labels on the internet to learn
about this new class. The preliminary results demonstrate that this system is able to reach
higher than baseline performance on the novel classes and that it can be successfully deployed
in physical robots. I suggest that controllable environments and external resources (e.g. internet)
should be considered for building artificial agents that could restructure their surroundings to
support their communicative goals and quickly update their linguistic knowledge to the ever
changing environment.
3.3.3. DEVELOPING BRAINS, DEVELOPING BODIES, AND DEVELOPING ENVIRONMENTS

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
35
The course of sensorimotor and physiological development dynamically determines what
kind of sensory data the baby can acquire, what actions they can perform, what motor skills are
possible to learn, and what prior background and skillset they have in their disposition (Thelen
& Smith, 1996; Iverson, 2010).
One potentially powerful idea is that motor development places strong dynamic constraints
on the kinds of problems that an agent can learn. By gradually increasing the action and
perceptual spaces of the agent, motor development adaptively constrains the possible
child-world interactions, allowing knowledge to emerge gradually over time (Thelen & Smith,
1996; Iverson, 2010). In humans, early language learning involves mastering simplistic,
exaggerated utterances, simple objects, and coarse-grain motor responses. Later, as the space of
available motor skills for interacting with the environment grows, so does the richness and
diversity of perceptual experiences. Thus, the learning problem at any given time is constrained
by perceptual and motor limitations: learning is more constrained in the beginning of life, and it
gradually becomes more flexible across development.
Motor development shapes the perceptual experience of a language learner by determining
the set of exploratory actions (e.g. grasping big simple-shaped objects or interacting with small
items) and perceptual perspectives (e.g. sitting or standing position) available to the child at any
given moment. For example, in the earliest stages of postnatal development, children can only
look at objects and people from a distance, which makes big, salient, and frequent items the
main data available for learning. Later, children learn to grasp objects and move, which enables
them to approach attractive items and manipulate them, generating variable samples that
predict their word learning success (Slone, Smith, & Yu, 2019). A large dataset of children’s
visual views acquired through head cameras shows that the object distributions in children’s
worldview are right-skewed, meaning that there is a very small number of objects that are

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
36
almost constantly present in the child’s environment (Clerkin et al., 2017); as a result, the names
of these objects tend to be learned first and can help bootstrap learning of other words
(Kachergis, Yu, & Shiffrin, 2017; Smith et al., 2018). Motor development causes environmental
adaptations to child’s growth. The most frequent objects in the natural right-skewed
distributions of children’s visual world change through development: from faces to hands, from
rattles to footballs, from small food items available for early grasping to bigger ones. Several
potential benefits of such learning distribution are hypothesized (i.e. it might allow consistent
learning of gradually changing high-frequency items or support disambiguation of the names of
low-frequency items, because they are likely to be surrounded by the already acquired
high-frequency items; for more discussion, see Smith et al., 2018; Jayaraman, Fausey, & Smith,
2015; Yoshida & Smith, 2008; Fausey, Jayaraman, & Smith, 2016), but one aspect is undeniable:
early word learning is oriented towards a very small number of representative objects which
gradually change over time and potentially bootstrap learning of the other objects and their
names.
The way that infants sample their learning data is dynamically constrained by their
sensorimotor development and their environment, upon which the exploration processes
operate. In contrast, modern communicative AI systems are not endowed with developing
bodies that constrain their learning within adaptive environments (Fig.3). Rather, in a typical
machine language learning task, the learning problem remains constant during training and
often represents a desirable end-point, such as answering natural language questions. Moreover,
while the communicative machines might learn through weight changes (i.e., in neural
networks), their morphology, neural architecture and action space typically remain static across
the training. This is analogous to expecting a prelinguistic human baby to learn typing answers
to abstract natural language questions from scratch, and then being surprised that the baby

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
37
takes too much time and too many training examples to learn accurately. In contrast, by
“growing” the machine’s architecture and morphology in adaptive training environments, we
can allow the step-wise and scaffolded accumulation of knowledge (e.g. the neural structure
“growing” approach has recently been successfully applied for tackling catastrophic forgetting
in continual learning: see Li et al., 2019).

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
38
Figure 3. Interaction of learning environments and individual development. Human babies learn
through adaptively constrained interactions with their immediate environments (e.g. objects and
agents) which, in turn, adapt to babies’ development (top). Machines, in contrast, typically learn
in the static contexts that represent the desired end-state of their learning (bottom). Note that
the ages, common action space, objects, and language input are approximate.

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
39
The figure uses materials from the following sources:
Flaticon.com
Wikipedia contributors. (2021, February 12). Artificial intelligence. In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved 21:17, February 14,
2021, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Artificial_intelligence&oldid=1006429124
Wikipedia contributors. (2021, February 9). Human intelligence. In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved 21:35, February 14,
2021, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Human_intelligence&oldid=1005838764
3.4. WHERE DO LANGUAGE LEARNING CONSTRAINTS COME FROM?
Domain-general and language-specific constraints guide communicative inferences in
infinite spaces of potential solutions, making language acquisition a tractable problem for
humans. Natural communicative abilities grow on top of the innate limitations and acquired
biases of human perceptual and motor systems (Elman et al., 1996; Regier, 2003; Di Paolo,
Cuffari, & De Jaegher, 2018).
Some language learning constraints result from evolutionary processes which adapt species
to their evolutionary niche, while other language learning constraints result from developmental
processes as an individual gradually learns about the world. Human learner’s innate and
acquired biases, in turn, determine what forms their communicative systems might take. In the
next subsections, I will briefly introduce the ways in which evolutionary, culturally, and
individually acquired constraints facilitate human language learning (Fig.4).
Here, again, I focus on the mechanisms that give rise to language learning constraints,
rather than on the specific contents of these constraints, which are much harder to determine.
This approach contrasts with the “core knowledge” and “core ingredients” approaches in
cognitive psychology and AI, which instead focus on the hypothesized high-level contents of the
developmental constraints.

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
40
Figure 4. Processes that give rise to human (left) and machine (right) language learning
constraints.
The figure uses materials from flaticon.com
3.4.1. MACRO-SCALE OF EVOLUTIONARY SEARCH
The biological organization of our species is a precursor to our linguistic abilities and the
shape of our languages themselves. Both humans and our communicative systems are not
“neutral”: human learners inherit a bag of cognitive biases and constraints, and natural
languages are well-adapted to them.
Evolution has been adapting our bodies, sensory systems, and learning mechanisms to the
ecological niches of our species for millions of years. Most of these adaptations have nothing to
do with communication and culture, but these more recent developments are built on top of
older components, and are often constrained by them (Elman et al., 1996; Di Paolo, Cuffari, & De
Jaegher, 2018). One or a few changes to the pre-existing set of adaptations could have allowed
rich and flexible communicative systems to develop in humans (Oudeyer (2006) examines a
proof-of-concept computational demonstration, which is also described in section 3.2.1.; Di
Paolo, Cuffari, & De Jaegher (2018) provide an overview of the broad existing evidence).

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
41
Evolution of language abilities through these curiosity-driven exploration mechanisms,
attentional preferences, spontaneous vocal activity, and several other “key” adaptations requires
a significantly lower level of evolutionary complexity than the evolution of speech code or
language acquisition device (see also Oudeyer & Smith, 2016).
Evolutionary constraints supporting language learning are still under-determined. We
know a lot about brain and body organization. However, it is still difficult to trace these
low-level components to the development of communication in particular. These biological
constraints, however, can often be simulated in artificial neural networks to probe their
potential
effects
on
communication
learning,
which
is
generally
emphasized
by
biologically-motivated deep learning research programs (e.g. Elman et al., 1996; Marblestone,
Wayne, & Kording, 2016; Guerguiev, Lillicrap, & Richards, 2017; Hassabis et al., 2017).
More generally, human cognitive development is optimized on two levels: evolutionary
search, on a large scale, explores the space of possible developmental programs for building
brains and bodies, while ontogenetic learning, on the individual scale, adapts particular
individuals to particular environments using evolutionarily provided mechanisms. Simulations
suggest that this combination of searching the space of available learning algorithms
(meta-optimization)
and
individual
learning
can
be
very
beneficial
for
finding good
reinforcement learning algorithms for a given environment; in many cases, the discovered
learning strategies are more successful or more diverse than the algorithms hand-crafted by
human engineers (Pourchot & Sigaud, 2018; Houthooft et al., 2018; Khadka & Tumer, 2018; Leite,
Candadai, & Izquierdo, 2020). On the other hand, large-scale genetic search facilitates individual
learning by finding a good starting point to bias the learning processes in directions that are
more promising for given tasks or environmental challenges (e.g. Nolfi, Parisi, & Elman, 1994;
Todd, Candadai, & Izquierdo, 2020). Thus, AI scientists do not need to wait until all human

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
42
biases that support communication learning are determined and translated to the language of
artificial neural networks to take advantage of the power of optimization performed at the level
of learning programs or architectures. For such simulations to be informative, special emphasis
should be put into the construction of naturalistic environments where communication can be
useful.
While the evolutionary constraints contributing to human language learning are being
determined, AI research can benefit from searching for such constraints. General principles,
emphasized in the previous sections, as well as considerations of the biologically and
environmentally plausible pressures for developing communication, should be combined in the
search for innate biases which can successfully guide communication learning in machines.
3.4.2. MESO-SCALE OF CULTURAL EVOLUTION: FITTING LANGUAGES TO LEARNING AND
SENSORIMOTOR BIASES
What we learn and how we learn it is deeply grounded in our cultural advances. While some
of our biological biases facilitate language learning in naturalistic conditions, our languages are
fit to our biological constraints through cultural evolution (Christiansen & Chater, 2008; Gibson
et al., 2019). Languages in their modern state, artifacts and events that languages refer to,
language education, methods for helping children with special needs to acquire language, and
many others are the products of human cultural adaptation.
The
cultural
evolution
of
language
operates
on
a
relatively
short
timescale
of
communicative interactions within and between generations. Words that are easy to forget, hard
to acquire, or difficult to pronounce are likely to be replaced with other forms (e.g. Nowak &
Krakauer, 1999; Nowak, Komarova, & Niyogi, 2002). Not only particular words and word
combinations, but also whole language properties adapt to the cognitive limitations of their

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
43
users. For example, the analysis of morphological complexity of more than 2000 languages
showed that languages spoken by larger groups of people tend to have simpler inflectional
morphology than languages spoken by smaller groups. This pattern suggests that widely spoken
languages adapt to the cognitive limitations of adult second-language learners, who constitute a
considerable portion of their speakers (Lupyan & Dale, 2010). Thus, the cognitively constrained
communicative interactions ultimately result in communicative systems that are biased to fit
their users’ predispositions and constraints.
Some language properties arise from the properties of naturalistic communication and
learning contexts. For example, communicative systems that are transmitted iteratively – from
one generation to another – with a minimal individual experience bottleneck result in the
development of compositional concepts (e.g. Kirby, 2001; Kirby & Hurford, 2002; Kirby, 2002;
Kirby, Cornish, & Smith, 2008). In particular, when “teachers” cannot supervise learners on every
object name or if there is a limit on how many words learners can memorize, then the concepts
that refer to a diagnostic property (e.g. color, size or shape) of many objects are maintained,
while the identifiers of unique items (e.g. a word that refers to a big green triangle) die out.
Thus, the properties of communicative systems are adapted both to the biological constraints of
their users and to the properties of naturalistic communicative interactions.
Human languages are optimized for human learning, perception, and production, instead of
being universally convenient and learnable. Artificial systems not characterized by these same
limitations will not benefit from, and might even be misguided by, the culturally adapted natural
languages.
3.4.3. MICRO-SCALE OF INDIVIDUAL LEARNING
Individual domain-general and language-specific experiences constrain language learning
throughout individual lifetime, and these constraints appear to contribute to human language

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
44
learning efficiency (e.g. Elman et al., 1996; Seidenberg & MacDonald, 1999; Regier, 2003).
Computational simulations of statistical learning of words demonstrate that the gradual
accumulation of learning constraints leads to speed shifts in language acquisition (language
spurts) (Elman et al., 1996; Regier et al., 2001).
Some constraints emerge from statistical learning of linguistic patterns, while others
emerge from perceptual adaptations. For example, simple associative learning quickly gives rise
to the mutual exclusivity constraint that greatly accelerates word acquisition (Regier et al., 2001).
On the other hand, human attention and perceptual encoding processes flexibly adapt to the
cognitive goals of individuals and the statistics of their environments, allowing humans to
primarily focus on informative and relevant features at the moment (this perspective is
summarized in Goldstone, Leeuw, & Landy, 2015). For example, an individual’s auditory
perception quickly tunes to the phonetic structure of their language, accentuating the
perceptual differences between different phonemes and making the perceptual differences
within one phoneme less noticeable (Kuhl et al., 1992; Kuhl, 2000). Thus, human perceptual
systems quickly tune to the most cognitively-relevant information in the environment, greatly
reducing the amount of less relevant information in perceptual data.
Experience-based constraint accumulation is the most natural domain for connectionist
architectures. Designing ecologically valid datasets, training modes, and learning environments
(i.e. providing multimodal naturalistic communication data as described in section 3.1; allowing
the agents to actively explore their environments as described in section 3.2, and placing the
agents in adaptive and controllable communicative environments as described in section 3.3)
will help to make sure that the individually learned constraints translate to desired situations of
applying this knowledge. Moreover, architectures with adaptive perception (e.g. having active

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
45
vision or covert attention) are the best candidates to learn perceptual constraints that could
accelerate their language learning.
4. BUILDING GROUNDED COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE: REVIEW OF
THE DIRECTIONS
4.1. GROUNDED LANGUAGE LEARNING: OVERVIEW OF THE PRINCIPLES
As we have seen, there are many ideas from the mind sciences on how “grounding” in
adaptive, social, and multimodal environments allows humans to efficiently acquire languages. I
suggest that the AI community can potentially benefit from these insights. The language
“grounding” ideas that I covered in this paper overlap, complement, and sometimes contradict
each other. Therefore, I provide a list of directions for AI researchers, each of which can either
be pursued separately or in combination with other directions, depending on the goals of the
researcher:
1.
Agents interact with their environments. Embodied agents interacting with their
environments
(real
or virtual) are more promising candidates for learning
human-like language abilities than passive pattern-matching systems. Embodiment
allows agents to discover various ways to achieve their communicative goals through
sensorimotor shortcuts: by actively manipulating their own perceptual inputs
through motor activity.
2.
“Naturalistic” environments. By using more ecological environments, a developer
can ensure that the information that humans use for efficient communication is also
available to machines. Careful experimentation with different environments can

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
46
help to isolate particular experiences or data properties that are crucial for language
learning and communication.
3.
Open-ended controllable environments. The structure of the environment should
provide opportunities for continuous interaction. Controllable environments allow
the learners to continuously reorganize their learning conditions in the ways that
facilitate their language learning process and help them solve communicative tasks.
Such possibility enables agents to achieve more distant cognitive goals than the ones
which are attainable in the “initial” states of environment provided by the engineers.
4.
Powerful information-seeking exploration mechanisms. Agents operating in rich,
open-ended
environments
require
powerful
domain-general
exploration
mechanisms
to
guide
their
learning.
Curiosity-driven
exploration
endows
autonomous agents with individualized exploration strategies: such learning can
gradually proceed from simpler skills, objects, and concepts to more difficult.
5.
Motor and perceptual development. Agents who change their motor and
perceptual organization across time learn in the hierarchical way: the agent’s
learning objective, available actions, and data can dramatically transform after they
reach a particular developmental milestone. Developing agents can be challenged
only with subsets or simplified versions of the full language learning problem at
each moment, instead of being required to develop adult-level language capacities
from the very start of their learning.
6.
Evolved or naturalistic bodies and neural architectures. Trajectories of motor and
perceptual development that support learning goals in a given environment can be
found through carefully designed evolutionary simulations. Evolving the bodies of
artificial agents together with their brains (neural architectures) in the target

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
47
environment enriches optimization possibilities, opening up new ways to find the
learning biases and developmental programs that help agents achieve their
communicative goals. The analogues of human bodies and their development can
also be explored for machines to help them operate in naturalistic environments and
succeed in “human-like” communication tasks.
7.
Social learning. Data and feedback provided by the communication “experts” (e.g.
human adults) can guide learner’s development in more “objectively” promising
directions.
8.
Learning
in
adaptive
social contexts. Learning in a context of adaptive
communicative partners allows agents to continuously receive individualized
communicative feedback. Moreover, experience with naturalistic communicative
feedback
prepares
a
learner
to
participate
in
naturalistic
communicative
interactions with humans, which are constantly shaped by partners’ adaptations to
each other.
9.
Multi-agent
communicative
settings.
Interactive,
multi-agent
learning
environments should be a (distant) goal in building artificial communicative
intelligence. Such settings open possibilities for automatized adaptive language
teaching and the cultural development of communicative systems that fit particular
agents’ goals and limitations.
10. Perceptual simulations. Embodied models with predictive (or other model-based)
feedback can be explored as candidates for learning “perceptual simulations” for
language comprehension. The multimodal, rather than purely linguistic, semantic
representations are essential for building machines that understand languages in the
same way as humans do it.

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
48
4.2. LIMITATIONS
There are considerable difficulties associated with adopting the grounded approach to language
learning in AI. First of all, grounded language learning requires developing new tools, models,
environments, and benchmarks, whereas the resources for efficiently training language models
in amodal contexts are plentiful. Secondly, simulating the agents that learn to communicate by
interacting with their (virtual or real-world) environments might require more time and
computing resources than amodal supervised training: the data have to be richer, the adaptive
environments and communicative partners have to be simulated or accessed in real time.
Thirdly, as the modern state-of-the-art language models might be unadapted for actively
exploring and picking up the regularities in interactive multimodal contexts, the agents learning
languages in the grounded way might need to undergo substantial development to reach the
impressive performance of their amodal counterparts. I hope that these challenges, however,
will not dissuade the AI researchers from exploring and gradually incorporating the grounded
learning principles into the development of human-like communicative AI.
4.3. A CASE OF SUCCESSFUL APPLICATION
Recent work from Hill and colleagues at DeepMind illustrates the potential power of using
the language grounding principles for building artificial language learning systems. The
researchers trained agents embodied in virtual environments to follow verbal instructions, such
as “put a pencil on the bed” or “pick up the dax”. The first set of experiments (Hill et al., 2019)
demonstrates that active, egocentric perception plays a central role in agent’s success in
compositional generalization: the ability to understand new combinations of already learned
concepts. When agents were learning from their perceptuomotor interactions with the
environment through a bounded visual frame (field of view), they developed almost perfect
generalization abilities, contrastively to the agents without active bounded perception. The next

BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE COMMUNICATIVE INTELLIGENCE
49
study showed that when the embodied agents were tested on their ability to follow instructions
with entirely new objects, they were able to learn from a single demonstration, showing a
capacity known as “fast-mapping” (Hill et al., 2020). Here, the curiosity-driven exploration, rich
perceptual experiences, and the temporal properties of the training data played a critical role in
allowing the agents to succeed in this challenging fast-mapping task. Thus, preliminary
grounded language learning experiments provide existence proofs that embodied agents can
solve the same kind of language learning challenges that young human children begin solving
early in development. I hope that these new results, combined with evidence from 4E research
in cognitive science, will inspire more work in grounded language learning in AI.
