ITERATED DECOMPOSITION: IMPROVING SCIENCE Q&A
BY SUPERVISING REASONING PROCESSES
Justin Reppert∗, Ben Rachbach, Charlie George, Luke Stebbing,
Jungwon Byun, Maggie Appleton, Andreas Stuhlmüller
Ought
ABSTRACT
Language models (LMs) can perform complex reasoning either end-to-end, with hidden latent state, or
compositionally, with transparent intermediate state. Composition offers beneﬁts for interpretability
and safety, but may need workﬂow support and infrastructure to remain competitive. We describe
iterated decomposition, a human-in-the-loop workﬂow for developing and reﬁning compositional
LM programs. We improve the performance of compositions by zooming in on failing components
and reﬁning them through decomposition, additional context, chain of thought, etc. To support
this workﬂow, we develop ICE, an open-source tool for visualizing the execution traces of LM
programs. We apply iterated decomposition to three real-world tasks and improve the accuracy
of LM programs over less compositional baselines on held-out test sets: describing the placebo
used in a randomized controlled trial (25% →65%), evaluating participant adherence to a medical
intervention (53% →70%), and answering NLP questions on the QASPER dataset (38% →69%).
These applications serve as case studies for a workﬂow that, if automated, could keep ML systems
interpretable and safe even as they scale to increasingly complex tasks.
1
Introduction
Language models are often trained using feedback on outcomes, leveraging reward models that imitate human
evaluations provided as pairwise comparisons (Christiano et al., 2017; Ziegler et al., 2020). This works well for basic
question-answering, summarization, simple code generation, and general short-form instruction-following (Stiennon
et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2021; Ouyang et al., 2022). For these tasks, good outputs can readily be distinguished from
bad ones, especially with model-supported evaluation (Saunders et al., 2022). And with rare exceptions like WebGPT
(Nakano et al., 2021), there is no difference between the model’s output and the relevant outcomes, so evaluations
relatively directly inform the model’s behavior.
However, as model capabilities and task complexities scale up, outcome-based evaluation may run into alignment
problems:
First, for some important applications the process used to generate the output matters as much as the output itself.
Consider long-range forecasting, and policy decisions informed by such forecasts: The quality of a forecast or decision
depends on the assumptions, evidence, and reasoning used to produce it. If feedback doesn’t inform the process used to
generate outputs, we may get results that look good (because they are optimized for favorable evaluation), and may
even look systematic, but are worse in exactly the ways that can’t easily be measured (Stuhlmüller and Byun, 2022).
Second, outcome-based feedback may create incentives for language models to deceive or manipulate their users by
exploiting gaps or biases in the feedback signal (Amodei et al., 2016). In extreme cases, this could lead to models
behaving as intended during training, hiding their true intentions and capabilities, but defecting at deployment (Cotra,
2022; Ngo et al., 2022).

arXiv:2301.01751v2  [cs.CL]  5 Jan 2023

Iterated Decomposition: Improving Science Q&A by Supervising Reasoning Processes
Supervise outcomes
?
Input
Did this study on 
drowning use a 
placebo?
output
Yes, a video 
about dog bites
Supervise process
Find sections 
about trial 
arms
Extract trial 
arms from 
sections
Classify & 
name 
placebo
5 paragraphs 
found
Drowning video, 
dog bite video
Input
Did this study on 
drowning use a 
placebo?
output
Yes, a video 
about dog bites
observable Interim outputs
Figure 1: Process supervision breaks black-box language model computation into human-understandable reasoning
steps without end-to-end optimization. This increases transparency and trust because it allows inspection of intermediate
results and reduces risks from imperfect feedback signals and deceptive alignment.
Process supervision is an alternative to outcome-based training that uses language models to execute human-
understandable task decompositions, either by imitating human steps or by rewarding human-endorsed steps (Christiano,
2016; Stuhlmüller and Byun, 2022; Uesato et al., 2022). This paradigm promises increased interpretability, trust, and
alignment by reducing the reliance on black-box computation and enabling users to inspect and intervene in the model’s
reasoning process.
Right now, process supervision is ahead of outcome-based training: Language model capabilities are weak, so complex
tasks require a composition of multiple calls. Indeed, engineered multi-step pipelines have been a staple of NLP for a
long time. However, without scalable infrastructure to support it, we expect that outcome-based training will eventually
crush process supervision performance-wise, leading to the alignment problems above.
This paper describes our experience applying process supervision to academic question-answering in the context of
Elicit2, the AI research assistant developed by Ought. Our contributions are:
1. A review of the literature on process supervision, highlighting gaps in workﬂows and tooling that contribute to
making real-world use cases rare
2. Iterated decomposition, a human-in-the-loop workﬂow for developing compositional language model programs
3. ICE, an open-source visualizer for language model execution traces
4. Case studies that use this workﬂow to improve performance over baselines on three real-world tasks:
(a) extracting placebo information from randomized controlled trials (RCTs),
(b) analyzing participant ﬂow in RCTs, and
(c) answering questions about natural language processing papers.
As models advance and become more reliable at completing component tasks, we expect that process supervision
will become more feasible, and that eventually the iterated decomposition process will be automated. By sharing
our workﬂow and tooling now when even basic tasks are still challenging, we hope to accelerate a future where LM
deployments are controllable and interpretable.
2
Process Supervision
Process supervision refers to approaches to LM training and deployment that rely on human-understandable intermediate
steps. We review the literature and highlight gaps, then explain the iterated decomposition workﬂow and ICE visualizer.
2.1
Prior work on process supervision
Over the past year, there have been signiﬁcant advances in techniques for process supervision as well as frameworks,
interfaces, and libraries for implementing it. At the same time, real-world use cases are still rare. We review prior work
and highlight gaps in the literature that may be contributing to this. This is a rapidly growing ﬁeld, so we are only able
to review a sample of the work (Table 1).
2https://elicit.org
2

Iterated Decomposition: Improving Science Q&A by Supervising Reasoning Processes
Authors
Title
Decomposition
Training
Workﬂow
Survey
Tool
Theory
Saha et al. (2022)
Summarization Programs: Interpretable Abstractive Summarization [..]
✓
✓
✓
Wu et al. (2021)
Recursively Summarizing Books with Human Feedback
✓
✓
✓
Yao et al. (2022)
ReAct: Synergizing Reasoning and Acting in Language Models
✓
✓
Kumar and Talukdar (2020)
NILE : Natural Language Inference with Faithful Natural Language Explanations
✓
✓
Nakano et al. (2021)
WebGPT: Browser-assisted question-answering with human feedback
✓
✓
Creswell et al. (2022)
Selection-Inference: Exploiting LLMs for Interpretable Logical Reasoning
✓
✓
Jung et al. (2022)
Maieutic Prompting: Logically Consistent Reasoning with Recursive Explanations
✓
✓
Sanyal et al. (2022)
FaiRR: Faithful and Robust Deductive Reasoning over Natural Language
✓
✓
Creswell and Shanahan (2022)
Faithful Reasoning Using Large Language Models
✓
✓
Bostrom et al. (2022)
Natural Language Deduction through Search over Statement Compositions
✓
✓
Wang et al. (2022)
Locate Then Ask: Interpretable Stepwise Reasoning for Multi-hop Question Answering
✓
✓
Fu et al. (2021)
Decomposing Complex Questions Makes Multi-Hop QA Easier and More Interpretable
✓
✓
Dua et al. (2022)
Successive Prompting for Decomposing Complex Questions
✓
✓
Guo et al. (2022)
Complex Reading Comprehension Through Question Decomposition
✓
✓
Shridhar et al. (2022)
Distilling Multi-Step Reasoning Capabilities of LLMs into Smaller Models [..]
✓
✓
Zhou et al. (2022)
Learning to Decompose: Hypothetical Question Decomposition [..]
✓
✓
Khattab et al. (2022)
Demonstrate-Search-Predict: Composing retrieval and language models [..]
✓
✓
✓
Press et al. (2022)
Measuring and narrowing the compositionality gap in language models
✓
✓
Khot et al. (2022)
Decomposed Prompting: A Modular Approach for Solving Complex Tasks
✓
Ozturkler et al. (2022)
ThinkSum: Probabilistic reasoning over sets using large language models
✓
Yang et al. (2022)
Re3: Generating Longer Stories With Recursive Reprompting and Revision
✓
Gao et al. (2022)
PAL: Program-aided Language Models
✓
Drozdov et al. (2022)
Compositional Semantic Parsing with Large Language Models
✓
Trivedi et al. (2022)
Interleaving Retrieval with Chain-of-Thought Reasoning for [..] Multi-Step Questions
✓
Kazemi et al. (2022)
LAMBADA: Backward Chaining for Automated Reasoning in Natural Language
✓
Zelikman et al. (2022)
STaR: Bootstrapping Reasoning With Reasoning
✓
✓
Xie et al. (2022)
Calibrating Trust of Multi-Hop Question Answering Systems with Decompositional Probes
✓
✓
Uesato et al. (2022)
Solving math word problems with process- and outcome-based feedback
✓
Dohan et al. (2022)
Language Model Cascades
✓
✓
✓
Stuhlmüller et al. (2022)
Factored Cognition Primer
✓
✓
Wu et al. (2022a)
PromptChainer: Chaining Large Language Model Prompts through Visual Programming
✓
✓
Wu et al. (2022b)
AI Chains: Transparent and Controllable Human-AI Interaction by Chaining LLM Prompts
✓
✓
Chase (2022)
LangChain
✓
✓
Polu (2022)
Dust
✓
Wies et al. (2022)
Sub-Task Decomposition Enables Learning in Sequence to Sequence Tasks
✓
Table 1: A sample of prior work on process supervision, categorized into work that primarily contributes (1) new task
decompositions, (2) training and ﬁnetuning techniques, (3) workﬂows and tutorials, (4) surveys and frameworks for
organizing prior work, (5) tools, and (6) theory. While work on decompositions and training techniques is rapidly
growing, there is little investigation of workﬂows, tooling, and theory.
Task decompositions
There is a quickly growing literature on how to compose multiple language model calls to improve performance or
accomplish more difﬁcult tasks:
• Creswell et al. (2022) and Creswell and Shanahan (2022) generate reasoning steps by alternating between
selection and inference. They show that their approach outperforms other prompting methods on multi-step
logical deduction and scientiﬁc QA tasks, and generates interpretable reasoning traces.
• Kazemi et al. (2022) apply backward-chaining to simple logic tasks, starting with a goal proposition and
recursively decomposing it into sub-goals until the sub-goals can be proved or disproved.
• Wu et al. (2021) and Saha et al. (2022) apply recursive summarization to generate summaries of long texts, such
as books or articles. They use LMs to summarize small sections of the text and then recursively summarize
these summaries to produce a summary of the entire text. They show that recursive summarization improves
the quality and coherence of the summaries, and enables human feedback and evaluation.
• Yang et al. (2022) generate long stories by ﬁrst creating a story plan, generating passages b yprompting a
model with contextual information from the plan and the current story state, and then revising the passages by
reranking and editing them.
• ReAct (Yao et al., 2022) interleaves generating chain-of-thought reasoning and actions pertaining to a task
(e.g., search, lookup).
• WebGPT (Nakano et al., 2021) ﬁnetunes LMs to answer long-form questions using a text-based web-browsing
environment.
3

Iterated Decomposition: Improving Science Q&A by Supervising Reasoning Processes
• Gao et al. (2022) ofﬂoad computation to Python interpreters.
• Trivedi et al. (2022) and Khattab et al. (2022) interleave chain-of-thought with knowledge retrieval steps.
• Khot et al. (2022) study decomposition in general, letting the language model push subtasks to task-speciﬁc
handlers.
• Ozturkler et al. (2022) aggregate language model probabilities using mathematical combinators like sum and
product.
• Jung et al. (2022) recursively generate a tree of explanations for a statement, then determine the truth of the
statement by treating the inference as a satisﬁability problem over these explanations and their logical relations.
• Various works, including Fu et al. (2021), Dua et al. (2022), Guo et al. (2022), and Zhou et al. (2022), explore
decomposition of questions into subquestions, often under the name multi-hop question-answering.
Training and ﬁnetuning techniques
The most relevant work is Uesato et al. (2022) who directly compare process-based and outcome-based feedback
for solving math word problems with LMs. They ﬁnd that process-based feedback improves the correctness and
interpretability of reasoning steps, but requires more label supervision than outcome-based feedback.
Wu et al. (2021) ﬁnetune GPT-3 using behavioral cloning and reward modeling to do summarization recursively. Zhou
et al. (2022) train a decomposition model based on a parallel news corpus. Nakano et al. (2021) compare behavior
cloning, RL and rejection sampling for training a web browsing model, and ﬁnd that a combination of behavior
cloning and rejection sampling against a reward model worked best. Zelikman et al. (2022) generate chains-of-thought,
ﬁnetuning on the ones that lead to correct answers.
Most other work under “training” in Table 1 trains small models from scratch for particular composition steps.
Theory and conceptual advances
Wies et al. (2022) show some beneﬁts of process supervision: When concatenating intermediate supervision to the
input and training a sequence-to-sequence model on this modiﬁed input, unlearnable composite problems can become
learnable.
Press et al. (2022) coin the name “compositionality gap” for the fraction of questions that the model answers incorrectly
out of the questions for which the model answers all of the sub-questions correctly. They ﬁnd this number to be around
40%. They show that chain of thought can narrow the gap, and that generating and answering follow-up questions
further narrows it.
Workﬂows, tutorials, and tools
Dohan et al. (2022) introduce language model cascades, which are probabilistic programs that compose LMs with
random variables and control ﬂow. They formalize several existing techniques, such as scratchpads, veriﬁers, STaR,
selection-inference, and tool use, as instances of language model cascades. They provide an open-source probabilistic
programming system. The Factored Cognition Primer (Stuhlmüller et al., 2022) is a tutorial that explains how to write
compositional LM programs, including recursive question-answering, debate, search, and veriﬁcation. Xie et al. (2022)
show in human participant studies that letting users probe a language model with subquestions helps them calibrate
when the model is correct. Wu et al. (2022a) and Wu et al. (2022b) describe a closed-source visual programming
interfaces for making compositional language model programs. Dust (Polu, 2022) is a web service and Rust library for
designing and deploying LM apps. LangChain (Chase, 2022) is a Python library that assists in the development of LM
applications that involve chaining LMs with each other or with other experts.
Relation to this work
While there is a quickly growing literature on task decompositions, there is effectively no work on theory and only a
few tools, tutorials, and workﬂows for building real-world process-based systems. We see this paper as demonstrating a
real-world application (science Q&A) as well as a description of the workﬂow (iterated decomposition) and tooling
(ICE) used.
The prior work above varies in what exactly is meant by “process” and “supervision”. We provide a taxonomy in
Appendix 9.3. Brieﬂy, in this work, we focus on decompositions designed by a human developer, with occasional
choices made by the language model. We balance pragmatic decompositions that improve task performance with
decompositions that reﬂect ideal reasoning and facilitate better supervision. Our decompositions mostly improve
performance by helping the model use long context more effectively, although some also apply multiple lines of
4

Iterated Decomposition: Improving Science Q&A by Supervising Reasoning Processes
Task
decompose into Subtasks
Papers
Results
1
Decompose the task into subtasks
Subtasks should be independently meaningful so 
that they can be evaluated on their own
2
Run the decomposition 
across multiple inputs
For example, research papers for 
which gold-standard results are 
available
Gold standards
VS.
3
Evaluate the results
Either manually or 
automatically using 
metrics such as accuracy 
and F1-score
inputs
outputs
evaluate failed Subtasks
4
Inspect failing subtasks
Zoom in on failures using the ICE  
trace visualizer to inspect the inputs 
and outputs of each subtask
custom 
code edits
decomposition
5
Improve failing subtasks
Using further decomposition 
(e.g. adding chain-of-thought, 
retrieval steps) or custom code 
(e.g. prompt edits)
Repeat
Figure 2: Iterated decomposition is a workﬂow for human-in-the-loop language model programming. We start with a
trivial decomposition, evaluate it against gold standards, diagnose the source of failures using the ICE visualizer, reﬁne
the failing subtasks through further decomposition or other adjustments, and repeat.
reasoning to subtasks. When we talk about “supervision“, we mean checking the outputs or behavior of individual steps
in the composition. We supervise the process to improve the LM program, the supervisor is the human developer, and
we always have access to the correct answer.
2.2
Iterated decomposition
We study process supervision via iterated decomposition, a human-in-the-loop workﬂow that incrementally improves a
task decomposition through error diagnosis and amendment (illustrated in Figure 2):
1. Start with a minimal decomposition, breaking the task into subtasks that can be performed by a LM. For
example, the task of extracting the placebo used in academic studies can be decomposed into ﬁrst ﬁnding the
most relevant section, then generating the placebo (if any) given that section.
2. Apply the decomposition to multiple test inputs with gold standard answers. For example, this could be a
dataset of academic papers from various domains, such as medicine, psychology, and economics, and their
corresponding placebo descriptions, if applicable.
5

Iterated Decomposition: Improving Science Q&A by Supervising Reasoning Processes
Figure 3: The Interactive Composition Explorer (ICE) is an open-source debugger for language model execution traces.
It visualizes task decompositions and supports zooming in on failing subcomponents. The top left pane in the screenshot
shows the trace of function calls in the original execution hierarchy. The bottom pane supports sorting and ﬁltering
of calls, with each row showing values that were recorded at execution time. The right pane shows function inputs,
outputs, recorded intermediate values, and source code of the call selected in the main pane.
3. Evaluate the results automatically (using LM) or manually, using metrics such as accuracy, F1-score, or other
metrics. For example, the result of the placebo extraction task can be compared to a gold standard dataset of
placebo descriptions from academic papers.
4. Identify failures using the ICE trace visualizer or other tools to inspect the intermediate inputs and outputs
of each subtask. For example, given that the generated placebo is incorrect, one can determine whether the
wrong section was found or the right section was found but the wrong answer was extracted.
5. Improve failing components using further decomposition (e.g., semantic decomposition into subtasks, chain-
of-thought, retrieval), or by making custom edits (e.g. prompt tweaks, language model inference parameters).
For example, the task can be split into ﬁrst ﬁnding each experiment mentioned in the paper, then asking for
each experiment whether it used a placebo or not.
The process repeats steps 2-5 until it achieves good performance or exhausts the relevant resources (time, compute
budget for experiments).
2.3
Interactive Composition Explorer
To support the error identiﬁcation step in iterated decomposition, we have developed the Interactive Composition
Explorer (ICE), an open-source3 debugger and execution trace visualizer for language model programs.
ICE records and visualizes the execution of all async functions in a Python program, including all inputs (prompts,
parameters) and outputs (language model responses, intermediate values), in a way that is suitable even for executions
3https://github.com/oughtinc/ice
6

Iterated Decomposition: Improving Science Q&A by Supervising Reasoning Processes
Placebo classification 
and description
EXAMPLE input
Did Shen et al. 2015 use a 
placebo in their experiment on 
using testimonial videos about 
drowning to reduce drowning 
risk? If so, what was it?
Participant flow
Example input
What were the experiments, trial 
arms, and adherence for each 
arm in Bloom et al. 2016?
Qasper NLP Q&A
Example input
Which retrieval system was used 
for the baselines?
Figure 4: We apply iterated decomposition to three real-world case studies: Extracting placebos from academic papers
about randomized controlled trials, extracting participant ﬂow, and NLP question-answering. The tasks are part of our
work on automated literature review for the AI Research Assistant Elicit.
with hundreds to thousands of LM calls. ICE provides a decorator that can be applied to any async function that should
be recorded, as well as utilities for recording all top-level async functions deﬁned in a given module, any custom values
of interest within a function, and the structure of each interpolated string. This data can then be visualized in a browser
for interactive exploration, as shown in Figure 3.
ICE provides three views into this data:
1. An expandable tree of function calls shown in order of execution
2. A sortable, ﬁlterable table of function calls and their custom values
3. A function call detail pane containing inputs, custom values, outputs, and source code
The tree can be browsed to a particular function call which can then be inspected in the detail pane. Often, it is helpful to
compare many calls to the same function, so ICE provides a dropdown menu of all recorded functions in the execution
trace and their respective call counts. If a function is selected, all calls to it will be shown in the table and highlighted in
the tree.
Since prompts are of particular interest in LM programs, the detail pane includes special support for rendering
interpolated strings (f-strings). Each interpolated value is shown in an alternating color, and the interpolating source
code is shown in a tooltip.
These functions all serve the purpose of understanding, analyzing, and debugging task decompositions, going from the
high-level structure of the call tree to seeing all functions of a particular type in the table, to seeing what exactly the
prompt was when a particular instance of that type generated an unexpected result.
3
Real-World Context of Case Studies
We used iterated decomposition and ICE to improve performance over simple baselines on three real-world case studies
we encountered in our work on Elicit (Figure 4).
A primary use case for Elicit is to ﬁnd out what the academic literature knows about a research question. Many of
Elicit’s users work in biomedicine, psychology, experimental economics, and other ﬁelds where randomized controlled
trials (RCTs) are an important source of evidence. When these users do literature review or metanalyses, they often
roughly follow this process:
1. What are the RCTs that are potentially most relevant to answering my research question?
2. For each RCT:
(a) Does this study actually address my research question?
(b) What is the risk of bias? Can I take the ﬁndings at face value, or do I need to discount it or ignore it?
3. What does the aggregate of RCTs, weighted by evidence quality, say about my research question?
7

Iterated Decomposition: Improving Science Q&A by Supervising Reasoning Processes
input
Did Shen et al. 2015 use a 
placebo in their experiment on 
using testimonial videos about 
drowning to reduce drowning 
risk? If so, what was it?
methods
Baseline: Select-and-generate 
like Elicit
Trial arm classification
Paragraph-wise aggregation
Rank & answer for description
output
Yes, a testimonial video about dog 
bites
Figure 5: In the placebo case study, the goal is to determine if a randomized controlled trial used a placebo, and if so,
what it was. We start with the select-and-generate baseline used in Elicit and improve it by ensembling classiﬁcation
based on trial arms and paragraphs.
The Placebo Classiﬁcation & Description task is designed to help researchers evaluate risk of bias. Information about
the placebo helps researchers assess the risk of bias in the study and decide how much to trust the results – comparing
an intervention to a placebo control is usually stronger evidence than comparing to a no-treatment control, especially if
the placebo successfully blinded the participants.
The ﬁrst step of the Participant Flow in RCTs task is to identify the trials and trial arms within each study. This helps
the user understand what the researchers did in the study, to determine whether it addresses their research question.
The second step, evaluating participant adherence to an intervention, helps the researcher assess risk of bias and
contextualize the study’s ﬁndings: Was a small effect driven by poor adherence to the treatment?
These tasks represent a much broader class of tasks in Elicit: answering questions about papers. Elicit currently supports
about 20 pre-speciﬁed questions, but also allows users to enter their own questions. Ultimately, we want to ﬁnd highly
generalizable strategies to improve performance. The QASPER NLP Q&A task tests this by generalizing the participant
ﬂow decomposition to a different domain.
4
Case Study: Placebo Classiﬁcation & Description
In this case study, we focus on domain-speciﬁc decompositions. Through iteration on the classiﬁcation and description
steps, accuracy of the generated placebo description improved from 25% to 65% on a held-out test set.
4.1
Setup
Given the full text of an RCT, the task is to answer “Did this RCT use a placebo?” (classiﬁcation) and “If so, what was
it?” (description). For both classiﬁcation and description we ﬁnd strong agreement among human raters.
Appendix 9.5.1 has a detailed description of the task. Table 9.5.2 in the Appendix shows examples of the most relevant
quotations from two papers with corresponding classiﬁcations and descriptions.
4.2
Iterations
4.2.1
Baseline: Select-and-generate like Elicit
The baseline is the “select-then-generate” algorithm currently deployed for paper question-answering in Elicit. Elicit
uses monoT54 to rank paragraphs from the paper against the question (Lin et al., 2021). The top-ranking paragraph is
fed to text-davinci-002 with the following prompt:
Answer the question "{{ question}} " based on the excerpt from a research paper.
Try to answer, but say "The answer to the question is not mentioned in the excerpt" if you
don't know how to answer.
Include everything that the paper excerpt has to say about the answer. Make sure everything you
say is supported by the excerpt.
The excerpt may cite other papers; answer about the paper you're reading the excerpt from, not
the papers that it cites.
Answer in one phrase or sentence:
4https://huggingface.co/castorini/monot5-base-msmarco-10k
8

Iterated Decomposition: Improving Science Q&A by Supervising Reasoning Processes
Paper title: {{ title}}
Paper excerpt: {{ paragraph}}
Question: {{ question}}
Answer:
On a held-out test set, this approach has 71% accuracy for classiﬁcation, 25% for description (Table 2).
4.2.2
Improving classiﬁcation
Diagnosis
For each of the 14 trials that the baseline classiﬁed incorrectly, there was in fact a placebo. In all cases, the selection
step failed to ﬁnd the part of the paper that most clearly stated that there was a placebo. For 10/14 trials, selection found
no evidence that there was a placebo. For the remaining 4/14 trials, selection found some mention of the placebo but
not a full description, then generation failed to conclude that there was a placebo (see Appendix 9.5.3 for examples).
To improve classiﬁcation, we needed a way to more robustly ﬁnd evidence that there was a placebo without introducing
false positives.
Solution
We created a decomposition that mirrors our own reasoning process for determining placebo classiﬁcation and
description. When we read the papers in our validation set, we noticed two things: First, almost all papers clearly
describe their trial arms. Then, if there was a placebo in the study, one of the arms will usually be clearly identiﬁed as
the placebo arm. So, we identify and describe each trial arm and classify whether any of the arms is a placebo. Second,
often many paragraphs in the paper provide evidence about whether the paper used a placebo, and sometimes this
evidence is contradictory. So, we could check what each paragraph tells us about whether the paper used a placebo,
then aggregate those answers.
In outline, the decomposition looks like this:
1. Classify based on trial arms
(a) What were the trial arms?
i. Rank paragraphs by relevance to this question through pairwise comparisons
ii. Answer based on the most relevant paragraphs
(b) Describe each trial arm: Rank and Answer
(c) Do any of the arms look like placebos?
(d) If so, could participants tell which arm they were in? (If so, there’s not really a placebo.)
2. Classify based on each paragraph
(a) Was there a placebo, according to each paragraph?
(b) Aggregate answers from paragraphs
3. Ensemble the classiﬁcation based on trial arms and paragraphs
Appendix 9.5.4 shows the full decomposition.
Results
This approach substantially improves on the baseline (71% correct →98%; p=0.0004), achieving near-perfect perfor-
mance (Table 2).
Reviewing the execution traces in ICE showed that the improved performance is almost entirely due to answering
based on each paragraph, not due to answering based on trial arms. Whenever the arms-based classiﬁcation tentatively
classiﬁed one of the trial arms as a placebo, it also found that participants might be able to tell which arm they were in,
and so it ultimately said that it was unclear whether there was a placebo.
4.2.3
Improving description
Diagnosis
14 of the 15 trials where the baseline failed to describe the placebo correctly are ones that it failed to classify correctly.
The baseline does not even attempt to describe the placebo if the classiﬁcation is “no placebo”, so it fails all of these by
9

Iterated Decomposition: Improving Science Q&A by Supervising Reasoning Processes
Method
Classiﬁcation (n=48)
Description (n=20)
Elicit select-then-generate baseline
71%
25%
Select-then-generate with “not mentioned" perplexity selection
65%
10%
Stuff paper in prompt
69%
30%
Final decomposition
98%
65%
Keyword decision tree
94%
10%
Table 2: Through iteration on the task decomposition, accuracy of the placebo classiﬁcation improved from 71% to
98% and description accuracy improved from 25% to 65%, both on a held-out test set.
construction. However, in each of these cases selection failed to ﬁnd the excerpts needed for description, so any attempt
at description would have failed.
Solution
We noticed that the information required to describe the placebo is often dispersed throughout the paper. So, we rank the
most relevant paragraphs in the paper and then use them to generate an answer. We re-use the same Rank and Answer
technique that we used for classiﬁcation. This generalizable subtask decomposition works well for both purposes.
Results
This approach results in a big improvement on the Elicit baseline (25% correct →65%; p = 0.025—see Table 2).
4.2.4
A keyword baseline
The strong paragraph-based classiﬁcation results raise the question whether can we encode our understanding of how to
ﬁgure out whether a trial used a placebo in a much simpler algorithm.
We created a simple regex keyword-matching algorithm:
1. Classify as no placebo if the paper contains words like "open-label"
2. Then classify as placebo is the paper contains words like "placebo", and take the ﬁrst matching sentence as a
description
3. Then classify as no placebo if none of these words are present
This algorithm does about as well as our task decomposition on classiﬁcation. However, a regex keyword approach
doesn’t generalize to harder and more ambiguous tasks—for example, adherence is discussed using a variety of
wordings, so keywords don’t help as much to select relevant passages (Appendix 9.6.2).
5
Case Study: Participant Flow in Randomized Controlled Trials
In this case study, we mostly focused on simple generalizable decompositions for long-form question-answering.
Through iteration on the selection and generation steps, accuracy on all subtasks improved substantially on a held-out
test set: Extracting experiments improved from 40% to 70%, trial arms from 55% to 86%, and adherence from 53% to
70%.
5.1
Setup
Randomized controlled trials often include a standardized diagram that helps the reader understand what happened in
a given trial: How did participants journey through the study, from enrollment to ﬁnal analysis? These diagrams are
called CONSORT diagrams (see Appendix 9.6.1 for an example). In our experience, they appear in about half of recent
RCTs are very often incomplete. If we could generate complete CONSORT diagrams for all RCTs, we could provide
valuable information to readers.
In this case study we consider a limited version of this task: We name the trials in the paper, the arms in each trial, and
describe the participant adherence rate for each arm. Figure 6 shows an example.
10

Iterated Decomposition: Improving Science Q&A by Supervising Reasoning Processes
input
What were the experiments, trial 
arms, and adherence for each 
arm in Bloom et al. 2016?
methods
Baseline: Select-and-generate like 
Elicit
Improving selection
Fine-tuned classifiers
Task-specific prompting
Zero-shot perplexity classifier
Pruning
Improving generation
Decontextualization
Auto-few-shot demonstrations
output
Experiments
Fall experiment
Arms
Park walking
Adherence: 72% of the 
participants in the 
intervention groups 
engaged in relaxation or 
park walking during their 
lunch break at least 8 times. 
On average, they engaged 
in relaxation/park walking 
8.6 out of 10 times during 
the intervention period.
Relaxation exercises
Adherence: same as for 
park walking
Control
Adherence: not mentioned
Spring experiment
Arms
Park walking
Adherence: 76% of the 
participants in the 
intervention groups 
engaged in relaxation or 
park walking during their 
lunch break at least 8 times. 
On average, they engaged 
in relaxation/park walking 
8.5 out of 10 times during 
the intervention period.
Relaxation exercises
Adherence: same as for 
park walking
Control
Adherence: not mentioned
Figure 6: In the participant ﬂow case study, the goal is to analyze a randomized controlled trial and extract the
experiments, the arms for each experiment, and the adherence rate for each arm. Starting again from the Elicit
select-and-generate baseline, we implemented domain-agnostic improvements to both selection and generation.
5.2
Evaluation
Experiments and arms are relatively easy to evaluate—we can check whether each experiment/arm from the gold
standard is represented and whether there are any additional ones that should not be there.
Adherence tends to require a narrative answer, and to be more subjective. This means that it may beneﬁt more from a
nuanced decomposition, and approaches that work well for adherence may generalize better to other fuzzy tasks.
Each arm has an adherence answer, so there are a total of 135 adherence answers in our test set. Often, no information
about adherence is available in the text of the paper—information about adherence is only available for 56/135 arms
(41%) in our test set. So the adherence task is substantially a classiﬁcation task (adherence mentioned vs. not mentioned).
5.3
Iterations
5.3.1
Baseline: Select-and-generate like Elicit
The baseline is the same “select-then-generate” approach used for general paper question-answering in Elicit as
described above in Section 4.2.1. This is a reasonably strong baseline, scoring 53% on the adherence subtask.
Diagnosis
For adherence, 80% of errors were false negatives, i.e. saying that adherence was not mentioned when it in fact was
(see Table 5). Further, all (51/51) of these false negatives resulted from errors at the selection stage—the answer really
was not mentioned in the top-1 paragraph from the monoT5 ranker. By using an oracle for selection with the same
generation approach, accuracy on the adherence task rose to 77%. So, the baseline fails primarily by failing to make
good use of the long context of the paper. For this reason, we started by iterating on selection.
5.3.2
Improving selection
Finetuned classiﬁers
Because our research is aimed at generalizable approaches, we restricted any ﬁnetuning to approaches that were either
very sample-efﬁcient (so little labeling effort would be needed to adapt the approach to new tasks) or very general. We
11

Iterated Decomposition: Improving Science Q&A by Supervising Reasoning Processes
evaluated small dataset and machine-in-the-loop labeling approaches, favoring approaches using at most a few hours of
subject matter expert labeling effort.
We adapted the approach from Liu et al. (2022) to ﬁne tune classiﬁers for text classiﬁcation subtasks. This approach
combines low-rank adaptation (scaling selected activations by learned vectors) with additional regularization terms in
the loss and hyperparameters the authors found to generalize well. This combination enables (a) a very small set of
ﬁnetuned weights, enabling multiple ﬁnetuned tasks to share a single model backbone at inference time, and (b) true
low-data ﬁnetuning, since the approach prescribes hyperparameters, thus obviating the need for separate training and
validation sets.
Liu et al. (2022) suggest that their approach works well with as few as 20 examples. bootstrapped to a larger number of
positive examples and more than 20 "hard negative" examples using weak models: For our tasks, most paragraphs are
not relevant to answering a given question, and it is time-consuming and expensive to collect even a moderate amount
of positive examples by hand. We ensembled multiple weak classiﬁers such as monoT5, BART-based classiﬁers, and
T0-3B to identify positive examples from thousands of papers, then had experts moderate the examples identiﬁed by
all the weak classiﬁers as answering the question, leaving in any negatives from this approach as “hard negatives”.
Intuitively, we would expect that this would provide an outsized number of “easy positives” (from the ensemble
consensus) and “hard negatives” (false positives from the ensemble consensus, as corrected by experts). Although we
would expect this approach to have a difﬁcult time identifying “hard positives”, in practice it created a dataset that
worked very well in concert with T-few ﬁnetuning, bringing performance on a holdout set on the selection subtask for
adherence from 72% before ﬁnetuning to 94% accuracy after.
Using T0-3B and T0pp (11B parameters) as base models, we ﬁnetuned using the T-Few approach. We found that the
models generalized better when we left zero-shot prompts in our ﬁnetuning data, which can be interpreted as a form of
regularization (in this example, the decoder answer choices are yes and no):
Context: {{ paragraph}}
Section: {{ section}}
Answer yes if the following sentence is about how many participants in the study complied with
the study's protocol, had to drop out, or withdrew; answer no if it is about something else,
such as the study's design, sampling strategy, or results.
Sentence: {{ sentence}}
Answer:
Many failures to get the right answer using ﬁnetuned classiﬁers at the selection stage were rooted in false negatives
from the classiﬁer (for 67% of failures in the development set with n = 9, the classiﬁer missed the gold standard
excerpts), and the generation stage was somewhat robust to “distractors” caused by lower precision. We therefore
explored variations on this technique to favor recall. For instance, we explored classifying sentences (while including the
paragraph as context), then, at inference time, classifying a paragraph as positive if any of its sentences were classiﬁed
as positive. We also tried ﬁnetuning with multiple zero-shot prompt templates, then, at inference time, classifying a
paragraph as positive if it was classiﬁed as positive via any of the prompt templates.
On the adherence subtask, the ﬁnetuned classiﬁer signiﬁcantly outperformed the base monoT5 classiﬁer (paragraph
classiﬁcation F1 = 0.10 for Elicit top-1 approach versus F1 = 0.77 via T-Few ﬁnetuning of T0-3B).
Overall, while this approach led to signiﬁcant performance improvement, it also had downsides: It requires data and
training, and is less interpretable than some of the classiﬁcation approaches we explored later. In the future, we would
consider data-efﬁcient ﬁnetuning of classiﬁers where (a) the task was hard to specify but data was easy to collect or (b)
where the inference-time computational advantage of a smaller ﬁnetuned classiﬁer was needed.
Task-speciﬁc prompting
An alternative to ﬁnetuning is crafting prompts for speciﬁc subtasks. This reduces the data collection burden of
ﬁnetuning, requiring just a few examples, at the cost of involving a different sort of expertise in the craft of writing
effective prompts.
With text-davinci-002, we found that we could get considerable performance gains on speciﬁc subtasks by prompt
engineering. Naive zero-shot or few-shot instructions performed performed worse than “simulation” approaches where
the prompt emulated a genre of text that had certain desirable properties, such as containing correct mathematical
12

Iterated Decomposition: Improving Science Q&A by Supervising Reasoning Processes
reasoning. Appendix 9.6.4 shows an example of a prompt that frames a task as excerpts from a (nonexistent) textbook
on evaluating scientiﬁc papers. Appendix 9.6.5 shows a prompt that simulates a StatsExchange post.
Because we wanted to focus on general-purpose decompositions in this case study, and because we expect simulation-
based approaches to be less necessary with future instruction-tuned models, we did not evaluate this line of approaches
systematically.
Zero-shot perplexity classiﬁer
Ideally, we could improve selection performance over the baseline monoT5 classiﬁer with an approach that requires
neither substantial data collection nor task-speciﬁc prompt engineering.
Inspired by the relative strength of the “generation” stage of the baseline approach, we implemented a zero-shot
perplexity-based cross-encoder using text-davinci-002 that performed remarkably well across many questions,
outperforming the monoT5 classiﬁer and competitive with the T-Few low-rank ﬁnetuning.
In this paragraph classiﬁcation approach, we used the following prompt with text-davinci-002, echoing the log
probs back from the OpenAI API in order to measure perplexity:
Answer the question "{{ question}} " based on the excerpt from a research paper. Try to answer,
but say "The answer to the question is not mentioned in the excerpt" if you don't know how to
answer. Include everything that the paper excerpt has to say about the answer. Make sure
everything you say is supported by the excerpt. The excerpt may cite other papers; answer about
the paper you're reading the excerpt from, not the papers that it cites. Answer in one phrase
or sentence:
Paper excerpt: {{ paragraph}}
Question: {{ question}}
Answer: The answer to the question is not mentioned in the excerpt
We then scored paragraphs by the inverse perplexity of the tokens X : {(xi=1, . . . , xt)} in the sequence “The answer to
the question is not mentioned in the excerpt”:
exp
 
1
t
t
X
i=1
log pθ(xi|x<i)
!
(1)
We studied different uses of these scores. In the simplest approach using this perplexity-based method, we also generated
the answer using this prompt, based on the paragraph with the highest perplexity for the “not mentioned” completion.
This closely mimics the structure of the question-answering method used in Elicit, with the text-davinci-002
perplexity-based ranker replacing the monoT5 ranker.
The text-davinci-002 perplexity approach seemed more robust to subtle but important semantic differences than the
monoT5 ranker. For example, on the adherence task, the monoT5 top-1 paragraph was often some paragraph discussing
adherence but not with respect to the speciﬁc trial arm in question. In many cases, the text-davinci-002 perplexity
approach correctly scored these “about adherence but not the right trial arm” paragraphs below results paragraphs about
the correct trial arm that did not discuss adherence rates as explicitly but alluded to information about adherence for
that arm.
Further, we found that it was generally better to include multiple paragraphs at the answering stage, in the order of the
original paper. We adapted the perplexity top-1 approach into a classiﬁcation approach by choosing a classiﬁcation
threshold empirically, slightly favoring recall over precision; the perplexity threshold adapted reasonably well across
different questions, so we used the same threshold across all tasks. As expected, including multiple paragraphs above a
threshold helped compensate for remaining weaknesses in the ranker, and, in some cases, multiple paragraphs were
required to generate a complete answer. Including multiple paragraphs instead of one paragraph mostly addressed cases
where the top-1 approach incorrectly answered “not mentioned”.
This zero-shot classiﬁcation approach was remarkably strong for the “select” stage of our “select-then-generate”
approaches, improving paragraph classiﬁcation recall over the top-1 monoT5 Elicit baseline from 0.09 to 0.76 on the
adherence task. It is zero-shot and requires no additional data (with the exception of needing data to set a classiﬁcation
threshold once across all tasks). The approach also offers a built-in interpretability beneﬁt, in that we can look at the
most likely completion that is not “The answer to the question is not mentioned in the excerpt” to understand what the
model found relevant in each paragraph.
13

Iterated Decomposition: Improving Science Q&A by Supervising Reasoning Processes
Method
Experiments
(n=50)
Arms
(n=50)
Adherence
(n=135)
Elicit select-then-generate baseline
40%
55%
53%
+ “not mentioned" perplexity selection
55%
78%
61%
+ “not mentioned" perplexity selection + prune
60%
70%
54%
+ “not mentioned" perplexity selection + auto-few-shot selection
65%
72%
55%
+ “not mentioned" perplexity selection + auto-few-shot selection + prune
55%
56%
58%
+ “not mentioned" perplexity selection + auto-few-shot generation
70%
86%
70%
+ “not mentioned" perplexity selection + decontextualize
65%
75%
54%
Table 3: Through iteration on the participant ﬂow decomposition, accuracy at extracting experiments improved from
40% to 70%, trial arms from 55% to 86%, and adherence from 53% to 70%, all on a held-out test set.
This approach also offers both classiﬁcation and ranking via a natural interpretation and approach, where the ranks
are reasonably well-calibrated; this means that, for instance, if we ﬁnd that we have too many paragraphs to ﬁt into
the model’s context window at the answering stage, we can with reasonable conﬁdence simply remove lower-ranked
paragraphs, without additional work.
Pruning
Many implementations of the “select” stage both look at each paragraph independently and are tuned to slightly favor
recall over precision. Conceptually, this may lead to a situation where we select redundant information or where, once
we see all selected candidates together, it becomes clearer which ones contain the answer. Therefore, we tested a
“pruning” step that looked at all paragraphs selected by the previous selection stage, in paper order, then reselected the
paragraphs needed to answer the question.
Despite testing chain-of-thought and few-shot variants of this stage, our results here were only moderately promising.
We were unable to substantially improve bottom line accuracy by adding this stage, and we were unable to improve
paragraph classiﬁcation precision without substantially hurting recall. For the experiments task, pruning improved
precision from 0.14 to 0.29 while reducing recall from 0.77 to 0.54, increasing paragraph classiﬁcation F1 from 0.24 to
0.38. This led to an improvement in ﬁnal answer accuracy from 0.55 to 0.6. Further iteration on the implementation of
this stage may yield better results.
5.3.3
Improving generation
Improving the “select” stage of the “select-then-generate” approach boosted performance on the participant ﬂow tasks.
However, the ICE traces revealed that the “generate” stage, which answers the question given the most relevant excerpts,
also made interesting errors: Even with an oracle for selection, the baseline generation step only achieved 77% accuracy
on the adherence task.
Error analysis
We identiﬁed some common errors in the generation stage when the selection stage had high recall.
Some errors came from lack of context in the selected paragraphs. They answered the question, but without the
surrounding text, the answer was unclear. This happened often on the arms task: the selected paragraphs mentioned the
trial arms, but not the corresponding trial or the experimental methodology, and so it was difﬁcult to correctly describe
the trial arms.
More often, the desired answer style and detail were unclear, especially for the adherence task. For example, some
papers said “adherence was generally good” and gave numerical details, but the generation stage only included the
former, not realizing the latter were also important.
Below we discuss two approaches we tried to reduce these errors.
14

Iterated Decomposition: Improving Science Q&A by Supervising Reasoning Processes
Decontextualization
The select-then-generate pipeline may struggle to fully answer questions that require resolving coreferences or under-
standing context from surrounding text. To address this, we experimented with a decontextualization stage, inspired by
Choi et al. (2021), that operates on the paper and adds context from previous paragraphs in square brackets. The goal is
to make paragraphs more self-contained and easier to use for generation. We used an autoregressive model with a ﬁxed
few-shot prompt (see Appendix 9.6.6) based on Eisenstein et al. (2022) to perform decontextualization. We did not
systematically evaluate the accuracy or relevance of the added context, but we spot-checked some examples using ICE.
Decontextualization improved generation performance on some tasks, but not all. It helped the model identify the
experiments and arms of the trials, as the added context clariﬁed the methodology and the relevance of the selection.
However, it did not help much with the adherence task, as most adherence information was already self-contained
and the added context introduced more noise and confusion. The performance using decontextualized paragraphs as
inputs to the generation stage was 0.65 for experiments and 0.75 for arms, compared to 0.40 and 0.55 for the baselines,
respectively. For adherence, it was 0.54, barely above the baseline of 0.53.
Auto-generated “demonstrations”
We studied the use of demonstrations to address a failure mode of the generation stage: producing answers with
insufﬁcient detail or inappropriate style. Demonstrations are examples of question-answering tasks with the same shape:
(a) a question, (b) a text, (c) excerpts from that text that support an answer, and (d) an answer. Unlike other methods
that encode expert knowledge, such as the placebo decomposition or the placebo keyword decision tree algorithm,
demonstrations do not require any algorithm-speciﬁc or language-model-speciﬁc work from the expert. The expert
simply gives examples of applying their expertise.
We generated few-shot prompts from expert demonstrations (gold standards) by prepending the existing perplexity
selection prompt with multiple ﬁlled examples. We either used only positive demonstrations, which included a
supporting paragraph and an expert’s handwritten answer based on that paragraph, or mixed positive and negative
demonstrations, which assumed that unmarked paragraphs did not answer the question. This assumption was often
false, so we found it better to use only positive examples in the few-shot demonstration prompts.
Across all tasks, the few-shot prompts derived from demonstrations improved the accuracy of generation over the
zero-shot approach, even with randomly sampled examples from the development set. The improvement was larger
for harder tasks or tasks that beneﬁted from implicit background knowledge. The demonstrations often helped by
showing the expected types of answers for the task, such as including numerical detail where available. For example,
for the adherence task, the zero-shot approach produced an incorrect answer like “The paper says that both groups had
good compliance with all products in each nursing home”, while the few-shot approach via demonstrations produced a
correct answer like “Compliance with oral supplementation was good, and daily intake averaged about 400 kcal”. The
few-shot approach via demonstrations increased the ﬁnal answer accuracy from 0.53 to 0.70 overall for this task.
5.3.4
Combined improvements
The zero-shot perplexity classiﬁer and few-shot answering via “demonstrations” add up to substantial improvements
over the Elicit baseline (e.g. 53% correct →70% for adherence, p=0.0065; see Table 3). These techniques vastly reduce
the number of false negatives for the adherence task (error analysis in Appendix 9.6.3).
6
Case Study: QASPER NLP question answering
We primarily iterated on decompositions using the tasks above. However, we also wanted to explore how well these
task decompositions generalized to other domains and questions, so we tested them on a subset of the QASPER dataset,
a question-answering dataset of 5,049 questions and answers written by NLP practitioners, covering 1,585 NLP papers
(Dasigi et al., 2021). By using the ﬁnal decomposition for participant ﬂow, accuracy at answering NLP questions on the
QASPER dataset improved from 38% to 69%.
6.1
Setup
Answers to QASPER questions are in one of three formats: yes/no, excerpts from the text, or freeform answers. In the
original QASPER paper and benchmark, the authors measured F1 scores of generated answers versus the expert answers.
5Fisher’s exact test, considering each adherence answer to be independent. In reality the answers are clustered by trial and paper,
so the true p-value is somewhat higher.
15

Iterated Decomposition: Improving Science Q&A by Supervising Reasoning Processes
input
Which retrieval system was used 
for the baselines?
methods
Baseline: Select-and-generate like 
Elicit
Improving selection
Zero-shot perplexity classifier
Pruning
Improving generation
Auto-few-shot demonstrations
output
The dataset comes with a ranked set of relevant 
documents. Hence the baselines do not use a 
retrieval system.
Figure 7: In the QASPER case study, the goal is to answer questions about NLP papers. QASPER is a dataset of 5049
information-seeking questions asked by regular readers of NLP papers and answered by separate NLP experts. Apart
from ﬁnetuning we explored the same methods as for participant ﬂow to learn how they generalize.
Method
Accuracy
F1
Elicit select-then-generate baseline
38%
15%
+ “not mentioned” perplexity selection
55%
21%
+ “not mentioned” perplexity selection + prune
53%
20%
+ “not mentioned” perplexity selection + auto-few-shot generation
69%
32%
Table 4: Results for the QASPER NLP question-answering task (n=100). The ordering of methods by performance is
the same as for the participant ﬂow case study, providing some evidence of generality for decompositions.
Because we care about correctness of answers, not whether they literally match expert wording, we focused instead on
a binary assessment of whether the generated answer was semantically equivalent to the expert answers. For example, a
yes-no answer of “yes” versus a generated answer of “true” would have F1 = 0, but we would rate it as correct. For
completeness, we also measure and report F1 scores, but we did not adapt decompositions to maximize F1.
To keep the task and assessments manageable but meaningful, we sampled 100 questions from QASPER to test both
baselines and decompositions that performed substantially better than baselines on the participant ﬂow tasks. We
performed light data cleaning before testing, removing special tokens indicating cross-references with natural language
equivalents (e.g., converting ‘BIBREF0’ to ‘[1]’) and, as in the original QASPER paper, omitting questions that required
tables or ﬁgures to answer.
6.2
Iterations
We tested both our select-then-generate baselines and our best-performing decompositions (perplexity selection, with
and without few-shot examples from demonstrations) on a sample of QASPER questions. Table 4 shows the results.
We found that, of the approaches we tested, the best approach on the participant ﬂow questions was also the best
approach on QASPER. This approach is using a perplexity classiﬁer followed by a few-shot prompt generated from
demonstrations (in this case just other, randomly selected QASPER question-supporting paragraph-answer tuples) and
scored 69% accuracy on our sample. This approach signiﬁcantly outperformed both the baseline approach of using only
the top-1 paragraph from the classiﬁer, then generating the answer (38%) and using the Elicit-like perplexity classiﬁer
then generating without few-shot demonstrations (55%). These ﬁndings provide evidence that this decomposition is
somewhat robust to domain transfer.
7
Conclusion
We have described iterated decomposition, a human-in-the-loop workﬂow for process supervision. We are using
this workﬂow as part of our work on Elicit, the AI Research Assistant. To support this workﬂow, we built ICE, an
open-source debugger for language model programs.
16

Iterated Decomposition: Improving Science Q&A by Supervising Reasoning Processes
Over time, we expect that similar workﬂows will be run in a mostly or fully automated fashion, with LMs creating the
decompositions, doing error analysis, and adapting the programs. Based on our experience with the case studies, the
work needed to get there looks like this:
1. Increased iteration speed. Before full automation, we expect to be in the world where human programmers can
automate novel complex tasks by improving a task decomposition with many iterations per day.
2. Complex decompositions. Essentially all decompositions in prior work and to some extent also in our case
studies are fairly simple, even when they make hundreds of language model calls.
3. To accomplish 1 and 2, more sophisticated developer tools that make it faster to go from overall result to the
sources of errors, to proposals for how to address them.
4. Making the dev tools in 3 machine-accessible so that the diagnosis and improvement steps can be learned by
LMs.
5. Reducing the boundary between task design and execution, so that decomposition, debugging, and iteration
can happen at runtime as models execute complex tasks.
6. Distillation and other ways to reduce cost of complex decompositions, so that decompositions are more
cost-competitive with end-to-end execution.
Our hope is that we can develop sufﬁcient infrastructure for scalable process supervision so that humans can always in-
principle understand how models are solving complex tasks even if eventually almost all decomposition and supervision
is done by machines.
17

Iterated Decomposition: Improving Science Q&A by Supervising Reasoning Processes
8
