LAREX – A semi-automatic open-source Tool for Layout 
Analysis and Region Extraction on Early Printed Books 
Christian Reul 
University of Würzburg 
Am Hubland 
D-97074 Würzburg 

wuerzburg.de 
Uwe Springmann 
LMU Munich 
Oettingenstraße 67 
D-80538 München 

muenchen.de 
Frank Puppe 
University of Würzburg 
Am Hubland 
D-97074 Würzburg 

wuerzburg.de 
 
ABSTRACT 
A semi-automatic open-source tool for layout analysis on early 
printed books is presented. LAREX uses a rule based connected 
components approach which is very fast, easily comprehensible for 
the user and allows an intuitive manual correction if necessary. The 
PageXML format is used to support integration into existing OCR 
workflows. Evaluations showed that LAREX provides an efficient 
and flexible way to segment pages of early printed books. 
Categories and Subject Descriptors 
Applied computing: document management and text processing – 
document analysis, optical character recognition. 
General Terms 
Algorithms, Experimentation, Human Factors, Performance 
Keywords 
Layout Analysis, Segmentation, Early Printed Books 
1. INTRODUCTION 
With the large amount of historical documents that have become 
available as scanned images in recent years, the run is now open to 
unlock these heritage data and make them available as fully 
electronic, machine-actionable research data. Several hurdles must 
be overcome. The first sub goal is to achieve a high-quality 
recognition on printed (and manuscript) text with characteristics 
(unusual glyphs, fonts, background noise etc.) completely different 
to our modern printings on which existing Optical Character 
Recognition (OCR) engines have been trained. This has recently 
been achieved by trained recurrent neural networks with LSTM 
architecture (see [1] and [2] for printed books with character 
recognition rates above 95% and [3] for manuscripts). However, a 
workflow geared at high-volume throughput relies on largely 
automatic preprocessing methods for the layout analysis task, i.e. 
the segmentation of pages into text and non-text zones, preferably 
with semantic meaning (running text, heading, page number, 
marginalia, etc.). Text zones are further processed and subject to a 
subsequent OCR step yielding electronic text. If manual work is 
necessary to obtain a satisfactory segmentation, ease and efficiency 
is crucial. A third necessary task is the annotation of OCR results 
in the post correction phase, comprising both error correction and 
the normalization of the often highly variable historical spelling. 
In the following, we present a tool for the difficult page layout 
analysis task, which is currently the biggest obstacles for a large-
scale application of OCR methods to digital images of historical 
                                                                
1 https://github.com/chreul/LAREX 
2 http://www.frakturschrift.com/en:start 
3 https://transkribus.eu/Transkribus/ 
documents. A fast segmentation allowing quick interactive steps to 
tune global parameters is essential to enable a subsequent automatic 
turnaround of a whole book, whose single pages can afterwards be 
corrected individually if needed. Therefore, our semi-automatic 
approach allows a quick preprocessing compared to purely manual 
methods and is  available1 under an open-source license to enable 
the definition of a sustainable, fully open-source OCR workflow. 
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: After a short 
overview of related work in chapter 2 the functionality of LAREX 
is described in chapter 3. During the evaluation in chapter 4 the  
tool is tested in two different scenarios and its performance is 
measured against Aletheia’s. The obtained results are discussed in 
chapter 5 and chapter 6 concludes the paper. 
2. RELATED WORK 
Given our focus on open-source tools and workflows, it is sensible 
to divide existing tools into open-source and proprietary software. 
Among proprietary tools the ABBYY2 OCR products (Finereader 
and Recognition Server) define the state of the art of available 
automatic products with excellent results on a wide variety of 
layouts. The downside is that they cannot be adapted by the end 
user. The company does not have any interest in the relatively low 
volume of historical documents and, less importantly but maybe 
still of interest, they have a fee assigned. As with any proprietary 
product long term availability or even adherence to data standards 
is not guaranteed. 
ABBYY is also the underlying engine for automatic preprocessing 
for the Transkribus3 cross-platform Java tool which is itself open-
source, but not the server software behind it. 
Aletheia4 (see [4]) is a highly functional proprietary product from 
PRIMA research group at the University of Salford. It is Windows 
only and uses Tesseract for automatic preprocessing. Its manual 
features are very extensive but because of its closed-source nature 
there is no community contribution except by feature request, no 
guaranteed long term availability and it comes with a fee. 
The open-source OCR engine Tesseract5 has some built-in analysis 
routines, but is significantly less successful than ABBYY. It is used 
by Aletheia and also by our own LAREX tool for line segmentation 
(see section 3.4). The OCR engine OCRopus6 (also open-source) is 
very capable at segmenting lines of text regions, but offers almost 
no capability of text/non-text region detection. 
The SCRIBO module of the OLENA platform (see [5]) is an open-
source layout analysis framework which finished second at the 
4 http://www.primaresearch.org/tools/Aletheia 
5 https://github.com/tesseract-ocr/tesseract 
6 https://github.com/tmbdev/ocropy 

2011 competition on historical book recognition (see [6]). While it 
clearly has its strengths because of its modularity and flexibility, it 
does not seem to be suited for the needs of the average user who is 
looking for a stand-alone tool which can be used right away. 
Agora is an open-source software developed in the PARADIIT 
project7 of the University of Tours (see [7]). Just like LAREX’ it is 
based on a connected components approach. The software is 
Windows only and the project appears to be currently dormant. 
Finally, Gupta et al. [8] proposed a method that utilizes Tesseract’s 
automatic segmentation in order to perform a text/noise 
classification on the obtained word bounding boxes. This 
information is then used to estimate a document’s overall quality 
and increase the OCR accuracy. Despite not performing a layout 
analysis in the proper sense, this area is still highly relevant for the 
mass digitization of historical documents. As it is part of eMOP8 
the produced tool has to be free or open-source. 
We conclude that an open-source tool that is well documented, 
adaptable und easily usable is very much lacking and hampering 
the progress of the OCR of historical books. 
3. LAREX 
The goal of the LAREX (Layout Analysis and Region Extraction) 
tool currently under development at the University of Würzburg is 
to support end users in the segmentation and classification of 
regions in images. In this paper, we discuss its application for 
analysis of early printed books.  
The segmentation procedure is user-driven and uses a connected 
components approach. It is based on two main assumptions: First, 
it starts from the premise that related characters, words and text 
lines usually are closer to each other than unrelated ones. Second, 
it expects most pages within the same book to have similar layouts 
or at least to belong to one of only a few layout categories. 
LAREX is not designed to be able to automatically segment any 
given document to perfection. In contrast, it aims to provide the 
user with a quick and easily comprehensible way to adapt to a given 
layout, get a segmentation suggestion and to manually correct it if 
necessary. Therefore, the correction operations should be as simple 
as possible and deliver an immediate feedback.  
3.1 
Overview 
The goal of the proposed approach is to detect and classify different 
regions on a scanned page (see Figure 1). 
 
Figure 1. Example input (left) and output (right) with eleven 
regions marked belonging to five different types. 
                                                                
7 https://sites.google.com/site/paradiitproject/home 
These regions are connected areas on a page like image, running 
text (paragraph), headings, marginalia, page numbers etc.. LAREX 
uses the type definitions of the PageXML format8 for denoting 
regions. 
The workflow for segmentation consists of the following main 
steps, illustrated in Figure 2: 
Input: Scanned page. 
Output: Classified segments as PageXML. 
1. 
Pre Processing: input → resized binary ([A in Figure 2]). 
1.1. Conversion to binary. 
1.2. Definition of a region of interest (optional). 
1.3. Resizing the image. 
2. 
Image detection by Region Growing ([A] → [B]). 
2.1. Region Growing: regions → larger regions (optional). 
2.2. Region Classification: image ↔ no image. 
3. 
Coarse text region detection. 
3.1. Region Growing: regions → larger regions ([C]). 
3.2. Region Classification using constraints on attributes of 
regions: regions → region types ([C] → [D][E]). 
3.3. Post-processing: pruning and fine tuning of region 
types. 
4. 
Manual amendments and text sub region classification 
(optional, see sections 3.3  and 3.4) ([E] → [F]). 
5. 
Conversion to output format. 
 
 
Figure 2. Workflow. A: binary, B: after image detection, C: 
after image removal and region growing, D: after text region 
classification (P: paragraph, M: marginalia, PN: page 
number), E: algorithm output, F: after user amendment. 
3.2 
Detailed Description of the Algorithm 
In this section the steps of the basic workflow are described. 
Optional manual adaptations and the more advanced text sub-
region detection are discussed separately in section 3.3 and 3.4. 
8 http://www.primaresearch.org/tools/PAGELibraries 

3.2.1 
Preprocessing 
LAREX accepts color, grayscale and binary images as input. 
However, the upcoming region growing and contour detection 
operations require the binary format. Therefore, a conversion is 
performed if necessary. Obviously, the resulting segmentation still 
corresponds to the original input image. The user can work on the 
entire binary image or specify a region of interest by drawing a 
rectangle, e.g. to exclude artefacts of the input image due to 
scanning. Everything outside the specified area is painted white and 
will not have any effect on the rest of the segmentation process. A 
region of interest can either be specified for a single page or be 
applied for the entire book. It can be adjusted at any time. The 
image is resized to a given resolution (default: 1600 pixels in 
height) in order to speed up the segmentation process and to 
normalize parameters like the upcoming dilation catchment areas 
or the required minimum area of the regions. 
3.2.2 
Image Detection 
Images are expected to have a certain minimum area and to either 
be very compact or to possess a border. First, a dilation operation 
is applied using small kernel values to prevent letters and words 
from merging as well. It may be imagined as a growing process 
during which black foreground pixels within a defined kernel grow 
together. All connected components bigger than the given image 
area threshold (default: 3000 pixels) are marked as images. For 
further processing either only the contours themselves or the 
straight or rotated bounding rectangles around them are removed 
from the image. 
3.2.3 
Coarse text region detection 
Afterwards, another dilation process with a bigger kernel than 
before takes place (step 3.1). Then in step 3.2, the newly emerged 
regions are assigned a type by enforcing several constraints. The 
constraints for type classification (Table 4) use the region attributes 
shown in Table 1, constants in Table 2 and functions in Table 3. 
Table 1. Region attributes. 
Attribute 
Description 
contour 
A list of points describing the outer contour of 
the region. 
rectangle 
The straight bounding rectangle of the contour. 
area 
Area of the contour (in pixel). 
max-
occurrence 
Maximum valid number of occurrences of a 
type on a page: {1, unbounded} 
priority-
position 
Preferred positions if max occurrence = 1: 
{top, bottom, left, right} 
Table 2. Constants. 
Constant 
Default 
minAreaParagraph 
2000 px 
minAreaMarginalia  
2000 px 
minAreaPageNumber 
500 px 
Table 3. Functions. 
Function 
Description 
>, <, =, … 
Returns true / false 
within(rectangle, 
rectangles) 
Returns true if rectangle is entirely 
covered by one of the rectangles. 
 
                                                                
9 Default case for marginalia: rectangle has to be located within 
the left or right 25% of the page. 
Table 4. Constraints of the default text types. 
Type 
Constraints 
paragraph 
region.area > minAreaParagraph 
marginalia 
region.area > minAreaMarginalia, 
within(region.rectangle, marginalia.rectangles)9 
page 
number 
region.area > minAreaPageNumber, 
within(region.rectangle, pageNumber.rectangles)10,  
max-occurrence = 1, priority-position = top 
Table 4 shows constraints of three region types: paragraph, 
marginalia and page number. Position constraints of different 
regions may overlap. For all types it is checked if the area of the 
region is bigger than the type-specific minimal area. If this is the 
case and if the bounding rectangle of the region is completely 
covered by the rectangle-position of the type, the region is 
considered a candidate for that type. During the initial classification 
step regions can be assigned several types. In the post processing 
step (3.3.) a type priority list is applied. The default order is first 
page number, second marginalia, and third paragraph. Each region 
that satisfied the constraints of two or more types is assigned to the 
type with the highest priority. In addition, it is possible to define 
the number of maximal occurrences on a page for each type. For 
example, usually there exists only one page number. Therefore, 
only the best fitting page number candidate is chosen and the others 
are either re-assigned to other types or dropped. Again, for this 
decision a priority list is used. In case of the page number the 
priority position is ‘top’, therefore, the topmost candidate is chosen. 
3.2.4 
Conversion to output format 
When the user is satisfied, the segmentation result can be stored as 
an XML file using the PageXML format. Thus, the segmentation 
result is recalculated to the true size of the input image. Afterwards 
the resulting file is placed within the same folder as the input using 
the same file name. 
3.3 
Manual Adaptions 
In many cases the default parameters will not be enough to obtain 
a satisfying segmentation result. In the following sections global 
and local operations to improve the results are shown. 
3.3.1 
Global Adjustments to the given Book 
Figure 3 shows an example outcome of the default setup consisting 
of four regions (image: green, can occur anywhere on the page; 
paragraph: red, anywhere; marginalia: yellow, left and right 25%; 
page number: cyan, top and bottom 25%). Obviously, there is still 
some work to be done. The initial was correctly detected as well as 
the page number. However, the marginalia regions got classified as 
paragraph, as their outer contour was not located entirely within the 
marginalia regions. Furthermore, there is a signature mark at the 
very bottom of the page. Lastly, the vertical spacing between text 
lines is relatively big, leading to the unwanted separation of text 
blocks. It is worth mentioning that the marginalia located at the 
bottom right is not classified as a page number, despite being in an 
eligible position. That is because by default the max occurrence 
value of the page number region is 1 and the priority position is top. 
The default setup can be easily adapted by only a few clicks. First, 
the page number position at the bottom is deleted and the upper one 
is slightly adjusted, as in this book page numbers always occur at 
the top center of the page. Furthermore, the marginalia regions have 
to be expanded towards the middle of the image. The dilation 
10 Default case for page number: rectangle has to be located within 
the top or bottom 25% of the page. 

parameters are slightly increased. Finally, another region of the 
type signature-mark (maroon) is added and located at the bottom 
center of the page. The settings can be saved and applied to the rest 
of the book as well as to other books with similar layouts. 
 
Figure 3. Result using the default (left) and slightly adjusted 
(right) parameters. 
3.3.2 
Local Manual Corrections 
For special cases the user can make amendments like adjustment of 
region parameters or the manual adaption of the obtained 
segmentation result by deleting segments, changing their type and 
splitting or merging them. For example, in Figure 3 the signature 
mark is connected to the bottom text block which is difficult to 
correct with global parameter optimization. There are several ways 
to deal with such problems (see Figure 4): The segments can be cut 
by drawing a line or a string of lines. The separated block gets 
automatically assigned the correct type if it is within the 
corresponding position. As an alternative, segments can be marked 
by drawing a rectangle or a polygon around them and assigning a 
type. This remains fixed for the entire segmentation process and is 
unaffected by other parameters. 
 
Figure 4. Three ways to influence the result directly (left: user 
action, right: resulting segmentation): by drawing lines (top), a 
rectangle (middle) or a polygon (bottom).  
3.4 
Text Sub-Region Segmentation 
Sometimes it is necessary to cut a detected text block along one or 
several of its lines, e. g. when a heading or a highlighted first line 
of a paragraph has to be cut from the rest of the text. This can be 
done by drawing a cut line. If a lot of line segmentation is needed, 
one can utilize Tesseracts page segmentation algorithm and 
manually correct rather than do it completely manually. 
3.4.1 
Locating the Lines 
To assure optimal line segmentation results the previously detected 
segments are processed separately. After cutting them from the 
original image, they are rotated into an upright position. If a 
segment is too small for Tesseract to predict the needed angle, the 
weighted average of the remaining segments is used. Now the line 
segmentation can take place. Afterwards, the resulting lines are 
rotated back into their original position. 
This process can be quite time consuming: During a test on an 
image of the size 5100 x 7800 pixels it took a PC (i7-6700) with 
3.40 GHz around 20 seconds to complete the line segmentation. 
Reducing the image resolution usually worsens the result 
significantly. Therefore, it is recommended to collect an arbitrary 
number of temporary segmentation results and then process all of 
them at once, for example during night time. The resulting line 
coordinates are stored in a separate PageXML file and 
automatically matched to the original segmentation result at 
runtime, as soon as the corresponding page is selected in the tool. 
An example output of the line segmentation can be seen in Figure 
5. Despite the heavy skewing of the image, the result is very 
precise. When the mouse cursor is moved over one of the block 
segments, the corresponding lines are displayed and the one 
directly under the cursor is marked as active. 
 
Figure 5. Example block (left) and line segmentation (right). 
3.4.2 
Putting the Line Segmentation to Use 
While the manual separation of a text block is a tedious task, it is 
much easier when using the text lines. After selecting a line with a 
mouse click the user can cut the underlying segment above or below 
the selected line. A third option is to change the type of the line. 
This automatically triggers both cuts. 
 
Figure 6. Example operational scenario for applying the line 
segmentation: segment (top left), detected lines (top right), 
extracted first line (bottom left), final result (bottom right). 
Figure 6 shows the line segmentation in action. In this particular 
book each chapter starts with a heading which looks like standard 
text but is slightly indented. It is followed by the first line of the 
paragraph which is printed in a bigger, more prominent font. The 
standard segmentation process recognizes a single block (top left), 
as the gaps around these special parts of the text are equal to the 
ones of the standard text. The task is to split these segments from 
the text and assign the correct types to them. This can be done by a 
few simple actions: After the line segmentation (top right) the first 
line of the paragraph is marked as the desired type (bottom left; 
blue) triggering the line cutting. Next, the heading is split from the 
text above and the resulting text block is marked as heading (bottom 
right; cyan). 

4. EVALUATION 
Due to its interactive design it would be misleading to compare 
LAREX to approaches by using evaluation metrics for fully auto-
matic tools. In addition, for an interactive tool the overall required 
time and user effort to achieve a satisfactory segmentation is 
important. Therefore, both the number of problems and the time 
needed to correct them were assessed. We report two evaluations: 
The first one with the standard tool and the second one with slight 
extensions for special requirements. Additional to the time 
exposure the OCR accuracy on the resulting text regions was 
compared to the one obtained by fully manual segmentation. 
4.1 
Evaluating the Standard Functionality 
The first evaluation was performed on ‘The Shyp of Folys’ (The 
Ship of Fools)11 as part of an effort to support the ‘Narragonien 
digital’ project12. The book consists of 570 pages and alternates 
between English and Latin text. Figure 7 shows the segmentation 
guidelines for this task: Images and initials have to be marked, 
while the ornaments around the image are supposed to be dropped. 
All text regions, marginalia, signature marks and page 
numbers/sheet titles have to be recorded. The image descriptions 
are supposed to be classified as normal text. 
 
Figure 7. Expected segmentation examples. 
The segmentation process was performed by a student research 
assistant of the Narragonien digital project who had some prior 
experience with LAREX but no background in computer science, 
image processing or layout analysis. In total, 378 corrections were 
performed on the first 200 of the 570 scanned pages (see Table 5). 
The vast majority of user actions consisted of the removal of 
unneeded regions like ornaments, stains or the bordures next to the 
main images. Not all corrections were due to real segmentation 
errors. A closer analysis showed that about half of the amendments 
became necessary due to additional requirements, initially not 
specified in the parameter setup. This included the removal of 
bordures next to images or of ornaments at the end of text blocks 
or lines. Furthermore, LAREX classified text blocks next to images 
(e.g. Figure 7, left) as marginalia whereas they are supposed to be 
running text. Instead of trying to optimize the parameter setup in 
order to cover all occurring special cases it is often more efficient 
to simply correct the respective annotations manually. 
                                                                
11 Translated by Alexander Barclay, 1509. 
Scans provided by the University Library of Würzburg. 
Table 5. Required user actions on 200 pages. 
Description 
# 
Effort 
Removing irrelevant regions  
161 
Right click 
Removing irrelevant images 
90 
Right click 
Type correction: 
marginalia → image description 
65 
Double click 
and type 
Cutting off signature-mark 
31 
Draw lines 
Type correction: 
paragraph → marginalia 
17 
Double click 
and type 
Combining text blocks 
10 
Rectangle 
and type 
Manual labeling of images 
2 
Rectangle 
and type 
Manual labeling of the page number 
2 
Rectangle 
and type 
Fortunately, the most frequent errors requiring individual adjust-
ments are most easily to correct. Almost two thirds of the applied 
corrections required only a single mouse click on top of the region 
to resolve the issue. Furthermore, close to 90% of the alternations 
can be done by either a single click or by a double click followed 
by a selection of the desired region type. The costlier corrections 
are rare requiring fitting lines, rectangles or polygons into the text. 
For the layout analysis of the entire book a total time expenditure 
of 2 hours and 18 minutes was recorded, including the time required 
for finding an optimal parameter set. Within the first 30 minutes 80 
scans were segmented. Subsequently, the number of processed 
pages per half hour rose to 112, 131 and 149. The last 98 scans were 
processed within 18 minutes (≙ 163 scans per 30 minutes). 
For comparison, a student research assistant of the University 
Library of Würzburg managed to segment only 160 pages (28% of 
the entire book) during the same 2 hours and 18 minutes using 
Aletheia. It is worth mentioning that the student had extensive 
experience in segmenting early printed books with Aletheia. 
4.2 
Application to ‘Der Heiligen Leben’ 
LAREX was also deployed to the book ‘Der Heiligen Leben’, 
printed by Anton Koberger in Nuremberg in 148813. For an in-
detail description see Reul et al.: Case Study of a highly automated 
Layout Analysis and OCR of an incunabulum: ‘Der Heiligen 
Leben’ (1488) (submitted to this conference). Figure 8 shows a 
representative selection of page layouts occurring in the book. 
 
Figure 8. Example pages from ‘Der Heiligen Leben’. 
A slight alteration of the default setup was necessary to achieve an 
appealing coarse segmentation. However, at this point several 
headings, i.e. lines consisting of more prominent letters, were often 
12 http://kallimachos.de/kallimachos/index.php/Narragonien 
13 http://vb.uni-wuerzburg.de/ub/itf954/ueber.html 

still connected to or even surrounded by running text. To detect and 
separate these segments, the line location and segmentation 
functionality described in 3.4 was utilized. Additionally, simple 
rules were applied taking the height of a heading line candidate and 
the area of its connected components into consideration. Moreover, 
a reading order was determined for each page. Finally, the segmen-
tation results were manually checked and corrected if necessary. 
During the evaluation, it was shown that the OCR accuracy 
decreased slightly from 97.57% (Aletheia) to 97.35% (LAREX). 
However, the overall time expenditure needed for segmentation 
was reduced significantly by using LAREX. While the (semi-) 
automatic extraction finished in less than six hours (including 
manual tuning for global properties), the fully manual extraction 
lasted close to 100 hours. Notably, an additional correction of the 
LAREX output within the tool took almost two hours but improved 
the OCR accuracy only insignificantly (97.37%). This implies that 
the raw text/non-text segmentation worked very well. 
5. DISCUSSION 
The evaluation illustrated that LAREX is a powerful tool for the 
segmentation of early printed books due to its interactivity and 
flexibility. The assessment of the required user actions illustrated 
that LAREX enables the user to influence the result heavily with 
minimal effort and without changing the setup in itself. For 
example, a common error is the non-separation of small text blocks 
like the signature mark or the catchword from the running text. 
These types of errors would require considerable effort to be 
prevented by adjusting the expected region positions or the dilation 
kernel, as there is no real spatial separation from the adjacent 
region. However, it is very easy to correct these mistakes manually. 
Assessing and optimizing such trade-offs is part of our future work. 
The application on ‘Der Heiligen Leben’ showed that further 
functionality can dramatically reduce the required user effort while 
only slightly decreasing the OCR accuracy. During the experiment 
additional rules had to be added within the program code. For a 
more generic approach a larger set of region or line attributes as 
well as rules utilizing them are required. Moreover, the user has to 
be able to enter rules directly, test a setup and change it if necessary. 
6. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
A semi-automatic tool for layout analysis and region extraction was 
proposed. LAREX uses parameters in order to be flexible enough 
to be adjusted to different book layouts. It offers maximal value on 
books with an extensive number of pages whose layouts are 
complex but consist of clearly spatially separated segments. The 
manual corrections can be done in a simple and time efficient way. 
LAREX does not offer an almost pixel-perfect segmentation like 
Aletheia. However, as the experiments on ‘Der Heiligen Leben’ 
showed, there are cases where a much faster but slightly less 
accurate segmentation may be completely sufficient.  
Despite LAREX already being a fully functional tool, there are still 
many things that could be added or refined to further improve it: 
First, the rule functionality will be extended as described in chapter 
5 to offer the user more parameters and to make the tool more 
flexible. Furthermore, the post-processing and correction 
performance could be improved by providing the user with further 
tools to perform an even finer grained segmentation if needed. In 
addition, many smaller additions are planned, e. g. user-driven 
swash capital removal and optimized line segmentation. The latter 
could further improve the text sub-region detection or even directly 
support OCR. However, the main goal remains the improvement of 
the declarative specification of rules based on a range of extracted 
parameters by image processing operations. To enhance LAREX´ 
range of functions considerably while keeping most of its 
simplicity will be a challenging task for the future. Due to its open-
source nature, LAREX will benefit a lot from the anticipated 
feedback and co-development of a global user group. The ready-to-
use tool together with some example data are available at 
https://go.uniwue.de/larex. 
We want to highlight that (to our knowledge) LAREX is currently 
the only available fully stand-alone open-source tool under active 
development that significantly reduces the time of manual high-
quality page analysis for historical books. It has been shown to be 
usable by non-specialists after a very short training period. 
Hopefully, it will help to break down the preprocessing barrier for 
mass-OCR of digital images. 
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors would like to thank Maximilian Wehner and 
Maximilian Nöth for their testing efforts, Marco Dittrich and 
Martin Gruner for their helpful remarks on the tool and the 
University Library of Würzburg for providing the required scans. 
8. REFERENCES 
[1] Springmann, U. and Lüdeling, A. 2016. OCR of historical 
printings with an application to building diachronic corpora: 
A case study using the RIDGES herbal corpus. 
ArXiv e-prints. URL = https://arxiv.org/abs/1608.02153. 
Accepted by Digital Humanities Quarterly. 
[2] Springmann, U., Fink, F. and Schulz, K. U. 2016. Automatic 
quality evaluation and (semi-) automatic improvement of 
OCR models for historical printings. ArXiv e-prints. 
URL = https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.05157. 
[3] Fischer, A., Wütherich, M., Liwicki, M., Frinken, V., Bunke, 
H., Viehhauser, G. and Stolz, M. 2009. Automatic trans-
cription of handwritten medieval documents. 15th Int. Conf. 
on Virtual Systems and Multimedia (VSMM’09). IEEE, 137-
142. DOI = http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/VSMM.2009.26. 
[4] Clausner, C., Pletschacher, S. and Antonacopoulos, A. 2011. 
Aletheia – An Advanced Document Layout and Text 
Ground-Truthing System for Production Enviroments. Int. 
Conf. on Document Analysis and Recognition (ICDAR 2011). 
IEEE, 48–52. 
DOI = http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICDAR.2011.19. 
[5] Lazzara, G., Levillain, R., Geraud, T., Jacquelet, Y., 
Marquegnies, J. and Crepin-Leblond, A. 2011. The SCRIBO 
Module of the OLENA Platform: A Free Software 
Framework for Document Image Analysis. Int. Conf. on 
Document Analysis and Recognition (ICDAR 2011). IEEE, 
252 – 258. DOI = http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICDAR.2011.59. 
[6] Antonacopoulos, A. 2011. Historical Document Layout 
Analysis Competition. Int. Conf. on Document Analysis and 
Recognition (ICDAR 2011). IEEE, 1516 – 1520. 
DOI = http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICDAR.2011.301. 
[7] Ramel, J. Y., Busson, S., and Demonet, M. L. 2006. 
AGORA: the Interactive Document Image Analysis Tool of 
the BVH Project. Proceedings of the 2nd Int. Conf. on 
Document Analysis for Libraries (DIAL ’06). 
DOI = http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/DIAL.2006.2. 
[8] Gupta, A., Gutierrez-Osuna, R., Christy, M., Capitanu, B., 
Auvil, L., Grumbach, L., Furuta, R. and Mandell, L. 2015. 
Automatic Assessment of OCR Quality in Historical 
Documents. Proceedings of the 29th AAAI Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence (AAAI 2015). 1735 – 1741.
