Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 32 (2008) 607–629
Submitted 01/08; published 06/08
A Unifying Framework for Structural Properties of CSPs:
Deﬁnitions, Complexity, Tractability
Lucas Bordeaux

Microsoft Research
7 J J Thomson Avenue
Cambridge, CB3 0FB, United Kingdom
Marco Cadoli

Toni Mancini

Dipartimento di Informatica e Sistemistica
Sapienza Universit`a di Roma
Via Ariosto 25, I-00185 Roma, Italy
Abstract
Literature on Constraint Satisfaction exhibits the deﬁnition of several “structural” prop-
erties that can be possessed by CSPs, like (in)consistency, substitutability or interchange-
ability. Current tools for constraint solving typically detect such properties eﬃciently by
means of incomplete yet eﬀective algorithms, and use them to reduce the search space and
boost search.
In this paper, we provide a unifying framework encompassing most of the properties known
so far, both in CSP and other ﬁelds’ literature, and shed light on the semantical relation-
ships among them. This gives a uniﬁed and comprehensive view of the topic, allows new,
unknown, properties to emerge, and clariﬁes the computational complexity of the various
detection problems.
In particular, among the others, two new concepts, ﬁxability and removability emerge, that
come out to be the ideal characterisations of values that may be safely assigned or re-
moved from a variable’s domain, while preserving problem satisﬁability. These two notions
subsume a large number of known properties, including inconsistency, substitutability and
others.
Because of the computational intractability of all the property-detection problems, by fol-
lowing the CSP approach we then determine a number of relaxations which provide suﬃ-
cient conditions for their tractability. In particular, we exploit forms of language restrictions
and local reasoning.
1. Introduction
Many Constraint Satisfaction Problems (CSPs) which arise in the modelling of real-life
applications exhibit “structural” properties that distinguish them from random instances.
Detecting such properties has been widely recognised to be an eﬀective way for improving
the solving process. To this end, several of them have already been identiﬁed, and diﬀerent
techniques have been developed in order to exploit them, with the goal of reducing the
search space to be explored. Good examples are value inconsistency (Mackworth, 1977;
Montanari, 1974), substitutability and interchangeability (Freuder, 1991), more general
c⃝2008 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

Bordeaux, Cadoli, & Mancini
forms of symmetries (Crawford, Ginsberg, Luks, & Roy, 1996; Gent & Smith, 2000), and
functional dependencies among variables (Li, 2000; Mancini & Cadoli, 2007).
Unfortunately, checking whether such properties hold, is (or is thought to be) often
computationally hard. As an example, let us consider interchangeability. Value a is said
to be interchangeable with value b for variable x if every solution which assigns a to x
remains a solution if x is changed to b, and vice versa (Freuder, 1991). The problem of
checking interchangeability is coNP-complete (cf. Proposition 4). Analogously, detecting
some other forms of symmetry reduces to the graph automorphism problem (Crawford,
1992) (for which there is no known polynomial time algorithm, even if there is evidence
that it is not NP-complete, K¨obler, Sch¨oning, & Tor´an, 1993).
To this end, in order to allow general algorithms to exploit such properties eﬃciently,
diﬀerent approaches can be followed. First of all, syntactic restrictions on the constraint
languages can be enforced, in order to allow the eﬃcient veriﬁcation of the properties of
interest.
Alternatively, “local” versions of such properties can be deﬁned, that can be
used to infer their global counterparts, and that can be veriﬁed in polynomial time. As
an instance of this “local reasoning” approach, instead of checking whether a value is fully
interchangeable for a variable, Freuder (1991) proposes to check whether that value is neigh-
bourhood, or k-interchangeable. This task involves considering only bounded-sized subsets
of the constraints, and hence can be performed in polynomial time. Neighbourhood and
k-interchangeability are suﬃcient (but not necessary) conditions for full interchangeability,
and have been proven to be highly eﬀective in practice (cf., e.g., Choueiry & Noubir, 1998;
Lal, Choueiry, & Freuder, 2005).
In this paper we give a formal characterisation of several properties of CSPs which can be
exploited in order to save search, and present a unifying framework for them that allows for
their semantical connections to emerge. Some of the properties are well-known in the Con-
straint Programming literature, others have been used in other contexts (as in databases),
while some others are, to the best of our knowledge, original, and, in our opinion, play
a key role in allowing a deep understanding of the topic. In particular, we reconsider the
notions of inconsistency, substitutability and interchangeability, and propose those of ﬁxable,
removable, and implied value for a given variable, which are instances of the more general
deﬁnition of satisﬁability-preserving transformation and those of determined, dependent, and
irrelevant variable. These properties make it possible to transform a problem into a simpler
one. Depending on the case, this transformation is guaranteed to preserve all solutions, or
the satisﬁability of the problem, i.e., at least a solution, if one exists. In general, each of
these properties can be detected either statically, during a preprocessing stage of the input
CSP (cf., e.g., Cadoli & Mancini, 2007), or dynamically, during search (since they may arise
at any time). Moreover, in some cases we don’t even need to explicitly verify whether some
properties hold, because this is guaranteed by the intrinsic characteristics of the problem.
For instance, some problems are guaranteed to have a unique solution. Such cases are re-
ferred to as “promise problems” in the literature (Even, Selman, & Yacobi, 1984), meaning
that in addition to the problem description we are informed of certain properties it veriﬁes
(cf. forthcoming Example 1 for an example).
The formal characterisation of the properties and their connections allow us to shed light
on the computational complexity of their recognition task in a very elegant way, proving
608

A Unifying Framework for Structural Properties of CSPs
that, in the worst case, the detection of each of them is as complex as the original problem.
In particular, as we will see in Section 3.1, detecting each of the proposed properties is a
coNP-complete task. This holds also for Freuder’s substitutability and interchangeability
(this result is, to the best of our knowledge, original).
Hence, in order to be able to
practically make the relevant checks during preprocessing and search, we investigate two
diﬀerent approaches for the eﬃcient veriﬁcation of the proposed properties: additions of
suitable restrictions to the constraint language, and exploitation of eﬃcient forms of local
reasoning, i.e., by checking them for single constraints.
The outline of the paper is as follows: after giving an intuitive example and recalling
some preliminaries, in Section 2 we present the properties we are interested in, and discuss
their connections. Then, in Section 3 we focus on the complexity of the various property-
detection tasks. In particular, in Section 3.1 we prove that all of them are intractable; hence,
in Section 3.2 we focus on relaxations that guarantee tractability of reasoning, investigating
the two aforementioned approaches. Finally, in Section 4 we draw conclusions and address
future work.
2. A Hierarchy of Properties
In this section, we formally deﬁne several structural properties of CSPs, discuss the se-
mantical relationships that hold among them, and show how they can be exploited during
constraint solving.
2.1 An Intuitive Example
In order to allow for a gentle introduction of the main properties investigated in the forth-
coming sections, we ﬁrst introduce the following example.
Example 1 (Factoring, Lenstra & Lenstra, 1990; Pyh¨al¨a, 2004). This problem is a sim-
pliﬁed version of one of the most important problems in public-key cryptography. Given a
(large) positive integer Z and the fact that it is a product of two diﬀerent unknown prime
numbers X and Y (diﬀerent from 1), the goal is to identify these two numbers.
An intuitive formulation of any instance of this problem (i.e., for any given Z) as a
CSP, adequate for arbitrarily large numbers, amounts to encode the combinatorial circuit of
integer multiplication, and is as follows: assuming Z has n digits (in base b) z1, . . . , zn, we
consider 2n variables x1, . . . , xn and y1, . . . , yn one for each digit (in base b) of X and Y
(x1 and y1 being the least signiﬁcant ones). The domain for all these variables is [0, b −1].
In order to maintain information about the carries, n + 1 additional variables c1, . . . , cn+1
must be considered, with domain [0..(b −1)2n/b].1
As for the constraints (cf. Figure 1 for the intuition, where x4, x5, x6, y4, y5, y6 are
equal to 0, and are omitted for readability), they are the following:
1. Constraints on factors:
1. In this intuitive example, with a little abuse with respect to what will be permitted by forthcoming
Deﬁnition 1, we allow, to enhance readability, diﬀerent variables to be deﬁned over diﬀerent domains.
However, we observe that it is easy to recover from this by using standard and well-known techniques
(e.g., adding new monadic constraints to model smaller domains).
609

Bordeaux, Cadoli, & Mancini
7
8
7 ∗
7
9
7 =
0 6 13 18 12
4
0
49 56 49
63 72 63 −
49 56 49 −−
6
2
7
2
3
9
x3
x2
x1 ∗
y3
y2
y1 =
c7
c6
c5
c4
c3
c2
c1
x3y1 x2y1 x1y1
x3y2 x2y2 x1y2
−
x3y3 x2y3 x1y3
−
−
z6
z5
z4
z3
z2
z1
Figure 1: Factoring instance 627239, n = 6, b = 10
(a) Factors must be diﬀerent from 1, or, equivalently, X ̸= Z and Y ̸= Z must hold;
(b) For every digit i ∈[1, n]: zi = ci + P
j,k∈[1,n]:j+k=i+1(xj ∗yk mod b);
2. Constraints on carries:
(a) Carry on the least signiﬁcant digit is 0: c1 = 0;
(b) Carries on other digits: ∀i ∈[2, n + 1], ci = ci−1 + P
j,k∈[1,n]:j+k=i
xj∗yk
b
;
(c) Carry on the most signiﬁcant digit is 0: cn+1 = 0.
When a guess on the two factors X and Y (i.e., on variables x1, . . . , xn and y1, . . . , yn) has
been made, values for variables c1, . . . , cn+1 are completely determined, since they follow
from the semantics of the multiplication. This is called a functional dependence among
variables.
Functional dependencies arise very often in, e.g., problems for which an intermediate
state has to be maintained, and their detection and exploitation has been recognized to be of
great importance from an eﬃciency point of view, since it can lead to signiﬁcant reductions
of the search space (cf., e.g., Giunchiglia, Massarotto, & Sebastiani, 1998; Mancini & Cadoli,
2007; Cadoli & Mancini, 2007).
Moreover, the presence of functional dependencies among variables of a CSP highlights
a second interesting problem, i.e., that of computing the values of dependent variables after
a choice of the deﬁning ones has been made. This problem, which is always a subproblem of
a CSP with dependencies, has exactly one solution, hence, the knowledge of such a promise
can be useful to the solver. It is worth noting that there are also problems which intrinsically
exhibit promises. This is the case of, e.g., Factoring where we add the symmetry-breaking
constraint forcing x1, . . . , xn to be lexicographically less than or equal to y1, . . . , yn. This
new formulation is guaranteed to have exactly one solution (since both X and Y are prime).
The Factoring problem exhibits also other interesting properties: let us consider an
instance such that Z is given in binary notation (i.e., b = 2) and with the least signiﬁcant
digit z1 being equal to 1. This implies that the last digit of both factors X and Y must be 1.
Hence, we can say that value 1 is implied for variables x1 and y1, and that 0 is removable for
them and, more precisely inconsistent. Moreover, for this problem, which, if the symmetry
is broken, has a unique solution, we also know that all variables x1, . . . , xn and y1, . . . , yn
610

A Unifying Framework for Structural Properties of CSPs
are determined (cf. forthcoming Deﬁnition 2), regardless of the instance, and because of
the functional dependence already discussed, we have that variables encoding carries, i.e.,
ci (i ∈[1, n]), are dependent on {x1, . . . , xn, y1, . . . , yn}.
As for problems with unique solutions, it is known that, unfortunately, their resolution re-
mains intractable (cf., e.g., Papadimitriou, 1994; Valiant & Vijay V. Vazirani, 1986; Calabro,
Impagliazzo, Kabanets, & Paturi, 2003). However, this does not exclude the possibility to
ﬁnd good heuristics for instances with such a promise, or to look for other properties that
are implied by the existence of unique solutions, that can be exploited in order to improve
the search process. In particular, determined and implied values play an important role in
this and other classes of problems. As the Factoring example shows, such problems arise
frequently in practice, either as subproblems of other CSPs, as in presence of functional de-
pendencies (cf. also Mancini & Cadoli, 2007; Mancini, Cadoli, Micaletto, & Patrizi, 2008, for
more examples), or because of intrinsic characteristics of the problem at hand. In general,
if a problem has a unique solution, all variables have a determined value.
Another central role is played by the removability property, that characterises precisely
the case when a value can be safely removed from the domain of a variable, while preserving
satisﬁability. This property is of course weaker than inconsistency (since some solutions may
be lost), but can be safely used in place of it when we are interested in ﬁnding only a solution
of a CSP, if one exists, and not all of them.
2.2 Preliminaries
Deﬁnition 1 (Constraint Satisfaction Problem (CSP), Dechter, 1992). A Constraint Sat-
isfaction Problem is a triple ⟨X, D, C⟩where:
• X is a ﬁnite set of variables;
• D is a ﬁnite set of values, representing the domain for each variable;
• C is a ﬁnite set of constraints {c1, . . . c|C|}, with each of them being of the form
ci = ri(Vi), where Vi is a list of k ≤|X| variables in X (the constraint scope), and
ri ⊆Dk is a k-ary relation over D (the constraint relation).
We sometimes will
denote the set Vi of variables of constraint ci by var(ci).
Given a set of variables V and a domain D, a V -tuple t over D is a mapping which
associates a value tx ∈D to every x ∈V . Such value is called the x-component of t. Given
a V -tuple t and a subset U ⊆V of its variables, we denote by t|U the restriction of t to
U, which has the same value as t on the variables of U and is undeﬁned elsewhere. The
explicit assignment of the value a ∈D to the x-component of a V -tuple t (x ∈V ) is written
t[x := a].
Given a CSP ⟨X, D, C⟩, an X-tuple t satisﬁes a constraint ci = ri(Vi) ∈C if t|Vi ∈ri.
We denote by Sol(ci) the set of X-tuples which satisfy ci. The set T
c∈C Sol(c) of X-tuples
which satisfy all the constraints is called the solution space, and denoted Sol(C).
By solving a CSP we mean to decide whether the set Sol(C) is non-empty and, if so,
compute one (or all) the solutions.
611

Bordeaux, Cadoli, & Mancini
5
&%
'$
&%
'$
&%
'$
&%
'$
..................................
"
"
"
"
"
PPPPP
1
2
4
3
&%
'$
Figure 2: A graph to be 3-colored
The set of X-tuples t over D is called the search space and denoted by SD, or simply S
if the domain is implicit from the context. The relational operators of selection, projection
and complement will be useful: given a V -relation c, a subset U of V and a value a ∈D,
we denote by σx=a(ci) (resp. σx̸=a(ci)) the V -relation which contains the tuples of ci whose
value on x is a (resp. is diﬀerent from a), by πU(ci) the set of restrictions to U of tuples of
ci (i.e., the set of U-tuples {t | ∃t′ ∈ci (t = t′|U)}) and by ci the set of V -tuples {t | t ̸∈ci}.
Note that σx=a(S) denotes the search space obtained by ﬁxing the value of x to a. For
the sake of simplicity, the sets X and C will be considered as globally deﬁned and shall
therefore be omitted from the parameters of most deﬁnitions; only the search space will be
explicitly mentioned.
Example 2. Consider the CSP ⟨X, D, C⟩modeling the 3-coloring problem for the graph in
Figure 2. We have that:
• X = {x1, . . . , x5} is the set of variables (one for each node),
• D = {R, G, B} is the set of colors, and
• C is the following ﬁnite set of constraints, one for each edge:
C = {NE(x2, x3), NE(x3, x4), NE(x2, x4), NE(x4, x5)},
where NE (not-equal) is a binary relation deﬁned as
({R, G, B} × {R, G, B}) \ {⟨R, R⟩, ⟨G, G⟩, ⟨B, B⟩}.
2.3 Deﬁnitions
In this section, we formally present the properties already introduced in Section 2.1, and
show their applicability on some examples.
Deﬁnition 2. The following properties are deﬁned for a search space S, variables x and y,
values a and b, and for a set of variables V :
612

A Unifying Framework for Structural Properties of CSPs
ﬁxable(S, x, a)
≡
∀t ∈S (t ∈Sol(C) →t[x := a] ∈Sol(C))
substitutable(S, x, a, b)
≡
∀t ∈S
 tx = a ∧t ∈Sol(C) →
t[x := b] ∈Sol(C)

removable(S, x, a)
≡
∀t ∈S
 tx = a ∧t ∈Sol(C) →
∃b ̸= a (t[x := b] ∈Sol(C))

inconsistent(S, x, a)
≡
∀t ∈S
 t ∈Sol(C) →tx ̸= a

implied(S, x, a)
≡
∀t ∈S
 t ∈Sol(C) →tx = a

determined(S, x)
≡
∀t ∈S
 t ∈Sol(C) →
∀b ̸= tx (t[x := b] ̸∈Sol(C))

dependent(S, V, y)
≡
∀t, t′ ∈S




t ∈Sol(C)∧
t′ ∈Sol(C)∧
∀x ∈V (tx = t′
x)

→ty = t′
y


irrelevant(S, x)
≡
∀t ∈S
 t ∈Sol(C) →
∀a ∈D (t[x := a] ∈Sol(C))

As for interchangeability, it is well-known (Freuder, 1991) that it can be deﬁned in terms
of substitutability:
interchangeable(S, x, a, b)
≡
substitutable(S, x, a, b) ∧substitutable(S, x, b, a)
In the few cases where an ambiguity arises on the considered set of constraints, we will
indicate it using subscript (e.g., irrelevantC(S, x)). Note that all the deﬁnitions but the
last three are value-oriented, in that they are properties of speciﬁc values of the domain.
On the contrary, determinacy, irrelevance, and dependence are variable-oriented properties
which do not directly express results on particular values of the domains but have important
relations with the value-oriented notions (cf. forthcoming Section 2.4).
As already claimed in Section 1, some of the properties of Deﬁnition 2 are already
known, as well as their beneﬁcial eﬀects to search. In particular, the notion of consistency
was proposed by Montanari (1974) and Mackworth (1977), and is one of the best-studied
notions in CSP. Substitutability and interchangeability were introduced by Freuder (1991).
Implied values, which are also known in the literature as backbones, were seemingly ﬁrst
studied explicitly by Monasson, Zecchina, Kirkpatrick, Selman, and Troyansky (1999). To
the best of our knowledge, the notions of removable and ﬁxable values (which, as we show
in Section 2.4 play a key role in the unifying framework proposed in this paper) have on
the contrary not been considered. Determined, irrelevant and dependent variables have
been studied in a number of contexts as logic, SAT, and databases, cf., e.g., Beth deﬁn-
ability (Chang & Keisler, 1990), don’t care variables in propositional formulae (Thiﬀault,
613

Bordeaux, Cadoli, & Mancini
Bacchus, & Walsh, 2004; Safarpour, Veneris, Drechsler, & Lee, 2004), and the Audit prob-
lem (Jonsson & Krokhin, 2008), but we are aware of little work concerning their application
in the context of CSPs.
The following examples illustrate some of the properties.
Example 3 (Example 2 continued). Consider a CSP modeling the coloring problem for the
graph in Figure 2. Let Σ denote the search space in which all ﬁve variables x1, . . . , x5 have
domain {R, G, B}. The following properties hold:
• ﬁxable(Σ,x1,R), since for every solution t, t[x1 := R] is a solution as well;
• substitutable(Σ,x1,R,G), since for every solution t such that tx1 = R, t[x1 := G] is a
solution as well;
• interchangeable(Σ,x1,R,G),
from
the
previous
point
and
the
fact
that
substitutable(Σ,x1,G,R) also holds;
• removable(Σ,x1,G), because for every solution t such that tx1 = G, there exists a
diﬀerent color K ∈{R, B} for x1 such that t[x1 := K] is a solution as well;
• irrelevant(Σ,x1), because we can actually replace the x1-component of any solution t
with any other value, since x1 denotes a disconnected node of the graph.
The above properties holding for variable x1 that encodes the disconnected node give some
initial suggestions on the relationships that exist among the diﬀerent notions. As for the
other nodes, we have, for example:
• removable(Σ,x5,G), because for every solution t such that tx5 = G, there exists a
diﬀerent color K ∈{R, B} for x5 such that t[x5 := K] is a solution as well. This is
due to the fact that node 5 is connected only to node 4.
As another, more complex, example, consider the following:
Example 4. Let a CSP be given over boolean variables x, y, z, w, p, q, r, whose constraints
are encoded by the formula below:
x ∧(x →y) ∧((z ∨w) ↔p) ∧((z ∨y) ↔(q ∧r))
Denoting as Ξ the search space in which all variables range over {true, false}, we have,
among the others:
• inconsistent(Ξ,x,false),
• ﬁxable(Ξ,x,true),
• implied(Ξ,x,true),
• implied(Ξ,y,true),
• inconsistent(Ξ,y,false),
• determined(Ξ,y),
• dependent(Ξ,{z, w},p),
• dependent(Ξ,{z, y},q),
• dependent(Ξ,{z, y},r),
• ﬁxable(Ξ,q,true),
614

A Unifying Framework for Structural Properties of CSPs
• implied(Ξ,q,true),
• ﬁxable(Ξ,r,true),
• implied(Ξ,r,true).
Some of the deﬁnitions of Deﬁnition 2 can be used to construct solution-preserving trans-
formations, i.e., mappings which transform solutions into solutions.
Deﬁnition 3 (solution-preserving transformation). A solution-preserving transformation
is a total mapping τ from S to S such that
∀t ∈S (t ∈Sol(C) →τ(t) ∈Sol(C))
To understand the connection between solution-preserving transformations and the afore-
mentioned properties, consider the following mappings:
τ1(t) = t[x := a]
τ2(t) =
(
t[x := b]
if tx = a
t
otherwise
τ3(t) =





t[x := b]
if tx = a
t[x := a]
if tx = b
t
otherwise
Checking whether value a is ﬁxable for variable x, whether value a is substitutable to value
b for variable x, and whether values a and b are interchangeable for variable x amounts to
check whether mappings τ1, τ2 and τ3 (respectively) are solution-preserving.
Solution-preserving transformations are interesting because they allow us to remove val-
ues from the search space while preserving the satisﬁability of the problem. Moreover, the
correspondence between some properties and the existence of particular solution-preserving
mappings shows that interesting connections hold among these properties and other con-
cepts, like symmetries. As an example, Mancini and Cadoli (2005) give a logical characteri-
sation of symmetries in problem speciﬁcations, which is very similar to, and in fact stronger
than, that of Deﬁnition 3. In addition, more general forms of solution-preserving transfor-
mations could be deﬁned, that, e.g., allow also for the modiﬁcation of the constraints, i.e.,
as pairs (τ, σ) such that ∀t ∈S (t ∈Sol(C) →τ(t) ∈Sol(σ(t, C))). This interesting topic,
that may lead to the deﬁnition of further and more general properties of a CSP, is left for
future research.
2.4 Semantical Relationships
As already observed (cf. also Examples 3 and 4), several semantical relationships exist
among the notions presented in Deﬁnition 2, some of which appear weaker, while some
others stronger. The main connections are clariﬁed by the following theorem.
Theorem 1. The relationships shown in Figure 3 hold between the properties of Deﬁni-
tion 2.
Proof.
Dependence-determinacy. We have dependent(S, {x1, . . . , xi}, y) iﬀevery solution t has a
value on y which is given by a function f of the values it assigns to x1 . . . xi, iﬀin any search
615

Bordeaux, Cadoli, & Mancini
determined(S, x) ←
∃b ∈D implied(S, x, b)
inconsistent(S, x, a) →
∀b ∈D substitutable(S, x, a, b)
implied(S, x, a) ↔
∀b ∈D \ {a} inconsistent(S, x, b)
dependent(S, {x1, . . . , xi}, y) ↔
∀a1 ∈D . . . ai ∈D determined(σx1=a1,...,xi=ai(S), y)
irrelevant(S, x) ↔
∀a ∈D ﬁxable(S, x, a)
implied(S, x, b) →
ﬁxable(S, x, b)
removable(S, x, a) ←
∃b ∈D \ {a} substitutable(S, x, a, b)
inconsistent(S, x, a) →
removable(S, x, a)
ﬁxable(S, x, b) ↔
∀a ∈D substitutable(S, x, a, b)
irrelevance
dependence
determinacy
implication
ﬁxability
inconsistency
substitutability
removability
Figure 3: Semantical relationships among the properties.
space σx1=a1,...,xi=ai(S) (where all these variables receive a ﬁxed value), all solutions assign
the same value f(a1, . . . , an) to y.
Irrelevance-ﬁxability. t ∈Sol(C) →∀a ∈D (t[x := a] ∈Sol(C)) rewrites to ∀a ∈D (t ∈
Sol(C) →t[x := a] ∈Sol(C)).
Determinacy-implication. If implied(S, x, b) holds for some b, then for each t and a ̸= b we
have t[x := a] ̸∈Sol(C).
Implication-ﬁxability. implied(S, x, b) means that every t ∈Sol(C) has tx = b. Hence for
every t ∈Sol(C), we have t[x := b] = t ∈Sol(C).
Implication-inconsistency.
implied(S, x, a) holds iﬀ∀t (tx ̸= a →t ̸∈Sol(C)), i.e., iﬀ
∀t ∀b ∈D \ {a} (tx = b →t ̸∈Sol(C)). This rewrites to ∀b ∈D \ {a} inconsistent(S, x, b).
Fixability-substitutability. Let D = {a1, .., ad}. We have V
i∈1..d substitutable(S, x, ai, b) iﬀ
∀t ((tx = a1 ∨· · · ∨tx = ad) ∧t ∈Sol(C) →t[x := b] ∈Sol(C)), which rewrites to
ﬁxable(S, x, b).
Inconsistency-substitutability. Suppose inconsistent(S, x, a) holds. No solution t with tx = a
exists, hence the implication tx = a ∧t ∈Sol(C) →t[x := b] ∈Sol(C) is true for all choices
of b.
Inconsistency-removability. Same argument as for inconsistency-substitutability.
Substitutability-removability. Suppose substitutable(S, x, a, b) holds for some value b ̸= a.
This can be written ∃b ∀t (tx = a ∧t ∈Sol(C) →t[x := b] ∈Sol(C)), which implies
∀t ∃b(tx = a ∧t ∈Sol(C) →t[x := b] ∈Sol(C)). The latter rewrites to ∀t (tx = a ∧t ∈
Sol(C) →∃b t[x := b] ∈Sol(C)).
616

A Unifying Framework for Structural Properties of CSPs
Note also that implied values and determined variables are strongly related to problems
with a unique solution: if a problem has a unique solution, then all its variables have an
implied value (cf. Example 1), hence they are determined.
2.5 Exploiting Properties in Constraint Solving
An important reason why the aforementioned properties are interesting is that, when de-
tected, they allow us to reduce the search space by removing values from the active domains
of the variables. In particular, several properties have successfully been exploited for this
purpose, like inconsistency (Montanari, 1974; Mackworth, 1977), substitutability (Freuder,
1991), irrelevance (Thiﬀault et al., 2004; Safarpour et al., 2004), implication (Monasson
et al., 1999), dependence (Mancini & Cadoli, 2007). However, thanks to the unifying frame-
work of Figure 3, we can now show that the wide interest in the aforementioned properties
essentially relies in their relations with the two fundamental properties of removability and
ﬁxability.
Theorem 2. Let π be a CSP ⟨X, D, C⟩. If value a is ﬁxable for variable x ∈X, then π is
satisﬁable if and only if the CSP π′ = ⟨X, D, C ∪{x = a}⟩obtained from π by instantiating
variable x to value a is satisﬁable.
Proof. Assume that π′ is satisﬁable. Then there exists a X-tuple t that satisﬁes all the
constraints. Since the constraints of π′ are a superset of those of π, t is also a solution of π.
As for the other direction, assume that π is satisﬁable. Then there exists a solution
t. Since value a if ﬁxable for x, it follows that t[x := a] is a solution as well. t[x := a]
satisﬁes also the additional constraint “x = a” of π′, hence the latter problem is satisﬁable
as well.
Theorem 3. Let π be a CSP ⟨X, D, C⟩. If value a is removable for variable x ∈X, then π
is satisﬁable if and only if the CSP π′ = ⟨X, D, C ∪{x ̸= a}⟩obtained from π by removing
value a from the domain of variable x is satisﬁable.
Proof. If π′ is satisﬁable, then, by the same arguments of the proof of Theorem 2, π is
satisﬁable as well.
As for the other direction, assume that π is satisﬁable. Then there exists a solution t.
If tx ̸= a, t is of course also a solution of π′. On the other hand, if tx = a, since value a is
removable for x in π, it follows that there exists b ̸= a such that t[x := b] is a solution as
well. t[x := b] satisﬁes also the additional constraint “x ̸= a” of π′, hence the latter problem
is also satisﬁable.
The above results show the key roles played by ﬁxability and removability. They are
the ideal properties that should be checked in order to reduce the domain for a variable.
The interest in the other notions essentially relies on their relationships with ﬁxability and
removability. As an example, an implied value is of interest essentially because it is ﬁxable,
an irrelevant variable is of interest essentially because it is ﬁxable to any value of its domain,
a substitutable value is of interest essentially because it is removable, etc.
Also the interest in inconsistent values relies on the fact that they are removable. How-
ever, inconsistency is much stronger that removability, because removing inconsistent values
617

Bordeaux, Cadoli, & Mancini
guarantees that all solutions (and not only the satisﬁability of the problem) are preserved.
Hence removability plays exactly the same role of inconsistency in case we do not want to
ﬁnd all solutions of a problem but simply want to ﬁnd one. In such situations removability
is the ideal property to use.
As for the other properties, it is worth noting that, although they may appear very strong
and unlikely at a ﬁrst sight, they can still play a precious role when detected dynamically
during search.
As an example, Thiﬀault et al. (2004) show that dynamically detecting
variables that become irrelevant during search (called don’t care variables in the paper) can
greatly speed-up non-CNF SAT solvers, by actually separating problems into independent
components.
3. Complexity of reasoning
In this section we show that the problem of checking whether properties of Deﬁnition 2 hold
is coNP-complete. Hence, in Section 3.2, we try to determine special cases where checking
can be done eﬃciently (i.e., in polynomial time).
3.1 Intractability Results
From now on, we assume that the input is given as a set of constraints C over a set of
variables X. We also assume that the problem of checking whether t ∈Sol(C) is polynomial
in the size of the representation of the input. Such properties hold for propositional logic
and for CSPs, in the sense of Dechter (1992).
We note that the problem of checking whether properties of Deﬁnition 2 hold is in
coNP, because, for each of them it is possible to ﬁnd a counter-example by guessing a tuple
in S (two, in case of dependency) in non-deterministic polynomial time, and checking, in
polynomial time, whether the negation of the subformula between parentheses holds (as
for interchangeability, we note that the logical “and” of two properties in coNP is still in
coNP). Alternatively, coNP-membership follows observing that succinct certiﬁcates exist
proving that the various properties do not hold (as an example, a certiﬁcate proving that
variable x is not ﬁxable to a is a V -tuple t ∈Sol(C) such that t[x := a] ̸∈Sol(C)). In the
rest of this section, proofs are therefore restricted to the coNP-hardness part.
Theorem 4 (coNP-completeness of properties of Deﬁnition 2). Given a CSP, the following
tasks are coNP-complete:
• Checking whether value a is ﬁxable, removable, inconsistent, implied, or determined
for variable x ∈X;
• Checking whether value a ∈D is substitutable to, or interchangeable with value b ∈D
for variable x ∈X;
• Checking whether variable y ∈X is dependent on variables in a set V ⊆X;
• Checking whether variable x ∈X is irrelevant.
Proof. To prove that checking such properties is hard for coNP, we reduce a coNP-complete
problem, i.e., that of checking that an arbitrary CSP is unsatisﬁable, to the problem of
618

A Unifying Framework for Structural Properties of CSPs
checking these properties. In particular, the proofs hold even if the domain is boolean,
in which case the CSP can be written as a propositional formula φ, e.g., in CNF. Hence,
let φ be an arbitrary propositional formula in CNF over set of variables X, and let x be
a variable such that x ̸∈X: the unsatisﬁability problem of φ can be reduced into the
problem of checking the various properties. Moreover, the semantical relationships deﬁned
in Theorem 1 allow to infer in an elegant way hardness results for several properties starting
from those of the others.
Irrelevance. Consider ψ deﬁned as φ ∧x. ψ is unsatisﬁable if and only if φ is unsatisﬁable.
We now show that φ is unsatisﬁable if and only if x is irrelevant in formula ψ. Let us ﬁrst
assume that φ is unsatisﬁable. It follows that x is irrelevant in ψ, because ψ has no models.
On the other hand, let M be a model of φ. Interpretation M ∪{x ←true} is a model of ψ,
while M ∪{x ←false} is not, implying that x is not irrelevant in ψ.
Fixability, Substitutability. Results follow from that of irrelevance, combined with the se-
mantical relationships that deﬁne irrelevance in terms of ﬁxability, and ﬁxability in terms
of substitutability.
Dependence. Consider ψ deﬁned as φ ∧(x ∨¬x). ψ is unsatisﬁable if and only if φ is
unsatisﬁable, and that x is dependent on X in ψ if and only if φ is unsatisﬁable.
Determinacy. The result follows from that of dependence, combined with the semantical
relationship that deﬁnes dependence in terms of determinacy.
Implication. Consider ψ deﬁned as φ ∧x. Value false is implied for x in ψ if and only if φ
is unsatisﬁable.
Inconsistency. The result follows from that of implication, combined with the semantical
relationship that deﬁnes implication in terms of inconsistency.
Removability. Consider ψ deﬁned as φ ∧x. Value true is removable for x in ψ if and only
if φ is unsatisﬁable.
From the proof of Theorem 4, it can be observed that the intractability of checking each of
the properties holds also for binary CSPs (i.e., CSPs in which all constraints relate at most
two variables).
Theorem 5 (coNP-completeness of properties of Deﬁnition 2 for binary CSPs). Given
a CSP with only binary constraints on a domain of size greater than two, checking the
properties of Deﬁnition 2 is coNP-complete.
Proof. We give the proof for irrelevance only: the others can be derived similarly.
Let Φ = ⟨X, D, C⟩be a binary CSP. Consider an arbitrary variable x ̸∈X and let a and b
be arbitrary distinct values in D. Let Ψ denote the CSP ⟨X′, D, C′⟩with X′ = X ∪{x}, and
C′ = C ∪{x = a}. Ψ is binary and, similarly to the proof of Theorem 4, Φ is unsatisﬁable
if and only if variable x is irrelevant for Ψ.
From the observation that a CSP encoding of the graph 3-colourability problem can be
made using only binary constraints, the thesis follows, since checking unsatisﬁability of this
problem (which is coNP-hard) can be reduced to checking irrelevance in a binary CSP.
619

Bordeaux, Cadoli, & Mancini
3.2 Tractability Results
Since detecting any of the properties we are interested in is a computationally hard problem,
a natural question is to determine special cases where checking can be done eﬃciently. To
this end, we investigate two approaches: we exhibit syntactical restrictions which make the
problem tractable, and we study local relaxations of the deﬁnitions which are polynomial-
time checkable, and which therefore provide incomplete algorithms for detecting the various
properties.
3.2.1 Tractability for Restricted Constraint Languages
A number of syntactical restrictions to the constraint satisfaction problem are known which
make it tractable. For instance, in the case of boolean constraints, i.e., propositional for-
mulae, the satisﬁability problem becomes tractable if the instance is expressed using only
Horn clauses, only dual Horn clauses (i.e., clauses with at most one negative literal), only
clauses of size at most 2, or only aﬃne constraints (i.e., formulae built using XOR). These
are known as the Schaefer’s (1978) classes. It is natural to wonder if all the properties
identiﬁed in Deﬁnition 2 are also easy to determine for these classes of formulae. This is in-
deed the case for most of them, and we give a more general condition under which tractable
classes for the consistency property are also tractable for other properties of our framework.
We note that a recent paper (Jonsson & Krokhin, 2004) gives a complete characterisation
of tractable cases for a related property.
In what follows we are interested in classes of CSPs. To this end, we deﬁne a constraint
language ΓD over domain D to be a ﬁnite set of relations (of ﬁnite arity) with elements
in D, and denote by CSP(ΓD) the set of CSPs of the form ⟨X, D, C⟩with every element
ci = ri(Vi) ∈C being such that Vi ⊆X and ri ∈ΓD. (We observe that once the constraint
language ΓD is ﬁxed, the domain D for all instances of CSP(ΓD) is ﬁxed as well.)
A constraint language Γ is said to be closed under instantiation (resp. under comple-
mentation) if whenever a constraint ci = ri(Vi) is expressible in the language (i.e., ri ∈Γ),
the relation πX\{x}(σx=a(ci)), a ∈D (resp. the complementation ci) can be represented
by a conjunction of constraints of the language. This means that there exist constraints
c′
1 = r′
1(V ′
1), . . . , c′
k = r′
k(V ′
k), with V ′
j ⊆X and r′
j ∈Γ for each j, such that πX\{x}(σx=a(ci))
(resp. ci) is equivalent to c′
1∧· · ·∧c′
k.2 Well known constraint languages on boolean domains
which are closed under instantiation and complementation are those of Horn clauses, dual
Horn clauses, 2CNF clauses or aﬃne constraints (since the instantiation or the complement
of a Horn /dual Horn/2CNF clause or aﬃne constraint can be expressed as a conjunction
of Horn /dual Horn/2CNF clauses or aﬃne constraints).
Theorem 6. Given a constraint language Γ, if the satisﬁability problem CSP(Γ) is tractable
and if Γ is closed under instantiation, then the problem of checking determinacy for CSPs
in the class CSP(Γ) is tractable as well.
2. Note that we deﬁne closure with respect to complementation with a slightly diﬀerent non-standard
meaning, as the negation of the constraint needs be expressible as a conjunction of constraints. Some
deﬁnitions impose that it be deﬁnable as a single constraint of the language.
620

A Unifying Framework for Structural Properties of CSPs
Proof. Let us consider an arbitrary instance ⟨X, D, C⟩∈CSP(Γ). Variable x ∈X is not
determined if and only if there exist two diﬀerent domain values, a and b ∈D, such that
πX\{x}(σx=a(Sol(C))) ∩πX\{x}(σx=b(Sol(C)))
is not empty, i.e., if and only if one of the CSPs ⟨ˆX, D, ˆCa,b⟩, with:
• ˆX = X \ {x}, and
• ˆCa,b = {πX\{x}(σx=a(c)) | c ∈C} ∪{πX\{x}(σx=b(c)) | c ∈C},
is satisﬁable. If Γ is closed under instantiation, constraints in ˆCa,b can all be written as
conjunctions of constraints in Γ. Hence, we have reduced the determinacy-testing problem
to solving O(|D|2) instances of CSP(Γ), which is tractable.
Theorem 7. Given a constraint language Γ, if the satisﬁability problem CSP(Γ) is tractable
and if Γ is closed under instantiation and complementation, then the problem of checking any
property among ﬁxability, substitutability, interchangeability, inconsistency or irrelevance
for CSPs in the class CSP(Γ) is tractable as well.
Proof. We start with the substitutability property and note that, given an arbitrary instance
⟨X, D, C⟩∈CSP(Γ), value a ∈D is substitutable by b ∈D for variable x ∈X if and only if
πX\{x}(σx=a(Sol(C)))
⊆
πX\{x}(σx=b(Sol(C))).
This inclusion is false, i.e., substitutability does not hold, if and only if the set
πX\{x}(σx=a(Sol(C)))
∩
πX\{x}(σx=b(Sol(C)))
(1)
is non-empty. Since σx=b(Sol(C)) = σx=b(T
c∈C Sol(c)) = T
c∈C(σx=b(Sol(c))), we have:
πX\{x}(σx=b(Sol(C))) = πX\{x}
  T
c∈C(σx=b(Sol(c)))

.
Although the projection of an intersection of relations is not equal to the intersection of
their projections in general, the latter rewrites to:
\
c∈C
πX\{x}(σx=b(Sol(c))).
This is due to the fact that we select on x before eliminating it by projection. We only prove
the inclusion which does not hold in general: suppose we have t ∈T
c∈C πX\{x}(σx=b(Sol(c))).
This means that ∀c ∈C, there exists a tuple tc such that tc|X\{x} = t and tc ∈σx=b(Sol(c)).
It follows that tc
x = b and that we have indeed a unique t with tx = b and tc|X\{x} = t which
is such that ∀c ∈C (t ∈σx=b(Sol(c))), i.e., t ∈πX\{x}(T
c∈C(σx=b(Sol(c)))).
Formula (1) is therefore equivalent to:
\
c∈C
πX\{x}(σx=a(Sol(c)))
∩
[
c∈C
πX\{x}(σx=b(Sol(c)))
621

Bordeaux, Cadoli, & Mancini
A solution exists (and therefore substitutability does not hold) if one of the sets
\
c∈C
πX\{x}(σx=a(Sol(c)))
∩
πX\{x}(σx=b(Sol(c)))
obtained for every c ∈C has a solution. If language Γ is closed under instantiation and com-
plement, we can express the new constraint πX\{x}(σx=b(Sol(c))) as a conjunction C′ of con-
straints in Γ. Each of the sets has a solution iﬀthe CSP ⟨X \{x}, D, {πX\{x}(σx=a(c)) | c ∈
C} ∪C′⟩is satisﬁable. We have reduced the substitutability testing problem to solving |C|
instances of a constraint satisfaction problem whose constraints are all in the language Γ,
which is tractable.
The results for ﬁxability, interchangeability and irrelevance follow directly, because of
the semantical relationships shown in Figure 3. Consistency of value a for variable x can
directly be expressed as the satisﬁability of πX\{x}(σx=a(Sol(C))), which can be expressed
in Γ, and the proof for implication follows from this result.
A slightly diﬀerent closure property is needed for the removability of value a for variable x
since it is expressed as πX\{x}(Sol(C))
⊆
πX\{x}(σx̸=a(Sol(C))).
Nevertheless, since on boolean domains a value v is removable if v is substitutable by
¬v, and from the remarks on the closure properties of Schaefer’s classes and the previous
theorem, we obtain that:
Corollary 1. Testing ﬁxability, substitutability, interchangeability, inconsistency, deter-
minacy, irrelevance and removability is tractable for a boolean CSP where constraints are
either Horn clauses, dual Horn clauses, clauses of size at most two or aﬃne constraints.
Unfortunately, we don’t have tractability results for dependence.
Table below summarizes Theorems 6 and 7, and Corollary 1:
Property
Polynomial if Γ is
Determinacy
Tractable and closed under instantiation
Fixability, substitutability,
interchangeability,
incon-
sistency, irrelevance
Tractable and closed under inst. and compl.
Removability
Boolean Schaefer
It is worth noting that conditions become more restrictive when reading the table top-down.
Moreover, in all the cases, it can be observed that tractability of the various property-
detection problems derives from tractability of the constraint language Γ. This leads to
serious concerns about the practical applicability of such results: if CSP(Γ) is tractable,
why worrying for identifying such properties? Actually, preliminary studies show that bet-
ter results are unlikely to hold: as an example, it can be proven that if the constraint
language is intractable, then there is no hope for detecting properties like ﬁxability, ir-
relevance, substitutability, inconsistency in polynomial time. So these results become of
622

A Unifying Framework for Structural Properties of CSPs
interest, suggesting two main directions of further research: the ﬁrst is of course that of
investigating the practical beneﬁt of detecting such properties in real cases; the second is to
exploit suﬃcient but eﬃciently evaluable conditions for these properties to hold, that can
be regarded as a form of approximate reasoning. One of the most used forms of such kind
of reasoning is called local reasoning, which is addressed below.
3.2.2 Tractability Through Locality
An important class of incomplete criteria to determine in polynomial time whether a com-
plex property holds are those based on local reasoning. This approach has proved extremely
successful for consistency (Mackworth, 1977) and interchangeability (Freuder, 1991) (cf.
also Choueiry & Noubir, 1998, where a classiﬁcation of diﬀerent local forms of interchange-
ability are studied and classiﬁed). We propose in this section a systematic investigation of
whether a local approach can be used for value-based properties.
Verifying a property P(C) of a set of constraints C locally means that we verify the
property on a well-chosen number of sub-problems. We must ensure that this approach is
sound for the considered property:
Deﬁnition 4 (soundness of local reasoning). We say that local reasoning on a property P
is sound if, for all subsets of constraints C1 ⊆C, . . . , Ck ⊆C such that S
i∈1..k Ci = C, we
have (depending on the property):
  V
i∈1..k P(Ci)

→P(C)
or
  W
i∈1..k P(Ci)

→P(C).
A typical choice of granularity is to simply consider that each Ci contains one of the con-
straints of C as is done, for instance, for arc-consistency. On the other extreme, if we take
a unique C1 = C, we have a global checking. Between these two extremes, a wide range of
intermediate levels can be deﬁned (cf., e.g., Freuder, 1978, 1991).
Example 5. Consider the CSP ⟨X, D, C⟩with X = {x, y, z}, D = {0, 1, 2} and C =
{c1, c2, c3}, whose elements are deﬁned as follows:
x
y
0
1
1
2
2
1
2
2
x
z
1
0
1
2
2
0
2
2
y
z
1
1
1
2
2
1
2
2
c1(x, y)
c2(x, z)
c3(y, z)
It can be observed that value 1 is substitutable to 2 for variable x. In order to check this
property locally, we consider a suitable covering C1, . . . , Ck of the set C, and verify it on the
induced subproblems. As an example, by taking C1 = {c1}, C2 = {c2}, C3 = {c3}, we have
substitutableCi(S, x, 1, 2) for every i ∈{1, 2, 3}. Since local reasoning is sound for substi-
tutability (cf. Freuder, 1991), we can infer that the global property substitutableC(S, x, 1, 2)
holds.
Reasoning locally is typically tractable if we focus on a moderate number of subsets of C,
and under the condition that we can bound the complexity of reasoning on each of these
623

Bordeaux, Cadoli, & Mancini
subsets. A typical assumption in CSP is that we can bound the arity of the constraints,
and that every constraint is for instance binary. In this case, the cost of determining any
property of the constraint is polynomial; and if we choose to reason locally by considering
each constraint separately, or by taking groups of constraints of bounded size, then local
checking is tractable.
Theorem 8. Local reasoning is sound for the properties of substitutability, interchangeabil-
ity, ﬁxability, inconsistency, implication, irrelevance, determinacy, dependence. In particu-
lar, for any C1 ⊆C, . . . , Ck ⊆C such that S
i∈1..k Ci = C:
•
  V
i∈1..k substitutableCi(S, x, a, b) 
→substitutableC(S, x, a, b);
•
 V
i∈1..k interchangeableCi(S, x, a, b)

→interchangeableC(S, x, a, b);
•
  V
i∈1..k ﬁxableCi(S, x, b) 
→ﬁxableC(S, x, b);
•
  W
i∈1..k inconsistentCi(S, x, a) 
→inconsistentC(S, x, a);
•
 W
i∈1..k impliedCi(S, x, a)

→impliedC(S, x, a);
•
  V
i∈1..k irrelevantCi(S, x) 
→irrelevantC(S, x);
•
  W
i∈1..k determinedCi(S, x) 
→determinedC(S, x);
•
 W
i∈1..k dependentCi(S, V, y)

→dependentC(S, V, y).
Proof. The result is well-known for consistency (Mackworth, 1977), substitutability and
interchangeability (Freuder, 1991).
Fixability of variable x to value b can be expressed as
∀a ̸= b (substitutableC(S, x, a, b))
Therefore,
if
we
have
V
i∈1..k ﬁxableCi(S, x, b)
(which
is
equivalent
to
V
i
V
a̸=b
substitutableCi(S, x, a, b)
and
to
V
a̸=b
V
i
substitutableCi(S, x, a, b)),
then
we
have
V
a̸=b substitutableC(S, x, a, b), which means ﬁxableC(S, x, b).
A similar argument works
for irrelevance, which can be analogously deﬁned in terms of ﬁxability (cf. Figure 3). As
for implication, if a value a is implied for variable x in any Ci, then all tuples t with tx ̸= a
violate the constraints of Ci and do a fortiori not belong to Sol(C). Similarly for deter-
minacy: if a variable x is determined in any Ci, then all tuples t ∈Sol(Ci) will be such
that t[x := b] ̸∈Sol(Ci) for any b ̸= tx. Hence there cannot be any solution t ∈Sol(C)
such that t[x := b] ∈Sol(C) with b ̸= tx. Finally, as for dependence, if there exists a Ci
for which dependentCi(S, V, y) holds (it is enough to consider sets of constraints Cis such
that V ∩var(Ci) ̸= ∅and y ∈var(Ci) for which we have dependentCi(S, V ∩var(Ci), y)),
we have, by deﬁnition, that ∀t, t′ ∈Sol(Ci) (∀x ∈V ∩var(Ci) (tx = t′
x)) →ty = t′
y, and
so dependentC(S, V, y) also holds, since any solution of the whole problem must satisfy also
Ci.
Example 6 (Example 5 continued). Value 2 is ﬁxable for z.
This can be inferred by
performing local reasoning as follows:
624

A Unifying Framework for Structural Properties of CSPs
• ﬁxableC1(S, z, 2) holds, since z does not occur in the scope of c1;
• ﬁxableC2(S, z, 2) holds, since for any tuple t that belongs to c2, also t[z := 2] belongs
to c2;
• ﬁxableC3(S, z, 2) holds, because of the same argument.
Since by Theorem 8 local reasoning is sound for ﬁxability, we can infer that ﬁxableC(S, z, 2)
holds.
There is only one (value-based) property, namely removability, for which the local approach
is unfortunately not sound:
Theorem 9. Local reasoning is not sound for the removability property.
Proof. Take C = C1 ∧C2, where C1 is deﬁned as x ≤y and C2 as x ≥y. Suppose the
domain has values {1, 2, 3}. Value 2 for x is removable from both constraints considered
independently since, in both cases, we can change the value of any solution which assigns 2
to x to another value. Still, value 2 is not removable for x from their conjunction. To see
why, consider the solution with ⟨x, y⟩= ⟨2, 2⟩, and observe that neither ⟨1, 2⟩or ⟨3, 2⟩are
solutions.
Note that removing values which are shown to be removable only locally can even make
a satisﬁable problem unsatisﬁable: if furthermore we add the constraints C3, deﬁned as
x ̸= 1 and C4, deﬁned as x ̸= 3, then value 2 for x is removable in each constraint, while
the only (global) solution actually assigns value 2 to x.
This result, although negative, is in fact interesting, because it gives an ex-post justiﬁca-
tion of the extensive use that has been made in the last decades of stronger notions, like
inconsistency or substitutability, both of which imply removability (cf. Figure 3). The main
reason why current tools and frameworks for CP try to detect these properties is in order
to remove values from the active domain of some variables. This naturally relies on the re-
movability property (cf. Section 2.5). However, the reason why removability is not directly
used is because it is intractable. For that reason, stronger notions like consistency or sub-
stitutability are the forms of removability that have been more commonly used. Actually,
unlike full-ﬂedged removability (cf. Theorem 9), these properties can be detected eﬃciently,
but incompletely, through local reasoning. Hence, this raises an interesting open issue: do
there exist new (i.e., other than substitutability and inconsistency) properties for which
local reasoning is sound and which imply removability?
We end this section by noting that the local version of the ﬁxability property is indeed a
generalisation to arbitrary domains of the pure literal rule (Davis & Putnam, 1960) which
is well-known in the case of boolean constraints in conjunctive normal form.
The pure
literal rule exploits the cases where no constraint (clause) of the problem has a positive
(resp. negative) occurrence of some variable x. In this case, assigning value 0 (resp. 1) to x
preserves the satisﬁability of the problem: if a solution t with tx = 1 exists, then t[x := 0]
will also be a solution since no clause constrains x to have value 1.
625

Bordeaux, Cadoli, & Mancini
Example 7. Consider the following propositional formula ϕ in CNF:
(x ∨y ∨z) ∧(x ∨¬y ∨¬z) ∧(y ∨¬z)
Since ¬x does not occur in any clause, we can assign x to 1, and maintain the satisﬁability
of the formula: for any solution t of ϕ, the assignment t[x := 1] is a solution of ϕ as well.
It is clear that the pure literal rule detects ﬁxability based on a reasoning local to each
clause (a variable x is ﬁxable to, say, 1 in a clause iﬀthis clause does not contain the literal
¬x, and the pure literal rule checks that this condition holds for every constraint).
No generalisation of the pure literal rule has, to the best of our knowledge, been proposed
for CSP, while a generalisation of the pure literal rule for QBF has been applied to solvers
for Quantiﬁed CSP under the name pure value rule (Gent, Nightingale, & Stergiou, 2005).
It can be observed that such proposal is in fact a local relaxation of the generalisation
to quantiﬁed constraints of ﬁxability.
As will be shortly discussed in Section 4, all the
properties presented in this paper can be generalized to Quantiﬁed CSP in an elegant way,
and many local relaxations remain valid.
4. Conclusions and Perspectives
In this paper we reconsidered most of the structural properties of CSPs extensively studied
and exploited in order to simplify search. Such properties may be of course useful also in
other tasks, e.g., for the classiﬁcation or update of solutions, or for compacting the solution
space, and for supporting explanation and interaction with users.
We provided a unifying framework for the properties, that clariﬁes their semantical
relationships and allows new ones to emerge. We argued that some of the new notions,
namely ﬁxability and removability play a key role in a deep understanding of the topic,
being the ideal characterisations of values that can be ﬁxed or removed preserving the
satisﬁability of the problem. Known properties, like inconsistency and substitutability are
thus suitable specialisations of them.
We then tackled the questions related to the automated detection of the diﬀerent prop-
erties and of their exploitation by the solving engine for simplifying problems. In particular,
we showed how detecting each of the proposed properties is in general as hard as the original
CSP. Hence, in order to ﬁnd eﬃcient ways for their veriﬁcation, we investigated, according
to the CSP approach, two main lines: addition of suitable restrictions of the constraint lan-
guage and approximation of the reasoning task by exploiting local versions of the various
notions. Moreover, we discussed how in some cases such properties may arise from explicit
promises made by users. This is the case of problems with properties such as functional
dependencies and unique solutions.
Two of the perspectives raised by our work concern the new central properties which
have emerged from it. We have identiﬁed the removability property as an ideal character-
isation of the values which can be removed while preserving satisﬁability. Unfortunately,
negative results (coNP-completeness of the detection of this property and impossibility of lo-
cal reasoning) make it impossible to directly use the removability property in practice. This
gives an ex-post justiﬁcation for the extensive use that has been made in the last decades of
stronger notions (like inconsistency or substitutability) which imply removability, yet can be
626

A Unifying Framework for Structural Properties of CSPs
checked by tractable means (of course at the price of losing completeness). An interesting
problem is thus to determine new cases where removability-checking is tractable.
Also, the beneﬁts of ﬁxability have long been known in the boolean case, since this
property has been used in the form of the pure literal rule in many SAT solvers. However,
no generalisation of this property to CSPs has been considered so far.
Finally, the proposed framework allows a natural and elegant generalisation to the case
of Quantiﬁed CSP. In particular, in related work (Bordeaux, Cadoli, & Mancini, 2008) we
propose the new notion of outcome as the natural counterpart at the quantiﬁed level of
the concept of solution of a CSP. With such notion in mind, all the properties studied
in this paper can be straightforwardly restated for Quantiﬁed CSP, as well as their local
relaxations, and new, even more general concepts emerge (the so-called shallow properties,
that may have an impact also at the pure existential –CSP– level). This opens important
new horizons, allowing QCSP solvers to perform a smarter reasoning on the input problem,
by taking into proper account the quantiﬁers preﬁx, that today is usually ignored.
