Self reference in word deﬁnitions
David Levary1,3, Jean-Pierre Eckmann2, Elisha Moses3 and Tsvi Tlusty3
1 Department of Physics, Harvard University, 17 Oxford Street, Cambridge, MA 02138
2 D´epartement de Physique Th´eorique and Section de Math´ematiques, Universit´e de Gen`eve, CH-1211, Geneva 4,
Switzerland
3 Department of Physics of Complex Systems, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel
PACS 89.75.-k – Complex systems
PACS 43.71.Sy – Spoken languages, processing of
PACS 89.65.-s – Social systems
Abstract – Dictionaries are inherently circular in nature. A given word is linked to a set of
alternative words (the deﬁnition) which in turn point to further descendants. Iterating through
deﬁnitions in this way, one typically ﬁnds that deﬁnitions loop back upon themselves. The graph
formed by such deﬁnitional relations is our object of study. By eliminating those links which are
not in loops, we arrive at a core subgraph of highly connected nodes. We observe that deﬁnitional
loops are conveniently classiﬁed by length, with longer loops usually emerging from semantic
misinterpretation. By breaking the long loops in the graph of the dictionary, we arrive at a set
of disconnected clusters. We ﬁnd that the words in these clusters constitute semantic units, and
moreover tend to have been introduced into the English language at similar times, suggesting a
possible mechanism for language evolution.
Introduction. –
Words are the building blocks of lan-
guage. By stringing together chains of these simple blocks,
complex thoughts and ideas can be conveyed. For a lan-
guage to be eﬀective, this transmission must not only be
precise but also eﬃcient. Indeed, the continuous expan-
sion of human languages tends to be driven less out of a
need to express concepts that were previously uncommuni-
cable, than by the constraint that concepts be transmitted
rapidly. As a result of this need for eﬃcient communica-
tion, the human lexicon is not a simple 1 to 1 mapping of
concepts onto words, but rather a complex web of seman-
tically related parts.
Network based formulations of human language have
been employed previously to study language evolution. In
this approach, words are considered to be the nodes of a
graph with edges drawn based on a variety of possible re-
lationships such as word co-occurrence in texts, thesauri,
or word association experiments on human users [1, 2].
Such language networks tend to be scale-free and exhibit
the small-world eﬀect (i.e., nodes are separated from one
another by a relatively small number of edges), character-
istics shared by many other complex, empirically observed
networks [2].
The notion of a dictionary based graph, in which di-
rected links are drawn between a word and the words in
its deﬁnition, was proposed early on in view of using com-
putational tools [3].
Dictionaries provide an important
tool for studying the relationship between words and con-
cepts by linking a given word to a set of alternative words
(the deﬁnition) which can express the same meaning. Of
course, the given deﬁnition is not unique. One might just
as well replace all of the words in the deﬁnition of the orig-
inal word in question, with their respective deﬁnitions. In
the graph of the dictionary then, a word and its set of
descendants can be viewed as semantically equivalent.
Recently, the overall structure of this dictionary graph
was analyzed [4]. It was found that dictionaries consist of
a set of words, roughly 10% the size of the original dic-
tionary, from which all other words can be deﬁned. This
subgraph was observed to be highly interconnected, with
a central strongly connected component dubbed the core.
The authors then studied the connection of this ﬁnding
with the acquisition of language in children.
The existence of the core reﬂects an important prop-
erty of the dictionary, namely its requirement that every
word have a deﬁnition (i.e., a non-zero out-degree). The
absence of “axiomatic” words whose deﬁnition is assumed
results in a graph with a large number of loops, which is
p-1
arXiv:1103.2325v1  [cs.CL]  11 Mar 2011

D. Levary et al.
inherently not tree-like in structure. Here we study these
deﬁnitional loops and show that they arise not as sim-
ple artifacts of the dictionary’s construction, but rather
as a manifestation of how coherent concepts are formed in
a language. The distribution of loops in the actual dic-
tionary diﬀers markedly from the predictions of random
graph theory. While the strong interconnectivity within
the core normally obscures semantic relationships among
its elements, by disconnecting the large loops of the graph,
we are able to decompose the core into semantically re-
lated components. We show that by careful analysis of
the interactions among these components, some of the cen-
tral concepts upon which vocabulary is structured can be
revealed. Finally, using additional etymological data, we
demonstrate that words within the same loop tend to have
been introduced into the English language at similar times,
suggesting a possible mechanism for language evolution.
Dictionary Construction. –
In order to construct
an iterable dictionary, one must both reduce inﬂected
words to their stems and resolve polysemous words to their
proper sense. We therefore used as our primary dictionary
eXtended WordNet, which provides semantically parsed
deﬁnitions for each WordNet 2.0 synset (set of synonymous
words) [5, 6]. To reduce complexity, we chose to restrict
our attention to nouns as they are the part of speech gen-
erally most directly related to the main concepts within a
text [7].
We treat the dictionary as a directed graph in which
WordNet synsets are designated as nodes, with a directed
link drawn from a node to all of the synset nodes which
appear in its deﬁnition. With this construction each sense
of a word is represented by a separate node. The resulting
graph consists of 79,689 nodes and 285,773 edges. Its in-
degree distribution obeys an approximate power law, while
the out-degree is distributed randomly following a Poisson
distribution. The in-degree and out-degree distributions
we observed are consistent with those found in [4].
For our studies, we found it convenient to represent this
graph as an adjacency matrix. The process of iterating
through deﬁnitions then corresponds to taking successive
powers of the adjacency matrix, with loops appearing as
non-zero entries in the diagonal.
The Core. –
The current lexicon arose out of the
need to express concepts both precisely and concisely. As
such, there should exist not only words that expand the
breadth of ideas we are able to communicate, but also
those that simply serve to increase the eﬃciency of infor-
mation transfer. To isolate those words which form the
conceptual basis of the English language, we calculate the
“descendants” of each word in the dictionary, namely all
nodes which can ultimately be reached along a directed
path from the given starting point. Surprisingly, as illus-
trated in ﬁg. 1, we ﬁnd that these sets of descendants are
almost completely independent of the starting point used
to reach them, intersecting in a 6,310 node set which we
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
Path Length
Number of Nodes Reached
0
5
10
15
20
0   
0.05
0.1 
0.15
0.2 
0.25
0.3 
0.35
Path Length to Half−Height
Frequency
Fig. 1: Deﬁnitional iteration of words in the dictionary.
Using a random sample of 100 words, the number of
unique nodes that could be reached within the given dis-
tance of each node was recorded. Nearly all words ulti-
mately reach a common set of 6,310 words which we call
the core of the dictionary. The convergence to the core is
both rapid, as seen in the distribution of path lengths to
half height (inset), and complete, indicating a very high
concentration of loops within the core. Note that several
words in our sample were not connected to the core, ex-
isting instead as part of small isolated deﬁnitional loops.
The half-height in these samples is therefore reached al-
most immediately.
label as our core1.
While the existence of a central strongly connected has
been demonstrated in similar dictionary graphs previously
[4], the speed at which the deﬁnitional paths converge on
the core is surprising (inset to ﬁg. 1). After only twelve
steps most paths will have already encompassed half the
core, and by thirty, all descendants will have already been
reached.
This behavior suggests that the core contains
a very high concentration of overlapping loops because,
otherwise, if there were disjoint sinks, the algorithm would
lead to one of them and miss the full height.
Our set of core words should theoretically be suﬃcient
to deﬁne all words in the dictionary, albeit with exten-
sive paraphrasing, and thus can be thought of as a simple
vocabulary.
Having constructed this dictionary core by
purely computational means, it is interesting to compare
the words in it to other simple lexicons. We compared our
core to Basic English [8], a set of 850 words British lin-
guist Charles Ogden claimed suﬃcient for daily discourse,
as well as to the English translations of the words in J¯oy¯o
Kanji, the Japanese Education Ministry’s list of 1,945
characters required to be learned by Japanese secondary
school students (accessed from [9]). As a control, we also
1To ensure that this result was not an anomaly of WordNet
glosses, we constructed a graph using the English Wiktionary [11] by
associating each word with the ﬁrst sense of its deﬁnition. Although
this set is a mere crude construction, a core of ∼2, 500 words (out
of ∼80, 000) emerged in an identical fashion.
p-2

Self reference in word deﬁnitions
Core
Basic English
J¯oy¯o Kanji
Gutenberg
Core
1595
314 (52%)
403 (29%)
265 (39%)
Basic English
600
328 (24%)
213 (32%)
J¯oy¯o Kanji
1376
319 (47%)
Gutenberg
673
Table 1: Intersection of core with other simple word lists.
Table entries represent the number of words in the inter-
section of the sets, with percent overlap given in paren-
theses. The core was reached using a simpliﬁed WordNet
dictionary graph, in which nodes were words (not synsets)
with only the ﬁrst sense of the deﬁnition considered. Only
nouns in each word list were considered. Descriptions of
the word lists are found in the main text.
compared these lists to the top 1000 most frequently used
words in all books found on Project Gutenberg (accessed
from [10]).
As these lists were of course not sense dis-
ambiguated, we temporarily reduced the resolution of our
graph by making the nodes words (instead of synsets) and
using only the ﬁrst sense of the deﬁnition. Again, only
nouns were considered in all comparisons.
Our new set of 1595 core words did share great over-
lap with all three lists (see Table 1). Notably, however
the overlap never exceeded 50% of any word list. A sur-
vey of the words in Basic English not found in the core
reveals a trend of potentially useful but perhaps deﬁni-
tionally “over-speciﬁc” words such as apple, brick, chalk,
hammer, and glove.
While these words might come in
handy in daily life, as Ogden had intended, it is easy to
see how these words would be reduced in our dictionary
into more general words which in combination can com-
municate these more speciﬁc words (e.g., in the case of
apple, both fruit and red appear in our core).
The Decomposition. –
The manner in which we
were able to reach the core suggests the somewhat coun-
terintuitive idea that all words are conceptually intercon-
nected.
In order to better characterize the connections
which lead to the emergence of our core, we searched for
deﬁnitional loops within the dictionary. We found that a
total of 9,085 nodes in our graph were elements of loops.
The core itself was saturated with loops with over 99% of
its elements being involved in cycles within it.
The distribution of loop lengths, shown in ﬁg. 2, in the
dictionary is illuminating. It appears that cycles in the
dictionary fall into two classes: short (≤5) and long (> 5).
While the appearance of long loops can be predicted solely
based on the in and out degree distributions of our graph
(the randomization in the ﬁgure), the short loops appear
to be a unique feature arising from meaningful connec-
tions between nodes. Inspection of individual loops con-
ﬁrms this assessment, with small cycles following a very
clear conceptual path while large cycles are for the most
part characterized by one or more conceptual leaps, typ-
ically caused by a misinterpretation of word sense as the
following example illustrates.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
Loop Length
Frequency
 
 
Real Graph
Randomization
Fig. 2: Distribution of deﬁnitional loops in the dictionary.
The data represent counts of links in the core indexed by
the shortest loop in which they appear. For the random-
ization, links were randomly redrawn between nodes while
keeping the in-degree and out-degree distributions of the
graph constant.
railcar →rails →bar →weapon →instrument →
skill ̸→train →railcar
Though the link between bar and weapon is perhaps ques-
tionable, the link between skill and train clearly is a
case of mistaken sense, in this case between “train” the
verb and “train” the noun. Such errors reﬂect the fact
that the semantic tagging in eXtended WordNet was done
largely computationally and is therefore subject to mis-
takes. We have observed, however, that the ratio of large
to small loops is considerably lowered when links are as-
signed based on the semantic tag in eXtended WordNet in-
stead of being assigned using na¨ıve, usage frequency based
approaches (data not shown).
Fig. 2 also shows a slight overabundance of links in-
volved in large loops in the dictionary as compared to the
randomization. This longer tail appears to result from the
fact that not all connections within a long loop are false as
illustrated in the example loop above. It therefore takes
more connections for a false loop to form in the real data
than in the randomization where every link is likely wrong.
The ﬁnding that long loops generally emerge as a re-
sult of semantic misinterpretations, suggests that the core
is in fact structured among sets of small, albeit interre-
lated, loops. Indeed, when we considered only the links
in the core involved in small loops, we found that the
core decomposed into several hundred isolated, strongly
connected components which show thematic convergence
(Table 2). The size of these components ranged from 2
to 94. For subsequent analysis we further resolved com-
ponents with size greater than twenty by considering only
the links involved in four loops within them, yielding a
total of 386 components.
It is important to note that given the high-degree of con-
nectivity between loops, large loops did exist within some
p-3

D. Levary et al.
sleet
rain
atmosphere
weather
meteorological_conditions
climate
geography
area
wind
hail
precipitation
low_pressure
snow
region
surface
periphery
edge
location
outer_space
sky
expanse
space
region
continuum
degree
position
point
extent
Fig. 3: An example of a large connected component in the decomposition. Arrows are drawn from a node to words in
it’s deﬁnition. Red links appear ﬁrst in two loops, green in three loops, blue in four loops, and orange in ﬁve loops.
emotion
height
bark
injury
winner
spirit
end
trunk
violence
contestant
dejection
dimension
tree
accident
competition
melancholy
length
lumber
feeling
Table 2: Examples of strongly connected components in
the decomposed core.
of these components. The links within these large loops,
however, were simultaneously involved in small loops and
as a result generally followed a logical progression of ideas.
Fig. 3 provides a graphical view of one of the larger com-
ponents in our decomposition, emphasizing the embedding
of small loops within the overall component.
Though clusters in our decomposition are built upon
distinct semantic ideas, they are not conceptually orthog-
onal to one another since diﬀerent loops actually share
edges.
Meaningful connections between the connected
components do of course exist, our results suggesting sim-
ply that these connections are generally acyclic in nature
(i.e., loops can be found only within clusters, not between
them).
In order to better characterize the interactions
among components and their role in the overall dictionary,
we wish to “deﬁne” each word in the dictionary in terms of
the semantic clusters. To quantify the importance of each
component in the deﬁnition we count the number of paths
in our original graph leading from the word to a given clus-
ter. In an attempt to increase the deﬁnitional weight of
clusters located close to the word in question, we allowed
vertices and edges to be repeated when counting paths so
that the number of paths to a closer cluster continues to
grow in the time taken to reach a farther one. This choice
requires us to impose a bound on the length of path we
consider. We choose this upper limit in path length as 5,
in keeping with our ﬁnding that loops of size greater than
5 usually emerge from semantic misinterpretations. Each
node in the original graph can now be associated with a
vector whose elements are the number of paths from that
node to each of the 386 components. Concatenating these
vectors yields a sparse 79, 689 × 386 matrix.
In analyzing this matrix we found that ﬁve components
appeared in over 80% of the vectors.
Not surprisingly
these components consisted of very general words (e.g.,
“entity” and “group”) and were thus ignored in further
analysis and removed from the matrix. In an attempt to
identify cohesive groups of connected components, we per-
formed singular value decomposition (SVD) on our matrix.
The resulting singular vectors (examples of which can be
found in Table 3) show a striking ability to capture ma-
jor themes within the dictionary including geography, life,
and religion. It is however the connections between the
elements in these singular vectors that are most signiﬁ-
cant. Though normally obscured by noisy connections in
the dictionary, links among topics such as the body, water,
energy, and disease in our singular vectors reﬂect powerful
semantic chains underlying the conceptual lexicon.
Loop Etymology. –
As we have seen, deﬁnitional
loops underlie much of the core structure of the dictio-
nary.
When one considers the evolution of a language,
the question arises how such loops in meaning came to
exist.
Using the Online Etymology Dictionary [12], we
manually looked up the dates of origin for words in small
loops (namely the connected components in our decom-
position). Dates were recorded only when the deﬁnition
given in the dictionary matched the sense of the word in
p-4

Self reference in word deﬁnitions
Vector 1
Vector 2
Vector 5
Vector 6
Vector 8
Old World, oceans
spine, brain
grains
body parts
Jesus, Christianity
bodies of water
body parts
bodies of water
ﬂower, seed
man, woman
The Americas
Old World, oceans
herbage
tree, bark
nucleus, DNA
inﬂuence, power
energy
ﬂower, seed
grains
Roman Empire
pathology
land
nucleus, DNA
student, teacher
narrative
water
spine, brain
speaker, speech
cognition
Gymnosperms
Vatican, absolution
organic process
bodies of water
Old Testament
respiration
pathology
book
Table 3: Examples of the highest singular components for the dictionary. The elements in the singular components are
the semantically cohesive clusters of words obtained from decomposing the core. For table entries, word(s) representing
the main theme of each cluster were chosen. Clusters are listed in order of the absolute value of their coeﬃcient in
the singular component. Only components whose absolute values were greater than 0.1 were listed. Plain text and
italics indicate positive and negative values respectively. The 3rd, 4th, and 7th highest singular components were very
similar to the vectors shown and therefore not displayed.
the loop and in the case of synsets with multiple words,
only the ﬁrst word in the synset was used. Given the con-
siderable vagueness surrounding dates of emergence in Old
English, for the purposes of our analysis all Old English
words were recorded as having emerged in the year 1150.
After eliminating proper nouns and compound words,
we found dates for 971 words distributed among 310 con-
nected components.
As shown in ﬁg. 4a, the distance
among dates of origin of words in the components is for
the most part considerably smaller than that obtained by
randomly clustering these dates.
While several compo-
nents do contain words with somewhat disparate dates of
origin, we found that such exceptions often reﬂected fun-
damental changes in the understanding of a word after
its introduction. For instance, the word “cell” was in use
several hundred years before the discovery of DNA, but
since that event the two ideas have become conceptually
interdependent.
Interestingly, the distribution of mean
dates of origin for each component (ﬁg. 4b) is bimodal in
nature. This distribution is perhaps indicative of major
periods of conceptual expansion within the English lan-
guage, with most growth appearing to occur between the
14th-16th centuries, with a secondary growth of largely
scientiﬁc words emerging in the last two centuries.
The apparent coevolution of words in loops is quite
striking. While words in a loop are of course semantically
related, there is no a priori reason to assume that seman-
tically related words in general emerge around the same
time period. For instance, the word “sneaker” is clearly
closely related to the word “shoe”, yet it is not surprising
that the two words emerged at very diﬀerent epochs (the
Online Etymology Dictionary places sneaker in 1895 and
shoe in Old English). The ﬁnding that words in loops are
typically introduced into language at the same time thus
appears to reﬂect the unique type of semantic relationship
they share.
Conclusions. –
Dictionaries possess widespread cir-
cularity in deﬁnitions. We have shown that the loop struc-
ture of actual dictionaries varies dramatically from that
which would be predicted based on random graph the-
ory alone. Speciﬁcally, we found that dictionaries rely on
short loops of between two to ﬁve words in order to deﬁne
co-dependent concepts. While long range loops do exist,
they often arise as a result of semantic misinterpretation.
Indeed, it appears to be these false loops which account
for the strongly connected nature of the dictionary core,
obscuring pockets of meaning within it.
In order to isolate “true” loops within the dictionary, we
disconnected all links between nodes which do not appear
in loops of size ﬁve or smaller. Due to strong interconnec-
tivity among certain loops, this approach importantly did
not lead to the dissolution of all long loops. Rather, our
graph decomposed into a number of strongly connected
components formed by collections of overlapping, short-
ranged loops which show thematic convergence.
Our ﬁnding that the words within a loop (i.e., elements
of the same strongly connected component in our decom-
position) were generally introduced into the English lan-
guage in the same time period underscores the unique re-
lationship among words involved in a deﬁnitional loop.
Although in theory one need only know the meanings of
some subset of the words in a loop in order to infer the def-
initions of the remaining words, at the conceptual level the
meanings of these words remain completely intertwined.
This of course begs the question of how loops could have
come to exist in the ﬁrst place. In order for a word to be
introduced into language it must be understood by mul-
tiple individuals to mean the same thing. The necessary
synchronization of word meaning among diﬀerent individ-
uals is particularly diﬃcult when the meanings themselves
exist as conceptual loops.
A potential solution to this
problem is for an individual to attempt to sequentially de-
ﬁne all the elements of the loop. While the central concept
p-5

D. Levary et al.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Median Pairwise Distance (Years)
Frequency
 
 
Real Dates
Randomizations
(a)
1100
1200
1300
1400
1500
1600
1700
1800
1900
2000
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Date of Origin
Frequency
(b)
Fig. 4: Dates of origin of words in loops. For each com-
ponent in the decomposition, the dates of origin of its
element words (in the desired sense) were looked up in
the Etymology Dictionary. Compound words and proper
nouns were ignored, as well as polysemous words.
The
median pairwise distance of elements (a) and the mean
date of origin (b) were calculated for each of the 310 com-
ponents in our analysis.
of the loop cannot be directly communicated, we propose
that the juxtaposition of the partially deﬁned elements
within the loop allows the receiver to infer the common
link among the words, thereby completing the deﬁnition
of all words in the loop. Such a system is consistent with
our ﬁnding that words within a loop tend to enter the
lexicon at the same time and, if correct, suggests that def-
initional loops are not simply a mathematical artifact of
dictionaries, but rather a key mechanism underlying lan-
guage evolution.
∗∗∗
We thank Ch. Fellbaum for pointing us to the work
of reference [4] and for helpful discussions.
This work
was funded in part by the Minerva Foundation, Munich
and the Einsten Minerva Center for Theoretical Physics.
JPE was partially supported by Fonds National Suisse and
TT was supported by Israel Science Foundation grant no.
1329/08.
