1
Image and Vision Computing
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com
Ego-Object Discovery
Marc Bola˜nosa, Petia Radevaa,b
aUniversitat de Barcelona, Gran Via de les Corts Catalanes, 585, Barcelona 08007, Spain
bComputer Vision Center, Building O Campus UAB, Bellaterra (Barcelona) 08193, Spain
ABSTRACT
Lifelogging devices are spreading faster everyday. This growth can represent great beneﬁts to develop
methods for extraction of meaningful information about the user wearing the device and his/her envi-
ronment. In this paper, we propose a semi-supervised strategy for easily discovering objects relevant
to the person wearing a ﬁrst-person camera. Given an egocentric video/images sequence acquired
by the camera, our algorithm uses both the appearance extracted by means of a convolutional neural
network and an object reﬁll methodology that allows to discover objects even in case of small amount
of object appearance in the collection of images. An SVM ﬁltering strategy is applied to deal with the
great part of the False Positive object candidates found by most of the state of the art object detectors.
We validate our method on a new egocentric dataset of 4912 daily images acquired by 4 persons as
well as on both PASCAL 2012 and MSRC datasets. We obtain for all of them results that largely
outperform the state of the art approach. We make public both the EDUB dataset1 and the algorithm
code2.
c⃝2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Ubiquitous computing is more present everyday in our lives,
and with it lifelogging devices (Hodges et al., 2006; Michael,
2013) are increasing their popularity and spread.
By us-
ing wearable cameras, we can acquire continuous data about
the life of persons, and build applications that convert this
huge amount of data into meaningful information about their
lifestyle. Hence, wearable cameras oﬀer an easy manner to ac-
quire information about our daily life tasks, and extract infor-
mation about our typical activities and habits (Betancourt et al.)
from an egocentric (or ﬁrst-person) point of view. For exam-
ple, Fig. 1 shows datasets acquired in three days by 3 diﬀerent
users. We can observe that diﬀerent persons have diﬀerent envi-
ronments. Probably, the most remarkable reason for being able
to detect visually the diﬀerences in the users’ datasets is usually
due to the distribution and aspect of scenes, objects and people
that appear. Following these premises, in this paper, we address
the problem of automatically discovering which are the usual
∗∗Marc Bola˜nos: Tel.: +34-669-648-301

1https://www.dropbox.com/s/py8xhalqxz15co3/EDUB%202015.zip?dl=0
2https://github.com/MarcBS/Ego-Object Discovery/releases
objects that form the environment of a person wearing the cam-
era by means of a novel Object Discovery (OD) method. We
must note the diﬀerence between Object Recognition, where
the goal is to discriminate objects according to their classes by
a classiﬁer previously trained with a set of training samples;
Fig. 1. Lifelogging sets from 3 users (each 2 row correspond to a diﬀerent
user). Note how objects help to discriminate diﬀerent environments. The
annotated objects are to be discovered by the object discovery algorithm.
arXiv:1504.01639v2  [cs.CV]  8 Jul 2015

2
Object Detection, where we should detect the subregion in the
image where an object appears; and Object Discovery, where
we have to both detect new object instances or concepts, and
assign them a label even without having training examples from
all possible classes of objects.
1.1. Previous Work
Several works have been previously done in the OD ﬁeld,
some using segmentation techniques (Schulter et al., 2013; Rus-
sell et al., 2006), others extracting objects relying on visual
words (Russell et al., 2006; Sivic et al., 2005; Liu and Chen,
2007). In (Chatzilari et al., 2011), a semi-supervised method
for segmentation-level labeling is presented and in (Tuytelaars
et al., 2010) a comparison of unsupervised OD methods is
shown. One of the best performing OD methods is the one Lee’s
et.al. published in (Lee and Grauman, 2011), where the authors
propose a semi-supervised OD approach for object discovery.
It starts by selecting the easiest objects by an objectness de-
tector and keeps an iterative discovery procedure by clustering
object candidates, selecting the best one as the one correspond-
ing to the newly discovered object and applying an One-Class
SVM to discover harder instances of it. The authors use a set
of low-level image appearance (texture, colour and shape) and
context features. One of its main drawbacks is that the features
that it used are not rich enough to capture the characteristics
of any existent real world object. More recently, in (Kading
et al., 2015), a method for object discovery relying in active
learning was presented. The authors base their work in the as-
sumption that when dealing with an active learning problem,
the oracle does not always know all the classes in advance and
that, furthermore, not all the classes are always interesting for
the problem at hand. With this in mind, they propose an Ex-
pected Model Output Change (EMOC) criterion for selecting
the most relevant and useful images to label for the problem
they are addressing, and at the same time trying to avoid no
valid objects by using a local density measure. Cho et al. in
(Cho et al., 2015) worked on a part-based object discovery by
proposing a new probabilistic matching strategy (Probabilistic
Hough Matching) based on HOG descriptors for ﬁnding sim-
ilar objects in diﬀerent images. Additionally, they propose an
associated conﬁdence for ﬁnding the most outstanding object in
each image.
In egocentric data, object discovery has been studied in much
less extent. There, the OD brings new challenges consider-
ing the non-intentionallity of the images, that is, compared to
usual intentional images, the objects and people (if any) usu-
ally do not appear in centered positions, and partial occlusions
produced by other objects or the image border are quite fre-
quent. In (Kang et al., 2011), the authors deﬁne a method for
ﬁnding new objects that a person can encounter in their daily
living. They start by applying a segmentation of the images at
diﬀerent levels, extracting colour, texture and shape informa-
tion from each segment and applying a series of grouping and
reﬁnement steps to ﬁnd consistent clusters that can represent
new concepts. The authors in (Fathi et al., 2011) develop an
object recognition method that uses segmentation techniques
for extracting objects on egocentric visual data. In this case,
the data acquired is captured using head-mounted cameras with
high-temporal resolution (about 30 fps), what makes impossi-
ble to record the whole day of the person (due to memory and
battery constraints). In order to solve this problem, we use cam-
eras with low-temporal resolution (2-3 frames per minute) that
are worn on chest level for maximizing the user comfort. As
a result, we obtain a collection of images instead of a video,
where objects are captured non-intentionally, and frequently ap-
pear blurred and non-centred. The main additional challenges
these cameras cause are: 1) having frames so much temporally
spaced disable the possibility to directly infer information from
sequential frames and 2) extracted motion information is not
reliable enough.
The main handicaps of existent OD methods are: 1) they lack
a way to capture and reuse the knowledge acquired when ana-
lyzing the previous data, which is very important considering
the redundancy of the data acquired in lifelogging (Min et al.,
2014), and 2) many OD methods rely on using as a ﬁrst step an
object detection algorithm like (Alexe et al., 2010; Cheng et al.,
2014; Arbel´aez et al., 2014; Uijlings et al., 2013) for having an
initial set of object candidates. As we prove in section 3.2, these
methods usually produce a very high number of False Positives
(FP) that should be dealt with.
1.2. Contributions
In this paper, we propose a new OD method for egocentric
data (based on our previous work presented in (Bola˜nos et al.,
2015)), that we call Ego-Object Discovery (EOD). Our contri-
butions start by using a set of powerful features extracted by
means of a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). These net-
works are proving their huge potential to address diﬀerent prob-
lems in the ﬁeld of Computer Vision ((Honglak et al., 2009a,b;
Goodfellow et al., 2014), just to mention a few). Lately, a new
method (Moghimi et al., 2014) using CNN data has been pro-
posed for egocentric activity recognition. However, no methods
on OD using these features exist yet. To overcome the problem
present in previous works of nonexistent knowledge reuse we
use a new Reﬁll methodology, which allows to discover new
samples from the categories, even having a low number of in-
stances, which are quite present in egocentric sequences. As ad-
ditional contributions w.r.t. our previous work, we here present
a strategy for solving the high number of FPs (or ’No Object’
candidates) produced by the object detection methods: a SVM
ﬁltering strategy. Also introduce the ﬁrst egocentric object dis-
covery dataset (EDUB) of lifelogging data with ground truth
(GT) object segmentations, apply a comparison with the state
of the art object detection algorithms, and analyze the results
of our method also on two public datasets of intentional images
(PASCAL and MSRC).
The article is organized as follows: in section 2, we deﬁne
the EOD algorithm. In section 3, we present the datasets used
to validate our method, the tests of EOD on all datasets, com-
parison of state of the art object detectors and discussions on
the obtained results. We ﬁnish with some conclusions and fu-
ture work.

3
2. The Ego-Object Discovery Approach
Given the problem of OD in low-temporal resolution egocen-
tric data, our algorithm is formulated as an iterative procedure.
At the beginning, it should be provided with a seed of initial ob-
jects information to expand, deﬁned as a small bag of labeled
objects, represented by their regions, and called a bag of re-
ﬁll. The EOD algorithm passes through several steps (see Fig.
2): a) it detects image regions representing object candidates
and their corresponding objectness scores from each new set of
images, b) extracts object candidates features by using a pre-
trained CNN, c) ﬁlters false object (’No Object’) instances and
d) proceeds with a clustering-based iterative procedure as fol-
lows: 1) on the easiest objects, it applies a reﬁll strategy by us-
ing the bag of reﬁll, 2) clusters them by using an agglomerative
clustering approach and labels the best cluster that represents
the newly discovered object and 3) applies a supervised expan-
sion to ﬁnd harder instances of it. After a ﬁxed number of t
iterations or until no easy sample remains, it outputs the set of
found object coordinates and labels.
To describe and cluster the candidates, EOD uses both ap-
pearance and local context features. Appearance are extracted
by a CNN (Jia, 2013), and context is provided by both the in-
herent description of the object background that also extracts
the CNN, and indirectly the reﬁll procedure, that will introduce
instances of the same classes but with diﬀerent backgrounds.
Being very suitable for lifelogging images considering the re-
dundancy of the objects we routinely see. In the following sub-
sections, we give details about each step of the EOD procedure.
2.1. Object Candidates Preparation
Object Candidates Generation: The ﬁrst step needed to
characterize the environment of the user through object discov-
ery is extracting a set of object candidates for each image. To
do so, we used the Objectness detector provided by Ferrari et
al. in (Alexe et al., 2010), which additionally to the bounding
box for each candidate, outputs a score associated to the prob-
ability of being a true object (objectness score). This score is
produced by three visual cues: Multi-scale Saliency (ﬁnds blob-
like structures at multiple scales that could indicate the presence
of an object); Color Contrast (ﬁnds high colour diﬀerences be-
tween the analyzed bounding box and its surroundings); and
Superpixels Straddling (penalizes the bounding boxes that do
not respect the boundaries of the superpixels in the image).
Object Candidates Characterization:
As features to
cluster the object candidates, we used a pre-trained CNN
(Krizhevsky et al., 2012), which was trained on millions of
images and is composed as a succession of convolutional and
pooling layers. We deleted the last layer, which oﬀers a su-
pervised classiﬁcation of 1.000 ImageNet classes, and used the
output of the penultimate layer as our features (4096 variables).
Note that our approach is diﬀerent to the one of (Lee and Grau-
man, 2011) that used: LAB histograms for extracting colour in-
formation, Pyramid HOG for extracting shape information, and
Spatial Pyramid Matching (Lazebnik et al., 2006) for extracting
texture information.
Fig. 2. Ego-Object Discovery methodology scheme.
The diﬀerent algo-
rithms applied in each part of the methodology are represented in orange.
False Objects Filtering: The main drawback of most object
detection methods is the huge number of FPs, they produce.
Given that it is not enough to rely on the objectness score for
discarding the ’No Object’ instances, we ﬁlter the object can-
didates by an RBF-SVM classiﬁer trained on CNN features to
distinguish ’Object’ vs. ’No Object’ instances.

4
2.2. Iterative Discovery
Easiest Objects Selection: In order to achieve an iterative
easy-ﬁrst discovery, we used their associated objectness score
to decide if a candidate ω is considered in the current iteration:
ob jectnessS core(ω) > µ + ω1σ −ω2t,
(1)
where µ and σ are respectively, the mean and the standard de-
viation of all scores, t is the current iteration, and ω1 and ω2 are
weights. This easiness measure seems a promising method for
obtaining object candidates in general. However, this technique
does not obtain the same results in egocentric datasets than in
intentional images due to the fact that images are not captured
by a person looking at objects of the world, but are acquired
non-intentionally while a person is loosely wearing the camera.
As a result of the inherent low frequency of appearance of dif-
ferent objects of the real world, to the limited image quality of
the wearable egocentric devices and to the constant moving of
the user, a great part of the photos are unclear, dark or blurry
(see Fig. 1). All this causes lower precision, when clustering
the obtained object candidates.
Reﬁll Strategy: In order to solve these problems, we deﬁne
a ”reﬁll” methodology as follows: at each iteration, the set of
selected easiest samples is completed with a certain percentage
(w.r.t. the number of easy samples retrieved) of samples from
the Bag of Reﬁll, which are randomly chosen labeled samples
distributed on the already discovered object classes. In this way,
we address two problems: 1) diﬃculty to form a cluster from a
very small set of class instances, and 2) diﬃculty to link sam-
ples of the same class that were blurry and unclear. So, reﬁlling
the space with more samples of the same class of objects, we
can obtain more compact clusters (see Fig. 3 and Fig. 4).
Fig. 3. Clusters formed by the
easiest samples.
Fig. 4. Clusters formed by the re-
ﬁlled and easiest samples.
Clustering and Hard Instances Classiﬁcation: In this step
we apply an Agglomerative Ward clustering on the object can-
didates. Moreover, once the clusters are formed, we get the Sil-
houette Coeﬃcient (Tan and Steinbach, 2011) on each cluster
and select the best for the user to assign it a label. This coeﬃ-
cient is only calculated on the unlabeled samples, never using
the reﬁlled ones for selecting the most reliable cluster. At the
end of each iteration, a OneClass-SVM for searching for harder
instances is built with the new cluster and the rest of the easy
samples are classiﬁed.
3. Results
In this section, we discuss the three datasets we used (sum-
marizing their characteristics in Table 1), and expose the diﬀer-
ent tests applied to illustrate the EOD performance.
3.1. Datasets
Due to the low number of publicly available egocentric
datasets and the complete lack of egocentric object-labeled
datasets, we considered very important to construct one and
make it public in order to serve as a base for algorithms com-
parison for the egocentric community.
The Egocentric Dataset of the University of Barcelona
(EDUB) (see Fig.
5) is a dataset composed of 4912 im-
ages acquired by 4 people using the Narrative wearable cam-
era (www.getnarrative.com). It is divided in 8 diﬀerent days,
2 days per person. The objects appearing in the images were
segmented using the online tool LabelMe (Russell et al., 2008)
(although here we only use their bounding box) and their anno-
tation ﬁles are similar to the ones provided by PASCAL. EDUB
includes the following classes (number of samples per class
are given in parenthesis): ’lamp’ (2299), ’tvmonitor’ (1274),
’hand’ (1232), ’person’ (1175), ’glass’ (831), ’building’ (732),
’face’ (565), ’aircon’ (530), ’sign’ (506), ’cupboard’ (392),
’paper’ (377), ’car’ (315), ’bottle’ (260), ’door’ (199), ’chair’
(179), ’mobilephone’ (145), ’window’ (138), ’dish’ (65), ’mo-
torbike’ (64), ’bicycle’ (12), and ’train’ (4). Note that in our
tests, we did not use the classes with few instances (i.e. smaller
than 100), considering that it would not be possible to discover
them with a clustering strategy.
Fig. 5. Object candidates obtained by the Ferrari’s objectness detector on
the EDUB dataset. From left to right and top to bottom: aircon, bottle,
building, car, chair, sign, cupboard, door, face, glass, hand, tvmonitor,
lamp, mobilephone, paper, person, window.
The second of the datasets we considered is the PASCAL
VOC 2012 (Everingham et al., 2012), being one of the most
widely used in object detection/recognition research , with very
diﬃcult and challenging images. We used the ’trainval’ (for
having more samples) set of images for our tests, but previously
deleted the images that had in common with its 2007 version.
We applied this pre-processing to avoid any bias in the results,
since some of the used object detection methods were trained
using PASCAL VOC 2007.

5
Table 1. Image/object characteristics for each of the used datasets.
images
object
candidates
GT objects
classes
MSRC
3,427
171,350
4,217
16
PASCAL
16,369
818,450
38,144
20
EDUB
4,912
245,600
11,149
17
The last of the datasets, we chose is the Microsoft Research
Cambridge (MSRC) (Lee and Grauman, 2005), which was
also used in (Lee and Grauman, 2011) for object discovery, and
therefore will ease the comparison of the results. Considering
that MSRC dataset is labeled at pixel level, we had to extract
the bounding boxes corresponding to each of the objects mak-
ing some assumptions: 1) the bounding box for an object is the
minimal closing box around all the connected pixels that belong
to the same class; 2) given the dataset is split in folders, we only
considered valid the objects with the same class as the folder’s
name; 3) the minimal area for an object to be valid was set to
50x50 image pixels (about 0.81% of the whole image); and 4)
we excluded the labels ’grass’, ’sky’, ’mountain’, ’water’ and
’road’, because they are not objects, but rather environments.
Fig. 1 and 6 show some image samples from the 3 datasets.
MSRC dataset, compared to the other two should obtain better
results due to the position of the objects (central to the image)
and their clear appearance. Even though in general PASCAL
has some object instances very diﬃcult to ﬁnd, the hardest one
is the EDUB (also considering the high rate of objects occlu-
sions, blurriness and lower image quality).
Fig. 6. MSRC image samples (top) and PASCAL 12 samples (bottom).
3.2. Object Detection Methods
Given that the ﬁrst step of the algorithm is to obtain object
candidates from the images, we tested and compared four dif-
ferent state of the art object detection methods on the three
datasets (see Table 2).
We chose Objectness (Alexe et al.,
2010), BING (Cheng et al., 2014), Multiscale Combinatorial
Grouping (MCG) (Arbel´aez et al., 2014) and Selective Search
(Uijlings et al., 2013) methods considering their good perfor-
mances. For MCG, we applied its quickest, but less exhaustive
version.
Due to the dramatic increase of space needed to store all the
samples1, we extracted the top W = 50 object candidates per
image sorted by their objectness score.
Analyzing the percentage of NO (see overlapping score in
section 3.3) and DR of each method, we can see that the DR
1Considering the PASCAL 12 dataset, we needed nearly 30GB of data to
store all the images and features for the tests
Table 2. Percentage of ’No Objects’ (NO) (or of False Positives) and De-
tection Rate (DR) comparison of the four object detection methods on our
three datasets.
Objectness
BING
MCG
Sel.Search
MSRC
NO
DR
91.69
88.83
96.68
64.15
48.42
79.61
61.95
70.98
PASCAL
NO
DR
92.14
60.47
92.93
56.93
65.16
49.36
71.30
36.71
EDUB
NO
DR
92.75
60.45
95.43
50.00
79.17
49.57
84.27
29.09
is not as high as desired and the % of NO is remarkably high.
Meaning that using any of the best state of the art approaches
for object detection makes us lose a lot of information, so we
have to consider that our ﬁnal results will be inevitably biased
and worsen for this reason.
Comparing the diﬀerent datasets, as one could immediately
expect looking at the images, it is clearly easier for any object-
ness measure to get good results on the MSRC dataset, mean-
while it is quite more diﬃcult on PASCAL and EDUB, having
an extra diﬃculty for the second one due to the non-intentional
acquisition and less clear images of the wearable cameras.
Given our ﬁnal goal of being able to discover the true dis-
tribution of object classes and as many individual GT objects
as possible, we considered that the objectness measure that ob-
tained better results for EOD was the one proposed by (Alexe
et al., 2010), because we are interested in getting most of the
GT objects in the dataset, even if we have to deal with a lot of
NO (i.e. noisy or FP) instances.
3.3. Experimental Setup
In order to perform the methodology validation, we ﬁrst
leave a 50% of the object classes in the unlabeled pool as
a test set. Note that we need to test if the algorithm is able
to discover unseen object classes. From the remaining part of
classes, similar to (Lee and Grauman, 2011), we separated a
40% of the total object candidates to represent the initial knowl-
edge located into the bag of reﬁll and used the remaining 60%
for testing, too.
In order to say that a candidate matches a GT object bounding
box, we followed the PASCAL VOC challenge criterion, that
uses the Overlapping Score (OS). Given a window region ω
produced by the object detector, is considered a hit on a GT
label, iﬀ:
OS = |GT ∩ω|
|GT ∪ω| > 0.5
(2)
Due to the challenging images presented to the object detec-
tor, a very high percentage of samples (more than 92% using
Ferrari’s objectness) could not be considered objects, and were
labeled as NO.
In order to tune the parameters for the SVM ﬁlter strat-
egy for each of the datasets, we applied a nested 5-fold cross-
validation with 5 test divisions with a grid of parameters of σ ∈
{0.1, 0.5, 3, 10, 100, 1000} and C ∈{0.1, 0.5, 3, 10, 100, 1000}.
All the tests were performed for each dataset separately and on a

6
randomly selected fraction of its samples to save computational
time. With these tests, we ﬁnally found that the best param-
eters for ﬁltering as many NO instances and at the same time
keeping as many ’Object’ instances as possible (high sensitiv-
ity and high speciﬁcity) for both the PASCAL and the MSRC
classiﬁers were σ = 100 and C = 3. In the labeling step, for
simulation purposes, we labeled the best cluster with a majority
voting strategy w.r.t the GT, although this labeling is intended
to be made by the camera user his-/herself.
We designed diﬀerent test settings to evaluate our proposal:
S1: Features of (Lee and Grauman, 2011).
S2: CNN object features.
S3: CNN object features with Reﬁll strategy.
S4: CNN object concatenated with CNN scene features and
Reﬁll strategy.
S5: CNN object features with Reﬁll and SVM ﬁlter.
S6: CNN object features with Reﬁll, SVM ﬁlter and PCA.
With the ﬁrst pair of settings, we intend to compare the gen-
eralization capabilities of the appearance features from (Lee
and Grauman, 2011) against the extracted CNN features. In
setting S4, we tested adding a context about the scene, and in
setting S6, we applied a PCA feature dimensionality reduction
and transformation in case there is redundancy in the extracted
CNN features.
3.4. Silhouette Coeﬃcient Comparison
In order to check if the clusters formed by using CNN fea-
tures are more robust than the ones formed by using the features
from (Lee and Grauman, 2011), we can analyse the mean sil-
houette coeﬃcient values obtained in several iterations. In Fig.
7 we plot the diﬀerence on the silhouette coeﬃcient values ob-
tained by using the two kind of features. The comparison is
applied for the top 15 clusters on the ﬁrst 50 iterations of the
algorithm.
We can immediately realise that the average compactness of
the clusters and their diﬀerence to the other clusters (which is
what Silhouette Coeﬃcient measures) is always higher when
using CNN features, and will lead to get purer clusters and a
better labeling.
3.5. F-Measure Comparison on EDUB
To evaluate our approach, we used the F-Measure, because it
objectively penalizes the FP and FN objects in each class, that
is, represents a trade-oﬀbetween the Precision and Recall of the
method. At the same time, we want to give the same importance
to all classes, and are interested in ﬁnding as many diﬀerent
classes as possible, but always leaving the NO instances aside,
without considering them into the quality measures. Hence,
we applied the average per-class precision and recall deﬁned in
Fig. 7. Comparison of mean silhouette coeﬃcient (thick lines) and standard
deviation (thin lines) for the top 15 clusters on 50 algorithm iterations (high
values are better).
(Sokolova and Lapalme, 2009) in order to obtain the average
F-Measure:
F-Measure = 2 PrecisionM ∗RecallM
PrecisionM + RecallM
,
(3)
where PrecisionM and RecallM are the mean precision and re-
call of all classes, giving the same weight to all of them.
All measures were averaged by at least 5 executions per set-
ting and for a maximum of 100 algorithm iterations. Using
these tests, we compared all settings at the end of the easiest
samples discovery (Fig.8) and on each iteration (Fig.9).
Fig. 8. Final F-Measure for each
setting.
Fig. 9. F-Measure evolution for
each diﬀerent setting.
Looking at Fig.8, we can clearly see that using CNN outper-
forms the features of (Lee and Grauman, 2011), indicating that
they can form purer clusters and ﬁnd a wider variety of classes
thanks to their best representation. Then, adding the Reﬁll tech-
nique, the EOD method outperforms the one using the CNN
features only. The rest of the methods can not reach the same
results as CNN + Reﬁll. Moreover, using the additional CNN
features of the whole image adds just noise to the set of fea-
tures. That is, simply by using the CNN with the bounding box
of the object candidate already captures the closest and most
relevant object context. Considering the high dimensionality
of CNN features, it seems that including a PCA dimensionality

7
reduction to the data does not provide any beneﬁt to the object
discovery.
Comparing the evolution of the F-Measure through the it-
erations (Fig. 9), we see that any of the settings using CNN
features experiments a much higher increase in the F-Measure
value just in the ﬁrst 5-10 iterations, meaning that they can ﬁnd
clusters of true objects quicker than using the setting S1.
Also, using the CNN features combined with the reﬁll strat-
egy, the results clearly improved from 0.072 to 0.285. This is
caused by the discovery of diﬀerent classes of samples. While
when using the features of (Lee and Grauman, 2011), we are
only able to discover 3 or 4 classes at most, achieving an aver-
age of 0.072 F-Measure; with the setting S3, we can discover
instances of more than half of the classes, getting nearly 0.29
of F-Measure. Although on the EDUB using the setting S5
(CNN + Reﬁll + SVM Filtering) does not seem to get as good
F-Measure results as on the other settings, in other datasets, as
we will be able to see, it outperforms or nearly reaches the re-
sults of setting S3. Furthermore, it gets a wider variety of object
classes.
3.6. F-Measure Comparison on All Datasets
After having found the best combination of methods and pa-
rameters to use, we tested and compared how good the new
method was contrasting it with the state of the art method (Lee
and Grauman, 2011) for any of the datasets (EDUB, PASCAL
2012 and MSRC). In table 3, we can see a summary of the F-
Measure results obtained for each of the datasets and each of
the best test settings (average on at least 5 tests per setting).
Table 3. F-Measure comparison for the three datasets, the state of the art
(Lee and Grauman, 2011) and our best test settings (CNN + Reﬁll and
CNN + Reﬁll + Filter).
F-Measure
S1
S3 (ours)
S5 (ours)
MSRC
0.121
0.431
0.410
PASCAL
0.002
0.145
0.179
EDUB
0.072
0.285
0.250
Average
0.065
0.287
0.280
As we can see, using any of our best methods (either set-
ting S3 or setting S5) clearly outperforms the state of the art
features, having from a 350% to a 9000% of improvement de-
pending on the dataset and the settings, and a 453% of average
improvement with the best setting.
Even though the average F-Measure result obtained using the
SVM ﬁltering (setting S5) is worse than without it (setting S3),
we must consider that these classiﬁers have been built with sam-
ples from diﬀerent datasets than the ones on test (1/2 of the
PASCAL samples for MSRC tests and all MSRC samples for
both PASCAL and EDUB tests), meaning that the generaliza-
tion will be poorer than if we built a general classiﬁer with im-
ages from any of the datasets.
Another important consideration we must take into account,
is that for the MSRC tests, although the ﬁnal (after 100 itera-
tions) F-Measure results are better without the ﬁltering, in fact
they were better with the ﬁltering from the 1st to the 75th iter-
ation, meaning that in some cases, it can oﬀer better results if
we want to stop early the discovery method.
3.7. Object Discovery Results
In this section, we analyze the object discovery results in
more general terms. In Fig. 10, we can see the absolute number
of object instances found by each of the methods compared to
the GT and the ones found by the Objectness measure ((Alexe
et al., 2010), in this case without counting repeated instances of
the same object).
Fig. 10. Objects found by each method compared to the GT and the ones
found by the Objectness measure (Alexe et al., 2010).
As we can see, using the parameters of setting S1 (Lee and
Grauman, 2011), we are only able to ﬁnd instances from 3 dif-
ferent classes, which causes the previously seen very low F-
Measure results. On the other hand, using either CNN + Re-
ﬁll (setting S3) or CNN + Reﬁll + Filter (setting S5), we can
clearly discover objects from a wider variety of classes, which
also causes the higher resulting F-Measure. Moreover, we get
a wider variety of classes with setting S5 (10 diﬀerent classes)
than with setting S3 (8 diﬀerent classes).
If we check the discovery order of the classes in each of
the methods (see Fig. 12), we can see that some classes are
more easily discovered and repeated over the following itera-
tions than others. This is caused not only by the number of
class instances appearing in the dataset, but also by the pre-
viously acquired knowledge (reﬁll), the general method used,
and/or the intra-class variability.
Fig. 12. First discovery of the object classes as a function of iterations.

8
Table 4. Number of clusters found for each class using any of the settings S1, S3 or S5.
Test
No Object
hand
lamp
cupboard
car
glass
chair
face
door
window
tvmonitor
building
paper
person
mobilephone
sign
S1
96
0
1
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
S3
71
1
0
3
0
1
0
6
0
0
8
0
4
0
0
3
S5
49
2
3
6
0
0
4
5
1
1
23
0
1
5
0
0
Fig. 11. Examples of discovered objects for three diﬀerent subjects (one row each). Better viewed in digital format.
If we analyse the clusters number, where we ﬁnd each class
(see Table 4), we can see that even though having the same per-
centage of NO candidates (92.75%), using Grauman’s features
(setting S1), we get 96% of the clusters labeled as NO, but only
71% of them using CNN + Reﬁll (setting S3). Then, comparing
it when adding the SVM ﬁltering (setting S5), we can see that
it gets reduced to a 49% of the clusters thanks to the dramatic
reduction of NO instances in the pool of unlabeled samples.
In Fig. 13, we can see the evolution of GT unique instances
discovered by each of the methods on the accumulated itera-
tions (each data point corresponds to an algorithm iteration)
w.r.t. the F-Measure obtained by the method.
Fig. 13. Percentage of GT object discoveries accumulated on each iteration
w.r.t. the F-Measure obtained.
We can see that using Grauman’s features seems to cover a
wider variety of object samples than either with settings S3 or
S5 (about 16% against about 6-7% of the GT samples). This
result is probably directly related to the lower F-Measure ob-
tained. Due to the lower generalization and representation ca-
pabilities of the set of features used (compared to CNN), the
labeled clusters contain a wider variety of samples and objects,
causing to label more unique object instances, but at the same
time having a worse average result.
In Fig. 11 there are some examples of objects discovered by
our methodology. We can see that it is able to discover instances
of the same classes even having a high intra-class variability
(person or hand). Note that some samples are not yet discovered
due to the limited number of iterations applied (100).
Regarding the complexity of EOD, it is easy to see that (in-
dependently to the length of our feature vectors):
• The objectness score extraction is of complexity O(N), be-
ing N the number of images in the dataset;
• The SVM ﬁltering has complexity O(N);
• The sorting of easiest objects is O(N∗Wlog(N∗W)), being
W the number of candidates extracted for each image;
• The reﬁll strategy is O(1);
• The CNN features extraction is O(M), being M the easy
objects number in the current iteration;
• The clustering of easy objects is O(M2);
• The best cluster labeling is O(1);
• The one-class SVM cost is O(M).
Leading in total a cost of O(N ∗Wlog(N ∗W) + M2), for each
iteration.
4. Conclusions
In this paper, we proposed a novel semi-supervised object
discovery algorithm for egocentric data that relies on features
extracted from a pre-trained CNN and uses a reﬁll strategy for
ﬁnding easily the classes with less samples.
Moreover, we
added a SVM ﬁltering strategy for discarding a great part of
the high amount of ’No Object’ classes produced by any of the

9
objectness measures. We compared 4 of the state of the art ob-
jectness measures in terms of ’No Object’ instances produced
and the Detection Rate obtained when extracting a low number
of object candidates (W=50). We proved that the CNN fea-
tures, the reﬁll strategy (and the SVM ﬁltering) can produce
much better F-Measure results and can discover a larger num-
ber of infrequent classes than the state of the art approach on
three datasets (MSRC, PASCAL 12 and EDUB), either being
from general easy images, to egocentric and very diﬃcult ones.
Furthermore, we proved that this combined strategy also works
better than the previous ones for very noisy and blurry images.
5. Future Work
Our future work involves the following tasks:
1. Deﬁne an algorithm to discover objects, scenes and people
to characterize the environment of the persons wearing the
camera,
2. Propose an iterative and combined scene and object dis-
covery to take proﬁt of the samples discovered from the
complementary categories, and
3. Make the method discriminative i.e. to detect which are
the objects and scenes that characterize the environment
of a person and distinguish them with respect to those of
the other people.
