Combining Federated and Active Learning for
Communication-efﬁcient Distributed Failure
Prediction in Aeronautics
Nicolas Aussel∗†, Sophie Chabridon†, Yohan Petetin†
∗formerly: Zodiac Inﬂight Innovations, Wessling, Germany
†SAMOVAR, T´el´ecom SudParis, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France
Abstract—Machine Learning has proven useful in the recent
years as a way to achieve failure prediction for industrial systems.
However, the high computational resources necessary to run
learning algorithms are an obstacle to its widespread application.
The sub-ﬁeld of Distributed Learning offers a solution to this
problem by enabling the use of remote resources but at the ex-
pense of introducing communication costs in the application that
are not always acceptable. In this paper, we propose a distributed
learning approach able to optimize the use of computational
and communication resources to achieve excellent learning model
performances through a centralized architecture. To achieve this,
we present a new centralized distributed learning algorithm
that relies on the learning paradigms of Active Learning and
Federated Learning to offer a communication-efﬁcient method
that offers guarantees of model precision on both the clients
and the central server. We evaluate this method on a public
benchmark and show that its performances in terms of precision
are very close to state-of-the-art performance level of non-
distributed learning despite additional constraints.
Index Terms—Distributed Learning, Failure Prediction, Active
Learning, Federated Learning, Machine Learning
I. INTRODUCTION
A. General problem
In the recent years, the efﬁciency of Machine Learning for
automated processing of large volumes of data has been widely
demonstrated. This has been of particular interest for industrial
applications that commonly generate large datasets. One such
application is failure prediction as the ability to anticipate on
a system failure can lead to improvement in its reliability and
to more optimized maintenance processes. However, a known
limitation for the use of Machine Learning is its high computa-
tional costs relative to more traditional threshold-based system
monitoring. In some application contexts, a simple solution to
this can be found by either deploying additional resources at
the location where they are needed or by ofﬂoading the data
to a remote location following the cloud computing paradigm.
There are however situations where neither of those options
are realistic.
If we consider the application case of vehicular systems
in general and, more speciﬁcally, aeronautical systems, they
would greatly beneﬁt from increased reliability and optimized
maintenance processes and the latest generations of aircraft
do have both on-board computational capabilities and data
links with the ground. However, aeronautical systems generate
too much data to be able to handle failure prediction on the
aircraft for lack of computational resources and deploying
additional on-board resources is very complex and costly.
Moreover, the data links available between the aircraft and
the ground are too expensive and not fast enough to transfer
all the data. Therefore, we cannot directly apply a cloud
computing paradigm which would consist in ofﬂoading all the
data to a remote location such as a data centre with sufﬁcient
computational resources and collecting the results.
The solution for this would be to distribute the workload
between the aircraft and a ground station in a client/server
architecture in order to use their different capabilities in the
most efﬁcient way. In this situation, we can identify require-
ments that the solution will need to demonstrate to function
in a distributed manner. Firstly, it will need to be able to
classify data from normal readings, i.e. situations where there
are no signs of imminent failures, using a minimal amount of
computation power. We will refer to this requirement as R1.
This is key to be able to process the large volume of data
generated by the aeronautical systems without overloading
the data link. Secondly, the solution for failure prediction
will need a mechanism to identify interesting data, i.e. data
that could be indicative of an imminent failure with regards
to a pre-deﬁned threshold, and transfer this data from the
aircraft to a central server on the ground without spending too
much communication budget. We will refer to it as R2. This
is a direct consequence of the observation that the amount
of computational power on board is too limited to give an
accurate prediction of failure risks. Thirdly, we need a way to
train a prediction model on the ground without accessing the
data from the aircraft. We will refer to it as R3. This is a direct
consequence of the previous two requirements as only a small
amount data can be sent to the central server. But, as accurate
predictions are expected from it, we need a mechanism to
enable centralized learning without accessing the raw data.
Different solutions already exist for each of the requirements
we have identiﬁed taken individually. The main concern here
is to ﬁgure out how to fulﬁl all three requirements simultane-
ously.
B. Distributed Learning paradigms
The ﬁeld of Machine Learning dealing with distributed
algorithms is Distributed Learning. There are two sub-ﬁelds
in particular that provide interesting elements of answer for
arXiv:2001.07504v1  [cs.AI]  21 Jan 2020

our application case, Active Learning [1] and Federated Learn-
ing [2]. They have been designed with slightly different use
cases in mind which obviously leads to slightly different
requirements but that nevertheless matches our use case quite
well.
The Active Learning paradigm offers a way to model the
envisioned relationship between the aircraft and the central
server on the ground. Its premise is that the model being
trained has access to a third-party source of information, called
an oracle, to reveal labels when necessary and its goal is
to maximize the performance of the trained model under a
request budget. We can immediately draw a parallel with the
requirement R2 of the solution we identiﬁed, identify uncertain
samples and transmit them under a communication budget.
With the aircraft playing the role of the active learning model
in training and the central server playing the role of the oracle
albeit an imperfect one (an unusual situation but already stud-
ied, for example in [3]), the active learning paradigm offers
an approach to select the hard-to-classify data and balance the
amount of requests with the communication budget. Regarding
requirement R1, enabling computation-efﬁcient classiﬁcation
of normal samples, however, further investigations are required
as a number of works in Active Learning favour a greedy
approach incompatible with the idea that normal readings need
to be processed quickly.
The Federated Learning paradigm is directly related to
requirement R3, i.e. enabling centralized learning without
accessing raw data. The communication budget and the com-
putational resources of the hosts are also concerns that are
considered in this approach. However, it is purely driven by
the central server and does not provide any mechanism for the
clients to assess their performance and request clariﬁcations
from the central server.
The goal of this contribution is to propose a new approach
that fulﬁls all three requirements by combining Active Learn-
ing and Federated Learning. The performances are evaluated
on a public benchmark and compared to existing solutions.
The contribution is organized as follows. First, we study
existing works in Active Learning and Federated Learning
in section II. Next, we detail our solution in section III. We
present our results and interpret them in section IV and section
V concludes the contribution.
II. RELATED WORK
In this section, we review state-of-the-art works related to
our problem focussing on the applicability of the techniques
reviewed with regards to the three identiﬁed requirements.
On the matter of distributed learning publications that are of
particular interest to us we have to mention [4]. In this article,
an Internet of Things (IoT) distributed learning framework for
classiﬁcation is presented and evaluated on network overhead
and model accuracy. The authors present a solution called
Hypothesis Transfer Learning based on an implementation of
Greedy Transfer Learning found in [5]. In this decentralized
approach, every host computes a local model based on the
data accessible to it, sends its model to all its neighbours in
a synchronization phase and collects their models. A second
round of training is done, using Greedy Transfer Learning
from neighbour models to improve the local model. The
synchronization phase is then repeated until the host receives
the updated local model of every host that has contributed
to the distributed learning. Finally, the models are aggregated
in an ensemble model using majority voting, that is to say
the result of the classiﬁcation is the most frequent prediction
among the aggregated models. This work considers several
hypothesis that are relevant for aeronautical systems; namely,
it avoids data transfer between hosts, provides an explicit way
to trade-off network overhead and models accuracy by tuning
how many nodes take part to the Greedy Transfer Learning
training and it considers the case of class imbalance (though
with a much less drastic ratio). The most signiﬁcant difference
with the prediction in aeronautical systems, beside the order
of magnitude change in class imbalance ratio, is that it is a
decentralized algorithm with communication between hosts,
which is not a realistic hypothesis for an aircraft. Another
problem that it does not address is the fact that the performance
of individual models is not controlled meaning that it is not
lower bounded and that there are no mechanisms to correct a
potential drift of a local model. It makes sense in the situation
considered in [4] but it is a requirement that needs to be
addressed in the aeronautical use case.
Note that for aeronautics applications, we would like to use
Random Forest (RF) because of its resilience to noise and class
imbalance as seen in [6] and that it can be proved reliable in a
range of safety scenarios. An issue remains in that RF is easy
to distribute but there is no guarantee on the performance of
individual trees.
A. Federated Learning
The terminology of Federated Learning was coined recently
in [2]. It describes a Distributed Learning situation where the
following observations apply:
• There is a massive number of clients with limited com-
putational resources each holding a unique fraction of
the dataset. Their availability is subject to changes. This
matches well the aeronautical use case where individual
aircraft can be seen as clients. Their availability is not
perfect and depends on the satellite connection.
• The data are not independent and identically distributed
between clients. In the original use case because it is
assumed that different users will interact differently with
their mobile device and type differently. In the aeronau-
tical use case, this holds true as different aircraft can
face different ﬂight conditions depending on their route
and the way their systems are used by the crew and the
passengers.
• Communications are allowed between the clients and a
central server but they are limited by a communication
budget and, for privacy concerns, no exchange of raw
data is allowed. In the aeronautical use case, the privacy
requirement between the client and the server is relaxed
but the communication constraint is certainly relevant.

The original solution proposed is to initialize randomly a deep
learning model at the server level and to gather incremental
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) updates from the clients
while exchanging only the model parameters with them.
Since the publication of the original article, several contri-
butions have followed and improved different aspects of this
method. More speciﬁcally, [7] proposes a way to improve the
communication efﬁciency and [8] and [9] offer new insights as
how to better guarantee that the privacy concerns are respected.
The Federated Learning approach is of high interest for
us as it describes a framework for massively distributed and
communication-efﬁcient learning in a context very close to
ours. In particular, Federated Learning would be a great
answer to our requirement R3, learning in a centralized model
without downloading data from the clients. There are however
limitations. We have so far identiﬁed RF as our most promising
choice for a base learning model. Also, Federated Learning
is developed for Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) and uses
incremental SGD updates from the clients. However, RF does
not use SGD so we cannot apply Federated Learning directly.
Also, Federated Learning does not offer any solution for
our second identiﬁed requirement R2, identify and uncertain
samples and transmit them under a communication budget. For
that, we turn to Active Learning.
B. Active Learning
Active Learning is a sub-ﬁeld of semi-supervised learning
where a third-party, called an oracle, can provide missing
labels on request. It is traditionally applied in situations where
data labelling requires the intervention of a human operator
that is both costly and slow. The goal is then to learn the
most accurate model possible under a given request budget.
The general principle of Active Learning is interesting for
our problem because it allows us to dynamically balance
uncertainty on client-side and communication budget which
would offer us a solution to fulﬁl the requirement R2, identify
uncertain samples and transmit them under a communication
budget.
A summary of the principles of Active Learning from a
statistical perspective can be found in [1].The most common
approach for concrete applications is called pool-based active
learning and described in [10]. The assumption in this ap-
proach is that there is a large pool of unlabelled data and a
smaller pool of labelled data available. The labelled data is
used to bootstrap a tentative model and a metrics to measure
the amount of information gain one can expect from a sample
is deﬁned. Some examples of metrics can be a distance metrics
between the sample and the decision boundary of the model,
the density of labelled data in the vicinity of the sample or the
difference in the learned model with regards to the possible
labels. Once the metrics is deﬁned, the unlabelled samples that
are expected to maximize the information gain are queried
from the oracle then the tentative model is updated and the
process is repeated until the expected information gain falls
below a pre-deﬁned threshold, meaning that no new label is
expected to signiﬁcantly change the model, or the query budget
is spent.
However, pool-based approaches are not a very good ﬁt for
our aeronautical application case as they often use a greedy
sampling approach meant to minimize the intervention of the
oracle, often a human operator, with the limitation of being
prohibitively expensive in terms of computation; a human
operator is indeed still orders of magnitude slower and more
expensive than a complex computation. Examples of this can
be found in [11], [12] and [13] illustrating the versatility of
pool-based Active Learning with three applications on very
different use cases of respectively spam detection, image
classiﬁcation and network intrusion detection. In our case,
however, we envision the oracle as another more powerful
model faster and less expensive than a human operator and
we assume that complex computations are not possible on the
client-side.
There are other works on online active learning that adopt
a stream-based approach. In that approach, the decision to
request a label from the oracle must be done immediately
and leads to more efﬁcient decision from a computation point
of view. Examples of this approach can be found in [14]
for an application to document classiﬁcation and in [15] for
an application to sentiment analysis. [16] is an article of
particular interest to this article as it proposes a new way
to train decision trees using an active learning approach that
focuses on minimizing the risk of selecting a sub-optimal split
when a new leaf is added to the tree by computing conﬁdence
intervals. To put it differently, when a new leaf is added to
the tree, the comparison is made between the ideal decision
tree that could have been made if the true distribution of
the samples were known and the expected performance of
the current tree. If the difference is then found to exceed a
certain threshold, labels are requested to minimize the risk of
selecting a sub-optimal split for the new leaf. The point that is
the most relevant for this article is that, by moving away from
a greedy approach, we can ensure that the computation cost
remains manageable, making this algorithm suitable for an on-
board implementation. Moreover, the notion of approaching
the uncertainty in terms of bounded risks for the model to
be sub-optimal instead of considering sample misclassiﬁcation
makes it possible to directly manage the trade-off between
the communication budget and the quality of the model. The
only remaining limitation is that this model is not distributed.
Therefore, we still need to implement a mechanism to leverage
remote data sources to create a centralized model in order
to fulﬁl requirement R3, enable centralized learning without
accessing client raw data.
III. PROPOSED ALGORITHM
The approach we propose to combine Active Learning and
Federated Learning is to use the conﬁdence based active online
Decision Tree (DT) from [16] as a base model that is learned
on the client side and sent to the server. The server aggregates
the client DTs in an ensemble model similar to a RF to learn
an accurate model without accessing the raw data. Finally, the

individual DTs use the ensemble model from the server as an
oracle for label requests. The ﬁgure 1 provides a high-level
illustration of the approach envisioned.
To get more into details, each client has access to its local
dataset and trains a conﬁdence based active online DT locally.
Regularly, the central server sends an update request to the
clients. The clients reply with their current DT. The server
creates an ensemble model by collecting all the DTs. The
ensemble model relies on majority voting to classify new
samples, that is to say a new sample is run through each DT
and its classiﬁcation is the most frequent result among all
DTs. A ﬁrst parameter to control the communication budget
of the approach will therefore be how often the central server
requests updates from the clients.
From the clients perspective, they have at their disposal a
stream of observations to train their local DT. As described
in [16], whenever the uncertainty surrounding a new split in
the DT exceeds a certain conﬁdence threshold, a request is
made to reveal the true label of the samples needed to decide
on the right split and a part of the request budget is spent. Here
the requests are sent to the server and the labels are decided
using the ensemble model. There is a second parameter to
control the communication budget of the approach in the
request budget of each client.
There is a last point that needs to be clariﬁed in the
initialization of the model. Indeed, the necessary labels for
the training of the DT are provided by the ensemble model.
However, the ensemble model can only provide labels after
it has received base models from the clients. In order to
get around this constraint, we assume that some amount of
labelled historical data is already available and can be used in
the ﬁrst round of update to initialize the DTs. This assumption
is perfectly justiﬁed in the aeronautical use case where there
is plenty of historical data available and the problem of label
availability only concerns recent data where the true status of a
system has not been clariﬁed through a maintenance operation
yet.
The proposed process is described in algorithm 1.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Experimental settings
In order to enable a meaningful comparison with other
works, we have selected for our experiments the MOA airlines
dataset1, one of the public benchmarks that was used in [16].
Though it is related to the air transport industry, it is not strictly
speaking a dataset from an aeronautical system but it presents
the advantages of being public and enabling comparisons with
other solutions. This dataset consists of over 500, 000 samples
each with a label and seven features. Each sample corresponds
to a real ﬂight and the task is to predict if the ﬂight has
taken off on schedule or if it was delayed. The seven features
available are summarized in Table I. The imbalance ratio in
this dataset is quite even at 0.80 in favour of the ﬂights that are
not delayed. This means that some of the techniques such as
1https://moa.cms.waikato.ac.nz/datasets/
Support Vector Machine (SVM) or Logistic Regression (LR)
could have acceptable performances on this particular dataset.
However, since the target application for aeronautical systems
would display a much higher level of class imbalance due to
their reliability and since our proposed method is DT based,
we do not consider them further.
To evaluate the performance of our algorithm, we report the
precision, recall and F-score as in the previous contributions.
Given the relatively balanced nature of this dataset and to
provide as many elements of comparison as possible with other
works done on this benchmark, we also report the accuracy.
Deﬁning the delayed ﬂights as positives and the ﬂights on
schedule as negatives, as the labels in the dataset suggest us
to do, and writing true positives, false positives, true negatives
and false negatives respectively TP, FP, TN and FN, we deﬁne:
accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN
(1)
precision =
TP
TP + FP
(2)
recall =
TP
TP + FN
(3)
F −score = 2 × precision × recall
precision + recall
(4)
In order to ensure the validity of our results, we apply a 2-
fold cross-validation by randomly splitting out the dataset into
two sets, one for training and one for testing, measuring the
performances a ﬁrst time and repeating every measurement
a second time after inverting the training and testing sets.
Regarding the parameters of this experiment, we examine
more speciﬁcally the performance of our method with regards
to the number of hosts among which the samples will be
split, the maximum request budget available for the active
learning process and the number of communication rounds for
the federated learning process. When studying the variations
of a parameter, others were kept at constant with 20 commu-
nication rounds, 5 clients and a request budget of 10%. The
numbers of communication rounds and clients were chosen
so that the constraints of distributed learning would be visible
and the request budget was chosen so that comparisons with
other methods are facilitated.
B. Results and discussion
The results are grouped by variable parameter and displayed
in Figure 2 for the number of hosts, in Figure 3 for the number
of communication rounds and in Figure 4 for the request
budget. As additional information, Figure 5 provides insights
on the average performances of individual clients for varying
number request budgets.
In Figure 2, the ﬁrst observation that we can make is that
the results seem slightly unstable, especially considering that
cross-validation has already been applied to them so one could
expect smoother curves. In fact, the relative instability is a side
effect of the majority voting employed in the ensemble model.
When the number of clients is even, there is a limit case where

Fig. 1. Illustration of Federated Active Learning
Algorithm 1 Federated Active Forest
▷Ft is the forest at round t, Tk,t is the kth tree of Ft, C is the set of clients, Ck is the kth client of C, nk,t is the dataset
gathered by the kth client between rounds t and t −1, Bmax is the maximum request budget and Bk,t is the request budget
remaining for the kth client at round t
1: Start
2:
F0 ←SEEDFOREST(C)
3:
for each round t = 1, 2, ... do
4:
for each client Ck in C do
5:
Tk,t ←CLIENTUPDATE((Tk,t−1))
6:
end for
7:
Ft ←S
∀k
(Tk,t)
8:
end for
9: End
10: function SEEDFOREST(C)
▷Server-side function
11:
for each client Ck in C do
12:
Tk,0 ←SEEDTREE()
13:
end for
14:
F0 ←S
∀k
(Tk,0)
15: end function
16: function CLIENTUPDATE(Tk,t−1)
▷Client-side function
17:
Bupdated ←Bk,t−1 + UPDATEBUDGET(sizeof(nk,t))
▷Request budget increased to match dataset growth
18:
Tk,t, Bkt ←CONFIDENCEDECISIONTREE(Tk,t−1, nk,tBupdated)
19:
return (Tk,t)
20: end function
21: function SEEDTREE
▷Client-side function
22:
Tk,0, Bk,0 ←CONFIDENCEDECISIONTREE(Root Tree, nk,0, Bmax)
▷Root Tree is a tree limited to a root node,
nk,0 is assumed to be fully labelled
23:
return (Tk,0)
24: end function

Feature
Description
Format
Airline
Unique identiﬁer of the airline operating the ﬂight
alphanumeric
Flight numeric
Unique ﬂight ID
numeric
AirportFrom
Origin airport unique IATA code
string
AirportTo
Destination airport unique IATA code
string
DayOfWeek
Day of the week
numeric
Time
Timestamp (scale not disclosed)
numeric
Length
Length of the ﬂight (min)
numeric
TABLE I
DESCRIPTION OF FEATURES IN THE MOA AIRLINES DATASET
each classiﬁcation outcome gets the same number of votes. In
such a case, our model was conﬁgured to favour the delay
prediction, resulting in an increase in recall and a decrease in
precision. This limit case is more frequent for small numbers
of clients. Beside this, we can observe that the accuracy is
stable at about 61% which is an excellent level of performance
comparable to state-of-the-art results in the non-distributed
case with [16] reporting about 62% of accuracy with a similar
request budget. This validates the potential of the approach we
propose for communication-efﬁcient distributed learning. For
the other metrics, we can observe that they decrease slightly
for a high number of clients which illustrates the fact that
the distributed learning constraint does have an impact on the
performance even if it is relatively small with the F-score
decreasing from about 49.75% with a single host to 41.3%
with 10 hosts.
Concerning Figure 3, the results are more straightforward.
We observe that as the number of communication rounds
increase, the model accuracy is quite stable but it hides the
fact that precision is increasing at the expense of recall leading
to an overall decreasing F-score from 51% to 30%. The
interpretation to this behaviour is that the ensemble model
is being updated too frequently. The base DT model makes
use of a grace period parameter which deﬁnes a minimum
amount of samples that need to be collected before a request
can be made. The default value used was 100, the same as
in the original publication. However, as the dataset is split
between multiple clients and further down between multiple
communication rounds, it is possible when the number of
communication rounds is too high that between consecutive
updates of the ensemble model, no updates of the local DTs
have been made and consequently no change is made on the
ensemble model leading to ”skipped” communication rounds
that eventually lead to lower the overall performances. We
tested this interpretation by lowering the grace period to
30 and observed that performances for a high number of
communication rounds were increased.
Regarding Figure 4, it is worth noting that it is using a
different scale than the other ﬁgures as the request budget
is presented on a logarithmic scale. The reason for that is
to highlight the extreme stability of the performances with a
very slight increase of the accuracy for high request budget
from 56% to 59%. The interpretation for the very low values is
largely due to the initialization step that relies on fully labelled
data. Given 5 clients, 20 rounds and a 50/50 training/test split,
the amount of data used in the initialization represents 2.5% of
the total dataset so even for an extremely low request budget of
0.1%, it is necessary to label 2.51% of the dataset. Still, given
that typical range for request budget in similar studies such
as [16] starts at 10% this is a very promising result, showing
that our approach is efﬁcient for extremely low request budgets
thus fulﬁlling one of the requirements for applicability to
aeronautical systems. Finally, we have included Figure 5 to
give insight as to what changes in the model for different
request budget. Indeed, if the performance of the ensemble
model is very stable, it is hiding the fact that the performance
of the local DTs. Selecting recall as the best illustration of
this, we see that the average recall of individual DTs increases
from about 30% to 37% when the request budget increases.
This is signiﬁcant as local DTs would act in a real-world
implementation as back-up in situations where the data link
between the aircraft and the ground would be unavailable, as
such, being able to guarantee a certain level of performance
of the local model is important.
Overall, it can be noted that the performances of the
Federated Active Learning approach that we propose are very
stable and very close to state-of-the-art level of performance
for non-distributed learning despite the additional constraints.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a new applied Machine Learning
framework to enable real-time distributed learning for aero-
nautical systems. To do so, we identify three requirements for
a solution, namely R1 the ability to classify normal samples
with minimal computations, R2 a mechanism to identify and
transmit uncertain data under a communication budget and
R3 the ability to train a centralized model without accessing
remote data. Then, we review existing solutions for each of
the three requirements and propose a new method to fulﬁl all
of them at the same time. Our method is a combination of
Active Learning and Federated Learning. It relies on training
conﬁdence decision trees at client level and aggregating them
at server level to create an ensemble model to act as an oracle.
We provide a detailed performance analysis of our method on
a public benchmark and compare our results to state-of-the-art
classiﬁers.
Our approach achieves an accuracy of up to 61% very close
to state-of-the-art levels of performance of 62% despite the
additional constraint of Distributed Learning that implies that
each client has to make decisions with partial information on
the dataset and the constraint on limited computation power
on the clients. Our method also achieves very consistent levels

(a) Accuracy
(b) Precision
(c) Recall
(d) F-score
Fig. 2. Performance with regards to number of clients
(a) Accuracy
(b) Precision
(c) Recall
(d) F-score
Fig. 3. Performance with regards to the number of communication rounds

(a) Accuracy
(b) Precision
(c) Recall
(d) F-score
Fig. 4. Performance with regards to the request budget
Fig. 5. Average recall per client with regards to the budget request
of performance with label budgets as low as 3% thanks to the
initialization step and the use of the ensemble model.
In general, with regards to the objective of this article of
proposing a new communication-efﬁcient and computationally
cheap distributed learning framework suitable for the appli-
cation case of real-time failure prediction for aeronautical
systems, we have determined a new method that fulﬁls all
three requirements we identiﬁed by combining existing works
in an original way.
