arXiv:1503.02834v1  [stat.ME]  10 Mar 2015
Statistical Science
2014, Vol. 29, No. 4, 485–511
DOI: 10.1214/14-STS500
c
⃝Institute of Mathematical Statistics, 2014
Doubly Robust Policy Evaluation and
Optimization1
Miroslav Dud´ık, Dumitru Erhan, John Langford and Lihong Li
Abstract.
We study sequential decision making in environments where
rewards are only partially observed, but can be modeled as a function
of observed contexts and the chosen action by the decision maker. This
setting, known as contextual bandits, encompasses a wide variety of
applications such as health care, content recommendation and Inter-
net advertising. A central task is evaluation of a new policy given his-
toric data consisting of contexts, actions and received rewards. The key
challenge is that the past data typically does not faithfully represent
proportions of actions taken by a new policy. Previous approaches rely
either on models of rewards or models of the past policy. The former
are plagued by a large bias whereas the latter have a large variance.
In this work, we leverage the strengths and overcome the weaknesses
of the two approaches by applying the doubly robust estimation tech-
nique to the problems of policy evaluation and optimization. We prove
that this approach yields accurate value estimates when we have ei-
ther a good (but not necessarily consistent) model of rewards or a
good (but not necessarily consistent) model of past policy. Extensive
empirical comparison demonstrates that the doubly robust estimation
uniformly improves over existing techniques, achieving both lower vari-
ance in value estimation and better policies. As such, we expect the
doubly robust approach to become common practice in policy evalua-
tion and optimization.
Key words and phrases:
Contextual bandits, doubly robust estima-
tors, causal inference.
1. INTRODUCTION
Contextual bandits (Auer et al., 2002/03; Lang-
ford and Zhang, 2008), sometimes known as asso-
Miroslav Dud´ık is Senior Researcher and John Langford
is Principal Researcher, Microsoft Research, New York,

Engineer, Google Inc., Mountain View, California, USA

Microsoft Research, Redmond, Washington, USA

1Parts of this paper were presented at the 28th Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning (Dud´ık, Langford and
Li, 2011), and the 28th Conference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁ-
cial Intelligence (Dud´ık et al., 2012).
ciative reinforcement learning (Barto and Anandan,
1985), are a natural generalization of the classic mul-
tiarmed bandits introduced by Robbins (1952). In a
contextual bandit problem, the decision maker ob-
serves contextual information, based on which an
action is chosen out of a set of candidates; in re-
turn, a numerical “reward” signal is observed for
the chosen action, but not for others. The process
repeats for multiple steps, and the goal of the deci-
sion maker is to maximize the total rewards in this
This is an electronic reprint of the original article
published by the Institute of Mathematical Statistics in
Statistical Science, 2014, Vol. 29, No. 4, 485–511. This
reprint diﬀers from the original in pagination and
typographic detail.
1

2
DUD´IK, ERHAN, LANGFORD AND LI
process. Usually, contexts observed by the decision
maker provide useful information to infer the ex-
pected reward of each action, thus allowing greater
rewards to be accumulated, compared to standard
multi-armed bandits, which take no account of the
context.
Many problems in practice can be modeled by con-
textual bandits. For example, in one type of Inter-
net advertising, the decision maker (such as a web-
site) dynamically selects which ad to display to a
user who visits the page, and receives a payment
from the advertiser if the user clicks on the ad (e.g.,
Chapelle and Li, 2012). In this case, the context can
be the user’s geographical information, the action is
the displayed ad and the reward is the payment. Im-
portantly, we ﬁnd only whether a user clicked on the
presented ad, but receive no information about the
ads that were not presented.
Another example is content recommendation on
Web portals (Agarwal et al., 2013). Here, the deci-
sion maker (the web portal) selects, for each user
visit, what content (e.g., news, images, videos and
music) to display on the page. A natural objective is
to “personalize” the recommendations, so that the
number of clicks is maximized (Li et al., 2010). In
this case, the context is the user’s interests in dif-
ferent topics, either self-reported by the user or in-
ferred from the user browsing history; the action is
the recommended item; the reward can be deﬁned
as 1 if the user clicks on an item, and 0 otherwise.
Similarly, in health care, we only ﬁnd out the clin-
ical outcome (the reward) of a patient who received
a treatment (action), but not the outcomes for alter-
native treatments. In general, the treatment strat-
egy may depend on the context of the patient such
as her health level and treatment history. Therefore,
contextual bandits can also be a natural model to
describe personalized treatments.
The behavior of a decision maker in contextual
bandits can be described as a policy, to be de-
ﬁned precisely in the next sections. Roughly speak-
ing, a policy is a function that maps the decision
maker’s past observations and the contextual infor-
mation to a distribution over the actions. This paper
considers the oﬄine version of contextual bandits:
we assume access to historical data, but no ability
to gather new data (Langford, Strehl and Wortman,
2008; Strehl et al., 2011). There are two related
tasks that arise in this setting: policy evaluation and
policy optimization. The goal of policy evaluation
is to estimate the expected total reward of a given
policy. The goal of policy optimization is to obtain
a policy that (approximately) maximizes expected
total rewards. The focus of this paper is on policy
evaluation, but as we will see in the experiments,
the ideas can also be applied to policy optimiza-
tion. The oﬄine version of contextual bandits is im-
portant in practice. For instance, it allows a web-
site to estimate, from historical log data, how much
gain in revenue can be achieved by changing the ad-
selection policy to a new one (Bottou et al., 2013).
Therefore, the website does not have to experiment
on real users to test a new policy, which can be very
expensive and time-consuming. Finally, we note that
this problem is a special case of oﬀ-policy reinforce-
ment learning (Precup, Sutton and Singh, 2000).
Two kinds of approaches address oﬄine policy
evaluation. The ﬁrst, called the direct method (DM),
estimates the reward function from given data and
uses this estimate in place of actual reward to
evaluate the policy value on a set of contexts.
The second kind, called inverse propensity score
(IPS) (Horvitz and Thompson, 1952), uses impor-
tance weighting to correct for the incorrect pro-
portions of actions in the historic data. The ﬁrst
approach requires an accurate model of rewards,
whereas the second approach requires an accurate
model of the past policy. In general, it might be
diﬃcult to accurately model rewards, so the ﬁrst
assumption can be too restrictive. On the other
hand, in many applications, such as advertising,
Web search and content recommendation, the de-
cision maker has substantial, and possibly perfect,
knowledge of the past policy, so the second approach
can be applied. However, it often suﬀers from large
variance, especially when the past policy diﬀers sig-
niﬁcantly from the policy being evaluated.
In this paper, we propose to use the technique
of doubly robust
(DR) estimation to overcome
problems with the two existing approaches. Dou-
bly robust (or doubly protected) estimation (Cas-
sel, S¨arndal and Wretman, 1976; Robins, Rot-
nitzky and Zhao, 1994; Robins and Rotnitzky, 1995;
Lunceford and Davidian, 2004; Kang and Schafer,
2007) is a statistical approach for estimation from
incomplete data with an important property: if ei-
ther one of the two estimators (i.e., DM or IPS)
is correct, then the estimation is unbiased. This
method thus increases the chances of drawing re-
liable inference.
We apply the doubly robust technique to policy
evaluation and optimization in a contextual bandit

DOUBLY ROBUST POLICY EVALUATION AND OPTIMIZATION
3
setting. The most straightforward policies to con-
sider are stationary policies, whose actions depend
on the current, observed context alone. Nonstation-
ary policies, on the other hand, map the current con-
text and a history of past rounds to an action. They
are of critical interest because online learning algo-
rithms (also known as adaptive allocation rules), by
deﬁnition, produce nonstationary policies. We ad-
dress both stationary and nonstationary policies in
this paper.
In Section 2, we describe previous work and con-
nect our setting to the related area of dynamic treat-
ment regimes.
In Section 3, we study stationary policy evalua-
tion, analyzing the bias and variance of our core
technique. Unlike previous theoretical analyses, we
do not assume that either the reward model or the
past policy model are correct. Instead, we show how
the deviations of the two models from the truth im-
pact bias and variance of the doubly robust estima-
tor. To our knowledge, this style of analysis is novel
and may provide insights into doubly robust esti-
mation beyond the speciﬁc setting studied here. In
Section 4, we apply this method to both policy eval-
uation and optimization, ﬁnding that this approach
can substantially sharpen existing techniques.
In Section 5, we consider nonstationary policy
evaluation. The main approach here is to use the
historic data to obtain a sample of the run of an
evaluated nonstationary policy via rejection sam-
pling (Li et al., 2011). We combine the doubly ro-
bust technique with an improved form of rejection
sampling that makes better use of data at the cost
of small, controllable bias. Experiments in Section 6
suggest the combination is able to extract more in-
formation from data than existing approaches.
2. PRIOR WORK
2.1 Doubly Robust Estimation
Doubly robust estimation is widely used in sta-
tistical inference (see, e.g., Kang and Schafer, 2007,
and the references therein). More recently, it has
been used in Internet advertising to estimate the ef-
fects of new features for online advertisers (Lambert
and Pregibon, 2007; Chan et al., 2010). Most of pre-
vious analysis of doubly robust estimation is focused
on asymptotic behavior or relies on various model-
ing assumptions (e.g., Robins, Rotnitzky and Zhao,
1994; Lunceford and Davidian, 2004; Kang and
Schafer, 2007). Our analysis is nonasymptotic and
makes no such assumptions.
Several papers in machine learning have used
ideas related to the basic technique discussed here,
although not with the same language. For benign
bandits, Hazan and Kale (2009) construct algo-
rithms which use reward estimators to improve
regret bounds when the variance of actual re-
wards is small. Similarly, the Oﬀset Tree algorithm
(Beygelzimer and Langford, 2009) can be thought
of as using a crude reward estimate for the “oﬀset.”
The algorithms and estimators described here are
substantially more sophisticated.
Our nonstationary policy evaluation builds on the
rejection sampling approach, which has been previ-
ously shown to be eﬀective (Li et al., 2011). Rela-
tive to this earlier work, our nonstationary results
take advantage of the doubly robust technique and
a carefully introduced bias/variance tradeoﬀto ob-
tain an empirical order-of-magnitude improvement
in evaluation quality.
2.2 Dynamic Treatment Regimes
Contextual bandit problems are closely related to
dynamic treatment regime (DTR) estimation/opti-
mization in medical research. A DTR is a set of (pos-
sibly randomized) rules that specify what treatment
to choose, given current characteristics (including
past treatment history and outcomes) of a patient.
In the terminology of the present paper, the pa-
tient’s current characteristics are contextual infor-
mation, a treatment is an action, and a DTR is a
policy. Similar to contextual bandits, the quantity
of interest in DTR can be expressed by a numeric
reward signal related to the clinical outcome of a
treatment. We comment on similarities and diﬀer-
ences between DTR and contextual bandits in more
detail in later sections of the paper, where we de-
ﬁne our setting more formally. Here, we make a few
higher-level remarks.
Due to ethical concerns, research in DTR is of-
ten performed with observational data rather than
on patients. This corresponds to the oﬄine ver-
sion of contextual bandits, which only has access
to past data but no ability to gather new data.
Causal inference techniques have been studied to
estimate the mean response of a given DTR (e.g.,
Robins, 1986; Murphy, van der Laan and Robins,
2001), and to optimize DTR (e.g., Murphy, 2003;
Orellana, Rotnitzky and Robins, 2010). These two

4
DUD´IK, ERHAN, LANGFORD AND LI
problems correspond to evaluation and optimization
of policies in the present paper.
In DTR, however, a treatment typically exhibits a
long-term eﬀect on a patient’s future “state,” while
in contextual bandits the contexts are drawn IID
with no dependence on actions taken previously.
Such a diﬀerence turns out to enable statistically
more eﬃcient estimators, which will be explained in
greater detail in Section 5.2.
Despite these diﬀerences, as we will see later, con-
textual bandits and DTR share many similarities,
and in some cases are almost identical. For exam-
ple, analogous to the results introduced in this pa-
per, doubly robust estimators have been applied to
DTR estimation (Murphy, van der Laan and Robins,
2001), and also used as a subroutine for optimization
in a family of parameterized policies (Zhang et al.,
2012). The connection suggests a broader applica-
bility of DTR techniques beyond the medical do-
main, for instance, to the Internet-motivated prob-
lems studied in this paper.
3. EVALUATION OF STATIONARY POLICIES
3.1 Problem Deﬁnition
We are interested in the contextual bandit setting
where on each round:
1. A vector of covariates (or a context) x ∈X is
revealed.
2. An action (or arm) a is chosen from a given set
A.
3. A reward r ∈[0,1] for the action a is revealed, but
the rewards of other actions are not. The reward
may depend stochastically on x and a.
We assume that contexts are chosen IID from an
unknown distribution D(x), the actions are chosen
from a ﬁnite (and typically not too large) action set
A, and the distribution over rewards D(r|a,x) does
not change over time (but is unknown).
The input data consists of a ﬁnite stream of triples
(xk,ak,rk) indexed by k = 1,2,...,n. We assume
that the actions ak are generated by some past (pos-
sibly nonstationary) policy, which we refer to as
the exploration policy. The exploration history up
to round k is denoted
zk = (x1,a1,r1,...,xk,ak,rk).
Histories are viewed as samples from a probability
measure µ. Our assumptions about data generation
then translate into the assumption about factoring
of µ as
µ(xk,ak,rk|zk−1)
= D(xk)µ(ak|xk,zk−1)D(rk|xk,ak),
for any k. Note that apart from the unknown dis-
tribution D, the only degree of freedom above is
µ(ak|xk,zk−1), that is, the unknown exploration pol-
icy.
When zk−1 is clear from the context, we use a
shorthand µk for the conditional distribution over
the kth triple
µk(x,a,r) = µ(xk = x,ak = a,rk = r|zk−1).
We also write Pµ
k
and Eµ
k
for Pµ[·|zk−1] and
Eµ[·|zk−1].
Given input data zn, we study the stationary pol-
icy evaluation problem. A stationary randomized
policy ν is described by a conditional distribution
ν(a|x) of choosing an action on each context. The
goal is to use the history zn to estimate the value of
ν, namely, the expected reward obtained by follow-
ing ν:
V (ν) = Ex∼DEa∼ν(· |x)Er∼D(· |x,a)[r].
In content recommendation on Web portals, for ex-
ample, V (ν) measures the average click probability
per user visit, one of the major metrics with critical
business importance.
In order to have unbiased policy evaluation, we
make a standard assumption that if ν(a|x) > 0 then
µk(a|x) > 0 for all k (and all possible histories zk−1).
This clearly holds for instance if µk(a|x) > 0 for all
a. Since ν is ﬁxed in our paper, we will write V
for V (ν). To simplify notation, we extend the con-
ditional distribution ν to a distribution over triples
(x,a,r)
ν(x,a,r) = D(x)ν(a|x)D(r|a,x)
and hence V = Eν[r].
The problem of stationary policy evaluation, de-
ﬁned above, is slightly more general than DTR anal-
ysis in a typical cross-sectional observational study,
where the exploration policy (known as “treatment
mechanism” in the DTR literature) is stationary;
that is, the conditional distribution µ(ak|xk,zk−1)
is independent of zk−1 and identical across all k,
that is, µk = µ1 for all k.

DOUBLY ROBUST POLICY EVALUATION AND OPTIMIZATION
5
3.2 Existing Approaches
The key challenge in estimating policy value in
contextual bandits is that rewards are partially ob-
servable: in each round, only the reward for the cho-
sen action is revealed; we do not know what the
reward would have been if we chose a diﬀerent ac-
tion. Hence, the data collected in a contextual ban-
dit process cannot be used directly to estimate a
new policy’s value: if in a context x the new policy
selects an action a′ diﬀerent from the action a cho-
sen during data collection, we simply do not have
the reward signal for a′.
There are two common solutions for overcom-
ing this limitation (see, e.g., Lambert and Pregibon,
2007, for an introduction to these solutions). The
ﬁrst, called the direct method (DM), forms an es-
timate ˆr(x,a) of the expected reward conditioned
on the context and action. The policy value is then
estimated by
ˆVDM = 1
n
n
X
k=1
X
a∈A
ν(a|xk)ˆr(xk,a).
Clearly, if ˆr(x,a) is a good approximation of the
true expected reward ED[r|x,a], then the DM es-
timate is close to V . A problem with this method
is that the estimate ˆr is typically formed without
the knowledge of ν, and hence might focus on ap-
proximating expected reward in the areas that are
irrelevant for ν and not suﬃciently in the areas
that are important for ν (see, e.g., the analysis of
Beygelzimer and Langford, 2009).
The second approach, called inverse propensity
score (IPS), is typically less prone to problems
with bias. Instead of approximating the reward, IPS
forms an approximation ˆµk(a|x) of µk(a|x), and uses
this estimate to correct for the shift in action pro-
portions between the exploration policy and the new
policy:
ˆVIPS = 1
n
n
X
k=1
ν(ak|xk)
ˆµk(ak|xk) · rk.
If ˆµk(a|x) ≈µk(a|x), then the IPS estimate above
will be, approximately, an unbiased estimate of V .
Since we typically have a good (or even accurate)
understanding of the data-collection policy, it is of-
ten easier to obtain good estimates ˆµk, and thus the
IPS estimator is in practice less susceptible to prob-
lems with bias compared with the direct method.
However, IPS typically has a much larger variance,
due to the increased range of the random variable
ν(ak|xk)/ˆµk(ak|xk). The issue becomes more severe
when ˆµk(ak|xk) gets smaller in high probability ar-
eas under ν. Our approach alleviates the large vari-
ance problem of IPS by taking advantage of the es-
timate ˆr used by the direct method.
3.3 Doubly Robust Estimator
Doubly robust estimators take advantage of both
the estimate of the expected reward ˆr and the
estimate of action probabilities ˆµk(a|x). A sim-
ilar idea has been suggested earlier by a num-
ber of authors for diﬀerent estimation problems
(Cassel, S¨arndal and Wretman, 1976; Rotnitzky and
Robins, 1995; Robins and Rotnitzky, 1995; Murphy,
van der Laan and Robins, 2001; Robins, 1998). For
the setting in this section, the estimator of Murphy,
van der Laan and Robins (2001) can be reduced to
ˆVDR = 1
n
n
X
k=1

ˆr(xk,ν)
(3.1)
+ ν(ak|xk)
ˆµk(ak|xk) · (rk −ˆr(xk,ak))

,
where
ˆr(x,ν) =
X
a∈A
ν(a|x)ˆr(x,a)
is the estimate of Eν[r|x] derived from ˆr. Informally,
the doubly robust estimator uses ˆr as a baseline and
if there is data available, a correction is applied. We
will see that our estimator is unbiased if at least one
of the estimators, ˆr and ˆµk, is accurate, hence the
name doubly robust.
In practice, quite often neither ED[r|x,a] or µk
is accurate. It should be noted that, although µk
tends to be much easier to estimate than ED[r|x,a]
in applications that motivate this study, it is rare
to be able to get a perfect estimator, due to engi-
neering constraints in complex applications like Web
search and Internet advertising. Thus, a basic ques-
tion is: How does the estimator ˆVDR perform as the
estimates ˆr and ˆµk deviate from the truth? The fol-
lowing section analyzes bias and variance of the DR
estimator as a function of errors in ˆr and ˆµk. Note
that our DR estimator encompasses DM and IPS
as special cases (by respectively setting ˆµk ≡∞and
ˆr ≡0), so our analysis also encompasses DM and
IPS.

6
DUD´IK, ERHAN, LANGFORD AND LI
3.4 Analysis
We assume that ˆr(x,a) ∈[0,1] and ˆµk(a|x) ∈
(0,∞], but in general ˆµk does not need to repre-
sent conditional probabilities (our notation is only
meant to indicate that ˆµk estimates µk, but no prob-
abilistic structure). In general, we allow ˆr and ˆµk to
be random variables, as long as they satisfy the fol-
lowing independence assumptions:
• ˆr is independent of zn.
• ˆµk is conditionally independent of {(xℓ,aℓ,rℓ)}ℓ≥k,
conditioned on zk−1.
The ﬁrst assumption means that ˆr can be assumed
ﬁxed and determined before we see the input data
zn, for example, by initially splitting the input
dataset and using the ﬁrst part to obtain ˆr and the
second part to evaluate the policy. In our analysis,
we condition on ˆr and ignore any randomness in its
choice.
The second assumption means that ˆµk is not al-
lowed to depend on future. A simple way to satisfy
this assumption is to split the dataset to form an
estimator (and potentially also include data zk−1).
If we have some control over the exploration pro-
cess, we might also have access to “perfect logging”,
that is, recorded probabilities µk(ak|xk). With per-
fect logging, we can achieve ˆµk = µk, respecting our
assumptions.2
Analogous to ˆr(x,a), we deﬁne the population
quantity r∗(x,a)
r∗(x,a) = ED[r|x,a],
and deﬁne r∗(x,ν) similarly to ˆr(x,ν):
r∗(x,ν) = Eν[r|x].
Let ∆(x,a) and ̺k(x,a) denote, respectively, the
additive error of ˆr and the multiplicative error of ˆµk:
∆(x,a) = ˆr(x,a) −r∗(x,a),
̺k(x,a) = µk(a|x)/ˆµk(a|x).
We assume that for some M ≥0, with probability
one under µ:
ν(ak|xk)/ˆµk(ak|xk) ≤M
which can always be satisﬁed by enforcing ˆµk ≥
1/M.
2As we will see later in the paper, in order to reduce the
variance of the estimator it might still be advantageous to use
a slightly inﬂated estimator, for example, ˆµk = cµk for c > 1,
or ˆµk(a|x) = max{c,µk(a|x)} for some c > 0.
To bound the error of ˆVDR, we ﬁrst analyze a sin-
gle term:
ˆVk = ˆr(xk,ν) + ν(ak|xk)
ˆµk(ak|xk) · (rk −ˆr(xk,ak)).
We bound its range, bias, and conditional variance
as follows (for proofs, see Appendix A):
Lemma 3.1.
The range of ˆVk is bounded as
| ˆVk| ≤1 + M.
Lemma 3.2.
The expectation of the term ˆVk is
Eµ
k[ ˆVk] =
E
(x,a)∼ν
[r∗(x,a) + (1 −̺k(x,a))∆(x,a)].
Lemma 3.3.
The variance of the term ˆVk can be
decomposed and bounded as follows:
Vµ
k[ ˆVk]
(i)
= V
x∼D
h
E
a∼ν(· |x)
[r∗(x,a)
+ (1 −̺k(x,a))
· ∆(x,a)]
i
−E
x∼D
h
E
a∼ν(· |x)
[̺k(x,a)∆(x,a)]2i
+
E
(x,a)∼ν
 ν(a|x)
ˆµk(a|x)
· ̺k(x,a) ·
V
r∼D(· |x,a)
[r]

+
E
(x,a)∼ν
 ν(a|x)
ˆµk(a|x)
· ̺k(x,a)∆(x,a)2

.
Vµ
k[ ˆVk]
(ii)
≤V
x∼D[r∗(x,ν)]
+ 2
E
(x,a)∼ν
[|(1 −̺k(x,a))∆(x,a)|]
+ M
E
(x,a)∼ν
h
̺k(x,a)
·
E
r∼D(· |x,a)
[(r −ˆr(x,a))2]
i
.
The range of ˆVk is controlled by the worst-case ra-
tio ν(ak|xk)/ˆµk(ak|xk). The bias of ˆVk gets smaller
as ∆and ̺k become more accurate, that is, as ∆≈0

DOUBLY ROBUST POLICY EVALUATION AND OPTIMIZATION
7
and ̺k ≈1. The expression for variance is more com-
plicated. Lemma 3.3(i) lists four terms. The ﬁrst
term represents the variance component due to the
randomness over x. The second term can contribute
to the decrease in the variance. The ﬁnal two terms
represent the penalty due to the importance weight-
ing. The third term scales with the conditional vari-
ance of rewards (given contexts and actions), and
it vanishes if rewards are deterministic. The fourth
term scales with the magnitude of ∆, and it cap-
tures the potential improvement due to the use of a
good estimator ˆr.
The upper bound on the variance [Lemma 3.3(ii)]
is easier to interpret. The ﬁrst term is the variance
of the estimated variable over x. The second term
measures the quality of the estimators ˆµk and ˆr—it
equals zero if either of them is perfect (or if the union
of regions where they are perfect covers the support
of ν over x and a). The ﬁnal term represents the
importance weighting penalty. It vanishes if we do
not apply importance weighting (i.e., ˆµk ≡∞and
̺k ≡0). With nonzero ̺k, this term decreases with
a better quality of ˆr—but it does not disappear even
if ˆr is perfect (unless the rewards are deterministic).
3.4.1 Bias analysis Lemma 3.2 immediately yields
a bound on the bias of the doubly robust estima-
tor, as stated in the following theorem. The special
case for stationary policies (second part of the theo-
rem) has been shown by Vansteelandt, Bekaert and
Claeskens (2012).
Theorem 3.4.
Let ∆and ̺k be deﬁned as
above. Then the bias of the doubly robust estimator
is
|Eµ[ ˆVDR] −V |
= 1
n
Eµ
" n
X
k=1
E
(x,a)∼ν
[(1 −̺k(x,a))∆(x,a)]
#.
If the exploration policy µ and the estimator ˆµk are
stationary (i.e., µk = µ1 and ˆµk = ˆµ1 for all k), the
expression simpliﬁes to
|Eµ[ ˆVDR] −V | = |Eν[(1 −̺1(x,a))∆(x,a)]|.
Proof.
The theorem follows immediately from
Lemma 3.2.
□
In contrast, we have (for simplicity, assuming sta-
tionarity of the exploration policy and its estimate)
|Eµ[ ˆVDM] −V | = |Eν[∆(x,a)]|,
|Eµ[ ˆVIPS] −V | = |Eν[r∗(x,a)(1 −̺1(x,a))]|,
where the ﬁrst equality is based on the observation
that DM is a special case of DR with ˆµk(a|x) ≡∞
(and hence ̺k ≡0), and the second equality is based
on the observation that IPS is a special case of DR
with ˆr(x,a) ≡0 (and hence ∆≡r∗).
In general, neither of the estimators dominates
the others. However, if either ∆≈0, or ̺k ≈1,
the expected value of the doubly robust estima-
tor will be close to the true value, whereas DM
requires ∆≈0 and IPS requires ̺k ≈1. Also, if
∥̺k −1∥p,ν ≪1 [for a suitable Lp(ν) norm], we
expect that DR will outperform DM. Similarly, if
̺k ≈1 but ∥∆∥p,ν ≪∥r∗∥p,ν, we expect that DR will
outperform IPS. Thus, DR can eﬀectively take ad-
vantage of both sources of information to lower the
bias.
3.4.2 Variance analysis We argued that the ex-
pected value of ˆVDR compares favorably with IPS
and DM. We next look at the variance of DR. Since
large-deviation bounds have a primary dependence
on variance; a lower variance implies a faster con-
vergence rate. To contrast DR with IPS and DM,
we study a simpler setting with a stationary explo-
ration policy, and deterministic target policy ν, that
is, ν(·|x) puts all the probability on a single action.
In the next section, we revisit the fully general set-
ting and derive a ﬁnite-sample bound on the error
of DR.
Theorem 3.5.
Let ∆and ̺k be deﬁned as
above. If exploration policy µ and the estimator ˆµk
are stationary, and the target policy ν is determinis-
tic, then the variance of the doubly robust estimator
is
Vµ[ ˆVDR]
= 1
n

V
(x,a)∼ν
[r∗(x,a)
+ (1 −̺1(x,a))∆(x,a)]
+
E
(x,a)∼ν

1
ˆµ1(a|x) · ̺1(x,a) ·
V
r∼D(· |x,a)
[r]

+
E
(x,a)∼ν
1 −µ1(a|x)
ˆµ1(a|x)
· ̺1(x,a)∆(x,a)2

.
Proof.
The theorem follows immediately from
Lemma 3.3(i).
□
The variance can be decomposed into three terms.
The ﬁrst term accounts for the randomness in x
(note that a is deterministic given x). The other two

8
DUD´IK, ERHAN, LANGFORD AND LI
terms can be viewed as the importance weighting
penalty. These two terms disappear in DM, which
does not use rewards rk. The second term accounts
for randomness in rewards and disappears when re-
wards are deterministic functions of x and a. How-
ever, the last term stays, accounting for the disagree-
ment between actions taken by ν and µ1.
Similar expressions can be derived for the DM and
IPS estimators. Since IPS is a special case of DR
with ˆr ≡0, we obtain the following equation:
Vµ[ ˆVIPS]
= 1
n

V
(x,a)∼ν
[̺1(x,a)r∗(x,a)]
+
E
(x,a)∼ν

1
ˆµ1(a|x) · ̺1(x,a) ·
V
r∼D(· |x,a)
[r]

+
E
(x,a)∼ν
1 −µ1(a|x)
ˆµ1(a|x)
· ̺1(x,a)r∗(x,a)2

.
The ﬁrst term will be of similar magnitude as the
corresponding term of the DR estimator, provided
that ̺1 ≈1. The second term is identical to the DR
estimator. However, the third term can be much
larger for IPS if µ1(a|x) ≪1 and |∆(x,a)| is smaller
than r∗(x,a) for the actions chosen by ν.
In contrast, for the direct method, which is a spe-
cial case of DR with ˆµk ≡∞, the following variance
is obtained immediately:
Vµ[ ˆVDM] = 1
n
V
(x,a)∼ν
[r∗(x,a) + ∆(x,a)].
Thus, the variance of the direct method does not
have terms depending either on the exploration pol-
icy or the randomness in the rewards. This fact
usually suﬃces to ensure that its variance is sig-
niﬁcantly lower than that of DR or IPS. However,
as mentioned in the previous section, when we can
estimate µk reasonably well (namely, ̺k ≈1), the
bias of the direct method is typically much larger,
leading to larger errors in estimating policy values.
3.4.3 Finite-sample error bound By combining
bias and variance bounds, we now work out a spe-
ciﬁc ﬁnite-sample bound on the error of the estima-
tor ˆVDR. While such an error bound could be used
as a conservative conﬁdence bound, we expect it to
be too loose in most settings (as is typical for ﬁnite-
sample bounds). Instead, our main intention is to
explicitly highlight how the errors of estimators ˆr
and ˆµk contribute to the ﬁnal error.
To begin, we ﬁrst quantify magnitudes of the ad-
ditive error ∆= ˆr −r∗of the estimator ˆr, and the
relative error |1 −̺k| = |ˆµk −µk|/ˆµk of the estima-
tor ˆµk:
Assumption 3.6.
Assume there exist δ∆,δ̺ ≥0
such that
E
(x,a)∼ν
[|∆(x,a)|] ≤δ∆,
and with probability one under µ:
|1 −̺k(x,a)| ≤δ̺
for all k.
Recall that ν/ˆµk ≤M. In addition, our analysis
depends on the magnitude of the ratio ̺k = µk/ˆµk
and a term that captures both the variance of the
rewards and the error of ˆr.
Assumption 3.7.
Assume there exist eˆr,̺max ≥
0 such that with probability one under µ, for all k:
E
(x,a)∼ν
h
E
r∼D(· |x,a)
[(ˆr(x,a) −r)2]
i
≤eˆr,
̺k(x,a) ≤̺max
for all x,a.
With the assumptions above, we can now bound
the bias and variance of a single term ˆVk. As in the
previous sections, the bias decreases with the quality
of ˆr and ˆµk, and the variance increases with the vari-
ance of the rewards and with the magnitudes of the
ratios ν/ˆµk ≤M, µk/ˆµk ≤̺max. The analysis below
for instance captures the bias-variance tradeoﬀof
using ˆµk ≈cµk for some c > 1: such a strategy can
lead to a lower variance (by lowering M and ̺max)
but incurs some additional bias that is controlled by
the quality of ˆr.
Lemma 3.8.
Under Assumptions 3.6–3.7, with
probability one under µ, for all k:
|Eµ
k[ ˆVk] −V | ≤δ̺δ∆,
Vµ
k[ ˆVk] ≤Vx∼D[r∗(x,ν)] + 2δ̺δ∆+ M̺maxeˆr.
Proof.
The bias and variance bound follow
from Lemma 3.2 and Lemma 3.3(ii), respectively,
by H¨older’s inequality.
□
Using the above lemma and Freedman’s inequality
yields the following theorem.
Theorem
3.9.
Under
Assumptions
3.6–3.7,
with probability at least 1 −δ,
| ˆVDR −V |
≤δ̺δ∆

DOUBLY ROBUST POLICY EVALUATION AND OPTIMIZATION
9
+ 2max
(1 + M)ln(2/δ)
n
,
r
(Vx∼D[r∗(x,ν)] + 2δ̺δ∆+ M̺maxeˆr)ln(2/δ)
n

.
Proof.
The proof follows by Freedman’s in-
equality (Theorem B.1 in Appendix B), applied to
random variables ˆVk, whose range and variance are
bounded using Lemmas 3.1 and 3.8.
□
The theorem is a ﬁnite-sample error bound that
holds for all sample size n, and in the limit the
error converges to δ̺δ∆. As we mentioned, this re-
sult gives a conﬁdence interval for the doubly-robust
estimate ˆVDR for any ﬁnite sample n. Other au-
thors have used asymptotic theory to derive con-
ﬁdence intervals for policy evaluation by showing
that the estimator is asymptotically normal (e.g.,
Murphy, van der Laan and Robins,
2001;
Zhang
et al., 2012). When using asymptotic conﬁdence
bounds, it can be diﬃcult to know a priori whether
the
asymptotic
distribution
has
been
reached,
whereas our bound applies to all ﬁnite sample sizes.
Although our bound may be conservative for small
sample sizes, it provides a “safe” nonasymptotic
conﬁdence interval. In certain applications like those
on the Internet, the sample size is usually large
enough for this kind of nonasymptotic conﬁdence
bound to be almost as small as its asymptotic value
(the term δqδ∆in Theorem 3.9), as demonstrated
by Bottou et al. (2013) for online advertising.
Note that Assumptions 3.6–3.7 rely on bounds of
|1 −̺k| and ̺k which have to hold with probability
one. In Appendix C, we replace these bounds with
moment bounds, and present analogs of Lemma 3.8
and Theorem 3.9.
4. EXPERIMENTS: THE STATIONARY CASE
This section provides empirical evidence for the
eﬀectiveness of the DR estimator compared to IPS
and DM. We study these estimators on several
real-world datasets. First, we use public bench-
mark datasets for multiclass classiﬁcation to con-
struct contextual bandit data, on which we evalu-
ate both policy evaluation and policy optimization
approaches. Second, we use a proprietary dataset
to model the pattern of user visits to an Internet
portal. We study covariate shift, which can be for-
malized as a special case of policy evaluation. Our
third experiment uses another proprietary dataset
to model slotting of various types of search results
on a webpage.
4.1 Multiclass Classiﬁcation with Partial
Feedback
We begin with a description of how to turn a K-
class classiﬁcation dataset into a K-armed contex-
tual bandit dataset. Instead of rewards, we will work
with losses, speciﬁcally the 0/1-classiﬁcation error.
The actions correspond to predicted classes. In the
usual multiclass classiﬁcation, we can infer the loss
of any action on training data (since we know its
correct label), so we call this a full feedback setting.
On the other hand, in contextual bandits, we only
know the loss of the speciﬁc action that was taken by
the exploration policy, but of no other action, which
we call a partial feedback setting. After choosing an
exploration policy, our transformation from full to
partial feedback simply “hides” the losses of actions
that were not picked by the exploration policy.
This protocol gives us two beneﬁts: we can carry
out comparison using public multiclass classiﬁcation
datasets, which are more common than contextual
bandit datasets. Second, fully revealed data can be
used to obtain ground truth value of an arbitrary
policy. Note that the original data is real-world, but
exploration and partial feedback are simulated.
4.1.1 Data generation In a classiﬁcation task, we
assume data are drawn IID from a ﬁxed distribution:
(x,y) ∼D, where x ∈X is a real-valued covariate
vector and y ∈{1,2,... ,K} is a class label. A typ-
ical goal is to ﬁnd a classiﬁer ν :X 7→{1,2,... ,K}
minimizing the classiﬁcation error:
e(ν) =
E
(x,y)∼D
[I[ν(x) ̸= y]],
where I[·] is an indicator function, equal to 1 if its
argument is true and 0 otherwise.
The classiﬁer ν can be viewed as a deterministic
stationary policy with the action set A = {1,...,K}
and the loss function
l(y,a) = I[a ̸= y].
Loss minimization is symmetric to the reward max-
imization (under transformation r = 1 −l), but loss
minimization is more commonly used in classiﬁca-
tion setting, so we work with loss here. Note that
the distribution D(y|x) together with the deﬁnition
of the loss above, induce the conditional probability
D(l|x,a) in contextual bandits, and minimizing the
classiﬁcation error coincides with policy optimiza-
tion.

10
DUD´IK, ERHAN, LANGFORD AND LI
Table 1
Characteristics of benchmark datasets used in Section 4.1
Dataset
Ecoli
Glass
Letter
Optdigits
Page-blocks
Pendigits
Satimage
Vehicle
Yeast
Classes (K)
8
6
26
10
5
10
6
4
10
Sample size
336
214
20,000
5620
5473
10,992
6435
846
1484
To construct partially labeled data in multi-
class classiﬁcation, it remains to specify the explo-
ration policy. We simulate stationary exploration
with µk(a|x) = µ1(a|x) = 1/K for all a. Hence, the
original example (x,y) is transformed into an ex-
ample (x,a,l(y,a)) for a randomly selected action
a ∼uniform(1,2,... ,K). We assume perfect log-
ging of the exploration policy and use the estimator
ˆµk = µk. Below, we describe how we obtained an
estimator ˆl(x,a) (the counterpart of ˆr).
Table 1 summarizes the benchmark problems
adopted from the UCI repository (Asuncion and
Newman, 2007).
4.1.2 Policy evaluation We ﬁrst investigate wheth-
er the DR technique indeed gives more accurate es-
timates of the policy value (or classiﬁcation error in
our context), compared to DM and IPS. For each
dataset:
1. We randomly split data into training and evalu-
ation sets of (roughly) the same size;
2. On the training set, we keep full classiﬁcation
feedback of form (x,y) and train the direct loss
minimization (DLM) algorithm of McAllester,
Hazan and Keshet (2011), based on gradient de-
scent, to obtain a classiﬁer (see Appendix D for
details). This classiﬁer constitutes the policy ν
whose value we estimate on evaluation data;
3. We compute the classiﬁcation error on fully ob-
served evaluation data. This error is treated as
the ground truth for comparing various esti-
mates;
4. Finally, we apply the transformation in Sec-
tion 4.1.1 to the evaluation data to obtain a
partially labeled set (exploration history), from
which DM, IPS and DR estimates are computed.
Both DM and DR require estimating the expected
conditional loss for a given (x,a). We use a lin-
ear loss model: ˆl(x,a) = wa · x, parameterized by K
weight vectors {wa}a∈{1,...,K}, and use least-squares
ridge regression to ﬁt wa based on the training set.
Step 4 of the above protocol is repeated 500 times,
and the resulting bias and rmse (root mean squared
error) are reported in Figure 1.
As predicted by analysis, both IPS and DR are un-
biased, since the estimator ˆµk is perfect. In contrast,
the linear loss model fails to capture the classiﬁca-
tion error accurately, and as a result, DM suﬀers a
much larger bias.
While IPS and DR estimators are unbiased, it is
apparent from the rmse plot that the DR estima-
tor enjoys a lower variance, which translates into a
smaller rmse. As we shall see next, this has a sub-
stantial eﬀect on the quality of policy optimization.
Fig. 1.
Comparison of bias (left) and rmse (right) of the three estimators of classiﬁcation error on partial feedback classiﬁ-
cation data.

DOUBLY ROBUST POLICY EVALUATION AND OPTIMIZATION
11
4.1.3 Policy optimization This subsection devi-
ates from much of the paper to study policy op-
timization rather than policy evaluation. Given a
space of possible policies, policy optimization is a
procedure that searches this space for the policy
with the highest value. Since policy values are un-
known, the optimization procedure requires access
to exploration data and uses a policy evaluator as
a subroutine. Given the superiority of DR over DM
and IPS for policy evaluation (in previous subsec-
tion), a natural question is whether a similar beneﬁt
can be translated into policy optimization as well.
Since DM is signiﬁcantly worse on all datasets, as
indicated in Figure 1, we focus on the comparison
between IPS and DR.
Here, we apply the data transformation in Sec-
tion 4.1.1 to the training data, and then learn a
classiﬁer based on the loss estimated by IPS and
DR, respectively. Speciﬁcally, for each dataset, we
repeat the following steps 30 times:
1. We randomly split data into training (70%) and
test (30%) sets;
2. We apply the transformation in Section 4.1.1 to
the training data to obtain a partially labeled set
(exploration history);
3. We then use the IPS and DR estimators to im-
pute unrevealed losses in the training data; that
is, we transform each partial-feedback example
(x,a,l) into a cost sensitive example of the form
(x,l1,...,lK) where la′ is the loss for action a′,
imputed from the partial feedback data as fol-
lows:
la′ =



ˆl(x,a′) + l −ˆl(x,a′)
ˆµ1(a′|x) ,
if a′ = a,
ˆl(x,a′),
if a′ ̸= a.
In both cases, ˆµ1(a′|x) = 1/K (recall that ˆµ1 =
ˆµk); in DR we use the loss estimate (described
below), in IPS we use ˆl(x,a′) = 0;
4. Two cost-sensitive multiclass classiﬁcation algo-
rithms are used to learn a classiﬁer from the
losses completed by either IPS or DR: the ﬁrst
is DLM used also in the previous section (see
Appendix D and McAllester, Hazan and Keshet,
2011), the other is the Filter Tree reduction of
Beygelzimer, Langford and Ravikumar (2008)
applied to a decision-tree base learner (see Ap-
pendix E for more details);
5. Finally, we evaluate the learned classiﬁers on the
test data to obtain classiﬁcation error.
Again, we use least-squares ridge regression to
build a linear loss estimator: ˆl(x,a) = wa · x. How-
ever, since the training data is partially labeled, wa
is ﬁtted only using training data (x,a′,l) for which
a = a′. Note that this choice slightly violates our as-
sumptions, because ˆl is not independent of the train-
ing data zn. However, we expect the dependence to
be rather weak, and we ﬁnd this approach to be more
realistic in practical scenarios where one might want
to use all available data to form the reward estima-
tor, for instance due to data scarcity.
Average classiﬁcation errors (obtained in Step 5
above) of 30 runs are plotted in Figure 2. Clearly,
for policy optimization, the advantage of the DR
Fig. 2.
Classiﬁcation error of direct loss minimization (left) and ﬁlter tree (right). Note that the representations used by
DLM and the trees are very diﬀerent, making any comparison between the two approaches diﬃcult. However, the Oﬀset Tree
and Filter Tree approaches share a similar tree representation of the classiﬁers, so diﬀerences in performance are purely a
matter of superior optimization.

12
DUD´IK, ERHAN, LANGFORD AND LI
is even greater than for policy evaluation. In all
datasets, DR provides substantially more reliable
loss estimates than IPS, and results in signiﬁcantly
improved classiﬁers.
Figure 2 also includes classiﬁcation error of the
Oﬀset Tree reduction (Beygelzimer and Langford,
2009), which is designed speciﬁcally for policy opti-
mization with partially labeled data.3 While the IPS
versions of DLM and Filter Tree are rather weak, the
DR versions are competitive with Oﬀset Tree in all
datasets, and in some cases signiﬁcantly outperform
Oﬀset Tree.
Our experiments show that DR provides similar
improvements in two very diﬀerent algorithms, one
based on gradient descent, the other based on tree
induction, suggesting the DR technique is gener-
ally useful when combined with diﬀerent algorithmic
choices.
4.2 Estimating the Average Number of User
Visits
The next problem we consider is estimating the
average number of user visits to a popular Internet
portal. We formulate this as a regression problem
and in our evaluation introduce an artiﬁcial covari-
ate shift. As in the previous section, the original data
is real-world, but the covariate shift is simulated.
Real user visits to the website were recorded for
about 4 million bcookies4 randomly selected from
all bcookies during March 2010. Each bcookie is as-
sociated with a sparse binary covariate vector in
5000 dimensions. These covariates describe brows-
ing behavior as well as other information (such
as age, gender and geographical location) of the
bcookie. We chose a ﬁxed time window in March
2010 and calculated the number of visits by each
selected bcookie during this window. To summa-
rize, the dataset contains N = 3,854,689 data points:
D = {(bi,xi,vi)}i=1,...,N, where bi is the ith (unique)
bcookie, xi is the corresponding binary covariate
vector, and vi is the number of visits (the response
3We used decision trees as the base learner in Oﬀset Trees
to parallel our base learner choice in Filter Trees. The num-
bers reported here are not identical to those by Beygelzimer
and Langford (2009), even though we used a similar protocol
on the same datasets, probably because of small diﬀerences
in the data structures used.
4A bcookie is a unique string that identiﬁes a user. Strictly
speaking, one user may correspond to multiple bcookies, but
for simplicity we equate a bcookie with a user.
variable); we treat the empirical distribution over D
as the ground truth.
If it is possible to sample x uniformly at random
from D and measure the corresponding value v, the
sample mean of v will be an unbiased estimate of the
true average number of user visits, which is 23.8 in
this problem. However, in various situations, it may
be diﬃcult or impossible to ensure a uniform sam-
pling scheme due to practical constraints. Instead,
the best that one can do is to sample x from some
other distribution (e.g., allowed by the business con-
straints) and measure the corresponding value v.
In other words, the sampling distribution of x is
changed, but the conditional distribution of v given
x remains the same. In this case, the sample average
of v may be a biased estimate of the true quantity
of interest. This setting is known as covariate shift
(Shimodaira, 2000), where data are missing at ran-
dom (see Kang and Schafer, 2007, for related com-
parisons).
Covariate shift can be modeled as a contextual
bandit problem with 2 actions: action a = 0 cor-
responding to “conceal the response” and action
a = 1 corresponding to “reveal the response.” Be-
low we specify the stationary exploration policy
µk(a|x) = µ1(a|x). The contextual bandit data is
generated by ﬁrst sampling (x,v) ∼D, then choos-
ing an action a ∼µ1(·|x), and observing the reward
r = a · v (i.e., reward is only revealed if a = 1). The
exploration policy µ1 determines the covariate shift.
The quantity of interest, ED[v], corresponds to the
value of the constant policy ν which always chooses
“reveal the response.”
To deﬁne the exploration sampling probabilities
µ1(a = 1|x), we adopted an approach similar to
Gretton et al. (2008), with a bias toward the smaller
values along the ﬁrst principal component of the
distribution over x. In particular, we obtained the
ﬁrst principal component (denoted ¯x) of all covari-
ate vectors {xi}i=1,...,N, and projected all data onto
¯x. Let φ be the density of a univariate normal
distribution with mean m + ( ¯m −m)/3 and stan-
dard deviation ( ¯m−m)/4, where m is the minimum
and ¯m is the mean of the projected values. We set
µ1(a = 1|x) = min{φ(x · ¯x),1}.
To control the size of exploration data, we ran-
domly subsampled a fraction f ∈{0.0001, 0.0005,
0.001, 0.005, 0.01, 0.05} from the entire dataset D
and then chose actions a according to the explo-
ration policy. We then calculated the IPS and DR

DOUBLY ROBUST POLICY EVALUATION AND OPTIMIZATION
13
Fig. 3.
Comparison of IPS and DR: rmse (left), bias (right). The ground truth policy value (average number of user visits)
is 23.8.
estimates on this subsample, assuming perfect log-
ging, that is, ˆµk = µk.5 The whole process was re-
peated 100 times.
The DR estimator required building a reward
model ˆr(x,a), which, for a given covariate vector
x and a = 1, predicted the average number of vis-
its (and for a = 0 was equal to zero). Again, least-
squares ridge regression was used on a separate
dataset to ﬁt a linear model ˆr(x,1) = w · x from the
exploration data.
Figure 3 summarizes the estimation error of the
two methods with increasing exploration data size.
For both IPS and DR, the estimation error goes
down with more data. In terms of rmse, the DR
estimator is consistently better than IPS, especially
when dataset size is smaller. The DR estimator of-
ten reduces the rmse by a fraction between 10% and
20%, and on average by 13.6%. By comparing to the
bias values (which are much smaller), it is clear that
DR’s gain of accuracy comes from a lower variance,
which accelerates convergence of the estimator to
the true value. These results conﬁrm our analysis
that DR tends to reduce variance provided that a
reasonable reward estimator is available.
4.3 Content Slotting in Response to User
Queries
In this section, we compare our estimators on
a proprietary real-world dataset consisting of web
search queries. In response to a search query, the
search engine returns a set of search results. A search
result can be of various types such as a web-link, a
5Assuming perfect knowledge of exploration probabilities is
fair when we compare IPS and DR. However, it does not give
implications of how DR compares against DM when there is
an estimation error in ˆµk.
news snippet or a movie information snippet. We
will be evaluating policies that decide which among
the diﬀerent result types to present at the ﬁrst posi-
tion. The reward is meant to capture the relevance
for the user. It equals +1 if the user clicks on the
result at the ﬁrst position, −1 if the user clicks on
some result below the ﬁrst position, and 0 otherwise
(for instance, if the user leaves the search page, or
decides to rewrite the query). We call this a click-
skip reward.
Our partially labeled dataset consists of tuples of
the form (xk,ak,rk,pk), where xk is the covariate
vector (a sparse, high-dimensional representation of
the terms of the query as well as other contextual
information, such as user information), ak ∈{web-
link, news, movie} is the type of result at the ﬁrst
position, rk is the click-skip reward, and pk is the
recorded probability with which the exploration pol-
icy chose the given result type. Note that due to
practical constraints, the values pk do not always
exactly correspond to µk(ak|xk) and should be re-
ally viewed as the “best eﬀort” approximation of
perfect logging. We still expect them to be highly
accurate, so we use the estimator ˆµk(ak|xk) = pk.
The page views corresponding to these tuples rep-
resent a small percentage of user traﬃc to a major
website; any visit to the website had a small chance
of being part of this experiment. Data was collected
over a span of several days during July 2011. It con-
sists of 1.2 million tuples, out of which the ﬁrst 1 mil-
lion were used for estimating ˆr (training data) with
the remainder used for policy evaluation (evaluation
data). The evaluation data was further split into 10
independent subsets of equal size, which were used
to estimate variance of the compared estimators.
We estimated the value of two policies: the ex-
ploration policy itself, and the argmax policy (de-
scribed below). Evaluating exploration policy on

14
DUD´IK, ERHAN, LANGFORD AND LI
Table 2
The results of diﬀerent policy evaluators on two standard
policies for a real-world exploration problem. In the ﬁrst
column, results are normalized by the (known) actual
reward of the deployed policy. In the second column,
results are normalized by the reward reported by IPS. All
± are computed as standard deviations over results on 10
disjoint test sets. In previous publication of the same
experiments (Dud´ık et al., 2012), we used a
deterministic-policy version of DR (the same as in Dud´ık,
Langford and Li, 2011), hence the results for
self-evaluation presented there slightly diﬀer
Self-evaluation
Argmax
IPS
0.995 ± 0.041
1.000 ± 0.027
DM
1.213 ± 0.010
1.211 ± 0.002
DR
0.974 ± 0.039
0.991 ± 0.026
its own exploration data (we call this setup self-
evaluation) serves as a sanity check. The argmax
policy is based on a linear estimator r′(x,a) = wa · x
(in general diﬀerent from ˆr), and chooses the ac-
tion with the largest predicted reward r′(x,a) (hence
the name). We ﬁtted r′(x,a) on training data by
importance-weighted linear regression with impor-
tance weights 1/pk. Note that both ˆr and r′ are
linear estimators obtained from the same training
set, but ˆr was computed without importance weights
and we therefore expect it to be more biased.
Table 2 contains the comparison of IPS, DM and
DR, for both policies under consideration. For busi-
ness reasons, we do not report the estimated reward
directly, but normalize to either the empirical aver-
age reward (for self-evaluation) or the IPS estimate
(for the argmax policy evaluation).
The experimental results are generally in line with
theory. The variance is smallest for DR, although
IPS does surprisingly well on this dataset, presum-
ably because ˆr is not suﬃciently accurate. The Di-
rect Method (DM) has an unsurprisingly large bias.
If we divide the listed standard deviations by
√
10,
we obtain standard errors, suggesting that DR has
a slight bias (on self-evaluation where we know the
ground truth). We believe that this is due to imper-
fect logging.
5. EVALUATION OF NONSTATIONARY
POLICIES
5.1 Problem Deﬁnition
The contextual bandit setting can also be used to
model a broad class of sequential decision-making
problems, where the decision maker adapts her
action-selection policy over time, based on her ob-
served history of context-action-reward triples. In
contrast to policies studied in the previous two sec-
tions, such a policy depends on both the current
context and the current history and is therefore non-
stationary.
In the personalized news recommendation exam-
ple (Li et al., 2010), a learning algorithm chooses
an article (an action) for the current user (the con-
text), with the need for balancing exploration and
exploitation. Exploration corresponds to presenting
articles about which the algorithm does not yet have
enough data to conclude if they are of interest to a
particular type of user. Exploitation corresponds to
presenting articles for which the algorithm collected
enough data to know that they elicit a positive re-
sponse. At the beginning, the algorithm may pur-
sue more aggressive exploration since it has a more
limited knowledge of what the users like. As more
and more data is collected, the algorithm eventu-
ally converges to a good recommendation policy and
performs more exploitation. Obviously, for the same
user, the algorithm may choose diﬀerent articles in
diﬀerent stages, so the policy is not stationary. In
machine learning terminology, such adaptive proce-
dures are called online learning algorithms. Evalu-
ating performance of an online learning algorithm
(in terms of average per-step reward when run for T
steps) is an important problem in practice. Online
learning algorithms are speciﬁc instances of nonsta-
tionary policies.
Formally, a nonstationary randomized policy is
described by a conditional distribution π(at|xt,ht−1)
of choosing an action at on a context xt, given the
history of past observations
ht−1 = (x1,a1,r1),...,(xt−1,at−1,rt−1).
We use the index t (instead of k), and write ht (in-
stead of zk) to make clear the distinction between
the histories experienced by the target policy π ver-
sus the exploration policy µ.
A target history of length T is denoted hT . In our
analysis, we extend the target policy π(at|xt,ht−1)
into a probability distribution over hT deﬁned by
the factoring
π(xt,at,rt|ht−1) = D(xt)π(at|xt,ht−1)D(rt|xt,at).
Similarly to µ, we deﬁne shorthands πt(x,a,r), Pπ
t ,
Eπ
t . The goal of nonstationary policy evaluation is to

DOUBLY ROBUST POLICY EVALUATION AND OPTIMIZATION
15
estimate the expected cumulative reward of policy
π after T rounds:
V1:T =
E
hT ∼π
" T
X
t=1
rt
#
.
In the news recommendation example, rt indicates
whether a user clicked on the recommended article,
and V1:T is the expected number of clicks garnered
by an online learning algorithm after serving T user
visits. A more eﬀective learning algorithm, by deﬁ-
nition, will have a higher V1:T value (Li et al., 2010).
Again, to have unbiased policy evaluation, we as-
sume that if πt(a|x) > 0 for any t (and some his-
tory ht−1) then µk(a|x) > 0 for all k (and all possi-
ble histories zk−1). This clearly holds for instance if
µk(a|x) > 0 for all a.
In our analysis of nonstationary policy evaluation,
we assume perfect logging, that is, we assume access
to probabilities
pk := µk(ak|xk).
Whereas in general this assumption does not hold, it
is realistic in some applications such as those on the
Internet. For example, when a website chooses one
news article from a pool to recommend to a user,
engineers often have full control/knowledge of how
to randomize the article selection process (Li et al.,
2010; Li et al., 2011).
5.2 Relation to Dynamic Treatment Regimes
The nonstationary policy evaluation problem de-
ﬁned above is closely related to DTR analysis in
a longitudinal observational study. Using the same
notation, the inference goal in DTR is to estimate
the expected sum of rewards by following a possibly
randomized rule π for T steps.6 Unlike contextual
bandits, there is no assumption on the distribution
from which the data zn is generated. More precisely,
given an exploration policy µ, the data generation
is described by
µ(xk,ak,rk|zk−1)
= D(xk|zk−1)µ(ak|xk,zk−1)D(rk|xk,ak,zk−1).
Compared to the data-generation process in contex-
tual bandits (see Section 3.1), one allows the laws
6In DTR often the goal is to estimate the expectation of a
composite outcome that depends on the entire length-T tra-
jectory. However, the objective of composite outcomes can
easily be reformulated as a sum of properly redeﬁned rewards.
of xk and rk to depend on history zk−1. The tar-
get policy π is subject to the same conditional laws.
The setting in longitudinal observational studies is
therefore more general than contextual bandits.
IPS-style estimators (such as DR of the previous
section) can be extended to handle nonstationary
policy evaluation, where the likelihood ratios are
now the ratios of likelihoods of the whole length-
T trajectories. In DTR analysis, it is often assumed
that the number of trajectories is much larger than
T. Under this assumption and with T small, the
variance of IPS-style estimates is on the order of
O(1/n), diminishing to 0 as n →∞.
In contextual bandits, one similarly assumes n ≫
T. However, the number of steps T is often large,
ranging from hundreds to millions. The likelihood
ratio for a length-T trajectory can be exponential
in T, resulting in exponentially large variance. As
a concrete example, consider the case where the
exploration policy (i.e., the treatment mechanism)
chooses actions uniformly at random from K pos-
sibilities, and where the target policy π is a deter-
ministic function of the current history and context.
The likelihood ratio of any trajectory is exactly KT ,
and there are n/T trajectories (by breaking zn into
n/T pieces of length T). Assuming bounded vari-
ance of rewards, the variance of IPS-style estimators
given data zn is O(TKT /n), which can be extremely
large (or even vacuous) for even moderate values of
T, such as those in the studies of online learning in
the Internet applications.
In contrast, the “replay” approach of Li et al.
(2011) takes advantage of the independence be-
tween (xk,rk) and history zk−1. It has a variance
of O(KT/n), ignoring logarithmic terms, when the
exploration policy is uniformly random. When the
exploration data is generated by a nonuniformly ran-
dom policy, one may apply rejection sampling to
simulate uniformly random exploration, obtaining
a subset of the exploration data, which can then
be used to run the replay approach. However, this
method may discard a large fraction of data, espe-
cially when the historical actions in the log are cho-
sen from a highly nonuniform distribution, which
can yield an unacceptably large variance. The next
subsection describes an improved replay-based esti-
mator that uses doubly-robust estimation as well as
a variant of rejection sampling.
5.3 A Nonstationary Policy Evaluator
Our replay-based nonstationary policy evaluator
(Algorithm 1) takes advantage of high accuracy

16
DUD´IK, ERHAN, LANGFORD AND LI
Algorithm 1
DR-ns(π, {(xk,ak,rk,pk)}k=1,2,...,n, ˆr, q, cmax, T)
Input:
target nonstationary policy π
exploration data {(xk,ak,rk,pk)}k=1,2,...,n
reward estimator ˆr(x,a)
rejection sampling parameters:
q ∈[0,1] and cmax ∈(0,1]
number of steps T for estimation
Initialize:
simulated history of target policy h0 ←∅
simulated step of target policy t ←0
acceptance rate multiplier c1 ←cmax
cumulative reward estimate ˆVDR-ns ←0
cumulative normalizing weight C ←0
importance weights seen so far Q ←∅
For k = 1,2,... consider event (xk,ak,rk,pk):
(1) ˆVk ←ˆr(xk,πt) + πt(ak|xk)
pk
· (rk −ˆr(xk,ak))
(2) ˆVDR-ns ←ˆVDR-ns + ct ˆVk
(3) C ←C + ct
(4) Q ←Q ∪{
pk
πt(ak|xk)}
(5) Let uk ∼uniform[0,1]
(6) If uk ≤ctπt(ak|xk)
pk
(a) ht ←ht−1 + (xk,ak,rk)
(b) t ←t + 1
(c) if t = T + 1, go to “Exit”
(d) ct ←min{cmax,qth quantile of Q}
Exit: If t < T + 1, report failure and terminate;
otherwise, return:
cumulative reward estimate ˆVDR-ns
average reward estimate ˆV avg
DR-ns := ˆVDR-ns/C
of DR estimator while tackling nonstationarity via
rejection sampling. We substatially improve sam-
ple use (i.e., acceptance rate) in rejection sampling
while only modestly increasing the bias. This algo-
rithm is referred to as DR-ns, for “doubly robust
nonstationary.” Over the run of the algorithm, we
process the exploration history and run rejection
sampling [Steps (5)–(6)] to create a simulated his-
tory ht of the interaction between the target policy
and the environment. If the algorithm manages to
simulate T steps of history, it exits and returns an
estimate ˆVDR-ns of the cumulative reward V1:T , and
an estimate ˆV avg
DR-ns of the average reward V1:T /T;
otherwise, it reports failure indicating not enough
data is available.
Since we assume n ≫T, the algorithm fails with
a small probability as long as the exploration pol-
icy does not assign too small probabilities to actions.
Speciﬁcally, let α > 0 be a lower bound on the accep-
tance probability in the rejection sampling step; that
is, the condition in Step (6) succeeds with probabil-
ity at least α. Then, using the Hoeﬀding’s inequality,
one can show that the probability of failure of the
algorithm is at most δ if
n ≥T + ln(e/δ)
α
.
Note that the algorithm returns one “sample” of
the policy value. In reality, the algorithm continu-
ously consumes a stream of n data, outputs a sam-
ple of policy value whenever a length-T history is
simulated, and ﬁnally returns the average of these
samples. Suppose we aim to simulate m histories of
length T. Again, by Hoeﬀding’s inequality, the prob-
ability of failing to obtain m trajectories is at most
δ if
n ≥mT + ln(e/δ)
α
.
Compared with naive rejection sampling, our ap-
proach diﬀers in two respects. First, we use not only
the accepted samples, but also the rejected ones to
estimate the expected reward Eπ
t [r] with a DR esti-
mator [see Step (1)]. As we will see below, the value
of 1/ct is in expectation equal to the total number
of exploration samples used while simulating the tth
action of the target policy. Therefore, in Step (2), we
eﬀectively take an average of 1/ct estimates of Eπ
t [r],
decreasing the variance of the ﬁnal estimator. This
is in addition to lower variance due to the use of the
doubly robust estimate in Step (1).
The second modiﬁcation is in the control of the
acceptance rate (i.e., the bound α above). When
simulating the tth action of the target policy,
we accept exploration samples with a probability
min{1,ctπt/pk} where ct is a multiplier [see Steps
(5)–(6)]. We will see below that the bias of the esti-
mator is controlled by the probability that ctπt/pk
exceeds 1, or equivalently, that pk/πt falls below ct.
As a heuristic toward controlling this probability,
we maintain a set Q consisting of observed density
ratios pk/πt, and at the beginning of simulating the
tth action, we set ct to the qth quantile of Q, for
some small value of q [Step (6)(d)], while never al-
lowing it to exceed some predetermined cmax. Thus,

DOUBLY ROBUST POLICY EVALUATION AND OPTIMIZATION
17
the value q approximately corresponds to the prob-
ability value that we wish to control. Setting q = 0,
we obtain the unbiased case (in the limit). By using
larger values of q, we increase the bias, but reach
the length T with fewer exploration samples thanks
to increased acceptance rate. A similar eﬀect is ob-
tained by varying cmax, but the control is cruder,
since it ignores the evaluated policy. In our exper-
iments, we therefore set cmax = 1 and rely on q to
control the acceptance rate. It is an interesting open
question how to select q and c in practice.
To study our algorithm DR-ns, we modify the deﬁ-
nition of the exploration history so as to include the
samples uk from the uniform distribution used by
the algorithm when processing the kth exploration
sample. Thus, we have an augmented deﬁnition
zk = (x1,a1,r1,u1,...,xk,ak,rk,uk).
With this in mind, expressions Pµ
k and Eµ
k in-
clude conditioning on variables u1,...,uk−1, and µ
is viewed as a distribution over augmented histo-
ries zn.
For convenience of analysis, we assume in this sec-
tion that we have access to an inﬁnite exploration
history z (i.e., zn for n = ∞) and that the counter
t in the pseudocode eventually becomes T + 1 with
probability one (at which point hT is generated).
Such an assumption is mild in practice when n is
much larger than T.
Formally, for t ≥1, let κ(t) be the index of the
tth sample accepted in Step (6); thus, κ converts
an index in the target history into an index in
the exploration history. We set κ(0) = 0 and deﬁne
κ(t) = ∞if fewer than t samples are accepted. Note
that κ is a deterministic function of the history z
(thanks to including samples uk in z). We assume
that Pµ[κ(T) = ∞] = 0. This means that the algo-
rithm (together with the exploration policy µ) gen-
erates a distribution over histories hT ; we denote
this distribution ˆπ.
Let B(t) = {κ(t −1) + 1,κ(t −1) + 2,...,κ(t)} for
t ≥1 denote the set of sample indices between the
(t−1)st acceptance and the tth acceptance. This set
of samples is called the tth block. The contribution
of the tth block to the value estimator is denoted
ˆVB(t) = P
k∈B(t) ˆVk. After completion of T blocks,
the two estimators returned by our algorithm are
ˆVDR-ns =
T
X
t=1
ct ˆVB(t),
ˆV avg
DR-ns =
PT
t=1 ct ˆVB(t)
PT
t=1 ct|B(t)|
.
5.4 Bias Analysis
A simple approach to evaluating a nonstationary
policy is to divide the exploration data into sev-
eral parts, run the algorithm separately on each
part to generate simulated histories, obtaining es-
timates ˆV (1)
DR-ns,..., ˆV (m)
DR-ns, and return the average
Pm
i=1 ˆV (i)
DR-ns/m.7 Here, we assume n is large enough
so that m simulated histories of length T can be
generated with high probability. Using standard
concentration inequalities, we can then show that
the average is within O(1/√m) of the expectation
Eµ[ ˆVDR-ns]. The remaining piece is then bounding
the bias term Eµ[ ˆVDR-ns] −Eπ[PT
t=1 rt].8
Recall that ˆVDR-ns = PT
t=1 ct ˆVB(t). The source of
bias are events when ct is not small enough to guar-
antee that ctπt(ak|xk)/pk is a probability. In this
case, the probability that the kth exploration sam-
ple includes the action ak and is accepted is
pk min

1, ctπt(ak|xk)
pk

= min{pk,ctπt(ak|xk)},
(5.1)
which may violate the unbiasedness requirement of
rejection sampling, requiring that the probability of
acceptance be proportional to πt(ak|xk).
Conditioned on zk−1 and the induced target his-
tory ht−1, deﬁne the event
Ek := {(x,a):ctπt(a|x) > µk(a|x)},
which contributes to the bias of the estimate, be-
cause it corresponds to cases when the minimum in
equation (5.1) is attained by pk. Associated with this
event is the “bias mass” εk, which measures (up to
scaling by ct) the diﬀerence between the probability
of the bad event under πt and under the run of our
algorithm:
εk := P(x,a)∼πt[Ek] −P(x,a)∼µk[Ek]/ct.
Notice that from the deﬁnition of Ek, this mass is
nonnegative. Since the ﬁrst term is a probability,
this mass is at most 1. We will assume that this
7We only consider estimators for cumulative rewards (not
average rewards) in this section. We assume that the division
into parts is done sequentially, so that individual estimates are
built from nonoverlapping sequences of T consecutive blocks
of examples.
8As shown in Li et al. (2011), when m is constant, making
T large does not necessarily reduce variance of any estimator
of nonstationary policies.

18
DUD´IK, ERHAN, LANGFORD AND LI
mass is bounded away from 1, that is, that there
exists ε such that for all k and zk−1
0 ≤εk ≤ε < 1.
The following theorem analyzes how much bias is
introduced in the worst case, as a function of ε. It
shows how the bias mass controls the bias of our
estimator.
Theorem 5.1.
For T ≥1,
Eµ
" T
X
t=1
ct ˆVB(t)
#
−Eπ
" T
X
t=1
rt
#
≤T(T + 1)
2
·
ε
1 −ε.
Intuitively, this theorem says that if a bias of ε is
introduced in round t, its eﬀect on the sum of re-
wards can be felt for T −t rounds. Summing over
rounds, we expect to get an O(εT 2) eﬀect on the es-
timator of the cumulative reward. In general a very
slight bias can result in a signiﬁcantly better accep-
tance rate, and hence more replicates ˆV (i)
DR-ns.
This theorem is the ﬁrst of this sort for policy eval-
uators, although the mechanics of its proof have ap-
peared in model-based reinforcement-learning (e.g.,
Kearns and Singh, 1998).
To prove the main theorem, we state two technical
lemmas bounding the diﬀerences of probabilities and
expectations under the target policy and our algo-
rithm (for proofs of lemmas, see Appendix F). The
theorem follows as their immediate consequence. Re-
call that ˆπ denotes the distribution over target his-
tories generated by our algorithm (together with the
exploration policy µ).
Lemma 5.2.
Let t ≤T, k ≥1 and let zk−1 be
such that the kth exploration sample marks the be-
ginning of the tth block, that is, κ(t−1) = k −1. Let
ht−1 and ct be the target history and acceptance rate
multiplier induced by zk−1. Then:
X
x,a
|Pµ
k[xκ(t) = x,aκ(t) = a] −πt(x,a)| ≤
2ε
1 −ε,
|ctEµ
k[ ˆVB(t)] −Eπ
t [r]| ≤
ε
1 −ε.
Lemma 5.3.
X
hT
|ˆπ(hT ) −π(hT )| ≤(2εT)/(1 −ε).
Proof of Theorem 5.1.
First, bound |Eµ[ct ·
ˆVB(t)] −Eπ[rt]| using the previous two lemmas, the
triangle inequality and H¨older’s inequality:
|Eµ[ct ˆVB(t)] −Eπ[rt]|
= |Eµ[ctEµ
κ(t)[ ˆVB(t)]] −Eπ[rt]|
≤|Eµ[Eπ
t [rt]] −Eπ[Eπ
t [rt]]| +
ε
1 −ε
=

E
ht−1∼ˆπ

Eπ
t

r −1
2

−
E
ht−1∼π

Eπ
t

r −1
2

+
ε
1 −ε
≤1
2
X
ht−1
|ˆπ(ht−1) −π(ht−1)| +
ε
1 −ε
≤1
2 · 2ε(t −1)
1 −ε
+
ε
1 −ε =
εt
1 −ε.
The theorem now follows by summing over t and
using the triangle inequality.
□
6. EXPERIMENTS: THE NONSTATIONARY
CASE
We now study how DR-ns may achieve greater
sample eﬃciency than rejection sampling through
the use of a controlled bias. We evaluate our estima-
tor on the problem of a multiclass multi-label clas-
siﬁcation with partial feedback using the publicly
available dataset rcv1 (Lewis et al., 2004). In this
data, the goal is to predict whether a news article is
in one of many Reuters categories given the contents
of the article. This dataset is chosen instead of the
UCI benchmarks in Section 4 because of its bigger
size, which is helpful for simulating online learning
(i.e., adaptive policies).
6.1 Data Generation
For multi-label dataset like rcv1, an example has
the form (˜x,Y ), where ˜x is the covariate vector and
Y ⊆{1,...,K} is the set of correct class labels.9
In our modeling, we assume that any y ∈Y is the
correct prediction for ˜x. Similar to Section 4.1, an
example (˜x,Y ) may be interpreted as a bandit event
with context ˜x and loss l(Y,a) := I(a /∈Y ), for ev-
ery action a ∈{1,...,K}. A classiﬁer can be inter-
preted as a stationary policy whose expected loss
9The reason why we call the covariate vector ˜x rather than
x becomes in the sequel.

DOUBLY ROBUST POLICY EVALUATION AND OPTIMIZATION
19
is its classiﬁcation error. In this section, we again
aim at evaluating expected policy loss, which can
be understood as negative reward. For our exper-
iments, we only use the K = 4 top-level classes in
rcv1, namely {C,E,G,M}. We take a random se-
lection of 40,000 data points from the whole dataset
and call the resulting dataset D.
To construct a partially labeled exploration data-
set, we simulate a stationary but nonuniform explo-
ration policy with a bias toward correct answers.
This is meant to emulate the typical setting where
a baseline system already has a good understanding
of which actions are likely best. For each example
(˜x,Y ), a uniformly random value s(a) ∈[0.1,1] is
assigned independently to each action a, and the ﬁ-
nal probability of action a is determined by
µ1(a|˜x,Y,s) = 0.3 × s(a)
P
a′ s(a′) + 0.7 × I(a ∈Y )
|Y |
.
Note that this policy will assign a nonzero probabil-
ity to every action. Formally, our exploration policy
is a function of an extended context x = (˜x,Y,s),
and our data generating distribution D(x) includes
the generation of the correct answers Y and values
s. Of course, we will be evaluating policies π that
only get to see ˜x, but have no access to Y and s.
Also, the estimator ˆl (recall that we are evaluating
loss here, not reward) is purely a function of ˜x and
a. We stress that in a real-world setting, the explo-
ration policy would not have access to all correct
answers Y .
6.2 Evaluation of a Nonstationary Policy
As described before, a ﬁxed (nonadaptive) classi-
ﬁer can be interpreted as a stationary policy. Simi-
larly, a classiﬁer that adapts as more data arrive is
equivalent to a nonstationary policy.
In our experiments, we evaluate performance of an
adaptive ǫ-greedy classiﬁer deﬁned as follows: with
probability ǫ = 0.1, it predicts a label drawn uni-
formly at random from {1,2,... ,K}; with probabil-
ity 1 −ǫ, it predicts the best label according to a
linear score (the “greedy” label):
argmax
a
{wt
a · ˜x},
where {wt
a}a∈{1,...,K} is a set of K weight vectors
at time t. This design mimics a commonly used ǫ-
greedy exploration strategy for contextual bandits
(e.g., Li et al., 2010). Weight vectors wt
a are ob-
tained by ﬁtting a logistic regression model for the
binary classiﬁcation problem a ∈Y (positive) ver-
sus a /∈Y (negative). The data used to ﬁt wt
a is de-
scribed below. Thus, the greedy label is the most
likely label according to the current set of logis-
tic regression models. The loss estimator ˆl(˜x,a) is
also obtained by ﬁtting a logistic regression model
for a ∈Y versus a /∈Y , potentially on a diﬀerent
dataset.
We partition the whole data D randomly into
three disjoint subsets: Dinit
(initialization set),
Dvalid (validation set), and Deval (evaluation set),
consisting of 1%, 19%, and 80% of D, respectively.
Our goal in this experiment is to estimate the ex-
pected loss, V1:T , of an adaptive policy π after
T = 300 rounds.
The full-feedback set Dinit is used to ﬁt the loss
estimator ˆl.
Since Dvalid is a random subset of D, it may be
used to simulate the behavior of policy π to obtain
an unbiased estimate of V1:T . We do this by taking
an average of 2000 simulations of π on random shuf-
ﬂes of the set Dvalid. This estimate, denoted ¯V1:T , is
a highly accurate approximation to (the unknown)
V1:T , and serves as our ground truth.
To assess diﬀerent policy-value estimators, we ran-
domly permute Deval and transform it into a par-
tially labeled set as described in Section 6.1. On the
resulting partially labeled data, we then evaluate the
policy π up to round T, obtaining an estimate of
V1:T . If the exploration history is not exhausted, we
start the evaluation of π again, continuing with the
next exploration sample, but restarting from empty
target history (for T rounds), and repeat until we
use up all the exploration data. The ﬁnal estimate
is the average across thus obtained replicates. We re-
peat this process (permutation of Deval, generation
of exploration history, and policy evaluation until
using up all exploration data) 50 times, so that we
can compare the 50 estimates against the ground
truth ¯V1:T to compute bias and standard deviation
of a policy-value estimator.
Finally, we describe in more detail the ε-greedy
adaptive classiﬁer π being evaluated:
• First, the policy is initialized by ﬁtting weights w0
a
on the full-feedback set Dinit (similarly to ˆl). This
step mimics the practical situation where one usu-
ally has prior information (in the form of either
domain knowledge or historical data) to initialize
a policy, instead of starting from scratch.

20
DUD´IK, ERHAN, LANGFORD AND LI
• After this “warm-start” step, the “online” phase
begins: in each round, the policy observes a ran-
domly selected ˜x, predicts a label in an ǫ-greedy
fashion (as described above), and then observes
the corresponding 0/1 prediction loss. The policy
is updated every 15 rounds. On those rounds, we
retrain weights wt
a for each action a, using the full
feedback set Dinit as well as all the data from the
online phase where the policy chose action a. The
online phase terminates after T = 300 rounds.
6.3 Compared Evaluators
We compared the following evaluators described
earlier: DM for direct method, RS for the unbiased
evaluator based on rejection sampling and “replay”
(Li et al., 2011), and DR-ns as in Algorithm 1 (with
cmax = 1). We also tested a variant of DR-ns, which
does not monitor the quantile, but instead uses ct
equal to minD µ1(a|x); we call it DR-ns-wc since it
uses the worst-case (most conservative) value of ct
that ensures unbiasedness of rejection sampling.
6.4 Results
Table 3 summarizes the accuracy of diﬀerent eval-
uators in terms of rmse (root mean squared error),
bias (the absolute diﬀerence between the average es-
timate and the ground truth) and stdev (standard
deviation of the estimates across diﬀerent runs). It
should be noted that, given the relatively small num-
ber of trials, the measurement of bias is not statis-
tically signiﬁcant. However, the table provides 95%
conﬁdence interval for the rmse metric that allows a
meaningful comparison.
It is clear that although rejection sampling is guar-
anteed to be unbiased, its variance is usually the
dominating part of its rmse. At the other extreme is
the direct method, which has the smallest variance
but often suﬀers large bias. In contrast, our method
DR-ns is able to ﬁnd a good balance between the two
Table 3
Nonstationary policy evaluation results
Evaluator
rmse (±95% C.I.)
bias
stdev
DM
0.0329 ± 0.0007
0.0328
0.0027
RS
0.0179 ± 0.0050
0.0007
0.0181
DR-ns-wc
0.0156 ± 0.0037
0.0086
0.0132
DR-ns (q = 0)
0.0129 ± 0.0034
0.0046
0.0122
DR-ns (q = 0.01)
0.0089 ± 0.0017
0.0065
0.0062
DR-ns (q = 0.05)
0.0123 ± 0.0017
0.0107
0.0061
DR-ns (q = 0.1)
0.0946 ± 0.0015
0.0946
0.0053
extremes and, with proper selection of the param-
eter q, is able to make the evaluation results much
more accurate than others.
It is also clear that the main beneﬁt of DR-ns is its
low variance, which stems from the adaptive choice
of ct values. By slightly violating the unbiasedness
guarantee, it increases the eﬀective data size signiﬁ-
cantly, hence reducing the variance of its evaluation.
For q > 0, DR-ns was able to extract many more tra-
jectories of length 300 for evaluating π, while RS and
DR-ns-wc were able to ﬁnd only one such trajectory
out of the evaluation set. In fact, if we increase the
trajectory length of π from 300 to 500, both RS and
DR-ns-wc are not able to construct a complete tra-
jectory of length 500 and fail the task completely.
7. CONCLUSIONS
Doubly robust policy estimation is an eﬀective
technique which virtually always improves on the
widely used inverse propensity score method. Our
analysis shows that doubly robust methods tend
to give more reliable and accurate estimates, for
evaluating both stationary and nonstationary poli-
cies. The theory is corroborated by experiments on
benchmark data as well as two large-scale real-world
problems. In the future, we expect the DR technique
to become common practice in improving contextual
bandit algorithms.
APPENDIX A: PROOFS OF LEMMAS 3.1–3.3
Throughout proofs in this appendix, we write ˆr
and r∗instead of ˆr(x,a) and r∗(x,a) when x and a
are clear from the context, and similarly for ∆and
̺k.
Lemma 3.1.
The range of ˆVk is bounded as
| ˆVk| ≤1 + M.
Proof.
| ˆVk| =
ˆr(xk,ν) + ν(ak|xk)
ˆµk(ak|xk) · (rk −ˆr(xk,ak))

≤|ˆr(xk,ν)| + ν(ak|xk)
ˆµk(ak|xk) · |rk −ˆr(xk,ak)|
≤1 + M,
where the last inequality follows because ˆr and rk
are bounded in [0,1].
□
Lemma 3.2.
The expectation of the term ˆVk is
Eµ
k[ ˆVk] =
E
(x,a)∼ν
[r∗(x,a) + (1 −̺k(x,a))∆(x,a)].

DOUBLY ROBUST POLICY EVALUATION AND OPTIMIZATION
21
Proof.
Eµ
k[ ˆVk] =
E
(x,a,r)∼µk

ˆr(x,ν) + ν(a|x)
µk(a|x) · ̺k · (r −ˆr)

= E
x∼D[ˆr(x,ν)]
+ E
x∼D
X
a∈A
µk(a|x)
E
r∼D(· |x,a)
 ν(a|x)
µk(a|x)
· ̺k · (r −ˆr)

= E
x∼D[ˆr(x,ν)]
+ E
x∼D
X
a∈A
ν(a|x)
E
r∼D(· |x,a)
[̺k · (r −ˆr)]

=
E
(x,a)∼ν
[ˆr] +
E
(x,a,r)∼ν
[̺k · (r −ˆr)]
=
E
(x,a)∼ν
[r∗+ (ˆr −r∗) + ̺k · (r∗−ˆr)]
(A.1)
=
E
(x,a)∼ν
[r∗+ (1 −̺k)∆].
□
Lemma 3.3.
The variance of the term ˆVk can be
decomposed and bounded as follows:
Vµ
k[ ˆVk]
(i)
= V
x∼D[
E
a∼ν(· |x)
[r∗(x,a)
+ (1 −̺k(x,a))∆(x,a)]]
−E
x∼D[
E
a∼ν(· |x)
[̺k(x,a)∆(x,a)]2]
+
E
(x,a)∼ν
 ν(a|x)
ˆµk(a|x) · ̺k(x,a) ·
V
r∼D(· |x,a)
[r]

+
E
(x,a)∼ν
 ν(a|x)
ˆµk(a|x) · ̺k(x,a)∆(x,a)2

.
Vµ
k[ ˆVk]
(ii)
≤V
x∼D[r∗(x,ν)]
+ 2
E
(x,a)∼ν
[|(1 −̺k(x,a))∆(x,a)|]
+ M
E
(x,a)∼ν
[̺k(x,a)
·
E
r∼D(· |x,a)
[(r −ˆr(x,a))2]].
Proof.
Eµ
k[ ˆV 2
k ] =
E
(x,a,r)∼µk

ˆr(x,ν) + ν(a|x)
µk(a|x) · ̺k
· (r −ˆr)
2
= E
x∼D[ˆr(x,ν)2]
+ 2
E
(x,a,r)∼µk

ˆr(x,ν)
· ν(a|x)
µk(a|x) · ̺k · (r −ˆr)

+
E
(x,a,r)∼µk
 ν(a|x)
µk(a|x)
· ν(a|x)
ˆµk(a|x) · ̺k · (r −ˆr)2

= E
x∼D[ˆr(x,ν)2]
(A.2)
+ 2
E
(x,a,r)∼ν
[ˆr(x,ν) · ̺k · (r −ˆr)]
+
E
(x,a,r)∼ν
 ν(a|x)
ˆµk(a|x) · ̺k · (r −ˆr)2

=
E
(x,a)∼ν
[(ˆr(x,ν) −̺k∆)2]
(A.3)
−
E
(x,a)∼ν
[̺2
k∆2] + E,
where E denotes the term
E :=
E
(x,a,r)∼ν
 ν(a|x)
ˆµk(a|x) · ̺k · (r −ˆr)2

.
To obtain an expression for the variance of ˆVk, ﬁrst
note that by equation (A.1),
Eµ
k[ ˆVk] =
E
(x,a)∼ν
[ˆr(x,ν) −̺k∆].
(A.4)
Combining this with equation (A.3), we obtain
Vµ
k[ ˆVk] =
V
(x,a)∼ν
[ˆr(x,ν) −̺k∆]
−
E
(x,a)∼ν
[̺2
k∆2] + E
= V
x∼D[
E
a∼ν(· |x)
[ˆr(x,ν) −̺k∆]]
+ E
x∼D[
V
a∼ν(· |x)
[ˆr(x,ν) −̺k∆]]
−E
x∼D[
V
a∼ν(· |x)
[̺k∆]]
−E
x∼D[
E
a∼ν(· |x)
[̺k∆]2] + E
= V
x∼D[
E
a∼ν(· |x)
[r∗+ (1 −̺k)∆]]

22
DUD´IK, ERHAN, LANGFORD AND LI
+ E
x∼D[
V
a∼ν(· |x)
[̺k∆]]
−E
x∼D[
V
a∼ν(· |x)
[̺k∆]]
−E
x∼D[
E
a∼ν(· |x)
[̺k∆]2] + E
= V
x∼D[
E
a∼ν(· |x)
[r∗+ (1 −̺k)∆]]
−E
x∼D[
E
a∼ν(· |x)
[̺k∆]2] + E.
We now obtain part (i) of the lemma by decompos-
ing the term E:
E =
E
(x,a,r)∼ν
 ν(a|x)
ˆµk(a|x) · ̺k · (r −r∗)2

+
E
(x,a)∼ν
 ν(a|x)
ˆµk(a|x) · ̺k · (r∗−ˆr)2

=
E
(x,a)∼ν
 ν(a|x)
ˆµk(a|x) · ̺k ·
V
r∼D(· |x,a)
[r]

+
E
(x,a)∼ν
 ν(a|x)
ˆµk(a|x) · ̺k∆2

.
To prove part (ii) of the lemma, ﬁrst note that
ˆr(x,ν)2 = (r∗(x,ν) +
E
a∼ν(· |x)
[∆(x,a)])2
= r∗(x,ν)2 + 2r∗(x,ν)
E
a∼ν(· |x)
[∆(x,a)]
+
E
a∼ν(· |x)
[∆(x,a)]2
= r∗(x,ν)2 + 2ˆr(x,ν)
E
a∼ν(· |x)
[∆(x,a)]
−
E
a∼ν(· |x)
[∆(x,a)]2
≤r∗(x,ν)2 + 2ˆr(x,ν)
E
a∼ν(· |x)
[∆(x,a)].
Plugging this in equation (A.2), we obtain
Eµ
k[ ˆV 2
k ] = E
x∼D[ˆr(x,ν)2]
+ 2
E
(x,a,r)∼ν
[ˆr(x,ν) · ̺k · (r −ˆr)] + E
≤E
x∼D[r∗(x,ν)2]
+ 2 E
x∼D[ˆr(x,ν)
E
a∼ν(· |x)
[∆]]
+ 2
E
(x,a)∼ν
[ˆr(x,ν) · (−̺k) · ∆] + E
= E
x∼D[r∗(x,ν)2]
(A.5)
+ 2
E
(x,a)∼ν
[ˆr(x,ν) · (1 −̺k) · ∆] + E.
On the other hand, equation (A.4) can be rewritten
as
Eµ
k[ ˆVk] =
E
(x,a)∼ν
[r∗(x,ν) + (1 −̺k)∆].
Combining with equation (A.5), we obtain
Vµ
k[ ˆVk] ≤V
x∼D[r∗(x,ν)]
+ 2
E
(x,a)∼ν
[ˆr(x,ν) · (1 −̺k)∆]
−2 E
x∼D[r∗(x,ν)]
E
(x,a)∼ν
[(1 −̺k)∆]
−
E
(x,a)∼ν
[(1 −̺k)∆]2 + E
≤V
x∼D[r∗(x,ν)]
+ 2
E
(x,a)∼ν
[(ˆr(x,ν) −1
2)(1 −̺k)∆]
−2 E
x∼D[r∗(x,ν) −1
2]
E
(x,a)∼ν
[(1 −̺k)∆]
+ E
≤V
x∼D[r∗(x,ν)] +
E
(x,a)∼ν
[|(1 −̺k)∆|]
+ |
E
(x,a)∼ν
[(1 −̺k)∆]| + E,
where the last inequality follows by H¨older’s inequal-
ity and the observations that |ˆr −1/2| ≤1/2 and
|r∗−1/2| ≤1/2. Part (ii) now follows by the bound
E =
E
(x,a,r)∼ν
 ν(a|x)
ˆµk(a|x) · ̺k · (r −ˆr)2

≤M
E
(x,a)∼ν
[̺k
E
r∼D(· |x,a)
[(r −ˆr)2]].
□
APPENDIX B: FREEDMAN’S INEQUALITY
The following is a corollary of Theorem 1 of
Beygelzimer et al. (2011). It can be viewed as a
version of Freedman’s inequality Freedman’s (1975).
Let y1,...,yn be a sequence of real-valued random
variables. Let Ek denote E[ · |y1,...,yk−1] and Vk
conditional variance.
Theorem B.1.
Let V,D ∈R such that
n
X
k=1
Vk[yk] ≤V,

DOUBLY ROBUST POLICY EVALUATION AND OPTIMIZATION
23
and for all k, |yk −Ek[yk]| ≤D. Then for any δ > 0,
with probability at least 1 −δ,

n
X
k=1
yk−
n
X
k=1
Ek[yk]
 ≤2max{D ln(2/δ),
p
V ln(2/δ)}.
APPENDIX C: IMPROVED FINITE-SAMPLE
ERROR BOUND
In this appendix, we analyze the error of ˆVDR in
estimating the value of a stationary policy ν. We
generalize the analysis of Section 3.4.3 by replacing
conditions on the ranges of variables by conditions
on the moments.
For a function f :X × A →R and 1 ≤p < ∞, we
deﬁne the Lp(ν) norm as usual:
∥f∥p,ν = E(x,a)∼ν[|f(x,a)|p]1/p.
For p = ∞, ∥f∥∞,ν is the essential supremum of |f|
under ν.
As in Section 3.4.3, we ﬁrst simplify Lemmas 3.1–
3.3, and then apply Freedman’s inequality to obtain
a speciﬁc error bound.
Lemma C.1.
Let 1 ≤p,q ≤∞be such that
1/p + 1/q = 1. Assume there are ﬁnite constants
M,eˆr,δ∆,δ̺,̺max ≥0 such that with probability one
under µ, for all k:
ν(ak|xk)/ˆµk(ak|xk) ≤M,
∥∆∥q,ν ≤δ∆,
∥1 −̺k∥p,ν ≤δ̺,
∥̺k∥p,ν ≤̺max,
E
(x,a)∼ν
[
E
r∼D(· |x,a)
[(ˆr(x,a) −r)2]q]1/q ≤eˆr.
Then with probability one under µ, for all k:
|Eµ
k[ ˆVk] −V | ≤δ̺δ∆,
Vµ
k[ ˆVk] ≤Vx∼D[r∗(x,ν)] + 2δ̺δ∆+ M̺maxeˆr.
Proof.
The bias and variance bound follow
from Lemma 3.2 and Lemma 3.3(ii), respectively,
by H¨older’s inequality.
□
Theorem C.2.
If assumptions of Lemma C.1
hold, then with probability at least 1 −δ,
| ˆVDR −V |
≤δ̺δ∆
+ 2max
(1 + M)ln(2/δ)
n
,
r
(Vx∼D[r∗(x,ν)] + 2δ̺δ∆+ M̺maxeˆr)ln(2/δ)
n

.
Proof.
The proof follows by Freedman’s in-
equality (Theorem B.1 in Appendix B), applied to
random variables ˆVk, whose range and variance are
bounded using Lemma 3.1 and C.1.
□
APPENDIX D: DIRECT LOSS MINIMIZATION
Given cost-sensitive multiclass classiﬁcation data
{(x,l1,...,lK)}, we perform approximate gradi-
ent descent on the policy loss (or classiﬁcation
error). In the experiments of Section 4.1, pol-
icy ν is speciﬁed by K weight vectors θ1,...,θK.
Given x ∈X , the policy predicts as follows: ν(x) =
argmaxa∈{1,...,K}{x · θa}.
To optimize θa, we adapt the “toward-better”
version of the direct loss minimization method of
McAllester, Hazan and Keshet (2011) as follows:
given any data point (x,l1,...,lK) and the current
weights θa, the weights are adjusted by
θa1 ←θa1 + ηx,
θa2 ←θa2 −ηx,
where a1 = argmaxa{x · θa −ǫla}, a2 = argmaxa{x ·
θa}, η ∈(0,1) is a decaying learning rate, and ǫ > 0
is an input parameter.
For computational reasons, we actually perform
batch updates rather than incremental updates. Up-
dates continue until the weights converge. We found
that the learning rate η = t−0.3/2, where t is the
batch iteration, worked well across all datasets. The
parameter ǫ was ﬁxed to 0.1 for all datasets.
Furthermore, since the policy loss is not convex
in the weight vectors, we repeat the algorithm 20
times with randomly perturbed starting weights and
then return the best run’s weight according to the
learned policy’s loss in the training data. We also
tried using a holdout validation set for choosing the
best weights out of the 20 candidates, but did not
observe beneﬁts from doing so.
APPENDIX E: FILTER TREE
The Filter Tree (Beygelzimer, Langford and Ravi-
kumar, 2008) is a reduction from multiclass cost-
sensitive classiﬁcation to binary classiﬁcation. Its
input is of the same form as for Direct Loss Min-
imization, but its output is a Filter Tree: a decision
tree, where each inner node is itself implemented
by some binary classiﬁer (called base classiﬁer), and
leaves correspond to classes of the original multi-
class problem. As base classiﬁers we used J48 de-
cision trees implemented in Weka 3.6.4 (Hall et al.,

24
DUD´IK, ERHAN, LANGFORD AND LI
2009). Thus, there are 2-class decision trees in the
nodes, with the nodes arranged as per a Filter Tree.
Training in a Filter Tree proceeds bottom-up, but
the classiﬁcation in a trained Filter Tree proceeds
root-to-leaf, with the running time logarithmic in
the number of classes. We did not test the all-pairs
Filter Tree, which classiﬁes examples in the time lin-
ear in the number of classes, similar to DLM.
APPENDIX F: PROOFS OF LEMMAS 5.2
AND 5.3
Lemma 5.2.
Let t ≤T, k ≥1 and let zk−1 be
such that the kth exploration sample marks the be-
ginning of the tth block, that is, κ(t−1) = k −1. Let
ht−1 and ct be the target history and acceptance rate
multiplier induced by zk−1. Then:
X
x,a
|Pµ
k[xκ(t) = x,aκ(t) = a] −πt(x,a)|
(F.1)
≤
2ε
1 −ε,
|ctEµ
k[ ˆVB(t)] −Eπ
t [r]| ≤
ε
1 −ε.
(F.2)
Proof.
We begin by showing equation (F.1).
Consider the mth exploration sample (x,a) ∼µm
and assume that this sample is in the tth block. The
probability of accepting this sample is
Pu∼µm(· |x,a)

u ≤ctπt(a|x)
µm(a|x)

= I[(x,a) ∈Em] + ctπt(a|x)
µm(a|x) I[(x,a) /∈Em],
where I[·] is the indicator function equal to 1 when
its argument is true and 0 otherwise. The probability
of seeing and accepting a sample (x,a) from µm is
acceptm(x,a)
:= µm(x,a)

I[(x,a) ∈Em]
+ ctπt(a|x)
µm(a|x) I[(x,a) /∈Em]

= µm(x,a)I[(x,a) ∈Em]
+ ctπt(x,a)I[(x,a) /∈Em]
= ctπt(x,a)
−(ctπt(x,a) −µm(x,a))I[(x,a) ∈Em]
and the marginal probability of accepting a sample
from µm is
acceptm(∗) :=
X
x,a
acceptm(x,a)
= ct −ctεm = ct(1 −εm).
In order to accept the mth exploration sample, sam-
ples k through m −1 must be rejected. The proba-
bility of eventually accepting (x,a), conditioned on
zk−1 is therefore
Pµ
k(xκ(t) = x,aκ(t) = a)
= Eµ
k
" ∞
X
m≥k
acceptm(x,a)
m−1
Y
k′=k
(1 −acceptk′(∗))
#
= ctπt(x,a)
(F.3)
· Eµ
k
" ∞
X
m≥k
m−1
Y
k′=k
(1 −acceptk′(∗))
#
−Eµ
k
" ∞
X
m≥k
(ctπt(x,a) −µm(x,a))
(F.4)
· I[(x,a) ∈Em]
·
m−1
Y
k′=k
(1 −acceptk′(∗))
#
.
To bound |Pµ
k[xκ(t) = x,aκ(t) = a] −πt(x,a)| and
prove equation (F.1), we ﬁrst need to bound equa-
tions (F.3) and (F.4). Note that from the deﬁnition
of Em, the expression inside the expectation of equa-
tion (F.4) is always nonnegative. Let E1(x,a) denote
the expression in equation (F.3) and E2(x,a) the ex-
pression in equation (F.4). We bound E1(x,a) and
E2(x,a) separately, using bounds 0 ≤εm ≤ε:
E1(x,a) = ctπt(x,a)Eµ
k
" ∞
X
m≥k
m−1
Y
k′=k
(1 −acceptk′(∗))
#
≤ctπt(x,a)Eµ
k
" ∞
X
m≥k
m−1
Y
k′=k
(1 −ct(1 −ε))
#
= πt(x,a)
1 −ε ,
E1(x,a) ≥ctπt(x,a)Eµ
k
" ∞
X
m≥k
m−1
Y
k′=k
(1 −ct)
#
= πt(x,a),

DOUBLY ROBUST POLICY EVALUATION AND OPTIMIZATION
25
E2(x,a) = Eµ
k
" ∞
X
m≥k
(ctπt(x,a) −µm(x,a))
· I[(x,a) ∈Em]
·
m−1
Y
k′=k
(1 −acceptk′(∗))
#
≤Eµ
k
" ∞
X
m≥k
(ctπt(x,a) −µm(x,a))
· I[(x,a) ∈Em]
· (1 −ct(1 −ε))m−k
#
.
Now we are ready to prove equation (F.1):
X
x,a
|Pµ
k[xκ(t) = x,aκ(t) = a] −πt(x,a)|
=
X
x,a
|E1(x,a) −πt(x,a) −E2(x,a)|
≤
X
x,a
|E1(x,a) −πt(x,a)| +
X
x,a
E2(x,a)
≤
X
x,a
πt(x,a)ε
1 −ε
+ Eµ
k
" ∞
X
m≥k
X
x,a
(ctπt(x,a) −µm(x,a))
· I[(x,a) ∈Em](1 −ct(1 −ε))m−k
#
=
ε
1 −ε + Eµ
k
" ∞
X
m≥k
ctεm(1 −ct(1 −ε))m−k
#
≤
2ε
1 −ε
proving equation (F.1).
Let reachm denote the indicator of the event that
the mth sample is in block t (i.e., samples k,k +
1,...,m −1 are rejected). Then
Eµ
k[ ˆVB(t)] =
∞
X
m=k
Eµ
k[ ˆVm reachm]
=
∞
X
m=k
Eµ
k[Eµ
m[ ˆVm reachm]]
=
∞
X
m=k
Eµ
k[reachm Eµ
m[ ˆVm]],
(F.5)
where equation (F.5) follows because the event of
reaching the mth sample depends only on the pre-
ceding samples, and hence it is a deterministic func-
tion of zm−1. Plugging Lemma 3.2 in equation (F.5),
we obtain
ctEµ
k[ ˆVB(t)]
= ct E
r∼πt[r]
∞
X
m=k
Eµ
k[reachm]
= ct E
r∼πt[r]Eµ
k
" ∞
X
m=k
m−1
Y
k′=k
(1 −acceptk′(∗))
#
(because Er∼πt[r] is a deterministic function of
zk−1). This can be bounded, similarly as before, as
E
r∼πt[r] ≤ctEµ
k[ ˆVB(t)] ≤Er∼πt[r]
1 −ε
yielding equation (F.2).
□
Lemma 5.3.
X
hT
|ˆπ(hT ) −π(hT )| ≤(2εT)/(1 −ε).
Proof.
We prove the lemma by induction and
the triangle inequality (essentially following Kakade,
Kearns and Langford, 2003). The lemma holds for
T = 0 since there is only one empty history (and
hence both ˆπ and π are point distributions over h0).
Now assume the lemma holds for T −1. We prove
it for T:
X
hT
|ˆπ(hT ) −π(hT )|
=
X
hT −1
X
(xT ,aT ,rT )
|ˆπ(hT−1)ˆπT (xT ,aT ,rT )
−π(hT−1)πT (xT ,aT ,rT )|
≤
X
hT −1
X
(xT ,aT ,rT )
(|ˆπ(hT−1)ˆπT (xT ,aT ,rT )
−ˆπ(hT−1)πT (xT ,aT ,rT )|
+ |ˆπ(hT−1)πT (xT ,aT ,rT )
−π(hT−1)πT (xT ,aT ,rT )|)
=
E
hT −1∼ˆπ

X
(xT ,aT ,rT )
|ˆπT (xT ,aT ,rT )

26
DUD´IK, ERHAN, LANGFORD AND LI
−πT (xT ,aT ,rT )|

+
X
hT −1
|ˆπ(hT−1) −π(hT−1)|
≤
2ε
1 −ε + 2ε(T −1)
1 −ε
= 2εT
1 −ε.
□
APPENDIX G: PROGRESSIVE VALIDATION
POLICY
In Section 4.1.3, we showed how the stationary DR
estimator can be used not only for policy evaluation,
but also for policy optimization by transforming the
contextual bandit problem into a cost sensitive clas-
siﬁcation problem.
In this appendix, we show how the nonstation-
ary DR estimator, when applied to an online learn-
ing algorithm, can also be used to obtain a high-
performing stationary policy. The value of this pol-
icy concentrates around the average per-step re-
ward estimated for the online learning algorithm.
Thus, to the extent that the online algorithm
achieves a high reward, so does this stationary
policy. The policy is constructed using the ideas
behind the “progressive validation” error bound
(Blum, Kalai and Langford, 1999), and hence we
call it a “progressive validation policy.”
Assume that the algorithm DR-ns successfully ter-
minates after generating T blocks. The progressive
validation policy is the randomized stationary policy
πPV deﬁned as
πPV(a|x) :=
T
X
t=1
ct|B(t)|
C
π(a|x,ht−1).
Conceptually, this policy ﬁrst picks among the histo-
ries h0,...,hT−1 with probabilities c1|B(1)|/C,... ,
ct|B(T)|/C, and then executes the policy π given
the chosen history. We extend πPV to a distribution
over triples
πPV(x,a,r) = D(x)πPV(a|x)D(r|x,a).
We will show that the average reward estimator
ˆV avg
DR-ns returned by our algorithm estimates the ex-
pected reward of πPV with an error O(1/
√
N) where
N is the number of exploration samples used to gen-
erate T blocks. Thus, assuming that the nonstation-
ary policy π improves with more data, we expect
to obtain the best-performing progressive validation
policy with the most accurate value estimate by run-
ning the algorithm DR-ns on all of the exploration
data.
The error bound in the theorem below is proved by
analyzing range and variance of ˆVk using Lemma 3.8.
The theorem relies on the following conditions (mir-
roring the assumptions of Lemma 3.8):
• There is a constant M > 0 such that πt(ak|xk)/pk ≤
M.
• There is a constant eˆr > 0 such that
E(x,a)∼πt[ED[(ˆr −r)2 | x,a]] ≤eˆr.
• There is a constant vr > 0 such that
Vx∼D[Er,a∼πt(·,· |x)[r]] ≤vr.
These conditions ensure boundedness of density ra-
tios, squared prediction error of rewards, and vari-
ance of a conditional expected reward, respectively.
It should be noted that, since rewards are assumed
to be in [0,1], one can always choose eˆr and vr that
are no greater than 1.
Theorem G.1.
Let N be the number of explo-
ration samples used to generate T blocks, that is,
N = PT
t=1 |B(t)|. Assume the above conditions hold
for all k and t (and all histories zk−1 and ht−1).
Then, with probability at least 1 −δ,
| ˆV avg
DR-ns −
E
r∼πPV
[r]|
≤Ncmax
C
· 2max
(1 + M)ln(2/δ)
N
,
r
(vr + Meˆr)ln(2/δ)
N

.
Proof.
The proof follows by Freedman’s in-
equality (Theorem B.1 in Appendix B), applied to
random variables ct ˆVk, whose range and variance
can be bounded using Lemma 3.8 and the bound
ct ≤cmax. In applying Lemma 3.8, note that δ̺ = 0
and ̺max = 1, because ˆµk = µk.
□
