Can You Trust This Prediction?
Auditing Pointwise Reliability After Learning
Peter Schulam
Suchi Saria
Department of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University

Department of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University

Abstract
To use machine learning in high stakes ap-
plications (e.g. medicine), we need tools for
building conﬁdence in the system and evaluat-
ing whether it is reliable. Methods to improve
model reliability often require new learning
algorithms (e.g. using Bayesian inference to
obtain uncertainty estimates). An alternative
is to audit a model after it is trained. In this
paper, we describe resampling uncertainty es-
timation (RUE), an algorithm to audit the
pointwise reliability of predictions. Intuitively,
RUE estimates the amount that a prediction
would change if the model had been ﬁt on
diﬀerent training data. The algorithm uses
the gradient and Hessian of the model’s loss
function to create an ensemble of predictions.
Experimentally, we show that RUE more ef-
fectively detects inaccurate predictions than
existing tools for auditing reliability subse-
quent to training. We also show that RUE
can create predictive distributions that are
competitive with state-of-the-art methods like
Monte Carlo dropout, probabilistic backprop-
agation, and deep ensembles, but does not
depend on speciﬁc algorithms at train-time
like these methods do.
1
Introduction
Machine learning is quickly becoming an important
component of everyday software systems. This is due,
in large part, to advances in tools that make it easy to
express and train models. Using automatic diﬀerentia-
tion software, a programmer can describe the “forward
Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Ar-
tiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS) 2019, Naha,
Okinawa, Japan. PMLR: Volume 89. Copyright 2019 by
the author(s).
pass” of a predictive model and then train the model
using gradient-based methods without much additional
eﬀort (e.g. Maclaurin et al. 2015; Abadi et al. 2016).
As the barriers to building machine learning systems
become lower, there is rising excitement around the
idea of applying the technology in high-impact domains
(e.g. Soleimani et al. 2018; Lipton et al. 2018).
Tools for quickly building machine learning systems,
however, have generally outpaced the growth and adop-
tion of tools to understand whether they are reliable.
The average error on heldout training data is a common
measure of model performance, but is inadequate for
ensuring model reliability. For instance, low average
error on heldout training data does not give assurances
under data set shift (see e.g. Quiñonero Candela et al.
2009). A model with low average error can also still
make large pointwise errors on individual predictions
for some types of inputs (see e.g. Nushi et al. 2018).
Reliability is commonly addressed during learning. In
this paper, we focus on methods that improve reliability
by preventing errors at test time (there are other ways
to make a system reliable; Saria and Subbaswamy 2019).
For instance, we can proactively account for data set
shift by using learning algorithms that adjust for possi-
ble causes of the diﬀerence between train and test dis-
tributions (e.g. Schulam and Saria 2017; Subbaswamy
and Saria 2018; Subbaswamy et al. 2019). To detect
pointwise errors, we can use specialized learning algo-
rithms that produce models equipped with uncertainty
estimates of predictions (e.g. Gal and Ghahramani
2016; Lakshminarayanan et al. 2017). More generally,
we can build conﬁdence in a model by criticizing and
reﬁning it (e.g. Blei 2014; Kim et al. 2016).
In this paper, we consider the problem of improving
model reliability after learning with tools that audit
the predictions of a ﬁxed model. To perform the audit,
we introduce the Resampling Uncertainty Estimation
(RUE) algorithm to calculate an uncertainty score for
each prediction at test time.
RUE makes minimal
assumptions about the structure of the model and how
arXiv:1901.00403v2  [stat.ML]  28 Feb 2019

Can You Trust This Prediction?
it was learned. This makes RUE easy to use alongside
the rich ecosystem of tools for training models (like
automatic diﬀerentiation).
The most common approach in machine learning to
assessing uncertainty is using Bayesian methods (e.g.
Graves 2011; Blundell et al. 2015; Gal and Ghahramani
2016). This approach is tightly coupled to the model
structure and the learning algorithm.
As a result,
Bayesian methods cannot be applied after learning as
an auditing tool. Many non-Bayesian methods like
the bootstrap (Efron and Tibshirani, 1986) or deep
ensembles (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017) also depend
on speciﬁc train-time procedures, and so cannot be
applied after learning either.
There are several existing tools for improving model
reliability after learning. For instance, Courrieu (1994)
computes the convex hull of inputs in the training data
and uses it to deﬁne a region wherein outcomes can be
safely interpolated by a neural network. Bishop (1994)
generalizes this idea by using density estimation to
characterize regions where there are suﬃcient training
samples to make reliable predictions. This approach
can be further generalized using ideas from novelty
detection where the aim is to characterize the support
of a distribution without an explicit generative model
(see e.g. Schölkopf et al. 2000). Another approach is to
ﬁt a second model to errors made by the ﬁrst, which is
related to stacked generalization (Wolpert, 1992).
One limitation of many existing tools for improving
model reliability after learning is that they rely on
Euclidean distance, which often ignores model-speciﬁc
structure. For example, the predictive model may use
an internal representation wherein similar points (ac-
cording to the internal representation) are in fact far
away in Euclidean space. This is an issue especially
for deep learning, where the empirical successes are
thought to be due to rich internal representations of the
data that are learned to reﬂect task-speciﬁc invariances
(Bengio et al., 2013; Farabet et al., 2013). Characteriz-
ing similarity among inputs for these models is diﬃcult
because it is not clear how internal representations can
be extracted (see e.g. Hinton et al. 2015; Mahendran
and Vedaldi 2015).
In Section 3.2, we show that RUE’s uncertainty score
reﬂects two important criteria to judge whether a pre-
diction is reliable: the density criterion and local ﬁt
criterion (Leonard et al., 1992). The density criterion
states that a prediction at input x is reliable if there
are samples in the training data that are similar to x.
The local ﬁt criterion states that a prediction at x is
reliable if the model has small error on samples in the
training data similar to x. These criteria hinge upon
a deﬁnition of similarity, and we show that RUE im-
plements these criteria using a model-dependent inner
product to measure similarity.
Contributions. We describe Resampling Uncertainty
Estimation (RUE), an algorithm used to audit the
pointwise reliability of predictions by computing an un-
certainty score. To quantify uncertainty, the RUE algo-
rithm uses the gradients and Hessian of the model’s loss
on training data (Line 2 in Algorithm 1) and bootstrap
samples (Line 7) to produce an ensemble of predictions
for a test input (Lines 9-11). Intuitively, this estimates
the amount that the prediction would change had the
model been ﬁt on diﬀerent data sets drawn from the
same distribution as the training data. This intuition
has connections to the classical bootstrap (Efron and
Tibshirani, 1986), and in Section 3.1 we show that
RUE can be derived as an approximation to this pro-
cedure that does not require ﬁtting multiple models.
We also show that RUE implements the density and
local ﬁt criteria using a model-dependent inner product
as a measure of similarity. Experimentally, we show
that RUE more eﬀectively detects inaccurate predic-
tions than existing methods for improving reliability
after learning. Moreover, we show that RUE’s uncer-
tainty score can create predictive distributions that are
well-calibrated and competitive with state-of-the-art in-
tegrated methods (i.e. methods like Hernández-Lobato
and Adams 2015; Gal and Ghahramani 2016; and Lak-
shminarayanan et al. 2017) that estimate uncertainty
during learning.
2
Related Work
The dominant approach to modeling uncertainty in ma-
chine learning is to use Bayesian inference. Gaussian
processes are a ﬂexible class of Bayesian nonparametric
priors over functions and provide a natural framework
for reasoning about posterior predictive distributions at
test time given training data (Rasmussen and Williams,
2006). Bayesian neural networks are another important
class of regression models, but have historically been
much more challenging to work with given the non-
linearities in the likelihood function. Early important
work on this subject was done by Buntine and Weigend
(1991) and by MacKay (1992), who proposed using a
Laplace approximation to the posterior distribution in
order to obtain posterior predictive distributions and
estimates of the evidence (marginal probability of the
data) for model selection. A key challenge with this
technique is that it requires computing and inverting
the Hessian with respect to the network parameters,
which can be prohibitively expensive for larger neural
networks. There has, however, been recent work in scal-
able approximations to the Hessian for second-order
optimization (e.g. Martens and Grosse 2015; Botev
et al. 2017), which could make the Laplace approxima-
tion to the posterior feasible (Ritter et al., 2018).

Peter Schulam, Suchi Saria
Eﬀorts to scale Bayesian inference to modern neu-
ral networks have revolved around mean ﬁeld varia-
tional approximations to the posterior distribution (e.g.
Graves 2011; Blundell et al. 2015). There has also been
work to apply expectation propagation to Bayesian
neural networks (Hernández-Lobato and Adams, 2015;
Hernández-Lobato et al., 2016).
Dropout, a non-
Bayesian technique for regularizing neural networks
(Srivastava et al., 2014), was recently shown to ap-
proximate a variational approximation of the posterior
(Gal and Ghahramani, 2016), and the insight led to an
approach for computing posterior predictive distribu-
tions using a simple simulation algorithm that leverages
existing software for ﬁtting neural networks that imple-
ments dropout layers. There has also been recent work
to scale MCMC for posterior inference by designing ap-
proximate transition operators that trade oﬀbetween
ﬁdelity to the desired stationary distribution and com-
putational cost (e.g. Welling and Teh 2011; Ahn et al.
2012). Although the Bayesian approach is conceptually
appealing, it is diﬃcult to place meaningful priors on
neural networks (see e.g. Buntine and Weigend 1991).
Many authors have explored alternatives to Bayesian
methods for modeling uncertainty in predictive mod-
els.
Early work by Leonard et al. (1992) explored
heuristic scores that reﬂect the density and local ﬁt
principles.
Bishop (1994) proposes a technique for
identifying “novel” inputs as a way to detect when a
model is likely to be unreliable. Hooker (2004) pro-
poses a tree-based density estimator for detecting novel
inputs. More recently, Hendrycks and Gimpel (2016)
proposed a simple heuristic using softmax outputs to
detect misclassiﬁcations and out-of-distribution sam-
ples for classiﬁcation problems. They also propose an
“abnormality module” for detecting novel inputs that is
similar in spirit to the validity index network proposed
by Leonard et al. (1992). Guo et al. (2017) investigate
whether softmax outputs are calibrated estimates of
the conditional distribution p(y | x). They ﬁnd that
the softmax probabilities are not calibrated in large
neural networks and propose an approach related to
Platt scaling (Platt, 1999) to address the issue. Ensem-
bles can also be used to express uncertainties (Breiman,
1996; Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017).
The bootstrap (Efron and Tibshirani, 1986) is a classic
approach to estimating uncertainty that uses Monte
Carlo simulation to estimate the sampling distribution
of arbitrary functions of a data set. It cannot be used
after learning because we must ﬁt many models at
train time rather than just one (this also makes it
computationally expensive). We show that RUE is
an approximation of the boostrap by building upon
sensitivity analysis ideas pioneered by Cook (1986) that
were recently extended to modern machine learning
problems by Koh and Liang (2017) in order to shed light
on a model’s provenance and improve interpretability.
There are several other threads of research related to
improving model reliability. One issue that in clas-
siﬁcation problems is when the current set of labels
that a model assigns to inputs is not exhaustive. If
this occurs, a model that automatically identiﬁes and
learns to classify new categories can make the system
more robust (e.g. Bendale and Boult 2016; Liu et al.
2018). It is also useful for a machine learning system
to implement a policy for rejecting an input due to
uncertainty. Such a policy can be easy to implement if
the model outputs well-calibrated probability distribu-
tions (e.g. Chow 1970), but models can also be trained
to directly minimize a risk function incorporating the
reject option (e.g. Herbei and Wegkamp 2006; Bartlett
and Wegkamp 2008; Grandvalet et al. 2009).
3
Resampling Uncertainty Estimation
We assume the classical supervised learning setup. Let
(x, y) denote an input-output pair, where x lies in
X ⊆Rp and y lies in Y ⊆R. Our learning algorithm
is given n training examples D ≜{(xi, yi)}n
i=1, which
we assume are drawn iid from an unknown distribution
P. Let H denote a hypothesis space with members f
indexed by a vector of parameters θ ∈Rd. We assume
that our algorithm learns by minimizing an objective
JD(θ) ≜
n
X
i=1
ℓ(yi, f(xi, θ)) + R(θ),
(1)
where ℓis a loss function and R(θ) is a regularizer.
To apply RUE, we assume that we have access to
(1) the matrix L ∈Rd×n where each column i con-
tains the gradient ∇θℓ(yi, f(xi, ˆθ) and (2) the Hes-
sian H = ∇2
θJD(ˆθ), where ˆθ is the parameter vector
returned by the learning algorithm. RUE does not
depend on assumptions about how the solution ˆθ is
obtained. Moreover, we do not assume that ˆθ is a local
or global minimum.
Algorithm 1 shows the full steps used to compute un-
certainty estimates using RUE for a set of m test points
{xj}m
j=1. Note that RUE must invert the Hessian H,
but because we do not assume anything about the con-
vergence of the learning algorithm to a local minimum
of Equation 1, there is no guarantee that H is positive
deﬁnite. As in Koh and Liang (2017), we can add a
dampening term λI to make the Hessian invertible,
which is equivalent to adding L2 regularization to the
learning objective. We denote this adjusted Hessian
using ˜H ≜H + λI, and discuss a strategy to select λ
in the experiments section below.

Can You Trust This Prediction?
Algorithm 1 Resampling Uncertainty Estimation
Require: num. training samples n, ensemble size b,
Hessian of loss H ∈Rd×d, loss gradient matrix
L ∈Rd×n, test cases {xj}m
j=1, dampen term λ.
1: ˜H ←H + λ ∗Eye(d)
2: A ←˜H−1L
3: w0 ←Ones(n)
4: p0 ←w0/n
5: ˆY ←Zeros(b, m)
6: for i = 1 to b do
7:
wi ∼Multinomial(n, p0)
8:
θ∗
i ←ˆθ −A(wi −w0)
9:
for j = 1 to m do
10:
ˆY [i, j] ←Predict(θ∗
i , xj)
11:
end for
12: end for
13: return ColumnWiseVariance( ˆY )
3.1
RUE as Approximation to the Bootstrap
In this section, we connect RUE to Efron’s bootstrap
procedure. The bootstrap approximates the sampling
distribution of an estimate by repeatedly simulating
bootstrap samples, which are new data sets of size n
created by sampling with replacement from the uniform
distribution over the original data set. To bootstrap
a supervised learning algorithm, one would need to
sample b bootstrap datasets and run the learning pro-
cedure from scratch each time. When learning on the
original sample, let ˆθ denote the learned parameters
that satisfy
∇JD(ˆθ) =
n
X
i=1
∇θℓi(ˆθ) + ∇θR(ˆθ) = C
(2)
for some constant C, where we have used ℓi(ˆθ) as short-
hand for ℓ(yi, f(xi, ˆθ)). Let wi denote a multiplicative
weight for the ith training sample in the objective func-
tion. When wi = 1 for all i, then the objective can be
rewritten to depend on the weights
JD(θ; w) =
n
X
i=1
wiℓi(θ) + R(θ).
(3)
The bootstrap is equivalent to choosing new weights wi
that count the number of times a particular example
is included in the bootstrap sample and then reﬁtting
the objective. Considering our objective function as a
function of both the model parameters θ and sample
weights w0 ≜{wi}, the following equality holds at the
solution ˆθ:
∇θJD(ˆθ; w0) ≜KD(ˆθ; w0) = Lw0 + ∇θR(ˆθ) = C. (4)
As a reminder, L ∈Rd×n is a matrix where the ith
column is the gradient of the loss of the ith sample
∇θℓi(ˆθ), and w0 ∈Rn is a vector of ones.
If we assume that KD(ˆθ; w0) is smooth in θ (this
amounts to assuming that the loss and regularizer are
twice continuously diﬀerentiable), we can use the im-
plicit function theorem to conclude that there exists
a local function such that φ(w0) = ˆθ. In other words,
there is a map from the sample weights to learned
model parameters.
If we knew this map, then the
bootstrap procedure would be straightforward: sam-
ple new weights w∗and map them to the parameters
φ(w∗) = θ∗. Our approach approximates this function
using a ﬁrst-order Taylor expansion around ˆθ, which
means we can estimate the parameters we would obtain
with a bootstrap sample w∗as
θ∗≈ˆθ + ∂φ
∂w

w0
(w∗−w0) = ˆθ −H−1L(w∗−w0), (5)
where the equality above also follows from the implicit
function theorem (recall that H is the Hessian of the
objective JD evaluated at ˆθ). The Jacobian of φ can
be computed once (this is the matrix A in Algorithm
1), then sampling θ∗only requires drawing new weights
w∗and a matrix multiplication. To approximate the
sampling distribution of the model’s prediction at a
new point x∗, we compute the predictions made by a
collection of models with parameters {θ∗
i }b
i=1.
3.2
Density and Local Fit Criteria
RUE outputs uncertainty scores ˆσRUE(x) by computing
the standard deviation of predictions sampled within
the loop on lines 6-12 in Algorithm 1. In this section,
we argue that these uncertainty scores check both the
density and local ﬁt criteria. Moreover, we show that
RUE uses a model-dependent similarity measure. For
this analysis, we will assume that the loss ℓis the
negative log likelihood of an exponential family:
ℓ(yi, f) = −log h(yi) −t(yi)f + a(f),
(6)
where h(yi) is the base measure of the exponential fam-
ily, t(yi) is the natural suﬃcient statistic, the predicted
value f is the natural parameter, and a(f) is the log
normalizing constant. Our argument rests upon the
following claim.
Claim 1. As the number of training samples n grows,
we can approximate ˆσ2
RUE(x) as
ˆσ2
RUE(x) ≈
n
X
i=1
r2
i kRUE(x, xi),
(7)
where ri = E[t(yi) | f] −t(yi) and kRUE is a positive
deﬁnite kernel function with deﬁnition
kRUE(x1, x2) =
h
∇⊤
θ f(x1, ˆθ) ˜H−1∇θf(x2, ˆθ)
i2
.
(8)

Peter Schulam, Suchi Saria
y = β1(1 −e−β2x) + ✏
(a)
(b)
(c)
ˆσ2(·)
Figure 1: Simulated data demonstrating the model-dependent density and local ﬁt principles for Resampling
Uncertainty Estimation (RUE).
Proof. Let θ∗denote a parameter vector resampled
according to lines 7-8 in Algorithm 1, then
ˆσ2
RUE(x) = V[f(x, θ∗)]
(9)
≈V[f(x, ˆθ) + ∇⊤
θ f(x, ˆθ)(θ∗−ˆθ)]
(10)
= ∇⊤
θ f(x, ˆθ)V[θ∗]∇⊤
θ f(x, ˆθ)
(11)
To compute the variance of θ∗, recall that θ∗=
ˆθ −˜H−1L(w −w0), where w ∼Multinomial(n, p0),
p0 ∈Rn with all entries n−1, and w0 ∈Rn is a vector
of ones. The covariance matrix is therefore V[θ∗] =
˜H−1LV[w]L⊤˜H−1. Because w is a multinomial ran-
dom variable, its covariance matrix is n/n−1 along the di-
agonal, and −1/n on the oﬀdiagonal. Therefore, as the
number of samples n →∞we have V[w] →I, where I
is the identity matrix. Now, recall that L ∈Rd×n is a
matrix where column i contains ∇θℓ(yi, f(xi, ˆθ). Using
the chain rule, we can write L = GR, where G ∈Rd×n
is a matrix where column i contains ∇θf(xi, ˆθ) and
R ∈Rn×n is a diagonal matrix where the ith diagonal
is ri ≜∇fℓ(yi, f(xi, ˆθ) = E[t(yi) | f] −t(yi).1 As n
gets large, we have
ˆσ2
RUE(x) ≈∇⊤
θ f(x, ˆθ) ˜H−1LL⊤˜H−1∇θf(x, ˆθ)
= ∇⊤
θ f(x, ˆθ) ˜H−1GR2G⊤˜H−1∇θf(x, ˆθ).
Deﬁnine the kernel as in 8 and write the matrix expres-
sion as a sum of scalars to complete the argument.
Note that the approximation of ˆσ2
RUE(x) resembles a
kernel smoothing estimate of the exponential family
residual at a test input x. Interpeting the kernel func-
tion kRUE(x, xi) as a measure of similarity between
the test point x and training point xi, we can see that
ˆσRUE(x) reﬂects the local ﬁt criterion. In other words,
the uncertainty score will be smaller (larger) if the
model’s predictions have small (large) errors on the
training samples that are similar to x.
We can also use Equations 7 and 8 to show that RUE
implements the density criterion. Let N(x) denote
1The last equality follows from ∇fa(f) = E[t(y) | f]
the set of inﬂuential neighbors of x; i.e. those with
the highest similarity that contribute most to the un-
certainty score ˆσRUE(x). In Equation 8, we see that
the similarity kRUE(x, xi) depends on the gradients
∇θf(x, ˆθ) and ∇θf(xi, ˆθ), but also on the dampened
Hessian ˜H ≜H + λI. In particular, we see that the
gradients will be projected into the space spanned by
the eigenvectors of ˜H, and then scaled by the corre-
sponding inverse eigenvalues. The eigenvectors with
largest eigenvalues will point in directions with high
curvature, implying that the training data strongly
determine the model parameters along that direction.
We see that ˆσRUE(x) will be smaller if x’s gradient and
those of its neighbors N(x) lie along a direction with
high curvature. If we consider curvature to be a proxy
for density, then we see that RUE also implements a
form of the density criterion.
Finally, we note that the similarity metric kRUE(x, xi)
depends on both the structure of the model and the
learned parameter values ˆθ through the gradient and
Hessian. We therefore see that RUE uses a measure of
similarity that is model-dependent for both the local ﬁt
and density criteria, which is a distinguishing feature
among tools for improving reliability after learning.
3.2.1
Simulated Data Illustration
To make the connection between RUE and the density
and local ﬁt criteria concrete, we use a small simu-
lated data set shown in Figure 1. We consider a 1-
dimensional nonlinear regression problem, where the
mean function is shown in Figure 1a (grey line) and
is deﬁned as E[y | x] = β1(1 −exp−β2x). The data
are normally distributed around the mean and are
shown as points in the same panel. In Figure 1b, we
plot the directions of the gradient of the likelihood
∇θℓ(yi, f(xi, ˆθ)) evaluated at the MLE for each of the
training samples projected on to the eigenvectors of
the Hessian. The grey contours show the shape of the
quadratic deﬁned by the Hessian in this rotated space.
The colors of the points in Figure 1a and of the direc-
tions in Figure 1b show the correspondence between
training samples and their gradients. We highlight two

Can You Trust This Prediction?
observations about panel (b). First, the points whose
gradient vectors lie along similar directions are not nec-
essarily close on the x-axis in panel (a). The blue and
tan points, for example, have similar gradient vectors
but the tan points are closer to the red than to the
blue points in panel (a). Second, the gradient vectors
lie along directions with high curvature (i.e. moving
left to right in panel (b)), suggesting that curvature
does indeed reﬂect the density principle in this space.
Finally, in Figure 1c we show how the model-dependent
kernel and error terms r2
i are smoothed to produce an
uncertainty estimate. Each summand in Equation 7
is an error r2
i weighted by a basis function kRUE(·, xi).
Panel (c) plots these basis functions for three samples
from the training data (colored curves, location of train-
ing sample is indicated by colored tick at the top of
the plot) and also shows the uncertainty score ˆσ2
RUE(·)
as a function of x (dotted curve). Higher values of the
basis functions reﬂect points for which the associated
training sample is considered relevant.
3.2.2
Related Uncertainty Scores
Laplace approximation.
As a point of compari-
son, the variance of θ under the Laplace approxima-
tion to the posterior is V[θ] = [∇2
θJD(ˆθ)]−1 = H−1.
If we linearize the model at ˆθ we can approximate
the posterior predictive variance at a test point x as
ˆσ2
Laplace(x) ≈∇⊤
θ f(x, ˆθ) ˜H−1∇θf(x, ˆθ). We see that
the Laplace approximation measures uncertainty using
the norm of the test point according to a model-speciﬁc
inner product. The score is small when the gradient of
the input points in a direction of high curvature, and
so reﬂects the density criteria, but not local ﬁt.
Sandwich covariance estimator.
RUE has con-
nections to robust statistics. When the learning objec-
tive is the log likelihood of independent samples, the
negative Hessian of the objective is known as the Fisher
information matrix, and it is often used to approximate
the covariance matrix under the sampling distribution
of a maximum likelihood estimator (Tibshirani, 1996).
In likelihood theory, an alternative estimator of the
covariance matrix of the parameters that is robust to
model misspeciﬁcation is the sandwich covariance esti-
mator (Kent, 1982), which is g⊤(x)H−1LL⊤H−1g(x).
Recall that we arrived at a similar expression in Equa-
tion 7 by letting n →∞. This draws a connection be-
tween RUE and robust statistics (Huber and Ronchetti,
2009). In our experiments, we ﬁnd that RUE outper-
forms the Laplace approximation and these connections
to robust statistics may help to develop theory that
explains this observation.
3.2.3
Scalability
One concern with RUE is that it may be too compu-
tationally demanding to use in practice. In particular,
the algorithm requires us to store the Hessian (requir-
ing O(d2) space), invert the Hessian (requiring O(d3)
operations), and store all gradients of the training data
(requiring O(nd) space). We address the issue related to
storing all gradients of the training data by noting that
it may be possible to retain only a small fraction of the
original data set and still obtain high quality reliability
scores. Note that in step 8 of Algorithm 1, we sample a
parameter using the update θ∗
i ←ˆθ−A(wi−w0), where
A = ˜H−1L. This sampling step is a Newton-Raphson
update using a resampled data set. Just as there are
diminishing returns in terms of accuracy when comput-
ing stochastic gradient updates with larger minibatches
(Bousquet and Bottou), there may be a similar rela-
tionship between the amount of training data retained
and the quality of the reliability scores computed using
RUE. In our experiments, we consider smaller data sets
and so leave this extension for future work.
To address storage and computation issues related to
the Hessian, we note that we do not need to explic-
itly store the Hessian so long as we have access to the
model code and can run backwards-mode automatic
diﬀerentiation, which allows us to eﬃciently compute
Hessian-vector products (Pearlmutter, 1994). More-
over, we can perform the required inversion approxi-
mately using conjugate gradients (which only requires
Hessian-vector products), or can use more sophisti-
cated techniques discussed by Koh and Liang (2017).
Alternatively, we could use recently developed approxi-
mations to the Hessian such as K-FAC (Martens and
Grosse, 2015). We leave exploration and evaluation of
these approximations for future work.
4
Experiments
Overview. We ﬁrst evaluate RUE on an auditing task
where the goal is to detect when model predictions
will be wrong. We compare to existing methods for
improving reliability after learning, and show that RUE
generally outperforms them. Next, we show that RUE
can create predictive distributions over outputs that are
competitive with state-of-the-art integrated methods
that rely on particular algorithms at train time (e.g.
Bayesian inference).
4.1
Error Detection
In our ﬁrst experiment, we compare how well RUE and
three baseline methods for improving reliability after
learning are able to detect when a model’s prediction
will be far from the true value. The ﬁrst alternative is
the Laplace approximation (MacKay, 1992), which uses
the curvature of the learning objective as the precision
matrix of a multivariate normal over the model param-
eters. We draw samples from this multivariate normal
distribution and compute an ensemble of predictions
to obtain a predictive distribution. The second base-

Peter Schulam, Suchi Saria
Housing
Concrete
Energy
Kin8nm
Naval
Power
Wine
Yacht
Error Threshold
Area Under the ROC Curve
RUE
Laplace
KDE
Bootstrap SGD
Figure 2: Comparison of uncertainty scores across eight benchmark regression data sets. Each ﬁgure plots area
under the ROC curve as a function of the error threshold used to deﬁne correct and incorrect predictions (curves
that grow higher and faster from left to right are better).
line uses a kernel density estimator (KDE) to estimate
the marginal distribution over inputs in the training
sample. The uncertainty score of a test prediction is
the negative density of the input; test cases that have
higher density lie closer to the training data in Eu-
clidean space and so should be more certain according
to the density principle. We use an isotropic Gaussian
kernel for the KDE, which depends on a single band-
width parameter that we estimate using 5-fold cross
validation on the training data. Finally, we compare to
a method similar to RUE but that uses only ﬁrst-order
rather than second-order information. This baseline
computes an ensemble as in Algorithm 1 but on Line 8
the new parameter θ∗
i is set to θ −ηLwi, which is the
parameter vector obtained by taking a single gradient
step using a bootstrapped sample with step size η. We
use the step size η = 0.001, which is the base learning
rate during training (more information is in paragraph
Model below). We refer to this baseline as Bootstrap
SGD. Both RUE and the Laplace approximation must
invert the Hessian. To choose a dampening factor λ, we
compute the eigenvalues of H using LAPACK’s syevd
routine and choose λ so that the smallest eigenvalue of
˜H is at least one.
Data.
We run our experiments on eight common
benchmark regression data sets (e.g. Hernández-Lobato
and Adams 2015; Gal and Ghahramani 2016; Laksh-
minarayanan et al. 2017). The data sets we use are:
Boston housing, concrete compression strength, energy
eﬃciency, robot arm kinematics, naval propulsion, com-
bined cycle power plant, red wine quality, and yacht
hydrodynamics.2 For each data set, we sample twenty
2These
data
sets
are
all
available
from
https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/index.php
train-test splits. For the smaller data sets (housing,
concrete, energy, and yacht), we sample 90% of the
points for training. The remaining data sets are larger
and so we use smaller percentages of the data set for
each training split in order to simulate a small data
regime, where uncertainty scores are most useful. For
the larger data sets we sample approximately 600 train-
ing points per split and test on the remaining points.
Model.
To control for model structure, learning ob-
jective, and optimization algorithm across all data sets
and uncertainty estimation algorithms, we ﬁx a single
feedforward neural network architecture with a single
hidden layer comprised of 50 hidden units, softplus
nonlinearities, and L2 loss. We regularize with weight
decay and set the penalty α = 1. Moreover, we use a
single set of learning hyperparameters: we learn for a
total of 500 epochs with 128 samples per minibatch,
and use the default settings (b1 = 0.9, b2 = 0.999) of
Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2015) with a ﬁxed learning
rate of 0.001. We ﬁt a single model for each split of
each data set, and compute uncertainty scores for the
predictions made by that model on the test set using
the four alternative uncertainty score methods (RUE,
Laplace, KDE, and Bootstrap SGD).
Evaluation.
Let y ∈R denote the true output for
input x and let ˆy ∈R be the model’s prediction. For a
given error tolerance τ, our goal is to use uncertainty
scores to detect whether the prediction will be correct
(|y −ˆy| ≤τ) or incorrect (|y −ˆy| > τ). We use the
area under the ROC curve (AUC) to evaluate each un-
certainty score’s ability to detect incorrect predictions
across all test splits for a given data set. Figure 2 shows
AUC as a function of error tolerance τ for each data
set and for each uncertainty score. We sweep across

Can You Trust This Prediction?
Table 1: Negative log likelihoods for integrated and after-learning methods. Details are in Section 4.2
.
Integrated Methods
Subsequent-to-Training Methods
Data Set
PBP
MCDropout
Deep Ensembles
RUE
Laplace
Bootstrap SGD
Housing
2.57 (0.09)
2.46 (0.25)
2.39 (0.25)
2.54 (0.06)
4.12 (0.01)
2.55 (0.04)
Concrete
3.16 (0.02)
3.04 (0.09)
3.05 (0.15)
3.36 (0.02)
4.09 (0.01)
3.40 (0.01)
Energy
2.04 (0.02)
1.99 (0.09)
1.40 (0.17)
2.27 (0.02)
3.66 (0.01)
2.32 (0.01)
Kin8nm
-0.90 (0.01)
-0.95 (0.03)
-1.19 (0.02)
-0.34 (0.00)
0.11 (0.00)
-0.32 (0.00)
Naval
-3.73 (0.01)
-3.80 (0.05)
-4.17 (0.05)
-3.33 (0.00)
-2.74 (0.00)
-3.01 (0.00)
Power
2.84 (0.01)
2.80 (0.05)
2.78 (0.04)
2.88 (0.00)
4.51 (0.00)
2.90 (0.00)
Wine
0.97 (0.01)
0.93 (0.06)
0.93 (0.12)
1.01 (0.00)
1.47 (0.00)
1.01 (0.00)
Yacht
1.63 (0.02)
1.55 (0.12)
1.18 (0.19)
3.02 (0.05)
3.88 (0.01)
2.99 (0.04)
thresholds between the 5th and 95th percentiles of the
empirical distribution over absolute errors.
Results.
RUE is better at detecting errors than
Laplace, KDE, and Bootstrap SGD for most data sets
and most error tolerances. Note that the range of AUC
scores varies widely across data sets. For instance, the
RUE scores are able to discriminate well across all
thresholds in the energy data set. The power data set,
however, is challenging; all AUCs are < 0.56.
4.2
RUE Predictive Distributions
Existing methods for quantifying uncertainty output
probabilities. Although the methods we compare to in
the ﬁrst experiments above do not output probability
distributions, there is a natural way to create one for the
methods that use ensembles of model predictions (RUE,
Laplace, and Bootstrap SGD). When the observation
noise is additive—that is, y = f(x) + ϵ—the posterior
variance of a prediction at input x for a Bayesian model
is the posterior variance of f(x) plus the variance of
the observation noise ϵ. For the ensemble methods,
the uncertainty scores can be seen as approximations
of the variance of f(x), which we denote using ˆσ2(x).
We can also estimate the variance of ϵ using the resid-
uals on the training data, which we denote using ˆν2.
A natural predictive distribution is a Gaussian cen-
tered at the prediction f(x) under the learned model
parameters ˆθ with variance ˆσ2(x)+ ˆν2. We use this pre-
dictive distribution to compute negative log likelihoods
(NLL) and compare the methods used after learning to
state-of-the-art alternatives that estimate uncertainty
during training using specialized objectives (Gal and
Ghahramani 2016; Hernández-Lobato and Adams 2015;
Lakshminarayanan et al. 2017), which we refer to as
integrated methods.
Table 1 shows the results of this experiment. The neg-
ative log likelihoods for the integrated methods are the
results reported in Table 1 of Lakshminarayanan et al.
(2017). We ﬁnd that RUE has better NLL than Laplace
and Bootstrap SGD on all but two data sets. The im-
provements over Bootstrap SGD, however, are small,
but recall that RUE generally outperformed Bootstrap
SGD in the detection experiments shown in Figure 2.
We also compare RUE to three integrated methods:
Probabilistic Backpropagation (Hernández-Lobato and
Adams, 2015), Monte Carlo Dropout (Gal and Ghahra-
mani, 2016), and Deep Ensembles (Lakshminarayanan
et al., 2017). We ﬁnd that RUE is competitive with
these methods (e.g., on Housing, Power and Wine),
but does not outperform them. We are not surprised
by this result because integrated methods jointly ﬁt
predictions and uncertainty using a specialized objec-
tive. Furthermore, we suspect that RUE’s negative log
likelihood would be further improved if the learning
rates and regularization weights were tuned using cross
validation for each data set (these choices were ﬁxed
upfront at a single setting for all data sets in order to
control for eﬀects of learning algorithms).
5
Conclusion
We introduced RUE, an algorithm that audits a model
by estimating the uncertainty of predictions without
changing the learning algorithm. This makes it easy
to use RUE alongside the rich ecosystem of existing
tools for training machine learning models (e.g. auto-
matic diﬀerentiation libraries). This is in contrast to
methods like Bayesian inference that depend on spe-
ciﬁc learning algorithms to estimate uncertainty. By
making it easier to estimate uncertainty, we suspect
that after-learning auditing methods like RUE will help
to increase the adoption of machine learning in high-
stakes domains such as medicine. We evaluated RUE
on an error detection task, and showed that it out-
performs existing tools for improving model reliability
after learning. Moreover, we showed that RUE gener-
ates predictive distributions that are competitive with
state-of-the-art integrated methods that use special-
ized training algorithms to quantify uncertainty (e.g.
Bayesian inference). We also showed that RUE’s un-
certainty score reﬂects the density and local ﬁt criteria
using a model-dependent similarity measure. In future
work we can deﬁne new audits by leveraging diﬀer-
ent principles. For instance, methods for interpreting
model predictions (e.g. Ribeiro et al. 2016) or perform-
ing sensitivity analyses (e.g. Koh and Liang 2017) after
learning may inspire new criteria for reliability that
could be integrated into diﬀerent auditing tools.

Peter Schulam, Suchi Saria
