Using CNNs For Users Segmentation In 
Video See-Through Augmented Virtuality 
 
Pierre-Olivier Pigny 
CLARTE 
Laval, France 

Lionel Dominjon 
CLARTE 
Laval, France 

 
 
Abstract— In this paper, we present preliminary results on the 
use of deep learning techniques to integrate the user’s self-
body and other participants into a head-mounted video see-
through augmented virtuality scenario. It has been previously 
shown that seeing user’s bodies in such simulations may 
improve the feeling of both self and social presence in the 
virtual environment, as well as user performance. We propose 
to use a convolutional neural network for real time semantic 
segmentation of users’ bodies in the stereoscopic RGB video 
streams acquired from the perspective of the user. We describe 
design issues as well as implementation details of the system 
and demonstrate the feasibility of using such neural networks 
for merging users’ bodies in an augmented virtuality 
simulation. 
Keywords – augmented virtuality, semantic segmentation, 
video see-through 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Augmented Virtuality (AV) is a sub-category of mixed 
reality environments where real world objects are integrated 
into a computer generated environment [1]. In particular, 
users’ bodies can be merged into the simulation in order to 
increase their feeling of self [2], [3] and social  presence [4]. 
Self-embodiment also facilitates the perception of spatial 
characteristics of the virtual world  such as distance [5] and 
position [6] estimation. In particular, high fidelity visual 
hand feedback has been demonstrated to produce a strong 
visuo-proprioceptive integration [7] and shorter movement 
times compared to a lower fidelity hand feedback [8]. 
Several approaches have been proposed to date to 
integrate users’ bodies in an AV simulation. Most of them 
rely on computer vision techniques to reconstruct the body 
either through point clouds [9], polygon meshes [10], or 
voxels [3] models. Reconstructing real users’ bodies to 
integrate them into the simulation has the main advantage of 
providing a view-independent representation. But except for 
a couple of high-end complex systems [10], they also usually 
suffer from the improving but still rather poor quality of the 
depth maps provided by current hardware [11]. In addition, 
most reconstruction-based systems rely on said outside-in 
setup [3], [9] (as opposed to head-mounted, inside-out, 
systems [12]) that may lead to occlusions preventing a whole 
reconstruction of the users. Other approaches provide depth 
perception without reconstruction steps by presenting 
synchronized stereoscopic video pairs to the user’s eyes.  
 
That’s the underlying concept of head-mounted Video See-
Through (VST) approaches [13]: cameras mounted on the 
headset close to the user’s eyes capture the real world from 
the perspective of the user, while the position and the 
orientation of the tracked head is used to render the Virtual 
Environment (VE). Using a VST approach for AV has the 
main advantage of not being impacted by depth map quality, 
as it is not required actually. In addition, because the 
reconstruction step is not necessary, VST approaches are 
also faster. 
But video streams segmentation is required to isolate 
users’ bodies from other objects. The particularity of the 
segmentation required for merging bodies into a VST-based 
AV simulation is that 1) bodies can look very different 
depending on the point of observation (user’s self-body vs. 
others’ bodies as observed from the perspective of the user) 
and nevertheless they should be identified as the same 
“person” class and 2) the segmentation process has to be fast 
enough for keeping up with update rates required for 
immersive experiences [14], or at least with the cameras 
update rate. To our knowledge, solutions that have been 
proposed to date exclusively rely on chroma-keying, which 
suffers from significant limitations. Recent advances in deep 
learning techniques, and in particular on Convolutional 
Neural Networks (CNNs)-based semantic segmentation, 
make us wonder whether they may be used in a VST-based 
AV scenario. In particular, can CNNs-based semantic 
segmentation be both accurate and fast enough for an AV 
experiences? Can it be versatile enough to segment bodies 
observed from both an ego- and exocentric point of view in 
an acceptable time scale? What training set should be used? 
Fig. 1. Self-body and collaborator's body viewed from the user perspective 
and merged into an augmented virtuality experience. 
229
2019 IEEE International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Virtual Reality (AIVR)
978-1-7281-5604-0/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/AIVR.2019.00048

In this paper, we present preliminary work and 
demonstrate the feasibility of using CNNs for segmenting 
human bodies in VST video feeds captured from the user 
perspective (see sample result in Fig. 1) in real-time and 
report on implementation details used to achieve such a 
result. The paper is organized as follows. Section II describes 
related work in terms of body segmentation in live video 
streams. Section III provides an insight on semantic 
segmentation design and implementation and measured 
performance. Section IV discusses the results, with a focus 
on qualitative evaluation. Finally, we summarize our 
conclusions in section V along with mentioning our on-going 
and future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
To our knowledge, all the proposed solutions to date to 
integrate selected objects in a VST-based AV simulation rely 
on chroma keying. Chroma keying refers to a technique for 
compositing two video streams together based on color hues. 
Implementations differ in the sense of what is represented by 
the keying color: either the pixels to be discarded [15], or the 
pixels to be composited [2], [16]–[18]. The former is the 
most widespread approach and have been used for decades in 
the cinema industry. Its main drawback is that it requires 
dedicated facilities (“green screen studios”), which makes it 
incompatible with many applications, especially for home 
usage. The opposite technique may seem more convenient as 
it does not impose any constrain on the user physical 
environment, but it will fail at segmenting a whole body 
composed of many different colors (hair, clothes, shoes…). 
Beyond the scope of VST display, other techniques for 
segmenting human bodies in a real-time video stream have 
been proposed. Some methods use randomized decision 
forests together with hand-crafted image features to segment 
either hands or full body in a video stream [19]–[22]. The 
latter implementation has been popularized through its 
integration 
in 
the 
official 
Microsoft 
Kinect 
SDK. 
Nevertheless, it seems to only support quasi-static 
backgrounds and would not work with a sensor bound to the 
head of the user. Finally, recent work also investigates deep 
learning approaches, either on a depth map [23] or on an 
RGB map [24]. 
III. 
SEMANTIC SEGMENTATION FOR AV EXPERIENCES 
In the following we describe the CNN model we use to 
perform semantic segmentation in the cameras streams. We 
also report implementation details and provide an evaluation 
of the performances of our technique. 
A. Design of the semantic segmentation model 
The semantic segmentation model is designed with 
inference speed as a leading constraint to limit the overhead 
due to segmentation in the whole rendering process of the 
AV scenario and keep a comfortable experience. 
1) Network architecture 
The selected architecture is based on a modified U-net 
[25] CNN architecture. U-net extends Fully Convolutional 
Networks (FCN) [26] by requiring much smaller training 
datasets and yield more precise segmentations. In addition, 
U-net architecture is reputed to be fast enough to perform 
some basic segmentation tasks at 30Hz on mobile platforms 
[27], which makes it a relevant candidate for our application. 
It is also now a well-known, efficient, and widely used 
architecture. In the rest of the paper our network will be 
referred as SSTU-net, standing for Semantic See-Through U-
net. SSTU-net is made of two parts, a 5-layer FCN encoder 
with pooling which extracts features from an RGB image, 
and a U-net-like 5-layer FCN decoder with up-sampling 
deconvolution and concatenation layers. Each layer contains 
two 3x3 convolutions, batch normalization and ReLU 
activation and one 2x2 pooling or up-sampling layer. The 
last 1x1 convolution decoder layer is replaced by a sigmoid 
activation function to obtain a segmentation probability 
instead of an absolute decision. This feature will be used 
during compositing to reduce flickering and soften contours. 
2) Datasets 
For training our model, we used the COCO dataset [28] 
as it is one the most comprehensive datasets currently 
available for semantic segmentation. Since we’re only 
interested in body segmentation, COCO was restricted to 
images containing instances of the “person” class, referenced 
as COCO-body in the rest of this paper. Because COCO-
body does not include any human body seen from an 
egocentric point of view, we had to complete COCO-body 
with our own custom dataset we called EGO-body. EGO-
body was created using a chroma-keying technique similar to 
[29] to capture bodies viewed from an egocentric point of 
view and the associated ground-truth segmentation mask. 
Images were captured on a green background through a 
stereoscopic head-mounted camera. Seven people were 
asked to look around while wearing the camera and shoot 
pictures showing their body in as many different conditions 
as possible. The height and the orientation of the head while 
shooting were also collected. Every non-green pixel was 
considered as the ground-truth mask. In addition, a collection 
of backgrounds (i.e. pictures with no human body part) was 
shot from the same height and orientation, and then 
composited with the foreground. EGO-body contains about 
1500 train images and 120 validation images. 
3) Training 
Weights are initialized by training a base version of 
SSTU-net using COCO-body with a batch size of 12 and an 
Adam optimizer. The resulting model is referred as 
SSTU_coco. Learned weights are then fine-tuned with a 
balanced dataset containing all EGO-body data and a random 
subset of COCO-body. Two fine-tuned models were trained: 
one with fine-tuning performed on the decoder only 
(SSTU_f1), with fixed encoder weights, and one with fine-
tuning performed on both the encoder and the decoder 
(SSTU_f2). 
As EGO-body is a rather small dataset, a lot of data 
augmentation was performed during the training phase. 
Different random transformations were applied on the 
training set regarding brightness, saturation, hue, contrast, 
normal distributed noise, horizontal flip, image scaling (up to 
10%) and image rotation. Image rotation was bound to [-30°; 
+30°] and vertical flip was not used to remain consistent 
with our head-worn camera use-case. 
230

B. Implementation of the model 
1) Hardware setup 
Our hardware setup consists of a PC (Intel Core i7-
7800X CPU - RAM 64GB - two Nvidia GeForce GTX 
1080Ti graphics cards) and a ZED mini stereoscopic camera 
mounted on an HTC VIVE headset (see Fig. 2). The ZED 

streams with an average latency of 37ms [30]. It is worth 
noting that VST headsets equipped with high performance 
embedded cameras will be available soon [31], thus probably 
removing the need for any additional hardware for our 
technique in a near future. 
 
2) Software implementation 
The segmentation module is implemented on top of 
Google TensorFlow and is fed with images captured from 
the ZED mini camera and downscaled to 256x256 pixels 
which seems to be an acceptable processing speed / accuracy 
tradeoff. Processing of both eyes is parallelized on the two 
graphics cards. The output of the module is a 256x256 
segmentation mask for each eye, i.e. a probability map for 
each pixel to belong to the “person” class. The mask is then 
set as an alpha channel for the displayed video stream, 
resulting in displaying uncertain pixels as transparent, with a 
level of transparency depending on the probability. This 
helps reducing flickering a lot. 
To render the video streams in the VR headset, the Zed 
mini camera is modelized as two virtual cameras camZed, 
while the eyes of the user are modelized as two other virtual 
cameras camEyes. CamZed and camEyes projection matrices are 
derived from the intrinsics of the Zed mini camera provided 
by the vendor and the field of view of the VR headset 
respectively. To address the difference of field of view, the 
rendering region is restricted to the overlap between camZed 
and camEyes. In other words, the content outside of camZed 
frustum is not rendered. Both images of the stereoscopic 
video stream are mapped on planes located in front of camZed 
and covering its whole field of view. The rendering of the 
planes is performed through a shader that makes use of the 
depth map provided by the Zed mini camera to perform the 
z-test for every pixel of the plane. This allows to handle 
occlusions between the video stream and the 3D content (see 
Fig. 6. bottom-center). 
To deal with the delay introduced along the image 
workflow – from capture to presentation - a Camera Time 
Warp [32] algorithm has been implemented. This ensures 
video frames are consistent and synchronized with the 
computer generated content. In our case, the system has to 
compensate for the camera capture latency plus the overhead 
for segmentation inference time and data transfer. 
3) Performances 
Execution time. With our implementation, the whole 
video processing runs in an average 22ms (data preparation 
6ms + inference time 16ms), i.e. it can be run at a 45Hz 
frequency. Including the camera capture latency, frames can 
thus be delivered to the display system with an average delay 
of 59ms.  
Segmentation quality. To measure the quality of the 
segmentation, we extracted a subset of 500 random images 
from COCO-body train part and 500 images from EGO-
body. All the images in these test sets were not used for 
training the model. Since ground-truth data are represented 
by a binary mask, computing a mean Intersection over Union 
(mIoU) indicator requires to binarize predictions, which is 
achieved using a 0.5 threshold. The mIoUs computed for 
every model based on SSTU-net are summarized in Table I 
for the two test sets. The first line shows that the model 
trained on COCO-body only, SSTU_coco, does not perform 
well on EGO-body data, as expected. Unfortunately, the 
fine-tuned models SSTU_f2 and SSTU_f1 do not perform 
better since their performances, on COCO-body this time, 
drop off. We suspect that, because body shapes in the two 
datasets are very different, the features learned by the 
decoder might be in concurrence. 
 
C. Optimization 
Following this hypothesis, our model has been modified 
to test a two-decoder approach. In this new architecture, 
referred as SSTU-net-2, the encoding part remains the same, 
but two decoders are running in parallel: one is in charge of 
computing the probability for every pixel to belong to a 
“person-exo” class, and the other one predicts the belonging 
to a “person-ego” class (see Fig. 3). The probability for a 
pixel to belong to the integrated “person” class is then 
computed as the maximum value of both predictions. The 
encoder-decoder path used to predict “person-exo” pixels is 
referred as SSTU_exo, while the path used to predict 
“person-ego” pixels is referred as SSTU_ego. The model 
aggregating SSTU_exo and SSTU_ego is referred as SSTU. 
SSTU_exo is basically the same as SSTU_coco. Then, the 
decoder weights of SSTU_ego are computed by freezing 
SSTU_exo weights and training the model on the balanced 
dataset. In order to specialize SSTU_ego, the COCO-body 
data part of the balanced dataset is considered as 
background. With this new implementation, the whole video 
processing runs in an average 29ms (data preparation 6ms + 
inference time 23ms) and can thus be run at 34Hz. That 
means that currently only 1 frame out of 2 can be processed 
in the video stream (i.e. 1 out of 2 is dropped), which is not 
ideal but enough to demonstrate the feasibility and the 
interest of the technique. The delay to the display system 
thus raises to 66ms. 
 
Fig. 2. ZED mini stereoscopic camera mounted on an HTC VIVE headset.
TABLE I.  
SEGMENTATION ACCURACY (MIOU) 
COCO-body 
EGO-body 
SSTU_coco 
0.63 
0.52 
SSTU_f2 
0.33 
0.73 
SSTU_f1 
0.42 
0.50 
231

As stated above, SSTU_exo is identical to SSTU_coco, 
so their quality is the same as well: it performs well on 
exocentric points of view but is limited on egocentric points 
of view (see Table II). Unsurprisingly, the exact opposite is 
observed for SSTU_ego. But in the end, we can observe that 
the aggregated model, SSTU, succeeds in remaining as 
accurate as SSTU_exo on exocentric data while improving 
its accuracy on egocentric point of views. 
 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
Fig. 5 illustrates SSTU quality from a qualitative point of 
view. The image samples are extracted from the test sets. For 
each original RGB image (left column), ground truth (middle 
column) and SSTU prediction (right column) are presented. 
Three rows of images illustrate different levels of 
segmentation quality in terms of IoU for each of the two 
datasets: the first two rows illustrate what may considered as 
“good” quality segmentation (image #1: IoU = 0.94, image 
#2: IoU = 0.95), while the last two rows may be considered 
as “bad” (image #3: IoU = 0.17, image #4: IoU = 0.46). 
Yet, informal preliminary tests tend to show that the 
mIoU metric cannot reflect on its own the quality of the 
experience in a VST AV scenario. For example, the IoU of 
image #3 is very low (0.17), but these segmentation errors 
would probably not be disturbing in an AV scenario: the 
person in the background is almost completely missed by 
SSTU, hence the low IoU, but is represented by only a small 
number of pixels. This error will probably not be noticed by 
the user and its impact on the user experience will be low. 
On the other hand, the IoU of image #4 is much higher 
(0.46), but the proportion of pixels incorrectly classified as 
person looks so high that the user experience will be greatly 
impaired. Therefore, in the case of an AV scenario, we 
believe that the Pixel Accuracy (PA) seems to be a metric 
that can better reflect the quality of the user experience. Let’s 
get back to image #3 example: PA of the prediction is 0.99, 
which means that most of the pixels are correctly classified. 
The impact of incorrectly classified pixels on the user 
experience will be low. Regarding image #4, PA is equal to 
0.7, which means that 30% of the pixels are incorrectly 
classified: this can have a huge impact on the user 
experience, considering that the images cover a large portion 
of the user field of view - despite a greater IoU. On our test 
sets, the global mean PA for COCO-body is mPACOCO-body = 
0.96, and equal to mPAEGO-body = 0.92 for EGO-body, which 
means that, in average, a very large proportion of pixels is 
correctly classified by SSTU (see samples in Fig. 6, upper 
row). This seems consistent with the good feedbacks we 
received from our informal evaluations. 
A more in-depth observation of the results seems to 
indicate that SSTU tends to classify as person more pixels 
than it is supposed to (see Fig. 6, bottom right sample). To 
confirm this observation, pixel precision and recall indicators 
for the person class have been computed. On the EGO-body 
test set, they show that almost all person pixels in the images 
have been correctly classified (recallEGO-body = 0.93), but also 
that a significant amount of background pixels has also been 
classified as person (precisionEGO-body = 0.74). Regarding 
COCO-body test set, a lot of person pixels may have been 
missed (recallCOCO-body = 0.68), but pixels are more reliably 
classified as person than on EGO-body (recallCOCO-body = 
0.85). Overall, the low values of precision on both datasets 
indicate that background pixels can sometimes be incorrectly 
classified as person pixels by SSTU. We hypothesize that 
this may be due to the lack of images with no person in our 
training sets. Possibly, SSTU has not correctly learned how 
not to detect persons. 
Finally, our tests show that the segmentation consistency 
between stereo pairs can sometimes be visible enough to 
impair the user experience (see Fig. 4). This confirms that 
this issue should be addressed to support the adoption of our 
technique. 
TABLE II.  
TWO-DECODER SEGMENTATION ACCURACY (MIOU) 
COCO-body 
EGO-body 
SSTU_exo 
0.63 
0.52 
SSTU_ego 
0.01 
0.86 
SSTU 
0.63 
0.69 
 
Fig. 3. SSTU-net-2 architecture: 1 encoder path, 2 decoder paths (person-exo, person-ego). 
232

V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We have presented preliminary work that demonstrates 
the feasibility of using CNNs for semantic segmentation of 
users’ bodies in a head-mounted VST-based AV simulation. 
Our approach allows for real-time segmentation of bodies 
seen from both exo- and egocentric point of view at the same 
time. 
Even 
if 
in 
this 
preliminary 
implementation, 
segmentation execution speed can’t currently totally keep up 
with the cameras update rate while maintaining a decent 
quality, results are promising and already sufficient to 
demonstrate the interest of the approach. In addition, the 
rapid evolution of CNNs research [33]–[35] suggest that this 
issue will probably be solved soon. We will not fail to test 
and compare these new network structures in the near future. 
Hybrid approaches [36] will also be another option to speed 
up the segmentation process. Another direction in our future 
work will deal with stereoscopic consistency, which we have 
not addressed yet. We’ll indeed need to find a way to ensure 
that masks computed by semantic segmentation are 
consistent between both eyes. Finally, despite our focus on 
body segmentation in this paper, our technique could be 
extended to any other class of objects: keyboards, 
smartphones, furniture… Which may open a wide range of 
new opportunities for interaction design in immersive virtual 
environments. 
 
Fig. 4. Segmentation disparity between left and right images. 
Image #1 
IoU = 0.94 
PA = 0.97 
Precision = 0.95 
Recall = 0.98 
Image #2 
IoU = 0.95 
PA = 0.99 
Precision = 0.95 
Recall = 0.99 
Image #3 
IoU = 0.17 
PA = 0.99 
Precision = 0.48 
Recall = 0.2 
Image #4 
IoU = 0.48 
PA = 0.7 
Precision = 0.49 
Recall = 0.99 
Fig. 5. Qualitative results of SSTU on COCO-body (odd rows) and EGO-body (even rows) validation sets. 
First column: input RGB images; second column: ground truth mask; third column: binarized SSTU outputs. 
      
      
 
 
      
      
 
Fig. 6. Visualization of the segmented video streams composited into the rendering of a 3D environment. 
233
