Traffic Cameras to detect inland waterway barge traffic: An Application of machine 
learning. 
 
Geoffery Agorku 
Department of Civil Engineering 
University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Arkansas, 72701 

https://orcid.org/0009-0000-7716-0334 
 
Sarah Hernandez, PhD 
Department of Civil Engineering 
University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Arkansas, 72701 

https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4243-1461 
 
Maria Falquez 
Department of Civil Engineering 
University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Arkansas, 72701 

 
Subhadipto Poddar, PhD 
Department of Civil Engineering 
University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Arkansas, 72701 

https://orcid.org/ 0000-0003-4211-6688 
 
Kwadwo Amankwah-Nkyi 
Department of Civil Engineering 
University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Arkansas, 72701 

https://orcid.org/ 0009-0001-1860-2961 
 
Word Count: 7,847 words + 1,500 [6 tables (250 words per table)] = 9,359 words 
 
Submitted 1/5/2024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Agorku et al. 
 
2 
 
ABSTRACT 
Inland waterways are critical for freight movement, but limited means exist for monitoring their 
performance and usage by freight-carrying vessels, e.g., barges.  While methods to track vessels, e.g., tug 
and tow boats, are publicly available through Automatic Identification Systems (AIS), ways to track freight 
tonnages and commodity flows carried on barges along these critical marine highways are non-existent, 
especially in real-time settings. This paper develops a method to detect barge traffic on inland waterways 
using existing traffic cameras with opportune viewing angles. Deep learning models, specifically, You Only 
Look Once (YOLO), Single Shot MultiBox Detector (SSD), and EfficientDet are employed. The model 
detects the presence of vessels and/or barges from video and performs a classification (no vessel or barge, 
vessel without barge, vessel with barge, and barge). A dataset of 331 annotated images was collected from 
five existing traffic cameras along the Mississippi and Ohio Rivers for model development. YOLOv8 
achieves an F1-score of 96%, outperforming YOLOv5, SSD, and EfficientDet models with 86%, 79%, and 
77% respectively. Sensitivity analysis was carried out regarding weather conditions (fog and rain) and 
location (Mississippi and Ohio rivers). A background subtraction technique was used to normalize video 
images across the various locations for the location sensitivity analysis. This model can be used to detect 
the presence of barges along river segments, which can be used for anonymous bulk commodity tracking 
and monitoring. Such data is valuable for long-range transportation planning efforts carried out by public 
transportation agencies, in addition to operational and maintenance planning conducted by federal agencies 
such as the US Army Corp of Engineers.   
Keywords: barge operations, machine learning, detection and identification systems, maritime safety, 
inland waterways. 
 
 

Agorku et al. 
 
3 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Barge transportation plays a pivotal role in the logistics industry, especially in countries with 
extensive river systems like the United States [1].  Barge transportation is considered an environmentally 
friendly alternative to road and rail transportation, contributing to the reduction of carbon emissions [2]. 
Barges offer an efficient and cost-effective means for transporting large quantities of goods such as coal, 
grains, and petroleum products [3]. Compared to other modes of transportation, barge transportation on 
waterways provides advantages in terms of safety, reliability, and environmental sustainability [4].  
Monitoring barge traffic on waterways presents significant challenges as barges, unlike the vessels 
that tow them, are not typically equipped with tracking devices to monitor their position [5]. In comparison, 
vessels like tugs and towboats, and other self-propelled vessels operate with Automatic Identification 
Systems (AIS) tracking equipment. AIS is mandated for safety purposes and assists with navigation [6]. 
AIS data is shared publicly and can be used to monitor vessel traffic along inland and coastal waterways 
[7]. Using AIS, vessel traffic (volume), speed, stopping events, and travel times, among other parameters 
can be measured and monitored to provide performance metrics for our inland waterways.  However, barge 
volumes in terms of the number of barges, commodities carried, quantity of commodity, etc. cannot be 
monitored in real-time (or in near-real time) as the only public source of this information includes the Lock 
Performance Monitoring System (LPMS) [8], Commodity Flow Survey (CFS), and Waterborne Commerce 
Statistics Center (WCSC) [9]. Such sources are derived from waybills, surveys, and other passive means. 
The usage of passive means like waybills and surveys introduce potential inaccuracies. Surveys are 
inherently limited due to delays in data collection, sampling biases, issues with data quality and response 
lags. Similarly, waybills are associated with manual data entry errors and delays in reporting. Human errors, 
intentional or unintentional, and incomplete reporting can compromise the efficacy of an efficient barge 
monitoring system. All these limitations can lead to potential inaccuracies in the data obtained through 
these passive means.  
Thus, there is value in monitoring barge movements through direct observation and potentially in 
real-time. Ling et al. [5] developed the TRACC system, a real-time identification and monitoring system 
for tracking barge-carried hazardous commodities on waterways. This system uses static and trip 
information databases and tracking devices attached to barges. Key components of the system include an 
Event Prediction Module, which estimates the position of the barge based on updates from onboard 
instruments and predicts the arrival of the barge at critical locations. However, this relies on specially 
installed tracking devices reliant on cell phone connection and solar power. This dependence on solar power 
and cell signals limits the system's ability for real-time tracking in certain conditions. Also, the prediction 
model is susceptible to errors in time series forecasting, potential false positives or false negatives in the 
anomaly detection module, and the reliance on an honor system for barge movement reporting, where 
operators may miss reporting or omit essential information. Furthermore, the static information database 
reports on river infrastructure, equipment inventory, and points of interest. The trip information database 
contains a hierarchy of information related to a barge trip. However, some of these data may change on a 
longer temporal scale when equipment is bought or sold, or new points of interest are established. This 
could potentially lead to inconsistencies or inaccuracies in the data. 
This study acknowledges these challenges and addresses the need for automated real-time detection 
of barges and vessels. The novelty of this study lies in being the first to utilize publicly available traffic 
cameras for detecting barges along inland river systems. Highway traffic cameras (referred to as traffic 
cameras) are typically installed along interstates or major highways to monitor traffic flows, verify reports 
of accidents/incidents, and improve response times and operations by connecting to Traffic Management 
Centers [10].  In locations near inland waterways, bridges, and other critical infrastructure, traffic cameras 
purposely or opportunistically include a view of the waterway.  In these cases, the cameras can effectively 
monitor marine vessel traffic.  For this work, we identified twenty cameras that had views of the Mississippi 
River, Tennessee River, Ohio River, and Arkansas River systems. Five of these were used to develop the 

Agorku et al. 
 
4 
 
models in this paper to detect barge traffic. Demonstrating the ability to use existing traffic cameras for 
marine applications may promote the idea of co-usage of camera monitoring and lead to more prolific 
installation of cameras in marine settings.  
The objectives of this study are to: 
1. Develop an automated, real-time barge monitoring system that ensures high accuracy in barge 
detection while being robust to variations in lighting, angles, and perspectives. 
2. Evaluate the performance of the developed barge detection system under different conditions, 
namely fog, rain, and location types, to assess its robustness and reliability in real-world 
scenarios. 
The paper is structured like this: Introduction (topic and motivation), Background (literature 
review), Methods (methodology and techniques), Results and Discussion (implications and significance), 
and Conclusion (findings summary and future research suggestions). 
BACKGROUND 
This study focuses on barge movements via the US inland waterways, also known as the Marine 
Highway System. The US inland waterways span approximately 12,000 miles and include commercially 
active routes for transporting major bulk commodities like grain, coal, and petroleum [16]. These waterways 
support the movement of about 630 million tons of cargo annually, valued at over $73 billion, which 
underscores the importance of efficient barge detection systems in maintaining economic vitality [16]. As 
previously mentioned, there are limited means of capturing real-time movements of barge traffic on inland 
waterways and as a result there is limited data on which to base performance metrics for planning, 
operations, and management decisions. Moreover, this becomes increasingly relevant considering the 
federal government’s role in supporting navigation. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the 
Departments of Transportation, through agencies like the U.S. Coast Guard and the Maritime 
Administration, play crucial roles in maintaining and operating the navigation system, which includes 
ensuring the safety and efficiency of inland waterway transport [16]. Automated detection has the potential 
to produce real-time barge movement data. Because inland waterways serve 38 states and contribute 
significantly to the nation’s economy, with states like Texas and Louisiana shipping over $10 billion worth 
of cargo annually, the implementation of an advanced barge detection system is not only a technological 
advancement but a strategic necessity [16]. 
Recent advancements in computer vision and deep learning techniques transformed the field of 
automated detection systems across various domains, including transportation [11]–[13]. These techniques 
empower machines to interpret and comprehend visual information, making them particularly suitable for 
object detection tasks. While numerous studies explored the application of computer vision and deep 
learning for object detection in surface transportation [13]–[15] (e.g., roads and rail), a gap exists 
specifically in the automated detection of barges. Barges are like truck trailers in freight transport 
applications in that they carry commodities but are non-self-propelled and often not actively tracked. This 
presents a unique challenge that lends itself to passive detection approaches like vision, Lidar, or radar-
based, among other approaches.  
With decreasing costs of installation and operation, there is an increasing proliferation of cameras 
for transportation data collection [18]. Considering freight applications as a key contribution of this study, 
this section first highlights research on advanced freight detection using passive collection tools, 
specifically vision-based systems like cameras. The state-of-the-practice and -art approaches for vision 
detection methods are summarized concurrently with the application areas.  
Moghimi et al. [14] proposed a vehicle detection system that uses the Viola-Jones algorithm 
combined with AdaBoost. The modeled dataset consisted of 576 images of vehicles under different lighting 

Agorku et al. 
 
5 
 
conditions obtained from surveillance videos. The accuracy, completeness, and quality rates of the proposed 
method were about 94%, 92%, and 87%, respectively in all lighting conditions. Gupta and Gupta [19] 
designed an automated object detection system for marine environments using cameras. The system 
employed a support vector machine (SVM) algorithm trained on a dataset of over 2500 images 
encompassing 16 categories. The accuracy of the proposed method was 67%. The algorithm's performance 
was compared to the works of Koch et al. [20] and Zhang et al. [21] demonstrating its enhanced results and 
potential for object detection and classification in coastline surveillance systems. Similarly, Liu et al. [12] 
developed ship detection methods in river environments using enhanced Convolutional Neural Network 
(CNN) methods under different weather conditions. A key component of their approach was the 
implementation of a flexible data augmentation strategy that generated synthetically degraded images to 
augment the volume and diversity of the original dataset. Their approach significantly outperformed several 
cutting-edge techniques, including Single Shot MultiBox Detector (SSD), Faster Region Convolutional 
Neural Network (R-CNN), and You Only Look Once version 3 (YOLOv3), in terms of detection accuracy, 
robustness, and efficiency. However, like previous studies, it did not focus specifically on barge detection, 
which is unique given the physical, low-lying structure of the barges themselves. Barges vary significantly 
in size and configuration. Their appearance in images or video depends on their distance from and angle of 
the camera [22]. Detecting barges at varying scales and perspectives requires robust object detection 
algorithms capable of handling these variations [23]. Furthermore, waterways and coastlines often have 
complex and cluttered backgrounds, with many objects, including boats, buoys, bridges, and buildings [24]. 
This cluttered environment can hinder the accurate detection of barges, as the system needs to differentiate 
between the barge of interest and other objects in the scene [25]. 
Hammedi et al. [26] explored the application of several object detection algorithms, including 
Faster R-CNN, SSD, and different versions of YOLO, for real-time object detection in river environments. 
Their dataset consisted of 2,488 images with almost 35,400 annotations. The findings demonstrated that all 
six algorithms exhibited the ability to detect object classes including riverside (embankment), vessels, 
persons, infrastructure, and road signals in near real-time. Faster R-CNN achieved the highest accuracy but 
was slower, while SSD was faster but slightly less accurate, and YOLO was the fastest but had the lowest 
accuracy. The authors recommended selecting the algorithm based on the specific application requirements, 
with Faster R-CNN prioritized for accuracy-critical tasks and YOLO for speed-oriented applications. The 
paper also contributed by providing an annotated dataset for training and adapting deep learning techniques 
to river environments, showcasing the feasibility of real-time object detection in such environments. 
While these studies provided valuable insights into the application of computer vision and deep 
learning techniques for object detection in transportation, none addressed the challenges of using existing 
traffic cameras. This is an important challenge as it has implications for the quality of images and 
viewpoints which affect model performance and transferability.  Additionally, much of the existing research 
targets the detection and classification of self-propelled vessels. Barges are non-self-propelled with physical 
dimensions (low, flat, grouped, etc.) that make barge detection difficult. These research gaps serve as 
motivation for the current study, which aims to develop an automated barge detection system that leverages 
state-of-the-art computer vision and deep learning techniques, using Single Shot Multibox Detector (SSD), 
EfficientDet, You Only Look Once Version 5 (YOLOv5) and You Only Look Once Version 8 (YOLOv8) 
models. These models, as indicated in the above review, have shown superior performance in real-time 
settings, specifically where video feeds are segmented into images, and then fed into feature extraction and 
classification algorithms.  
 
 
 

Agorku et al. 
 
6 
 
METHODS 
Dataset and Data Collection 
The dataset for this experiment was collected by monitoring five cameras located at the Cincinnati 
Covington Bridge (CBB) in Ohio, St. Louis Arch (SLA) in Missouri, Emerson River Bridge (ERB) in 
Missouri, Mississippi River Bridge (MRB) in Mississippi, and Louisiana River Bridge (LRB) in Mississippi 
(Figure 1; example images in Figure 3). These locations were chosen from a cursory review of about 
twenty cameras located on roadways along inland waterways in the states of Mississippi, Tennessee, Ohio, 
and Arkansas. The two river locations present diverse river traffic with the Mississippi River locations 
seeing mostly barges and the Ohio River seeing barges and recreational (riverboat) vessels. The assumed 
intention of the selected cameras, based on view angles, was for bridge monitoring or tourism/scenic 
observation. Cameras at ERB and LRB are operated by state transportation agencies and those at CCB, 
SLA, and MRB are operated by EarthCam [27]. Real-time video feeds were recorded and then used to 
extract 331 images for annotation (Figure 2).  For this work, the conversion process was achieved using 
the OpenCV Python library, a robust computer vision tool. 
 
Table 1: Image Source and Number of Images in Dataset 
Image Source / 
Camera Location 
Operating 
Agency 
Number 
(percentage) of 
Images in Dataset 
Vessel/Barge 
Traffic  
(vessels per day1) 
River Width 
(Approx) at 
camera 
position 
ERB: Emerson River 
Bridge 
Missouri 
Department of 
Transportation 
[28] 
48 (14.4%) 
12 (90% vessels 
with barges) 
0.4 miles 
LRB: Louisiana 
River Bridge 
55 (16.5%) 
13 (79.6% vessels 
with barges) 
0.6 miles 
SLA: St. Louis Arch 
EarthCam 
(Private) [29] 
60 (18.1%) 
14 (69.3% vessels 
with barges) 
0.3 miles 
MRB: Mississippi 
River Bridge 
EarthCam 
(Private) [30] 
142 (43.0%) 
12 (80.8% vessels 
with barges) 
0.6 miles 
CCB: Cincinnati 
Covington 
EarthCam 
(Private) [31] 
26 (7.9%) 
5 (45% vessels 
with barges) 
0.2 miles 
Total 
- 
331 
- 
- 
 

Agorku et al. 
 
7 
 
 
Figure 1: Locations of traffic cameras used for data collection for model development and testing. 
Notes: 1. ‘Day’ refers to daytime hours only.  
To ensure generalization of the model, images were collected during different times of the day (day 
and night) and different weather conditions (clear, rainy, and foggy weather) (Figures 2 & 3). Data was 
collected between 9th October 2022 and 3rd May 2023. Background images are images with no objects 
added to a dataset to reduce False Positives (FP). Twelve percent of the images in the dataset were 
background images [32]. 

Agorku et al. 
 
8 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Distribution of Samples in the Dataset by Time of Day and Weather Conditions 
 
 
 
Clear Daytime 
Rainy Daytime 
Foggy Daytime 
Clear Nighttime 
Rainy Nighttime 
 
Foggy Nighttime 
Figure 3: Dataset instances showing diverse environmental and weather conditions. 
Image Annotation and Data Augmentation 
There are no publicly available annotated datasets containing vessel and barge images. Thus, the 
annotated images were generated specifically for this study from the five camera locations. Annotation 
involved drawing rectangular bounding boxes around vessels and barges (Figure 4). A consensus-based 
approach was employed by a team of annotators to resolve discrepancies and ensure accurate annotation. 
The manual annotation process was facilitated using the Computer Vision Annotation Tool (CVAT) [33] 
to draw precise bounding boxes around barges and vessels, minimizing annotation errors and enhancing 
annotation quality. CVAT was used because it provided a user-friendly web-based interface, which 

Agorku et al. 
 
9 
 
simplified the annotation process. Researchers can utilize this dataset as a benchmark for future studies. 
The annotated dataset consisted of a total of 331 images. 
(A) 
(B) 
(C)  
Figure 4: Sample annotations of Barges and Vessels on waterways. (A) and (C) denotes vessels with 
barges, (B) denotes a vessel without a barge. 
To address the challenges posed by adverse weather conditions and low illumination in real-world 
imaging scenarios, data augmentation techniques were employed [12] to expand the data set with 441 
additional images generated using label-preserving transformations with Roboflow [34]. The augmentation 
techniques included random cropping [35], Gaussian blur, horizontal flipping [36], scaling, rotation, shear, 
saturation adjustment, brightness adjustment, exposure adjustment, cutout, and the addition of noise to the 
images (Figure 5). Random cropping generated multiple sub-images from each original image, allowing 
the model to learn from diverse perspectives and improve its object detection capabilities [37]. Gaussian 
blur simulated adverse weather conditions, enabling the model to better handle degraded image quality. 
Horizontal flipping introduced additional variety and helped the model generalize better to different barge 
orientations [38]. Simulating variations in lighting conditions, angles, and perspectives through scaling, 
rotation, shear, and other transformations enhanced the model's barge detection accuracy under diverse 
scenarios. However, it is essential to acknowledge that data augmentation techniques have limitations. 
Excessive application of certain augmentation methods may introduce artifacts or distortions that could 
impact the model's performance. Nevertheless, the augmented dataset, comprising both original images and 
their augmented versions, offered a more diverse and representative training set. 
(A) Original Image  
(B) Foggy daytime augmentation (C) Foggy nighttime augmentation 

Agorku et al. 
 
10 
 
(D) Rainy daytime augmentation (E) Rainy nighttime augmentation 
Figure 5: Sample images before and after applying augmentations. 
Model Selection and Transfer Learning 
The study employed state-of-the-art Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) for barge detection. 
CNNs are very effective for image classification and recognition tasks [39]. A CNN consists of several 
building blocks: convolutional layers, pooling layers, and fully connected layers [39]. 
1. Convolutional Layers: The convolutional layers form the foundation of a CNN. They scan the input 
image and build feature maps using a set of learnable filters (also known as kernels or weights) 
[40]. Each filter performs a mathematical operation (convolution) on a small portion of the input 
image and outputs a single value [40]. All filter output values are arranged in a 2D feature map. 
Convolutional layers help in the detection of low-level characteristics like edges and corners [40]. 
2. Pooling Layers: The pooling layers reduce the feature maps produced by the convolutional layers 
[41]. The feature maps are down-sampled by obtaining the maximum or average value of a small 
portion of the feature map [41]. This reduces the network's computational complexity and makes it 
more robust to translation and rotation of the input picture [41]. 
3. Fully Connected Layers: They classify the input image into various classes [42]. They take the 
preceding layer's flattened output (the feature vector) and apply a set of learnable weights to 
generate a probability distribution across the classes [42]. To generate the final output probabilities, 
the output of the fully connected layers is fed into a SoftMax activation function [43]. 
A CNN's architecture generally comprises multiple convolutional and pooling layers followed by 
one or more fully connected layers (Figure 6) [43]. Hyperparameters such as filter size, stride, and padding 
are tweaked for optimal performance [43]. During training, the network learns the optimal values of the 
filters and weights by minimizing a loss function (such as cross-entropy loss) using backpropagation [44]. 
The backpropagation algorithm computes the gradients of the loss with respect to the parameters of the 
network and updates them using an optimization algorithm (such as stochastic gradient descent) to 
minimize the loss [44]. 
 
 
 

Agorku et al. 
 
11 
 
 
Figure 6: Schematic of the CNN Architecture [45] 
For this work, SSD [46], EfficientDet [47], YOLOv5 [48], and YOLOv8 [49], four widely 
recognized pre-trained CNN models, were chosen based on their architectural strengths in object detection 
and their reported successes in related research domains [12], [26], [50]. SSD was chosen for its speed, 
efficiency, accuracy, and robustness [51]. EfficientDet is recognized for effectively balancing the tradeoff 
between speed and accuracy within a cost-effective parameter space [52]. YOLOv5, the predecessor of 
YOLOv8, was selected for its advanced user-friendliness, making it an excellent choice for projects where 
simplified setup and ease of use are essential. YOLOv5's architecture and design focus on delivering an 
accessible tool for a wide range of applications. YOLOv8 is preferred when speed and accuracy are 
paramount. It excels in real-time object detection scenarios, such as this barge detection application, where 
rapid decision-making based on high-accuracy object detection is vital. YOLOv8 builds upon YOLOv5 
and achieves this by implementing optimizations in its architecture that prioritize speed and maintain high 
levels of accuracy, making it ideal for real-time use cases. 
Transfer learning was used to adapt the pre-trained models to the unique objective of barge 
detection [53]. This resulted in less training time and higher detection accuracy [53]. This involved fine-
tuning specific layers of the models on our annotated dataset. By focusing the learning process on the 
relevant features for barge detection, transfer learning enabled us to leverage the models’ pre-existing 
knowledge while tailoring them to our specific task of real-time barge detection.  
Hyperparameter Tuning 
The training process for the YOLO models requires tuning of approximately 30 hyperparameters 
[54] (Table 2) including network architecture, optimization algorithms, and regularization techniques. The 
tuning process was conducted through a systematic, iterative approach. Specific ranges and step sizes were 
defined for each hyperparameter, and various combinations were evaluated to gauge their impact on the 
model’s performance. Performance evaluation was carried out using the F1-score (Eq. 1-3) [55]. Overall, 
hyperparameter tuning increased the model’s performance from an F1 score of 84% to 96%. Future work 
will explore the use of genetic algorithms and Markov processes or Bayesian optimization algorithms to 
determine optimal hyperparameters.   
F1 score = 
2 ×Precision×Recall
Precision+Recall  [55] 
      
Equation 1 
Where,  
Precision = 
True Positives
True Positives+False Positives [56] 
Equation 2 

Agorku et al. 
 
12 
 
Recall = 
True Positives
True Positives+False Negatives [56] 
Equation 3 
Table 2: Hyperparameter value ranges for training YOLOV5 and YOLOV8 models 
Hyperpara
meter 
Description 
Tuning Range 
Selected Values 
YOLO
v5 
YOLO
v8 
SSD 
EfficientDet 
Batch size 
Number of 
images in each 
training batch 
4-32 
8 
4 
4 
4 
Epochs 
Number of times 
the entire dataset 
is passed through 
the model 
200-1500 
600 
600 
1000 
500 
Image Size 
Size of input 
images 
320, 512, 640, 
896, 1024, 1216 
896 
1216 
320 
512 
Optimizer 
Algorithm used 
to update model 
weights 
Adam, SGD, 
AdamW, 
RMSProp, 
Momentum 
Adam 
SGD 
Adam 
Momentum 
Momentum 
Amount of 
contribution from 
previous weight 
updates 
0.9-0.99 
0.937 
0.937 
0.9 
0.9 
Weight 
Decay 
Regularization 
term to prevent 
overfitting 
0.00001 – 0.001 
0.0005 
0.0005 
0.00004 
0.000004 
IOU 
Ratio of overlap 
to total area 
0.2 – 0.7 
0.2 
0.7 
0.4 
0.5 
Lr0 
Initial learning 
rate 
0.01-0.00126 
0.01 
0.01 
0.10 
0.08 
 
 
Model Training and Validation 
A stratified random sampling approach was used to divide the data into training, validation, and 
testing sets. The training set optimized model parameters, while the validation set fine-tuned 
hyperparameters and monitored performance. The testing dataset remained separate for final model 
evaluation. To prevent overfitting during the training process, early stopping was implemented using the 
patience parameter [57]. The patience value used was 100. This technique allowed for the termination of 
training when the model’s performance did not improve beyond the specified number of epochs. The best-
performing model was selected for further assessment on the testing set. In total, 771 images were divided 
into training, validation, and testing sets with a ratio of 70:15:15 (Figure 7). Only original images (not 
augmented) were used in the testing dataset. Later sensitivity training divided the dataset by location and 
image condition (rain, fog, etc.). 

Agorku et al. 
 
13 
 
 
 
Figure 7: Summary of Dataset Split and Vessel Characteristics 
Spatial Transferability Analysis Framework 
Spatial transferability is the generalizability of the model to different environments [58, 45] and 
enables identification of potential challenges and development of strategies to enhance transferability [60]. 
In the context of this paper, that refers to different inland waterways, view angles, lighting conditions, and 
vessel/barge traffic mixes (Table 3). The spatial transferability was performed using cross-validation.  A 
model was trained on four of the five locations and tested on the fifth location. 
 
Table 3: Environmental Characteristics of Data Collection Locations 
Location 
Lighting 
Water 
Coloration 
Occlusion levels 
Percent of river area 
in image 
ERB: Emerson 
River Bridge  
Clear and foggy 
conditions 
present 
Dark brown, 
muddy, 
murky 
Heavy occlusion 
River comprised 
approximately 80% of 
the image's viewable 
area 
LRB: Louisiana 
River Bridge  
Varies between 
clear and foggy 
weather 
Dark brown 
Partial occlusion 
80%  
SLA: St. Louis 
Arch 
Mostly clear, 
good lightening 
Dark brown 
Partial Occlusion 
20%  
MRB: 
Mississippi River 
Bridge 
Variation 
between clear and 
foggy weather 
Dark brown; 
muddy and 
murky during 
rainy 
conditions 
No occlusion 
90%  
CCB: Cincinnati 
Covington  
Generally clearer 
than Mississippi 
Greenish blue 
Partial occlusion 
60%  

Agorku et al. 
 
14 
 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 
The classification was based on a five-class scheme (Figure 8):  
A. No Detection (no vessel, no barge): No vessel or barge(s) detected in the image. (Figure 8A) 
B. Vessel Detected without Barge, No Barge Detected: The model detects a vessel, but there is no 
barge present (Figure 8B) 
C. Vessel Detected without Barge, Barge Detected: The model detects a vessel without barge(s), 
but there is also a barge in the image (Figure 8C). 
D. Vessel Detected with Barge, Barge Detected: The model detects both the vessel towing barge(s) 
and the barge(s) present in the image (Figure 8D). 
E. Barge Detected: The model detects a barge, but there is no vessel present (Figure 8E). 
The model occasionally introduces a sixth class denoted as "(F) Vessel Detected with Barge, No 
Barge Detected," alongside the five target classes. This additional class emerges when the model 
mistakenly identifies or predicts a vessel with a barge even when no barge is actually present. This 
misclassification is likely attributed to a consistent association where the presence of a barge is frequently 
linked to its being pushed by a tug or tow boat. This scenario is reflected in the confusion matrix presented 
in Table 5. 
There are also instances in the image dataset where barges are present, but no vessel is present due to 
the position of the barge/vessel pair within the view of the image (Figure 8E). Images may contain more 
than one vessel and/or more than one set of barges, although this is rare (approximately 2% of the annotated 
data) (Figure 8C).  
 
(A) No Detection (no vessel, no barge) 
(B) Vessel Detected without Barge,  
No Barge Detected 
 
(C) Vessel Detected without Barge,  
Barge Detected 
(D) Vessel Detected with Barge, Barge Detected 
(E) Barge Detected 
Figure 8: Schematic representation of the five-class scheme  

Agorku et al. 
 
15 
 
On the testing dataset which contains 15% (116 images) of the sample images across all five 
locations, the YOLOv8 achieved an F1 score of 96% at a speed of 34 frames per second (fps), YOLOv5 
achieved 86% at a speed of 32 fps, SSD achieved an F1 score of 79% at a speed of 42 frames per second 
and EfficientDet achieved an F1 score of 77% at 33 frames per second (Table 4).  The YOLOv8 model 
demonstrated class-specific F1 scores of 100% for (A) No Detection (no vessel, no barge) Class, 100% for 
(B) Vessel Detected without Barge, No Barge Detected Class, 100% for (C) Vessel Detected without Barge, 
Barge Detected Class, 93% for (D) Vessel Detected with Barge, Barge Detected Class and 85% for (E) 
Barge Detected Class (Table 4). Comparing the class F1 scores and speed between models, the YOLOv8 
model consistently outperformed all the other three models. The models were carried out on Google Colab, 
leveraging the computational capabilities of the NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPU equipped with 8 GB of RAM. 
Table 4: Performance Comparison of Object Detection Models YOLOv5 and YOLOv8 
Model 
Class F1-scores (%) 
Speed 
(fps) 
F1 Score (%) 
A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
F1 
 
 
EfficientDet 
73.3 
57.1 
100 
77.6 
79.3 
- 
33.1 
77.4 
SSD 
78.6 
60 
100 
77.6 
79.3 
- 
42.3 
79.1 
YOLOv5 
96.3 
87 
100 
89.1 
55.2 
- 
31.9 
85.5 
YOLOv8 
100 
100 
100 
92.6 
85 
- 
34.0 
95.5 
No. of Samples per class 
13 
12 
1 
70 
20 
0 
- 
116 
1. Classes not present in the original dataset but falsely predicted by the YOLO models. 
Table 5: Cross Classification Matrix for the YOLOv8 Model 
Count 
Predicted 
Total 
Accuracy 
A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
F1 
(Obs.) 
Observed 
A 
13 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
13 
100% 
B 
0 
12 
0 
0 
0 
0 
12 
100% 
C 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
1 
100% 
D 
0 
0 
0 
63 
3 
4 
70 
90% 
E 
0 
0 
0 
3 
17 
0 
20 
85% 
F1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
- 
Total 
13 
12 
1 
66 
20 
4 
116 
96% 
(Predicted) 
1  Classes not present in the original dataset but falsely predicted by the YOLO models. 
SLA 
 
 
 
 
 

Agorku et al. 
 
16 
 
MRB 
 
 
 
 
LRB 
 
 
 
 
ERB 
 
 
 
 
Location 
(A) Original image 
(E) EfficientDet 
(D) SSD 
(B) YOLOv5 
(C) YOLOv8 
Figure 9: Sample detections of models at different locations 
Spatial Transferability 
A spatial transferability analysis evaluated the model's generalization capabilities on unseen 
locations. The model was trained on four locations along the Mississippi River (ERB, SLA, MRB, LRB) 
and tested on an unseen location along the Ohio River (CCB). The selection of the CCB location as the 
holdout (test) dataset demonstrates the following model capabilities. First, the CCB location offers 
geographical diversity compared to the training locations along the Mississippi River. The Ohio River 
exhibits unique characteristics, including different water flow patterns, depths, and widths. Second, the 
CCB location presents operational challenges that differ from the locations along the Mississippi River. 
Factors such as environmental conditions, lighting, camera angles, water color, and the physical 
characteristics of the CCB bridge itself differ from those encountered in the Mississippi River settings 
(Figure 9). There were 747 images in the training dataset which includes augmented images and 26 images 
in the test dataset which does not contain augmented images. The same hyperparameters determined using 
the original training/validation data set (e.g., all five sites) are applied. 
 
An F1-score of 97.2% resulted for the CCB location as the holdout test set with class-specific 
accuracies of 100% for (A) No Detection (no vessel, no barge) class, 100% for the (B) Vessel Detected 
without Barge, No Barge Detected class and 91.7% for the (D) Vessel Detected with Barge, Barge Detected 
class. It is important to note that the testing dataset did not include class C and E images because these 
categories are not present in the dataset for the CCB location. 
(A) Towboat 
(B) Towboat and Barge 
traversing toward bridge 
(C) Riverboat 
(D) Towboat and Barge 
traversing away from 
bridge 

Agorku et al. 
 
17 
 
Figure 9: Sample detections from spatial transferability analysis on CCB 
 
Sensitivity to Environmental Characteristics 
Sensitivity analysis was performed to evaluate the robustness of the model under different weather 
and environmental conditions: rain (Figure 10A-C) and fog (Figure 10D-F).  
Rain Sensitivity Analysis 
For the rain sensitivity analysis, the model was trained without rain images or rain augmentation 
and then tested on rainy images. Hyperparameters learned on the full model (all five locations for testing 
and training) were applied to the models in this section. The model trained without rain train images or rain 
augmentation achieved an F1 score of 82.3% during training and a score of 90.8% on the test dataset. For 
the test dataset with the presence of rain conditions (74 samples), class-specific accuracies were as follows. 
• 
(A) No Detection (no vessel, no barge): 88.9% 
• 
(B) Vessel Detected without Barge, No Barge Detected class: 100% 
• 
(D) Vessel Detected with Barge, Barge Detected class: 94.3% 
• 
(E) Barge Detected class: 80% 
It is important to note that the testing dataset did not include images from class C as these were not 
observed under rain conditions at any of the locations. 
Fog Sensitivity Analysis 
For fog conditions, the model was trained without foggy images or fog augmentation and then tested 
on foggy images. The model trained without foggy images or fog augmentation achieved an F1 score of 
80.8% during training and a score of 81.9% on the test dataset. For the test dataset with the presence of fog 
conditions (19 samples), class-specific accuracies were as follows. 
• 
(A) No Detection (no vessel, no barge): 100% 
• 
(B) Vessel Detected without Barge, No Barge Detected class: 100% 
• 
(D) Vessel Detected with Barge, Barge Detected class: 77.8% 
• 
(E) Barge Detected class: 50% 
It is important to note that the testing dataset did not include images from class C as these were not observed 
under fog conditions at any of the locations. 
Table 6: Model performance under rain and fog sensitivity conditions 
Condition 
Class F1-scores (%) 
No. test 
samples 
F1 Score 
(%) 
A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
F1 
 
 
Fog 
88.9 
100 
- 
94.3 
80 
- 
74 
90.8 
Rain 
100 
100 
- 
77.8 
50 
- 
19 
81.9 
1. Classes not present in the original dataset but falsely predicted by the YOLO models. 

Agorku et al. 
 
18 
 
(A) MRB 
(B) SLA 
(C) LRB 
(D) LRB 
(E) SLA 
(F) LRB 
Figure 10: Sample detections for sensitivity analysis depicting rainy conditions (A)-(C) and foggy 
conditions (D)-(F) 
CONCLUSION 
This paper presents an object detection model for vessels and barges on inland waterways. The 
novelty of the approach is twofold. First, the study uses existing highway traffic cameras rather than marine-
specific cameras. Using opportune view angles, images of river traffic can be captured.  This presents an 
opportunity to leverage existing investments in highway detection infrastructure for multimodal traffic 
detection, e.g., roads and waterways.  Second, while datasets such as the AIS are available for real-time 
marine vessel tracking, this data tracks self-propelled vessels like tugs and tow boats and does not track the 
commodity-carrying entity, i.e., the barge. Barge movements indicate where commodity tonnages are 
traveling and transferring. Thus, by detecting barges in traffic camera images, data on commodity 
movements may be more readily available.  
The study evaluates four CNN models: SSD, EfficientDet, YOLOv5, and YOLOv8, using a dataset of 
771 annotated images collected from five, real-time traffic cameras positioned along the Mississippi and 
Ohio Rivers. Images are extracted from video feeds. The YOLOv8 model achieves an overall F1-score of 
96% at a speed of 34 fps with class-specific accuracies above 85% for all five classes. The YOLOv8 model 
outperforms YOLOv5 which achieved an F1-score of 86% at a speed of 32 fps, the SSD model which 
achieved an F1 score of 79% at 42 frames per second, and the EfficientDet model which achieved an F1 
score of 77% at 33 frames per second. The overall best model was the YOLOv8 model whose worst 
performing class ((E) Barge Detected Class), had an F1-score was the with a score of 85% with all wrong 
instances misclassified as (D) Vessel Detected with Barge, Barge Detected. This may be attributed to the 
model learning to associate barges with vessels. As a result, when faced with isolated barge images without 
vessels, the model might mistakenly classify them as if they were towed by vessels due to the shared visual 
features between the two scenarios. The processing speed was 34 frames per second (fps), resulting in a 
total runtime of 3.41 seconds for the analysis of 116 test images. This observation signifies the model's 
efficiency within the specified experimental setup. However, the ultimate viability of the model for 
industrial implementation may rest upon further optimization and targeted assessments of specific 
requirements. 
Spatial transferability and robustness to environmental conditions including rain and fog was assessed 
through cross-validation. For spatial transferability, a model was trained on images from cameras along the 

Agorku et al. 
 
19 
 
Mississippi River and tested on images from the Ohio River.  Results show an F1-score of 97% for the 
Ohio River location as the holdout test set with class-specific accuracies above 92% for all classes.  Two 
models were trained without fog or rain images and tested on fog and rain images respectively. The results 
show the model trained without rain images or rain augmentation achieved an F1 score of 82% and a score 
of 91% on the test dataset. For fog conditions, the model was trained without foggy images or foggy 
augmentation and then tested on foggy images. The model trained without foggy images or foggy 
augmentation achieved an F1 score of 81% and a score of 82% on the test dataset.  
Although data for model development and testing was drawn from five traffic cameras that covered 
two different river systems and multiple view angles, etc., the data can be expanded in future studies to 
further improve the generalizability of the models. Future research should focus on expanding the dataset 
by including data from additional cameras, diverse waterway contexts, and more view angles and evaluating 
the models' performance in diverse waterway contexts to ensure their applicability in real-world maritime 
settings. Furthermore, future work could also concentrate on improving model performance, particularly in 
scenarios where the camera's viewing angle does not align with the path of the barge. This could involve 
refining the model's ability to detect isolated barges accurately. 
The approach outlined in this paper makes strategic use of traffic cameras for barge detection. This 
is a novel use of an existing resource though use of traffic cameras comes with some constraints. Publicly 
available cameras do not cover all inland waterways. However, a cursory search was conducted and twenty 
cameras with views of the Mississippi River, Tennessee River, Ohio River, and Arkansas River systems 
were identified. Another constraint is the dependency on the camera aligning with the path of the barge. In 
scenarios where the camera’s viewing angle does not align with the path of the barge or location of interest, 
the effectiveness of monitoring may be reduced. Lastly, some many consider the repurposed use of traffic 
cameras for waterways monitoring to have privacy and ethical implications. In the context of our paper, we 
argue that traffic cameras routinely collect vehicle-related data without explicit permission from drivers, 
and this practice has become a standard for traffic monitoring. As such, we don't perceive inherent ethical 
concerns in the collection of marine traffic data using a similar approach. However, it's essential to 
recognize that ethical concerns may indeed arise when data collected for one specific purpose, such as 
traffic monitoring, is repurposed for another, like marine monitoring, without obtaining appropriate 
permissions or considering the privacy implications. Future work can delve deeper into these concerns and 
explore potential solutions or guidelines to address privacy and ethical implications effectively. Despite 
this constraint, our findings offer a starting point for the optimization and placement of cameras to maximize 
their effectiveness as a future advancement of this work. This practical challenge emphasizes the need for 
strategic camera positioning to ensure comprehensive monitoring of waterways. 
 
Another practical implication of the study lies in the potential integration of vessel tracking data, 
such as AIS, with the automated barge detection system. Future advancements in this integration have the 
potential to offer a comprehensive approach to barge detection. By combining object detection models with 
AIS data, the system can improve real-time commodity tracking, making it feasible to track the movement 
of specific commodities. This is invaluable for supply chain management, trade, and logistics, as it allows 
for real-time visibility into the transportation of goods via waterways. Furthermore, this integration can 
enhance situational awareness and decision-making, leading to improved safety. By providing real-time 
tracking and monitoring of barge traffic, transportation agencies and federal agencies such as the US Army 
Corp of Engineers can make informed decisions about long-range transportation planning, operational and 
maintenance planning, and freight movement data. This could lead to cost savings, improved resource 
allocation, and increased productivity in the transportation sector. Future work will examine case studies 
that specifically delve into and quantify the potential cost savings and economic benefits of implementing 
our model on a broader scale.  While this study represents an intermediate approach toward ultimately using 
AIS data for barge traffic monitoring, it emphasizes the need for comprehensive monitoring and data 
management. 

Agorku et al. 
 
20
