Published at Deep RL Workshop, NeurIPS 2022
EMERGENT COLLECTIVE INTELLIGENCE FROM
MASSIVE-AGENT COOPERATION AND COMPETITION
Hanmo Chen1,*,‡, Stone Tao2,∗, Jiaxin Chen3,†, Weihan Shen3,
Xihui Li1,‡, Chenghui Yu1,‡, Sikai Cheng4,‡, Xiaolong Zhu3, Xiu Li1
1Tsinghua University, Shenzhen International Graduate School, 2University of California, San Diego
3Parametrix.ai, 4Georgia Institute of Technology

ABSTRACT
Inspired by organisms evolving through cooperation and competition between dif-
ferent populations on Earth, we study the emergence of artiﬁcial collective intel-
ligence through massive-agent reinforcement learning. To this end, We propose
a new massive-agent reinforcement learning environment, Lux, where dynamic
and massive agents in two teams scramble for limited resources and ﬁght off the
darkness. In Lux, we build our agents through the standard reinforcement learn-
ing algorithm in curriculum learning phases and leverage centralized control via a
pixel-to-pixel policy network. As agents co-evolve through self-play, we observe
several stages of intelligence, from the acquisition of atomic skills to the develop-
ment of group strategies. Since these learned group strategies arise from individ-
ual decisions without an explicit coordination mechanism, we claim that artiﬁcial
collective intelligence emerges from massive-agent cooperation and competition.
We further analyze the emergence of various learned strategies through metrics
and ablation studies, aiming to provide insights for reinforcement learning imple-
mentations in massive-agent environments.
1
INTRODUCTION
Complex group and social behaviors widely exist in humans and animals on Earth. In a vast ecosys-
tem, the simultaneous cooperation and competition between populations and the changing environ-
ment serve as a natural driving force for the co-evolution of massive numbers of organisms (Wolpert
& Tumer, 1999; Dawkins & Krebs, 1979). This large-scale co-evolution between populations has
enabled group strategies for tasks individuals cannot accomplish (Ha & Tang, 2022). Inspired by this
self-organizing mechanism in nature, i.e., collective intelligence emerges from massive-agent coop-
eration and competition, we propose to simulate the emergence of collective intelligence through
training reinforcement learning agents in a massive-agent environment. We hope this can become
a stepping stone toward massive-agent reinforcement learning research and an inspiring method for
complex massive-agent problems.
Recent progress in multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) demonstrates its potential to com-
plete complex tasks through multi-agent cooperation, such as playing StarCraft2 (Vinyals et al.,
2019) and DOTA2 (Berner et al., 2019). However, the number of agents is still limited to dozens in
those scenarios, far away from natural populations. To support large-scale multi-agent cooperation
and competition, we reintroduce the massive-agent setting into multi-agent reinforcement learning.
To this end, we propose Lux, a cooperative and competitive environment where hundreds of agents
in two populations scramble for limited resources and ﬁght off the darkness. We believe Lux is a
suitable testbench for experimenting with collective intelligence because it provides an open envi-
ronment for hundreds of agents to cooperate, compete and evolve.
∗Equal contribution.
†Corresponding author.
‡Work done as research intern at Parametrix.ai.
1
arXiv:2301.01609v2  [cs.AI]  5 Jan 2023

Published at Deep RL Workshop, NeurIPS 2022
From the algorithmic perspective, the massive-agent setting poses great difﬁculties to reinforcement
learning algorithms since the credit assignment problem becomes increasingly challenging. Some
research (Lowe et al., 2017) focuses on the credit assignment problem between multi-agents, how-
ever, it lacks the scalability to massive-agent scenarios. To overcome that, we present a centralized
control solution for Lux using a pixel-to-pixel modeling architecture (Han et al., 2019) coupled with
Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) algorithm. Using that solution, we
avoid the problem of credit assignment, with up to a 90% win rate versus the state-of-the-art policy
(Isaiah et al., 2021) proposed by the Toad Brigade team (TB) which won ﬁrst place in the Lux AI
competition on Kaggle1.
Through self-play and curriculum learning phases, we observe several stages of the massive-agent
co-evolution, from atomic skills such as moving and building to group strategies such as efﬁcient
territory occupation and long-term resource management. Note that group strategies arise from indi-
vidual decisions without any explicit coordination mechanism or hierarchy, demonstrating how col-
lective intelligence arises with co-evolution. Through quantitative analyses, further evidence shows
that collective intelligence can emerge from massive-agent cooperation and competition, leading to
behaviors beyond our expectations. For example, agents learn to stand in a diagonal row and move
as a whole to segment off parts of the map as shown in Figure 1. Without any prior knowledge,
this efﬁcient strategy emerges from spontaneous exploration. Furthermore, we perform a detailed
ablation study to illustrate some implementation techniques which may be helpful in massive-agent
reinforcement learning.
(a) Blue is our policy and Yellow is TB.
(b) Yellow is our policy and Blue is TB.
Figure 1: Two episodes between our policy and TB where our Workers stand in a diagonal row. Our
agents discover it as an efﬁcient way to expand the territory and limit the enemy’s movement.
Our main contributions are 1) we reintroduce massive-agent reinforcement learning as a scenario
for studying collective intelligence and propose a new environment, Lux, as a starting point. 2)
we provide evidence that collective intelligence emerges from co-evolution through massive agents’
cooperation and competition in Lux. 3) we discuss the implementation details of our solution, which
may provide valuable insights into massive-agent reinforcement learning.
2
RELATED WORK
Multi-Agent Environments. Many environments such as Multi-agent Particle Environment (MPE)
(Lowe et al., 2017) and Google Research Football (Kurach et al., 2020) are proposed to study multi-
agent cooperation and competition. For multi-agent cooperation, StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge
(SMAC) (Samvelyan et al., 2019) provides a common testbench. However, SMAC focuses on de-
centralized micromanagement scenarios with only approximately 30 agents in play. In massive-
agent environments, Neural MMO (Suarez et al., 2021) is an open-ended Massively Multi-player
Online (MMO) game environment with up to 1024 agents. MAgent (Zheng et al., 2018) is a grid
world environment that supports up to a million agents. We propose Lux, a massive-agent rein-
forcement learning environment, which can support thousands of agents simultaneously acting at
one step. Unlike previous massive-agent environments, Lux incorporates Real-Time-Strategy (RTS)
game dynamics that are similar to Battlecode (2022) and MiniRTS (Tian et al., 2017). Moreover,
Lux scales up the number of agents with frequent spawns and deaths, which opens up the potential
for complex strategies in such a large-scale and highly dynamic scenario.
1https://www.kaggle.com/c/lux-ai-2021/
2

Published at Deep RL Workshop, NeurIPS 2022
Credit Assignment in MARL. Credit assignment between agents (Chang et al., 2003) is a crucial
challenge in multi-agent cooperation. Several value-based multi-agent algorithms (Sunehag et al.,
2017; Rashid et al., 2018; Iqbal & Sha, 2018)) decompose global value into individual values using
a linear model or neural network, which can be viewed as an implicit way of credit assignment.
Another way of doing this is computing an agent-speciﬁc advantage function. For example, Foerster
et al. (2017) uses counterfactual regret to measure contributions to the team. In complex games,
Berner et al. (2019) and Ye et al. (2020) use hand-crafted team-based rewards for each agent as an
explicit method of credit assignment. Compared to the implicit value decomposition method, this
explicit reward-shaping method requires prior domain knowledge and lacks generalization ability.
However, both of them are limited to small population scenarios and are hard to scale to massive and
dynamic agents. Han et al. (2019) handles this problem using grid-wise centralized policy instead of
decentralized policy. It uses a convolutional neural network to map from pixel-wise observations to
actions over each pixel, which avoids the credit assignment problem while achieving efﬁcient multi-
agent collaboration. Following this, we adapt this pixel-to-pixel architecture to the Lux environment
with the PPO algorithm (Schulman et al., 2017) and curriculum learning phases.
Collective Intelligence and Emergence Behaviors.
Collective Intelligence, including self-
organization and emergent behaviors (Wolpert & Tumer, 1999; Woolley et al., 2010), has a long
history connected with biological and economic studies. Research on emergent behavior usually
emphasizes that group strategies emerge from multi-agent co-evolution in a designed environment
rather than hand-crafted collaboration mechanisms. Baker et al. (2019) uses reinforcement learn-
ing agents and autocurricula (Leibo et al., 2019) in the Hide-and-seek environment, leading to the
emergence of tool use. Yang et al. (2018) proposes using million-agent reinforcement learning to
study how the agents’ grouping behaviors will change with the environmental resources. Zheng
et al. (2021) uses a two-level, deep RL framework to train agents and a social planner in an eco-
nomic environment, where optimal taxation policy emerges as the result of co-adaptation. Johanson
et al. (2022) studies the emergence of bartering behavior in a microeconomics-based environment
with producers and consumers. Dynamics in those environments usually induce agents’ behaviors
within human comprehension, thus limiting the possible emergent strategies. Since RTS games pro-
vide a perfect Petri dish for collective intelligence, our study absorbs RTS game dynamics into the
environment where simple rules may induce complex group strategies.
3
LUX
Like the Earth, a suitable environment for collective intelligence to evolve must support massive
agents’ competition and cooperation. For that purpose, we propose an open-sourced environment
Lux, where hundreds of agents in two teams compete for resources and build cities as illustrated in
Figure 2.
Figure 2: A snapshot of Lux with hundreds of agents in two teams. Workers can collect resources
and build CityTiles. At night, CityTiles and Workers need fuel to stay alive and will be consumed by
darkness if fuel runs out. The team that owns more cities wins in the end.
3

Published at Deep RL Workshop, NeurIPS 2022
Setups. The map is a 2D square grid of size 12 to 32, scattered with different resources. An
episode consists of 360 turns, split into 9 Day/Night cycles of 30 days and 10 nights. There are
two basic units named Worker and CityTile. Each team starts with one Worker and one CityTile.
Workers can collect resources and build CityTiles and CityTiles can also build new Workers. Workers
collect adjacent resources automatically and convert resources to fuel when standing upon a friendly
CityTile. At night, CityTiles and Workers consume fuel to stay alive and will be consumed by
darkness if the fuel runs out. At the end of the game, the team with more CityTiles wins. More
details about the environment are in Appendix A.1.
Observation and Action Space. For observation, each team has perfect information about the
game state, including the global map, its own, and the opponent’s information. For actions, each
team needs to make decisions for every Worker and CityTile. A Worker can move in 4 cardinal
directions and build a CityTile when it has enough resources. Workers however cannot move onto
a tile with an enemy CityTile or Worker. A CityTile can build a Worker or research to increase the
team’s research points. Sufﬁcient research points unlock the ability for the team’s Workers to mine
high-level resources that convert to more fuel like coal and uranium.
MARL in Lux. For MARL research, Lux raises a challenging situation for multi-agent modeling
and the credit assignment problem. Distinguished from other environments, the number of agents
in Lux is massive and dynamic. For a 32 × 32 map, the number of agents in a team can rise to
1000. Moreover, Workers and CityTiles are built and lost all the time, bringing difﬁculty for multi-
agent modeling of dynamic agents. A carefully-designed credit assignment scheme may be useful
in small-scale problems; however, with massive and dynamic agents, it becomes impractical due to
the combinatorial complexity. Furthermore, the win-or-lose sparse reward throws another challenge
on the hard exploration.
RTS in Lux. At ﬁrst sight, Lux seems like a pocket-sized RTS game like StarCraft2. Agents in Lux
need to balance economic decisions and individual control, which requires high-level coordination
between hundreds of agents. However, the major difference between Lux and RTS games is the
way of controlling units. In RTS games, the low-level unit actions are executed by ﬁxed rules,
which allows human players or AI to focus on macro-strategies and economic decisions. In Lux,
atomic actions such as moving and building are all controlled by the learned policy, resulting in an
action space of approximately 10180, magnitudes beyond StarCraft2 (Vinyals et al., 2019). Thus, a
successful policy needs to learn atomic skills and group strategies together, which is signiﬁcant in
the emergence of collective intelligence.
4
METHODOLOGY
Overall, our policy is trained using the standard algorithm PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) with Gen-
eralized Advantage Estimation (GAE) (Schulman et al., 2016). For massive-agent coordination, we
use a pixel-to-pixel architecture as the centralized policy (Han et al., 2019; Isaiah et al., 2021), tak-
ing both observations and actions as images and using the ResNet (He et al., 2016) structure as the
backbone. To address the sparse reward problem, we design three phases with different rewards as a
progressive curriculum. For clarity, we refer to the “agent” as each unit on the map and refer to the
“policy” as the centralized policy network that controls every agent.
4.1
PIXEL-TO-PIXEL ARCHITECTURE
We model the massive-agent control problem using a centralized policy with a pixel-to-pixel archi-
tecture (Han et al., 2019). The policy network takes images as input observations and outputs actions
over each pixel in the form of an action map. More implementation details are in Appendix A.2.
Policy Network Architecture. The architecture of our policy network is pictured in Figure 3. The
input image (C ×H ×W) consists of C channels containing information about itself, the opponent,
and the global state. We use a ResNet-style convolutional network as the backbone. For actions, we
use a convolutional layer with kernel size 1 and output channels as the action dimensions. Moreover,
we use a ﬂattened layer and a fully-connected layer for the value estimation as the critic. A valid
action mask is used to eliminate unnecessary exploration.
4

Published at Deep RL Workshop, NeurIPS 2022
Figure 3: Policy network architecture. C is the input channels and H, W denote the map height
and width. E is the feature map channel through the backbone. Output channels AWorker/CityTile are
the corresponding action dimensions.
Why Centralized Policy. In Lux, our policy needs to control hundreds of agents each time step.
While the decentralized policy in MARL is computationally efﬁcient and easy to scale, it needs a
carefully-designed credit assignment mechanism. In Lux, however, as agents are massive and dy-
namic, the credit assignment problem becomes increasingly challenging. To avoid that, we adopt a
centralized policy controlling every agent over the map. This pixel-to-pixel architecture with a con-
volutional network leverages the advantage of centralized and decentralized methods. Convolutional
layers work as a parameter-sharing mechanism across agents, similar to shared policy networks in
decentralized methods. This parameter-sharing mechanism improves learning efﬁciency via data
reuse. Furthermore, the deep stacked structure provides a large receptive ﬁeld for global information
extraction and multi-agent communication, which naturally avoids the trouble of credit assignment
(Han et al., 2019).
4.2
CURRICULUM TRAINING PHASES
The objective of agents in Lux is to own more CityTiles than the opponent, but the ﬁnal result only
provides a sparse reward (1 for win, −1 for lose), resulting in the hard exploration problem (Badia
et al., 2020). Reward shaping is a common method to handle this problem in reinforcement learning.
However, hand-crafted rewards can easily direct agents into speciﬁc behavioral patterns with limited
strategies. Hence, we design three phases with different rewards as a progressive curriculum. First,
we use a dense reward to guide the policy towards basic skills. Then we gradually reduce the learning
signals and utilize the sparse reward to encourage the policy to explore more diversiﬁed strategies.
Phase 1: Dense Rewards for Basic Skills. At ﬁrst, we use hand-crafted dense rewards to encourage
basic skills. Speciﬁcally, four kinds of behaviors are given rewards, namely, the increase of Workers
and CityTiles, Research Points and fuel. More details are in Appendix A.2.
Phase 2: Sparse Reward with Scaled Signals. In Phase 2, a reward is given only when an episode
ends. However, our policy still needs guidance through long-term reasoning. We modify the reward
with a slight signal about the win condition, i.e., ±
p
|Nself −Nop|, where Nself and Nop denote
the number of our own and the enemy’s CityTiles, encouraging to own more CityTiles for the win.
Phase 3: Win-or-Lose Sparse Reward. The win-or-lose sparse reward (1 for win and −1 for lose)
is applied in the ﬁnal phase. After human-designed guidance in the ﬁrst two phases, the win-or-lose
sparse reward encourages our policy to explore more advanced strategies.
5
EMERGENT COLLECTIVE INTELLIGENCE
Through massive-agent cooperation and competition, we have observed three stages of our agents’
evolution. Training from scratch, agents quickly acquire atomic skills such as collecting resources
and building cities. After around 5 million episodes, an elementary level of coordination appears on
the regional scale with dozens of agents. As training proceeds, the coordination expands from re-
5

Published at Deep RL Workshop, NeurIPS 2022
gional to global scope, which includes long-term economic decisions and precise control of hundreds
of agents. Those global strategies naturally arise from individual decisions due to massive-agent in-
teraction and co-evolution without any explicit coordination mechanism, signifying the emergence
of collective intelligence.
5.1
ATOMIC SKILLS
The ﬁrst step of our agents is to get a grasp of atomic skills. Guided by dense rewards, Workers
learn to move toward resources to collect fuel, and build and fuel the CityTiles, as shown in Figure
4a. However, at this stage agents are more likely to work alone and unable to make group decisions.
For example, Workers tend to build more CityTiles than they can support, leading to a sudden loss
of large cities as illustrated in Figure 4b as they run out of fuel.
(a) Workers collect resources and build CityTiles.
(b) CityTiles run out of fuel and collapse.
Figure 4: Illustration of atomic skills in a self-play episode. Agents acquire atomic skills such as
collecting resources and building CityTiles. However, due to a lack of group coordination, CityTiles
often burn out fuel and collapse.
5.2
REGIONAL COORDINATION
As training proceeds, regional coordination appears, which involves dozens of agents in a local area.
For example, agents learn to carefully choose locations before building a CityTile and develop self-
organizing patterns for occupying resources efﬁciently. We describe a few examples of regional
strategies:
Construction Planning. As CityTiles built next to each other can share fuel and reduce cost at night,
agents gradually learn that the locations of CityTiles are important in city survival and fuel saving.
We ﬁnd that agents discover several patterns of construction planning as visualized in Figure 5: 1)
build CityTiles near the resources for quicker access to fuel sources. 2) build CityTiles in a long row
to form cities that act like the Great Wall to prevent enemies’ aggression. 3) build CityTiles in blocks
to reduce fuel costs at night.
(a) CityTiles built near resources.
(b) CityTiles built in a row.
(c) CityTiles built in blocks.
Figure 5: Three emergent patterns of construction planning. a) build near resources for quick
access to fuel. b) build in a row as the Great Wall for defense. c) build in blocks to save fuel.
We use the city survival ratio (the ﬁnal number of CityTiles divided by the most number of CityTiles
in one episode) to measure how these building patterns work quantitatively. As shown in Figure 6a,
the regional-scale construction planning effectively helps CityTiles ﬁght off the darkness.
Territory Division. We have also observed a self-organizing structure where several Workers stand
in a diagonal row shown in Figure 1. Those Workers simultaneously move forward and backward
6

Published at Deep RL Workshop, NeurIPS 2022
(a) City survival ratio: ﬁnal number divided by
the most number of CityTiles in one episode.
(b) Five-diagonal: how many times ﬁve or more
Workers stand in a diagonal row in one episode.
Figure 6: Quantitative analysis of region coordination using city survival ratio and ﬁve-
diagonal. Both metrics are evaluated using self-play. a) The city survival ratio increases as training
continues, indicating that the regional construction planning effectively helps CityTiles live long and
prosper. b) The frequency of the ﬁve-diagonal shape increases during the course of training, which
demonstrates the gradual acquisition of this strategy.
as a whole to keep the formation, and when any of them die, a new Worker nearby will ﬁll in.
In this shape, they can effectively guard and expand the team’s territory and limit the enemy’s
movement. We measure a statistic called Five-Diagonal (how many times ﬁve or more Workers
stand in a diagonal row in one game) to investigate how often this strategy is utilized. Results in
Figure 6b illustrate that the frequency our agents use this strategy generally increases with training
in the long term, indicating it is an acquired strategy rather than a circumstance.
5.3
GLOBAL STRATEGIES
As in micro-management scenarios of SMAC (Samvelyan et al., 2019), regional coordination of
dozens of agents is often found in multi-agent cooperation. However, our agents go far beyond that,
achieving much larger-scale coordination between hundreds of agents. We provide interpretation
and analysis of several global strategies as follows:
Sustainable Development. A key component in Lux is the balance of city development and re-
source consumption. In the early stages, the rapidly growing cities often face severe fuel shortages.
Gradually, our policy learns to develop cities at a sustainable speed in tune with fuel production
depending on the resource distribution and the opponent’s behavior. Another phenomenon we have
observed is the retention of trees. As trees are the only renewable resource in Lux, forest protection
is signiﬁcant in securing long-term fuel supplies. Our agents intentionally preserve trees from exces-
sive deforestation and build CityTiles near the woods in defense of the enemy’s aggression. Another
metric, total wood collect (the total collected woods divided by originally spawned woods) is used to
measure how this forest protection strategy inﬂuences our fuel supplies. Results in Figure 7a show
how these protection strategies signiﬁcantly improve the utilization efﬁciency of wood, resulting in
our agent collecting more than 500% of the original wood on the map at times.
(a) Total wood collect: total wood collected di-
vided by originally spawn woods.
(b) Total fuel: total fuel storage in one episode
using our latest model in a ﬁxed map.
Figure 7: Quantitative analysis of global strategies using total wood collect and total fuel. The
metrics are evaluated using self-play. a) The utilization efﬁciency of wood increases as our policy
grows the sense of forest protection. b) In one episode, our fuel storage accumulates until turn 240.
After that, it tries to build more CityTiles for the win.
All In For The Win. Another surprising strategy is that when the episode is about to end, our policy
will rapidly harvest all the protected trees and try to build as many CityTiles as possible for the win
7

Published at Deep RL Workshop, NeurIPS 2022
as shown in Figure 7b. Furthermore, we observe that sometimes cities retain very little fuel at the
end of an episode, evidence that almost all the resources have been fully utilized, as any resources
left at the end would be a waste. Efﬁciently using all remaining resources before the end is very
challenging because it needs the overall calculation of total fuel consumption by all Workers and
CityTiles, in addition to precise control of every agent. We think this strategy perfectly demonstrates
the emergence of collective intelligence through the combination of long-term economic decisions
and massive-agent mobilization.
6
EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we perform ablation studies to reﬂect on our policy implementation and general
reinforcement learning algorithms under massive-agent settings: 1) we investigate the necessity of
curriculum learning phases by training with different procedures. Results demonstrate that our cur-
riculum design can help tackle the hard exploration problem caused by sparse rewards in the early
stages of training and encourage the emergence of complex strategies beyond human design. 2) we
further demonstrate the generalization ability of our model across different map sizes. When eval-
uating on maps of size 32, the policy trained on size 12 still retains some basic strategies. After a
ﬁne-tuning phase of only 1.8 million episodes, the transferred policy achieves a 90% win rate against
TB on maps of size 32. The results indicate our model can learn generalizable representations suit-
able for the environment through learned spatial structures via convolutional layers. 3) we compare
our centralized policy against a standard decentralized solution with carefully-designed team-based
rewards. The centralized policy achieves a 98% win rate. See implementation details in Appendix
A.2. The decentralized policy implementation and experiment are in Appendix A.3.
6.1
DESIGN OF CURRICULUM LEARNING PHASES
We perform experiments to investigate the necessity of our curriculum learning phases. Five differ-
ent procedures are applied: a) Only Phase 1; b) Phase 1 and 2 without Phase 3; c) Phase 1 and 3,
without Phase 2; d) Phase 1, 2, and 3 (the original procedure); e) Only Phase 3.
Figure 8: The win rate curves from different training phases. All win rates are evaluated against
TB on maps of size 12. Training with direct sparse rewards results in a 0% win rate, while training
only with Phase 1 dense rewards converges at around 50%. Compared to Phase 1+2, Phase 1+3
improves slower and results in a lower win rate of around 70%. Phase 1+2 achieves an 85% win-
rate, and Phase 1+2+3 further boosts it to above 90%.
Phase 1 utilizes dense rewards which are fundamental for helping the centralized policy acquire
atomic skills for individual agents. As shown in Figure 8, our policy can hardly learn any basic
skills when directly training with sparse rewards, resulting in a win rate of around zero due to the
hard exploration problem.
Phase 2 utilizes a scaled sparse reward which plays two roles in the whole learning procedure,
accelerating learning and improving performance. First, continuous learning with dense rewards
converges at a 50% win rate, but the win rate rapidly rises to 70% with Phase 2. On the other hand,
without Phase 2, switching from Phase 1 to Phase 3 is more challenging with a lower performance
even after training for a longer period. This shows that the scaled sparse reward can work as a proper
8

Published at Deep RL Workshop, NeurIPS 2022
transition between dense rewards and a win-or-loss sparse reward (applied in Phase 3) as it explicitly
tells the policy that owning more cities is the key to winning.
Phase 3 utilizes a sparse win-loss reward which further boosts the ﬁnal performance to above 90%.
As the Phase 2 training converges to a win rate of 85% without Phase 3, the win-loss sparse reward
pushes our policy to go further and explore, resulting in an overall 90% win rate.
6.2
GENERALIZATION OF REPRESENTATIONS FOR REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
We provide clear evidence that the learned representations from the convolutional neural network
and reinforcement learning algorithms can be generalized to different map sizes. First, we directly
transfer the policy net trained on maps of size 12 to size 32. As shown in Figure 9, basic skills
are retained on larger maps such as Workers collecting and fueling cities, even showcasing some
structured city construction planning to surround and protect wood resources. Secondly, after an ad-
ditional ﬁne-tuning phase of around 1 million episodes, the policy quickly adapts to larger maps and
achieves an overall 90% win rate against TB, while training from scratch uses 1.6 million episodes
for a 20% win rate as shown in Figure 10.
Figure 9: Illustration of the general-
ization ability in a self-play episode.
When the policy trained on maps of size
12 is directly transferred to 32, some
strategies are retained such as Workers
building and fueling cities with plans.
Figure 10: The win-rate curves on 32 × 32 maps of
training from scratch and transfer. Both are evalu-
ated against TB. After a ﬁne-tuning phase of 1 million
steps, the transferred policy achieves a 90% win rate,
while training from scratch uses 1.6 million episodes
for a 20% win rate.
The results demonstrate the generalization ability of our model, which provides insights into speed-
ing up policy training on large maps: we can pre-train our policy on small maps and then transfer
it to large maps with a ﬁne-tuning phase. This procedure signiﬁcantly reduces the training time
because smaller maps are faster for environment simulation and network update. For example, the
Lux environment simulation on CPU is 2.5× slower on maps of size 32 than size 12, and the policy
network update on GPU is 5× slower on maps of size 32. As training on maps of size 12 is both
time-saving and computationally efﬁcient, our “Pre-train and Fine-tune” scheme achieves a higher
win rate with fewer training hours.
7
DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
We have demonstrated that collective intelligence can emerge from massive-agent cooperation and
competition. As proof of concept, we propose Lux, an environment hosting hundreds of agents and
incorporating RTS game dynamics. Through standard reinforcement learning algorithms and pixel-
to-pixel centralized modeling, we observe several stages of agents’ strategy evolution. Our agents
exhibit ambitious group strategies based on accurate individual control of massive agents without
explicit coordination mechanisms, signifying the emergence of collective intelligence.
We hope our work with Lux will be a stepping stone toward artiﬁcial collective intelligence. In
Lux, we observe the number of agents can reach up to 2000 in a single timestep, but this still pales
in comparison to the millions or even billions of organisms cooperating and competing in nature.
The Lux environment can be easily extended to host more agents as the experiments in Appendix
A.4, but simulation and inference become extremely slow reaching the million-agent level. Going
forward, the environment design and engineering as well as the training algorithm need a lot of
9

Published at Deep RL Workshop, NeurIPS 2022
modiﬁcations to adapt to such a scale. We also acknowledge that the RTS game dynamics in Lux
may not directly coincide with real-world problems. However, with Lux as a blueprint, economic
rules and dynamics like Zheng et al. (2021) can be incorporated, which may provide some reference
for economic decisions and policies in the real world.
