GRAYING THE BLACK BOX: UNDERSTANDING DQNS
Graying the black box: Understanding DQNs
Tom Zahavy*

Nir Baram*

Shie Mannor

DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
THE TECHNION, ISRAEL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
HAIFA, 32000, ISRAEL
*THESE AUTHORS HAVE CONTRIBUTED EQUALLY.
Editor:
Abstract
In recent years there is a growing interest in using deep representations for reinforcement learn-
ing. In this paper, we present a methodology and tools to analyze Deep Q-networks (DQNs) in a
non-blind matter. Moreover, we propose a new model, the Semi Aggregated Markov Decision
Process (SAMDP), and an algorithm that learns it automatically. The SAMDP model allows us to
identify spatio-temporal abstractions directly from features and may be used as a sub-goal detector
in future work. Using our tools we reveal that the features learned by DQNs aggregate the state
space in a hierarchical fashion, explaining its success. Moreover, we are able to understand and
describe the policies learned by DQNs for three different Atari2600 games and suggest ways to
interpret, debug and optimize deep neural networks in reinforcement learning.
1. Introduction
In the Reinforcement Learning (RL) paradigm, an agent autonomously learns from experience
in order to maximize some reward signal. Learning to control agents directly from high-dimensional
inputs like vision and speech is a long-standing problem in RL, known as the curse of dimensional-
ity. Countless solutions to this problem have been offered including linear function approximators
(Tsitsiklis and Van Roy, 1997), hierarchical representations (Dayan and Hinton, 1993), state aggre-
gation (Singh et al., 1995) and options (Sutton et al., 1999). These methods rely upon engineering
problem-speciﬁc state representations, hence, reducing the agent’s ﬂexibility and making the learn-
ing more tedious. Therefore, there is a growing interest in using nonlinear function approximators,
that are more general and require less domain speciﬁc knowledge, e.g., TD-gammon (Tesauro,
1995). Unfortunately, such methods are known to be unstable or even to diverge when used to rep-
resent the action-value function (Tsitsiklis and Van Roy, 1997; Gordon, 1995; Riedmiller, 2005).
. This paper was done with the support of the Intel Collaborative Research institute for Computational Intelligence
(ICRI-CI) and is part of the ’Why & When Deep Learning works looking inside Deep Learning’ ICRI-CI paper
bundle. Some of the results in this paper were originally published in (Zahavy et al., 2016; Ben Zrihem et al., 2016;
Baram et al., 2016)
1
arXiv:1602.02658v4  [cs.LG]  24 Apr 2017

ZAHAVY, BARAM AND MANNOR
The Deep Q-Network (DQN) algorithm (Mnih et al., 2015) increased training stability by in-
troducing the target network and by using Experience Replay (ER) (Lin, 1993). Its success was
demonstrated in the Arcade Learning Environment (ALE) (Bellemare et al., 2012), a challenging
framework composed of dozens of Atari games used to evaluate general competency in AI. DQN
achieved dramatically better results than earlier approaches, showing a robust ability to learn repre-
sentations.
While using Deep Learning (DL) in RL seems promising, there is no free lunch. Training a
Deep Neural Network (DNNs) is a complex two-levels optimization process. At the inner level,
we ﬁx a hypothesis class and learn it using some gradient descent method. The optimization of
the outer level addresses the choice of network architecture, setting hyper-parameters, and even the
choice of the optimization algorithm. While the optimization of the inner level is analytic to a high
degree, the optimization of the outer level is far from being so. Currently, most practitioners tackle
this problem by either a trial and error methodology, or by exhaustively searching over the space of
possible conﬁgurations. Moreover, in Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) we also need to choose
how to model the environment as a Markov Decision Process (MDP), i.e., to choose the discount
factor, the amount of history frames that represent a state, and to choose between the various algo-
rithms and architectures (Nair et al., 2015; Van Hasselt et al., 2015; Schaul et al., 2015; Wang et al.,
2015; Bellemare et al., 2015).
A key issue in RL is that of representation, i.e., allowing the agent to locally generalize the
policy across similar states. Unfortunately, spatially similar states often induce different control
rules (”labels”) in contrast to other machine learning problems that enjoy local generalization. In
fact, in many cases the optimal policy is not a smooth function of the state, thus using a linear ap-
proximation is far from being optimal. For example, in the Atari2600 game Seaquest, whether or
not a diver has been collected (represented by a few pixels) controls the outcome of the submarine
surface action (with: ﬁll air, without: loose a life) and therefore the optimal policy. Another cause
for control discontinuities is that for a given problem, two states with similar representations may,
in fact, be far from each other in terms of the number of state transitions required to reach one from
the other. This observation can also explain the lack of pooling layers in DRL architectures (Mnih
et al., 2015, 2013; Levine et al., 2015).
Different methods that focus on the temporal structure of the policy, has also been proposed.
Such methods decompose the learning task into simpler subtasks using graph partitioning (Men-
ache et al., 2002; Mannor et al., 2004; S¸ims¸ek et al., 2005) and path processing mechanisms (Stolle,
2004; Thrun, 1998). Given a good temporal representation of the states, varying levels of con-
vergence guarantees can be promised (Dean and Lin, 1995; Parr, 1998; Hauskrecht et al., 1998;
Dietterich, 2000).
Our main observation in this work is that DQN is learning an internal model (Francis and Won-
ham, 1975; Sontag, 2003) of the domain without explicitly being trained to. We discover the internal
model by identifying spatio-temporal abstractions directly from the learned representation in two
different ways: (1) manually clustering the state space using hand crafted features, and (2), the Semi
Aggregated Markov Decision Process (SAMDP), an approximation of the true MDP that is learned
automatically from data. We show that by doing so we can offer an interpretation of learned policies
2

GRAYING THE BLACK BOX: UNDERSTANDING DQNS
and discover the policy hierarchy.
In particular, our main contributions are:
• Understanding: We show that DQNs are learning temporal abstractions of the state space
such as hierarchical state aggregation and options. Temporal abstractions were known to the
RL community before as mostly manual tools to tackle the curse of dimensionality; how-
ever, we observe that a DQN is ﬁnding abstractions automatically. Thus, we believe that our
analysis explains the success of DRL from a reinforcement learning research perspective.
• Interpretability: We give an interpretation of the agent’s policy in a clear way, thus allowing
to understand what are its weaknesses and strengths.
• Debugging: We propose debugging methods that help to reduce the hyper parameters grid
search of DRL. Examples are given on game modeling, termination and initial states and
score over-ﬁtting.
2. Background and Related Work
2.1 RL
The goal of RL agents is to maximize its expected total reward by learning an optimal policy (map-
ping states to actions). At time t the agent observes a state st, selects an action at, and receives a
reward rt, following the agents decision it observes the next state st+1 . We consider inﬁnite hori-
zon problems where the cumulative return is discounted by a factor of γ ∈[0, 1] and the return at
time t is given by Rt = PT
t′=t γt′−trt, where T is the termination step. The action-value function
Qπ(s, a) measures the expected return when choosing action at at state st, and following policy
π: Q(s, a) = E[Rt|st = s, at = a, π] afterwards. The optimal action-value obeys a fundamental
recursion known as the Bellman equation,
Q∗(st, at) = E

rt + γmax
a′ Q∗(st+1, a′)

2.2 Deep Q Networks
(Mnih et al., 2015, 2013) approximate the optimal Q function using a Convolutional Neural Net-
work (CNN). The training objective is to minimize the expected TD error of the optimal Bellman
equation:
Est,at,rt,st+1 ∥Qθ (st, at) −yt∥2
2
yt =



rt
st+1 is terminal
rt + γmax
a’
Qθtarget

st+1, a
′
otherwise
Notice that this is an off-line algorithm, meaning that the tuples {st,at, rt, st+1, γ} are collected
from the agents experience, stored in the ER and later used for training. The reward rt is clipped to
the range of [−1, 1] to guarantee stability when training DQNs over multiple domains with different
reward scales. The DQN algorithm maintains two separate Q-networks: one with parameters θ,
and a second with parameters θtarget that are updated from θ every ﬁxed number of iterations. In
order to capture the game dynamics, the DQN algorithm represents a state by a sequence of history
3

ZAHAVY, BARAM AND MANNOR
frames and pads initial states with zero frames.
2.3 Visualization
The goal behind visualization of DNNs is to give a better understanding of these inscrutable black
boxes. While some approaches study the type of computation performed at each layer as a group
(Yosinski et al., 2014), others try to explain the function computed by each individual neuron (sim-
ilar to the ”Jennifer Aniston Neuron” (Quiroga et al., 2005)). Dataset-centric approaches display
images from the data set that cause high activations of individual units. For example, the deconvolu-
tion method (Zeiler and Fergus, 2014) highlights the areas of a particular image that are responsible
for the ﬁring of each neural unit. Network-centric approaches investigate a network directly without
any data from a dataset, e.g., (Erhan et al., 2009) synthesized images that cause high activations for
particular units. Other works used the input gradient to ﬁnd images that cause strong activations
(e.g., (Simonyan and Zisserman, 2014); (Nguyen et al., 2014); (Szegedy et al., 2013)).
Since RL research had been mostly focused on linear function approximations and policy gra-
dient methods, we are less familiar with visualization techniques and attempts to understand the
structure learned by an agent. (Wang et al., 2015), suggested to use saliency maps and analyzed
which pixels affect network predictions the most. Using this method they compared between the
standard DQN and their dueling network architecture. (Engel and Mannor, 2001) learned an em-
bedded map of Markov processes and visualized it on two dimensions. Their analysis is based on
the state transition distribution while we will focus on distances between the features learned by
DQN.
t-SNE is a non-linear dimensionality reduction method used mostly for visualizing high dimen-
sional data. The technique is easy to optimize, and it has been proven to outperform linear di-
mensionality reduction methods and non-linear embedding methods such as ISOMAP (Tenenbaum
et al., 2000) in several research ﬁelds including machine learning benchmarks and hyper-spectral
remote sensing data (Lunga et al., 2014). t-SNE reduces the tendency to crowd points together in
the center of the map by employing a heavy-tailed Student-t distribution in the low dimensional
space. It is known to be particularly good at creating a single map that reveals structure at many
different scales, which is particularly important for high-dimensional data that lies on several low-
dimensional manifolds. This enables us to visualize the different sub-manifolds learned by the
network and interpret their meaning.
2.4 Abstractions
An abstraction is an important tool that enables an agent to focus less on the lower level details
of a task and more on solving the task at hand. Many real-world domains can be modeled using
some form of abstraction. The Semi MDP (SMDP) and the Aggregated MDP (AMDP) models are
two important examples that extend the standard MDP formulation by using temporal and spatial
abstractions respectively.
4

GRAYING THE BLACK BOX: UNDERSTANDING DQNS
SMDP. (Sutton et al., 1999), extends the MDP action space A and allows the agent to plan with
skills Σ (also known as options, macro-actions and temporally-extended actions) . A skill is deﬁned
by a triplet: σ =< I, π, β >, where I deﬁnes the set of states where the skill can be initiated, π is
the intra-skill policy, and β is the set of termination probabilities determining when a skill will stop
executing. β is typically either a function of state s or time t. Planning with skills can be performed
by learning for each state the value of choosing each skill. More formally, an SMDP can be deﬁned
by a ﬁve-tuple < S, Σ, P, R, γ >, where S is the set of states, Σ is the set of skills, P is the SMDP
transition matrix, γ is the discount factor and the SMDP reward is deﬁned by:
Rσ
s = E[rσ
s ] = E[rt+1 + γrt+2 + · · · + γk−1rt+k|st = s, σ]
(1)
Analyzing policies using the SMDP model shortens the planning horizon and simpliﬁes the
analysis. However, there are two drawbacks with this approach. First, one must consider the high
complexity of the state space, and second, the SMDP model requires to identify a set of skills, a
challenging problem with no easy solution (Mankowitz et al., 2016).
AMDP. Another approach is to analyze a policy using spatial abstractions in the state space. If
there is a reason to believe that groups of states share common attributes such as similar policy or
value function, it is possible to use State Aggregation (Moore, 1991). State Aggregation is a well-
studied problem that typically involves identifying clusters as the new states of an AMDP, where the
set of clusters C replaces the MDP states S. Doing RL on aggregated states is potentially advanta-
geous because the transition probability matrix P, the reward signal R and the policy π dimensions
are decreased, e.g., (Singh et al., 1995). The AMDP modeling approach has two drawbacks. First,
the action space A is not modiﬁed and therefore the planning horizon is still intractable. Second,
AMDPs are not necessarily Markovian (Bai et al.).
3. Methods
3.1 Manual clustering
Figure 1 presents our Visualization tool. Each state is represented as a point in the t-SNE map
(Left). The color of the points is set manually using global features (Top right) or game speciﬁc
hand crafted features (Middle right). Clicking on each data point displays the corresponding game
image and saliency map (Bottom right). It is possible to move between states along the trajectory
using the F/W and B/W buttons.
Feature extraction: During the DQN run, we collect statistics for each state such as Q values
estimates, generation time, the termination signal, reward and played action. We also extract hand-
crafted features, directly from the emulator raw frames, such as player position, enemy position,
the number of lives, and so on. We use these features to color and ﬁlter points on the t-SNE map.
The ﬁltered images reveal insightful patterns that cannot be seen otherwise. From our experience,
hand-crafted features are very powerful, however, the drawback of using them is that they require
manual work. In all the ﬁgures below we use a heat color map (red corresponds to high values and
blue to low ones).
5

ZAHAVY, BARAM AND MANNOR
Figure 1: Graphical user interface for our methodology.
Similar to (Engel and Mannor, 2001) we visualize the dynamics (state transitions) of the learned
policy. To do so we use a 3D t-SNE state representation wich we found insightfull. The transitions
are displayed with arrows using Mayavi (Ramachandran and Varoquaux, 2011).
t-SNE: We apply the t-SNE algorithm directly on the collected neural activations, similar to
(Mnih et al., 2015). The input X ∈R120k×512 consists of 120k game states with 512 features each
(size of the last layer). Since these data are relatively large, we pre-processed it using Principal
Component Analysis to dimensionality of 50 and used the Barnes-Hut t-SNE approximation (Van
Der Maaten, 2014).
Saliency maps: We generate Saliency maps (similar to (Simonyan and Zisserman, 2014)) by
computing the Jacobian of the network with respect to the input and presenting it above the input
image itself (Figure 1, bottom right). These maps helps to understand which pixels in the image
affect the value prediction of the network the most.
Analysis: Using these features we are able to understand the common attributes of a given clus-
ter (e.g, Figure 19 in the appendix). Moreover, by analyzing the dynamics between clusters we can
identify a hierarchical aggregation of the state space. We deﬁne clusters with a clear entrance and
termination areas as options and interpret the agent policy there. For some options we are able to
derive rules for initiation and termination (i.e., landmark options, (Sutton et al., 1999; Mann et al.,
2015)).
To summarize, the manual clustering methodology comprises the following steps:
1. Train a DQN.
6

GRAYING THE BLACK BOX: UNDERSTANDING DQNS
 
𝐶2 
𝐶1
𝐶3 
𝜎1,2
𝜎1,3
Cluster 
State 
Action 
Skill 
 𝑆, 𝐴, 𝑃𝑆
𝐴, 𝑅𝑆
𝐴, 𝛾  
MDP 
 
SMDP 
 
AMDP 
 
SAMDP 
 
Skill 
Identification 
State 
Aggregation 
Low Temporal Hierarchy 
High Temporal Hierarchy 
Low Spatial 
Hierarchy 
High Spatial 
Hierarchy 
 𝑆, Σ, 𝑃𝑆
Σ, 𝑅𝑆
Σ, 𝛾  
 𝐶, 𝐴, 𝑃𝐶
𝐴, 𝑅𝐶
𝐴, 𝛾  
 𝐶, Σ, 𝑃𝐶
Σ, 𝑅𝐶
Σ, 𝛾  
State 
Aggregation 
𝝋(𝑺) 
Figure 2: Left: Illustration of state aggregation and skills. Primitive actions (orange arrows) cause
transitions between MDP states (black dots) while skills (red arrows) induce transitions
between SAMDP states (blue circles). Right: Modeling approaches for analyzing poli-
cies.
2. Evaluate the DQN. For each visited state record: (a) activations of the last hidden layer, (b)
the gradient information and (c) the game state (raw pixel frame).
3. Apply t-SNE on the activations data.
4. Visualize the data.
5. Analyze the policy manually.
3.2 The Semi Aggregated MDP
In this paper, we propose a model that combines the advantages of the SMDP and AMDP ap-
proaches and denote it by SAMDP. Under SAMDP modeling, aggregation deﬁnes both the states
and the set of skills, allowing analysis with spatio-temporal abstractions (the state-space dimensions
and the planning horizon are reduced). However, SAMDPs are still not necessarily Markovian. We
summarize the different modeling approaches in Figure 2. The rest of this section is devoted to ex-
plaining the ﬁve stages of building an SAMDP model: (0) Feature selection, (1) State Aggregation,
(2) Skill identiﬁcation, (3) Inference, and (4) Model Selection.
(0) Feature selection. We deﬁne the mapping from MDP states to features, by a mapping func-
tion φ : s →s′ ⊂Rm. The features may be raw (e.g., spatial coordinates, frame pixels) or higher
level abstractions (e.g., the last hidden layer of a NN). The feature representation has a signiﬁcant
effect on the quality of the resulting SAMDP model and visa versa, good model can point out a
good feature representation.
(1) Aggregation via Spatio-temporal clustering. The goal of Aggregation is to ﬁnd a mapping
(clustering) from the MDP feature space S′ ⊂Rm to the AMDP state space C. Typically, clustering
algorithms assume that the data is drawn from an i.i.d distribution. However, in our problem the
data is generated from an MDP and therefore violates this assumption. We alleviate this problem
7

ZAHAVY, BARAM AND MANNOR
using two different approaches. First, we decouple the clustering step with the SAMDP model. This
is done by creating an ensemble of clustering candidates and building an SAMDP model for each
(following stages 2 and 3). In stage 4, we will explain how to run a non-analytic outer optimization
loop to choose between these candidates based on spatio-temporal evaluation criteria. Second, we
introduce a novel extension of the celebrated K-means algorithm (MacQueen et al., 1967), that
enforces temporal coherency along trajectories. In the vanilla K-means algorithm, a cluster ci with
mean µi is assigned to a point xt such that the cluster with the closest mean to the point xt is chosen
(please refer to the supplementary material for more details). We modiﬁed this step as follows:
c(xt) =

ci :

Xt −µi

2
F ≤

Xt −µj

2
F , ∀j ∈[1, K]
	
.
Here, F stands for the Frobenius norm, K is the number of clusters, t is the time index of xt, and Xt
is a set of 2w + 1 centered at xt from the same trajectory:

xj ∈Xt ⇐⇒j ∈[t −w, t + w]
	
.
The dimensions of µ correspond to a single point, but it is expanded to the dimensions of Xt. In
this way, a point xt is assigned to a cluster ci, if its neighbors along the trajectory are also close to
µi. Thus, enforcing temporal coherency.
We have also experienced with other clustering methods such as spectral clustering, hierarchical
agglomerative clustering and entropy minimization (please refer to the supplementary material for
more details).
(2) Skill identiﬁcation. We deﬁne an SAMDP skill σi,j ∈Σ uniquely by a single initiation
state ci ∈C and a single termination state cj ∈C : σij =< ci, πi,j, cj > . More formally, at time
t the agent enters an AMDP state ci at an MDP state st ∈ci. It chooses a skill according to its
SAMDP policy and follows the skill policy πi,j for k time steps until it reaches a state st+k ∈cj, s.t
i ̸= j. We do not deﬁne the skill length k a-priori nor the skill policy but infer the skill length from
the data. As for the skill policies, our model does not deﬁne them explicitly but we will observe
later that our model successfully identiﬁes skills that are localized in time and space.
(3) Inference. Given the SAMDP states and skills, we infer the skill length, the SAMDP reward
and the SAMDP probability transition matrix from observations. The skill length, is inferred for a
skill σi,j by averaging the number of MDP states visited since entering SAMDP state ci and until
leaving for SAMDP state cj. The skill reward is inferred similarly using Equation 1.
The inference of the SAMDP transition matrices is a bit more puzzling, since the probability of
seeing the next SAMDP state depends both on the MDP dynamics and the agent policy in the MDP
state space. We now turn to discuss how to infer these matrices by observing transitions in the MDP
state space. Our goal is to infer two quantities: (a) The SAMDP transition probability matri-
ces PΣ : P σ∈Σ
i,j
= Pr(cj|ci, σ), measures the probability of moving from state ci to cj given that
skill σ is chosen. These matrices are deﬁned uniquely by our deﬁnition of skills as deterministic
probability matrices. (b) The probability of moving from state ci to cj given that skill σ is chosen
according to the agent SAMDP policy: P π
i,j = Pr(cj|ci, σ = π(ci)). This quantity involves both
the SAMDP transition probability matrices and the agent policy. However, since SAMDP tran-
sition probability matrices are deterministic, this is equivalent to the agent policy in the SAMDP
state space. Therefore by inferring transitions between SAMDP states we directly infer the agent’s
SAMDP policy.
Given an MDP with a deterministic environment and an agent with a nearly deterministic MDP pol-
icy (e.g., a deterministic policy that uses an ϵ-greedy exploration (ϵ ≪1)), it is intuitive to assume
8

GRAYING THE BLACK BOX: UNDERSTANDING DQNS
that we would observe a nearly deterministic SAMDP policy. However, there are two sources that
increase the stochasticity of the SAMDP policy: (1) Stochasticity is accumulated along skill trajec-
tories. (2) The aggregation process is only an approximation. A given SAMDP state may contain
more than one ”real” state and therefore more than one skill. Performing inference, in this case, we
will simply observe a stochastic policy that chooses between those skills at random.
Thus, it is very likely to infer a stochastic SAMDP transition matrix, although the SAMDP transi-
tion probability matrices are deterministic and even if the MDP environment is deterministic and
the MDP policy is near deterministic.
(4) Model selection. So far we explained how to build an SAMDP from observations. In
this stage we explain how to choose between different SAMDP model candidates. There are two
advantages for choosing between multiple SAMDPs. First, there are different hyper parameter to
tune. Two examples are the number of SAMDP states (K) and the window size (w) for the clustering
algorithm. Second, there is randomness in the aggregation step. Hence, clustering multiple times
and picking the best result will potentially yield better models.
We therefore developed evaluation criteria that allow us to select the best model, motivated by
Hallak et al. (2013). We follow the Occams Razor principle, and aim to ﬁnd the simplest model
which best explains the data. (i) Value Mean Square Error(VMSE), measures the consistency of
the model with the observations. The estimator is given by
V MSE = ∥v −vSAMDP ∥
∥v∥
(2)
where v stands for the SAMDP value function of the given policy, and vSAMDP is given by:
vSAMDP = (I + γkP)−1r, where P is measured under the SAMDP policy. (ii) Inertia, the K-
means algorithm objective function, is given by : I = Pn
i=0 minµj∈C(||xj −µi||2). Inertia mea-
sures the variance inside clusters and encourages spatial coherency. Motivated by Ncut and spectral
clustering (Von Luxburg, 2007), we deﬁne (iii) The Intensity Factor as the fraction of out/in clus-
ter transitions. However, we deﬁne edges between states that are connected along the trajectory (a
transition between them was observed) and give them equal weights (instead of deﬁning the edges
by euclidean distances as in spectral clustering). Minimizing the intensity factor encourages longer
duration skills. (iv) Entropy, is deﬁned on the SAMDP probability transition matrix as follows:
e = −P
i{|Ci| · P
j Pi,j log Pi,j}. Low entropy encourages clusters to have less skills, i.e., clusters
that are localized both in time and space.
4. Experiments
In this section, we demonstrate our method on a Gridword domain as well as on three ATARI
games: Pacman (a game where DQN performs very well), Seaquest (from the opposite reason) and
Breakout (a popular game). For each domain we: (1) provide a short description of the domain
and the optimal policy, (2) detail the hand-crafted features we designed for the domain, (3) analyze
the DQN’s policy using the manual approach and the SAMDP model and derive conclusions. We
then analyze two cross-domain observations: the representation of initial and terminal states and the
inﬂuence of score pixels in Atari. We ﬁnish with additional experiments on the SAMDP model. We
show that it is consistent and suggest a novel shared autonomy application.
9

ZAHAVY, BARAM AND MANNOR
(a) MDP
(b) SMDP
(c) AMDP
(d) SAMDP
Figure 3: State-action diagrams for a gridworld problem. a. MDP diagram: relate to individual
states and primitive actions. b. SMDP diagram: Edge colors represent different skills.
c. AMDP diagram: clusters are formed using spatial aggregation in the original state.
d. SAMDP diagram: clusters are found after transforming the state space. intra-cluster
transitions (dashed arrows) can be used to explain the skills, while inter-cluster transitions
(big red arrows) loyaly explain the governing policy.
4.1 Gridworld
Description. An agent is placed at the origin (marked in X), where the goal is to reach the green
ball and return. Hand-crafted features. The state s ∈R3 is given by: s = {x, y, b}, where
(x, y) are the coordinates and b ∈{0, 1} indicates whether the agent has reached the ball or not.
The policy is trained to ﬁnd skills following Mankowitz et al. (2014). Analysis. We visualize the
learned policy using the maze coordinates with the different modeling approaches. The MDP graph
(Figure 3a), consists of a large number of states. It is also difﬁcult to understand which skills the
agent is using. In the SMDP graph (Figure 3b), the number of states remain high, however coloring
the edges by the skills, helps to understand the agent’s behaviour. Unfortunately, producing this
graph is seldom possible because we rarely receive information about the skills. On the other hand,
abstracting the state space can be done more easily using state aggregation. However, in the AMDP
graph (Figure 3c), the clusters are not aligned with the played skills because the routes leading to
and from the ball overlap.
SAMDP. We use the following state representation:
φ(x, y) =
(
(x, y),
if b is 0
(2L −x, y),
if b is 1
where L is the maze width. The transformation φ ﬂips and translates the states where b = 1.
Now that the routes to and from the ball are disentangled, the clusters are aligned with the skills.
Understanding the behaviour of the agent is now possible by examining inter-cluster and intra-
10

GRAYING THE BLACK BOX: UNDERSTANDING DQNS
cluster transitions (Figure 3d). The key observation from the gridworld domain is that under the
correct representation, the hirerchy of the MDP is discovered by the SAMDP model. In the next
experiments we will show that DQN is capable to learn such a representation automatically.
4.2 Setup for Atari
Data collection. We record the neural activations of the last hidden layer and the DQN value estima-
tions for 120k game states (indexed by visitation order). t-SNE is applied on the neural activations
data, a non-linear dimensionality reduction method that is particularly good at creating a single map
that reveals structure at many different scales. The result is a compact, well-separated representa-
tion, that is easy and fast to cluster.
SAMDP algorithm details.
Feature selection. We use the t-SNE coordinates and a value coordinate (three coordinates in to-
tal). Each coordinate is normalized to have zero mean and unit variance. We also experimented
with other conﬁgurations such as using the activations without t-SNE and different normalization.
However, we found that this conﬁguration is fast and gives nice results. SAMDP clustering and
skill identiﬁcation follow Section 3.2 with no additional details. SAMDP inference. We use two
approximations in the inference stage which we found to work well: we overlook transitions with
small skill length (shorter than 2) and we truncate transitions that have less than 0.1 probability.
SAMDP model Selection. We perform a grid search on two parameters: i) number of clusters
K ∈[15, 25]. ii) window size w ∈[1, 7]. We found that models larger (smaller) than that are too
cumbersome (simple) to analyze. We select the best model in the following way: we ﬁrst sort all
models by the four evaluation criteria (SAMDP Section, stage 4) from best to worst. Then, we itera-
tively intersect the p-preﬁx of all sets (i.e., the ﬁrst p elements of each set) starting with 1-preﬁx. We
stop when the intersection is non-empty and choose the conﬁguration at the intersection. We also
measure the p-value of the chosen model. For the null hypothesis, we choose the SAMDP model
constructed with random clusters. We tested 10000 random SAMDP models, none of which scored
better than the chosen model (for all the evaluation criteria).
11

ZAHAVY, BARAM AND MANNOR
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
5 
7 
8 
9 
9 
Figure 4: Breakout aggregated states on the t-SNE map.
4.3 Breakout
Description. In Breakout, a layer of bricks lines the top of the screen. A ball travels across the
screen, bouncing off the top and side walls. When a brick is hit, the ball bounces away, the brick
is destroyed and the player receives a reward. The player loses a turn when the ball touches the
bottom of the screen. To prevent this from happening, the player has a movable paddle to bounce
the ball upward, keeping it in play. The highest score achievable for one player is 896; this is done
by eliminating exactly two screens of bricks worth 448 points each. A good strategy for Breakout
is leading the ball above the bricks by digging a tunnel on one side of the bricks block. Doing so
enables the agent to achieve high reward while being safe from losing the ball. By introducing a
discount factor to Breakout’s MDP, this strategy becomes even more favorable since it achieves high
immediate reward.
Hand-crafted features. We extract features for the player (paddle) position, ball’s position,
balls direction of movement, number of missing bricks, and a tunnel feature (a tunnel exists when
there is a clear path between the area below the bricks and the area above it, and we approximate
this event by looking for at least one clear column of bricks).
Analysis. Figure 4 presents the t-SNE of Breakout. The agent learns a hierarchical policy: (a)
carve a tunnel in the left side of the screen and (b) keep the ball above the bricks as long as possible.
In clusters (1-3) the agent is carving the left tunnel. Once the agent enters those clusters, it will
not exit until the tunnel is carved (see Figure 18). We identify these clusters as a landmark option.
The clusters are separated from each other by the ball position and direction. In cluster 1 the ball is
12

GRAYING THE BLACK BOX: UNDERSTANDING DQNS
 
Figure 5: Breakout tunnel digging option. Left: states that the agent visits once it entered the
option clusters (1-3 in Figure 4) until it ﬁnishes to carve the left tunnel are marked in red.
Right: Dynamics is displayed by arrows above a 3d t-SNE map. The option termination
zone is marked by a black annotation box and corresponds to carving the left tunnel. All
transitions from clusters 1-3 into clusters 4-7 pass through a singular point.
heading toward the tunnel, in cluster 2 the ball is on the right side and in cluster 3 the ball bounces
back from the tunnel after hitting bricks. As fewer bricks remain in the tunnel the value is gradually
rising till the tunnel is carved where the value is maximal (this makes sense since the agent is enjoy-
ing high reward rate straight after reaching it). Once the tunnel is carved, the option is terminated
and the agent moves to clusters 4-7 (dashed red line), differentiated by the ball position with regard
to the bricks (see Figure 4). In cluster 4 and 6 the ball is above the bricks and in 5 it is below them.
Clusters 8 and 9 represent termination and initial states respectively (see Figure 18 in the appendix
for examples of states along the option path).
Cluster 7 is created due to a bug in the emulator that allows the ball to pass the tunnel without
completely carving it. The agent learned to represent this incident to its own cluster and assigned
it high-value estimates (same as the other tunnel clusters). This observation is interesting since it
indicates that the agent is learning a representation based on the game dynamics and not only on the
pixels.
By coloring the t-SNE map by time, we can identify some policy downsides. States with only
a few remaining bricks are visited for multiple times along the trajectory (see Figure 17 in the ap-
pendix). In these states, the ball bounces without hitting any bricks which causes a ﬁxed reﬂection
pattern, indicating that the agent is stuck in local optima. We discuss the inability of the agent to
perform well on the second screen of the game in Section 4.7.
SAMDP. Figure 6 presents the resulted SAMDP for the game Breakout. First, we can observe
that the algorithm managed to identify most of the policy hierarchy automatically and that the clus-
ters are consistent with our manual clusters. We can also observe that the transitions between the
clusters are sparse, which implies low entropy SAMDP. Finally, inspecting the mean image of each
cluster reveals insights about the nature of the skills hiding within and uncovers the policy hierarchy.
13

ZAHAVY, BARAM AND MANNOR
Figure 6: SAMDP visualization for Breakout. Each MDP state is represented on the map by its two
t-SNE coordinates and colored by its value estimate (low values in blue and high in red).
SAMDP states are visualize by their mean state (with frame pixels) at the mean t-SNE
coordinate. An Edge between two SAMDP states represent a skill (bold side indicate
terminal state), and the numbers above the edges correspond to the inferred SAMDP
policy.
14

GRAYING THE BLACK BOX: UNDERSTANDING DQNS
10 
9 
8 
7 
6 
5 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
4 
2 
3 
11 
Figure 7: Seaquest aggregated states on the t-SNE map, colored by value function estimate.
4.4 Seaquest
Description. In Seaquest, the player’s goal is to retrieve as many treasure-divers, while dodging
and blasting enemy subs and killer sharks before the oxygen runs out. When the game begins, each
enemy is worth 20 points and a rescued diver worth 50. Every time the agent surface with six divers,
killing an enemy (rescuing a diver) is increased by 10 (50) points up to a maximum of 90 (1000).
Moreover, the agent is awarded an extra bonus based on its remaining oxygen level. However, if it
surfaces with less than six divers the oxygen ﬁlls up with no bonus, and if it surfaces with none it
loses a life.
DQN’s performance on Seaquest (∼5k) is inferior to human experts (∼100k). What makes
Seaquest hard for DQN is that shooting enemies is rewarded immediately while rescuing divers is
rewarded only once six divers are collected and rescued to sea level. Moreover, the bonus points for
collecting 6 divers is diminished by reward clipping. This sparse and delayed reward signal requires
much longer planning that is harder to learn.
Hand-crafted features. We extract features for player position, direction of movement (as-
cent/descent), oxygen level, number of enemies, number of available divers to collect, number of
available divers to use, and number of lives.
Analysis. Figure 7 shows the t-SNE map divided into different clusters. We notice two main
partitions of the t-SNE clusters: (a) by oxygen level (low: clusters 4-10, high: cluster 3 and other
unmarked areas), and (b) by the amount of collected divers (clusters 2 and 11 represent having a
diver). We also identiﬁed other partitions between clusters such as refuelling clusters (1: pre-episode
15

ZAHAVY, BARAM AND MANNOR
 
1 
1b 
2b 
2 
3
3b 
3
3b
1b
Figure 8: Seaquest refuel option. Left: Option path above the t-SNE map colored by the amount
of remaining oxygen. Shaded blue mark the clusters with a collected diver, and red
arrows mark the direction of progress. Right: 3d t-SNE with colored arrows representing
transitions. All transitions from cluster 3 are leading to cluster 3b in order to reach the
refuel cluster (1b), thus indicating a clear option termination structure.
Figure 9: Salincy maps of states with available diver. Left: A diver is noticed in the saliency map
but misunderstood as an enemy and being shot at. Center: Both diver and enemy are
noticed by the network. Right: The diver is unnoticed by the network.
and 2: in-episode), various termination clusters (8: agent appears in black and white, 9: agent’s
ﬁgure is replaced with drops, 10: agent’s ﬁgure disappears) and low oxygen clusters characterized
by ﬂickering in the oxygen bar (4 and 7).
While the agent distinguishes states with a collected diver, Figure 9 implies that the agent did
not understand the concept of collecting a diver and sometimes treats it as an enemy. Moreover, we
see that the clusters share a similar value estimate that is highly correlated with the amount of re-
16

GRAYING THE BLACK BOX: UNDERSTANDING DQNS
maining oxygen and the number of present enemies. However, states with an available or collected
diver do not raise the value estimates nor do states that are close to refueling. Moreover, the agent
never explores the bottom of the screen, nor collects more than two divers.
As a result, the agent’s policy is to kill as many enemies as possible while avoiding being shot.
If it hasn’t collected a diver, the agent follows a sub-optimal policy and ascends near to sea level as
the oxygen decreases. There, it continues to shoot at enemies but not collecting divers. However, it
also learned not to surface entirely without a diver.
If the agent collects a diver it moves to the blue shaded clusters (all clusters in this paragraph
refer to Figure 8), where we identify a refuel option. We noticed that the option can be initiated
from two different zones based on the oxygen level but has a singular termination cluster (3b). If
the diver is taken while having a high level of oxygen, then it enters the option at the northern
(red) part of cluster 1. Otherwise, it will enter a point further along the direction of the option (red
arrows). In cluster 1, the agent keeps following the normal shooting policy. Eventually, the agent
reaches a critical level of oxygen (cluster 3) and ascends to sea level. From there the agent jumps to
the fueling cluster (area 1b). The fueling cluster is identiﬁed by its rainbow appearance because the
level of oxygen is increasing rapidly. However, the refuel option was not learned perfectly. Area
2 is another refuel cluster, there, the agent does not exploit its oxygen before ascending to get air
(area 2b).
17

ZAHAVY, BARAM AND MANNOR
2 
3  
1 
8 
7 
6 
4 
5 
9 
7 
10 
10 
10 
Figure 10: Pacman aggregated states on the t-SNE map colored by value function estimates.
4.5 Pacman
Description. In Pacman, an agent navigates in a maze while being chased by two ghosts. The
agent is positively rewarded (+1) for collecting bricks. An episode ends when a predator catches
the agent, or when the agent collects all bricks. There are also 4 bonus bricks, one at each corner
of the maze. The bonus bricks provide a larger reward (+5), and more importantly, they make the
ghosts vulnerable for a short period of time, during which they cannot kill the agent. Occasionally,
a bonus box appears for a short time providing high reward (+100) if collected.
Hand-crafted features. We extract features for the player position, direction of movement,
number of left bricks to eat, minimal distance (L1) between the player and the predators, number of
lives, ghost mode that indicates that the predators are vulnerable, and bonus box feature that indicate
when the highly valued box appears.
Analysis. Figure 10 shows the t-SNE colored by value function, while Figure 11 shows the t-
SNE colored by the number of left bricks with examples of states from each cluster. We can see that
the clusters are well partitioned by the number of remaining bricks and value estimates. Moreover,
examining the states in each cluster (Figure 11) we see that the clusters share speciﬁc bricks pattern
and agent location.
From Figure 12 we also learn that the agent collects the bonus bricks at very speciﬁc times
and order. Thus, we conclude that the agent has learned a location-based policy that is focused on
collecting the bonus bricks (similar to maze problems) while avoiding the ghosts.
18

GRAYING THE BLACK BOX: UNDERSTANDING DQNS
 
 
Figure 11: t-SNE for Pacman colored by the number of left bricks with state examples from each
cluster.
 
Figure 12: Histogram showing the time passed until each bonus brick is collected.
19

ZAHAVY, BARAM AND MANNOR
Figure 13: SAMDP visualization for Pacman.
The agent starts at cluster 1, heading for the bottom-left bonus brick and collecting it in cluster
2. Once collected, it moves to cluster 3 where it is heading to the top-right bonus brick and collects
it in cluster 4. The agent is then moving to clusters 5 and 6 where it is taking the bottom-right and
top-left bonus bricks respectively. We also identiﬁed cluster 7 and 9 as termination clusters and
cluster 8 as a hiding cluster in which the agent hides from the ghosts in the top-left corner. The
effects of reward-clipping can be clearly seen in the case of the bonus box. Cluster 10 comprises of
states with a visible bonus box. However, these states are assigned with a lower value.
SAMDP. Figure 13 presents the resulted SAMDP for the game Pacman. The sparsity of the
transitions between the clusters indicates that the agent is spatio-temporally located, meaning that it
spends long times in deﬁned areas of the state space as suggested by Figure 12.
20

GRAYING THE BLACK BOX: UNDERSTANDING DQNS
4.6 Enviroment modeling
The DQN algorithm requires speciﬁc treatment for initial (padded with zero frames) and terminal
(receive target value of zero) states, however, it is not clear how to check if this treatment works
well. Therefore we show t-SNE maps for different games with a focus on termination and initial
states in Figure 14. We can see that all terminal states are mapped successfully into a singular zone,
however, initial states are also mapped to singular zones and assigned with wrong value predictions.
Following these observations, we suggest to investigate different ways to model initial states, i.e.,
replicating a frame instead of feeding zeros and test it.
Figure 14: Terminal and initial states.
Top: All terminal states are mapped into a singular
zone(red). Bottom: Initial states are mapped into singular zones (pointed by colored
arrows from the terminal zone) above the 3d t-SNE dynamics representation.
4.7 Score pixels
Some Atari2600 games include multiple repetitions of the same game. Once the agent ﬁnished the
ﬁrst screen it is presented with another one, distinguished only by the score that was accumulated in
the ﬁrst screen. Therefore, an agent might encounter problems with generalizing to the new screen
if it over-ﬁts the score pixels. In Breakout, for example, the current state of the art architectures
achieves a game score of around 450 points while the maximal available points are 896 suggesting
that the agent is somehow not learning to generalize for the new level. We investigated the effect
21

ZAHAVY, BARAM AND MANNOR
that score pixels have on the network predictions. Figure 15 shows the saliency maps of different
games supporting our claim that DQN is basing its estimates using these pixels. We suggest to
further investigate this, for example, we suggest to train an agent that does not receive those pixels
as input.
Figure 15: Saliency maps of score pixels. The input state is presented in gray scale while the value
input gradients are displayed above it in red.
22

GRAYING THE BLACK BOX: UNDERSTANDING DQNS
4.8 SAMDPs
Model Evaluation. We perform three simulations to evaluate the SAMDP model. First, we measure
the VMSE criteria, as deﬁned in Equation 2. Since the true value function v is unknown, we
approximate it by averaging the DQN value estimates in each cluster:
vDQN(cj) =
1
|Cj|
X
i:si∈cj
vDQN(si),
and evaluate VSAMDP as deﬁned in Section 3.2. Examining Figure 16, top, we observe that DQN
values and the SAMDP values are very similar, indicating that the SAMDP model ﬁts the data well.
Second, we evaluate the greedy policy with respect to the SAMDP value function by: πgreedy(ci) =
argmax
j
{Rσi,j + γkσi,j vSAMDP (cj)}. We measure the correlation between the greedy policy deci-
sions and the trajectory reward. For a given trajectory j we measure P j
i : the empirical distribution
of choosing the greedy policy at state ci and the cumulative reward Rj. Finally, we present the
correlation between these two measures in each state: corri = corr(P j
i , Rj) in (Figure 16, center).
Positive correlation indicates that following the greedy policy leads to high reward. Indeed for most
of the states we observe positive correlation, supporting the consistency of the model.
The third evaluation is close in spirit to the second one. We partition the data to train and test.
We evaluate the greedy policy based on the train set and create two transition matrices T +, T −using
k top and bottom rewarded trajectories respectively from the test set. We measure the correlation
of the greedy policy T G with each of the transition matrices for different values of k (Figure 16
bottom). As clearly seen, the correlation of the greedy policy and the top trajectories is higher than
the correlation with the bottom trajectories.
Eject Button: The motivation for this experiment stems from the idea of shared autonomy
(Pitzer et al., 2011). There are domains where errors are not permitted and performance must be as
high as possible. The idea of shared autonomy is to allow an operator to intervene in the decision
loop in critical times. For example, it is known that in 20% of commercial ﬂights, the auto-pilot
returns the control to the human pilots. In the following experiment, we show how the SAMDP
model can help to identify where agent’s behavior deteriorates. Setup. (a) Evaluate a DQN agent,
create a trajectory data set, and evaluate the features for each state (stage 0). (b) Divide the data
between train (100 trajectories) and test (60) and build an SAMDP model (stages 1-4) on the train
data. (c) Split the train data to k top and bottom rewarded trajectories T +, T −and re-infer the
model parameters separately for each (stage 3). (d) Project the test data on the SAMDP model
(each state is mapped to the nearest SAMDP state). (e) Once it becomes more likely that the agent
transitions are coming from T −rather then from T +, we eject (inspired by option interruption
(Sutton et al., 1999)). (f) We average the trajectory reward on (i) the entire test set, and (ii) the
un-ejected trajectories subset. We measure 36%, 20%, and 4.7% performance gain for Breakout
Seaquest and Pacman, respectively. The eject experiment indicates that the SAMDP model can be
used to robustify a given DQN policy by identifying when the agent is not going to perform well
and return control to a human operator or some other AI agent.
23

ZAHAVY, BARAM AND MANNOR
0
5
10
15
20
25
Cluster index
2
0
2
4
Value
DQN value vs. SAMDP value
DQN
SAMDP
0
5
10
15
20
25
Cluster index
1
0
1
Correlation
Correlation between greedy policy and trajectory reward
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
Percentage of extermum trajectories used
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Weight
Greedy policy weight in good/bad trajectories
High reward trajs
Low reward trajs
Figure 16: Model Evaluation. Top: VMSE. Center: greedy policy correlation with trajectory
reward. Bottom: top (blue), least (red) rewarded trajectories.
5. Conclusions
In this work, we showed that the features learned by DQN map the state space to different sub-
manifolds, in each, different features are present. By analyzing the dynamics in these clusters and
between them we were able to identify hierarchical structures. In particular, we were able to identify
options with deﬁned initial and termination rules. State aggregation gives the agent the ability to
learn speciﬁc policies for the different regions, thus giving an explanation to the success of DRL
agents. The ability to automatically detect sub-goals and skills can also be used in the future as a
component of an hierarchical DRL algorithm (Tessler et al., 2017; Kulkarni et al., 2016). Another
possibility is to use the aggregation mechanism in order to allocate learning resources between
clusters better, for example by using a prioritized experience replay (Schaul et al., 2015).
Similar to Neuro-Science, where reverse engineering methods like fMRI reveal structure in
brain activity, we demonstrated how to describe the agent’s policy with simple logic rules by pro-
cessing the network’s neural activity. We believe that interpretation of policies learned by DRL
agents is of particular importance by itself. First, it can help in the debugging process by giving
the designer qualitative understanding of the learned policies. Second, there is a growing interest
in applying DRL solutions to a real-world problem such as autonomous driving and medicine. We
believe that before we can reach that goal we will have to gain greater conﬁdence on what the agent
is learning. Lastly, understanding what is learned by DRL agents, can help designers develop better
algorithms by suggesting solutions that address policy downsides.
To conclude, when a deep network is not performing well it is hard to understand the cause and
even harder to ﬁnd ways to improve it. Particularly in DRL, we lack the tools needed to analyze what
an agent has learned and therefore left with black box testing. In this paper we showed how to gray
the black box: understand better why DQNs work well in practice, and suggested a methodology to
interpret the learned policies.
24

GRAYING THE BLACK BOX: UNDERSTANDING DQNS
In the Eject experiment, we showed how SAMDP model can help to improve the policy at hand
without the need to re-train it. It would be even more interesting to use the SAMDP model to
improve the training phase itself.
Acknowledgement
This research was supported in part by the European Communitys Seventh Framework Programme
(FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement 306638 (SUPREL) and the Intel Collaborative Research
Institute for Computational Intelligence (ICRI-CI).
25

ZAHAVY, BARAM AND MANNOR
