Street-level Travel-time Estimation via Aggregated Uber Data
Kelsey Maass∗, Arun V. Sathanur† , Arif Khan‡ , and Robert Rallo§
Abstract. Estimating temporal patterns in travel times along road segments in urban settings is of central
importance to traﬃc engineers and city planners. In this work, we propose a methodology to leverage
coarse-grained and aggregated travel time data to estimate the street-level travel times of a given
metropolitan area. Our main focus is to estimate travel times along the arterial road segments where
relevant data are often unavailable. The central idea of our approach is to leverage easy-to-obtain,
aggregated data sets with broad spatial coverage, such as the data published by Uber Movement, as
the fabric over which other expensive, ﬁne-grained datasets, such as loop counter and probe data,
can be overlaid. Our proposed methodology uses a graph representation of the road network and
combines several techniques such as graph-based routing, trip sampling, graph sparsiﬁcation, and
least-squares optimization to estimate the street-level travel times. Using sampled trips and weighted
shortest-path routing, we iteratively solve constrained least-squares problems to obtain the travel
time estimates. We demonstrate our method on the Los Angeles metropolitan-area street network,
where aggregated travel time data is available for trips between traﬃc analysis zones. Additionally,
we present techniques to scale our approach via a novel graph pseudo-sparsiﬁcation technique.
Key words. transportation datasets, arterial travel time, optimization, graph analytics, traﬃc analysis zone
AMS subject classiﬁcations. 90B06, 65K05, 05C85
1. Introduction. Data-driven mobility modeling and prediction are important aspects of
modern urban planning. With respect to travel forecasting, the two major areas of research are
demand modeling and travel-time estimation [1], where demand modeling involves generating
accurate statistics of the number of trips between origin–destination (O–D) pairs, and travel-
time estimation involves predicting the travel times for trips between O–D pairs. The focus of
this work is on the latter, speciﬁcally, street-level travel-time estimation. In existing research
on travel-time estimation, interstate link models have received disproportionate attention from
the transportation research community, due primarily to the availability of large amounts of
freeway sensor data. Although equally important, the same is not true for arterial models,
where coverage is limited due to the costs related to installing probe sensors and associated
infrastructure. Under these circumstances, signiﬁcant insights can be gained at a fraction of
the cost with coarse-grained data sets such as the summary statistics of Uber trips.
Uber Movement datasets [22] provide anonymized, aggregated, and coarse-grained O–D
travel time statistics at the TAZ (traﬃc analysis zone) level for many metropolitan areas
around the world. TAZs are small geographical units into which a given metropolitan area is
divided, characterized by factors such as the total population, type of population, and employ-
ment. While Uber Movement datasets can be coarse-grained and have high uncertainty, they
cover large geographical regions and are available for multiple metropolitan areas, allowing for

1
arXiv:2001.04533v1  [physics.soc-ph]  13 Jan 2020

2
K.MAASS, A.SATHANUR, A.KHAN, AND R.RALLO
generalizability. Similar datasets are also available through other sources (for speciﬁc cities)
such as the New York City taxi-cab data [14].
Our work is concerned with ﬁlling the gap in arterial travel-time estimation. While our
prior work [20] focused on travel-time estimation at the TAZ level, this work is concerned
with travel-time estimation at the street level. We start with the graph representation of a
given road network, where intersections and road segments are represented as vertices and
edges, respectively. Next, using the Uber Movement data and the street network graphs as
inputs, we iteratively estimate the travel time on each edge for a given time window. At
each iteration, we solve a constrained least-squares problem on the pseudo-sparsiﬁed graph.
While the examples here utilize the coarse-grained, high-coverage Uber Movement data, the
developed approach could seamlessly incorporate high-quality, low-uncertainty datasets, such
as those from loop counters or probe sensors, by including these elements as constraints. While
this work uses methods similar to those in [2], which combines shortest-path routing with a
convex optimization formulation, we make the following contributions:
• We utilize trip sampling in order to leverage coarse-grained, aggregated TAZ-level
data. Finer-grained data from sensors as well as street-level trip data can easily be
absorbed into our approach.
• We propose a biasing scheme for sampling travel times from the statistics of the ag-
gregated data, which can signiﬁcantly improve predicted travel time distributions.
• We make use of constraints and the convex combinations of sequential iterates as a
means of stabilizing solutions and improving convergence rates.
• We demonstrate the eﬃcacy of a graph pseudo-sparsiﬁcation technique that can im-
prove scalability with little loss of accuracy. We are currently building on this approach
to scaling to much larger network sizes that encompass entire metropolitan areas with
the aid of high performance computing resources.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the Uber Movement and the LA road
network data used in this work. In the subsequent section (Section 3), we describe the forward
model and simulated trips, followed by the optimization methodology (Section 4) used in this
work. Section 5 presents our principal experimental results, followed by the methods and
scaling results related to our pseudo-sparsiﬁcation technique in Section 6. Section 7 describes
related work in the area of graph analytics, optimization, and machine learning applied to
road networks. We conclude the paper with a note on future work in Section 8.
2. Datasets. Our primary data sources for this work are from Uber Movement [22] and the
road network for the LA area. Uber has released a trove of aggregated and anonymized data
on travel-time and average-speed statistics for a large number of cities around the world [22].
Because gathering transportation data is an expensive and cumbersome process, leveraging
these surrogate datasets is expected to help researchers and city planners conduct quick and
fairly detailed studies of the various aspects of vehicle mobility in urban settings. In this work,
we focus on Uber’s travel time data, which includes statistics for travel times between pairs
of TAZs or census tracts for each hour of the day and day of the week.
The graph representation of the LA city road network is made available to us as part of
the project. Similar analyses is possible with the open-source version of the maps provided
by OpenStreetMaps [16]. Table 2.1 lists some basic network properties of the full LA road

STREET-LEVEL TRAVEL-TIME ESTIMATION VIA AGGREGATED UBER DATA
3
network, along with sub-networks formed with diﬀerent radii around downtown LA. Other
than the number of TAZs, most of the structural properties are similar across all of the
networks. The number of TAZs included increases with the size of the graph.
Area
Vertices
Edges
TAZ
min(Deg)
max(Deg)
avg(Deg)
Clust. Coeﬀ.
LA DT+1
3239
7138
25
2
12
2.2
0.018
LA DT+2
9879
22756
79
2
12
2.3
0.025
LA DT+3
16906
40929
159
2
12
2.4
0.026
LA full
368419
905622
2205
2
14
2.46
0.034
Table 2.1: Structural properties of LA road networks of varying sizes: one, two and three miles radii
of downtown LA (DT) and the full LA network.
3. The graph-based forward model. In this section we describe a forward model for
travel-time prediction, and in the following section we show how the parameters of this model
can be estimated by means of an optimizer. Let P denote a set of edges that forms a path
from vertex i to vertex j in the road network graph. The expected travel time yij between
the vertices i and j can be computed as
(3.1)
yij =
X
k∈P
tk = sT t,
where tk represents the expected travel time along edge k, the vector t ∈RM
>0 represents the
travel time along all M edges in the graph, and the binary vector s ∈{0, 1}M encodes the
edges in P. The choice of optimal routing (P) between the origin and destination vertices
is a variable in the model. Routing is typically done with special routing software such as
the Open Source Routing Machine [13]. However, in this work, we use shortest-path routes
where the edges are weighted by travel times [2, 12, 24]. Speciﬁcally, for initialization, we
use weights determined by free-ﬂow travel times f ∈RM
>0, the time it takes to travel along a
road segment free of congestion, computed by dividing the length of the road segment by the
posted speed limit.
3.1. Training and testing tasks. Eq. 3.1 is based on O–D pairs in the road network graph.
However, the Uber Movement data is provided at the much coarser granularity of TAZ O–D
pairs, consisting of travel-time statistics computed over all trips originating at a given TAZ
and ending in another during a particular hour of the day. Furthermore, not all TAZ pairs
are included in the data.
For a given hour of the day and geographic area, we ﬁrst collect all the TAZ O–D pair
statistics available from Uber Movement. We then choose a random 90-10 split of the available
TAZ O–D pairs for training and testing, respectively. For each of the TAZ O–D pairs, we
simulate trips by sampling vertices from the origin and destination TAZs to form vertex O–D
pairs, assigning trip times by sampling from a log-normal distribution based on the geometric
mean and geometric standard deviation travel times given in the Uber dataset.
After estimating edge travel times using our vertex-level training data, testing is done at
the TAZ level using the geometric mean travel time for all vertex O–D pairs present in a given
test TAZ O–D pair. For example, suppose there are nij simulated trips from TAZ i to TAZ

4
K.MAASS, A.SATHANUR, A.KHAN, AND R.RALLO
j. The estimated geometric mean travel time would then be computed as
(3.2)
gij(t) =
 nij
Y
k=1
sT
k t
!
1
nij
,
where vector sk ∈{0, 1}M encodes the edges in the weighted shortest-path between sampled
vertex O–D pair k. The vertex O–D sampling and travel-time sampling are described in detail
below.
3.1.1. Vertex sampling. For each iteration k of our edge travel-time estimation algorithm,
we sample N vertex O–D pairs each from our training and test sets, letting the number
of simulated trips for each TAZ O–D pair be proportional to the size of the two TAZs.
Speciﬁcally, for each TAZ O–D pair (i, j) in the current subset Uk of the Uber dataset, we let
mij be the product of the number of vertices in origin TAZ i and destination TAZ j, then we
set the number of simulated trips nij = int

mij
P
k,ℓ∈Uk mkℓ

N

.
We sample the nij origin and destination vertices for a given TAZ O–D pair uniformly
from all vertices within their respective TAZ. We note that this process selects the shortest-
path edges with a probability proportional to their local betweenness centrality, which in turn
correlates with the importance of the edge with respect to traﬃc ﬂow [5, 10, 17].
3.1.2. Travel-time sampling. Let S ∈{0, 1}M×N represent the free-ﬂow shortest-path
matrix for our N simulated trips. We assign travel times y ∈RN
>0 to trips based on the
ordering of free-ﬂow shortest-path travel times yf = ST f for all vertex O–D pairs within a
TAZ O–D pair, summarized in Algorithm 3.1 below. Here f ∈RM
>0 denotes the vector of
free-ﬂow travel times for each of the M edges.
Algorithm 3.1 Travel-time sampling
Input: Free-ﬂow shortest-paths matrix Sk
Output: Sampled travel times vector yk
for all TAZ O–D pairs (i, j) ∈Uk do
Sample nij travel times ys from log-normal distribution
Get indices ℓs and ℓf of longest to shortest travel times for ys and yt, respectively
for m = 1, . . . , nij do
Assign yk(ℓf(m)) = ys(ℓs(m))
end for
end for
In practice, biased travel-time sampling appears to improve results when there is a rela-
tively large number of trips for a given TAZ O–D pair. For example, Fig. 3.1 illustrates the
diﬀerence between estimated trip travel-time distributions with and without biased travel-
time sampling. For 2000 trip times sampled from the log-normal distribution of a given TAZ
O–D pair (left), the distribution of estimated trip travel times deviates less from the target
distribution (red line, same across panels) when we bias the travel times assigned to each
vertex O–D pair (center) than when we do not (right).

STREET-LEVEL TRAVEL-TIME ESTIMATION VIA AGGREGATED UBER DATA
5
Figure 3.1: Illustrating the eﬀect of biasing travel-time assignments for simulated trips for a TAZ
O-D pair with nij = 2000 trips. (Left) Distribution of simulated travel times ys according to the
log-normal distribution drawn in red. (Center) Distribution of estimated trip travel times ST t ≈y
computed using biased sampling y(ℓf(k)) = ys(ℓs(k)). (Right) Distribution of estimated trip travel
times ST t ≈y computed using unbiased sampling y = ys.
4. The optimization process. Our approach solves a series of constrained least-squares
problems to ﬁt edge travel times to simulated trips (vertex O–D pairs, travel times, and
routes) with travel-time statistics consistent with the Uber dataset.
For each iteration k,
we sample N vertex O–D pairs with sampled travel times vector yk ∈RN
>0 and weighted
shortest-paths matrix Sk ∈{0, 1}M×N. Our goal is to then estimate edge travel times vector
t ∈RM
>0 so that ST
k t ≈yk to satisfy our forward model in Eq. 3.1. Thus we have a system of N
equations with M unknowns where M is the number of road segments (or edges in the graph).
The estimates are then updated using a convex combination of the previous estimates and
the solution found by minimizing the mean-squared error with constraints on the unknown
coeﬃcients, illustrated by Eqs. 4.1-4.3 below.
ˆt = arg min
αgk≤t≤βhk

ST
k t −yk

2
2
(4.1)
tk+1 = (1 −λk)tk + λkˆt
(4.2)
λk+1 = θkλk
(4.3)
In our implementation, we initialize t0 = f with the free-ﬂow estimates and let λ0 = 1,
we constrain the elements of the vector ˆt to be bounded below by αgk = 0.8f and above
by βhk = 1.25tk, and we update our weight λk using the constant θk = 0.9 for all k. Our
weighted shortest-paths matrix Sk is recomputed each iteration using our current estimates tk
as weights, and our constrained least-squares sub-problems are solved using the lsq linear
function from the well-known Python scientiﬁc computing library SciPy. We run the optimizer
until the estimates converge (measured by the magnitude of the average change in the solution
vector between iterations, Eq. 4.4 with δ = 0.01), or we reach a maximum number of iterations
kmax. This iterative scheme is similar to the one proposed in [2] but with a choice of optimizer
that favors scalability in conjunction with a number of heuristics that improve convergence.
The workﬂow of our proposed travel-time estimation algorithm is given in Algorithm 4.1.
(4.4)
1
M ∥tk −tk−1∥2 ≤δ

6
K.MAASS, A.SATHANUR, A.KHAN, AND R.RALLO
Algorithm 4.1 Travel-time Estimation
Input: Travel time statistics for TAZ O–D pairs; Road network G = (V, E); Number of trips N
Output: Estimated travel times along edges t
Determine number of trips nij for each TAZ O–D pair (Section 3.1.1)
Initialize edges with free-ﬂow travel times t0 = f and k = 0
while Eq. 4.4 not satisﬁed do
Sample N vertex O–D pairs
Compute shortest-path matrix Sk using weights tk
Compute yk using biased travel-time sampling (Algorithm 3.1)
Compute tk+1 according to Eqs. 4.1-4.3
k = k + 1
end while
5. Experimental results. We implement the workﬂow Algorithm 4.1 on a road network
encompassing a three mile radius of downtown Los Angeles (network LA DT+3 in Table 2.1).
Fig. 5.1 shows the convergence of the travel-time error (both training and test sets) for the
road network at 3am and 6pm, measured by
(5.1)
ϵk =
v
u
u
t 1
N
X
(i,j)∈Uk
nij
 log gij(tk) −log Gij
2,
where N is the total number of trips in the training (test) data, nij is the number of trips
for TAZ O–D pair (i, j) ∈Uk in the training (test) subset, gij(tk) is the current estimated
geometric mean travel time (Eq. 3.2), and Gij is the geometric mean travel-time from the Uber
Movement dataset. This RMSLE error metric represents the relative mean-squared error in
the logarithm of the estimated geometric mean travel time [2]. Fig. 5.2 shows the estimated
travel times (as a percent of free-ﬂow travel time f) for both 3am and 6pm, where congested
regions (red) are clearly visible in the 6pm plot.
6. Scalability and graph sparsiﬁcation. The computational complexity of our proposed
model is proportional to the number of trips N and the number of the edges M (Fig. 5.3). Due
to the amount of data available, including 368, 419 vertices and 905, 622 edges in the full LA
road network graph and between 507, 449 (3am) and 1, 115, 432 (6pm) TAZ O–D pairs in the
2019 Quarter 1 Weekdays-Only Uber dataset, the constrained least-squares optimizer becomes
a computational bottleneck, limiting our ability to solve large systems (i.e., street-level travel-
time estimation of a large geographical area). Since our goal is to generate a data-driven
solution, we aim to use as much data as possible, therefore leading us to systemically reduce the
number of unknowns. One strategy would be to sparsify the graph by dropping edges according
to a pre-determined criterion but still maintaining the graph connectivity.
This strategy,
however, changes routing, which can result in skewed travel-time estimations. For example,
consider two paths between vertex u and v: the shortest route through intermediate vertices
s and t, and an alternative, but longer, route through vertices x and y. If a sparsiﬁcation
algorithm removes the road segment between s and t based on some metric (e.g., low edge
betweenness centrality), our model would incorrectly estimate the travel time from u to v
using the available road segment through x and y.

STREET-LEVEL TRAVEL-TIME ESTIMATION VIA AGGREGATED UBER DATA
7
Figure 5.1: Travel-time estimation results for downtown LA for oﬀ-peak (3am) and peak traﬃc (6pm).
Top: Convergence of travel time error ϵk. Bottom: Geometric mean travel times gij calculated using
free-ﬂow edge weights and estimated edge weights compared to ground-truth data Gij from Uber.
In light of this, our approach is to pseudo-sparsify the underlying road network. Rather
than remove edges from the graph, we sort road segments into two sets based on their sig-
niﬁcance with respect to traﬃc ﬂow (e.g., betweenness centrality).
We then estimate the
travel-time along the edges with the top p% signiﬁcance, setting the travel times along the
remaining edges to the free-ﬂow travel times. In our implementation, we sort edges based
on their betweenness centrality, computed using shortest-paths weighted by free-ﬂow travel
times. For instance, if i are the indices of the edges with the top p% betweenness and j are
indices of the remaining edges, we solve a modiﬁed version of Eqs. 4.1-4.2 each iteration:
ˆt =
arg min
αgk(i)≤t≤βhk(i)

Sk(i)T t + Sk(j)T f(j) −yk

2
2
(6.1)
tk+1(i) = (1 −λk)tk(i) + λkˆt,
tk+1(j) = f(j)
(6.2)
In this way, we can control the number of unknowns M and scale our method for larger
geographical areas.
We test our pseudo-sparsiﬁcation approach using diﬀerent values of p (Figs. 6.1-6.2). In
Fig. 6.1 (left), we ﬁrst run our algorithm on the full graph (i.e., p = 100%), and plot the
relative diﬀerence between our estimated travel times and the initial free-ﬂow travel times
|t −f|/f versus the percentile of the edges sorted by betweenness centrality.
We observe
that roughly 15% of lowest betweenness edges retain their free-ﬂow travel time as the ﬁnal
estimate, suggesting that we can set these edges to their free-ﬂow travel times to reduce the
number of unknowns.

8
K.MAASS, A.SATHANUR, A.KHAN, AND R.RALLO
Figure 5.2: Estimated travel time t as a percent of free-ﬂow travel time f in downtown LA for oﬀ-peak
traﬃc (3am, left) and peak traﬃc (6pm, right).
Figure 5.3: Scaling results for travel time estimation in downtown LA for peak traﬃc (6pm). Left
column: Results for one, two, and three mile radii of downtown. Right column: Results for 1000, 3000,
and 5000 simulated trips per iteration. Top row: The average time per iteration scales proportionally
with both the number of edges and number of trips. Bottom row: The travel time errors for both
training and test sets achieve their lowest values for larger problem sizes.
Of course, drivers rarely maintain the exact speed limit. To account for this uncertainty
in free-ﬂow travel times, we sort the edges into bins based on their betweenness percentiles
and plot the fraction of edges within each bin that have a relative diﬀerence within a factor
of q% of their free-ﬂow travel times (Fig. 6.1, right). We observe that the high betweenness
edges are less likely to have an estimated travel time close to their free-ﬂow times irrespective
of the level of uncertainty q. Therefore, we can pseudo-sparsify the graph to diﬀerent extents
depending upon the level of uncertainty that can be tolerated.

STREET-LEVEL TRAVEL-TIME ESTIMATION VIA AGGREGATED UBER DATA
9
In Fig. 6.2, we vary the number of edges by estimating only the top 50%, 75%, and 100%
of edges by betweenness. Here the time per iteration scales proportionally with the number of
unknown edges included in the problem, and the travel-time error given by Eq. 5.1 increases
as we assign more edges to their free-ﬂow travel times.
Figure 6.1: Relative diﬀerence (|t −f|/f) between estimated travel time t and free-ﬂow travel time f
by percentile of betweenness for peak downtown LA traﬃc (left) and fraction of estimated edge travel
times that are within q% of free-ﬂow (|t −f|/f ≤q%), where edges are binned by percentile (right).
Edge betweenness centrality is calculated using shortest paths weighted by free-ﬂow travel time.
Figure 6.2: Scaling results for travel time estimation in downtown LA for peak traﬃc (6pm) solved
using pseudo-sparsiﬁed graphs, where 50%, 75%, and 100% of the edges were estimated and the
remainder set to free-ﬂow travel times. Left: The average time per iteration scales proportionally
with the percent of edges estimated. Right: Travel time errors decrease as less edges are set to free-
ﬂow travel time.
7. Related work. Urban traﬃc modeling has seen a recent surge of interest in the use of
graph analytics and machine learning methods. Reference [23] provides an overview of many
of these methods. In this section we summarize the prior work related to both of these themes
as applied to road transportation networks.
The authors in [21] use graph analytics on networks with three diﬀerent weighting schemes
to perform a statistical characterization of the Beijing road network. Many prior publications
consider betweenness centrality [6] to be an important metric when applied to road networks,
as it is argued to be a direct predictor of important links in urban transport. It has been shown

10
K.MAASS, A.SATHANUR, A.KHAN, AND R.RALLO
that betweenness centrality is highly correlated with the traﬃc ﬂow count on a road network
[5, 10, 17], a natural result of including travel time as a factor when selecting trip routes.
In real-world scenarios, however, route choices are also inﬂuenced by time-of-day and other
socio-economic factors. Using these observations, the authors in [18] deﬁne an augmented be-
tweenness centrality measure where shortest paths are weighted according to a traﬃc demand
model based on census tracts and traﬃc analysis zones. The authors show that this new cen-
trality measure correlates better with traﬃc ﬂow than other centrality measures. Similarly,
in [4] the authors employ analytics in the form of novel graph centrality measures to derive
insights into the traﬃc ﬂow patters in Singapore. Graph models, along with heterogeneous
data sources, were leveraged to understand the urban traﬃc patterns in [15]. Finally, the
authors in [7] utilize a grid-based fabric and cellular automata for modeling arterial traﬃc,
resulting in gains in computational eﬃciency.
Many approaches make use of machine learning models and optimization methods to model
various aspects of urban traﬃc ﬂow. In [11], the authors leverage a deep-learning approach
in the form of a diﬀusion convolutional recurrent neural network (DCRNN) to forecast short-
term freeway traﬃc counts in the LA and San Francisco Bay Area networks. The authors in
[3] also propose a deep-learning approach that brings together convolutional neural networks
and recurrent neural networks with long short-term memory (LSTM) units, utilizing their
architecture for short-term traﬃc count extrapolation at 349 locations on the Beijing road
network. In a set of articles [19, 25], the authors leverage data from Bluetooth and GPS probe
sensors for travel-time estimation and validation. Coupled hidden Markov models (CHMM)
were used in [8] to model the evolution of traﬃc states, applied to a sparse taxi-ﬂeet dataset
for the San Francisco Bay area road network. In a subsequent publication [9] leveraging the
same dataset, the authors employ a dynamic Bayesian network to learn arterial dynamics.
8. Conclusions and future work. In this work we leveraged coarse-grained Uber Move-
ment data in the form of TAZ O–D pair summary statistics to provide estimates of ﬁne-grained,
street-level travel times. Our techniques for trip simulation and biased travel-time sampling
were used in conjunction with weighted shortest-path routing to set up a system of linear
equations with unknown edge travel times. The travel times were iteratively reﬁned using
a constrained least-squares optimizer for multiple batches of simulated trips. In our largest
road network (40,522 edges and 24,472 TAZ O–D pairs), we achieved a RMSLE of 0.28 on our
test set after 13 iterations with 4.7 hours total runtime (32-core Intel Xeon E7-8860 system
with 2.27 GHz processor speed and 512 GB primary memory). We demonstrated a graph
pseudo-sparsiﬁcation algorithm in order to improve the computational eﬃciency of our esti-
mation routines. Our future work involves improving the optimization process, formalizing
the sparsiﬁcation approach, and scaling the approach to metropolitan-sized road networks
using high-performance computing systems.
