Diverse Weighted Bipartite b-Matching
Faez Ahmed
Dept. of Mechanical Engg.
University of Maryland

John P. Dickerson
Dept. of Computer Sci.
University of Maryland

Mark Fuge
Dept. of Mechanical Engg.
University of Maryland

Abstract
Bipartite matching, where agents on one side of a
market are matched to agents or items on the other,
is a classical problem in computer science and eco-
nomics, with widespread application in healthcare,
education, advertising, and general resource alloca-
tion. A practitioner’s goal is typically to maximize
a matching market’s economic efﬁciency, possibly
subject to some fairness requirements that promote
equal access to resources. A natural balancing act
exists between fairness and efﬁciency in matching
markets, and has been the subject of much research.
In this paper, we study a complementary goal—
balancing diversity and efﬁciency—in a general-
ization of bipartite matching where agents on one
side of the market can be matched to sets of agents
on the other.
Adapting a classical deﬁnition of
the diversity of a set, we propose a quadratic
programming-based approach to solving a super-
modular minimization problem that balances diver-
sity and total weight of the solution. We also pro-
vide a scalable greedy algorithm with theoretical
performance bounds. We then deﬁne the price of
diversity, a measure of the efﬁciency loss due to
enforcing diversity, and give a worst-case theoreti-
cal bound. Finally, we demonstrate the efﬁcacy of
our methods on three real-world datasets, and show
that the price of diversity is not bad in practice. Our
code is publicly accessible for further research.1
1
Introduction
Bipartite matching problems pair an agent or item on one side
of a market to an agent or item on the other. Weighted bipar-
tite b-matching generalizes this problem to the setting where
matches have a real-valued quality, and agents on one side of
the market can be matched to a cardinality-constrained set
of items or agents on the other side; real-world examples
include matching children to schools [Kurata et al., 2015;
Drummond et al., 2015], reviewers to manuscripts [Char-
lin and Zemel, 2013; Liu et al., 2014], donor organs to
1https://github.com/faezahmed/diverse matching
patients [Bertsimas et al., 2013; Dickerson and Sandholm,
2015], and workers to ﬁrms [Horton, 2017].
Often, a matching market’s central goal is to maximize
economic efﬁciency subject to some fairness constraints, such
as ensuring equal opportunity amongst participants. For ex-
ample, a ﬁrm might wish to maximize the number of open
positions ﬁlled subject to a fairness constraint: a ﬁrm must
interview a representative number of workers from marginal-
ized backgrounds. Yet, the ﬁrm also cares about the entire
cohort’s ability: the workers it hires should hold high quality,
yet complementary skill sets. This paper studies the trade-off
between economic efﬁciency and diversity, where matchings
provide good coverage over different classes of item or agent.
A representative example this paper considers is match-
ing academic papers to possible reviewers. A paper might
have highest relevance to three reviewers who all come from
the same lab group, perhaps because they all published heav-
ily in a similar area. Existing weighted bipartite b-matching
(WBM) algorithms would likely assign those three review-
ers to the same paper. Is this outcome desirable? On the
one hand, yes, because they have expertise related to the pa-
per. On the other hand, those reviewers would stress similar
points, given their common background. So the paper may
only improve in a narrow (albeit important) direction. What if
we wanted to diversify the reviewer backgrounds—to ﬁnd re-
viewers well-suited to the paper and complementary to each
other? Ideally, the reviews would remain high quality, but
would cover different, complementary aspects of the paper.
This paper addresses how to compute diverse matchings
under various constraints, bounds the loss on economic efﬁ-
ciency due to using a diverse matching, and shows in simu-
lation and on data from three real-world bipartite matching
problems that it is possible to achieve diverse matchings with
limited cost to economic efﬁciency.
1.1
Related Work
In practice, the weighted bipartite b-matching (WBM) prob-
lem—ﬁnd the feasible matching with maximum weight—has
arisen naturally as a problem in many ﬁelds, such as: protein
structure alignment [Krissinel and Henrick, 2004]; computer
vision [Belongie et al., 2002]; estimating text similarity [Pang
et al., 2016]; VLSI design [Huang et al., 1991]; and match-
ing reviewers to papers in peer-review systems [Charlin and
Zemel, 2013; Liu et al., 2014; Tang et al., 2010]. Driven by
arXiv:1702.07134v2  [cs.DS]  15 Aug 2017

practical application, such previous work aims to maximize
economic efﬁciency. We will compare against this objective
in the present work.
This paper incorporates diversity objectives into the WBM
problem. The closest related paper, due to Liu et al. [2014],
performs a node-speciﬁc diversity-inspired preprocess before
solving a related matching problem; in our work, we con-
sider the “global” diversity of the full matching, a function
of the diversity of sets of vertices. Other papers have ad-
dressed diversity in ranking problems (e.g., diverse recom-
mendations [Adomavicius and Kwon, 2012; Sha et al., 2016;
Ashkan et al., 2015]), but not for matching. Past approaches
mathematically represent coverage of a set of items, such that
a diverse set better covers the space of items. This cover-
age is often deﬁned via diminishing marginal utility over a
space, such that adding more items to nearby areas of space
is less useful. There are many application-dependent choices
for what such a space entails including vector spaces such as
text vectors [Puthiya Parambath et al., 2016] or metrics over
graphs [Zhang et al., 2005], among others. To represent di-
minishing marginal utility, families of submodular functions
are natural candidates that have shown promise in diversity
tasks like document summarization [Lin and Bilmes, 2011].
We will use similar reasoning when deﬁning our objectives.
The most similar work to ours is due to Chen et al. [2016],
who propose Conﬂict-Aware WBM (CA-WBM). They con-
sider conﬂict constraints between vertices on the same side
of a bipartite graph. In CA-WBM, if two vertices are in con-
ﬂict, they may not both be matched to a vertex on the other
side of the graph. CA-WBM enforces a kind of binary diver-
sity by manually deﬁning conﬂicts between speciﬁc nodes.
In contrast, this paper treats diversity as an objective, not a
constraint, allowing us to ﬂexibly control the degree to which
a matching algorithm encourages or discourages diverse so-
lutions to the standard WBM problem. This is useful when
one wants conﬂicts or diversity to vary in degree, or trade off
diversity with other measures of match quality.
1.2
Our Contributions
This work studies the trade-off between diversity and efﬁ-
ciency in matching markets. This is different from earlier
work as the diversity measure is modeled as an objective and
not as constraints, and diversity is deﬁned over sets of items.
Our main contributions are as follows.
1. We formulate the diverse weighted bipartite b-matching
optimization problem.
2. We propose a polynomial-time greedy algorithm for
constrained b-matching, and prove performance bounds
on that relative to the NP-hard main problem.
3. We show via simulation and data from three large real-
world bipartite matching problems that our method pro-
duces matchings with much higher diversity than stan-
dard efﬁcient matchings, at little overall cost to eco-
nomic efﬁciency.
In the following Section 2, we formalize the weighed b-
matching optimization problem; then, in Section 3, we de-
ﬁne our diversity-promoting objective and present the price
of diversity, a measure of the tradeoff in economic efﬁciency
under a diverse matching objective. Section 4 presents an op-
Figure 1: Bipartite b-matching problem where the left side nodes are
divided into two clusters.
timal method for solving our problem, a scalable polynomial-
time greedy algorithm with performance bounds, and a worst-
case bound on the price of diversity. Section 5 shows via sim-
ulation and on real data from three matching problems that (i)
our method promotes diversity in matching, (iii) the greedy
approximate algorithm is both scalable and performs com-
parable to optimal, (ii) both algorithms retain dramatically
more efﬁciency than our worst-case bounds implied; that is,
the price of diversity in practice is quite good.
2
Weighted Bipartite Matching
Weighted bipartite b-matching is a combinatorial optimiza-
tion problem formulated as follows. Given a weighted bipar-
tite graph G = (U, V, E) with weights W : E →R+, where
U, V and E represent left vertices, right vertices and edges,
the weighted bipartite b-matching problem is to ﬁnd a sub-
graph T ⊂G such that each vertex i in T has at most b edges
(i.e., a degree constraint). WBM maximizes or minimizes the
objective depending on the application.
We use similar notation to Chen et al. [2016] to deﬁne a
weighed bipartite b-matching problem, with two notable dif-
ferences. First, we deﬁne it as a minimization problem, and
second, we deﬁne a harder problem which has both node-
speciﬁc upper- and lower-cardinality constraints. The con-
strained weighed bipartite b-matching (WBM) problem can
be expressed as follows.
min
X
f1 = WX
s.t.
L−≤AXi ≤L+
∀i ∈{1, . . . , M}
R−≤AXi ≤R+
∀i ∈{M + 1, . . . , M + N}
xij ∈{0, 1}
∀i, j, 1 ≤i ≤M, 1 ≤j ≤N
(1)
We have N items on the right side with R−and R+ integral
lower and upper cardinality constraints, respectively, and M
items on the left side with L−and L+ as integral cardinality
bounds. Here, X is a column vector of binary variables of
size MN, with xij = 1 if left item i is matched to right item
j, and xij = 0 otherwise. W is a matrix of weights wij
representing the local quality of matching items i and j.
Items on the same side of bipartite graph cannot be
matched; thus, we use A as a linking matrix, such that any
row i indicates which nodes are allowed to be connected
to item i. We index edges (i, j) uniquely using a function
ℓ: E →{1, . . . , MN}. Then, A is an (M + N) × MN
matrix, where aiℓ((i,j)) = 1 if edge (i, j) exists; otherwise,
aiℓ((i,j)) = 0. The degree constraints for left nodes are given
by L−≤AXi ≤L+, where AXi denotes the ith element
in (vector) AX. L+ is the upper bound on cardinality of ith
node and L−is the lower bound.
The above formulation shows a constrained matching prob-
lem, where nodes on both sides have capacity constraints.

This discrete linear optimization problem is NP-hard [Chen
et al., 2016]. Its optimal solution will minimize the weights,
emphasizing on efﬁciency and neglecting diversity.
3
Diversity in Matching
Diversity in matching can be deﬁned as the need to match
a node with other nodes from different groups. To add di-
versity, we consider a scenario where left-side nodes are di-
vided into K groups. Let us say that we want a matching
which matches each node on the right side to nodes from dif-
ferent clusters. The diversity is calculated using supermodu-
lar functions. These functions have been widely used in ex-
tractive document summarization [Lin and Bilmes, 2011] to
get a diverse high quality summary of documents. We use a
quadratic function which can incorporate diversity by balanc-
ing the number of nodes (e.g., items or agents) selected from
different clusters.
Let El = {(1, l), . . . , (M, l)} be the set of all M edges
from a node l ∈{1, . . . , N} on the right side of the graph.
Let the subset Sl ⊆El = {(1, l), ..., (m, l)} be the matched
m edges for node l. Let (Pi)l, i ∈{1, . . . , K} is a partition of
the ground set El into K separate clusters (i.e., ∪iP l
i = El,
and ∩iP l
i = ∅). That is, a left item can only belong to one
cluster. The weight of an edge from left node n to right node
l is wn,l. We deﬁne the quality of match for node l on the
right side as:
f(l) =
K
X
k=1



X
j∈Sl∩P l
k
wj,l



2
(2)
This quadratic function gives lower cost to solutions with
even coverage over all clusters. As an example, Figure 1
shows three nodes on either side, each requiring two edges.
If all edge weights w are one, the node-speciﬁc utility of a
matching {(L1, R1), (L2, R1)} is 4, while the utility of al-
ternate matching {(L1, R1), (L3, R1)} is 2. Hence, by min-
imizing the function in Equation 2, diversity is encouraged.
By transforming the matching problem to quadratic mini-
mization, the resultant objective function simultaneously op-
timizes quality and diversity. In the next section, we provide
a formal framework to generalize this function to constrained
b-matching problems.
To the best of our knowledge, no known general mea-
sure exists to measure the performance of diverse b-matching
methods. Even veriﬁcation of diverse matching is difﬁcult,
due to different deﬁnitions of diversity in the literature. One
way of comparing our diversity results is to look at the
Shannon entropy of a match for each item, with and with-
out our method. Shannon entropy has been used to incor-
porate diversity in recommendations [Qin and Zhu, 2013;
Di Noia et al., 2014] and also widely used in the ecologi-
cal literature as a diversity index. It quantiﬁes the uncertainty
in predicting the cluster label of an individual that is taken at
random from the dataset. Here entropy of a node is given by:
−PK
i=1 (pk log pk), where pk is the proportion of selected
edges in cluster K.
Entropy for an item is maximized if it is matched to other
items with even coverage of different clusters; it is zero when
all such items are from the same cluster. Hence, the impact of
diverse matching can be measured as improvement in average
entropy. We deﬁne the entropy gain (EG) as:
EG = Average entropy using a diverse matching rule
Average entropy using WBM
(3)
We also propose a new metric to measure the efﬁciency lost
due to diversity. We deﬁne the price of diversity (PoD) as:
PoD =
Utility using WBM
Utility using a diverse matching rule.
(4)
Later in the paper, we will show in simulation and on real
data that the entropy gain under our proposed diverse match-
ing method is high, at very little cost to overall efﬁciency.
4
Exact and Approximate Algorithms
In our bipartite matching formulation with utility mini-
mization, the degree constraints L−and R−can be inter-
preted as setting the demand. The short side of market de-
termines the number of edges in the matching, which is
min{ML−, NR−}.
If the right side is short, the maxi-
mum capacity on the left should be more than the demand:
NR−≤ML+ for any matching to be feasible. For the pur-
pose of this paper, we always assume that right side is the
short side of market and the left side is clustered into groups.
The cardinality constraints make the problem more difﬁcult
than what has usually been solved for matching as nodes can-
not be matched independent of each other.
4.1
Diverse WBM
To generalize the quadratic function (cf. Equation 2) to an op-
timization framework for all nodes, we deﬁne a MN × MN
block-diagonal matrix B = diag(B1, . . . , BM) such that:
Bl =
wi · wj if edges i, j ∈P l
k (same cluster)
0 otherwise
Bl is the block diagonal matrix for every right node, with
K blocks on the diagonal corresponding to each cluster. Ma-
trix B is a diagonal matrix for all Bl matrices combined.
Later, we show a visualization of the symmetric Bl ma-
trix in Fig. 3 for ﬁve clusters for reviewer matching appli-
cation. Hence, the optimization problem for Diverse WBM
(D-WBM) can be written as:
minimize
X
f2(X) = XT BX
(5)
To show that this formulation is equivalent to Eq. 2,
let us again consider R1 in Fig. 1 with two clusters,
three edges and unit weights.
Using Eq. 5 for the
node-speciﬁc utility of a matching {(L1, R1), (L2, R1)}
is
[1, 1, 0][1, 1, 0; 1, 1, 0; 0, 0, 1][1, 1, 0]
=
4
and
the utility of alternate matching {(L1, R1), (L3, R1)} is
[1, 0, 1][1, 1, 0; 1, 1, 0; 0, 0, 1][1, 0, 1] = 2. This is same as
obtained by Eq. 2 before. The constraints and variables are
the same as in WBM (cf. Equation 1). Our new model has
a quadratic objective with linear constraints and integrality
requirement for variables. We solve it using two different ap-
proaches, ﬁrst using Gurobi’s Mixed Integer Quadratic Pro-
gramming (MIQP) Solver [Gurobi Optimization, 2016], and

second by using a novel greedy algorithm that builds up a set
by minimizing marginal gain. Next, we propose this greedy
algorithm and give bounds on its performance.
4.2
Greedy Diverse WBM
The objective of the D-WBM formulation is supermodular,
that is, adding new elements leads to (strictly) increasing dif-
ferences.
Hence a method which greedily adds edges by
minimizing the marginal gain can attain reasonable perfor-
mance bounds [Nemhauser et al., 1978]. Secondly, solving
the MIQP exactly requires storing the block diagonal matrix;
for large problems, MIQP may run out of memory as the num-
ber of non-zero terms in the matrix scales by M 2N.
We propose an algorithm which incrementally satisﬁes the
lower degree constraints for all nodes. It does this by increas-
ing the lower bound of all nodes unit step at a time and se-
lecting edges by minimizing marginal gain in the objective
f2. In selecting edges, it gives preference to the set of nodes
with unsatisﬁed lower bound. This ensures that the greedy se-
lection always ﬁnds a feasible matching with good empirical
performance.
Algorithm 1: GD-WBM Greedy Diverse Matching
Input: A set of N + M nodes, bounds L−, L+, R−, R+
and edge weights matrix B
Output: A feasible matching
1 C ←∅
2 for i ←1 to max{L−, R−} do
3
L−
i = min{i, L−}; R−
i = min{i, R−}
4
for j ←1 to N + M do
5
if j’s lower bound is not satisﬁed then
6
Select the feasible edge e with lowest
marginal gain f(C ∪{e}) −f(C) whose
opposite node’s lower bound is not satisﬁed
7
If no such node exists, pick the feasible edge
with lowest marginal gain.
8 return C
For a right constrained matching, the matching for every
right node is independent of others as they do not have over-
lapping constraints. Hence GD-WBM achieves a (1 −1/e)-
approximation of the optimum due to its supermodular objec-
tive function. In practice, Section 5 will show that GD-WBM
performs much better than the lower bound.
4.3
Price of Diversity Bound
In this section, we propose lower bounds on the price of di-
versity (PoD)—the utility loss due to diverse matching—in
right-constrained market. Theorem 1 gives such a bound.
Theorem 1. The worst-case Price of Diversity (PoD) for a
right-constrained diverse matching is:
1
N
N
X
l=1
zl
1 +
√
R−−1√zl2 −1, where zl =
P wjl
min wjl
(6)
Proof sketch. We wish to ﬁnd a problem instance where the
best diverse matching has high weight under the utilitarian
objective. Such PoD for a matching will be minimized when
diversity leads to all low-weight weight edges being replaced
by higher weight edges. Such a situation can occur when
WBM provides a match for a right node with all m edges
going to left nodes in the same cluster 1. Let {w1, . . . , wm}
be such edge weights. In this instance, let D-WBM select
edges going to m unique clusters. Here, D-WBM will select
the single edge with least weight from each cluster, includ-
ing cluster 1. Call those edges {a1, . . . , am} be the selected
edge weights by D-WBM. The edge weights will satisfy the
following constraints:
m
X
i=1
wi ≤
m
X
i=1
ai
and
(
m
X
i=1
wi)2 ≥
m
X
i=1
ai
2
(7)
Both WBM and D-WBM select edge a1 = mini∈[m] wi
from cluster 1. To minimize PoD, the denominator—f1 of
the diverse matching—Pm
i=1 ai should be maximized. Using
the Lagrangian method, this constrained maximization prob-
lem is solved, with optima occurring at the surface of a hy-
persphere and a2 = a3 . . . = am.
If the minimum weight for every right node is 0, by taking
limits on Eq. 6, the PoD becomes
1
√
R−−1. In the succeeding
section, we will show that Theorem 1 is quite conservative.
5
Results and Discussion
We begin by comparing the two methods’ PoD to its theo-
retical bound on a synthetic dataset. Next, we solve the b-
matching problem on three datasets, one for movie recom-
mendation and two for papers–reviewers matching. We ana-
lyze the effect of problem size by increasing the number of
nodes and the cardinality requirements. Finally, we discuss
the trade-off between diversity and utility.
5.1
Artiﬁcial Dataset
In this section, we simulate matching 10 nodes with another
10 nodes; by Theorem 1, the worst-case PoD is 0.5. Weights
are selected randomly from a uniform distribution between 0
to 1 and the cluster labels of the left-side nodes are selected
randomly. For right-constrained matching, we use R−= 5,
implying that each right side node will be matched to at least
ﬁve items. The number of clusters are varied from 2 to 10,
and 100 trials are done to compare D-WBM with WBM.
Figure 2 shows that in practice, PoD is never below 0.9
despite random clusters and weights. Also, EG generally de-
creases when PoD increases. The greedy approximation GD-
WBM ﬁnds the same matches as D-WBM for all cases.
5.2
Application to MovieLens dataset
This example considers matching movies to users, while en-
suring that the movies contain diverse genres. We use a sub-
set of the MovieLens 1M dataset [Harper and Konstan, 2016],
which includes one million ratings by 6,040 users for 3,900
items. This dataset contains both users’ movie ratings be-
tween 1 and 5 and genre categories for each movie (e.g., com-
edy, romance, and action).
We ﬁrst train a standard collaborative recommender system
[Bradley, 2016] to obtain ratings for all movies by every user.

1.0
1.1
1.2
En t r op y Gain
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Nu m b er  of  Clu st er s
0.95
1.00
PoD
Figure 2: PoD and EG for a simulated dataset showing the aver-
age PoD with 5th and 95th percentile values. D-WBM unilaterally
outperforms the worst-case PoD of 0.5.
Dataset
D-WBM
GD-WBM
PoD
EG
PoD
EG
Movie-Lens
0.99
1.45
0.99
1.45
UIUC Reviewer
0.92
1.63
0.83
1.60
Sugiyama
0.94
4.28
0.93
4.28
Table 1: Price of Diversity and Entropy Gain results for three real
world datasets.
We cluster the movies into 5 clusters using their vector of 18
genres using spectral clustering,2 so that each movie gets a
unique cluster label. We solve the right constrained match-
ing problem for 500 movies and make recommendations for
500 users with at least 10 recommendations for every user.
Table 1 shows that with average EG of 1.45, D-WBM ﬁnds
a more diverse matching for all users and on average a user
loses only 1% utility for this gain. To save computational
time, in all our simulations we terminate D-WBM after 1 hour
and take the best solution, while WBM converges to true op-
tima. Hence the results are conservative estimates.
To further understand the matching result, we compare the
movie recommendations by D-WBM and WBM for User ID
423. WBM matches her to movies that are all either Come-
dies or Dramas, with an average predicted rating of 4.07. In
contrast, D-WBM matches the user with movies from ﬁve dif-
ferent clusters, with an average movie rating of 4.05, show-
ing negligible loss in efﬁciency. Table 2 compares the rec-
ommended genres. While we chose to promote diversity in
genre, the MovieLens dataset also provides information about
the user’s gender, age group, and occupation; D-WBM can
encourage other types of diversity in movie recommendation.
5.3
Application to Reviewer Assignment
In this section, we present an application of diverse match-
ing to automatically determine the most appropriate reviewers
for a manuscript by also ensuring that reviewers are different
from each other.
2The exact choice of recommender system and clustering algo-
rithm is not central to paper; it just helps set up the graph.
D-WBM
WBM
Cluster
Genres
Cluster
Genres
2
Drama, Thriller
2
Drama,Thriller
1
Adventure,Sci-Fi
2
Crime,Drama,Thriller
3
Documentary
0
Comedy
3
Documentary
0
Comedy,Drama
0
Comedy,Romance
0
Comedy,Romance
4
Drama,Horror
2
Drama
4
Horror,Sci-Fi,Thriller
2
Drama
2
Drama
2
Drama
0
Comedy,Mystery
0
Comedy,Mystery
1
Action,Thriller
2
Action,Crime,Drama
Table 2: Genres and Cluster labels of ten movies recommended to
a user by WBM and D-WBM. The movies by D-WBM provide a
broader genre coverage.
UIUC Multi-Aspect Review Assignment Dataset
We use the multi-aspect review assignment evaluation dataset
[Karimzadehgan and Zhai, 2009] which is a benchmark
dataset from UIUC. It contains 73 papers accepted by SIGIR
2007, and 189 prospective reviewers who had published in
the main information retrieval conferences. The dataset pro-
vides 25 major topics and for each paper in the set, an ex-
pert provided 25-dimensional label on that paper based on a
set of deﬁned topics. Similarly for the 189 reviewers, a 25-
dimensional expertise representation is provided.
For the reviewer-paper bipartite graph, edge weights be-
tween each test paper and reviewer are set as the cosine dis-
tance of their label vectors. We cluster the reviewers into 5
clusters based on their topic vectors using spectral clustering.
We set the constraints such that each paper matches with at
least 3 reviewers and every reviewer is allocated at least 1
paper, while no reviewer is allocated more than 10 papers.
Despite the constraints, D-WBM ﬁnds a diverse matching
with PoD of 0.92. GD-WBM provides an average entropy
gain of 1.60 but pays a higher price of diversity as shown in
Table 1. To delve deeper into the results, we take the exam-
ple of 48th paper titled “Towards musical query-by-semantic-
description using the CAL500 data set” from the dataset. This
paper is labeled as related to Topics T8 (Multimedia IR), T16
(Language models) and T3 (Other machine learning). WBM
matches it to three reviewers with IDs 43, 34, and 1583. If we
analyze their topic vectors, we ﬁnd that all of them have the
Language Models (T16) topic common between them. Not
surprisingly, they are all found by our clustering method to
be in the same cluster, as shown in Fig. 3.
On the other hand, diverse matching provides a match with
three reviewers (IDs 131, 153 and 158) from three differ-
ent clusters. Reviewer 131 provides a balance between IR
and Language Model topics but also works on User Stud-
ies. Reviewer 153 works on many topics relevant to the paper
—Multimedia IR (T8), ML (T2, T3) and Text Categorization
(T1). In D-WBM’s reviewer set, Reviewers 153 and 131 have
no common aspect between them while Reviewer 158 shares
interests with both. Having a set of reviewers who are similar
to the query paper but complementary in skillsets may pro-
vide a well-rounded review with good coverage of different
viewpoints. GD-WBM also ﬁnds a match which has higher
entropy (three different clusters) than WBM.
3More information on the reviewers is available here:
http:
//sifaka.cs.uiuc.edu/ir/data/review.html

B-Matrix
Values  
50
100
150
Edges
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Edges
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
D-WBM matches 
from 3 clusters
All matches for WBM
 from this cluster
Figure 3: Block Diagonal B-Matrix for Paper 48; WBM selects all
matches from a single cluster
Scholarly Paper Recommendation Dataset
To further test our method on matching reviewers with papers,
we use the Scholarly Paper Recommendation dataset pro-
vided by Sugiyama et al. [Sugiyama and Kan, 2010], which
contains 50 researchers and 100, 351 candidate papers from
proceedings in the ACM Digital Library.
We select all papers from KDD 2000 to KDD 2010 from
this dataset (a total of 1184 papers) and ﬁnd three reviewers
for each of them from the given set of 50 reviewers. We calcu-
late edge weights between papers and reviewers as the cosine
distance between the tf-idf vector of the query paper and re-
viewer’s latest paper. No limit of maximum number of papers
that a reviewer can review is imposed but each reviewer must
be allocated at least one paper. We divide the reviewers into
5 clusters using their tf-idf vectors with Spectral Clustering.
The results show that D-WBM improves on the diversity of
all 1184 papers with EG of 4.28 as shown in Table 1. The
larger EG in this dataset compared to UIUC is because EG
decreases as we reduce the upper bound, so the net effect ob-
served in UIUC dataset is also due to choice of bounds. Here,
we removed one factor and noticed much larger entropy gain
for little loss of efﬁciency (6%).
5.4
Effect of Bounds and Problem Size
So far, we have set the cardinality bounds without discussing
their effect on the matching results. One would expect that as
bounds become tighter, the utility of WBM and D-WBM will
suffer due to lesser search space. However, the question we
answer here is how it affects the relative performance of the
two methods as measured by PoD and EG.
More speciﬁcally, we study R−, as the number of edges
in the matching is determined by it. We use UIUC dataset
discussed before, where each reviewer must review at least
one paper and we cluster the reviewers into 10 groups. Fig-
ure 4 shows that the PoD is consistently high irrespective of
the number of reviewers matched to every paper. The PoD
initially decreases as more clusters contribute to diversity but
then slowly increases to 1 as the problem becomes more and
more constrained. Obviously, when R−= M, there is only
one matching possible and both WBM and D-WBM have the
same utility. EG in general increases when R−is less than the
Figure 4: Change of PoD and EG with increasing R−.
Figure 5: Runtime comparison as problem size increases
number of clusters as new clusters can contribute to diversity.
Among other bounds, setting R+ to any value has no effect
on optimization. Increasing L+ allows WBM to overuse few
good nodes, who might have low edge weights with everyone.
Hence, WBM’s entropy suffers signiﬁcantly.
Finally, we discuss the effect of problem size on the perfor-
mance of WBM, D-WBM, and GD-WBM. We use the UIUC
dataset with R−= 3, L−= 1 and increase the number of re-
viewers available to review the papers. Figure 5 shows the rel-
ative time performance of the three methods. We can see that
WBM and GD-WBM take much less time than D-WBM’s
MIQP solver. The latter time is capped at one hour and the
best solution at that point is used for analysis.
6
Conclusions & Future Research
In this paper, we presented a quantitative approach to bal-
ancing diversity and efﬁciency in a generalization of bipar-
tite matching where agents on one side of the market can be
matched to sets of agents or items on the other. We propose
a quadratic programming-based approach to solving a super-
modular minimization problem that balances diversity and to-
tal weight of the solution. The general problem is NP-hard, so
we proposed a scalable greedy algorithm with theoretical per-
formance bounds. We proposed the price of diversity (PoD),
which measures efﬁciency loss due to enforcing diversity, and
gave worst-case theoretical bounds on that metric. Finally,
we validated our methods on three real-world datasets, and
showed that the price of diversity is quite good in practice.
Future research will focus on diverse matching for online
problems, where edges arrive sequentially and on scaling di-
verse matching to larger datasets. Another area of work can
be diverse matching with diversity of a set deﬁned using De-
terminantal Point Process (DPP) kernels [Kulesza and Taskar,
2012], which do not require explicit clustering. Lastly, the
trade-off between diversity and efﬁciency can be further ex-
plored using an objective function which combines efﬁciency
maximizing WBM and entropy maximizing D-WBM.
