arXiv:1901.07333v1  [cs.CY]  17 Jan 2019
MULTI-AGENT REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
EMBEDDED GAME FOR THE OPTIMIZATION OF
BUILDING ENERGY CONTROL AND POWER SYSTEM
PLANNING
A DISSERTATION
PRESENTED TO THE FACULTY
OF DANIEL FELIX RITCHIE SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING AND COMPUTER SCIENCE
UNIVERSITY OF DENVER
IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT
OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE COMPREHENSIVE EXAM
OF DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY
BY
JUN HAO
OCTOBER, 2018
ADVISOR: JUN JASON ZHANG

c⃝Copyright by Jun Hao, 2019.
All Rights Reserved

Author: Jun Hao
Title: Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning Embedded Game for the Optimization of Build-
ing Energy Control and Power System Planning
Advisor: Jun Jason Zhang
Degree Date: October, 2018
Abstract
Most of the current game-theoretic demand-side management methods focus primarily on
the scheduling of home appliances, and the related numerical experiments are analyzed
under various scenarios to achieve the corresponding Nash-equilibrium (NE) and optimal
results. However, not much work is conducted for academic or commercial buildings. The
methods for optimizing academic-buildings are distinct from the optimal methods for home
appliances. In my study, we address a novel methodology to control the operation of heat-
ing, ventilation, and air conditioning system (HVAC).
We assume that each building in our campus is equipped with smart meter and commu-
nication system which is envisioned in the future smart grid. For academic and commercial
buildings, HVAC systems consume considerable electrical energy and impact the person-
nels in the buildings which is interpreted as monetary value in this article. Therefore, we
deﬁne social cost as the combination of energy expense and cost of human working pro-
ductivity reduction. We implement game theory and formulate a controlling and scheduling
game for HVAC system, where the players are the building managers and their strategies
are the indoor temperature settings for the corresponding building. We use the University
of Denver campus power system as the demonstration smart grid and it is assumed that the
utility company can adopt the real-time pricing mechanism, which is demonstrated in this
paper, to reﬂect the energy usage and power system condition in real time. For general
scenarios, the global optimal results in terms of minimizing social costs can be reached at
ii

the Nash equilibrium of the formulated objective function. The proposed distributed HVAC
controlling system requires each manager set the indoor temperature to the best response
strategy to optimize their overall management. The building managers will be willing to
participate in the proposed game to save energy cost while maintaining the indoor in com-
fortable zone.
With the development of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and computer technologies, reinforce-
ment learning (RL) can be implemented in multiple realistic scenarios and help people to
solve thousands of real-world problems. Reinforcement Learning, which is considered as
the art of future AI, builds the bridge between agents and environments through Markov
Decision Chain or Neural Network and has seldom been used in power system. The art
of RL is that once the simulator for a speciﬁc environment is built, the algorithm can keep
learning from the environment. Therefore, RL is capable of dealing with constantly chang-
ing simulator inputs such as power demand, the condition of power system and outdoor
temperature, etc. Compared with the existing distribution power system planning mecha-
nisms and the related game theoretical methodologies, our proposed algorithm can plan and
optimize the hourly energy usage, and have the ability to corporate with even shorter time
window if needed.
Simulation results prove that the proposed methodology can set the indoor tempera-
ture with respect to real-time pricing and the number of inside occupants, maintain in-
door comfort, reduce individual building energy cost and the overall campus electricity
charges. Compared with the traditional game theoretical methodology, the RL based gam-
ing methodology can achieve the optiaml resutls much more quicker.
iii
