arXiv:1103.1156v1  [cs.AI]  6 Mar 2011
1
Efﬁcient neuro-fuzzy system and its Memristor
Crossbar-based Hardware Implementation
Farnood Merrikh-Bayat and Saeed Bagheri-Shouraki
Abstract
In this paper a novel neuro-fuzzy system is proposed where its learning is based on the creation of fuzzy relations
by using new implication method without utilizing any exact mathematical techniques. Then, a simple memristor
crossbar-based analog circuit is designed to implement this neuro-fuzzy system which offers very interesting
properties. In addition to high connectivity between neurons and being fault-tolerant, all synaptic weights in our
proposed method are always non-negative and there is no need to precisely adjust them. Finally, this structure is
hierarchically expandable and can compute operations in real time since it is implemented through analog circuits.
Simulation results show the efﬁciency and applicability of our neuro-fuzzy computing system. They also indicate
that this system can be a good candidate to be used for creating artiﬁcial brain.
I. INTRODUCTION
In the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence, neuro-fuzzy refers to combination of artiﬁcial neural networks and
fuzzy logics trying to use beneﬁts of these two ﬁelds. Perhaps the most important advantage of neural
networks is their adaptivity. Adaptivity comes from learning capability of neural networks which allows
these networks to perform well even when the environment varies over time like what human brain does.
Another signiﬁcant beneﬁt of neural networks relates to their huge connectivity (again inspired from real
brain) that offers high fault tolerance and parallel processing power which is also assumed to be the
reason of high efﬁciency of biological systems. On the other hand, fuzzy logic performs an inference
mechanism under cognitive uncertainty and provides an inference morphology that enables approximate
human reasoning capabilities to be applied to knowledge-based systems. However, in fuzzy inference
systems, it usually takes a lot of time to design and tune membership functions and rules. To overcome
this problem, similar to what is done in neuro-fuzzy systems, learning techniques of neural networks can
automated this tuning process to reduce development time.

2
Therefore, it can be said that current neuro-fuzzy systems like ANFIS [1], RuleNet [2] and GARIC
[3] are fuzzy systems that use a learning algorithm derived from neural network theory to determine
their parameters (fuzzy sets and fuzzy rules) by processing training data. However, eventually all of these
neuro-fuzzy systems are trying to approach an ideal soft-computing tool where the nature of its computing
or inference be as similar as possible to computation and inference in human brain. Although now we
can see signiﬁcant progresses in this area in the software domain, samples of successful hardware which
could even approach computing capabilities of real brain are very rare. One of the main obstacle in front
of this purpose relates to the ability of efﬁciently modeling and construction of synapses. Actually, highly
parallel processing power of biological systems comes from large connectivity between neurons through
synapses (each neuron in human brain is connected to about 10000 other neurons through these synapses)
and it is widely believed that the adaptation of synaptic weights enables the biological systems to learn
and function. Therefore, efﬁcient construction of synaptic weights is a critical factor in the success of ﬁnal
system. After the ﬁrst physical realization of memristor [4], it becomes clear that this passive element can
be a perfect representative of synapse since similar to synapse, its conductance can be precisely modulated
by passing charge and ﬂux through it.
In the past few years and by the discovery of memristor and improvements achieved in the construc-
tion of powerful digital hardware, extensive works are in progress to build an artiﬁcial brain that can
adaptively interact with the world in real time. Among then we can name projects like IFAT 4G at John
Hopkins University, BrainScales in the European Union’s neuromorphic chip program, brain simulator
C2 introduced by IBM, and Modular Neural Exploring Traveling Agent (MoNETA). The most recent one
between these projects, i.e. MoNETA which is the part of the DARPA’s SyNAPSE program, is a software
developed by the researchers at Boston University which will run on a brain-inspired microprocessor
under development at HP labs in California [5]. In this still under construction system, in spite of internal
structure of real brain, all units are implemented in digital with separate memory and computational units.
However, it has been argued that by constructing memristive memories (to store synaptic weights) and
putting them very close to computational circuits that read and write them, signalling losses and power
consumption can be minimized [5].
In this paper, we introduce another approach to construct a simple neuro-fuzzy computing system which
differs signiﬁcantly from other systems in this category. In fact, we believe that structures similar to what
is proposed in this paper merit more to be called neuro-fuzzy compared to currently available systems.

3
This is because of the fact that as can be seen in the rest of the paper, in our proposed system neural
network and fuzzy logic ﬁelds are completely involved with each other and it is hard to distinguish that
which part belongs to fuzzy logic and which part relates to neural networks. Moreover, there is no use of
exact mathematical techniques. As another advantage, in this system memristor crossbar is used to store
synaptic weights but by this difference that memory is assimilated with computational units like what we
have in human brain. In addition, because of large connectivity between input and output neurons, this
proposed structure is completely fault-tolerant. Actually we have shown that even if during the fabrication
process or execution phase of the system near half of the memristors become faulty, system can still
continue working satisfactory. On the other hand, learning in our structure is based on the creation of
fuzzy relations which is shown to be equal to primary Hebbian learning rule and therefore all synaptic
weights will be always non-negative. However, in spite of almost all developed learning methods, there is
no need to precisely adjust these weights which are represented by memristors. Finally, our neuro-fuzzy
system is hierarchically expandable and since it is constructed with analog circuits, its computations are
almost in real-time.
The paper is organized as follows. Inference method in our proposed neuro-fuzzy system is described in
Section II. Section III is devoted to the explanation of the hardware implementation of proposed inference
method based on memristor crossbar structure. The reason that we have considered our proposed system
as a neuro-fuzzy one is presented in Section IV. Eventually, a few experimental results are presented in
Section V, before conclusions in Section VI.
II. CONSTRUCTION OF A NEW FUZZY NEURO-FUZZY STRUCTURE
In this paper we propose a new fuzzy structure with biological support which can do some inferential
tasks in fuzzy form. In addition, this fuzzy structure has learning capability like human brain but in
spite of neural networks, it performs any operation based on concepts of fuzzy logic. This means that
in our proposed structure, inputs and outputs of the structure are fuzzy numbers and any calculation
in the structure for doing inferential processes is done in fuzzy without using any precise and accurate
mathematical techniques. Figure 1(a) shows such a typical Single Input Single Output (SISO) system
where in this system, fuzzy input and output variables are considered to be discrete for simplicity. If
this system was a non-fuzzy system, its input or output would be a single crisp number. However, since
this system is a fuzzy one, its input and output should be fuzzy numbers or set of pairs like what is
depicted in Fig. 1(a). Since the construction of this system with this kind of input and output terminals is

4
impossible (from hardware aspect), we modify input and output terminals of the fuzzy system of Fig.1(a)
such as the one presented in Fig. 1(b). In this ﬁgure, the ith input and the jth output of the system
represent concepts x = xi and y = yj respectively. Note that resolution or domain of input or output
variables can be increased by adding input or output terminals to the system where each of these newly
added terminals will represent new values of input or output variables. Now, if in the system of Fig.
1(b), the input applied to the ith input terminal which represents concept x = xi be µA′(x = xi) (µA′:
membership function of input fuzzy number) and the output at the jth output terminal which represents
concept y = yj be µB′(y = yj) (µB′: membership function of output fuzzy number), the system of Fig.
1(b) will be equal to the fuzzy system of Fig. 1(a) but by this difference that the construction of the fuzzy
system shown in Fig. 1(b) is much simpler. Consequently, input of the system of Fig. 1(b) is a vector
of membership degrees, i.e. [µ(x = x1), µ(x = x2), . . . , µ(x = xn)], and the output of this system is also
a vector of membership degrees, i.e. [µ(y = y1), µ(y = y2), . . . , µ(y = ym)] where combination of these
membership grades with those concepts which are assigned to input and output terminals creates input
and output fuzzy numbers. As a result, we again have a totally fuzzy system with fuzzy input and fuzzy
output variables. For example, consider a typical fuzzy system shown in Fig. 1(c). In this example, input
of the system is a fuzzy number {(0, 0.2), (1, 0.6), (2, 1), (3, 0.5), (4, 0.1), (5, 0)} which can be roughly
considered as a fuzzy representation of crisp number x = 2 and the output of this system for this input
is a fuzzy number {(2, 0), (2.5, 1), (3, 2), (3.5, 1), (4, 0.5), (4.5, 0), (5, 0)} where its deffuzziﬁcation may
probably result in a crisp number y = 4.
Now, let’s see how the fuzzy inference system of Fig. 1(b) which relates the fuzzy input variable
to fuzzy output variable can be constructed. It is well known that the compositional rule of inference
describes a composition of a fuzzy set and a fuzzy relation. Any fuzzy rule in the form of
IF
x
is
A
THEN
y
is
B
(1)
is usually represented by a fuzzy relation R [6]. Having given input linguistic value A′, we can infer
an output fuzzy set B′ by the composition of the fuzzy set A′ and the relation R. Therefore, doing any
inference between fuzzy input and output variables requires a fuzzy relation R between these variables.
Each fuzzy relation can be represented by a surface which we call it Fuzzy Relation Surface or FRS.
Value of this surface at any point is from a kind of membership degree and therefore will be always
non-negative. In literature, several implication methods have been proposed to construct a fuzzy relation
based on given input and output fuzzy sets [7], [8], [9]. In this paper, we will show another method to

5
(a)
(b)
(c)
0
1
2
3
4
5
2
3
4
5
0
0.5
1
y
x
µR(x,y)
(d)
Fig. 1.
Construction of fuzzy inference system. (a) A typical discrete fuzzy inference system with fuzzy input and output variables. (b)
Fuzzy inference system with modiﬁed input and output terminals where its hardware implementation is much simpler than the system of
Fig. 1(a). (c) A typical example of the structure of Fig. 1(b). (d) A typical fuzzy relation for the system of Fig. 1(c) where fuzzy reasoning
can be done based on it and given fuzzy number.
construct fuzzy relation based on available training fuzzy data when input and output fuzzy sets are not
known. As can be seen in the rest of this paper, our proposed method has the ability of learning as well.
Figure 1(d) shows one typical FRS for the fuzzy system of Fig. 1(c). Note that since input and output
variables of the fuzzy system of Fig. 1(c) are discrete, this surface has became discrete as well. One
reason that we have made input and output of this system and consequently its representing fuzzy relation
discrete is that the hardware implementation of continues fuzzy system is very difﬁcult if not impossible.
As stated before, it is evident that based on the requirements of the application that this fuzzy system is
intended for, resolution and range of its corresponding discrete fuzzy relation (surface) can be increased

6
simply by increasing the number of input and(or) output terminals of the system.
In its simplest form, any fuzzy relation can be deﬁned as follows [6]:
Deﬁnition II.1 (Fuzzy Relation). Let X and Y be two universes of discourse. Binary fuzzy relation,
denoted by R, are fuzzy sets which map each element in the product set X × Y to a membership grade
µR(x, y), where x ∈X and y ∈Y. So any fuzzy relation can be expressed as:
R = {((x, y), µR(x, y)) |µR(x, y) ≥0, x ∈X, y ∈Y}
(2)
Now the problem is to determine the membership function of the fuzzy relation R based on given input
and output fuzzy sets. In this section, two different situation will be considered: (i) input and output fuzzy
sets are available and (ii) input and output fuzzy sets are not in hand but instead of them, some fuzzy
input-output training data are available.
A. construction of fuzzy relation based on available input and output fuzzy sets
Consider that input fuzzy set A with membership function µA and output fuzzy set B with membership
function µB are available and the goal is to determine the membership function of the fuzzy relation
described by:
µR(x, y) = µA→B = I(µA(x), µB(y)), ∀x ∈X and y ∈Y,
(3)
based on the knowledge of µA(x) and µB(y) where I is a fuzzy implication scheme. Here, we consider
a new and simple implication method deﬁned as:
µR(x, y) = I(µA(x), µB(y)) = f(µA(x) + µB(y)), ∀x ∈X and y ∈Y,
(4)
where f(·, ·) can be any monolithically increasing function. Note that since we are dealing with fuzzy
systems, function f(·, ·) does not need to be deﬁned precisely. Equation 4 says that the membership value
of the constructed fuzzy relation at any point (x, y) should be directly proportional to the sum of the
values of the input’s membership function at point x and the output’s membership function at point y. In
other words, whatever both values of input and output membership functions at points x and y respectively
be higher, the membership value of fuzzy relation R at point (x, y) should be higher as well. Although
this implication method is not similar to other common methods, it has this beneﬁt that as can be seen
later, its hardware implementation is straightforward.

7
B. construction of fuzzy relation based on available fuzzy training data
Now, consider the case in which input and output fuzzy sets are not available but we want to construct
a fuzzy relation based on N existing fuzzy input-output training data. Each fuzzy input-output training
data for any SISO system consists of two fuzzy numbers: input fuzzy number denoted by A′ and output
fuzzy number denoted by B′. Therefore, the ith fuzzy training data can be considered as {A′
i, B′
i} where:
A′
i
=
{(x, µA′
i(x))| x ∈X}, ∀x ∈X,
B′
i
=
{(y, µB′
i(y))| y ∈Y}, ∀y ∈Y,
(5)
In above equations, X and Y are universes of discourse and µA′
i and µB′
i are membership functions
of fuzzy numbers A′
i and B′
i respectively. Similar to what is done in previous subsection, we propose to
construct a fuzzy relation representing the relation between input and output fuzzy variables as:
µR(x, y) =
N
X
i=1
f(µA′
i(x) + µB′
i(y)), ∀x ∈X and y ∈Y.
(6)
However, when all training data are not entirely available at the beginning or when they are entering
one by one, fuzzy relation can be formed iteratively. In this case, entrance of any new data should update
the current fuzzy relation which its updating rule can be written as:
µnew
R (x, y) = µold
R (x, y) + f(µA′new(x) + µB′new(y)), ∀x ∈X and y ∈Y.
(7)
where {A′
new, B′
new} is the newly observed fuzzy input-output training data. Here it is worth to discuss a
bit more about our proposed method to construct fuzzy relation based on fuzzy training data. Actually,
this implication method is inspired from the ink drop spreading concept in active learning method [10],
[11] because of three reasons: (i) it has biological support, (ii) its hardware implementation is very simple
and (iii) it does not obey from exact mathematical techniques. Figure 2 shows this process graphically.
In this ﬁgure, fuzzy relation is interpreted as an image where in this image the intensity of the pixel at
location (x, y) is directly proportional to µR(x, y) and pixels with higher intensity are depicted darker.
When a new training data is being observed, the value of the fuzzy relation at any point like (x, y)
should be increased (should be made darker). However, increasing amount of fuzzy relation at point
(x, y) should be proportional to membership grades of observed input and output fuzzy numbers at points
x and y respectively. Since most of naturally created fuzzy numbers have bell like shapes (gaussian-like
membership functions), updating the fuzzy relation due to this new fuzzy input-output training data can
be equated with the distillation of one ink drop and then spreading it on the image representing this

8
Fig. 2.
Ink drop spreading process used to construct fuzzy relation based on available fuzzy training data.
fuzzy relation. This process is clearly demonstrated in Fig. 2 as well. In a similar way, updating the fuzzy
relation with the next fuzzy input-output training data will be equal to dropping another ink drop on the
fuzzy relation image. As individual ink drop patterns overlap, the overlapping area become increasingly
darker. The effective radius of distilling ink drop on the image is to somehow related to the amount of
uncertainty in measuring input and output numbers. For example, when we can measure input and output
data with inﬁnite precision, they will become simple crisp numbers and therefore the radius of distilling
ink drop should approach zero.
Gradually by the entrance of more and more data (by progressing in the learning process and spreading
more data), a pattern will be formed on this image. Finally, this pattern will represent the fuzzy relation
which connects input and output fuzzy variables.
To conclude, any fuzzy inference needs a fuzzy relation which in its simplest form can be represented
by a 2-dimensional matrix (like the one shown in Fig. 2). Consequently, any fuzzy inference hardware
that one would like to propose should at least have a structure for storing and manipulating matrixes.
C. Doing inference
In this section, we explain how inference is done in our proposed method. For this purpose, assume that
fuzzy relation is created and based on this relation and given input fuzzy number, we want to determine
corresponding output fuzzy number. In literature, several different approaches have been proposed to
design fuzzy inference systems having linguistic descriptions of inputs and outputs [12], [13]. However,
most of these inference systems have this disadvantage that their hardware implementation is not simple.

9
For example, consider min and max operators which are frequently in use in fuzzy inference systems.
It is well known that their hardware implementation is not efﬁcient compared to some other t-norm or
t-conorm operators. Therefore, it is evident that the construction of large scale systems like human brain
based on these inference methods is very hard if not impossible. Actually, this is because of the fact that
these operators are not inherently consistent with the physical behavior of circuit elements. To avoid this
problem, we propose a new but unusual inference method as described below. Suppose that we have a
fuzzy relation R and input fuzzy number A′ = {(x, µA′(x))|x ∈X}. Now, we propose to compute the
membership function of output fuzzy number B′ corresponds to the input fuzzy number A′ as:
µB′(y) =
X
x∈X
µA′(x) × µR(x, y),
∀y ∈Y
(8)
where Y is the universe of discourse of output fuzzy number B′. If we refer back to our proposed
structure shown in Fig. 1(b) and consider the input of the structure as a vector of membership grades like
µA′ = [µA′(x1), µA′(x2), . . . , µA′(xn)]T, in this case output of that structure can be written as:
µB′ = [µB′(y1), µB′(y2), . . . , µB′(ym)]T = µR × µA′
(9)
where T is a transposition operator and µR = {µR(x, y)}. Therefore, our proposed inference method is
nothing else than a simple vector to matrix multiplication. This process is depicted in Fig. 3 graphically
in two cases: (i) input of the system is a crisp number and (ii) input of the system is a fuzzy number.
Note that to have better understanding, fuzzy relation in this fuzzy system is considered to be continuous.
Figure 3(a) shows that when the input of the fuzzy system is a crisp number, like x = xi (xi is equal to 2
in Fig. 3(a)), output of the system which is acquired by our proposed inference method will be the curve
(representing output fuzzy number) of intersection of the fuzzy relation with the plane x = xi multiplied
by µ(x = xi). Figure 3(b) shows the other case in which the input of the system is a fuzzy number.
However, without loos of generality and to better illustrate the concept behind our inference method,
input fuzzy number is considered to be discrete with only two non-zero samples at points x = xi(= 2)
and x = xj(= 0.4) with membership grades of µA′(x = xi) and µA′(x = xj) respectively. When this
input is applied to the structure, output fuzzy number B′ will be the weighted sum of two fuzzy numbers
obtained by intersecting of the fuzzy relation with planes x = xi and x = xj which can be written as:
B′ = {(y, µB′(y))|y ∈Y}
(10)
where
µB′(y) = µA′(xi) × R(xi, y) + µA′(xj) × R(xj, y), ∀y ∈Y
(11)

10
(a)
(b)
Fig. 3.
These ﬁgures show how inference is done in our proposed inference system. In our method, each sample of input fuzzy number
creates a distinct output fuzzy number which is the curve of intersection of the fuzzy relation with the speciﬁc plane. Then, these fuzzy
numbers are aggregated (summed) with each other with different gains to create the output fuzzy number; as the membership grade of one
sample in fuzzy input number be higher, contribution of its corresponding fuzzy number in the creation of ﬁnal output fuzzy number will
be more. (a) input of the system is a crisp number. (b) input of the system is a fuzzy number.
This equation means that each sample of input fuzzy number creates a distinct output fuzzy number
which is the curve of intersection of the fuzzy relation with the speciﬁc plane. Then, these fuzzy numbers
are aggregated (summed) with each other with different gains to create the output fuzzy number; as
the membership grade of one sample in fuzzy input number be higher, contribution of its corresponding
fuzzy number in the creation of ﬁnal output fuzzy number will be more. Therefore, our proposed inference
method (Eq. 8 or Eq. 9) which is only a simple vector to matrix multiplication is not so much irrelevant
and illogical. Note that since multiplying the left-hand side of Eq. 11 by a constant will not change the

11
output fuzzy number (its defuzziﬁcation before and after this multiplication will result in a same crisp
number), the height of the output fuzzy number does not need to be equal to 1.
In the following sections, we will show how this proposed inference method can be simply implemented
by using memristor crossbar structure. In addition, the reason that made us to consider this system as a
neuro-fuzzy one will be explained as well.
III. HARDWARE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROPOSED NEURO-FUZZY SYSTEM
In this section, at ﬁrst physical properties of the forth circuit element i.e. memristor will be discussed
and then the working procedure of memristor crossbar and its application will be explained. Finally, we
will show that how the fuzzy inference system that we developed in previous section can be implemented
with this memristor crossbar structure.
A. Memristor
After the ﬁrst experimental realization of the forth fundamental circuit element i.e. memristor [4] whose
existence was previously predicted in 1971 by Leon Chua [14], extraordinary increased researches are in
process in variety of ﬁelds like neuroscience, neural networks and artiﬁcial intelligence. It has become clear
that this passive element can have many potential applications such as non-volatile memory construction
[15], creation of analog neural network and emulation of human learning [16], building programmable
analog circuits [17], [18], [19], constructing hardware for soft computing tools [20], implementing digital
circuits [21] and in the ﬁeld of signal processing [22], [23].
Memristor, different from other electrical elements namely resistor, capacitor and inductor, denotes the
relationship between ﬂux(ϕ) and electric charge (q) as [14]:
dϕ = Mdq.
(12)
By rewriting this equation, memristance of the memristor can be expressed as:
M(q) = dϕ/dt
dq/dt = v(t)
i(t) ,
(13)
which shows that the unit of memristance is ohm. In fact, A memristor can be thought of as a resistive
device that its resistance varies in dependence of its current or ﬂux.
Memristor is an electrically switchable semiconductor thin ﬁlm sandwiched between two metal contact
with a total length of D and consists of doped and un-doped regions which its physical structure with

12
Fig. 4.
Structure of the memristor reported by HP researchers and its equivalent circuit model [4].
its equivalent circuit model is shown in Fig. 4 [4]. The internal state variable w determines the length of
doped region with low resistance against un-doped region with high resistivity. This internal state variable
and consequently the total resistivity of the device can be changed by applying external voltage bias v(t)
[24]. If the doped region extends to the full length D, the total resistance of the device will be at its
lowest level denoted as Ron and if the un-doped region extends to the full length D, the total resistance
of the device will be at its highest level namely Roff. For example, the mathematical model for the total
resistance of the memristor reported by HP can be written as [4]:
M(w)
=
Ron
w
D + Roff

1 −w
D

,
w(t)
=
w0 + µvRon
D
q(t),
(14)
where w0 is the initial state for state variable w, µv is the average ion mobility and q(t) is the amount of
electric charge (integral of current) that has passed through the device. Above equations show that passing
current from memristor in one direction will increase the memristance of the memristor while changing
the direction of the applied current will decrease its memristance. In addition, it is obvious that in this
element, passing current in one direction for longer period of time (which means q(t) has higher absolute
value) will change the memristance of the memristor more. Moreover, by setting the passing current
into zero, the memristance of the memristor will not change anymore. Finally, note that determining the
memristance of the memristor at any time can be done by passing a small current through the memristor
and measuring the dropped voltage across it (see Eq. 13).
As a result, memristor is nothing else than the analog variable resistor where its resistance can be
adjusted by changing the direction and the duration of the applied voltage. Therefore, memristor can be
used as a storage device in which analog values can be stored as a memristance instead of voltage or charge.
Here it should be emphasized that memristor-based storage devices have some advantages compared to
those storage devices which use capacitors. At ﬁrst, the former can be fabricated much denser than the later

13
one through the nano-crossbar technology [25]. Second, memristor can hold the stored data unchanged
theoretically for an inﬁnite period of time without refreshing [26]. Finally, unlike capacitors, memristors
can be used in the memristor crossbar structure which has so many potential applications (one of them
is demonstrated in this paper).
A crossbar array basically consists of two sets of conductive parallel wires intersecting each other
perpendicularly. The region where a wire in one set crosses over a wire in the other set is called a
crosspoint (or junction). Crosspoints are usually separated by a thin ﬁlm material which its properties
such as its resistance can be changed by controlling the voltage applied to it. One of such materials is
memristor which is used in our proposed crossbar-based circuits in this paper. Figure 5 shows a typical
memristor crossbar. In this circuit, memristors which are formed at crosspoints are depicted explicitly to
have better visibility. In this crossbar, memristance of any memristor can simply be changed by applying
suitable voltages to those wires that memristor is fabricated between them. For example, consider the
memristor located at coordinate (1, 1) (crossing point of the ﬁrst horizontal and the ﬁrst vertical wires)
of the crossbar. Memristance of this memristor can be decreased by applying a positive voltage to the
ﬁrst vertical wire while grounding the ﬁrst horizontal one (or connecting to negative voltage). Dropping
a positive voltage across the memristor will cause the current to pass through it and consequently, the
memristance of this passive element will be decreased. In a similar way, memristance of this memristor
can be increased by reversing the polarity of applied voltage. As stated before, application of higher
voltages for longer period of time will change the memristance of the memristor more. This means that
the memristance of any memristor in the crossbar can be adjusted to any predetermined value by the
application of suitable voltages to the speciﬁc row and column of the crossbar. However, here it should
be emphasized that in this paper, there will be no need to adjust the memristance of the memristors
accurately and only increasing or decreasing the memristance of the memristor will be sufﬁcient.
To summarize, memristor crossbar is a 2-dimensional grid that analog values can be stored in its
crosspoints through the memristance of the memristors. Consequently, it seems that the memristor crossbar
is a perfect structure to construct and store 2-dimensional patterns like fuzzy relations. In this case,
vertical and horizontal wires of the crossbar will represent different discrete values of input and output
variables respectively and memristors in crosspoints will have the role of entries of 2-dimensional matrixes
representing fuzzy relations.
Against these mentioned advantages, memristor crossbar structure has some drawbacks. First of all,

14
Fig. 5.
A typical memristor crossbar. In this crossbar, memristor is formed in each crosspoint.
reading the memristance of the memristors at any point of the crossbar is partly difﬁcult. But the second
and the most important disadvantage of memristor crossbar structure relates to the inherent physical
limitation of memristor. As stated before, memristance of the memristor can be between R0ff and Ron ̸= 0.
Therefore, it seems that storing analog values through the memristance of the memristors needs a linear
mapping from input space to interval [Ron, Roff]. In the next section, we show how these problems can
be solved by slightly modifying the structure of Fig. 5 and how this structure can be used to construct
and store fuzzy relations.
B. Using memristor crossbar to do fuzzy inference
Figure 6 shows the memristor crossbar-based analog circuit that we have proposed to construct fuzzy
inference system introduced in previous section. As can be seen later, this structure has biological support
and can be considered as a single-layer fuzzy neural network which conforms with the Hebbian learning
rule but with very new interesting properties compared to today’s conventional neural networks.
Figure 6 consists of a simple crossbar that each of its rows is connected to the negative input terminal
of a simple opamp. Through these opamp-based circuits added to rows of the crossbar we will be able
to read the pattern stored in the crosspoints of the crossbar. Since these opamps have a ﬁxed resistor
with resistance Roff (maximum memristance value of the memristors used in the crossbar) as a feedback,
combination of each of these opamps and those memristors which are connected directly to the same
horizontal wire that opamp is connected to it creates a simple opamp-based summing circuit. Note that
in the uppermost row of the crossbar, instead of memristor, a resistor with resistance Rc is fabricated in
each crosspoint. Since this row of the crossbar is connected to an opamp with a feedback resistor Rc, it

15
Fig. 6.
Memristor crossbar-based analog circuit which is proposed to implement the fuzzy inference method developed in this paper. Each
vertical and horizontal wire of the crossbar represents distinct value of input and output variables respectively. In this structure, fuzzy relation
between input and output variables be formed in the memristors of the crossbar.
again forms a simple inverting summing circuit that adds inputs of the crossbar with the same gain i.e.
-1. Therefore, at any time output of this summing circuit, i.e. temp(t), can be written as:
temp(t) = −
n
X
j=1
ˆxj(t),
(15)
where ˆxj(t) is the input signal (represented by voltage) connected to the jth vertical wire of the crossbar
and n is the number of columns of the crossbar. Note that the hat sign in Eq. 15 is used to distinguish
inputs and outputs of the structure from those concepts which are assigned to rows and columns of the
circuit. The reason of using this summing circuit will become clear in the rest of this section. Now, by
applying standard opamp circuit analysis techniques, output voltage of the opamp connected to the ith
row of the crossbar can be expressed as:
ˆyi(t) = −


n
X
j=1
ˆxj
Roff
Mij(t) + temp(t)

for i = 1, 2, . . . , m,
(16)
where Mij(t) is the current memristance of the memristor at coordinate (i, j) of memristor crossbar and
m is the number of rows of the crossbar. Note that to write this equation, memristor is treated like a
simple resistor. This is true only when the memristance of the memristor be almost constant during the
calculation of output voltages. This can be guaranteed by applying input voltages ˆxj (for j = 1, 2, . . . , n)

16
to columns of the crossbar for very short period of time during the execution phase. Another condition that
this structure should satisfy is that the memristance of all memristors in the crosspoints of the crossbar
should initially be equal to Roff. In fact, in all of our proposed structures in this paper, storing any value
at coordinate (i, j) of the crossbar is done by decreasing the initial memristance of the memristor located
at this coordinate by the given value. In other words, current stored value at coordinate (i, j) denoted by
∆Mij(t) can be written as:
∆Mij(t) = Roff −Mij(t),
∀i, j : 1 ≤j ≤n and 1 ≤i ≤m,
(17)
By this trick, there will be no need to use linear mapping as mentioned in previous section. By
substituting 17 and 15 into 16 we will get:
ˆyi(t) = −


n
X
j=1
ˆxj
Roff
Roff −∆Mij(t) −
n
X
j=1
ˆxj(t)

for i = 1, 2, . . . , m,
(18)
Now, by assuming that the stored value in every crosspoint is always much smaller than Roff, i.e.
∆Mij(t)
Roff
≪1 (∀i, j), which can be satisﬁed by scaling data before storing, Eq. 18 can be simpliﬁed to:
ˆyi(t)
=
−



n
X
j=1
ˆxj
1
1 −∆Mij(t)
Roff
−
n
X
j=1
ˆxj(t)


≃−


n
X
j=1
ˆxj
 
1 + ∆Mij(t)
Roff
!
−
n
X
j=1
ˆxj(t)


=
−
n
X
j=1
ˆxj
∆Mij(t)
Roff
for
i = 1, 2, . . . , m,
(19)
or equivalently can be expressed in matrix form as:
ˆy(t) = α∆M(t) (ˆx(t))T ,
(20)
where α =
−1
Roff , ˆx(t) = [ˆx1(t), ˆx2(t), . . . , ˆxn(t)], ˆy(t) = [ˆy1(t), ˆy2(t), . . . , ˆym(t)]T, and ∆M(t) =
{∆Mij(t)}. It is evident that although we will use this structure for performing fuzzy operations, any
matrix multiplication in the form of Eq. 20 can be done by this structure.
By comparing Eqs. 20 and 9 (or equivalently by comparing structures of Fig. 6 and Fig. 1(b)) it becomes
clear that if somehow we can store fuzzy relation in the crosspoints of the crossbar (as matrix ∆M(t))
our proposed structure will be a perfect analog circuit to perform our proposed inference method (note
that in Eq. 9, µA′ was a column vector while in Eq. 20 ˆx(t) is a row vector). For this purpose, it is
sufﬁcient to consider that the ith column and the jth row of the crossbar represent concepts x = xi and
y = yj respectively similar to inputs and outputs of the system shown in Fig. 1(b) and then connect the
membership grades of newly observed input fuzzy number to the inputs of this structure. In this case,
the membership grades of the corresponding output fuzzy number will emerge at outputs of the structure

17
instantaneously. As another example, consider the case in which the row vector vk with only one non-
zero element at position k is being applied as an input to the structure where fuzzy relation ∆M(t) is
programmed in its crosspoints. In this case, the output of the structure will be α (vk × ∆mk(t)) where
∆mk(t) is the kth column of matrix ∆M(t) and vk is the value of the kth entry of vector vk. Note
that this example is equivalent to the inferential process depicted in Fig. 3(a). As stated in that section,
multiplication of output fuzzy number (∆mk(t) which is the intersection of stored 2-dimensional fuzzy
relation (∆M(t)) with the plane x = vk) with a constant, i.e. α, will not degrade the generated output
fuzzy number signiﬁcantly or it can be easily compensated by using some auxiliary circuits.
As stated before, domain and resolution of input and output variables can be increased by adding more
horizontal and vertical wires to the structure. Simplicity of the circuit and computing in realtime are some
of the advantages of our proposed hardware.
To summarize, proposed hardware of Fig. 6 can do vector to matrix multiplication and therefore can
do any of the inferential processes previously described in Sec. II-C. The only question that we should
answer is how to program the memristors in the crossbar or how to create and store fuzzy relation in this
memristor crossbar-based structure. This will be addressed in the next subsection.
C. creating and storing fuzzy relations on the proposed memristor crossbar-based structure
In this subsection, we will consider two cases to construct a fuzzy relation on the proposed structure of
Fig. 6: (i) input and output fuzzy sets are available and (ii) instead of input and output fuzzy sets some
input-output training data are in hand.
1) creating binary fuzzy relation based on given input and output fuzzy sets: In the ﬁrst case, assume
that we have input fuzzy set A and output fuzzy set B with membership functions µA(x) and µB(y)
respectively and we want to construct a fuzzy relation between these two fuzzy sets based on fuzzy
implication of Eq. 4. To create a fuzzy relation from µA(x) and µB(y) in the memristor crossbar structure
of Fig. 6, it is sufﬁcient to interpret membership degrees in each fuzzy set as a voltage and apply them
to their corresponding rows and columns of the memristor crossbar for t0 second(s). To be exact, each
element of µA(x) should be connected to its corresponding column in the crossbar and the negative of
each element of µB(y) should be connected to its corresponding row in the crossbar (remember that as
depicted in Fig. 1(b), each input and output terminal of the structure corresponds to exclusive value or

18
concept of input and output fuzzy variables respectively). For example, if sets A and B be deﬁned as:
A = {(x1, µA(x1)), (x2, µA(x2)), . . . , (xn, µA(xn))}
(21)
B = {(y1, µB(y1)), (y2, µB(y2)), . . . , (ym, µB(ym))}
(22)
then to create a fuzzy relation which is connecting these input and output fuzzy sets on this structure,
these following tasks should be done:
• interpret membership grades as a voltage signal and connect µA(x1) to the vertical wire of the crossbar
representing concept x = x1, µA(x2) to the vertical wire of the crossbar representing concept x = x2
and so on.
• at the same time, connect −µB(y1) to the horizontal wire of the crossbar representing concept y = y1,
−µB(y2) to the horizontal wire of the crossbar representing concept y = y2 and so on.
• only wait for t0 second(s) and then remove applied voltages from the crossbar.
This process is depicted in Fig. 7 for two typical fuzzy sets. Simultaneous application of positive and
negative voltages to rows and columns of the crossbar respectively will cause the current to pass through
the memristors in crosspoints. Amount of current passing through the memristor located at the intersection
point of jth column and ith row of the crossbar corresponding to concepts x = xj and y = yi respectively
(or equivalently through the memristor at coordinate (i, j) of the crossbar) is directly proportional to the
dropped voltage over this passive element or equivalently to (µA(x = xj) + µB(y = yi)). As this term
increases, memristance of the memristor at coordinate (i, j) will decrease more during this t0 second(s).
Assuming the HP model for the memristors of the crossbar, memristance of this memristor after this t0
second(s) can be written as [27]:
Mij(t)|t=t0 =
q
R2
off −β(µA(x = xj) + µB(y = yi))t0, ∀i, j : 1 ≤i ≤m and 1 ≤j ≤n,
(23)
where β is a constant deﬁned as:
β = 2µvRon(Roff −Ron)
D2
(24)
Note that to obtain Eq. 23, initial memristance of the memristors, Mij(t = 0), as expected is assumed
to be Roff. Using Eq. 23 and Eq. 17, amount of change of Mij(t) during this t0 second(s) which is equal
to the stored value at coordinate (i, j) of the crossbar will become:
∆Mij(t)|t=t0 = µR(x = xj, y = yi) = Mij(t)|t=0 −Mij(t)|t=t0 = Roff −Mij(t)|t=t0
=
Roff −
q
R2
off −β(µA(x = xj) + µB(y = yi))t0

∀i, j : 1 ≤i ≤m and 1 ≤j ≤n,
(25)

19
Fig. 7.
This ﬁgure shows the procedure of the creation of the fuzzy relation on the memristor crossbar of the circuit of Fig. 6. For this
purpose it is only sufﬁcient to connect samples of input and output fuzzy sets to their corresponding vertical or horizontal wires for t0
second(s).
Comparing Eqs. 25 and 4 shows that the implication function f(·) considered in Eq. 4 for this speciﬁc
memristor crossbar structure is:
f(ν) = Roff −
q
R2
off −βt0ν
(26)
Figure 8 shows a plot of function f(·) for different values of t0 which shows that as expected it
is a monolithically increasing function. For plotting this ﬁgure, values of other parameters are set as
following: µv = 10−14m2s−1V −1, D = 10−8m, Ron = 1KΩand Roff = 100KΩ. Although here we
tried to obtain mathematical expression for the implication method of our proposed hardware, it is clear
that while working with this structure, there is no need to be involved with these exact mathematics.
The only thing that we should do is to connect voltages to rows and columns of the crossbar and wait
for t0 second(s) and then fuzzy relation will automatically be created and stored on the crossbar. Finally
note that to satisfy the mentioned condition for properly working of the memristor crossbar structure, i.e.
∆Mij(t) ≪Roff, (∀i, j), it is necessary to choose a small value for t0 (for example, in the above test,
t0 = 0.0001 will be a good choice).
2) creating 2-dimensional fuzzy relation based on available training data: It is well known that one
of the major applications of memristor is in the construction of non-volatile memories. This is because of
the fact that memristance of the memristor will remain ﬁxed theoretically for an inﬁnite period of time
when there is no applied voltage or current. This can be seen in Eq. 14 by setting q(t) to zero. This

20
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
2
4
6
8
10
x 10
4
ν
f(ν)
 
 
t0=0.006
t0=0.01
t0=0.02
t0=0.1
Fig. 8.
A plot of function f(·) deﬁned in Eq. 26 for different values of t0 which shows that this is a monolithically increasing function.
means that the created fuzzy relation on the crossbar will remain unchanged without refreshing (which
is required for most of currently available capacitor-based memories). This property of memristor says
that ﬁnal memristance of the memristor after the application of speciﬁc voltage (or current) will act as
a initial memristance of the memristor during the application of next voltage (or current). This means
that effects of these sequentially applied voltages on the memristance of the memristor will be added to
each other. By this explanation, it would be logical to think that one simple way for the construction of
fuzzy relation on the proposed hardware based on available input-output fuzzy training data can be the
repetition of the process described in previous subsection for each of these training data. To illustrate this
process a bit more, consider that N input-output fuzzy training data like {A′
i, B′
i} for i = 1, 2, . . . , N
are available and we want to construct a pattern on our memristor crossbar circuit corresponding to the
fuzzy relation between input and output fuzzy variables based on these training data. For this purpose, it
is sufﬁcient to behave as follows:
For i = 1, 2, . . . , N repeat these steps:
• connect membership grades of fuzzy number A′
i and the negative of membership grades of fuzzy
number B′
i to their corresponding columns and rows of the crossbar respectively.
• wait for t0.
presentation of each of these training data will decrease the memristance of the memristors in some
areas of the crossbar. Therefore, the effect of observing any new training data will be added to the currently
stored pattern in the crossbar. In other words, entrance of any new training data simply updates the stored
pattern. Hence, by presenting more training data to the structure, gradually a pattern (fuzzy relation) will
begin to form on the crossbar.

21
Here, three important aspects of this described procedure should be emphasized. First, t0 should be
decreased by the increase of N to satisfy the condition ∆Mij(t) ≪Roff (∀i, j). Second, since a crisp
number is a special case of fuzzy number, it is evident that the described procedure will be also applicable
to crisp training data. Creating fuzzy relation based on crisp data is possible either by using large number
of training data to form a pattern or by converting crisp training data to their corresponding fuzzy numbers
before applying them to the structure (for example by using gaussian membership function). The third and
the most important note pertains to how to create voltages corresponding to membership grades of input
and output fuzzy numbers and how to apply(remove) them to(from) inputs and outputs of the structure.
As will be demonstrated in the section of simulation results as well, there is no need to have any other
auxiliary circuit to perform these tasks. This is because of the fact that our proposed circuit has this
capability that it can be directly connected to other similar circuits. In this case, output of one circuit
will be the input of the next structure and by this way, signals will propagate easily in the entire system.
At the same time, based on the current values of input and output of each of these proposed memristor
crossbar-based circuits in the whole system, stored pattern in their crossbar will automatically be updated.
IV. WHY OUR PROPOSED STRUCTURE IS A NEURO-FUZZY SYSTEM
The neuromorphic paradigm is attractive for nanoscale computation because of its massive parallelism,
potential scalability, and inherent defect- and fault-tolerance [28], [29]. In biological systems, the synaptic
weights between neurons can be precisely adjusted by the ionic ﬂow through them and it is widely believed
that the adaptation of synaptic weights enables biological systems to learn and function. However, before
the ﬁrst physical realization of memristor, experimental construction of these neuromorphic systems which
consist of neurons and synapses, especially in the electronic domain, has remained somewhat difﬁcult.
The primary problem was the lack of a small and efﬁcient circuit that can emulate essential properties of
synapses namely: having low power consumption, ability to be fabricated in high density (human brain
has about 1014 synapses) and plasticity.
After the ﬁrst experimental realization of memristor [4], it became widely accepted that memristor is
a good candidate to emulate synapse. This is because of the fact that memristors can be fabricated in
high density through the crossbar technology. In addition, similar to biological synapse, the conductance
of the memristor can be changed by passing current from it or applying voltage to it [28], [30]. Based
of these evidences, several authors have tried to use memristor as a synapse and showed that this passive
element can facilitate hardware implementation of artiﬁcial neural networks and their corresponding

22
learning rules such as Spike Time Dependent Plasticity (STDP) [31], [32], [33]. Figure 9(a) shows the
memristor crossbar-based structure that has been proposed in almost all of these works. In this ﬁgure,
each fabricated memristor at each crosspoint represents one synapse which connects one presynaptic to
one postsynaptic neuron. In this case, every neuron (shown by a triangle) in the input layer is directly
connected to every neuron in output layer with unique synaptic weights. If in Fig. 9(a), we denote output
voltages of presynaptic neurons by a row vector ˆx, output voltages at postsynaptic neurons by a column
vector ˆy and weights of synapses by matrix W, the structure of Fig. 9(a) implements the following
mathematical operation:
ˆy = Wˆx
(27)
where to obtain this equation, we have assumed identity activation function for neurons. Note that Eq.
27 is a very familiar equation we have in conventional neural networks like the typical one depicted
in Fig. 9(b) [34]. Therefore, Fig. 9(a) does not present anything new but only shows how memristor
crossbar can be used as an electrical representation of synapses weights. Learning can be accomplished
in this structure based on learning methods mostly inspired from Hebbian learning rule (or equivalently
STDP in spiky neural networks) which in its simplest form says: neurons that ﬁre together, wire together
[35]. This means that when one input and one output neuron ﬁre simultaneously, the weight of that
synapse which is connecting these neurons should be increased (strengthened). For this purpose, in Fig.
9(a) memristance of the memristor connecting these neurons should be modiﬁed (actually it should be
decreased). However, unfortunately it is well known that Hebbian learning rule (although is very simple) is
not enough to train neural networks and other complex methods like backpropagation learning algorithm
are needed [34]. Moreover, hardware implementation of currently in use learning methods like STDP on
this structure is difﬁcult and needs some auxiliary circuits [36]. In addition, in these kinds of learning
rules synaptic weights may be either increased or decreased. These mentioned drawbacks have caused the
efﬁcient hardware implementation of neural networks very difﬁcult.
Now, compare the structure of Fig. 9(a) and Eq. 27 with Fig. 6 and Eq. 20 respectively. In addition to
their structural similarities, both of these structures perform the same task (vector to matrix multiplication)
during the execution phase. However, in learning phase, we can see some differences. In the structure
representing hardware implementation of artiﬁcial neural networks such as the one depicted in Fig. 9(a),
learning is usually carried out based on methods like back propagation or STDP. On the other hand,
learning in our proposed method is based on the creation of fuzzy relation between input and output

23
(a)
(b)
Fig. 9.
(a) Memristor crossbar-based structure recently have been proposed for the hardware implementation of the third generation of
artiﬁcial neural networks. (b) Conventional single layer neural network consists of neurons with identity activation function.
variables or concepts. However, here we will show that learning based on the creation of fuzzy relation
is the same as fuzzy learning in artiﬁcial neural networks but. To illustrate this theorem better, consider
the creation of fuzzy relation on the circuit of Fig. 1 based on available fuzzy training data described
in Section III-C2. In this process, simultaneous application of input and output fuzzy numbers to inputs
and outputs of the structure is equivalent with the simultaneous ﬁring of input and output neurons and
the value of applied membership grades to each of input or output terminals actually determines the
ﬁring strength of each neuron. By this statement we mean that each simultaneous ﬁring of input and
output neurons generates one fuzzy input-output training data. Therefore, in our belief, all of neurons
are active at the same time during learning phase but with different conﬁdence degrees where output of
each neuron determines the conﬁdence degree of its activation. In fact, when we connect µ(x = xi) to
the column of the crossbar representing concept x = xi it means that the neuron in input layer which
represents concept x = xi is ﬁring with the conﬁdence degree of µ(x = xi). By interpreting applied
membership grades as a ﬁring strength of neurons, the concept of ink drop spread introduced in Section
II-B to create fuzzy relation on the crossbar (see Fig. 2) becomes equal to primary Hebbian learning rule
in neural networks. For example, Fig. 2 from another point of view says that weights of those connections
which are connecting simultaneously ﬁring input and output neurons should be strengthened. However,
the amount of increase of the weight of each connection should be proportional to the ﬁring strength of
those input and output neurons. When conﬁdence degrees of ﬁring of both input and output neurons are
high, the weight of the connection connecting these input and output neurons should be increased more
(see Eq. 4 or Eq. 7). Note that if we have crisp input-output training data instead of fuzzy one, ink drop

24
spread method in Fig. 2 will become completely the same as Hebbian learning rule in conventional neural
networks. Therefore, it seems that our proposed fuzzy inference system implements the same function as
neural networks and also learns in a similar way. In this case, a simple question may arise: what is the
beneﬁt of our proposed structure and inference method compared to conventional neural networks?. To
answer this question, the reader should note that in reality, by these explanations we tried to show that
neural networks and fuzzy are not two disjoint ﬁelds. In fact, we strongly believe that the reason which
causes Hebbian learning not to be able to learn neural networks properly is the misinterpretation of the
nature of input and output signals in neural networks.
Let’s look at neural networks from another point of view for a short time. Suppose that each neuron
represents one and only one concept like x = xi where x can be a numerical or linguistic variable. Note
that in this situation, spatial location of each neuron in the entire system determines its corresponding
concept. In addition, assume that output (ﬁring strength) of each neuron in the network speciﬁes the
conﬁdence degree of the activation of that neuron or its corresponding concept. In this case, combination
of those neurons (or concepts) lied in one layer and their corresponding conﬁdence degrees (outputs)
simply creates a fuzzy number. Now, application of primary Hebbian learning method to this described
neural network with this kind of input and output signals will result in a creation of fuzzy relation on
the matrix representing connection weights. Note that changing the functionality of neural networks to
work with conﬁdence or membership degrees is not in contrast with biological ﬁndings but in return it
offers some interesting properties. First of all, as we will illustrate in the section of simulation result, in
spite of conventional neural networks a simple primary Hebbian learning method (or equivalently creating
fuzzy relation) is completely enough to learn these kinds of networks. Consequently, as we showed in
this paper their hardware implementation becomes more simple than other learning methods in artiﬁcial
neural networks such as STDP or backpropagation. Second, since in Hebbian learning the connection
weights are only strengthened, they will always be non-negative. Note that we have the same case in our
proposed fuzzy inference system since the created fuzzy relation on the crossbar is always non-negative.
It is clear that working with non-negative weights is much simpler than working with weights which can
have both positive and negative values. Third, if after the training of the conventional neural networks, we
plot the matrix which is holding connection weights as a surface it will have no meaningful shape and no
information can be obtained from it. However, corresponding surface in a neural network which works
with conﬁdence or membership degrees is a fuzzy relation where its shape describes the overall behavior

25
of input and output variables versus each other. Remember that human brain remembers most concepts
and relations through the images (surfaces). Fourth, in the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial neural networks and based on
biological ﬁndings, it is common to put a threshold on the outputs of neurons. However, putting threshold
on conﬁdence or membership degrees (output of our proposed structure) seems to be more logical than
putting threshold on meaningless output values in conventional neural networks. Finally, it is interesting
to note that that in Sec. III-C2 we told that by increasing the number of training data, t0 should approach
zero. In this case, signals that propagate in the network will become similar to spike and therefore we
would have spiking neural networks.
To summarize, in this section we tried to show that it is possible to look at the working procedure
of neural networks from another aspect. If we accept that biological neurons transmit information in the
form of conﬁdence degrees, then the computational task which is done in conventional neural network
will become equal to our proposed fuzzy inference method with extra advantages.
V. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, we want to verify the efﬁciency of our proposed hardware and fuzzy inference method
by conducting several simulations. In the ﬁrst simulation, we show how mathematical functions can
be constructed in an unprecise manner and how function composition can be done in our proposed
structure. For this purpose, consider the creation of two fuzzy relations representing two different functions
y = f1(x) = x2 and y = f2(x) = √x on two distinct samples of the circuit shown in Fig. 6. To construct
each of these functions on the circuit of Fig. 6 near 500 input-output fuzzy training data are used. These
training data are created artiﬁcially by ﬁrstly generating 500 crisp input-output training data uniformly
distributed on input domain and then converting them to their corresponding fuzzy numbers by using
gaussian membership function. Although in this paper we have used gaussian membership function for
the fuzziﬁcation of crisp training data, repeating this test showed that any other membership function can
also be used without degrading output results signiﬁcantly. Figures 10(a) and 10(b) show the constructed
fuzzy relations on the memristor crossbar of the circuit of Fig. 6 based on these training data by following
the procedure described in Section III-C2. Note that these ﬁgures indicate ﬁnal stored values (or created
fuzzy relations) on the crossbars, i.e. matrix ∆M, after the accomplishment of training process where they
are plotted as a continues surface to have better visibility. In this test, it is assumed that input variable
of both functions f1 and f2, i.e. x, is bounded between 0 and 1 and memristor crossbar of the circuit
of Fig. 6 has 100 rows and 100 columns (100 vertical and 100 horizontal wires). Other parameters are

26
(a)
(b)
Fig. 10.
Constructed fuzzy relations on the crossbar of the circuit of Fig. 6 based on artiﬁcially created fuzzy input-output training data.
(a) Fuzzy relation of function y = f1(x) = x2. (b) Fuzzy relation of function y = f2(x) = √x.
set as follows: µv = 10−14m2s−1V −1, D = 10−8m, Ron = 1KΩ, t0 = 0.0001 and Roff = 100KΩ.
These crossbars are simulated in HSPICE software by utilizing the SPICE model proposed in [37] for
memristors. Figure 10(a) and 10(b) demonstrate that application of Hebbian learning to our proposed
structure which we showed that it is equal to the creation of fuzzy relation creates a meaningful surface
on the memristor crossbar since it is easy to recognize shapes of functions f1(x) = x2 and f2(x) = √x
in these ﬁgures. Therefore, it is clear that in our structure, relations between input and output variables
are stored in the system based on their shapes and not through their exact mathematical formulas.
Now, let’s see how these two programmed circuits where each of them is a representative of one function
can be combined with each other to create new functions. Without loss of generality, consider the creation
of function f3(x) = f1(f2(x)) = x. To build this function, it is only sufﬁcient to directly connect outputs of
the circuit on which function f2 is constructed to their corresponding inputs in the circuit which represents
function f1. This process is depicted schematically in Fig. 11(a). Note that since the resolution of output
variable in function f2 may not be the same as the resolution of input variable in function f1, in Fig.
11(a) output terminals of the ﬁrst circuit is not connected sequentially to input terminals of the second
circuit. Connecting two circuits representing functions f1 and f2 with fuzzy relations of Figs. 10(a) and
10(b) respectively in this way will create a new function f3(x) = f1(f2(x)) = x. Since f3(x) = x is a
identity function its input and output should always be the same. Figure 11(b) shows the result of testing
this circuit which is obtained by applying randomly generated crisp number to the input of the system
and then plotting the result of the defuzziﬁcation of the output fuzzy number versus original input. This

27
(a)
(b)
Fig. 11.
(a) This ﬁgure shows that how simple circuits can be combined with each other to create complex functions. (b) Result of simulating
function f3(x) = f1(f2(x)) = x where this function is constructed by sequentially connecting two circuits implementing functions f1 and
f2.
ﬁgure shows that the newly constructed function by merging two functions f1(x) = x2 and f2(x) = √x
is a good approximation of function f3(x) = f1(f2(x)) = x. From the results of this simulation, it can
be concluded that by sequentially connecting several circuits of Fig. 6 where each of them represents
different but simple function, any complex function can be reproduced. Here it is worth to mention that
since in combinational circuits like the one shown in Fig. 11(a) output of one circuit directly connects to
inputs of other circuit, input signals of one circuit will come from previous circuits. Actually, these are
fuzzy numbers that propagate in the structure from one block to others and therefore no defuzziﬁcation
process will be required in the entire system. Moreover, In this case there will be no need to any other
auxiliary circuits to generate these signals since they are coming from other blocks.

28
Functions with more than one input variable play an important roles in the construction of complex
systems and inference methods. Note that functions like AND, OR, MIN and MAX belong to this
category. Until now, we have deal only with 1-input functions in the form of y = f(x) and our proposed
structure in Fig. 6 seems to be able to implement only these kinds of functions (because each binary
fuzzy relation has one input and one output variable). In this part, we want to show how efﬁciently our
proposed method and circuit can model multi-input functions. To use the structure of Fig. 6 for modeling
multi-input functions, there is no need to apply any changes to it. This is because of the fact that actually
this structure in its current form is inherently implementing multi-input functions. To demonstrate this
concept, note that if we assume that the concepts which are assigned to different input terminals of the
circuit of Fig. 6 (its vertical wires) be completely independent from each other, then each of these inputs
can be considered as a distinct input variable. For example, assume that we want to implement a 2-input
function z = f(x, y) on the structure of Fig. 6. For this purpose, we can split the vertical wires of this
circuit into two sections; wires in one section represent different values of one input variable and wires
in other section represent different values of other input variable. This process is depicted in Fig. 12 for
better illustration. Note that by adding more vertical wire to the structure of Fig. 6, resolution and domain
of each of these input variables can be simply increased. It is obvious that generalization of this method
for the implementation of multi-input functions with any number of input variables is straightforward.
Since we have not changed the circuit of Fig. 6, learning of this circuit (creation of fuzzy relation) can
be done the same as before. For this purpose, it is sufﬁcient to apply fuzzy numbers of independent input
variables to their corresponding columns of the crossbar and the fuzzy number of output variable to rows
of the crossbar for t0 second(s). Repeating this process for other fuzzy input-output training data will cause
the fuzzy relation to be formed on the memristor crossbar of the circuit. However, in spite of previous
tests, when implementing multi-input functions in this way instead of single fuzzy relation, several fuzzy
relations will be formed on the crossbar. Actually, in this case one fuzzy relation per each input variable
will be created on the crossbar as shown in Fig. 12 as well. Each of these fuzzy relations speciﬁes the
overall behavior of output variable versus one of input variables. In this situation, structure’s output fuzzy
number for one given input sample will be computed from several intermediate output fuzzy numbers
where each of them is obtained through one of these fuzzy relations based on the same method described
in Section II-C. To be precise, in fact as shown in Fig. 3(b) as well, these fuzzy numbers are summed to
each other to generate ﬁnal output fuzzy number corresponding to given input. To illustrate this procedure

29
Fig. 12.
Structure of Fig. 6 can be used to implement multi-input functions. For this purpose, one can split input terminals into several
sections one for each of input variables. Training of this structure will be the same az before but it should be noted that in spite of the
structure of Fig. 6, in this structure several fuzzy relation will be formed on the crossbar.
better, we do several simulations. In the ﬁrst simulation, ability of our proposed structure in modeling
2-input functions is investigated. The following nonlinear function is considered for this purpose:
z = 0.5
v
u
u
t2
sin x
x
2
+ 3
 sin y
y
!2
,
1 ≤x, y ≤10,
(28)
where its graph is shown in Fig. 13(a). This modeling test is conducted on the structure similar to the
circuit depicted in Fig. 12 with 180 vertical wires (90 wires for each of input variables) and 100 horizontal
wires (for output variable). Since input variables are bounded between 1 and 10 and there are 90 wires
to cover this interval, minimum achievable resolution for input variables by assuming that these wires are
spread uniformly over this interval will be:
minimum achievable resolution for x and y =
max(x) −min(x)
number of reserved wires
=
max(y) −min(y)
number of reserved wires = 10 −1
90
= 0.1,
(29)
In a similar way, minimum achievable resolution for output variable z can be computed which becomes
equal to 0.0112. To create fuzzy relations on the structure of Fig. 12, 800 fuzzy input-output training
data are used. Since no fuzzy input-output data are available, we have to create them artiﬁcially. For this
purpose, at ﬁrst 800 crisp input-output training data which are uniformly distributed over input space are
generated and then they are converted to their corresponding fuzzy input-output training data by using

30
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 13.
This ﬁgure shows the ability of our proposed method in modeling 2-input functions. (a) graph of 2-input nonlinear function deﬁned
in Eq. 28. (b) Modeling result obtained by using 800 training data. (c) Modeling result obtained by using 800 training data while about half
of the memristors of the crossbar are defective.
gaussian membership function. Application of these training data to rows and columns of the crossbar
of Fig. 12 will cause fuzzy relations to be created on the crossbar. Figures 14(a) and 14(b) show these
formed fuzzy relations on the crossbar separately after this training process. Now, similar to what is done
in previous simulation, i.e. by application of randomly generated crisp data and defuzziﬁcation of produced
output fuzzy number, the model of function deﬁned in Eq. 28 can be reconstructed. The result of this
modeling test is presented in Fig. 13(b). The Mean Square Error (MSE) between the target function and
constructed model is 0.021. This simulation clearly demonstrates the efﬁciency of our proposed inference
method in modeling multi-input functions.
Nowadays, nano-scale devices and molecular electronics promise to overcome the fundamental physical

31
(a)
(b)
Fig. 14.
Created fuzzy relations on the structure of Fig. 12 during the modeling of 2-input nonlinear function deﬁned in Eq. 28. (a) Created
fuzzy relation between variables x and z. (b) Created fuzzy relation between variables y and z.
limitation of lithography-based silicon VLSI technology [38]. Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that
nano devices such as nanoscale crossbars can be fabricated efﬁciently by using bottom-up self-assembly
techniques without relying on lithography to deﬁne the smallest feature size [38], [39]. However, non-
determinism in bottom-up self-assembly chemical processes at molecular scale results in more defects
compared to highly controlled lithography-based manufacturing processes currently used in CMOS tech-
nologies [39]. Therefore, defect tolerance is necessary for circuits which are realized through the usage
of nano-scale devices [40], [41]. In the next simulation, we will illustrate the excellent fault tolerance
capability of our proposed hardware.
Figure 13(c) shows the result of modeling test obtained by repeating the above simulation but this
time with the hardware which has some defects. In this test, we have assumed that approximately half of
the memristors in the memristor crossbar of the circuit of Fig. 12 is not working. This means that these
randomly chosen memristors have the memristance Roff and their memristance cannot be changed during
the training process. In other words, we have assumed that these faulty memristors behave completely
the same as a simple resistor with the resistance of Roff and nothing can be stored at these points. The
training set and the value of other parameters in this simulation are the same as the previous test. The
Mean Square Error (MSE) between the target function and constructed model is 0.0281. Figure 13(c)
indicates that although 50 percent of all of the memristors in the crossbar are working incorrectly, our
proposed hardware still can model functions with acceptable accuracy.

32
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper we proposed a new fuzzy inference system and a simple method to create fuzzy relation
based on input and output fuzzy sets. In addition our proposed scheme has this beneﬁt that fuzzy relation
can be formed in it based on fuzzy training data and therefore offering learning capability. Since one of the
main problems of fuzzy systems relates to their efﬁcient hardware implementation, we have also designed
simple memristor crossbar-based circuit as a hardware implementation of our proposed inference method.
Simulation results show that this structure can effectively be used to construct multi-input functions.
Moreover, we illustrated that samples of this memristor crossbar-based analog circuit can be sequentially
connected to each other to create a cellular structure on which complex functions can be constructed.
Finally, according to the similarities between our proposed fuzzy inference method and recently suggested
memristor crossbar-based circuits for constructing artiﬁcial neural networks, we showed that if input and
output signals of neural networks be of a kind of conﬁdence degree, then the computational task which
is done in conventional neural network will become equal to our proposed fuzzy inference method with
extra advantages.
