CheckThat! at CLEF 2020:
Enabling the Automatic Identiﬁcation
and Veriﬁcation of Claims in Social Media
Alberto Barr´on-Cede˜no1, Tamer Elsayed2, Preslav Nakov3, Giovanni Da San
Martino3, Maram Hasanain2, Reem Suwaileh2, and Fatima Haouari2
1 DIT–Universit`a di Bologna, Forl`ı, Italy
2 Qatar University, Doha, Qatar
3 Qatar Computing Research Institute, HBKU, Doha, Qatar

Abstract. We describe the third edition of the CheckThat! Lab, which
is part of the 2020 Cross-Language Evaluation Forum (CLEF). CheckThat!
proposes four complementary tasks and a related task from previous lab
editions, oﬀered in English, Arabic, and Spanish. Task 1 asks to predict
which tweets in a Twitter stream are worth fact-checking. Task 2 asks to
determine whether a claim posted in a tweet can be veriﬁed using a set
of previously fact-checked claims. Task 3 asks to retrieve text snippets
from a given set of Web pages that would be useful for verifying a target
tweet’s claim. Task 4 asks to predict the veracity of a target tweet’s claim
using a set of Web pages and potentially useful snippets in them. Finally,
the lab oﬀers a ﬁfth task that asks to predict the check-worthiness of the
claims made in English political debates and speeches. CheckThat! fea-
tures a full evaluation framework. The evaluation is carried out using
mean average precision or precision at rank k for ranking tasks, and F1
for classiﬁcation tasks.
1
Introduction
The mission of the CheckThat! lab is to foster the development of technology
that would enable the automatic veriﬁcation of claims. Automated systems for
claim identiﬁcation and veriﬁcation can be very useful as supportive technology
for investigative journalism, as they could provide help and guidance, thus saving
time [14,22,24,33]. A system could automatically identify check-worthy claims,
make sure they have not been fact-checked already by a reputable fact-checking
organization, and then present them to a journalist for further analysis in a
ranked list. Additionally, the system could identify documents that are poten-
tially useful for humans to perform manual fact-checking of a claim, and it could
also estimate a veracity score supported by evidence to increase the journalist’s
understanding and the trust in the system’s decision.
arXiv:2001.08546v1  [cs.CL]  21 Jan 2020

Fig. 1. Information veriﬁcation pipeline. Our tasks cover all four steps. (Box 1 maps
to task 1 whereas boxes 3–4 map to task 2 of the 2018 and 2019 editions [10,29].)
CheckThat! at CLEF 2020 is the third edition of the lab. The 2018 edi-
tion [29] of CheckThat! focused on the identiﬁcation and veriﬁcation of claims
in political debates.4 Whereas the 2019 edition [9,10] also focused on political
debates, isolated claims were considered as well, in conjunction with a closed set
of Web documents to retrieve evidence from.5
In 2020, CheckThat! turns its attention to social media —in particular to
Twitter— as information posted on that platform is not checked by an authori-
tative entity before publication and such information tends to disseminate very
quickly. Moreover, social media posts lack context due to their short length and
conversational nature; thus, identifying a claim’s context is sometimes key for
enabling eﬀective fact-checking [7].
2
Description of the Tasks
The lab is mainly organized around four tasks, which correspond to the four main
blocks in the veriﬁcation pipeline, as illustrated in Figure 1. Tasks 1, 3, and 4 can
be seen as reformulations of corresponding tasks in 2019, which enables re-use
of training data and systems from previous editions of the lab (cf. Section 3).
Task 2 runs for the ﬁrst time. While Tasks 1–4 are focused on Twitter, Task 5
(not in Figure 1) focuses on political debates as in the previous two editions of
the lab. All tasks are run in English. Additionally, Tasks 1, 3, and 4 are also
oﬀered in Arabic and/or Spanish.
2.1
Task 1: Check-Worthiness on Tweets
Task 1 is formulated as follows: Given a topic and a stream of potentially-related
tweets, rank the tweets according to their check-worthiness for the topic.
Previous work on check-worthiness focused primarily on political debates and
speeches, but here we focus on tweets instead.
4 http://alt.qcri.org/clef2018-factcheck/
5 https://sites.google.com/view/clef2019-checkthat

Dataset We include “topics” this year, as we want to have a scenario that is
close to that from 2019: a topic gives a context just like a debate did. We con-
struct the dataset by tracking a set of manually created topics in Twitter. A
sample of tweets from the tracked stream (per topic) is shared with the partic-
ipating systems as input for Task 1. The systems are asked to submit a ranked
list of the tweets for each topic. Finally, using pooling, a set of tweets is selected
and then judged by in-house annotators.
Evaluation We treat Task 1 as a ranking problem. Systems are evaluated us-
ing ranking evaluation measures, namely Mean Average Precision (MAP) and

2.2
Task 2: Veriﬁed Claim Retrieval
Task 2 is deﬁned as follows: Given a check-worthy claim and a dataset of veriﬁed
claims, rank the veriﬁed claims, so that those that verify the input claim (or a
sub-claim in it) are ranked on top.
Given an input claim c and a set Vc = {vi} of veriﬁed claims, we consider
each pair (c, vi) as Relevant if vi would save the process of verifying c from
scratch, and as Irrelevant otherwise. Note that there might be more than one
Relevant veriﬁed claim per input claim, e.g., because the input claim might be
composed of multiple claims. The task is similar to paraphrasing and textual
similarity tasks, as well as to textual entailment [8,12,30].
Dataset Veriﬁed claims are retrieved from fact-checking websites such as Snopes
and PolitiFact.

is used to assess the quality of the rankings submitted by the participants. A
perfect ranking will have on top all vi such that (c, vi) is Relevant, in any order,

participants with more information about their systems.
2.3
Task 3: Evidence Retrieval
Task 3 is deﬁned as follows: Given a check-worthy claim on a speciﬁc topic and a
set of text snippets extracted from potentially-relevant webpages, return a ranked
list of all evidence snippets for the claim. Evidence snippets are those snippets
useful to judge the claim’s factuality.
Dataset While tracking on-topic tweets, we search the Web to retrieve top-m
Web pages using topic-related queries. This would ensure the freshness of the
retrieved pages and enable reusability of the dataset for real-time veriﬁcation
tasks. Once we acquire annotations for Task 1, we share with participants the
Web pages and text snippets from them solely for the check-worthy claims, which
would enable the start of the evaluation cycle for Task 3. In-house annotators
will label each snippet as evidence or not for a target claim.

Evaluation Tasks 3 is a ranking problem. We evaluate the ranked list per topic

2.4
Task 4: Claim Veriﬁcation
Task 4 is deﬁned as follows: Given a check-worthy claim from a tweet and a set
of potentially relevant Web pages, predict the veracity of the claim.
This task closes the veriﬁcation pipeline.
Dataset The dataset for this task is the same as for Task 3. The only diﬀerence
is that the in-house annotators judge each claim as true or false.
Evaluation Task 4 is a binary classiﬁcation problem. Therefore, it is evaluated
using standard classiﬁcation evaluation measures: Precision, Recall, F1, and Ac-
curacy. The oﬃcial measure is macro-averaged F1.
2.5
Task 5: Check-Worthiness on Debates
Task 5 is deﬁned as follows: Given a debate segmented into sentences, together
with speaker information, prioritize sentences for fact-checking.
This is a ranking task and each sentence should be associated with a score.
Dataset This is the third iteration of this task. We believe it is important to
keep it alive as we have a large body of annotated data already and new material
arrives with the coming 2020 US Presidential elections.
Evaluation Task 5 is yet another ranking problem. We use MAP as the oﬃcial

3
Previously on CheckThat!
Two editions of CheckThat! have been held so far. While the datasets come
from diﬀerent genres, some of the tasks in the 2020 edition are reformulated.
Hence, considering some of the most successful approaches applied in the past
represents a good starting point to address the current challenges.
3.1
CheckThat! 2019
The 2019 edition featured two tasks [10]:
Task 12019. Given a political debate, interview, or speech, transcribed and seg-
mented into sentences, rank the sentences by the priority with which they should
be fact-checked.
The most successful approaches used neural networks for the individual clas-
siﬁcation of the instances. For example, Hansen et al. [19] learned domain-speciﬁc
word embeddings and syntactic dependencies and applied an LSTM classiﬁer.

Using some external knowledge paid oﬀ—they pre-trained the network with pre-
vious Trump and Clinton debates, supervised weakly with the ClaimBuster sys-
tem. Some eﬀorts were carried out in order to consider context. Favano et al. [11]
trained a feed-forward neural network, including the two previous sentences as
context. Whereas many approaches opted for embedding representations, feature
engineering was also popular [13].
Task 22019. Given a claim and a set of Web pages potentially relevant with respect
to the claim, identify which of the pages (and passages thereof) are useful for
assisting a human in fact-checking the claim. Finally, determine the factuality
of the claim.
The systems for evidence passage identiﬁcation followed two approaches.
BERT was trained and used to predict whether an input passage is useful to
fact-check a claim [11]. Other participating systems used classiﬁers (e.g., SVM)
with a variety of features including similarity between the claim and a passage,
bag of words, and named entities [20]. As for predicting claim veracity, the most
eﬀective approach used a textual entailment model. The input was represented
using word embeddings and external data was also used in training [15].
In the 2020 edition, Task 12019 becomes Task 5, and Task 1 is a reformulation
based on tweets (cf. Section 2.1). See [2] for further details. Task 22019 becomes
Tasks 3 and 4 (cf. Sections 2.3 and 2.4). See [21] for further details.
3.2
CheckThat! 2018
The 2018 edition featured two tasks [29]:
Task 12018 was identical to Task 12019.
The most successful approaches used either a multilayer perceptron or an
SVM. Zuo et al. [36] enriched the dataset by producing pseudo-speeches as a
concatenation of all interventions by a debater. They used averaged word em-
beddings and bag-of-words as representations. Hansen et al. [18] represented the
entries with embeddings, part of speech tags, and syntactic dependencies. They
used a GRU neural network with attention. See [1] for further details.
Task 22018. Given a check-worthy claim in the form of a (transcribed) sentence,
determine whether the claim is likely to be true, half-true, or false.
The best way to address this task was to retrieve relevant information from
the Web, followed by a comparison to the claim in order to assess its factuality.6
After retrieving such evidence, it is fed into the supervised model, together with
the claim in order to assess its veracity. In the case of [18], they fed the claim
and the most similar Web-retrieved text to convolutional neural networks and
SVMs. Meanwhile, Ghanem et al. [16] computed features, such as the similarity
between the claim and the Web text, and the Alexa rank for the website. See [4]
for further details.
6 While this year a similar procedure had to be carried out, we decompose it into three
tasks (cf. Section 2).

4
Related Work
There has been work on checking the factuality/credibility of a claim, of a news
article, or of an information source [3,25,26,28,31,35]. Claims can come from
diﬀerent sources, but special attention has been given to those from social me-
dia [17,27,32,34]. Check worthiness estimation is still a fairly-new problem espe-
cially in the context of social media [14,22,23,24].
CheckThat! further shares some aspects with other initiatives that have been
run with high success in the past, e.g., stance detection (Fake News7), semantic
textual similarity (STS at SemEval8), and community question answering (cQA
at SemEval9).
5
Conclusion
We have presented the 2020 edition of the CheckThat! Lab, which features
tasks that span the full veriﬁcation pipeline: from spotting check-worthy claims
to checking whether they have been fact-checked elsewhere already, to retrieving
useful passages within relevant pages, to ﬁnally making a prediction about the
factuality of a claim. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst shared task
that addresses all steps of the fact-checking process. Moreover, unlike previous
editions of the CheckThat! Lab, our main focus here is on social media, which
are the center of “fake news” and disinformation. We further feature a more
realistic information retrieval scenario with pooling for evaluation, as done at
IR venues such as TREC. Last but not least, in-line with the general mission of
CLEF, we promote multi-linguality by oﬀering our tasks in diﬀerent languages.
We hope that these tasks and the associated datasets will serve the mission
of the CheckThat! initiative, which is to foster the development of datasets,
tools and technology that would enable the automatic veriﬁcation of claims
and will supporting human fact-checkers in their ﬁght against “fake news” and
disinformation.
