1
Federated Learning for distribution skewed data
using sample weights
Hung Nguyen∗, Peiyuan Wu † and J. Morris Chang‡
∗‡ Electrical Engineering Dept, University of South Florida, USA
† Electrical Engineering Dept, National Taiwan University, Taiwan

Abstract— One of the most challenging issues in federated
learning is that the data is often not independent and identically
distributed (non-IID). Clients are expected to contribute the same
type of data and drawn from one global distribution. However,
data are often collected in different ways from different resources.
Thus, the data distributions among clients might be different
from the underlying global distribution. This creates a weight
divergence issue and reduces federated learning performance.
This work focuses on improving federated learning performance
for skewed data distribution across clients. The main idea is to
adjust the client distribution closer to the global distribution us-
ing sample weights. Thus, the machine learning model converges
faster with higher accuracy. We start from the fundamental
concept of empirical risk minimization and theoretically derive
a solution for adjusting the distribution skewness using sample
weights. To determine sample weights, we implicitly exchange
density information by leveraging a neural network-based density
estimation model, MADE. The clients’ data distribution can then
be adjusted without exposing their raw data. Our experiment
results on three real-world datasets show that the proposed
method not only improves federated learning accuracy but also
significantly reduces communication costs compared to the other
experimental methods.
Impact Statement—Non-IID issue is a well-known problem in
machine learning applications, especially for Federated Learning,
as clients often collect data from different sources and in different
conditions. The problem significantly reduces machine learning
performance and increases communication costs. To alleviate
the nagative impact of non-IID data, several works have been
proposed. However, they mostly require clients to share part of
their private data or rely on the global information from the
global model, which already suffered the non-IID. In this work,
the proposed method adjusts the distribution via sample weight
in the loss function during training. We only ask clients to share
some extra models. Similar to a typical FL framework, clients
are not required to expose their raw data. The results on three
real-world datasets showed that the proposed method is much
more efficient than other experimental methods. It increases the
accuracy of ML model and significantly reduces communication
costs e.i., up to eight times for real non-IID dataset FEMNIST.
Index Terms—feature skewness, communication cost reduction,
privacy preservation, deep learning.
I. INTRODUCTION
Since the demand for massive data in artificial intelligent
machines, federated learning (FL) was first introduced in 2016,
[1], a collaboratively decentralized learning framework, in
contrast to centralized learning approaches (in which datasets
are sent to an aggregator), FL encourages data holders to
Code and Data are available at https://github.com/nsh135/FedDiskPytorch
contribute without the privacy concern of exposing their raw
data. For example, a number of hospitals holding patient
records would participate in a machine learning (ML) system
to provide better disease predictions via a FL framework
without the concern of privacy disclosure. An FL framework
is then set up to train a global machine learning model with
the participation of all hospitals (clients) and an aggregator
coordinating the model transfer between clients and the aggre-
gator. Instead of sharing raw data, each client trains their ML
model for a small number of iterations and updates the model
parameters to the aggregator. The aggregator then merges all
clients’ model parameters into a new global model and sends
them back to the clients for further training iterations. Clients
receive the global model and continue to train for the next
iterations. The process is repeated until the global model is
fully trained.
Because the data in such collaborative learning usually
come from different sources, they might be drawn from local
distributions that are different from the underlying global
distribution. This can be considered a non-IID issue, and it
might cause a performance reduction. The primary problem
is the divergence of model weights, as found in [2] by Zhao
et al. The authors showed that the model’s weights tend to
be more diverged for non-IID data compared to that for IDD
data. This causes a performance reduction, and it worsens as
the data distribution becomes more skewed. For example, the
accuracy dropped by about 10% for image dataset Cifar-10
[3], and speech recognition dataset KWS [4] with a non-IID
setting. In FL, this issue arises due to differences between
client individual distribution and the global distribution. To
address this problem, we proposed an algorithm that utilizes
sample weights to adjust individual client distributions closer
to the global distribution during the training process. However,
obtaining global information across clients is challenging in an
FL setting because clients need to allow the exposure of their
raw data. To overcome this challenge, the proposed method
implicitly shares statistical information of client data without
revealing the client’s raw data. The method only requires
clients to exchange additional model weights using a typical
FL procedure. Once the adjustment weights are acquired, the
machine learning model can be trained using a standard FL
framework. The proposed method is demonstrated to improve
FL accuracy and significantly reduce FL communication costs
through experiments on three real-world datasets.
Our contributions are as follows:
arXiv:2401.02586v1  [cs.LG]  5 Jan 2024

2
1) Provide a theoretical base for skewed feature distribution
data for federated learning by adjusting sample weights
derived from the machine learning empirical risk.
2) Provide a practical solution to mitigate the problem
of learning from non-IID data for the FL framework
without sharing clients’ draw data. The proposed method
only requires clients to share additional model parame-
ters, similar to a typical federated learning framework.
3) Several experiments were conducted on three datasets,
including MNIST, non-IID benchmark dataset FEM-
NIST and real-world dataset Chest-Xray. The results
demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms other
experimental methods in classification accuracy and
dramatically reduces the communication cost.
4) As the proposed method needs to exchange additional
information, we also provide a theoretical analysis to
analyze the potential privacy leakage. We showed that
the leakage information becomes insignificant when the
number of clients increases.
5) To our best knowledge, the proposed method is the
first method utilizing data distribution information and
sample weights to tackle the FL Non-IID issue.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. A brief
review was conducted in Section II Related Work. Section III
formulates our problem and our goal to achieve. Section IV
introduces a neural network-based model that is leveraged in
our work to carry density information. Our proposed solution
is introduced in Section V. A comprehensive study on the
modules in the proposed method is introduced in Section
VI Ablation Study. We provide a privacy leakage analysis
in Section VIII as the proposed method indirectly exchanges
distribution information. Section VII shows our experimental
results and illustrates the proposed method’s performance.
Section IX summarizes our study and discusses future work
to improve the proposed method.
II. RELATED WORKS
To learn a model utilizing data from multiple clients without
directly accessing clients’ data, authors in [1] first introduced
Federated Averaging (FedAvg) and demonstrated its robust-
ness in 2016. The main idea is that clients (data holders) are
involved in a model training process by exchanging local mod-
els’ parameters instead of exchanging raw data. Since then, FL
has been seen in various applications in different fields [5],
[6], [7], [8], [9], [10]. Federated Learning can be categorized
into two primary scenarios: cross-silo and cross-device FL.
In the former, there are fewer clients, each having substantial
data (such as hospitals). In contrast, the latter scenario involves
numerous clients with lightweight devices, and each client may
have a smaller dataset (like mobile users). One of the main
concerns in FL is that the data might come from different
sources and have different distributions. Thus, FL performance
is significantly reduced because this violates a fundamental
machine learning assumption that data should be independent
and identically distributed (IID). The FL over non-IID data has
been shown in existing works [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16],
[17], [18], [39] that its performance deteriorates dramatically.
In this work, we focus on tackling the non-IID data issue in a
federated learning system in which the collected data feature
distribution is skewed. Many different reasons might cause
the skewness. For example, clients might perform different
sampling methods, apply different normalization methods, or
sample using different devices.
Over the past few years, there have been a number of
approaches aiming at reducing non-IID data impacts. While
many current works focus on skewed label distribution, there
are only limited approaches considering skewed feature dis-
tribution data, which is very common in various fields, e.g.,
medical images collected from different X-ray machines. We
classify the existing works into three categories as follows.
• Sharing data: This approach mainly focuses on adjusting
model weights or calibrating model parameters using
sharing data. However, they require a certain amount of
raw data to be shared among users. For example, authors
in [2], [19] proposed an alleviation by finetuning the
model on globally shared data to adjust the distribution
drift. Thus, this still poses a privacy concern. Zhu et al. in
[20] used adversarial training and shared the generator for
generating synthetic samples, which might contain global
information. However, training generators also suffered
from the non-IID itself.
• Training stabilization: This approach focuses on sta-
bilizing the local training process by regulating the de-
viation between local parameters and global parameters.
This could be implemented by normalizing layers, adding
regularization terms in loss functions, or sharing specific
layers. For example, Li et al. illustrated in their work
(FedBN) [21] that Local Batch Normalization would
help to reduce the problem of non-IID data. FedBN
suggests clients not synchronize local batch normalization
parameters with the global model. Sahu et al. introduce
FedProx [22] to solve the weight-divergence issue by
proposing a loss function that constrains the local models
to stay close to the global model. FedNova [23] suggests
to normalize local weights before synchronizing with the
aggregator. FedMA [24], AFL [25], and PFNM [26] con-
sider combinations of layer-wise parameters and provide
an aggregation of such parameters to alleviate the non-
IID issue. In FedRod [27], Chen and Chao deal with the
non-IID issue by learning hyper-networks locally, which
results in personalized classifiers for clients and clients’
class distributions. Recently, Tan et al. [28] tackled the
non-IID data issue by exchanging representation vectors
of samples in a given class instead of the model’s
parameters, enabling clients to have personalized model
architecture.
• Weighted aggregation: The approach mitigates hetero-
geneity by adjusting the model weight during aggre-
gation. However, this works on the model level, so it
is ineffective if the data is non-IID within a client.
FedCL [29] and FedDNA [30] share statistical parameters
of models (means and variances) and aim at finding
averaging weights for each client’s model to minimize
models’ weights divergence across clients. However, as

3
this approach only considers the aggregating weights for
each model, the improvement is minor.
III. PROBLEM STATEMENT
In this section, we introduce and formulate the scenario
of FL with skewed feature distribution across clients. Our
scenario is a learning collaboration between K clients to
build a global classification model that maximizes the global
accuracy given arbitrary data. Each client holds a number of
individual records that they are not willing to share with others
due to privacy concerns. This study focuses on preventing the
performance of the global model from deteriorating because
of the distribution skewness issue [31] across clients.
Our goal is to adjust the clients’ distributions to be closer
to the global distribution via sample weights. We denote the
data and associated labels held by client k ∈{1, ..., K} as
{(xj
k, yj
k)}Nk
j=1 where xj
k ∈Rd and yj
k ∈N. Let the data
distribution of the kth client be qk(x) and the ground truth
global distribution is p(x). Our problem becomes finding an
adjusting weight function for each client k, α(xk) such that
αk(x)qk(x) = p(x)
(1)
IV. PRELIMINARY: MASKED AUTOENCODER FOR
DISTRIBUTION ESTIMATION (MADE)
The proposed method asks the clients to share additional
model weights that carry their local datasets’ distribution
information instead of sharing the raw data. We utilize a neural
network-based density estimation, namely, Masked Autoen-
coder for Distribution Estimation (MADE) [32]. This section
briefly introduces MADE.
MADE is designed to estimate the probability distribution of
input components (e.g., pixels in an image). MADE assumes
input components are dependent instead of independent, which
is relevant in many applications. For example, MADE can
decompose the distribution of an instance x consisting n
components x1, x2, x3, ..., xn as follows:
p(x) = p(x1|x2, x3, .., xn)·p(x2|x3, ..., xn)...p(xn−1|xn)·p(xn).
(2)
In our study, the instances are images and each pixel can be
considered as a component. Thus, n is the size of a flatten
image vector.
For MADE implementation, a shallow neural network is
utilized. Its input and output size are equal (similar to an
Autoencoder), for example a size of n for the above example.
The main idea is to mimic Equation 2 by masking neuron
connections across layers to control the seen and unseen
connections to model output. Specifically, MADE poses con-
straints on the model that each output component in a certain
layer only connects to its dependent input components in the
previous layer. Masks are created based on such principle, and
applied to the weights of the model.
Specifically, MADE assigns each unit in a hidden layer an
integer m between 1 and D −1, where D is the number of
dimensions. Denote m(k) as the maximum number of units in
the previous layer to which the kth hidden unit can connect,
the weight mask M is then formulated as follows: Mk,d =
1m(k)≥d =
(
1
if m(k) ≥d
0
otherwise,
for d ∈{1, ..., D} and k ∈
{1, ..., K} with K being the number of hidden layer units.
V. FEDERATED LEARNING FOR DISTRIBUTION SKEWED
DATA USING SAMPLE WEIGHTS
In this section, a solution is proposed to alleviate the
negative impact of distribution skewness across clients for fed-
erated learning by adjusting client data distribution during the
training process. The proposed method aims to find weights for
training samples in order to adjust client data distributions. The
remainder of this section introduces how we design sample
weights. We also show that the goal in Equation 1 can be
derived from the machine learning optimization problem as
described in this section.
By applying the sample weights for the local training on
each client, the proposed method reduces the distribution
skewness of each client’s data and prevents clients’ raw data
from being exposed. Some statistical information between
clients and the aggregator must be exchanged to find sample
weights. However, instead of exchanging the raw information,
which might hurt clients’ privacy, the proposed method only
exchanges model parameters, similar to a typical Fl frame-
work.
Our framework is illustrated in Figure 1. Where f(·) denotes
local inference models and wk is the model’s parameter of the
kth client. The proposed method, namely FedDisk, requires a
2-phase process. First, clients jointly learn a global density es-
timation model and their local density models utilizing MADE
models. These models are then used to derive sample weights
for the local training process. Second, the machine learning
tasks can be learned by the conventional FL procedure, with
the data skewness issue mitigated by the sample weights from
the first phase.
A. Sample Weights Design
As we do not have sufficient information about the true
distribution, we consider the combination of all clients’ dataset
distribution as our true distribution. Thus, we consider the
probability density function (pdf) of the true distribution as
p(x) =
K
X
k=1
ckqk(x),
(3)
where qk(x) denotes the pdf of the kth client’s data. ck depicts
the client’s weight, as determined by the ratio of the client’s
sample count Nk to the total number of samples N:
ck = Nk
N .
(4)
To jointly learn a global model, the system finds the
expectation of the loss function l(g(x), y) with sample x
that drawn from the true distribution. The expected loss is
formulated by the associated risk [33] as follows:
E[l(g(x), y)] =
ZZ
l(g(x), y)p(y|x)p(x)dxdy,
(5)

4
…
Client 1
Client 𝐾𝐾
Aggregator
2
1
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
Figure 1: FedDisk Framework: The proposed framework has two phases. First, local and global probability density functions
(p(x), q(x)) are estimated via MADE models leveraging FL procedures. Then, the sample weights α are computed by
approximating density ratio via class probability estimation. Second, the machine learning tasks (e.g., classification) can be
performed similar to a typical FL method (i.e., FedAvg) with the sample weights acquired from phase 1.
where p(x, y) is the joint pdf of a sample x and its associated
label y, and p(y|x) is the conditional probability of a label
y given a sample x. We also assume that for any client k ∈
{1, ..., K} with local data distribution qk(x), the conditional
probability of a label y given a sample x is equivalent to that
of the true distribution, namely
qk(y|x) = p(y|x).
(6)
From Equation 3, 5, 6, and by multiplying with factor
qk(x)
qk(x) = 1, the expected loss in Equation 5 can be expanded
as follows:
E[l(g(x), y)] =
ZZ
l(g(x), y)p(y|x)p(x)dxdy,
(7)
=
ZZ
l(g(x), y)qk(y|x)qk(x)
qk(x)p(x)dxdy
(8)
=
ZZ
l(g(x), y)qk(x, y) p(x)
qk(x)dxdy.
(9)
The objective of the global model thus amounts to minimize
the empirical risk over all K clients’ datasets:
minimize
g
1
N
K
X
k=1
Nk
X
j=1
αj
k l(g(xj
k), yj
k)),
(10)
where xj
k, yj
k are the jth sample and its label. N is the
total number of samples. αj
k denotes αk(xj), which represents
client k sample weight function with respect to x, computed
as
αj
k = p(x)
qk(x) =
PK
i=1 qi(x)
qk(x)
. .
(11)
Our problem becomes minimizing the summation of the loss
functions (Equation 10) over all clients. For each client, the
loss function is minimized over local samples with the corre-
sponding jth sample weight of the client kth, αj
k. The sample
weights could be estimated by the density ratio between the
true distribution (global distribution) and the client distribu-
tions (local distributions). For each client, the local distribution
can be estimated using its local data. However, the challenge is
to achieve the true distribution without having access to other
clients’ data. To solve this, we leverage a neural network-based
density estimation model to learn the global density function
via a typical federated learning procedure. Thus, clients can
implicitly exchange some statistical information, while still
preserving the privacy in client data.
B. Probability Density Approximation
To estimate global density and preserve client privacy at
the same time, we propose to leverage a neural network-
based density estimation so that we can exchange local density
information (via models’ weights) with the aggregator without
sharing the raw data. In this work, we leverage a well-
known method, namely, Masked Autoencoder for Distribu-
tion Estimation (MADE, [32]), which is briefly reviewed
in Section IV. Elaborately, each client aims to estimate its
local probability density qk(x) using its own dataset, and
all K clients jointly estimate the global probability density
p(x) = q1(x)+...+qK(x). Learned MADE models are used to
approximate local probability density functions, and the global
MADE model approximates the global probability density. The
learning process is described as follows.

5
The kth client learns a local density estimation model
ldk( ˆwk) (where ld(·) approximates density estimation function
with parameter ˆw) using its local data. It then jointly learns a
global density estimation model gd( ˜w) (where gd(·) represents
the global density function with the parameter ˜w) using the
procedure similarly to FedAvg [1]. Specifically, for the local
model density estimation models, each client train a MADE
model on its local data until the loss function can not be
improved. For the global density estimation model, each client
trains its data locally for a certain number of iterations,
and then model parameters are sent to an aggregator for
the aggregation. Since clients might own different number
of samples, a weight of Nk/N (where Nk and N are the
number of samples of the kth client and the the total number of
samples over all clients) is used for adjusting client parameter
significance, similar to FedAvg. After aggregating all clients’
model parameters, the aggregator shares global model param-
eters to all clients. The steps are repeated until the validation
loss starts increasing. The global MADE model aggregation
from K clients at iteration t can be described as follows:
˜wt =
K
X
k=1
Nk
N ˜wt
k
(12)
C. Sample Weight Approximation
After the local and global density approximations by MADE
models are fully learned ( Section V-B), we can estimate
sample weights in Equation 11. Since MADE models output
vectors of conditional probabilities for each element in the d-
dimensional input x, an intuitive way to compute p(x) is to
multiply all the conditional probabilities. However, as p(x)
vanishes when any of the conditional probabilities vanishes,
we instead keep the output as a vector of conditional prob-
abilities (same size as input) and approximate the density
ratio in Equation 11 using a class probability estimation
method inspired by [34]. The method aims at training a
binary classifier to output a probability that represents the ratio
between p(x) and q(x). The solution detail is described in the
rest of this subsection.
After each client receives the final global MADE model and
trains its own local MADE, it starts to evaluate sample weights
for its local data. The training data of the kth client, Xk, is
then fed into both the global MADE (the global MADE is
downloaded to clients so that this step can be done locally)
and the local MADE to estimate p(x) and qk(x), respectively.
Denote u as the output vector of density estimation models,
and l be the pseudo label indicating whether it is sampled from
the global destination (l = 1) or the local distribution (l = 0).
Each client then trains a binary classifier to differentiate
whether the output u comes from p(x) or qk(x). Outputs of
the two MADE models (the sample size of each output is Nk)
are concatenated to a new vector dataset including samples
{(ui
k, li
k)}2Nk
i=1 , and is used to train the binary classifier. The
conditional probabilities of the binary classification model
h(u, wh) (where u is the input variable , wh is the model
parameter) can be approximated as following:
P(u|l = 0) ∝qk(x),
P(u|l = 1) ∝p(x).
(13)
From Bayes’ rule, we have
p(x)
q(x) = P(u|l = 1)
P(u|l = 0) =
P(l = 1|u)P(u)
P(l = 1)
 
P(l = 0)
P(l = 0|u)P(u)

(14)
= P(l = 1|u)P(l = 0)
P(l = 0|u)P(l = 1).
(15)
We approximate the marginal probability ratio between two distri-
butions ( P(l = 0) and P(l = 1)) by the number of samples from the
two distributions Nk over the concatenated dataset size (2Nk).Thus,
We have P(l=0)
P(l=1) =
Nk
2Nk
2Nk
Nk = 1.
The density ratio then can be estimated as follows:
p(x)
q(x) = P(l = 1|u)
P(l = 0|u) =
P(l = 1|u)
1 −P(l = 1|u),
(16)
where P(l = 1|u) is the classifier’s probability-liked output indicat-
ing how likely an input vector u comes from the global probability
p(x).
To summarize, the jth training sample of client k, xj
k, is fed into
the client’s local MADE model to achieve its corresponding density
estimation uj
k. uj
k is then fed into the binary classification function
h(u) to achieve the class probability P(l = 1|uj
k). This is used
to estimate the sample weight αj
k (Equation 11) based on Equation
16. In words, the binary classification model h(u, ¯w) is expected to
return higher weights for samples that are likely belonging to the true
distribution and vise versa.
D. Learning With Skewed Distribution Data Across clients
After acquiring sample weights, each client starts to train the model
on the local dataset and corresponding sample weights for a machine
learning task (e.g., classification) as a typical FL framework. In this
work, we follow the procedure introduced by FedAvg to learn the
global model. The aggregator aggregates clients’ local models as
follows:
wt =
K
X
k=1
Nk
N wt
k
(17)
where wt and wt
k are the global and local model parameter of kth
client at the tth iteration.
E. Algorithm
Our main strategy can be described in Algorithm 1. We only
concentrated on describing the first phase of FedDisk as the second
is the same as a typical FL framework. First, each client trains its
own local MADE model on the local data to obtain local distribution
information (lines 1 −3). All clients then jointly train global MADE
utilizing a typical FL framework (lines 4 −14). After achieving
these two models, data are sampled from the two output models to
acquire data samples containing local and global information (lines
15 −17). These samples are concatenated with the pseudo label of
0 for samples that come from local distribution and 1 for ones from
the global distribution (line 18). They are then used for training an
adversarial binary classifier (line 19). The purpose is to differentiate
the two datasets sampled from the two distributions. The samples that
are similar to the global samples will return a higher probability of
belonging to class 1 (come from global distribution) and vice versa.
Thus, the classifier probability-like output that represents class 1 is
then used to be the weights for the sample (line 20).
VI. ABLATION STUDY: FEDDISKAB
In this section, we examine the idea of using sample weight for
non-IID data and the FedDisk sample weight effectiveness by looking
at the case when the weights are derived directly from the raw
data. Specifically, instead of learning sample weights from the local
and global MADE model output, the weights are learned directly

6
Algorithm 1 Phase 1: Sample Weight Computing.
Input: Client kth: Dataset {Xk, yk}.
Parameter: K : Number of client.
N : Number of total samples.
Nk: Number of sample of client kth. PK
k=1 Nk = N
localiter: Number of iterations for training local model
globaliter : Number of iterations for training global model.
ld( ˆw) : Local MADE model containing local distribution
information
gd( ˜w) : Global MADE model containing global distribution
information
h( ¯wk): Shallow Binary Classifier to differentiate output from
px and qx αk: sample weights for client k data
Output: αk: Sample weights for Xk
{Training local MADE model}
1: for k ←1 to K do
• Client k:
2:
Fully train ldk( ˆ
wk) on local data {Xk, yk}.
3: end for
{Training global MADE model}
4: for i ←1 to global iter do
5:
for k ←1 to K do
• Client k:
6:
Update ˜wi−1 from the Aggregator
7:
for j ←1 to local iter do
8:
Train gd( ˜w) on {Xk, yk}.
9:
end for
10:
Sending gd( ˜w) to Agreegator
11:
end for
• Aggregator:
12:
Aggregate ˜wi = PK
k=1
Nk
N ˜wi
k
13:
Broatcasting ˜wi to clients
14: end for
{Training shallow binary classifier}
15: for k ←1 to K do
Sample data from local distribution:
16:
X′local
k
←ld(Xk| ˆwk), y′local
k
←[0...0]
Sample data from global distribution:
17:
X′glob
k
←gd(Xk| ˜wk) , y′global
k
←[1...1]
18:
X′
k ←concat(X′local
k
, X′glob
k
),
y′
k ←concat(y′local
k
, y′global
k
)
• Client k:
19:
Fully train h( ¯wk) on local data {X′
k, y′
k}.
{Estimate sample weight}
20:
αk ←h(X′
k| ¯w)[: 1]
21: end for
from the raw local and global data. To obtain the global data, we
combine all client’s data and randomly sample the same number of
the client dataset size to avoid data imbalance. This setting variant of
FedDisk (namely FedDiskAb) is an ideal case for a sample weight-
based approach as it assumes to have access to the raw data. To
obtain sample weights, FedDiskAb only needs to train the binary
classifier on the combination of local data and global data, aiming to
discriminate the two datasets. The classifier’s output is used to derive
the sample weight, similar to FedDisk.
Several experiments have been conducted for FedDiskAb and
other methods in Section VII. The outcome demonstrates that both
FedDiskAb and FedDisk surpass the performance of all alternative
methods. This confirms the effectiveness of the sample weight-based
strategy, whether acquired through learning the distribution from
MADE models or directly from the data, in enhancing federated
learning when faced with non-IID challenges. Furthermore, the
performance of FedDisk closely aligns with that of FedDiskAb. This
shows the fact that the local and global MADE models contribute
significantly to the framework’s ability to capture essential distribu-
tion information, much akin to the process of direct learning from
the raw data. The details of the experimental results will be shown
in Chapter VII.
VII. EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we conduct several experiments to evaluate the
proposed method on non-IID FL scenarios with three real image
datasets (MNIST, Chest-Xray and FEMNIST). Our FL system goal
is to learn a global classifier leveraging data from all clients. The
classification accuracy is used as a metric to evaluate the performance
of the proposed method. The communication cost is evaluated by
counting the number of iterations needed for clients to exchange
model parameters with the aggregator. We compare our method
with other state-of-the-art methods, e.i., FedAvg, FedProx, FedBN,
FedROD and FedPCL.
A. Datasets & non-IID setting.
In this Section, we describe how datasets are used in our exper-
iments. We categorize our dataset into two groups, simulated non-
IID dataset (MNIST) and real non-IID datasets (Femnist & Chest-
Xray). The first one contains images that have already been combined
together so that our partitioning process is considered for sampling
from the same contribution. Thus, we added different levels of noise
to each client to simulate the feature skewness as inspired by settings
in [17], and [28]. The second group’s data are collected from different
sources so that they are considered to be non-IID by nature. All the
data are normalized and clipped to the range of [0,1] before training.
Each client’s data is split to 85% and 15% for training and testing
sets, respectively. The detail of the datasets is described as follows.
1) Simulated non-IID: MNIST dataset: MNIST dataset [35]
contains 60,000 (1x28x28) gray scale images of 10 digits (0-9).
The number of unique output labels is 10 representing 10 digits.
To mimic feature skewness, we split data equally into 100 partitions
and add different level of noise to each client’s data as inspried by
the skewness simulation in [17]. The noise is drawn from Gaussian
distribution with a mean of 0 and different values of standard
deviations. More specifically, the kth client (k ∈[0, 99]) is added
noise with the variance of k ∗x/100 where x is the added noise
variance.
2) Real non-IID: Femnist dataset: FEMNIST dataset is down-
loaded from https://leaf.cmu.edu/, which is considered a benchmark
dataset for real non-IID data. It contains handwritten images of
62 digits and characters (corresponding to 62 unique labels) from
different writers and strokes. In this study, we randomly select 100
different writers (each of them owns more than 300 images to avoid
overfitting) and assign their data to 100 clients. The average sample
size of clients is 387.47, and the standard deviation is 83.04. All
images are resized to a (32x32) grayscale and normalized to the range
of [0,1] before inputting to models.
3) Real non-IID: Chest Xray dataset: The Chest-Xray dataset,
which contains pneumonia and normal chest Chest-Xray images,
are collected from different sources (i.e., COVID-19 [36], Shenzhen
Hospital [37], and University of California San Diego (UCSD) [38])
with different image sizes, colors and potentially taken from different
medical devices. Thus, we consider this dataset non-IID by nature.

7
After partitioning the data into 100 clients, the mean and standard
deviation of the client sample size are 325.50 and 63.74, respectively.
All images are converted to grayscale and resized to (32x32). There
are two unique output labels (binary classification) to predict chest
Chest-Xray images are normal or abnormal.
4) Data examples.: Figure 2 provides several sample images
from the three datasets. The MNIST dataset images have various
degrees of noise. Besides, the FEMNIST dataset includes images with
different writing styles from various sources. The Chest-Xray dataset
comprises images with varying resolutions and light conditions, etc.
This makes them non-IID across clients.
Figure 2: Example images from MNIST, FEMNIST and Chest
Xray datasets. They are collected from different sources and
carried a veraity of resolutions, styles or conditions.
B. Implementation Detail
1) Baselines: We compare our methods with different methods,
i.e., FedAvg, FedProx, FedBN, FedROD and FedPCL. While most
implementation details are taken from the initial parameter sets in
original papers, we also tune suggested parameters and report the
results that give the best values. For FedROD, the results are reported
for the hyper-parameter µ of 1. We also tried other values in the set 1,
5, 10, 20 and found that the results are very similar. For FedProx, we
tuned the parameter µ with the candidates of 0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 1 and
reported the value of 0.01, 1, 0.01 for the three datasets, Chest-Xray,
FEMNIST, MNIST, respectively.
2) Federated Learning Classification Model: We use shallow
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) for the classification of image
datasets. The models are constructed by two 5x5 convolutional layers
(32 and 32 channels for Chest-Xray, 128 and 128 channels for
FEMNIST, 16 and 16 channels for MNIST). Each convolutional layer
is followed by 2x2 max pooling and batch normalization layers. A
fully connected layer with 16 neurons is added on the top of the
models. The input and output sizes are designed to fit each dataset
scenario (i.e., image size and the number of unique labels). We use
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with a learning rate of 0.01 for
the optimizers. Local iterations are set to 2 for all datasets. Global
iterations are set to 1500 for FEMNIST and MNIST, and 500 for
Chest-Xray.
3) Density Estimation Model (MADE): Density estimation
models (MADE) are constructed by neural networks and the hyper-
parameters are taken directly from the initial setting in the original
work [32]. Several experiments were conducted to select the optimal
set of parameters which yield lowest loss value. The networks include
input, output and one hidden layer. The number of neurons in the
hidden layer is tuned from a value set of {30, 50, 100, 200, 300,
400}. The final selected number of neurons in the hidden layer are
50, 400, 30 for XRAY, FEMNIST and MNIST datasets, respectively.
We noticed that using more neurons than numbers above did not
significantly decrease the validation loss, thus they are the optimal
settings. The model’s input and output sizes are set to the flattened
size of images. Specifically, the input and output size for MNIST
and FEMNIST datasets is 784 with image sizes of 28x28 pixels. This
number is 1024 (32x32 pixels) for Chest-Xray dataset. The maximum
training iteration is set to 500, and the training process is stopped
when the validation loss starts increasing. Other hyper-parameters
are taken directly from [32].
4) Sample Weight Approximation: In order to compute the
sample weight alpha, we use a shallow, fully connected neural
network to discriminate the density estimation output vectors coming
from which of the two distribution density functions p(x) or q(x).
The model contains a 100-neuron hidden layer with Relu activation
function. The output layer contains two neurons with Softmax acti-
vation function. All models applied a learning rate of 0.01, and SGD
optimization were used in the training process. The training process
is terminated if the loss function is not significantly reduced.
C. Results
1) Classification Accuracy: Figure 3 shows the average of the
100 clients’ testing accuracies over training iterations. The shaded
regions illustrate the standard deviation over five trials. Overall,
FedDisk significantly outperforms other methods in terms of classi-
fication accuracy. For example, in Figure 3a for Chest-Xray dataset,
FedDisk with an accuracy of 92% outperforms others with the
highest accuracy of 90.5%. For FEMNIST dataset (Figure 3b), our
method achieved an accuracy of 78% while others only reached
the maximum accuracy of 56% (FedROD). For MNIST, FedDisk
reached the accuracy of 54.5% while others only obtained the highest
accuracy of 51.7%.
Figure 4 shows the descriptive statistical accuracy results of 100
clients on different datasets. The colored rectangles contain 50% of
client accuracies. The colored rectangular’s lower and upper edges
show the middle values in the first and second half of the sorted
clients’ accuracies (lower quartile and higher quartile). The middle
dash is the median value. The upper and lower dashes represent the
min and max clients’ accuracies. Dots illustrate outliers. Overall, the
bars for FedDisk are higher than others, meaning that most clients
archive higher accuracy. Dots are also higher (Figure 4a and 4b) for
FedDisk, showing that outlier clients are also improved. Especially,
the bar for FEMNIST is significantly raised for FedDisk, indicating
that the proposed method significantly improved for this dataset. It
is clear that the proposed method outperforms compared methods in
all experimental datasets, including real-world non-IID and simulated
non-IID settings.
2) Effective Communication Rounds: To have a fair compari-
sion, we use “Effective Communication Rounds” (ECR) to evaluate
effective number of communication iterations for each method. On
FedDisk, ECR includes the communication rounds for exchanging
MADE models and classification models. Figure 5 show the aggre-
gated training loss and validation loss for the global MADE model
over communication rounds. The global MADE exchanging process
stops when the validation loss starts increasing. For example, the
proposed method needs 15 rounds for exchanging global MADE
models in the case of the FEMNIST dataset (Figure 5b). The ECR
for FedDisk in the classification phase is calculated with the number
of iterations the method needs to achieve the highest value among
other methods gained. Take the FEMNIST dataset experiment shown
in Figure 4b for example, FedDisk only needs 105 rounds to reach
FedROD’s accuracy at 57% which is the highest accuracy among
other experimental methods. Plus 15 rounds to exchange MADE
model, FedDisk only needs a total of 120 rounds to effectively reach
the top comparison method accuracy. Since other methods don’t need
to exchange extra models, the ECRs are calculated by the number of
rounds to exchange classification model until they reach their highest
accuracy values.

8
(a) Chest-Xray
(b) FEMNIST
(c) MNIST (NoiseVar 0.3)
Figure 3: Global model’s average test accuracy during aggregation process. For MNIST dataset, clients’ data were added noise
with the mean of zero and variance of 0.3
(a) Chest-Xray
(b) FEMNIST
(c) MNIST (NoiseVar 0.3)
Figure 4: Test accuracy percentiles, min, max and median plot of 100 clients for different datasets and methods.
(a) Chest-Xray
(b) FEMNIST
(c) MNIST (NoiseVar 0.3)
Figure 5: Average validation and train losses during training the global MADE models. The training processes were stopped
if the validation loss starts increasing.
Table I shows the summary of “Effective Communication Rounds”
for the three experimental datasets. FedDisk mechanism has two
phases; one is to transfer MADE models, and the other is to exchange
classifiers. The overall FedDisk ECR comprises the communication
rounds in the two phases. As shown in the Table, FedDisk is the most
effective method as it needs many fewer communication rounds to
reach the highest accuracy among other methods. This is because the
proposed method only needs a few number communication rounds for
the global MADE model to be converged. Besides, the weight-based
adjustment converges the global classification model much faster than
others. For example, the FedDisk ECR for FEMNIST is only 120
(15 for MADE model exchange plus 105 for classification model

9
Chest-Xray
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
Communication Cost
1e7
FEMNIST
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1e9
MNIST
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
1e7
FedDisk
FedAvg
FedBN
FedProx
FedROD
FedPCL
Figure 6: Summary of “Effective Communication Cost” over 3 datasets. The Figure shows that FedDisk is much more efficient
in number of communication cost.
(a) Chest-Xray
(b) FEMNIST
(c) MNIST
Figure 7: Global model’s losses over communication rounds on the three datasets during training. FedDisk loss reduced much
faster than other methods.
exchange), whereas others take more than 1000 iterations.
3) Effective Communication Cost: To have a comprehensive
comparison, the communication cost is estimated for each method.
The cost is comprised of communication rounds and overhead, where
the overhead is measured by the size of transferred data each round
between a client and the aggregator. Since the transferred data mainly
contains model weights, our study uses the number of model weights
to estimate the overhead size. Table II shows the number of model
weights in different scenarios. Note that a client must consume two
costs each communication round; one is for transferring its current
model weight, and another is for receiving the updated weight from
the aggregator. Generally, the ”effective communication cost” is then
computed as follows.
C = 2 ∗Scls ∗ECRcls,
(18)
where C is the overall communication cost for one client, Scls is
the overhead (number of transferred classification model weights),
and ECRcls is the number of effective communication rounds. For
FedDisk, as it needs to exchange extra MADE in the first phase, the

10
Model
Chest-Xray
FEMNIST
MNIST
FedDisk MADE
80
15
70
FedDisk Classifier
100
105
85
FedDisk Total
180
120
155
FedAvg Classifier
450
1100
500
FedBN Classifier
457
1255
600
FedProx Classifier
440
1200
800
FedROD Classifier
480
1015
550
FedPCL Classifier
500
1030
550
Table I: The average of “Effective Communication Rounds”
for exchanging model weights between each client and the
aggregator.
Model
Chest-Xray
FEMNIST
MNIST
FedDisk MADE
102000
614000
47000
FedDisk Classifier
39000
447000
12000
FedAvg Classifier
39000
447000
12000
FedBN Classifier
39000
447000
12000
FedProx Classifier
39000
447000
12000
FedROD Classifier
39000
447000
12000
FedPCL Classifier
39000
447000
12000
Table II: Communication overhead each round per client.
computation is adjusted as follows.
CF edDisk = 2 ∗(SMADE ∗ECRMADE + Scls ∗ECRcls), (19)
where SMADE and Scls are model sizes needed to be transferred
in phase 1 (MADE models) and phase 2 (classification models), re-
spectively. ECRMADE and ECRcls are the corresponding effective
communication rounds in the two phases. Note that for FedDisk,
ECRMADE + ECRcls = ECR, and ECRcls = ECR for other
methods.
Figure 6 summarizes effective communication cost. Noticeably, the
communication cost reduced significantly for the FEMNIST dataset
under the proposed method, 8 times, from the second lowest cost
method of 907,000,000 (FedROD, brown column) to 112,000,000
(FedDisk, green column). The communication cost reduction trend
is also applied to other experimental datasets, Chest-Xray (1.4
times) and MNIST (1.6 times). Thus, the proposed method improves
accuracy and dramatically reduces communication costs, one of the
most critical concerns in Federated Learning. This is because the
loss function were reduced faster as we adjusted using the sample
weights. Figure 7 demonstrates the global loss values during training.
For FedDisk, the sample weights effectively affect the optimization
function, and the loss reduces much faster, and the accuracies
proportionally increase faster.
D. Discusion
The proposed method offers a holistic improvement over existing
federated learning methods. Its combination of enhanced accuracy
and reduced communication costs signifies its effectiveness across
a variety of datasets and scenarios. For example, the accuray can
be increased by 22% and the communication time reduced by 8
times for FEMNIST dataset. While FedDisk exhibits remarkable
performance across various metrics in federated learning scenarios,
it’s important to acknowledge a drawback associated with its larger
model size compared to some other methods as described in Table
II. The increased model size leads to higher space occupation on
client devices, which can have implications for light weight devices
with limited storage capacity. Hence, the suggested approach could
be well-suited for the cross-silo scenario, typically characterized by
clients having ample data and adequate computational capabilities.
Overal, the proposed approach provides an avenue to address critical
challenges in federated learning, making it a promising option for
real-world applications.
VIII. PRIVACY LEAKAGE ANALYSIS
In this section, we discuss the privacy leakage of our method
compared to the conventional FL. Similar to many other works,
we utilize additional information to alleviate the negative impact
of non-IID data, i.e., parameters of MADE models. However, these
parameters might contain distribution information of clients’ data.
However, we prove that the more clients are involved in the FL
training process, the less our extra information is leaked. The detail
is described as follows.
Assume each client samples their own data point ˆZk ∼Qk
independently, and let Θ be a random variable taking values in J1, KK
with P[Θ = k] = κk and independent of ˆZk for each k ∈J1, KK.
Note that ˆZΘ ∼P, and one may quantify the privacy leakage of
client k’s data through the knowledge of P by the mutual information
between ˆZk and ˆZΘ, as given by
I( ˆZk; ˆZΘ) ≤I( ˆZk; ˆZΘ, Θ) = I( ˆZk; Θ) + I( ˆZk; ˆZΘ|Θ)
= I( ˆZk; ˆZΘ|Θ) =
K
X
i=1
P[Θ = i]I( ˆZk; ˆZi)
= κkH( ˆZk).
(20)
In other words, the privacy leakage is proportional to κk, which
decreases to 0 as long as κk = O(1/K) and K →∞.
IX. CONCLUSION
In this work, we have proposed an FL method to tackle the issue of
data distribution skewness. The technique utilizes an FL framework
and a neural network-based density estimation model to derive train-
ing sample weights. This helps to adjust the individual distribution
without revealing clients’ raw data. Thus, the global model loss is
converged faster and more accurately. The experimental results show
that the proposed method improves FL accuracy and significantly
reduces communication costs. We also provide a privacy analysis
for the extra information used in FedDisk (i.e., the parameters of
MADE models) and prove that the leakage information becomes
less important when the number of clients increases. To advance our
research, we intend to fine-tune the parameters of the MADE model
and investigate various distribution models in order to potentially
achieve improved outcomes and have a greater impact on real-world
applications. More analysis on privacy vulnerabilities and potential
attacks will also be our future research.
