ORDisCo: Effective and Efﬁcient Usage of Incremental Unlabeled Data
for Semi-supervised Continual Learning
Liyuan Wang1, Kuo Yang2, Chongxuan Li1*, Lanqing Hong2, Zhenguo Li2, Jun Zhu1*
1 Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Center,
THBI Lab, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
Abstract
Continual learning usually assumes the incoming data
are fully labeled, which might not be applicable in real ap-
plications. In this work, we consider semi-supervised con-
tinual learning (SSCL) that incrementally learns from par-
tially labeled data. Observing that existing continual learn-
ing methods lack the ability to continually exploit the unla-
beled data, we propose deep Online Replay with Discrim-
inator Consistency (ORDisCo) to interdependently learn a
classiﬁer with a conditional generative adversarial network
(GAN), which continually passes the learned data distribu-
tion to the classiﬁer. In particular, ORDisCo replays data
sampled from the conditional generator to the classiﬁer in
an online manner, exploiting unlabeled data in a time- and
storage-efﬁcient way. Further, to explicitly overcome the
catastrophic forgetting of unlabeled data, we selectively
stabilize parameters of the discriminator that are impor-
tant for discriminating the pairs of old unlabeled data and
their pseudo-labels predicted by the classiﬁer. We exten-
sively evaluate ORDisCo on various semi-supervised learn-
ing benchmark datasets for SSCL, and show that ORDisCo
achieves signiﬁcant performance improvement on SVHN,
CIFAR10 and Tiny-ImageNet, compared to strong base-
lines.
1. Introduction
Current achievements of deep neural networks (DNNs)
heavily rely on large amounts of supervised data, which are
expensive and difﬁcult to acquire simultaneously. There-
fore, the ability of continual learning (CL) on incremental
training samples becomes extremely important. Numerous
efforts have been devoted to CL, which aim to continually
learn new training samples without catastrophic forgetting
of the learned data distribution [29]. Existing CL methods
mainly fall in two categories: weight regularization meth-
*Corresponding author: C. Li and J. Zhu.
ods [29, 11, 1] and replay-based methods [29, 32, 35], and
have achieved promising results in purely supervised set-
tings.
In many real-world applications, nevertheless, the incre-
mental data are often partially labeled. For example, in face
recognition [33], a device continually obtains user data for
unlocking. These increasing data could be used to update
the model for better user experience. However, true labels
of the incoming data are usually unavailable unless the user
provides the password for veriﬁcation.
Since frequently
asking for labelling would affect user experience, most of
the input data are unlabeled.
Similar scenarios occur in
ﬁngerprint identiﬁcation [46] and video recognition [20].
Though such scenarios are common in our daily life, they
are seldom studied in the CL literature. Therefore, in this
paper, we focus on the challenging and realistic task that
continually learns incremental partially labeled data. For
simplicity, we refer to it as semi-supervised continual learn-
ing (SSCL).
Different from supervised CL, SSCL provides insufﬁ-
cient supervision and a large amount of unlabeled data. As
is well known, unlabeled data are crucial in semi-supervised
scenarios [48] but are massive to exploit. In fact, we con-
duct preliminary experiments in SSCL and empirically ver-
ify that the representative CL methods including the weight
regularization methods [29, 11, 1] and the replay-based
methods [29, 32, 35] may not effectively exploit the unla-
beled data. Speciﬁcally, the joint training of a strong semi-
supervised classiﬁer signiﬁcantly outperforms the best of
existing CL strategies on the same classiﬁer (see results in
Fig. 1 and Appendix A). We identify this as the catastrophic
forgetting of unlabeled data problem in SSCL.
To this end, we present deep online replay with discrim-
inator consistency (ORDisCo), a framework to continually
learn a semi-supervised classiﬁer and a conditional gener-
ative adversarial networks (GAN) [23] together in SSCL.
Speciﬁcally, ORDisCo is formulated as a minimax adver-
sarial game [7], where a generator tries to capture the un-
derlying joint distribution of partially labeled data, and help
arXiv:2101.00407v2  [cs.LG]  9 Apr 2021

the classiﬁer make accurate predictions. At the same time,
the classiﬁer also predicts pseudo-labels for unlabeled data
to improve the training of the conditional generator. In con-
trast to previous work [35, 43, 28], ORDisCo replays data
sampled from the conditional generator to the classiﬁer in
an online manner, which is time- and storage-efﬁcient to
exploit the large amount of unlabeled data in SSCL. Fur-
ther, to explicitly overcome the catastrophic forgetting of
unlabeled data, we selectively stabilize parameters of the
discriminator that are important for discriminating the pairs
of old unlabeled data and their pseudo-labels predicted by
the classiﬁer.
We follow the New Instance and New Class scenarios of
CL [29] to split commonly used SSL benchmark datasets
[16, 27], including SVHN, CIFAR10 and Tiny-ImageNet,
as the evaluation benchmarks for SSCL. To simulate the
practical scenarios, all methods continually receive a batch
of data with a few labels during training. Extensive evalua-
tions on such benchmarks show that ORDisCo can signiﬁ-
cantly outperform strong baselines in SSCL.
In summary, our contributions include: (i) We consider
a realistic yet challenging task called semi-supervised con-
tinue learning (SSCL). We provide a systematical study of
existing CL strategies and show that the catastrophic for-
getting of unlabeled data is the key challenge in SSCL.
(ii) We present ORDisCo to continually learn a classiﬁer
and a conditional GAN in SSCL. The generator replays
data in an online manner with a consistency regularization
on the discriminator to address the catastrophic forgetting
of unlabeled data; (iii) We evaluate ORDisCO on various
benchmarks and demonstrate that ORDisCO signiﬁcantly
improves both classiﬁcation and conditional image genera-
tion over strong baselines in SSCL.
2. Related Work
Continual learning (CL) aims to address catastrophic
forgetting in DNNs on a dynamic data distribution [29],
which requires DNNs to learn from incoming tasks or train-
ing samples while retaining previously learned data distri-
bution. Current efforts in CL mainly consider the setting
where large amounts of annotated data are available for
training. Regularization-based methods selectively penal-
ize changes of the parameters to maintain the learned data
distribution, e.g., EWC [11], SI [47] and MAS [1]. While,
replay-based methods store a small memory buffer to re-
play representative training samples [32, 4].
To address
the imbalance between the small memory buffer and large
amounts of training samples, BiC [44] splits an equal num-
ber of samples from both the memory buffer and new train-
ing data as a validation set to train an additional linear layer
for bias correction, while the Uniﬁed Classiﬁer [8] regu-
larizes the cosine similarity of features in an unsupervised
fashion to normalize the prediction. [39] maintains a topol-
ogy of learned feature space, but it’s difﬁcult to learn such
a CL-based topology from semi-supervised data. [19] pro-
vides a more effective strategy to select the memory buffer
from large amounts of labeled data, which is unavailable
in SSCL. To better recover the learned data distribution,
generative replay strategies continually learn a generative
model to replay generated data [35, 43, 28]. However, con-
ditional generation for CL heavily relies on large amounts
of labeled data to assign correct labels. Thus, the extension
to large amounts of unlabeled data with only a few labels
is highly nontrivial. Also, the generative models are often
ofﬂine saved in CL, which results in additional time and
storage cost.
CL of limited supervised data Few-shot continual or
incremental learning (FSIL) [10, 40, 3] incrementally learns
new classes from a small amount of labeled data, which
generally requires a pretraining step on large amounts of
base tasks and training samples for few-shot generalization.
Unsupervised continual learning (UCL) [31, 36] continu-
ally learns new classes from large amounts of unlabeled
data. However, FSIL and UCL only make use of a small
amount of labeled data or large amounts of unlabeled data,
both of which are easy to acquire in many real-world appli-
cations. Also, both FSIL and UCL mainly consider learning
new classes from a ﬁxed number of training samples, rather
than continually learn new instances of the learned classes.
By contrast, our setting of SSCL aims to continually learn
new instances of the learned classes and new classes from
partially labeled data, which is more realistic in real-world
scenarios. [17] continually learns partially labeled new in-
stances of ﬁxed classes through stacking generators and dis-
criminators that signiﬁcantly expand the model. While, we
focus on the setting that the model should maintain a rel-
atively constant size, which is a common assumption for
continual learning.
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) provides a powerful
framework to leverage unlabeled data from a small amount
of labels. Pseudo-Labeling (PL) [14] is an early work to as-
sign the prediction of an unlabeled data that is higher than
a threshold as its pseudo-label to augment the labeled data.
Many more recent works of SSL on discriminative model
deﬁne a regularization term to learn the distribution of unla-
beled data. Consistency regularization, e.g., PI-model [13],
makes use of the stochastic predictions of a network and
adds a loss term to regularize the consistency of predic-
tions on different passes of the same data. Mean teacher
(MT) [41] enforces the predictions of the classiﬁer closer
to its exponential moving average on the same batch of un-
labeled data. Virtual Adversarial Training (VAT) [24] adds
adversarial perturbations to the unlabeled data and enforces
the predictions to be the same as the original one. Graph
Laplacian regularization [6] penalizes the variation of la-
bels on the graph of manifold structure. SSL on GAN is

generally built on a two-network architecture, that the dis-
criminator is responsible for both sample quality and label
prediction, including CatGAN [38], Improved-GAN [34],
CGAN [23] and its variants [30, 26]. Triple-GAN [16] ap-
plies a triple-network architecture that includes a classiﬁer
taking the role of label prediction. ISL-GAN [42] dynam-
ically assigns more virtual labels to unlabeled data during
joint training of all the partially labeled data together. How-
ever, existing efforts of SSL on both discriminative model
and GAN only consider a static data distribution rather than
a dynamic one.
3. Semi-supervised Continual Learning and Its
Challenges
In this section, we ﬁrst introduce the problem formu-
lation of continual learning (CL) of incremental semi-
supervised data, i.e.
semi-supervised continual learning
(SSCL). Then, we provide a systematic study of existing
representative continual learning methods in SSCL. They
suffer from catastrophic forgetting due to the poor usage of
large amounts of unlabeled data.
3.1. Problem Formulation
Compared with supervised CL, SSCL only provides
a small amount of labeled data and a large amount of
unlabeled data, which is key to achieve good perfor-
mance.
Formally, when training on a task t, SSCL
is a special continual learning setting on a partially la-
beled dataset Dt
= S[B]
b=0 Dt
b with B batches, where
Dt
b = {(xi, yi)}i∈bl
S{(xj)}j∈bul is a semi-supervised
batch consisting of a labeled sub-batch bl and an unlabeled
sub-batch bul. Dt
b is introduced when training on the cur-
rent batch b and the performance on the task is evaluated
after learning each batch.
The above SSCL setting is similar to continual learning
of New Instance [29], while the dataset Dt for SSCL only
consists of small amounts of labels rather than all the labels.
We consider continual learning of New Class [29] with par-
tially labeled data as a natural extension, where a collection
of T semi-supervised datasets D = S[T ]
t=0 Dt is sequentially
learned. Dt is provided during training on the task t, which
includes several classes. After learning each task, all of the
classes ever seen are evaluated without access to the task
labels, i.e. the single-head evaluation [5].
3.2. A Systematic Study of Existing CL Methods
We adapt the representative continual learning strategies,
including weight regularization methods [29] and memory
replay ones [29], to SSCL by considering unlabeled data
and provides a systematical analysis.
In particular, we conduct extensive SSCL experiments
on the SVHN dataset, where we equally split the training set
Figure 1. Baselines that combine CL strategies to address SSCL.
JT: Joint training of all the training samples ever seen. ST: Se-
quential training on the incremental data; SMB: ST with replaying
the supervised data ever seen. SMB+UMB: SMB with an unsu-
pervised memory buffer of 10000 images to replay unlabeled data.
Weight regularization methods (EWC, MAS and SI) are imple-
mented on only the supervised loss (-sl) and both the supervised
loss and the unsupervised loss (-sl+ul). The gap between JT and
SMB is around 9.70% in average, which is caused by the catas-
trophic forgetting of unlabeled data.
into 30 batches with 3 labels per class in each batch. No-
tably, we learn various strong semi-supervised classiﬁers,
including MT [41], VAT [24], PL [14] and PI [13] models
in SSCL. We consider four learning strategies for all clas-
siﬁers to verify the existence of catastrophic forgetting and
analyze the underling reason, as follows:
• Joint Training (JT): The classiﬁer is jointly trained
on all the partially labeled data ever seen.
• Sequential Training (ST): The classiﬁer is sequen-
tially trained on the incremental partially labeled data.
• Weight Regularization: Representative approaches
of weight regularization, including SI [47], MAS [1]
and EWC [11], are implemented to the classiﬁer to se-
lectively stabilize parameters.
• Memory Replay: A memory buffer is implemented
to replay old training data. Classical methods [32, 4]
in CL use mean-of-feature to select samples, while
in SSCL we do not have sufﬁcient labels to perform
selection. Therefore, we select data through uniform
sampling, which is indeed competitive to existing se-
lection methods as analyzed in [5] (See empirical re-
sults in Appendix A).
We extensively search the hyperparameters of all base-
lines and summarize the best results. For details like the

(a) UMB
(b) ORDisCo
Figure 2. Data coverage of an unsupervised memory buffer, i.e.
UMB (a), and the samples generated from ORDisCo (b). OR-
DisCo has a less storage cost but achieves a better result.
search space, we refer the readers to Appendix B. We com-
pare the performance of different learning strategies based
on the MT classiﬁer in Fig. 1. The results of other classiﬁers
are similar and detailed in Appendix A.
In Fig. 1, it can be seen that ST on the incremental par-
tially labeled data signiﬁcantly underperforms JT, suggest-
ing the existence of catastrophic forgetting. Besides, sim-
ply adopting weight regularization methods [29, 11, 1, 47]
on a semi-supervised classiﬁer cannot address the issue in
SSCL. We hypothesize that the regularization of parameter
changes in such methods limits the learning of incremental
data, see more experiments and detailed discussion in Ap-
pendix B. A potential future work can be designing proper
regularization terms in SSCL.
In comparison, using a supervised memory buffer
(SMB), whose maximum size is of 900 images, to replay
labeled data [29, 5] can effectively reduce the gap from JT
but still has a large space to improve. Further, we evaluate
a strategy with an additional unsupervised memory buffer
(SMB+UMB), whose maximum size is of 10,000 images,
to replay unlabeled data. Indeed, the extra buffer is about
twice the size of a typical generator used in our method.
Given an extra large memory buffer for unlabeled data,
however, we observed that the performance of the mem-
ory replay approach cannot be further improved, implying
that the unlabeled data are not fully exploited. In fact, we
visualize the coverage of the UMB on the distribution of all
the training data using t-SNE [22] embedding (see details
in Appendix A). As shown in Fig. 2 (a), although the UMB
has already stored around 10% data of the entire dataset, it
still cannot cover the distribution of training data very well.
Therefore, a common issue of existing CL strategies in
the semi-supervised scenarios is that they cannot effectively
capture and exploit the distribution of unlabeled data. We
identify this as the catastrophic forgetting of unlabeled data
problem, which is challenging because the incremental un-
labeled data are massive and lack annotations. This moti-
vates us to propose two new strategies to continually learn
a generative model that can successfully capture the data
distribution (see Fig. 2, b) given partially labeled data.
Figure 3. Deep online replay with discriminator consistency (OR-
DisCo). The partially labeled data are incrementally learned in the
interplay of C, G, and D. To mitigate catastrophic forgetting and
better exploit the unlabeled data, we implement x online semi-
supervised generative replay in C and y stabilization of discrimi-
nation consistency in D. z and y′ are the noise and the labels for
conditional sampling, where the generated samples are applied as
both labeled and unlabeled data for replay. Here, sl and ul stand
for supervised and unsupervised losses, respectively.
4. Method
Based on the empirical analysis above, in this section, we
ﬁrst describe our framework that interdependently trains a
classiﬁer, a discriminator and a generator on the incremen-
tal semi-supervised data in Sec.4.1. Then, in Sec.4.2, we
present two new strategies to mitigate catastrophic forget-
ting of the unlabeled data.
4.1. Conditional Generation on Incremental Semi-
supervised Data
Different from existing generative replay methods [35,
43, 28], we consider a SSCL setting where partially la-
beled data are given. Inspired by the state-of-the-art semi-
supervised learning (SSL) GAN [16, 15], we build up a
triple-network structure that continually learns a classiﬁer
together with a conditional generative adversarial network
(GAN) to better exploit the unlabeled distribution from a
few labeled data in SSCL. Both the classiﬁer and the con-
ditional generator produce “fake” data-label pairs and the
discriminator focuses on discriminating if a data-label pair
is real or fake. Compared to other SSL GANs [38, 34, 23],
our framework is theoretically optimal under a nonparamet-
ric assumption and ensures that the GAN to capture the data
distribution and the classiﬁer to make predictions actually
help each other [16, 15].
Formally, the entire model includes a classiﬁer C, a gen-
erator G and a discriminator D. Correspondingly, the opti-
mization problem is to learn three groups of parameters as

{θC, θG, θD}. In such a triple-network architecture, C tries
to improve its ability of classiﬁcation and generate pseudo-
labels for the conditional generation in D and G. While, D
and G continually learn and recover the data distributions
seen in the incremental semi-supervised data. The general
framework is shown in Fig. 3 and we will describe the ob-
jective function for each component below.
To learn a classiﬁer C from partially labeled data, the
loss functions can be generally deﬁned as a supervised loss
Lsl(θC) and an unsupervised loss Lul(θC). Since our mo-
tivation is to continually capture and exploit the unlabeled
data, we build up our method with a supervised memory
buffer smb to replay a few labeled data. We deﬁne Lsl(θC)
and Lul(θC) as a cross entropy term and a consistency reg-
ularization term [41]:
LC,pl(θC) = Lsl(θC) + Lul(θC),
(1)
Lsl(θC) = Ex, y∼bl∪smb [−y log C(x)],
(2)
Lul(θC) = Ex∼bul,ϵ,ϵ′ [∥C(x, ϵ) −C′(x, ϵ′) ∥2],
(3)
where C′ is the exponential moving average of C [41], ∥
· ∥2 is the square of the l2-norm, and ϵ and ϵ′ denote two
different random noises, e.g. dropout masks. We mention
that there are other options of unlabeled losses for SSL such
as [24, 13, 37]. We leave a systematical study of this for
future work.
Next, we design a semi-supervised discriminator, which
aims to distinguish if a data-label pair is from the labeled
dataset or is a fake one:
LD,pl(θD) = Ex, y∼bl∪smb [log(D(x, y))]
+ α Ey′∼py′,z∼pz [log(1 −D(G(z, y′), y′))]
+ (1 −α) Ex∼bu [log(1 −D(x, C(x)))],
(4)
where the sampling distribution of label y′ is uniform py′ =
U{1, 2, ..., k} among all the k classes ever seen and the
noise z is Gaussian pz = N(0, 1). The ﬁrst two terms are
the regular loss functions for conditional GAN, computed
on the labeled training data and the generated data, respec-
tively. While the third term is computed on the unlabeled
sub-batch bul with the pseudo-labels predicted by C. We
assign α and 1 −α as the coefﬁcients of the last two terms
to keep balance with the ﬁrst term.
Finally, the generator applies a regular loss function for
conditional generation as follows:
LG(θG) = Ey′∼py′,z∼pz [−log(1−D(G(z, y′), y′))]. (5)
4.2. Improving Continual Learning of Unlabeled
Data
In such a framework, after training on a semi-supervised
batch bi, C learns the distribution of bi,ul from bi,l for clas-
siﬁcation while G and D learns that for conditional gen-
eration.
When accommodating for the next batch bi+1,
Figure 4. Conditional samples in SSCL on SVHN (after learning 5
batches of partially labeled data). (a) Training data in SVHN. (b)
Conditional samples from a conditional GAN baseline with replay
of supervised data (SMB). (c) Conditional samples from ORDisCo
with the same SMB. Each row has a ﬁxed label. Our method out-
performs the baseline in terms of label consistency because of the
two strategies proposed.
Table 1. Time and storage complexity of different generative re-
play strategies. B is the total number of batches to learn.
Strategy (1) [28]
Strategy (2) [35, 43]
ORDisCo
Algorithm
ofﬂine
ofﬂine
online
Time
O(B)
O(B2)
O(B)
Storage
O(B)
O(1)
O(1)
all of the three networks adjust the learned parameters of
the previous batch and suffer from catastrophic forgetting,
especially on unlabeled data. Because unlabeled data are
key to solve semi-supervised tasks, without effective strate-
gies to continually learn the unlabeled data from limited la-
bels, the generative model would fail to assign correct labels
to the conditional samples during the incremental learning
(see Fig. 4 for empirical evidence). To this end, we pro-
pose two strategies: online semi-supervised generative re-
play and stabilization of discrimination consistency.
First, we propose a time- and storage-efﬁcient strategy
of online semi-supervised generative replay to improve CL
of unlabeled data in C. Existing generative replay meth-
ods [35, 43, 28, 45, 18] often ofﬂine sample generated data
or embedding, or save the old generators, which results in
additional time and storage cost. Let’s consider two main
strategies for ofﬂine generative replay: (1) All old genera-
tors learned on each task or batch are saved, and replay con-
ditional samples to a classiﬁer [28]; and (2) After learning
each task or batch, the generator is saved. In the next task
or batch, the generator replays conditional samples with the
new training samples to update the generator and the clas-
siﬁer [35, 43, 45, 18]. In contrast, we online generate con-
ditional samples from G and replay them to C rather than
ofﬂine save a model for replay. As shown in Table 1, our
online strategy is more time- and storage-efﬁcient to exploit
the large amounts of unlabeled data in SSCL (See detailed
calculation in Appendix E). The conditional samples are
used as both labeled data and unlabeled data to fully exploit
the learned data distribution:
LC(θC) = LC,pl(θC) + LG→C(θC),
(6)

where the ﬁrst term is deﬁned in Eqn. 1 and the second term
exploits the data sampled from the generator in an online
manner, as follows:
LG→C(θC) = Ey′∼py′,z∼pz [−y′ log C(G(z, y′))]
+ Ey′∼py′,z∼pz,ϵ,ϵ′ [∥C(G(z, y′), ϵ) −C′(G(z, y′), ϵ′) ∥2],
(7)
which is in analogy to the losses of labeled and unlabeled
training data in Eqn. 2, 3.
Further, to explicitly mitigate catastrophic forgetting of
unlabeled data in D, we add a regularization term to se-
lectively penalize changes of the parameters θD from the
old parameters θ∗
D learned from the previous batches 1 : b,
depending on their contributions to the consistency of dis-
criminating data-label pairs:
LD(θD) = LD,pl(θD) + λ
X
i
ξ1:b,i(θD,i −θ∗
D,i)2,
(8)
where the ﬁrst term is deﬁned in Eqn. 4 and ξ1:b,i is the
strength of penalty on the changes of parameter i. It is com-
puted as
ξ1:b,i = ((b −1) × ξ1:b−1,i + ξb,i)/b,
(9)
where
ξb,i = Ex∼bu

∥∂∥(D(x, C(x)) ∥2
∂θD,i
∥

.
(10)
After training on each batch b, we measure ξb,i through
the expected norm of gradients on each parameters to the
squared l2-norm of discriminating the pairs of unlabeled
data and their pseudo-labels predicted by C. Then we up-
date ξ1:b,i by its average. Therefore, the changes of pa-
rameters will be penalized if they change the predictions of
data-label pairs on the old unlabeled batches and the learned
pseudo-labels. Note that, since the regularization is in a re-
weighted weight decay form, which is non-negative and is
zero in expectation given an optimal discriminator, the regu-
larization won’t hurt the consistency and convergence given
different initialization and data sequences.
5. Experiment
In this section, we ﬁrst introduce the benchmark dataset
and experiment settings of SSCL. Then we show the results
of our method and the baselines on SSCL.
5.1. Experiment Setup
Dataset: SVHN [25] is a dataset of colored digits, in-
cluding 73,257 training samples and 26,032 testing samples
of size 32 × 32. CIFAR10 [12] is a dataset of 10-class col-
ored images with 50,000 training samples and 10,000 test-
ing samples of size 32 × 32. Tiny-ImageNet is a dataset
of 200-class natural images with 500, 50, 50 samples per
class for training, validating and testing, respectively. We
randomly choose 10 or 20 classes of images from Tiny-
ImageNet, resized to 32 × 32 or 64 × 64. For the exper-
iment of New Instance, we randomly split the training im-
ages of SVHN, CIFAR10 and Tiny-ImageNet into 30, 30
and 10 batches. Then we allocate a small amount of labels
to each batch as the benchmark of SSCL. To simplify the
notation, the benchmarks are denoted as “dataset-(number
of labels / class / batch)”, including SVHN-1, SVHN-3,
CIFAR10-5, CIFAR10-13 and Tiny-ImageNet-5. A model
incrementally learns the semi-supervised batch and is eval-
uated on the test set after training on each batch. For the
experiment of New Class, we use the same semi-supervised
splits as New Instance, but construct the sequence as 5 bi-
nary classiﬁcation tasks, where the partially labeled data of
two new classes are provided in each task. We follow the
single-head evaluation [5] that all of the classes ever seen
are evaluated without access to the task labels.
Architecture: In our preliminary experiments (Fig. 1,
Appendix A), the classiﬁers use a Wide ResNet architec-
ture (WRN-28-2), which is widely applied in SSL [27].
To accelerate training, ORDisCo applies a much simpli-
ﬁed classiﬁer similar to [15], including 9 convolution lay-
ers without residual connections.
The simpliﬁed classi-
ﬁer achieves a comparable performance on the incremental
semi-supervised data as WRN-28-2 (Fig. 1, Appendix A).
Our generator and discriminator use a similar architecture
as [15], with spectral norm to stabilize training. We keep
ORDisCo and all the baselines that directly compare with
ORDisCo using the same architecture for fair comparison.
Please see Appendix G for hyperparameters of ORDisCo.
Baselines: All the SSL methods in our preliminary ex-
periment (Fig.
1, Appendix A) follow the same imple-
mentation as [27], validated in Appendix B. Because mean
teacher (MT) [41] can be easily extended to many recent
works [9, 2, 21], we choose it as the base model of SSL
classiﬁer in ORDisCo.
We compare ORDisCo with the
strongest baseline in the preliminary experiment, that the
classiﬁer is accessible to the labeled data ever seen through
a supervised memory buffer (SMB). Since our motivation
is to effectively capture and exploit the unlabeled data, we
consider two extensions of SMB: (1) We combine SMB
with an unsupervised memory buffer (UMB) of a similar
size as our generator; and (2) We implement the Uniﬁed
Classiﬁer [8], the state-of-the-art method of incremental
learning with memory replay, to better exploit the unsuper-
vised memory buffer (UMB+UC). The Uniﬁed Classiﬁer
aims to address the imbalance between the small memory
buffer and large amounts of training samples through regu-
larizing the cosine distance of feature extractors in an unsu-
pervised fashion to unify the prediction.

Table 2. Averaged accuracy (%) of SSCL on Tiny-ImageNet. We
randomly split training images of Tiny-ImageNet into 10 batches
with equal number of labels (5 labels / class) in each batch. Here
we show the results on the earlier 5 batches.
Method
Batch 1
Batch 2
Batch 3
Batch 4
Batch 5
10-class
32 × 32
SMB
43.00
46.60
55.40
63.00
59.80
SMB+UMB
43.80
47.60
55.20
62.20
63.40
ORDisCo
45.20
54.40
59.60
65.40
69.20
20-class
32 × 32
SMB
24.90
32.50
32.80
38.70
42.30
SMB+UMB
25.20
33.10
33.60
37.70
42.60
ORDisCo
25.20
33.30
36.50
42.00
45.10
10-class
64 × 64
SMB
52.00
53.00
58.60
66.00
68.40
SMB+UMB
51.60
57.00
62.80
68.40
68.80
ORDisCo
51.20
60.20
65.20
70.40
72.80
Table 3. Ablation study on SVHN-1 and CIFAR10-5. Both online
semi-supervised generative replay (Replay) and regularization of
discrimination consistency (Reg) substantially improve SSCL.
SVHN-1
CIFAR10-5
Method
15 Batch
30 Batch
15 Batch
30 Batch
SMB
38.08
73.32
59.61
67.18
ORDisCo (+Replay, -Reg)
31.14
84.66
64.38
71.69
ORDisCo (+Replay, +Reg)
55.07
85.52
66.58
73.13
5.2. SSCL of New Instance
We report the performance of ORDisCo and other base-
lines during SSCL of 30 incremental batches in Fig.
5
(SVHN-1 and CIFAR10-5) and Appendix C (SVHN-3
and CIFAR10-13).
ORDisCo signiﬁcantly outperforms
other baselines, particularly when the numbers of la-
bels are smaller, i.e.
SVHN-1 and CIFAR10-5.
Com-
pared with SMB, an additional unsupervised buffer (UMB)
slightly improves the performance of SSCL on SVHN-
3 and CIFAR10-13, but results in overﬁtting on SVHN-1
and CIFAR10-5 where the labeled data are extremely lim-
ited (See empirical results and analysis of the overﬁtting
in Appendix A). The Uniﬁed Classiﬁer better exploits the
UMB through balancing the predictions on UMB and large
amounts of unlabeled data, and thus slightly improves its
performance.
Also, the performance is only slightly in-
creased by using a much larger UMB (See details in Ap-
pendix C). By contrast, ORDisCo can much better exploit
the unlabeled data and substantially improve SSCL. We
then evaluate ORDisCo on Tiny-ImageNet-5 with larger
number of classes and larger-scale images in Table 2. Com-
pared with SMB and SMB+UMB, ORDisCo achieves a
much better performance on 10-class and 20-class of size
32×32 and 10-class of size 64×64, through effective usage
of the incremental unlabeled data to improve classiﬁcation.
Note that the reported performance is the result after
training on each semi-supervised batch till convergence.
Therefore, the outstanding performance of ORDisCo on
limited partially labeled data, i.e. smaller numbers of labels
and semi-supervised batches, indicates that ORDisCo can
quickly learn a usable model rather than waiting for more
data to be collected.
Figure 5. Averaged accuracy (%) of SSCL on SVHN-1 and
CIFAR10-5.
ORDisCo (Ours) improves SMB by 12.20% and
5.95% at the ﬁnal batch on SVHN-1 and CIFAR10-5, respectively.
UMB: An unsupervised memory buffer of a similar size as our
generator; UC: Using the uniﬁed classiﬁer to exploit UMB.
5.3. Ablation Study and Analysis
Next, we analyze why ORDisCo improves continual
learning of unlabeled data. ORDisCo enables a generative
model to continually learn conditional generation from in-
cremental semi-supervised data. Thus, the conditional gen-
erator of ORDisCo can much better cover the training data
distribution than an unsupervised memory buffer of a simi-
lar size (Fig. 2). We make the ablation study (SVHN-1 and
CIFAR10-5 in Table 3, SVHN-3 and CIFAR10-13 in Ap-
pendix C) to validate the effects of the proposed strategies
in ORDisCo, that both the online semi-supervised genera-
tive replay (refer to as Replay) and the regularizer to sta-
bilize discrimination consistency (refer to as Reg) can sig-
niﬁcantly improve SSCL. The ablation study shows that the
effects of the regularization on discrimination consistency
are much more signiﬁcant when the data sources are lim-
ited, i.e. fewer labels and semi-supervised batches.
To verify how the discrimination consistency improves
SSCL, we use a jointly trained classiﬁer on the semi-
supervised dataset, which achieves considerable perfor-
mance of classiﬁcation (94.38% for SVHN, 87.37% for CI-
FAR10), to evaluate conditional samples. We present the

Table 4. Averaged accuracy (%) of a jointly trained classiﬁer
to predict conditional samples learned from earlier batches on
SVHN-1 and CIFAR10-5, where regularization of discrimination
consistency (Reg) signiﬁcantly improves generative replay.
SVHN-1
CIFAR10-5
Method
5 Batch
15 Batch
5 Batch
15 Batch
SMB
27.37
51.45
43.37
70.64
ORDisCo (+Replay, -Reg)
16.95
37.89
49.98
68.67
ORDisCo (+Replay, +Reg)
25.46
64.93
64.15
81.13
Table 5. Averaged accuracy (%) of SSCL of New Class. We fol-
low the same semi-supervised splits as New Instance on SVHN-1,
CIFAR10-5, or 10-class Tiny-ImageNet-5 of the size 32 × 32, but
construct a sequence of 5 binary classiﬁcation tasks.
Split
Method
Task 1
Task 2
Task 3
Task 4
Task 5
SVHN-1
SMB
81.80
50.73
39.77
40.41
35.46
SMB+UMB
83.30
50.53
35.92
33.00
37.35
SMB+UMB+UC
83.04
53.10
36.18
36.83
38.33
ORDisCo
82.72
54.69
60.68
56.18
53.79
CIFAR10-5
SMB
95.78
74.54
61.63
56.85
55.12
SMB+UMB
95.50
76.68
63.22
62.34
60.52
SMB+UMB+UC
95.67
77.94
65.95
63.33
62.43
ORDisCo
95.60
77.23
68.62
66.49
65.91
TinyImageNet-5
SMB
88.50
75.17
67.17
67.58
65.47
SMB+UMB
87.83
80.17
68.33
71.33
67.13
SMB+UMB+UC
88.67
79.08
69.94
71.13
69.87
ORDisCo
88.50
83.17
70.56
73.92
71.07
accuracy of the classiﬁer to predict conditional samples on
the earlier 5 and 15 batches of SVHN-1 and CIFAR10-5,
which include only a few labels per batch. As shown in
Table. 4, the predictions on the conditional samples of OR-
DisCo are signiﬁcantly better than the one of a sequentially
trained conditional GAN with SMB. Because the quality
of conditional samples is generally poor when the partially
labeled data are limited, replay of such conditional sam-
ples to the classiﬁer in ORDisCo will decrease its perfor-
mance to predict pseudo-labels of unlabeled data, and fur-
ther interfere with conditional generation. While, the regu-
larizer on discrimination consistency largely alleviates this
issue through stabilizing the learned distribution of unla-
beled data in the discriminator, which is critical to SSCL.
5.4. SSCL of New Class
ORDisCo can be naturally extended to incremental
learning of New Class in semi-supervised scenarios. We
consider an incremental dataset consisting of 5 binary clas-
siﬁcation tasks, where the partially labeled data of two new
classes are introduced in each task. We keep the total num-
ber of labels the same as the one used in New Instance.
As shown in Table 5, ORDisCo signiﬁcantly outperforms
SMB, SMB+UMB and SMB+UMB+UC through more ef-
fective usage of the unlabeled data.
5.5. Conditional Generation in SSCL
We present the conditional samples from ORDisCo and
a sequentially trained conditional GAN with SMB during
SSCL in Fig. 6 (See complete conditional samples of OR-
(a) SVHN-3
(b) CIFAR10-13
Figure 6. Conditional generation in SSCL. We show the condi-
tional samples of ‘0’ in SVHN-3 and ‘horse’ in CIFAR10-13. The
column denotes the number of incremental batches learned by the
conditional generator to generate images in each row. Starting
from the sixth batch (the red box), ORDisCo can generate high-
quality conditional samples, signiﬁcantly better than the SMB
baseline.
DisCo in Appendix D), where conditional generation is im-
proved from incremental learning of partially labeled data.
Due to more effective usage of unlabeled data, ORDisCo
can generate high-quality conditional samples in SSCL, sig-
niﬁcantly better than the SMB baseline.
6. Conclusion
In this work, we provide a systematic analysis of semi-
supervised continual learning, which is a realistic yet chal-
lenging setting without extensive study. Then we propose a
novel method to continually learn a conditional GAN with a
classiﬁer from partially labeled data. Extensive evaluations
on various benchmarks show that our method can effec-
tively capture and exploit the unlabeled data in both classi-
ﬁcation tasks and conditional generation. Since our method
can be a plug-and-play approach for semi-supervised con-
tinual learning, a wide range of semi-supervised learning
approaches for classiﬁcation and conditional generation can
be ﬂexibly implemented into the framework, which is our
further direction. Another further work is to use ORDisCo
on Mindspore1, a new deep learning computing framework.
Acknowledgement
This
work
was
supported
by
the
National
Key
Research and Development Program of China (Nos.
2017YFA0700904, 2020AAA0104304), NSFC Projects
(Nos. 61620106010, 62076145), Beijing NSF Project (No.
L172037), Tsinghua-Huawei Joint Research Program. C.
Li was supported by the fellowship of China postdoctoral
Science Foundation (2020M680572), and the fellowship of
China national postdoctoral program for innovative talents
(BX20190172) and Shuimu Tsinghua Scholar.
1https://www.mindspore.cn
