Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 45 (2012) 761-780
Submitted 08/12; published 12/12
Evaluating Indirect Strategies for Chinese–Spanish
Statistical Machine Translation
Marta R. Costa-juss`a

Institute for Infocomm Research,
Singapore 138632
Carlos A. Henr´ıquez Q.

Universitat Polit`ecnica de Catalunya,
08034 Barcelona
Rafael E. Banchs

Institute for Infocomm Research,
Singapore 138632
Abstract
Although, Chinese and Spanish are two of the most spoken languages in the world,
not much research has been done in machine translation for this language pair.
This
paper focuses on investigating the state-of-the-art of Chinese-to-Spanish statistical machine
translation (Smt), which nowadays is one of the most popular approaches to machine
translation.
For this purpose, we report details of the available parallel corpus which
are Basic Traveller Expressions Corpus (Btec), Holy Bible and United Nations (Un).
Additionally, we conduct experimental work with the largest of these three corpora to
explore alternative Smt strategies by means of using a pivot language. Three alternatives
are considered for pivoting: cascading, pseudo-corpus and triangulation. As pivot language,
we use either English, Arabic or French. Results show that, for a phrase-based Smt system,
English is the best pivot language between Chinese and Spanish. We propose a system
output combination using the pivot strategies which is capable of outperforming the direct
translation strategy.
The main objective of this work is motivating and involving the
research community to work in this important pair of languages given their demographic
impact.
1. Introduction
Chinese and Spanish are very distant languages in many aspects. However, they come close
together in the ranking of most spoken languages in the world (Ethnologue, 2012). In the
Web 2.0 era, in which most of the content is produced by the users, the number of native
speakers is an excellent indicator of the actual relevance of machine translation between two
languages. Of course, other factors such as literacy, amount of text published and strength
of commercial relationships are also to be taken into account, but these factors will actually
support further our idea of the strategic importance of developing machine translation
technologies between Chinese and Spanish. The huge increase in volume of online contents
in Chinese during the last years, as well as the steady increase of commercial relationships
between Spanish speaking Latin American countries and China are just two basic examples
supporting this fact. Needless to say, these languages involve many economical interests
c⃝2012 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

Costa-juss`a, Henr´ıquez & Banchs
(Zapatero, 2010). Nevertheless, these two languages seem to become far apart again when
looking for bilingual resources.
We have been recently interested in gathering and collecting Chinese–Spanish bilingual
resources for research and machine translation application purposes. The amount of bilin-
gual resources that are currently available for this speciﬁc language pair is surprisingly low.
Similarly, the related amount of work we have found, within the computational linguistic
community, can be reduced to a very small set of references (Banchs, Crego, Lambert, &
Mari˜no, 2006; Banchs & Li, 2008; Bertoldi, Cattoni, Federico, & Barbaiani, 2008; Wang,
Wu, Hu, Liu, Li, Ren, & Niu, 2008). Apart from the Btec1 corpus available through Inter-
national Workshop on Spoken Language Translation (Iwslt) competition (Bertoldi et al.,
2008) and Holy Bible datasets (Banchs & Li, 2008), we were not aware of any other Chinese–
Spanish parallel corpus suitable for training phrase-based (Koehn, Och, & Marcu, 2003)2
statistical machine translation systems between these two languages, until a six-language
parallel corpus (including both Chinese and Spanish) from United Nations was released for
research purposes (Rafalovitch & Dale, 2009).
Using the recently released United Nations parallel corpus as a starting point, this work
focuses on the problem of developing Chinese-to-Spanish phrase-based machine translation
technologies with a limited set of bilingual resources. We explore and evaluate diﬀerent
alternatives for the problem in hand by means of pivot-language strategies through other
languages available in the United Nations parallel corpus, such as Arabic, English and
French 3. Existing strategies such as system cascading, pseudo-corpus generation and tri-
angulation are implemented and compared against a baseline system built with a direct
translation approach. As follows, we brieﬂy describe these pivot approaches:
• The cascaded approach generates Chinese-to-Spanish translations by concatenating a
system that translates Chinese into a pivot language with a system that translates
from the pivot language into Spanish.
• The pseudo-corpus approach builds a synthetic Chinese–Spanish corpus either by
translating into Spanish the pivot side of a Chinese–pivot corpus or by translating
into Chinese the pivot side of a Pivot–Spanish corpus.
• The triangulation approach implements a Chinese-to-Spanish translation system by
combining the translation table probabilities of a Chinese–pivot system and a Pivot–
Spanish system.
Additionally, we implement and evaluate a system combination of the three pivot strate-
gies based on the minimum Bayes risk (Mbr) (Kumar & Byrne, 2004) technique. Such a
combination strategy is capable of outperforming the direct system.
Besides experimenting with diﬀerent pivot languages to compare the mentioned ap-
proaches, we also wanted to determine which pivot alone gives the best results and why.
1. Basic Traveller Expressions Corpus.
2. Note that phrase-based is commonly used to refer to statistical machine translation systems, in which
the term phrase refers to segments of one or more than one word and it does not have the usual meaning
of multi-word syntactical consitutent, as it has in linguistics.
3. Although Russian is available in the Un corpus, we discard to use it because we do not have the proper
preprocessing tools for it.
762

Evaluating Indirect Strategies for Chinese–Spanish SMT
Hence, we present a short comparison of the amount of reordering and vocabulary sizes of
pivot languages, following the study presented by Birch et al. (2008) where they identiﬁed
these two properties as key elements for predicting machine translation quality. The results
from such comparisons, together with the translation quality obtained in the diﬀerent ap-
proaches, show that English was the best pivot language for Chinese-to-Spanish translation
purposes in our experimental framework.
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 motivates this work which is intended to
bring some light into the investigation of Chinese-to-Spanish translation task. Section 3
presents some related work in the Chinese-to-Spanish translation task. Section 4 reports
the details of the main parallel corpora available for this translation task. Next, section
5 describes the main strategies for performing Chinese-to-Spanish translation which are
tested in this work: direct, cascade, pseudo-corpus and triangulation. Section 6 presents
the evaluation framework which includes the corpus statistics, the system and evaluation
details. Then, section 7 reports the experiments (including the system combination) and
the results. Finally, section 8 concludes our work and proposes new research directions in
the area.
2. Motivation
Although some current web translation systems allow for performing translations between
Chinese and Spanish, the quality of current Chinese-to-Spanish translations is still well
below the quality achieved for other language pairs, such as English to Spanish. As far as
we know, there is not much research in this translation task. The main reason may be the
lack of parallel corpora. This study intends to make progress and involve other researchers
in the area of Chinese–Spanish statistical machine translation by:
1. Listing the available parallel corpora for Chinese–Spanish.
2. Comparing diﬀerent methodologies for performing statistical machine translation: cas-
caded (Wang et al., 2008), pseudo-corpus generation (Banchs et al., 2006; de Gispert
& Mari˜no, 2006) and triangulation (Wu & Wang, 2007).
3. Evaluating which is the best language (among Arabic, English and French) for gen-
erating the cascade, pseudo-corpus or triangulation Mt between Chinese–Spanish.
4. Performing an output system combination to explore new ways of improving Chinese-
to-Spanish translation.
3. Related Work
One of the ﬁrst works dealing with Chinese–Spanish statistical machine translation was
presented by Banchs et al. (2006). Authors experimented with two independent corpora
Chinese–English and English–Spanish to translate from Chinese to Spanish. They built
their translation systems using the so-called Ngram-based approach, which diﬀers from
the phrase-based system mainly in the translation and reordering model (Mari˜no, Banchs,
Crego, de Gispert, Lambert, Fonollosa, & Costa-juss`a, 2006).
763

Costa-juss`a, Henr´ıquez & Banchs
The only research event recently performed for this language pair was the 2008 Iwslt
evaluation campaign (Paul, 2008). This evaluation organized two Chinese-to-Spanish tracks.
One of them focused on direct translation and the other one on pivot translation through
English. The best translation results accordingly to the manual evaluation were obtained
by far in the pivot task.
The best systems in both tracks were developed by Wang et al. (2008). Regarding the
direct system, they used a standard phrase-based Smt system. What makes it diﬀerent from
the other participating systems is that they provide their own Chinese segmentation and
the Ldc (Linguistic Data Consortium) bilingual dictionary. Regarding the pivot task, they
compared two diﬀerent approaches. The ﬁrst one, referred to as triangulation, consisted of
training two translation models on the Chinese–English corpus and English–Spanish corpus,
and then building a new translation model for Chinese–Spanish translation by combining
the two previous models as proposed by Wu & Wang (2007); the second one obtained better
results and it was based on a cascaded approach. The idea here is to translate from Chinese
into English and then from English into Spanish, which means performing two translations.
Other participants also proposed the cascaded methodology. This approximation can be
done with the n-best translations (Khalilov, Costa-Juss`a, Henr´ıquez, Fonollosa, Hern´andez,
Mari˜no, Banchs, Chen, Zhang, Aw, & Li, 2008).
Another proposal was to generate pseudo-corpus which means to translate either the
English into Chinese or into Spanish, creating a parallel Chinese–Spanish corpus.
This
pseudo-corpus is used to train the Chinese–Spanish translation (Bertoldi et al., 2008).
As mentioned aboved, the comparison performed by Wang et al. (2008) showed that the
cascaded approach performed better than the phrase-table combination for the Chinese–
Spanish pivot task.
Finally, our previous work (Costa-juss`a, Henr´ıquez, & Banchs, 2011b) compared two
standard pivot approaches (pseudo-corpus and cascaded) using English and the direct sys-
tem. Experiments in this work showed that the quality between the direct system and the
pivot systems did not diﬀer much. Additionally, the cascaded system presented slightly
better results than the pseudo-corpus system. In our other previous work (Costa-juss`a,
Henr´ıquez, & Banchs, 2011a), we compared again two pivot approaches (pseudo-corpus and
cascaded) using Arabic, French and English as pivot languages and the direct system. We
concluded that English was the best pivot language.
In the present work, we are extending the two previous studies by: (1) using more pivot
strategies (including the triangulation strategy); (2) introducing a measure to pre-evaluate
the quality of pivot approaches; (3) extending the pivot combination experiments; and (4)
providing further evaluation.
Note that we are working with the United Nations (Un) corpus rather than with the
Btec corpus (the one used in the Iwslt). The former is freely available and larger than
the latter.
4. Chinese–Spanish Parallel Corpora
There are very limited resources for the language pair Chinese–Spanish in comparison to
the number of native speakers in these languages. In practice, it is also common to translate
Chinese into Spanish through English even when manual translations are conducted.
764

Evaluating Indirect Strategies for Chinese–Spanish SMT
As parallel corpus at the sentence level, there is the Basic Travel Expressions Corpus
(Btec) (Paul, Yamamoto, Sumita, & Nakamura, 2009), which is a collection of sentences
that bilingual travel experts consider useful for people going to or coming from another
country. This corpus contains around 160,000 parallel sentences but only around 20,000
sentences and 180,000 words are actively used for Mt purposes in the Iwslt evaluation
campaign. The full corpus is not freely available, and the 20,000 version was only available
for participation purposes in the 2008 Iwslt evaluation campaign.
Another parallel corpus is the Holy Bible, which has been proved to be a good resource for
CLIR (Cross-language information retrieval) (Chew, Verzi, Bauer, & McClain, 2006). This
corpus contains around 28,000 parallel sentences and around 800,000 tokens per language.
The main advantages of using this corpus is that it is the world’s most translated book; it
covers a variety of literary styles including narrative, poetry, and correspondence; great care
is taken over the translations; and, perhaps surprisingly, its vocabulary appears to have a
high rate of coverage (as much as 85%) of modern-day language.
Finally, there is the United Nations multilanguage corpus (Rafalovitch & Dale, 2009),
which is freely available online for research purposes. Among others, it contains parallel
texts at the sentence level in the following languages: Chinese, English, Spanish, French and
Arabic. It consists of 2100 United Nations General Assembly resolutions with translation in
the six oﬃcial languages of the United Nations, with average of around 3 million tokens per
language. This is the material that we are using in this work. Table 1 shows the statistics
of the three diﬀerent corpora with their corresponding languages.
Corpus
Lang.
Sent.
Words
Vocab.
Avg. sent. length
Chinese
20
164
8
6
Btec
English
20
182
8
7
Spanish
20
147
17
9
Holy
Chinese
30
814
13
26
Bible
English
30
908
12
29
Spanish
30
836
27
27
Chinese
60
1,750
18
28
English
60
2,080
15
34
Un
Spanish
60
2,380
20
39
Arabic
60
2,720
17
44
French
60
2,380
18
39
Table 1: Available corpora for Chinese–Spanish (all ﬁgures are given in thousands, except
the average sentence length)
Additionally, we can surf the web and ﬁnd several publications which are available both
in Chinese and Spanish e.g. Global Asia Magazine (2012), but this additional material con-
sists mainly of comparable corpora rather than parallel corpora. This comparable material
cannot directly be used in a statistical machine translation system. However, there are
many nice algorithms which can extract parallel corpora from comparable corpora (Moore,
2002; Senrich, 2010; Abdul-Rauf, Fishel, Lambert, Noubours, & Sennrich, 2012).
765

Costa-juss`a, Henr´ıquez & Banchs
5. Direct and Pivot Statistical Machine Translation Approaches
There are several strategies that we can follow when translating a pair of languages in
statistical machine translation (Smt). In this section we present the details of the ones we
are using in this work.
In general, a statistical machine translation system relies on the translation of a source
language sentence s into a target language sentence ˆt. Among all possible target language
sentences t we choose the one with the highest probability, as show in equation (2):
ˆt
=
arg max
t
[P (t|s)]
(1)
=
arg max
t
[P (t) P (s|t)]
(2)
This probability decomposition based on Bayes’ theorem is known as the source-channel
approach to statistical machine translation (Brown, Cocke, Della Pietra, Della Pietra, Je-
linek, Laﬀerty, Mercer, & Roossin, 1990).
It allows to model independently the target
language model P (t) and the source translation model P (s|t). On the one hand, the trans-
lation model weights how likely words in the foreign language are translation of words in the
source language; the language model, on the other hand, measures the ﬂuency of hypothesis
ˆt. The search process is represented as the arg max operation.
Later on, a variation was proposed by Och & Ney (2002) named log-linear model. It
allows using more than two models or features and to weight them independently as can be
seen in equation (3):
ˆt = arg max
t
" M
X
m=1
λmhm(s, t)
#
(3)
This equation should be interpreted as a maximum-entropy framework. We see that eq.
(2) is a special case of eq. (3). In fact, it is the logarithm of (2) which would be similar
to (3). Then, we have to identify h1(s, t) with log(p(t)) and h2(s, t) with log(p(s|t)), and
taking M = 2 (two models) and λ1 = λ2 = 1. In the general case, λ’s are obtained by
maximizing an objective function on a held-out set (development set).
Among the additional features that can be used with the log-linear model we have lexical
models, word bonus, and the reordering model. The lexical models are particularly useful in
cases where the translation model may be sparse. For example, for phrases which may have
appeared few times the translation model probability may not be well estimated. Then, the
lexical models provide a probability among words (Koehn et al., 2003). The word bonus
is used to compensate the language model which beneﬁts shorter outputs. The reordering
model is used to provide reordering between phrases.
If not, reordering would only be
treated internally in each phrase. Finally, it should be mentioned that the name log-linear
is clearly a misnomer as many of these features are not logarithms at all.
As regards the reordering model, the standard way of implementing it is with a distance-
based model that gives a linear cost depending on the reordering distance. For instance,
if consecutive target words t1, t2 come from translating source words s1 and s5, where the
sub-scripts indicate the word position in their corresponding sentences, then a movement
766

Evaluating Indirect Strategies for Chinese–Spanish SMT
Figure 1: Word alignment between two sentences
of d = 5 −1 = 4 words has taken place and its cost should be double than a movement of
d = 2 words. A visual representation of these phrases can be seen in Figure 1
Besides the traditional distance-based reordering mentioned before, state-of-the-art sys-
tems implement an additional lexicalized reordering model (Tillman, 2004). The lexicalized
reordering model classiﬁes phrases by the movement they make relative to the previous used
phrase, i.e., for each phrase the model learns how likely it is followed by the previous phrase
(monotone), swapped with it (swap) or not connected at all (discontinuous). For instance,
considering again sub-scripts as word positions in their corresponding sentences, in Figure
1 the bilingual phrases (s1 →t1) and (s5 →t2) are not connected, (s7 →t6) is followed by
(s6 →t5) and (s2 →t4) is swapped with (s3 s4 →t3).
5.1 Direct System
Our direct system uses the phrase-based translation approach (Koehn et al., 2003). The
basic idea is to segment the given source sentence s into segments of one or more words,
then each source segment is translated using a bilingual phrase obtained from the training
corpus and ﬁnally compose the target sentence from these phrase translations. A bilingual
phrase is a pair of m source words and n target words extracted from a parallel sentence
that belongs to a bilingual corpus previously aligned by words. For extraction, we consider
the words that are consecutive in both source and target sides and which are consistent
with the word alignment. We consider a phrase is consistent with the word alignment if no
word inside the phrase is aligned with one word outside the phrase.
Regarding the segmentation of the sentence in K phrases, we assume that all possible
segmentations (which are considered as a hidden variable M) have the same probability
α(t):
P (s|t)
=
X
M
P(s, M|t)
(4)
=
X
M
P(M|t)P(¯s|¯t)
(5)
=
α(t)
X
M
P(¯s|¯t)
(6)
Then, we consider only monotone translations so the phrase ¯sk is produced by ¯tk (Zens,
Och, & Ney, 2002).
P (¯s|¯t)
=
K
Y
k=1
p( ¯sk, ¯tk)
(7)
767

Costa-juss`a, Henr´ıquez & Banchs
Finally, phrase translation probabilities are estimated as relative frequencies over all
bilingual phrases in the corpus.
p (s|t)
=
N (s, t)
N (t)
(8)
where N (s, t) counts the number of times the phrase s is translated as t and N (t) the
number of times the phrase in the target language appears in the training corpus.
5.2 Pivot-Based Systems
The cascaded approach handles the source–pivot and the pivot–target system indepen-
dently. They are both built and tuned to improve their local translation quality and then
composed to translate from the source language to the target language in two steps: ﬁrst,
the translation output from source to pivot is computed and then it is used to obtain the
target translation output.
The pseudo-corpus approach translates the pivot section of the source–pivot paral-
lel corpus to the target language using a pivot–target system built previously. Then, a
source–target Smt system is built using the source side and the translated pivot side of the
source–pivot corpus. The pseudo-corpus system is tuned using an original source–target
development corpus, since we have it available.
The triangulation approach combines the source–pivot (P(s|p) and P(p|s)) and pivot–
target (P(p|t) and P(t|p)) relative frequencies following the strategy proposed by Cohn &
Lapata (2007) in order to build a source–target translation model. The translation prob-
abilities are computed assuming the independence between the source and target phrases
when given the pivot phrase.
P (s|t)
=
X
p
P(s|p)P(p|t)
(9)
P (t|s)
=
X
p
P(t|p)P(p|s)
(10)
where s, t, and p represent phrases in the source, target and pivot language respectively.
The lexical weights are computed in a similar manner, following the strategy proposed
by Cohn & Lapata (2007). This approach does not handle the lexicalized reordering and
the other pivot strategies and therefore represents a limitation in its potential. Instead, a
simple distance-based reordering is applied during decoding. This model gives a cost linear
to the reordering distance. For instance, skipping over two words costs twice as much as
skipping over one word.
Once the corresponding translation model have been obtained, the source–target system
is tuned using the same original source–target development corpus mentioned in the previous
approach.
768

Evaluating Indirect Strategies for Chinese–Spanish SMT
6. Evaluation Framework
The following section introduces the details of the evaluation framework. We report the
statistics of the Un corpus, a description of how we built the systems and the evaluation
details.
6.1 Corpus Statistics
As far as we know, and as discussed in section 4, three parallel corpora are available for
the Chinese–Spanish language pair: Btec, Holy Bible and Un.4 The former was used in
the 2008 Iwslt and complete experiments of pivot strategies are reported in works such
as Bertoldi et al. (2008). The Holy Bible was used for the similar purposes by Henr´ıquez,
Banchs & Mari˜no (2010).
In this study we decide to use the Un corpus taking advantage of the fact that it is
the largest corpus (among those three) and it contains the same sentences in six languages,
therefore we can experiment with diﬀerent pivot languages.
When experimenting with diﬀerent pivot languages, in order to make the systems as
comparable as possible, we ﬁrst did a sentence selection over the corpus so all systems were
built exactly with the same training, tuning and testing sets. This selection process was as
follows:
1. All corpora were tokenized, using the standard tokenizer available in Moses (Koehn,
Hoang, Birch, Callison-Burch, Federico, Bertoldi, Cowan, Shen, Moran, Zens, Dyer,
Bojar, Constantin, & Herbst, 2007) for Spanish, English and French; ictclass (Zhang,
Yu, Xiong, & Liu, 2003) for Chinese; and Mada+Tokan (Habash & Rambow, 2005)
for Arabic.
2. The Spanish, English and French corpora were lowercased.
3. If a sentence had more than 100 words in any language, it was deleted from all corpora.
4. If a sentence pair had a word ratio larger than three for any Chinese–pivot or pivot–
Spanish parallel corpora, it was deleted from all corpora.
5. To extract the tuning and test sets we identiﬁed all sentences ocurring once in the
corpora for all languages. The tuning and testing sets were drawn over these sentences
to assure they do not appear in the training corpus. Additionally, from these sentences,
we want to select those which diﬀer most from the sentences in the training set and
which have the lowest out-of-vocabulary rate. In order to do this, the perplexity over
the English language model was computed on a sentence-by-sentence basis by using
a leave-one-out strategy; then, we selected the two thousand sentences which had the
highest perplexity and the lowest ratio of out-of-vocabulary words for constructing
the tuning and testing sets. The highest perplexity criterion was used in order to
avoid that tuning and test sentences were similar from the ones in the training set.
The lowest out-of-vocabulary words criterion was used to minimize the number of out-
of-vocabulary words in the tuning and test translation. The two criteria were used
4. During the review process of this paper, we have been aware of a new corpus KDE (K Desktop Envi-
ronment), which is available from the recent OPUS project 5
769

Costa-juss`a, Henr´ıquez & Banchs
sequentially, ﬁrst we selected the sentences with the highest perplexity, and among
them, we selected those with the lowest ratio of out-of-vocabulary words.
Table 2 shows the main statistics for all corpora used once divided for experimentation.
Dataset
Lang.
Sent.
Words
Vocab.
Chinese
58
1,700
17
Spanish
58
2,300
20
Train
English
58
2,000
14
Arabic
58
2,600
17
French
58
2,300
18
Chinese
1
33.0
3
Spanish
1
43.4
5
Dev.
English
1
37.4
4.2
Arabic
1
48.8
4.6
French
1
44.1
5
Chinese
1
33.7
3.8
Spanish
1
44.2
5
Test
English
1
38.1
4.2
Arabic
1
49.3
4.6
French
1
44.9
5
Table 2: Un Corpus Statistics used for this research (all ﬁgures are given in thousands)
6.2 System Implementation and Evaluation Details
Our systems were build using revision 4075 of Moses (Koehn et al., 2007). For all systems,
we used the default Moses parameters which includes the grow-diagonal-ﬁnal-and word
alignment symmetrization, the lexicalized reordering (where possible), relative frequencies,
lexical weights and phrase bonus for the translation model (with phrases up to length 10), a
5-gram language model using Kneser-Ney smoothing and a word penalty model. Therefore,
14 diﬀerent features are combined in equation (3). The language model was built using
Srilm (Stolcke, 2002) version 1.5.12. The optimization was done using Mert (Och, 2003).
For word aligning we used Giza++ (Och & Ney, 2000) version 1.0.5.
In order to evaluate the translation quality, we used Bleu (Papineni, Roukos, Ward,
& Zhu, 2001), Ter (Snover, Dorr, Schwartz, Micciulla, & Makhoul, 2006) and Meteor
(Banerjee & Lavie, 2005) automatic evaluation metrics.
Additionally, signiﬁcance tests were performed to study when a system was better than
the other. These tests followed the “pair bootstrap resampling” method presented by Koehn
(2004): Given two translation outputs coming from two diﬀerent systems, we created two
new virtual test sets by drawing sentences with replacement from the translation outputs.
Once we obtained them, we computed their Bleus and observed which system performs
better. This procedure was repeated 1, 000 times. At the end, if one of the systems out-
performed the other 99% of the time, we concluded that it was indeed a better Bleu score
with 99% statistical signiﬁcance.
770

Evaluating Indirect Strategies for Chinese–Spanish SMT
7. Chinese–Spanish Machine Translation Strategies
Given the diﬀerent languages available in the Un corpora, we tested three diﬀerent language
pivots.
Additionally, we compared the cascaded, pseudo-corpus and triangulation pivot
strategies. Finally, we tried to combine the system outputs to improve the translation.
7.1 Experimenting with Diﬀerent Pivot Languages
We built and compared several translation approaches in order to study the impact of
the diﬀerent pivot languages when translating from Chinese into Spanish. Moreover, we
evaluated how the quality of pivot approaches diﬀers from a direct system. We built the
pivot systems using ﬁve of the languages available in the Un parallel corpus: English,
Spanish, Chinese, Arabic and French, and we built the direct system on a Chinese–Spanish
parallel corpus.
In particular, we experimented with the following Chinese-to-Spanish systems: the direct
Chinese-to-Spanish system as a quality upper bound; three cascaded, three pseudo-corpus
and three triangulation approaches, using English, Arabic and French as pivots. In order
to build the pivot systems, we need the corresponding Chinese–pivot and pivot–Spanish
systems.
Table 3 shows the Bleu, Ter and Meteor scores achieved with the intermediate
systems trained with the Un Corpus that were later used to built the diﬀerent pivot ap-
proaches. Meteor score for the Chinese-to-Arabic system is not shown as we did not have
the postprocessing tools required for the language.
Bleu
Ter
Meteor
Chinese–English
35.67
51.07
36.77
Chinese–Arabic
46.11
56.12
–
Chinese–French
28.31
63.21
47.35
English–Spanish
51.22
32.02
70.12
Arabic–Spanish
41.79
44.37
60.22
French–Spanish
46.42
40.25
64.76
Table 3: Pivot Systems.
Table 4 shows the results for our Chinese-to-Spanish conﬁgurations with the Un corpus.
We can see there that the best pivot system used the pseudo-corpus approach with English
as the pivot language.
In Chinese-to-Spanish, the fact that the pseudo-corpus through English outperforms
cascaded through English according to the Bleu score is not statistically signiﬁcant, with
a 99% conﬁdence (Koehn, 2004). These results, however, are coherent with previous works
using the same language pair (Bertoldi et al., 2008; Henr´ıquez Q. et al., 2010) that also
reported the pseudo-corpus strategy was better than the cascaded strategy. The cascaded
and pseudo-corpus approaches through English are statistically signiﬁcantly better than the
triangulation approach, with a 99% conﬁdence. To the best of our knowledge, reasons why
one pivot approach is better than the other are not reported in the literature. Moreover,
given that diﬀerence among approaches such as pseudo-corpus as cascaded approaches is
771

Costa-juss`a, Henr´ıquez & Banchs
Languages
System
Bleu
Ter
Meteor
Pivot vocab.
Chinese–Spanish
direct
33.06
57.32
53.96
-
Chinese–English–Spanish
cascaded
32.90
56.67
54.06
14k
Chinese–French–Spanish
cascaded
30.37
60.33
50.96
18k
Chinese–Arabic–Spanish
cascaded
28.88
60.37
50.15
17k
Chinese–English–Spanish
pseudo
32.97
57.39
53.99
14k
Chinese–French–Spanish
pseudo
32.61
57.43
53.55
18k
Chinese–Arabic–Spanish
pseudo
32.23
57.47
53.27
17k
Chinese–English–Spanish
triangulation
32.05
57.91
53.37
14k
Chinese–French–Spanish
triangulation
30.41
59.70
51.51
18k
Chinese–Arabic–Spanish
triangulation
30.61
59.53
51.43
17k
Table 4: Chinese-to-Spanish cascaded, pseudo-corpus and triangulation approaches.
not signiﬁcant, it is better to perform experiments for each particular task and language
pair.
In all three approaches, according to the scores in table 4 English is the best pivot
language, with a statistical signicance of 99%, which is coherent with the pivot–Spanish
results in table 3.
As follows, we use a procedure to predict the most suitable pivot language and justify
why a language may be a better pivot than another. For example, the pivot vocabulary
sizes play an important role. Birch et al. (2008) concluded in their study that the target
vocabulary size has a negative impact in the translation quality as measured with the Bleu
score and it can be seen that Arabic and French have both a larger vocabulary size than
English.
Apart from the vocabulary size, the research mentioned above also measured the success
of machine translation in terms of word reordering, i.e., diﬀerences in word order that occur
in a parallel corpus, which are mainly driven by syntactic diﬀerences between the languages.
In order to measure reordering in translation they assumed that reordering only occurs
between two adjacent blocks in the source side. This simpliﬁcation allowed them to detect
a extract all reordering in a deterministic way.
A block As is deﬁned by Birch et. al. (2008) as a segment of consecutive source words
(source span) which is aligned to a set of target words. The target words also form a block
At. With the deﬁnition of block set, they formally deﬁned a reordering r as two blocks
A and B that are adjacent in the source, the relative order of the blocks in the source is
reversed in the target and the reordering is consistent. A reordering between blocks As
and Bs is consistent if the block Cs, consisting of the union of blocks As and Bs, is also
consistent. A block As is said to be consistent if the span deﬁned by its corresponding
target block At does not contain words that are aligned to source words outside of As. This
deﬁnition of a consistent block is equivalent to the deﬁnition of a phrase in the phrase-based
machine translation paradigm. Finally, the set of all reorderings r in a sentence is deﬁned
as R and it is unique for a given pair of sentences. Summarizing, this concept of reordering
is equivalent to the swap movement described in the lexicalized reordering at the end of
section 5.
772

Evaluating Indirect Strategies for Chinese–Spanish SMT
Languages
Source–Pivot
Pivot–Target
Average
Chinese–English–Spanish
0.3955
0.2124
0.3039
Chinese–French–Spanish
0.6200
0.0170
0.3185
Chinese–Arabic–Spanish
0.6921
0.0908
0.3914
Table 5: Chinese-to-Spanish RQuantity metrics depending on the pivot used.
With those concepts deﬁned, they developed a metric called RQuantity, deﬁned as a
sentence level metric which is then averaged over a corpus:
RQuantity =
P
r∈R |rAs| + |rBs|
I
(11)
where R is the set of reorderings for a sentence, I is the source sentence length, A and B
are the two blocks involved in the reordering, |rAs| is the size or span of block A on the
source side and |rBs| is the size or span of block B on the source side (Birch et al., 2008).
The objective of the RQuantity is to measure the amount of reordering we need when
translating from a source language to a target language. The minimum RQuantity for a
given sentence is 0 if the translation does not involve any word movement and its maximum
is (PI
i=2 i)/I when the words in the translation are inverted compared with their order in
the source sentence.
We have computed the RQuantity for the diﬀerent language pairs involved in our pivot
approaches. It can be seen in table 5 that English appears as the best pivot because it
has the lowest average RQuantity between the three, i.e. it is the pivot that needs the
least amount of reordering in average to achieve the ﬁnal translation. French and Arabic
required less movements to translate into Spanish than English, but a lot of reordering is
needed to obtain the ﬁrst step from Chinese, hence penalizing the average. This result is
coherent with the conclusion obtained by Birch et al. (2008), which says that the amount
of reordering has also a negative impact in Bleu score.
These results support the intuitive idea that English works as a good intermediate
step between Chinese and Spanish. Both French and Arabic have a vocabulary which is
closer in size to Spanish and their reorderings are also more complex than English during
the ﬁrst step, making the source-to-pivot translation harder with these candidates. The
gradual increase in diﬃculty (measured as target vocabulary size and reordering) presented
in English seems to beneﬁt the global result.
Nevertheless, it is also possible that most Un texts were authored in English, and then,
translated into the other languages.
This would also favour English as the best pivot
language.
In order to observe the beneﬁts of the pivot language against the direct translation,
table 6 presents three examples where the Bleu scores of the pivot approach were better
than those of the direct approach. Notice how some phrases that disappeared from the
direct translation correctly appear on the pseudo-corpus approach.
773

Costa-juss`a, Henr´ıquez & Banchs
DIRECT
cuestiones como a que consideren seriamente la posibilidad de ratiﬁcar la tortura y otros tratos
o penas crueles , inhumanos o degradantes
PSEUDO
como cuestiones a que consideren seriamente la posibilidad de ratiﬁcar la convenci´on contra
la tortura y otros tratos o penas crueles , inhumanos o degradantes
REF
considere seriamente la posibilidad de ratiﬁcar , con car´acter prioritario , la convenci´on
contra la tortura y otros tratos o penas crueles , inhumanos o degradantes
EN REF
to seriously consider ratifying , as a matter of priority , the convention against torture and
other cruel , inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment
DIRECT
habiendo examinado el segundo informe de la comisi´on y la recomendaci´on que ﬁgura en ´el
PSEUDO
habiendo examinado el segundo informe de la comisi´on de veriﬁcaci´on de poderes y las
recomendaciones que ﬁguran en ´el
REF
habiendo examinado el segundo informe de la comisi´on de veriﬁcaci´on de poderes y la
recomendaci´on que ﬁgura en ´el
EN REF
having considered the second report of the credentials committee and the recommendation
contained therein
DIRECT
pide al secretario general que prepare un informe sobre la aplicaci´on de esta resoluci´on a la
asamblea general , quincuag´esimo sexto per´ıodo de sesiones
PSEUDO
pide al secretario general que prepare un informe sobre la aplicaci´on de la presente resoluci´on
para su examen por la asamblea general en su quincuag´esimo sexto per´ıodo de sesiones
REF
pide al secretario general que prepare un informe sobre la aplicaci´on de la presente resoluci´on ,
que ser´a examinado por la asamblea general en su quincuag´esimo sexto per´ıodo de sesiones
EN REF
requests the secretary-general to prepare a report on the implementation of the present resolution
for consideration by the general assembly at its ﬁfty-sixth session .
Table 6: Chinese-to-Spanish examples for which the pseudo-corpus system (through En-
glish) is better than the direct system. En ref is the English reference of the
sentence
7.2 Pivot Combination
Using the 1-best translation output from the diﬀerent pivot strategies, we built an n-best
list and computed the ﬁnal translation using minimum Bayes risk (Mbr) (Kumar & Byrne,
2004).
When translating a sentence s, we obtain a translation t′ which can then be evaluated
against reference t to measure the system’s performance. Mbr focuses on ﬁnding the best
performance over all possible translations. To do so, it uses a loss function LF(t, t′) that
measures the loss of obtaining hypothesis t′ instead of the real translation t. The Bayes
Risk is deﬁned as the expected value of the loss function over all possible hypotheses t′ and
translations t.
E(LF) =
X
t,t′
LF(t, t′)p(t′|s)
(12)
where p(t′|s) is the translation probability of hypothesis t′ given the source sentence s as
obtained by the decoder, as an approximation of its real probability distribution.
The objective of ﬁnding the best performance over all possible translation is therefore
to minimize the Bayes Risk. Given a loss function and a distribution, the decision rule that
minimizes the Bayes Risk (Bickel & Doksum, 1977; Goel & Byrne, 2000) is given by:
ˆt = arg min
t′
X
t
LF(t, t′)p(t′|s)
(13)
774

Evaluating Indirect Strategies for Chinese–Spanish SMT
Mbr has been used in literature both during decoding (Ehling, Zens, & Ney, 2007) and as
a postprocess over a n-best list. For instance, this last approach was used by Khalilov et al.
(2008) together with their cascaded approach in order to obtain the best Chinese–Spanish
translation. The current version of the Moses toolkit includes both implementations.
The Mbr algorithm implemented in Moses as postprocess uses 1−Bleu(t, t′) as the loss
function. In our experiment, we consider all our hypothesis as equally likely and therefore
p(t′|s) was a positive constant and therefore could be discarded. At the end, Mbr chooses
the hypotheses ˆt that fullﬁlls:
ˆt = arg min
t′

X
t̸=t′
1 −Bleu(t, t′)


(14)
Diﬀerent n-best lists were built to compare diﬀerent Mbr outputs: a cascaded Mbr
using all three pivot languages (hence n = 3, one hypothesis per pivot), a pseudo-corpus
Mbr again using all three pivot languages (n = 3), a triangulation Mbr using all three
languages (n = 3), a combination of cascaded, pseudo-corpus and triangulation outputs
using two languages (n = 6, one hypothesis per pivot and strategy) and another using all of
them (n = 9). It is important to mention that all n-best lists must have at least 3 hypothesis
per sentence. Having only two hypothesis would not work as expected because the Loss
Function would always choose the longest one, which can be explained by the deﬁnition of
Bleu:
Bleu(t, t′) = exp
 N
X
n=1
log pn(t, t′)
N
!
γ(t, t′)
(15)
where pn(t, t′) is the precision of n-grams in the hypothesis t′ with reference t; and γ(t, t′)
is a brevity penalty disfavouring translation t′ if it is shorter than the reference t. Then
pn(t, t′) = pn(t′, t) and
 ∀t, t′ : length(t) > length(t′)

(16)
1 −Bleu(t, t′) ≥1 −Bleu(t′, t)
(17)
Tables 7 and 8 show the results of the diﬀerent Chinese–Spanish output systems (from
table 4) combined with the Mbr technique. From these tables, it can be observed that
combinations from all pivot strategies obtained better results in all metrics than the direct
approach. Only in the case of Ar + Fr, the combination was not statistically signiﬁcantly
better than the direct system in terms of Bleu score (with a 99% conﬁdence).
The Mbr cascaded and triangulation approach (1st row, 2nd and 4th column, respec-
tively, in table 8) did not outperform the direct system.
Finally, both A All and D+A All (which combine all languages and pivot system outputs
from table 4 including or not the direct approach) are the best Chinese-to-Spanish systems.
We have not experimented on the reverse translation direction (from Spanish into Chi-
nese) as we would be unable to assess subjective evaluations on the resulting translation
outputs. However, in the reversed direction, our intuition is that the reordering diﬃculties
will be then moved to the pivot–target step of the cascade system.
775

Costa-juss`a, Henr´ıquez & Banchs
All
En+Fr
33.58*/56.34/54.48
En+Ar
33.53*/56.15/54.63
Ar+Fr
33.14/56.83/53.95
Table 7: Chinese-to-Spanish percent Bleu/Ter/Meteor scores for system combinations
of two languages and all pivot approaches using Mbr. (*) statistically signiﬁcant
better Bleu than the direct system.
Cascaded
Pseudo
Triangulation
All
A
32.66/57.27/53.34
33.30*/57.04/53.91
31.84/58.12/53.05
33.97*/56.00/54.87
D+A
33.60*/56.72/54.38
33.77*/56.52/54.47
32.90/57.01/54.03
34.09*/55.88/55.02
Table 8: Chinese-to-Spanish percent Bleu/Ter/Meteor scores for system combinations
of En + Fr + Ar languages (A), direct system (D) and pivot approaches using
Mbr. (*) statistically signiﬁcant better Bleu than the direct system.
Regarding the fact of English being the best pivot language for the task under con-
sideration, we can argue that English might constitute a better intermediate step between
Spanish and Chinese, rather than French or Arabic, based on the assumption of Spanish
being closer to French (both are romance languages derived from Latin) and Arabic (the
Iberian peninsula was occupied by Arabic culture for more than 500 years, so Spanish has
strong inﬂuence from Arabic) than Chinese to French and Arabic. In this sense, English
seems to represent an optimal intermediate point between Chinese and Spanish, in which the
translation complexity is divided in two phases. Most of the reordering burden is resolved
in the Chinese-to-English phase and most of the morphology generation burden is resolved
in the English-to-Spanish phase. Thinking on translation-space as a non-conservative ﬁeld,
we can say that English is just in the middle of the way between Chinese and Spanish, while
passing through French or Arabic implies a larger path by some kind of detour in the prox-
imities of Spanish. This is just a conjecture, of course, but it nicely explains what we are
observing. Deﬁnitively, more research is needed to better understand what is happening.
8. Conclusions
This work provided a brief survey in the state-of-the-art of Chinese–Spanish Smt. First
of all, this language pair is of great interest both economically and culturally if we take
into account the high number of Chinese and Spanish speakers. Besides, statistical machine
translation is the most popular approach in the ﬁeld of Mt given that has shown great
quality in all the international evaluation campaigns such as Nist (2009) and Wmt (2012).
The main points covered in our study were:
• There are mainly three Chinese–Spanish parallel corpora (Btec, Holy Bible and Un)
that are freely available for research purposes.
776

Evaluating Indirect Strategies for Chinese–Spanish SMT
• English is the best pivot language for conducting Chinese-to-Spanish translations
compared to languages such as French or Arabic. The system built using English as
pivot was signiﬁcantly better than the ones built with French or Arabic, with a 99%
conﬁdence in both comparisons.
• The preference for a pivot language appears to be correlated with other proposed
translation-quality prediction metrics such as the diﬀerences in vocabulary sizes and
the amount of reordering. According to the above conclusion, the best pivot language
is English because it has the lowest increase in vocabulary size and the lowest increase
in reordering complexity.
• No signiﬁcant diﬀerence is found among the best cascaded and pseudo-corpus pivot
approaches, but the pseudo-corpus strategy is the best pivot strategy for Chinese-
to-Spanish.
Additionally, pseudo-corpus and cascaded approaches are signiﬁcantly
better than the triangulation approach.
• The output combination using Mbr is able to improve the direct system in 1 Bleu
point in the best case. This improvement is signiﬁcantly better with a 99% conﬁdence
and is coherent with improvements in all other evaluation metrics studied.
As future research we plan to work on the problem of automatically extracting parallel
corpus from comparable corpora collected from the web. Additionally, we intend to develop
a freely available Chinese–Spanish translation system which would allow for collecting user
feedback. Then, we will work on special techniques to incorporate this knowledge in the
Smt system.
