Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 39 (2010) 217-268
Submitted 12/09; published 09/10
Narrative Planning: Balancing Plot and Character
Mark O. Riedl

School of Interactive Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332 USA
R. Michael Young

Department of Computer Science
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC 27695 USA
Abstract
Narrative, and in particular storytelling, is an important part of the human experience.
Consequently, computational systems that can reason about narrative can be more eﬀec-
tive communicators, entertainers, educators, and trainers. One of the central challenges in
computational narrative reasoning is narrative generation, the automated creation of mean-
ingful event sequences. There are many factors – logical and aesthetic – that contribute
to the success of a narrative artifact. Central to this success is its understandability. We
argue that the following two attributes of narratives are universal: (a) the logical causal
progression of plot, and (b) character believability. Character believability is the percep-
tion by the audience that the actions performed by characters do not negatively impact
the audience’s suspension of disbelief. Speciﬁcally, characters must be perceived by the
audience to be intentional agents. In this article, we explore the use of reﬁnement search
as a technique for solving the narrative generation problem – to ﬁnd a sound and believable
sequence of character actions that transforms an initial world state into a world state in
which goal propositions hold. We describe a novel reﬁnement search planning algorithm –
the Intent-based Partial Order Causal Link (IPOCL) planner – that, in addition to creating
causally sound plot progression, reasons about character intentionality by identifying possi-
ble character goals that explain their actions and creating plan structures that explain why
those characters commit to their goals. We present the results of an empirical evaluation
that demonstrates that narrative plans generated by the IPOCL algorithm support audi-
ence comprehension of character intentions better than plans generated by conventional
partial-order planners.
1. Introduction
Narrative as entertainment, in the form of oral, written, or visual storytelling, plays a
central role in many forms of entertainment media, including novels, movies, television,
and theatre. Narrative is also used in education and training contexts to motivate and to
illustrate. One of the reasons for the prevalence of storytelling in human culture may be due
to the way in which narrative is a cognitive tool for situated understanding (Bruner, 1990;
McKoon & Ratcliﬀ, 1992; Gerrig, 1993, 1994; Graesser, Singer, & Trabasso, 1994). There
is evidence that suggests that we, as humans, build cognitive structures that represent the
real events in our lives using models similar to the ones used for narrative in order to better
understand the world around us (Bruner, 1990). This narrative intelligence (Blair & Meyer,
c⃝2010 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

Riedl & Young
1997; Mateas & Sengers, 1999) is central in the cognitive processes that we employ across
a range of experiences, from entertainment contexts to active learning.
Computational systems that reason about narrative intelligence are able to interact with
human users in a natural way because they understand collaborative contexts as emerging
narrative and are able to express themselves through storytelling. The standard approach to
incorporating storytelling into a computer system, however, is to script a story at design time
and then to have the story’s script execute without variation at run-time. For a computer
system to use a scripted story means that the ability of the system to adapt to the user’s
preferences and abilities is limited. The story scripted into a system may not completely
engage the user’s interests or may be too challenging for the user to follow. Furthermore,
if stories are scripted at design time, a system can only have a limited number of stories
it can present to the user. In entertainment applications, a limited number of stories or a
limited number of permutations of a single story results in limited opportunities for user
interaction (or limited replay value if the computational system is a computer game). In
educational and training applications, a limited number of stories or a limited number of
permutations of a single story limits the ability of the system to adapt to a learner’s needs
and abilities.
An alternative approach is to generate stories either dynamically or on a per-session basis
(one story per time the system is engaged). Narrative generation is a process that involves
the selection of narrative content (the events that will be presented to an audience), ordering
of narrative content, and presentation of narrative content through discourse. A system that
can generate stories is capable of adapting narrative to the user’s preferences and abilities,
has expanded replay value, and is capable of interacting with the user in ways that were
not initially envisioned by system designers. While many entertainment, educational, and
training systems incorporate aspects of storytelling, very few systems exist that generate
novel narrative content in order to support the particular needs and preferences of the user.
The ability to customize narrative content to the user is the primary motivation of the
research eﬀort described in this article.
Narrative content must be understandable, regardless of the purpose of the system that
utilizes a narrative generator and the needs of the system user. Of the many factors – both
logical and aesthetic – that relate to narrative understandability, we focus on two attributes
of narratives we consider to be relatively universal: (a) the logical causal progression of plot
and (b) character believability. Logical progression of plot refers to a property of narrative in
which the central events of the narrative obey the rules of the world in which the narrative
occurs. Character believability (Bates, 1994) is the perception by the audience that the
actions performed by characters do not negatively impact the audience’s suspension of
disbelief. Speciﬁcally, characters must be perceived by the audience to be intentional agents
(Dennett, 1989). Thus a believable narrative sequence is one in which all characters can be
perceived to be intentional agents.
In this article we describe a narrative generation system that models the ﬁctional nar-
rative creation process as a search-based planning process. The resulting artifact – the
plan – is a description of the temporally ordered sequence of actions that story world char-
acters will perform.
This plan, when executed or rendered into natural language, tells
a story. Plans have been found to be good computational representations of narratives
because plans encode attributes central to narrative: action, temporality, and causality
218

Narrative Planning: Balancing Plot and Character
(Young, 1999). Unfortunately, solving the planning problem does not also solve the narra-
tive generation problem because planners do not consider many of the logical and aesthetic
properties of narratives. Speciﬁcally, planners do not consider character believability. We
describe a novel reﬁnement search planner – the Intent-based Partial Order Causal Link
(IPOCL) planner – that, in addition to creating causally sound plot progression, reasons
about character intentionality by (a) identifying possible character goals that explain their
actions and (b) creating plan structures that explain why those characters commit to their
goals. We begin with a brief background on narrative and lay the theoretical groundwork
for planning-based narrative generation (Section 2). Section 3 discusses related work in nar-
rative generation. In Section 4, we lay out our algorithm, IPOCL, for narrative planning
in detail and illustrate its processing through examples. Finally, in Section 5, we describe
how we evaluated the system.
2. Narrative and Planning
In this section we cover some of the relevant background on narrative from the humanities
and from cognitive psychology. We use the introduced concepts related to narrative to build
an argument for using planning technologies to generate narratives and why oﬀ-the-shelf
planners, with their emphasis on goal satisfaction, are insuﬃcient.
2.1 Narrative Background
Narrative and storytelling are terms that are widely understood but not often well deﬁned.
One deﬁnition is given here:
Narrative: A narrative is the recounting of a sequence of events that have a continuant
subject and constitute a whole (Prince, 1987).
For a narrative to have a continuant subject and constitute a whole, the events described in
the narrative have a single point or relate to a single communicative goal (Chatman, 1993).
One can, however distinguish between narratives that tell a story and narratives that do
not (Herman, 2002). A narrative that tells a story has certain properties that one comes to
expect. In particular, a story is a narrative that has a plot – the outline of main incidents
in a narrative – that is structured to have a particular eﬀect on the audience over time.
Narratologists break narrative down into two layers of interpretation: fabula and sjuzet
(Bal, 1998). The fabula of a narrative is an enumeration of all the events that occur in the
story world between the time the story begins and the time the story ends. The events in
the fabula are temporally sequenced in the order that they occur, which is not necessarily
the same order in which they are told. The sjuzet of a narrative is a subset of the fabula that
is presented via narration to the audience. If the narrative is written or spoken word, the
narration is in natural language. If the narrative is a cinematic presentation, the narration
is through the actions of actors and the camera shots that capture that action. While it is
the narrated sjuzet that is directly exposed to the audience, it is the fabula of a narrative
that is the content of the narrative, what the narrative is about. In this article, our work
is primarily concerned with the generation of a fabula. We assume that a sjuzet can be
generated from a fabula in a distinct process (e.g., Callaway & Lester, 2002; Young, 2006;
Jhala, 2009; Bae & Young, 2008; Cheong & Young, 2008).
219

Riedl & Young
There are many aspects that determine whether a story is accepted by the audience
as good. Many of these aspects are subjective in nature, such as the degree to which the
audience empathizes with the protagonist.
Other aspects appear to be more universal
across a wide variety of genres. Cognitive psychologists have determined that the ability
of an audience to comprehend a narrative is strongly correlated with the causal structure
of the story (Trabasso & Sperry, 1985; van den Broek, 1988; Graesser, Lang, & Roberts,
1991; Graesser et al., 1994) and the attribution of intentions to the characters that are
participants in the events (Graesser et al., 1991; Gerrig, 1993; Graesser et al., 1994). Story
comprehension requires the audience (e.g. reader, hearer, viewer) to perceive the causal
connectedness of story events and to infer intentionality of characters. Accordingly, the
two attributes of narrative that we focus on in this work on narrative generation are logical
causal progression and character believability.
The causality of events is an inherent property of narratives and ensures a whole and
continuant subject (Chatman, 1993). Causality refers to the notion that there is a rela-
tionship between temporally ordered events such that one event changes the story world
in a particular way that enables future events to occur (Trabasso & van den Broek, 1985).
For a story to be considered successful, it must contain a degree of causal coherence that
allows the audience to follow the logical succession of events and predict possible outcomes.
Attesting to the importance of causality in story, Trabasso and Sperry (1985) found a sig-
niﬁcant correlation between recall of an event in a story and its existence as part of a causal
chain that terminates in the outcome of the story.
Character believability (Bates, 1994) is the perception by the audience that the actions
performed by characters do not negatively impact the audience’s suspension of disbelief.
Character believability is partially dependent on the idiosyncrasies of a character’s appear-
ance and physical movements. Physical appearance is very important in visual media such
as animated ﬁlm (Thomas & Johnson, 1981). Descriptions of character appearances are
also found in written and spoken presentations. Equally important is the way in which the
internal attributes of a character such as personality, emotion, desires, and intentions man-
ifest themselves through the decisions the character makes and the behaviors the character
performs (Thomas & Johnson, 1981; Bates, 1994; Loyall, 1997).1 The deﬁnition of charac-
ter believability places emphasis on the goal-oriented nature of characters. Goal-oriented
behavior is a primary requirement for believability (Loyall, 1997; Charles, Lozano, Mead,
Bisquerra, & Cavazza, 2003). Speciﬁcally, we, as humans, ascribe intentionality to agents
with minds (Dennett, 1989). The implication is that if a character is to be perceived as
believable, one should be able to, through observations of the character, infer and predict
its motivations and intentions. In this article, our approach to narrative generation focuses
explicitly on creating narrative sequences in which characters will be perceived to be in-
tentional agents. Other research eﬀorts have directly addressed other aspects of character
believability, including personality (e.g., Carbonell, 1980; Reilly, 1996; Rizzo, Veloso, Miceli,
& Cesta, 1999; Sengers, 2000), emotion (e.g., Gratch & Marsella, 2004; Seif El-Nasr, Yen,
& Ioerger, 2000), and appearance and physical performance (e.g., Blumberg & Galyean,
1995; Maes, Darrell, Blumberg, & Pentland, 1995; Perlin & Goldberg, 1996; Loyall, 1997;
Hayes-Roth, van Gent, & Huber, 1997; Lester, Voerman, Towns, & Callaway, 1999).
1. Loyall (1997) enumerates many of the elements that aﬀect character believability in autonomous agents.
220

Narrative Planning: Balancing Plot and Character
2.2 Planning as a Model of Narrative Generation
There are many parallels between plans and narrative at the level of fabula. In particular,
a narrative is a sequence of events that describes how the story world changes over time.
In a fabula, change is instigated by intentional actions of story world characters, although
the story world can also be changed through unintentional acts such as accidents and forces
of nature. Likewise, a plan is a set of ordered operators that transforms a world from one
state to another state. If the operators of a plan are events that can happen in a story
world, then a plan can be a model of a fabula. Partially ordered plans allow operations
to remain temporally unconstrained if their relative execution order does not matter. The
semantics of the plan and the capabilities of the plan execution engine may determine
whether operations can, in fact, be executed in parallel (Knoblock, 1994). Similarly, the
events in a fabula can occur simultaneously in the story world, even though the narration
(e.g., sjuzet) of the events is necessarily linear.
Planners are implementations of algorithms that solve the planning problem: given a
domain theory, an initial state I, and a goal situation G consisting of a set of propositions,
ﬁnd a sound sequence of actions that maps the initial state into a state where G is true.
The domain theory is a model of how the world can change. For example, one can use
STRIPS (Fikes & Nilsson, 1971) or STRIPS-like operators that specify what operations
can be performed in the world, when they are applicable, and how the world is diﬀerent
afterward. Various algorithms have been developed that solve planning problems including
partial-order planners, constraint satisfaction planners, and heuristic search planners.
Since a plan can be used as a model of fabula, a planning algorithm can also be used
as a model of the dramatic authoring process that humans use to create narratives. Thus,
the creation of a narrative can be considered a problem solving activity if one considers the
fabula of a narrative to be the sequence of story-world events that achieves some outcome
desired by the author in order to have some eﬀect or impact on an audience.
In this article, we present an algorithm for planning narratives. It speciﬁcally solves the
fabula planning problem.
Fabula Planning Problem: Given a domain theory, ﬁnd a sound and believable sequence
of character actions that transforms an initial world state I into a world state in which
goal propositions G hold.
The domain theory, initial state, and goal situation are provided by the user of the fabula
generation system, whom we call the human author. The fabula generation system is tasked
with selecting and ordering a set of actions that, when told (as opposed to executed), is
considered a narrative.
The algorithm presented in subsequent sections can be considered one example of an
algorithm that solves the fabula generation problem. As with planning algorithms in gen-
eral, we acknowledge that other algorithms may exist. In the next sections, we explore the
implications of searching for believable narrative plans.
221

Riedl & Young
2.2.1 Challenges of Planning as a Computational Model of Narrative
Generation
Algorithms that solve the planning problem ﬁnd sequences of operations that are sound,
meaning that, in the absence of non-determinism, they are guaranteed to ﬁnd a sequence of
operations that maps the initial state into a state in which the goal situation holds. When
generating a fabula, we assume that operations are actions to be performed by characters
that exist in a story world.
A consequence of the planning problem deﬁnition is that
planners do not consider whether it is natural or believable for a character to perform an
action at any given time during the plan; they do not consider actions from the perspective
of the character or the audience, but from the context of whether it is necessary for the goal
situation to be achieved. We argue that this limits the applicability of oﬀ-the-shelf planners
as techniques for generating stories.
To illustrate this limitation, we present a simple example. Suppose we describe a world
with three characters: a king, a knight, and a princess. All characters live in a castle and the
castle has a tower in which characters can be locked up. Further suppose a goal situation
has been provided by the human author in which the princess is locked in the tower and
the king is dead. Given a reasonable domain theory – e.g., a set of possible actions – one
plan that can be found by a planner is:
1. The princess kills the king.
2. The princess locks herself in the tower.
This plan is valid from the perspective that it transforms the initial state into a state in
which the goal situation holds. But does it make sense as a story? A reader of this short
story will be left with many questions in mind. Why does the princess kill the king? Why
does the princess lock herself in the tower? Other plans exist that might make more sense,
such as:
1. The king locks the princess in the tower.
2. The knight kills the king.
Intuitively, it is easier for the reader to ﬁnd an explanation that makes sense of this second
story: the princess must have upset the king and the knight must be avenging the princess.
Let us consider ways we can inﬂuence a planner to give us more favorable plans.
One possibility is that we could modify the problem deﬁnition. For example, we can
change the initial state and domain theory such that princesses cannot kill kings or that
characters cannot lock themselves in the tower. Do these modiﬁcations make sense? Sup-
pose the king were attempting to harm the princess – the princess would be justiﬁed in
killing the king. To declare that princesses can never kill kings seems to impose an unnec-
essarily strong assumption on what narratives can be generated. Likewise, we can imagine
narratives in which it makes sense to lock oneself in a tower (perhaps to escape from dan-
ger). One of the advantages of automated generation of narratives is that an algorithm can
explore many possibilities and/or create narratives that were not envisioned by the human
author. This argument is further expanded by Riedl and Young (2006) in the context of
creativity on the part of a computational system.
222

Narrative Planning: Balancing Plot and Character
Another possibility is that we provide a heuristic function to a planner that favorably
ranks plans that demonstrate the quality of character believability. Such a heuristic will
increase the probability that the planner ﬁnd a solution that is believable by ranking plans
as being “closer” to being a solution when they include actions that create the appearance
of intentionality. For example, a planner with a good heuristic could, in principal, ﬁnd the
following plan:
1. The princess and the knight fall in love.
2. The king proposes to the princess.
3. The princess refuses the king’s proposal.
4. The king locks the princess in the tower.
5. The knight kills the king.
Like the previous example, this plan has the king lock the princess in the tower and then has
the knight kill the king. The inclusion of actions 1 and 3, however, increase the likelihood
that a reader will ﬁnd this story believable; the princess’s refusal explains why the king locks
the princess in the tower (the king’s proposal establishes the conditions for the princess’s
refusal), and the princess and the knight falling in love explains why princess refuses the
king’s proposal and why the knight kills the king.
A good heuristic that ranks on believability, however, only increases the probability that
a complete plan is found that has the desired properties by making it cost less to explore the
portions of the search space in which those solutions are likely to exist. It is still possible
for the planner to return a plan that is not believable in situations where it ﬁnds a shorter,
complete solution before it ﬁnds the longer, complete, and believable solution. This occurs
because the planning problem is solved when a sound sequence of actions that transforms
the initial state into one in which the goal situation holds.
We conclude that the fabula generation problem is suﬃciently diﬀerent than the planning
problem that if we wish to automatically plan the actions in a fabula, we can beneﬁt from
new deﬁnitions for plan completeness and mechanisms for selecting actions that move the
planner toward complete solutions.
We consider in greater detail what it means for a
character to appear believable with respect to intentionality, how we can detect character
believability in fabula plans, and how a planner can select actions that directly address both
logical causal progression and believability.
2.2.2 Intentionality in Character Believability
Character believability is partially due to character intentionality in that a story is more
likely to be considered believable if the story world characters appear to be motivated by
individual goals and desires. Stories are likely to be found more comprehensible when there
are well-formed relationships between character actions and recognizable character goals
(Graesser et al., 1991, 1994). However, unlike causal properties of story, there are no struc-
tures in plans or processes in planning algorithms that correspond directly to character
intentionality except the goal propositions in the planning problem. However, this is com-
plicated by the fact that stories typically comprise of multiple characters who cannot be
223

Riedl & Young
assumed to have the same goals as the human author, or to want to achieve any of the goal
situation propositions provided by the human author.
The goal situation in fabula planning is thus reinterpreted as the outcome of the story.
However, all the propositions of the outcome are not necessarily intended by all story world
characters. Indeed, it is possible that none of the propositions of the goal situation are
intended by any of the story world characters. It is also not necessarily the case that any or
all of the story world characters have declared intentions at the beginning of the story (in
the initial state). That is, characters may only form intentions as a reaction to conditions
in the world or in response to the actions of other characters.
Achieving character intentionality in a fabula planner requires a decoupling of the char-
acters’ intentions from the intentions of the human author and from the declaration of the
initial state and goal situation. Thus, we distinguish between the author goals (Riedl, 2004,
2009) and character goals. The author goal is a description of the world that the author
would like the fabula generator to achieve. For simplicity, we only consider a single author
goal encoded into the outcome, although it is often advantageous for the human author to
indicate several intermediate situations through which the fabula should pass as means of
providing additional guidance as to what he or she desires in a solution (cf., Riedl, 2009).
Character goals, on the other hand, are the goals that characters are perceived to pursue
through a portion of the overall fabula. Characters goals may be diﬀerent from the outcome
in the sense that not all characters in a story desire the outcome state or seek to achieve
it. Character goals may also be adopted and resolved throughout a story. For example,
in the previous section the king appears to develop a goal of punishing the princess after
she refuses to marry him. The king’s goal neither exists at the beginning of the story nor
persists through to the outcome.
Once agent intentions are decoupled from the initial world state and goal situation,
the planner must assume responsibility for determining character goals – why the agents
are performing the actions in the plan – and motivate those intentions with other actions.
Failure to distinguish between author goals and character goals results in the appearance
of collusion between characters to achieve the outcome situation when it does not makes
sense (e.g., a protagonist and antagonist) and/or to act inconsistently and erratically.2 Our
approach to incorporating character intentionality into narrative planning is described in
Section 4.
To illustrate the decoupling of character intentions, let us inspect the example planning
problem from Section 2.2.1 in more detail. The goal situation has two propositions: (a)
the princess is locked in the tower, and (b) the king is dead. This is an example where the
human author’s intentions – that a particular outcome is reached – is not likely to be the
same as reasonable intentions of story world characters. That is, the princess is unlikely
to intend to be locked up and the king is unlikely to intend to be dead. Further, it is not
clear that there is any reason why the princess or the knight should intend that the king
be dead, although these declarations could be made by the human author at initialization
time. It would be reasonable for the reader to see the king appear to ﬁght back against the
2. Sengers (2000) refers to this phenomenon as agent schizophrenia.
224

Narrative Planning: Balancing Plot and Character
knight to try to avoid death. But the planning problem is not adversarial in the sense that
there can be any uncertainty about whether the knight will prevail.3
We conclude that a fabula planner must select actions for characters that achieve the
outcome situation and that also create the appearance that the story world characters have
intentions that are potentially distinct from the human author’s desires. Since characters’
intentions are not necessarily provided in advance by the human author, reasonable goals
for characters must be discovered that explain their behaviors, and fabula structure must
be constructed that illustrates the formation of those intentions. After reviewing related
work, we will describe one algorithm that meets the requirements for solving the fabula
generation problem as laid out earlier.
3. Related Work
Narrative generation systems can often be classiﬁed as using one of two approaches to ﬁc-
tional fabula content creation. Simulation-based narrative generation systems (also referred
to as emergent systems in Aylett, 1999, 2000) are those that simulate a story world. The
simulation approach is to establish a set of characters and a world context. The narra-
tive generation system then progressively determines the actions that the characters should
take over time as the situational context evolves. Often simulation-based narrative genera-
tion systems employ decentralized, autonomous embodied agents that represent story world
characters and react to the evolving world state. Deliberative narrative generation systems
are those that generate narratives by solving the problem of choosing a sequence of actions –
physical, mental, and dialogue – for all story world characters that meet certain constraints
and parameters (aesthetic, dramatic, or pedagogical). The narrative is the output of this
procedure. The primary distinction to simulation-based approaches is that a deliberative
narrative generation system uses a centralized reasoning algorithm – often a planner – to
determine the optimal actions for all characters. We limit our discussion of related narrative
generation research to how systems produce fabula content.
The simulation-based (emergent) approach to narrative generation is based on the asser-
tion that the best way to generate a narrative is to model the behaviors and decision-making
processes of story world characters. Tale-Spin (Meehan, 1976) is a system that generates
Aesop’s Fables based on moment-to-moment inference about what each character should
do. The inference engine is based on theories of common-sense reasoning (Schank & Abel-
son, 1977). Meehan (1977) notes that in circumstances where character goals are not well
chosen or where the facts of the story world do not support the character actions the user
intends, generated narratives can be very short and oddly structured (see Meehan, 1977,
for examples of “mis-spun” narratives). The Carnegie Mellon University Oz project (Bates,
1992, 1994; Mateas, 1997; Loyall, 1997) uses autonomous, reactive, embodied agents to
represent characters in a virtual world. The agents use “shallow and broad” (Bates, Loyall,
& Reilly, 1992) decision-making routines to cover a wide repertoire of believable-looking ac-
tivities. As ﬁrst proposed by Laurel (1986) and later implemented by Bates and colleagues
(Bates, 1992; Kelso, Weyhrauch, & Bates, 1993; Weyhrauch, 1997), a special agent, called
3. This is an example in which agents be perceived to intentionally strive to avoid the human author’s
desired outcome. Since the goal situation is the human author’s intention, the goal situation must be
achieved.
225

Riedl & Young
a drama manager may be necessary to prevent uninteresting and poorly structured narra-
tives from emerging. A drama manager oversees and coordinates character agent behavior
in order to coerce interesting and well-structured performances out of the autonomous
agents. The I-Storytelling system (Cavazza, Charles, & Mead, 2002) likewise relies on
autonomous, reactive agents to represent story world characters. Unlike the Oz project,
I-Storytelling system agents use hierarchical task network (HTN) planners to achieve
pre-determined goals. Cavazza et al. note that the way in which the virtual world is con-
ﬁgured, including the initial position of character agents, and the initial goals of character
agents strongly inﬂuences the outcome of the story; poor initial conﬁgurations may result
in uninteresting narratives with no conﬂict.
Dehn (1981) asserts that the process of computational story generation must be a process
that includes the satisfaction of the intentions of the human author. Deliberative narrative
generation systems often consider the process of narrative creation from the perspective of
a singular author that has authority over the resulting narrative structure and is working to
achieve a narrative sequence that conforms to particular given constraints and parameters.
The Universe system (Lebowitz, 1984, 1985, 1987) uses a centralized hierarchical planner
to produce open-ended narrative soap-opera episodes that achieve the narratological inten-
tions of the human author. The human author provides a goal situation that describes the
outcome of a particular episode and the Universe system’s planner ﬁnds a sequence of
character actions that achieves that goal using hierarchically related task networks describ-
ing common activity. In general, hierarchical decomposition requires some form of grammar
or rules. Story grammars such as that by Rumelhart (1975) have been criticized as too re-
strictive (Black & Wilensky, 1979; Wilensky, 1983). Tailor (Smith & Witten, 1991) uses
state-space search to plan the actions of the story’s protagonist. The protagonist is given a
goal to achieve and Tailor searches for a sequence of actions the protagonist can take to
achieve the goal. When an antagonist is present, Tailor uses adversarial search.
More recent work on deliberative narrative generation systems has focused on two areas:
the role of knowledge, and specialized search algorithms. The Minstrel system (Turner,
1994) implements a model of computational creativity based on adaptation and reuse of
existing concepts to create new stories. The Minstrel system uses specialized routines to
transform old stories into new stories. M´exica (P´erez y P´erez & Sharples, 2001) implements
a model of creative writing (cf., Sharples, 1999) that conceptualizes writing as a cycle
of cognitive engagement and reﬂection. The model employs a combination of case-based
reasoning – it probes a database of known existing stories for elements that match current
patterns of emotion and tension – and partial-order planning to ensure coherence between
story fragments.
The ProtoPropp system (Gerv´as, D´ıaz-Agudo, Peinado, & Herv´as,
2005) uses a case-based reasoning approach to creating narratives. ProtoPropp encodes
examples of Russian folktales from Propp (1968) and functions based on regularities about
folktales identiﬁed by Propp into an ontology from which new folktales are created by
retrieving, adapting, and reusing parts of old folktales. More recently Porteous and Cavazza
(2009) have turned to planning narrative structures using a variation of FF (Hoﬀmann &
Nebel, 2001) to ﬁnd a sequence of events that brings about a goal situation. The planner
does not consider character goals independent of the goal situation. Instead their generation
algorithm uses landmarks – partially ordered sets of ﬁrst-order logic literals that must be
made true throughout the course of a solution – as a means of guiding the planner toward
226

Narrative Planning: Balancing Plot and Character
a solution consistent with the human author’s vision. Landmarks are author goals (Riedl,
2004, 2009).
The goal of our research is to devise a narrative generation system that generates narra-
tives that exhibit both causal coherence and character intentionality. We favor a deliberative
approach to narrative generation because a deliberative approach provides a mechanism for
ensuring that character actions are chosen with global structure in mind. Contrast this to
simulation-based approaches that choose character actions based on temporally localized
information. Deliberative systems avoid problems with logical causal progression because
they consider the narrative sequence as a whole. However, those deliberative narrative gen-
eration systems that have been designed to date conﬂate character goals and human author
goals without consideration for audience – reader, viewer, etc. – perspective.
Our algorithm, the Intent-Driven Partial Order Causal Link (IPOCL) planner, is an
algorithm that solves the fabula generation problem. The IPOCL algorithm is based on a
class of planning algorithms called Partial Order Causal Link (POCL) planners, of which
UCPOP (Penberthy & Weld, 1992; Weld, 1994) is a well known example. POCL planners
represent operators in a plan as STRIPS (Fikes & Nilsson, 1971) or STRIPS-like constructs
consisting of the operator name, a precondition – the conditions that must be true in a
world for an operator to be executable – and an eﬀect – the conditions in the world that
are changed once an operator ﬁnishes execution. The precondition and eﬀect consist of
zero or more ﬁrst-order logic literals. Operators may be parameterized with variables that,
when bound to ground symbols, allows a single operator schema to represent many possible
ground operators. POCL planners use the following deﬁnition of a partially ordered plan,
using the term “step” to refer to operators that are instantiated into the plan structure:
Deﬁnition 1 (POCL Plan): A POCL plan is a tuple ⟨S, B, O, L⟩such that S is a
set of plan steps, B is a set of binding constraints on the parameters of the steps in
S, O is a set of temporal orderings of the form s1 < s2 where s1, s2 ∈S, and L is a
set of causal links of the form ⟨s1, p, q, s2⟩where s1, s2 ∈S and p is an eﬀect of s1 and
q is a precondition of s2 and p uniﬁes with q.
Note that we use the term step synonymously with action and operator. This diﬀers
from the usage of the term in literature on non-POCL planners such as SATPLAN and
Graphplan.
POCL planners use an iterative process of identifying ﬂaws in a plan and revising the
plan in a least-commitment manner. A ﬂaw is any reason why a plan cannot be considered
a valid solution. An open condition ﬂaw occurs when the precondition of a step or the goal
situation is not satisﬁed by the eﬀects of a preceding step or the initial state. A POCL
planner solves for the open condition of the step or goal situation by non-deterministically
choosing existing steps or instantiating new steps that have eﬀects that unify with the goal
conditions. A causal link (Penberthy & Weld, 1992) connects two plan steps s1 and s2 via
condition p, written s1
p−→s2, when s1 establishes the condition p in the story world needed
by subsequent step s2 in order for step s2 to execute. Causal links are used to record the
causal relationships between steps and record the satisfaction of open conditions. A causal
threat ﬂaw occurs when the eﬀects of one plan step possibly undo the eﬀects of another plan
step. Causal threats are resolved by explicitly ordering the conﬂicting steps. We provide
227

Riedl & Young
POCL (⟨S, B, O, L⟩, F, Λ)
The ﬁrst parameter is a plan. On the initial call to POCL, there are only two steps in S – the dummy
initial step whose eﬀect is the initial state and the ﬁnal step. F is a set of ﬂaws. On the initial call, F
contains an open condition ﬂaw for each goal literal in the goal situation. B = L = ∅. Λ is the set of action
schemata. Output is a complete plan or fail.
I. Termination. If O or B is inconsistent, fail. Otherwise, if F is empty, return ⟨S, B, O, L⟩.
II. Plan Reﬁnement.
1. Goal selection. Select an open condition ﬂaw f = ⟨sneed, p⟩from F. Let F ′ = F −{f}.
2. Operator selection. Let sadd be a step that adds an eﬀect e that can be uniﬁed with p (to
create sadd, non-deterministically choose a step sold already in S or instantiate an action schema
in Λ). If no such step exists, backtrack. Otherwise, let S′ = S∪{sadd}, O′ = O∪{sadd < sneed},
B′ = B ∪Bnew where Bnew are bindings (e.g., assignments of ground symbols to variables)
needed to make sadd add e, including the bindings of sadd itself, and L′ = L∪{⟨sadd, e, p, sneed⟩}.
If sadd ̸= sold, add new open condition ﬂaws to F ′ for every precondition of sadd.
3. Threat resolution. A step sthreat threatens a causal link ⟨sj, e, p, sk⟩when it occurs between
sj and sk and it asserts ¬e.
For every used step sthreat that might threaten a causal link
⟨sj, e, p, sk⟩∈L′, non-deterministically do one of the following.
• Promotion. If sk possibly precedes sthreat, let O′ = O′ ∪{sk < sthreat}.
• Demotion. If sthreat possibly precedes sj, let O′ = O′ ∪{sthreat < sj}.
• Separation. Let O′ = O′ ∪{sj < sthreat, sthreat < sk} and let B′ = B′∪the set of variable
constraints needed to ensure that sthreat won’t assert ¬e.
III. Recursive invocation. Call POCL (⟨S′, B′, O′, L′⟩, F ′, Λ).
Figure 1: The POCL algorithm.
the POCL planning algorithm in Figure 1 as a point of comparison for later discussion of
our fabula planning algorithm.
In the next section, we introduce our algorithm, the Intent-Driven Partial Order Causal
Link (IPOCL) planner, which creates narratives that, from the perspective of a reader, more
closely resemble the results of an emergent narrative generation system with regard to char-
acter intentionality. Speciﬁcally, IPOCL is a modiﬁcation of existing search-based planning
algorithms to support character intentionality independent of author intentions. The goal
is to generate narratives through a deliberative process such that characters appear to the
audience to form intentions and act to achieve those intentions as if they were simulated. In
this way, IPOCL can produce narratives that have both logical causal progression, meaning
that they achieve author-indicated outcomes states, and have believable characters.
4. Intent-Driven Planning
The deﬁnition of character believability in this work is constrained to focus on the perceived
intentionality of character behavior in the story world. Perceived intentionality refers to
the way in which characters are observed by an audience to have goals and to act to achieve
those goals. In the context of computational storytelling systems, it is not suﬃcient for
a character to act intentionally if the audience is not capable of inferring that character’s
228

Narrative Planning: Balancing Plot and Character
intentions from the circumstances that surround the character in the story world.
The
audience of a story is not a collection of passive observers. Instead, the audience actively
performs mental problem-solving activities to predict what characters will do and how
the story will evolve (Gerrig, 1993). It makes sense, therefore, to reason about character
intentions and motivations at the time of generation from the perspective of the audience.
This will ensure that every character action considered for inclusion in the narrative will
appear motivated and intentional.
The Intent-Driven Partial Order Causal Link (IPOCL) planner that generates fabula
plans in which characters act intentionally and in which that intentionality is observable.
IPOCL extends conventional POCL planning to include an expanded plan representation,
deﬁnition of plan completeness, and action selection mechanisms that facilitate a fabula
planner to search for a solution in which the author’s goal is achieved (e.g., the outcome)
and all characters appear to act intentionally.
Conventionally, planners are means-ends
tools for solving problems. When employing a planning system to generate a fabula, the
system must produce the actions that make up the plot line of a story, along with a temporal
ordering – partial or total – over the execution times of those actions. We make the following
observations about the conventional planning problem:
• Plans being generated are created by or for a single agent (Bratman, Israel, and
Pollack, 1988) or for a collection of cooperating agents (Grosz & Sidner, 1990).4
• The goal situation is intended by one or more of the character agents and all agents
intend to execute a plan in support of achieving the goal state.
In order to facilitate the active mental processes of the audience suggested by Gerrig, we
observe that solving the fabula planning problem requires the following:
• Plans being generated are created for multiple character agents that are not necessarily
cooperating but also not necessarily adversarial.
• The goal situation describes properties of the world that are not necessarily intended
by any of the character agents that are to execute the plan.
The goal situation for the conventional planning problem is a partial description of the world
state that will be obtained at the end of the plan’s execution. In the context of narrative
planning, we refer to the goal situation as the outcome because it describes how the world
must be diﬀerent after the narrative is completed.
The fabula generation algorithm described in the remainder of this section searches the
space of plans in which individual agent goals are potentially distinct from the outcome
4. The SharedPlans (Grosz & Sidner, 1990) formalism addresses the situation where more than one agent
collaborates to construct a joint plan for achieving some goal. Grosz and Sidner’s approach addresses
the cases where all agents intend that a joint goal is achieved or where one agent has a goal and
“contracts out” part of the task to another agent by communicating its intentions (Grosz & Kraus, 1996).
SharedPlans address the coordination of many individual plans into a single joint plan by deﬁning how
agent intentions to perform actions and agent intentions that goals and sub-goals be achieved constrain
the behaviors of the individual agents working together.
The formalism, however, does not address
situations where agents have diﬀerent goals and are cooperating or “contracting out.”
229

Riedl & Young
ACTION ::= ACTION-NAME (VARIABLE∗)
actors:
VARIABLE∗
happening:
BOOLEAN
constraints:
LITERAL∗
precondition:
LITERAL∗
effect:
LITERAL∗
LITERAL := PREDICATE ([VARIABLE | SYMBOL]∗)
Figure 2: Syntax for action schemata in IPOCL.
and in which agents are not necessarily cooperating. Character agents can either be given
intentions as part of the speciﬁcation of the initial world state or develop them during
the course of the plan. The IPOCL planning algorithm accomplishes this by expanding
the representation of the plan structure to include information about the intentions of the
individual agents. Algorithmically, IPOCL simultaneously searches the space of plans and
the space of agent intentions. At any point in the process, agent intentions are ensured to be
plausible through the use of a special reasoning process that tests for character intentionality
from the perspective of the audience and attempts to revise the plan if the test fails.
4.1 Extensions to the Planning Problem Deﬁnition Language
The IPOCL planning problem is given in Deﬁnition 2.
Deﬁnition 2 (IPOCL Planning Problem): An IPOCL planning problem is a tuple,
⟨I, A, G, Λ⟩, such that I is the initial state, A is a set of symbols that refer to character
agents, G is the goal situation, and Λ is a set of action schemata.
A signiﬁcant factor in the IPOCL planning problem is A, the set of symbols that refer to
character agents in the world. These symbols are handled specially in processes determining
character intentionality.
We have extended the traditional planning problem deﬁnition
language to use the character agents in two ways:
• Speciﬁcation of which actions do not need to be intentional.
• Speciﬁcation of which parameters of an action refer to the character agents that will
be intentionally performing the action.
The syntax for specifying action schemata for IPOCL is given in Figure 2. As with other
POCL planners, we use a STRIPS-like representation with preconditions and eﬀects. Ad-
ditionally, constraints are literals that must unify with those in the initial state and act as
a ﬁlter on applicable parameter bindings.
We distinguish between two types of actions:
happenings (Prince, 1987) and non-
happenings. Happenings are actions that can occur without the intention of any character
such as accidents, involuntary reactions to stimuli, and forces of nature. Non-happening
events must be intended by a character. For clarity, we assume that, unless indicated oth-
erwise, all actions are non-happenings and thus require an actor for whom the action fulﬁlls
230

Narrative Planning: Balancing Plot and Character
Action: slay (?slayer, ?monster, ?place)
actors: ?slayer
constraints: knight(?slayer), monster(?monster), place(?place)
precondition: at(?slayer, ?place), at(?monster, ?place), alive(?slayer), alive(?monster)
eﬀect: ¬alive(?monster)
Action: marry (?groom, ?bride, ?place)
actors: ?groom, ?bride
constraints: male(?groom), female(?bride), place(?place)
precondition: at(?groom, ?place), at(?bride, ?place), loves(?groom, ?bride),
loves(?bride, ?groom), alive(?groom), alive(?bride)
eﬀect: married(?groom), married(?bride), ¬single(?groom), ¬single(?bride),
married-to(?groom, ?bride), married-to(?bride, ?groom)
Action: appear-threatening (?monster, ?char, ?place)
actors: ?monster
happening: t
constraints: monster(?monster), character(?char), place(?place)
precondition: at(?monster, ?place), at(?char, ?place), scary(?monster), ?monster̸=?char
eﬀect: intends(?char, ¬alive(?monster))
Figure 3: Example IPOCL action schemata.
an intention. If there are actions that can occur in the world without intent (for example,
falling down the stairs), they are marked by specifying the happening slot as true.
If the action is a non-happening, the actors slot speciﬁes which of the parameters refer
to symbols representing characters that are acting intentionally to enact the particular
action. We say that an action is to be performed by character agent a when the actors
slot of the action references a. Figure 3 shows three action schemata involving a single
intentional actor, multiple intentional actors, and no intentional actor, respectively. The
action schema for Slay(?slayer, ?victim, ?place) speciﬁes that ?slayer will refer to
the intentional actor. Note the implication that slaying cannot be performed accidentally.
The action schema for Marry(?groom, ?bride, ?place) speciﬁes two intentional actors,
?groom and ?bride. Finally, Appear-threatening(?monster, ?char, ?place) indicates
that ?char will appear to be become frightened by a monster. This action does not need
to be intentional on the part of the ?monster or ?char.
A ﬁnal note on action deﬁnition is the use of the special intends predicate, which can
only be used in the eﬀect of an action. Semantically the intends predicate should be read
as meaning “it is reasonable for a character to have the following goal” as a response to
the action. Whether the intention is acted upon is determine by whether the proposition is
used, as described in the next section. When the narrative is told, there will be no mention
of facts that are unused. The intends predicate only occurs in action eﬀects; it is not used in
action preconditions because that creates a strong commitment to how actions can be used.
For example, if Marry were to require intends(?groom, married-to(?groom, ?bride)),
it would preclude stories in which a character wants to not be single (but doesn’t necessarily
want to be married) and also stories in which a character marries someone as revenge against
231

Riedl & Young
a third party (the marriage is just one action in a chain leading up to another goal that is
none of the action’s eﬀects).
4.2 Character Intentionality in Fabula Planning
Because a story’s audience actively performs problem-solving as the story progresses in order
to predict the outcome and the fate of story world characters, a generated story should
support these cognitive processes.
This means providing narrative structure that gives
enough information for the audience to infer the intentionality of character behavior. From
the fabula planner’s perspective, all character actions should be intentional (or happenings).
That is, for every character goal, a portion of the actions in the complete fabula plan describe
the actions to be performed by that character to achieve the character goal. We formalize
this as follows:
Deﬁnition 3 (Frame of Commitment):
A frame of commitment is a tuple,
⟨S′, P, a, ga, sf⟩, such that S′ is a proper subset of plan steps in a plan P = ⟨S, B, O, L⟩,
a is a symbolic reference to a character agent such that the character agent is the actor
of all steps in S′, ga is a goal that character agent a is pursing by executing the steps
in S′, and sf ∈S′ – referred to as the ﬁnal step – has ga for one of its eﬀects and all
other steps in S′ temporally precede sf in the step ordering O of plan P.
The purpose of the frame of commitment is to record a character’s internal character goal
ga and the actions of the plan that the character will appear to perform during storytelling to
achieve that goal. However, from the perspective of the audience, it is not enough to declare
a character as having a goal; in order to make inferences about character intentions and
plans, the audience must observe the characters forming and committing to goals. Therefore,
each frame of commitment is associated with a condition, eg, of the form intends(a, ga),
which indicates that for a character to commit to an internal character goal, a must be in
a state where it is reasonable to intend ga. The condition eg must be established in the
world by some plan step that has eg as an eﬀect. That is, something in the world causes
character a to commit to ga. The plan step that causes eg and consequently causes the
frame of commitment is referred to as the motivating step for the frame of commitment. The
motivating step necessarily temporally precedes all plan steps in the frame of commitment.
Informally, the interval of intentionality is the set of actions S′ that character a will perform
to achieve the internal character goal, ga.5
Character goals partially describe a world state that the character commits to achieving.
Commitments persist through time and a character will remain committed to the goal even
though the desired world state is undone (Bratman, 1987).
IPOCL does not explicitly
represent the release of a commitment except to say that the interval of intentionality is
bounded temporally by the set of steps in the interval of intentionality.
5. An interval of intentionality roughly equates to the notion of a Full Individual Plan (FIP) in the Shared-
Plans formulation (Grosz & Sidner, 1990). A full individual plan is a portion of the larger Full Shared
Plan (FSP) that a single agent is responsible for executing. The distinction between a fabula plan and
an FSP is that the full fabula plan is not made up of many individual FIPs generated by collaborating
planning agents. Instead, a fabula plan is constructed as a whole and the individual character actions
that make up the whole plan are annotated to indicate what intention they might be used to achieve.
232

Narrative Planning: Balancing Plot and Character
s1 (a2)
Frame of commitment for a1
with goal ga1
s2 (a1)
s3 (a1)
s4 (a1)
s5 (a2)
Intention level
Domain level
p2
p3
ga1
intends(a1, ga1)
Figure 4: An IPOCL plan with a single frame of commitment and motivating step.
Character goals are captured in two ways.
First, potential character intentions are
recorded in world states through the existence of world state propositions of the form
intends(a, ga). These world state propositions record the fact that a character can have
an intention, but do not indicate whether an intention is acted upon, nor do they capture
which subsequent actions are executed in order for that character to act on the intention.
Second, character intentions are recorded in frame of commitment data structures. Frames
of commitment elaborate on the intention by also identifying which actions in the fabula
plan the character is to perform in pursuit of the intention.
Note that an interval of
intentionality can contain more than one step with ga as an eﬀect. This is necessary in the
case where another action in the fabula plan undoes ga in the world and the condition must
be reestablished.
IPOCL extends the deﬁnition of the POCL plan data structure to include frames of
commitment. The deﬁnition of an IPOCL plan is as follows.
Deﬁnition 4 (IPOCL Plan): An IPOCL plan is a tuple ⟨S, B, O, L, C⟩where S is a
set of plan steps, B is a set of binding constraints on the free variables in the steps
in S, O is the set of ordering constraints on the steps in S, L is a set of causal links
between steps in S, and C is a set of frames of commitment.
The sets S, B, O, and L are deﬁned in the standard way (e.g., Penberthy & Weld, 1992).
The frames of commitment in C are deﬁned in Deﬁnition 3. See Figure 4 for an illustration
of an IPOCL plan with a single frame of commitment and a motivating step for that frame.
The actor of each step si is indicated in parentheses. The IPOCL algorithm ensures that
all story world characters that participate in a fabula plan appear to act believably with
respect to intentionality. To satisfy this requirement, all character actions in an IPOCL
plan (except those marked as not needing to be intentional) must be intentional in the ﬁnal
solution plan or happenings.
Deﬁnition 5 (Action Intentionality): An action in plan P is intentional if it belongs
to a frame of commitment in P.
Unintentional actions are not part of any interval of intentionality and are referred to as
orphans. In order for an IPOCL plan to be considered complete, all actions – except for
233

Riedl & Young
happenings – must be part of at least one frame of commitment. A character action can
belong to more than one interval of intentionality. The deﬁnition of plan completeness is as
follows:
Deﬁnition 6 (Complete IPOCL Plan): An IPOCL plan is complete if and only
if (1) all preconditions of all plan steps are established, (2) all causal threats6 are
resolved, and (3) all plan steps that are not happenings are intentional.
Conditions 1 and 2 together make up the conventional deﬁnition of plan completeness,
which can be termed causally complete. A fabula plan in IPOCL can be causally complete
without being fully complete under Deﬁnition 6. When a plan is causally complete but
not fully complete, then the plan contains orphans. If there are no ways to correct for
the orphans, IPOCL backtracks to ﬁnd another possible complete solution plan. Taken
together, Deﬁnitions 4 and 6 directly address the high-level problem of ﬁnding a sound and
believable sequence of actions that transforms an initial world state into a world state in
which a goal situation holds.
4.3 Integrating Intentionality into Least-Commitment Planning
Frames of commitment are products of a process in which the planner tests the intentionality
of character actions and revises the plan if necessary. IPOCL, as a reﬁnement search process,
uses an iterative, least-commitment process of identifying ﬂaws in a plan and revising the
plan to repair the ﬂaws. This creates a tree-like search space in which leaf nodes are either
complete plans (under Deﬁnition 6) or incomplete plans that cannot be repaired. Internal
nodes are incomplete plans that have one or more ﬂaws.
In addition to open conditions and causal threat ﬂaws adopted from POCL we deﬁne
three additional types of ﬂaws:
Deﬁnition 7 (Open Motivation Flaw): An open motivation ﬂaw in plan P is a
tuple, ⟨c, p⟩, such that c is a frame of commitment in P and p is the sentence intends(a,
ga) such that a is the character of c and ga is the internal character goal of c.
Deﬁnition 8 (Intent Flaw): An intent ﬂaw in plan P is a tuple ⟨s, c⟩where s is a
step in P and c is a frame of commitment in P such that s
p−→sj is a causal link in
the plan, s is not part of c, and sj is a step in P, is part of c, and the character of s
is the same as the character of sj and c.
Deﬁnition 9 (Intentional Threat Flaw): An intentional threat ﬂaw in plan P is a
tuple, ⟨ck, ci⟩, such that frame of commitment ck has an internal character goal that
negates the internal character goal of another frame of commitment ci.
Open motivation ﬂaws reﬂect the fact that characters must appear motivated to have goals.
That is, something must cause a character to commit to a goal.
An open motivation
ﬂaw means that a plan has a frame of commitment whose interval of intentionality is not
preceded by a motivating step.
Intent ﬂaws reﬂect the fact that a plan step, s, to be
6. A causal threat occurs when, due to insuﬃcient constraints of action ordering in a partially ordered plan,
the eﬀects of one action can potentially undo the preconditions of another action.
234

Narrative Planning: Balancing Plot and Character
performed by a character can be part of a frame of commitment, c, held by that same
character. That is, step s causally establishes a precondition of some other step, sj, which
is part of c. The planner must non-deterministically decide whether the step is part of the
frame of commitment. The next sections describe algorithms for identifying and repairing
open motivation ﬂaws and intent ﬂaws. To facilitate this, the IPOCL algorithm, shown in
Figure 5, is broken up into three parts: causal planning, motivation planning, and intent
planning.
4.3.1 Causal Planning in IPOCL
The causal planning portion of the IPOCL algorithm implements the conventional POCL
algorithm with the addition of a frame of commitment discovery phase. Causal planning
occurs when there is an open condition that needs to be resolved. That is, some step sneed
has a precondition p that is not satisﬁed by any causal link. The planner chooses a plan
step sadd whose eﬀect e can unify with p. This is accomplished by non-deterministically
choosing an existing plan step or by instantiating a new action.
The frame of commitment discovery process is triggered by the changes in the plan (e.g.
the addition of a causal link to the plan structure). If sadd is a newly instantiated step, then
there is the possibility that it is the ﬁnal step (due to the backward-chaining nature of the
planning algorithm) of some previously undiscovered character intention. If this is the case,
then one of the eﬀects of sadd, in addition to causally satisfying some open condition, is
intended by the character speciﬁed to perform sadd. IPOCL non-deterministically chooses
one of the eﬀects of sadd (or no eﬀect, in the case where sadd is not the ﬁnal step of some
yet-to-be-discovered intention). If an eﬀect is chosen, then a new frame of commitment
is constructed to record the character’s commitment to achieving that eﬀect in the world.
Step sadd is made to be the ﬁnal step of the frame’s interval of intentionality and a new
open motivation ﬂaw annotates the plan to indicate that the planner must ﬁnd a motivating
step.
Regardless of whether sadd is newly instantiated or an existing plan step that is reused,
the planner must consider the possibility that sadd is part of an existing interval of inten-
tionality. Steps can be performed as part of more than one intention; Pollack (1992) refers
to this as overloading. IPOCL performs a search of the plan node for frames of commitment
that sadd can be part of. The search routine ﬁnds a set of frames C′′ such that cj ∈C′′
when one of the two following conditions holds:
1. The frame of commitment cj contains step sj such that sadd
p−→sj is a causal link in
the plan and sadd and sj are to be performed by the same character.
2. The frame of commitment cj contains step sj such that some frame ci /∈C′′ is in
service of sj and sadd is a motivating step for ci. Frame ci is in service of step sj if
the ﬁnal step of ci has an eﬀect that establishes a precondition of sj, and sj is part of
frame ck, and ck ̸= ci.
For each frame of commitment ci ∈C′′, the plan is annotated with an intent ﬂaw ⟨sadd, cj⟩.
By resolving these ﬂaws, the planner will determine whether step sadd becomes part of an
existing frame’s interval of intentionality.
235

Riedl & Young
IPOCL (⟨S, B, O, L, C⟩, F, Λ)
The ﬁrst parameter is a plan, with steps S, variable bindings B, ordering constraints O, causal links L,
and frames of commitment C.
F is a set of ﬂaws (initially open conditions for each literal in the goal
situation). Λ is a set of action schemata. Output is a complete plan according to Deﬁnition 6 or fail.
I. Termination. If O or B are inconsistent, fail. If F is empty and ∀s ∈S, ∃c ∈C | s is part of c,
return ⟨S, B, O, L, C⟩. Otherwise, if F is empty, fail.
II. Plan Reﬁnement. Non-deterministically do one of the following.
• Causal planning
1. Goal selection. Select an open condition ﬂaw f = ⟨sneed, p⟩from F. Let F ′ = F −{f}.
2. Operator selection. Let sadd be a step that adds an eﬀect e that can be uniﬁed with
p (to create sadd, non-deterministically choose a step sold already in S or instantiate an
action schema in Λ). If no such step exists, backtrack. Otherwise, let S′ = S ∪{sadd},
O′ = O ∪{sadd < sneed}, B′ = B ∪Bnew where Bnew are bindings (e.g., assignments of
ground symbols to variables) needed to make sadd add e, including the bindings of sadd
itself, and L′ = L ∪{⟨sadd, e, p, sneed⟩}. If sadd ̸= sold, add new open condition ﬂaws to F ′
for every precondition of sadd.
3. Frame discovery. Let C′ = C.
a. If sadd ̸= sold, non-deterministically choose an eﬀect e of sadd or e = nil. If e ̸=
nil, construct a new frame of commitment c with internal character goal e and the
character of sadd, let sadd be part of c, let C′ = C ∪{c}, create a new open motivation
ﬂaw f = ⟨c⟩, and let F ′ = F ∪{f}.
b. Let C′′ be the set of existing frames of commitment that can be used to explain sadd.
For all d ∈C′′, create an intent ﬂaw f = ⟨sadd, d⟩and let F ′ = F ∪{f}.
4. Threat resolution
– Causal threat resolution. Performed as in II.3 in the POCL algorithm (Figure 1)
– Intentional threat resolution. For all c1 ∈C′ and c2 ∈C′, such that the character
of c1 is the same as the character of c2, e1 is the goal of c1, and e2 is the goal of c2, if
e1 negates e2, non-deterministically order c1 before c2 or vice versa and for all s1 ∈c1
and all s2 ∈c2, O′ = O′ ∪{s1 < s2} or O′ = O′ ∪{s2 < s1}.
5. Recursive invocation. Call IPOCL (⟨S′, B′, O′, L′, C′⟩, F ′, Λ).
• Motivation planning
1. Goal selection. Select an open motivation ﬂaw f = ⟨c⟩from F. Let p be the condition
of c. Let F ′ = F −{f}.
2. Operator selection. Same as causal planning above, except
∀si ∈c, O′ = O′ ∪{sadd < si}.
3. Frame discovery. Same as for causal planning, above.
4. Threat resolution. Same as for causal planning, above.
5. Recursive invocation. Call IPOCL (⟨S′, B′, O′, L′, C′⟩, F ′, Λ).
• Intent planning
1. Goal selection. Select an intent ﬂaw f = ⟨s, c⟩from F. Let F ′ = F −{f}.
2. Frame selection. Let O′ = O. Non-deterministically choose to do one of the following.
– Make s part of c. Let sm be the motivating step of c. O′ = O′ ∪{sm < s}. For all
ci ∈C such that ci is ordered with respect to c, then for all si ∈ci, O′ = O′ ∪{si < s}
or O′ = O′ ∪{s < si}. For each spred ∈S such that ⟨spred, p, q, s⟩∈L and spred and
s have the same character, create an intent ﬂaw f = ⟨spred, c⟩and let F ′ = F ′ ∪{f}.
– Do not make s part of c.
3. Recursive invocation. Call IPOCL (⟨S, B, O′, L, C⟩, F ′, Λ).
Figure 5: The IPOCL algorithm.
236

Narrative Planning: Balancing Plot and Character
s1 (a2)
f1: Frame of commitment for a1 with goal ga1
s2 (a1)
s3 (a2)
s4 (a2)
Intention level
Domain level
p3
ga2
f2: Frame of commitment 
for a2 with goal ga2
intends(a2, ga2)
Figure 6: An IPOCL plan where one character is contracted out by another character.
Condition 1 indicates that if two actions, sj and sadd, are to be performed by the same
character and the earlier action, sadd, establishes some condition in the world required
for the later action, sj, then a reasonable hypothesis is that both were part of the same
intention. The intent ﬂaw on the earlier action indicates that the planner must, at some
point, decide whether to support this hypothesis by incorporating the actions into the
same interval of intentionality or to reject the hypothesis by leaving the plan structure
unchanged. Condition 2 indicates the situation where an agent requires a certain world
state to be achieved to make its intentional actions feasible and this sub-goal is contracted
out (e.g., Grosz & Kraus, 1996) to another agent. This occurs when a motivating action
to be performed by one character causes another character to have an intention that is in
service of the ﬁrst character’s actions, as illustrated in Figure 6. Character a1 is to perform
action s1 in pursuit of goal ga1. Action s1 has a single precondition that is satisﬁed by an
action s3 performed by character a2 in pursuit of goal ga2. Action s2 is the motivating action
that causes character a2 to have the goal to establish the precondition of step s1. Since the
motivating step is to be performed by character a1, it is a candidate under Condition 2 to
be incorporated into the frame of commitment of a1.
Once frame discovery takes place, the planner must resolve any threats that were inad-
vertently introduced into the reﬁned plan. There are two types of threats: causal threats
and intentional threats.
The standard POCL means of detecting and correcting causal
threats is used (see Section 3). Intentional threats occur when a newly instantiated frame
of commitment, ck, has an internal character goal that negates the internal character goal
of some other frame of commitment ci for the same character. Character actions in the
fabula plan may be unordered with respect to one another and this allows for intervals of
intentionality that are interleaved. While it is possible for an agent – or character – to
hold conﬂicting desires, it is not rational for an agent to concurrently commit to conﬂicting
desires (Bratman, 1987). In the case that a character has two frames with goals that negate
each other, IPOCL corrects intentional threats by non-deterministically constraining the
ordering of ci and ck. The ordering of frames of commitment amounts to explicitly ordering
the actions that are part of each frame to correspond to the ordering of ci and ck. For more
complicated cases in which the goals of ci and ck do not negate each other but in which
plans causally interfere with each other, IPOCL relies on standard causal threat resolution
to either order the action sequences of each plan while leaving the frames unordered, or
237

Riedl & Young
to force the algorithm to backtrack. Some cases will not be identiﬁed or repaired without
additional semantic and contextual reasoning.
4.3.2 Motivation Planning in IPOCL
The motivation planning portion of the IPOCL algorithm is responsible for ensuring that
characters in the story world are motivated. A motivating step is a plan step in which one
of its eﬀects causes a character to commit to a goal. Repairing an open motivation ﬂaw
consists of non-deterministically ﬁnding a plan step with eﬀect intends(a, ga) – either by
choosing an existing plan step or by instantiating an action schema and explicitly ordering
that step before the plan steps that are part of the frame of commitment.
Motivation
planning is similar to causal planning except instead of establishing a causal link between
two plan steps, it establishes a motivation link between a motivating step and a frame of
commitment. Additionally, the motivating step for a frame of commitment is explicitly
ordered before all other steps in the frames interval of intentionality. In the work presented
here, a character agent cannot begin pursuing a character goal before it has committed to
the goal. Motivation planning involves frame discovery and threat resolution phases that
are identical to causal planning.
4.3.3 Intent Planning in IPOCL
The intent planning portion of the IPOCL algorithm determines interval membership for
all character actions except those that are ﬁnal steps for their intervals of intentionality.
Intent planning repairs intent ﬂaws. An intent ﬂaw is a decision point that asks whether
a plan step s should be made part of the interval of some frame of commitment c. Unlike
other ﬂaws that are repaired by reﬁning the structure of the plan, intent ﬂaws are resolved
by non-deterministically choosing one of the following:
• Make step s part of the interval of c and reﬁne the plan structure to reﬂect the
association.
• Do not make step s part of the interval of c, remove the ﬂaw annotation, and leave
the plan structure unchanged.7
When the former is chosen, step s becomes part of the interval of intentionality of frame
c. When this choice is made, the interval of frame c is updated appropriately and s is
explicitly ordered after the motivating step of frame c. Furthermore, the change in the
step’s membership status can have an eﬀect on the membership of plan steps that precede
s. Let spred be an establishing step of s – a step that precedes s and is causally linked to
s. The inclusion of step s in the interval of frame c also makes it possible for establishing
steps to be included in the interval of c if the following conditions hold:
• Step spred is to be performed by the same character as s.
7. Because an intent ﬂaw can be addressed by not making any revisions to the plan structure, an intent
ﬂaw is not strictly a ﬂaw in the conventional sense. However, for the purpose of maintaining consistency
with existing revision mechanisms, we ﬁnd it useful to treat an intent ﬂaw as a ﬂaw up until the point
that it is repaired.
238

Narrative Planning: Balancing Plot and Character
• Step spred is not a part of the interval of intentionality of c.
• The intent ﬂaw, f = ⟨spred, c⟩has not already been proposed and/or resolved.8
Intent ﬂaws are created for each establishing step for which all three conditions hold. In-
tent planning thus operates in a spreading activation fashion. When one step becomes a
member of a frame of commitment, an entire sequence of establishing steps may follow.
This approach is necessary since frames of commitment can be created at any time during
plan reﬁnement. Intent ﬂaws are not standard ﬂaws in the sense that they mark a potential
ﬂaw instead of an actual ﬂaw. We cannot determine at the time an action is instantiated
whether it is necessary for that action to be part of an interval of intentionality. The frame
of commitment it should belong to may not have been discovered yet, or it may not yet have
been discovered that the action can be part of a frame of commitment due to adjacency
requirements.
The propagation of intent ﬂaws makes it possible for plan steps to become members of
more than one frame of commitment, which is a desirable property of the IPOCL algorithm.
Every time a character action – belonging to one frame of commitment – is used to satisfy
an open condition of a successor action that belongs to a diﬀerent frame of commitment, the
system must non-deterministically decide whether the establishing action belongs to both
frames of commitment or remains only a member of its original frame. The decision about
interval membership also constrains the possible ordering of motivating steps for the frames
of commitment involved because motivating steps are temporally ordered before all actions
in the frame of commitment that the motivating step establishes. When a step becomes a
member of more than one frame of commitment, the possible placement of motivating steps
is constrained as in Figure 7 because the motivating step must occur before the earliest step
in a frame of commitment.
One thing we have not yet discussed is how to handle orphans. An orphan is a step in
the plan that does not belong to any interval of intentionality. Orphans are surreptitiously
repaired when they are adopted into intervals of intentionality. This can happen when they
causally establish conditions necessary for other, intentional actions.
Orphaned actions
cannot be repaired directly because frames of commitment are discovered opportunistically
instead of instantiated in a least-commitment approach (as plan steps are). If there are
orphans remaining that have not been surreptitiously repaired by the time the planning
process completes, then the planner must backtrack.
4.4 An Example
The IPOCL algorithm is illustrated by the following story about an arch-villain who bribes
the President of the United States with a large sum of money.
The example traces a
single path through the fabula plan search space generated by IPOCL. The initial plan
node contains only the initial state step and goal situation step. The initial state contains
propositions describing the state of the world before the story begins. The goal situation
contains a single proposition, corrupt(President), which describes what must be diﬀerent
8. The inclusion of this condition ensures the systematicity of the algorithm since there can be more than
one causal link between spred and s. A search algorithm is systematic if it is guaranteed to never duplicate
a portion of the search space.
239

Riedl & Young
f1: Frame of commitment for a
s8
s7
s2
Intention level
Domain level
f2: Frame of commitment for a
s5
s4: Pickup (a, gun)
s3: Load (a, gun)
s1: Shoot (a, deer, gun)
s2: Rob (a, bank, gun)
Intention level
Domain level
s9
Figure 7: An IPOCL plan with overlapping intervals of intentionality for a single character.
about the world after the story is complete. The story that will be generated by IPOCL is,
in eﬀect, the story about how the President becomes corrupt.
The goal proposition corrupt(President) is non-deterministically established by in-
stantiating a new character action, Bribe(Villain, President, $), which states that the
Villain character will bribe the President character with some money. The Bribe action
was chosen because it has corrupt(President) as an eﬀect. From the planners perspec-
tive, the Bribe action is causally motivated by the open condition of the goal situation.
Upon instantiation of the Bribe action, frame discovery is invoked. The eﬀects of the Bribe
action are:
• corrupt(President) – the President is corrupt.
• controls(Villain, President) – the Villain exerts control over the President.
• has(President, $) – the President has the money.
• ¬has(Villain, $) – the Villain does not have the money.
From the audience’s perspective, any of these eﬀects can be a reason why the Villain per-
forms the actions in the story.
The planner non-deterministically chooses controls(Villain, President) as the char-
acter goal for the Villain character. Note that in this case the goal of the Villain diﬀers from
the outcome of the story although the same action satisﬁes both conditions. There is no
reason why the planner could not have chosen corrupt(President) as the character goal
for the Villain. It is assumed here that either the plan cannot be completed if the alterna-
tive is chosen or that some heuristic function has evaluated all options and determined that
villains are more likely to want control over the President than anything else. Given the
choice made, the planner constructs a frame of commitment for the Villain character and
240

Narrative Planning: Balancing Plot and Character
Frame of commitment for Villain with goal 
controls(vil, prez)
init
Intention level
Domain level
intends(vil, controls(vil, prez))
goal
corrupt(prez)
Bribe (vil, prez, $)
has(vil, $)
Figure 8: Example narrative plan after discovering the one action and corresponding frame
of commitment.
makes the Bribe action the ﬁnal step in the frame’s interval of intentionality. Even with
the new frame of commitment, the plan is still ﬂawed since there is no reason for the Villain
character to have the goal of controlling the President. That is, the Villain needs to form
the intention to appear believable to the audience. An open motivation ﬂaw indicates that
some action in the plan must satisfy the condition intends(Villain, controls(Villain,
President)) on the frame of commitment.
Since there are no other frames of commitment for the Villain, no intent ﬂaws occur.
The Bribe action, however, has a precondition has(Villain, $) that becomes an open
condition; the Villain character must have the money if he is to bribe the President with
it. The planner chooses to repair the open motivation ﬂaw on the single frame of commit-
ment ﬁrst and non-deterministically chooses the initial state to satisfy the open motivation
condition. This illustrates a situation where the intention of a character in the story world
is encoded as part of the initial conditions. While it does not have to be this way, the
domain engineer that speciﬁed the inputs to IPOCL has decided that no further motivation
for the Villain to want to control the President is needed. While this may not be the most
satisfactory solution, it is a valid solution. The partial plan at this point is shown in Figure
8.
The open condition has(Villain, $) on the Bribe action is considered next. To repair
this ﬂaw, the planner non-deterministically instantiates a new character action Give(Hero,
Villain, $) in which the Hero character gives the Villain the money. The planner must
consider, from the audience’s, perspective, why the Hero character gives the money to the
Villain. The planner inspects the eﬀects of the Give action:
• has(Villain, $) – the Villain has the money.
• ¬has(Hero, $) – the Hero does not have the money.
The planner non-deterministically chooses has(Villain, $) as the goal that the Hero is
attempting to achieve. A new frame of commitment for the Hero’s goal is created. Note
that the Hero’s intention matches the open condition that the Give action was instantiated
to satisfy. This indicates that the Hero’s commitment is in service to the Bribe action.
An open motivation ﬂaw is created that corresponds to the new frame of commitment.
There are many actions that will establish the Hero’s intention that the Villain has the
money: the Villain might persuade the Hero if they are friends, or the Villain might coerce
241

Riedl & Young
Frame of commitment for Villain with goal 
controls(vil, prez)
init
Intention level
Domain level
Frame of commitment for Hero 
with goal has(vil, $)
Coerce (vil, hero, (has vil $))
Give (hero, vil, $)
intends(vil, controls(vil, prez))
Bribe (vil, prez, $)
has(vil, $)
goal
corrupt(prez)
has(hero, $)
has(vil, $)
Figure 9: Solution IPOCL plan graph for the example narrative.
the Hero. The latter, Coerce(Villain, Hero, has(Villain, $)), is chosen by the plan-
ner: the Villain character coerces the Hero character into having the goal has(Villain,
$).
At this point, the planner must determine why the Villain coerces the Hero. There
are several possibilities. First, frame discovery comes into play to determine if the Villain
intends any of the eﬀects of the Coerce action. Assume the only eﬀect of the Coerce action
is intends(Hero, has(Villain, $)). The planner can select this eﬀect and construct a
new frame of commitment specifying that the Villain intends that the Hero intends that
the Villain has the money. Another option is to leave the Coerce action an orphan for the
time being. Let us suppose that this is the course that the planner chooses. A search of the
current plan structure indicates that the Coerce action can be part of the Villain’s existing
commitment to control the President. This is possible because Coerce is a motivating step
for the Hero’s frame of commitment and the Heros frame of commitment is in service to the
Bribe action, which is part of the Villain’s frame of commitment. An intent ﬂaw associating
the Coerce action with the Villain’s existing frame of commitment is created. Eventually,
the spreading activation of intent planning will associate Coerce with the Villain’s frame of
commitment. The plan structure at this point is shown in Figure 9. Any remaining ﬂaws
are handled by conventional causal planning.
4.5 Complexity of the IPOCL Algorithm
The computational complexity of the IPOCL algorithm is O(c(b(e + 1)a)n), where
• n is the depth of the search space,
• b is the number of ways that an action can be instantiated (e.g., the number of
permutations of legal parameter bindings),
• e is the number of eﬀects of an instantiated action, and
• a is the number of actors in an instantiated action.
242

Narrative Planning: Balancing Plot and Character
The worst-case branching factor of the IPOCL search space is b(e + 1)a. The factor,
(e + 1) signiﬁes that if a new frame of commitment is being constructed, the planner must
choose between the e eﬀects of the action (plus one to signify the condition where no eﬀect
is chosen). The exponent a reﬂects the fact that if multiple characters are intentionally
participating in an action, then each of those characters can have distinct intentions for
performing that action. For example, the action Marry(?groom, ?bride, ?place) has six
eﬀects (see the Appendix for the action schema) and two intentional actors (?groom and
?bride).
The depth of the IPOCL search space n is the number of open condition ﬂaws, open
motivation ﬂaws, intent ﬂaws, causal threats, and intentional threats that are repaired. In
the worst-case, for every newly instantiated step in the plan IPOCL also creates a new
frame of commitment and a corresponding open motivation ﬂaw. If nPOCL is the depth
of a solution in the search space of POCL planning problem and nIPOCL is the depth of
the corresponding solution in the search space on an IPOCL fabula planning problem, then
nIPOCL is bounded by the function nIPOCL = 2nPOCL.
A narrative was generated for evaluation purposes (see Section 5). The narrative, ren-
dered into natural language, is given in Figure 13 and the plan data structure is presented
graphically in the Appendix (Figure 15). This complete fabula plan exists at a depth of
n = 82. The average branching factor for this domain is ∼6.56, with the worst branching
factor for any given node being 98. The node with 98 children is the ﬁrst ﬂaw that the
planner solves for: married(Jafar, Jasmine), which is solved by instantiating the action
Marry(Jafar, Jasmine, ?place). The operator schema has six eﬀects. The two char-
acters are both intentional actors meaning there can be up to two frames of commitment
generated. Finally, the parameter ?place can be bound in two ways. Note that our im-
plementation of IPOCL uses constraint propositions to generate a child node for each legal
permutation of parameter bindings. When we provide a domain-speciﬁc heuristic evalua-
tion function that favors plan structures with certain preferred character goals (for example,
“Jafar intends that Jasmine is dead” is not included), then the complete plan is generated
in approximately 12.3 hours (approximately 11.6 hours were spent in garbage collection)
on an Intel Core2 Duo 3GHz system with 3GB of RAM and 100GB of virtual memory
running Allegro CL
R
⃝8.0. Under these conditions, IPOCL generates 1,857,373 nodes and
visits 673,079 nodes. When the algorithm is run with only a domain-independent heuristic
adopted from classical planning (e.g., number of ﬂaws plus plan length), the problem cannot
be solved before the system runs out of virtual memory. The Appendix gives details on the
domain, fabula planning problem, and heuristic used.
Practical experience with the IPOCL algorithm suggests that better heuristic evaluation
functions are needed to guide the search process. Without suﬃcient heuristic functions, the
behavior of IPOCL devolves to nearly breadth-ﬁrst. Practical experience with the algorithm
also suggests that it is diﬃcult to write heuristic functions that practically distinguish
between sibling nodes. The problem of deﬁning heuristic functions that distinguish between
sibling nodes in the plan search space arises in all POCL algorithms, but is exacerbated in
IPOCL due to the increased number of structural features that need to be distinguished.
243

Riedl & Young
4.6 Limitations and Future Work
As an algorithm that solves the fabula generation problem, IPOCL has been demonstrated
to generate sound narrative structures that support believability through the enforcement
of character intentions. IPOCL is able to achieve this by eﬀectively decoupling the concept
of character intentions from those of author intentions. Consequently, intentionality of char-
acter actions must be opportunistically discovered at the time that actions are discovered.
The opportunistic discovery of character intentions during action instantiation signiﬁcantly
increases the branching factor to the detriment of the ability to generate long narratives.
However, we feel that opportunistic discovery of intentions is a vital part of expanding the
space of narratives that can be searched to include those that have logical causal progression
and also have well-motivated and thus more believable characters. An alternative is to use a
grammar (cf., Rumelhart, 1975), hierarchical task networks (cf., Sacerdoti, 1977), or other
form of hierarchical decomposition (cf., Young, Pollack, & Moore, 1994) such that inten-
tions are dealt with at one level of abstraction and speciﬁc character actions dealt with at
the primitive level. However, using grammars, HTNs, or other decompositional techniques
to generate narrative requires reasoning at higher levels of abstraction than the action and
introduces potentially rigid top-down structuring of plot that can limit the system’s ability
to ﬁnd solutions that might exist but cannot be described by the grammar/task-network.
There are additional limitations that need to be addressed. First, while the IPOCL
algorithm asserts that all non-happening character actions must be part of a frame of
commitment, and therefore motivated by an event (or the initial state), IPOCL also assumes
that each frame of commitment’s interval of intentionality terminates in an action that
successfully achieves the goal of the frame of commitment. Essentially, every character acts
according to an intention and every intention is achieved. This inherently limits the types
of narratives that can generated.
For example, narratives in which a character tries to
achieve a goal but fails several times before ﬁnally succeeding are unlikely. Narratives in
which one character – a hero – defeats another – a villain – cannot be generated. Although,
it is possible to generate a narrative in which the villain ﬁrst achieves his goal and then the
hero achieves his goal (thus defeating the villain).
The inability to consider actions that support intentions that are never achieved ap-
pears to be an inherent limitation of our partial-order planning approach. In particular,
the backward-chaining nature of the algorithm biases the approach toward explaining ac-
tions. To ensure soundness, causal threats are eliminated or backtracking occurs. It is
possible that a forward-chaining approach could resolve this issue, but only at the expense
of promiscuous intention generation. One way to force the algorithm to consider narrative
structures in which one character defeats another or in which a character fails several times
before succeeding is to seed the plan space with intermediate author goals indicating sets
of states through which all solutions must pass (Riedl, 2009). This approach, however,
presupposes that the human author knows, wants, or can predict some of the resultant
narrative structure.
As mentioned in Section 4.3.1, IPOCL currently only has weak mechanisms to detect
or prevent contradictory intentions for a character. Better heuristics may help control for
the situations that are not resolved through ordering of actions or ordering of frames of
244

Narrative Planning: Balancing Plot and Character
commitment. It is possible to extend the algorithm to include common-sense reasoning or
semantic analysis at the frame of commitment level. However, this work has not been done.
In general, better heuristics are needed. Heuristics can be divided into domain-dependent
and domain-independent heuristics.
Domain-dependent heuristics, in this case, refer to
those that employ knowledge about the characters, setting, or preferences over the narra-
tive structure. For example, to generate the example in Figure 13, we use a heuristic that
penalizes narratives that contain character goals that we thought unreasonable based on our
intuitions about characters and the types of stories that we sought. Domain-independent
heuristics are more diﬃcult to identify but might include preferences for fewer frames of
commitment with longer action sequences. Domain-independent heuristics that can reward
narrative structures with dramatic arc will likely require complex models of narrative psy-
chology such as those described by Gerrig and colleagues (Gerrig, 1993; Gerrig & Bernardo,
1994) and implemented by Fitzgerald, Kahlon, and Riedl (2009) and may not work on
intermediate, incomplete narratives.
5. An Evaluation of Character Intentionality in IPOCL-Generated
Fabula Plans
In order to perform an empirical evaluation of a reader’s perception of character intention-
ality in IPOCL-generated fabulas, we designed an objective evaluation procedure based on
question-answering in order to reveal a readers understanding of character intentions with-
out the use of subjective questionnaires (Riedl & Young, 2005). The goal of the evaluation
was to determine if IPOCL-generated fabulas supported the cognitive processes that read-
ers apply to comprehend character actions better than fabulas generated by conventional
planning algorithms. The evaluation procedure is outlined as follows. Two planning-based
algorithms were used to generate plans to be interpreted as fabulas: the IPOCL algorithm
and a conventional POCL planning algorithm. Each planner was provided identical initial-
ization parameters. The ﬁrst plan generated by each algorithm was selected to be presented
to study participants. Because the plans must be read, a simple natural language generation
process was used to produce natural language text from each fabula plan. Recall that the
purpose of a fabula plan is not to be executed by a plan execution system, but to contain
temporal event information to be told as a story. Participants were recruited and randomly
assigned to one of two groups. Participants in the POCL group read the POCL-generated
narrative text. Participants in the IPOCL group read the IPOCL-generated narrative text.
A variation of the question-answering protocol from the work of Graesser et al. (1991) was
used to elicit participants’ mental models of the narratives. In particular, we focused on
“why” questions that elicit understanding of story world character goals and motivations.
How do we evaluate question-answering performance across groups? QUEST (Graesser
et al., 1991) takes a graphical representation of a story and reliably predicts the question-
answering performance of a human who might also read the story. One of the implicit
assumptions behind QUEST is that it has been provided a well-structured story that has
contained within the story’s narrative structure all the answers to any question one might
ask about character goals and motivations. We exploit that assumption as a means of mea-
suring how well a story actually supports a human reader’s reasoning about character goals
and motivations. That is, if a story does not support human comprehension, we should see
245

Riedl & Young
Once there was a Czar who had three lovely daughters. One day the three daughters
went walking in the woods. They were enjoying themselves so much that they forgot
the time and stayed too long.
A dragon kidnapped the three daughters.
As they
were being dragged oﬀ, they cried for help. Three heroes heard the cries and set oﬀ
to rescue the daughters.
The heroes came and fought the dragon and rescued the
maidens.
Then the heroes returned the daughters to their palace.
When the Czar
heard of the rescue, he rewarded the heroes.
Figure 10: An example story from the work of Graesser et al. (1991).
this manifested in human question-answering performance. QUEST knowledge structures
can be translated into fabula plans and vice versa (Christian & Young, 2004). From QUEST
knowledge structures automatically generated from fabula plans, we run QUEST to predict
question-answering performance and compare QUEST predictions to actual performance.
We expect to see that IPOCL-generated narratives are more understandable than the alter-
native; we should ﬁnd a greater correspondence between QUEST and actual performance
in the IPOCL condition than we ﬁnd in the POCL condition.
5.1 The QUEST Model of Question-Answering
The QUEST model (Graesser et al., 1991) accounts for the goodness-of-answer (GOA)
judgments for questions asked about passages of prose. One application of the QUEST
model is to show that people build cognitive representations of stories they read that capture
certain relationships between events in a story and the perceived goals of the characters in
the story (Graesser et al., 1991). QUEST knowledge structures can be represented visually
as directed graphs with nodes referring to either story events (typically character actions)
or character goals. Directed links capture the relationship between story event nodes in
terms of causality and the relationship between events and character goals in terms of
intentionality. A reader’s cognitive representation of the story is queried when the reader
answers questions about the story. The types of questions supported by the QUEST model
are: why, how, when, enablement, and consequence. For example, the story in Figure 10
(Graesser et al., 1991, Fig. 1) has the corresponding QUEST knowledge structure shown
in Figure 11 (Graesser et al., 1991, Fig. 2). There are two types of nodes in the QUEST
knowledge structure: event nodes, which correspond to occurrences in the story world,
and goal nodes, which correspond to goals that characters have. The links between nodes
capture the diﬀerent types of relationships between events and character goals.
• Consequence (C): The terminal event node is a consequence of the initiating event
node.
• Reason (R): The initiating goal node is the reason for the terminal goal node.
• Initiate (I): The initiating event node initiates the terminal goal node.
• Outcome (O): The terminal event node is the outcome of the initiating goal node.
• Implies (Im): The initiating event node implies the terminal event node.
246

Narrative Planning: Balancing Plot and Character
GOAL 10
Daughters get 
help
GOAL 12
Daughters cry
EVENT 11
Daughters got 
help
EVENT 13
Daughters 
cried
O
O
R
C
EVENT 14
Heroes heard 
cries
C
GOAL 15
Heroes rescue 
daughters
EVENT 16
Heroes 
rescued 
daughters
GOAL 17
Heroes fight 
dragon
EVENT 18
Heroes 
fought dragon
GOAL 19
Heroes go to 
daughters and 
dragon
EVENT 20
Heroes came 
to daughters 
and dragon
R
R
C
C
O
O
O
I
Im
I
I
C
Figure 11: An example of a QUEST model of the Czar and the Daughters story from
Graesser et al. (1991).
The QUEST model deﬁnes arc search procedures for each type of question (e.g. why, how,
when, enablement, and consequence). The arc search procedures, starting at the queried
node, distinguish between legal answer nodes and illegal answer nodes. That is, only nodes
reachable by the arc search procedures are legal answer nodes. The legality of answers and
the weight of structural distance correspond to GOA judgments of human story readers.
5.2 Procedure
The procedure involves comparing subject question-answering performance to QUEST
question-answering predictions in two conditions. The POCL condition is based on nar-
rative structures generated by a conventional POCL planning algorithm. The IPOCL con-
dition is based on narrative structures generated by the IPOCL algorithm. Both planners
were initialized with identical information deﬁning a story world.
The story world was
based loosely on the story of Aladdin. The initial parameters included the following:
• An initial state that deﬁnes the story world, including (a) locations, (b) objects, (c)
characters, and (d) the relevant initial relationships between all of the above. Story
world characters include Aladdin, King Jafar, Princess Jasmine, a dragon, and a genie.
• A library of operators deﬁning the events that can be performed by story world
characters.
• An outcome: Jasmine and Jafar are married and the genie is dead.
Note that even though the initialization parameters were identical in both conditions,
there are diﬀerences in how the respective planners handle the parameters. In particular,
IPOCL makes use of additional information in action schemata about actors and whether
an action can be a happening. The POCL planner ignored this information, which did not
impact its ability to ﬁnd a valid solution. The initialization information used by IPOCL
but ignored by the POCL planner are as follows. First, all operators must specify which of
247

Riedl & Young
the parameters are the intentional actors (and not characters being acted upon). Second,
some operators are tagged as happenings. Finally, some operators have eﬀects of the form
intends(a, p) where a is a variable that can be bound to a ground symbol representing
a character, and p is a variable that can be bound to a literal that becomes one of the
character’s internal goals.
Eﬀects of this form are used by the IPOCL implementation
during motivation planning to ensure there are actions that cause frames of commitment.
Since no operators have preconditions of this form, the POCL planner does not utilize
this information. The Appendix lists the entire set of initialization parameters used in the
evaluation.
The fabula plans generated by the two planning algorithms are shown in the Appendix.
For the plans to be human-readable, each plan was input into the Longbow discourse plan-
ner (Young et al., 1994). Longbow results in a plan consisting of communicative acts such
as describe-character and describe-event for conveying the temporally ordered infor-
mation of the narrative. The discourse plan steps were then rendered into natural language
using a simple template-matching procedure. The resulting narrative texts for the POCL
condition and IPOCL condition are shown in Figures 12 and 13, respectively. Similarities
between the two narratives make a comparison study possible. Speciﬁcally, the set of events
in the IPOCL-generated narrative are a superset of the events in the POCL-generated nar-
rative. There is one distinct action ordering diﬀerence between the two fabula plans: in
the IPOCL condition only the event where the King falls in love with Jasmine is tempo-
rally constrained to occur ﬁrst, but in the POCL condition the ordering of this event is
under-constrained and falls late in the text. In the POCL condition, had this event come
earlier, some participants may have inferred a relationship between the king falling in love
and Aladdin’s actions even though there is no actual relationship in the generated QUEST
graph. We believe that the ordering had an insigniﬁcant impact on the results.
The fabula plans were also converted to structures that QUEST can use to predict
question-answering performance. We use a procedure described by Christian and Young
(2004). Their algorithm for generating QUEST graph structures from a plan has been only
evaluated for POCL plans involving a single character.9 IPOCL plans, however, contain
additional structures such as frames of commitment and motivation links that are not part
of conventional plan representations. Consequently, the algorithm for generating a QUEST
graph structure from a plan was extended to take into consideration IPOCL plans. An
additional study by the authors (not reported) determined that QUEST knowledge struc-
tures derived from IPOCL plans with the extended algorithm signiﬁcantly predict question-
answering judgments when structural distance is ignored (p < 0.0005). The modiﬁcations
to Christian and Young’s (2004) algorithm are beyond the scope of this paper, but details
can be found in the work of Riedl (2004).
The evaluation involved a questionnaire in which participants read a story and then make
goodness-of-answer (GOA) judgments about pairs of question and answers. A question-
answer pair has a “why” question about an intentional action performed by a character in
the story and a possible answer. For example, the question, “Why did Aladdin slay the
9. Christian and Young (2004) compare DPOCL plans to QUEST knowledge structures.
DPOCL is a
decompositional, partial order causal link planning algorithm (Young et al., 1994) that extends the
conventional POCL algorithm by explicitly representing hierarchical relationships between abstract and
primitive planning operators.
248

Narrative Planning: Balancing Plot and Character
There is a woman named Jasmine. There is a king named Jafar. This is a story
about how King Jafar becomes married to Jasmine. There is a magic genie. This is
also a story about how the genie dies.
There is a magic lamp. There is a dragon. The dragon has the magic lamp. The
genie is conﬁned within the magic lamp.
There is a brave knight named Aladdin.
Aladdin travels from the castle to the mountains.
Aladdin slays the dragon.
The
dragon is dead.
Aladdin takes the magic lamp from the dead body of the dragon.
Aladdin travels from the mountains to the castle. Aladdin hands the magic lamp to
King Jafar.
The genie is in the magic lamp.
King Jafar rubs the magic lamp and
summons the genie out of it. The genie is not conﬁned within the magic lamp. The
genie casts a spell on Jasmine making her fall in love with King Jafar.
Jasmine is
madly in love with King Jafar. Aladdin slays the genie. King Jafar is not married.
Jasmine is very beautiful. King Jafar sees Jasmine and instantly falls in love with her.
King Jafar and Jasmine wed in an extravagant ceremony.
The genie is dead. King Jafar and Jasmine are married. The end.
Figure 12: Text of story in control condition.
There is a woman named Jasmine. There is a king named Jafar. This is a story
about how King Jafar becomes married to Jasmine. There is a magic genie. This is
also a story about how the genie dies.
There is a magic lamp. There is a dragon. The dragon has the magic lamp. The
genie is conﬁned within the magic lamp.
King Jafar is not married. Jasmine is very beautiful. King Jafar sees Jasmine and
instantly falls in love with her. King Jafar wants to marry Jasmine. There is a brave
knight named Aladdin. Aladdin is loyal to the death to King Jafar. King Jafar orders
Aladdin to get the magic lamp for him. Aladdin wants King Jafar to have the magic
lamp. Aladdin travels from the castle to the mountains. Aladdin slays the dragon.
The dragon is dead. Aladdin takes the magic lamp from the dead body of the dragon.
Aladdin travels from the mountains to the castle. Aladdin hands the magic lamp to
King Jafar.
The genie is in the magic lamp.
King Jafar rubs the magic lamp and
summons the genie out of it. The genie is not conﬁned within the magic lamp. King
Jafar controls the genie with the magic lamp.
King Jafar uses the magic lamp to
command the genie to make Jasmine love him. The genie wants Jasmine to be in love
with King Jafar. The genie casts a spell on Jasmine making her fall in love with King
Jafar. Jasmine is madly in love with King Jafar. Jasmine wants to marry King Jafar.
The genie has a frightening appearance. The genie appears threatening to Aladdin.
Aladdin wants the genie to die. Aladdin slays the genie. King Jafar and Jasmine wed
in an extravagant ceremony.
The genie is dead. King Jafar and Jasmine are married. The end.
Figure 13: Text of story in experimental condition.
dragon?” might be paired with the answer, “Because King Jafar ordered Aladdin to get
the magic lamp for him.” The participants were asked to rate the goodness of the answer
for the given question on a four-point scale ranging from “Very bad answer” to “Very good
answer.” The participants were shown examples of a question-answer pairs before the rating
task began, but were not otherwise given a deﬁnition of “good” or “poor” or trained to make
the judgment. Participants rated the GOA of a question-answer pair for every combination
249

Riedl & Young
of goal nodes in the QUEST knowledge structure for the story.
The POCL condition
questionnaire had 52 question-answer pairs while the IPOCL condition questionnaire had
82 question-answer pairs due to the increased story plan length. Participants were asked to
read the story text completely at least once before proceeding to the ratings task and were
allowed to refer back to the original text at any time during the rating task.
For each narrative, QUEST was used to predict whether question-answer pairs would
be considered as “good” or “poor” based on the arc search procedure following forward
reason arcs, backward initiate arcs, and backward outcome arcs (Graesser et al., 1991).
The hypotheses of the experiment were as follows.
Hypothesis 1 Participants in the IPOCL condition will have higher mean GOA judg-
ment ratings for question-answer pairs identiﬁed by QUEST as being “good” than
participants in the POCL condition.
Hypothesis 2 Participants in the IPOCL condition will have lower mean GOA judg-
ment ratings for question-answer pairs identiﬁed by QUEST as being “poor” than
participants in the POCL condition.
If the actual question-answering performance of participants results in statistically higher
GOA ratings for question-answer pairs judged by QUEST to be “good,” then there is greater
correspondence between QUEST predictions and actual performance. Likewise, if actual
question-answering performance of participants results in statistically lower GOA ratings
for question-answer pairs judged by QUEST to be “poor,” then there is greater correspon-
dence between QUEST predictions and actual performance. Poor correspondence between
QUEST predictions and actual question-answering performance is an indication that a nar-
rative lacks structure that supports human understanding of character goals, intentions,
and motivations.
Thirty-two undergraduate students in the Computer Science program at North Carolina
State University participated in the study. All participants were enrolled in the course Game
Design and Development and were compensated for their time with ﬁve extra credit points
on their ﬁnal grade in the course.
5.3 Results and Discussion
Each question-answer pair in each questionnaire was assigned a “good” rating or a “poor”
rating based on the QUEST prediction. “Good” question-answer pairs were assigned a value
of 4 and “poor” question-answer pairs were assigned a value of 1. Human GOA ratings of
question-answer pairs were also assigned values from 1 to 4 with 1 corresponding to “Very
poor answer” and 4 corresponding to “Very good answer.”
The results of participants’
answers to questionnaire answers are compiled into Table 1. The numbers are the mean
GOA ratings for each category and each condition. The numbers in parentheses are stan-
dard deviations for the results. Mean human question-answering performance is more in
agreement with QUEST when the mean GOA ratings for question-answer pairs categorized
as “good” is closer to 4 and the mean GOA ratings for question-answer pairs categorized
as “poor” is closer to 1.
A standard one-tailed t-test was used to compare the mean GOA rating of “good”
question-answer pairs in the IPOCL condition to the mean GOA rating of “good” question-
250

Narrative Planning: Balancing Plot and Character
Condition
Mean GOA rating for “good”
question-answer pairs
(standard deviation)
Mean GOA rating for “poor”
question-answer pairs
(standard deviation)
IPOCL
3.1976 (0.1741)
1.1898 (0.1406)
POCL
2.9912 (0.4587)
1.2969 (0.1802)
Table 1: Results of the evaluation study.
answer pairs in the POCL condition. The result of the t-test with 15 degrees of freedom
yields t = 1.6827 (p < 0.0585).
This result is strongly suggestive that Hypothesis 1 is
supported.
A standard one-tailed t-test was used to compare the mean GOA rating of “poor”
question-answer pairs in the IPOCL condition to the mean GOA rating of “poor” question-
answer pairs in the POCL condition. The result of the t-test with 15 degrees of freedom
yields t = 1.8743 (p < 0.05). Participants in the IPOCL condition had signiﬁcantly lower
GOA ratings for “poor” question-answer pairs than participants in the POCL condition.
Hypothesis 2 is supported.
It is interesting to note that the standard deviation for results in the POCL condition for
“good” question-answer pairs was high. Further analysis reveals that human participants
are likely to judge a question-answer pair as “good” if there is lack of evidence against
the possibility that the character action might have been intentional. We speculate that
reader/viewers simultaneously consider multiple hypotheses explaining character behavior
until they are disproved.
Regardless of the content of any communicative act, one will
always be able to provide a more or less plausible explanation of the meaning (Sadock,
1990).
There were a couple of limitations to note. We did not control for narrative length.
It is possible that the eﬀects we measured were a result of narrative length instead of im-
proved narrative structure generated by IPOCL. We believe this to be unlikely, but future
evaluations should add “ﬁller sentences” to the POCL condition narrative that do not im-
pact character intentionality so that the control narrative matches the length of the IPOCL
condition.
According to the narrative comprehension theories of Graesser et al. (1994)
and Trabasso and colleagues (Trabasso & Sperry, 1985; Trabasso & van den Broek, 1985),
such ﬁller sentences will not be included in the reader’s mental model in a meaningful way
because they will not be causally related to other concepts in the mental model of the
narrative. Consequently, we felt that it was safe to leave the ﬁller sentences out. Another
limitation is that the model of discourse used in the Longbow discourse planner was sim-
plistic. Speciﬁcally, explicit statements about character intentions were incorporated into
the narrative text in the experimental condition due to an overly promiscuous discourse
model used by the Longbow discourse planner. We believe that our results would be the
same if these explicit statements were excluded because human readers are very good at
inferring intentions from stories (Graesser et al., 1991, 1994). However, to be complete we
would have to control for such artifacts from discourse generation.
We conclude that there is strong evidence that the narrative in the experimental condi-
tion supported reader comprehension of character goals, intentions, and motivations better
than the narrative in the control condition. Since both were generated from identical initial-
251

Riedl & Young
ization parameters, the most signiﬁcant independent variable is the generation algorithm.
We infer that the improvement of the IPOCL condition over the POCL condition is due
to enhancements to the automated story generation capability introduced in the IPOCL
algorithm.
6. Conclusions
The objective of the research presented here is to develop an approach to the generation
of narrative fabula that has the properties of supporting audience perception of character
intentionality and causal plot progression. An informal analysis of related work suggests
that narrative generation systems can be categorized as using simulation-based or delibera-
tive approaches. Simulation-based approaches tend to produce narratives with reasonable
character believability but are unlikely to produce narrative with globally coherent plots.
This is due to the fact that simulation-based approaches model characters and attempt to
optimize character decisions in any given moment. Thus simulation-based approaches are
prone to local maxima. Deliberative approaches reviewed in this article do not directly con-
sider character intentions but are otherwise more likely to produce narratives with causally
coherent plot progressions. This is due to the fact that deliberative narrative generation
systems tend to reason about the entire plot instead of separately about characters. In our
informal analysis, we did not see any evidence that a deliberative system cannot reliably pro-
duce narrative structures with character believability (especially character intentionality).
We use a reﬁnement search approach to construct the entire fabula from the perspective of
the author. Our approach is consequently a deliberative one. We favor reﬁnement search
because partial-order plans appear to be a good representation for the fabula of a narrative.
In our analysis, algorithms that solve the planning problem are not suﬃcient for generat-
ing narratives with character intentionality because planning algorithms are conventionally
designed to provide a singular agent with the ability to achieve a singular goal. Stories
are more likely than not to involve multiple agents – characters – who are not necessarily
cooperating to achieve a singular goal state. Accordingly, we developed a deliberative fab-
ula generation algorithm that reasons about the understandability of characters from the
perspective of a hypothetical audience. The IPOCL fabula generation algorithm treats any
potential solution as ﬂawed unless the audience is capable of understanding what individual
(and potentially conﬂicting) goals each character has and what motivated the characters
to adopt those goals throughout the progression of the narrative. IPOCL contains rou-
tines for repairing character intentionality ﬂaws by non-deterministically attributing goals
to characters and then generating event sequences that motivate those goals.
In adopting the approach to narrative generation in the IPOCL algorithm, we realize
several limitations. First, IPOCL is incapable of producing narrative structures in which
a character fails to achieve their goals.
Character failure of this sort is a natural part
of most stories and is especially important in comedy and tragedy (Charles et al., 2003).
Unfortunately, planners do not produce plans that fail – e.g. cannot execute to completion
– because the planner will prune that branch of the search space and backtrack. Conﬂict
can arise between characters when characters adopt contradictory goals. However, each
character will succeed in achieving their goal, although this will happen serially because
conﬂicting frames of commitment will be temporally ordered. Second, in our work to date,
252

Narrative Planning: Balancing Plot and Character
we have assumed that fabula and sjuzet can be reasoned about distinctly. That is, once
a fabula is generated indicating what a narrative is about, a separate process can reason
about how the narrative should be told. This may suﬃce for simple telling of generated
narratives. Intuitively, in order to achieve more sophisticated eﬀects on an audience such
as suspense, one might have to consider how a narrative can be told while the generator is
determining what should be told.
We believe that the work reported here represents a step towards achieving greater ca-
pability in computer systems to generate ﬁctional narratives for communication, entertain-
ment, education, and training. It is an incremental step, building from established artiﬁcial
intelligence technologies – planning – and cognitive science principles. Non-subjective em-
pirical evidence suggests that we have achieved improvement in narrative generation over
alternative, conventional planners. Furthermore, we believe we have created a framework on
which we can continue to make incremental improvements to narrative generation capabili-
ties. For example, we have been able to incorporate the ability to handle folk psychological
models of character personality (Riedl & Young, 2006). A system that can generate stories
is capable of adapting narrative to the user’s preferences and abilities, has expanded replay
value, and is capable of interacting with the user in ways that were not initially envisioned
by system designers. Narrative generation is just one example of how instilling computa-
tional systems with the ability to reason about narrative can result in a system that is more
capable of communicating, entertaining, educating, and training.
253

Riedl & Young
Appendix A.
This appendix contains details about the Aladdin planning domain used for the evaluation,
including planning problem speciﬁcation, heuristics, complete diagrams for the plans gen-
erated and their accompanying QUEST diagrams, and a partial trace generated during the
creation of the Aladdin narrative.
A.1 Planning Problem Speciﬁcation for the Study
The POCL planning algorithm used in the evaluation study and our implementation of the
IPOCL algorithm use PDDL-like formulations. A problem describes the initial world state
and the goal situation. The operator library contains operator schemata. In the evaluation
study, the POCL planning algorithm and IPOCL algorithm were given the same inputs.
Note however that some parts of the inputs are not used by the POCL algorithm.
The following propositions deﬁne the initial state:
character(aladdin)
male(aladdin)
knight(aladdin)
at(aladdin, castle)
alive(aladdin)
single(aladdin)
loyal-to(aladdin, jafar)
character(jafar)
male(jafar)
king(jafar)
at(jafar, castle)
alive(jafar)
single(jafar)
character(jasmine)
female(jasmine)
at(jasmine, castle)
alive(jasmine)
single(jasmine)
beautiful(jasmine)
character(dragon)
monster(dragon)
dragon(dragon)
at(dragon, mountain)
alive(dragon)
scary(dragon)
character(genie)
monster(genie)
genie(genie)
in(genie, lamp)
conﬁned(genie)
alive(genie)
scary(genie)
place(castle)
place(mountain)
thing(lamp)
magic-lamp(lamp)
has(dragon, lamp)
The following propositions deﬁne the outcome situation:
married-to(jafar, jasmine)
¬alive(genie)
The following action schemata were provided in the operator library for the evalua-
tion study. Note the deviations from conventional PDDL. Constraints indicate immutable
propositions that must always be true. Constraints function like preconditions except that
they can only be satisﬁed by the initial state and no operators can negate a proposition
that is used as a constraint in an operator schema. The actors slot lists the parameters
that refer to the actors that intend the operation; we do not assume that the ﬁrst param-
eter is always the intentional actor. Further, when there is more than one actor listed, the
operator is a joint operation, meaning that the operator can only be accomplished by that
many actors working as a team and that all actors intend one of the eﬀects of the operator.
When happening is true, the operator is a is allowed to remain an orphan. Some operators
have eﬀects of the form intends(?x, ?c) indicating that the eﬀect of one of the characters
bound to ?x has an intention to achieve the literal bound to ?c. There are no operators that
have preconditions of that form; intention propositions are exclusively used by the IPOCL
algorithm implementation.
254

Narrative Planning: Balancing Plot and Character
Action: travel (?traveller, ?from, ?dest)
actors: ?traveller
constraints: character(?traveller), place(?from), place(?dest)
precondition: at(?traveller, ?from), alive(?traveller), ?from̸=?dest
eﬀect: ¬at(?traveller, ?from), at(?traveller, ?dest)
Action: slay (?slayer, ?monster, ?place)
actors: ?slayer
constraints: knight(?slayer), monster(?monster), place(?place)
precondition: at(?slayer, ?place), at(?monster, ?place), alive(?slayer), alive(?monster)
eﬀect: ¬alive(?monster)
Action: pillage (?pillager, ?body, ?thing, ?place)
actors: ?pillager
constraints: character(?pillager), character(?body), thing(?thing), place(?place)
precondition: at(?pillager, ?place), at(?body, ?place), has(?body, ?thing),
¬alive(?body), alive(?pillager), ?pillager̸=?body
eﬀect: ¬has(?body, ?thing), has(?pillager, ?thing)
Action: give (?giver, ?givee, ?thing, ?place)
actors: ?giver
constraints: character(?giver), character(?givee), thing(?thing), place(?place)
precondition: at(?giver, ?place), at(?givee, ?place), has(?giver, ?thing),
alive(?giver), alive(?givee), ?giver̸=?givee
eﬀect: ¬has(?giver, ?thing), has(?givee, ?thing)
Action: summon (?char, ?genie, ?lamp, ?place)
actors: ?char
constraints: character(?char), genie(?genie), magic-lamp(?lamp), place(?place)
precondition: at(?char, ?place), has(?char, ?lamp), in(?genie, ?lamp),
alive(?char), alive(?genie), ?char̸=?genie
eﬀect: at(?genie, ?place), ¬in(?genie, ?lamp), ¬conﬁned(?genie), controls(?char, ?genie, ?lamp)
Action: love-spell (?genie, ?target, ?lover)
actors: ?genie
constraints: genie(?genie), character(?target), character(?lover)
precondition: ¬conﬁned(?genie), ¬loves(?target, ?lover), alive(?genie), alive(?target), alive(?lover),
?genie̸=?target, ?genie̸=?lover, ?target̸=?lover
eﬀect: loves(?target, ?lover), intends(?target, married-to(?target, ?lover))
Action: marry (?groom, ?bride, ?place)
actors: ?groom, ?bride
constraints: male(?groom), female(?bride), place(?place)
precondition: at(?groom, ?place), at(?bride, ?place), loves(?groom, ?bride), loves(?bride, ?groom),
alive(?groom), alive(?bride)
eﬀect: married(?groom), married(?bride), ¬single(?groom), ¬single(?bride),
married-to(?groom, ?bride), married-to(?bride, ?groom)
255

Riedl & Young
Action: fall-in-love (?male, ?female, ?place)
actors: ?male
happening: t
constraints: male(?male), female(?female), place(?place)
precondition: at(?male, ?place), at(?female, ?place), single(?male), alive(?male), alive(?female),
¬loves(?male, ?female), ¬loves(?female, ?male), beautiful(?female)
eﬀect: loves(?male, ?female), intends(?male, married-to(?male, ?female))
Action: order (?king, ?knight, ?place, ?objective)
actors: ?king
constraints: king(?king), knight(?knight), place(?place)
precondition: at(?king, ?place), at(?knight, ?place), alive(?king), alive(?knight),
loyal-to(?knight, ?king)
eﬀect: intends(?knight, ?objective)
Action: command (?char, ?genie, ?lamp, ?objective)
actors: ?char
constraints: character(?char), genie(?genie), magic-lamp(?lamp)
precondition: has(?char, ?lamp), controls(?char, ?genie, ?lamp), alive(?char), alive(?genie),
?char̸=?genie
eﬀect: intends(?genie, ?objective)
Action: appear-threatening (?monster, ?char, ?place)
actors: ?monster
happening: t
constraints: monster(?monster), character(?char), place(?place)
precondition: at(?monster, ?place), at(?char, ?place), scary(?monster), ?monster̸=?char
eﬀect: intends(?char, ¬alive(?monster))
As mentioned in Section 4.5, we required domain-dependent and domain-independent
heuristics to generate the example fabula shown in Figure 13 (the plan structure diagram
is shown in Figure 15). In IPOCL, heuristics evaluate a plan node and return an integer
such that solutions are evaluated to 0 and the higher the number the farther the plan node
is from being a solution. We used two heuristic functions whose return values were added
together.
• Domain-independent heuristic
– 1 for each action
– 1 for each ﬂaw
– 10 for each frame of commitment if there is more than one frame per character
– 1000 for orphans to be performed by characters for which there are no frames of
commitment
• Domain-dependent heuristic
– 5000 for repeat actions
– 5000 for frames of commitment for character-goal combinations that are not on
the following lists:
256

Narrative Planning: Balancing Plot and Character
∗Aladdin intends has(king, lamp), ¬alive(genie), ¬alive(dragon), has(hero,
lamp), or married-to(hero, jasmine)
∗Jafar intends married-to(jafar, jasmine)
∗Jasmine intends married-to(jasmine, jafar), or married-to(jasmine,
jafar)
∗Genie intends loves(jasmine, jafar), loves(jafar, jasmine), loves(aladdin,
jasmine), or loves(jasmine, jafar)
– 1000 if the action marry is not associated with two frames of commitment
A.2 Plan Diagrams and QUEST Structures for the Study
The subsequent ﬁgures show the plan diagrams and corresponding QUEST structures for
fabula generated for the evaluation.
• Figure 14: a fabula plan automatically generated by a POCL planning algorithm for
the POCL condition of the evaluation study.
• Figure 15: a fabula plan automatically generated by our IPOCL algorithm implemen-
tation for the IPOCL condition on the evaluation study.
• Figure 16: the QUEST structure corresponding to the fabula plan for the POCL
condition of the evaluation study.
• Figure 17: the QUEST structure corresponding to the fabula plan for the IPOCL
condition of the evaluation study.
In Figures 14 and 15, solid boxes represent actions in the plan structure (where the last
action is the goal step). Solid arrows represent causal links and the associated text is both
an eﬀect of the preceding action and a precondition of the successive action. Dashed arrows
are temporal constraints found by the planning algorithm, indicating a necessary temporally
ordering between two actions added due to promotion or demotion strategies for resolving
causal threats. In Figure 15, ovals are frames of commitment and horizontal dashed lines
represent membership of actions in frames of commitment.
257

Riedl & Young
Travel (A, castle, mount)
Slay (A, D, mount)
Pillage (A, D, lamp, mount)
Travel (A, mount, castle)
Give (A, K, lamp, castle)
Summon (K, G, lamp, castle)
Love-Spell (G, K, J)
Slay (A, G, castle)
Fall-In-Love (K, J, castle)
Marry (K, J, castle)
Goal: married(K, J), ¬alive(G)
at(A, mount)
at(A, mount)
at(A, mount)
¬alive(D)
at(A, castle)
at(A, castle)
has(K, lamp)
¬confined(G)
love(J, K)
loves(J, K)
married(K, J)
¬alive(G)
at(G, castle)
Key:
A: Aladdin
J: Jasmine
K: King Jafar
D: Dragon
G: Genie
Figure 14: Fabula plan representation of the story used in the POCL condition of the
evaluation study.
258

Narrative Planning: Balancing Plot and Character
Travel (A, castle, mount)
Slay (A, D, mount)
Pillage (A, D, lamp, mount)
Travel (A, mount, castle)
Give (A, K, lamp, castle)
Summon (K, G, lamp, castle)
Love-Spell (G, K, J)
Slay (A, G, castle)
Fall-In-Love (K, J, castle)
Marry (K, J, castle)
Goal: married(K, J), ¬alive(G)
at(A, mount)
at(A, mount)
at(A, mount)
¬alive(D)
at(A, castle)
at(A, castle)
has(K, lamp)
¬confined(G)
loves(J, K)
loves(J, K)
married(K, J)
¬alive(G)
at(G, castle)
Order (K, A, castle, (has K lamp))
King intends married(K, J)
intends(K, married(K, J))
Aladdin intends has(K, lamp)
intends(K, married(K, J))
Aladdin intends 
¬alive(G)
Appear-Threat (G, A, castle)
at(A, castle)
at(G, castle)
intends(A, ¬alive(G))
Genie intends 
loves(J, K)
Command (K, G, castle, (loves J K))
controls(K, G)
intends(G, loves(J, K))
Jasmine intends 
married(J, K)
intends(J, married(J, K))
Figure 15: Fabula plan representation of the story used in the experimental IPOCL of the
evaluation study.
259

Riedl & Young
GOAL 3
Aladdin slay 
Dragon
GOAL 1
Aladdin 
travel to 
mountain
EVENT 4
Aladdin slew 
Dragon
EVENT 2
Aladdin 
traveled to 
mountain
O
O
R
C
C
GOAL 5
Aladdin 
pillage lamp 
from Dragon
EVENT 6
Aladdin 
pillaged lamp 
from Dragon
O
R
C
GOAL 7
Aladdin 
travel to 
castle
EVENT 8
Aladdin 
traveled to 
castle
O
GOAL 9
Aladdin give 
lamp to King
EVENT 10
Aladdin gave 
lamp to King
O
R
C
R
R
C
C
GOAL 11
King 
summon 
Genie
EVENT 12
King 
summoned 
Genie
O
GOAL 13
Genie cast 
love-spell
EVENT 14
Genie cast 
love-spell
O
C
GOAL 15
Aladdin slay 
Genie
EVENT 16
Aladdin slew 
Genie
O
C
GOAL 18
King marry 
Jasmine
EVENT 20
King and 
Jasmine 
married
O
GOAL 19
Jasmine 
marry King
O
C
EVENT 17
King fell in 
love with 
Jasmine
C
C
Figure 16: The QUEST knowledge structure for the story plan from the POCL condition.
260

Narrative Planning: Balancing Plot and Character
GOAL 6
Aladdin slay 
Dragon
GOAL 4
Aladdin 
travel to 
mountain
EVENT 7
Aladdin slew 
Dragon
EVENT 5
Aladdin 
traveled to 
mountain
O
O
R
C
GOAL 8
Aladdin 
pillage lamp 
from Dragon
EVENT 9
Aladdin 
pillaged lamp 
from Dragon
O
R
C
GOAL 10
Aladdin 
travel to 
castle
EVENT 11
Aladdin 
traveled to 
castle
O
GOAL 12
Aladdin give 
lamp to King
EVENT 13
Aladdin gave 
lamp to King
O
R
C
R
R
C
C
GOAL 19
Genie cast 
love-spell
EVENT 20
Genie cast 
love-spell
O
GOAL 23
King marry 
Jasmine
EVENT 25
King and 
Jasmine 
married
O
GOAL 24
Jasmine 
marry King
O
EVENT 1
King fell in 
love with 
Jasmine
C
GOAL 14
King 
summon 
Genie
GOAL 2
King order 
Aladdin to 
get lamp
EVENT 15
King 
summoned 
Genie
EVENT 3
King ordered 
Aladdin to 
get lamp
O
O
R
C
GOAL 17
King 
command 
Genie to cast
EVENT 18
King 
commanded 
Genie to cast
R
C
O
GOAL 21
Aladdin slay 
Genie
EVENT 22
Aladdin slew 
Genie
O
EVENT 16
Genie 
appeared 
frightening
I
R
I
C
C
I
I
C
C
C
C
C
Figure 17: The QUEST knowledge structure for the story plan from the IPOCL condition.
261

Riedl & Young
A.3 Trace
The following is a portion of a trace generated by IPOCL initialized with the above fabula
planning problem speciﬁcation and heuristic. The trace focuses on the generation of some
of the nodes in the plan space that contribute to the ﬁnal solution (shown graphically in
Figure 15).
plan0
reason: initial plan
now working on: open condition married-to(jafar, jasmine) on step goal
children: 98 (visited 2; selecting 9)
plan 9
reason: created new step 1: marry(jafar, jasmine, castle) to solve married-to(jafar, jasmine)
now working on: open motivation intends(jafar, married-to(jafar, jasmine)) on frame 2
children: 9 (visited 2; selecting 105)
plan 105
reason: created new step 2: fall-in-love(jafar, jasmine, castle) to solve
intends(jafar, married-to(jafar, jasmine))
now working on: open motivation intends(jasmine, married-to(jasmine, jafar)) on frame 1
children: 3 (visited 1; selecting 122)
plan 122
reason: created new step 3: love-spell(genie, jasmine, jafar) to solve
intends(jasmine, married-to(jasmine, jafar))
now working on: open motivation intends(genie, loves(jasmine, jafar)) on frame 3
children: 8 (visited 2; selecting 141)
plan 141
reason: created new step 4: command(jafar, genie, lamp, loves(jasmine, jafar)) to solve
intends(genie, loves(jasmine, jafar))
now working on: open condition alive(genie) on step 4
children: 1 (visited 1; selecting 197)
...
plan 591
reason: created new step 6: give(aladdin, jafar, lamp, castle) to solve has(jafar, lamp)
now working on: open motivation intends(aladdin, has(jafar, lamp)) on frame 4
children: 4 (visited 2; selecting 4675)
plan 4675
reason: created new step 7: order(jafar, aladdin, castle, has(jafar, lamp)) to solve
intends(aladdin, has(jafar, lamp))
now working on: open condition loyal-to(aladdin, jafar) on step 7
children: 1 (visited 1; selecting 21578)
...
plan 21597
reason: created new step 8: pillage(aladdin, dragon, lamp, mountain) to solve has(aladdin, lamp)
now working on: open condition alive(aladdin) on step 8
children: 1 (visited 1; selecting 21653)
262

Narrative Planning: Balancing Plot and Character
...
plan 1398116
reason: created new step 12: slay(aladdin, genie, castle) to solve ¬alive(genie)
now working on: causal threat on alive(genie) between 0 and 3, clobbered by step 12
children: 1 (visited 1; selecting 1398282)
...
plan 1398289
reason: created new step 13: appear-threatening(genie, aladdin, mountain) to solve
intends(aladdin, ¬alive(genie))
now working on: open condition scary(genie) on step 13
children: 1 (visited 1; selecting 1398304)
...
plan 1398364
reason: adoption of step 4 by frame 2: jafar intends married-to(jafar, jasmine)
now working on: intent ﬂaw for aladdin, to possibly link step 8 to frame 4: aladdin intends
has(jafar, lamp)
children: 2 (visited 2; selecting 1398368)
plan 1398368
reason: adoption of step 8 by frame 4: aladdin intends has(jafar, lamp)
now working on: intent ﬂaw for aladdin, to possibly link step 10 to frame 4: aladdin intends
has(jafar, lamp)
children: 2 (visited 2; selecting: 1398376)
...
plan 1398384
reason: no adoption of step 2 by frame 2: jafar intends married-to(jafar, jasmine)
now working on: intent ﬂaw for jasmine, to possibly link step 12 to frame 1: jasmine intends
married-to(jasmine, jafar)
children: 2 (visited 2; selecting 1398400)
...
plan 1398576
reason: adoption of step 7 by frame 2: jafar intends married-to(jafar, jasmine)
now working on: intent ﬂaw for aladdin, to possibly link step 9 to frame 4: aladdin intends
has(jafar, lamp)
children: 2 (visited 1; selecting 1398640)
plan 1398640
reason: adoption of step 9 by frame 4: aladdin intends has(jafar, lamp)
solution found
263

Riedl & Young
