arXiv:2301.01026v4  [cs.LG]  10 Apr 2023
Continual Causal Effect Estimation: Challenges and Opportunities
Zhixuan Chu1, Sheng Li2
1Ant Group, Hangzhou, China
2University of Virginia, Charlottesville, USA

Introduction
A further understanding of cause and effect within obser-
vational data is critical across many domains, such as eco-
nomics, health care, public policy, web mining, online ad-
vertising, and marketing campaigns. Although signiﬁcant
advances have been made to overcome the challenges in
causal effect estimation with observational data, such as
missing counterfactual outcomes and selection bias between
treatment and control groups, the existing methods mainly
focus on source-speciﬁc and stationary observational data.
In particular, such learning strategies assume that all obser-
vational data are already available during the training phase
and from only one source.
Along with the fast-growing segments of industrial appli-
cations, this assumption is unsubstantial in practice. Taking
Alipay as an example, which is one of the world’s largest
mobile payment platforms and offers ﬁnancial services to
billion-scale users, a tremendous amount of data contain-
ing much privacy-related information is produced daily and
collected from different sources. In the following, we fur-
ther elaborate this problem by two points. The ﬁrst one is
based on the characteristics of observational data, which are
incrementally available from non-stationary data distribu-
tions. For instance, the electronic ﬁnancial records for one
marketing campaign are growing every day and they may
be collected from different cities or even other countries.
This characteristic implies that one cannot have access to
all observational data at one time point and from one sin-
gle source. The second reason is based on the realistic con-
sideration of accessibility. For example, when new observa-
tional data are available, one may want to reﬁne the pre-
viously trained model using both the new data and orig-
inal data. However, it is likely that the original training
data are no longer accessible due to a variety of reasons,
e.g., legacy data may be unrecorded, proprietary, the sen-
sitivity of ﬁnancial data, too large to store, or subject to
privacy constraints of personal information
(Zhang et al.
2020). This practical concern of accessibility is ubiquitous
in various academic and industrial applications. That’s what
it boiled down to in the era of big data, we face new
challenges in causal inference with observational data. We
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
ﬁrst presented the continual causal effect estimation prob-
lem in (Chu, Rathbun, and Li 2020a), in which we discussed
three desired properties of continual causal inference frame-
works, i.e., the extensibility for incrementally available ob-
servational data, the adaptability for various data sources in
new domains, and the accessibility for an enormous amount
of data.
In this position paper, we formally deﬁne the problem of
continual treatment effect estimation, describe its research
challenges, and then present possible solutions to this prob-
lem. Moreover, we will discuss future research directions on
this topic.
Related Work
Instead of randomized controlled trials, observational
data is obtained by the researcher simply observing
the subjects without any interference. It means that the
researchers have no control over the treatment assign-
ments, and they just observe the subjects and record
data based on observations (Yao et al. 2021; Chu et al.
2023a). Therefore, from the observational data, directly
estimating the treatment effect is challenging due to the
missing counterfactual outcomes and the existence of
confounders. Recently, powerful machine learning methods
such as tree-based methods (Athey and Imbens 2016;
Wager and Athey 2018), representation learning (Li and Fu
2017; Shalit, Johansson, and Sontag 2017; Yao et al. 2018;
Chu, Rathbun, and Li 2022), meta-learning (K¨unzel et al.
2019;
Nie and Wager
2021),
and
generative
models
(Louizos et al.
2017;
Yoon, Jordon, and van der Schaar
2018) have achieved prominent progress in treatment effect
estimation.
In addition, the combination of causal inference and
other research ﬁelds also exhibits complementary strengths,
such as computer vision (Tang et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2022a),
graph learning (Ma et al. 2022; Chu, Rathbun, and Li 2021),
natural language processing (Feder et al. 2022; Liu et al.
2022b), and so on. The involved causal analysis helps im-
prove the model’s capability of discovering and resolving
the underlying system beyond the statistical relationships
learned from observational data.

Problem Deﬁnition
Suppose that the observational data contain n units collected
from d different domains, and Dd = {(x, y, t)|x ∈X, y ∈
Y, t ∈T } denotes the dataset collected from the d-th do-
main, which contains nd units. Let X denote all observed
variables, Y denote the outcomes in the observational data,
and T be a binary variable. Let D1:d = {D1, D2, ..., Dd}
be the combination of d datasets, separately collected from
d different domains. For d datasets {D1, D2, ..., Dd}, they
have the commonly observed variables, but due to the fact
that they are collected from different domains, they usually
have different distributions with respect to X, Y , and T in
each dataset. Each unit in the observational data received
one of two or multiple treatments. Let ti denote the treat-
ment assignment for unit i; i = 1, ..., n. For binary treat-
ments, ti = 1 is for the treatment group and ti = 0 for the
control group. The outcome for unit i is denoted by yi
t when
treatment t is applied to unit i. For observational data, only
one of the potential outcomes is observed. The observed out-
come is called the factual outcome, and the remaining un-
observed potential outcomes are called counterfactual out-
comes.
The potential outcome framework has been widely
used for estimating treatment effects
(Rubin 1974;
Splawa-Neyman, Dabrowska, and Speed 1990). The indi-
vidual treatment effect (ITE) for unit i is the difference be-
tween the potential treated and control outcomes and is de-
ﬁned as:
ITEi = yi
1 −yi
0.
(1)
The average treatment effect (ATE) is the difference be-
tween the mean potential treated and control outcomes,
which is deﬁned as:
ATE = 1
n
n
X
i=1
(yi
1 −yi
0).
(2)
The success of the potential outcome framework is based
on the following assumptions (Imbens and Rubin 2015),
which ensure that the treatment effect can be identiﬁed.
Assumption 1 Stable Unit Treatment Value Assumption
(SUTVA): The potential outcomes for any unit do not vary
with the treatments assigned to other units, and, for each
unit, there are no different forms or versions of each treat-
ment level, which lead to different potential outcomes.
Assumption 2 Consistency: The potential outcome of treat-
ment t is equal to the observed outcome if the actual treat-
ment received is t.
Assumption 3 Positivity: For any value of x, treatment as-
signment is not deterministic, i.e.,P(T = t|X = x) > 0, for
all t and x.
Assumption 4 Ignorability: Given covariates, treatment
assignment is independent of the potential outcomes, i.e.,
(y1, y0) ⊥⊥t|x.
The goal of continual treatment effect estimation is to
estimate the causal effect of treatments for all available data,
including new data Dd and the previous data D1:(d−1), with-
out having access to previous data D1:(d−1).
Research Challenges
Existing causal effect inference methods, however, are un-
able to deal with the aforementioned new challenges in con-
tinual treatment effect estimation, i.e., extensibility, adapt-
ability, and accessibility. Although it is possible to adapt ex-
isting treatment effect estimation methods to cater to these
issues, these modiﬁed methods still have inevitable defects.
Three straightforward adaptation strategies are described as
follows:
1. If we directly apply the model previously trained based
on original data to new observational data, the perfor-
mance on new tasks will be very poor due to the domain
shift issues among different data sources;
2. Suppose we utilize newly available data to re-train the
previously learned model for adapting changes in the
data distribution. In that case, old knowledge will be
completely or partially overwritten by the new one,
which can result in severe performance degradation on
old tasks. This is the well-known catastrophic forgetting
problem (McCloskey and Cohen 1989; French 1999);
3. To overcome the catastrophic forgetting problem, we
may rely on the storage of old data and combine the old
and new data together, and then re-train the model from
scratch. However, this strategy is memory inefﬁcient and
time-consuming, and it brings practical concerns such as
copyright or privacy issues when storing data for a long
time (Samet, Miri, and Granger 2013).
Any of these three strategies, in combination with the exist-
ing causal effect inference methods, is deﬁcient.
Potential Solution
To address the continual treatment effect estimation prob-
lem, we propose a Continual Causal Effect Representation
Learning framework (CERL) for estimating causal effect
with incrementally available observational data. Instead of
having access to all previous observational data, we only
store a limited subset of feature representations learned from
previous data. Combining selective and balanced represen-
tation learning, feature representation distillation, and fea-
ture transformation, our framework preserves the knowl-
edge learned from previous data and updates the knowledge
by leveraging new data so that it can achieve the continual
causal effect estimation for incrementally new data without
compromising the estimation capability for previous data.
In the following, we will brieﬂy describe the design of our
CERL framework. More technical details of CERL are pre-
sented in (Chu et al. 2023b).
Framework Overview. To deal with the incrementally
available observational data, the framework of CERL is
mainly composed of two components: (1) the baseline
causal effect learning model is only for the ﬁrst available
observational data, and thus we don’t need to consider the
domain shift issue among different data sources. This com-
ponent is equivalent to the traditional causal effect estima-
tion problem; (2) the continual causal effect learning model
is for the sequentially available observational data, where
we need to handle more complex issues, such as knowledge

transfer, catastrophic forgetting, global representation bal-
ance, and memory constraint.
Baseline Causal Effect Learning Model. We ﬁrst train
the baseline causal effect learning model for the initial obser-
vational dataset and then bring in subsequent datasets. The
task on the initial dataset can be converted to a traditional
causal effect estimation problem. Owing to the success
of deep learning for counterfactual inference, we propose
to learn the selective and balanced feature representations
(Shalit, Johansson, and Sontag 2017; Chu, Rathbun, and Li
2020b) for units in treatment and control groups and then
infer the potential outcomes based on learned representation
space.
Sustainability of Model Learning. To avoid catastrophic
forgetting when learning new data, we propose to preserve
a subset of lower-dimensional feature representations rather
than all original covariates. We can also adjust the number of
preserved feature representations according to the memory
constraint.
Continual Causal Effect Learning. We have stored mem-
ory and the baseline model. To continually estimate the
causal effect for incrementally available observational data,
we incorporate feature representation distillation and feature
representation transformation to estimate the causal effect
for all seen data based on a balanced global feature repre-
sentation space.
Research Opportunities
Although signiﬁcant advances have been made to over-
come the challenges in causal effect estimation, real-world
applications based on observational data are always very
complicated. Unlike source-speciﬁc and stationary observa-
tional data, most real-world data are incrementally available
and from non-stationary data distributions. Signiﬁcantly, we
also face the realistic consideration of accessibility. Our
work (Chu, Rathbun, and Li 2020a) might be the ﬁrst at-
tempt to investigate the continual causal inference prob-
lem, and we proposed the corresponding evaluation criteria.
However, constructing the comprehensive analytical tools
and the theoretical framework derived from this brand-new
problem requires non-trivial efforts. Speciﬁcally, there are
several potential directions for continual causal inference:
• In addition to the distribution shift of the covariates
among different domains, there are other potential tech-
nical issues for continual effect estimation: for example,
perhaps we do not initially observe all the necessary con-
founding variables and may get access to increasingly
more confounders.
• Compared with homogeneous treatment effects (e.g., the
magnitude and direction of the treatment effect are the
same for all patients, regardless of any other patient char-
acteristics), heterogeneous causal effects could differ for
different individuals. This could be another important as-
pect to consider for the continual treatment effect estima-
tion model.
• The basic assumptions for traditional causal effect esti-
mation may not be completely applicable. New assump-
tions may be supplemented, or previous assumptions
need to be relaxed.
• There exists a natural connection with continual domain
adaptation among different times or domains (“contin-
ual” causal inference) and between treatment and control
groups (continual “causal inference”).
• Compared to traditional causal effect estimation tasks
based on relatively small datasets, the continual causal
inference method will embrace high-performance com-
puting or cloud computing due to its ambitious objective.
• With the increasing public concern over privacy leakage
in data, federated learning, which collaboratively trains
the machine learning model without directly sharing the
raw data among the data holders, may become a potential
solution for continual causal inference.
