arXiv:2101.00250v1  [cs.IT]  1 Jan 2021
1
Interplay between RIS and AI in Wireless
Communications: Fundamentals, Architectures,
Applications, and Open Research Problems
Jinghe Wang1, Wankai Tang1, Yu Han1, Shi Jin1, Xiao Li1,
Chao-Kai Wen2, Qiang Cheng3, and Tie Jun Cui3
1National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory, Southeast University, Nanjing, China,

2Institute of Communications Engineering, National Sun Yat-sen University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan,

3State Key Laboratory of Millimeter Waves, Southeast University, Nanjing, China,

Abstract—Future wireless communication networks are ex-
pected to fulﬁll the unprecedented performance requirements to
support our highly digitized and globally data-driven society.
Various technological challenges must be overcome to achieve
our goal. Among many potential technologies, reconﬁgurable
intelligent surface (RIS) and artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) have
attracted extensive attention, thereby leading to a proliferation
of studies for utilizing them in wireless communication systems.
The RIS-based wireless communication frameworks and AI-
enabled technologies, two of the promising technologies for the
sixth-generation networks, interact and promote with each other,
striving to collaboratively create a controllable, intelligent, recon-
ﬁgurable, and programmable wireless propagation environment.
This paper explores the road to implementing the combination
of RIS and AI; speciﬁcally, integrating AI-enabled technologies
into RIS-based frameworks for maximizing the practicality of
RIS to facilitate the realization of smart radio propagation
environments, elaborated from shallow to deep insights. We begin
with the basic concept and fundamental characteristics of RIS,
followed by the overview of the research status of RIS. Then,
we analyze the inevitable trend of RIS to be combined with
AI. In particular, we focus on recent research about RIS-based
architectures embedded with AI, elucidating from the intelligent
structures and systems of metamaterials to the AI-embedded RIS-
assisted wireless communication systems. Finally, the challenges
and potential of the topic are discussed.
Index Terms—6G, metamaterials, reconﬁgurable intelligent
surface, artiﬁcial intelligence, smart radio propagation environ-
ment
I. INTRODUCTION
W
ITH the global standardization and commercialization
of the ﬁfth-generation (5G) networks by 2020, the
communication academia and industry are devoted to shaping
the next-generation communication system, which is the sixth-
generation (6G). The 6G networks will be able to fulﬁll
unprecedented performance requirements to make all through
hyper-connectivity involving humans and machines possible
and our society will be highly digitized and globally data-
driven by providing the ubiquitous and reliable wireless con-
nectivity [1]. On the one hand, typical frameworks of 5G, such
as enhanced mobile broadband (eMBB), ultra-reliable and low
latency communications (uRLLC), and massive machine-type
communications (mMTC) are expected to obtain continuous
improvement towards next generation [2]–[4]. On the other
hand, 6G yearns for ground breaking paradigm shifts. Ad-
vances in communications, high-resolution imaging and sens-
ing, accurate identiﬁcation and positioning, mobile robots and
drone techniques lead to the emergence of brand-new services
and applications; examples of these applications include, truly
immersive multisensory extended reality (XR) services, con-
nected robotics and autonomous systems, high-ﬁdelity mobile
hologram, wireless brain-computer interactions, blockchain,
and distributed ledger technologies, which extremely make
our daily life smoother and safer and signiﬁcantly improve
the enterprise and individual efﬁciency [5]–[8].
To realize these exciting applications, the performance re-
quirements of these services include a peak data rate of 1
Tbps and over-the-air latency of less than 100 휇s, raising
the typical peak data rate by orders-of-magnitude compared
with 5G and one-tenth the latency of 5G and, supporting
broadband connectivity at railway speeds up to 1000 km/h [9].
Considering the challenges for guaranteeing these performance
requirements, the way the data are collected, processed, trans-
mitted, and received over the 6G wireless system is expected
to be innovated or even redeﬁned. Following this trend, rather
than merely adapting to the communication environment for
acquiring better system performance by elaborately designing
the transmit or receive modules of the systems through large-
scale multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) [10], multiplex-
ing and diversity, beamforming, and precoding technologies
[11]–[13], which lack the adjustment of wireless propagation
environment in current 5G wireless networks, 6G networks
may have the vision of shaping the radio propagation environ-
ment towards their liking [14].
With the revolution in electromagnetic (EM) metamaterials
[15]–[19], the reconﬁgurable intelligent surface (RIS) has
received considerable attention in recent years due to its

2
unique characteristics of EM wave regulation, therefore rapidly
becoming a key instrument in realizing the intelligence of the
propagation environment. Based on RISs, 6G networks can
tailor the propagation paths of the signal. Such a transforma-
tive wireless concept of tailored radio propagation achieves
signiﬁcant developmental potential and application value. The
RISs can not only break through the half-wavelength limitation
of antenna spacing in wireless communication systems but also
gain the advantages of cost and energy efﬁciencies, according
to which, RISs can be spread over the whole city to promptly
establish smooth communication links, embracing everything
in internet-of-things (IoT). In addition to providing the sup-
plementary links and achieving the propagation environment
reconﬁguration, RISs can recycle EM waves, which can ef-
fectively reduce the power consumption for uninterrupted data
transmission. Smart radio propagation environments based on
RISs have the potential to provide ubiquitous and uninter-
rupted wireless connections in the most energy-efﬁcient way.
Besides RISs, artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) [20]–[22] has re-
ceived considerable attention and widespread recognition for
assisting wireless communication systems as early as 5G.
Moreover, AI has the potential to satisfy the performance of
future wireless communication networks and play a major role
in the link-level and system-level solutions of 6G. The RIS-
based wireless communication frameworks and AI-enabled
technologies, two of the promising technologies for future
wireless networks, interact and promote with each other,
striving to create a controllable, intelligent, reconﬁgurable,
and programmable wireless propagation environment. The
paradigm of conﬁguring IWPE is shown in Fig. 1. Therefore,
combining RIS and AI techniques is imperative. On this basis,
we explore, analyze, and overview the road to implementing
RIS architectures, which are integrated with AI in 6G wireless
networks.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The basic
concepts, fundamental characteristics, and research status of
RISs are presented in Section II. The inevitable trend of RIS
combined with AI is also thoroughly elucidated. A synopsis of
how AI can be embedded with RISs frameworks is provided
in Sections III to V. The intelligent structures of metamaterials
are introduced in Section III. The intelligent systems of
metamaterials are expounded in Section IV. The AI-embedded
RIS-assisted wireless communication systems are elaborately
discussed in Section V. Then, the challenges and potentials
related to the topic are provided and discussed in Section VI.
Finally, the conclusions are summarized in Section VII.
II. RECONFIGURABLE INTELLIGENT SURFACE
The future wireless networks tend to use high frequency
spectrum. Accordingly, the wireless propagation conditions
become tougher and more challenging because extreme pene-
tration losses and fewer scatterers lead to the channel sparsity
and rank deﬁciency and shortage of the available links between
the transmitter and the user. Meanwhile, the beam design of
high-frequency antenna arrays also becomes difﬁcult. Under
such conditions, RISs can be deployed and utilized to provide
supplementary links to improve the propagation environments
7UDQVPLWWHU
5HFHLYHU
,QWHOOLJHQW
:LUHOHVV
3URSDJDWLRQ
(QYLURQPHQW
5HFRQILJXUDEOH
,QWHOOLJHQW
6XUIDFH
$UWLILFLDO
,QWHOOLJHQFH
0HWKRGRORJ\
D
E
F
K
G
H
I
J
Fig. 1. Paradigm of conﬁguring an intelligent wireless propagation environ-
ment (IWPE) of 6G by RIS and AI. (a) and (b): Data ﬂow. (c), (d) and (h): AI
learns the environmental information to design the transmitter and receiver. (e)
and (f): AI conﬁgures the IWPE through RIS. (g): RISs interact with IWPE.
in a cost efﬁcient and energy efﬁcient way, which bring new
degrees of freedom for the system performance enhancement
[23]–[29]. In this section, we start from the fundamental
knowledge and characteristics of metamaterials, metasurfaces,
and RISs and then present the research status of RIS utilized
in wireless communications. Furthermore, the inevitable trend
of RIS to be combined with AI is also thoroughly explicated.
A. Metamaterial, metasurface, and RIS
Metamaterial, also called special media or new artiﬁcial EM
media, is not the material that can be naturally synthesized in
nature. In Fig. 2, the physical structure of the metamaterial
is created by imitating the lattice arrangement of atoms or
molecules in nature and periodically arranging the artiﬁcial
units of subwavelengths to interact with external EM ﬁelds
through resonant systems; accordingly, the metamaterial can
achieve unique macroscopic EM properties that natural mate-
rials do not possess. These EM properties, such as equivalent
permittivity and permeability, can be controlled by modifying
the shape, size, and arrangement of meta-atoms in space.
Such a new type of artiﬁcial EM medium can be applied to
effectively control the propagation behavior of EM waves and
bring about new physical phenomena.
During 2011 and 2012, the concept of metasurfaces was
ﬁrst proposed, and the generalized law of metasurfaces was
found in [30]. Thereafter, EM materials changed from 3D
objects towards planarization. The propagation characteristics
(including the reﬂection, refraction, and diffraction) of EM
waves can be effectively regulated by adjusting the amplitude
and phase distribution of the metasurface. However, the meta-
surface, which is solidiﬁed by the traditional EM material,
cannot regulate the EM wave in real time. In 2014, another
group of researchers developed metamaterials in the direction
of coding, digital, and programmable properties in [15]. The
phase response of the meta-atoms over the metasurface can
be encoded through PIN diodes and Field-Programmable Gate
Array (FPGA) into zero or one in real time, thus transferring

3
Unit 
cell
Biased 
diode
Substrate
Metal ground
Via hole
Metamaterial 
structure
DC
GS
V
MM
C
MM
L
LOSS
R
O
Metamaterial
Meta-atoms
Fig. 2. Physical structure of the metamaterial and its unit cell.
the design of metamaterial from the analog domain to the
digital domain, building a bridge between the EM world and
the information world, and further extending the concept of
information metamaterial.
RISs are concrete objects of information materials whose
structure and geometric arrangement of meta-atoms can be
reprogrammed according to the regulation of external signals.
Speciﬁcally, RISs apply electronic phase transition elements
(e.g. semiconductors or graphene) as switches or tunable re-
actance/ resistance elements between adjacent meta-atoms (or
intra single meta-atom) to adjust the properties of individual
meta-atom or the arrangement of a series of meta-atoms, thus
realizing the function of reprogramming and reconﬁguration.
This type of digital and real-time metamaterials has con-
structed many system-level applications that are difﬁcult to
achieve by traditional metamaterials, such as the space-time
coded digital communication system [31]–[33]and intelligent
imaging and sensing systems [34]–[37].
B. Fundamental characteristics of RIS
Researchers in wireless communication community pay
more attention to the characteristics of RISs at signal transmis-
sion level, such as how RISs can change and affect the signal
during the propagation period. Actually, by appropriately
conﬁguring the amplitude, phase, frequency, and polarization
characteristics of the meta-atoms, RISs are capable of achiev-
ing various prospective uses.
1) Amplitude: In time-domain, numerous sub-wavelength
sized meta-atoms with highly-controllable properties can be
jointly tuned to determine how the incident signal will be like
through the RIS. It has been already found in [38] that by
adjusting the amplitude characteristic of the RIS, the RIS can
absorb the undesirable signal (e.g. strong interference signals).
More speciﬁcally, within the designed frequency band, a unit
cell in the tunable metamaterial absorber presents superior
absorptivity covering a wide range of incident angles by
regulating the bias voltage on the varactor diodes.
2) Phase: By adjusting the phase characteristic of the RIS,
the spatial phase gradient is introduced so that the incident EM
wave is no longer along the direction of the mirror image, ac-
cording to which, both a single beam and multiple beams can
be formed with the reﬂected direction being controlled freely.
At present, the phase regulation characteristic is the most
utilized for solving the problems in wireless communications,
such as blind spots supplementary, wireless communication
links replenishment, system performance improvements, and
so on.
Firstly, RISs can provide supplementary links to com-
pensate severe path loss and the channel sparsity, enriching
the effective links between the base station (BS) and the
user. Meanwhile, reﬂection coefﬁcients, such as phase shift
matrix can be jointly optimized with active beamforming at
transmitters to improve the system performances including the
spectral/energy efﬁciency, received signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)
of the end-to-end link and so on. Secondly, by deploying RISs
around the destination, the reﬂected signal can be focused on
the particular spatial object by multi-beam focusing through
reﬂected elements, gaining the equivalent performance com-
pared to the conventional lens array. Moreover, an RIS can
be regarded as a low-cost and lightweight alternative to large-
scale MIMO systems with complex structures in millimeter-
wave (mmWave) wireless communication since the whole
system architecture possesses quite high hardware complexity
and cost, as well as high power consumption whether applying
analog beamforming or digital hybrid beamforming in large-
scale MIMO systems, leading to more complicated algorithms
and framework designs.
3) Frequency: The frequency domain regulation of the RIS
is to utilize the fast time-varying EM characteristics of RIS
to control the frequency spectrum distribution. Speciﬁcally,
EM waves can achieve non-linear spectrum shifts and allied
functions of radio frequency (RF) devices through the unique
EM response of RIS, similar to the application of mixer and
frequency multiplier. In this way, the spectrum characteristics
of the signal can be expanded and adjusted, and the harmonics
can be regarded as independent channels and control the
amplitude and phase independently, so that each harmonic can
transmit information independently, which taps the potential of
RIS in the frequency domain [39], [40].
4) Polarization: Besides, RISs can be deliberately designed
to be polarization-sensitive. In the applications of RISs, the
polarizations in different directions have varying amplitude
or phase responses with high isolation. Polarization in each
direction can be independently controlled through individual
interface in real time, and the waves can carry different

4
Outdoor
Indoor
BS
User
User
User
User
User
RIS
RIS
Fig. 3. RIS-assisted wireless communications for outdoor and indoor deployments.
information, which gains the potential of multiplexing. To
keep up with the surge studies of dual-polarized RISs [41]–
[43], we have ﬁrst explored the dual-polarized RIS-assisted
wireless communication system and evaluated its performance,
including ergodic spectral efﬁciency and optimal phase shift
design considering practical hardware imperfect of the RIS.
C. Research status of RIS-assisted wireless communication
RISs can be deployed in multiple scenarios in wireless
communication networks in outdoor and indoor environments.
In Fig. 3, RISs can provide extra links in the outdoor scenario
when the direct paths between the BS and the users are
blocked. In the indoor scenario, RISs can be regarded as a
lightweight solution to rapidly increase the system capacity.
Over the past several years, considerable tutorials and surveys
of RIS have emerged. In [14], a comprehensive overview of
smart propagation environments, RIS state-of-art research, RIS
research projects and future research road ahead has been
provided. In [44], a literature review of the framework and
application aspects of RIS has been presented. In [45], the sim-
ilarities, differences, advantages and disadvantages between
the RIS and active relays have been exhaustively discussed.
A comprehensive overview of RIS has been provided in [46],
wherein the fundamentals of RIS, recent research results,
challenges, and potential for future research have been elabo-
rated. In [47], a comprehensive tutorial on RISs for wireless
communication is provided. In the aforementioned research,
the channel modeling affected by the RIS implementation from
two aspects of channel distribution and large-scale path loss,
and challenges to be tackled in RIS optimization problems are
concentrated and discussed in detail.
The prototypes of RIS-based multi-stream transmitters have
also received great interest [31]–[33]. A novel RIS-based
wireless transmitter gains the comparable performance as the
conventional channel coding methods with cost-effective and
hardware-concise architecture without any ﬁlter, mixer, power
ampliﬁer, or RF chains. Moreover, path loss and channel mod-
eling is essential for practical deployments of RISs. In [48],
free-space path loss models under far/near ﬁeld beamforming
and near ﬁeld broadcasting scenarios have been proposed and
validated by solid numerical simulation results.
Performances enhancement is also one of the popular re-
search topics that has been extensively studied in RIS-based
wireless communication systems. Numerous papers empha-
size on the RIS phase shift design, especially joint active
beamforming design at the BS and passive beamforming
design at RISs to achieve their goals for power consumption
minimization, and spectral/energy efﬁciency improvement. For
instance, reference [49] tackled the minimization problem
of power consumption at the BS in a conventional convex
optimization approach. Reference [50] obtained a closed-form
solution of the optimal phase shift design for the RIS-assisted
large-scale multiple-input single-output (MISO) system based
on the derivation of the upper bound of the ergodic spectral
efﬁciency and statistical channel state information (CSI).
In particular, channel estimation is an indicating research
topic because the CSI acquisition problem of RIS is chal-
lenging due to its nearly-passive properties. However, a few
research studies have attempted to solve the problem. In
Reference [51], the authors have proposed a channel estima-
tion scheme on the basis of ON/OFF mechanism, which can
improve the normalized mean-squared error (MSE) in single-
user and multi-user scenarios. In [52], [53], low-overhead
channel estimation algorithms have been proposed by taking
advantage of the channel sparsity.
D. What will it be like if RISs are embedded with AI?
Conventional approaches for optimal RIS-assisted wireless
communication network design have gradually presented var-
ious limitations, such as complicated establishment of the
optimization problems, numerous slow optimal iterations, and
high computational complexity. Accordingly, research top-
ics towards AI-embedded RIS-assisted communications, have

5
recently attracted considerable interest to break the above-
mentioned original limitations. As illustrated in the previous
sections, AI techniques are expected to be embedded into the
RIS-assisted wireless communication networks for maximiz-
ing the availability of RIS to further realize the concept of
smart radio propagation environments.
On the one hand, we can conﬁgure multiple sensors sur-
rounding RISs to help capture the current range of environ-
mental information, enabling RISs to seize large amounts of
data that can be stored and locally processed, or retransmitted
to the central controller for centralized processing in the BS.
Accordingly, RISs conﬁgured with sensors can act as a part
of the architecture of AI because the large amount of data
obtained by RISs is necessary for training machine learning
models and implementing data-driven machine learning algo-
rithms [54].
On the other hand, RIS phase shift matrices can also
be optimized in addition to transceiver terminals compared
with the traditional communication networks. Considering that
multiple RISs will be in practical deployment and individual
RIS is always conﬁgured by dozens or even hundreds of
elements, RISs become particularly challenging in the phase
shift design because the optimization of RIS-assisted wireless
communication networks requires mathematical and consid-
erable algorithm iterations, which is likely to gain time and
computational complexity. In the scenario with high mobility,
the complexity of the inter-connected smart devices in the IoT
is increasingly difﬁcult to deal with by utilizing stiff and static
communication networks. Under such a condition, AI has
become a key strategy for processing and integrating the data.
Such a data-driven scheme can extract system features without
requiring a concrete mathematical model [55], [56]. Thus, this
mechanism can be applied to signiﬁcantly simplify non-convex
optimization tasks while making the training model robust
against the various imperfections and, quickly adapt to the
time-varying characteristics of the channel.
The AI schemes must be integrated into RIS-based networks
to continue making further progress towards IWPE, making
IWPE more feasible and robust to the non-linear factors in the
system. In the following sections, we will illustrate how AI
will be integrated into RISs and elaborate on various speciﬁc
cases of study.
III. INTELLIGENT STRUCTURES OF METASURFACES
Among various AI techniques, deep neural networks
(DNN), also called multi-layer perceptron in deep learning
(DL), utilize a hierarchical interconnection structure to imitate
the connections between human brain neurons, which have
been widely implemented for complex optimization problems.
A DNN consists of an input layer, hidden layers, and an output
layer. In this section, two types of RIS based deep neural
networks (Rb-DNNs) are introduced. The ﬁrst one models
programmable wireless environments (PWEs) as a DNN with
RISs as neuron nodes. The other one models multi-layer
digital-coding metasurface arrays as a complex valued DNN
with meta-atoms as neuron nodes.
A. Neural network-conﬁgured PWE (NN-CONFIG PWE)
To possess deterministic and adaptive control over the EM
wave propagation, the concept of PWEs has been proposed in
[57], which models them as an interpretable back-propagating
neural network. In particular, this mechanism models software-
deﬁned metasurfaces (SDMs) as the neural nodes and their
cross-interactions as links. A SDM tile contains multiple meta-
atoms, and a layer has multiple SDM tiles, as illustrated in
Fig. 4(a)).
Speciﬁcally, a PWE consists of a transmitter (Tx), a receiver
(Rx), and several walls deployed with SDMs. The incident
EM waves from the Tx impinge upon the ﬁrst wall (the
ﬁrst SDM layer), where the input layer units are conﬁgured
by the propagation environments, such as Tx/Rx locations,
densities, and dimensions of the RIS elements, frequency
spectrum, and noise levels. Thus, an individual unit has its
own impinging power, which can be split and reﬂected to
the elements over the next layer; thus, cross-interactions are
established as LoS links. The received power from the nodes
in the last layer can be considered as the receiver output. The
ideal output is the distribution over the Rx links, which can
be obtained from the corresponding receiving gains of the Rx
devices, as derived by the Rx antenna patterns and the MIMO
conﬁguration. The gap between the received and the ideal
output is a metric for back-propagation period. After model
training, the SDM tile-constructed neural network grasps the
EM wave propagation characteristics and gains the capability
of elevating communications between the BS and the user.
In another comprehensive work of [57] in [58], the previous
2D precursor has been extended to operate in full 3D settings.
B. PAIM
Previous research applies SDM tiles as neuron nodes to con-
struct an interpretable neural network for adaptively conﬁgur-
ing the PWE. Another work based on the fabricated all-optical
diffraction deep neural networks (D2NN) applies multi-layer
digital-coding metasurface arrays as deep neural networks for
implementing various tasks, such as image classiﬁcation and
EM wave sensing, even acting as a novel wireless commu-
nication coder - decoder or real-time multi-beam focusing
instrument [59]. The 2D structure of the PAIM model is shown
in Fig. 4(b). It is a fully connected (FC) complex-valued neural
network. The multiple squares represent meta-atoms in the
RIS, whose complex transmission coefﬁcients Ti constitute the
trainable part of the model. The EM ﬁeld is represented by
Ei, which can be attenuated according to the space attenuation
coefﬁcients Wi and transmitted by the meta-atoms to all meta-
atoms in the next layer.
The proposed PAIM can not only process typical DL tasks,
such as image recognition and feature detection, but also
act as a communication transceiver to manipulate the spatial
EM waves and execute multi-channel coding and decoding
or multi-beam focusing, which provides potential applications
in the wireless communications, remote control, and other
intelligent applications.

6
Ă
Ă
Ă
Ă
,QSXW
/D\HU
2XWSXW
/D\HU
/HDUQLQJ
/D\HUV
0HWDDWRP

(

(
0
(
0
(

7

7
0
7
0
7
Ă
Ă

:
0
:
,QSXW
(0
6'0WLOH

7LOH

7LOH

7LOH

7LOH

7LOH

7LOH

7LOH

7LOH
11&RQILJ3:(
3$,0
D
E
7[
5[
:DOO
:DOO
:DOO
:DOO
,QSXW
(0
,QSXW
LPSLQJLQJ
SRZHU
5HFHLYHG
SRZHU
2XWSXW
(0
Fig. 4.
Paradigms of two intelligent structures of metasurfaces. (a) Con-
ceptual framework of PWE as a neural network [57]. (b) 2D structure of
the programmable AI machine (PAIM) model. Ti represents the complex
transmission coefﬁcients, Ei represents the EM ﬁeld, and Wi represents the
space attenuation coefﬁcients.
IV. INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS OF METAMATERIALS
As previously mentioned, the fast imaging, high-resolution
sensing, and high accuracy localization will coexist with basic
wireless communication functions in 6G, which can constantly
share the abundant data and information in the time, fre-
quency, and space domain. For instance, simultaneous sensing
and mapping methods signiﬁcantly enhance miscellaneous
truly immersive XR services, and they can also be regarded
as auxiliary approaches for autonomous systems, including
vehicle navigation and drone cruise. Moreover, intelligent
context-aware networks in 6G can also utilize localization and
sensing information to optimize wireless resource allocation
and execute appropriate operation with no or limited human
intervention [60].
Particularly, RISs have the potential to obtain such imaging,
sensing, and recognition capabilities via an appropriate design.
In the following subsection, RIS-based intelligent systems are
introduced in detail, ranging from the imaging, recognition,
and sensing systems based on DL schemes to the adaptive
intelligent metamaterial system based on AI.
A. Imaging system
Conventional microwave imaging
systems
need
time-
consuming data acquisition and complex reconstruction algo-
rithms because they are based on a compressed sensing (CS)
method and require iterative operations for data processing.
Therefore, a tradeoff exists between imaging reconstruction
speed and image quality. Given this background, the modern
society is seeking for efﬁcient and concise imaging systems,
which are expected to quickly, intelligently, and efﬁciently
reconstruct the image and extract important features with high
ﬁdelity and compression ratio.
To achieve fast super-resolution imaging, the feature in-
formation for the scenarios must be extracted in advance to
apply some measurement modes. In [34], a super-resolution
imaging system applies machine learning algorithms, called
principal component analysis (PCA), to obtain features for
scenarios and utilize information metamaterials to generate
speciﬁc radiation patterns that match the scenarios. After a
portrait is conducted, the PCA method is exploited to extract
a series of feature maps of the portrait. Next, the information
metamaterials will quickly form 400 radiation graphs based on
400 coding forms according to the extracted feature maps in
each imaging period. The radiation graphs are connected with
metamaterial coding forms through the discretized Gerchberg-
Saxton (G-S) iterative algorithm. Then, a receiving antenna is
deployed to receive the intensity of reﬂected waves after each
radiation graph is irradiated to the human body. This process
can obtain 400 sets of radiation graphs encoded by different
metamaterial units and their corresponding mapping sets of
reﬂected wave intensity.
In the above work, the intensity of the reﬂected wave
corresponding to the radiation graph obtained by each code
is assumed to be proportional to the overlapping area of the
object. The system equations can be established through the
relationship between the portrait and the data pair, and portraits
can be reconstructed according to these equations. In com-
parison, with those randomly generated radiation maps with-
out using machine learning to acquire scenario information,
the imaging performance of information metamaterial coding
based on the PCA method for obtaining prior information is
better than random radiation map imaging, clearly showing
the superior performance of using machine learning and the
importance of introducing machine learning algorithms.
B. Imaging and automatic recognition system
The above imaging system in [34] only introduces the PCA
method in the acquisition of prior information of portraits
while a traditional algorithm is still applied in the imaging
period. In [35], the prior information of portrait is further
extended to the imaging algorithm, thus forming a complete
imaging system driven by the DL approach. As an extension,
the system can execute extra DL tasks, such as gesture
recognition and respiratory monitoring, as shown in Fig. 5(a).
First, an end-to-end convolutional neural network (CNN)
from the imaging input data to imaging target output is trained
by IM-CNN-1. The training data are collected by shooting
videos, and 80,000 training portraits are gathered. The PCA
method is adopted to acquire feature information of portraits
as [34], which is further organized as a 2D matrix as the input
of the imaging system. With regard to the output, the portrait is

7
IM-CNN-1
Faster R-CNN
G-S algorithm
Intelligent
Metasurface
IM-CNN-2
Time-frequency 
Analysis
Metasurface
Manipulation
Form the image of 
the whole body
Find the region 
of interest (ROI)
Find the coding 
sequence for the 
metasurface
Recognize the 
hand sign
Identify the human 
breathing
Microwave data
Control flow
Data flow
CNN Cluster
m-ANN
r-ANN
Image of 
interest
Raw EM 
data
Desired 
imaging


ĭ
ĭ
,
,
L
C
min
C
x
y
ˆx
4
)
Metamaterial 
coding pattern
C
Error back-propagation
(a)
(b)
Data acquisition 
module
Data processing 
module
Fig. 5.
(a) Imaging and recognition system utilizing the DL-CNN cluster
[35]. (b) Intelligent sensing system based on the m-ANN data acquisition and
r-ANN data processing module [36].
extracted from the background of the image after the original
image is collected with the optical camera and binarized as
the target output of the imaging system.
Next, the great advantage of DL has been demonstrated in
the ﬁeld of target recognition to extend the imaging system to
gesture recognition and respiratory monitoring. Speciﬁcally,
for the gesture recognition function, the hand position is
located by Faster R-CNN according to the portrait formed
by the system and the G-S algorithm is utilized to design the
encoding of the information metamaterial to focus the EM
wave energy on the hand, deploy the receiving antenna and
collect the reﬂected wave intensity under different gestures as
training data. Finally, a CNN, capable of recognizing 10 types
of gestures and with a recognition accuracy of 95% is trained
by IM-CNN-2. In the respiratory monitoring task, the same
method is applied to locate toward the chest cavity, collect
echo data for a period of time, and perform time-frequency
analysis to obtain the target’s respiratory status during that
period.
C. Intelligent sensing system
Although the imaging and recognition systems in [35]
introduced the DL methods, including CNN and R-CNN, into
the data acquisition and imaging period, these two periods
must be independently trained and require a large number of
training samples. In [36], the neural network that combines
the data acquisition process with imaging process is proposed
with information metamaterial coding enrolled.
Speciﬁcally, the intelligent sensing system consists of two
data-driven modules, namely, the m-ANN data acquisition
module and the r-ANN data processing module, as illustrated
in Fig. 5(b). The input of the m-ANN network (equivalent
to the encoder) is the image of interest x and the coding
pattern of the metamaterial C. The output is the received
raw microwave data y collected by the receiving antenna,
which is also the input of the r-ANN network (equivalent
to the decoder). The target output of r-ANN is the desired
imaging of interest ˆ푥. First, the weight of m-ANN 횯is ﬁxed
by supervised learning. Next, the metasurface coding pattern
C and the weight of r-ANN 횽are jointly learned by error
back-propagation. The proposed network connects the entire
imaging system into a whole, and the author can ﬁnd optimal
metamaterial radiation patterns (codings) with less number of
radiation pattern image requirement through the joint training
while ensuring the imaging quality.
D. Adaptive intelligent metamaterial system
Reconﬁgurable metasurfaces have been developed to dy-
namically and arbitrarily manipulate the EM waves to execute
variable tasks. However, manual controls are required to
switch among different functionalities. Therefore, the adaptive
intelligent metamaterial system is proposed in [61], which
is a closed-loop decision-making system integrated with sen-
sors, feedback links, and algorithms to ensure that the pro-
grammable metasurface can self-adaptively switch between
different functions without manual adjustment.
When sensing the changes of the outside environment, the
sensed information is fed back to the FPGA and micropro-
cessor for analysis. Then, the closed-loop decision system
executes the corresponding metamaterial code distribution
according to the internal preset algorithm to achieve beam
control. The metasurface can adjust the EM radiation beam
according to its motion posture; accordingly, the communi-
cation beam always points to the satellite. In addition to the
beam staring function, the metasurface can also implement
other functions such as multi-beam dynamic tracking, dynamic
RCS scattering control, vortex wave generation, and multi-
beam scanning.
V. AI-EMBEDDED RIS-AIDED WIRELESS COMMUNICATION
SYSTEM
The recent years have witnessed the rapid development
of AI in ﬁnancial analysis, e-health care, and industry 4.0.
The future communication networks will also have to rely
on AI. Some basic concepts still need to be clariﬁed. The
relationship among AI, machine learning, supervised learning,
unsupervised learning, DL, reinforcement learning (RL), and
federate learning (FL) is illustrated in Fig. 6 and the basic
concepts of machine learning schemes are presented in Table I.

8
$UWLILFLDO,QWHOOLJHQFH
0DFKLQH/HDUQLQJ
6XSHUYLVHG
/HDUQLQJ
8QVXSHUYLVHG
/HDUQLQJ
5HLQIRUFHPHQW
/HDUQLQJ
'HHS
5HLQIRUFHPHQW
/HDUQLQJ
'HHS
/HDUQLQJ
)HGHUDWHG
/HDUQLQJ
Fig. 6.
Relationship among AI, machine learning, supervised learning,
unsupervised learning, DL, reinforcement learning (RL), and federate learning
(FL) [62].
The DL method utilizes multi-layer non-linear mapping
networks via hierarchical connections of like-brain neurons
and has potential to efﬁciently solve optimization problems.
Recently, DNNs have been shown to provide superior perfor-
mance in various tasks such as image recognition and natural
language processing. Moreover, CNNs further play a critical
role in DL because the convolution kernel parameter sharing
in the hidden layer and the sparsity of the connections between
layers enable the CNN to perform and learn grid-like topology
features with a small amount of calculation.
In addition to the DL, the RL [63] utilizes an agent to
interact with the environment and learns how to take actions in
the next state. At each step of the learning process, the agent
observes the current state of the environment and generates
an action. After the agent receives a reward, it moves to the
next stage. In deep RL (DRL), the critic and actor networks
take DNNs as the main structure. Given that the agent aims
to maximize the long-term cumulative rewards, many wireless
communication problems, such as resource allocation, can be
formulated as a RL problem.
The FL [64] is a distributed machine learning algorithm that
enables mobile devices to collaboratively learn a shared ma-
chine learning model without frequent data exchange between
mobile devices and servers. In the FL framework, each mobile
device and its datacenter owns independent machine learning
models, called the local FL model, and the machine learning
model of the datacenter is called a global FL model.
Speciﬁcally, supervised learning and unsupervised learning
are two learning schemes that can be distinguished by the
existense or absense of the output labels. In the following
section, AI-embedded RIS-assisted wireless communication
systems are elaborately overviewed (Fig. 7 ), including the
signal detection, channel estimation, and beamforming design
at the physical layer, resource allocation, and over-the-air
computation (AirComp) at the upper layers.
A. Survey of RIS with AI
In the survey in [54], AI is considered to play a critical
role in RIS-assisted wireless communication systems as a
TABLE I
BASIC CONCEPTS OF MACHINE LEARNING SCHEMES
Schemes
Characteristics
DL
A model utilizing multi-layer non-linear
mapping networks via hierarchical con-
nections of like-brain neurons. DNNs and
CNNs are most widely used especially
in DRLs for state representation, function
approximation for value function, policy,
transition model, or reward.
RL
A model contains an agent, in which
the agent interacts with the environment,
learning an optimal policy, by trial and
error, for maximizing the long-term cumu-
lative rewards.
FL
A distributed machine learning algorithm
that enables geo-distributed devices to col-
laboratively learn a global model while
keeping the data processed locally.
Supervised
Learning
A scheme that training the model by il-
lustrating input samples and their known
associated output labels.
Unsupervised
Learning
A scheme that the model learns to classify
input samples optionally without given
output labels.
supplement to the traditional mathematical model-based wire-
less network design. In [54], interactions is said to occur
between the AI-based wireless communication networks and
the RIS-based smart wireless radio environments. The RISs
can acquire environmental information by conﬁguring various
sensors, and the data-driven characteristic of AI can reduce
the high computational complexity of the optimization design
of RIS-based network with hybrid active points and numerous
passive RIS elements.
According to another comprehensive survey about RIS in
[14], machine learning must be applied into the RIS-assisted
network to realize a truly smart radio environments because
machine learning methods can perform intelligent tasks. This
notion means that these methods can intelligently interact
with the wireless radio environment by planning, perceiving,
reasoning, learning, and problem solving.
Another work presents a concise introduction of Wireless
2.0 in [71], which means the intelligent radio environment
leveraging RISs and AI. This research focuses on the AI-
based computational methods and elaborates the application
of AI in Wireless 2.0 from the perspective of classiﬁcation. In
[72], a short survey of DL technologies utilized in RIS-assisted
wireless systems is presented but, without considering those
intelligent structures and systems of RIS.
B. Physical layer
1) Signal detection:
In [73], an RIS-assisted MISO communication system is
considered, and a novel detector, called “DeepRIS” is devel-

9
TABLE II
CHANNEL ESTIMATION
Ref.
Model
Highlights and drawbacks
[65]
double CNNs
The RIS is completely passive, and double CNNs estimate the direct channel and cascaded channel,
respectively. However, there is need for extra control links and signals for the manipulation of
RIS elements (turn on/off).
[66]
CV-DnCNN
Combination of model-driven and data-driven: Conventional CS channel estimation and recon-
struction for rough estimation and CV-DnCNN model for accurate channel estimation. However,
a hybrid passive/active framework requires extra power consumption and control signals for the
manipulation of RIS elements.
[67]
DNN
Combination of model-driven and data-driven: Direct calculation (DC) for rough estimation and
DNN model for accurate channel estimation. The hybrid passive/active framework gains high
complexity as well.
[68]
CDRN
To improve the estimation accuracy, the proposed framework take fully advantages of CNN in
feature extraction and DReL in denoising.
[69]
FL-CNN
The FL scheme avoids huge transmission overhead, and a single CNN is trained for two different
datasets for both direct and cascaded channels.
[70]
ODE-based
CNN
The proposed structure not only take the advantage of the CNN in using the correlation between
elements for information completion, but also introduce the ODE to describe the latent relationship
between different layers to speed up the convergence and the learning performance.
oped for estimating and detecting symbols signals transmitted
through RIS on the basis of a DNN framework. Speciﬁcally,
the RIS is fully passive to make it as cost-efﬁcient as possible
instead of deploying active elements on RIS to assist detection.
The proposed DeepRIS, acting as a data-driven black box,
consists of three FC layers. The model is trained ofﬂine by
utilizing different simulated channels and RIS phase shift
matrices and, a large amount of training patches, including
the transmitted vectors acting as the output and the received
vectors as the input. After training, the model can directly
estimate the transmitted symbols beyond the complicated step
of channel estimation in RIS, thus reducing the pilot sig-
naling overhead. Moreover, the bit-error-rate of the proposed
method outperformed that of the traditional detectors, such
as least squares and minimum mean-squared error (MMSE)
estimators, which can achieve a near-optimal bit error rate by
maximum likelihood (ML) estimator.
2) Channel estimation:
The channel estimation of RIS-based wireless communica-
tion systems is faced with much more severe challenges than
that of the conventional communication scenarios. On the one
hand, RISs do not require a large amount of RF chains due
to the passive reﬂection characteristics. In comparison with
MIMO and relay with strong signal processing capability,
RISs are only equipped with simple on-board signal processing
units. On the other hand, each RIS consists of a huge number
of reﬂecting elements, leading to the challenges for CSI
acquisition (if the CSI acquisition is possible).
To carry out an effective channel estimation, new algorithms
and protocols must be designed to avoid the complex on-
board signal processing operations. Moreover, the near-ﬁeld/
far-ﬁeld channel modeling of RISs have different propagation
characteristics, and the introduction of RISs may affect the
EM ﬁeld. These challenges hinder the characterization and
simpliﬁcation of cascaded BS-RIS-UE channels.
Reference [65] pioneered a DL framework for channel
estimation in RIS-assisted mmWave massive MIMO systems.
A twin CNNs called ChannelNet, has been proposed to esti-
mate the channels, where the direct channel (BS-UE) and the
cascaded channel (BS-RIS-UE) are estimated by conﬁguring
two types of phases for the pilot training model. In phase I, all
RIS elements are turned off for the direct channel estimation.
And in phase II, the RIS elements are turned on one by one
or they are turned on simultaneously for the cascaded channel
estimation.
However, the model training of the DL-based method is
conducted in a centralized manner in [65], which poses
much more training overhead. Moreover, in cascaded channel
estimation, extra control links are necessary for controlling the
on/off state of reﬂecting elements. To solve this problem, deep
denoising neural networks can be effective. In [66], a hybrid
passive/active RIS architecture is ﬁrst proposed, in which a
small part of RIS elements are activated and a few receive
chains are deployed to estimate the partial channels. A con-
ventional CS algorithm, i.e., orthogonal match pursuit (OMP)
is applied to reconstruct the complete channel matrix whereby
the angle domain is sparse. After preliminary estimation, a
complex-valued denoising convolution neural network (CV-
DnCNN) is used to further enhance the estimation accuracy.
Similar to [66], the overall channel estimation problem is also
divided into two tasks in [67]. The ﬁrst task is to activate
a small number of RIS elements for the angle parameter
estimation, and the second task is to utilize a DL framework
for further estimation accuracy improvement. Instead of com-

10
Coding 
Modulation
Module
BS
User
Demodulation 
Decoding
Module
Channel
Estimation
RIS
Intelligent 
Propagation
Environment
DL
DL
Environment
DNN
DNN
State
Agent
Critic 
Network
Actor 
Network
DRL
Global model
Model 
Aggregation
Aggregation 
Server
User 1
Local dataset 1
Local model 1 
User 2
Local dataset 2
Local model 2 
User k
Local dataset k
Local model k 
Ă
Ă
Upload model
Download model
FL
FL
FL
Fig. 7.
Architecture of the AI-embedded RIS-assisted wireless communication system.
plicated CS, the direct calculation (DC) approach is applied
to directly calculate the angle parameters through the channel
estimation of the adjacent active elements.
According to the simulation results, these hybrid archi-
tectures gain better performance by leveraging conventional
channel estimation approaches and DL methods; however, they
require extra power consumption and control signals for the
manipulation of RIS elements.
Taking advantage of the feature extraction of CNN and
the denoising capability of deep residual learning (DReL),
reference [68] proposed a CNN-based deep residual network
(CDRN) to tackle the channel estimation, which is regarded as
a denoising problem. This approach can intelligently exploit
the channel spatial features and implicitly learn the residual
noise for further improving the channel estimation accuracy.
The model training in [65]–[68] is centralized in the BS,
introducing huge transmission overhead from the users to
the BS. FL-based channel estimation can solve the problem.
Reference [69] proposed a FL framework for channel esti-
mation, wherein the learning model is trained at the local
user with its own local dataset. In comparison with the
centralized approaches, only model updates are sent rather
than all datasets, thereby reducing the transmission overhead.
Furthermore, a single CNN is trained for two different datasets
for both channels instead of using double CNNs to estimate
the direct channel and the cascaded channel in the previous
work [65].
In [70], an ordinary differential equation (ODE)-based CNN
structure is proposed to extrapolate the full channel informa-
tion from the partial channel. Speciﬁcally, the sub-sampled
RIS channel is formulated by turning on a fraction of all
the RIS elements. The ODE-based CNN, where the cross-
layer connections are added to describe the latent relationship
between different layers, is adopted to learn the mapping
function from the channel of chosen elements to that of the all
elements. The proposed CNN can achieve better performance
than the cascaded CNN because extra coefﬁcients and linear
calculations are introduced.
These studies relevant to the channel estimation are con-
cluded in Table II, including their machine learning models
and highlights/drawbacks.
3) Beamforming design for performance enhancement:
The RIS phase shift conﬁguration is critical to the enhance-
ment of the system performances. Nevertheless, the optimal
beamforming design is a challenging issue due to the non-
convex constraints on the RIS reﬂecting elements and the var-
ious complicated non-convex optimization objective functions.
Conventional phase shift design approaches are mostly to ﬁnd
a sub-optimal solution (no closed-form solution is available)
on the basis of the semi-deﬁnite relaxation (SDR) technique,
for instance, in [74], to maximize the received signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR). Given that the SDR method is of high compu-
tational complexity, a relatively low complexity ﬁxed-point
iteration algorithm has been proposed in [75] for optimization
problems. In [49], the greedy manner is a promising solution
for combating the high performance loss when the user is
located far away from the BS, in which the phase shift of
individual unit is iteratively optimized. The resulting sub-
optimal iterative algorithms incur high complexity; hence, they
are not suitable for real-time implementation. On this basis,
the DL, RL, and FL methods have been introduced for the

11
phase shift design in the RIS-assisted wireless communication
systems.
Reference [76] considered two different types of methods,
namely, CS and DL, as efﬁcient solutions for channel estima-
tion and optimal RIS reﬂection matrix design. In the second
task, a DL framework is utilized to help the RIS in optimally
interacting with the incident signal and design its phase shift
matrix to ensure that it can represent the current state of
the environment and the transmitter/receiver locations, which
maximizes the achievable rate of the system.
Reference [77] addressed the RIS beamforming design
problem in an indoor communications scenario. The proposed
network employs a DL method to increase the received signal
strength for the indoor user by training a DNN to learn the
mapping between the user coordinates and the RIS phase
shift conﬁguration. After training from data (a preconstructed
ﬁngerprint database), the trained model can map the target
user coordinate to the optimal phase shift matrix as the output,
further focusing the beam to the target user location. However,
this work still applies a hybrid RIS architecture wherein
the RIS is also equipped with several activated elements for
channel estimation, which blurs the passive nature of the RIS.
A further adaptability analysis of the proposed network is
desired because the current analysis assumes that only the
perfect CSI condition was considered.
Supervised learning is extremely dependent on a large
amount of labeled data in advance for model training. An
efﬁcient way to leapfrog the labeling acquirement process is to
utilize label-free unsupervised learning techniques. Reference
[78] also proposed a DL approach for passive beamforming
design. In contrast with the previous work [77], a standard
DNN that comprised ﬁve FC layers is trained ofﬂine in terms
of an unsupervised learning mechanism to avoid tremen-
dous training labels overhead compared with the supervised
learning-based DL approach. Fed with the product of the
BS to RIS, RIS to users, and BS to user channels, the
proposed method can predict the phase shift conﬁguration as
the output. Simulation results illustrate that this method can
achieve comparable performance as conventional SDR-based
approaches with much lower computation complexity.
Previous work in [77] has introduced current DNN-
estimated channel information to design RIS reﬂection matri-
ces. Acorrelation exists between the current and the previously
estimated channels, which is ignored by many researchers.
In contrast with the existing works, reference [79] exploit
the channel correlation to more reliably conﬁgure the RIS
reﬂection interaction. The simulation results demonstrate the
performance improvements achieved by introducing the strong
correlation between the previously sampled channels and the
ones being estimated.
Various DNN architectures are leveraged for designing RIS
beamformers [76]–[79]. To avoid huge training labels, DRL-
based methods, which achieve the property of online learning
and sample generation, are widely utilized. In [80], an efﬁcient
DRL method is proposed to solve the non-convex optimization
problem of the phase shift deign for the RIS-aided down-
link MISO wireless communication system to maximize the
received SNR and, in [81], to minimize the BS transmit
Environment
DNN
DNN
State
Agent
Critic Network
Actor Network
Emit reward
tr
1
ts 
Transmit to the next state
Q function
DNN
update
Generate action


t
ta
S
S
 


, ; 
| 
, 
t
t
t
Q
s a
G s
s a
a
S
S
 
 
 
ª
º
¬
¼
ș
E
User 1
Local dataset 1
Local model 1 
User 2
Local dataset 2
Local model 2 
User k
Local dataset k
Local model k 
Ă
Global model
Model 
Aggregation
Aggregation 
Server
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(1). Download the global model
(2). Upload the local model 
Fig. 8.
(a) Illustration of the DRL architecture, where double DNNs are
utilized to approximate the optimal state-action value and Q function. (b)
Illustration of the FL framework. Individual user utilizes its own local dataset
to generate its local model and updates the model to the aggregation server.
The server executes the model aggregation to generate the global model, which
is sent back to the users.
power by jointly optimizing the active beamforming at the BS
and passive beamforming at the RIS, as shown in Fig. 8(a).
The deep deterministic policy gradient (DDPG) algorithm is
introduced into the DRL framework.
Reference [82] also investigated the joint beamforming
design of transmit beamforming matrix at the BS and the
phase shift matrix at the RIS by leveraging the recent advances
in DRL with the model-driven DDPG approach. However,
unlike the aforementioned work in [81] that applies alternat-
ing optimization to alternatively obtain the optimal transmit
beamforming and phase shift matrix, the proposed method
can simultaneously achieve the optimal transmit beamforming
and phase shift matrix by maximizing the sum rate, which
is utilized as the instant rewards to train the DRL-based
algorithm. The same group of authors also investigated the
joint design of digital beamforming matrix at the BS and
analog beamforming matrices at the RISs by leveraging the
DRL framework to combat the propagation loss in [83], which
further shows that DRL-based architectures are those effective
methods for tackling the non-convex optimization problems,
such as NP-hard beamforming problems.
To eliminate the challenging labeling process of the su-
pervised learning-based DRL techniques, reference [84] em-
ployed an unsupervised learning-based DRL approach to

12
design the RIS reﬂection matrices. In the method, a few
elements are activated to acquire channel information, and
the state is updated according to the normalized concatenated
sampled channel of each transmitter-receiver pair. Moreover,
the achievable rate at the receiver is utilized as the reward
to train the network. Specially, the proposed framework is
said to be directed towards standalone RIS operation. This
notion means that the RIS architecture adapts and interacts
with the surrounding environment for phase shift conﬁguration
rather than by controlling signal from the BS through the wired
connection between the BS and the RIS.
Referencce [85], designed a novel optimization-driven DRL
framework for the joint beamforming optimization problem,
which takes the advantages of the efﬁciency in model-based
optimization and the robustness in data-driven machine learn-
ing approaches. In [86], a novel Deep Q-network (DQN)
approach based on DRL is proposed, in which the BS receives
the state information, consisting of the users CSI feedback
and the available energy reported by the RIS, to maximize the
average energy efﬁciency by enabling the BS to determine the
transmit power and RIS conﬁguration with uncertainty on the
wireless channel and harvested energy of the RIS system.
The decaying DQN (D-DQN)- based algorithm proposed
in [87] can tackle UAV trajectory and RIS phase shift design
problem. In this algorithm, the central controller is selected
as an agent for periodically observing the state of the UAV-
enabled wireless network and executing actions for adapting
to the dynamic environment. In contrast with the conventional
DQN algorithm, the decaying learning rate is leveraged in the
proposed D-DQN-based algorithm for a tradeoff between ac-
celerating training speed and converging to the local optimum.
The DRL and FL approaches can also be adopted to enhance
the physical layer security and privacy. In [88], a joint active
beamforming at the BS and passive beamforming at the RIS
optimization problem considering the different quality of ser-
vice (QoS) requirements and time-varying channel conditions
is formulated to improve the secrecy rate of multiple legitimate
users. DRL solves the problem by formulating the reward
function as the difference between the secrecy rate and a
penalty term, accounting for the QoS at the receivers.
To consider user privacy, reference [89] exploited the phase
shift design of RIS. An optimal phase shift design based on FL
is proposed with the sparse CSI to simultaneously enhance the
data rate and protect the data privacy. Several local models are
trained according to the CSI of users and further uploaded to a
central server for aggregation to generate a global model. The
user can download the global model as the initial conﬁguration
for the next training period.
Age-of-Information (AoI) is deﬁned as the elapsed time
since the generated/sampled of the most recently received
status-update. To fully characterize the freshness of status-
update, the concept of AoI has been introduced as a main
performance metric for those applications that require relia-
bility and timeliness in delivering status-update information,
such as smart environmental monitoring, industrial control
systems, and intelligent transportation systems. Reference [90]
investigated a wireless network in which IoT devices (IoTDs)
with limited transmission capabilities need to sample the
TABLE III
BEAMFORMING DESIGN
Ref.
Model
Objective
[76]
DNN
Maximize the achievable rate of the
system.
[77]
DNN
Increase
the
received
signal
strength (RSS).
[78]
UL-DNN
Enhance the effective gain of the
reﬂecting path.
[79]
DNN
Maximize the achievable rate of the
system.
[80]
DRL-DNN
Maximize the received SNR.
[81]
DRL-DNN
Minimize the BS’s transmit power.
[82]
DRL-DNN
Maximize the sum rate of the sys-
tem.
[83]
DRL
Combat the propagation loss in ter-
ahertz band.
[84]
UL-DRL
Maximize the achievable rate of the
system.
[86]
DQN
Maximize the average energy efﬁ-
ciency.
[87]
DQN
Tackle the UAV trajectory.
[88]
DRL
Improve the secrecy rate of legiti-
mate users.
[89]
FL
Enhance the data rate and protect
the data privacy simultaneously.
[90]
DRL
Minimize the expected sum AoI.
stochastic process and deliver the sampled data to a BS
for processing, and an aerial RIS (deployed over a UAV)
provides supplementary links for the sampled data delivering.
To address the challenging problem, a DRL framework based
on proximal policy optimization is proposed to effectively
learn the IoTD activation patterns, control the UAV altitude,
and ﬁnd the optimal RIS phase shift design to minimize the
expected sum AoI.
In summary, the studies relevant to the RIS beamforming
design are listed in Table III, wherein their machine learning
models and optimal objectives are included.
C. Upper layers
Communication efﬁciency is essential in exploiting massive
amounts of data generated at the mobile user equipment. FL
has been widely utilized as a potential substitute for centralized
ML schemes. It avoids heavy data transmission overhead by
collaboratively illustrating a shared global model at the server,
while the local data is processed at distributed services only.
This method also reduces the communication latency and
enhances the user privacy and data security, compared with
the conventional centralized machine learning schemes. The
FL framework is shown in Fig. 8(b)). When the local datasets

13
become large and local models are complex, training machine
learning models are prefer to distribute the model parameter
optimization over multiple local devices and generate the
global model at an aggregation server by model aggregation.
AirComp provides a novel simultaneous access technique to
support fast model aggregation for FL via exploiting the signal
superposition property of multi-access channels, which can be
regarded as one of the uplink non-orthogonal multiple access
schemes. However, AirComp suffers the severe propagation
errors since the local parameters are transmitted over the
shared wireless channels, thus deteriorating the global model
aggregation performance. By contrast, RIS-aided FL can be
as an innovative and promising candidate to boost the model
aggregation process, effectively minimize the propagation er-
ror, and enhance the convergence rate of FL. The available
links for cell-edge users who are blocked by obstacles are
also provided to expand the coverage and connectivity of FL,
thus boosting the utilization of wireless network resources.
With the advancement of AI, Intelligent IoT (I-IoT) will
be innovative, moving from connected things towards con-
nected intelligence. Under such a condition, the FL method
is an effective solution for those privacy sensitive and low-
latency intelligent IoT services and applications, including au-
tonomous cars and massive robotics. Reference [91] proposed
an AirComp based communication-efﬁcient FL framework for
such intelligent IoT networks to provide low-latency decisions
with strong privacy and security guarantees for applications
in the IoT network. In the proposed framework, the RIS is
leveraged to reduce the model aggregation error for AirComp-
based FL.
Particularly, the MSE is widely adopted as the performance
metric to characterize the model aggregation error, which
heavily depends on the channel conditions between the local
devices and the aggregation server. Minimizing the model
aggregation error of MSE quantization for AirComp-based
FL is the key to improving the learning performance. Given
that the RIS can tailor the IWPE to obtain the desired
channel responses, the MSE of the global model aggregation
is accordingly reduced, and the model prediction accuracy is
also improved. Moreover, the smaller MSE makes it possible
to select more local devices at each round of communication,
thereby accelerating the convergence of FL.
Although the work in [91] has demonstrated the effective-
ness of RIS for AirComp model aggregation improvement, it
merely concentrates on the communication aspect. In [92], an
RIS-enabled FL system is considered, in which the RIS phase
conﬁgurations and device selection are jointly optimized in a
uniform framework to act on the FL performance. Speciﬁcally,
an effective algorithm based on Gibbs sampling and successive
convex approximation principle is proposed, which aims to
jointly optimize the device selection, the receiver beamform-
ing, and the RIS phase shifts. Numerical experiments also
verify that enhanced FL performance can be achieved by
unifying the communication system design and user equipment
selection under a uniﬁed framework.
Reference [93] also investigated the model aggregation
problems in the multiple RISs-aided FL system. A novel
framework of resource allocation and device selection is
proposed for optimal global parameter aggregation with the
help of multiple RISs. This work not only reduces the model
aggregation error but also accelerates the convergence rate of
the global aggregation in FL. This task is carried out by jointly
optimizing the transmit power, receive scalar, RIS phase shifts,
and learning participants selection subject to the constraints,
including the transmit power for devices, the phase shift of
RIS reﬂected element, and the aggregation requirement. The
simulation results show that the proposed communication-
efﬁcient resource allocation algorithms with the aid of multiple
RISs outperform the benchmarks (i.e., single RIS auxiliary,
random phase shift of the RIS), speciﬁcally illustrated as better
convergence rate and lower learning error.
VI. CHALLENGES AND POTENTIALS
To further make IWPE a reality, some challenges must be
addressed and potentials must be explored, including the novel
wireless transceiver based on the RIS neural network, RIS-
based localization and sensing system design, dynamic and
ﬂexible control of RIS, and the data collection and model
training algorithm design in machine learning schemes.
A. Towards the intelligent structure of RIS
We can take a further step to explore the novel wire-
less transceiver on the basis of the RIS neural network
structure, which can directly process the signal without RF
transceiver modules. Nowadays, conventional separate wire-
less transceiver architecture is widely used, including informa-
tion processing module (baseband module) and RF transceiver
module. However, conventional baseband modules cannot eas-
ily cope with the task of real-time processing of instantaneous
massive baseband signals due to the extreme increase in
baseband data throughput caused by the number of extreme
large-scale MIMO and ultra-high bandwidth technologies.
Moreover, the cost and power consumption of RF hardware
also sharply increase. Therefore, the novel wireless transceiver,
which integrates information processing and RF modules to
achieve ultra-high-speed and low-power data transmission
directly on RF signals, must be explored.
In Fig. 9, the novel transceiver consists of an input layer,
hidden layers, an output layer, and a classiﬁer composed
of a signal detector and an association decision unit. The
classiﬁer at the receiver ﬁrst detects the spatial distribution
of the intensity or phase of the output RF signal in the output
layer, and then makes a joint decision. The classiﬁer at the
receiver ﬁrst detects the spatial distribution of the intensity
or phase of the output RF signal in the output layer and
then makes an associated decision to obtain demodulated RF
signals. The RF signals are transmitted between the layers of
the Rb-DNN. Each layer is composed of multiple meta-atoms.
The meta-atom between the adjacent layers are interconnected
via EM wave propagation. In speciﬁc transceiver tasks, the
electromagnetic responses can be changed when the external
control signal is loaded on the adjustable element of the meta
atoms, and the weight parameters of the meta atom neurons
are further reconﬁgured (i.e., the amplitude or phase change of
EM wave transmission). Particularly, the processing speed of

14
Ă
Ă
Ă
Ă
Input
Layer
Output
Layer
Hidden
Layers
Ă
Ă
Ă
Ă
Ă
Ă
Input
Layer
Output
Layer
Hidden
Layers
Ă
Ă
Meta-atom weight parameter controller
Transmitter
Receiver
Meta-atom weight parameter controller
Input RF signal 
Modulated RF signal 
Received RF signal to be processed
Output RF signal 
Classifier
Ă
Meta atom
Signal 
strength/phase 
detector
Associated Decision 
Demodulation signal 
Fig. 9. Framework of the novel wireless transceiver based on Rb-DNN.
this type of transceiver may reach the speed of light and gains
the advantages of high ﬂexibility and low power consumption.
B. Towards the intelligent sensing and localization system of
RIS
As previously mentioned, the intelligent manipulation of
RISs is expected to achieve high-resolution sensing and
high accuracy localization coexisting with the basic wireless
communication functions, which can constantly share the
abundant data and information in the time, frequency, and
space domains. Apart from providing extra reﬂecting paths
to supplement LoS links in high frequency scenarios such as
mmWave and THz ranges, RISs can enhance the power of
NLoS links near the RIS deployment range.
This study takes a low-energy reﬂective wall as an example.
The power of the reﬂected links is particularly low to sense the
channel information, which can be regarded as a blind area.
Against the condition, acting as a highly reﬂective plane, an
RIS can be deployed to enhance the energy of the reﬂected
links for grabbing the channel information to expand the
sensing range and enhance the coverage and further improve
the localization. Furthermore, AI and machine learning-aided
can extract deep features and hidden patterns of the raw data
to increase the resistance to environmental noise doped in
effective information and achieve high precision sensing and
positioning which have not been seen before. Not only for
a single RIS, multiple RISs should be developed for further
expanding the sensing scope. AI is a competitive method for
the ultra-high deployment and computational complexities due
to the multiple RISs by jointly adjusting the conﬁguration of
each RIS to maximize the sensing range.
C. Towards the RIS-assisted wireless communication system
integrated with AI
1) Dynamic and ﬂexible control of RIS: Optimal perfor-
mance can be obtained by dynamic beamforming of RIS.
However, a key technical problem still persists, which is
the manner by which, to dynamically and ﬂexibly control
the RIS. To the authors’ knowledge, most studies on the
RIS is based on the assumption that RISs are controlled by
wired connection, which is relatively simple and low power
consuming. In this case, wired connection routes need to be
reserved and become the barrier for ﬂexible deployment of
RIS. Wireless connection between the BS and the controller
avoids the constraints of wired connections. Nevertheless, the
interface scheme may require additional protocols and increase
the power consumption.
Under such a condition, we may consider a highly au-
tonomous scheme in which the RIS controller independently
adjusts according to the environment-aware information with-
out the control of the server and interfaces. In combination
with the sensing capability of sensors deployed in the sur-
rounding RISs, the angle, direction, and even part of the
channel information can be obtained, which may greatly
reduce the difﬁculty of channel estimation and pilot overhead.
Meanwhile, a large number of environmental characteristic in-
formation can be collected from environmental information to
further enhance the training and deployment ability of AI and
machine learning in wireless communication. However, the
complete autonomous control of the RIS outside the control
of the BS leads to difﬁculties in achieving joint estimation
and beamforming with the BS, and the sensing capability and
accuracy have a great effect on the system performance.
2) AI data collection and model training: Modern AI tech-
niques have already provided various applications employed
for the wireless transmission. Nevertheless, certain limitations
remains to be solved. In these data-driven machine learning
schemes, the effectiveness of the trained model heavily relies
on the validity and quality of the data. The more accurate
and abundant the data collected, the better the performance
of the model gained. However, a large amount of labeled
training data and high calculating power are required in

15
those data-hungry supervised learning methods for training
a well-established model, especially in the IWPE integrated
with numerous RISs and sensors. Therefore, semi-supervised
learning, unsupervised learning, and label-free DRL could be
stepped forward to learn from fast time-varying, reconﬁgurable
environment, and applying the advances of generative adver-
sarial networks to generate artiﬁcial data is a good approach.
Furthermore, the machine learning model is always time
and power consuming, and it is trained ofﬂine before the
online deployment. To overcome the cost of model training,
the recent advances in domain adaptation and transfer learning
are potential techniques for reducing the training workload of
these models for optimization [55].
VII. CONCLUSION
In this article, we comprehensively elaborate how RIS
based communication frameworks and AI based technologies
interact and promote with each other from several different
aspects. Particularly, we discuss the recent studies on the novel
RIS-based neural network architecture, intelligent imaging,
recognition, sensing system of RIS based on ML method-
ology, and AI-embedded RIS-aided wireless communication
systems. Several challenges are overcome by combining AI
with RIS, which further make the RIS-controlled intelligent
radio environments become a reality. However, signiﬁcant
additional research in RIS and AI are needed on a number of
issues, including further exploration of RIS neural network-
based wireless transceiver, RIS-based localization and sensing
system design, dynamic and ﬂexible control of RIS, AI data
collection and model training.
