1
Diffusion Models, Image Super-Resolution
And Everything: A Survey
Brian B. Moser1,2, Arundhati S. Shanbhag1,2, Federico Raue1, Stanislav Frolov1,2, Sebastian Palacio1, Andreas
Dengel1,2
1 German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI), Germany
2 Rheinland-Pf¨alzische Technische Universit¨at Kaiserslautern-Landau, Germany

Abstract—Diffusion Models (DMs) have disrupted the image
Super-Resolution (SR) field and further closed the gap between
image quality and human perceptual preferences. They are
easy to train and can produce very high-quality samples that
exceed the realism of those produced by previous generative
methods. Despite their promising results, they also come with
new challenges that need further research: high computational
demands, comparability, lack of explainability, color shifts, and
more. Unfortunately, entry into this field is overwhelming because
of the abundance of publications. To address this, we provide a
unified recount of the theoretical foundations underlying DMs
applied to image SR and offer a detailed analysis that under-
scores the unique characteristics and methodologies within this
domain, distinct from broader existing reviews in the field. This
survey articulates a cohesive understanding of DM principles
and explores current research avenues, including alternative
input domains, conditioning techniques, guidance mechanisms,
corruption spaces, and zero-shot learning approaches. By offering
a detailed examination of the evolution and current trends in
image SR through the lens of DMs, this survey sheds light on the
existing challenges and charts potential future directions, aiming
to inspire further innovation in this rapidly advancing area.
Index Terms—Super-Resolution, Diffusion Models, Survey.
I. INTRODUCTION
I
N the ever-evolving field of computer vision, the task of
image Super-Resolution (SR) – enhancing Low-Resolution
(LR) images into High-Resolution (HR) counterparts – stands
as a longstanding challenge due to its ill-posed nature: Multi-
ple HR images are plausible for any given LR image, differing
in aspects such as brightness and color [1]. Its applications
span a broad spectrum, from everyday photography to refining
satellite [2] and medical images [3]. Despite notable achieve-
ments of prior generative SR models, each comes with its
own limitations. For example, the computational demands of
Autoregressive models often outweigh their utility, while Nor-
malizing Flows or Variational Autoencoders struggle to match
quality expectations [4]–[6]. Although powerful, Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) need careful regularization and
optimization strategies to overcome instability issues [7].
The advent of Diffusion Models (DMs) marks a significant
shift in image generation tasks, including SR, challenging
the long-standing dominance of Generative Adversarial Net-
works (GANs) [8]–[11]. Applications like Dall-E and Stable
Diffusion demonstrate that DMs have surpassed GANs in
various aspects [12]–[14]. Their capability to generate high-
quality images from LR inputs has shown immense promise
in SR by closely aligning with the qualitative judgments of
human evaluators [15]. In other words, human raters perceive
SR images generated by DMs as more realistic than those
produced by other generative models like GANs.
However, as the volume of publications expands, staying
updated on the latest developments is becoming more chal-
lenging, particularly for those new to the field. DMs diverge
fundamentally from prior generative models and pose new
challenges while addressing the limitations of earlier models.
Identifying coherent trends and potential research directions is
challenging despite this rapid expansion. This survey aims to
demystify DMs, offers a comprehensive overview that bridges
foundational concepts with the forefront of image SR and
critically analyzes current strengths and weaknesses.
The presented survey builds upon the previous work Hitch-
hiker’s Guide to Super-Resolution [16], which gives a broad
overview of the image SR field in general. Similar in spirit
is the survey of Li et al., which reviews diffusion models
on the more general image restoration tasks like inpainting
and dehazing [17]. Both have overlapping topics, such as the
foundations and types of DMs, namely DDPMs [8], SGMs
[11], and SDEs [10]. Moreover, both surveys highlight the
introduction of conditioning strategies and zero-shot diffusion
as well as show potential research directions. However, our
survey covers all topics related to image SR and is, there-
fore, more detailed regarding recent developments specifically
developed for image SR. Moreover, we explain SR-related
challenges, like color shifting and cascaded image SR. We also
highlight the relationship of DMs with other generative SR
models, namely Variational Autoencoders, GANs, and Flow-
based methods. In addition, we review frequency-based DMs,
alternative corruption spaces, and diffusion-based image SR
applications.
Concluding with a discussion on emerging trends and their
potential for reshaping SR and DM development, this survey
sets the stage for future research. By offering clarity and
direction in the rapidly evolving domain of DMs, we aim
to inspire and inform the next wave of research, fostering
advancements that continue to push the boundaries of what
is possible in image SR with DMs.
The structure of this paper is organized as follows:
0000–0000/00$00.00 © 2021 IEEE
arXiv:2401.00736v3  [cs.CV]  23 Jun 2024

2
section II - Super-Resolution Basics: This section pro-
vides fundamental definitions and introduces standard datasets,
methods, and metrics for assessing image quality commonly
utilized in image SR publications.
section III - Diffusion Models Basics: Introduces the prin-
ciples and various formulations of DMs, including Denoising
Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs), Score-based Gener-
ative Models (SGMs), and Stochastic Differential Equations
(SDEs). This section also explores how DMs relate to other
generative models.
section IV - Improvements for Diffusion Models: Common
practices for enhancing DMs, focusing on efficient sampling
techniques and improved likelihood estimation.
section V - Diffusion Models for Image SR: Presents con-
crete realizations of DMs in SR, explores alternative domains
(latent space and wavelet domain), discusses architectural
designs and multiple tasks with Null-Space Models, and
examines alternative corruption spaces.
section VII - Domain-Specific Applications: DM-based SR
applications, namely medical imaging, blind face restoration,
atmospheric turbulence in face SR, and remote sensing.
section VIII - Discussion and Future Work:
Common
problems of DMs for image SR and noteworthy research
avenues for DMs specific to image SR.
section IX - Conclusion: Summarizes the survey.
II. IMAGE SUPER-RESOLUTION
The goal of image Super-Resolution (SR) is to trans-
form one or more Low-Resolution (LR) images into High-
Resolution (HR) images. The domain can be broadly cate-
gorized into two areas [16]: Single Image Super-Resolution
(SISR) and Multi-Image Super-Resolution (MISR). In SISR,
a single LR image leads to a single HR image. In contrast,
MISR methods use multiple LR images to produce one or
many HR outputs. This section focuses on SISR and explores
relevant datasets, established SR models, and techniques to
assess image quality.
Given a LR image x ∈R ¯
w×¯h×c, the goal is to generate a
HR counterpart y ∈Rw×h×c with ¯w < w and ¯h < h. The
relationship is represented by a degradation mapping
x = D (y; Θ) = ((y ⊗k) ↓s +n)JP EGq
(1)
where D is a degradation map D : Rw×h×c →R ¯
w×¯h×c and
Θ contains degradation parameters, including aspects like blur
k, noise n, scaling s, and compression quality q [18]. The
degradation is typically unknown, posing the main challenge
in determining the inverse mapping of D with parameters θ,
usually embodied as SR model. It leads to an optimization task
aimed at minimizing the difference between the predicted SR
image ˆy and the original HR image y:
θ∗= argminθ L (ˆy, y) + λϕ(θ),
(2)
where L represents the loss between the predicted SR image
and the actual HR image. Here, λ is a balancing parameter,
while ϕ(θ) is introduced as a regularization term.
The inherent complexity arises from the ill-posed nature
of predicting θ, as several SR images can be valid for any
given LR image, i.e., they can have similar loss values
compared to the ground-truth image but are subjectively
perceived differently due to many aspects like brightness and
coloring [1], [15], [19]. Traditional regression techniques, like
standard CNNs, are often adequate for lower magnifications
but struggle to replicate high-frequency details required at
higher magnifications (e.g., s > 4). To address this, SR models
must hallucinate realistic details beyond interpolation, which
typically falls under the umbrella topic of generative models,
where diffusion models are now at the forefront.
A. Datasets
Several datasets offer a variety of images, resolutions, and
content types. Typically, these datasets consist of LR and HR
image pairs. However, some datasets contain only HR images,
with LR images created by bicubic downsampling with anti-
aliasing - a default setting for imresize in MATLAB [20].
One famous general SR train set is the Diverse 2K resolution
(DIV2K) dataset [21], which includes various realistic images
at different resolutions designed specifically for image SR.
Classical test datasets for SR models trained on DIV2K are
Set5 [22], Set14 [23], BSDS100 [24], Urban100 [25] and
Manga109 [26] that cover a variety of scenes and images
contents like buildings and manga paintings. Flickr2K [27]
and Flickr-Faces-HQ (FFHQ) [28] offer diverse sets of human-
centric and scene-centric images from Flickr, respectively.
While FFHQ is commonly employed for training models for
face SR tasks, Flickr2K is usually used as a train data ex-
tension in combination with DIV2K. Another dataset for face
SR is CelebA-HQ [29], which provides high-quality celebrity
images and is typically used to evaluate FFHQ-trained SR
models. For broader applications in CV, datasets like ImageNet
[30] and Visual Object Classes (VOC2012) [31] are favored.
ImageNet offers an extensive range of images that help train
models on various object classes, whereas VOC2012 is vital
for object detection and segmentation. Both are valuable for
multi-task learning involving SR. More datasets can be found
in the Hitchhiker’s Guide to Super-Resolution [16].
B. SR Models
The primary objective is to design a SR model M :
R ¯
w×¯h×c →Rw×h×c, such that it inverses Equation 1:
ˆy = M (x; θ) ,
(3)
where ˆy is the predicted HR approximation of the LR image
x and θ the parameters of M. The parameters θ are optimized
using Equation 2, i.e., minimizing the loss function L between
the estimation ˆy and the ground-truth HR image y. The
following section focuses on standard methods for designing
an SR model, especially deep learning methods before we
examine how diffusion models fulfill this role in detail.
Traditional Methods: Traditional methods for image SR
define a range of methodologies, such as statistical [32],
edge-based [33], [34] patch-based [35], [36], prediction-based
[37], [38] and sparse representation techniques [39]. They
fundamentally rely on image statistics and the information
inherent in existing pixels to generate HR images. Despite

3
their utility, a noteworthy drawback of these methods is the
potential introduction of noise, blur, and visual artifacts [16].
Regression-based Deep Learning: Image SR significantly
evolved with advancements in deep learning and computa-
tional power. Typically, they employ a Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN) for end-to-end mapping from LR to HR.
Initial models, such as SRCNN [40], FSRCNN [41], and
ESPCNN [42], utilized simple CNNs of diverse depth and
feature maps sizes. Later models adapted concepts from the
broader CV domain into SR models, e.g., ResNet led to
SRResNet, where residual information was propagated to
successive network layers [43]. Likewise, DenseNet [44] was
adapted with SRDenseNet [45]. They employ dense blocks,
where each layer receives additionally the features generated
in all preceding layers. Recursive CNNs that recursively use
the same module to learn representations were also inspired by
other CV methods for regression-based SR methods in DRCN
[46], DRRN [47], and CARN [48]. More recently, attention
mechanisms have been incorporated to focus on regions of
interest in images, predominantly via the channel and spatial
attention mechanisms [16], [49]–[51]. All those methods have
in common that they are regression-based. Commonly used
loss functions are the L1 and L2 losses. As mentioned, they
often produce satisfying results for lower magnifications but
struggle to replicate the high-frequency details required at
higher magnifications (e.g., s > 4). These limitations arise
because these models primarily learn an averaged mapping
(due to L1 and L2 losses) from LR to HR images, which tends
to produce overly smooth textures lacking detail, especially
noticeable in larger upscaling factors [16]. To address this, SR
models must hallucinate realistic details beyond simple inter-
polation, a challenge typically tackled by generative models.
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs): One of the
most prominent generative models is the Generative Adver-
sarial Network (GAN). It uses two CNNs: A generator G
and a discriminator D, which are trained simultaneously. The
generator aims to produce HR samples that are as close to the
original as to fool the discriminator, which tries to distinguish
between generated and real samples. This framework, e.g.,
in SRGAN [52] or ESRGAN [53], is optimized using a
combination of adversarial loss and content loss to produce
less-smoothed images. The resultant images of state-of-the-art
GANs are sharper and more detailed. Due to their capability to
generate high-quality and diverse images, they have received
much attention lately. However, they are susceptible to mode
collapse, have a sizeable computational footprint, sometimes
fail to converge, and suffer from stabilization issues [7].
Flow-based Methods: Flow-based methods employ optical
flow algorithms to generate SR images [54]. They were
introduced in an attempt to counter the ill-posed nature of
image SR by learning the conditional distribution of plausible
HR images given a LR input. They introduce a conditional
normalized flow architecture that aligns LR and HR images by
calculating the displacement field between them and then uses
this information to recover SR images. They employ a fully
invertible encoder capable of mapping any input HR image to
the latent flow space and ensuring exact reconstruction. This
framework enables the SR model to learn rich distributions
using exact log-likelihood-based training [54]. This facilitates
flow-based methods to circumvent training instability but
incurs a substantial computational cost.
C. Image Quality Assessment (IQA)
Image quality is a multifaceted concept that addresses prop-
erties like sharpness, contrast, and absence of noise. Hence,
a fair evaluation of SR models based on produced image
quality forms a non-trivial task. This section presents the
essential methods, especially for diffusion models, to assess
image quality in the context of image SR, which fall under
the umbrella term Image Quality Assessment (IQA) 1. At its
core, IQA refers to any metric that resembles the perceptual
evaluations from human observers, specifically, the level of
realism perceived in an image after the application of SR tech-
niques. During this section, we will use the following notation:
Nx = w·h·c, which defines the number of pixels of an image
x ∈Rw×h×c and Ωx = {(i, j, k) ∈N3
1|i ≤h, j ≤w, k ≤c}
that defines the set of all valid positions in x.
Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR): The Peak Signal-to-
Noise Ratio (PSNR) is one of the most widely used techniques
to evaluate SISR reconstruction quality. It represents the ratio
between the maximum pixel value L and the Mean Squared
Error (MSE) between the SR image ˆy and the HR image y.
PSNR (y, ˆy) = 10 · log10
 
L2
1
N
PN
i=1 [y −ˆy]2
!
(4)
Despite being one of the most popular IQA methods, it does
not accurately match human perception [15]. It focuses on
pixel differences, which can often be inconsistent with the
subjectively perceived quality: the slightest shift in pixels
can result in worse PSNR values while not affecting human
perceptual quality. Due to its pixel-level calculation, models
trained with correlated pixel-based loss tend to achieve high
PSNR values [16], whereas generative models tend to produce
lower PSNR values [15].
Structural Similarity Index (SSIM): The SSIM, like
the PSNR, is a popular evaluation method that focuses on
the differences in structural features between images. It in-
dependently captures the structural similarity by comparing
luminance, contrast, and structures. SSIM estimates for an
image y the luminance µy as the mean of the intensity, while
it is estimating contrast σy as its standard deviation:
µy =
1
Ny
X
p∈Ωy
yp,
(5)
σy =
1
Ny −1
X
p∈Ωy
[yp −µy]2
(6)
To capture the similarity between the computed entities, the
authors introduced a comparison function S:
S (x, y, c) = 2 · x · y + c
x2 + y2 + c ,
(7)
where x and y are the scalar variables being compared, and
c = (k · L)2, 0 < k ≪1 is a constant for numerical stability.
1More SR-related IQA methods can be found in Moser et al. [16].

4
For a HR image y and its approximation ˆy, the luminance (Cl)
and contrast (Cc) comparisons are computed using Cl (y, ˆy) =
S (µy, µˆy, c1) and Cc (y, ˆy) = S (σy, σˆy, c2), where c1, c2 >
0. The empirical covariance
σy,ˆy =
1
Ny −1
X
p∈Ωy
(yp −µy) · (ˆyp −µˆy) ,
(8)
defines the structure comparison (Cs), which is the correlation
coefficient between y and ˆy:
Cs (y, ˆy) =
σy,ˆy + c3
σy · σˆy + c3
,
(9)
where c3 > 0. Finally, the SSIM is defined as:
SSIM (y, ˆy) = [Cl (y, ˆy)]α · [Cc (y, ˆy)]β · [Cs (y, ˆy)]γ
(10)
where α > 0, β > 0, and γ > 0 are parameters that can be
adjusted to tune the relative importance of the components.
Mean Opinion Score (MOS): The MOS is a subjective
measure that leverages human perceptual quality for the eval-
uation of the generated SR images. Human viewers are shown
SR images and asked to rate them with quality scores that are
then mapped to numerical values and later averaged. Typically,
these range from 1 (bad) to 5 (good) but may vary [15]. While
this method is a direct evaluation of human perception, it is
more time-consuming and cumbersome to conduct compared
to objective metrics. Moreover, due to the highly subjective
nature of this metric, it is susceptible to bias.
Consistency: Consistency measures the degree of stability
of non-deterministic SR methods, such as generative models
like GANs or DMs. Like flow-based methods, generative
approaches are intentionally designed to generate a spectrum
of plausible outputs for the same input. However, low consis-
tency is not desirable. Minor variations lessen the influence
of a relatively consistent method in the input. Nevertheless,
consistency can vary depending on the requirements. One
commonly employed metric to quantify consistency is the
Mean Squared Error.
Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity (LPIPS):
Contrary to the pixel-based evaluation of PSNR and SSIM, the
Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity (LPIPS) utilizes
a pre-trained CNN φ, e.g., VGG [55] or AlexNet [56], and
generates L feature maps from the SR and HR image, and
subsequently calculates the similarity between them. Given
hl and wl as the height and width of the l-th feature map
respectively, and a scaling vector αl ∈RCl, the LPIPS metric
is formulated as follows:
LPIPS (y, ˆy) =
L
X
l=1
X
p

αl ⊙
 φl (ˆy) −φl (y)

p

2
2
hl · wl
(11)
LPIPS operates by projecting images into a perceptual fea-
ture space through φ and evaluating the difference between
corresponding patches in SR and HR images, scaled by αl.
This methodology allows for a more human-centric evaluation,
given that it is better aligned with human perception than
traditional metrics such as PSNR and SSIM [16].
No-Reference Metrics: All IQA metrics discussed so far
require a reference (ground-truth) image. However, there are
cases where no reference images are available, e.g., in unsu-
pervised settings. Fortunately, we can assess an image by mea-
suring the distance of statistical features from those obtained
from a collection of high-quality images of a similar domain,
i.e., natural images. This can be opinion- and distortion-aware
like BRISQUE [57] or opinion- and distortion-unaware like
NIQE [58]. Another intriguing way to assess no-reference
image quality is to exploit the visual-language pre-trained
CLIP model [59]. One example is CLIP-IQA, which calculates
the cosine similarity of the encoded image with two prompts
of opposing meaning, i.e., ”good photo” and ”bad photo”
[60]. The resulting relative similarity metric for one or the
other prompt determines the image quality. CLIP-IQA shows
results comparable to those of BRISQUE without the hand-
crafted features and surpasses other no-reference IQA methods
like NIQE. Another way to exploit deep learning models is
to train them to predict subjective scores using IQA datasets
like TID2013 [61]. Examples are DeepQA [62], NIMA [63],
or MUSIQ [64]. Others can be found in the learning-based
perceptual quality section of the Hitchhiker’s Guide to Super-
Resolution [16].
III. DIFFUSION MODELS BASICS
Diffusion Models (DMs) have profoundly impacted the
realm of generative AI, and many approaches that fall under
the umbrella term DM have emerged. What sets DMs apart
from earlier generative models is their execution over iterative
time steps, both forward and backward in time and denoted by
t, as depicted in Figure 1. The forward and backward diffusion
processes are distinguished by:
Forward q - degrade input data using noise iteratively, forward
in time (i.e., t increases).
Backward p - denoise the degraded data, thereby reversing
the noise iteratively, backward in time (i.e., t decreases).
The time step t increases during forward diffusion, whereas
it propagates towards 0 during backward diffusion. Let D =
{xi, yi}N
i=1 be a dataset of LR-HR image-pairs. For each time
step t, the random variable zt describes the current state, a
state between the image and corruption space. In literature,
there is no clear distinction between zt in the forward and zt in
the backward diffusion. During forward diffusion, we assume
zt ∼q (zt | zt−1). Conversely, in the backward diffusion, we
assume zt−1 ∼p (zt−1 | zt). We will denote T with 0 < t ≤
T as the maximal time step for finite cases. The initial data
distribution (t = 0) is represented by z0 ∼q (x), which is then
slowly injected with noise (additive). Vice versa, DMs remove
noise therein by running a parameterized model pθ (zt−1 | zt)
in the reverse time direction that approximates the ideal (but
unattainable) denoised distribution p (zt−1 | zt).
The explicit implementation of the forward diffusion q and
backward diffusion p, approximated by pθ, is defined by the
specific DM in use. There are three types: Two discrete forms,
namely Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs)
and Score-Based Generative Models (SGMs), and the contin-
uous form by Stochastic Differential Equations (SDEs) [65].
Each of these types will be discussed next are comprehensively
shown in Figure 1.

5
Image
Space
Corruption
Space
...
...
backward
forward
DDPM
DDPM SGM
SGM
SDE
SDE
Fig. 1: Principle of DMs. The forward diffusion adds noise
iteratively (red), which translates an image from the image
space to the corruption space. The backward diffusion, the
iterative refinement process, reverts the process (blue) back
to the image space. Shown are three different implemen-
tations of DMs, namely Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic
Models (DDPMs), Score-based Generative Models (SGMs),
and Stochastic Differential Equations (SDEs) with their respect
formulation of the forward and backward diffusion.
A. Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs)
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs) [8]
use two Markov chains to enact the forward and backward
diffusion across a finite amount of discrete time steps.
Forward Diffusion: It transforms the data distribution
into a prior distribution, typically designed manually (e.g.,
Gaussian), given by:
q(zt | zt−1) = N(zt |
√
1 −αt zt−1, αtI),
(12)
where the hyper-parameters 0 < α1:T < 1 represent the
variance of noise incorporated at each time step. While the
Gaussian kernel is commonly adopted, alternative kernel types
can also be employed. This formulation can be condensed to
a single-step calculation, as shown by:
q(zt | z0) = N(zt | √γt z0, (1 −γt)I),
(13)
where γt = Qt
i=1(1 −αi) [66]. Consequently, zt can be
directly sampled regardless of what ought to happen on
previous time steps by
zt = √γt · z0 +
p
1 −γt · ϵ,
ϵ ∼N (0, I) .
(14)
Backward Diffusion: The goal is to directly learn the
inverse of the forward diffusion and generate a distribution
that resembles the prior z0, usually the HR image in SR. In
practice, we use a CNN to learn a parameterized form of p.
Since the forward process approximates q(zT ) ≈N (0, I), the
formulation of the learnable transition kernel becomes:
pθ (zt−1 | zt) = N (zt−1 | µθ(zt, γt), Σθ(zt, γt)) ,
(15)
where µθ and Σθ are learnable. Similarly, the conditional
formulation pθ (zt−1 | zt, x) conditioned on x (e.g., a LR
image) is using µθ(zt, x, γt) and Σθ(zt, x, γt) instead.
Optimization: To guide the backward diffusion in learning
the forward process, we minimize the Kullback-Leibler (KL)
divergence of the joint distribution of the forward and reverse
sequences
pθ (z0, ..., zT ) = p (zT )
T
Y
t=1
pθ (zt−1 | zt) , and
(16)
q (z0, ..., zT ) = q (z0)
T
Y
t=1
q (zt | zt−1) ,
(17)
which leads to minimizing
KL(q (z0, ..., zT ) ∥pθ (z0, ..., zT ))
(18)
= −Eq(z0,...,zT ) [log pθ (z0, ..., zT )] + c
(i)
= Eq(z0,...,zT )
"
−log p (zT ) −
T
X
t=1
log pθ (zt−1 | zt)
q (zt | zt−1)
#
+ c
(ii)
≥E [−log pθ (z0)] + c,
where (i) is possible because both terms are products of
distributions and (ii) is the product of Jensen’s inequality. The
constant c is unaffected and, therefore, irrelevant in optimizing
θ. Note that Equation 18 without c is the Variational Lower
Bound (VLB) of the log-likelihood of the data z0, which is
commonly maximized by DDPMs.
B. Score-based Generative Models (SGMs)
Score-based
Generative
Models
(SGMs),
much
like
DDPMs, utilize discrete diffusion processes but employ an
alternative mathematical foundation. Instead of using proba-
bility density function p(z) directly, Song et al. [11] propose
to work with its (Stein) score function, which is defined as
the gradient of the log probability density ∇z log p(z). Math-
ematically, the score function preserves all information about
the density function, but computationally, it is easier to work
with. Furthermore, the decoupling of model training from
the sampling procedure grants greater flexibility in defining
sampling methods and training objectives.
Forward Diffusion: Let 0 < σ1 < ... < σT be a finite
sequence of noise levels. Like DDPMs, the forward diffusion,
typically assigned to a Gaussian noise distribution, is
q(zt | z0) = N(zt | z0, σ2
t I).
(19)
This equation results in a sequence of noisy data densities
q(z1), ..., q(zT ) with q(zt) =
R
q(zt)q(z0)dz0. Consequently,
the intermediate step zt = z0 +σt ·ϵ with ϵ ∼N (0, I) can be
sampled agnostic from previous time steps in a single step.
Backward Diffusion: To revert the noise during the back-
ward diffusion, we need to approximate ∇zt log q(zt) and
choose a method for estimating the intermediate states zt from

6
that approximation. For the gradient approximation at each
time step t, we use a trained predictor, denoted as sθ and
called Noise-Conditional Score Network (NCSN), such that
sθ(zt, t) ≈∇zt log q(zt) [11].
The training of the NCSN will be covered in the next sec-
tion; for now, we focus on the sampling process using NCSN.
Sampling with NCSN involves generating the intermediate
states zt through an iterative approach, using sθ(zt, t). Note
that this iterative process is different from the iterations done
during the diffusion as it addresses solely the generation of zt.
This is a key difference to DDPMs as zt needs to be sampled
iteratively, whereas DDPMs directly predict zt from zt+1.
There are various ways to perform this iterative generation,
but we will concentrate on a specific method known as
Annealed Langevin Dynamics (ALD), introduced by Song et
al. [10]. Let N be the number of estimation iterations for zt
at time step t and αt > 0 the corresponding step size, which
determines how much the estimation moves from one estimate
z(i)
t−1 towards z(i+1)
t−1 . The initial state is z(N)
T
∼N (0, I). For
each 0 < t ≤T, we initialize z(0)
t−1 = z(N)
t
≈zt, which is the
latest estimation of the previous intermediate state. In order to
get z(N)
t−1 ≈zt−1 iteratively, ALD uses the following update
rules for i = 0, ..., N −1:
ϵ(i) ←N (0, I)
(20)
z(i+1)
t−1
←z(i)
t−1 + 1
2αt−1sθ(z(i)
t−1, t −1) + √st−1ϵ(i)
(21)
This update rule guarantees that z(N)
0
converges to q(z0) for
αt →0 and N →∞[67].
Similar to DDPMs, we can turn SGMs into conditional
SGMs by integrating the condition x, e.g., a LR image, into
sθ(zt, x, t) ≈∇zt log q(zt|x).
Optimization: Without specifically formulating the back-
ward diffusion, we can train a NCSN such that sθ(zt, t) ≈
∇zt log q(zt). Estimating the score can be done by using the
denoising score matching method [68]:
E
t∼U(1,T )
z0∼q(z0)
zt∼q(zt|z0)

λ(t)σ2
t ∥∇zt log q(zt) −sθ(zt, t)∥2
(22)
(i)
=
E
t∼U(1,T )
z0∼q(z0)
zt∼q(zt|z0)

λ(t)σ2
t ∥∇zt log q(zt|z0) −sθ(zt, t)∥2
+ c
(ii)
=
E
t∼U(1,T )
z0∼q(z0)
zt∼q(zt|z0)

λ(t)∥−zt −z0
σt
−σtsθ(zt, t)∥2

+ c
(iii)
=
E
t∼U(1,T )
z0∼q(z0)
ϵ∼N(0,I)

λ(t)∥ϵ + σtsθ(zt, t)∥2
+ c
where λ(t) > 0 is a weighting function, σt the noise level
added at time step t, (i) derived by Vincent et al. [68], (ii)
from Equation 19, (iii) from zt = z0 +σtϵ and with c again a
constant unaffected in the optimization of θ. Note that there are
other ways to estimate the score, e.g., based on score matching
[69] or sliced score matching [70].
C. Stochastic Differential Equations (SDEs)
So far, we have discussed DMs that deal with finite time
steps. A generalization to infinite continuous time steps is
made by formulating these as solutions to Stochastic Differ-
ential Equations (SDEs), also known as Score SDEs [10].
In fact, we can view SGMs and DDPMs as discretizations
of a continuous-time SDE. SDEs are not entirely bound to
DMs, as they are a mathematical concept describing stochastic
processes. As such, they fit perfectly to describe the processes
we want to simulate in DMs. Like previously, data is perturbed
in a general diffusion process but generalized to an infinite
number of noise scales.
Forward Diffusion: We can represent the forward diffusion
by the following SDE:
dz = f(z, t)dt + g(t)dw,
(23)
where f and g are the drift and diffusion functions, respectively,
and w is the standard Wiener process (also known as Brownian
motion). This generalized formulation allows uniform repre-
sentation of both DDPMs and SGMs. The SDE for DDPMs
is given by:
dz = −1
2α(t)zdt +
p
α(t)dw,
(24)
with α( t
T ) = Tαt for T →∞. For SGMs, the SDE is
dz =
r
d [σ(t)2]
dt
dw,
(25)
with σ( t
T ) = σt for T →∞. From now on, we denote with
qt(z) the distribution of zt in the diffusion process.
Backward Diffusion: The reverse-time SDE is formulated
by Anderson et al. [71] as:
dz =

f(z, t) −g(t)2∇z log qt(z)

dt + g(t)d ˜w,
(26)
where ˜w is the standard Wiener process when time flows
backwards and dt an infinitesimal negative time step. Solutions
to Equation 26 can be viewed as diffusion processes that grad-
ually convert noise to data. The existence of a corresponding
probability flow Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE), whose
trajectories possess the same marginals as the reverse-time
SDE, was proven by Song et al. [11] and is
dz =

f(z, t) −1
2g(t)2∇z log qt(z)

dt.
(27)
Thus, the reverse-time SDE and the probability flow ODE
enable sampling from the same data distribution.
Optimization: Similar to the approach in SGMs, we define
a score model such that sθ(zt, t) ≈∇z log qt(z). Additionally,
we extend Equation 22 to continuous time as follows:
E
t∼U(0,T )
z0∼q(z0)
zt∼q(zt|z0)

λ(t)∥sθ(zt, t) −∇zt log qt(zt | z0)∥2
,
(28)
where λ(t) > 0 is a weighting function.

7
Diffusion Models
Forward
Backward
times
Generator
Discriminator
1/0
Encoder
Decoder
Encoder
Decoder
Generative Adversarial Networks
Variational Autoencoders
Normalizing Flows
Fig. 2:
Conceptual overview of generative models (GANs,
VAEs, NFs, and DMs).
D. Relation between Diffusion Models
As highlighted in the SDE section, we can describe both
variations, namely SGMs, and DDPMs, with SDEs. We can
also showcase this close relationship by reformulating the
optimization targets. For DDPMs, we saw in Equation 18 that
KL(q (z0, ..., zT ) ∥pθ (z0, ..., zT ))
(ii)
≥E [−log pθ (z0)] + c
is minimized. By reweighting the VLB, as Ho et al. [8]
recommends for improved sample quality, we can further
derive:
E
t∼U(1,T )
z0∼q(z0)
ϵ∼N(0,I)

λ(t)∥ϵ −ϵθ(zt, t)∥2
,
where λ(t) > 0 is a weighting function. If we now take the
optimization target in Equation 22 of SGMs, which was
E
t∼U(1,T )
z0∼q(z0)
ϵ∼N(0,I)

λ(t)∥ϵ + σtsθ(zt, t)∥2
+ c,
the connection between DDPMs and SGMs becomes clear
once we set ϵθ(zt, t) = −σtsθ(zt, t). As the constant c is
irrelevant for the optimization, we can see once again that there
is a mathematical connection between DDPMs and SGMs.
E. Relation to other Image SR Generative Models
Generative models in image SR differ primarily in how they
approach the task of generating HR images from LR inputs
and are illustrated in Figure 2. These differences stem from
the underlying architecture and training objectives. While they
offer significant advantages, they come with a individual set
of challenges, like training stability and computational costs.
GAN: One prominent category of generative models is
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [72], which have
demonstrated state-of-the-art performance in various vision-
related tasks, including text-to-image synthesis [7] and im-
age super-resolution (SR) [52]. GANs are known for their
adversarial training, where a generator competes against a
discriminator. Although DMs do not employ a discriminator,
they utilize a similar adversarial training strategy by iter-
atively adding and removing noise to enable realistic data
generation. However, approaches with GANs often suffer from
non-convergence, training instability, and high computational
costs. They require careful hyperparameter tuning due to the
interplay between the generator and the discriminator.
VAE: Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [73] are designed
as autoencoders with a variational latent space, which is
especially interesting in addressing the ill-posedness of image
SR. The core objective of a VAE centers around establishing
the variational lower bound of the log data likelihood, akin to
the fundamental principle underlying DMs. In a comparative
context, one can consider DMs as a variation of VAEs but
with a fixed VAE encoder responsible for perturbing the input
data, while the VAE decoder resembles the backward diffusion
process in DMs. Still, unlike VAEs, which compress the
input into smaller dimensions in the latent space, DMs often
maintain the same spatial size.
ARM: Autoregressive Models (ARMs) treat images as
sequences of pixels and generate each pixel based on the
values of previously generated pixels in a sequential manner
[6]. The probability of the entire image is given as the product
of conditional probability distributions for each individual
pixel. This makes ARMs computationally expensive for HR
image generation. Conversely, DMs generate data by gradually
diffusing noise into an initial data sample and then reverse this
process. Noise is diffused across the entire image simultane-
ously rather than sequentially.
NF: Normalizing Flows (NF) [74] are a distinct category
of generative models renowned for their capacity to represent
data as intricate and complex distributions. Like DMs and
VAEs, these models are optimized based on the log-likelihood
of the data they generate. However, what sets NFs apart is their
unique ability to learn an invertible parameterized transfor-
mation. Importantly, this transformation possesses a tractable
Jacobian determinant, making it feasible to compute. The
concept of DiffFlow [75] enters the picture as an innovative
algorithm that marries the principles of DMs with those of
NFs. This combination offers the promise of enhanced genera-
tive modeling capabilities. Yet, while promising, NFs are often
considered challenging to train and can be computationally
demanding [76].
IV. IMPROVEMENTS FOR DIFFUSION MODELS
In the broader research community, there are several ways to
improve DMs for image generation, as presented, for example,
by Karras et al. [77]. This section, however, focuses on
enhancements particularly interesting for image SR: Efficient
sampling and enhanced likelihood estimation.

8
A. Efficient Sampling
Efficient sampling refers to strategies that generate samples
from noise more quickly, i.e., in fewer time steps, without
compromising the quality of the produced image significantly.
For instance, a DDPM takes about 20 hours to sample 50,000
32x32 images, in contrast to a GAN’s less than one minute on
a Nvidia 2080 Ti GPU; for larger 256x256 images, this extends
to nearly 1,000 hours [78]. Fortunately, the independence
between training and inference schedules is often leveraged
in image SR. For example, a model may undergo training
with 1,000 time steps, but the subsequent inference phase
may require only a fraction, i.e., 200 [15], [79]. However, the
broader community of DM research has made further attempts
focusing on either training-based or training-free sampling.
Training-based sampling methods speed up data genera-
tion using a trained sampler that approximates the backward
diffusion process instead of a traditional numerical solver. This
process may be complete or partial. For example, Watson et
al. [80] developed a dynamic programming algorithm that
identifies optimal inference paths using a fixed number of
refinement steps, significantly reducing the computation re-
quired. Diffusion Sampler Search [81] offers another approach,
optimizing fast samplers for pre-trained DMs by adjusting
the Kernel Inception Distance. Another technique is truncated
diffusion, which improves speed by prematurely ending the
forward diffusion process [82], [83]. This early termination
results in outputs that are not purely Gaussian noise, presenting
computational challenges. These challenges are addressed us-
ing proxy distributions from pre-trained VAEs or GANs, which
match the diffused data distribution and facilitate efficient
backward diffusion. Lastly, Knowledge distillation is also used
to accelerate sampling. It involves transferring knowledge from
a complex, slower sampler (the teacher model) to simpler,
faster models (student models) [84], [85]. As demonstrated
by Salimans et al. [86], this method progressively reduces
the number of sampling steps, trading off a slight decrease
in sample quality for increased speed. Similarly, Xiao et al.
[87] addressed the slow sampling issue associated with the
Gaussian assumption in denoising steps, which is usually
only effective for small step sizes. They proposed Denoising
Diffusion GANs that use conditional GANs for the denoising
steps, allowing for larger step sizes and faster sampling. For
image SR, an application for exploiting knowledge distillation
can be found in AddSR [88]. Similarly, YONOS-SR [89] uses
knowledge distillation, but instead of training faster samplers,
they transfer different scaling task knowledge and use the
training-free DDIMs for efficient sampling, which is presented
in the next section.
Training-free sampling methods aim to speed up sampling
by minimizing the number of discretization steps while solving
the Stochastic Differential Equation (SDE) or Probability Flow
Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE) [90], [91]. Denoising
Diffusion Implicit Models (DDIMs) [90] introduced by Song
et al. generalizes the Markovian forward diffusion of DDPMs
into non-Markovian ones. This generalization allows the
DDIMs to learn a Markov chain to reverse the non-Markovian
forward diffusion, resulting in higher sampling speeds with
minimal loss in sample quality. Jolicoeur-Martineau et al. [91]
have devised an efficient SDE solver with adaptive step sizes
for the accelerated generation of score-based models. This
method has been found to generate samples more rapidly than
the Euler-Maruyama method without compromising sample
quality. Building upon DDIM and Jolicoeur-Martineau et al.,
the DPM-solver [92], inspired by the AnalyticalDPM [93],
approximates the error prediction via Taylor expansion and
thereby achieves efficient sampling by analytically resolving
the linear component of the ODE solution instead of relying
on generic black-box ODE solvers. This method significantly
reduces the sampling steps to 10 to 20. In a later work, the
authors introduced an improved version with DPM-solver++
that essentially approximates the predicted image instead of
the error [94]. Lately, a more general formulation and exten-
sion of the DPM-solver++ was introduced by UniPC [95].
B. Improved Likelihood
Log-likelihood improvement is directly coupled with en-
hancing the performance of various applications and methods,
including but not limited to compression [96], semi-supervised
learning [97], and image SR. Given that DMs do not directly
optimize the log-likelihood, e.g., SGMs utilize a weighted
combination of score-matching losses, an objective that forms
an upper bound on the negative log-likelihood needs to be
optimized. Song et al. [98] proposed a method called likeli-
hood weighting to address this need. This method minimizes
the weighted combination of score matching losses for score-
based DMs. A carefully chosen weighting function sets an
upper bound on the negative log-likelihood in the weighted
score-matching objective. Upon minimization, this results in
an elevation of the log-likelihood. Kingma et al. [99] explored
methods that simultaneously train the noise schedule and
diffusion parameters to maximize the variational lower bound
within Variational Diffusion Models. Additionally, the Im-
proved Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (iDDPMs)
proposed by Nichol and Dhariwal et al. [100] implement a
cosine noise schedule. This gradually introduces noise into the
input, contrasting with the linear schedules that tend to degrade
the information quicker. Using the cosine noise schedule leads
to better log-likelihoods and facilitates faster sampling.
V. DIFFUSION MODELS FOR IMAGE SR
So far, we introduced the theoretical framework of DMs.
This section reviews practical applications and recent advances
in image SR. We will discuss concrete realizations of DMs,
which are predominantly DDPMs. We then discuss guidance
strategies to enhance conditioning usage, represent condi-
tioning information in alternative state domains for DDPMs,
and incorporate various conditioning methods. Additionally,
we explore SR-specific research areas, including corruption
spaces, color-shifting, and architectural designs. Figure 3 pro-
vides a topological overview of this section.
A. Concrete Realization of Diffusion Models
While SGMs provide considerable design flexibility, the
image SR trend leans towards DDPMs. DDPMs benefit from

9
State Domain:
How are states represented?
- Pixel Space
- Latent Space
- Frequency Space
- Residual Space
Guidance:
Improve conditioning influencing training
- Classifier guidance
- Classifier-free guidance
Conditioning:
What information guides sampling?
- LR reference
- SR reference
- Feature reference
- Text-to-Image information
Corruption Space:
What is the target of the forward diffusion? /
What is the start of the backward diffusion?
- Gaussian noise
- Cold Diffusion
- I2SB
- InDi
Fig. 3: Topology of this work. Conditioning (subsection V-D)
leads the backward diffusion, whereas guidance (subsec-
tion V-B) is a training strategy to improve the incorporation
of conditioning into DMs. The state domain (subsection V-C)
describes the representation of states zt. The corruption space
(subsection V-E) describes the target of the forward diffusion
process or the start of the backward diffusion.
a straightforward implementation, which reduces the entry
barrier. It is a significant advantage, as it allows quicker de-
velopment cycles and replication of results. In addition, while
the flexibility of SGMs is advantageous in creating customized
solutions, it introduces design complexity due to the multitude
of design variables that need to be considered. This poses a
challenge in research settings, where rigorously evaluating the
impact of each variable (e.g., different sampling algorithms)
becomes cumbersome. Moreover, the growing DDPM liter-
ature contributes to their popularity. As more studies adopt
DDPMs, a virtuous cycle is created, where familiarity and
proven effectiveness encourage further adoption.
Among the pioneering DM efforts is SR3 [15], which
concretely realizes DDPMs for image SR. Like typical for
DDPMs, it adds Gaussian noise to the LR image until zT ∼
N (0, I) and generates a target HR image z0 iteratively in T
refinement steps. SR3 employs the denoising model to predict
the noise ϵt. The denoising model, φθ (x, zt, γt), takes the LR
image x, the noise variance γt, and the noisy target image zt
as inputs. With the prediction of ϵt provided by φθ, we can
reformulate Equation 14 to approximate z0 as follows:
zt = √γt · ˆz0 +
p
1 −γt · φθ (x, zt, γt)
⇐⇒ˆz0 =
1
√γt
·

zt −
p
1 −γt · φθ (x, zt, γt)

(29)
The substitution of ˆz0 into the posterior distribution to param-
eterize the mean of pθ (zt−1|zt, x) leads to:
µθ (x, zt, γt) =
1
√αt

zt −1 −αt
√1 −γt
· φθ (x, zt, γt)

(30)
In SR3, the authors simplified the variance Σθ to (1 −αt) for
ease of computation. Consequently, each refinement step with
ϵt ∼N (0, I) can be represented as:
zt−1 =
1
√αt

zt −1 −αt
√1 −γt
· φθ (x, zt, γt)

+
√
1 −αt · ϵt
(31)
Concurrent work focused on a similar implementation of SR3
but shows different variations implementing the denoising
model φθ (x, zt, γt), which we will discuss later. A notable
mention is SRDiff [79], published around the same time
and follows a close realization of SR3. The main distinction
between SRDiff and SR3 is that SR3 predicts the HR image
directly, whereas SRDiff predicts the residual information
between the LR and HR image, i.e., the difference. Thus, it
has an alternative state domain, which will be discussed next.
B. Guidance in Training
The backbone of diffusion-based image SR is the learning
of conditional distributions [15], [101]. As such, the condition
x, e.g., the LR image, is integrated into the backward diffu-
sion, i.e., pθ (zt−1 | zt, x) for DDPMs or in sθ(zt, x, t) for
SGMs/SDEs. However, this simple formulation can result in a
model that overlooks the conditioning. A principle known as
guidance can mitigate this issue by controlling the weighting
of the conditioning information at the expense of sample
diversity. It can be categorized into classifier and classifier-
free guidance. To our knowledge, while effectively used for
improving DMs, they have not been applied to image SR.
Classifier Guidance: Classifier guidance employs a clas-
sifier to guide the diffusion process by merging the score
estimate of the DM with the gradients of the classifier during
sampling [12]. This process is similar to low temperature or
truncated sampling in BigGANs [102] and facilitates a trade-
off between mode coverage and sample fidelity. The classifier
is trained concurrently with the DM to predict the conditional
information x from zt. For weighting of the conditioning
information, the score function becomes:
∇zt log q(zt | x) = ∇zt log q(zt) + λ∇zt log q(x | zt), (32)
where λ ∈R+ is a hyper-parameter for controlling the
weighting. The downside of this approach is its dependence
on a learned classifier that can handle arbitrarily noisy inputs,
a capability most existing pre-trained image classification
models lack.
Classifier-Free Guidance: Classifier-Free guidance aims to
achieve similar results without a classifier [103]. It modifies
Equation 32 into
∇zt log q(zt|x) = (1 −λ)∇zt log q(zt) + λ∇zt log q(zt | x).
(33)
As a result, we have a standard unconditional DM and a
conditional DM that has the score estimate ∇zt log q(zt | x).
The unconditional DM remains when λ = 0, and for λ =
1, it aligns with the vanilla formulation of the conditional
DM. The interesting scenario arises when λ > 1, where
the DM prioritizes conditional information and moves away
from the unconditional score function, thus reducing the
likelihood of generating samples disregarding conditioning
information. However, the major downside of this approach

10
is its computational cost for training two separate DMs. This
can be mitigated by training a single conditional model and
substituting the conditioning information with a null value in
the unconditional score function [104].
C. State Domains
So far, we have discussed methods that operate directly on
the pixel space. This section introduces different methods that
map the input into alternative state domains: latent, frequency,
and residual space. Apart from particular challenges arising
from the alternative state domain, these methods incur an
additional step that maps the pixel domain into their own,
as illustrated in Figure 4.
Latent Space: Models like SR3 [15], and SRDiff [79]
have achieved high-quality SR results by operating in the
pixel domain. However, these models are computationally
intensive due to their iterative nature and the high-dimensional
calculations in RGB space. To reduce computational demands,
one can move the diffusion process into the latent space
of an autoencoder [105]. The first of this kind was the
Latent Score-based Generative Models (LSGMs) by Vadhat
et al. [106]. It is a regular SGM that operates in the latent
space of a VAE and, by pre-training the VAE, achieves
even faster sampling speeds. It yields comparable and better
results than DMs operating in the pixel domain while being
faster. Building upon LSGMs, Rombach et al. introduced
the Latent Diffusion Model (LDM) [13], [107], which also
performs diffusion in a low-dimensional latent space of an
autoencoder. In contrast to LSGM, LDM utilizes a DDPM
and an autoencoder that is pre-trained, like the VQ-GAN [5],
and is not jointly trained with the denoising network. This
approach significantly lowers resource requirements without
compromising performance. Due to the decoupled training, it
requires very little regularization of the latent space and allows
the reuse of latent representations across multiple models. Im-
proving upon LDMs is REFUSION (image REstoration with
difFUSION models) [108] by Luo et al., which differs in two
aspects: First, it uses a U-Net that contains skip connections
from the encoder to the decoder, which provides the decoder
with additional details. Moreover, it introduces Nonlinear
Activation-Free blocks (NAFBlocks) [109], replacing all non-
linear activations with an element-wise operation that splits
feature channels into two parts and multiplies them to produce
one output. Secondly, they train their U-Net with a latent-
replacing training strategy, which partially replaces the latent
representation with either the encoded LR or HR image for
reconstruction training. Similarly, Chen et al. [110] improve
the architectural aspects of LDMs and propose a two-stage
strategy called the Hierarchical Integration Diffusion Model
(HI-Diff). In the first stage, an encoder compresses the ground
truth image to a highly compact latent space representation,
which has a much higher compression ratio than LDM. As
a result, the computational burden of the DM, which refines
multi-scale latent representations, is much more reduced. The
second stage is a vision transformer-based autoencoder, which
incorporates the latent representations of the first stage during
the downsampling process via Hierarchical Integration Mod-
ules (HIM), a cross-attention fusion module.
Corruption
Space
Pixel-based Diffusion
Clean
image
Corruption
Space
Latent Space Diffusion
Latent
Representation
Corruption
Space
Frequency-based Diffusion
Wavelet
Representation
Clean
image
Clean
image
DWT
iDWT
Dec.
Enc.
Fig. 4: Overview of state domains. The green bar shows the
vanilla DM operating in pixel space. The blue bar shows the
exploit of the latent space domain via Autoencoders. The red
bar shows the application of DMs in the wavelet domain.
Frequency Space: Wavelets provide a novel outlook on SR
[16], [111]. The conversion from the spatial to the wavelet
domain is lossless and offers significant advantages as the
spatial size of an image can be downsized by a factor of
four, thereby allowing faster diffusion during the training
and inference stages. Moreover, the conversion segregates
high-frequency details into distinct channels, facilitating a
more concentrated and intentional focus on high-frequency
information, offering a higher degree of control [112]. Besides,
it can be conveniently incorporated into existing DMs as a
plug-in feature. The diffusion process can interact directly with
all wavelet bands as proposed in DiWa [113] or specifically
target certain bands while the remaining bands are predicted
via standard CNNs. For instance, WaveDM [114] modifies
the low-frequency band, whereas WSGM [115] or ResDiff
[116] conditions the high-frequency bands relative to the low-
resolution image. Altogether, the wavelet domain presents a
promising avenue for future research. It provides potential for
significant performance acceleration while maintaining, if not
enhancing, the quality of SR results.
Residual Space: SRDiff [79] was the first work that ad-
vocated for shifting the generation process into the residual
space, i.e., the difference between the upsampled LR and the
HR image. This enables the DM to focus on residual details,
speeds up convergence, and stabilizes the training [16], [111].
Whang et al. [117] also employs residual predictions as a
fundamental component of their predict-and-refine approach
for image deblurring. However, unlike SRDiff, they provide a
SR prediction with a CNN instead of the bilinear upsampled
LR and predict the residuals between the SR prediction and
the HR ground truth with their DM. An improvement is
presented by ResDiff [116], which additionally incorporates
the SR prediction and its high-frequency information during
the backward diffusion for better guidance. In a different vein,
Yue et al. [118] presents ResShift. This technique constructs a
Markov chain of transformations between HR and LR images
by manipulating the residual between them. Thus, instead of
just adding Gaussian noise with zero mean in the forward
process, the residual is also added as the mean of the noise
sampling during training. This novel approach substantially
enhances sampling efficiency, i.e., only 15 sampling steps.

11
Stage 2: Diffusion Training
Encoder
Decoder
+
Stage 1: VAE Training
Fig. 5:
Overview of DiffuseVAE. The two-stage approach
employs a VAE (first stage), which generates variational
prediction as a condition for the DM (second stage).
D. Conditioning Diffusion Models
DMs depend on conditioning information to guide the
sampling process toward a reasonable HR prediction. One
common strategy is to use the LR image during the backward
diffusion. This section reviews various alternative methods for
integrating conditioning information into backward diffusion.
Low Resolution Reference: High-quality SR predictions
can be achieved through a straightforward channel concatena-
tion [119]. The LR image is concatenated with the denoised
result from time step t−1 and serves as the conditioning input
for noise prediction at time step t. In contrast, Iterative Latent
Variable Refinement (ILVR) by Choi et al. [120] conditions
the generative process of an unconditional LDM [13]. This
approach offers the advantage of shorter training times, as it
leverages a pre-trained DM. To integrate conditioning infor-
mation, the low-frequency components of the denoised output
are replaced with their corresponding counterparts from the
LR image. Thus, the latent variable is aligned with a provided
reference image at each generation process stage, ensuring
precise control and adaptation during generation.
Super-Resolved Reference: An alternative to conditioning
the denoising on the LR image involves learned priors from
pre-trained SR models to predict a reference image. E.g.,
CDPMSR [121] conditions the denoising process with a
predicted SR reference image obtained using existing and stan-
dard SR models. ResDiff [116], on the other hand, leverages
a pre-trained CNN to predict a low-frequency, content-rich
image that includes partial high-frequency components. This
image guides the noise towards the residual space, offering an
alternative means of conditioning the generative process.
Pandey et al. [128] introduced an exciting idea of vary-
ing predicted conditions with DiffuseVAE as illustrated in
Figure 5. This approach integrates the stochastic predictions
generated by a VAE as conditioning information for the
DM, capitalizing on the advantages offered by both models.
They use a two-stage approach called the generator-refiner
framework. In the first stage, a VAE is trained on the training
data. In the subsequent stage, the DM is conditioned using
varying, often blurred, reconstructions generated by the VAE.
The essential advantage of this method lies in the diversity
in the generated samples, which is defined within the lower-
dimensional latent space of the VAE. This characteristic
creates a more favorable balance between sampling speed
TABLE I: Results for 4× SR of general images on DIV2K val.
Note that EDSR, FxSR-PD, CAR, and RRDB are regression-
based methods that generally produce better PSNR and SSIM
scores than generative approaches [15].
Methods
PSNR ↑
SSIM ↑
LPIPS ↓
Bicubic
26.70
0.77
0.409
EDSR [122]
28.98
0.83
0.270
FxSR-PD [123]
29.24
0.84
0.239
RRDB [53]
29.44
0.84
0.253
CAR [1]
32.82
0.88
-
RankSRGAN [124]
26.55
0.75
0.128
ESRGAN [53]
26.22
0.75
0.124
SRFlow [125]
27.09
0.76
0.120
SRDiff [79]
27.41
0.79
0.136
IDM [100]
27.59
0.78
-
DiWa [113]
28.09
0.78
0.104
TABLE II: PSNR and SSIM comparison on CelebA-HQ face
SR 16×16 →128×128. Consistency measures MSE (×10−5)
between LR inputs and the downsampled SR outputs.
Methods
PSNR ↑
SSIM ↑
Consistency ↓
PULSE [126]
16.88
0.44
161.1
FSRGAN [127]
23.01
0.62
33.8
SR3 (regression) [15]
23.96
0.69
2.71
SR3 (diffusion) [15]
23.04
0.65
2.68
DiWa [113]
23.34
0.67
-
IDM [100]
24.01
0.71
2.14
and sample quality. It is advantageous in scenarios where
multiple predictions are required, similar to the use cases for
Normalizing Flows.
Feature Reference: Another avenue for conditioning in-
volves relevant features extracted from pre-trained networks.
SRDiff [79] leverages a pre-trained encoder to encode LR
image features at each step of the backward diffusion. These
features serve as guidance, aiding in the generation of higher-
resolution outputs. Implicit DMs (IDMs) [100] take a different
approach by conditioning their denoising network with a neu-
ral representation, which enables the learning of a continuous
representation at various scales. They encode the image as a
function within continuous space and seamlessly integrate it
into the DM. These extracted features are adapted to multiple
scales and are used across multiple layers within the DMs. To
comprehensively understand the performance differences be-
tween these approaches, comparisons can be found in Table II
and Table I. Recently, DeeDSR was introduced [129], which
incorporates degradation-aware features extracted from the LR
image to guide the diffusion process of a LDM [107].
Text-to-Image Information: By incorporating conditioning
information that goes beyond the LR image (e.g., its SR
prediction, direct concatenation of the LR image, or its feature
representation), one can add Text-To-Image (T2I) information.
The incorporation of T2I information proves advantageous as
it allows the usage of pre-trained T2I models. These models
can be fine-tuned by adding specific layers or encoders tailored

12
TABLE III: Results for 4× SR of general images on resized
DIV2K val (128 × 128 →512 × 512).
Methods
PSNR ↑
SSIM ↑
LPIPS ↓
BSRGAN [134]
23.41
0.61
0.426
Real-ESRGAN [135]
23.15
0.62
0.403
LDL [136]
22.74
0.62
0.416
FeMaSR [137]
21.86
0.54
0.410
SwinIR-GAN [49]
22.65
0.61
0.406
LDM [13]
21.48
0.56
0.450
SD Upscaler [13]
21.21
0.55
0.430
StableSR [107]
20.88
0.53
0.438
PASD [131]
21.85
0.52
0.403
to the SR task, facilitating the integration of textual descrip-
tions into the image generation process. This approach enables
a richer source of guidance, potentially improving image
synthesis and interpretation in SR tasks. Wang et al. have
put this concept into practice with StableSR [107]. Central
to StableSR is a time-aware encoder trained in tandem with a
frozen Stable DM, essentially a LDM. This setup seamlessly
integrates trainable spatial feature transform layers, enabling
conditioning based on the input image. To further augment the
flexibility of StableSR and achieve a delicate balance between
realism and fidelity, they introduce an optional controllable
feature wrapping module. This module accommodates user
preferences, allowing for fine-tuned adjustments based on
individual requirements. The inspiration for this feature comes
from the methodology introduced in CodeFormer [130], which
enhances the versatility of StableSR in catering to diverse
user needs and preferences. Likewise, Yang et al. introduce a
method known as Pixel-Aware Stable Diffusion (PASD) [131].
PASD takes conditioning a step further by incorporating text
embeddings of the LR input using a CLIP text encoder [59]
and its feature representation. This approach augments the
model’s ability to generate images by incorporating textual
information, thus allowing for more precise and context-
aware image synthesis. Comparisons between PASD and other
approaches can be found in Table III, demonstrating the impact
of this text-based conditioning on image SR results. A similar
concurrent work can be found with SeeSR [132]. XPSR [133]
extends this idea by fusing different levels of semantic text
encodings (high-level: the content of the image; low-level: the
perception of overall quality, sharpness, noise level, and other
distortions about the LR image).
E. Corruption Space
Karras et al. [77] identified three pillars of DMs: the noise
schedule, the network parameterization, and the sampling
algorithm. Recently, many authors argued to consider also
different types of corruption instead of pure Gaussian noise
used during forward diffusion like Soft Score Matching [138],
i.e., the starting point for backward diffusion or the target
for the forward diffusion zT . Soft Score Matching directly
incorporates the filtering process within the SGM, training the
model to predict a clean image. Upon corruption, this predicted
image aligns with the diffused observation. Note that zT may
...
...
...
...
Forward
Diffusion
Backward
Diffusion
Standard
...
...
...
...
Image-to-Image
Schrödinger
Fig. 6: Comparison of the standard corruption space and I2SB.
Instead of injecting noise to the clean image (initial state z0),
the final state zT is the degraded image.
be represented differently due to alternative state domains
(e.g., latent, frequency, or residual). Cold Diffusion [139]
presents another ingenious way of modifying the corruption
space for DDPMs. It shows that the generative capability is
not strongly dependent on the choice of image degradation. It
reveals new experimental types of diffusion besides Gaussian
noise can be effectively used, like animorphosis (i.e., human
faces iteratively degrading to animal faces). The Image-to-
Image Schr¨odinger Bridge (I2SB) goes in a similar direction
but does not impose any assumptions on the underlying prior
distributions [140]. In its diffusion process, the clean image
represents the initial state, while the degraded image is the
final state in both forward and backward diffusion processes.
This is notable for its ability to provide a transparent and
traceable path from a degraded image to its clean version,
as illustrated in Figure 6. Consequently, it provides enhanced
interpretability since the process between degraded and clean
images is directly addressed, which is not commonly present
in many DMs. Another benefit is its higher efficiency in
backward diffusion since it requires fewer steps (often be-
tween 2 and 10) to achieve comparable performance. Its
conditionality, however, limits its use specifically to paired
data during training, which is unsuitable for unsupervised SR.
While Cold Diffusion and I2SB show promising results for
image restoration, an extensive and more detailed quantitative
analysis of different corruption types for image SR remains
an exciting and open research avenue. Another avenue for
alternative corruption space is presented by Inversion by
Direct Iteration (InDI) [141]. InDI delineates a direct mapping
strategy, efficiently bridging the gap between the two quality
spaces without the iterative refinement typically required by
conventional diffusion processes. The intrinsic flexibility and
the direct mapping capability of InDI propose intriguing
possibilities for enhancing image quality, suggesting a potent
avenue for research exploration. The potential integration of
InDI’s principles with those of conditional DMs could offer
substantial advancements in the field of image SR. A detailed
examination and discussion of InDI within the broader scope
of diffusion-based image enhancement could yield valuable in-
sights and contribute significantly to the ongoing development
of generative models in image processing.

13
Fig. 7:
Example of color shifting produced by vanilla SR3
in a 64 × 64 →256 × 256 setting when trained with reduced
batch size (8 instead of 256).
F. Color Shifting
As a result of high computational costs, DMs can occasion-
ally suffer from color shifting when limited hardware neces-
sitates smaller batch sizes or shorter learning periods [142].
An example with SR3 is shown in Figure 7. As presented by
StableSR, a straightforward modification can address this issue
by performing color normalization by adjusting the mean and
variance with those of the LR image on the generated image
[107]. Mathematically, it gives the following equation:
ˆz0 = zc
0 −µc
z0
σcz0
· σc
x + µc
x,
(34)
where c ∈{r, g, b} denotes the color channel, and µc
z0 and σc
z0
(or µc
x and σc
x) are the mean and standard variance from the
c-th channel of the predicted image z0 (or the input image x),
respectively. You Only Diffuse Areas (YODA) [143], which
targets diffusion on important image areas more frequently
through time-dependent masks generated with DINO [144],
also mitigates the color shift effect for image SR. This suggests
that properly defined architecture and diffusion design are
crucial to omit this effect. Further analysis of why this effect
emerges must be obtained in future work.
G. Architecture Designs for Denoising
The design of the denoising model in DMs offers a range
of options. The majority of DMs adopt the use of U-Net,
as noted in most literature [102]. SR3 [15], for instance,
employs residual blocks from BigGAN [102] and re-scales
skip connections by a factor of
1
√
2. SRDiff takes a similar
approach [79], although it opts for vanilla residual blocks
without the re-scaling of skip connections and uses a LR
encoder to incorporate the information of the LR image during
the backward diffusion. Whang et al. [117] exploit an initial
predictor to combine the strengths of deterministic image SR
models and DMs. It has the advantage that the DM only
needs to learn the residuals that the deterministic image SR
model (initial predictor) fails to predict, hence simplifying
the learning target. Additionally, the removal of self-attention,
positional encodings and group normalization from the SR3
U-Net enables their model to support arbitrary resolutions.
An initial predictor is also employed in the wavelet-based
approach DiWa [113]. Moreover, wavelet SR models, such
as DWSR [112] – a simple sequence of convolution layers of
depth 10 – are utilized for denoising prediction in the wavelet
domain. In WaveDM [114], a deterministic U-Net predictor is
used for the high-frequency band, while diffusion is applied
in the low-frequency band.
Latent Diffusion Models proposed by Rombach et al. [13]
use a VQ-GAN [5] autoencoder in the latent space. For DiffIR
[145], multiple variations of state-of-the-art Vision Transform-
ers are employed [49], [146], [147]. Another common practice
is pre-training deterministic components, as seen in models
like SRDiff [79] or DiffIR [145]. Overall, the potential ways
to design a denoising network are infinite, generally drawing
inspiration from advancements made in general computer
vision. The optimal denoising networks will vary based on
the task, and the development of new models is anticipated.
VI. DIFFUSION-BASED ZERO-SHOT SR
Zero-shot image SR aims to develop methods that do not
depend on prior image examples or training [16], [153].
Typically, these methods harness the inherent redundancy
within a single image for improvement. They often leverage
pre-trained DMs for generation, incorporating LR images as
conditions during the sampling process, in contrast to other
conditioning methods discussed earlier [154]. Additionally,
they differ from guidance-based methods, where conditioning
information is used to weight the training of a DM from
scratch. A recent study by Li et al. [17] categorizes diffusion-
based methods into projection-based, decomposition-based,
and posterior estimation, which are introduced in this section.
The discussed methods are compared in Table IV.
A. Projection-Based
Projection-based methods aim to extract inherent structures
or textures from LR images to complement the generated
images at each step and to ensure data consistency. An
illustrative example of a projection-based method in the realm
of inpainting tasks is RePaint [155]. In RePaint, the diffusion
process is selectively applied to the specific area requiring
inpainting, leaving the remaining image portions unaltered.
Taking inspiration from this concept, YODA [143] applies
a similar technique, but for image SR. YODA incorporates
importance masks derived from DINO [144] to define the areas
for diffusion during each time step, but it is not a zero-shot
approach.
One zero-shot method is ILVR [120], which projects the
low-frequency information from the LR image to the HR
image, ensuring data consistency and establishing an improved
DM condition. A more sophisticated method is Come-Closer-
Diffuse-Faster (CCDF) [156], which modifies the unified pro-
jection method to SR as follows:
ˆzt−1 = f(zt, t) + g(zt, t) · εt
(35)
zt−1 = (I −P) · ˆzt−1 + ˆx,
ˆx ∼q(zt|z0 = x),
(36)
where f, g depend on the type of DMs, P is the degradation
process of the LR image, and ˆx is the LR image with the
added and time-dependent noise.

14
TABLE IV: Comparison of zero-shot methods. Data in bold represents the best performance. Second-best is underlined. Values
derived from Li et al. [17].
Methods
ImageNet 1K
CelebA 1K
Time
Flops
PSNR ↑
SSIM ↑
LPIPS ↓
PSNR ↑
SSIM ↑
LPIPS ↓
[s/image]
[G]
Bicubic
25.36
0.643
0.27
24.26
0.628
0.34
-
-
ILVR [120]
27.40
0.871
0.21
31.59
0.878
0.22
41.3
1113.75
SNIPS [148]
24.31
0.684
0.21
27.34
0.675
0.27
31.4
-
DDRM [149]
27.38
0.869
0.22
31.64
0.946
0.19
10.1
1113.75
DPS [150]
25.88
0.814
0.15
29.65
0.878
0.18
141.2
1113.75
DDNM [151]
27.46
0.871
0.15
31.64
0.945
0.16
15.5
1113.75
GDP [152]
26.51
0.832
0.14
28.65
0.876
0.17
3.1
1113.76
B. Decomposition-Based
Decomposition-based methods view image SR tasks as a
linear reverse problem similar to Equation 1:
x = Ay + b,
(37)
where A is the degradation operator and b contaminating
noise. Among the earliest decomposition-based methods, we
find SNIPS [148] and its subsequent work DDRM [149].
These methods employ diffusion in the spectral domain,
enhancing SR outcomes. To achieve this, they apply singular
value decomposition to the degradation operator A, thereby
facilitating a spectral-domain transformation that contributes
to their improved SR results.
The Denoising Diffusion Null-space Model (DDNM) rep-
resents another decomposition-based zero-shot approach ap-
plicable to a broad range of linear IR problems [151] beyond
image SR to tasks like colorization, inpainting, and deblurring
[151]. It leverages the range-null space decomposition method-
ology [157], [158] to tackle diverse IR challenges effectively.
DDNM approaches the problem by reconfiguring Equation 1
as a linear reverse problem, although it is essential to note
that this approach differs from SNIPS and DDRM in that it
operates in a noiseless context:
x = Ay,
(38)
with y ∈RD×1 as the linearized HR image and x ∈Rd×1
the linearized degraded image. Furthermore, it has to conform
to the following two constraints:
Consistency :
Aˆy ≡x,
Realness :
ˆy ∼p(y), (39)
with p(y) as the distribution of ground-truth images and ˆy the
predicted image. The range-null space decomposition allows
constructing a general solution for ˆy in the form of:
ˆy = A†x + (I −A†A)¯y,
(40)
with A† ∈RD×d the pseudo-inverse that satisfies AA†A ≡
A. Our goal is to find a proper ¯y that generates the null-space
(I −A†A)¯y and agrees with the range-space A†x that also
fulfills realness in Equation 39.
DDNM derives clean intermediate states, denoted as z0|t,
for the range-null space decomposition from z0 at time-step
t. This is achieved through the equation:
z0|t =
1
√¯αt
 zt −ϵθ(zt, t)
√
1 −¯αt

(41)
with ϵt = ϵθ(zt, t). To produce a z0 that fulfills the equation
Az0 ≡x, the model leaves the null-space unaltered while
setting the range-space as A†y. This generates a rectified
estimation, ˆz0|t, defined by:
ˆz0|t = A†x + (I −A†A)z0|t.
(42)
Finally, zt−1 is derived by sampling from p(zt−1|zt, ˆz0|t):
zt−1 =
√¯αt−1βt
1 −¯αt
ˆz0|t+
√αt(1 −¯αt−1)
1 −¯αt
zt+σtϵ,
ϵ ∼N(0, I),
(43)
with αt = 1 −βt and ¯αt = Qt
i=0 αi, illustrated in Figure 8.
The term zt−1 represents a noised version of ˆz0|t. This noise
effectively mitigates the dissonance between the range-space
contents, represented by A†x, and the null-space contents,
denoted by (I −A†A)z0|t. The authors of DDNM show
additionally that ˆz0|t conforms to consistency.
The last step involves defining A and A†, the construction
of which is contingent on the restoration task at hand. For
instance, in SR tasks involving scaling by a factor of n,
A can be defined as a 1 × n2 matrix, representative of
an average-pooling operator. The average-pooling operator,
denoted as
 1
n2
...
1
n2

, functions to average each patch into
a singular value. Similarly, we can construct its pseudo-inverse
as A† ∈Rn2×1 =
1
...
1⊤. The original work provides
further examples of tasks (such as colorization, inpainting,
and restoration), illustrating how these methods are applied.
In addition, it describes how compound operations consisting
of numerous sub-operations function in these contexts. In
their research, the authors also introduced DDNM+ to support
the restoration of noisy images. They utilized a technique
analogous to the ”back and forward” strategy implemented
in RePaint [155]. This approach was leveraged to enhance the
quality further.
Given this approach’s novelty, only a handful of subsequent
studies extend and build upon it, such as the work presented
in CDPMSR [121]. This research direction promises exciting
possibilities, although it calls for further investigation. For
example, it should be noted that the DDNM approach in-
troduces additional computational expenses compared to the
task-specific training carried out using DDPMs. Moreover,
the degradation operator A is set manually, which can be
challenging for certain tasks. Another potential drawback is the
assumption that A functions as a linear degradation operator,
which may not always hold true and thus could limit the
model’s effectiveness in certain scenarios.

15
+
+
Fig. 8:
Overview of DDNM [151]. It utilizes the range-
null space decomposition to construct a general solution for
multiple tasks, such as image SR, colorization, inpainting, and
deblurring.
C. Posterior Estimation
Most projection-based methods typically address the noise-
less inverse problem. However, this assumption can weaken
data consistency because the projection process can deviate
the sample path from the data manifold [17]. To address this
and enhance data consistency, some recent works [150], [159],
[160] take a different approach by aiming to estimate the
posterior distribution using the Bayes theorem:
p(zt | x) = p(x | zt) · p(zt)
p(x)
,
(44)
This Bayesian approach provides a more robust and prob-
abilistic framework for solving inverse problems, ultimately
improving results in various image processing tasks. It results
in the corresponding score function:
∇zt log pt(zt | x) = ∇zt log pt(x | zt) + sθ(x, t),
(45)
where sθ(x, t) is extracted from a pre-trained model while
pt(x|zt) is intractable. Thus, the goal is precisely estimating
pt(x|zt). MCG [159] and DPS [150] approximate the posterior
pt(x|zt) with pt(x|ˆz0(zt)), where ˆz0(zt) is the expectation
given zt as ˆz0(zt) = E [z0|zt] according to Tweedie’s formula
[150]. While MCG also relies on projection, which can be
harmful to data consistency, DPS discards the projection step
and estimates the posterior as:
∇zt log pt(x | zt) ≈∇zt log p(x | ˆz0(zt))
(46)
≈−1
σ2 ∇zt∥x −H(ˆz0(zt))∥2
2,
where H is a forward measurement operator. A further ex-
pansion of this formula to the unified form for the linear,
non-linear, differentiable inverse problem with Moore Penrose
pseudoinverse can be found in IIGDM [160].
A different approach to estimate pt(x|zt) is demonstrated
by GDP [152]. The authors noted that a higher conditional
probability of pt(x|zt) correlates with a smaller distance
between the application of the degradation model D(zt) and
x. Thus, they propose a heuristic approximation:
pt(x|zt) ≈1
Z exp(−[sL(D(zt), x)]) + λQ(zt),
(47)
where L and Q denote a distance and quality metric, re-
spectively. The term Z is for normalization, and s is a
scaling factor controlling the guidance weight. However, due
to varying noise levels between zt and x, precisely defining
the distance metric L can be challenging. To overcome this
challenge, GDP substitutes zt with its clean estimation ˆz0 in
the distance calculation, providing a pragmatic solution to the
noise discrepancy issue.
VII. DOMAIN-SPECIFIC APPLICATIONS
SR3 [15] produces photo-realistic and perceptually state-
of-the-art images on faces and natural images but may not be
suitable for other tasks like remote sensing. Some models are
more suited to certain tasks as they tackle issues specific to
the domain [161]. This section highlights the applications of
DMs to domain-specific SR tasks: Medical imaging, special
cases of face SR (Blind Face Restoration and Atmospheric
Turbulences), and remote sensing.
A. Medical Imaging
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scans are widely used
to aid patient diagnosis but can often be of low quality and
corrupted with noise. Chung et al. [162] propose a combined
denoising and SR network referred to as R2D2+ (Regularized
Reverse Diffusion Denoiser + SR). They perform denoising of
the MRI scans, followed by an SR module. Inspired by CCDF
(i.e., a zero-shot method) from Chung et al. [156], they start
their backward diffusion from an initial noisy image instead of
pure Gaussian noise. The reverse SDE is solved using a non-
parametric, eigenvalue-based method. In addition, they restrict
the stochasticity of the DMs through low-frequency regular-
ization. Particularly, they maintain low-frequency information
while correcting the high-frequency ones to produce sharp
and super-resolved MRI scans. Mao et al. [163] addresses the
lack of diffusion-based multi-contrast MRI SR methods. They
propose a Disentangled Conditional Diffusion model (DisC-
Diff) to leverage a multi-conditional fusion strategy based
on representation disentanglement, enabling high-quality HR
image sampling. Specifically, they employ a disentangled U-
Net with multiple encoders to extract latent representations and
use a novel joint disentanglement and Charbonnier loss func-
tion to learn representations across MRI contrasts. They also
implement curriculum learning and improve their MRI model
for varying anatomical complexity by gradually increasing the
difficulty of training images. An improvement of DisC-Diff by
combining the DM with a transformer was introduced by Li
et al. with DiffMSR [164].
B. Blind Face Restoration
Most previously discussed SR methods are founded on
a fixed degradation process during training, such as bicu-
bic downsampling. However, when applied practically, these
assumptions frequently diverge from the actual degradation
process and yield subpar results. Additionally, datasets with
pairs of clean and real-world distorted images are usually
unavailable. This issue is particularly researched in face SR,
termed Blind Face Restoration (BFR), where datasets typically
contain supervised samples (x, y) with unknown degradation.
A solution to BFR was proposed by Yue et al. with DifFace
[165] that leverages the rich generative priors of pre-trained
DMs with parameters θ, which were trained to approximate

16
pθ(zt|zt−1). In contrast to existing methods that learn direct
mappings from x to y under several constraints [166], [167],
DifFace circumvents this by generating a diffused version zN
of the desired HR image y with N < T. They predict the
starting point, the posterior q(zN|x) via a transition distribu-
tion p(zN|x). The transition distribution is formulated like the
regular diffusion process, a Gaussian distribution, but uses an
initial predictor φ(x) to generate the mean, named diffused
estimator. As their model borrows the reverse Markov chain
from a pre-trained DM, DifFace requires no full retraining for
new and unknown degradations, unlike SR3.
A concurrent and better performing approach is DiffBFR
[168] that adopts a two-step approach to BFR: A Identity
Restoration Module (IRM), which employs two conditional
DDPMs, and a Texture Enhancement Module (TEM), which
employs an unconditional DDPM. In the first step within
the IRM, a conditional DDPM enriches facial details at a
low-resolution space same as x. The downsampled version
of y gives the target objective. Next, it resizes the output
to the desired spatial size of y and applies another condi-
tional DDPM to approximate the HR image y. To ensure
minimal deviation from the actual image, DiffBFR employs
a novel truncated sampling method, which begins denoising
at intermediate steps. The TEM further enhances realism
through image texture and sharpened facial details. It imposes
a diffuse-base facial prior with an unconditional DM trained
on HR images and a backward diffusion starting from pure
noise. However, it has more parameters than SR3 and requires
optimization to accelerate sampling.
Another method is DR2E [169], which employs two stages:
degradation removal and enhancement modules. For degrada-
tion removal, they use a pre-trained face SR DDPM to remove
degradations from an LR image with severe and unknown
degradations. In particular, they diffuse the degraded image
x in T time steps to obtain xT = zT . Then, they use xt
to guide the backward diffusion such that the low-frequency
part of zt is replaced with that of xt, which is close in distri-
bution. Theoretically, it produces visually clean intermediate
results that are degradation-invariant. In the second stage, the
enhancement module pθ(y | z0), an arbitrary backbone CNN
trained to map LR images to HR using a simple L2 loss,
predicts the final output. DR2E can be slower than existing
diffusion-based SR models for images with slight degradations
and can even remove details from the input.
C. Atmospheric Turbulence in Face SR
Atmospheric Turbulence (AT) results from atmospheric con-
ditions fluctuations, leading to images’ perceptual degradation
through geometric distortions, spatially variant blur, and noise.
These alterations negatively impact downstream vision tasks,
such as tracking or detection. Wang et al. [170] introduced a
variational inference framework known as AT-VarDiff, which
aims to correct AT in generic scenes. The distinctive feature of
this approach is its reliance on a conditioning signal derived
from latent task-specific prior information extracted from the
input image to guide the DM. Nair et al. [171] put forth an-
other technique to restore facial images impaired by AT using
SR. The method transfers class prior information from an SR
model trained on clean facial data to a model designed to
counteract turbulence degradation via knowledge distillation.
The final model operates within the realistic faces manifold,
which allows it to generate realistic face outputs even under
substantial distortions. During inference, the process begins
with noise- and turbulence-degraded images to ensure that the
restored images closely resemble the distorted ones.
D. Remote Sensing
Remote Sensing Super-Resolution (RSSR) addresses the
HR reconstruction from one or more LR images to aid
object detection and semantic segmentation tasks for satellite
imagery. RSSR is limited by the absence of small targets
with complex granularity in the HR images [172]. To produce
finer details and texture, Liu et al. [173] present DMs with
a Detail Complement mechanism (DMDC). They train their
model similar to SR3 [15] and perform a detailed supplement
task. To generate high-frequency information, they randomly
mask several parts of the images to mimic dense objects.
The SR images recover the occluded patches as the model
learns small-grained information. Additionally, they introduce
a novel pixel constraint loss to limit the diversity of DMDC
and improve overall accuracy. Ali et al. [174] design a new
architecture for RS images that integrates Vision Transformers
(ViT) with DMs as a Two-stage approach for Enhancement
and Super-Resolution (TESR). In the first stage (SR stage),
the SwinIR [49] model is used for RSSR. In the second
stage (enhancement stage), the noisy images are enhanced by
employing DMs to reconstruct the finer details. Xu et al. [175]
propose a blind SR framework based on Dual conditioning
DDPMs for SR (DDSR). A kernel predictor conditioned on
LR image encodings estimates the degradation kernel in the
first stage. This is followed by an SR module consisting of a
conditional DDPM in a U-Net with the predicted kernel and
the LR encodings as guidance. An RRDB encoder extracts the
encodings from LR images. Recently, Khanna et al. introduced
DiffusionSat [176], which uses a LDM for RSSR and incorpo-
rates additional remote sensing conditioning information (e.g.,
longitude, latitude, cloud cover, etc.).
VIII. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
Though relatively new, DMs are quickly becoming a
promising research area, especially in image SR. There are
several avenues of ongoing research in this field, aiming to
enhance the efficiency of DMs, accelerate computation speeds,
and minimize memory footprint, all while generating high-
quality, high-fidelity images. This section introduces common
problems of DMs for image SR and examines noteworthy
research avenues for DMs specific to image SR.
A. Color Shifting
Often, the most practical advancements come from a solid
theoretical understanding. As discussed in subsection V-F,
due to the substantial computational demands, DMs may
occasionally exhibit color shifts when constrained by hardware

17
limitations that demand smaller batch sizes or shorter training
periods [142]. While well-defined diffusion methods [143]
or color normalization [107] might mitigate this problem, a
theoretical understanding of why it is emerging is necessary.
B. Computational Costs
In a study conducted by Ganguli et al., it was observed
that the computing power needed for large-scale AI experi-
ments has surged by over 300,000 times in the last decade
[177]. Regrettably, this increase in resource intensity has been
accompanied by a sharp decline in the share of these results
originating from academic circles. DMs are not immune to this
issue; their computational demands add to the expanding gap
between industry and academia. Therefore, there is a pressing
need to reduce computational costs and memory footprints for
practical applicability and research. One strategy to alleviate
computational demands is to examine smaller spatial-sized
domains, as discussed in subsection V-C. Examples of such
approaches include LDMs [5], [13] and wavelet-based models
[113], [115]. However, the capability of LDMs to reconstruct
data with high precision and fine-grained accuracy, as required
in image SR, remains to be questioned. Therefore, further
advancements in these methods are critically needed. On the
other hand, wavelet-based models do not present a bottleneck
regarding information preservation. This advantage suggests
that they should be the subject of more intensive exploration.
C. Efficient Sampling
A benefit of DMs is the possibility of decoupling training
and inference schedules [178]. This allows for substantial
enhancements in curtailing the time required for inference in
practical applications, providing a significant efficiency edge in
real-world scenarios. While reducing the number of steps taken
during inference is relatively simple, a systematic method
for determining inference schedules has yet to be developed
[179]. As outlined in subsection IV-A, this research direction
represents a promising avenue. We explored training-based
sampling methods for SR with AddSR [88] and YONOS-
SR [89] but also introduced efficient DMs that need fewer
sampling steps, like ResShift [118] and DiffIR [145]. An alter-
native is given by methods that use different corruption spaces,
as discussed in subsection V-E. Unlike sampling from pure
Gaussian noise, notable works such as Luo et al. [108], I2SB
[140], Come-Closer-Diffuse-Faster [156], or Cold Diffusion
[139] define a process from the LR to the HR image di-
rectly. Additional techniques for decreasing computation time,
such as knowledge distillation, alternative noise schedulers, or
truncated diffusion, demand further investigation concerning
image SR [84], [85], [180], [181].
D. Corruption Spaces
New approaches for corruption spaces allow a more di-
rect approach for upsampling images from LR to HR. The
significance of exploring different corruption spaces lies in
addressing the inherent limitations and assumptions embedded
within current DM frameworks, e.g., diversity and blurriness
added during the forward diffusion process. The adaptability
and efficiency demonstrated by novel approaches like InDI or
I2SB, especially in handling diverse and complex corruption
patterns, spotlight the urgent need for future research.
E. Comparability
Comparing DMs in SR is complex because of the varied
datasets used in different studies. They vary in resolution,
content diversity, color distribution, and noise levels, all of
which significantly influence model performance. A model
may perform well with one dataset but poorly with another,
complicating the assessment of its overall effectiveness. Es-
tablishing a standard benchmark with diverse, representative
datasets and uniform evaluation metrics is essential for com-
parability. This approach would help identify models that
consistently perform well across different conditions and tasks,
thereby promoting faster progress in the field. Furthermore,
evaluating the quality of SR images from generative mod-
els is still problematic. Although DMs often produce more
photorealistic images, they typically score lower on standard
metrics like PSNR and SSIM [16]. However, these models tend
to receive more favorable assessments from human evaluators
[15]. LPIPS [182] performs better reflecting this perception,
but the domain of image SR has to adapt to more diverse
metrics, such as predictors that reflect human ratings directly
[183], [184]. For instance, datasets with subjective ratings, like
TID2013 [61], and neural networks, such as DeepQA [62] or
NIMA [63], can be employed to predict human-like scoring
of images and should be further explored.
F. Image Manipulation
Image manipulation can be particularly useful in multi-
image SR for generating HR images that blend characteristics
from multiple sources, potentially improving the quality and
diversity of the output (e.g., satellite imagery for SR pre-
dictions with flexible daylights). SRDiff [79] proposed two
potential extensions: content fusion and latent space interpola-
tion. Content fusion involves the combination of content from
two source images. For instance, they replace the eyes in one
source image with the face from another image before con-
ducting diffusion in the image space like CutMix [185]. The
backward diffusion successfully creates a smooth transition
between both images. In the latent space interpolation model,
the latent space of two SR predictions is linearly interpolated
to generate a new image. While these extensions have yielded
remarkable results, unlike other generative models such as
VAEs or GANs, DMs have been found to offer less proficient
latent representations [186]. Therefore, recent and ongoing
research into the manipulation of latent representations in DMs
is both in its early stages and greatly needed [187]–[189].
G. Cascaded Image Generation
Saharia et al. [15] presented cascaded image SR, in which
multiple DDPMs are chained across different scales. This
strategy was applied to unconditional and class-conditional
generation, cascading a model synthesizing 64 × 64 images

18
with SR3 models generating 1024 × 1024 unconditional faces
and 256×256 class-conditional natural images. The cascading
approach allows several simpler models to be trained simul-
taneously, improving computational efficiency due to faster
training times and reduced parameter counts. Furthermore,
they implemented cascading for inference, using more refine-
ment steps at lower and fewer steps at higher resolutions.
They found this more efficient than generating SR images
directly. Even though their approach underperforms compared
to BigGAN [102] concerning cascaded generation, it still
represents an exciting research opportunity.
IX. CONCLUSION
Diffusion Models (DMs) revolutionized image Super-
Resolution (SR) by enhancing both technical image quality
and human perceptual preferences. While traditional SR often
focuses solely on pixel-level accuracy, DMs can generate
HR images that are aesthetically pleasing and realistic. Un-
like previous generative models, they do not suffer typical
convergence issues. This survey explored the progress and
diverse methods that have propelled DMs to the forefront
of SR. Potential use cases, as discussed in our applications
section, extend far beyond what was previously imagined. We
introduced their foundational principles and compared them to
other generative models. We explored conditioning strategies,
from LR image guidance to text embeddings. Zero-shot SR,
a particularly intriguing paradigm, was also a subject, as well
as corruption spaces and image SR-specific topics like color
shifting and architectural designs. In conclusion, the survey
provides a comprehensive guide to the current landscape and
valuable insights into trends, challenges, and future directions.
As we continue to explore and refine these models, the future
of image SR looks more promising than ever.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the BMBF project XAINES
(Grant 01IW20005) and SustainML (Horizon Europe grant
agreement No 101070408).
