arXiv:1602.02089v1  [cs.AI]  5 Feb 2016
Harmonic Grammar in a DisCo Model of Meaning
Martha Lewis, Bob Coecke
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford

1
Introduction
The model of cognition developed in [4] seeks to unify two levels of description of the cognitive pro-
cess: the connectionist and the symbolic. The theory developed brings together these two levels into
the Integrated Connectionist/Symbolic Cognitive architecture (ICS). [2] draw a parallel with semantics
where meaning may be modelled on both distributional and symbolic levels, developed by [3] into the
Distributional Compositional (DisCo) model of meaning. In the current work, we revisit Smolensky and
Legendre (S&L)’s model. We describe the DisCo framework, summarise the key ideas in S&L’s archi-
tecture, and describe how their description of harmony as a graded measure of grammaticality may be
applied in the DisCo model.
2
Distributional Compositional Model of Meaning
We summarise the DisCo model: for a full description see [3]. The model characterizes individual words
as co-occurrence vectors. Composite terms are constructed based on the grammatical structure described
by a Lambek pregroup grammar. Both pregroup grammars and vector spaces have a compact closed
monoidal structure, and therefore the operations in the grammar can be transferred to vector spaces.
The grammar includes atomic types n for nouns and s for sentences, with adjoints xr, xl such that:
xlx ≤1 ≤xxl and xxr ≤1 ≤xrx, and composite types such as verb = nrsnl. A string of words is
represented by the juxtaposition of the relevant types. For example, “Priscilla eats bananas” is rendered
as n(nrsnl)n. The reduction rules are applied, and if the resulting type is an s, the sentence is judged
grammatical. In the given example, we have nnrsnln ≤1 · snln ≤1 · s · 1 ≤s. Reductions can be
described in a graphical calculus, shown in ﬁgure 1.
Priscilla
n
eats
s
nr
nl
bananas
n
Figure 1: The reduction nnrsnln ≤s represented in the graphical calculus.
Within the category of vector spaces, concatenation of atomic types into composite types, and words
into sentences, is rendered as a tensor product. The reduction map ǫ is an inner product.
3
Integrated Connectionist/Symbolic Cognitive Architecture
In [4], symbols are represented in a high dimensional vector space as the tensor product of ﬁller vectors
fi, representing meaning, and role vectors ri, which specify type. These composite ﬁller/role vectors are
concatenated by summation. Filler/role vectors may also be recursively embedded, and structures such
as sentences may be represented as a sum s = P
i fi ⊗ri.

Grammars are represented by matrices W = P
i wiWi. Rules are encoded in each Wi so that
the calculation H(s) = s⊤Ws returns a weighted sum of the number of times each rule occurs in the
sentence. The quantity H(s) is called harmony, and provides a graded measure of well-formedness
of a sentence. For example, a harmonic grammar for intransitive sentences could have the rules 1)
S →N V and 2) “S is at the root”, encoded in weight matrices WS→NV and WS. The sentence s =
“John runs” obeys both these rules, so if each rule has weighting 1, we assign the sentence a harmony
value H(s) = 2. However, the sentence “runs John” does not obey the rule S →N V , and so we
assign it harmony H(t) = 1. We can therefore judge “John runs” to be more grammatical than “runs
John”. These calculations can be performed using a vector representation s of the sentence and matrix
representation (WS + WS→NV ) of the grammar, so that H(s) = s⊤(WS + WS→NV )s.
4
Comparisons with the DisCo Model
S&L introduce a graded notion of grammaticality, whereas grammaticality in pregroup grammar is bi-
nary. However, we can draw parallels between the use of the rule matrices in the ICS architecture and
the operations of the DisCo model. In S&L’s framework, components of a sentence interact indirectly
through the rules of the grammar. In contrast, components of sentences in the DisCo model interact
directly. Further, rule matrices in the ICS architecture have a similar structure to components of a sen-
tence. We could consider the rule matrices themselves to be components of the sentence, and matrix
multiplication to act as cancellation between components.
We may then view rules of the form WX→AB as corresponding to one or more ǫ reductions, and WS
to the fact that the sentence should reduce to s. We therefore deﬁne a simple harmonic grammar in the
DisCo framework by assigning one point to an ǫ-reduction and one to reducing to the type s. Then the
ungrammatical sentence “John is who Mary loves” (ﬁgure 2), can be given a measure of grammaticality.
John
n
is
s
nr
nl
who
nr
n
nll
sl
Mary
n
loves
s
nr
nl
Figure 2: Reduction of an ungrammatical sentence. Red lines indicate unreduced types.
The contribution to grammaticality of other operations in the DisCo framework, such as type intro-
duction or operations within Frobenius algebra [1] can be investigated. Further questions include how
word sequences could be rendered grammatical, for example by adding, removing, or permuting words,
and how a graded measure could aid search in production of grammatical sentences.
