IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS. PREPRINT VERSION. ACCEPTED DECEMBER, 2022
1
SCENE: Reasoning about Trafﬁc Scenes using
Heterogeneous Graph Neural Networks
Thomas Monninger†,1, Julian Schmidt†,2,3,
Jan Rupprecht2, David Raba2, Julian Jordan2,
Daniel Frank4, Steffen Staab4,5 and Klaus Dietmayer3, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Understanding trafﬁc scenes requires considering
heterogeneous information about dynamic agents and the static
infrastructure. In this work we propose SCENE, a methodology
to encode diverse trafﬁc scenes in heterogeneous graphs and to
reason about these graphs using a heterogeneous Graph Neural
Network encoder and task-speciﬁc decoders. The heterogeneous
graphs, whose structures are deﬁned by an ontology, consist of
different nodes with type-speciﬁc node features and different
relations with type-speciﬁc edge features. In order to exploit
all the information given by these graphs, we propose to use
cascaded layers of graph convolution. The result is an encoding
of the scene. Task-speciﬁc decoders can be applied to predict
desired attributes of the scene. Extensive evaluation on two
diverse binary node classiﬁcation tasks show the main strength
of this methodology: despite being generic, it even manages to
outperform task-speciﬁc baselines. The further application of
our methodology to the task of node classiﬁcation in various
knowledge graphs shows its transferability to other domains.
Index Terms—Semantic Scene Understanding, AI-Based Meth-
ods, Behavior-Based Systems
I. INTRODUCTION
U
NDERSTANDING trafﬁc scenes is important for an
autonomous vehicle such that it may develop a safe,
effective and efﬁcient plan of how to move forward. For
instance, whether a stationary car is parked or just temporarily
stopped determines whether the autonomous vehicle should
wait or overtake. Understanding of trafﬁc scenes requires
reasoning about dynamic agents and static infrastructure in
order to predict the intents of nearby dynamic agents (e.g.,
Manuscript received: August 26, 2022; Revised: November 21, 2022;
Accepted: December 20, 2022.
This paper was recommended for publication by Editor Markus Vincze
upon evaluation of the Associate Editor and Reviewers’ comments. This
work was supported by the BMWK within the project ”KI Delta Learning”
(F¨orderkennzeichen 19A19013A) and the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(DFG, German Research Foundation) under Germany’s Excellence Strategy -
EXC 2075 – 390740016. (Corresponding author: Julian Schmidt)
†Thomas Monninger and Julian Schmidt are co-ﬁrst authors. The order was
determined alphabetically.
1Thomas Monninger is with Mercedes-Benz R&D North America, Sunny-

2Julian Schmidt, Jan Rupprecht, David Raba and Julian Jordan are with

3Julian Schmidt and Klaus Dietmayer are with Ulm University, Institute

4Daniel Frank and Steffen Staab are with University of Stuttgart, Institute

5Steffen Staab is with University of Southampton, Electronics and Com-
puter Science, Southampton, United Kingdom
Dynamic 
Agents
Static 
Infrastructure
GNN
GNN
Heterogeneous 
Scene Graph
Task-Speci§c 
Decoder
GNN Encoder
Fig. 1. Overview of SCENE: The trafﬁc scene is modeled in a heterogeneous
scene graph with different node types and different relation types between
these nodes. The combination of a generic GNN architecture, making use of
cascaded layers of graph convolution, and a task-speciﬁc decoder is used to
predict relevant information about the given scene.
parked or temporarily stopped). To this end, the vehicle needs
to correctly estimate which sensory information is reliable
and it must reason about the relative positions, features and
trajectories of dynamic agents.
© 2023 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including
reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or
reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.
Information about dynamic
agents is conveyed by the perception systems of autonomous
vehicles. We raise the hypothesis that considering additional
heterogeneous entities in a trafﬁc scene might add valu-
able information. In particular, reasoning should also involve
knowledge about static infrastructure, which may either be
perceived or in our case is provided by a High Deﬁnition
(HD) map. Thus, the problem of understanding trafﬁc scenes
boils down to integrating a plenitude of heterogeneous data,
which may change over time, and reasoning about it in order to
predict intents of nearby trafﬁc agents. This is difﬁcult because
data from heterogeneous sources may be structured in a myriad
of ways and reasoning may require deriving complex relations
and patterns across this heterogeneous data.
Related
work
has
tackled
the
problem
of
scene
understanding from heterogeneous data by using machine
learning approaches to reason about the scene. Existing
machine learning approaches that jointly leverage information
about dynamic agents and static infrastructure, so far, have
been based on rasterized representations (e.g., [1]), have been
handcrafted and task-speciﬁc (e.g., [2]) or have been limited
in their ability to consider heterogeneous data (e.g., [3]).
Shortcomings of rasterized representations lie in the loss of
information and task-speciﬁc approaches lack the ability to
generalize to further tasks.
arXiv:2301.03512v1  [cs.CV]  9 Jan 2023

2
IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS. PREPRINT VERSION. ACCEPTED DECEMBER, 2022
We propose SCENE (SCene Encoding NEtwork), a graph-
based methodology to encode and perform reasoning about
a trafﬁc scene. An overview of SCENE is given in Fig. 1.
Inputs to SCENE are features provided by upstream perception
components, which represent dynamic agents over a dura-
tion of 3 s, as well as the abstract representation of static
infrastructure, in our case given in an HD map. This input is
encoded in a heterogeneous scene graph with different node
types and a set of typed relations between nodes. In addition
to this expressive representation, we provide the means for
versatile reasoning and predictions in trafﬁc scene graphs
using a novel architecture based on Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs). With this work we contribute to the research on
heterogeneous GNNs, deﬁned by a recent survey as a core
ﬁeld of future work [4]. Our GNN model learns from examples
how information about dynamic agents and static infrastructure
of a trafﬁc scene may be integrated and reasoned about,
such that it can correctly predict unknown characteristics of
entities or relations. In order to show that this methodology
is not task-speciﬁc, we evaluate it on two different binary
node-classiﬁcation tasks that correspond to the predictions (i)
whether a car is parked or temporarily stopped and (ii) whether
perceived information is reliable or not.
Our main contributions are:
• We propose a novel way to model information about
dynamic agents and static infrastructure of trafﬁc scenes
in one heterogeneous graph structure with edge features,
allowing for an extensible and generic representation.
• We propose a novel GNN architecture that is able to
perform reasoning on this heterogeneous graph.
• We extensively evaluate our proposed methodology on
two diverse learning tasks.
• We quantify the effect of including heterogeneous data
about additional scene entities and relations for those
learning tasks in detailed ablation studies.
• We show that our GNN architecture transfers to applica-
tions beyond scene understanding, by applying it to the
task of node classiﬁcation in knowledge graphs.
II. RELATED WORK
In this section, related work regarding reasoning about
trafﬁc scenes is discussed. Existing approaches focus on the
prediction of intents and trajectories of agents.
A. Grid-based Approaches
Grid-based approaches rasterize information in a bird’s-eye
view grid with multiple channels and use Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNN) to learn from patterns in the given data in
order to perform reasoning about the trafﬁc scene. One option
is to use raw sensor data as input and project it into a bird’s-
eye view grid. [5]. Most recent approaches receive dynamic
agents, extracted and processed from an upstream perception
component, and information about the static infrastructure as
input and render both into different channels of a grid [1], [6],
[7], [8]. Different to the heterogeneous graph from our work,
a grid cannot represent complex relationships in an abstract
form, e.g., the right of way between lanes [3], [9].
B. Hybrid Approaches
Hybrid approaches introduce a graph-based representation
of the provided dynamic agents, but keep the grid-based
representation for the static infrastructure. The graph-based
representation of agents allows for an agent-wise encoding,
considering semantic attributes and temporal information. Rea-
soning on these encodings is done via GNNs [10], [11], [12],
which can consider edges in the graph to derive complex
interaction patterns between agents. In contrast to our work,
these hybrid approaches still come with the aforementioned
limitations of not representing complex relationships that
involve static infrastructure.
C. Graph-based Approaches
Graph-based approaches model both, dynamic agents and
static infrastructure via graph structures. This idea of holisti-
cally modeling scenes in a graph structure and reasoning on
it originated from the ﬁeld of image retrieval [13].
Since graph-based approaches work on sparse graphs in-
stead of dense grids, these approaches tend to be more memory
efﬁcient [14]. Analogously to the hybrid approaches, GNNs
are used to model interactions between dynamic agents.
Early work of Ulbrich et al. [15] proposes an ontology for
representing a scene graph for autonomous driving, but do
not provide means for reasoning on the graph. Tian et al. [16]
propose a simpliﬁed approach by not modeling lanes explicitly.
This is a limitation compared to our work because their ap-
proach cannot capture topological nor regulatory relationships
between lanes.
Gao et al. [17] propose VectorNet, which shares the concept
of creating one global graph and serves as a baseline in our
evaluations. In contrast, their graph is homogeneous and fully-
connected. The homogeneous representation is obtained by
learning a node embedding for each of the heterogeneous
entities in the scene, including dynamic agents and static in-
frastructure (e.g., crosswalks and lanes). Their fully-connected
graph has only one type of edges, which requires the network
to implicitly learn different semantic relations between nodes
based on their embeddings. As a drawback, their representa-
tion does not capture edge features. However, edge features
enable the inclusion of additional relational information in the
graph, which we evaluate as advantageous in our ablation
study. The use of edge features in general is very limited
in recent publications. Approaches either only use spatial
relations as edge features (e.g., distances or headings between
dynamic agents) [18], [19], or intermediate representations by
combining information of two connected nodes [20], [21].
Li et al. [22] use one graph to model the interactions
between an ego vehicle and its nearby vehicles (ego-thing
graph) and one graph to model interactions between the ego
vehicle and its static infrastructure (ego-stuff graph). For the
ego-stuff graph, only graph edges between the node of the
ego vehicle and stuff nodes are allowed. This modeling limits
their reasoning to the ego vehicle only, while our approach
is capable of also reasoning over patterns between non-ego
vehicles. Kumar et al. [23] lift that restriction and create a
heterogeneous graph in which all agents are fully connected

MONNINGER AND SCHMIDT et al.: SCENE
3
to each other as well as to nodes of the static infrastructure
within a ﬁxed radius. Still, no relations between the static
infrastructure are explicitly modeled in the graph. Both ap-
proaches suffer from the aforementioned limitation that the
graph contains no explicitly modeled edge features between
entities of the static infrastructure.
Other approaches [3], [9], [14] explicitly model the lane
topology in a graph in order to incorporate knowledge about
the static infrastructure. These approaches utilize specialized
mechanisms in the inference process to include lane informa-
tion, allowing a transductive exchange of information between
agents via the underlying lanes. However, they do not cover
other entities of the static infrastructure, such as crosswalks or
trafﬁc lights. In contrast, our methodology is generic and freely
extensible in a sense that it can capture various information in
a heterogeneous graph by using typed nodes. Furthermore, our
methodology allows for modeling relations with arbitrary type
and edge features between these nodes, which we demonstrate
to be a valuable addition. The result is one heterogeneous
graph that explicitly models all aspects of a given trafﬁc scene
without limitations to speciﬁc use cases.
III. METHODOLOGY
This section describes our proposed methodology. Firstly,
we deﬁne a graph ontology to model the given dynamic
agents and static infrastructure in a heterogeneous scene graph.
Secondly, we use a learning-based approach to predict relevant
information from this scene graph.
A. Heterogeneous Scene Graph Ontology
We represent a scene by a directed heterogeneous graph
G = (V, E, T , R, φ). Every node vi ∈V has a feature vector
vi. The edge ej,r,i = (vj, r, vi) ∈E between the source node
vj and the destination node vi with the relation type r ∈R has
a feature vector ej,r,i. The type of node v is deﬁned by the type
operator φ : V →T , with T being the set of allowed node
types. We deﬁne the domain type operator dom : R →T
and range type operator ran : R →T to map a relation
type r to the source and target node types, respectively. Each
relation type r has a ﬁxed source and destination node type:
∀(vj, r, vi)
φ(vj) ∈dom(r) and φ(vi) ∈ran(r).
Fig. 2 illustrates our used node types and our used relation
types between these node types. Each node and edge has
a corresponding feature vector. The relation types belong to
three groups. Relations between agents are of type interacts.
They are dynamically generated for each pair based on the
assumption that all agents can interact with each other. Re-
lations between agents and map entities are of the types on,
under and crosses. All valid relations are dynamically derived
from the geometric constellation. The remaining relation types
link map entities and are given by the HD map.
B. Reasoning on the Heterogeneous Scene Graph
Reasoning on the generated heterogeneous scene graph is
done with the encoder-decoder architecture presented below.
The encoder ﬁrst aggregates information of a trafﬁc scene into
crosswalk
light
lane
agent
stop
interacts
on
under
conﬂict
connection
precedence
overlaps
controls
crosses
signals
stops
Fig. 2.
Node types and allowed relation types of the proposed ontology.
Different colors are used to indicate the order of our proposed ﬂow of
information.
embeddings of the agent nodes. From these embeddings, task-
speciﬁc decoders can directly predict agent-speciﬁc attributes
(e.g., intents or trajectories). Encoder and decoder are jointly
trained with task-speciﬁc data in a supervised manner. The
focus of this work is the generic encoder.
1) Encoder: Multiple layers of graph convolution are cas-
caded to aggregate information regarding the heterogeneous
scene. Thanks to their invariance properties [24], graph con-
volutional layers can learn general, abstract patterns from con-
crete scenes. We show that this principle works for different
classiﬁcation tasks.
For graph convolution, a variety of operators is applicable.
We follow the principle described in [25], allowing to incorpo-
rate edge features in the established Graph Attention Network
(GAT) operator [26]. For better error propagation and to avoid
over-smoothing, we add a residual connection for Θs,r · vi to
the operator. The update of node vi under consideration of
neighboring nodes connected via the relation type r is given
by
v′
i,r = EdgeGATr(vi) =
Θs,r · vi+

K
k=1


X
j∈Nr(vi)
αk
j,r,i
 Θk
n,r · vj + Θk
e,r · ej,r,i


.
(1)
Θ is used to denote learnable weight matrices for the trans-
formation of features of the node to update (s=self), neigh-
boring nodes (n=neighbor) and edge features (e=edge). K
corresponds to the number of attention heads and ∥denotes
the concatenation operator. Attention weights are obtained by
αk
j,r,i = softmaxr,i

LeakyReLU
 ak
r
T [Θk
n,r · vi||Θk
n,r · vj||Θk
e,r · ej,r,i]

,
(2)
with a corresponding to a learnable vector. softmaxr,i stands
for the normalization by all incoming edges of node i con-
nected via relation type r.

4
IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS. PREPRINT VERSION. ACCEPTED DECEMBER, 2022
While EdgeGAT is able to aggregate information of one
speciﬁc relation type, reasoning on a heterogeneous graph
requires aggregating information of neighboring nodes that are
possibly connected via different relation types. Adapted from
Schlichtkrull et al. [27], we deﬁne the node update of one
heterogeneous GNN layer as
v′
i = ReLU
 X
r∈R
v′
i,r
!
.
(3)
We denote the combination of EdgeGAT and the aggregation
of the resulting embeddings over multiple relation types as
HetEdgeGAT.
We propose to use cascaded layers of HetEdgeGAT in order
to aggregate information of the scene into agent nodes. The
ﬂow of information towards the agent nodes is represented by
the color of the relation types in Fig. 2: The ﬁrst layer aggre-
gates information into crosswalk nodes (green). Subsequent
layers aggregate information into lane nodes (blue) and agent
nodes (red). The last layer of graph convolution then considers
social interaction between agents and updates the agent nodes
again (pink).
2) Decoder: The decoder is task-speciﬁc. We use a Multi-
layer Perceptron (MLP) and apply it to the encodings of agent
nodes for the two binary node classiﬁcation tasks considered
in the experiments section.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
In this section we describe the extensive evaluation of our
proposed methodology.
A. Learning Tasks
We evaluate our methodology on two diverse binary node
classiﬁcation tasks:
1) Classiﬁcation whether an agent is parked or not. We
consider one prior publication introducing and address-
ing this task as a baseline [2].
2) Classiﬁcation whether an agent is a ghost or not. Ghosts
are unreliable detections of agents by upstream per-
ception components that do not exist in real world,
i.e., false positive detections. We are not aware of
prior publications that consider static infrastructure for
this task. Comparison is done with an approach that
considers only dynamic information [28].
B. Dataset
Experiments are carried out on a large-scale, in-house
dataset with over 22 400 sequences, each coming with 3 s of
temporal history. They are extracted from in-vehicle recordings
from different areas in Germany and the U.S. with a sampling
rate of 10 Hz. Camera, LiDAR and Radar detections are fused
together in order to detect surrounding dynamic agents. The
dataset includes diverse environments (e.g., urban, rural and
highway) as well as diverse scenarios (e.g., driving and yield-
ing). To the best of our knowledge, there is no publicly avail-
able dataset for scene understanding that similarly provides
manually annotated semantic attributes for dynamic agents in
TABLE I
NODE TYPE-SPECIFIC FEATURES
Node type
Features
agent
• State vector (position, velocity, acceleration, yaw, yaw rate) with
corresponding covariances
• Tracking properties (e.g., max. velocity, tracked time)
• Bounding box dimensions
• Estimate of agent type (e.g., car, truck, two-wheeler)
• Sensor speciﬁc detection and existence probabilities
• Existence conﬁdence calculated according to [28]
• Trajectory of the past three seconds as a series of positional and
angular differences
lane
• Type (car, bike, shoulder, parking)
• Geometric properties (length, min. and max. width, max. curvature)
• Maximum legal speed
• Left and right boundary types
• Turn type
crosswalk
• Is signaled
stop
• Type (e.g., stop, crosswalk, yield)
light
• Type (e.g., car, pedestrian)
• State (e.g., red, yellow)
• Is deactivatable
TABLE II
RELATION TYPE-SPECIFIC EDGE FEATURES
Relation type
Features
interacts
• Geometric differences (position, velocity, angle)
under
• Assignment probability
• Frenet state (position, velocity) at agent position
• Lane properties at agent position
• Gap to lane boundaries at agent position
• Behavior primitive of agent in lane (e.g., following, crossing)
connection
• Type (e.g., precede, left neighbor)
conﬂict
• Type (e.g., cross, merge)
precedence
• Type (e.g., higher, lower)
stops
• Longitudinal position in lane
combination with an extensively attributed heterogeneous HD
map.
By deriving correspondences between manually annotated
agents and agent detections from upstream perception com-
ponents, more than 430 000 labels per training tasks are
generated. For our experiments, we use a dataset split of 60%
(training), 30% (validation) and 10% (testing).
C. Model Implementation Details
We use an extensive set of features for nodes and edges in
the scene graph to explicitly model all available knowledge of
the scene. Features are provided by the upstream perception
components and the HD map. Table I and Table II list the
used feature sets for each node type and each relation type.
To propagate uncertainty of the perception component to the
model, the feature vectors of agent nodes contain covariances
and conﬁdence values. All features that express a category
type are one-hot encoded. While this set of features is given
by our perception and HD map, the proposed methodology
can use any arbitrary set of features.
Details of the ﬁnal implementation are shown in Fig. 3,
including the dimensions of all feature vectors. The features
of all nodes and edges are type-speciﬁcally encoded with a
single linear layer and ReLU. Static and temporal aspects of
agents are encoded separately and concatenated thereafter. The
static encoding uses a linear layer with ReLU. The temporal
encoding uses a Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) and ReLU to

MONNINGER AND SCHMIDT et al.: SCENE
5
1
16
50
Agent
Features
30x3
Agent
Trajectory
1
Crosswalk
Features
12
Light
Features
5
Stop
Features
21
Lane
Features
5
Connection
Features
5
Conflict
Features
6
Precedence
Features
15
Under
Features
3
Interacts
Features
64
Linear
64
GRU
32
Linear
16
Linear
16
Linear
Linear
64
64
Linear
Predicted
Binary Label
64
128
Linear
HetEdgeGAT
Encoder
Decoder
64
1
Stops
Features
16
Linear
16
Linear
16
Linear
16
Linear
16
Linear
16
Linear
16
Linear

Fig. 3. Implementation details of the SCENE encoder and the task-speciﬁc MLP-decoder: Four cascaded layers of HetEdgeGAT (green, blue, red, pink) are
used to combine information of nodes of different types and their relations in order to update the feature vector of agent nodes. Residual connections (orange)
prevent over-smoothing. For the two binary node classiﬁcation tasks, an MLP is then used to generate a classiﬁcation score.
process the trajectory feature. Following the idea of [3], the
trajectory feature contains a ﬁxed-length series of positional
and angular differences of the last 30 timesteps (3 s). We add
a binary ﬂag that indicates whether an entry contains a valid
measurement for each timestep.
In order to avoid over-smoothing, which is one of the main
issues of multilayer GNNs [29], we exploit two concatenated
residual connections (orange). These allow the decoder to
combine high and low-level features of agent nodes.
Binary cross-entropy is used as a loss function. The model
is trained with Adam optimizer [30] with a learning rate of
10−5 and a batch size of 32. Dropout with a rate of 0.3 is
used for the two linear layers of the decoder.
D. Baselines
For both tasks, we compare our generic methodology to
multiple task-speciﬁc and generic baselines.
1) Task-speciﬁc Baselines for the Parked Attribute: The
velocity baseline evaluates the velocity of each car in a given
scene. Stationary cars (zero velocity) are labeled as parked and
vice versa.
The logistic regression baseline uses a handcrafted set of
features based on the inputs provided by upstream perception
components and the HD map. This baseline has been speciﬁ-
cally designed for classifying the parked attribute.
We also consider two approaches of one prior publication
addressing parked car classiﬁcation [2], namely the heuristic
approach and the MLP approach, which operates on only three
features for each agent. Both approaches utilize features that
contain information about the agent and one underlying lane.
We call these baselines heuristic and MoveMLP3.
2) Task-speciﬁc Baseline for the Ghost Attribute: The ex-
istence conﬁdence baseline gives an estimate about the exis-
tence of an agent. This baseline approach [28] uses a method
based on Dempster-Shafer evidence theory to estimate a fused
existence conﬁdence about an agent based on detections from
multiple sensor modalities. Note that the resulting existence
conﬁdence is also part of the input features of agent nodes.
A comparison to this baseline therefore shows the beneﬁt of
additionally considering social context and map context.
3) Generic Baselines: The MLP baseline contains four
linear layers with ReLU between these layers. It operates
directly on the features of agent nodes and does not process
the graph structure. In comparison to our proposed model, this
baseline shows the effect of neglecting relational information
about social context, deﬁned by nearby dynamic agents, and
map context, deﬁned by the static infrastructure.
The R-GCN baseline applies the Relational Graph Convo-
lutional Network [27], typically used as a common approach to
reason about knowledge graphs, to our scene graph. We extend
the original R-GCN approach by introducing edge features,
which allows our implementation of R-GCN to use the same
input features as SCENE. After four layers of R-GCN, an MLP
decoder is used to predict the labels. Feature vector sizes of
nodes and edges are similar to the ones used in SCENE.
To compare our methodology to the current-state-of-the-
art in scene encoding, we adapt VectorNet [17] to our input
representation. The VectorNet-like baselines therefore rely
on learning from a fully-connected, homogeneous graph. In
contrast to SCENE, the features of all heterogeneous nodes
are type-speciﬁcially encoded into a joint feature space with
size 64 to get a homogeneous graph. The vanilla VectorNet-
like baseline does not use edge features. In order to allow a fair
comparison to SCENE, we also extend the original VectorNet
approach by the introduction of edge features. All existing
edges are type-speciﬁcally encoded to a size of 16. To obtain
the required fully-connected graph, edges are instantiated with
a zero vector of size 16 between all nodes that are not yet
connected. A binary ﬂag concatenated to the edge feature
vector is used to indicate whether an edge is valid (1) or invalid
(0). Despite this leading to a fully-connected, homogeneous
graph, connectivity information of our initial scene graph is
still conserved in the edge features. One layer of EdgeGAT
is used on the resulting fully-connected graph. Similar to
SCENE, the labels are then predicted with an MLP decoder.

6
IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS. PREPRINT VERSION. ACCEPTED DECEMBER, 2022
TABLE III
RESULTS ON THE TEST SET
Method
Parked
Ghost
F1 (%)
Acc (%)
F1 (%)
Acc (%)
Velocity
76.51
81.41
-
-
Logistic regression
89.79
93.21
-
-
Heuristic [2]
86.75
90.47
-
-
MoveMLP3 [2]
88.56±0.15 92.78±0.07 -
-
Existence conﬁdence [28]
-
-
53.48
66.01
Naive prior
0.00
67.33
66.88
50.24
MLP
75.79±0.89 83.23±0.40 79.93±0.67 80.73±0.44
R-GCN [27]
89.68±0.81 93.11±0.58 78.76±0.36 79.87±0.24
VectorNet-like [17]
73.90±1.43 82.71±0.74 74.63±4.17 75.84±1.68
VectorNet-like (w/ edge feat) [17]
89.18±1.28 93.08±0.75 80.93±1.26 81.40±0.98
Ours (using HetEdgeGAT)1
91.17±0.71 94.29±0.46 80.56±0.77 81.44±0.71
Ours (using HetEdgeGatedGCN)
90.09±0.29 93.54±0.15 82.42±1.33 82.83±1.07
Ours (using HetEdgeSAGE)
91.11±0.43 94.19±0.34 80.72±1.23 81.68±0.71
Ours (using HetEdgeGAT)∗
90.16±1.42 93.49±1.10 81.05±1.26 81.93±0.80
1Selected for all further experiments.
∗Multi-task training.
E. Metrics
F-Score (F1) and accuracy (Acc) are used for evaluation.
F. Quantitative Results
The models were trained over ﬁve random seeds to min-
imize stochasticity in the results. The resulting average and
standard deviation of the performance metrics on the test
split are shown in Table III. Besides GAT, we evaluated
our approach using different operators for graph convolution,
including variants of Gated Graph Convolutional Neural Net-
works (EdgeGatedGCN) [31] and GraphSAGE (EdgeSAGE)
[32]. They all consistently perform well, which suggests
that the graph convolution operator is interchangeable, also
with regards to the architecture. Therefore, our methodology
can beneﬁt from upcoming advances in the ﬁeld of GNNs.
HetEdgeGAT was selected for all further experiments because
it uses the least number of parameters. Also, Schmidt et al.
[33] show that the resulting attention weights of interacts
relations offer additional interpretability, as they are a direct
measure for interactions.
Comparing the results of our methodology with the MLP
baseline supports our initial hypothesis that our proposed way
of modeling a scene in a heterogeneous scene graph adds
valuable information.
Our generic methodology outperforms all task-speciﬁc and
generic baselines on both tasks. The last row in Table III
shows the result of the model simultaneously trained on both
learning tasks. The performance is on par with the single-
task setup, which supports the indication that our method
works as a generic scene encoder. The VectorNet-like baseline
extended with edge features performs much better than the
vanilla VectorNet-like baseline, which supports the intuition
that adding relational attributes provides valuable information
for scene understanding. Comparing the average number of
Floating-Point Operations (FLOPs) of the VectorNet-like base-
line with edge features (6.24·108 FLOPs) and our SCENE ap-
proach (4.57 · 107 FLOPs) shows that our approach has more
than an order of magnitude less computational complexity. The
higher complexity of the VectorNet-like baselines comes from
TABLE IV
CONTEXT ABLATION STUDY ON THE TEST SET
Context
#Params
Parked
Ghost
Agent Lane Remaining
F1 (%)
Acc (%)
F1 (%)
Acc (%)
50k
75.35±0.70 82.96±0.54 80.13±1.14 80.70±0.59
✓
59k
81.85±2.80 88.31±2.00 79.85±0.51 80.69±0.43
✓
✓
99k
91.03±1.46 94.28±0.89 80.63±0.63 81.40±0.47
✓
✓
✓
118k
91.17±0.71 94.29±0.46 80.56±0.77 81.44±0.71
TABLE V
ARCHITECTURAL ABLATION STUDY ON THE TEST SET
Architecture
#Params
Parked
Ghost
Temp Res
Edge feat2
F1 (%)
Acc (%)
F1 (%)
Acc (%)
77k
89.47±1.19 93.28±0.63 77.42±0.96 78.74±0.85
✓
✓
101k
90.47±0.76 93.92±0.45 80.26±0.55 80.92±0.55
✓
✓
102k
90.81±1.17 94.06±0.72 80.12±1.47 81.02±1.26
✓
✓
111k
89.06±0.72 92.92±0.60 77.13±0.46 78.71±0.23
✓
✓
✓
118k
91.17±0.71 94.29±0.46 80.56±0.77 81.44±0.71
2In contrast to the temporal and residual architectural measures, edge features
introduce additional information into the graph.
applying convolution over the fully-connected graph, which
also results in signiﬁcantly higher GPU memory requirements
and training time than our approach.
G. Ablation Studies
In two ablation studies we analyze how well our approach
can leverage the various sources of information and the
effectiveness of our architectural measures.
Table IV ablates the value of various sources of information
coming from the dynamic agents and static infrastructure and
the ability of our approach to leverage this information. With-
out any context at all, the model performs the classiﬁcation
tasks with the features of agent nodes only. Our experiments
show that considering social interactions to nearby agents
(agent context), lane information (lane context) and informa-
tion given by crosswalks, stops and lights (remaining context)
can have a strong positive effect on model performance. The
relevance of each contextual aspect differs between tasks.
The remaining context has only a small effect, since much
information is implicitly present in the lane model already.
Overall, the results show that incrementally adding further
context information improves model performance. This con-
ﬁrms the value of the additional information as hypothesized
in the introduction as well as the capability of the generic
model to exploit the provided information.
Table V ablates the performance of our approach in terms
of applied architectural measures. These measures are the
temporal encoding of each agent’s trajectory, the residual
connections and the inclusion of edge features in the layers of
graph convolution. The results indicate that omitting individual
architectural measures decreases model performance compared
to applying the full set of measures. This is particularly
noteworthy for the edge features, suggesting a beneﬁt of
adding relational information to the graph. The architecture
that combines all measures either excels or comes very close to
the best results. This suggests that the individual architectural
measures beneﬁt from each other.

MONNINGER AND SCHMIDT et al.: SCENE
7
Parked classiﬁcation
Parked classiﬁcation
Ghost classiﬁcation
Fig. 4. Qualitative results of SCENE for the classiﬁcation of the parked attribute (left and center) and the classiﬁcation of the ghost attribute (right). The
upper row shows the front camera frame, which is one of multiple sensors used by upstream perception, and the lower row renders the corresponding scene
with lanes in gray. Bounding boxes of agents are drawn as rectangles, with the past trajectory visualized by an orange line. The color of the rectangle outline
indicates the ground-truth label and the ﬁll color indicates the label predicted by our model. Green corresponds to an agent being labeled as non-parked or
non-ghost. Red corresponds to an agent being labeled as parked or ghost. All agents are correctly classiﬁed as indicated by matching ﬁll and outline colors.
A purple outline indicates a missing label. The autonomous vehicle is colored in blue.
H. Qualitative Results
Fig. 4 shows qualitative results for both tasks. Color codes
are described in the caption of the ﬁgure. In the three examples
all agents with available ground-truth label are correctly clas-
siﬁed, which is represented by consistent coloring of outline
and ﬁll.
The ﬁgure on the left shows an urban scenario with vehicles
parked on the road side (red) and vehicles driving in the center
(green). Interestingly, the vehicle with white paint inside the
paved intersection is parked, which is correctly predicted by
our model.
The ﬁgure displayed in the center is a rare case where two
cars are parked on the left lane of a highway on-ramp. Again,
those are correctly classiﬁed by our model. The prediction is
likely supported by the humans nearby, which are detected by
the system (purple outline due to no parked label for agents of
type human) and provide social context to the parked vehicles.
The ﬁgure on the right shows a highway scenario, where
all nearby agents besides one are correctly classiﬁed as non-
ghost (green outline and ﬁll). The prediction of the one ghost
agent (red ﬁll) can be conﬁrmed by its trajectory showing a
wrong direction of travel. This speciﬁc detection is probably
caused by sensor reﬂections of a bridge. The corresponding
ground-truth label also classiﬁes it as ghost (red outline).
V. TRANSFERABILITY TO OTHER APPLICATIONS
As an extension to evaluating the prediction of unknown
characteristics of trafﬁc agents, in this section we show that,
without any modiﬁcations, the use of cascaded layers of graph
convolution can be transferred to applications that go beyond
the domain of scene understanding. We therefore apply our
methodology for the task of node classiﬁcation to multiple
knowledge graphs of different sizes. The source code of
these experiments, including our graph convolution operator,
is publicly available3.
A. Datasets
Evaluation is done on four publicly available heterogeneous
knowledge graph datasets, namely AIFB, MUTAG, BGS and
3Source code: https://github.com/schmidt-ju/scene
TABLE VI
ACCURACY (%) ON THE MASKED NODES OF KNOWLEDGE GRAPHS
Dataset
WL [36]
RDF2Vec [37] Walk Tree [35] R-GCN [27] Ours
AIFB
80.55±0.00
88.88±0.00
89.44±2.08
95.83±0.62 95.83±1.96
MUTAG
80.88±0.00 67.20±1.24
73.82±5.61
73.23±0.48
75.44±2.50
BGS
86.20±0.00
87.24±0.89
86.90±1.38
83.10±0.80
92.41±2.72
AM
87.37±0.00
88.33±0.61
86.77±0.59
89.29±0.35
90.05±1.07
AM [34]. The datasets cover varying graph sizes, ranging from
small (AIFB, 8 285 nodes) to large (AM, 1 666 764 nodes)
[27]. Given classes for some nodes of a target node type, the
goal is to correctly classify the classes of masked target nodes.
B. Model and Results
We remove low-degree nodes and initialize the features
of each node with a learnable bias vector. Four layers of
HetEdgeGAT are arranged in cascaded form. The ﬁrst two
layers sequentially update all nodes not of type target based on
neighboring nodes of the same and of other types. The second
two layers sequentially aggregate information into nodes of
type target by considering neighboring nodes of other types
and of type target. The model is trained full-batch with cross-
entropy loss. Average accuracy and standard deviation for ten
runs is reported in Table VI. Results of the compared methods
are taken from prior publications [27], [35], [36], [37].
Despite the task being different from predicting unknown
characteristics of trafﬁc agents, the results show that our
methodology manages to yield state-of-the-art performance for
the task of node classiﬁcation in knowledge graphs.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper proposes a method using cascaded layers of
graph convolution in order to predict relevant information from
heterogeneous graphs and examines it on the task of reasoning
about trafﬁc scenes. Combining the cascaded layers of graph
convolution with our novel way for modeling trafﬁc scenes
in heterogeneous graphs results in a generic and extensible
method to reason about trafﬁc scenes. The heterogeneous
graph ontology can be extended with additional types or
features of nodes and edges. Our methodology outperforms all

8
IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS. PREPRINT VERSION. ACCEPTED DECEMBER, 2022
task-speciﬁc baselines on two diverse tasks. Furthermore, we
compared it to multiple generic state-of-the-art encoders and
demonstrated that our method has signiﬁcant advantages with
regard to performance metrics and computational complexity.
The application of our methodology to the task of node
classiﬁcation in knowledge graphs indicates another key prop-
erty of our methodology: it is, without any modiﬁcations,
applicable to areas that go beyond the domain of scene
understanding. By making source code and GNN operator
publicly available, we contribute to the progress in this ﬁeld.
