IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2020
1
From Pixel to Slide image: Polarization
Modality-based Pathological Diagnosis Using
Representation Learning
Jia Dong*, Yao Yao*, Yang Dong, and Hui MaB
Abstract— Thyroid cancer is the most common en-
docrine malignancy, and accurately distinguishing between
benign and malignant thyroid tumors is crucial for develop-
ing effective treatment plans in clinical practice. Pathologi-
cally, thyroid tumors pose diagnostic challenges due to im-
proper specimen sampling. In this study, we have designed
a three-stage model using representation learning to inte-
grate pixel-level and slice-level annotations for distinguish-
ing thyroid tumors. This structure includes a pathology
structure recognition method to predict structures related
to thyroid tumors, an encoder-decoder network to extract
pixel-level annotation information by learning the feature
representations of image blocks, and an attention-based
learning mechanism for the final classification task. This
mechanism learns the importance of different image blocks
in a pathological region, globally considering the informa-
tion from each block. In the third stage, all information from
the image blocks in a region is aggregated using atten-
tion mechanisms, followed by classification to determine
the category of the region. Experimental results demon-
strate that our proposed method can predict microscopic
structures more accurately. After color-coding, the method
achieves results on unstained pathology slides that approx-
imate the quality of Hematoxylin and eosin staining, reduc-
ing the need for stained pathology slides. Furthermore, by
leveraging the concept of indirect measurement and ex-
tracting polarized features from structures correlated with
lesions, the proposed method can also classify samples
where membrane structures cannot be obtained through
sampling, providing a potential objective and highly accu-
rate indirect diagnostic technique for thyroid tumors.
Index Terms— cancer diagnosis, pathology, polarization,
representation learning, thyroid tumors.
I. INTRODUCTION
Both authors contributed equally: Jia Dong; Yao Yao.

Jia Dong is currently with Department of Statistical Science at Univer-

Jia Dong, Yang Dong, and Hui Ma are with Guangdong Engineering
Center of Polarization Imaging and Sensing Technology, Shenzhen Key
Lab for Minimal Invasive Medical Technologies, Tsinghua Shenzhen
International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, 518055,
China.
Yao Yao, Yang Dong, and Hui Ma are with the Tsinghua Berkeley
Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School,
Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, 518055, China.
This work was supported in part by National Natural Science
Foundation of China (NSFC) (Grant Nos. 61527826 and 11974206)
and
Shenzhen
Bureau
of
Science
and
Innovation
(Grant
No.
JCYJ20170412170814624).
T
HE thyroid gland is a crucial organ that regulates various
bodily functions such as metabolic rate, energy expen-
diture, and the function of organs like the heart and brain
[1]. Thyroid diseases are among the most common ailments,
with thyroid cancer ranking 9th globally in the incidence of
all cancers, totaling 586,000 cases in 2022 [2]. Currently, the
World Health Organization classification system is primarily
used, categorizing thyroid tumors into benign tumors (adeno-
mas), low-risk tumors, and malignant tumors (carcinomas) [3].
Thyroid cancer is the most common endocrine malignancy,
accounting for 2.1% of all new diagnoses of malignancies
(excluding skin cancers and in situ carcinomas) annually.
The incidence of thyroid cancer has been steadily rising over
the past few decades, and if the current trend continues, it
might become the fourth most common cancer by 2030 [4].
Thyroid cancer diagnosis involves intricate steps like tissue
preparation, histological observation, and immunohistochem-
istry [5]–[7]. Skilled physicians perform these, aligning with
clinical data for precision. Crucially, cancer classification aids
tailored treatment plans, prognosis prediction, and treatment
evaluation. Different thyroid cancer types necessitate diverse
treatments—papillary carcinoma often involves surgery and
hormone replacement, while follicular carcinoma may require
surgery and radiation [8]. Accurate classification, pivotal for
clinical decisions, provides insights into biological traits and
informs novel treatments and diagnostics. Thus, precise thy-
roid cancer classification is fundamental for clinical care,
prognosis, and research [9], [10].
Artificial intelligence (AI) technology has the capability
to automatically analyze and diagnose pathological images,
enhancing the accuracy and efficiency of digital pathology and
providing doctors with a more comprehensive and objective
reference for diagnosis [11]–[15]. In the pathological assisted
diagnosis of thyroid tumors, there has been extensive research
on using whole-slide pathology images [16], [17] for the
classification of thyroid follicular carcinoma. For example,
Wang et al. [18] developed an algorithm that distinguishes
thyroid cancer through three stages: image preprocessing
and segmentation, feature extraction, and model prediction.
Dov et al. [19] employed a deep learning algorithm based
on two cascaded convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to
classify thyroid cancer in whole-slide imaging (WSI) cy-
tological pathology images. The algorithm, trained on 799
slices, demonstrated an area under the Receiver Operating
Characteristic (ROC) curve of 0.932 in experimental results.
arXiv:2401.01496v1  [eess.IV]  3 Jan 2024

2
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2020
Elliott Range et al. [20] constructed a neural network for
predicting malignant tumors in thyroid pathology based on
two CNNs. Utilizing 908 fine-needle aspiration biopsy images
from 659 patients, the algorithm achieved a sensitivity of
92.0% and specificity of 90.5%. Hossiny et al. [21] employed
a cascaded CNN technique to divide the thyroid classification
process into two stages, reducing the number of classes at each
stage. They further subclassified follicular carcinoma from the
first stage into four subtypes, achieving an overall accuracy of
94.69%. Deep learning has been successfully applied to the
cell classification of different types of thyroid tumors [22] and
has demonstrated the ability to differentiate between benign
and malignant cell samples [23].
The polarization measurement and imaging method based
on Mueller matrix, as an emerging biomedical imaging tech-
nique, has demonstrated potential diagnostic capabilities in the
detection of various cancer tissues [24]–[27]. In recent years,
many studies have analyzed the polarization parameters of
pathological slices, utilizing them as two-dimensional images
for feature extraction and assisting in pathological diagnosis
[28], [29]. We can summarize the research progress of two
main polarization image analysis methods: quantitative feature
extraction and deep learning modeling. In the quantitative
feature extraction method, the Mueller matrix of pathological
samples is first measured, obtaining two-dimensional images
of polarization parameters from it [30], [31]. Subsequently,
through further statistical feature analysis or image texture
feature analysis of these two-dimensional images, a set of
quantitative parameters that effectively differentiate different
types of lesion structures is derived. These parameters provide
crucial information about the nature and pathological status
of the lesions. On the other hand, deep learning modeling
methods involve training deep learning models to automat-
ically learn and extract key features from images, aiming
for more accurate classification and diagnosis of pathological
structures [32], [33]. The training process of deep learning
models effectively discovers and utilizes hidden features in
images, enhancing the accuracy of analysis and recognition
capabilities for pathological structures.
The fusion of polarization imaging and Convolutional Neu-
ral Networks (CNN) proves feasible in early clinical trials.
Yao et al. [34] explored optimal CNN models for diverse
polarization images. In endometrial sample differentiation,
CNN1 (AlexNet-based) and CNN2 (ResNet-based) efficiently
extracted features from 2D polarization parameter images,
achieving reliable classification. Linear polarization and ex-
tinction angle parameters yielded the same highest accuracy
of 0.870. Zhao et al. [35] proposed a method for giant cell
tumor detection, employing a CNN for deep feature extraction
and a multi-parameter fusion network for improved accuracy.
Xia et al. [36] enhanced breast cancer cell classification using
ReSENet, showing superior accuracy by capturing polarization
image features. Ma et al. [37] introduced MuellerNet, a 3D-
2D hybrid CNN for breast cancer cell classification. This
innovative approach achieved higher accuracy by integrating
information from polarization and optical intensity images.
These studies highlight the promising role of polarization
imaging with CNN in accurate pathological analysis.
This article presents a three-stage model for thyroid tu-
mor classification using polarization features. The model
integrates pixel-level and slice-level annotations through a
representation learning [38] approach. The structure includes a
pathology structure recognition method for predicting thyroid
tumor-related structures—cells, fibers, and glial structures. An
encoder-decoder network distills pixel-level annotation infor-
mation by learning feature representations of image blocks,
connecting annotations at different levels. The features of
all image blocks in a region are aggregated using an atten-
tion mechanism to form a region-level feature representation,
which is then classified by a classifier to determine the region’s
category. To validate confidence learning, a portion of the
pathologist-provided annotations is randomly shuffled, and the
model predicts pixels in the unlabeled areas under various lev-
els of artificial noise. Experimental results indicate improved
performance with the introduced noise. The three recogni-
tion results are visualized in an H&E color-matched format,
presenting the polarized virtual staining in a pathologist-
friendly manner for convenient pathological observation. The
importance of different polarization parameters during the
recognition process is analyzed to understand each parameter’s
significance. For evaluating the restoration performance of
structural information, quantitative metrics, including accuracy
and loss functions, demonstrate the model’s quick convergence
and high consistency in predicting structural information at
both stages. The second stage effectively reconstructs the
structural information from the first stage, providing an ap-
proximation of pathological color images. ROC curves from
the proposed network’s classification illustrate effective dif-
ferentiation among malignant thyroid tumors, benign tumors,
and tumors with indeterminate malignant potential during the
classification process. Notably, the discrimination of malig-
nant thyroid tumors performs exceptionally well. In the third
stage, the visual representation of the aggregated region-level
features, learned using attention mechanisms, demonstrates
the method’s feasibility, with features possessing classification
capabilities and excellent distinctiveness between regions.
II. METHODS
A. Pathological Samples
In pathology, the preparation of stained slices involves
the use of chemical reagents containing harmful substances,
demanding strict workflows and staining conditions. Unstained
pathological slices allow the observation of cell and tissue
morphology without the need for staining, eliminating the time
and cost associated with the staining process. This presents
advantages for rapid testing and initial screening. Leveraging
the clinical significance of unstained pathological slices, we
explore the use of polarization information to classify thyroid
tumors. To investigate the impact of unstained slice thickness
on polarization imaging quality, we conducted experiments
using multiple consecutive slices from the same wax block,
with thicknesses ranging from 4µm to 12µm. One 4µm thick
slice underwent routine H&E staining to create a stained
pathological slice, while the others (4µm, 6µm, 8µm, 10µm,
12µm) remained unstained after deparaffinization and were

AUTHOR et al.: PREPARATION OF PAPERS FOR IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING
3
Fig. 1.
Polarization parameter maps for different slice thicknesses. (a)
4µm thick H&E stained slice. (b) 4µm thick unstained slice. (c) 6µm thick
unstained slice. (d) 8µm thick unstained slice. (e) 10µm thick unstained
slice. (f) 12µm thick unstained slice.
used to create unstained pathological slices. All six slices
were subjected to polarization imaging using a Mueller matrix
microscope, and the polarization parameter images were com-
pared. The results, as shown in Fig. 1, indicate that the 12µm
thick unstained slice exhibits high polarization signal contrast
and a clean background, resembling the polarization parameter
image of the H&E stained slice. Consequently, the 12µm
thick unstained slice was selected for subsequent experiments.
Considering the pathological significance and the exploration
of the impact of unstained slice thickness, we selected 116
slices from patients who underwent radical tumor resection at
the General Hospital of Southern Medical University. These
samples included 53 cases of confirmed malignant thyroid
cancer, 48 cases of benign thyroid adenoma, and 35 cases of
tumors with indeterminate malignant potential. Each postop-
erative specimen underwent routine sectioning, and for each
case, one sample from the tumor’s interior without necrosis
was chosen. According to pathology sampling standards, each
tissue block was approximately (1.5-2) × 1 × 0.2cm³. Two
consecutive slices, one 4µm thick stained with H&E for high-
resolution full-slide color pathology imaging, and the other
12µm thick unstained, were used for full polarization imaging.
B. Algorithm Architecture
The framework consists of a label classifier model for
pathological structure recognition, a PBP analyzing system for
illustrating the polarization features of target microstructures
in thyroid tumors, and a CNN for Thyroid carcinoma classifi-
cation, as shown in Fig. 2. This framework uses polarization
information to quantitatively diagnose thyroid tumors, where
architecture and parameters are illustrated as follows.
1) Confidence
Learning-Based
Pixel-Level
Pathological
Structure Recognition: Confidence learning [39] is a weakly
supervised learning approach that focuses on the quality
(confidence) of labels. It aims to enhance the quality of data
labels by characterizing and identifying erroneous labels in
the dataset. This method ensures that the model’s performance
remains unaffected by noisy labels, ultimately improving
the accuracy of the trained model. The key components of
confidence learning include:
1) Estimation of the joint distribution of noisy labels and
true labels.
2) Identification and removal of low-confidence samples.
3) Retraining the model after eliminating incorrectly la-
beled samples.
This approach is particularly useful in addressing issues
such as errors in data annotation or inconsistency in labeling
standards encountered in practical scenarios. To better handle
label noise introduced during the manual annotation process,
we employed confidence learning to prune the annotations of
the original microscopic structures. The confidence learning
process involves three steps:
1) Estimating the joint distribution of noisy labels ˜y and
true labels y∗to describe the noise in labels for different
categories.
2) Finding and filtering out low-confidence annotations.
3) Reassigning weights to different categories and retrain-
ing the model on the remaining clean data.
The dataset X for thyroid microscopic structures is rep-
resented as (x, ˜y)n, consisting of n samples with m classes
of noisy labels ˜y. Cross-validation is performed using a third-
party model to calculate the predicted probabilities ˆP for each
sample in each category. If the predicted probability ˆPj(x)
for a sample x with the label ˜y = i is greater than or equal
to the confidence threshold tj, it is considered that the true
underlying label y∗for the sample x is j instead of i to some
extent. The confidence threshold tj is obtained by calculating
the average predicted probability for samples with the label
˜y = j.
tj :=
1
X˜y=j
P
x∈X˜y=j ˆpj (x) .
(1)
Based on the predicted labels, we further introduce the
confusion matrix C˜y,y∗, where C˜y,y∗[i][j] represents the count
of samples x with the predicted label i (˜y = i) but the true
underlying label may be j (y∗= j). In formal terms, C˜y,y∗
can be defined as:
C˜y,y∗[i] [j] :=
 ˆX˜y=i,y∗=j
 .
(2)
ˆX˜y=i,y∗=j :=
(
x ∈X˜y=j : ˆpj (x) ≥tj, j =
argmax
l∈M:ˆpl(x)≥tj
ˆpl (x)
)
.
(3)
By constructing the confusion matrix C˜y,y∗, we can further
estimate the m×m joint distribution matrix Q˜y,y∗for p(˜y, y∗):
Q˜y,y∗[i] [j] =
C˜y,y∗[i][j]
P
j∈M C˜y,y∗[i] [j] · |X˜y=j|
P
i∈M,j∈M

C˜y,y∗[i][j]
P
j∈M C˜y,y∗[i] [j] · |X˜y=j|
.
(4)
Next, we utilize the Prune by Class (PBC) method to
identify incorrect labels. Specifically, for each class i ∈M,
PBC selects the samples with the lowest confidence ˆp(˜y =
i; x ∈Xi) as samples with incorrect annotations. The number
of selections is given by:
n · P
j∈M,j̸=i (Q˜y,y∗[i] [j]) .
(5)

4
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2020
Fig. 2.
The network architecture for representation learning is divided into three stages: the first stage is microstructure recognition, the second
stage involves feature extraction, and the third stage focuses on thyroid tumor classification.
After filtering out untrusted samples and considering data
missingness, the class weights for each category are adjusted
using the following formula:
1
ˆp (˜y = i | y∗= i) =
ˆQy∗[i]
ˆQ˜y,y∗[i] [j]
.
(6)
Qy∗[i] = P
j∈MQ˜y,y∗[j] [i] .
(7)
Therefore, high-confidence labels and samples serve as
input to the XGBoost classifier, designed as an extensible
tree-based algorithm within the machine learning system. Its
purpose is to predict the remaining unlabeled pixels in a
region, indicating their affiliation with specific microscopic
structural categories. In the first stage, pathologists provide
pixel-level annotations for cellular, fibrous, and glial structures
in color images, which we map onto polarization parameter
images. During the training of the pathological tissue structure
classifier in the first stage, the input consists of polarization
parameters for each pixel, and the output is a probability
map for the structural classification of each pixel. Due to the
limited and coarse-grained nature of the annotations provided
by doctors, and aiming to enhance classification performance,
we employ confidence learning and decision tree classifiers
to improve the accuracy of structure recognition. In the first
stage, we obtain a probability map for each pixel in the
measurement area, indicating the likelihood of belonging to
a specific structure. This probability map serves as the target
for the second-stage network.
2) Utilizing Encoder and Decoder to Extract Structural Infor-
mation: CNN has been widely applied in image classification
tasks. However, when using the pixel-level images (1591×
2291 pixels) generated in the first stage as input, it is chal-
lenging to apply CNN directly to the classification task. Firstly,
training CNN on a large number of high-resolution images is
computationally difficult due to increased input size and model
parameter count. Secondly, complex models require abundant
samples for training, and the available sample quantity is
insufficient for training a sophisticated model. Therefore, there
is a need to reduce model complexity, compress embedding
dimensions, and simultaneously decrease parameter count and
computational load. Additionally, preserving the pixel-level
annotations from the first stage as prior knowledge is desired
to retain the microscopic structural information predicted in
the first stage. Our solution involves dividing polarimetric
parameter images into smaller image blocks (224×224 pixels)
for direct input to CNN. Subsequently, CNN is employed

AUTHOR et al.: PREPARATION OF PAPERS FOR IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING
5
for feature extraction, converting all polarimetric parameter
image blocks into a collection of low-dimensional feature em-
beddings (Embedding Layer, EMB). After feature extraction,
both training and prediction can be performed in the low-
dimensional feature space rather than the high-dimensional
pixel space. This significantly reduces the computational load
required for training supervised deep learning models.
Popular pre-trained network models such as ResNet [36]
and pre-activation ResNet [40] have proven effective for
various image classification tasks. They offer a universal en-
coder that encompasses low and high-level feature extraction.
Therefore, when designing the second layer network, we
leverage the existing feature extraction architecture of mature
networks and focus on exploring the optimal approach for
training models with polarimetric data. Given that the second
stage aims to learn a universal feature representation at the
image block level through training a classification network,
we adopt the common encoder-decoder classification structure,
with the encoder being any basic structure. In this work, we
use the ResNet series model as the basic structure for the
encoder layer, with minor modifications to enable training
with polarimetric data. During training, a simple two-layer
convolutional network is employed as the decoder to combine
features from the encoder. To calculate the difference between
the network output and the structural classification probability
map from the first stage, we directly upsample the feature
maps from the decoder to the size of the corresponding
probability image. This simple decoder design allows the
network to focus on training a universal encoder. In the testing
phase, the decoder is removed, and the trained encoder can
be transferred to the third stage’s task. Therefore, the first
half of the encoder-decoder structure information extraction
network relies on the representation extraction ability of the
pre-trained model, maximizing the advantages of the pre-
trained model. Meanwhile, the simple decoder design ensures
that the information about the microscopic structure provided
by the probability map is fed back to the encoder as much
as possible. With this design, we aim for the encoder to learn
both the correlation between different pixels and distill the
information about the microscopic structure learned in the
first stage. As a result, the representation EMB learned in
the second stage possesses both the information from the first
stage’s structure and local correlation information.
In the second stage, for each pixel xi, the learned feature
representation EMB, after passing through the decoder, is used
to regenerate the probability of belonging to a certain structural
class, denoted as ˆPdecoder(xi). The probability of belonging to
a certain structural class predicted by the first stage for each
pixel is denoted as ˆPXGB(xi). To validate the consistency
between these two prediction results, we use two quantitative
metrics: accuracy and loss function. Accuracy measures the
ratio of pixels for which the predicted structure class with the
highest probability in the first stage matches the one predicted
by the decoder, and is defined as:
acc =
Pn
i=1 1 (argmaxˆpdecoder (xi) = argmaxˆpXGB (xi))
n
.
(8)
Fig. 3.
Polarization parameter maps for different slice thicknesses. (a)
4µm thick H&E stained slice. (b) 4µm thick unstained slice. (c) 6µm thick
unstained slice. (d) 8µm thick unstained slice. (e) 10µm thick unstained
slice. (f) 12µm thick unstained slice.
Where the indicator function 1(x) is defined as:
1(x) =
(
1,
if condition x is true
0,
if condition x is false .
(9)
The loss function is defined as the difference between the
predicted structural labels in the first and second stages, given
by:
loss =
Pn
i=1 RMSE

ˆPdecoder (xi, ) , ˆPXGB (xi)

n
.
(10)
The root mean square error (RMSE) is defined as:
RMSE

Y, ˆY

=
v
u
u
t
P4
i=1

Yi −ˆYi
2
4
.
(11)
Where Y is the label predicted by the decoder in the second
stage, Y ∗is the target label for each pixel, and it is the
predicted result label generated by the XGBoost classifier.
The target labels for each pixel are not the actual ground
truth labels. Due to the scarcity of real pixel-level annotation
information, we use the XGBoost classifier pre-trained in the
first stage as a pseudo-labeler to provide target labels.
3) Applying Attention Mechanism to Classify Pathological
Samples: In addition to using max pooling, other operators
such as average operator, weighted average operator, and
quantile truncation can be employed to filter or aggregate
representations of different image blocks. However, their lim-
itations lie in limited flexibility and sensitivity to data, often
requiring tedious fine-tuning for specific datasets. To provide
a simple, intuitive mechanism that is both flexible and user-
friendly for aggregating block-level representations with good
model interpretability, we designed a trainable attention-based
pooling function to aggregate block-level representations and
obtain ROI-level representations for downstream classification
tasks.

6
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2020
Fig. 4.
Comparison of Microstructure Recognition Results. (a) Without Confidence Learning. (b) With Confidence Learning. (c) Corresponding
H&E Image.
In our designed multi-class attention pooling network, the
downstream attention network first obtains ROI-level repre-
sentations based on the attention mechanism, and then trains
three binary classifiers simultaneously based on these repre-
sentations to obtain expected scores for the three types of
representations.
The specific implementation details are as follows: we use
two fully connected networks to remap and project the block-
level representations Va and Ua, projecting them onto a dense
256-dimensional latent space. We then obtain attention scores
for each block representation through softmax operations.
Here, assuming the operation is on the i-th ROI region, which
is divided into a total of K blocks, and the representation of
the k-th block is denoted as ei,k (obtained from the output of
the encoder layer of the pre-trained model in the second stage),
the shared two projection functions are: Va ∈R256×1024
with a tanh activation function, and Ua ∈R256×1024 with a
sigmoid activation function (denoted as sigm). Dropout layers
(P = 0.25) are added after both layers as regularization terms
to prevent overfitting. Thus, we can calculate the attention
weight for the k-th patch as follows:
ai,k =
exp {Wa,i (tanh (Vaei,k) ⊙sigm (Uaei,k))}
Pk
j=1 exp {Wa,i (tanh (Vaei,k) ⊙sigm (Uaei,k))}
.
(12)
Here, J represents the inner product operator. Furthermore,
aggregating block representations based on attention scores
yields the aggregated ROI-level representation as follows:
eroi,i = PK
k=1 ai,kei,k.
(13)
This type of aggregation allows adaptive learning of weights
based on block representations and maintains interpretabil-
ity, where regions with higher weights are more likely to
be critical for diagnostic decisions. Downstream of learning
the structured aggregation representation with the attention
network, we simultaneously train three classification layers
W1, W2, W3 ∈R1×1024 , along with sigmoid activation func-
tions, to obtain three binary prediction scores. These scores can
be further transformed using the softmax function to obtain the
final phenotype prediction at the ROI level.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Pathological Structure Recognition Results and
Analysis of Polarization Feature Importance
To verify the feasibility of confidence learning, we randomly
shuffled and artificially added noise to a portion of the anno-
tations provided by pathologists. Under different proportions
of artificial noisy labels, the proposed pathological structure
recognition method was used to predict pixels in unlabeled
regions of the training and test sets, with accuracy selected as
the evaluation metric. As shown in Fig. 3, we calculated the
pathological structure recognition results for four scenarios:
black dots represent accuracy with confidence learning added
in the training set, red dots represent accuracy with confidence
learning added in the test set, blue dots represent accuracy
without confidence learning in the training set, and green dots
represent accuracy without confidence learning in the test set.
From the recognition accuracy, it can be observed that the
accuracy with confidence learning added is higher than the
accuracy without confidence learning, both in the training
and test sets. As the proportion of noisy labels increases, the
accuracy drop with confidence learning is slower than the drop
without confidence learning, indicating that the model’s recog-
nition ability remains relatively stable. The accuracy on the
training set can to some extent represent the training effect of

AUTHOR et al.: PREPARATION OF PAPERS FOR IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING
7
Fig. 5.
Importance of Polarization Features. Demonstrates the pivotal
role played by polarization features in the process of microstructure
recognition.
the model, while the accuracy on the test set can represent the
model’s transfer and generalization ability. This demonstrates
that the proposed pathological structure recognition method
can improve classification performance.
Therefore, confidence learning can enhance the accuracy
of predictions in unlabeled regions. By using a small amount
of labeled data with confidence learning to train the classifier
within a region, the trained classifier can predict the structures
in the remaining region, increasing the credibility of the
prediction results. Moreover, if there are mislabeled instances
in the initial training annotations, this situation may lead to
incorrect classifier predictions. The introduction of confidence
learning can correct some of the classification results, reducing
the impact of labeling issues.
To visually demonstrate the comparison between recogni-
tion results with and without confidence learning, we present
the three recognition outcomes in the familiar H&E color
scheme for pathologists, as shown in Fig. 4. It can be observed
that the addition of confidence learning leads to more confident
identification of some originally uncertain pixels, manifested
in clearer colors for certain pixels. Additionally, some initially
misidentified pixels are corrected to the right identification,
as evident in color differences before and after introducing
confidence learning. This representation in polarized virtual
staining emulates the commonly used pathology observation
format, making it convenient for pathologists to observe
pathological structures. By comparing with adjacent stained
H&E images, it can be seen that the recognition results for
pathological structures are reasonably accurate, demonstrating
the feasibility of this recognition method.
Next, we conducted an analysis of the feature importance
of different polarization parameters in the process of mi-
crostructure recognition. This analysis helps us understand
the importance of each polarization parameter in the model’s
prediction process. Since polarization parameters have clear
physical meanings, we can interpret the differences in optical
features during microstructure recognition by analyzing the
physical significance of polarization parameters that are highly
Fig. 6.
Curves of Accuracy and Loss Function Metrics. (a) Accuracy.
(b) Loss Function.
Fig. 7.
Structure Classification Probability Maps. (a) Classification
results from the first stage. (b) Reconstruction results from the second
stage. (c) Corresponding H&E image.
relevant to the classification task.
As shown in Fig. 5, in the process of pathological structure
recognition in thyroid tumors, the following polarization pa-
rameters are considered important, providing insights into the
optical properties that play a significant role in the recognition
process from an interpretable perspective: linear retardance,
linear phase delay, degree of anisotropy, ability to convert cir-
cular polarization to linear polarization, circular birefringence,
and circular phase delay.
B. Evaluation of Structural Information Recovery
Performance
The results of the accuracy and loss metrics in the second
stage are shown in Fig. 6. It can be observed that due to the
presence of a pre-trained model, the model converges quickly
(approaching convergence at epoch=10), demonstrating the
advantage of introducing pre-trained models. Transferring
prior knowledge pre-trained on a common image dataset
significantly accelerates the training speed and reduces the
need for a large number of samples. As training progresses, the
loss metric continuously decreases, and the accuracy metric
continuously increases, indicating that the second stage can
adequately distill information from the first stage, showing
a high consistency between the two in predicting structural
information.
The comparison of the structural classification probability
maps between the two stages is shown in Fig. 7. It can be
observed that the second stage can highly reconstruct the struc-
tural information from the first stage. The reconstructed result
can serve as an approximation of the pathology color image. In
summary, the second stage can leverage the pre-trained model
and convolutional network structure to extract correlations
between different pixels. The learned feature representations,
combined with the decoder, can achieve pixel-level structural

8
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2020
Fig. 8.
Loss curves using different models as encoders. (a) Accuracy of ResNet18. (b) Accuracy of ResNet34. (c) Accuracy of ResNet50. (d)
Accuracy of ResNet101. (e) Loss of ResNet18. (f) Loss of ResNet34. (g) Loss of ResNet50. (h) Loss of ResNet101.
information prediction. The learned feature representations
have two key properties: first, benefiting from the presence of
pre-training, they capture inter-pixel correlations and leverage
prior knowledge pre-trained on another dataset in the image
domain; second, they possess the ability to predict pixel-level
structural information.
Moreover, to select the most suitable ResNet model, we an-
alyzed different models as encoders for the second stage based
on the accuracy and loss metrics. From Fig. 8, we can observe
that using pre-trained models leads to faster convergence, with
models approaching convergence at around epochs=10. Even
with only one training epoch (epochs=0), the accuracy already
exceeds 0.6, demonstrating the superiority of using pre-trained
models. When choosing a smaller pre-trained model, the final
prediction performance may slightly decrease, indicating that
smaller models learn representations of lower quality. As the
model size increases, the prediction performance improves.
On the other hand, we can observe that the performance
difference between ResNet models on the training set and the
test set is small. This suggests that larger pre-trained models
may be less prone to overfitting during fine-tuning, indicating
better generalization. Additionally, comparing ResNet101 and
ResNet50, we find that the performance difference between the
two models is already small. Further increasing the model size
may not yield significant gains. Therefore, in our experiments,
we chose ResNet101.
C. Evaluation of Classification Performance
In this work, we selected the Area Under the ROC Curve
(AUC) and Micro-average AUC as metrics to demonstrate the
Fig. 9. ROC curves and corresponding AUC metrics.
effectiveness of our proposed model. AUC is a value between 0
and 1, measuring the classifier’s ability to distinguish between
positive and negative instances. A higher AUC indicates better
classifier performance. Micro-average AUC consolidates the
prediction results of all samples and calculates the AUC
value for the entire dataset, providing a more comprehensive
reflection of the classifier’s overall performance.
As shown in Fig. 9, the ROC curves and corresponding
AUC values for the proposed network in the classification
of thyroid tumors demonstrate good discrimination among
malignant thyroid tumors, benign tumors, and indeterminate
borderline tumors. Particularly, the classification performance

AUTHOR et al.: PREPARATION OF PAPERS FOR IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING
9
Fig. 10.
Visualization of the classification of ROI-level feature representation. (a) Classification visualization of three tumors on the training set. (b)
Classification visualization of three tumors on the test set.
is excellent for malignant thyroid tumors with an AUC of
0.99. The discrimination for benign tumors follows with an
AUC of 0.93. Although the discrimination for indeterminate
borderline tumors shows a slightly lower AUC compared to
the previous two categories, it remains substantial at 0.86.
Moreover, the Micro-average AUC is 0.93, confirming the
effective differentiation of these three types of thyroid tumors
using polarimetric features.
In the third stage, utilizing the attention mechanism to
learn the weights of different image blocks, we aggregate all
the image block embeddings (EMB) into the entire Region
of Interest (ROI)’s EMB. Subsequently, we introduce an LR
classifier based on the ROI’s EMB for ROI-level classification
tasks. The final learned ROI’s EMB is visualized in Fig.
10, demonstrating its classification capability. The aggregated
EMBs exhibit distinctiveness among ROIs, confirming the ef-
fectiveness of the proposed attention mechanism in integrating
EMBs from different image blocks. The meaningfulness of
the learned weights for various image blocks is also validated
through this approach.
IV. CONCLUSION
This study focuses on polarization-modality-based repre-
sentation learning for pathological diagnosis of thyroid tu-
mors. Difficulty in pathological diagnosis of thyroid tumors
arises from inadequate sampling, and accurately distinguishing
between benign and malignant thyroid tumors is crucial for
devising optimal diagnosis and treatment plans in clinical
settings. We designed a three-stage classification model based
on polarization-modality representation learning. The net-
work comprises a pathology structure recognition method, an
encoder-decoder structure for extracting pixel-level annotation
information, and an attention-based learning mechanism for
the final classification task. Given the limited and coarse-
grained pixel-level annotations provided by pathologists, we
enhance microstructure recognition accuracy using confidence
learning and a decision tree classifier to obtain a probability
map of the structure category for each pixel in the mea-
surement region, serving as the target for the second-stage
encoder and decoder. Leveraging the representation extrac-
tion capability of pre-trained models and a simple decoding
design, the encoder learns the correlation between different
pixels and distills pixel-level structure annotation information.
Region prediction is improved by integrating local information
through importance learning. Additionally, this study transfers
the method of extracting polarization feature parameters from
stained samples to unstained samples. Polarization features
representing microstructure are extracted for the measured
pathological region, and polarization pseudo-coloring is ap-
plied to characterize the thyroid target region. The synthe-
sized polarization pseudo-color images are closely related
to pathological diagnosis and can be used by pathologists
for diagnosis on unstained samples, reducing the need for
stained pathological slides. Experimental results demonstrate
that, by leveraging the concept of indirect measurement and
extracting polarization features related to lesions, our method
is capable of determining sample types in cases where the
capsule structure cannot be obtained from the specimen. This
research aims to provide an objective and highly accurate
indirect diagnostic technique for thyroid tumors.
