arXiv:1901.08291v2  [stat.ML]  29 Nov 2019
Faking Fairness via Stealthily Biased Sampling
Kazuto Fukuchi ∗†‡
Satoshi Hara §
Takanori Maehara ‡
Abstract
Auditing fairness of decision-makers is now in high demand.
To respond to this social
demand, several fairness auditing tools have been developed.
The focus of this study is to
raise an awareness of the risk of malicious decision-makers who fake fairness by abusing the
auditing tools and thereby deceiving the social communities. The question is whether such a
fraud of the decision-maker is detectable so that the society can avoid the risk of fake fairness.
In this study, we answer this question negatively. We speciﬁcally put our focus on a situation
where the decision-maker publishes a benchmark dataset as the evidence of his/her fairness and
attempts to deceive a person who uses an auditing tool that computes a fairness metric. To
assess the (un)detectability of the fraud, we explicitly construct an algorithm, the stealthily
biased sampling, that can deliberately construct an evil benchmark dataset via subsampling.
We show that the fraud made by the stealthily based sampling is indeed diﬃcult to detect both
theoretically and empirically.
1
Introduction
Background
Machine learning models are being increasingly used in individuals’ consequential
decisions such as loan, insurance, and employment. In such applications, the models are required to
be fair in the sense that their outputs should be irrelevant to the individuals’ sensitive feature such
as gender, race, and religion [20]. Several eﬀorts have been devoted to establishing mathematical
formulation of fairness [8, 13, 9] and to propose algorithms that meet the fairness criteria [5, 10, 14].
With increasing attention to fairness, social communities now require to audit systems that
incorporate machine learning algorithms to prevent unfair decisions. For example, a 2014 White
House Report [22] mentioned “[t]he increasing use of algorithms to make eligibility decisions must
be carefully monitored for potential discriminatory outcomes for disadvantaged groups, even absent
discriminatory intent”. A similar statement also appeared in a 2016 White House Report [19].
To respond to the above social request, several fairness auditing tools have been developed [1,
4, 23].
These tools help the decision-maker to investigate the fairness of their system by, e.g.,
computing several fairness metrics [23], measuring the signiﬁcance of the system inputs [1], and
identifying minority groups with unfair treatments [4]. If the decision-maker found unfairness in
their systems, she/he can then ﬁx the systems by inspecting the causes of unfairness.
These auditing tools are also useful for promoting fairness of the decision-maker’s system to the
social communities. For promoting fairness of the system, the decision-maker publishes the outputs
of the auditing tools. If the outputs suggest no unfairness in the system, the fact can be seen as an
evidence of the system’s fairness. The decision-maker thus can appeal fairness of their system by
publishing the fact to earn the trust of the social communities.
∗The authors are listed in alphabetical order.
†University of Tsukuba, Japan.

1

Risk of Fake Fairness
The focus of this study is to raise awareness of the potential risk of
malicious decision-makers who fake fairness. If the decision-maker is malicious, he may control the
auditing tools’ results so that his system looks fair for the social communities even if the system
is indeed unfair. Such a risk is avoidable if the social communities can detect the decision-maker’s
fraud. Therefore, the question is whether such a fraud is detectable. In this study, we answer this
question negatively. That is, the fraud is very diﬃcult to detect in practice, which indicates that
the society is now facing a potential risk of fake fairness. In what follows, we refer to a person who
attempts to detect the decision-maker’s fraud as a detector.
If the decision-maker only publishes the auditing tools’ outputs, the detectability of the decision-
maker’s fraud is considerably low. That is, the malicious decision-maker may modify the auditing
tools’ outputs arbitrary, whereas the detector has no way to certify whether or not the outputs are
modiﬁed. This concludes that the decision-maker who only publishes the auditing tools’ outputs
might be untrustable.
The decision-maker should publish more information about their system in addition to the au-
diting tools’ outputs to acquire the social communities’ trust. However, because the system’s infor-
mation usually involves some conﬁdential information, the decision-maker wants to prove fairness
by publishing minimal information about their system.
In this study, we investigate a decision-maker who attempts to prove the fairness of their system
by constructing a benchmark dataset. That is, the decision-maker publishes a subset of his dataset
with his decisions as minimal information for proving the fairness of the system. Given the benchmark
dataset with the decisions, the detector can conﬁrm the fairness of the system by using the auditing
tools. In particular, we focus our attention on an auditing tool that computes a fairness metric.
With this setup, we assess the detectability of the decision-maker’s fraud.
Biased Sampling Attack
With the setup above, we consider a type of decision-maker’s attacking
algorithm, biased sampling attack.
In the biased sampling attack, an attacker has a dataset D
obtained from an underlying distribution P. Here, the dataset D involves the decisions made by
the decision-makers’ system, which are possibly unfair. The attacker deliberately selects a subset
Z ⊆D as the benchmark dataset so that the value of the fairness metric for Z is within a fair level.
Then, the detector who employs an auditing tool that computes the fairness metric cannot detect
unfairness of the decision-maker’s system.
The simplest method of the biased sampling attack might be case-control sampling [17]. If the
sensitive information is gender (man or woman) and the decision is binary (positive or negative), this
method classiﬁes the dataset into four classes: (man, positive), (woman, positive), (man, negative),
and (woman, negative).
Then, it samples the desired numbers of points from the classes.
By
controlling the number of points in each class appropriately, it produces a fair subset Z.
Fortunately, the fraud of the case-control sampling could be detected as follows. The detector
compares the distribution of the benchmark dataset Z with her prior knowledge (e.g., distributions
of ages or zip-codes).
Then, because the case-control samples involve a bias from the original
distribution, the detector may discover some unnatural thing, which indicates the decision-maker’s
fraud in the data-revealing process.
To hide the fraud, the malicious decision-maker will select fair subset Z whose distribution looks
similar to that of D. We refer to such a subset as stealthily biased subset and the problem of sampling
such a subset as stealthily biased sampling. Intuitively, the problem is formulated as follows. The
mathematical formulation of the problem is given in Section 3.
Problem 1 (Stealthily biased sampling problem (informal)). Given a possibly unfair dataset D
obtained from an underlying distribution P, sample subset Z ⊆D such that (i) Z is fair in terms of
2

some fairness criteria, and (ii) the distinguishing of the distribution of Z from P is diﬃcult.
Our Contributions
In this study, we develop an algorithm for the stealthily biased sampling
problem and demonstrate its diﬃculty of detection.
First, we formulate the stealthily biased sampling problem as a Wasserstein distance minimiza-
tion problem. We show that this problem is reduced to the minimum-cost ﬂow problem and solved
it in polynomial time. (Section 3)
Second, we show the diﬃculty of the detection of the proposed algorithm. We introduce an ideal
detector who can access the underlying distribution P and compares the distribution of Z and P
by a statistical test. The ideal detector has full information to perform the previously-mentioned
fraud detection procedure, and any realistic detector cannot have such access. Therefore, if the ideal
detector cannot detect the fraud, we can conclude that any realistic detector either cannot detect
the fraud. We prove that the Wasserstein distance is an upper-bound of the advantage, which is a
distinguishability measure used in the cryptographic theory [11], with respect to the Kolmogorov–
Smirnov statistical test (KS test) [18] (Theorem 4). This means that the proposed algorithm is hard
to detect even if the ideal detector uses the KS test. (Section 4)
Finally, through synthetic and real-world data experiments, we show that the decision-maker
can indeed pretend to be fair by using the stealthily biased sampling. Speciﬁcally, we demonstrate
that the detector cannot detect the fraud of the decision-maker. In the experiments, we investigate
detectability against a detector who can access an independent observation from P but cannot
P. This detector is also ideal but more practical than the detector introduced in Section 4. The
experimental results thus show more practical detectability than the theoretically analyzed one.
(Section 5)
2
Preliminaries
Wasserstein Distance
Let V be a ﬁnite set, and µ, ν : V →R≥0 be measures on V . A measure π
on V × V is a coupling measure of µ and ν if µi = P
j∈V πij, and νj = P
i∈V πij, which is denoted
by π ∈∆(µ, ν). Let (X, d) be a metric space, i.e., d: X ×X →R is positive deﬁnite, symmetric, and
satisﬁes the triangle inequality. Suppose that each i ∈V has feature xi ∈X on the metric space.
Then, the Wasserstein distance between µ and ν, denoted by W(µ, ν), is deﬁned by the optimal
value of the following optimization problem [24]:
min
X
i,j∈V
d(xi, xj)πij, s.t. π ∈∆(µ, ν).
(2.1)
The Wasserstein distance is computed in polynomial time by reducing to the minimum-cost ﬂow
problem or using the Sinkhorn iteration [21].
Minimum-Cost Flow
Let G = (V, E) be a directed graph, where V is the vertices, E is the edges,
c: E →R is the capacity, and a: E →R is the cost. The minimum-cost ﬂow problem is given by
min
X
e∈E
a(e)f(e)
s.t.
0 ≤f(e) ≤c(e), e ∈E,
X
e∈δ+(u)
f(e) −
X
e∈δ−(u)
f(e) =





0,
u ∈V \ {s, t},
d,
u = s,
−d,
u = t,
(2.2)
3

where δ+(u) = {(u, v) ∈E} and δ−(v) = {(u, v) ∈E} are the outgoing edges from u and the
incoming edges to v, respectively. d ≥0 is the required amount of the ﬂow. This problem is solvable
in ˜O(E
√
V) time in theory [16], where ˜O suppresses log factors. The practical evaluation of the
minimum-cost ﬂow algorithms are given in the study by [15].
3
Algorithm for Stealthily Biased Sampling
We formulate the stealthily biased sampling problem as a Wasserstein distance minimization problem.
The diﬃculty of detecting the stealthily biased sampling is studied in Section 4. Here, we present a
formulation for “categorical biasing,” which controls the number of points in each category. Another
biasing method for quantitative biasing is presented in Appendix A.
Problem Formulation
Let X be a metric space for the feature space and Y be a ﬁnite set
representing the outcome of the decisions. An entry of x ∈X corresponds to a sensitive information;
let S be a ﬁnite set representing the class of sensitive information, and let s: X →S be the mapping
that extracts the sensitive information from the feature.
The dataset is given by D = {(x1, y1), . . . , (xN, yN)}, where xi ∈X is the feature of the i-th
point and yi ∈Y is the decision of the i-th point. For simplicity, we write i ∈D for (xi, yi) ∈D.
Let ν be the uniform measure on D, whose expected number of points is K, i.e., νi = K
N , (i ∈D).
This is our reference distribution, i.e., if the decision-maker is not cheating, he will disclose subset
Z ⊆D following this distribution, i.e., P(i ∈S) = νi, where P denotes the probability.
However, as the decision-maker wants to show that the output is fair, he constructs another
distribution µ. Similar to the case-control sampling discussed in Section 1, we classify the dataset
into bins S ×Y, and control the expected number of points sampled from each bin. Let k: S ×Y →Z
be the number of points of the bins, where K = P
s∈S,y∈Y k(s, y) ≤|D|. Then, µ satisﬁes the
requirement if
X
(xi,yi)∈D:s(xi)=s,yi=y
µi = k(s, y),
(s ∈S, y ∈Y).
(3.1)
We denote by µ ∈P(k) if µ satisﬁes the above constraint. Note that by choosing k appropriately,
we can show that Z is fair, thus meeting the ﬁrst requirement in Problem 1.
To meet the second requirement in Problem 1, the decision-maker must determine distribution
µ such that µ is indistinguishable from reference distribution ν. Here, we propose to measure the
indistinguishability by using the Wasserstein distance. Then, the stealthily biased sampling problem
is mathematically formulated as follows.
Problem 2 (Stealthily biased sampling problem (formal)). min W(µ, ν), s.t. µ ∈P(k).
By substituting the deﬁnition of the Wasserstein distance into Problem 2, we obtain
min
X
i,j∈D
d(xi, xj)πij, s.t. π ∈∆(µ, ν), µ ∈P(k).
(3.2)
As the objective function is linear in π and both ∆(µ, ν) and P(k) are polytopes, Problem 3.2 is a
linear programming problem, hence is solved in a polynomial time [12].
4

s
usy
li
rj
t
(k(s, y), 0)
(1, 0)
(∞, d(xi, xj))
(K/N, 0)
Figure 3.1: Flow network for biased sampling. (c, a) on the edge if it has capacity c and cost a.
Eﬃcient Algorithm
To establish an eﬃcient algorithm for the stealthily biased sampling problem,
we reduce the problem to a minimum-cost ﬂow problem.
We construct the network G = (V, E) in Figure 3.1 with capacity c and cost a. Vertices V consist
of the following ﬁve classes: (i) supersource s, (ii) case-controlling vertices usy for all s ∈S and
y ∈Y, (iii) left vertices li for all i ∈D, (iv) right vertices rj for all j ∈D, and (v) supersink t.
Edges E consist of the following four classes: (i’) (s, usy) for all s ∈S and y ∈Y, whose cost is 0
and capacity is k(s, y), (ii’) (usy, li) for all i ∈D with s(xi) = s and yi = y, whose cost is 0 and
capacity is one, (iii’) (li, rj) for all i ∈D and j ∈D, whose cost is d(xi, xj) and capacity is ∞, and
(iv’) (rj, t) for all j ∈D, whose cost is 0 and capacity is K/N.
By setting the ﬂow amount to K, the solution to the above instance gives the solution to the
stealthily biased sampling problem, where πij is the ﬂow across edge (li, rj), and µi is the ﬂow across
edge (us(xi)yi, li). As |V| = O(|D|) and |E| = O(|D|2), the problem is solvable in ˜O(|D|2.5) time [16].
4
Stealthiness of Sampling
We theoretically conﬁrm that the stealthily biased sampling is diﬃcult to detect. Recall that the
decision-maker’s purpose is to make distribution µ indistinguishable from the uniform distribution
ν.
To measure the indistinguishability, we introduce advantage, which is used in cryptographic
theory [11].
Let νK be K product distribution of a sample drawn from the uniform probability distribution,
and let µK be K product distribution of a sample generated by our stealthily biased sampling
algorithm. To deﬁne the advantage, let us consider the following game in which a detector attempts
to distinguish µK and νK: (1). Flip an unbiased coin. (2). If a head outcome is achieved, the
decision-maker reveals D ∼µK to the detector; otherwise, the decision-maker reveals D ∼νK
to the detector. (3). The detector estimates the side of the ﬂipped coin. If the probability that
the detector estimates the outcome of the unbiased coin correctly is near 1/2, the detector cannot
distinguish whether the obtained samples are biased.
Let H be a random variable such that P(H = 1) = P(H = 0) = 1/2, which represents the ﬂipped
unbiased coin. The detector’s estimation algorithm is a mapping Φ from D to {0, 1}, where the
output is 1 if the detector expects that the samples are drawn from νK; otherwise, the output is
0. The probability that the detector detects bias correctly is obtained as P(Φ(D) = H), where the
randomness comes from ﬂipped coin H and dataset D. Then, the advantage is deﬁned as follows:
Adv(Φ; µK, νK) =
P(Φ(D) = H) −1
2
 .
(4.1)
A smaller Adv value implies that biased distribution µK is more diﬃcult to distinguish from νK
against a detector with the test algorithm Φ.
5

Stealthiness against Kolmogorov–Smirnov Test
To assess the diﬃculty of detecting the
stealthily biased sampling, we consider an ideal detector who can access the underlying distribu-
tion ν. Here, we analyze the advantage when the ideal detector who uses the KS test.
The KS test is a goodness-of-ﬁt test for real-valued samples. Let Fν be the cumulative distribution
function of distribution ν, and let FK be the cumulative distribution function of the empirical
measure of the obtained samples. Then, the KS statistic is deﬁned as KS(D; ν) = supx |FK(x) −
Fν(x)|. The KS test is rejected if KS(D; ν) is larger than an appropriate threshold.
Let us consider the detector’s algorithms based on the KS statistic.
We formally deﬁne a
detector’s algorithm that returns 1 if the KS statistic is larger than threshold τ as ΦKS,τ(D) =
I(KS(D; ν) > τ), where I is the indicator function.
We analyze the advantage against ΦKS,τ under a ﬂatness assumption on sample distribution ν.
For x ∈X, let Bǫ(x) be the ǫ-ball centered at x. Then, the ﬂatness assumption is deﬁned as follows:
Assumption 3. There exist constants s, C > 0 such that for any ǫ > 0, supx∈X ν(Bǫ(x)) ≤(ǫ/C)s.
Many natural distributions on a real line satisfy Assumption 3. For example, the one-dimensional
normal distribution satisﬁes Assumption 3 with s = 1 and C =
p
2/π.
Under the ﬂatness assumption on ν, we reveal an upper bound on the advantage against the KS
test in the categorical biasing setting. Let M be the number of pair types of decision and sensitive
attribute. Let κ and κ′ be the distribution over pairs of decision and sensitive attribute on the
sample distribution and biased distribution. Then, we reveal the following theorem.
Theorem 4. Let W(µK, νK) be the Wasserstein distance equipped with the distance d(D, D′) =
mini=1,...,K d(xi, x′
i) for D = {x1, ..., xK} and D′ = {x′
1, ..., x′
K}. Under Assumption 3, for threshold
τ ≥(C/K)1/s/2, we have
Adv(ΦKS,τ; µK, νK) ≤K1/sW(µK,νK)/C1/s + 4K! ((1+TV(κ,κ′))/K)K ,
(4.2)
where s and C are the constants from Assumption 3, TV(κ, κ′) = PM
i |κi −κ′
i|/2 is the total
variation distance.
The proof of this theorem can be found in the supplementary material. Since 1 + TV(κ, κ′) < e
and K! ∼(K/e)K, the second term in (4.2) is o(1) and is dominated by the ﬁrst term. Because
the stealthily biased sampling minimizes the Wasserstein distance (i.e., the ﬁrst term of (4.2)), it
also minimizes the upper-bound of the advantage. This implies that the stealthily biased sampling
is diﬃcult to detect for the ideal detector. Consequently, for any realistic detector who has less
information than the ideal one, it is even more diﬃcult to detect the stealthily biased sampling.
5
Experiments
In this section, we show that the stealthily biased sampling is indeed diﬃcult to detect, through
experiments on synthetic data and two real-world data (COMPAS and Adult).1
In the exper-
iments, we adopted the demographic parity (DP) [6] as the fairness metric for auditing.
Here,
let s ∈{0, 1} be a sensitive feature and y ∈{0, 1} be a decision.
The DP is then deﬁned as
DP = |P(y = 1 | s = 1) −P(y = 1 | s = 0)|. A large DP indicates that the decision is unfair because
the decision-maker favors providing positive decisions to one group over the other group.
1The codes can be found at https://github.com/sato9hara/stealthily-biased-sampling
6

Summary of the Results
Before moving to each experiment, we summarize the main results
here. In the experiments, we investigated detectability of the decision-makers’ fraud against an ideal
detector who can access an independent observation D′ from the underlying distribution P. In all
the experiments, we veriﬁed the following three points.
R1. Both the stealthily biased and case-control sampling could reduce the DP of the sampled set
Z.
R2. The stealthily biased sampling was more resistant against the detector’s fraud detection com-
pared to the case-control sampling. Speciﬁcally, the stealthily biased sampling marked low
scores of the fraud detection criteria for a wide range of the experimental settings.
R3. In all the experiments, the decision-makers successfully pretended to be fair. They could select
a subset Z with small DPs and small fraud detection criteria.
Implementation
We used Python 3 for data processing. In all the experiments, we used the
squared Euclidean distance d(xi, xj) = ∥xi −xj∥2 as the metric in Wasserstein distance. To solve
the minimum-cost ﬂow problem (3.2), we used the network simplex method implemented in LEMON
Graph Library.2 With LEMON, the problem could be solved in a few seconds for the datasets with
the size N up to a few thousand. For the Adult dataset, we used a bootstrap-type estimator to
improve the computational scalability (see Appendix C for the detail).
5.1
Synthetic Example
Example 5 (Loan check). Consider a decision-maker who decides to lend money (y = 1) or not
(y = 0) based on the applicants sensitive feature s ∈{0, 1} (e.g., gender) and a d-dimensional
feature vector x ∈[0, 1]d, where ﬁrst feature x1 is an income. Here, we model the criteria of the
decision-maker as
y = I(x1 + bs > 0.5),
(5.1)
where b ≥0 is a constant. Note that this decision-maker is unfair if b ̸= 0.
To pretend to be a fair, for a set of individual’s feature, sensitive feature, and the decision
D = {(xi, si, yi)}N
i=1, the decision-maker selects subset Z ⊆D as evidence that the decisions are fair.
We solve this problem by using both the stealthily biased and case-control sampling.
Data
We set the underlying data distribution P as follows. We sampled sensitive feature s with
P(s = 1) = 0.5, and sampled feature vector x in a uniformly random manner over [0, 1]d with
d = 1.3 Decision y is made by following the criteria (5.1). We sampled dataset D with N = 1, 000
observations from the underlying distribution P. We set the parameters in the criteria (5.1) to be
b = 0.2. Thus, the DP of the decision-maker is 0.2.
Attacker
To reduce the DP through sampling, the sampled set needs to satisfy P(y = 1 | s = 1) ≈
P(y = 1 | s = 0) ≈α for a predetermined ratio of positive decisions α ∈[0, 1]. The expected number
of sampling in each bin (s, y) ∈{0, 1} × {0, 1} is then determined by k(s, y) = ⌈0.5Kαy(1 −α)1−y⌉
(recall that P(s) = 0.5, ∀s ∈{0, 1}).
Detector
As a detector, we adopted the Kolmogorov–Smirnov two-sample test. The detector has
an independent observation D′ = {(x′
j, s′
j)}200
j=1 as a referential dataset sampled from underlying
2https://lemon.cs.elte.hu/trac/lemon
3Results for higher dimensional settings were almost the same as d = 1. See Appendix D.1.
7

0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0
0.05
0.1
Ratio of positive decisions α in sampling
Average DP
Case-control
Stealth
(a) Demographic parity
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0
0.5
1
Ratio of positive decisions α in sampling
Ratio of
rejection
(b) Ratio of rejection in test P(x)
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0
0.5
1
Ratio of positive decisions α in sampling
Ratio of
rejection
(c) Ratio of rejection in test P(x|s = 1)
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0
0.5
1
Ratio of positive decisions α in sampling
Ratio of
rejection
(d) Ratio of rejection in test P(x|s = 0)
Figure 5.1:
Results for the decision-maker with a = 0.2. The shaded regions in (a) denotes the
average DP ± std. The shaded regions in (b)–(d) denote 95% conﬁdence intervals. The dotted line
in (b)–(d) denotes the signiﬁcance level 0.05.
distribution P. Here, we note that the detector has no access to decision y for D′ because the
decision criteria (5.1) is not disclosed.
Given Z, the detector applies the Kolmogorov–Smirnov
two-sample test to detect whether the distribution of S is diﬀerent from that of referential set
D′. Here, we consider the strongest detector: we assume that she knows that only income x1 is
used in x for the decision. We denote the distribution of income x1 in Z and D′ by PS(x1) and
PD′(x1), respectively.
The detector can then use the Kolmogorov–Smirnov two-sample test4 in
three ways: (i) test PS(x1) = PD′(x1), (ii) test PS(x1 | s = 1) = PD′(x1 | s = 1), and (iii) test
PS(x1 | s = 0) = PD′(x1 | s = 0). In the experiment, we set the signiﬁcance level of the test to be
0.05.
Result
We selected a subset Z ⊆D with size |Z| = 200 using both the stealthily biased and case-
control sampling. We repeated the experiment 100 times, and summarized the results in Figure 5.1,
for several diﬀerent ratios of positive decisions α. As we summarized earlier, three key observations
R1, R2, and R3 can be found in the ﬁgures.
R1. Figure 1(a) shows that both the stealthily biased and case-control sampling successfully reduced
DP to less than 0.1 through sampling the subset Z. We note that no signiﬁcant diﬀerences were
observed in DPs between the two sampling methods.
R2. Figures 1(b), 1(c), and 1(d) show that the stealthily biased sampling was more resistant to the
Kolmogorov–Smirnov test, compared to the case-control sampling. Speciﬁcally, the stealthily biased
sampling attained a small rejection rate in a wide range of α in the sampling process.
R3. By using the stealthily biased sampling, the decision-maker successfully pretended to be fair.
4In practice, the detector does not know that x1 is a key feature. Thus, the detector needs to use the two-sample
test for multi-dimensional data. However, in our preliminary experiments, we found that multi-dimensional tests have
very low detection powers. Therefore, we used an advantageous setting for the detector.
8

By setting α in the sampling to be 0.6, none of the tests could conﬁdently reject that disclosed
dataset Z is diﬀerent from the referential dataset D′. For α = 0.6, the rejection rates of all the
three tests were kept around 0.05, which is exactly the same as the signiﬁcance level. These results
indicate that the detector cannot detect the fraud made by the stealthily biased sampling: the DP
of Z is small, and its distribution is suﬃciently natural so that the statistical test cannot reject it.
The case-control sampling showed higher rejection rates in tests of P(x | s = 1) and P(x | s = 0),
and thus was outperformed by the stealthily biased sampling.
Lastly, we note that the stochastic decision-maker can be far more evil than the deterministic
decision-maker considered in this section. See Appendix D.2 for the detail.
5.2
Real-World Data: COMPAS
For the ﬁrst real-world data experiment, we focus on the COMPAS dataset [3].5 The COMPAS
dataset contains several defendant’s records obtained from the Broward County Sheriﬀ’s Oﬃce in
Florida. Each defendant is scored his or her risk of recidivism using a software called COMPAS.
ProPublica [3] revealed that the COMPAS risk score is discriminative: it tends to score white
defendants with low scores while scoring black defendants with high scores.
Because Florida had strong open-records laws, the entire COMPAS dataset was made public,
and the bias in the COMPAS risk score was revealed. Here, we consider a virtual scenario that
the decision-maker was aware of the bias in the risk score, and he wants to pretend to be fair by
hiding the bias. To attain this goal, the decision-maker discloses a subset of the COMPAS dataset
as evidence that the COMPAS risk score is fair.
Data
We used the same data preprocessing following the analysis of ProPublica [3], which results in
eight features x ∈R8 of each defendant, with race as sensitive attribute s ∈{0(black), 1(white)}, and
the decision y ∈{0(low-risk), 1(middle/high-risk)}. The preprocessed data includes 5, 278 records,
which we randomly held out 1, 278 records as the referential dataset D′ for the detector. From the
remaining 4, 000 records D, we sampled 2, 000 records as Z using both the stealthily biased and
case-control sampling. To reduce the DP in the sampling, we required the sampled set to satisfy
P(y = 1 | s = 1) ≈P(y = 1 | s = 0) ≈α for some α ∈[0, 1].
Detector
The detector tries to detect the bias in the disclosed dataset Z by comparing its dis-
tribution with the referential dataset D′. In the experiment, we adopted the Wasserstein distance
(WD) as the detector’s detection criteria.6 If the WD between Z and D′ is suﬃciently large, the
detector can detect the bias in Z, and thus the fraud of the decision-maker is revealed.
Result
We repeated the experiment 100 times by randomly changing the data splitting, and
summarized the results in Figure 5.2.7 As the baseline without any biased sampling, we computed
DP and the WD for randomly sampled records from D, which are denoted as Baseline in the ﬁgures.
The ﬁgures show the clear success of the stealthily biased sampling, as we summarized in R1, R2, and
R3. In Figure 5.2(a), with the stealthily biased sampling, the DPs of Z have reduced signiﬁcantly
(R1). In Figures 5.2(b), the WDs between Z and D′ were suﬃciently small for α = 0.6 so that they
are completely indistinguishable from the baselines (R3).
The case-control sampling had higher
WDs, and it was thus easier for the detector to detect (R2).
5https://github.com/propublica/compas-analysis
6In COMPAS and Adult experiments, we did not adopt the multi-dimensional two-sample tests because they were
too weak.
7Here, we measured the WD on P(x). The WD on P(x | s = 1) and P(x | s = 0) can be found in Appendix E.2.
9

0.4
0.6
0
0.1
0.2
Ratio of positive decisions α in sampling
Average DP
Baseline
Case-control
Stealth
(a) Demographic parity
0.4
0.6
0.5
1
1.5
Ratio of positive decisions α in sampling
Average WD
(b) Wasserstein distance in P(x)
Figure 5.2: Results for the COMPAS dataset: The shaded regions in (a) denotes the average DP ±
std. The shaded regions in (b) denote the average WD ± std.
0.2
0.4
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Ratio of positive decisions α in sampling
Average DP
Baseline
Case-control
Stealth
(a) Demographic parity
0.2
0.4
25
30
Ratio of positive decisions α in sampling
Average WD
(b) Wasserstein Distance in P(x)
Figure 5.3: Results for the Adult dataset: The shaded regions in (a) denotes the average DP ± std.
The shaded regions in (b) denote the average WD ± std.
5.3
Real-World Data: Adult
As the second real-world data experiment, we used the Adult dataset [7]. The Adult dataset contains
48,842 records with several individual’s features and their labels (high-income or low-income). The
dataset is known to include gender bias: in the dataset, while 30% of the male have high-income,
only 10% of the female have high-income. The DP of the dataset is therefore 0.2. If we naively train
a classiﬁer using the dataset, the resulting classiﬁer inherits the bias and becomes discriminative,
i.e., the classiﬁer favors to classify males as high-income. The goal of this experiment is to show that
as if the biased classiﬁer is fair by disclosing a part of the dataset with classiﬁer’s decision.
Data & Classiﬁer
In the data preprocessing, we converted categorical features to numerical
features.8 We randomly split 10,000 records for the training set, 20,000 records for the test set, and
the remaining 18,842 records for the referential set D′ for the detector. In the experiment, we ﬁrst
train a classiﬁer using the training set. As a classiﬁer, we used logistic regression and random forest
with 100 trees. We labeled all the records in the test set using the trained classiﬁer and obtained
the dataset D with the classiﬁer’s decision. We then sample the subset Z ⊆D with size |Z| = 2, 000
using both the stealthily biased and case-control sampling. To reduce the DP in the sampling, we
required the sampled set to satisfy P(y = 1 | s = 1) ≈P(y = 1 | s = 0) ≈α for a predetermined
ratio of positive decisions α ∈[0, 1].
Detector
We adopted the same detector as the COMPAS data experiment, who refers to the WD
as the bias detection metric.
8We used the implementation used in https://www.kaggle.com/kost13/us-income-logistic-regression/notebook
10

Result
We repeated the experiment 100 times by randomly changing the data splitting, and
summarized the resultsf for logistic regression in Figure 5.3.9 As the baseline, we computed the DP
and the WD for randomly sampled 2, 000 sampled records from D, which is denoted as Baseline
in the ﬁgure. Similar to the results of COMPAS, the ﬁgures again show the clear success of the
stealthily biased sampling (R1, R2, and R3).
6
Conclusion
We assessed the risk of malicious decision-makers who try to deceive auditing tools, by investigating
the detectability of the decision-maker’s fraud. We speciﬁcally put our focus on an auditing tool
that computes a fairness metric. To assess the (un)detectability of the fraud, we considered the
biased sampling attack, where the decision-maker publishes a benchmark dataset as the evidence of
his or her fairness. In this study, we demonstrated the undetectability by explicitly constructing an
algorithm, the stealthily based sampling, that can deliberately construct a fair benchmark dataset.
To derive the algorithm, we formulated the sampling problem as a Wasserstein distance minimization,
which we reduced to a minimum-cost ﬂow problem for eﬃcient computation. We then showed that
the fraud made by the stealthily based sampling is indeed diﬃcult to detect both theoretically and
empirically.
A recent study of [2] has shown that malicious decision-makers can rationalize their unfair de-
cisions by generating seemingly fair explanations, which indicates that an explanation will not be
eﬀective for certifying fairnesses. Our results indicate that passing the auditing tools will not be
suﬃcient as the evidence of the fairness as well. Assessing the validity of other auditing tools and
mechanisms against malicious decision-makers would be essential.
Lastly, in this study, we revealed the diﬃculty of detecting decision-maker’s fraud. While audit-
ing tools are getting popular, we will need additional social mechanisms that certify the reported
results of these tools. We hope that our study opens up new research directions for practical social
mechanisms that can certify fairnesses.
