A Transfer Learning Pipeline for Educational Resource Discovery
with Application in Leading Paragraph Generation
Irene Li1, Thomas George2, Alexander Fabbri1, Tammy Liao1, Benjamin Chen1,
Rina Kawamura1, Richard Zhou1, Vanessa Yan1, Swapnil Hingmire3, Dragomir Radev1
1Yale University, USA, 2University of Waterloo, Canada, 3Tata Consultancy Services Limited, India

Abstract
Effective human learning depends on a wide selection of educational materials that align with the learner’s current understand-
ing of the topic. While the Internet has revolutionized human learning or education, a substantial resource accessibility barrier
still exists. Namely, the excess of online information can make it challenging to navigate and discover high-quality learning
materials. In this paper, we propose the educational resource discovery (ERD) pipeline that automates web resource discovery
for novel domains. The pipeline consists of three main steps: data collection, feature extraction, and resource classiﬁcation.
We start with a known source domain and conduct resource discovery on two unseen target domains via transfer learning. We
ﬁrst collect frequent queries from a set of seed documents and search on the web to obtain candidate resources, such as lecture
slides and introductory blog posts. Then we introduce a novel pretrained information retrieval deep neural network model,
query-document masked language modeling (QD-MLM), to extract deep features of these candidate resources. We apply a
tree-based classiﬁer to decide whether the candidate is a positive learning resource. The pipeline achieves F1 scores of 0.94
and 0.82 when evaluated on two similar but novel target domains. Finally, we demonstrate how this pipeline can beneﬁt an
application: leading paragraph generation for surveys. This is the ﬁrst study that considers various web resources for survey
generation, to the best of our knowledge. We also release a corpus of 39,728 manually labeled web resources and 659 queries
from NLP, Computer Vision (CV), and Statistics (STATS).
Keywords: web resources, transfer learning, text classiﬁcation, natural language generation
1.
Introduction
People rely on the internet for various educational ac-
tivities, such as watching lectures, reading textbooks,
articles, and encyclopedia pages. One may wish to de-
velop their knowledge in a familiar subject area or to
learn something entirely new. Many online tools en-
able and promote independent learning (Montalvo et
al., 2018; Romero and Ventura, 2017; Fabbri et al.,
2018; Li et al., 2019a). A subset of these platforms
provide primary literature resources (e.g. publications),
such as Google Scholar1 and Semantic Scholar2. As
an alternative to these advanced materials, other ed-
ucational platforms such as MOOC.org 3 deliver free
online courses. Also, unstructured searching on the in-
ternet is a popular method to discover other useful re-
sources, such as blog posts, GitHub projects, tutorials,
lecture slides and textbooks. Rather than diving into the
technical details, these secondary literature resources
provide a broad overview of the given domain, which
is more valuable for beginners. Still, sifting through
this material can be challenging and time-consuming,
even if the learner is simply looking for a general and
reliable introduction into a new subject area.
Publicly accessible data repositories that focus on gath-
1https://scholar.google.com/
2https://www.semanticscholar.org/
3https://www.mooc.org/
ering a ﬁxed number of educational resources exist,
such as scientiﬁc papers (Tang et al., 2008; Tang
et al., 2010), online platforms AMiner (Sinha et al.,
2015) and Semantic Scholar. Some archives also com-
pile secondary literature materials. TutorialBank (Fab-
bri et al., 2018) is a manually collected corpus with
over 6,300 NLP resources, as well as related ﬁelds
in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI), Machine Learning (ML)
and so on. LectureBank (Li et al., 2019b) is also a
manually-collected corpus and contains 1,717 lecture
slides. MOOCCube (Yu et al., 2020) is a large-scale
data repository containing 700 MOOC (Massive Open
Online Courses). However, in their initial synthesis,
these existing corpora either heavily relied on man-
ual efforts that restricted in certain domains, or on a
large volume of existing courses sourced from a certain
platform. Such solutions are not practically extensible
into new or evolving domains. Moreover, according to
(Fabbri et al., 2018), some web data such as blog posts,
tutorials and educational web pages are also suitable
materials for learners. These rich web data are ignored.
This paper aims to ease the need for human annota-
tors by proposing a pipeline that automates resource
discovery to similar unseen domains through transfer
learning. Besides, such a pipeline deals with multiple
resource types to take advantage of web data.
Our contributions can be summarized into three parts.
First, we present a self-sustaining pipeline for educa-
arXiv:2201.02312v1  [cs.CL]  7 Jan 2022

Concept
List
“Image Classification”
Seed 
Documents
“Convolutional 
Neural Networks”
Search on the Web
Resource Downloading
Tree-based
Classification
Method
1: Data Collection
“Text Summarization”
2: Feature Extraction
Group 1 Features:
Meta features
Resources
Application
Sample Queries
Survey
Generation
Keyword
Extraction
External
Corpora
Feature
Extractor
Group 2 Features:
Fine-grained Meta 
features, text-based 
features
Group 3 Features:
BERT-based features
Pre-trained
BERT 
models
3: Resource
Classification
Positive
Resources
Figure 1: Pipeline Overview. The pipeline contains three steps: query generation, feature extraction, and classiﬁ-
cation & evaluation. We also show an application in this ﬁgure.
tional resource discovery in similar but unseen sub-
ject areas or domains. We apply transfer learning with
a novel pre-training information retrieval (IR) model,
achieving competitive performances. We show that this
pipeline achieves 0.94 and 0.82 F1 scores for two ar-
bitrary target domains on discovering high-quality re-
sources. Second, we demonstrate an application that
leverage resources discovered by our pipeline, survey
generation for the leading paragraph. This is the ﬁrst
study that considers rich web resources for survey gen-
eration, to the best of our knowledge. Lastly, we release
the core source code of the pipeline and the training and
testing datasets, comprised of 39,728 manually labelled
web resources and 659 search queries4.
2.
Educational Resource Discovery
Pipeline
We propose the Educational Resource Discovery
(ERD) pipeline that aims at automatically recogniz-
ing high-quality educational resources. We model this
problem as a resource classiﬁcation task. Given a re-
source r, where r can be any source type such as web
page, PDF ﬁle and PPTX ﬁle, and we can obtain a list
of features by feature engineering; based on these fea-
tures, r is classiﬁed as positive if it is a high-quality re-
source, otherwise negative. We introduce the deﬁnition
of high-quality resource in detail later. We illustrate the
ERD pipeline in Figure 1. It consists of data collection,
feature extraction and resource classiﬁcation.
2.1.
Data Collection
2.1.1.
Queries for search
In this step, we need to conduct a list of meaningful
and ﬁne-grain search queries to start.
These search
queries will then be applied to online search engines
for web resources. Queries can be borrowed from ex-
ternal corpora or extracted from existing seed docu-
ments (e.g., textbooks). We focus on three domains:
NLP (natural language processing), CV (computer vi-
sion) and STATS (statistics). We utilize external topic
lists provided by LectureBankCD (Li et al., 2021), in
which there are 322 NLP-based and 201 CV-based top-
ics from crowdsourcing. For STATS, we extract a list
4https://github.com/yale-lily/
Educational-Resource-Discovery
towardsdatascience.com
datahacker.rs
medium.com
hackernoon.com
www.analyticsvidhya.com
skymind.ai
www.kdnuggets.com
maelfabien.github.io
machinelearningmastery.com
rubikscode.net
paperswithcode.com
research.googleblog.com
Table 1: Top sites found in the TutorialBank corpus.
of ﬁne-grained terms from several seed documents, in-
cluding several textbooks.
These terms contain fre-
quent keywords and phrases that are extracted by Tex-
tRank (Mihalcea and Tarau, 2004), a statistical method
to keyword ranking. In total, we end up with 322, 201
and 137 queries for NLP, CV and STATS domains.
To craft our search engine queries, we leverage ad-
vanced search conditions:
ﬁletype and site (web-
site). Speciﬁcally, we consider three ﬁle types: PDF,
PPTX/PPT, and HTML. Moreover, according to the
TutorialBank corpus (Fabbri et al., 2018), resources
clustered by the components of their URL possess
highly correlated educational content. Thus, we priori-
tize restricting our queries to websites that consistently
provide high-quality resources. We select the top sites
from the manually-created TutorialBank corpus and in-
corporate them into our search queries, as exempliﬁed
in 1. We also include the “.edu” top-level domain as
a special case for our search queries in order to cap-
ture general educational resources. Finally, we com-
bine our query terms with the website and ﬁletype con-
straints: e.g. “word embeddings ﬁletype:pdf”. We also
augment the original query by generating a disjunction
of its variations: e.g., “stochastic gradient descent” be-
comes “stochastic gradient descent OR SGD”. Table 2
displays several sample queries.
Once the queries are generated, we leverage three
well-established online search engines: DuckDuckGo
(https://duckduckgo.com/), Yahoo(https:
//search.yahoo.com/) and Bing (https://
www.bing.com/) to obtain our candidate resources.
The top N URLs (where N is determined from the do-
main, ﬁle type and site type, varying from 20 to 100
to control the total number of resources we want to
collect) for a given query are cached after checking
their HTTP response status and ensuring that a URL
has not already been collected as part of another query.
Moving forward, the documents pointed to by all of

these URLs were automatically downloaded and parsed
for their features. Certain features, such as the num-
ber of authors, were collected using heuristics that ac-
counted for most of the variability within the diverse
dataset. The ERD Pipeline’s parsers use the pdfminer5
and grobid6 libraries for PDF ﬁles, Apache Tika7 for
PPTX/PPT and beautifulsoup8 for HTML.
2.1.2.
Annotation
After collecting all resources, the next step is to assign
a binary label to each resource based on its quality. Our
annotators consist of 7 graduate and senior college stu-
dents with a solid background in NLP, CV, and STATS.
A resource is annotated as positive if it is a high-quality
one. Guidelines for a positive (high-quality) resource
are:
• Informative and relevant:
introducing basic
knowledge about a speciﬁc topic. For example,
tutorials, introductions, explanations, guides.
• Papers and lecture slides: papers and lecture notes
about a topic in the correct domain.
• Other secondary literature articles:
i.e., blog
posts with informative descriptions, deﬁnitions
and code blocks.
The annotation criteria for a negative (poor-quality) re-
source are:
• Not informative: dataset/software/tool download
page without introductory descriptions, such as
a paper abstract page (not the paper content), a
download page with links.
• Irrelevant: not showing correct content, broken
URLs, URLs with not enough or no text (video
or image only).
• No knowledge included: such as a course landing
page, a person’s personal website page.
• A list of resources/datasets: containing only links
to other pages.
Finally, to measure the inter-coder agreement of the
labels, we randomly picked 100 resources and asked
each annotator to provide labels independently. Krip-
pendorff’s alpha (Krippendorff, 2011) on this sample
evaluated to 0.8344, indicating a high degree of consis-
tency amongst all annotators.
We detail statistics about our collected dataset in Table
2, providing the total counts by ﬁletype and domain.
From the three domains, we collected 39,728 valid re-
sources using 659 distinct queries and achieved a total
positive rate of 69.05%.
In Table 4, we show token-level and sentence-level
statistics on the extracted free text of the collected data.
5https://github.com/pdfminer/
6https://github.com/kermitt2/grobid
7https://tika.apache.org/
8https://crummy.com/software/
BeautifulSoup/
NLP Sample Queries
“markov decision processes” site:.edu ﬁletype:.pdf
“sentiment analysis” site:.edu ﬁletype:.pptx
“unlexicalized parsing” site:kdnuggets.com ﬁletype:.html
“semantic parsing” site:.edu ﬁletype:.pdf
“information retrieval” site:.edu ﬁletype:.pptx
“monte carlo methods” site:rubikscode.net ﬁletype:.html
“natural language processing intro” site:.edu ﬁletype:.pdf
“sequence to sequence” site:.edu ﬁletype:.pptx
“naive bayes” site:paperswithcode.com ﬁletype:.html
“latent dirichlet allocation” site:.edu ﬁletype:.pdf
CV Sample Queries
“epipolar geometry” site:.edu ﬁletype:.pptx
“particle ﬁlters” site:hackernoon.com ﬁletype:.html
“image registration” site:.edu ﬁletype:.pdf
“reﬂectance model” site:.edu ﬁletype:.pptx
“shading analysis” site:skymind.ai ﬁletype:.html
“imaging geometry and physics” site:.edu ﬁletype:.pdf
“texture classiﬁcation” site:.edu ﬁletype:.pptx
“gibbs sampling” site:kdnuggets.com ﬁletype:.html
“image thresholding” site:.edu ﬁletype:.pdf
“region adjacency graphs” site:.edu ﬁletype:.pptx
STATS Sample Queries
“linear regression” site:rubikscode.net ﬁletype:.html
“hypothesis testing” site:.edu ﬁletype:.pdf
“heteroscedasticity” site:.edu ﬁletype:.pptx
“random event” site:paperswithcode.com ﬁletype:.html
“maximum liklihood” site:.edu ﬁletype:.pdf
“granger causality” site:.edu ﬁletype:.pptx
“probability” site:hackernoon.com ﬁletype:.html
“random sampling” site:.edu ﬁletype:.pdf
“correlation coefﬁcient” site:.edu ﬁletype:.pptx
“chi-squared statistic” site:skymind.ai ﬁletype:.html
Table 2: Sample queries in the three domains.
NLP
CV
STATS
Total
Query Num
322
200
137
659
PPTX
1,216
733
1,463
3,412
PDF
4,961
3,782
1,449
10,192
HTML
9,368
9,302
7,454
26,124
Total
15,545
13,817
10,366
39,728
Pos.Num
9,589
11,101
6,742
27,432
Pos.Rate
0.6169
0.8034
0.6501
0.6905
Table 3: Dataset statistics by domain and ﬁle type.
Pos.Num is the number of positive resources. Pos.Rate
is the fraction of resources that were labeled as positive.
2.2.
Feature Extraction
To train a classiﬁer to identify high-quality educa-
tional resources, we ﬁrst focus on feature engineering.
Speciﬁcally, we investigate three groups of classiﬁca-
tion features and summarize them in Table 5.
Group 1 Features Some of the meta-features of a doc-
ument that can characterize its quality are embedded
in its structure. The features encompassed by Group 1
are high-level and coarse-grained, and focus on aspects

NLP
CV
STATS
Token Number/per sentence
Mean
18.28
26.37
23.28
Median
12
19
18
Max
2,302
458,363
20,066
Sentence Number
Mean
161.60
122.49
107.32
Median
55
46
52
Max
5,929
21,301
52,793
Table 4: Free text statistics by domain.
BERT/SciBERT/Longformer
machine
translation
<SEP>
automatic
<MASK>
from
...
translation
Topic/Title Tokens
Document Tokens
Predict
Masked
 Token
Figure 2: QD-MLM pretraining: the topic term ma-
chine translation is paired with the document tokens.
such as: the number of headings, equations, outgoing
links and authors. Heuristically, some good tutorials
may tend to include more equations and paragraphs
(longer content). We list all 8 such features in Table
5, Group 1.
Group 2 Features These meta-features describe the
ﬁne-grained but statistical details of the resource doc-
ument. The URL’s components, such as the top-level
domain name and subdomain name, correlate resources
from websites that deliver consistent quality. The other
Group 2 features are centered around the characteris-
tics of the free text. For instance, NormalizedUnique-
Vocab (the size of the vocabulary divided by the total
number of words) can estimate the vocabulary’s com-
plexity, and PercentTypos (the percentage of words that
are incorrectly spelled) can approximate reliability. We
itemize such features in Table 5, Group 2.
Group 3 Features The above features are intuitive
and statistical features selected by feature engineering.
In addition, we introduce contextualized semantic fea-
tures with pretrained language models as Group 3 fea-
tures. To achieve this, we choose three base models:
BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), SciBERT (Beltagy et al.,
2019) and Longformer (Beltagy et al., 2020). BERT
is a language model that was pretrained on Wikipedia
documents 9. SciBERT is a BERT-based model trained
in the scientiﬁc domain, making it suitable for our use
case 10. Longformer is a BERT-based model that han-
dles longer input sequences 11.
We introduce a novel pretraining approach:
QD-
MLM (Query-Document Masked Language Modeling)
9https://huggingface.co/bert-base-uncased
10https://huggingface.co/allenai/scibert˙scivocab˙uncased
11https://huggingface.co/allenai/longformer-base-4096
Feature Name
Explanation
Group 1
NumAuthor
Number of authors
NumHeading
Number of headings
NumFig
Number of ﬁgures
NumEqu
Number of equations
NumPara
Number of paragraphs
NumSent
Number of sentences
NumLink
Number of outgoing links
BibLen
Bibliography length
Group 2
Subdomain
Subdomain of resource URL
SecondDomain
Second-level domain of resource URL
TopDomain
Top-level domain of resource URL
NumUrlSubdirs
Number of URL subdirectories
NormalizedUniqueVocab
Number of unique words
divided by total number of words
UniqueVocabMean
Mean number of occurrences of a word
UniqueVocabStdev
Stdev of number of occurrences of a word
WordLenMean
Mean number of characters per word
WordLenStdev
Stdev of number of characters per word
SentenceLenMean
Mean number of words per sentence
SentenceLenStdev
Stdev of number of words per sentence
PercentTypos
Percentage of words that were misspelled
NumGithubLinks
Number of links to GitHub
Group 3
bert
BERT base model
scibert
SciBERT base model
longformer
Longformer base model
arXiv˙bert˙QD-MLM
BERT pretrained on arXiv
arXiv˙scibert˙QD-MLM
SciBERT pretrained on arXiv
arXiv˙longformer˙QD-MLM
Longformer pretrained on arXiv
TB˙bert˙QD-MLM
BERT pretrained on TutorialBank
TB˙scibert˙QD-MLM
SciBERT pretrained on TutorialBank
TB˙longformer˙QD-MLM
Longformer pretrained on TutorialBank
Table 5: Chosen features: we select 3 groups consist of
meta features and deep learning-based features.
to leverage these base models to generate features for
our classiﬁcation task. The model takes a query term
and a corresponding document text as an input pair. A
query term could be a single word, phrase or a paper
title, indicating the topic or main idea of the docu-
ment. The pretraining approach is a following of the
Masked Language Modeling (MLM) method of BERT
(randomly masking 15% tokens and letting the model
predict them), as shown in Figure 2. To conduct QD-
MLM pretraining, we apply two external educational
corpora for pre-training to ensure the data quality: Tu-
torialBank (TB) 12 and arXiv 13. The latest Tutorial-
Bank has 15,584 topic-document pairs; and arXiv has
259,050 title-abstract pairs (computer science papers
only). We enumerate all models in Table 5, Group 3,
naming dataset modelname. We end up with 9 features
in Group 3.
After pretraining, the model serves as an encoder for
any input documents. However, one may notice that
this gives dense embeddings, making it hard to com-
bine with explainable Group 1 and 2 features. Thus, we
propose an information retrieval-based scoring func-
tion to transfer dense embeddings into a score feature.
This scoring function calculates a score for each re-
12http://aan.how/download/
13https://www.kaggle.com/
Cornell-University/arxiv

NumHeading
UniqueVocabStdev
WordLenMean
Subdomain_paperswithcode
BibLen
PercentTypos
arXiv_longformer_QD-MLM
arxiv_bert_QD-MLM
WordLenStdev
Bert
Scibert
TB_bert_QD-MLM
TB_longformer_QD-MLM
arXiv_scibert_QD-MLM
TB_scibert_QD-MLM
SentenceLenMean
Longformer
SentenceLenStdev
NumLink
UniqueVocabMean
Figure 3:
Top 20 features on two target domains:
shaded features are from Group 3.
source, showing the relevancy of the resource to all
the searching queries. Relevancy is one of the most
important indicators that the resource is annotated as
positive. The score is higher if it is more relevant to
the queries. In Section 2.1.1, we apply a list of queries
(q ∈Q) to download resources, we now compute a
cosine-similarity based ranking score scorer for re-
source r:
scorer =
X
q∈Q
cosine (Vq, Vr)
where Vq and Vr are QD-MLM encoded embeddings
for the query term and resource respectively.
2.3.
Resource Classiﬁcation
We treat NLP as the source domain, and CV and
STATS as two target domains, given the fact that there
are more resources in NLP. So we study two experi-
mental settings: NLP→CV and NLP→STATS.
Since there are various feature types, we conduct pre-
possessing before applying the classiﬁers. Numerical
values are binned into groups, and categorical features
are converted into integer codes. We evaluate four tra-
ditional classiﬁers: Random Forest (RF), Decision Tree
(DT), Support Vector Machine (SVM) and Logistic Re-
gression (LR). We ﬁnd that RF performs the best and
has a slight edge over DT, but SVM and LR signiﬁ-
cantly lag behind. Thus, we report the Random Forest’s
performance, summarized in Table 6. Speciﬁcally, we
include precision, recall and F1 scores on different fea-
ture groups: Group 1, Group 1+2, and Group 1+2+3. It
shows that with more features included, better perfor-
mance can be obtained. When we include all feature
groups, we can achieve the best F1 score in both target
domains. In general, performance on the CV domain is
better than on STATS. This is expected given that the
corpus distance between NLP and CV is smaller than
between NLP and STATS. We give detailed data anal-
ysis in the next section.
1-gram
2-gram
3-gram
4-gram
20
40
60
80
% of overlapping
CV
STATS
Figure 4: Percentage of overlapping n-grams.
3.
Data Analysis
To better understand the collected data and our classi-
ﬁer’s performance, we conduct a study on the feature
analysis and domain differences. Finally, we also com-
pare similar existing datasets.
Feature
Importance
Score
We
take
the
best-
performed
model
of
NLP→CV
domain
(Group
1+2+3), and take the Gini Index calculated by Decision
Trees as the feature importance score. Overall, we ex-
tract 8746 features in CV and 8525 features of STATS
after binning numerical values and encoding categori-
cal features. In Figure 3, we list the top 20 features of
CV and STATS. Some Group 1+2 features rank in the
top 5, since they are main indicators that the resource
is informative (i.e., more heading numbers, longer con-
tents). Some heuristic features such as sentence, word
and bibliography lengths rank in the top 20. This obser-
vation validates our assumption that such features may
indicate more informative content and tend to be a pos-
itive resource. Additionally, Group 3 features (marked
with shaded color) also play an important role. In fact,
all Group 3 features rank top 20, suggesting that our
scoring function that applies QD-MLM semantic fea-
tures into the pipeline is very helpful when doing clas-
siﬁcation for resource discovery.
Domain Differences As observed before, our trans-
fer learning pipeline performs better on CV than on
STATS, and this can be attributed to domain differ-
ences relative to the source domain NLP. In Figure
4, we plot the percentage of overlapping n-grams of
both {NLP, CV} and {NLP, STATS} domain pairs.
This indicates that NLP and CV have a larger overlap
than {NLP, STATS} with respect to all of the n-grams
(n ∈{1, 2, 3, 4}). For example, NLP and CV share
nearly 80% on 2-gram, while NLP and STATS share
only about 50%. From this perspective, we uphold that
the classiﬁers trained on semantic features based on
BERT models are valuable for bridging more distant
domains with transfer learning.
To further contrast our ﬁndings, we enumerate the top
10 URLs in Table 7. Although the websites are ranked
in different orders, there are still common URLs across
the domains (highlighted in the table).
Once again,
CV shares more overlap with NLP in comparison to
STATS. Along with the feature importance score, this
cross-domain consistency further illustrates that the
URL meta-features will beneﬁt our model’s out-of-
domain classiﬁcation.
Comparison with Similar Datasets We compare a
number of existing NLP-related educational datasets

NLP→CV
NLP→STATS
Features
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
Group 1
0.7238
0.5802
0.9617
0.6508
0.5405
0.8177
Group 1 + 2
0.8579
0.7772
0.9571
0.7990
0.8141
0.7845
Group 1 + 2 + 3
0.9402
0.9849
0.8994
0.8225
0.9965
0.7002
Table 6: Classiﬁcation Results in two target domains: CV and STATS.
Domain
Top 10 Sites
NLP
www.cs.cmu.edu ,
web.stanford.edu ,
www.cs.toronto.edu ,
www.paperswithcode.com ,
maelfabien.github.io , www.academia.edu , courses.cs.washington.edu , nlp.stanford.edu, ocw.mit.edu ,
www.cs.cornell.edu
CV
www.kdnuggets.com,
maelfabien.github.io , www.paperswithcode.com , www.academia.edu ,
www.cs.toronto.edu , www.cs.cmu.edu , web.stanford.edu , courses.cs.washington.edu, cseweb.ucsd.edu,
www.cs.cornell.edu
STATS
www.kdnuggets.com, maelfabien.github.io , www.paperswithcode.com , web.stanford.edu , ocw.mit.edu ,
online.stat.psu.edu, www.hackernoon.com, www.sjsu.edu, research.googleblog.com,www.cpp.edu
Table 7: Comparison of the top 10 sites. Gray means overlapped in both CV and STATS domain; Purple means
overlapping between NLP and CV; Blue means overlapping between NLP and STATS.
in Table 8, emphasizing the resource type, human ef-
fort for annotations, and corpus scale.
Note that in
this table, we only concentrate on human annotation
efforts for free-text resources. This is because these
resources are the primary goal of the ERD Pipeline,
as opposed to other tasks (e.g. learning concept rela-
tions, concept mining). We can see that MOOCcube
(Yu et al., 2020) has a massive quantities of a single re-
source type (papers). They obtained the metadata from
a third-party platform, AMiner, without a full round of
human annotations. TutorialBank (Fabbri et al., 2018)
has a larger number of resources than LectureBank (Li
et al., 2019b), and it consists of diverse resource types.
Our pipeline is very similar to TutorialBank in terms of
resource type, but ours extends to more resources and
subject areas, enabling us to research transfer learning
across domains.
4.
Application: Leading Paragraph
Generation for Surveys
This section demonstrates an interesting application
that applies the resources discovered using our ERD
Pipeline: leading paragraph generation for surveys us-
ing web data.
Novel concepts are being introduced and evolving at a
rate that creates high-quality surveys for web resources,
such as Wikipedia pages, challenging. Such existing
surveys like Wikipedia still needs human efforts on col-
lecting relevant resources and writing accurate content
on a given topic. Survey generation is a way to generate
concise introductory content for a query topic (Zhao et
al., 2021). While most of the existing work focuses on
utilizing scientiﬁc papers or Wikipedia to achieve this
ERD pipeline
Positive-labeled
Resources
Step 1:
Content
Selection
Step 2:
Abstractive 
Summarization
(HierSumm, 
BART)
Query Topic
“knowledge graphs”
Generated Survey
Leading Paragraph:
    “In computer science, 
knowledge graphs are 
a type of graphical 
representation of 
information about a 
system. Knowledge 
graphs are used in 
computer science to 
describe…”
Figure 5: Two-stage Method for Leading Paragraph
Generation. The query topic is knowledge graph as an
example.
(Liu et al., 2018), little has been done for using the data
on the web. Since our ERD pipeline discovers sufﬁ-
cient web data, we propose a two-stage approach for
generating the lead paragraph that applies these web
data. Notably, this is the ﬁrst research on abstractive
survey generation using web data.
4.1.
Two-stage method
We propose a two-stage method illustrates in Figure 5.
Given a query topic and high-quality web resources
selected by the ERD pipeline, we wish to generate
the leading introductory paragraph for the query topic.
This approach consists of content selection (step 1) and
abstractive summarization (step 2). Content selection is
the process of selecting the most relevant sentences ac-
cording to the given query. Abstractive summarization
generates the accurate lead paragraph from the selected
sentences.
Content Selection ERD is supposed to identify mas-

Name
Resource Type (with texts)
Domain Number
Annotation
Size
TutorialBank
Lecture sides, papers, blog posts
NLP only
Manually
6,300
LectureBank
Lecture sides only
NLP only
Manually
1,717
MOOCcube
Papers only
Multiple
Scrape from third-party
679,790
ERD (ours)
Lecture sides, papers, blog posts
Multiple
Manually
39,728
Table 8: Comparison with similar datasets.
sive resources with broad coverage of the topics, so
the ﬁrst step is to select related content with the query
topic.
While there is no suitable pretrained data for this sur-
vey generation task, we utilize the WikiSum dataset
(Liu et al., 2018).
WikiSum contains 1.5 million
Wikipedia pages, their references and their associ-
ated Google Search results. WikiSum includes many
well-established topics and comprehensive reference
documents, making it suitable for survey generation.
We ﬁrst evaluate content selection models using Wik-
iSum. We experiment with three approaches in this
step.
Liu and Lapata (2019) undertake query-based
content selection as a regression problem of predict-
ing the ROUGE-2 recall of a given paragraph-topic
pair (LSTM-Rank).
Reimers and Gurevych (2019)
ﬁne-tune BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) and RoBERTa
(Liu et al., 2019) to produce ﬁxed-length vectors which
can be compared using cosine similarity. We embed
the topic of each Wikipedia page and candidate para-
graph using this method, and select the paragraphs with
the closest vectors to the title (Semantic Search).
Additionally, we train RoBERTa in a similar manner
as (Liu and Lapata, 2019).
Then, we compare the
query topic and paragraphs as sentence pairs and use
the resulting relevance scores for the paragraph ranking
(RoBERTa-Rank). As shown in Table 9a, RoBERTa-
Rank is the highest-scoring content selector, so we em-
ploy it for the abstractive summarization’s input.
Abstractive Summarization This step is to generate
summarization from the content selected previously.
As a sequence-to-sequence task, there are many ex-
isting pretrained models. We experiment with BART
Methods
L=5
L=10
L=20
L=40
LSTM-Rank
39.38
46.74
53.84
60.42
Semantic Search
34.87
48.60
61.87
74.54
RoBERTa-Rank
64.12
72.49
79.17
84.28
(a) ROUGE-L (Lin, 2004) Recall scores for WikiSum content
selection, varying the number of paragraphs returned.
Methods
R-1
R-2
R-L
HierSumm (Liu and Lapata, 2019)
41.53
26.52
35.76
BART (Lewis et al., 2019)
46.61
26.82
43.25
(b) ROUGE scores for intro generation.
Table 9: Two-stage method evaluation using WikiSum.
(Lewis et al., 2019), a pretrained model for text gener-
ation, as well as HierSumm, a hierarchical model from
Liu and Lapata (2019). We show the summarization re-
sults on the WikiSum data in Table 9b, and observe that
BART achieves a better performance.
4.2.
Human Evaluation and Case Studies
So far, we have shown that applying RoBERTa-Rank
and BART as a two-stage method gives promising re-
sults evaluated on the WikiSum dataset. We connect
our pipeline with this method to generate the leading
paragraph. We choose ten queries randomly as survey
topics in each domain, for example, “sentiment analy-
sis”in NLP. A complete query topic list can be found
in Table 11. Since we do not have ground truth, we
conduct human evaluation and case studies.
We evaluate the model outputs on a 1-5 Likert scale
based on the following qualities:
• Readability: attains a maximum score of 5 if the
output is readable with a high degree of ﬂuency
and coherency.
• Relevancy: attains a maximum score of 5 if the
output is perfectly relevant to the current topic
with no hallucinations.
Evaluation
NLP
CV
STATS
Avg. Readability
3.45
2.90
2.75
Avg. Relevance
2.80
1.85
1.50
Avg. Non-redundancy
2.45
2.15
1.60
Table 10: Human Evaluation
NLP: adam optimizer, lstm model, dropout neural net-
works, recursive neural network, convolutional neural
network, automatic summarization, sentiment analysis,
attention mechanism deep learning, Pre-trained Language
Models NLP, knowledge graphs
CV: transfer learning, convolutional neural network,
image retrieval, image classiﬁcation, feature learning,
seq2seq, transformers, visual question answering, condi-
tional probability, k means
STATS: linear regression, hypothesis testing, conditional
probability, multinomial distribution, probability density,
density estimation, normal distributions, bernoulli distri-
bution, standard deviation, z-score
Table 11: Topics selected for human evaluation.

NLP: knowledge graphs
In computer science, knowledge graphs are a type of graphical representation of information about a system.
Knowledge graphs are used in computer science to describe the structure of a system, such as a graph of knowledge
about a particular system, ... or a list of items that can be used to describe a system ’s structure. For example, a knowl-
edge graph may contain information about an object ’s shape, its size, its shape relative to other objects, its orientation,
and its orientation relative to a point in space, or its position relative to another point in time, or any combination of
these things. Knowledge Graphs can also be used as a way of describing the structure and structure of systems, such
that a system can be described by a set of knowledge graphs that describe its structure and its properties.
CV: image retrieval
In computer science, a Convolutional neural network is a type of neural network used in image analysis and image
synthesis. It is a computer program that uses a neural network to learn from a large number of images, and can be
used to predict the appearance of a given image in real-world situations, such as the shape of a surface, or the color of
an object in a 3D environment such as an image of a person ’s face. It can also be used for image synthesis and image
analysis, as well as image processing and image processing for computer vision and image recognition. It has been
used in a number of applications such as computer vision, image processing, image recognition, and computer vision
for image recognition and image rendering.
STATS: normal distributions
In physics, normal distributions are a family of mathematical models that describe the distribution of normal
distributions.
They are used in the ﬁelds of statistics, physics , and computer science, and have been used in
a wide variety of applications, including computer vision, image analysis, computer graphics, computer vision,
computer graphics processing units (CPGs), as well as in the ﬁeld of computer vision. They have also been used
to study the visual appearance of real-world surfaces, such as the Phong Reﬂection Model, the Oren-Nayar model,
the Koenderink et al. representation, and the Shading of the Sphere Model, and in the study of light sources and light
sources in OpenGL and OpenGL-based graphics renderers.
Table 12: Examples of generated leading paragraphs.
• Non-redundancy: attains a maximum score of 5 if
the output has no repeating phrases/concepts.
We report average scores among 2 human judges of all
topics by domain, shown in Table 10. The scores of
NLP are the highest for all qualities, and STATS per-
formed most poorly. This discrepancy may be caused
by data collection bias, as more NLP resources were
included.
We randomly pick one case study from each domain
in Table 12. We eliminate some parts of the gener-
ated content due to limited space. The model is able
to generate leading paragraphs in a similar Wikipedia
article style by giving a deﬁnition of a certain con-
cept, following by descriptions of possible applica-
tions. Overall, while these surveys contains some facts,
but the quality can still be improved. For instance, the
STATS paragraph exhibits some repetition and redun-
dancy (e.g., “computer graphics”,“computer graphics
processing units”). This also happens in the NLP topic:
“describe the structure of a system”).
We highlight
them in underline. As an initial study, we have demon-
strated the opportunities of extending our ERD Pipeline
to produce survey paragraphs. In the future, we aim to
enhance the generated leading paragraphs and extend
the model for generating complete surveys.
5.
Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed a pipeline for automatic
knowledge discovery in novel domains. We applied
transfer learning with an MLM pre-training method
and achieved competitive classiﬁcation performances.
We demonstrated an application to take advantage of
resources discovered by our pipeline. Finally, we re-
leased our source code and the collected datasets, in-
cluding the 39,728 manually labelled web resources
and 659 search queries. We make this pipeline an on-
line live educational tool for the public.
6.
Bibliographical References
Beltagy, I., Cohan, A., and Lo, K. (2019). Scibert: Pre-
trained contextualized embeddings for scientiﬁc text.
CoRR, abs/1903.10676.
Beltagy, I., Peters, M. E., and Cohan, A. (2020). Long-
former:
The long-document transformer.
CoRR,
abs/2004.05150.
Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., and Toutanova, K.
(2019). BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional
Transformers for Language Uderstanding. NAACL.
Fabbri, A. R., Li, I., Trairatvorakul, P., He, Y., Ting,
W. T., Tung, R., Westerﬁeld, C., and Radev, D. R.
(2018). Tutorialbank:
A manually-collected cor-
pus for prerequisite chains, survey extraction and
resource recommendation. In Proceedings of ACL.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Krippendorff, K. (2011). Computing krippendorff’s
alpha-reliability.
Lewis, M., Liu, Y., Goyal, N., Ghazvininejad, M.,
Mohamed, A., Levy, O., Stoyanov, V., and Zettle-
moyer, L. (2019). Bart: Denoising Sequence-to-
sequence Pre-training for Natural Language Gen-
eration, Translation, and Comprehension.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:1910.13461.

Li, I., Fabbri, A. R., Tung, R. R., and Radev, D. R.
(2019a). What should I learn ﬁrst: Introducing lec-
turebank for NLP education and prerequisite chain
learning.
In The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AAAI 2019, The Thirty-
First Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence Conference, IAAI 2019, The Ninth AAAI Sym-
posium on Educational Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence, EAAI 2019, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, January
27 - February 1, 2019, pages 6674–6681. AAAI
Press.
Li, I., Fabbri, A. R., Tung, R. R., and Radev, D. R.
(2019b). What should I learn ﬁrst: Introducing lec-
turebank for NLP education and prerequisite chain
learning.
In The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AAAI 2019, The Thirty-
First Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence Conference, IAAI 2019, The Ninth AAAI Sym-
posium on Educational Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence, EAAI 2019, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, January
27 - February 1, 2019, pages 6674–6681. AAAI
Press.
Li, I., Yan, V., Li, T., Qu, R., and Radev, D. (2021).
Unsupervised cross-domain prerequisite chain learn-
ing using variational graph autoencoders. In Pro-
ceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (ACL).
Lin, C.-Y. (2004). ROUGE: A package for automatic
evaluation of summaries.
In Text Summarization
Branches Out, pages 74–81, Barcelona, Spain, July.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Liu, Y. and Lapata, M. (2019). Hierarchical Trans-
formers for Multi-document Summarization. ACL.
Liu, P. J., Saleh, M., Pot, E., Goodrich, B., Sepassi,
R., Kaiser, L., and Shazeer, N. (2018). Generating
wikipedia by summarizing long sequences. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1801.10198.
Liu, Y., Ott, M., Goyal, N., Du, J., Joshi, M., Chen,
D., Levy, O., Lewis, M., Zettlemoyer, L., and
Stoyanov, V. (2019). Roberta: A Robustly Opti-
mized Bert Pretraining Approach. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1907.11692.
Mihalcea, R. and Tarau, P. (2004). TextRank: Bring-
ing order into text. In Proceedings of the 2004 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 404–411, Barcelona, Spain, July.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Montalvo, S., Palomo, J., and de la Orden, C. (2018).
Building an educational platform using nlp: A case
study in teaching ﬁnance. J. UCS, 24(10):1403–
1423.
Reimers, N. and Gurevych, I.
(2019).
Sentence-
BERT: Sentence embeddings using Siamese BERT-
networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natu-
ral Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages
3982–3992, Hong Kong, China, November. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Romero, C. and Ventura, S. (2017). Educational data
science in massive open online courses. Wiley Inter-
disciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge
Discovery, 7(1):e1187.
Sinha, A., Shen, Z., Song, Y., Ma, H., Eide, D., Hsu,
B.-j. P., and Wang, K. (2015). An overview of mi-
crosoft academic service (mas) and applications. In
Proceedings of the 24th international conference on
world wide web, pages 243–246. ACM.
Tang, J., Zhang, J., Yao, L., Li, J., Zhang, L., and Su,
Z. (2008). Arnetminer: Extraction and mining of
academic social networks. In KDD’08, pages 990–
998.
Tang, J., Yao, L., Zhang, D., and Zhang, J. (2010). A
combination approach to web user proﬁling. ACM
TKDD, 5(1):1–44.
Yu, J., Luo, G., Xiao, T., Zhong, Q., Wang, Y., Feng,
W., Luo, J., Wang, C., Hou, L., Li, J., Liu, Z., and
Tang, J. (2020). MOOCCube: A large-scale data
repository for NLP applications in MOOCs. In Pro-
ceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 3135–
3142, Online, July. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Zhao, M., Yan, S., Liu, B., Zhong, X., Hao, Q., Chen,
H., Niu, D., Long, B., and Guo, W. (2021). QB-
SUM: A large-scale query-based document summa-
rization dataset from real-world applications. Com-
put. Speech Lang., 66:101166.
