Comparing Knowledge-Based Reinforcement Learning
to Neural Networks in a Strategy Game
Liudmyla Nechepurenko1, Viktor Voss1, and Vyacheslav Gritsenko1
Arago GmbH, Eschersheimer Landstr. 526-532, 60433 Frankfurt am Main, Gernamy

Abstract. The paper reports on an experiment, in which a Knowledge-Based
Reinforcement Learning (KB-RL) method was compared to a Neural Network
(NN) approach in solving a classical Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) task. In contrast
to NNs, which require a substantial amount of data to learn a good policy, the KB-
RL method seeks to encode human knowledge into the solution, considerably re-
ducing the amount of data needed for a good policy. By means of Reinforcement
Learning (RL), KB-RL learns to optimize the model and improves the output of
the system. Furthermore, KB-RL offers the advantage of a clear explanation of
the taken decisions as well as transparent reasoning behind the solution.
The goal of the reported experiment was to examine the performance of the KB-
RL method in contrast to the Neural Network and to explore the capabilities of
KB-RL to deliver a strong solution for the AI tasks. The results show that, within
the designed settings, KB-RL outperformed the NN, and was able to learn a bet-
ter policy from the available amount of data. These results support the opinion
that Artiﬁcial Intelligence can beneﬁt from the discovery and study of alternative
approaches, potentially extending the frontiers of AI.
1
INTRODUCTION
Machine Learning (ML) is one of the most recent trends in Artiﬁcial Intelligence. To a
high extend, ML owns its popularity to the development of Neural Networks (NNs) and,
particularly, Deep Neural Networks. The fact that NNs can ﬁnd solutions for previously
unsolvable tasks, drew a lot of attention to NNs and ML, while decreasing the attention
to other approaches. At the same time, NNs face a number of challenges that can result
in the lower performance of the NN method [27]. For example, NNs are data greedy
[8], they require an extensive amount of data in order to train an effective model. One
of the crucial hardships employing NNs is their unexplained output [35]: working as a
’back box’, NNs cannot justify their output and, thus, lack to be trusted [10].
Studying new approaches opens Artiﬁcial Intelligence to new possibilities and fa-
cilitates a more informed choice of the technology when it comes to ﬁnding a suit-
able method for a research problem. Therefore, we believe that this report positively
contributes to the healthy dynamic of the AI ﬁeld by encouraging the diversity of its
methodology and in-depth analysis of various methods. The objective of this article is
to study the KB-RL method and compare it to Neural Networks in order to bring more
light on the method’s performance, its characteristics and the beneﬁts of the method for
a corresponding problem area.
arXiv:1901.04626v2  [cs.AI]  17 Jan 2020

2
L. Nechepurenko et al.
In this report, KB-RL conforms to the idea that exploiting human knowledge can
shorten the time and data needed for machines to learn. KB-RL consists of two tech-
niques: the Knowledge-Based technique and Reinforcement Learning. In the Knowledge-
Based approach [3], the knowledge is the essence of the system, it expresses the facts,
information and skills needed to automate a particular task or a problem.
In KB-RL, RL is added to the Knowledge-Based System (KBS) as a conﬂict reso-
lution strategy targeted at integrating the alternative knowledge, or multi-expert knowl-
edge, into one knowledge base.
The core difference between KB-RL and the traditional KBSs is their approach to
knowledge. Classical KBSs strictly require the knowledge to be unambiguous. This
means, if there is more than one rule to be matched to the current situation, the infer-
ence engine cannot proceed and requires conﬂict resolution. The conﬂict resolution is
based on the assumption that only one rule can be correct in the given context, while
others are attributed to mistakes [20]. In contrast, KB-RL considers conﬂicting rules as
possible variations of the solution and employs RL to learn which variant delivers the
best outcome for the deﬁned task. Therefore, KB-RL easily accommodates ambiguous
knowledge seeing it as knowledge of multiple experts that have different opinions or
different strategies for the problem solution. Report [38] illustrates this principle on
the example of the multi-strategy game CIVILIZATION. The report shows that, based
on the several available strategies to play the game, the system learned to improve the
gameplay, increasing the winning rate for the trained agent.
Following the work [38], we chose FreeCiv as a benchmark for the reported compar-
ison. This allowed us to reuse the open-sourced framework of FreeCiv, the knowledge
base and the data that was openly published at [37]. Due to the highly complex nature of
FreeCiv, we addressed only a separate sub-task of the game. In particular, we chose to
optimize the selection of the cities locations that would lead the nation to the maximal
generated natural resources. Several reasons inﬂuenced the choice of the task. Besides
being of reasonable complexity, this task involves image analysis - the area where NNs
have shown a great performance. Moreover, there can be various strategies to approach
settlement in the game, which is an appropriate setting for the KB-RL approach. Gen-
erating natural resources is a critical activity in the game due to natural resources being
the main component for a nation to further develop. City locations are closely linked
to the amount of generated natural resources because natural resources are generated
by the city from the tiles within the city borders, and their amount depends, in the ﬁrst
place, on the map tiles properties. Therefore, wisely choosing the city region acts as a
fundamental prerequisite for generating rich natural resources.
For the purpose of this work, the selected task was solved twice, with the KB-
RL and the Neural Networks approach. The difference in their performance became a
determining factor for the analysis of this experiment. The results of this work satisfy
the goal to provide better understanding of KB-RL’s performance and capabilities, and
the advantages it can give in contrast to the Neural Networks. It is important to note
that the experiment could have other design decisions that may be questioned by the
reader throughout the article. Unfortunately, we were limited by the time dedicated to
this project to explore all possible designs.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
3
2
RELATED WORK
Comparative studies are commonly used to investigate methods and to gain better un-
derstanding of their strengths and weaknesses. Being one of the most popular AI tech-
niques nowadays, NNs have been compared to other approaches in numerous studies,
for example [25,6,22].
Previously, there were many instances of combining the Knowledge-Based approach
with Machine Learning techniques into one method, for example [14,33,34,26]. For
several decades, a large number of studies tackled the idea of combining these two
methods from various angles. To the best of our knowledge, applying RL as a conﬂict
resolution strategy in a multi-expert knowledge-based system for incremental solution
improvement was ﬁrst proposed in [38]. As the authors of [38] suggest, it is difﬁcult to
relate to similar studies that combine the Knowledge-Based and the Machine Learning
approaches due to the diversity of the addressed problems by these studies. Therefore,
it was not our objective to review all the methods combining Knowledge-Based ap-
proaches and Machine Learning in the related work section. We believe that KB-RL,
as well as other methods, are worth considering and can deliver comprehensive results
in numerous applications. Our primary goal was to examine the KB-RL method, for
which a comparative study was regarded as an effective mechanism.
Games are a recognized benchmark for testing AI algorithms. Strategy games, such
as CIVILIZATION, present an attractive case for AI research due to their high com-
plexity. To be aware of the previous applications, we reviewed several reports on em-
ploying FreeCiv as a proving point for AI algorithms. Most studies addressed speciﬁc
elements of the game, with only a few works playing the entire game. In 2004, A. Houk
used a symbolic approach and reasoning to develop an agent for playing FreeCiv [1].
A series of articles explored Knowledge-Based related approaches for tasks, such as
building and defending cities and population growth, see [18,19,17,36,15,16]. In 2014,
Branavan et al. employed Natural Language Processing (NLP) to improve the player
performance in CIVILISATION II [7]. In 2009, S. Wender, implemented several modi-
ﬁcations of Sarsa and Q-learning algorithms to learn the potentially best city sites [40].
References [39] and [4] explored the utilization of Genetic Algorithms for the opti-
mization of city placement and city development in FreeCiv. Overall, all the reviewed
reports showed improved results of using the proposed methodology.
Our work differs from the reviewed methods in a number of settings, such as meth-
ods, episode length, complexity of the game conﬁgurations and the selected metric. The
next sections give a detailed explanation of the performed experiment.
3
TASK DEFINITION
The amount of natural resources generated in the FreeCiv game is implemented through
the points of different types that are produced by cities in every game turn. We call the
amount of generated natural resource from all cities in one game: the total game output
(TGO). We aimed to maximize the total game output by analysing the map, predicting
the quality of map clusters (regions of 5x5 without corner tiles as it is shown in Figure
1, which are 21 tiles) with respect to the TGO and building the cities in the places with
the highest predicted quality.

4
L. Nechepurenko et al.
Cities generate natural resources from those tiles within city borders that have work-
ing citizen on the tile. City borders may reach terrain within the 5x5 region centered on
the city, minus its corners. To extract resources from a tile, the player must have a cit-
izen working there, and the city can reposition its citizens to optimize the generated
resources. Originally, the city is built with one citizen that works on the center tile. To
acquire new citizens, the city must generate a surplus of natural resources. As the city’s
population grows, more tiles become engaged with work. Each working tile generates
a number of food, production and trade points per turn. Trade points can be turned into
gold, luxury or science points. These six types of points - food, production, trade,
gold, luxury and science - constitute the city output. In this way, we calculate the
city output as a sum of all points that are collected with every turn, and doubling the
production points as they can be used as half of a gold point when buying the current
city project. The formula for the city output is given in equation 1:
OUTPUTT =
T
X
t=1
(goldt +luxuryt +sciencet +foodt +productiont ∗2+tradet)
(1)
where t and T refer to the turn number, and t = 1 is the ﬁrst turn of the game. For the
cities built in later turns, all points prior to the turn in which they were built were taken
as zeros.
Consequently, the total game output at turn T is the sum of all city outputs owned
by the player until the T-th turn:
TGO =
N
X
n=1
OUTPUTn,T
(2)
where N is the number of cities owned by the player.
The complexity of settling in FreeCiv lies in the abundance of options to exploit the
map tiles for natural resources and in the constrained nature of the player’s possibili-
ties. In general, the number of working tiles is in inverse ratio to the number of cities
because every new settler unit removes one citizen from the home city. Consequently,
home cities produce less resources and delay exploiting more working tiles. Therefore,
maximal accumulated natural resources do not necessarily arrive form maximizing the
number of cities. Moreover, placing the available citizens on different tiles within the
city borders results in different amounts for each particular type, as well as cumulative,
natural resources. Also, the type of the natural resources plays an important role in the
city’s development and, consequently, inﬂuences the total game output.
We saw the estimation of the total game output as a regression problem that deter-
mines the relationships between the parameters of the map cluster and the TGO value.
In other words, given a map cluster, we aimed to predict a continuous integer value
reﬂecting the future contribution of the city being built in the cluster center to the TGO.
In FreeCiv, the amount of generated natural resources of each tile is affected by
the map parameters, such as terrain type, the presence of special resources, rivers and
improvements; and by the city economy, such as special buildings, city governor, the
government type and trade routes. Since we were mainly interested in the relationships
between the map parameters and the city output, we only considered the parameters

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
5
relevant to the map qualities. They are listed as following: • (TERR) Terrain of the
center tile and terrain of the surrounding tiles within the map cluster. There are 9 pos-
sible terrain types in the game suitable for building a city: Desert, Forest, Grassland,
Hills, Jungle, Mountains, Plains, Swamp and Tundra. • (RES) Resources on the tile
and surrounding tiles within the map cluster. Every type of terrain has a chance of an
additional special resource that boosts one or two of the products. Special resources can
be one of 17 types and only one per tile. • (WATER) Availability of water resources.
Presence of Ocean or Deep Ocean terrain in the city has special signiﬁcance due to their
rich resources and strategic advantages. Therefore, we considered them as extra param-
eters. • (RIVERS) Availability of rivers. Rivers enable improvements of the terrain and
enhance trade for certain terrain types.
The outlined parameter list may not be exhaustive, however, we aimed to include
the most relevant features that have the highest correlation with the generated natural
resources. The only two attributes unrelated to the map qualities were considered as
those that characterize neighboring cities: number of player cities in the neighborhood
(the 2 tiles wide area behind the city border) and the number of enemy cities in this
region. We marked them ’MY NEIGHB’ and ’ENEMY NEIGHB’ respectively.
With all parameters considered, the regression problem was set in the form shown
in equation 3:
f : (TERR, RES, WATER, RIV ERS, NEIGHB) →TGO
(3)
Equation 3 was addressed by two approaches: KB-RL and NN. The next sections pro-
vide detailed descriptions of both solutions.
It is possible that there are exiting solutions for the discussed task that are better than
the two methods considered in this report. For example, such solutions may entail but
are not limited to rooting in combinatorics, logic, or other areas of computer sciences.
However, we did not aim to ﬁnd the best solution, but rather saw this problem as suitable
for comparing KB-RL with NN. Hence, it is possible that methods not addressed in this
report can achieve better results when applied to the discussed problem.
4
KB-RL METHOD
The KB-RL approach of the reported experiment is explained in detail in [38]. Due to
the restrictive nature of the conference paper, we provide here only a short summary of
the method. The core of KB-RL is a knowledge-based system. KBSs were intensively
studied in the 80s and 90s of the last century. Later, their popularity in the scientiﬁc
community declined. However, there are numerous practical applications of the KBSs,
such as [2,30,5]. Also, there is much literature available on KBSs, for example [3]. KBS
encodes human knowledge into machine-readable rules for automated problem solving.
A KBS typically consists of a knowledge base that holds the knowledge, and an infer-
ence engine that searches the knowledge to derive a valid conclusion for a given task.
The inference engine in KB-RL processes the knowledge by adopting abductive reason-
ing. Abductive reasoning is characterized by the consideration of contextual knowledge
in the process of inferring a solution [24]. The knowledge base is represented by a se-
mantic network that follows an ontology to deﬁne the formal speciﬁcation of the used

6
L. Nechepurenko et al.
concepts and their relationships. KB-RL distinguishes between two types of knowl-
edge: contextual knowledge and procedural knowledge. Contextual knowledge consists
of two types: facts about the environment and its state, and the situational information
(working memory). The procedural knowledge is encoded in the form of rules dictating
what actions should be accepted under the speciﬁed contextual conditions.
Unlike the classical KBSs, where rule conﬂicts need resolution, KB-RL is able to
handle conﬂicting knowledge, either contradictory, or redundant. It is particularly rel-
evant to multi-expert knowledge, where different experts can have different opinions
and diverse expertise about the problem domain. KB-RL views conﬂicting knowledge
as the variations of the solution and applies RL to handle the conﬂicts with the objective
to master the optimal solution for a speciﬁed task or problem. In the situation of con-
ﬂict, the inference engine acts as an agent in the RL setting, treating rules as actions and
using the learned policy to decide on the one rule to be executed. The KB-RL approach
employs the on-policy model-free Monte Carlo method as a RL algorithm for conﬂict
resolution. The Monte Carlo method is characterized by averaging the state-action val-
ues and utilising an ϵ-greedy policy to ensure state space exploration [32].
KB-RL inherited its ability to explain the derived solution and the corresponding
reasoning process from the traditional KBSs [23]. KB-RL provides visibility and in-
formation about the decision making with several mechanisms. Firstly, the knowledge
is represented in an explicit, human-readable format that can be viewed by users and
knowledge engineers. Moreover, the meta-knowledge in the form of ontology provides
a common vocabulary that carries the semantics of real-world concepts, facilitating the
understanding of the problem context [9]. Furthermore, by tracing the executed rules in
the history of the solution, one can understand the contextual conditions in which the
rule was applied [29].
In the reported experiment, we reused the implementation of playing FreeCiv with
the KB-RL method presented in [38], including the ontology for the semantic network,
most of the knowledge base, and the clustering model for the state space segmenta-
tion. The ontology entities represented the main concepts of FreeCiv, such as a game, a
player, a unit, a city, and a tile. The properties of these concepts were implemented as
attributes of the corresponding entities, while the edges reﬂected the relationships be-
tween the concepts. The semantic network contained all the game data as instances of
the outlined ontology types. The data was kept in constant sync with the FreeCiv’s envi-
ronment and, therefore, the inference engine could operate always up-to-date searching
for matching rules. For the RL algorithm, the clustering model was employed to reduce
the game state space to the ﬁnite number of states. The model was trained by the k-
mean algorithm, particularly Lloyd’s algorithm with a maximum of 300 iterations. The
dataset was created based on 1100 game histories published at [37]. The 31 features
of the dataset were selected based on their correlation with the won/lost outcome of
these games. The features were such as the game score, population size, the number
of learned technologies, and others. The collected dataset had 386895 entries. As a re-
sult of experimenting with hyperparameters, 185 clusters were deﬁned to represent the
game state space.
In [38]’s knowledge base, the tiles’ quality for the city output was calculated by
one rule summing the food, trade and shield points of all tiles within the map cluster.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
7
Fig. 1. An example of a map cluster.
Fig. 2. An example of a rule. The rule adds 5
points to the tile score for the special resource
’Bull’ on the central tile.
Considering the complex relationship between the parameters of the map cluster and
the amount of the natural resources that a city could generate being built in the centre
of this map cluster, [38]’s calculation of the tile quality is a rather simpliﬁed estimation.
For our experiment, we replaced this rule with two different approaches: one was the
Neural Network model (section 5), and the other one was using the new rules for the
knowledge base encoding several players’ strategies for the tile evaluation.
Settling in FreeCiv has various strategies and can be solved by human players in nu-
merous ways. Though the game rules are clearly deﬁned, it takes practice for the players
to master their settling strategies. Moreover, with more experience, players learn about
different techniques that can be equally successful in winning the game. Following the
KB-RL principle, we implemented several strategies into rules in order to evaluate the
map clusters. These rules created a multi-expert knowledge base for the given task. A
scoring system was used to estimate the tile quality to deliver high city output. Each tile
held an attribute representing the tile quality score. The rules were encoded to manip-
ulate the tile’s score by adding more or less, or negative points to it based on the listed
conditions. For example, the terrain of type Forest is highly valued by some players
due to its high production output. Thus, the rule conditioning the Forest terrain added
a high number of points to the tile score. Meanwhile, other players do not see this ter-
rain type highly advantageous. Therefore, we added another rule that contributed to the
tile score with less points. The terrain of type Desert earned negative reputation among
players due to its scarce resources for city growth. These rules were adding negative or
zero points to the tile score to reﬂect the rate of the players’ dislike of the Desert tiles.
Each rule contributed to the score of a particular tile independently of others, and rules
conditioning the same features created the conﬂicting knowledge in terms of classical
KBS. Following this principle, we could easily create more rules by adding various
numbers of points for different map features to implement any player’s strategy. Figure
2 illustrates an example of a rule for the tile quality evaluation.
The rules addressed the parameter set outlined in section 3: terrain type, special re-
sources and water resources on the central and surrounding tiles. There were 14 features
covered by the rules: 9 for different terrain types and 5 for other features: (1) special re-

8
L. Nechepurenko et al.
source on the central tile, (2) special resources on the surrounding tiles, (3) availability
of water resources, (4) access to the deep ocean and (5) presence of the whale resource.
As whales are resources that boost two products (food and production) at the same time,
many players favor them over other resources. Thus, we treated it with additional rules.
To cover different strategies, alternative rules were implemented for each feature
adding a different amount of points to the tile score. For example, for the rule given in
Figure 2, the alternative rules added 1, 5, or 10 points to the attribute ’tileScore’. These
numbers reﬂected the value that different human players would put, given the occur-
rence of a special resource on the tile when playing the game with different strategies.
In the classical KBS, these rules would create a conﬂict due to the identical speciﬁed
conditions. However, in KB-RL, the system had to learn by means of RL what rule
would convey the best outcome for the designed goal.
Overall, 56 rules were written for the aforementioned 14 features. The created rules
were added to the multi-expert knowledge base of report [38]. It has to be noted, though,
that the number of rules is rather indicative and does not reﬂect the complexity of the
knowledge base.
For the purpose of this experiment, we had to redeﬁne the reward function to reﬂect
the connection between the total game output and the desired goal. One game was
considered an episode and the total game output was calculated at the end of each game
run. Then, for every state s of the episode, the reward Rs was given in the amount of
the total game output of this episode. Accordingly, the value of a state was calculated
as the average of the acquired rewards: Vs = avg(Rs(n)) where n ∈N, and N is the
set of all games that visited the state s. And, the state-action values were calculated by
averaging the set of games M that visited the state s and performed action a: qa
s =
avg(Rs,a(m)), m ∈M.
5
NEURAL NETWORKS METHOD
Nowadays, Neural Networks do not need much of an introduction. A detailed discussion
of Artiﬁcial Neural Networks can be found in [13], or [11]. NNs learn to perform a task
by analysing the data rather than being explicitly programmed. Therefore, the data is a
fundamental component for the NNs. Hence, collecting a dataset to train the NN model
was our ﬁrst task for implementing the NN solution in this experiment. For this purpose,
we exploited 1100 fully played FreeCiv games from [37] that were played with the
KB-RL approach reported in [38]. The games were analysed, and all city places were
identiﬁed as well as city outputs and total game outputs for all games. Based on the
acquired information, the dataset was constructed for training NN to predict the quality
of the place for the city output.
For each city place, the map cluster around the city was taken to create the input
entry to the dataset, with the map cluster being centered on the tile where city was built.
Firstly, the input data went through preprocessing - a common practice in machine
learning engineering that usually includes procedures such as transforming data into
vectors, normalisation and dealing with noise or missing values. In FreeCiv, the map is
saved to a text ﬁle for each game turn being encoded into special symbols. These sym-
bols represent all tile properties, such as terrain type, special resources, rivers, roads, tile

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
9
owner and afﬁliation to the city. Based on these symbols, the map image can be entirely
reconstructed at any point of time. Therefore, it was beneﬁcial for us to use encoding,
allowing us to convert the map cluster image into a feature vector with no loss of data
integrity. Accordingly, the feature vector of the dataset included the following symbols:
21 symbols that reﬂect the terrain type of each tile in the map cluster, 21 symbols to
indicate the presence/absence of the special resources on each of the 21 tiles and one
symbol indicating the presence of the river on the central tile. Additionally, we counted
the number of the player’s cities and the number of the opponents’ cities already built
in the neighbourhood of the given place. We found it beneﬁcial to ignore the position
of the tiles within the city borders. The ﬁnal dataset entry was constructed as columns
where each column represented a symbol type, and the value was equal to the number
of such symbols in the map cluster. For more detail, the dataset can be found at [28].
As a label column for the dataset entries, we estimated the output of the cities built
on the derived map clusters. To do so, we faced a few challenges. Firstly, cities built on
the same land in different games would differ in their output due to the different game
development and the player’s progress. Secondly, cities were built in various turns, but
we had to estimate each city place independently from the turn built. Therefore, we
could not use equation 1 to calculate the label for our dataset entries. By analyzing the
data and experimenting with hyperparameters for training the neural network, we chose
to calculate the city output as in equation 4:
OUTPUTc =
100
X
i=1
(goldi + luxuryi + sciencei + foodi + productioni ∗2 + tradei)
(4)
where c refers to the city index, and i represents the age of the city in terms of turns.
For example, i = 1 relates to the ﬁrst turn after the city was built, and i = 100 is the
100th turn of city existence on the map.
As a result, the corresponding dataset had duplicate entries with different labels
for them. It was due to cities being built on the same spot in different games, or the
parameters of the map clusters were the same but in different locations. We replaced
the duplicate entries with the average of their label values. By keeping only unique
entries, we aimed to minimize potential data imbalance [21].
Accordingly, the resulting dataset contained 2765 unique entries for training the
NN model. The input dataset was normalized by a min-max algorithm, and the trained
model had the following structure: • Input layer accepts 83-dimensional feature vector.
• One hidden layer with 95 neurons and ReLU activation. • Weights are initialized
using normal distribution with zero mean and 0.0005 standard deviation. • To avoid
overﬁtting, a dropout with probability 0.5 is applied to the hidden layer. • The output is
a single neuron, which is a continuous variable. • The mean squared error is used as a
loss function. • The ADAM optimizer is employed as it has shown the best performance
among other optimization algorithms. • Batch size is 30 and learning rate is 0.002.
In order to ﬁnd optimal hyperparameters, including the number of hidden layers,
grid search has been applied to the model. For the model assessment, we chose K-fold
cross validation with 10 splits and with shufﬂing. After training, the mean squared error
for the test set reached the value 0,00637. To our surprise, the grid search resulted in
a single-layered model to be the optimal for the provided dataset. After careful con-

10
L. Nechepurenko et al.
Fig. 3. A fragment of the visual validation of the trained NN model. The number in the square is
the score predicted by the NN model for an assigned tile.
Fig. 4. TGO averaged over a number of games.
Fig. 5. TGO for each single game.
sideration, we suggest that it can be due to a theoretically proved ﬁnding that a neu-
ral network with one hidden layer can adequately approximate ”any Borel measurable
function from one ﬁnite-dimensional space to another”, given the sufﬁcient number of
hidden units [31,12]. To validate the trained model, we also performed visual inspec-
tion of the predicted tile scores for the different map fragments. Figure 3 shows that the
model performed reasonably well, predicting higher scores for the tiles of Grassland
and Plains terrain, especially if they were located on the coast or had a special resource.
The trained model was plugged into the KB-RL system in such a way that on the
start of every game turn, the game map was preprocessed, the feature vector for every
map cluster was created and passed to the NN for prediction. The predicted value was
assigned as the tile’s score representing the tiles’ quality for the TGO.
6
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
The experiment was set up in two ways. One time, the training of the KB-RL agent
was conducted with the KB-RL method holding created rules for the evaluation of map
clusters. The other time, the training ran with the plugged in NN model that replaced
the rules for the evaluation of map clusters. For both runs, the TGO was observed and
compared to estimate the performance of the two approaches. This way, the difference
in output of the two setups would result from the two approaches for the tile evaluation
and, thus, would become a point of comparison for these two methods.
There were several design decisions to be made. Firstly, we had to decide on a
starting point for the games. FreeCiv offers a game conﬁguration either with a random
starting point or with a predeﬁned starting position. A random starting position would
give more generalisation to the trained model and more balanced data. However, it
would also bring a lot of randomness to the progress of the game. The starting position

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
11
deﬁnes the player’s nation, and the nation dictates many aspects of the game, such as
the nation’s temperament, the way it is treated by other nations and the citizens’ loyalty
to the leader. Therefore, the nation also inﬂuences the generated natural resources in the
game. It would take a longer training time for the model to learn to recognize the effect
of the random start versus the inﬂuence of the map parameters. On the other hand, the
games used for creation of the Neural Network dataset were started at a ﬁxed position
on each of 5 maps [38]. Based on this consideration, the decision was made to start the
games from the ﬁxed staring position. Given that the conditions for both setups were
equal, we believe that this decision did not diminish the outcome of the experiment.
For the game conﬁguration, we chose one of the conﬁgurations described in [38]
named Chaos. The map of this conﬁguration is 80x50 tiles with two big continents in
the middle, and ﬁve small islands on the south of the map. The conﬁguration is designed
to be played by two KB-RL agents, where each of them starts the game on the separate
continent. No embedded AI players are added to the game, however, Barbarians are
activated. This conﬁguration favours the game conditions where the players have no
contact in the initial game phase to be engaged in warfare or diplomacy, and, therefore,
are encouraged to build and develop cities.
Another design decision was made about the length of the games. Settling happens
in FreeCiv in the initial phase. After cities are built, the player mostly focuses on de-
veloping the economy, technologies and warfare. For the purpose of the experiment,
we did not need to play the games until they are ﬁnished. Stopping the games ahead of
time gave us the advantage of signiﬁcantly shorter episode duration: such episodes took
about 10% −20% of the full game time. Analyzing the histories of games from [38],
we chose to play only the ﬁrst 120 turns of the game, as it seemed to be a good trade-off
among the amount of generated data, the game state and the play time.
Initially, we also considered the setup where learning would be performed only
once, with added rules for tile evaluation. Then, the performance would be observed for
the total game output with the learned policy and without ongoing learning. After that,
the rules would be replaced by the NN model, and the system performance would be
measured again. However, in this case the NN might lead the game through a different
set of states that were not well-learned during initial training. This fact would be a
disadvantage to the NN setup. Thus, the decision was made in favor of running learning
for both setups from the same starting point.
7
RESULTS
To measure the performance of both experiments, we chose the metric of averaging the
total game output over the number of games. The averaged total game output was calcu-
lated after every game and observed for both setups in comparison to each other. Figure
4 visualizes the averaged TGO progress throughout the training for the two setups. Ad-
ditionally, Figure 5 shows the TGO of each single game in the run of the episodes. At
the beginning, the TGOs had much variation, with the average value just under 15 000.
As learning proceeded, the TGO steadily climbed up, and the variation declined. This
behaviour was common for both experiments as a result of the reinforcement learning
optimization within the KB-RL system.

12
L. Nechepurenko et al.
Fig. 6. TGO improvement after training for the
KB-RL and the NN setups.
Fig. 7. Average TGO for the KB-RL and the NN
setups in contrast to the human players, the tour-
nament games and the computer AI players.
Fig. 8. Distribution of the terrain types
on the city’s central tile.
Fig. 9. Distribution of the terrain by type after
training.
Each experiment ran for 1000 episodes. At the end, the game play stabilized with
an average total reward of 20 500 and 22 400 points for the NN and the KB-RL se-
tups respectively. For the KB-RL setup, the improvement constituted 49% in contrast
to the starting value, while for the NN, it was a 36% increase ( Figure 6). The differ-
ence of 13% between the two approaches stems from the different solutions for the tile
evaluation.
To better understand the achieved results, we compared them to the performance of
the human players, FreeCiv’s computer AI players and the so-called tournament games
of report [38]. Figure 7 illustrates the compared TGOs. The games played by humans
were acquired as a part of the reused data of the report [38], they are published online
at [28]. For comparison, we show the TGO of the top 3 players. Analysing the histories
of their games, it can be concluded that they are deﬁnitely great experts in playing the
game as their play was quick and efﬁcient, and they won against computer AIs with
a big winning margin. This comparison showed that both trained agents outperformed
human and computer AI players (Figure 7). It must be noted, however, that neither
human, nor computer AI players explicitly pursued the goal of maximizing generated
natural resources. Therefore, this comparison is rather indicative.
When investigating the two setups in contrast to each other, it can be seen that the
fundamental difference in building cities was in the terrain type of the central tile. Fur-
thermore, there was a noticeable difference in the terrain type of the tiles surrounding
the central tile within city borders. While both setups built comparatively similar num-
ber of cities, with the similar amount of resources and rivers within city borders, the
terrain type of the city tiles differs signiﬁcantly (Figures 8 and 9). In the KB-RL setup,

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
13
the majority of cities were built on one of the three terrain types: plains (42%), grassland
(38%) and hills (16%). On the contrary, most of the cities in the NN setup were built
on grassland (63%) with a surprisingly big part of cities being built on the desert terrain
(13%). Most likely, this is a consequence of a data deﬁcit during the training of the NN
model as the desert terrain is an obvious disadvantage for the city’s development.
Cities of both setups occupied the terrain of types grassland and plains to a similar
extent (Figure 9). However, the KB-RL agent tended to build cities mostly on the coast,
occupying a high number of ocean tiles. At the same time, the NN setup showed more
preference towards the forest terrain, while coastal terrains were occupied considerably
less than forest. Furthermore, cities in the NN setup occupied more terrain of types hills
and desert in comparison to the KB-RL setup.
While explaining the NN’s prediction for the tile scores in the NN setup was chal-
lenging for us, the games’ execution histories of the KB-RL setup gave us a valuable
insight into the decision-making of the KB-RL agent. By reviewing the execution his-
tories, we were able to check which rules contributed to the score of every tile. As the
rules were encoded in the human-readable format using the semantically loaded vocab-
ulary, it was straightforward to understand the reasoning process of the KB-RL agent.
For example, for the map cluster in Figure 1, the executed rules were ResourceOnTile
(added points for special resource bull on the central tile), ResourcesAround (added
points for the two special resources within the map cluster), TerrainGrassland (added
points for the Grassland terrain type of the central tile) and OceanTileBonus (added
points for the Ocean terrain type of two tiles within the map cluster). Altogether, they
added 27 points to the tile score. This number varied from game to game depending
on the conﬂict resolution outcome since each of these rules had a set of the alterna-
tive rules, as it was explained in section 4. For each rule, the execution history listed
its conﬂicting rules and their probabilities at the time of conﬂict resolution. We saw a
strong possibility to use this information in the analysis of the training process and its
progress. However, this task was not included into this report and, potentially, could
become a research study on its own.
8
CONCLUSION
The goal of this article was to study the KB-RL approach by comparing its performance
to the NN in solving a classical Artiﬁcial Intelligence task. The evaluation of map tiles
for building cities to deliver high output of the generated natural resources was chosen
for this comparison. The results of the experiment support the idea that KB-RL can be
a worthy alternative to other AI approaches, such as Neural Networks, in solving tasks
of the Artiﬁcial Intelligence ﬁeld.
By leveraging human experts’ knowledge, KB-RL performed the initial phase of
the training equally well as the NN, which was trained on the 1100 previously played
games. These results advocate that KB-RL may be a better choice for the problems
where the data for training a NN model is scarce or unavailable, but there is an access
to human expertise. Moreover, with more games played, KB-RL demonstrated a greater
ability to optimize the complex policy, justifying the smaller demand of the data by KB-
RL to deliver a better policy.

14
L. Nechepurenko et al.
Another important advantage of the KB-RL solution was the ability to explain the
system decisions by reviewing the rules executed in the game. This fact can be impera-
tive in cases where the system’s explainability is a critical requirement.
