MULTIMODAL SEMANTIC TRANSFER
FROM TEXT TO IMAGE.
FINE-GRAINED IMAGE CLASSIFICATION
BY DISTRIBUTIONAL SEMANTICS.
Simon Donig
Chair for Digital Humanities
University Passau, Germany

Maria Christoforaki
Chair for Data Science
Institute for Computer Science
University of St.Gallen, Switzerland

Bernhard Bermeitinger
Chair for Data Science
Institute for Computer Science
University of St.Gallen, Switzerland

Siegfried Handschuh
Chair for Data Science
Institute for Computer Science
University of St.Gallen, Switzerland

December 2019
1
Introduction
In the last years, image classiﬁcation processes like neural networks in the area of art-
history and Heritage Informatics have experienced a broad distribution (Lang and Om-
mer 2018). These methods face several challenges, including the handling of compara-
tively small amounts of data as well as high-dimensional data in the Digital Humanities.
In most cases, these methods map the classiﬁcation task to ﬂat target space. This “ﬂat”
surface loses several relevant dimensions in the search for ontological uniqueness, in-
cluding taxonomical, mereological, and associative relationships between classes, or
the non-formal context, respectively.
The proposed solution by Donig, Bermeitinger, et al. (Donig, Bermeitinger, et al. 2019)
to expand the capabilities of visual classiﬁers is to take advantage of the greater expres-
siveness of text-based models. Here, a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is used
that output is not as usual a series of ﬂat text labels but a series of semantically loaded
vectors. These vectors result from a Distributional Semantic Model (DSM) (Lenci
2018) which is generated from an in-domain text corpus.
Here, we propose an early implementation of this method and analyze the results.
arXiv:2001.02372v1  [cs.CV]  7 Jan 2020

The conducted experiment is based on the collation of two corpora: one text-based and
a visual. From the text, a DSM is created and then queried for a list of target words
that are functionally the labels that are manually given to the images. The result is a
list of vectors that correspond to the target words leading to images that are annotated
not only with a label but also with a unique vector. The images and vectors are used as
training data for a CNN that, afterward, should be able to predict a vector for an unseen
image. This prediction vector can be converted back to a word by the DSM using a
nearest-neighbor algorithm. We are looking for richer representation in this process, so
we choose the ﬁve nearest neighbors. The similarity measure is the cosine similarity
for high-dimensional vector spaces between the given target vector and the prediction
vector. We derive a positive classiﬁcation result if the target label is within the list of
ﬁve nearest neighbors of the prediction vector.
Moreover, we compare the results between the proposed classiﬁcation method and a
conventional classiﬁcation method using the same CNN as for the vector-based ex-
periment but a list of ﬂat labels. Finally, we can show that the vector-based approach
(judging from classiﬁcation metrics) is equally performant or even better than the label-
based version.
2
Experiment Structure
The experiment is based on one text and one visual corpus from the area of material
culture research with a focus on neo-classical artifacts.
2.1
Text Corpus
The text corpus is compiled out of 44 sources that are available under a free and per-
missive license. It contains English specialist publications on furniture and spatial art,
published from the end of the 19th century to the middle of the 20th century. In multiple
steps, the corpus is cleaned and preprocessed. First, a series of standard NLP methods
are applied like tokenization, sentence- and word splitting, normalization of numbers,
and named entity recognition (NER). Since we used retro-digitized material from a dif-
ferent source, we implemented manual corrections for the most common errors (such as
ligatures like TT that were misinterpreted as U). Another level of preprocessing consists
of content-related augmentations. In particular, we normalized compound words and
synonyms according to a speciﬁed list, which is based on an ontology, the Neoclassica-
Ontology (Donig, Christoforaki, and Handschuh 2016). This resulted in the ﬁnal text
corpus of total 3 067 237 words comprised of 107 518 basic word forms.
The DSM is created using the Indra Frameworks (Sales et al. 2018) with a vector size
of 50, a word window size of 10, and minimal word count of 5. We used Skipgram as
the Word2Vec model (Mikolov et al. 2013) with negative sampling.
2.2
Image Corpus
The image corpus consists of 1231 images of neoclassical furniture in their entirety,
which are permissive licensed1. The images are either historical pictorial material or
1The corpus was compiled from collections from the Metropolitan Museum, New York, the
Victoria & Albert Museum, London, the Wallace Collection, London, and several contemporary
pattern books.
2

Figure 1: Class distribution of the image corpus
photographs from the modern as-built documentation. They are split into 28 different
classes.
2.3
Combined Corpus
The nature of the experiment is proof-of-concept, so we used a VGG-like architecture
of a “simple” convolutional neural network2.
The independence and robustness of the train/test split are guaranteed with 5-fold cross-
validation on 80 % on the full corpus from which 80 % are used for training and 20 %
for testing. The remaining 20 % are treated as an evaluation set.
The dataset is unbalanced, as can be seen in Fig. 1. During training, more promi-
nent classes are weighted down and underrepresented classes are given a higher weight
(Johnson and Khoshgoftaar 2019, p. 27). Apart from dropout during training for regu-
larization, Early Stopping was used to prevent overﬁtting.
2The CNN is built from three convolutional blocks with two consecutive Convolutional Lay-
ers each with 32/64/64 ﬁlters of size 3×3. Each block is followed by a Maximum Pooling Layer
with a size of 2 × 2 and a Dropout Layer for regularization with a dropout rate of 0.25. After the
Convolutional Block, there are two Fully Connected Layers with 256 nodes and a Dropout Layer
with a dropout rate of 0.5. The weights and biases for the Convolutional and the Fully Connected
Layers are initialized randomly. Their activation function is ReLU. The last layer, the classiﬁca-
tion layer, is a Fully Connected Layer with 50 output nodes and a linear activation function. The
optimization function of the chosen mean absolute error function is RMSprop. The implemen-
tation is done with Keras (https://keras.io) and TensorFlow (https://tensorflow.org)
3

3
Results
3.1
Results for CNN trained on Word Vectors
The Top-5 true-positive rate is 0.6052, meaning that the gold label from the annotations
is in 60 % of the cases within the list of the ﬁve nearest neighbors.
However, the mathematical quality metric in itself represents only part of the overall
picture. For this reason, a qualitative analysis of the results was performed.
A few true-positives show that, for example, the classiﬁcation is by no means random
but that the top 5 terms originate from the same semantic neighborhoods. They express
several relationships of a taxonomical and associative nature.
As an example, the Roentgen desk from the Victoria & Albert inventory in Fig. 2 is
associated with the labels dressing_table, writing_table and work_table. This
triad is meaningful because many of these artifacts were multifunctional and fulﬁlled
several of these functions. Besides, those artifacts that decidedly served only one pur-
pose are constructively similar to the other types of furniture. The similarity of the
three concepts thus emerges both on a semantic level (the distance of the words in
the DSM, which in turn is the product of real-world distance) and on a visual level
in the CNN (visual similarity of the form). Another image of the same object (see
Fig. 3) shows, on the other hand, that the method is consisted in itself—the top 4 near-
est neighbors of the predicted vector are identical, although the photograph is taken
from a different perspective—and, on the other hand, that the visual features within
the CNN also affect the classiﬁcation process. Since writing cabinets (secrétaires à
abbatants) are often displayed frontally, upright and with an open ﬂap or drawer, their
appearance in the image seems to have triggered a classiﬁcation as a secretary. In the
ﬁrst image, however, the presence of drawers could have led to a classiﬁcation as a
chest-of-drawers, which is associated with drawers on a semantic level.
While the labels considered so far reﬂect the taxonomic relationships and all originate
from the target words derived from the ontology, Fig. 4 shows that the procedure can
also generate labels for itself, purely data-driven. The crater vase shown was originally
classiﬁed as an urn. The Top-2 words therefore also reﬂect taxonomic relationships
(“urn”, “vase”). The other concepts reﬂect associative relationships. The label bell
is a leftover from the data cleaning process of the text corpus to describe this kind of
artifact. “Ovoid” refers to the egg stick decoration of the upper bead, which is often
described with this adjective. This ornamentation seems at the same time to have an
association with the rosette (patera). In this way, the target word patera_element ap-
pears among the top-5 nearest neighbors, although only whole artifacts were annotated
in the image corpus but not their decoration.
An effect of the visual classiﬁer cannot be excluded, as shown in Fig. 5. The mis-
classiﬁcation of the object, a small sewing table, led to consistent attributions in the
area of seating and reclining furniture. Looking at the outer form of the artifact on a
more abstract level, visual proximity to e.g. a (double)-camel-back sofa can be easily
derived.
4

Figure 2: Differences in the classiﬁcation of the same object (1)
Figure 3: Differences in the classiﬁcation of the same object (2)
5

Figure 4: A sèvres copy of a Medici vase results in a classiﬁcation of associative labels.
3.2
Comparison to a CNN with ﬂat labels
To better estimate the differences between the two approaches (conventional classi-
ﬁcation by ﬂat labels vs. vector-based approach), we present a comparison between
different metrics for both approaches.
As shown in Table 1 the metrics are comparable.
Thus, the proposed approach not only improves the accuracy but also provides a richer
description of the image.
4
Conclusion and Outlook
In this paper, we have presented a new multimodal approach for the classiﬁcation of im-
ages based on the combination of NLP methods with image classiﬁcation techniques.
The goal was to classify objects not only according to a scheme of ﬂat labels but in
a more context-appropriate way, whereby the context informed by relevant domain-
6

Figure 5: Misclassiﬁcation of a sewing table in the proximity of seating furniture hier-
archy.
Metric
Vector-based
Label-based
Top-1 Accuracy
0.5378
0.5302
Top-1 Precision
0.3487
0.4446
Top-1 Recall
0.2974
0.4044
Top-1 F1-Score
0.2976
0.3985
Top-5 True-Positive-Rate
0.6052
0.8463
Top-5 False-Positive-Rate
0.3948
0.1537
Table 1: Results of different Metrics.
7

historical publications. This classiﬁcation method offers access to the multidimen-
sional embedding of artifacts in the real-world and their linguistic reﬂection. This
circumstance is particularly useful for classifying multifunctional objects without hav-
ing to resort to several classiﬁers and a complex annotation process with several labels.
The results are encouraging. Even with a very simple CNN, we achieve an accuracy of
0.54.
As a next step, we want to train with a deeper CNN and an extended image corpus—to
reduce known problems like overﬁtting. The comparative experiment with a conven-
tional ﬂat-label approach has shown that from an efﬁciency point-of-view, i.e., indirect
metric comparison, our method not only provides comparable results but also provides
a richer description of the image.
We will continue to work to better understand how a particular body of text is reﬂected
int he labels that the DSM automatically assigns and that are not part of the list of target
words. A better understanding of these processes seems particularly relevant given the
relatively manageable text corpora that can be collated into speciﬁc topic complexes in
the humanities. Last but not least, for this reason, we will consider the use of thesauri
and dictionaries to create synonym lists for target words. Similarly, we are considering
combining named entities into URIs. This would allow us to associate speciﬁc entities
(e.g., workshops, ebenists, owners) with speciﬁc objects.
We think that multimodal access provides particularly efﬁcient access to humanities
and cultural studies corpora that are small and domain-restricted compared to corpora
of other disciplines in the natural and social sciences.
