Human Evaluation of Conversations is an Open Problem:
comparing the sensitivity of various methods for evaluating dialogue agents
Eric Michael Smith1
Orion Hsu2
Rebecca Qian1
Stephen Roller1
Y-Lan Boureau1
Jason Weston1
1Facebook AI Research
2Duke University
Abstract
At the heart of improving conversational AI is
the open problem of how to evaluate conversa-
tions. Issues with automatic metrics are well
known (Liu et al., 2016), with human evalua-
tions still considered the gold standard. Unfor-
tunately, how to perform human evaluations is
also an open problem: differing data collection
methods have varying levels of human agree-
ment and statistical sensitivity, resulting in dif-
fering amounts of human annotation hours and
labor costs. In this work we compare ﬁve dif-
ferent crowdworker-based human evaluation
methods and ﬁnd that different methods are
best depending on the types of models com-
pared, with no clear winner across the board.
While this highlights the open problems in the
area, our analysis leads to advice of when to
use which one, and possible future directions.
1
Introduction
Any comprehensive analysis of the performance
of an open-domain conversational model must in-
clude human evaluations: automatic metrics can
capture certain aspects of model performance but
are no replacement for having human raters judge
how adept models are at realistic and interesting
conversation (Deriu et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2016;
Dinan et al., 2019b). Unfortunately, human evalua-
tions themselves must be carefully constructed in
order to capture all the aspects desired of a good
conversationalist. Any evaluation technique must
evaluate over many turns of a conversation in or-
der to detect emergent faults such as repetitiveness
or contradiction, while techniques that rely solely
on a single evaluation at the end of a conversation
may fail to take into account changes in model per-
formance over its span. Further, techniques that
rate model performance on a Likert scale may suf-
fer from inconsistencies in subjective numerical
ratings across evaluations of different models (Li
et al., 2019). When comparing various human eval-
uation methods to assess which works best, we ﬁnd
that each has success and failure cases, leading us
to conclude that human evaluation is still an open
problem.
In this work, we analyze a representative set of
human evaluation techniques. First, we compare
per-turn evaluations, where ratings are given after
every model response, and per-dialogue evalua-
tions, where ratings are collected solely at the end
of the conversation. Per-turn evaluations have the
advantage of being more ﬁne-grained, encouraging
annotators to focus on small differences; however,
the quality of a conversation is more than the sum
of its parts, and global per-dialogue evaluations can
capture this better. Second, we consider pairwise
methods, where two models are compared directly
by an annotator, to single-model methods, where
the annotator sees and rates only one model at a
time. Both approaches can be either per-turn or
per-dialogue. For example, in Pairwise Per-Turn
evaluation, a crowdworker chats with a dialogue
agent, and after each of the worker’s messages, they
must choose between two possible responses from
the agent, one from each of two different models.
The pairwise approach can spot subtle differences
apparent when comparing responses, and it can
mitigate problems with distribution shift that oc-
cur in absolute scoring. Single-model approaches,
however, can work well when direct comparison is
not paramount.
We compare all of these different techniques
for evaluating dialogue models in three different
settings, and we contrast their individual strengths.
We ﬁnd that:
• Pairwise per-turn evaluations are adept at mea-
suring changes in model performance through-
out a conversation. This technique tends to
work well when pairs of models clearly differ
in how appropriate their responses are in the
context of the previous lines of dialogue, for
example, when comparing two models that
are trained on different datasets.
arXiv:2201.04723v1  [cs.CL]  12 Jan 2022

• Pairwise per-dialogue evaluations tend to per-
form best when differences between models
only emerge after several conversation turns,
such as when these differences are very sub-
tle, or when noticing patterns in responses that
emerge globally across the entire conversation,
for example the average length of responses.
• Single-model evaluations, performed both per
conversation turn and at the end of a con-
versation, tend to not do as well in the two
previously described settings, but do perform
well when comparing models that differ only
slightly in quality but are otherwise similar,
for example two models with different num-
bers of parameters.
These ﬁndings, while highlighting the difﬁculty
of human evaluation, also provide guidance on
which method might be best to use in these different
circumstances, as well as possible future work. In
particular, investigating the best way to merge pair-
wise and single-model, per-turn and per-dialogue
beneﬁts into a single method could be a fruitful
direction. We also analyze the interpretability of
these approaches when collecting human written
explanations. We will soon release code for these
evaluation techniques in the ParlAI framework.1
2
Existing work
Open-domain
versus
speciﬁc
domain
Our
work concentrates on the open-domain setting. In
speciﬁc conversational domains, such as question
answering (QA), evaluation can be simpler and is
often reduced to measuring overlap or exact match
with the correct answer (Chen et al., 2019). How-
ever, this no longer as easily sufﬁces for free-form,
conversational and long-form QA where answers
are more open-ended (Fan et al., 2019; Adolphs
et al., 2021). Similarly, for certain types of goal-
oriented conversations more targeted evaluations
can take place, for example evaluation of state
tracking (Williams et al., 2016) and task comple-
tion (Hastie, 2012; Henderson et al., 2014; Bordes
et al., 2017; El Asri et al., 2017; Wen et al., 2017).
Open-domain dialogue potentially covers all these
other cases as special cases, but also covers con-
versations that are more free-form or do not have a
precise goal. Hence, ﬁnding a reliable evaluation
technique is more difﬁcult, and there is currently no
single standard method that is agreed upon (Deriu
1https://parl.ai/projects/humaneval
et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2020; Roller et al., 2020).
Different techniques that have been proposed will
be described in the following paragraphs.
Automatic metrics
Automatic metrics are the
most convenient for fast, efﬁcient and reproducible
research with a quick turn-around and development
cycle, hence they are frequently used. Unfortu-
nately, many of them, such as BLEU, METEOR
and ROUGE have been shown to only “correlate
very weakly with human judgement” (Liu et al.,
2016). A central problem is that due to the open-
ended nature of conversations, there are many pos-
sible responses in a given dialogue, and, while
having multiple references can help, there is typ-
ically only one gold label available (Gupta et al.,
2019). Perplexity (computing the predicted proba-
bility of the given gold utterances) has been argued
to correlate with human judgments (Adiwardana
et al., 2020), however this has also been shown to
not always be the case (Dinan et al., 2019b), and
moreover does not actually evaluate the genera-
tions themselves produced by a decoder architec-
ture. Hence, changing the behavior of the genera-
tion method can dramatically change human evalu-
ations, while maintaining identical or near-identical
perplexity (See et al., 2019a; Welleck et al., 2020;
Adiwardana et al., 2020; Roller et al., 2021). An
alternative recent trend is to employ trainable met-
rics, whereby a neural network model is used to
score the conversational model (typically also an-
other neural network), see e.g. Lowe et al. (2017);
Ghandeharioun et al. (2019). Such systems pro-
vide a promise of improved speed of research and
development of dialogue agents, but so far have
not been met with wide adoption. Some issues are
that they may not generalize as well to data beyond
that which they are trained (overﬁt) and also may
be biased and gameable (Wu et al., 2019; Albrecht
and Hwa, 2007). For a comprehensive comparison
of automatic metrics – both standard and learned
metrics – see Yeh et al. (2021). In general, creating
a reliable automatic metric is still considered an
open problem (Deriu et al., 2021).
Crowdworkers versus experts versus organic
users
While utilizing human evaluations in re-
search is the current standard, we contend that
choosing exactly which kind of human evaluation
is also still an open question. In this work we will
concentrate on the study of crowdworker human
evaluations, however there are several alternative

paradigms. Utilizing trained experts, such as a
group of researchers in the same institution, is one
alternative (Deriu et al., 2021). Compared to em-
ploying crowdworkers, while model comparison
results can agree between the two types of anno-
tators, there can be vastly different sensitivity and
win rates (Welleck et al., 2020), with the experts
having more agreement and higher resulting sen-
sitivity. On the other hand, it is harder to recruit
and employ experts, limiting reproducibility. In
both the crowdworker and expert annotator case,
neither of those groups are necessarily the intended
target audience of a given system. If it is possible
to deploy a model to people who genuinely want
to talk to it (e.g., without being paid), conversa-
tions may be more natural and evaluations will be
in line with genuine interests. Evaluation by de-
ployment can be successful (Gabriel et al., 2020;
Shuster et al., 2020), where behavioral metrics such
as the amount of conversation time per user or re-
tention rate can serve as a proxy for interestingness
and engagingness metrics. Model deployment how-
ever also has its issues. First, user desires may
not necessarily be aligned with the goals of the
research itself, meaning researchers may have to
develop features and improvements towards the
goals of the product rather than towards long-term
research. Further, experiments are difﬁcult to set up
and may be difﬁcult to reproduce by other groups.
Crowdworker tasks can be more reproducible es-
pecially when code is made available to reproduce
experiments, but there are also many pitfalls when
constructing the tasks, see e.g. Huynh et al. (2021).
Conversation instructions to raters
When uti-
lizing evaluators in a evaluator-model conversa-
tional setup, the precise instructions on how to go
about the conversation will clearly have large ef-
fects. Such instructions can control the topic, e.g.
“get to know each other” as in the Persona-Chat
task (Zhang et al., 2018), versus “have a knowl-
edgeable conversation” in Wizard of Wikipedia
(Dinan et al., 2018). Instructions can also orient
workers towards a more fruitful strategy for a de-
sired dataset, for example orienting them towards
open questions on sensitive topics rather than pro-
fanity to get a bot to generate unsafe utterances (Xu
et al., 2020). The length of the conversation will
also play a role in the performance of models, for
example short conversations do not test the ability
of models to retain knowledge in the long-term (Xu
et al., 2021). Overall, the style of conversation has
large effects (even if the topic is unchanged) for
example when instructing crowdworkers to be ad-
versarial vs. non-adversarial (Dinan et al., 2019a),
which relates to the classic Turing Test (Turing
and Haugeland, 1950). Further, particular instruc-
tion wording choices will change the quality of
conversations, as they will change how well crowd-
workers understand the task (Huynh et al., 2021).
Evaluation question phrasing for raters
Be-
sides how the conversation is carried out, one also
needs to choose the precise question (or questions)
being asked to crowdworkers in order for them to
rate conversations. In open-domain conversation
there are a variety of qualities one could expect
from a good conversationalist, and potentially one
could ask about any of them individually, as well
as asking for overall performance. For example,
(See et al., 2019b) asks evaluators for ratings of
interestingness, making sense, ﬂuency, avoiding
repetition, listening ability and inquisitiveness as
intermediate conversational aspects, and human-
ness and engagingness questions to measure over-
all quality. Adiwardana et al. (2020) ask questions
based on sensibleness and speciﬁcity. Responsi-
bility, toxicity and bias can also be measured (Xu
et al., 2020). Even after settling on the exact ques-
tion(s) to be asked, their exact phrasing also has
impact on sensitivity, as shown in Li et al. (2019).
In that work, the authors optimized the question
phrasing by running evaluations with alternative
phrasings, and choosing the one with the highest
agreement.
Rating existing versus own conversations
The
standard setup is for a human to have a conversa-
tion with a model, and rate that conversation. Some
evaluation protocols deviate from this setup, and
ask evaluators to rate conversations they did not
participate in. One simple approach of that kind is
to present model completions of a dialogue from
the ﬁxed test set of a given task, and ask for their
evaluation, with hence no human taking part in
the actual conversation (Vinyals and Le, 2015; Li
et al., 2016). In the Acute-Eval method (Li et al.,
2019) raters are asked to compare two existing con-
versation logs, and the authors consider both the
case of human-model chat logs, and model-model
(self-chat) logs, where the former are actually a
different set of human conversationalists compared
to the ﬁnal raters. Deriu et al. (2020) considers
chat logs between pairs of models, again with no

humans taking part in the conversations. These
techniques allow efﬁcient reuse of existing conver-
sational data and have some reproducibility gains:
conversations collected in previous trials and by
other systems can be directly compared with a new
system, without having to recollect additional data.
This can signiﬁcantly reduce the resources needed
by a new evaluation, and ensure that multiple pa-
pers are comparing to prior work consistently. On
the other hand, it may be harder for evaluators to
rate conversations they have not been involved in.
Conversations that do not even involve humans
should be treated with some scepticism, as there is
no human to guide conversation and hence evaluate
interactive quality. Nevertheless, such approaches
do appear to be useful experimentally (Li et al.,
2019; Roller et al., 2021).
Pairwise versus single-model ratings
Conver-
sations are often either rated individually, e.g.
with Likert-score ratings (Ashwin et al., 2017;
Venkatesh et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2018; Rashkin
et al., 2019; See et al., 2019a; Dinan et al., 2019b,
2018), or pairwise by comparing models (Li et al.,
2019; Liang et al., 2020; Vinyals and Le, 2015;
Li et al., 2016; Lee et al., 2020). Likert scoring
relies on absolute identiﬁcation rather than relative
discrimination, which is less reliable in humans
(Stewart et al., 2005), leading to different biases
per annotator (Kulikov et al., 2019). It is thus often
necessary to then re-evaluate existing models at the
same time as a new model, as the distribution of hu-
man annotators can easily shift over time, causing
measurement errors (See et al., 2019a). Another
common difﬁculty is related to sequential effects
(Stewart et al., 2005), where the annotator can be
inﬂuenced by the ﬁrst model they evaluate, caus-
ing difﬁculties in using an absolute scale. Pairwise
comparisons, on the other hand, make comparing a
set of models less efﬁcient, and also have the same
problem that existing baseline models have to be
essentially reassessed with respect to new ones.
Per-turn versus per-dialogue evaluation
Some
research evaluates single-turn responses in conver-
sations given gold dialogue contexts, without tak-
ing into account whole interactive conversations
(Lee et al., 2020; Vinyals and Le, 2015; Li et al.,
2016). This fails to take into account multi-turn
aspects of a conversation, for example a model
repeating itself over multiple turns. Per-turn evalu-
ation instead conducts an entire conversation, but
raters are still asked to evaluate each turn (response
by their partner) (Adiwardana et al., 2020; Komeili
et al., 2021). Collecting per-turn evaluation also al-
lows for measuring learning effects where workers
become more adept at interacting with the bot for
certain speciﬁc tasks (e.g., see Xu et al. (2020)). In
contrast, methods like multi-turn Likert or Acute-
Eval ask evaluators to assess the entire dialogue as
a whole, rather than the individual turns, under the
assumption that the quality of a conversation is not
simply the sum of its parts. Literature from psy-
chology predicts several effects when considering
how people combine their impressions from single
conversational turns into an evaluation of an en-
tire conversation. The primacy effect refers to how
overall judgment is more shaped by characteristics
presented earlier (Asch, 1946; Anderson, 1965).
Conversely, the recency effect appears when more
weight is given to information presented the most
recently, and both effects combine to give more
weight to items at the beginning and end of a list
(Murdock Jr, 1962; Postman and Phillips, 1965),
with the recency effect being more prominent when
judgment is elicited without any delay when the re-
cent information is still fresh (Miller and Campbell,
1959; Hoch, 1984).
3
Methods
3.1
Evaluation techniques
We investigate several human evaluation tech-
niques, spanning a cross-section of the different
methods discussed in existing work. Speciﬁcally:
• Single-model per-turn evaluations
• Single-model per-dialogue evaluations
• Pairwise per-turn evaluations
• Pairwise per-dialogue evaluations
• Pairwise per-dialogue self-chat evaluations
We thus compare the spectrum of single vs. pair-
wise and per-turn vs. per-dialogue variations, as
well as trying a self-chat method compared to con-
ventional human-bot conversation ratings. Figure 1
summarizes the methods. In the following, we will
describe our exact methodology for each.
3.1.1
Conversational setting
Our human-bot evaluations consist of a set of con-
versations. Each conversation is between a crowd-
worker (the “Human Speaker”) paired with a con-
versational model (the “Bot Speaker”). The Human

OR
OR
OR
OR
or
or
Out of 
Figure 1: The human evaluation methods we compare in this work. SM-Turn rates each bot response during the
conversation, while SM-Dialog rates the entire conversation. PW-Turn compares two different bots’ responses at
every turn in the conversation, while PW-Dialog compares two entire conversations with two different bots. PW-
Dialog self-chat compares two conversations which only involve the two bots talking to themselves (self-chat).
Speaker will speak naturally in the conversation,
and they will be role-playing as a certain persona
with the help of two provided persona sentences
given to them at the start of the conversation, see
Figure 2 (left) for an example.
The Human Speaker’s ﬁrst message in the con-
versation is ﬁxed to “Hi!”, following the conven-
tion of Adiwardana et al. (2020). The conversation
ends after the Human Speaker and Bot Speaker
have both spoken for 6 turns each. We test three dif-
ferent evaluation metrics, preference, humanness
and interestingness, with exact wordings described
in the following subsections.
3.1.2
Pairwise per-turn evaluations
The Pairwise Per-Turn evaluation (PW-Turn) tech-
nique provides annotations for every turn of con-
versation by asking for the crowdworker to choose
from a pair of model responses after every sent
message. Hence, in this setting the Human Speaker
speaks to a Bot Speaker, the latter of which actually
represents the two models to be compared. The Hu-
man Speaker will speak naturally in the conversa-
tion. Every time that it is the Bot Speaker’s turn to
speak, the crowdworker will ﬁrst be presented with
two options as possible responses: each response
will come from one of the two models being com-
pared, similarly to Clark and Smith (2021). We
randomize the ordering of these model responses.
The worker must choose the better response for the
given evaluation metric. The wordings we use for
the three metrics are adapted from Li et al. (2019):
• Preference: “Which next response from your
partner would you prefer in a long conversa-
tion?”
• Humanness:
“Which next response from
your partner sounds more human?”
• Interestingness: “If you had to say one of
these responses is interesting and one is bor-
ing, which would you say is more interest-
ing?”
The worker must give a free-text justiﬁcation for
their choice of response. The response that they
choose is set to be the actual response given by the
Bot Speaker, and the conversation continues from

Figure 2: Screenshot of the Pairwise Per-Turn (PW-Turn) evaluation technique, in which we ask crowdworkers to
choose one of two possible responses from their conversation partner and describe why that response is better. The
two responses come from the two models that we are trying to compare the performance of.
there. Figure 2 provides a screenshot example of
the UI. A description of quality checks performed
when onboarding workers for this evaluation tech-
nique is given in Appendix A. In our experiments
we will consider win rates based on simply averag-
ing over turns, as well as nonlinear combinations of
per-turn results over entire dialogues (e.g., winner-
takes-all voting) in order to measure their impact.
3.1.3
Pairwise per-dialogue evaluations
The Pairwise Per-Dialogue evaluation (PW-Dialog)
technique we introduce asks evaluators to choose
between two models by presenting a pair of conver-
sations. The method we employ is identical to the
Acute-Eval method (Li et al., 2019), but for consis-
tency with the names of other techniques, we refer
to them here as PW-Dialog evaluations. For each
of the model pairs and evaluation metrics used, we
collect evaluations on (1) conversations conducted
between a crowdworker and a model agent; and
(2) self-chat conversations conducted between two
conversational agents of the same model (the self-
chat variant). The wordings we use (from (Li et al.,
2019)) are almost identical to the PW-Turn ver-
sions, but phrased for the per-dialogue, rather than
per-turn, case:
• Preference: “Who would you prefer to talk to
for a long conversation?”
• Humanness: “Which speaker sounds more
human?”
• Interestingness: “If you had to say one of
these speakers is interesting and one is boring,
who would you say is more interesting?”
Figure 3 provides a screenshot example of the
UI.
3.1.4
Single-model evaluations
In our single-model evaluation experiments, we
combine per-turn and per-dialogue into the same
UI (see Figure 4 for a screenshot).2 A crowdworker
chats with a conversational agent backed by a sin-
gle model, and for each response of that model
the worker must annotate whether it is engaging,
human-like, and/or interesting, with wording pro-
vided in the screenshot. At the end of the conver-
sation, again consisting of 6 messages per speaker,
the worker must rate their partner on a Likert scale
of 1 to 5 for each of the three evaluation metrics
listed in Section 3.1.2. We refer to the per-turn
annotations of model responses from this task as
Single-Model Per-Turn evaluations (SM-Turn) and
the end-of-conversation Likert scores as Single-
Model Per-Dialogue evaluations (SM-Dialog).
Empirically, we ﬁnd that SM-Turn success rates
and SM-Dialog Likert scores are highly dependent
2This may have undesirable effects in correlating their
results, but nonetheless they do appear to perform quite differ-
ently in evaluations.

Figure 3: Screenshot of the Pairwise Per-Dialogue (PW-Dialog) evaluation technique, in which we ask crowdwork-
ers to choose which of two speakers in two separate conversations is better on the given evaluation metric, here
“Who would you prefer to talk to for a long conversation?” The crowdworker must then describe why that speaker
is better.
Figure 4: Screenshot of the crowdsourcing task for collecting Single-Model Per-Turn (SM-Turn) and Single-Model
Per-Dialogue (SM-Dialog) evaluations. We ask the crowdworker to annotate each response from their partner
along several dimensions, as well as give a global Likert-scale rating of their partner’s performance at the end of
the conversation.
on the particular day that the evaluations are col-
lected: this is perhaps due to day-to-day variability
in the pool of crowdworkers. To counteract this, we
run these evaluations on all four of the models dis-
cussed in this work (Section 3.3) simultaneously.3
3For the pairwise evaluation techniques PW-Turn and PW-
3.2
Quality checks on crowdworkers
In order to ensure that our comparisons between
evaluation techniques are not affected by variability
Dialog, we collect evaluations over several days across mul-
tiple weeks for each of the three model pairs evaluated. This
helps to smooth out variability among days.

in the pool of crowdworkers when running one
technique vs. another, we adopt a consistent set
of criteria across all techniques regarding which
workers to exclude from our ﬁnal set of data. If
a worker fails one of the checks in Appendix B
during one of the per-turn evaluations PW-Turn
or SM-Turn, we retroactively exclude their ratings
from all of the evaluation techniques.
In order to prevent any worker from dispro-
portionately contributing to the ﬁnal results, each
worker is restricted to one conversation per model
pair and evaluation metric (for PW-Turn and PW-
Dialog) or one conversation per model (for SM-
Turn and SM-Dialog). All evaluations are collected
among residents of the United States on weekdays,
from roughly 9 AM to 6 PM in the U.S. Eastern
time zone, following Li et al. (2019).
3.3
Models
We analyze the relative performance of these ﬁve
human evaluation techniques, SM-Turn, and SM-
Dialog, PW-Turn, PW-Dialog and PW-Dialog self-
chat, on four different well-performing but rela-
tively similar dialogue models from Roller et al.
(2021):
• BlenderBot3B: The version of BlenderBot
with 2.7 billion parameters, pretrained on a
previously existing Reddit dataset extracted
and obtained by a third party and made avail-
able on pushshift.io (Baumgartner et al., 2020)
and then ﬁne-tuned on several purpose-built
dialogue datasets.
• BlenderBot3B-M0: BlenderBot3B uses a
minimum generation length of 20 tokens to
ensure relatively long, interesting responses.
We also compare to exactly the same model
but without a minimum generation length, re-
ferring to it with -M0 postﬁx.
• BlenderBot90M: The variant of BlenderBot
with 90 million parameters, trained on the
same datasets as BlenderBot3B.
• Reddit3B: BlenderBot3B, but only pretrained
on the third-party Reddit dump and not ﬁne-
tuned on dialogue datasets.
For all models, we use the same generation set-
tings as in Roller et al. (2021), apart from the -M0
adaptation. We choose these relatively similar mod-
els in our experiments as a difﬁcult challenge for
evaluation techniques to tell which one is best.
For the two pairwise evaluation techniques, we
speciﬁcally perform comparisons between three
pairs of models, each of which differ in a charac-
teristic way:
• Length comparison: Comparing Blender-
Bot3B to BlenderBot3B-M0: these models
differ only in the length of their generations.
• Size comparison: Comparing two models
with different numbers of parameters, Blender-
Bot3B and BlenderBot90M.
• Fine-tuning comparison:
Comparing the
ﬁne-tuned BlenderBot3B to the pretrained-
only Reddit3B (both with the same number of
parameters).
4
Results
4.1
Evaluation data collection
After ﬁltering out workers with unacceptable mes-
sages following Section 3.2, we are left with a
minimum of 144 and a mean of 231 ratings (typi-
cally 6 per conversation) for each of the PW-Turn
evaluations, a minimum of 191 and a mean of 324
ratings for PW-Dialog, a minimum of 349 and a
mean of 411 ratings (typically 6 per conversation)
for SM-Turn, and a minimum of 58 and a mean of
68 ratings for SM-Dialog evaluations (for which
there is only one rating per conversation). On av-
erage, the collection of ratings after ﬁltering rep-
resents 5.73 hours of worker labor for PW-Turn
per model pair and evaluation metric, 6.03 hours
for PW-Dialog per model pair and evaluation met-
ric, and 4.39 hours for joint SM-Turn/SM-Dialog
evaluations per model.
4.2
Model win rates from pairwise per-turn
evaluations
We compute the win rates of BlenderBot3B over
other models in Table 1 for the pairwise evalu-
ation technique PW-Turn.
We expect Blender-
Bot3B to be better, hence values closer to 100% are
deemed more preferable. We display the win rates
of four different variants: including all 6 conversa-
tion turns from the Bot Speaker, excluding the Bot
Speaker’s ﬁrst turn from the evaluations, and com-
puting a nonlinear function of the turns: either cal-
culating squared or winner-takes-all win rates for
each conversation and then averaging those scores
across all conversations. We generally ﬁnd that PW-
Turn win rates are higher when dropping the ﬁrst

All turns
Turns 2 to 6
Comp.
Metric
Lin
Lin
Sqr
WTA
Length
Pref
63%
67%
72%
74%
Human
63%
68%
75%
79%
Inter
68%
70%
77%
84%
Size
Pref
48%
52%
53%
49%
Human
51%
56%
58%
54%
Inter
49%
52%
54%
55%
FT
Pref
80%
82%
88%
93%
Human
81%
84%
88%
93%
Inter
71%
75%
80%
85%
Table 1:
PW-Turn win rates of BlenderBot3B vs.
BlenderBot3B-M0 (“Length”), vs. BlenderBot90M
(“Size”), and vs. the base pretrained model, Reddit3B
(“FT”), across three different evaluation metrics, Pref-
erence, Humanness, and Interestingness.
Win rates
are computed both across all turns and across only
the last 5 turns from the Bot Speaker (“Turns 2 to
6”). Lin: the linear win rate x/(x + y) of Blender-
Bot3B, given x wins of BlenderBot3B and y wins of
the comparison model. Sqr: the “squared” win rate
x2/(x2 + y2), calculated per-conversation and then
averaged across all conversations. WTA: the winner-
takes-all win rate, deﬁned as the percentage of all
conversations for which BlenderBot3B wins on more
turns, or equivalently x∞/(x∞+ y∞) as calculated
per-conversation. Winner-takes-all scores are generally
highest (highest values bolded).
turn of the Bot Speaker, as discussed further in Sec-
tion 4.2.1. Win rates are typically even higher by
aggregating over conversations in a winner-takes-
all fashion, which has the effect of reducing the
turn-by-turn variability of which model’s response
is chosen by the crowdworker.
We ﬁnd that, in general, win rates of Blender-
Bot3B do not vary much as a function of the evalu-
ation question used when asking workers to choose
one model response over the other. It is unclear
a priori whether this results from an ambiguity in
the precise deﬁnitions of these questions/metrics
when interpreted by the workers, correlations in
how well models perform on some metrics vs. oth-
ers, or some other reason.
4.2.1
Model win rates as a function of turn
Unlike PW-Dialog, the PW-Turn technique is able
to measure differences in the win rate of models
as a function of the number of turns into the con-
versation. In Figure 5 and Table 4, we see that
BlenderBot3B’s win rates tend to be closer to 50%
in the ﬁrst 1 or 2 turns of the Bot Speaker, and
higher later: this may be because the ﬁrst few lines
Figure 5: Win rate of BlenderBot3B vs. other models
for the comparisons in Section 3.3 on the PW-Turn eval-
uations, as a function of the number of Bot Speaker
turns into the conversation, for the Preference (blue),
Humanness (orange), and Interestingness (green) met-
rics. BlenderBot3B tends to fare better against other
models in later turns of the conversation.
of the conversation typically consist of greetings
(“Hi, how are you?”) or pleasantries, which may
be harder to judge model performance on. How-
ever, it may also be because improvements are ac-
cumulated and factored into evaluators’ decisions
later in the conversation. Strikingly, BlenderBot3B
performs very poorly vs. BlenderBot90M (the Size
comparison) on the ﬁrst Bot Speaker turn: empiri-
cally, this may be due to the fact that BlenderBot3B
generally starts its ﬁrst responses with the greet-
ings “Hi” or “Hello” much less frequently than
BlenderBot90M does.
4.3
Model scores from single-model
evaluations
Table 2 provides the per-turn success rates (SM-
Turn) and end-of-conversation Likert scores (SM-
Dialog) over all models for various metrics. As
with the pairwise evaluations of Section 4.2 and
Roller et al. (2021), BlenderBot3B generally out-
performs the other models using the SM-Turn and
SM-Dialog methods as well. Table 5 (in the Ap-
pendix) shows success rates from the SM-Turn
technique as a function of conversation turn (rather
than aggregated). BlenderBot3B scores are gener-

SM-Turn
SM-Dialog
All
Turns 3 to 6
Met.
Model
Lin
Lin
WTA
Preference
BB3B
70%
71%
73%
4.19
BB3B-M0
71%
70%
70%
4.02
BB90M
65%
64%
65%
3.97
Reddit3B
55%
50%
50%
3.30
Human
BB3B
70%
72%
73%
4.49
BB3B-M0
67%
66%
70%
4.22
BB90M
65%
66%
70%
3.94
Reddit3B
56%
54%
53%
3.50
Interesting
BB3B
44%
45%
47%
4.22
BB3B-M0
35%
35%
36%
3.76
BB90M
39%
40%
42%
3.83
Reddit3B
39%
39%
37%
3.30
Table 2:
Performance of BlenderBot3B (BB3B),
BlenderBot3B-M0
(BB3B-M0),
BlenderBot90M
(BB90M), and Reddit3B on SM-Turn and SM-Dialog
evaluations.
SM-Turn mean success rates are calcu-
lated across all turns (“All”) or across only the last 4
turns from the Bot Speaker (“Turns 3 to 6”). Scores
represent the overall fraction of model responses
marked as successful on the given evaluation metric
(“Lin”) or the number of conversations for which
at least half of the model responses are marked as
successful
(winner-takes-all,
“WTA”).
SM-Dialog
evaluations are Likert scores (with standard deviations
in the range of 0.8 to 1.3).
Highest scores across
models are bolded.
ally stable across conversation turn but are slightly
lower on the ﬁrst two turns of the Bot Speaker,
echoing similar ﬁndings with PW-Turn in Sec-
tion 4.2.1. We thus also consider removing SM-
Turn scores from the ﬁrst two turns in order to
maximize the performance of BlenderBot3B rela-
tive to the other models. As with PW-Turn, we ﬁnd
that calculating the winner-takes-all score per con-
versation allows for an even bigger separation in
performance between BlenderBot3B and the other
models.
Unlike PW-Turn for which win rates are similar
across all three evaluation metrics (Section 4.2),
single-model success rates on the Interestingness
metric are generally lower than those on the other
two, especially for SM-Turn. We hypothesize that
the juxtaposition of all three evaluation questions
side-by-side in the UI of the SM-Turn and SM-
Dialog crowdworker task (Figure 4) may aid work-
ers in distinguishing among these three metrics and
rating models differently on them.
4.3.1
Relationship between per-turn ratings
and ﬁnal ratings
Figure 6: The per-turn coefﬁcients of SM-Turn suc-
cess rates in an OLS regression with SM-Dialog Lik-
ert scores as the dependent variable. SM-Turn rates
and SM-Dialog scores are averaged across evaluation
metrics. The black curve represents data from all mod-
els concatenated together. SM-Turn rates from later
turns tend to be more positively correlated to the ﬁnal
SM-Dialog Likert scores, suggesting a possible recency
bias.
Given that SM-Turn allows us to measure per-
turn ratings of model performance, it is worth ex-
ploring whether there are certain turns of the con-
versation that contribute more strongly to the work-
ers’ ﬁnal Likert-scale ratings of the conversation
(SM-Dialog). Figure 6 plots the coefﬁcients of
workers’ per-turn SM-Turn ratings in an OLS re-
gression, with the SM-Dialog Likert score at the
end of the conversation as the dependent variable.
(Here, we reduce variability by taking the mean
over the three evaluation metrics for each turn’s
SM-Turn ratings and SM-Dialog Likert scores.)
Generally, we see a higher positive coefﬁcient of
the SM-Turn ratings in later turns in the conver-
sation, which implies that the workers may have
a recency bias: they may remember the most re-
cent turns of the conversation more strongly when
determining how to rate the model’s performance
overall.

4.4
Direct comparison of all evaluation
techniques
In this section we directly compare all the pairwise
and single-model evaluation techniques to each
other to discern their relative strengths.
4.4.1
Computing win rates across all
techniques
In order to directly compare the performance of
SM-Turn and SM-Dialog with that of the pairwise
techniques, we calculate effective win rates for the
two single-model techniques by bootstrapping sam-
ples of ratings from different models and then cal-
culating how often SM-Turn success rates and SM-
Dialog Likert scores from one model are higher
than those of another. Following the analysis of
best performing methods from Sections 4.2 and 4.3,
we consider only Bot Speaker turns 2 through 6 for
PW-Turn and turns 3 through 6 for SM-Turn in
winner-takes-all (WTA) mode, in order to maxi-
mize the ability of these techniques to distinguish
different models’ performances.
Table 3 compares the win rates produced by all
evaluation techniques. Overall, we ﬁnd that a dif-
ferent technique performs best for each of the three
model comparison types:
• Length comparison: The pairwise evalu-
ation techniques PW-Dialog and PW-Turn
perform much better than the single-model
ones. BlenderBot3B responses tend to con-
tain many more words on average than those
of BlenderBot3B-M0, and so we hypothesize
that this difference in sensitivity among the
techniques may be due to the fact that view-
ing responses from both models side-by-side
makes the length differences between them
much more evident, especially when compar-
ing two entire conversations as in PW-Dialog.
Thus, if crowdworkers tend to prefer longer re-
sponses on average, the side-by-side compari-
son of model responses might aid in their abil-
ity to choose BlenderBot3B responses over
those of BlenderBot3B-M0.
• Size comparison: The differences among
the techniques here are smaller than for
the
Length
comparison,
with
the
full-
dialogue techniques PW-Dialog and SM-
Dialog slightly outperforming the per-turn
ones.
As shown by Roller et al. (2021),
BlenderBot3B and BlenderBot90M do not
perform statistically signiﬁcantly differently
on Acute-Evals (i.e. PW-Dialog) on self-chat
conversations. Thus, it may make sense that
any small differences in performance between
these models are more evident on the level of
whole conversations.
• Fine-tuning comparison: In this compari-
son, PW-Turn performs best out of all tech-
niques. Because the Reddit3B model was not
ﬁne-tuned on conversational dialogue datasets,
its responses to its partner generally make less
sense in context than those of BlenderBot3B.
We hypothesize that these more nonsensical
responses may be very obvious to workers
who are in the middle of having a conversa-
tion with the Bot Speaker during the PW-Turn
evaluation. However, these responses may be
less obvious to workers reading whole con-
versations in the PW-Dialog evaluation who
have not interacted with the models directly,
as well as to workers in SM-Turn and SM-
Dialog evaluations who cannot directly com-
pare Reddit3B responses to those of a model
that has been ﬁne-tuned on dialogue.
Explainability in experiments:
analysis of
crowdworker reasons
During the crowdworker
evaluation tasks, we also ask for reasons for the
crowdworker’s judgments. These reasons can give
interpretability to the results. A full analysis is
given in Appendix D. Overall, we ﬁnd justiﬁca-
tions that make sense in each of the three model
comparisons, e.g. in the length comparison we see
keywords like “information” and “detailed” ap-
pearing often. For the ﬁne-tuning comparison, we
often ﬁnd keywords like “ﬂows”, “personal” and
“contradicts”, which shows that the ﬁne-tuning con-
versational datasets like Persona-Chat provide for
more personal, less contradictory, and ﬂowing con-
versations.
Repeatability of experiments
We provide an
analysis in Appendix E of the variability of model
win rates over time for each of the evaluation tech-
niques. Overall, we ﬁnd that PW-Turn, PW-Dialog,
and SM-Turn vary least across chunked experi-
ments, with SM-Dialog having more variability.
This makes the use of SM-Dialog less compelling.
4.4.2
Overall ﬁndings
The results of these three model comparisons hint
that perhaps a per-turn evaluation technique may

PW-Turn
PW-Dialog
PW combo
SM-Turn
SM-Dialog
Comparison
Metric
Turns 2–6, WTA
Human
Self
Turns 3–6, WTA
Length
Pref
74%
77%
82%
80%
55%
58%
Human
79%
77%
83%
81%
52%
59%
Inter
84%
85%
73%
73%
60%
65%
Size
Pref
49%
56%
55%
54%
59%
60%
Human
54%
61%
55%
55%
52%
66%
Inter
55%
59%
57%
56%
55%
64%
Fine-tuning
Pref
93%
70%
66%
69%
64%
71%
Human
93%
54%
61%
65%
62%
73%
Inter
85%
59%
64%
66%
60%
70%
Table 3: Win rates of BlenderBot3B vs. other models, for all evaluation techniques. For the per-turn techniques
PW-Turn and SM-Turn, only the speciﬁed Bot Speaker turns are used to compute winner-takes-all scores, as in
Tables 1 and 2. We show PW-Dialog win rates as measured on conversations between a crowdworker and a model
(“Human”) as well as from model self-chats (“Self”). “PW combo” represents the win rate when sampling ratings
from PW-Turn (turns 2–6) and PW-Dialog (on model self-chats) at a ratio of 1:5. PW-Turn, PW-Dialog, and SM-
Dialog are each found to be most sensitive at measuring model performance for one of the three model comparisons
tested (highest win rates bolded). See Section 4.1 for the number of evaluations and the estimated total number of
worker-hours per technique.
be more suitable for pairs of models that differ in
their ability to reply sensibly in a way that is easily
detectable by their partner (i.e. BlenderBot3B vs.
Reddit3B), but that a whole-conversation technique
may be preferable when differences between mod-
els are more sensitive. However, evaluations on
many more pairs of models would be needed to suf-
ﬁciently support such a broad hypothesis. We also
ﬁnd that single-model techniques perform compet-
itively to pairwise ones except for when model
generations differ by average length: in this case,
comparing the responses of both models side-by-
side may make the differences between them more
apparent than just viewing them separately.
Combining techniques
Given how much the rel-
ative sensitivities of different evaluation techniques
vary across different pairs of models, we also ex-
plore whether combining results from multiple
techniques together may allow for a compromise
technique that performs reasonably well in all
cases. We thus include in Table 3 the win rate
(“PW combo”) when sampling ratings from the
PW-Turn and PW-Dialog techniques together at
a ratio of 1:5. This sampling retains most of the
ability of PW-Dialog to quickly compare Blender-
Bot3B to BlenderBot3B-M0 and BlenderBot90M
(the Length and Size comparisons), and it also
gains some of PW-Turn’s superior strength at mea-
suring the performance of BlenderBot3B over Red-
dit3B (the Fine-tuning comparison).
By contrast, since ratings for the two single-
model techniques SM-Turn and SM-Dialog are col-
lected simultaneously, ratings from both techniques
on a given conversation can be averaged together
to achieve slightly ﬁner sensitivity than either tech-
nique individually. Figures 11, 12, and 13 show
that, with the proper weighting, such averaging
can produce a statistically signiﬁcant difference be-
tween models a bit faster than that of SM-Dialog
and dramatically faster than that of SM-Turn (Sec-
tion G).
4.4.3
Crowdsourcing time needed
Beyond win rates, another way to directly compare
the relative usefulness of our various evaluation
techniques is to estimate the amount of person-
hours that must be spent on evaluations by crowd-
workers in order to achieve a statistically signif-
icant result. These results (Figures 7, 8, and 9)
roughly follow the patterns found by win rates (Sec-
tion 4.4.1). See Appendix F for a discussion of the
assumptions made when producing these time esti-
mates.
5
Conclusion
In this work we compare the extent to which dif-
ferent evaluation techniques are able to measure
performance differences between dialogue mod-
els, and we show instances in which the perfor-
mance varies between per-turn techniques and per-
dialogue techniques, and between pairwise tech-
niques and single-model techniques. A completely
exhaustive analysis of the cases in which each tech-

Figure 7: The time needed for statistical signiﬁcance
for the Length comparison between models (Blender-
Bot3B vs. BlenderBot3B-M0).
Figure 8: The time needed for statistical signiﬁcance
for the Size comparison between models (Blender-
Bot3B vs. BlenderBot90M).
nique is most appropriate would require measure-
ment on many more pairs of models than the three
studied here, and would likely require a dramatic
scaling-up of labor for crowdworkers.
Nevertheless, the results shown here demonstrate
the difﬁculty in anointing one evaluation technique
Figure 9:
The time needed for statistical signiﬁ-
cance for the Fine-tuning comparison between models
(BlenderBot3B vs. Reddit3B).
as superior to all others regardless of the models be-
ing compared, and they suggest that a combination
of techniques, or else a different technique entirely,
may be necessary for optimal measurement of dif-
ferences among models. A more universally ideal
technique would likely need to investigate model
performance per-turn but still be able to give an
overall judgment of model quality across a conver-
sation in order to capture elements of performance
that manifest clearest in a single response vs. in ag-
gregate. We demonstrate that combining evaluation
scores from per-turn and per-dialogue techniques
can bridge the gap in the performance differences
between the two, but that this does not outperform
either individual technique in all cases, at least in
the way that we combined them.
Future improvements may also come from ex-
ploring other ways to amplify the weak signal from
models with only slight performance differences
such as BlenderBot3B and BlenderBot90M, per-
haps by training workers to select responses based
on general measures of conversational quality, as
opposed to content that appeals to their personal in-
terests. Improving sensitivity to roughly equivalent
pairs of models such as these should in turn en-
able the comparison of models whose performance
differences are smaller still.
While this work has concentrated on evaluating
techniques that enable differentiability (one can dif-

ferentiate between models) with efﬁciency (with
less annotator hours), there are other desirable qual-
ities as well. Some of these in particular are di-
versity of conversations (Hashimoto et al., 2019),
repeatability of experiments, and explainability of
results (Deriu et al., 2021). While there is some dis-
cussion of the latter two topics in our experiments,
these topics are fully deserving of a more thorough
analysis than is provided here.
