Weighted Ensemble-model and Network Analysis: A method to 
predict fluid intelligence via naturalistic functional connectivity 
Xiaobo Liu 1, Su Yang1* 
1. School of Computing and Engineering, University of West London, London, England, UK 

Abstract 
Objectives: Functional connectivity triggered by naturalistic stimulus (e.g., movies) 
and machine learning techniques provide a great insight in exploring the brain 
functions such as fluid intelligence. However, functional connectivity are considered 
to be multi-layered, while traditional machine learning based on individual models not 
only are limited in performance, but also fail to extract multi-dimensional and 
multi-layered information from brain network. Methods: In this study, inspired by 
multi-layer brain network structure, we propose a new method namely Weighted 
Ensemble-model and Network Analysis, which combines the machine learning and 
graph theory for improved fluid intelligence prediction. Firstly, functional 
connectivity analysis and graphical theory were jointly employed. The network and 
graphical indices computed using the preprocessed fMRI data were then fed into 
auto-encoder parallelly for feature extraction to predict the fluid intelligence. In order 
to improve the performance, different models were automatically stacked and fused 
with weighted values. Finally, layers of auto-encoder were visualized to better 
illustrate the impacts, followed by the evaluation of the performance to justify the 
mechanism of brain functions. Results: Our proposed methods achieved best 
performance with 3.85 mean absolute deviation, 0.66 correlation coefficient and 0.42 
R-squared coefficient, outperformed other state-of-the-art methods. It is also worth 
noting that, the optimization of the biological pattern extraction was automated 
though the auto-encoder algorithm. Conclusion: The proposed method not only 
outperforming the state-of-the-art reports, but also able to effectively capturing the 
common and biological pattern from functional connectivity during naturalistic 
movies state for potential clinical explorations. 
Keywords: functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging, Functional connectivity, 
Weighted Ensemble-model and Network Analysis, fluid intelligence  
1.  Introduction 

Human brain could be viewed as a complex network with enormous amount of 
locally segregated structural regions, each region dedicating to different 
functionalities, together they maintain global functional communications among 
different cognitive resources. One of the most important non-invasive approaches to 
measure the brain functional connectivity (FC) is the functional Magnetic Resonance 
Imaging (fMRI), which reflects the change of Blood Oxygen Level-Dependent 
(BOLD) signal [1]. As one of the major advancements in recent fMRI data analyses, 
functional connectivity is used to measure the temporal dependency of neuronal 
activation patterns in different brain regions and the communications between these 
regions [2]. Traditional FC analysis was based on specific experimental paradigm or 
resting-state; recent studies have shown that the Naturalistic Stimuli, which forms 
ecologically valid paradigms and approximate the real life, could improve compliance 
of the participants [3], hence increase the test-retest reliability [4]. Indeed, the 
functional connectivity with high ecological validity in naturalistic stimulus has been 
found more reliable than that in resting-state [5].  
 Many neuroimaging studies have shown that relationships between brain and 
cognitive functions can be established using brain measurements, cognitive 
measurements and statistical methods (e.g., Pearson correlation). However, statistics 
methods (e.g., parametric methods) tend to over-fit the data and yield a quantitatively 
increased certainty of the statistical estimates, while fail to generalize to novel data [6]. 
Furthermore, it may be impaired by high-dimensional situations (e.g., FC) [7]. On the 
other hand, machine learning methods with well-established processing standards, 
could simultaneously extract common-level patterns and leverage individual-level 
prediction from neuroimaging data [8]. By further integrating FC analysis into machine 
learning framework, a data-driven approach named connectome-based predictive 
modeling (CPM), could even predict individual differences in traits and behavior [9]. 
Coupled with the alerting score method, Rosenberg et al. found that CPM could 
predict sustained attention abilities using resting-state fMRI data, this finding may be 
applied to describe the new insight on the relationship between FC and attention [10]. 
Using machine learning techniques, the physiologically important representations 
buried in fMRI data could also be excavated and captured [11]. For example, using 
deep learning and fMRI, Plis et al. found that deep nets could screen out the latent 
relation and biological patterns from neuroimaging data [12]. These studies indicate 
that deep neural nets could not only be used to infer the presence of brain-behavior 

(e.g., FC and human behavior) relationships and bring new representation to explain 
the neural mechanisms, but also can be used as the fingerprint to translate 
neuroimaging finding into practical utility [13]. However, traditional machine learning 
model based on single model was limited in model generalization and model 
performance [9]. Previous studies have demonstrated that the ensemble learning, 
proposed by Breiman et al. [14], has been integrated with bootstrap samples and 
multiple classifiers to improve the generalization. In addition, the overfitting issue 
would also be eliminated by using ensemble learning [15]. Brain networks are 
considered hierarchical with information processed in different layers[16]. Inspired by 
this, combining hierarchical structure and ensemble learning could be an effective 
way to improve the performance of models and extract biological information from 
data. 
In this study, we propose a new machine learning hierarchical structure to predict 
the fluid intelligence, using the biological patterns extracted by measuring the 
functional connectivity. A new regression method based on machine learning and 
graph theory, namely Weighted Ensemble-model and Network Analysis (WENA) has 
been developed for this purpose. Compared with the traditional CPM, we used a 
self-supervised learning method named auto-encoder (AE) to extract no-linear and 
deep information from the functional connectivity and graphical theory indices based 
on fMRI data. In order to further improve the prediction performance, we also 
proposed 
a 
new 
method 
namely 
Weighted-Stacking 
(WS) 
which 
was 
multi-stacking-layers structure for WENA and based on the stacking structure and 
model fusion. The results showed that the proposed method outperforms other 
state-of-the-art methods, it also demonstrated the existing coherence between 
biological fluid intelligence and neuroimaging using this data-driven approach. 
2. Materials and methods 
2.1. Data acquisition  
Data of 464 participants, aged from 18 to 88 years old were downloaded from 
the population-based sample of the Cambridge Centre for Ageing and Neuroscience 
(Cam-CAN, http://www.cam-can.com). The subjects without behavioral and/or 
neuroimaging data (fMRI or MRI) were excluded in this study, hence in total 461 
controlled participants without mental illnesses and neurological disorders were 
included in this work. The fluid intelligence score (FIS) and other demographical 

information about the participants is shown in Table1. 
The fMRI data were recorded while subjects watching a clip of the movie by 
Alfred Hitchcock named “Bang! You’re Dead”. According to previous neural 
synchronization study, the full 25-minute episode was condensed to 8 minutes [17]. 
Participants were instructed to watch, listen, and pay attention to the movie. 
The data were collected using a 3T Siemens TIM Trio System, with a 32-channel 
head coil, at MRC Cognition Brain and Science Unit, Cambridge, UK. for each 
participant, a 3D-structural MRI was obtained using T1-weighted sequence 
(Generalized Auto-calibrating Partially Parallel Acquisition; repetition time = 2250 
ms; echo time = 2.99ms; inversion time = 900ms; flip angle α = 9°; matrix size 256 
mm × 240 mm × 19 mm; field of view = 256 mm × 240 mm × 192 mm; resolution = 
1 mm isotropic; accelerated factor = 2) during the movie watching.  
Table1. Demographical information of the subjects 
Total number 
Age 
FIS 
Gender (female/male) 
461 
54.64±18.63 
32.97±6.30 
231/230 
2.2. Experimental Pipeline 
To predict the brain fluid intelligence, we propose a novel WENA method to 
construct a series of model discriminative functional networks. Figure 1 illustrates the 
overall structure of the system. To start with, the raw fMRI data was preprocessed and 
the FCs (12720 FCs for each subject) from 160 regions of interest (ROIs) computed; 
the graphical theory indices were also obtained in parallel within this step. The indices 
were entered into AE module, encoded AE features and decoded AE patterns were 
then obtained. Finally, all features were fed into WS structures to obtain the FIS for 
each subject. 

 
Fig.1. The overall procedure of proposed method. a) data preprocessing. b) Encode functional 
connectivity and graphical theory indices. The AE was used in this step to extract features and 
biological patterns from the network indices. c) the structure of weighted stacking fusion Model. 
Firstly, the features extracted from network edges and graphical theory indices were trained 
respectively in the first layer. In the next layer, weighted operators based on the training error 
caused by the last layer of the training model were added into label predicted by the last layer, and 
these weighted-labels were used as training features in next layers. The final predicted labels were 
the weighted sum of labels from different models.  
2.3. Data preprocessing  
The data preprocessing was carried out using the Data Processing Assistant for 
Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM8, http://www.fil.ion. ucl.ac.uk/spm) and 
necessary hand-crafted MATLAB scripts (MATLAB 2018a). Initially, the first 5 
volumes were discarded to reduce the impact of instability of the magnetic field. The 
preprocessing procedure of naturalistic fMRI included slice-timing correction, 
realignment, spatial normalization (3×3×3 mm3) and smoothing [6-mm full-width at 
half maximum (FWHM)]. First, slice-timing correction were used for different signal 

acquisition between each slice and motion effect (6 head motion parameters). The 
possible nuisance signals, which included linear trend, global signal, individual mean 
WM and CSF signal, were removed via multiple linear regression analysis and 
temporal band-pass filtering (pass band 0.01-0.08 Hz). The calculation of head motion 
was the following formula: 
headmotion= 
1
M-1 √|∆𝑑𝑥𝑖
1|2 + |∆𝑑𝑦𝑖
1|2 + |∆𝑑𝑧𝑖
1|2 + |∆𝑑𝑥𝑖
2|2 + |∆𝑑𝑦𝑖
2|2 + |∆𝑑𝑧𝑖
2|2  
(1) 
 Where M means number of time points of each subject; 𝑑𝑥𝑖
1/𝑑𝑥𝑖
2, 𝑑𝑦𝑖
1/𝑑𝑦𝑖
2 and 
𝑑𝑧𝑖
1/𝑑𝑧𝑖
2 are translations/rotations at each time point in the x, y and z, and ∆𝑑𝑥𝑖
1 
means difference between 𝑥𝑖
1 and 𝑥𝑖−1
1 . Furthermore, the subjects with translational 
motion >2.5 mm, rotation > 2.5°, mean absolute head displacement (mFD) >0.5 mm 
were excluded in this study. Next, the fMRI data were spatially normalized to the 
Montreal neurological institute (MNI) space by using Dosenbach [18]. Finally, the 
fMRI data were smoothed with a Gaussian kernel of 6 mm full width at half 
maximum (FWHM) to decrease spatial noise.  
2.4. Functional connectivity and network property 
For each participant, the whole-brain functional connectivities between all 160 
brain regions were constructed pairwise from the preprocessed fMRI data according 
to Dosen Bash[19]. The FCs for each ROI pair, computed using the Pearson’s 
correlation (PC), Mutual information (MI) [20] and Distance correlation (DC) [21] were 
calculated respectively, then further averaged over time toward the BOLD signals per 
subject. Once the whole-brain network was available, numerous measures could be 
expressed in terms of a graph. A threshold (the highest 20% of the weights) was set to 
sparse the constructed network. Graph theory analysis was performed on the sparse 
network for each subject with different FC calculation strategies. The graph theory 
indicesincluded the degree centrality (DC), ROI’s strength (RS), local efficiency (LE) 
and betweenness centrality (BC). Finally, the features based on FC and graph theory 
indices were used for further feature representation via AE and regression. 
2.5. Feature encoder and network pattern construction 
Each subject’s Nnode × Nnode connectivity matrices which were concatenated to 
give Nsubject × Nedge matrix and graph theory indices which were Nsubject × Ngraph indices 
matrix were then entered into AE respectively (Fig. 1A). The number of epochs was 
500 and the hidden nodes was set to 50 [22]. The AE, illustrated in Fig. 2, is a special 

type of neural network which is capable of conduct feature engineering. The vectors 
𝑥∈R was encoded into hidden representation h ∈R′ by the activation function 𝑓: 
ℎ= 𝑓(𝑊𝑥+ 𝑏)                          (2) 
The hidden representation h was decoded to reconstruction data ℎ∈𝑅 by the 
activation function: 
r = g(W′h + b′)                          (3) 
where W and W’ are the weight matrices, b and b’ represent the bias vectors, the 
classic sigmoid(𝑥)=1/(1+𝑒−𝑥) has been adopted as the activation function for 𝑓 and 
g. 
Effectively a nonlinear principal components analysis (PCA) [23], the AE can be 
trained in a fully unsupervised manner. AE seeks the optimal parameters W, W’, b 
and b’ via gradient descent algorithm to minimizes the reconstruction error 𝐿(𝑥, 𝑟) =
‖𝑥−𝑟‖2. In order to prevent overfitting, a weighted constraint parameter was used to 
regularizes 𝐿′(𝑥, 𝑟), shown in (4). 
 L′(𝑥, 𝑟) = L(𝑥, 𝑟) + 𝜀‖𝑊‖2
2                   (4) 
where 𝜀 is regularization parameters. 
 
Fig.2 Autoencoder: the encoder maps input data into hidden representation, the decoder maps the 
encoded features to reconstruct the data 
The whole-brain FC was entered into AE to extract and preserve the main 
information of the network according to the loss function minimum criterion [24].  
2.6. Weighted-Ensemble models and Network Analysis Framework 
All models were initially trained using different AE features, these features were 
extracted from network patterns and graphical indices. To prevent overfitting and the 
accuracy bias due to the reuse of the same data, the extracted features were split into 
training and test set respectively for 10-fold cross-validation. Predictive models were 
implemented 
and 
merged 
in 
a 
multi-stacking-layers 
approach 
called 
Weighted-Stacking (WS). On its first layer, basic regression models were used to 

predict FIS from neuroimaging data, weighted operators were then obtained to 
measure the performance of each model. The formula of weight operator W was 
shown in (5). 
W𝑖=
𝐶𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 Coefficient𝑖
𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑛 𝐴𝑏𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑡𝑒 𝐸𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟𝑖
∑
𝐶𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 Coefficient𝑖
𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑛 𝐴𝑏𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑡𝑒 𝐸𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟𝑖
𝑛
𝑖=1
                    (5) 
Where n is the number of features, Correlation Coefficient refers to the 
correlation between real label and predicted label of each first level training model, 
Mean Absolute Error measures the absolute error between real label and predicted 
label of each first layer training model. 
On the second layer, predictions from the first level models were multiplied by 
W coefficient and then stacked with other regression models. Finally, the fusion 
factors were set to fuse the weighted stacking models. And Fusion operator W’ were 
defined in (6). 
W′𝑗=
𝐶𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 Coefficient′𝑗
𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑛 𝐴𝑏𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑡𝑒 𝐸𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟′𝑗
∑
𝐶𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 Coefficient′𝑗
𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑛 𝐴𝑏𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑡𝑒 𝐸𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟′𝑗
𝑚
𝑗=1
                   (6) 
Where m is the number of regression models, “Correlation Coefficient’” 
indicates the correlation coefficient between real label and predicted label of each 
second level training model, “Mean Absolute Error” is the mean absolute error 
between real label and predicted label of each second layers training model.  
In this study, basic regression models employed for WENA were ensemble tree 
regression (ETR) and ridge regression (RR). Support vector regression (SVR) with 
Gaussian kernel and extreme learning machine regression (ELMR) were also used to 
compare with the performance of WENA and test the robustness of proposed 
framework. 
2.7. Parameters Test  
In order to test the impact of the model parameters, in this study the stacking 
layers (from 2 layers to 4 layers), different FC construction methods and model fusion 
strategies were used to train WENA model . Also, in order to reduce the effect of 
other parameters on the performance, different regression models were trained via the 
same AE features. And we changed the parameters to be tested and fixed the others. 
and stacked into higher fixed stacking layers structure. 
2.8. Methods Comparison  

In this study, in order to test the performance of WENA, we compared the 
performance of conventional stacking models with ETR, RR, SVR and ELMR model 
and basic regression models. Also, features extracted via principal component 
analysis (PCA) and independent component analysis (ICA) were also used to trained 
WENA framework, the results were compared with using AE methods for feature 
extraction. All methods were tested in features based on three FC construction 
methods. 
3. Result Evaluation 
The Mean Absolute Deviation (MAE), Pearson Correlation Coefficient (R value) 
and R-squared Coefficient (R2 value) between real value and predicted value were 
used to evaluate the performance of the proposed method. 
3.1. Biological Pattern Visualization 
Each AE feature was evaluated by using RelifF method [25] and the feature with 
the largest RelifF value was considered as the biomarker with biological significance. 
Pearson correlation was used to evaluate the relationship between age and AE features 
to extract age-related and biological patterns. The biological patterns corresponding to 
the chosen AE features were extracted via weight value of AE and visualized [26].  
3.2. Results 
We compared the performance of our WENA method with different weighted 
stacking models and FC construction methods. Table 2 illustrated that the proposed 
WENA achieved the best performance for fluid intelligence prediction across three 
functional connectivity construction methods. The performance of MI-based features 
obtained the highest performance with 3.85 for Mae, 0.66 for R value and 0.42 for R2 
value. The best FIS prediction of each network construction was shown in Fig. 3. 
Furthermore, conventional stacking structures and feature engineering methods were 
used to compare with proposed WENA method based on AE features. Table 3 showed 
that conventional stacking model based on SVR achieved the best performance (Mae 
was 4.25, R value was 0.53, R2 was 0.26) with PC-network construction method and 
basic SVR model achieved best Mae with 4.20 (R value was 0.53, R2 was 0.28). 
Compared 
with 
conventional 
feature 
engineering 
methods 
with 
MI-network-construction method, WENA achieved the performance with 4.12 for 

Mae, 0.58 for R value and 0.33 for R2 value for PCA methods and 4.77 for Mae, 0.32 
for R value and 0.10 for R2 value for ICA methods. 
Stacking layers and model fusion strategies were used to test the robustness of 
proposed WENA. Fig 4 and Table 3 showed that proposed WENA outperformed 
conventional stacking models and basic regression models and was robust to network 
construction methods and applied stacking layer. Fig 5 showed that WENA with 
different regression models fusion strategies outperformed corresponding single 
regression models shown in Table 3. 
Additionally, there was a significantly correlation found between age and FIS (R 
= 0.65, p < 0.001). There were also significant differences between the network AE 
feature and age in FC pattern (R = -0.34, p < 0.001), BC pattern (R = 0.59, p < 0.001) 
and LE pattern (R= 0.46, p<0.001), while there were no significant relationship found 
between other graph theory indices (DC and RS) and age. The most discriminative 
and age-related FC with network-property patterns were visualized via AE, as well as 
the important ROIs extracted by WENA(shown in Fig. 4 and Table 5). These results 
revealed that the most biological patterns extracted by WENA were sensorimotor 
network, cingulo-opercular network, occipital network and cerebellum network. 
 
Table 2. The performance of weighted stack model and model fusion 
Feature 
Method 
MAE 
R 
R2 
PC 
WS- ETR 
4.21 
0.57 
0.31 
WS–RR 
4.07 
0.59 
0.33 
WS-SVR 
4.21 
0.55 
0.28 
WS-ELMR 
4.47 
0.54 
0.21 
WENA 
4.05 
0.61 
0.36 
MI 
WS-ETR 
4.06 
0.63 
0.36 
WS- RR 
3.90 
0.64 
0.39 
WS-SVR 
4.11 
0.60 
0.35 
WS-ELMR 
4.43 
0.57 
0.24 
WENA 
3.85 
0.66 
0.42 
DC 
WS-ETR 
4.20 
0.56 
0.31 
WS- RR 
4.32 
0.56 
0.28 
WS-SVR 
4.38 
0.52 
0.25 
WS-ELMR 
4.55 
0.52 
0.19 
WENA 
4.16 
0.58 
0.34 
 

 
Fig.3. The best prediction performance of FIS based on different construction methods. a) the 
regression performance based on network based on Pearson’s correlation (Mae=4.05, R2=0.36. 
R=0.61). b) the network based on Multi information (Mae=3.85, R2=0.42. R=0.66). c) the network 
based on Distance correlation (Mae=4.16, R2=0.34. R=0.58). (Left: the performance of regression, 
x-coordinate represents predicted label, y-coordinate represents real label Right: the distribution of 
label difference, x-coordinate represents number of subjects, y-coordinate represents difference 
between predicted label and real label). 
 
Table.3. The performance of conventional stacking models and single models. The performance of 
conventional stacking methods under different FC construction methods were obtained in order to 
compare the performance of WENA . 
Feature 
Method 
MAE 
R 
R2 

PC 
Stacking –ETR 
4.26 
0.53 
0.28 
Stacking–RR 
5.05 
0.054 
0.0041 
Stacking–SVR 
4.25 
0.53 
0.26 
Stacking–ELMR 
12.16 
0.27 
0.0039 
MI 
Stacking–ETR 
4.20 
0.54 
0.29 
Stacking–RR 
5.05 
0.038 
0.0042 
Stacking–SVR 
4.42 
0.50 
0.21 
Stacking–ELMR 
11.62 
0.23 
0.0010 
DC 
Stacking–ETR 
4.25 
0.54 
0.29 
Stacking–RR 
5.04 
0.25 
0.055 
Stacking–SVR 
4.33 
0.25 
0.061 
Stacking–ELMR 
11.98 
0.23 
0.0038 
Basic regression 
Models (MI) 
ETR 
4.22 
0.54 
0.29 
RR 
4.23 
0.52 
0.23 
SVR 
4.20 
0.53 
0.28 
ELMR 
4.41 
0.49 
0.18 
 
Table.4. The performance of different feature engineering method based on MI features. The 
performance of conventional dimension-reduction methods under different FC construction 
methods were obtained in order to compare the performance of AE. 
Feature 
Method 
MAE 
R 
R2 
PCA 
WS –ETR 
4.25 
0.54 
0.29 
WS –RR 
4.37 
0.55 
0.23 
WS –SVR 
4.24 
0.54 
0.27 
WS –ELMR 
4.58 
0.52 
0.19 
WENA 
4.12 
0.58 
0.33 
ICA 
WS –ETR 
4.86 
0.27 
0.0065 
WS –RR 
4.92 
0.30 
0.0097 
WS –SVR 
4.77 
0.33 
0.092 
WS –ELMR 
5.24 
0.25 
0.0013 
WENA 
4.77 
0.32 
0.10 

 
Fig. 4 The influence of stacking-layers on performance, including MAE, R value and R2 value. A. 
Mae of WENA with different stacking-layers. B. R value of WENA with different stacking-layers. 
C. R2 value of WENA with different stacking-layers. (X-coordinate represents MAE, R value and 
R2 value, Y-coordinate represents number of model stacking-layers, e.g., Four- layers means this 
stacking model consisted of four layers).  

 
Fig.5. The influence of regression models fusion on performance of WENA with different 
network construction methods. A. Mae of WENA with different regression model fusion. B. R 
value of WENA with different classifier-choice. C. R2 value of WENA with different regression 
model fusion. (Model-Fusion contains ETR and RR methods. X-coordinate represents MAE, R 
value and R2 value, Y-coordinate represents different model fusion methods with different 
network construction methods).  

 
Fig. 6. The extracted network pattern via WENA. a) Network pattern. b) Pearson’ correlation 
between age and AE feature (R = -0.34, p < 0.001. X-coordinate represents AE feature, 
Y-coordinate represents age). 
  
 
Fig.7. The extracted graphical theory indices pattern via WENA. a) BC age-related pattern (R = 
0.59, p < 0.001). b) LE age-related pattern (R = -0.46, p < 0.001). (X-coordinate represents age, 
Y-coordinate represents AE feature.) 

 
Table 5. the extracted important ROIs and functional networks 
network 
ROIs 
X 
Y 
Z 
sensorimotor 
Parietal 
46 
-20 
25 
precentral gyrus 
46 
-8 
24 
post insula 
-30 
-28 
9 
cingulo opercular 
mid insula 
32 
-12 
2 
post parietal 
-41 
-31 
48 
Thalamus 
-12 
-12 
6 
aPFC 
-25 
51 
27 
vFC 
-48 
6 
1 
vPFC 
34 
32 
7 
Temporal 
-41 
-37 
16 
occipital 
post occipital 
13 
-91 
2 
Occipital 
-16 
-76 
33 
cerebellum 
Infcerebellum 
-6 
-79 
-33 
 
Table 6. The state-of-the-art of fluid-intelligence score prediction. 
 
Feature 
MAE 
R 
R2 
[27] 
fMRI 
-- 
0.2~0.5 
-- 
[28] 
fMRI 
-- 
0.25~0.3 
-- 
[29] 
fMRI 
-- 
0.26 
-- 
 
4. Discussion 
In this study, we have developed a new regression method based on machine 
learning and graph theory called WENA, in order to better extract the biological 
patterns from functional connectivity and predict the fluid intelligence. The results 
indicate that (a) our proposed method outperformed the state-of-the-art reports; (b) 
proposed method was robust under the effect of network construction methods and 
other parameters; (c) the patterns extracted using this method were found with 
interesting biologically meaning. These patterns were significantly related to age, 
which were found stemmed from sensorimotor network, cingulo-opercular network, 
occipital network and cerebellum network. 
The proposed WENA structure also outperformed other traditional methods in 
term of performance of FIS prediction (shown in Table 2, Table 3, Table 4). Firstly, 

ensemble learning models (including bagging, stacking and boosting) which consisted 
of several single machine learning model [30], outperformed single machine learning 
model. Given that single machine learning algorithm was limited in model 
generalization and model performance [9], while performance of ensemble learning 
could be improved via using bootstrap replicates and simple bagging could be 
improved via stacking [31]. Unlike deep learning, which risks at overfitting and lacking 
model generalization [32], ensemble learning could integrate with bootstrap samples 
and multiple classifiers, which could lead to enhancement of model-generalization 
and reduction of model-overfitting [14, 33]. 
 Secondly, the proposed WENA based on WS methods and model fusion 
outperformed traditional stacking methods (see Table3). Thirdly, The proposed 
method was based on self-supervised learning AE, it could extract non-linear features 
and principal modes from FC data across population [34]. The performance of WENA 
based on WS outperformed that of WENA based on principal component analysis 
(PCA) and independent component analysis (ICA) (see Table 4). As traditional 
approaches in neuroscience, PCA and ICA were both for linear features, the 
performance based on PCA features and ICA features were influenced by uncertain 
reduced dimensions [35]. By contrast, AE could represent high-layers features and 
abstract low-level features (e.g., cerebrospinal fluid, cortical thickness and gray matter 
tissue volume) from neuroimaging data, but also general latent feature representation 
and improve the performance [11, 36]. For example, via AE and fMRI, Suk et al. 
extracted nonlinear hidden features from neuroimaging data and improved diagnostic 
accuracy[36].  
However, it should be noted that the network construction methods were used 
and compared in this study (shown in Table 1) and our results showed that 
performance of machine learning is affected by FC construction methods (shown in 
Table 1 and S-Table 1). WENA was robust to network construction methods for 
improving the performance of FIS prediction. However, the number of stacking-layers 
and the regression methods could affect the performance of WENA (seen in Fig. 4 
and Fig. 5). In all, our results revealed that the proposed WENA model achieved the 
best regression accuracy on FC constructed via MI methods (Mae = 3.85, R = 0.66, R2 
= 0.42). Furthermore, proposed WENA was better than other conventional methods 
and the state-of-the-art (shown in Table 4). Also, our results revealed that proposed 
method was robust to parameters and could keep performance improved.  

The proposed WENA methods achieved improvement in the performance of 
fluid-intelligence prediction from neuroimaging data, also was able to decode the 
biologically age-related patterns from the naturalistic fMRI data (shown in Table 3). 
The fluid intelligence, as a highly age-related cognitive traits, could offer objective 
evidence in understanding naturalistic neuroimaging data for aging problem. For 
example, fluid intelligence, the ability to think and solve problem under the limited 
knowledge situation [37], was tended to decline with aging due to reduction in 
executive function of prefrontal cortex [38]. In our study, FIS was negatively related to 
age and extracted AE features were negatively related to age (p<0.05). Furthermore, 
the functional network extracted via AE spatial filter were sensorimotor network, 
cingulo-opercular network, occipital network and cerebellum network. To be specific, 
AE feature corresponded to sensorimotor network and cerebellum network was 
significantly positively correlated to age, which demonstrated that compensatory may 
existing age-related decline in motor function [39]. The existence of the increased 
sensorimotor and cerebellum functional connectivity has been found in elders, 
supporting the increasing interactivity across network with age [40], in line with our 
study. Similarly, AE features corresponded to cingulo-opercular network and occipital 
network were significantly negatively associated with age, in line with previous 
studies [41]. Previous studies have also shown that sensorimotor network was 
associated with sensory processing and occipital network was related to visual 
preprocessing [41]. Additionally, cingulo-opercular network, also referred to as 
salience network, was decreased with age, which was the neural factor that visual 
processing-speed [42]. These brain functions were closely related to movie-watching 
experience and ageing issue as well as fluid intelligence. Therefore, these studies 
supported and revealed that our methods could decode biological patterns. 
However, several limitations should be noted. Firstly, the WENA was unable to 
clearly reflect the quantitative relationship between age, functional connectivity and 
fluid intelligence. Secondly, robustness of proposed methods should be further tested 
using samples from other resources. Finally, overfitting problem in training dataset 
should be carefully considered, though ensemble learning could reduce it in some 
degree. 
5. Conclusion 
In this study, we have proposed a new method namely WENA to predict fluid 

intelligence and mining deep network information naturalist fMRI data, which is 
based on ensemble learning, FC analysis and graph theory analysis. Results indicate 
that the proposed method outperformed mainstream state-of-the-art methods for the 
problem of interest. As a deep network, once the classifier-choice and stack-level been 
optimized, the performance of WENA is found rather robust. Special aging-related 
network pattern and its properties pattern were also able to be extracted via WENA. It 
is found the sensorimotor, cingulo-opercular and occipital-cerebellum are the most 
impacting regions for the prediction of fluid intelligence. Our future work will be 
focusing on addressing the existing limitations of the proposed method, hence better 
predicting human behavior and observing the human brain states.
