ADVANCES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND MACHINE LEARNING, VOL. ?, ISS. ?, DECEMBER 2021
1
Biased hypothesis formation from projection pursuit
John Patterson*1, Chris Avery*1, Tyler Grear 1,2 Donald J. Jacobs † 2,3
1 Department of Bioinformatics and Genomics, University of North Carolina Charlotte,
2 Department of Physics and Optical Science, University of North Carolina Charlotte,
3 Afﬁliate faculty of the UNC Charlotte School of Data Science
* equal contributions to work

Abstract
The effect of bias on hypothesis formation is characterized for an automated data-driven projection pursuit neural network to
extract and select features for binary classiﬁcation of data streams. This intelligent exploratory process partitions a complete vector
state space into disjoint subspaces to create working hypotheses quantiﬁed by similarities and differences observed between two
groups of labeled data streams. Data streams are typically time sequenced, and may exhibit complex spatio-temporal patterns. For
example, given atomic trajectories from molecular dynamics simulation, the machine’s task is to quantify dynamical mechanisms
that promote function by comparing protein mutants, some known to function while others are nonfunctional. Utilizing synthetic
two-dimensional molecules that mimic the dynamics of functional and nonfunctional proteins, biases are identiﬁed and controlled
in both the machine learning model and selected training data under different contexts. The reﬁnement of a working hypothesis
converges to a statistically robust multivariate perception of the data based on a context-dependent perspective. Including diverse
perspectives during data exploration enhances interpretability of the multivariate characterization of similarities and differences.
Index Terms
biased hypothesis formation, multivariate discriminant analysis, supervised projection pursuit, competitive learning, inter-
pretable perception, molecular functional dynamics, machine learning
I. INTRODUCTION
As machine learning (ML) becomes an integral part of human life, recent concerns about biases in ML predictions have arisen
[1], [2]. Analogous to self-directed category learning by humans [3], biases effect hypothesis formation during data exploration
using modulated perspectives within a neural network (NN). Generally, NN models yield non-unique optimal perceptron weights
[4]; furthermore, these weights depend on implementation details [5], [6] that contribute to biases. Unfortunately, results from
a NN are often difﬁcult to interpret; by extension, the underlying biases are difﬁcult to characterize. In contrast, biases can be
effectively controlled with an objective function within projection pursuit (PP) during the exploration of high-dimensional data
[7]–[15]. Moreover, PP is robust against statistical estimation errors [16], and perception is interpretable by linear projection
operators that govern dimension reduction.
A new intelligent ML paradigm known as supervised projective learning with orthogonal completeness (SPLOC) is employed
here. As an automated PP framework optimized by a recurrent NN, SPLOC performs a data-driven process for binary discrim-
inant analysis of data streams. For example, molecular dynamics simulations containing dozens of molecules, each involving
thousands of degrees of freedom (df) comprising tens of thousands sampled conformations, are feasible to simultaneously
analyze. Previously, SPLOC [15] was shown to successfully classify the classical iris and wine data sets and identify latent
signals embedded within a noisy environment while mitigating false identiﬁcation of noise as signal. The discriminate subspace
could accurately reconstruct the latent signal without over-ﬁtting to noise. When applied to the intricate problem of identifying
functional dynamics hidden within the atomic trajectories of beta lactamase enzymes, each involving 789 df, SPLOC was able
to pinpoint key features of atomic motions. Regarded as a working hypothesis, these identiﬁed collective motions are learned
as being critical for speciﬁc mutants to function. Furthermore, an iterative learning process for discovery of new molecules
was introduced, which is a self-directed learning process that involves the formation and reﬁnement of a working hypothesis
as new data is presented to the machine. This past work motivates the question of how biases alter the discovery process, such
as preset perspectives that amount to weighting certain information as more or less important during data exploration.
The work here utilizes a synthetic dataset to highlight the underlying effects of biases in perceptrons which can be controlled
by modifying the functional form of the data-driven adaptive rectifying functions used in SPLOC. The machine perception is
expressed by the coordinate system that the data is represented in as a complete basis set that spans the state space. Through the
use of projection pursuit, biases manifest during the partitioning of an orthonormal basis. With implementation details published
previously [15], only the salient components of SPLOC relevant to this study are highlighted. Particular emphasis is placed
on the importance of bias in relation to data-driven hypothesis reﬁnement, including bias from preconceived perspectives.
arXiv:2201.00889v1  [cs.LG]  3 Jan 2022

ADVANCES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND MACHINE LEARNING, VOL. ?, ISS. ?, DECEMBER 2021
2
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Data
The previously generated synthetic dataset of 24 two-dimensional molecules [15] is reused for illustration. This dataset
contains challenging spatio-temporal patterns to identify, yet it is simple enough for the results of the analysis to be clear and
certain. Each molecule contains Na = 29 atoms, resulting in p = 58 df. All trajectories are comprised of 20000 conformations.
Each of these trajectories is divided in half, spawning two data streams, each having 10000 observations that yield 142.41
observations per variable. The molecules differ due to subtle embedded atomic interactions that create certain geometrical
signatures. The nomenclature for each molecule is expressed as abc to reference geometrical signatures within each domain,
as depicted in Figure 1.
When no underlying pattern over time exists within a given domain, this is annotated by F (free). The free conformation is the
initial default for all molecular dynamics. The available geometrical signatures for each domain are: Domain 1: E (extended);
Domain 2: L (linear), S (square), T (triangular); Domain 3: L (linear), T (triangular). The partial permutations results in 24
molecules exhibiting distinct dynamics.
Fig. 1. (a) A synthetic molecule with atom labels. (b) Two partitions separate three domains labeled as 1, 2, 3. In each domain, the atoms can remain free
or a subset of atoms can interact, forming geometrical signatures. The possible geometrical variants of each domain are shown in the far-right column.
In this study, the set of 24 molecules is divided into two classes. The functional class includes the four molecules EFL, ELL,
ETL and ESL, which are of the type EbL where b can be F, L, T or S. These functional molecules are constrained to be in the
extended (E) geometry in the ﬁrst domain and have a linear (L) geometry in the third domain. There are no restrictions on the
type of geometry that can be explored in the second domain. This designation mimics an allosteric interaction, in which ligand
binding at one location, modeled as additional interactions shared among a subset of atoms, may impact the motions and ligand
binding afﬁnity at a distant location on the molecule. Among the 20 remaining nonfunctional molecules, three subgroups of
the form FbF, abF and Fbc are considered, respectively having 4, 8 and 12 molecules. Different scenarios of training compare
4 functional molecules of type EbL against the 4, 8, 12 molecule subgroups and all remaining 20 molecules.
For each training scenario the goal is for SPLOC to learn the particular structural motif which differentiates the functional
from nonfunctional molecules. In this work, SPLOC is run with ﬁve perspectives: -2, 0-, 0, 0+, and +2 to explore the impact
that bias has on the relevance of information that is explored while forming a hypothesis. Moreover, SPLOC was run 100 times
for each training scenario/bias combination to characterize the variations in the solutions that SPLOC produces. The hypothesis
SPLOC builds takes the form of a complete basis vector set in which the data can be represented to highlight similarities and
differences. This orthonormal basis is learned through data exploration, where the hypothesis partitions the high dimensional
data into discriminant features described by a subset of the basis vectors that span the discriminant subspace, and indifferent
features described by a subset of basis vectors that span the indifferent subspace.
Data streams are input to SPLOC as separate ensembles, each deﬁning a data packet. A data packet is constructed from m
distinct p dimensional observations of a system. For the synthetic data employed here, a single data sample is a conformation
of a molecule in a simulation, represented by the state vector ⃗x(t) = [x1, ..xNa, y1, .., yNa]. A data stream is an ensemble of
conformations that sample the dynamics of the system, X = {⃗x(0), ⃗x(1), ⃗x(2), .., ⃗x(m)}, as a series of frames or snapshots.
A data packet is labeled functional or non-functional depending on whether it contains the geometrical signature of interest.
B. Projection pursuit machine learning
Data packets with p df are described by a complete orthonormal basis set, where each basis vector (a.k.a. mode) deﬁnes a
projection direction. Starting from either the natural data basis, a basis constructed from PCA, or any complete set of orthogonal

ADVANCES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND MACHINE LEARNING, VOL. ?, ISS. ?, DECEMBER 2021
3
vectors, SPLOC optimizes the complete basis in p-dimensional space to elucidate similarities and differences between data
packets. In this work the starting basis for SPLOC was chosen to be constructed from PCA. For p modes, a 2p dimensional
feature space can be constructed from the emergent properties of the system. These properties are the mean, µ(m), and standard
deviation, σ(m), of the projections of each data packet along each of the basis vectors. SPLOC attempts to cluster the data in
each two dimensional cross section of this feature space representing the µ(m) and σ(m) of a particular mode m. This cross
section is called a mode feature space plane (MFSP) and is an essential component of the objective function used in SPLOC
that is maximized.
The objective function is net efﬁcacy (E), which is linearly separable as the sum over the efﬁcacy of each mode, E(m).
Based on the consensus of emergent properties over all pairs of data streams, each mode is evaluated for (1) selection power,
S(m), that quantiﬁes signal-to-noise; (2) consensus power, C(m), that quantiﬁes statistical signiﬁcance, and (3) quality of
clustering within a MFSP. The conditional selection power, S(m|α, β), associated with two data packets, α and β respectively
representing functional and nonfunctional classes, is calculated for mode m using the formula:
S(m|α, β) =





p
snr(m, α, β)2 + rex(m, α, β)2 + 1
if < Si
p
sbr(m, α, β)2 + rex(m, α, β)2 + 1
if > Sd
So
otherwise
(1)
where snr is the signal-to-noise-ratio given by snr(m, α, β) = |µ(m|α) −µ(m|β)|/
p
σ(m|α)2 + σ(m|β)2; sbr is the signal-
beyond-noise deﬁned by sbr(m, α, β) = max [0, snr(m, α, β) −1], and rex is the excess ratio of standard deviations deﬁned
as rex(m, α, β) = max
h
σ(m|α)
σ(m|β), σ(m|β)
σ(m|α)
i
−1. The values of Si and Sd are respectively 1.3 and 2.0 for the upper threshold
for indifference and the lower threshold for discrimination, and So = 1.6125 as their geometrical mean given as So = √SiSd.
The collection of results for emergent properties of the data streams obtained for a speciﬁc mode, m, must be statistically
consistent across all data stream pairs. The consensus measure C(m) quantiﬁes this consistency level using modiﬁed logistic
functions as explained in REF [15]. If different data stream pairs between functional and nonfunctional classes cannot reach a
statistically signiﬁcant consensus on whether there exists a difference or similarity between the two classes, then the information
associated with that mode is set as undetermined. In addition, within-class consistency between data streams is sought after as a
geometrical property within each MFSP, but this desired characteristic of data spread is not reﬂected in the C(m) measure. To
reduce uncertainties in statistical estimates, various sampling methods can be applied when collecting data streams to increase
the number of data packets to compare.
Fig. 2. Functional forms for the rectifying adaptive nonlinear units under different biasing cases (columns) and intensity of MFSP clustering quality (rows).
The light gray vertical line marks the reference score, So. Red and blue solid lines track the rd and ri functions, while dash lines indicate reverse biasing.
Letting x = log[S(m)/So], the efﬁcacy per mode is given by:
E(m) =
(
Qd(m) × rd(x)
if S(m) ≥So
Qi(m) × ri(x)
if S(m) < So
(2)

ADVANCES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND MACHINE LEARNING, VOL. ?, ISS. ?, DECEMBER 2021
4
where Qd(m) and Qi(m) are geometrical clustering quality factors associated with the MFSP [15]. For this work, it is only
important to note that when data packets separate well across a decision boundary within the MFSP, Qd > 0 while Qi < 0.
Alternatively, when the functional and nonfunctional points in the MFSP mix well, then Qd < 0 while Qi > 0. These quality
factors quantify how well the emergent properties spatially cluster within a MFSP, and they are completely data-driven based
on observation. Furthermore, the functions rd(x) and ri(x) control the biasing, and these functions are visualized in Figure 2.
The algorithm for learning an orthogonal basis set in SPLOC is presented for completeness in Algorithm 1.
Mode efﬁcacy increases when the mode can either resolve differences or similarities between functional and nonfunctional
data streams, which respectively occur when S(m) ≥So or S(m) < So. Modes that discriminate between functional and
nonfunctional data streams are called d-modes; conversely, modes that quantify similarity through indifference are called i-
modes. As orthogonal rotations of the basis vectors are performed, the efﬁcacy of some modes may increase at the expense of
others, creating a multi-objective optimization problem [17] [18] [19]. As optimization proceeds, S(m) is bifurcated away from
So while consensus and MFSP cluster quality are improved in relevant emergent properties. The collection of all modes deﬁnes
an orthonormal basis which grounds the perception of a multivariate hypothesis. The consistency of a proposed hypothesis
across the data is evaluated using the decision triad. This triad requires simultaneously exceeding minimum thresholds for
selection power (triad member 1), consensus power (triad member 2) and MFSP cluster quality (triad member 3) in order to
declare a mode as either a d-mode or i-mode; otherwise, the mode is considered undetermined (u-mode).
The process of collapsing high-dimensional data onto a line for a mode projection represents a tremendous loss of information
in exchange for an immense gain in speciﬁcity. Although no information is lost when using a complete orthonormal basis,
how information is distributed is not unique. Each mode is mapped to a perceptron which is governed by a rectifying
adaptive nonlinear unit (RANU). For the m-th mode, when S(m) > So this forms a data-driven hypothesis that there is
a difference between functional and nonfunctional data streams. Conditional upon a statistically signiﬁcant consensus, the

ADVANCES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND MACHINE LEARNING, VOL. ?, ISS. ?, DECEMBER 2021
5
proposed hypothesis is conﬁrmed when the quality of clustering within the MFSP for a d-mode is positive (Qd > 0). Upon
conﬁrmation, mode efﬁcacy increases through Eq. 2 to create a stronger belief supported by the observed projected data.
Conversely, if the quality of clustering within the MFSP for a d-mode is negative (Qd < 0), the proposed hypothesis is
rejected, and mode efﬁcacy decreases through Eq. 2 using a reverse bias. An analogous process is applied to i-modes. The
multi-objective optimization is then carried out simultaneously over all modes through competitive learning, where the recurrent
NN will have an abundance of diverse perspectives across the RANUs during data exploration, as depicted in Figure 2.
The proportion of modes that describe how similar or different data streams appear depends on the perspective of ﬁnding
differences or similarities more important. To bias importance, relative weights in a RANU are adjusted. For predisposed
perspectives, reverse biases are introduced to reduce efﬁcacy when unwanted results are found. In this work, ﬁve bias-cases
are considered: predisposed bias toward i-modes (-2), weak bias toward i-modes (0-), unbiased (0), weak bias toward d-modes
(0+) and predisposed bias toward d-modes (+2). The 0- bias sets rd(x) →
1
10rd(x) and the 0+ bias sets ri(x) →
1
10ri(x). A
bias of (-2, +2) introduces an indiscriminate ﬁxed level of reverse bias when a (d-mode, i-mode) is found since a predisposed
perspective is not data-driven. It is worth noting that bias cases of -1 and +1 exist in SPLOC. These biases are not considered
here because they are adaptive. The -1 and +1 cases start like their 0- and 0+ counterparts. However, as more (i-modes,
d-modes) are discovered, the scale factor relaxes from
1
10 to 1, corresponding to the unbiased case.
C. Subspace Comparison
The projection spaces obtained by SPLOC were compared by computing the mean square inner product (MSIP) between
basis sets. The MSIP between two subspaces U and V spanned by vectors ⃗u and ⃗v is given by
MSIP(U, V ) =
1
max[dim(U), dim(V )]
X
⃗u∈U
X
⃗v∈V
(⃗u · ⃗v)2.
(3)
III. RESULTS
In Figure 3, panels (a) and (b) show a typical MFSP for a d-mode and i-mode. These MFSPs will yield a positive and
negative cluster quality when the selection power for the mode is greater than the reference value, So. However, the same
MFSPs will yield a negative and positive cluster quality when the selection power for the mode is less than So. The sign of
the cluster quality is a bias based on observation. If selection power suggests a projection direction will discriminate between
functional and nonfunctional molecules, and the MFSP shows poor clustering, then the proposed direction is a mistake, and
alternative projections will be sought. Otherwise, good clustering conﬁrms the projection direction is correct, and after some
ﬁne tuning the d-mode will be locked in place once it cannot increase efﬁcacy at the expense of any other mode.
For each bias-case, the average numbers of d-modes, u-modes and i-modes are shown in Figure 3 (c-f). The number of
i-modes forming the indifference subspace is strongly dependent on the bias, while the number of d-modes forming the
discriminant subspace is dramatically affected only for the extreme bias toward i-modes by penalizing d-modes. Importantly,
the number of d-modes found with 0-, 0, 0+ and +2 bias was approximately the same. This indicates that SPLOC does not
overestimate the discriminate subspace in the presence of a large statistical sample size. In contrast, more similarity can be
found using a perspective where differences are considered less important.
The dynamical motions of the molecules are readily interpretable through the discriminant and indifference subspaces,
where the emergent properties of a MFSP show which molecules are similar or different. The d-modes and i-modes are used to
project the original data into the discriminant or indifference subspaces. The concept of functional dynamics is meaningful as
the dynamical motions projected into the discriminate subspace identiﬁes likely functional mechanisms, whereas the extracted
features from most other types of NN are usually obfuscated.
A common way to characterize atomic motion is through the root mean square ﬂuctuations (RMSF). When atomic motions
are ﬁrst projected with d-modes or i-modes, a dRMSF or iRMSF is constructed. Information contained in dRMSF and iRMSF
is readily mapped to speciﬁc atoms, which helps interpret mechanisms responsible for functional dynamics. When comparing
iRMSF across all molecules, the indifference subspace identiﬁed conserved motions across all molecules as expected. However,
unexpectedly the iRMSF were similar across all training scenarios (data not shown). More interestingly, dRMSF highlights
differences between functional and nonfunctional molecules shown in Figure 4.
The differences in dRMSF depend on training scenarios. When a group of similar nonfunctional molecules are compared
to the functional molecules, many differences are uncovered, but only a subset of these differences may be responsible for
functional dynamics. Over the four training scenarios, as more diverse nonfunctional molecules were included in the training
scenario, the number of d-modes decreased because the essential elements of function are being uncovered. An over zealous
working hypothesis will be associated with a larger discriminant subspace, as some differences are irrelevant to function. As
reported previously [15], the working hypothesis narrows as more constraints are introduced as diverse molecules are contrasted.
This is a consequence of an inductive reasoning where a hypothesis is proposed based on the consistency of examples observed,
and when contradicting data is found, a revision of the hypothesis is often necessary.

ADVANCES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND MACHINE LEARNING, VOL. ?, ISS. ?, DECEMBER 2021
6
Fig. 3. (a) MFSP for an example d-mode (b) MFSP for an example i-mode (c) EbL vs Fbc modes (d) EbL vs abF modes (e) EbL vs FbF modes (f) EbL vs
All modes. Shown for each training scenario are the averages from 100 replicates for extracted D, U, I modes with standard error bars. The ﬁgure legend of
(c) applies to (d), (e), and (f).
Fig. 4.
The dRMSF of each molecule is shown for the unbiased case under four training scenarios. The functional molecules included EbL, while the
nonfunctional molecules included: (a) Fbc (b) abF (c) FbF (d) all others. Different molecular types with similar dRMSF are grouped by color in each panel.
There are several clear differences in dRMSF between functional and nonfunctional groups at certain atoms. The inset highlights these atoms in red.
Interpreting data and hypothesis building in PP is exempliﬁed in ﬁgure 4 (a), where EbL is compared with Fbc. Major
differences in dRMSF are found at atoms {2,5,19,22,26,29}. Within functional molecules, atoms {5,19,29} make up the
extended signature in domain 1, and atoms {2,22,26} make up the linear signature in domain 3. By construction, these two
domains are precisely where differences between the functional and nonfunctional molecules should be found for optimal
discrimination. The dRMSF for all nonfunctional molecules at domain 1 atoms show strong similarities to each other, and
differences to the functional molecules, which indicates a conserved discriminating feature. The differences at domain 3 are
not universal as demonstrated by the segmented dRMSF in nonfunctional molecules. The FbL and FbT molecules show more
similar dRMSF to the functional class because they share constraints in this domain, whereas FbF molecules show much higher

ADVANCES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND MACHINE LEARNING, VOL. ?, ISS. ?, DECEMBER 2021
7
ﬂuctuation because there are no extra constraints. In this case SPLOC learned that the main differentiating feature between
functional and nonfunctional molecules is the F versus E conformation in domain 1. An additional hypothesis that reﬂects
differences between L or T versus F conformations in domain 3 was also proposed.
Fig. 5.
A collection of MSIP plots show subspace comparisons between SPLOC solutions obtained using different bias modes and training scenarios. In
panels a-e, all plots were obtained using EbL as functional and all other molecules as nonfunctional. (a) unbiased vs weakly positively biased (b) unbiased
vs strongly positively biased (c) unbiased vs weakly negatively biased (d) unbiased vs strongly negatively biased (e) strongly negatively biased vs strongly
positively biased. In (f) a comparison between the projection spaces of all training models is shown for the unbiased case.
By keeping a complete set of basis vectors, information is never lost regardless of bias, simply interpreted differently by the
model via perspective. MSIP was used to compare the similarity in SPLOC solutions. In ﬁgure 5 (a-d) the unbiased SPLOC
mode is compared with the various biased subspace results for D, U, and I modes. Figure 5 (a) and (c) show that information
in promiscuous u-modes can be rotated into and out of the D an I spaces, with a degree of difﬁculty depending on the bias.
Speciﬁcally with bias 0+, information is exchanged between the U and I space and with bias 0- there is a weak exchange
of information between the D and U spaces. This is due to the change in perspective to favor discriminant or indifferent
features. Comparing extreme biases with the unbiased case in ﬁgure 5 (b) and (d), all relevant information is lumped into the
discriminant or indifferent subspace, depending on the extreme.
Signiﬁcant d-modes can be extracted from the U space, but when aggressively searching for i-modes, information that was
discriminant can be forced into I space, as shown in ﬁgure 5 (d). This clearly demonstrates that based on perspective, data that
looks different under one bias now looks the same under another bias. It is worth pointing out that the MSIP analysis presented
here is not saying the entire mode switches from one subspace to another, but that various linear combinations of modes from
one space switches out from one space and into another. These type of alternative views will increase as the number of df
increases. When comparing the biases -2 and +2, 5 (e), little information is shared between D and I modes, as the algorithm
aggressively tries to ﬁll either the D space or the I space, however, their U spaces are quite similar. The u-modes with low
statistical support may facilitate alternate hypotheses across nonfunctional molecules that behave differently from one another.
Figure 5 (f), compares the SPLOC solutions across the different experiments. The D spaces for Fbc, abF, or FbF training sets
were very consistent. When all molecules other than EbL were considered nonfunctional, the decrease in number of d-modes
due to SPLOCs reﬁned hypothesis of functionality led to a decrease in D space MSIP with the other training sets. The D space
obtained with all biases except for (-2) captured the functional dynamics faithfully needed for accurate classiﬁcation.
IV. CONCLUSION
For the synthetic data set analyzed here, SPLOC successfully identiﬁed the major differences between functional and
nonfunctional molecules, and found that the shared conserved properties across all molecules are markedly high. For extreme
preconceived perspectives that either discount the possibility of ﬁnding differences or similarities, SPLOC could neither conﬁrm
or deny such a belief, because data supporting the contrary-view was not taken into account due to the predisposed bias.

ADVANCES IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND MACHINE LEARNING, VOL. ?, ISS. ?, DECEMBER 2021
8
However, this latent information is retained in the u-modes that can be extracted to reﬁne the working hypothesis once
supporting data for the contrary view is taken into account. Outside of these extreme cases, in general the biasing for reﬁning a
working hypothesis depends on whether more data is found to support the proposed claim either through augmenting training
data with more consistent examples or by optimizing the vantage point as basis vectors rotate. In SPLOC, the recurrent NN is
comprised of a heterogenous set of perceptrons, where each perceptron has a custom rectifying unit that adapts to the data that
is observed through exploration. Mistakes are found through inconsistencies, where parts of the multivariate hypothesis are
rejected, which leads to reﬁnement. These results suggest that an abundance of perspectives across perceptions comprising a NN
is a good strategy to achieve robust solutions with maximum consistency for an objective analysis that minimizes preconceived
prejudices with minimal risk of missing latent features.
All relevant code to SPLOC can be found at https://github.com/BioMolecularPhysicsGroup-UNCC/MachineLearning/tree/
master/SPLOC. The data set for the toy molecules can be downloaded in full at https://zenodo.org/record/4465089#.YaovumDMKl5.
V. CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors acknowledged no conﬂict of interest.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge the provision of additional computing facilities and resources by the University Research Computing group
in the Ofﬁce of OneIT at the University of North Carolina at Charlotte.
