Generative Emotional AI for Speech Emotion Recognition:
The Case for Synthetic Emotional Speech Augmentation
Abdullah Shahida, Siddique Latifb,∗and Junaid Qadirc
aInformation Technology University (ITU),Punjab, Pakistan
bUniversity of Southern Queensland, Australia
cQatar University, Doha, Qatar
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Tacotron, WaveRNN, speech synthesis,
text-to-speech, emotional speech syn-
thesis, speech emotion recognition
A B S T R A C T
Despite advances in deep learning, current state-of-the-art speech emotion recognition (SER) systems
still have poor performance due to a lack of speech emotion datasets. This paper proposes augmenting
SER systems with synthetic emotional speech generated by an end-to-end text-to-speech (TTS) system
based on an extended Tacotron architecture. The proposed TTS system includes encoders for speaker
and emotion embeddings, a sequence-to-sequence text generator for creating Mel-spectrograms, and a
WaveRNN to generate audio from the Mel-spectrograms. Extensive experiments show that the quality
of the generated emotional speech can signiﬁcantly improve SER performance on multiple datasets,
as demonstrated by a higher mean opinion score (MOS) compared to the baseline. The generated
samples were also eﬀective at augmenting SER performance.
1. Introduction
Speech emotion recognition (SER) is a rapidly growing
ﬁeld with many applications in ﬁelds such as healthcare, cus-
tomer service, media, education, and forensics. While deep
learning (DL) has shown promise in developing SER sys-
tems, their performance is still limited by the scarcity of
emotion datasets [20, 24]. Existing SER corpora are small
since the process of creating emotional data is costly and
time-consuming, as multiple annotators have to manually
listen to and annotate the material [26, 31]. To increase data
size, some studies have used multiple corpora, but the num-
ber of standard benchmark datasets is also limited, hindering
progress in SER systems [19].
Researchers have long been interested in creating natural-
sounding TTS systems. TTS technology has come a long
way from early TTS systems that often used pre-recorded
waveforms pieced together based on input text [11]. Such
systems were prone to boundary artefact issues and statis-
tical techniques were later developed to generate smoothed
audio features for the vocoder to synthesise speech [37, 44].
More recently, end-to-end neural network-based approaches
have been proposed that can synthesise more natural-sounding
human speech [3, 34]. Current state-of-the-art TTS systems
are trained using DL algorithms in an end-to-end fashion,
with popular models including Tacotron [41], Deepvoice [3],
Fastspeech [33, 34], Fastpitch [18], to name a few.
Unlike traditional systems, end-to-end TTS models can
learn to generate a spectrogram directly from text without
any complex pre-processing. These models, however, are
currently only able to synthesise natural speech. Using gen-
erative DL techniques such as generative adversarial net-
works (GANs) [8] for emotional speech synthesis is also
challenging, as it requires a large amount of time-aligned
data of a single speaker speaking the same content in dif-
∗Corresponding author
ORCID(s):
ferent emotions and complex equations to guide the model
in converting emotions using audio features. Some studies
have achieved promising results in single-speaker emotional
speech synthesis using TTS models [17], but the quality of
synthetic speech in augmenting SER has not been evaluated.
In this paper, we propose a method for augmenting SER
systems using an emotional text-to-speech (TTS) system and
make two main contributions. Firstly, we develop an end-to-
end multi-speaker emotional TTS system that does not re-
quire any alignment of audio ﬁles for emotion conversion
or complex pre-processing of input data. Inspired by the
success of end-to-end TTS models, we adopt a similar ar-
chitecture to Tacotron. We propose to use a condition en-
coder to control the speakers’ voices and emotions in the
output speech. We generate speaker voice feature vectors
using the encoder network. These feature vectors are modu-
lated with one of the encoded emotional feature representa-
tions. These modulated feature vectors are used to condition
the Tacotron to synthesise speech in diﬀerent speaker voices
and emotions. Subjective evaluation tasks show that our pro-
posed model improves controllability and successfully syn-
thesises emotional speech. Secondly, we use the synthesised
emotional speech to augment an SER system and conduct
multiple experiments to evaluate the generated data quan-
titatively. Results show that the synthesised data can help
improve SER performance in both within-corpus and cross-
corpus settings.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows. In Section
2, we brieﬂy introduce the related work to change diﬀerent
features of audio. The model’s architecture, loss functions,
and ﬂow of our architecture are described in Section 3. The
details of the dataset and experimental condition in which
we trained our model and hyper-parameters are provided in
Section 4. We report our results in Section 5. Finally, this
paper is concluded in Section 6.
A Shahid et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 1 of 9
arXiv:2301.03751v1  [cs.SD]  10 Jan 2023

Multi-Speaker Emotional Speech Synthesis
2. Previous Work
In this section, we review the literature that has emerged
around (1) the use of Tacotron for TTS, and for (2) emotional
speech synthesis, and (3) the process of augmenting SER.
2.1. Tacotron Based TTS Systems
Many recent studies have focused on modifying the Tacotron
model in order to better control the output of TTS systems.
For instance, [13] presented a Tacotron-based model that
synthesises multi-speaker speech by conditioning the Tacotron
on the speaker’s voice embedding, which was generated from
a speaker veriﬁcation model [40]. [42] introduced a Tacotron
variant that can change the speaking style, by learning dif-
ferent styles and saving them as vectors or tokens. These
tokens are obtained by clustering similar accents and repre-
senting each cluster with an average. During synthesis, the
Tacotron is conditioned on one of these tokens to produce
speech with a speciﬁc style. [35] presented a multi-speaker
Tacotron that can change accents (e.g., American, Indian,
British). Their model uses two encoder networks with the
Tacotron and requires two audio samples (one for the ac-
cent and one for the speaker’s voice) as input to generate
the desired output. [36] proposed a Tacotron model that is
trained with encoded output audio from a variational autoen-
coder as input. This not only improves the multi-speaker
performance of Tacotron but also allows for control over the
energy of the generated audio through the mean-variance
property of the variational autoencoder. [43] developed a
Tacotron model that can learn more complex vocalisations
by using the self-attention mechanism in Tacotron to learn
complex dependencies related to pitch in diﬀerent accents.
They claim that their model outperforms traditional end-to-
end approaches for languages with more pitch-dependent ac-
cents, such as Japanese. Our proposed model also gener-
ates speech in a multi-speaker setting and includes additional
control over the emotions in the output.
2.2. Tacotron Based Emotional TTS Systems
Several previous works have attempted to generate emo-
tional speech using TTS systems. For example, [38] devel-
oped an emotion control method for a TTS system based on
the GST-Tacotron network [35], and demonstrated its eﬀec-
tiveness in synthesising emotional speech in a single-speaker
setting in Korean. [27] also evaluated a Tacotron-based emo-
tional speech synthesizer in Korean, and found improvements
in the quality of the generated speech for a single speaker.
Other studies, such as [15, 17], have also proposed meth-
ods for controlling emotional speech synthesis, but these ap-
proaches only synthesise emotional speech in a single speaker’s
voice. In contrast, our proposed method achieves control
over emotional speech synthesis for multi-speaker TTS and
we also evaluate the quality of the synthesised data to aug-
ment the SER system.
2.3. Augmenting Techniques for SER
Speed perturbation [16] is a popular data augmentation
technique that has been widely studied in diﬀerent contexts
[2, 23]. It has been found to improve speech emotion recog-
nition (SER) performance by creating copies of input data
with diﬀerent speed eﬀects. Mixup [45] is another data aug-
mentation technique that generates augmented samples as a
linear combination of original samples from the input data.
Several studies have demonstrated the eﬀectiveness of mixup
in SER, including Latif et al. [25], who used the technique to
augment an SER system and achieve improved performance
and robustness. A recent method called SpecAugment [30],
originally proposed for automatic speech recognition, has
also been applied to SER [4]. In this study, the authors aug-
mented the SER system with duplicate samples by a factor
of two and found that SpecAugment improved model per-
formance. Other studies [2, 21, 23] have also achieved im-
proved performance by using input perturbation-based data
augmentation techniques to increase the training data.
Further research is required to explore data-driven ap-
proaches to increase the training data for SER. In this paper,
we propose to explore TTS based data augmentation method
where we explored diﬀerent variations in the training data
by changing the speaker and gender voices in diﬀerent emo-
tions.
3. Proposed Framework
We propose to generate synthetic speech using a Tacotron-
based emotional TTS system. We use synthetic speech data
to augment the speech emotion classiﬁer. The details of both
emotional TTS and classiﬁer are presented next.
3.1. Emotional Speech Synthesis
Our model consists of an encoder which conditions Tacotron
(as depicted in Figure 1) to alter the speaker’s voice and emo-
tion in the output. Tacotron generates a Mel-spectrogram
from a given text and embedding vector, while a Wave-RNN-
based vocoder is used to generate an audio signal from the
Mel-spectrogram
3.1.1. Condition Encoder
We propose using a condition encoder to create an em-
bedding that represents both speaker identity and emotion.
To do this, we use a speaker identiﬁcation model presented
in [40], which creates a ﬁxed-dimensional embedding, known
as a d-vector [10, 39], using a sequence of Mel-spectrograms
computed from a speech signal of arbitrary length. We train
this model using an end-to-end speaker veriﬁcation loss that
maximises the cosine similarity between utterances from the
same speaker while minimising the cosine similarity between
utterances from diﬀerent speakers. We ﬁne-tune this net-
work on an emotional corpus to create an emotional embed-
ding as well. Thus, the condition encoder is optimised to
maximise the cosine similarity between embeddings of the
same speaker with diﬀerent emotions and to minimise the
similarity between diﬀerent emotions and diﬀerent speak-
ers. In this way, the model learns to generate a feature vector
that contains both emotion and speaker identity information.
The speaker’s voice audio and emotion audio are embedded
A Shahid et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 2 of 9

Multi-Speaker Emotional Speech Synthesis
Figure 1: Architectural ﬂow diagram. The reference speaker’s voice is ﬁrst encoded and then modulated to desired emotion as
described in the model schema. The output is then passed to the Tacotron decoder with the text embedding to synthesise the
Mel-spectrogram.
using the condition encoder and combined to generate a ﬁ-
nal embedding, which is used to condition the synthesizer to
output speech with the selected emotion and speaker’s voice.
For each unique emotion of every speaker in dataset, a
centroid 푐푘is calculated by taking the average of embedding
for each unique emotion of every unique speaker. Loss for
an embedding 푒푖when the embedding and the centroid 푐푘
have the same speaker and emotion is calculated as:
(푒푖, 푐푘) = −1 × 휎(cos(푒푖, 푐푘))
(1)
When 푒푖have diﬀerent emotion or diﬀerent speaker for cen-
troid 푐푘then loss is calculated as:-
(푒푖, 푐푘) = 휎(cos(푒푖, 푐푘))
(2)
퐺(푆) =
∑
푖,푘
퐿(푒푖, 푐푘)
(3)
Equation 1 maximises the cosine similarity between em-
beddings for the same speaker voice and same emotion. Equa-
tion 2 represents the cosine similarity between embedding
and centroid when they have diﬀerent speaker voices or dif-
ferent emotions or both. Equation 3 represents the ﬁnal loss
over every embedding, which is calculated as the sum of the
loss for every embedding with every centroid.
The condition encoder consists of three LSTM layers
with 768 cells each, and a ﬁnal 256-length fully connected
layer. The input to the model is the Mel-spectrogram gener-
ated from a speech utterance of a reference speaker’s audio
sample, and its output is an embedding vector of size 256
which represents the speaker’s identity. After training the
model, we use it to extract speaker and emotional informa-
tion from a given audio. To separate the emotion from the
speaker’s voice, we generate vectors that only contain emo-
tional information by using the trained condition encoder to
generate embedding vectors for both the neutral and emo-
tional voices of the same speaker. The neutral embedding
vector is then subtracted from the emotional ones using Equa-
tion (4), resulting in a vector that only contains emotional
information. This vector can be used at inference time to
control the emotion of the synthesised audio.
푒푚푏em = (푒푚푏en −푒푚푏neu)
(4)
Where 푒푚푏en represents the embedding with emotion and
voice information generated from the emotional voice of a
speaker; 푒푚푏neu is generated from neutral audio of the same
speaker, and 푒푚푏em represents the embedding that only con-
tains emotional information. During inference, reference au-
dio embedding (voice in which we want our output sample
to be synthesised) and emotional embedding are added to
generate a ﬁnal embedding vector.
푒푚푏ﬁnal = 푒푚푏ref + 푒푚푏em
(5)
Finally, the modulated embedding vector and text are fed
to Tacotron, which generates the Mel-spectrograms. These
Mel-spectrograms are converted to the time domain using a
vocoder, resulting in an audio signal.
3.1.2. Synthesizer architecture
The synthesizer is a variation of Tacotron [41], which
is a sequence-to-sequence model that generates output one
frame at a time based on the input. In addition, we condition
this synthesizer on an embedding vector generated by the
condition encoder, which contains information about the de-
sired output emotion and the speaker’s voice. The condition
embedding is concatenated with the text embedding of the
synthesizer and then passed through a decoder to synthesise
A Shahid et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 3 of 9

Multi-Speaker Emotional Speech Synthesis
the output Mel-spectrogram. The synthesizer was trained on
80-channel Mel-spectrograms with a window size of 50 ms
and a hop size of 12.5 ms. The synthesizer encodes the input
characters into a hidden representation using three convolu-
tion layers, which learn longer-term context like an n-gram.
The output of these convolution layers is passed to a single
bi-directional LSTM layer with 256 units, which learns time
dependencies from these n-gram-like features. The LSTM
layer returns an encoded vector that fully represents the in-
put text sequence. This vector is concatenated with a vector
of emotional and speaker embeddings from the encoder.
It is worth noting that at this point, the encoder has been
trained and its weights are not updated. The combined text,
speaker, and emotion embedding is passed to the decoder to
generate a Mel-spectrogram. The decoder architecture in-
cludes a location-sensitive attention mechanism that trans-
forms the input embedding into a ﬁxed-length vector. The
output frame from the previous step is passed through two
fully connected layers and concatenated with the embedding
vector to ensure that sequences are generated without any
time artefacts. This vector is then passed through two LSTM
layers, and a linear transformation is applied to generate the
next frame of the Mel-spectrogram. The output from this
LSTM is also projected down to a single scalar, which serves
as a stop token and indicates when to stop generating further
frames. Once the Mel-spectrogram has been generated, it
is passed through a 5-layer convolution network called the
PostNet to improve overall reconstruction.
3.1.3. Vocoder
Traditionally, the Griﬃn-Lim algorithm [9] was used to
generate time-domain audio from a spectrogram, but it was
slow and the output speech lacked naturalness. To address
this, we use a vocoder based on the WaveRNN architecture
[14], which is a faster and more powerful recurrent network
for sequential modelling of high-ﬁdelity audio. It employs
residual convolutions and GRU layers to generate a time-
domain audio signal frame by frame from a Mel-spectrogram.
3.2. Emotion Classiﬁer
To evaluate the synthesised emotions, we trained a deep
neural network (DNN) for SER. We implemented a convo-
lutional neural network (CNN)-based classiﬁer that consists
of a convolutional layer, a batch normalisation layer, and a
dense layer before the softmax layer. Mel-frequency cepstral
coeﬃcients (MFCCs) are used as the input to the classiﬁer.
The CNN layers learn high-level features from the input fea-
tures, which are then transformed by the dense layer into a
more discriminative space for better emotion classiﬁcation
after passing through the normalisation layer.
4. Experimental Protocol
This section describes the details of the dataset, input
feature, and model training.
4.1. Datasets
We used the Librispeech dataset [29] to train our TTS
model. It consists of 1000 hours of speech data from various
speakers, sampled at 16 kHz. For the emotion embeddings,
we used the Emotional Voices Database (EVD) [1] and the
Toronto Emotional Speech Set (TESS) [7], which contain six
diﬀerent speakers reading diﬀerent sentences with diﬀerent
emotions. We conducted multiple experiments to evaluate
the performance of our model. For emotion classiﬁcation
experiments, we used the Ryerson Audio-Visual Database
of Emotional Speech and Song (RAVDESS) [28] and TESS.
For cross-corpus emotion classiﬁcation, we used the CREMA-
D [6], SAVEE [12], EmoDB [5], and synthesised audio. The
details of these datasets are presented in Table 1. We used
one speaker from Librispeech, as well as all the speakers
from EVD and TESS with two samples that were not in-
cluded in the training set, to determine the mean opinion
score. For emotion classiﬁcation experiments, we use speaker-
independent emotion classiﬁcation. We randomly select 70%
of CREMA-D for training, 10% for validation, and 20% for
testing. The full corpora including RAVDESS and EmoDB
were used as the test set in the emotion classiﬁcation experi-
ments, and the SAVEE dataset was used as the test set in the
cross-corpus emotion classiﬁcation experiments.
4.2. Input Features
Tacotron takes text strings as input, which are sequences
of characters. Each character is encoded into a one-hot en-
coded vector and embedded in a continuous vector. The
other input to Tacotron is a condition embedding vector that
contains speaker and emotion information. This vector is
obtained from an encoder, which takes speaker audio as in-
put and converts it into Mel-frequency cepstral coeﬃcients
(MFCCs). These MFCCs have 40 log ﬁlter banks, 80 frames,
and no overlapping window. To generate t-distributed stochas-
tic neighbour embedding (t-SNE) plots of synthesised audio,
we encoded our synthesised audio using the model presented
in [13]. The input to this model is also MFCCs with 40 log
ﬁlter banks, 80 frames, and no overlapping window, result-
ing in an 80x40-dimensional feature vector. This model is
also used in evaluating the equal error rate (EER) in speaker
veriﬁcation. In emotion classiﬁcation and cross-corpus emo-
tion classiﬁcation, we use MFCCs with 40 log ﬁlter banks
and a hop size of 64 milliseconds. The MFCC array is trans-
posed and the arithmetic mean is calculated across its hori-
zontal axis as in a previous work [32].
4.3. Speech Synthesis Models Training
First, the encoder is trained on the Librispeech dataset
to learn to generate a speaker embedding that is distinct for
each speaker. It takes a Mel-spectrogram as input and out-
puts an embedding vector of size 256. From these embed-
ding vectors, a similarity matrix is constructed such that each
column contains an embedding vector for a unique speaker,
and cosine similarity is maximised in all cells of the columns
and minimised in all cells of the rows. Cosine similarity is
maximised along the columns because they contain audio
embeddings for the same person, whereas it is minimised
A Shahid et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 4 of 9

Multi-Speaker Emotional Speech Synthesis
Table 1
Description of all the considered datasets.
Name
Number of
Speakers
Number of
Utterances
CREMA-D
91
7,442
EmoDB
10
535
EVD
5
7,590
Librispeech
2484
281,241
REVDESS
24
7,356
SAVEE
4
480
TESS
2
2,800
along the rows because they contain audio embeddings for
diﬀerent people. In this way, the embeddings of the same
people are similar and those of diﬀerent people are diﬀer-
ent.
After training the encoder on the Librispeech data, it is
ﬁne-tuned on the EVD and TESS datasets to generate dis-
tinct embedding vectors for diﬀerent emotions. This time,
a similarity matrix is constructed such that a column con-
tains embedding vectors generated for a single emotion for
the same speaker, and other emotions are placed in other
columns. This is done for all speakers, and then cosine sim-
ilarity is maximised along a column and minimised across
columns. This is done to increase the distance between dif-
ferent emotions of the same person, so cosine similarity is
minimised by adding it across columns rather than within
the same columns. We used a batch size of 30 and a learn-
ing rate of 10−4.
During training, the synthesizer model is ﬁrst trained on
the Librispeech data so that it can learn to generate audio
of diﬀerent speakers from a diverse range of text. This is
because the EVD and TESS datasets combined only have six
speakers. Once the synthesizer is trained enough that it can
generate audio resembling the reference speaker, we ﬁne-
tune it to generate diﬀerent emotional Mel-spectrograms by
training it on the EVD and TESS datasets. We use a learning
rate of 103 that exponentially decays to 10−5, and a batch size
of 30 for training the synthesizer. The Adam optimiser with
훽1 = 0.9, 훽2 = 0.999, and 휖= 10−6 is used as the optimiser.
The teacher forcing ratio is set to 1 (meaning the original
previous sequence is shown to the model for prediction of
the next sequence). The mean squared error is minimised
for the predicted Mel-spectrogram.
5. Results
In this section, we evaluate the performance of our pro-
posed model in terms of the similarity of the synthesized
speakers and the granularity of synthesized emotions.
5.1. Evaluating Synthetic Speech Quality
To evaluate the quality of synthetic speech, we conducted
multiple experiments. The details of these experiments are
presented below.
Table 2
Speaker veriﬁcation EERs of diﬀerent synthesizers.
# of samples
EER
Emotion + voice conversion TTS
100
0.16
Baseline Emotion conversion TTS
100
0.24
Voice conversion TTS
100
0.10
Real audios
100
0.04
Table 3
Mean Opinion Score (MOS) with 95% conﬁdence interval.
Emotion
Angry
Happy
Sad
Neutral
Overall
Recorded
4.6
4.50
4.50
4.60
4.55
Baseline
2.80
3.10
2.70
4.20
3.20
Proposed
3.60
3.70
3.80
4.10
3.80
5.1.1. Speaker Veriﬁcation
We evaluated the speaker similarity of synthesised au-
dios with real speech using speaker veriﬁcation and mea-
sured the equal error rate (EER) following [13]. The EER
is used to measure the performance of a speaker veriﬁcation
system by comparing the false reject rate (FRR) and false ac-
cept rate (FAR) at diﬀerent sensitivity levels. The EER is the
point at which the FRR and FAR are equal. To calculate the
EER, we used 100 audio samples, 40 of which were synthe-
sised. We enrolled only synthesised speakers in the system
and calculated the EER. We achieved an EER of 0.10% by
performing voice conversion using a multi-speaker Tacotron
model [13]. We also generated emotional audio samples us-
ing a base model, and the speaker veriﬁcation model gave an
EER of 0.24% on these synthesised audios. In contrast, we
achieved an EER of 0.16% when using the proposed model
for both emotion and voice conversion. The EER on real
samples using the approach in [13] was 0.04%. We have
compared the EER of these models in Table 2.
5.1.2. Listening Experiments
We performed mean opinion score (MOS) evaluations
to measure the quality of synthesised speech. We asked sub-
jects with post-graduate exposure to give a score after listen-
ing to the audio based on the following standard: 1 = Bad;
2 = Poor; 3 = Fair; 4 = Good; and 5 = Excellent. The re-
sults, shown in Table 3, indicate that the proposed model
can synthesise high-quality emotional speech compared to
the baseline model. The proposed model signiﬁcantly im-
proves the MOS score for emotions including angry, sad,
and happy compared to the baseline. However, it achieves
slightly lower MOS scores for natural speech compared to
the baseline. This may be because the baseline model is
speciﬁcally designed to generate natural speech and there-
fore performs better for neutral speech. Nevertheless, our
proposed model performs well for all emotions. Readers can
listen to samples of the generated speech at this URL1.
1https://emotaco.github.io/Emotional_Tacotron/
A Shahid et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 5 of 9

Multi-Speaker Emotional Speech Synthesis
Figure 2: Comparison of target and synthesized Mel-spectrograms for various emotions in Male and Female audios.
5.1.3. Speaker and Emotion Visualisation
During this experiment, we did not use teacher forcing
and generated audio as described in the inference part. The
synthesised Mel-spectrograms for diﬀerent emotions by the
baseline and proposed models were plotted in Figure 2, and
the results were compared with the target Mel-spectrograms.
In contrast to the baseline, our proposed model did not smooth
the generated Mel-spectrograms that help produce a better
quality of emotional speech using WaveRNN vocoder.
For the purpose of evaluation, we present the t-SNE plot,
which was generated by embedding vectors generated from
synthesised output samples using a speaker veriﬁcation model
as the encoder. Note that the speaker encoder was not trained
with the synthesizer, so it is not optimised for synthesizer
output. We generated t-SNE plots for emotional audio syn-
thesised using the model from the base papers and compared
the results with the proposed model. These t-SNE plots for
synthesised speech in both male and female voices are shown
in Figure 3 and 4, respectively. These plots demonstrate that
our model is able to synthesise distinct emotions compared
to the base model. It can be observed that diﬀerent emotions
are separated and similar emotions are clustered together, in-
dicating similarity between emotions.
Since the angry emotion has more expression compared
to the sad and happy emotions, which are tone variations,
the cluster of angry emotions is farther from the happy emo-
tions. We also visualise the t-SNE plot of multiple speakers
in neutral speech using our proposed model in Figure 5. It
shows distinct clusters for diﬀerent speakers indicating that
the model is able to learn the multiple speaker embeddings
eﬀectively.
.
5.2. Augmenting Speech Emotion Recognition
(SER)
In this section, we used the synthetic speech to augment
the SER system. We performed our evaluations using corpus
Figure 3: Comparison of t-SNE plots of male audio for various
emotions using baseline and our proposed model shows that
our model demonstrates better emotion performance.
and cross-corpus settings. Results for these experiments are
presented next.
5.2.1. Within Corpus Evaluations
We used the RAVDESS and TESS datasets for evalua-
tions. We combined both datasets and then randomly split
the data into a ratio of 70:10:20 for train, validation, and
test sets, respectively. We trained the model for 45 epochs.
We compared the results for speaker recognition on real and
synthesised speech in Figure 6. We achieved an accuracy
of 80% for synthesised speech, while the accuracy for the
real speech test set was 92.4%. This demonstrates that our
model can synthesise the emotional characteristics of out-
put speech. We also augmented the classiﬁer with synthetic
data and performed training using both real and synthesised
speech data. We achieved an accuracy of 94.6%, which is
better compared to the classiﬁer trained on real data alone.
This experiment shows that our model can also be used to
A Shahid et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 6 of 9

Multi-Speaker Emotional Speech Synthesis
Figure 4: Comparison of t-SNE plots of female audio for var-
ious emotions using baseline and our proposed model shows
that our model demonstrates better emotion performance.
Figure 5: The t-SNE plot for speaker voice of synthesised re-
sults shows that individual speakers’ voices are distinctly clus-
tered together.
generate additional audio data which can be used to augment
speaker recognition systems to improve their performance.
Figure 6: Bar plot which shows that our synthesized audio’s
emotion and real audio emotions are almost similarly classiﬁed
by the classiﬁcation model.
We have also plotted confusion matrices in Figure 7 for
emotion classiﬁcation on real audio, synthetic audio, and a
combination of real and synthetic data in the training set.
The confusion matrix shows that the model augmented with
synthetic data is able to better classify speech emotions. The
accuracy of other emotions has also been improved, but the
most signiﬁcant improvement can be seen in the classiﬁca-
tion of happy emotions.
5.2.2. Cross-Corpus Corpus Evaluations
We also evaluated the eﬀect of augmenting with syn-
thetic data by performing cross-corpus emotion classiﬁca-
tion. To do this, we implemented a classiﬁer consisting of an
LSTM layer, three dense layers, and a softmax layer for emo-
tion classiﬁcation. We also used two dropout layers between
dense layers to learn more generalised representations. We
selected the architecture of the model based on previous re-
search ﬁndings [22, 23]. We trained the classiﬁer on MFCC
features extracted from the input audio. The model was trained
with a sparse categorical cross-entropy loss and Adam op-
timiser for 100 epochs. The model was trained using the
CREMA-D dataset and the CREMA-D dataset augmented
with synthetic data and was evaluated on the CREMA-D,
SAVEE, and EMODB datasets. The results, shown in Figure
8, demonstrate that adding synthesised data increases accu-
racy not only on the SAVEE and EMODB datasets without
ﬁne-tuning the model but also on the CREMA-D test set as
well.
5.2.3. Changing Gender and Speaker Distributions
In this experiment, we compare the results of data aug-
mentation with new speaker voices that are not present in
the given corpus. For instance, the SAVEE corpus has four
male speakers, and synthetic data can be created either in the
voices of these four male speakers or in the voices of addi-
tional male and female speakers to bring diversity to the data
and augment speech emotion classiﬁcation. We present the
results in Table 4. We compared the results with the baseline
model, which was trained without any augmentation, and
also with the application of speed perturbation to the train-
ing data. We followed [19] and created two copies of aug-
mented samples using the speed perturbation data augmenta-
tion technique. We found that augmenting the data with dif-
ferent speaker voices helps improve performance compared
to the baseline and the widely used data augmentation tech-
nique of speed perturbation.
6. Conclusions
This paper proposes to utilise an emotional text-to-speech
(TTS) system to augment a speech emotion recognition (SER)
system. We present a Tacotron-based multi-speaker emo-
tional TTS system for synthetic speech generation in dif-
ferent speaker voices and use it for data augmentation in
speech emotion recognition to improve performance. The
results showed that the proposed TTS system can generate
high-quality emotionally discriminative samples. When we
augment the SER system with these augmented samples, we
ﬁnd that using synthetic data in diﬀerent emotional voices
A Shahid et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 7 of 9

Multi-Speaker Emotional Speech Synthesis
Figure 7: Confusion matrix for the test set of real, synthetic, and combined synthetic and real audio. The addition of synthetic
data improves emotion classiﬁcation.
Table 4
Results using diﬀerent distributions of synthetic data for speakers and gender
Dataset
Accuracy (%)
Baseline
Speed perturbation
augmentation
Male spakers
synthetic data
Female speakers
synthetic data
Both female and
male synthetic data
SAVEE
65.4
66.8
68.2
69.4
72.3
CREMA-D
68.3
70.1
72.7
72.9
74.3
Figure 8: Test results in cross-corpus setting, which shows
improvements when the model is augmented with synthetic
data.
can help improve performance compared to the widely used
speech data augmentation technique in SER. Our future work
will focus on investigating the learning of a uniﬁed embed-
ding for controlling style and emotions for all people, regard-
less of age, background, and gender.
