EARL: Joint Entity and Relation Linking for
Question Answering over Knowledge Graphs
Mohnish Dubey1,2, Debayan Banerjee1, Debanjan Chaudhuri1,2, and Jens Lehmann1,2
1 Smart Data Analytics Group (SDA), University of Bonn, Germany

2 Fraunhofer IAIS, Bonn, Germany

Abstract. Many question answering systems over knowledge graphs rely on
entity and relation linking components in order to connect the natural language
input to the underlying knowledge graph. Traditionally, entity linking and relation
linking have been performed either as dependent sequential tasks or as independent
parallel tasks. In this paper, we propose a framework called EARL, which performs
entity linking and relation linking as a joint task. EARL implements two different
solution strategies for which we provide a comparative analysis in this paper: The
ﬁrst strategy is a formalisation of the joint entity and relation linking tasks as an
instance of the Generalised Travelling Salesman Problem (GTSP). In order to
be computationally feasible, we employ approximate GTSP solvers. The second
strategy uses machine learning in order to exploit the connection density between
nodes in the knowledge graph. It relies on three base features and re-ranking steps
in order to predict entities and relations. We compare the strategies and evaluate
them on a dataset with 5000 questions. Both strategies signiﬁcantly outperform
the current state-of-the-art approaches for entity and relation linking.
Keywords: Entity Linking, Relation Linking, GTSP, Question Answering
1
Introduction
Question answering over knowledge graphs (KGs) is an active research area concerned
with techniques that allow obtaining information from knowledge graphs based on
natural language input. Speciﬁcally, Semantic Question Answering (SQA) as deﬁned
in [8] is the task of users asking questions in natural language (NL) to which they receive
a concise answer generated by a formal query over a KG.
Semantic question answering systems can be a fully rule based systems [4] or end-
to-end machine learning based systems [19]. The main challenges faced in SQA are (i)
entity identiﬁcation and linking, (ii) relation identiﬁcation and linking, (iii) query intent
identiﬁcation and (iv) formal query generation.
Some QA systems have achieved good performance on simple questions [11],
i.e. those questions which can be answered by linking to at most one relation and at most
one entity in the KG. Recently, the focus has shifted towards complex questions [30],
comprising of multiple entities and relations.
arXiv:1801.03825v4  [cs.AI]  25 Jun 2018

Fig. 1. An excerpt of the subdivision knowledge graph for the example question "Where was the
founder of Tesla and Space X born?". Note that both entities and relations are nodes in the graph.
Usually, all entities and relations need to be correctly linked to the knowledge graph
in order to generate the correct formal query and successfully answer the question of
a user. Hence, it is crucial to perform the linking process with high accuracy and this
is a major bottleneck for the widespread adoption of current SQA systems. In most
entity linking systems [12,26], disambiguation is performed by looking at other entities
present in the input text. However, in the case of natural language questions (short text
fragments) the number of other entities for disambiguation is not high. Therefore, it is
potentially beneﬁcial to consider entity and relation candidates for the input questions
in combination, to maximise the usable evidence for the candidate selection process.
To achieve this, we propose EARL (Entity and Relation Linker), a system for jointly
linking entities and relations in a question to a knowledge graph. EARL treats entity
linking and relation linking as a single task and thus aims to reduce the error caused by
the dependent steps.
EARL uses the knowledge graph to jointly disambiguate entity and relations: It
obtains the context for entity disambiguation by observing the relations surrounding
the entity. Similarly, it obtains the context for relation disambiguation by looking at
the surrounding entities. The system supports multiple entities and relations occurring
in complex questions. EARL implements two different solution strategies: The ﬁrst
strategy is a formalisation of the joint entity and relation linking tasks as an instance of
the Generalised Travelling Salesman Problem (GTSP). Since the problem is NP-hard,
we employ approximate GTSP solvers. The second strategy uses machine learning in
order to exploit the connection density between nodes in the KG. It relies on three base
features and re-ranking steps in order to predict entities and relations. We compare the
strategies and evaluate them on a dataset with 5000 questions. Both strategies outperform
the current state-of-the-art approaches for entity and relation linking.
Let us consider an example to explain the underlying idea: "Where was the founder
of Tesla and SpaceX born?". Here, the entity linker needs to perform disambiguation for
the keyword "Tesla" between the scientist "Nikola Tesla" and the car company "Tesla
Motors". EARL uses all other entities and relations (SpaceX, founder, born) present in the
query. It does this by analysing the subdivision graph of the knowledge graph fragment
containing the candidates for relevant entities and relations. While performing the joint
analysis (Figure 1), EARL detects that there is no likely combination of candidates,
which supports the disambiguation of "Tesla" as "Nikola Tesla", whereas there is a
plausible combination of candidates for the car company "Tesla Motors".
Overall, our contributions in this paper are as follows:

1. The framework EARL, where GTSP solver or Connection Density can be used for
joint linking of entities and relations (Sec. 4).
2. A formalisation of the joint entity and relation linking problem as an instance of the
Generalised Travelling Salesman (GTSP) problem (Sec. 4.2).
3. An implementation of the GTSP strategy using approximate GTSP solvers.
4. A "Connection Density" formalisation and implementation of the joint entity and
relation linking problem as a machine learning task (Sec. 4.3).
5. An adaptive E/R learning module, which can correct errors occurring across different
modules (Sec. 4.4).
6. A comparative analysis of both strategies - GTSP and connection density (Table 2).
7. A fully annotated version of the 5000 question LC-QuAD data-set, where entity and
relations are linked to the KG.
8. A large set of labels for DBpedia predicates and entities covering the syntactic and
semantic variations.3
The paper is organised into the following sections: (2) Related Work outlining some
of the major contributions in entity and relation linking used in question answering;
(3) Problem Statement, where we discuss the problem in depth and our hypotheses for
the solution; (4) the architecture of EARL including preprocessing steps followed by
(i) a GTSP solver or (ii) a connection density approach; (5) Evaluation, with various
evaluation criteria and results; (6) Discussion; and (7) Conclusion.
2
Related Work
The entity and relation linking challenge has attracted a wide variety of solutions over
time. Linking natural language phrases to DBpedia resources, Spotlight [12] breaks
down the process of entity spotting into four phases. It identiﬁes the entity using a list of
surface forms and then generates DBpedia resources candidates. It then disambiguates
the entity based on surrounding context. AGDISTIS [26] follows the inherent structure
of the target knowledge base more closely to solve the problem. Being a graph-based
disambiguation system, AGDISTIS performs disambiguation based on the hop-distance
between the candidates for the entities in a given text, where multiple entities are present.
Babelfy [13] uses word sense disambiguation for entity linking. On the other hand,
S-MART [29] is often appropriated as an entity linking system over Freebase resources.
It generates multiple regression trees and then applies sophisticated structured prediction
techniques to link entities to resources.
As relation linking is generally considered to be a problem-speciﬁc task, only a few
general purpose relation linking systems are in use. Iterative bootstrapping strategies for
extracting RDF resources from unstructured text have been explored in BOA [5] and
PATTY [15]. It consists of natural language patterns corresponding to relations present in
the knowledge graph. Word embedding models are also frequently used to overcome the
linguistic gap for relation linking. RelMatch [20] improves the accuracy of the PATTY
dataset for relation linking. There are tools such as ReMatch [14] which uses wordnet
similarity for relation linking.
3dataset available at https://github.com/AskNowQA/EARL

Linking
Approach
QA System
Advantage
Disadvantage
Sequential [4] [2][21]
-Reduces
candidate
search
space for Relation Linking
-Relation Linking information
cannot be exploited in Entity
Linking process
-Allows schema veriﬁcation
- Errors in Entity Linking cannot
be overcome
Parallel
[27] [28] [16] - Lower runtime
- Entity Linking process cannot
use information from Relation
Linking process and vice versa
- Re-ranking of Entities possible
based on Relation Linking
- Does not allow schema veriﬁ-
cation
Joint
[1] [30]
- Potentially high accuracy
- Complexity increase
(with
- Reduces error propagation
- Larger search space
limited
- Better disambiguation
candidate
- Allows schema veriﬁcation
set)
- Allows re-ranking
Table 1. State of the art for Entity and Relation linking in Question Answering
Many QA systems use an out-of-the-box entity linker, often one of the aforemen-
tioned ones. These tools are not tailor-made for questions and are instead trained on
large text corpora, typically devoid of questions. This may create several problems as
questions do not span over more than one sentence, thereby rendering context-based
disambiguation relatively ineffective. Further, graph based systems rely on the presence
of multiple entities in the source text and disambiguate them based on each other. This
becomes difﬁcult when dealing with questions, as they seldom consist of multiple entity.
Thus, to avoid the issues mentioned, a variety of approaches have been employed
for entity and relation linking for question answering. Semantic parsing-based systems
such as AskNow [4] and TBSL [25] ﬁrst link the entities and generate a list of candidate
relations based on the identiﬁed resources. They use several string and semantic similarity
techniques to ﬁnally select the correct entity and relation candidates for the question. In
these systems, the process of relation linking depends on linking the entities. Generating
entity and relation candidates has also been explored by [30], which uses these candidates
to create staged query graphs, and later re-ranks them based on textual similarity between
the query and the target question, computed by a Siamese architecture-based neural
network. There are some QA systems such as Xser [28], which performs relation linking
independent of entity linking. STAGG[30] takes the top 10 entities given by the entity
linker and tries to build query-subgraph chains corresponding to the question. This
approach considers a ranked list of entity candidates from the entity linker and chooses
the best candidate based on the query subgraph formed. Generally, semantic parsing
based systems treat entity and relation linking as separate tasks which can be observed
in the generalised pipeline of Frankenstein [21] and OKBQA www.okbqa.org/.

3
Overview and Preliminaries
3.1
Overview and Research Questions
As discussed previously, in question answering the tasks of entity and relation linking
are performed either sequentially or in parallel. In sequential systems, usually the
entity linking task is performed ﬁrst, followed by relation linking. As a consequence,
information in the relation linking phase cannot be exploited during entity linking in this
case. In parallel systems, entity and relation linking are performed independently. While
this is efﬁcient in terms of runtime performance, the entity linking process cannot beneﬁt
from further information obtained during relation linking and vice versa. We illustrate
the advantages and disadvantages of both approaches, as well as the systems following
them, in Table 1. Our main contribution in this paper is the provision of a system, which
takes candidates for entity and relation linking as input and performs a joint optimisation
selecting the best combination of entity and relation candidates.
Postulates We have three postulates, which we want to verify based on our approach:
H1: Given candidate lists of entities and relations from a question, the correct solution
is a cycle of minimal cost that visits exactly one candidate from each list.
H2: Given candidate lists of entities and relations from a question, the correct
candidates exhibit relatively dense and short-hop connections among themselves in the
knowledge graph compared to wrong candidate sets.
H3: Jointly linking entity and relation leads to higher accuracy compared to perform-
ing these tasks separately.
We will re-visit all of these postulates in the evaluation section of the paper.
3.2
Preliminaries
We will ﬁrst introduce basic notions from graph theory:
Deﬁnition 1 (Graph). A (simple, undirected) graph is an ordered pair G = (V, E)
where V is a set whose elements are called vertices and E is a set of pairs of vertices
which is called edges.
Deﬁnition 2 (Knowledge Graph). Within the scope of this paper, we deﬁne a knowl-
edge graph as a labelled directed multi-graph. A labelled directed multi-graph is a
tuple KG = (V, E, L) where V is a set called vertices, L is a set of edge labels and
E ⊆V × L × V is a set of ordered triples.
It should be noted that our deﬁnition of knowledge graphs captures basic aspects of
RDF datasets as well as property graphs [6]. The knowledge graph vertices represent
entities and the edges represent relationships between those entities.
Deﬁnition 3 (Subdivision Graph). The subdivision graph [24] S(G) of a graph G is
the graph obtained from G by replacing each edge e = (u, v) of G by a new vertex we
and 2 new edges (u, we) and (v, we) .

Fig. 2. EARL Architecture: In the disambiguation phase one may choose either Connection Density
or GTSP. In cases where training data is not available beforehand GTSP works better.
4
EARL
In general, entity linking is a two step process. The ﬁrst step is to identify and spot the
span of the entity. The second step is to disambiguate or link the entity to the knowledge
graph. For linking, the candidates are generated for the spotted span of the entity and then
the best candidate is chosen for the linking. These two steps are similarly followed in
standard relation linking approaches. In our approach, we ﬁrst spot the spans of entities
and relations. After that, the (disambiguation) linking task is performed jointly for both
entities and relations.
In this section we ﬁrst discuss the step of span detection of entity and relation in
natural language question and candidate list generation. We perform the disambiguation
by two different approaches, which are discussed later in this section.
4.1
Candidate Generation Steps
4.1.1
Shallow Parsing : Given a question, extract all keyword phrases out. EARL
uses SENNA[3] as the keyword extractor. We also remove stop words from the question
at this stage. In example question "Where was the founder of Tesla and SpaceX born?"
we identify <founder, Tesla, SpaceX, born> as our keyword phrases.
4.1.2
E/R Prediction Once keyword phrases are extracted from the questions, the
next step in EARL is to predict whether each of these is an entity or a relation. We use a
character embedding based long-short term memory network (LSTM) to do the same.
The network is trained using labels for entity and relation in the knowledge graph. For
handling out of vocabulary words [17], and also to encode the knowledge graph structure
in the network, we take a multi-task learning approach with hard parameter sharing. Our
model is trained on a custom loss given by:
E = (1 −α) ∗EBCE + α ∗EED
(1)
Where, EBCE is the binary cross entropy loss for the learning objective of a phrase
being an entity or a relation and EEd is the squared eucledian distance between the pre-
dicted embedding and the correct embedding for that label. The value of α is empirically
selected as 0.25. We use pre-trained label embeddings from RDF2Vec [18] which are

trained on knowledge graphs. RDF2Vec provides latent representation for entities and
relations in RDF graphs. It efﬁciently captures the semantic relatedness between entities
and relations.
We use a hidden layer size of 128 for the LSTM, followed by two dense layers of
sizes 512 and 256 respectively. A dropout value of 0.5 is used in the dense layers. The
network is trained using Adam optimizer [9] with a learning rate of 0.0001 and a batch
size of 128. Going back to the example, this module identiﬁes "founder" and "born" as
relations, "Tesla" and "SpaceX" as entities.
4.1.3
Candidate List Generation This module retrieves a candidate list for each
keyword identiﬁed in the natural language question by the shallow parser. To retrieve
the top candidates for a keyword we create an Elasticsearch4 index of URI-label pairs.
Since EARL requires an exhaustive list of labels for a URI in the knowledge graph, we
expand the labels. We used Wikidata labels for entities which are in same-as relation in
the knowledge base. For relations we require labels which were semantically equivalent
(such as writer, author) for which we took synonyms from the Oxford Dictionary API 5.
To cover grammatical variations of a particular label, we added inﬂections from fastText6.
We avoid any bias held towards or against popular entities and relations.
The output of these pre-processing steps are i) set of keywords from the question, ii)
every keyword is identiﬁed either as relation or entity, iii) for every keyword there is a
set of candidate URIs from the knowledge graph.
4.2
Using GTSP for Disambiguation
At this point we may use either a GTSP based solution or Connection Density (later
explained in 4.3) for disambiguation. We start with the formalisation for GTSP based
solution.
The entity and relation linking process can be formalised via spotting and candidate
generation functions as follows: Let S be the set of all strings. We assume that there
is a function spot : S →2S which maps a string s (the input question) to a set K
of substrings of s. We call this set K the keywords occurring in our input. Moreover,
we assume there is a function candKG : K →2V ∪L which maps each keyword to
a set of candidate node and edge labels for our knowledge graph G = (V, E, L).
The goal of joint entity and relation linking is to ﬁnd combinations of candidates,
which are closely related. How closely nodes are related is modelled by a cost function
costKG : (V ∪L) × (V ∪L) →[0, 1]. Lower values indicate closer relationships.
According to our ﬁrst postulate, we aim to encode graph distances in the cost function
to reward those combinations of entities and relations, which are located close to each
other in the input knowledge graph. To be able to consider distances between both
relations and entities, we transform the knowledge graph into its subdivision graph (see
Deﬁnition 3). This subdivision graph allows us to elegantly deﬁne the distance function
as illustrated in Figure 4.
4 https://www.elastic.co/products/elasticsearch
5 https://developer.oxforddictionaries.com/
6 https://fasttext.cc/

Fig. 3. Using GTSP for disambiguation : The bold line represents the solution offered by the GTSP
solver. Each edge represents an existing connection in the knowledge graph. The edge weight is
equal to the number of hops between the two nodes in the knowledge graph. We also add the index
search ranks of the two nodes the edges connect to the edge weight when solving for GTSP.
Given the knowledge graph KG and the functions spot, cand and cost, we can
cast the problem of joint entity and relation linking as an instance of the Generalised
Travelling Salesman (GTSP) problem: We construct a graph G with V = S
k∈K cand(k).
Each node set cand(k) is called a cluster in this vertex set. The GTSP problem is to ﬁnd
a subset V ′ = (v1, . . . , vn) of V which contains exactly one node from each cluster and
the total cost Pn−1
i=1 cost(vi, vi+1) is minimal with respect to all such subsets. Please
note that in our formalisation of the GTSP, we do not require V ′ to be a cycle, i.e. v1
and vn can be different. Moreover, we do not require clusters to be disjoint, i.e. different
keywords can have overlapping candidate sets.
Figure 3 illustrates the problem formulation. Each candidate set for a keyword forms
a cluster in the graph. The weight of each edge in this graph is given by the cost function,
which includes the distance between the nodes in the subdivision graph of the input
knowledge graph as well as the conﬁdence scores of the candidates. The GTSP requires
the solution to visit one element per cluster and minimises the overall distance.
Approximate GTSP Solvers In order to solve the joint entity and relation linking
problem, the corresponding GTSP instance needs to be solved. Unfortunately, the GTSP
is NP-hard [10] and hence it is intractable. However, since GTSP can be reduced to
standard TSP, several polynomial approximation algorithms exist to solve GTSP. The
state-of-the-art approximate GTSP solver is the Lin–Kernighan–Helsgaun algorithm [7].
Here, a GTSP instance is transformed into standard asymmetric TSP instances using
the Noon-Bean transformation. It allows the heuristic TSP solver LKH to be used for
solving the initial GTSP. Among LKH’s characteristics, its use of 1-tree approximation
for determining a candidate edge set, the extension of the basic search step, and effective
rules for directing and pruning the search contribute to its efﬁciency.
While a GTSP based solution would be suitable for solving the joint entity and
relation linking problem, it has the drawback that it can only provide the best candidate
for each keyword given the list of candidates. Most approximate GTSP solutions do

not explore all possible paths and nodes and hence a comprehensive scoring and re-
ranking of nodes is not possible. Ideally, we would like to go beyond this and re-rank
all candidates for a given keyword. This would open up new opportunities from a QA
perspective, i.e. a user could be presented with a sorted list of multiple possible answers
to select from.
4.3
Using Connection Density for Disambiguation
GTSP
Connection Density
Requires no training data
Requires data to train the XGBoost classiﬁer
The approximate GSTP LKH solution is only
able to return the top result as not all possible
paths are explored.
Returns a list of all possible candidates in order
of score
Time complexity of LKH is O(nL2) where n
= number of nodes in graph, L = number of
clusters in graph of
Time complexity is O(N 2L2) where N = num-
ber of nodes per cluster, L = number of clusters
in graph
Relies on identifying the path with minimum
cost
Depends on identifying dense and short-hop
connections
Table 2. Comparison of GTSP based approach and Connection density for Disambiguation
As discussed earlier, once the candidate list generation is achieved, EARL offers two
independent modules for the entity and relation linking. In the previous subsection 4.2
we discussed one approach using GTSP. In this subsection we will discuss the second
approach for disambiguation using Connection Density, which works as an alternative to
the GTSP approach. We have also compared the two methods in table 2.
4.3.1
Formalisation of Connection Density: For identiﬁed keywords in a question
we have the set K as deﬁned earlier. For each keyword Ki we have list Li which consists
of all the candidate uris generated by text search. We have n such candidate lists for
each question given by, L = {L1, L2, L3, ..., Ln}. We consider a probable candidate ci
m
∈Li, where m is the total number of candidates to be considered per keyword, which is
the same as the number of items in each list.
Fig. 4. Connection Density with example: The dotted lines represent corresponding connections
between the nodes in the knowledge base.

The hop distance dKGhops(ck
i , co
j) ∈Z+ is number of hops between ck
i and co
j
in the subdivision knowledge graph. If the shortest path from ck
i and co
j requires the
traversal of h edges then dKGhops(ck
i , co
j) = h.
Connection Density is based on the three features: Text similarity based initial Rank
of the List item (Ri) Connection-Count (C) and Hop-Count (H)
Initial Rank of the List (Ri), is generated by retrieving the candidates from the search
index via text search. This is achieved in the preprocessing steps as mentioned in the
section 4. Further, to deﬁne C we introduce dConnect.
dConnect(ck
i , co
j) =
(
1
if dKGhops(ck
i , co
j) ⩽2
0
otherwise
(2)
The Connection-Count C for an candidate c, is the number of connections from c to
candidates in all the other lists divided by the total number n of keywords spotted. We
consider nodes at hop counts of greater than 2 disconnected because nodes too far away
from each other in the knowledge base do not carry meaningful semantic connection to
each other.
C(ck
i ) = 1/n
X
o|o̸=k
j=m
X
j=1
dConnect(ck
i , co
j)
(3)
The Hop-Count H for a candidate c, is the sum of distances from c to all the other
candidates in all the other lists divided by the total number of keywords spotted.
H(ck
i ) = 1/n
X
o|o̸=k
j=m
X
j=1
dKGhops(ck
i , co
j)
(4)
4.3.2
Candidate Re-ranking: H, C and Ri constitute our feature space X. This
feature space is used to ﬁnd the most relevant candidate given a set of candidates for
an identiﬁed keyword in the question. We use a machine learning classiﬁer to learn the
probability of being the most suitable candidate ¯ci given the set of candidates. The ﬁnal
list Rf is obtained by re-ranking the candidate lists based on the probability assigned by
the classiﬁer. Ideally, ¯ci should be the top-most candidate in Rf.
The training data consists of the features H, C and Ri and a label 1 if the candidate is
the correct, 0 otherwise. For the testing, we apply the learned function from the classiﬁer
f on X for every candidate ∈ci and get a probability score for being the most suitable
candidate. We perform experiments with three different classiﬁers, namely extreme
gradient boosting(xgboost), SVM(with a linear kernel) and logistic regression to re-rank
the candidates. The experiments are done using a 5-fold cross-validation strategy where,
for each fold we train the classiﬁer on the training set and observe the mean reciprocal
rank (MRR) of ¯ci on the testing set after re-ranking the candidate lists based on the
assigned probability. The average MRR on 5-fold cross-validation for the three classiﬁers
are 0.905, 0.704 and 0.794 respectively. Hence, we use xgboost as the ﬁnal classiﬁer in
our subsequent experiments for re-ranking.

4.3.3
Algorithm We now present a pseudo-code version of the algorithm to calculate
the two features: Connection Density algorithm is used for ﬁnding hop count and
connection count for each candidate node. We then pass these features to a classiﬁer
for scoring and ranking This algorithm (Algorithm 1 Connection Density) has a time
complexity given by O(N 2L2) where N is the number of keywords and L is the number
of candidates for each keyword.
Algorithm 1: Connection Density
function :ConnectionDensity( )
input
:L , with n number of keywords // an array of arrays
output
:Hop-Count H, Connection-Count C
1 dConnectCounter = { } // Count for connections from and to each node
2 dHopCounter = { } // Similarly hop counts for each node
3 foreach La ∈L do
4
foreach ca
i ∈La do
5
dConnectCounter[ca
i ] = 0 // Initialising the dictionary
6
dHopCounter[ca
i ] = 0
7 foreach (La, Lb) ∈L do
8
foreach ca
i ∈La do
9
foreach cb
j ∈Lb do
10
if dKGhops(ca
i ,cb
j) <= 2 then
11
dConnectCounter[ca
i ] += 1
12
dConnectCounter[cb
j] += 1
13
dHopCounter[ca
i ] += dKGhops(ca
i ,cb
j)
14
dHopCounter[cb
j] += dKGhops(ca
i ,cb
j)
15 foreach (ci, score) ∈dConnectCounter do
16
C(ci) = dConnectCounter(ci)/n // Normalisation with respect to
number of keywords spotted
17 foreach (ci, score) ∈dHopCounter do
18
H(ci) = dHopCounter(ci)/n
19 return (Hop-Count H, Connection-Count C)
4.4
Adaptive E/R Learning
EARL uses a series of sequential modules with little to no feedback across them. Hence,
the errors in one module propagate down the line. To trammel this, we implement an
adaptive approach especially for curbing the errors made in the pre-processing modules.
While conducting experiments, it was observed that most of the errors are in the shallow
parsing phase, mainly because of grammatical errors in LC-QuAD which directly affects
the consecutive E/R prediction and candidate selection steps. If the E/R prediction is
erroneous, it will search in a wrong Elasticsearch index for probable candidate list
generation. In such a case none of the candidates ∈ci for a keyword would contain ¯ci as
is reﬂected by the probabilities assigned to ci by the re-ranker module. If the maximum
probability assigned to ci is less than a very small threshold value, empirically chosen as

Fig. 5. Adaptive E/R learning
0.01, we re-do the steps from ER prediction after altering the original prediction. If the
initial assigned probability is entity, we change it to relation and vice-versa, example
ﬁgure 5. This module is empirically evaluated in table 5.
5
Evaluation
Data Set: LC-QuAD [23] is the largest complex questions data set available for QA over
KGs. We have annotated this data set to create a gold label data set for entity and relation
linking, i.e. each question now contains the correct KG entity and relation URIs with
their respective text spans in the question. This annotation was done in a semi-automated
process and subsequently manually veriﬁed. The annotated dataset of 5000 questions is
publicly available at https://figshare.com/projects/EARL/28218
5.1
Experiment 1: Comparison of GTSP, LKH and Connection Density
Aim: We evaluate hypotheses (H1 and H2) that the connection density and GTSP can be
used for joint linking task. We also evaluate the LKH approximation solution of GTSP
for doing this task. We compare the time complexity of the three different approaches.
Results: Connection density results in a similar accuracy as that of an exact GTSP
solution with a better time complexity (see Table 3). Connection density has worse time
complexity than approximate GTSP solver LKH if we assume the best case of equal
cluster sizes for LKH. However, it provides a better accuracy. Moreover, the average
time taken in EARL using connection density (including the candidate generation step)
is 0.42 seconds per question. Further observing Table 3, we can see that the brute force
GTSP solution and Connection Density have similar accuracy, but the brute force GTSP
solution has exponential time complexity. The approximate solution LKH has polynomial
run time, but its accuracy drops compared to the brute force GTSP solution. Moreover,
from a question answering perspective the ranked list offered by the Connection Density
approach is useful since it can be presented to the user as a list of possible correct
Approach
Accuracy (K=30) Accuracy (K=10) Time Complexity
Brute Force GTSP
0.61
0.62
O(n22n)
LKH - GTSP
0.59
0.58
O(nL2)
Connection Density 0.61
0.62
O(N 2L2)
Table 3. Empirical comparison of Connection Density and GTSP: n = number of nodes in graph;
L = number of clusters in graph; N = number of nodes per cluster; top K results retrieved from
ElasticSearch.

solutions or used by subsequent processing steps of a QA system. Hence, for further
experiments in this section we used the connection density approach.
5.2
Experiment 2: Evaluating Joint Connectivity and Re-ranker
Aim: Evaluating the performance of Connection Density for predicting the correct
entity and relation candidates from a set of possible E-R candidates. Here we evaluate
hypothesis H2, the correct candidates exhibit relatively dense and short-hop connections.
Value of k
Rf based on Ri
Rf based on C, H
Rf based on Ri, C, H
k = 10
0.543
0.689
0.708
k = 30
0.544
0.666
0.735
k = 50
0.543
0.617
0.737
k = 100
0.540
0.534
0.733
k∗= 10
0.568
0.864
0.905
k∗= 30
0.554
0.779
0.864
k∗= 50
0.549
0.708
0.852
k∗= 50
0.545
0.603
0.817
Table 4. Evaluation of joint linking performance
Metrics: We use the mean reciprocal rank of the correct candidate ¯ci for each entity/re-
lation in the query. From the probable candidate list generation step, we fetch a list of
top candidates for each identiﬁed phrase in a query with a k value of 10, 30, 50 and 100,
where k is the number of results from text search for each keyword spotted. To evaluate
the robustness of our classiﬁer and features we perform two tests. i) On the top half
of Table 4 we re-rank the top k candidates returned from the previous step. ii) On the
bottom half of Table 4 we artiﬁcially insert the correct candidate into each list to purely
test re-ranking abilities of our system (this portion of the table contains k∗as the number
of items in each candidate list). We inject the correct uris at the lowest rank (see k∗), if it
was not retrieved in the top k results from previous step.
Results: The results in Table 4 depict that our algorithm is able to successfully re-rank
the correct URIs if the correct ones are already present. In case correct URIs were
missing in the candidate list, we inserted URIs artiﬁcially as the last candidate . The
MRR then increased from 0.568 to 0.905.
5.3
Experiment 3: Evaluating Entity Linking
Aim: To evaluate the performance of EARL with other state-of-the-art systems on the
entity linking task. This also evaluates our hypothesis H3.
Metrics: We are reporting the performance on accuracy. Accuracy is deﬁned by the ratio
of the correctly identiﬁed entities over the total number of entities present.
Result: EARL performs better entity linking than the other systems (Table 5), namely
Babelfy, DBpediaSpotlight, TextRazor and AGDISTIS + FOX (limited to entity types -
LOC, PER, ORG). We conducted this test on the LC-QuAD and QALD-7 dataset7. The
value of k is set to 30 while re-ranking and fetching the most probable entity.
7https://project-hobbit.eu/challenges/qald2017/

System
Accuracy LC-QuAD
Accuracy - QALD
FOX [22] + AGDISTIS [26]
0.36
0.30
DBpediaSpotlight [12]
0.40
0.42
TextRazor8
0.52
0.53
Babelfy [13]
0.56
0.56
EARL without adaptive learning
0.61
0.55
EARL with adaptive learning
0.65
0.57
Table 5. Evaluating EARL’s Entity Linking performance
5.4
Experiment 4: Evaluating Relation Linking
Aim: Given a question, the task is to the perform relation linking in the question. This
also evaluates our hypothesis H3.
Metrics: We use the same accuracy metric as in the Experiment 3
Results: As reported in Table 6, EARL outperforms other approaches we could run
on LC-QuAD and QALD. The large difference in accuracy of relation-linking over
LC-QuAD over QALD, is due to the face that LC-QuAD has 82% questions with more
than one relation, thus detecting relation phrases in the question was difﬁcult.
System
Accuracy LC-QuAD
Accuracy - QALD
ReMatch [14]
0.12
0.31
RelMatch [20]
0.15
0.29
EARL without adaptive learning
0.32
0.45
EARL with adaptive learning
0.36
0.47
Table 6. Evaluating EARL’s Relation Linking performance
6
Discussion
Our analysis shows that we have provided two tractable (polynomial with respect to
the number of clusters and the elements per cluster) approaches of solving the joint
entity and relation linking problem. We experimently achieve similar accuracy as the
exact GTSP solution with both LKH-GTSP and Connection Density with better time
complexity, which allows us to use the system in QA engines in practice. It must be
noted that one of the salient features of LKH-GTSP is that it requires no training data for
the disambiguation module while on the other hand Connection Density performs better
given training data for its XGBoost classiﬁer. While the system was tested on DBpedia,
it is not restricted to a particular knowledge graph.
There are some limitations: The current approach does not tackle questions with
hidden relations, such as "How many shows does HBO have?". Here the seman-
tic understanding of the corresponding SPARQL query is to count all TV shows
(dbo:TelevisionShow) which are owned by (dbo:company) the HBO (dbr:HBO). Here
dbo:company is the hidden relation which we do not attempt to link. However, it could
be argued that this problem goes beyond the scope of relation linking and could be better
handled by the query generation phase of a semantic QA system.
Another limitation is that EARL cannot be used as inference tool for entities as
required by some questions. For example Taikonaut is an astronaut with Chinese nation-
ality. The system can only link taikonaut to dbr:Astronaut, but additional information

can not be captured. It should be noted, however, that EARL can tackle the problem of
the "lexical gap" to a great extent as it uses synonyms via the grammar inﬂection forms.
Our approaches of LKH-GTSP and Connection Density both have polynomial and
approximately similar time complexities. EARL with either Connection Density or
LKH-GTSP can process a question in a few hundred milliseconds on a standard desktop
computer on average. The result logs, experimental setup and source code of our system
are publicly available at: https://github.com/AskNowQA/EARL.
7
Conclusions and Future Work
Here we propose EARL, a framework for joint entity and relation linking. We provided
two strategies for joint linking - one based on reducing the problem to an instance of the
Generalised Travelling Salesman problem and the other based on a connection density
based machine learning approach. Our experiments on QA benchmarks resulted in
accuracies which are signiﬁcantly above the results of current state-of-the-art approaches
for entity and relation linking. In future, we will improve the candidate generation phase
to ensure that a higher proportion of correct candidates are retrieved.
Acknowledgement This work is supported by the funding received from the EU
H2020 projects WDAqua (ITN, GA. 642795) and HOBBIT (GA. 688227).
