Trust in AutoML: Exploring Information Needs for Establishing
Trust in Automated Machine Learning Systems
Jaimie Drozdal
Gaurav Dass
Bingsheng Yao
Changruo Zhao

Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Justin Weisz
Dakuo Wang
Michael Muller

IBM Research
Lin Ju

IBM
Hui Su

IBM Research
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
ABSTRACT
We explore trust in a relatively new area of data science: Auto-
mated Machine Learning (AutoML). In AutoML, AI methods are
used to generate and optimize machine learning models by auto-
matically engineering features, selecting models, and optimizing
hyperparameters. In this paper, we seek to understand what kinds of
information influence data scientists’ trust in the models produced
by AutoML? We operationalize trust as a willingness to deploy a
model produced using automated methods. We report results from
three studies – qualitative interviews, a controlled experiment, and
a card-sorting task – to understand the information needs of data
scientists for establishing trust in AutoML systems. We find that
including transparency features in an AutoML tool increased user
trust and understandability in the tool; and out of all proposed fea-
tures, model performance metrics and visualizations are the most
important information to data scientists when establishing their
trust with an AutoML tool.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing →User studies; Empirical studies
in HCI; • Computing methodologies →Artificial intelligence.
KEYWORDS
AutoAI, AutoML, AutoDS, Automated Artificial Intelligence, Auto-
mated Machine Learning, Automated Data Science, Trust
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a

IUI ’20, March 17–20, 2020, Cagliari, Italy
© 2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-7118-6/20/03...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3377325.3377501
ACM Reference Format:
Jaimie Drozdal, Gaurav Dass, Bingsheng Yao, Changruo Zhao, Justin Weisz,
Dakuo Wang, Michael Muller, Lin Ju, and Hui Su. 2020. Trust in AutoML:
Exploring Information Needs for Establishing Trust in Automated Machine
Learning Systems. In 25th International Conference on Intelligent User Inter-
faces (IUI ’20), March 17–20, 2020, Cagliari, Italy. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
11 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3377325.3377501
1
INTRODUCTION
The practice of data science is rapidly becoming automated. New
techniques developed by the artificial intelligence and machine
learning communities are able to perform data science work such
as selecting models, engineering features, and tuning hyperparam-
eters [26, 30, 33, 36, 68]. Sometimes, these automated methods are
able to produce better results than people [38]. Given the current
shortage of data scientists in the profession [8], automated tech-
niques hold much promise for either improving the productivity of
current data scientists [61] or replacing them outright [56].
Many companies and open source communities are creating
tools and technologies for conducting automated data science [4, 9,
13, 15, 21, 42, 46, 49]. However, in order for these automated data
science techniques – which we collectively refer to as “AutoML”
– to become more widely used in practice, multiple studies have
recently suggested that a significant hurdle in establishing trust
must first be overcome [12, 34, 61, 62]. Can AI-generated models be
trusted? What factors contribute to the trust of AutoML systems?
In this paper, we discuss users’ trust in AutoML systems as it
pertains to transparency and understandability, thus we believe
it is necessary to clarify these three concepts. Our transparency
concept derives from [40] that transparency of the automation is
“the quality of an interface pertaining to its ability to afford an
operator’s comprehension about an intelligent agent’s intent, per-
formance, future plans and reasoning process.” Understandability
is the quality of comprehensibility in an automation tool. However,
high transparency of a system does not necessarily lead to high
understandability.
arXiv:2001.06509v1  [cs.LG]  17 Jan 2020

IUI ’20, March 17–20, 2020, Cagliari, Italy
J Drozdal et al.
In this paper, we use a definition of trust as “the extent to which a
user is confident in, and willing to act on the basis of, the recommen-
dations, actions, and decisions of an artificially intelligent decision
aid” [37]. Furthermore, we adopt an informational perspective of
trust [17, 19, 51, 67]: having information about how an AutoML sys-
tem works, as well as the artifacts it produces (i.e. machine learning
models), ought to increase trust in that system due to increased
levels of transparency. Conversely, not having information about
an AutoML system or its artifacts ought to decrease trust in that
system. Thus, we seek to understand what kinds of information are
important for an AutoML system to include in its user interface in
order to establish trust with its users.
Current AutoML systems offer a myriad of information about
their own operation and about the artifacts they produce. We
coarsely group this information into three categories: information
about the process of how AutoML works (e.g. information about
the data (such as how it was transformed or pre-processed), how it
performs feature engineering), and information about the models
produced by the system (such as their evaluation metrics).
In this paper, we report results from three studies designed to
evaluate how the inclusion or exclusion of these types of informa-
tion impacts data scientists’ trust in an AutoML system. Our first
study is formative, consisting of a number of semi-structured in-
terviews designed to capture the universe of information currently
present across a representative sample of commercial AutoML prod-
ucts, and identify information that is not commonly included in
those products. We hypothesize that the inclusion of this “hidden”
information will increase the transparency of AutoML systems, and
hence, increase the amount of trust users’ place in it. Our second
study is evaluative, designed to quantitatively test the impact of the
inclusion of new information – what we refer to as “transparency
features” – on ratings of trust. Our third study is an open card-
sorting task that aims to understand the relative importance of
different kinds of information in the AutoML “information space.”
We focus on addressing two research questions in our work.
• RQ1. To what extent does the inclusion of new transparency
features affect trust in and understanding of an AutoML
system?
• RQ2. What information is highly important for establish-
ing trust in an AutoML system? What information is not
important?
Our results make a number of significant contributions to the
existing literature on data science work and to the IUI community.
• We find quantitative evidence that the inclusion of trans-
parency features – visualizations of input data distributions
and a visual depiction of the feature engineering process –
increases peoples’ ratings of trust and understanding of an
AutoML system.
• We provide a ranking of relative importance of different
kinds of informational “nuggets” in establishing trust in an
AutoML system.
We expect our work to inform the design of AutoML systems
by highlighting the different types of informational needs data
scientists have in order to establish trust in the system.
2
RELATED WORK
We first review literature on human-in-the-loop machine learning,
focused on understanding the work practices and tool use of data
scientists. We then discuss recent advances in automated data sci-
ence, and summarize issues of trust and transparency in machine
learning.
2.1
Human-in-the-loop Machine Learning
Data science is the process of generating insights from primarily
quantitative data [32]. Often, data scientists leverage techniques
from machine learning to build models that make predictions or rec-
ommendations based on historical data. Studies have suggested that
data science work practices are different from traditional engineer-
ing work [14, 32, 44]. For example, Muller et al. [44] decomposed
the data science workflow into 4 sub-stages, based on interviews
with professional data scientists: data acquisition, data cleaning,
feature engineering, and model building and selection. They argued
that a data science task is more similar to a crafting work practice
than an engineering work practice, as data scientists need to be
deeply involved in the curation and the design of data, similar to
how artists craft their work.
Wang et al. proposed a three stage framework of data science
workflow with ten sub-steps [61]. It expands [44] workflow, which
mostly focuses on the model training steps and takes into account
the model deployment steps after the model is trained. In this paper,
we adopt the framework of [61], as shown in Figure 1, and we focus
mostly on data scientists’ trust in the model validation sub-step of
the modeling phase.
Preparation
Modeling
Deployment
Ensembling
Model Validation
Model 
Improvement
Data Acquisition
Data Cleaning & 
Labeling
Runtime 
Monitoring
Model 
Deployment
Hyperparameter 
Optimization
Feature 
Engineering
Model Selection
Figure 1: A data science workflow, consisting of three high-
level phases: data preparation, model building, and model
deployment [61]
CSCW researchers have also looked at collaborative aspects
of data science work. Hou and Wang [20] conducted an ethnog-
raphy study to explore collaboration in a civic data hackathon
event where data science workers help Non-profit organizations
to develop insights from their data. Mao et al. [39] interviewed
biomedical domain experts and data scientists who worked on the
same data science projects. Their findings partially echo previous
literature [14, 32, 44] results that data science workflow has multi-
ple steps. In addition, they also suggest that data science is a highly
collaborative effort where domain experts and data science workers
need to work closely together to advance the workflow. Often times,
the two parties are not “speaking the same language” [20] or do
not have the common ground related to their goal [39]. Thus, a
“broker role” in the team, who can bridge the two backgrounds and

Trust in AutoML: Exploring Information Needs for Establishing Trust in Automated Machine Learning Systems
IUI ’20, March 17–20, 2020, Cagliari, Italy
constantly re-calibrate the goal, may help to ease these tensions
and support the success of this cross-discipline data science work.
These empirical findings guided the designers and system builders
to propose human-in-the-loop data science design principles [1, 2,
11, 27, 28, 59]. Gil et al. surveyed papers about building machine
learning systems and developed a set of design guidelines for build-
ing human-centered machine learning systems [11]. Amershi et
al. in parallel reviewed a broader spectrum of AI applications and
proposed a set of design suggestions for AI system in general [2],
some of which are overlapping with the ones in [11].
With these design suggestions, more and more machine learning
tools are built to support data scientists. For example, Jupyter Note-
book is one of the successful examples [22]. It incorporates data
scientists’ three needs of coding, documenting narrative, and ob-
serving execution results [32] into a cohesive user interface. Thus,
many data science workers adopt Jupyter notebooks as their pri-
mary working environment. Researchers have studied how data
scientists use Notebooks [48, 50], how to build version control
components into Notebooks [27], how to enable multi-users syn-
chronous editing in Notebook [59], and other innovative designs.
In this paper, we build upon the understandings of how data
science teams work and how to build systems to support data
scientists work practice, but focus specifically on the scenario where
users interact with automated machine learning techniques in a
data science work practice.
2.2
Automated Machine Learning (AutoML)
Automated Data Science or Machine Learning (AutoML for short)
refers to systems that automatically select and optimize the ma-
chine learning model in each of the data science steps [62]. For
example, AI researchers have developed various algorithms to au-
tomatically clean data [31]. The feature engineering step is tedious
for human data scientists thus lots of solutions have been proposed
to automatically generate new features and select the best subset of
the features while balancing good model performance [25, 26, 33].
As for the model selection and hyperparameter optimization steps,
data scientists are already relying on publicly available libraries
such as Auto-sklearn [4] and TPOT [9], instead of writing code
from scratch.
However, all of these automation technologies focus only on a
single step and the data scientists still need to put various pieces
of the puzzle together to assemble a model generation pipeline.
End-to-end AutoML solutions have only recently become a reality.
These technologies arguably can complete the entire data science
workflow (as in Figure 1) from data acquisition to model selection,
and then to model deployment and improvement. Large technology
companies have released automated data science products, such as
Google’s AutoML [13], IBM’s AutoAI [21], and Microsoft’s Azure
Studio [42]. Small startups such as H2O [15] and Data Robot [49]
are also capturing significant market share.
With these latest developments, Automated Machine Learning
becomes increasingly promising, and more and more researchers
have begun to explore its user experience [11, 34, 61]. For example,
Gil et al. reviewed existing literature on how data scientists use
machine learning applications, from which they proposed design
guidelines for the development of future AutoML systems [11].
Wang et al. interviewed 20 professional data scientists and asked
their perceptions on AutoML technology [61]. They found that data
scientists in general hold a positive position towards the collabora-
tive future where “human and AI work together to build models”.
Lee et al. referenced back to the “mixed-initiative” literature and
argued that AutoML and human users can "collaborate efficiently
to achieve [the] user’s goals" [34], thus it is a human-in-the-loop
perspective of AutoML.
This emerging group of empirical studies enrich our under-
standing of how data scientists think, interact, and collaborate
with AutoML tools and generate useful design guidelines to im-
prove an AutoML system’s usability. However, as recent works sug-
gested [12, 34, 47, 62], transparency and trust in this new AutoML
technology is another major hindrance for large scale adoption.
Thus, in the next subsection, we will focus on the transparency and
trust issues of AutoML.
2.3
Trust in Machine Learning and in AutoML
AutoML is a relatively new topic, and therefore not many works
have investigated trust issues of AutoML systems in particular -
e.g., [11, 34, 61]. All of these works made design suggestions that, in
order to make AutoML systems accessible and effortless for the data
scientist users in the future, designers and system builders should
present not only the final model results coming out of the system,
but also the pipeline steps and decisions made in each of those steps
along with the model generation process. This argument implies
users demand higher transparency from AutoML system.
To accommodate the user needs of transparency and trust, a few
recent works proposed various design prototypes for increasing Au-
toML systems transparency [12, 34, 47, 62]. For example, Wang et
al. developed a first of its kind visualization systems, ATMSeer, that
aims to open up the blackbox of an end-to-end AutoML system [62].
The authors argue that their tool can provide a multi-granularity
visualization (both for the model selection as well as for hyperpa-
rameter selection) to the users so that they can monitor the AutoML
process and adjust the search space in real time [62].
This approach of using visualizations to increase transparency of
a system has been common in the traditional machine learning sys-
tem designs [45, 60, 63]. For example, Google Vizer is a visualization
tool that can reveal the optimization details of the hyperparameter
tuning step [12]. In addition, it provides a visualization that shows
the range of each hyperparameter in a model and the relationship
between performance and hyperparameters. The authors hope that
in this way, the users can understand how a final choice of the
hyperparameter value is decided among alternative options (i.e., it
leads to better model performance). VisualHyperTuner is a similar
visualization-based system that focuses only on the hyperparameter
tuning step [47].
All of these systems fall short in presenting an overview of the
AutoML process and how each model pipeline was created. Dignum
et al. suggests that transparency resides in not only the result of
the model but also the data and the processes where the model has
been generated [6]. This task is challenging for a visualization, as
some of the steps in the AutoML pipeline have a categorical search
space (e.g., various algorithms in the model selection step) but
others have a continuous search dimension (e.g., hyperparameters

IUI ’20, March 17–20, 2020, Cagliari, Italy
J Drozdal et al.
values in the optimization step). Furthermore, among these AutoML
steps, some have a sub-step or even a sub-sub-step. Thus, using
one visualization to convey both the overview view of the pipeline
as well as the necessary details of each step in the workflow is
challenging.
ATMSeer [62] presents a nice framework of proposing a visualiza-
tion prototype on top of an existing AutoML system, and evaluating
it with a number of users in a user study. Our paper adopted this re-
search methodology and we propose low-fidelity design prototypes
(based on the feedback from a Think-Aloud study) and evaluate
these features with users on the perceived transparency level of
AutoML. We hope these features can increase AutoML transparency
and further promote better collaboration and trust between the data
scientist and AutoML during the Preparation and Modeling phases
(Figure 1). We leave the transparency topic in the Deployment phase
for future work.
In particular, we join the group of researchers who argue that
higher transparency of an AI system leads to higher trust by a user
of that system [17, 35, 51, 66, 67]. Because transparency and trust
of AutoML systems is a relatively new research topic, we want to
build our baseline understanding about what information users
need and how they need those information from an AutoML user
interface. We designed a think-aloud pilot study as our first of a
series of three studies. Based on the findings from study 1 with four
data science students, we operationalize the transparency of an
AutoML system into various design features such as “showing the
distribution of data column (data-oriented transparency)” or “show-
ing how AutoML performs feature engineering (process-oriented
transparency)”. We hope a comparison user study (study 2) between
users who are and those who are not exposed to these transparency
features can reveal the quantifiable differences in their trust in
the AutoML system. Throwing more information to users can al-
ways increase the transparency of AutoML, but we are in danger
of users’ cognitive overload. To prioritize users information needs,
we designed a study 3 that asks users to do a card-sorting task to
prioritize those needs.
In what follows, we will start reporting our study designs and
findings of the three user studies in order.
3
STUDY 1: THINK-ALOUD EVALUATION
We conducted a small pilot study with four computer science Grad-
uate students to understand the current “information landscape”
of AutoML systems. Participants were asked to use four popular
commercial AutoML products while thinking aloud about the tool’s
information design and how it affected their feelings of trust in the
tool.
Participants were presented with four tools, in random order:
Google’s AutoML Tables [13], Microsoft’s Azure Machine Learning
Studio [42], IBM’s Watson Studio AutoAI [21], and H2O’s Driver-
less AI [15]. We selected these tools based on their popularity, the
fact that they require no coding from the user, and the fact that they
automate the entire machine learning workflow from data prepara-
tion to model evaluation. Participants were given 30 minutes with
each tool, with the task of generating and evaluating models for
the Titanic dataset [24].
Participants were asked to think aloud as they interacted with
each tool. Participants were also prompted with questions such as,
“is this tool showing you everything you need at this moment?” and
“how is this [feature/visualization/information] affecting your trust
in the tool?” At the end of reviewing all four tools, participants
were asked which of the four tools they preferred.
Our procedures were approved by our institution’s review board,
and participants provided written informed consent before partici-
pating. Participants were not compensated for their participation
in this study.
3.1
Results
Overall, transparency was a highly-desired feature from all par-
ticipants. Specifically, transparency of both data and models were
mentioned while interacting with all four of the tools.
Participants’ feedback was also varied, with many individual
differences in preferences. Each of the four participants preferred a
different tool. Two participants were hyper-focused on information
about data and consistently commented on the lack of support
for having conversations with the data [44], either in raw or pre-
processed form. Another participant cared the most about the model
selection process and noted the lack of transparency around the
set of candidate models that the tools considered when performing
model selection.
All participants expressed a lack of understanding about the
different processes used by the AutoML tools.
“I have no idea what was done to the data.” (P2)
“I would not use this software because it’s not clear what
is happening when the experiment is running.” (P3)
“Feature engineering is complicated and important, but
I don’t know how it’s doing it.” (P4)
Based on feedback from participants in this study, we focused on
understanding how two transparency features might affect trust in
an AutoML tool: visualizations of data distributions, and a visual de-
piction of how the feature engineering process works. We explored
the effect of these transparency features in Study 2, discussed in
the next section. Additional feedback from this study regarding
the different kinds of information present in each of the AutoML
interfaces was used in the design of Study 3, discussed in Section 5.
4
STUDY 2: INCREASING TRUST VIA
TRANSPARENCY FEATURES
Study 1 suggested that commercial AutoML systems at the time of
the study were lacking in transparency. In this study, we conducted
a more detailed examination of how increasing transparency would
affect trust. We recognize that transparency may be provided at
different levels:
• data-oriented transparency (e.g. showing data distributions
for the columns in the training set)
• process-oriented transparency (e.g. how AutoML performs
feature engineering or hyperparameter optimization)
• model-oriented transparency (e.g. showing various accuracy
metrics on a validation set)
In this study, we compared a baseline AutoML user interface with
one that included additional transparency features that provided

Trust in AutoML: Exploring Information Needs for Establishing Trust in Automated Machine Learning Systems
IUI ’20, March 17–20, 2020, Cagliari, Italy
additional insight into the distributions of input features (data-
oriented transparency) and the process by which the AutoML engi-
neers new features (process-oriented transparency). These trans-
parency features were chosen due to the overwhelming amount of
feedback from participants in Study 1, who felt that both of these
features were important, yet missing from the AutoML systems.
They may appear simple, but at the time of the study these features
did not exist in a majority of AutoML tools. Not to mention, while
including distributions of input features as a transparency feature
might be argued as overly simplified the future of AutoML is one
in which the entire data science process is captured in a single
environment.
To evaluate these transparency features, we used screenshots
from a commercially-available AutoML system, removing refer-
ences to the company’s name and logo, in order to provide both
a realistic AutoML experience, and one in which we could easily
incorporate the transparency features. Specifically, we used IBM’s
Watson Studio AutoAI [21]. Figure 2 shows examples of how these
transparency features were shown to participants.
4.1
Participants
We recruited 21 participants who had prior experience with ma-
chine learning to complete our study. One participant was dropped
from our study due to a lack of knowledge about machine learning
that was uncovered during the course of the study; thus, our final
sample consists of N = 20 participants.
Of the 20 participants, 5 (25%) were Undergraduate students
and 15 (75%) were Graduate students. Five participants (25%) were
female and 15 were male (75%), which is slightly higher than the
proportion of women in data science (16.8%) reported in the 2018
Kaggle data science survey [25]. Students’ areas of study included
information technology (35%), computer science (20%), business
analytics (15%), mathematics (10%), quantitative finance (10%), and
other disciplines (10%).
4.2
Procedure
Prior to participating in our study, participants listened to the na-
ture of the study and its procedures. Participants provided written
informed consent. Our study was reviewed and approved by the
institutional review board at our institution.
Participation in the study took approximately one hour, and
participants received a $10 USD gift card for their time.1 We began
by giving participants a packet of information about the dataset,
which included column meanings, and all of the documentation
on the tool available online from the provider. These handouts
were to be used as reference materials while completing the study.
Next, the experiment proceeded in two phases – reviewing AutoAI-
produced models (described in the next section) and a card-sorting
task (described in Section 5).
4.2.1
Reviewing AutoML-produced models. In this phase, partici-
pants completed a sequence of two tasks. Each task consisted of
reviewing a packet 2 of information about an AutoAI “run” for the
Census-Income dataset [7]. This dataset is used to train a model
1The local minimum wage at the time of study was $9.70.
2We opted not to run the actual AutoAI system during the course of the study as it
would take too much time. Therefore, we ran the system on the data on ourselves
that predicts whether a loan application should be approved from
a set of over 35 different factors.
In this run, AutoAI produced a set of four pipelines. Each pipeline
consisted of a series of steps, such as model selection, feature engi-
neering, and hyperparameter optimization.3 Participants reviewed
a number of details about these pipelines, such as performance
metrics and confusion matrices. Participants were asked by the re-
searcher whether they trusted any of the four models enough that
they would use them in a real deployment. After this, participants
filled out a questionnaire containing demographic questions and dif-
ferent Likert scale questions measuring trust and understandability
described in the following section.
To compare different user experiences of AutoAI, we developed
three separate packets of information. The “V1” packet represents
the base user interface provided by the commercial AutoML system
we used. From this, we developed two variants, “V2A” and “V2B,”
by adding in additional visualizations of the input data and feature
engineering process, respectively. We outline the informational
content of each packet in Table 1. In the study, all participants saw
the V1 packet, but each participant saw only one of the V2A or
V2B packets. Packets were shown in a random order to control for
order effects, and equal numbers of participants saw the V1 and V2
packets first.
Information
V1
V2A
V2B
Data
Raw data table.
✓
✓
✓
Charts of input feature distributions
✓
Process
Visualization of pipeline creation process
✓
✓
✓
Feature engineering process diagram
✓
Model
Metrics (ROC AUC, accuracy, F1, etc.)
✓
✓
✓
ROC curve
✓
✓
✓
Precision Recall curve
✓
✓
✓
Confusion matrix
✓
✓
✓
Feature importance chart
✓
✓
✓
Feature transformation table (for pipelines that
included feature engineering)
✓
✓
✓
Table 1: Information included in each of the V1, V2A, and
V2B packets. All participants saw the V1 packet, but only
one of the V2A and V2B packets. The packets were presented
in random order.
4.3
Measures
For each of the phase 1 packets, we asked participants whether
they trusted any of the pipelines produced by AutoAI enough to
use them in a real deployment of an AI system. In addition, we
asked participants to rate their overall trust in the AutoML system,
based on the Merritt scale [41] reported in Hoffman et al. [19].
and compiled a series of screenshots from the tool’s user interface for participants to
review.
3We use the terms “pipeline” and “model” interchangeably to refer to the resulting
output of the AutoAI process: a binary classifier for making loan approval decisions.
Some, but not all pipelines generated by AutoAI include feature engineering and
hyperparameter optimization.

IUI ’20, March 17–20, 2020, Cagliari, Italy
J Drozdal et al.
(a) Example of input data distribution for one of the columns
in the data set. Written explanations accompanied each distri-
bution to provide additional insight in interpreting the chart,
as a proxy for the subject matter expertise typically available
when conducting data science work.
(b) Diagram illustrating the feature engineering process. Nodes repre-
sent data set versions and lines represent transformations applied to
one of the data set’s features, producing a new “view” of the data set.
D0 is the base data set with no transformations applied. At each step,
accuracy is evaluated to determine if the transformed features provide
an increase in model performance. The blue highlight represents how
a sequence of feature transformations results in a model with a higher
accuracy.[30][29]
Figure 2: (a) Input data distribution transparency feature. (b) Feature engineering transparency feature.
This scale treats trust as an attitudinal judgement of the degree to
which a person can rely on an automated system to achieve their
goals. We included 4 items from this scale related to confidence
and dependability, and adapted them to our particular situation: “I
believe the tool is a competent performer,” “I trust the tool,” “I have
confidence in the advice given by the tool,” and “I can depend on
the tool.” These items were rated on 5-point Likert scales (Strongly
Disagree to Strongly Agree).
Another aspect of trust has to do with understandability [19, 37].
We developed a 9-item scale to assess the degree to which par-
ticipants understood the AutoML tool presented in each packet.
Whereas the Madsen-Gregor scale [37] for evaluating perceived
understandably contains high-level statements applied to a whole
system (e.g. “I understand how the system will assist me with de-
cisions I have to make”), we desired a scale that included items
specifically focused on aspects of AutoML systems. Our scale in-
cluded the following items: “I understand the tool,” “I understood
the tool’s overall process,” “I understand the data,” “I understand
how the tool performs data preprocessing,” “I understand how esti-
mators are selected,” “I understand how new features are generated
by the tool,” “I understand the differences between the generated
models,” “I understand the model evaluation metrics,” and “I under-
stand the model evaluation visualizations.” These items were also
rated on 5-point Likert scales.
Finally, we included one more way to assess trust, by asking
participants whether they felt they trusted any of the four models
enough that they would use them in a real deployment. Given
the high-stakes nature of the task (loan approval), we felt that
participants would only answer in the affirmative if they truly
understood and trusted the pipelines produced by AutoAI.
4.4
Results
We begin our analysis by evaluating the reliability of our trust
and understandability scales. Then, we examine the effect of the
transparency features on trust and understanding of the AutoAI
system [21].
When conducting analyses of variance, we controlled for the
effects of gender, education level (undergraduate or graduate), prior
experience with automated ML (used previously or not), and the
first packet seen by including these terms in the model. In addition,
when making comparisons between the V1 and V2 packets (a within-
subjects factor), we include participant ID in the model as a random
effect. We report effect sizes from our ANOVA models using partial
η2, which corresponds to the proportion of variance accounted for
by each main effect, controlling for all other effects 4.
4.4.1
Reliablity. Factor analysis [55] indicated a high degree of
reliability5 for the trust scale (Cronbach’s α = 0.89). Thus, despite
our minor modifications to the wording of scale items, we see that
its reliability falls within the [0.87−0.92] range previously reported
in Hoffman et al. [19].
4Miles & Shevlin [43] advise that a partial η2 of ≥.01 corresponds to a small effect,
≥.06 to a medium effect, and ≥.14 to a large effect.
5Reliability indicates the extent to which items in the scale measure the same underly-
ing conceptual construct. Common convention holds that α values greater than 0.70
are considered reliable, and we refer to Tavakol and Dennick [54] for a more detailed
discussion.

Trust in AutoML: Exploring Information Needs for Establishing Trust in Automated Machine Learning Systems
IUI ’20, March 17–20, 2020, Cagliari, Italy
Analysis of the understandability scale also indicates a high level
of reliability (Cronbach’s α = 0.80), without the need for dropping
any items. Therefore, we construct two outcome measures for trust
and understandability based on the averaged responses for each
set of questions.
4.4.2
Effect of Transparency Features on Trust and Understandabil-
ity. Overall ratings of trust for the V1 packet fell in the middle
of the scale (M (SD) = 3.2 (.81) of 5), indicating that participants
had neutral feelings about their trust of the base AutoML system.
Ratings of understandability were higher (M (SD) = 3.6 (.52) of
5), indicating that they although they generally understood the
information presented, there was also room for improvement.
We first compare the effect of having either of the transparency
features on ratings of trust and understandability. Participants had
more trust in the V2 packets (M (SD) = 4.1 (.62)) than the V1 packets,
and this difference was significant and large, F[1, 19] = 19.5, p <
.001, partial η2 = .36. Prior experience with AutoML was also a
marginally significant predictor of trust, F[1, 15] = 3.2, p = .09,
partial η2 = .06. Participants with prior AutoML experience had
more trust in both the V1 and V2 packets than participants without
prior AutoML experience.
Participants had a greater understanding of the V2 packets (M
(SD) = 4.0 (.54)) than the V1 packets, and this difference was also
significant and large, F[1, 19] = 21.9, p < .001, partial η2 = .49.
Unlike trust, participants with prior AutoML experience did not
differ in their ratings of understandabilty, F[1, 15] = .17, p = n.s.
We observe that the inclusion of either transparency feature
caused a significant increase in ratings of trust and understandabil-
ity over the base AutoML interface. We next seek to understand the
extent to which each individual transparency feature – input data
distributions and feature engineering process – affected ratings of
trust and understandability. As these are between-subjects compar-
isons (participants only experienced one of these features), we no
longer include participant ID as a random effect in our ANOVA
model.
Ratings of trust for the input data distribution variant were
higher (V2A M (SD) = 3.9 (.65)) than ratings of trust for the feature
engineering process variant (V2B M (SD) = 4.2 (.60)), although this
difference was not significant, F[1, 14] = .02, p = n.s. Ratings of un-
derstandability were equivalent for both variants (V2A M (SD) = 4.0
(.51), V2B M (SD) = 4.0 (.59), F[1, 14] = .12, p = n.s.). Therefore, we
conclude that the inclusion of any transparency feature improved
both trust and understandability, but the relative importance of
either feature on improving trust and understandability remains
unclear.
4.4.3
Would Participants Deploy AutoML Models? The decision to
deploy an AutoAI [21] model was significantly correlated with both
trust (Pearson’s r = .67, p < .001) and understandability (Pearson’s
r = .38,p = .02). In general, participants did not trust the V1 models
enough for deployment: 17 participants (85%) said they would not
deploy any of the pipelines produced in V1. In contrast, participants
trusted the V2 models more, with 16 participants (80%) saying that
they would deploy one of the pipelines produced in V2.
As with the previous results, we do not see clear differences
between the V2A and V2B variants: 7 of 10 participants having
V2A would deploy one of its pipelines, and 9 of 10 participants
having V2B would deploy one of its pipelines. This difference was
not significant, χ2 = .31, p = n.s.
We again find evidence that the inclusion of a transparency fea-
ture improved trust, but the relative importance of the two features
we examined remains unclear.
5
STUDY 3: ELICITING INFORMATION NEEDS
In order to understand peoples’ information needs in an AutoML
user interface, we conducted a card-sorting exercise in which partic-
ipants rank-ordered individual “nuggets” of information that might
be included in an AutoML UI. This information was based on our
examination of the kinds of information present across the AutoML
interfaces of multiple vendors (discussed in Section 3).
Each card took the form of a verb (i.e. “see,” “visualize,” “know
how”) followed by a piece of information related to the AutoML
tool. For example, one nugget was “view pre-processed data,” and
another was “know how features are engineered.”
5.1
Participants
This study ran concurrently with Study 2. First, participants com-
pleted the task described in Section 4. Next, they they completed
the card-sorting task described below. The same set of participants
completed both Study 2 and Study 3 in the same session.
5.2
Procedure
In this study, we used an open card-sorting method [52, 53] to gain
insight into what information is important for data scientists in
order to trust the models produced by an AutoML tool. Participants
were provided with 27 cards, each with a different nugget of in-
formation pertaining to an AutoML run based on our results from
Study 1. Participants were also provided with blank cards to fill
in additional information needs they identified. Participants were
asked to sort the cards from “most important for trust” to “least
important for trust.”
5.3
Results
The card sorting exercise provided us with the opportunity to better
understand the relative importance of different pieces of informa-
tion that might be reported by AutoML. Although we performed
an open card sorting task, in which participants were able to write
in new informational requirements on blank cards, only four par-
ticipants opted to do this. Therefore, we give an overall accounting
of how cards were sorted by first ignoring these new cards, and
then we provide detail on the content of these new cards.
We analyzed the card sorting results by computing the mean
rank assigned to a card across participants. These ranks are shown
in Table 2. Each card is categorized in two ways: which aspect of
the process it represents (process, data, or model), and whether the
information is rendered as a visualization.
5.3.1
Information Needs for Establishing Trust. Perhaps not surpris-
ingly, information pertaining to the performance of the generated
pipelines was rated as the most important for trust, either as a raw
metric (#26) or in visual form (#27). Also important were several
aspects related to process: knowing how data were pre-processed
before training (#10) and being able to view the process by which

IUI ’20, March 17–20, 2020, Cagliari, Italy
J Drozdal et al.
#
Aspect
Transp.
Description
Most important for trust
26
E
Model
View evaluation metrics
27
E
Model
View visualizations of model performance
10
PPD
Process
Know how raw data was pre-processed
2
RD
Data
View the meanings of each column in the
raw data
4
RD
Data
Visualize each column’s distribution in the
raw data
5
RD
Data
Visualize the raw data - view overall distri-
butions
23
P
Process
View process of how a pipeline is created
7
RD
Data
View the raw data - statistics of individual
distributions
3
RD
Data
Visualize outliers in the raw data
8
RD
Data
View statistics of missing values in the raw
data
11
PPD
Data
View statistics of the pre-processed data
17
FE
Model
Effect of engineered features
12
PPD
Data
Visualize data after pre-processing
19
P
Model
Show adopted models in output pipelines
6
RD
Data
View statistics of outliers in raw data
15
FE
Data
View how existing features were engineered
into new features
24
P
Model
Ability to edit a pipeline
25
E
Model
Compare differences between pipelines
1
RD
Data
View the raw data table
18
P
Process
Show which types of models considered for
model selection
9
PPD
Data
View the pre-processed data table
20
E
Model
Compare one model against other models
14
FE
Model
View new engineered features
13
RD
Data
See how data was split (test vs. train/holdout)
16
FE
Process
Know how features were engineered
21
HP
Model
See model’s hyperparameters
22
HP
Process
Know how hyperparameter optimization
was performed
Least important for trust
Table 2: Ranking of importance of different kinds of infor-
mation in an AutoML user interface. Items at the top of
the list were rated as being more important for establishing
trust in an AutoML system. Informational aspects are: RD:
raw data, PPD: pre-processed data, HP: hyperparameters, P:
pipeline, E: model evaluation, FE: feature engineering.
a pipeline was created (#23). Other process-related information
was deemed less important, such as knowing which types of mod-
els were considered for model selection (#18) and knowing how
hyperparameter optimization was performed (#22).
In our analysis of the Study 2 results, we did not see a significant
difference in ratings of trust between participants who were given
visualizations of input data distributions (#5) and participants who
were given information on how feature engineering worked (#16).
However, from the card-sorting exercise, we see a clear difference
in how participants ranked the importance of these two features:
participants felt that being able to see input data distributions was
more important.
We were struck by participants’ relative lack of interest in feature
engineering (FE in Table 2, mean rank of 19/27). Participants were
more interested in the raw data (mean rank of 11/27) and the model
evaluation metrics (mean rank of 11/27). However, in the course
of data science work, raw data are transformed and engineered
into features. Therefore, data scientists’ relative lack of interest in
the design of these features [10, 44] should be examined in future
research.
6
DISCUSSION
The goal of our research is to explore trust in the relationship
between human data scientists and AutoML systems. Based on pre-
vious literature [17, 51, 62], we were interested in how the inclusion
of transparency features in an AutoML system affects user trust and
understanding of the tool (RQ1) and identifying the most important
information data scientists need to establish trust in an AutoML
system (RQ2).
We find that including certain transparency features such as
visualizations of input data distributions and a graphic depicting
the feature engineering process does improve user trust and un-
derstandability of AutoML. The inclusion of either transparency
feature had a significant and sizable effect on both trust and un-
derstandability. Although we were unable to uncover a statistical
difference between the two transparency features in Study 2, re-
sults from the card-sorting exercise (Study 3) showed users clearly
ranked the “input data distributions” feature more important. Our
findings support the hypothesis that the increase of transparency
through adding additional information significantly lead to the in-
creased trust and understandability. Thus, we provide support for
RQ1, and we propose that future work should use a more sensitive,
full repeated-measures experimental design, to clarify RQ2.
6.1
Implications for Design and Future
Research
6.1.1
Visualizations. Our studies illustrate that conversations with
the input data [10, 44] and information on the processes of feature
engineering are valuable. Future work should explore the effective-
ness of different types of data visualizations for both input data and
also post-feature-engineered data. How do users want to examine
these data? Are there mini-visualizations that can be applied "in
place" in a pipeline diagram? What are effective ways to "sample"
the data at different points in a pipeline. Will it be possible to re-
cover transformations or feature-engineering algorithms from past
analyses [27] for comparison with current data and features?
If users will be sampling data along a pipeline, then we may also
want to explore effective comparative visualizations. Similarly to
the ManyEyes project [58] with data analysts, we may also want
to explore data scientists’ needs for annotation and communica-
tion regarding data visualizations along a pipeline. What individual
problems do data scientists want to solve in this way? What col-
laborative problems do they want to address collectively, and what
types of messages would be helpful?
6.1.2
Individual Differences and Personalization. We recognize that
there are many individual differences across those who practice data
science [3, 32]: difference in backgrounds including background
knowledge, skills, work practices, and experience levels make it

Trust in AutoML: Exploring Information Needs for Establishing Trust in Automated Machine Learning Systems
IUI ’20, March 17–20, 2020, Cagliari, Italy
difficult to claim that AutoML tools ought to be designed as “one
size fits all” [20]. We found a wide range of individual difference
and preferences, even within our (relatively) small sample of 24
participants. For example, while thinking aloud during Study 3, six
participants explicitly stated that information pertaining to the raw
data was most important for them. In contrast, three participants
said that the processed data was more important than the raw data,
and two participants commented that the raw data was the least
important and they had no desire to see this information in the
tool. These differences in individual preferences can create more
complications when we consider the fact that domain experts and
data science workers need to work closely together, as suggested
in[20, 39].
Our findings suggest that AutoML tools may need to allow for a
degree of personalization to accommodate individual preferences
or different domains of use. Recent research by Arya et al. [3]
addresses these concerns by defining explanation methods for dif-
ferent audiences and domains.
6.1.3
Context of Use. In all three of our studies, participants identi-
fied a dichotomy between using AutoML for research purposes and
using it in their day-to-day work practice. From these discussions,
we recognized that the importance of different kinds of information
depends on the intended use of the tool as well. For example, in
Study 3, the two cards relating to hyperparameter optimization
(#21, #22) had the lowest mean rank. But we should not conclude
that this information is therefore unimportant. Further qualitative
interview confirmed our speculation: two participants explicitly
mentioned that information about hyperparameter optimization
would be more important if the scenario of use was focused on
conducting research rather than building models to approve loans.
In addition, we discovered through discussions with our partici-
pants that there is a difference between trust in a model produced
by AutoML and trust in an AutoML tool itself. One participant in
Study 2 commented that even though they may produce a model
with low accuracy and not wish to deploy it, they would still main-
tain their trust in the AutoML tool itself. This disparity of trusting
AutoML’s artifacts versus trusting the AutoML itself is one research
topic that ought to be explored further.
6.2
Limitations
There are several limitations of our work that may limit our ability
to draw broad conclusions from our findings. First, our participants
were drawn from a pool of undergraduate and graduate students
having prior experience in data science work. However, their ex-
perience does not necessarily generalize to that of professional
data scientists, whose information needs for establishing trust in
AutoML may differ. Given the preponderance of AutoML systems
being developed by and for enterprise users (e.g. [13, 15, 21, 42, 49]),
additional work is needed to examine the viewpoints of professional
data scientists. As a future work, we plan to validate our results
with different user groups.
The dataset used in this study is a widely-used loan application
in data science training [23]. This application domain, together with
some other domains (e.g., healthcare and jurisdiction), are crucially
important to the involved individuals, families, and businesses.
Recent literature [16, 57] have suggested some of the datasets or
AI algorithms may inherit the discrimination against people of
color, or women, or women of color, in approving loans. Future
work can further investigate transparency features of presenting
bias-detection and bias-mitigation information as part of the initial
trust establishment.
It should also be noted that the card sorting task performed by the
participants who are first-time users of AutoML system generated
information needed for establishing trust and may not represent the
needs of data scientists who have an established relationship with
an AutoML system. The literature suggests that trust formation
and trust retention are different and therefore they require different
considerations in AutoML systems [18, 51].
In addition, during Study 3, participants were asked to sort the
cards on a scale of most important to least important for establishing
trust. As participants thought aloud about their sorting decisions,
some noted that the ranks of the cards could change over time
as they continued to interact with the tool. Therefore, the results
of the card rankings may only represent the information needed
to establish initial trust, which may be different from information
needed to maintain trust.
7
CONCLUSION
As the AI industry is expected to grow significantly in the next
few years [5], research on the relationship between user trust and
automated data science systems is critical to ensure these tools
can be trustworthy enough to be adopted responsibly by the pub-
lic. Transparency is known to be a significant factor in trusting
automated data science systems. However, much of the literature
states a lack of transparency in AI [5, 64, 65]. We believe exploring
the information needs and individual differences of data scientists
can inform us of possible ways to increase trust in AutoML tools.
Therefore, in this work we showed that increasing transparency
via providing a user with more information about an AutoML tool
significantly increased user trust as well as user understandability
in the tool. By gathering the information requirements of data sci-
entists to establish trust in these tools we have provided a pool of
transparency features that can each be further researched to see
how they impact user trust. As our work suggests it may be unrea-
sonable to design an AutoML tool suitable for all users across all
domains, we encourage the data science, HCI, and human studies
research communities to continue exploring how to accommodate
different AutoML users and enhance their trust in the tools based
on their domains, knowledge, and common practices.
