More Practical AI Solution: Breast 
Ultrasound Diagnosis Using Multi-AI 
Model Ensemble System 
Jian Dai1, Shuge Lei1,2, Licong Dong3, Xiaona Lin3, Huabin Zhang4, Desheng Sun3*, Kehong 
Yuan1* 
1 Graduate School at Shenzhen, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China  
2 Computer Science and Engineering, University of South Carolina, SC, United States 
3 Ultrasound department, Shenzhen Hospital of Peking University, Shenzhen, China 
4 Ultrasound department, Beijing Tsinghua Changgeng Hospital, Beijing, China 

ABSTRACT Objective: Breast cancer screening is of great significance in contemporary women's 
health prevention. Most current machines embedded in the AI system for breast cancer screening do 
not meet the clinical criteria. How to make intelligent systems more practical and reliable is a 
common problem. Methods: 1) Ultrasound image super-resolution: the SRGAN super-resolution 
network reduces ultrasound images’ unclearness caused by the device itself and improves the 
accuracy and generalization of the detection model. 2) We improved the YOLOv4 and the CenterNet 
models in response to the medical criteria. 3) Multi-AI model: based on the advantages of different 
AI models, we employ two AI models to detect clinical results via cross-validation; we only accept 
the same results from both models. Results: 1) The YOLOv4 model and the CenterNet model both 
increased the mAP score by 9.6% and 13.8% respectively, when added the super-resolution model. 
2) Two methods for transforming the target model into a classification model are proposed; the 
unified output is specified to call the multi-AI model. 3) In the classification evaluation 
experiment, concatenated by the YOLOv4 model (sensitivity 57.73%, specificity 90.08%) and 
the CenterNet model (sensitivity 62.64%, specificity 92.54%), the multi-AI model will refuse 
to make judgments on 23.55% of the input data. Correspondingly, the sensitivity has been 
improved to 95.91% and the specificity 96.02%. Conclusion: Our work makes the AI model more 
practical and reliable in medical image diagnosis, and it performs well in detecting breast lesions. 
Significance: 1) The proposed method makes the target detection model more suitable for remote 
diagnosis of breast ultrasound image. 2) It provides a new idea for applying AI in medical diagnosis, 
which can more conveniently introduce target detection models from other fields to serve medical 
lesion screening. 
Keywords artificial intelligence algorithm, breast lesions, breast ultrasound, multi-AI model 
ensemble system, remote diagnosis
I. INTRODUCTION 
Breast cancer has become one of the biggest threats to female health, and it is the malignant tumor 
that caused the highest breast cancer incidence among women1. The cumulative risks for females 
worldwide to age 75 are 5.03%2. Early screening and diagnosis are critical factors in reducing the 
mortality rate of breast cancer3. Formally used in clinical practice for decades, breast 
ultrasonography has gained continuous technological breakthroughs and eventually shows great 
potential for early screening for its convenience and lower cost, especially in some developing areas 
such as southern Asian countries4. Yet the ultrasonography for early screening is limited for several 
reasons. 
  The highly professional training required for ultrasonography operation and diagnosis and the 
variability of ultrasound images’ resolution are among the major handicaps. Ultrasonography relies 

 
heavily on the doctor's experience, operating methods, and equipment parameters. The skills of the 
doctors will significantly influence the diagnosis results5. There remains a lack of sonography 
education and ultrasound-trained physician support in developing countries6 although access to 
ultrasound has increased significantly in resource-limited settings. The diagnostic accuracy will be 
largely lowered by the increasing workloads of sonographers, the fatigue caused by long-term 
reading, the inexperience of young physicians, etc. Besides, the resolution of ultrasound inspection 
equipment varied greatly and will also affect doctors’ diagnosis. The lower resolution ultrasound 
equipment generally brings higher misdiagnosis. AI-based computer-aided diagnostic systems can 
assist the inexperienced physicians and help reduce the workloads, thus showing great promise in 
assisting breast diagnosis. 
There are two major challenges in developing AI-based ultrasound diagnostic systems for breast 
diagnosis. A significant one is the increasing complexity of algorithms due to the high accuracy 
requirements for medical diagnosis, which requires the ultra-high computing capability. Yet most 
current systems use AI-embedded devices and have low computing capability for real-time 
calculations7. Computing in the cloud gained increasing popularity to solve such problem8.  
Another challenge is that the current diagnostic systems always have problems dealing with 
ultrasound devices with different resolutions. One system usually expertized at a specific range of 
resolutions of medical images, limiting the systems' generalization and scalability. While the super-
resolution model improves the clarity of the image, it also makes the image characteristics more 
consistent. Besides, most current systems are based on a single traditional detection model, which 
always performs worse on individual evaluation indicators. To the best of our knowledge, multi-AI 
models are seldomly employed in breast cancer ultrasound detection. 
To address the above challenges in ultrasound breast examination, we develop a more practical 
ultrasonic computer-aided diagnosis system --- a Multi-AI Combination detection system. We 
employed the SRGAN super-resolution network to reduce unclear ultrasound images caused by the 
device and improved the detection model's accuracy and generalization. In addition, the Multi-AI 
model is cloud-based and has high computing power. Such systems can help unskilled operators 
improve the accuracy of diagnosis and experienced doctors concentrate on complex images. 
II. RELATED WORK 
Super-resolution techniques. Ultrasound equipment varies in different aspects and among them 
the resolution size matters most in the lesion detection task. The detection accuracy will decrease 
when the resolution of input images varies greatly. The goal of Super-Resolution (SR) methods is 
to recover a High Resolution (HR) image from one or more Low Resolution (LR) input images to 
the similar resolution. Two kinds of super-resolution methods for medical images are widely used: 
interpolation-based super-resolution reconstruction algorithm9 and learning-based super-resolution 
reconstruction algorithm10.  
SRGAN is the first to reconstruct super-resolution images using a convolutional neural network 
(CNN). It employed a three-layer CNN to learn the mapping relationship between high-resolution 
images and low-resolution images to guide the reconstruction11. SRGAN presented a super-
resolution generative adversarial network, which is the ﬁrst framework to recover photo-realistic 
images from 4× down sampling12. In the experiment, we use the super-resolution model as part of 
the image preprocessing to improve the clarity of the image, thereby improving the accuracy of the 
target detection. 
Object detection model. The detection model is to detect the breast lesions. The modern detector 
is usually composed of two parts, a backbone which is pre-trained on ImageNet and a head which 
is used to predict classes and bounding boxes of objects13. According to the difference of the head, 
it can be divided into two categories: a one-stage object detector and a two-stage object detector. 
The most representative models for one-stage object detectors are YOLO12,13,14,15, SSD16, and 
RetinaNet17. They predict locations and confidences for multiple objects directly based on the whole 
feature map18,24. The two-stage detector combines classifying the box proposals through a CNN 
model and refining the coordinates with the sliding window manner19, such as RCNN20, fast R-
CNN19, faster R-CNN21. The recently developed anchor-free one-stage detectors, such as 
CenterNet22 and CornerNet23, detect targets by matching key points rather than the anchor frame 

 
principle to improve accuracy and speed. We made some improvements between the head and the 
backbone on the anchor-free one-stage detectors for the classification.   
Multi-AI model combination. The Multi-AI model approach does not replace the existing high-
precision detection models but combines them together. The existing AI models usually work 
independently, but reasonable combination of multiple models can improve the classification 
accuracy. Different models analyze the same picture together, just like an expert consultation, which 
fully considers the individual evaluation of each model. This is in line with the normal human 
diagnostic process. We can constantly add more members to make the model more reliable. 
What's more, different from general target detection, medical workers do not care too much about 
indicators such as mAP (defined in Table 2). Doctors only care about whether this tool will 
misdiagnose patients. To some extent, we hope that AI assistants make a more reasonable judgment, 
helping doctors identify potential patients instead of displaying a bunch of boxes and scores.  
 
III. METHOD  
A. DATA AND PREPROCESSING 
Common steps of such deep learning systems are as follows: organize the lesion dataset, select 
the target detection model, adjust the parameters of the model, and transplant it to embedded devices 
or mobile workstations24. The paper also follows such steps.  
The dataset in this paper comes from the database of the Ultrasound Imaging Department of 
Peking University Shenzhen Hospital. We collected 6,860 pictures, including 2,065 images with 
benign lesions and 3,495 images with malignant lesions, and 1,300 images without lesions. 
Table 1 The dataset used in the experiment 
Dataset 
Images with benign 
nodules 
Images with malignant 
nodules 
Images without 
nodules 
Training Dataset 
1870 
3160 
0 
Validation Dataset 
195 
335 
1300 
Five doctors used the open-source software LabelImg to label these data, which were collected 
from 2804 patients. In order to ensure the accuracy of the data, one doctor marks the image while 
the other doctor checks it. 
The target detection model must have a target during the training process; only the image with a 
lesion is helpful to the training model. Therefore, as shown in Table 1, we finally selected 5030 
lesion images as the training set, and 530 lesion images and 1300 disease-free images as the 
validation set. 
B. SUPER-RESOLUTION USED IN THE EXPERIMENTS 
A clear ultrasound image can improve the clarity of the image and make subsequent analysis 
easier. When the characteristics of the input images are similar (indexes such as resolution size), the 
generalization ability of the detection model becomes stronger. In this paper, we use the SRGAN 
network for super-resolution processing. 
The GAN network consists of a generator model (G) and a discriminative model (D). The G 
model is responsible for generating data that is as close to the real sample as possible, and the D 
model is used to score the output result, which is to judge whether the generated sample is true or 
false. As shown in Fig.4, the input of the G model of the SRGAN network is a low-resolution image 
ILR, and the high-resolution output image ISR will be used as the input of the D model together 
with the original image IHR.  
 
 

 
 
Fig. 4.  The framework of SRGAN 
When training SRGAN, it uses a four times downsampling factor to obtain low-resolution images 
and optimizes in an alternating manner to solve the minimum-maximum adversarial problem: 
𝑚𝑖𝑛
𝜃𝐶𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝜃𝐷 𝔼𝐼𝐻𝑅∼𝑝train(𝐼𝐻𝑅)[log 𝐷𝜃𝐷(𝐼𝐻𝑅)] + 𝔼𝐼𝐿𝑅∼𝑝𝐶(𝐼𝐿𝑅) [log (1 −𝐷𝜃𝐷(𝐺𝜃𝐺(𝐼𝐿𝑅))]]  (4) 
Different from previous works, they deﬁned a novel perceptual loss using high-level feature maps 
of the VGG network24, combined with a discriminator that encourages solutions perceptually hard 
to distinguish from the HR reference images11. The VGG loss is defined as the Euclidean distance 
between the feature representation of the reconstructed image 𝑮𝜽𝑮(𝑰𝑳𝑹)and the reference image 
𝑰𝑯𝑹: 
𝑙𝑉𝐺𝐺/𝑖.𝑗
𝑆𝑅
=
1
𝑊𝑖,𝑗𝐻𝑖,𝑗∑
∑
−
𝐻𝑖,𝑗
𝑦=1
𝑊𝑖,𝑗
𝑥=1
(𝜙𝑖,𝑗(𝐼𝐻𝑅)𝑥,𝑦−𝜙𝑖,𝑗(𝐺𝜃𝐺(𝐼𝐿𝑅))
𝑥,𝑦)2  (5) 
The method of independent alternating iterative training makes the two networks oppose to each 
other. In the end, the goal of the G network can "deceive" the D network, and the G network is what 
we need. 
Fig. 5.  The architecture of Generator Network with corresponding kernel size (k), number of feature maps (n), and 
stride (s) indicated for each convolutional layer 
The generative network in the experiment was shown in Fig.5. After the input image passed the 
convolution block, it went through 16 Residual Blocks (RB) with skip connections. Each RB module 
consists of two convolutional layers with 3×3 filters and a feature map of 64 channels, followed by 
a batch-normalization layer and ReLU activation.  
The output went through the Elementwise-sum module, and the output of RB was connected to 
the features of the first convolutional layer. The image can be obtained through 2 upsampling blocks 
(PixelShuffler) and the last convolutional layer. The scale factor depends on the number (4 used in 
this article) of upsampling blocks. 
C. THE IMPROVED TARGET DETECTION MODEL 
The super-resolved image will use the detection model to identify the lesion. Considering factors 
such as the size of the lesion in the entire picture and the uncertainty of the quality of breast 
ultrasound imaging, the performance of the classification model will be interfered by auxiliary 
software and imaging effects. This means that we need to clean the data and extract the lesion area 
before making judgments. Therefore, it is more appropriate for us to use the target detection model. 
We need to make some improvements to the detection model. Common approaches are to make 
some improvements between the head and the backbone13. These optimizations will improve the 
accuracy of the model. As shown in Fig.1, our experiment combines the YOLOv4 model and the 
CenterNet model to evaluate the pathological images. The principles are similar when combining 
more models for analysis.  
The ultimate goal is to determine whether there is a malignant lesion or not, which is a 
classification task. The structure of the target detection model and image classification model has 

 
many commonalities. Image classification outputs the category information of the picture, while 
target detection requires a frame to distinguish target objects in each category. When analyzing 
medical images, these two tasks are performed simultaneously. Because if there is a lesion in a 
picture, then the patient is ill. In theory, we can use the target detection network to achieve the 
classification effect. 
All in all, there are two areas worthy of optimization: backbone and head. On the one hand, we 
can connect the output feature map of the backbone part of the YOLOv4 model to the fully 
connected layer to output category information (as shown in Figure 2). On the other hand, the output 
of the detection model itself represents information such as the location of the target (lesion), and 
we can also use the head output information of the CenterNet model for classification (as shown in 
Figure 3). 
 
Fig. 2.  The combination of the backbone of YOLOv4 and the SENet 
In this paper, we embed the SE module at the output of the Dark net. As shown in Figure 2, the 
channel of the SE module weights the feature map and inputs it to the fully connected layer to realize 
the function of the classification network. When the classification network determines that the input 
picture has a lesion, the remaining network of YOLOv4 determines the location of the target frame. 
 
Fig. 3.  The head of CenterNet with classification function 
As shown in Figure 3, the CenterNet module will output Heatmaps, Embeddings, Offsets after 
passing the unique angular pooling22. Among them, embeddings contains anchor position and score 
information in the output of the detection module. We extract the scores in Embedding, which is to 
score all possible target boxes of each heatmap in the result. Then we use maximum pooling to 
obtain the maximum probability of disease in different areas of the heatmap, followed by the 
Softmax to get two categories.  

 
Of course, both improvements of YOLOv4 and CenterNet can be applied to each other. What we 
have done is to prepare for the classification experiment (as shown in Figure 1).  
D. THE MULTI-AI MODEL ENSEMBLE SYSTEM 
Burnout in radiologists is a significant problem25. Intensely concentrating on radiology images 
for a long time is one of the major causes of burnout. Also, doctors usually have too many workloads 
due to the large volume of patients and limited doctors. Many AI lesion detection systems require 
doctors to view real-time ultrasound images of each patient, whether there is a lesion or not. We 
consider screening out part of the images so that doctors do not need to review those images. This 
means those being screened out will be judged by the AI system without doctors’ supervision. The 
critical point to achieve such function is the high reliability of the system. 
Multi-AI model is unique in that it does not evaluate all pictures, which makes the judgments 
made by the Multi-AI model more reliable. The super-resolution sub-model and all target detection 
sub-models are part of the Multi-AI model. How to combine the target detection models is the key 
to the problem. 
As shown in Figure 1, our Multi-AI model does not mark all pictures. Only when the two sub-
models agree on their opinions will they give a definite evaluation; the others will be left to the 
doctors for judgment. Therefore, the output is the affirmative result of multiple models, which 
largely reduces the misdiagnosis and increase the reliability. We define PP as diseased, NN as 
disease-free, and PN as unable to judge. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1.  The framework of the multi-AI model. The input picture pass through the super-resolution model——generator network 
of SRGAN. Then the images are judged by the “combination mod,” and the final output is PP, PN, NN. 
Here we averagely weighht the output of the two sub-models as shown in Eqn. (1), and P is the 
evaluation score of the AI model:  
𝑃𝑚𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖−𝐴𝐼= 𝑃𝑦𝑜𝑙𝑜𝑣4 + 𝑃𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑛𝑒𝑡  (1) 
After adjusting the appropriate threshold (𝐶1 and 𝐶2 ) according to Eqn. (2), the model can 
achieve the function of Figure 1. 
{
𝑖𝑓 𝑃𝑚𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖−𝐴𝐼≫𝐶1 , 𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑢𝑙𝑡= 𝑃𝑃
𝑖𝑓 𝑃𝑚𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖−𝐴𝐼≪𝐶2 , 𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑢𝑙𝑡= 𝑁𝑁
     𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑠     , 𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑢𝑙𝑡= 𝑃𝑁
  (2) 
Of course, we can also try the following operations in a joint system composed of multiple models: 
𝑃𝑚𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖−𝐴𝐼= ∑
𝜆𝑖𝑃𝑖
𝑛
𝑖=1
  (3) 
In E qn. (3), 𝝀𝒊 is the reliability coefficient of the sub-model. Adjusting the weights of different 
sub-models can make the model more flexible and stable. Combined with Eqn. (2), it is also very 
convenient to adjust n to n+1 in a multi-AI model. 
We have analyzed how to use a target detection network to complete the classification task, and 
we will implement similar functions in this section. Our purpose is to carry out preliminary 
screening of patients, under these circumstances, the multi-model pays more attention to the 
existence rather than the location of the lesions.                                                            

 
E. METRICS  
The purpose of the experiment is to improve the clarity of ultrasound images and improve the 
detection accuracy of the target detection model. Therefore, the evaluation indicators used in the 
experiments are mainly from the field of target detection and digital imagery.  
As shown in Table 2, in order to evaluate the effect of lesion feature detection, we used four 
indexes: precision, recall, sensitivity, and mAP. As shown in the calculation formula, TP represent 
the number of positive samples inferred as positive; FN epresent the number of negative samples 
inferred as positive. Of course, TN and FP have the same logic. Then Precision reflects the model's 
ability to accurately identify lesion images, and specificity reflects the model's ability to accurately 
identify disease-free images. If we draw a curve composed of recall score and precision score on 
the coordinate axis. We can get a area of the curve, which represents the AP value. mAP is average 
of diferent kinds of AP and usually used to comprehensively measure the accuracy of the detector 
model.  
Table 2 The metrics used in the experiments 
Evaluation index 
Method of calculation 
Precision 
𝑇𝑃
𝑇𝑃+ 𝐹𝑃 
Recall 
𝑇𝑃
𝑇𝑃+ 𝐹𝑁 
Specificity 
𝑇𝑁
𝑇𝑁+ 𝐹𝑃 
AP 
Area covered under PR curve 
MSE 
𝑀𝑆𝐸=
1
𝐻× 𝑊∑ 
𝐻
𝑖=1
∑ 
𝑊
𝑗=1
(𝑋(𝑖, 𝑗) −𝑌(𝑖, 𝑗))2 
PSNR 
𝑃𝑆𝑁𝑅= 10 ⋅log10 (𝑀𝐴𝑋𝐼
2
𝑀𝑆𝐸) 
SSIM 
SSIM (𝑥, 𝑦) =
(2𝜇𝑥𝜇𝑦+ 𝑐1)(2𝜎𝑥𝑦+ 𝑐2)
(𝜇𝑥2 + 𝜇𝑦2 + 𝑐1)(𝜎𝑥2 + 𝜎𝑦2 + 𝑐2) 
RTP 
The task reduced by AI machine 
The classification task is not the same as the target detection task. It only makes a judgment on 
whether there is a malignant lesion or not, rather than predicts the location of the lesion in the 
ultrasound image. Therefore, our experiment is divided into two tasks: improve the accuracy of the 
detection model first, and then use a better network to implement the classification task. We have 
discussed the specific implementation in section III.B. 
We also defined an RTP indicator (Reduced Task Proportion), which means the reduced workload 
that the AI-assisted diagnostic device contributed. The Multi-AI Model does not make an evaluation 
for every input picture. Only when the evaluations of all sub-models are consistent, the system will 
give its judgment, and the other pictures will be given to the doctor. Since it only selects certain 
pictures to make judgments, we use RTP indicators to comprehensively evaluate the practical 
significance of the model. Of course, the higher these indicators, the more practical our work is. 
MOS indicators were introduced as subjective evaluation indicators. 
Mean Opinion Score (MOS): the observer makes a subjective evaluation of the image’s quality. 
The larger the value (between 0 and 5), the better the image quality. We compared the evaluation 
value of the algorithm with the subjective score value from human judges. 
IV. RESULTS 
A. SUPER RESOLUTION 
A clearer image plays an important role in subsequent processing. We need to verify that super-
resolution can improve the quality of ultrasound images and improve the effect of lesion detection. 
In order to verify the actual effect of the super-resolution model, we evaluate both the image quality 

 
itself and the improvement of the performance of the target detection model. 
The training and testing of super-resolution models require low-resolution ultrasound images. The 
low-resolution image is obtained by down-sampling high resolution image; the reasons are as 
follows: first, most general SR datasets are constructed based on down-sampling operations with a 
scale factor of four. The commonly used down-sampling operation is the cubic bilinear interpolation 
with anti-aliasing26; second, it is difficult for different ultrasound equipment to scan the same section 
at the same angle in the actual scenario. Also, it is meaningless for doctors and patients in the 
ultrasound department to use cheap equipment to match the parts that have already acquired high-
definition ultrasound images. If the angle or position of the low-resolution section in the dataset is 
not appropriate, it will have a great impact on the experiment. 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
 
 
(c) 
(d) 
Figure 6 Super-resolution breast ultrasound images 
There are three main types of the data: the lesion image (a), the normal image (b), and the 
suspected lesion image (c) (d). In the super-resolution model, the size of the image will change, and 
we need to observe them separately. We finally chose three different image sizes: the sizes of "Low 
input," "Super-resolution," and "Original" are 64*64, 256*256, 720*1024, respectively. 
 
Table 3 Evaluation score of image super-resolution 
Size 
720×1024 
256×256 
64×64 
PSNR 
23.53 
24.48 
26.97 
SSIM 
0.5523 
0.5592 
0.8703 
MOS 
3.67 
3.98 
4.12 
We also analyzed the score of the image in three different sizes, and the output image will be the 
input data of the next target detection model. When evaluating images through qualitative indicators 
such as PSNR and SSIM, it is necessary to ensure that the contrast images are consistent in size.  
As shown in Table 3, if we reduce output image size, the evaluation index score will become 
higher. However, the smaller the size of the image, the more difficult it is to detect the location of 
the lesion. In this paper, we use the output with a size of 256×256 as the input of the next target 
detection model. 
B. TARGET RECOGNITION 
It is necessary to use the target detection network to verify the accuracy of the super-resolution 
image. That is to analyze the model's score changes from the three types of image resolution sizes.  
In order to avoid the contingency of a single model, we use both YOLOv4 and CenterNet to verify 
the actual model effect. As an anchor-based model, YOLOv4 added an artificial prior distribution; 
thus, the predicted value variability during training is relatively small, which makes anchor-based 
networks easier to train and more stable. As a key-point-based method, CenterNet has a larger and 
more flexible solution space. Getting rid of the amount of calculation brought by the use of anchors 
makes detection and segmentation further towards real-time high precision. 

 
As shown in Table 4, various indicators (precision, recall, and mAP) all indicate that although 
the super-resolution generated image has a certain distance from the original image, it is 
significantly better than the low-resolution image. The accuracy improvement effect on 
CenterNet is better than YOLOv4, which also shows that the key-point-based model is more 
dependent on the high resolution of the image than the anchor-based network. 
Table 4 The evaluation index used in our experiment 
Model 
Evaluation index 
LR 
SR 
HR 
YOLOv4 
Precision 
58.5% 
60.5% 
65.5% 
Recall 
65.0% 
73.6% 
79.5% 
mAP 
60.7% 
70.3% 
76.4% 
Specificity 
84.5% 
89.5% 
90.1% 
CenterNet 
Precision 
51.6% 
63.0% 
68.4% 
Recall 
52.9% 
59.2% 
62.5% 
mAP 
58.1% 
71.9% 
76.3% 
Specificity 
83.8% 
82.6% 
92.5% 
Moreover, the Specificity value of the model is significantly higher than the Precision value 
as we put more lesion-free images in the test data. We need to avoid increasing the false alarm 
rate while reducing missed inspections. That is to reduce the overall error rate in Multi-AI 
model ensemble system. 
The ultimate goal is to make the Multi-AI model embedded system perform better, not to 
optimize the target detection sub-model. The experiments showed that the super-resolution can 
significantly improve the performance of existing target detection models. It is worth noting 
that the super-resolution model works during the detection rather than in training the model. 
This means it won’t influence the subsequent multi-model combination strategy. 
C. MULTI-AI MODEL ENSEMBLE SYSTEM 
The system pays more attention to the reliability and practicality of the model. We have 
established a remote ultrasound diagnosis server to transmit the collected data to the cloud in 
real time for analysis. This makes the multi-AI model pay less attention to computing speed 
and resources. 
We only pay attention to the accuracy of the pictures that the model can make judgments, 
because doctors will analyze the images that cannot be judged. Thus, we discarded some 
important indicators in the target detection, such as sensitivity, recall rate, etc. 
Our results are expressed by the reproduction matrix, which is composed of TP, FP, TN, and 
FN. The result of a single classification model conforms to the following rules: the sum of TP 
and FN is 530, and the sum of FP and TN is 1300. Considering the relationship between multi-
AI model and single improved detection model, their results have the following limitations: 
{
𝑇𝑃𝑚𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖−𝐴𝐼≤𝑇𝑃𝑦𝑜𝑙𝑜𝑣4∩𝑇𝑃𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑛𝑒𝑡
𝑇𝑁𝑚𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖−𝐴𝐼≤𝑇𝑁𝑦𝑜𝑙𝑜𝑣4∩𝑇𝑁𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑛𝑒𝑡
𝐹𝑃𝑚𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖−𝐴𝐼≤𝐹𝑃𝑦𝑜𝑙𝑜𝑣4∩𝐹𝑃𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑛𝑒𝑡
𝐹𝑁𝑚𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖−𝐴𝐼≤𝐹𝑁𝑦𝑜𝑙𝑜𝑣4∩𝐹𝑁𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑛𝑒𝑡
  (6) 
The Multi-AI model makes trade-offs from the intersection of the sub-models’ outputs. For 
this purpose, we set two thresholds in Eqn. (2), which make the model selection more sensible.  
In order to test the actual effect of multi-AI model individually, we use original image of the 
ultrasound dataset as the input for this experiment. The results of the confusion matrix is as 
follows:   
 
 

 
Table 5 The confusion matrix of the models  
A) YOLOv4 
Label 
Prediction 
Positive 
Negative 
Positive 
306 
129 
Negative 
224 
1171 
B) CenterNet  
Label  
Prediction 
Positive 
Negative 
Positive 
332 
97 
Negative 
198 
1203 
C) YOLOv4+CenterNet  
Label  
Prediction 
Positive 
Negative 
Positive 
305 
43 
Negative 
13 
1038 
 
The images with benign and malignant tumors were treated as negative samples and those 
without lesions as positive samples. As shown in the two-class confusion matrix in Table 5, the 
performance are relatively poor when using the feature map of the backbone of a single target 
detection model for classification.  
The results of single model show that there is an overfitting phenomenon in detection. Single 
classification model is prone to the missed detection, which makes the FN value too large. 
What’s more, the model trained with target detection indicators will take more into account the 
images with multiple lesions. Therefore, evaluating the results with classification indicators 
shows poor performance. 
In the experiment, adjusting the threshold will influence the multi-AI model’s performance. 
Specifically, the stricter the threshold score, the less evaluation the multi-AI model can make; 
then the error rate can be lower than single model, and vice versa. In actual situations, people 
who are misjudged as having the disease will receive doctors’ second examination, while those 
who are misjudged as disease-free will not, in which the latter case will badly influence patients’ 
health and should be avoid as much as possible. Therefore, in the multi-AI model experiment, 
the number of positive images judged to be disease-free should be as few as possible. 
In order to make the experimental results clearer, we define the sensitivity and specificity as 
shown in Eqn. (7): 
{
𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑚𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖−𝐴𝐼=
𝑇𝑃𝑚𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖−𝐴𝐼
𝑇𝑃𝑚𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖−𝐴𝐼+𝐹𝑃𝑚𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖−𝐴𝐼
𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑓𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑚𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖−𝐴𝐼=
𝑇𝑁𝑚𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖−𝐴𝐼
𝑇𝑁𝑚𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖−𝐴𝐼+𝐹𝑃𝑚𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖−𝐴𝐼
  (7) 
  The results were presented as follows: 
 
 

 
Table 6 The metrics used in the classification experiment 
Model 
Sensitivity 
Specificity 
RTP 
YOLOv4 
57.73% 
90.08% 
100% 
CenterNet 
62.64% 
92.54% 
100% 
YOLOv4+CenterNet 
95.91% 
96.02% 
76.45% 
From Table 5 and Table 6, we can see that the model is more conservative in the positive 
judgment of the disease, which makes sensitivity low and specificity high relatively. This will 
reduce the correct positive diagnosis, yet it will also reduce the misdiagnosis rate, making the 
entire model more reliable. 
All in all, as shown in the experimental results of a single target detection model, the idea of 
the joint model allows them to play an effect far exceeding that of a single model, which 
validates a new idea for medical image detection. The good performance of related indicators 
shows that the multi-AI model is much more reliable compared to the single target detection 
model. At the same time, using the detection model with adjusted parameters is more in line 
with the actual use scenario. 
V. Conclusions and future work 
The super-resolution experiments performed well in imaging quality and detection effects. 
Yet, the low-resolution images were manually generated rather than collected from the 
ultrasound equipment, making the model generalization slightly insufficient. The super-
resolution model also employed the VGG network. Therefore, this part can also act as the 
classification or the evaluation tasks as a subsystem. 
Although the multi-AI model can reduce the doctors’ workloads, as shown in the experiments, 
the workload would still be very heavy when the input data size is large. In this case, the score 
of the indicator RPT will decrease. It was assumed that the more "members" in the combination 
model, the more difficult it is to reach a consistent opinion; thus, we only included two 
“members”. We may make the final decision through a voting system or by multiple members 
according to their weights27. From this perspective, the multi-AI model ensemble system 
provides a feasible solution and verifies the feasibility. 
Algorithm engineers usually pay their efforts to optimize the model, yet less attention to help 
medical workers reduce their workload. In other words, many systems do not consider doctors’ 
needs. One of this work’s contributions is coming up with a practical system with considering the 
doctors’ needs in the actual scenario.  
Finally, how the neural network model serves medical images is based on the purpose. Here 
we improved the detection model to complete the classification task, which is actually a very 
practical tip. Although many model improvements are based on the combination of channels or 
feature maps, apart from the partial increase or decrease in the evaluation score, they have not 
brought much substantial help to doctors. Unless a single model can approach 100% accuracy, 
it is difficult to bring AI models into practice in medical imaging. Here is how the multi 
ensemble AI system helps. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The 
authors 
thank 
Shenzhen 
Science 
and 
Technology 
Planning 
Project 
(NO. 
JSGG20191129103020960) and Guangdong Cloud Intelligent Ultrasonic Engineering Technology 
Research Center (No. 2019B092）for supporting this research.
