1
MODELING AND SIMULATING RETAIL MANAGEMENT PRACTICES: 
A FIRST APPROACH 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Multi-agent systems offer a new and exciting way of understanding the world of 
work. We apply agent-based modeling and simulation to investigate a set of problems 
in a retail context. Specifically, we are working to understand the relationship 
between people management practices on the shop-floor and retail performance. 
Despite the fact we are working within a relatively novel and complex domain, it is 
clear that using an agent-based approach offers great potential for improving 
organizational capabilities in the future. 
 
Our multi-disciplinary research team has worked closely with one of the UK’s top ten 
retailers to collect data and build an understanding of shop-floor operations and the 
key actors in a department (customers, staff, and managers). Based on this case study 
we have built and tested our first version of a retail branch agent-based simulation 
model where we have focused on how we can simulate the effects of people 
management practices on customer satisfaction and sales. In our experiments we have 
looked at employee development and cashier empowerment as two examples of shop-
floor management practices. 
 
In this paper we describe the underlying conceptual ideas and the features of our 
simulation model. We present a selection of experiments we have conducted in order 
to validate our simulation model and to show its potential for answering “what-if” 
questions in a retail context. We also introduce a novel performance measure which 
we have created to quantify customers’ satisfaction with service, based on their 
individual shopping experiences.  
 
 
KEYWORDS 
 
Agent-Based Modeling and Simulation, Retail, Management Practices, Shopping 
Behavior 
 
 
1 
BACKGROUND 
 
1.1 
Why is Retail Productivity Important? 
 
The retail sector significantly contributes to the UK’s relatively low productivity 
compared to France, Germany and the USA (Reynolds et al., 2005), popularly termed 
the ‘productivity gap’. A large-scale literature review of management practices and 
retail performance and productivity (Siebers et al., 2008) concluded that management 
practices are multidimensional constructs which tend to demonstrate a complex 
relationship with productivity. The authors concluded that it may be the context-
specific nature of management practices and productivity which precludes clear 
patterns in the results of empirical studies (for a further review see Wall & Wood 
2005). Many experts agree that the focus is shifting to looking inside organizations to 

 
2
understand the source of the problem (Delbridge et al., 2006). Focusing on 
management practices may offer an opportunity to further our understanding of the 
UK’s relatively low levels of retail productivity (Porter & Ketels, 2003). 
 
1.2 
Customer Satisfaction and In-Store Experiences 
 
Without customers a retailer is without a business; Hill and Alexander (2006, p.11) 
advocate the only route to success is, “Do best what matters to customers.” Measuring 
customer satisfaction is the key way in which a retailer can quantify and understand 
their strengths and weaknesses. Empirical evidence suggests there is a need to 
differentiate between the components of a global customer satisfaction measure (Rust 
et al., 1995; Garbarino & Johnson, 1999). Consequently, instead of focusing on 
overall satisfaction as a global evaluation, we will investigate customer satisfaction as 
it is empirically driven by visitors’ in-store experiences and perceptions of service 
they receive (Torres et al., 2001). 
 
1.3 
People Management Practices 
 
Managers working in retail stores tend to be under a lot of pressure to allocate their 
time effectively and to prioritize the competing tasks and impromptu issues that can 
crop up throughout their shift. People management practices offer a way of enhancing 
the overall operation of the store through its staff. People (or Human Resource) 
management practices have been defined as the, “… organizational activities directed 
at managing the pool of human capital and ensuring that the capital is employed 
towards the fulfillment of organizational goals,” (p.304, Wright et al., 1994). 
Examples of people management practices are empowerment, team-based working 
and skill development.  
 
 
 
2 
INTRODUCTION  
 
There exists a large body of work investigating the modeling and simulation of 
operational management practices, whereas people management practices have often 
been neglected. Yet research suggests that people management practices crucially 
impact upon an organization's performance (for example, Birdi et al., 2008).  
 
The overall aim of our project is to understand and predict the impact of different 
people management practices on retail productivity and performance. One key 
objective has been to apply simulation to devise a functional representation of the 
retail shop-floor driven by a real system. To achieve this objective we have adopted a 
case study approach and integrated applied research methods to collect 
complementary qualitative and quantitative data. In summary, we have conducted 
four weeks of informal participant observation, forty staff interviews supplemented by 
a short questionnaire regarding the effectiveness of various management practices, 
and drawn upon a range of internal company documentation. Early experimentation 
with the model has led us to develop and advance its operation in order to facilitate 
more comprehensive investigation of the impact of management practices. By 
reducing the level of abstraction within the model we are able to evaluate simulation 
runtime outcomes in terms more closely linked to those of the real system.  
 

 
3
In this paper we describe the development of the first version of our simulation model 
where we have focused mainly on how we can simulate the effects of people 
management practices on customer satisfaction and sales. We have chosen employee 
development and empowerment as examples of such people management practices. In 
Sections 3, 4, and 5 we provide an overview of the research we have completed 
leading up to the creation of our simulation model of two retail departments. Section 3 
embeds our selection of modeling technique in the broader modeling literature, and 
Section 4 describes the model design including data collection, model 
conceptualization, and a description of how we incorporate the empirical data we 
have gathered during our case study work. Section 5 explains the implementation of 
these concepts and the data according to the first full version of our simulation model 
(referred to as ManPraSim v1). In Section 6 we present two sets of validation 
experiments, and then three sets of operational experiments to investigate to impact of 
management practices on department performance measures including customers’ 
satisfaction with the service provided. We draw some conclusions in Section 7 and 
identify priorities for future work. 
 
 
3 
WHY USE AGENT-BASED SIMULATION? 
 
There are a number of competing approaches to modeling, and the decision to choose 
Agent-Based Modeling and Simulation (ABMS) followed a careful review and 
evaluation of different approaches. 
 
3.1 
Selection of modeling technique 
 
Operations Research (OR) is applied to problems concerning the conduct and co-
ordination of the operations within an organization (Hillier & Lieberman, 2005). An 
OR study usually involves the development of a scientific model which attempts to 
abstract the essence of the real problem. When investigating the behavior of a 
complex system it is very important to select an appropriate modeling technique. In 
order to be able to make a choice for our project, we reviewed the relevant literature 
spanning the fields of Economics, Organizational Behavior, Psychology, Retail, 
Marketing, OR, Artificial Intelligence, and Computer Science. Within these fields a 
wide variety of modeling approaches are used which can be classified into three main 
categories: analytical approaches, heuristic approaches, and simulation. In many cases 
we found modelers had adopted an integrated approach and applied more than one 
technique within a single model. Common combinations were ‘simulation / 
analytical’ for comparing efficiency of alternative future scenarios (e.g. Greasley, 
2005), and ‘simulation / analytical’ or ‘simulation / heuristic’ where analytical or 
heuristic models were used to represent the behavior of the entities within the 
simulation model (e.g. Schwaiger & Stahmer, 2003). 
 
Simulation opens the door to a new way of thinking about social and economic 
processes, based on ideas about the emergence of complex behavior from relatively 
simple activities (Simon, 1996). Whereas analytical models tend to aim to explain 
correlations between variables measured at one single point in time, simulation 
models are concerned with the development of a system over time. Furthermore, 
analytical models usually work on a much higher level of abstraction than simulation 
models. For simulation models it is critical to define the right level of abstraction. 

 
4
Csik (2003) states that on the one hand the number of free parameters must be kept as 
small as possible. On the other hand, too much abstraction and simplification will 
threaten the ability of the model to accurately represent the real system. OR usually 
employs three different types of simulation modeling to help understand the behavior 
of organizational systems, each of which has its distinct application area: Discrete 
Event Simulation (DES), System Dynamics Simulation (SDS) and Agent Based 
Simulation (ABS). The choice of the most suitable approach will always depend on 
the focus of the model, which input data is available, the level of analysis and what 
kind of answers are sought. 
 
In our review we put particular emphasis on those publications that try to model the 
link between management practices and productivity or performance in the retail 
sector. We found a very limited number of papers that investigate management 
practices in retail at the organizational level, with the majority of these papers 
focusing on marketing practices (e.g. Keh et al., 2006). Agent-Based Modeling 
(ABM), using simulation as the method of execution, was by far the most popular 
technique. It seems to be accepted as the natural way of system representation for 
organizations; active entities in the live environment are interpreted as actors in the 
model. 
 
3.2 
Agent-Based Modeling and Simulation 
 
Although computer simulation has been used widely since the 1960s, ABM only 
became popular at the start of the 1990s (Epstein & Axtell, 1996). ABM can be used 
to study how micro-level processes affect macro-level outcomes. A complex system is 
represented by a collection of individual agents which are programmed to follow 
simple behavioral rules. Agents can interact with one another and with their 
environment, and these interactions can result in complex collective behavioral 
patterns. Macro behavior is not explicitly simulated; it emerges from the micro-
decisions and actions of individual agents (Pourdehnad et al., 2002). The main 
characteristics of agents are: autonomous operation, the ability to act flexibly in 
response to the environment, and pro-activeness driven by internal motivations. 
Agents are designed to mimic the attributes and behaviors of their real-world 
counterparts. Simulation output can be used for explanatory, exploratory and 
predictive purposes (Twomey & Cadman, 2002).  
 
The way in which agents are modeled appears to be more suitable than DES for 
modeling human-centric complex adaptive systems (Siebers, 2006). There is a 
structural correspondence between the real system and the model representation, 
which makes these models more intuitive and easier to understand than for example a 
system of differential equations as used in SDS. Hood (1998) emphasized one of the 
key strengths of this technique is that the system as a whole is not constrained to 
exhibit any particular behavior because the system properties emerge from its 
constituent agent interactions. Consequently assumptions of linearity, equilibrium and 
so on, are not needed. Of course there are disadvantages; there is a general consensus 
in the literature that it is difficult to empirically evaluate agent-based models, in 
particular at the macro level, because the behavior of the system emerges from the 
interactions between the individual entities (Moss & Edmonds, 2005). Furthermore 
Twomey & Cadman (2002) state that problems often occur through the lack of 
adequate empirical data, and that there is always a danger that people new to ABM 

 
5
may expect too much from the models, in particular with respect to predictive ability, 
though this last criticism applies to all the simulation approaches mentioned above. 
 
Overall we can conclude that ABMS is the most appropriate technique to investigate 
people management practices. This approach provides us with the opportunity to 
model organizational characters and their interactions in realistic and valid ways. 
 
 
4 
MODEL DESIGN  
 
We emphasize the central role of data collection and understanding of the real system 
to inform the conceptualization and implementation of our model. 
 
4.1 
Knowledge gathering 
 
The case studies were conducted in the same two departments across two branches of 
a leading UK department store. We adopted an integrated approach using a 
complementary set of data collection methods: participant observation; semi-
structured interviews; completion of a management practices questionnaire with team 
members, managers and personnel managers; and the analysis of company data and 
reports. Research findings were consolidated and fed back (via report and 
presentation) to employees and managers with extensive experience and knowledge of 
the case study departments in order to cross-validate our understanding and 
conclusions. 
 
Preliminary case study findings suggested that we needed to configure the model to 
represent the different department types: Audio and Television (A&TV) and 
Womenswear (WW). This approach also helps to ensure that the simulation results 
remain as broadly applicable as possible. Case study work revealed substantial 
differences between the two department types, a divergence which is generally driven 
by fundamentally different product characteristics. For example, the average purchase 
in A&TV is more expensive than in WW. The likelihood of a customer seeking 
advice is higher in A&TV, and the average customer service time is longer than in 
WW. Customers in WW are more likely to make a purchase than in A&TV. 
 
Our empirical approach to understanding the real case studies has played a crucial 
role in facilitating the conceptualization of how the real system is structured. This is 
an important stage to any simulation project, revealing insights into the operation of 
the system as well as the behavior of and interactions between the different characters 
in the system. 
 
4.2 
Conceptual Modeling 
 
To make the most of the empirical data and insights obtained through the case studies, 
the core aspects of the model were conceptualized and mapped out prior to 
implementation. 
 
4.2.1 Modeling Approach  
 

 
6
Building on the findings from our literature review we have used the agent paradigm 
to conceptualize and model the actors within the system under investigation. 
 
Our modeling approach has been iterative, firstly creating a relatively simple model 
and progressively building in more and more complexity. We started by trying to 
understand the particular problem domain and to generate the underlying rules 
currently in place. We have since progressed to the process of building an ABS model 
of the real system using the information gathered during our case study and to validate 
our model by simulating the operation of the real system.  
 
This approach allows us to assess the accuracy of the system representation. When the 
simulation has provided a sufficiently good representation we have been able to move 
to the next stage, and generate new scenarios for how the system could work using 
new rules. 
 
4.2.2 Concept for the Simulation Model 
 
Our conceptual ideas for the simulation model are shown in Figure 1. Within our 
simulation model we have three different types of agents (customers, shop-floor staff, 
and managers) each with a different set of relevant attributes. Global parameters can 
influence any aspect of the system, and define, for example, the number of agents in 
the system. With regards to system outputs we hope to find some unforeseeable, 
emergent behavior on the macro level. Maintaining a visual representation of the 
simulated system and its actors will allow us to closely monitor and better understand 
the interactions of entities within the system. In addition, by measuring the 
performance of the system we will be able identify bottlenecks in the real system and 
to subsequently to optimize it. 
  
[INSERT FIGURE 1]  
 
4.2.3 Concept for the Actors 
 
The agents have been designed and represented using state charts. State charts display 
the different states which an entity can be in and define the transitional events which 
are the triggers driving an actor’s change from one behavioral state to another. This is 
exactly the information we need in order to represent our agents later within the 
simulation environment. Furthermore this form of graphical representation is helpful 
for validating the agent design (micro-level face validation) because it is easy for 
experts in the real system to understand.  
 
The art of modeling relies on simplification and abstraction (Shannon, 1975). A 
model is always a restricted copy of the real world and we have to identify the most 
important components of a system to build effective models. In our case, instead of 
looking for components we have identified the most important behaviors of each actor 
and the triggers which initiate a move from one state to another. We have developed 
state charts for all the relevant actors in our retail department model. Figure 2 shows 
as an example the conceptual template of a customer agent. The transition rules have 
been omitted here to keep the chart succinct (see Section 5.1 and 5.2 for a more 
detailed explanation of the transition rules). 
 

 
7
[INSERT FIGURE 2] 
 
Once a customer enters the department he or she will be in the contemplating state. 
This is a dummy state and represents the reality of an individual thinking through 
their behavioral intentions prior to acting (Ajzen, 1985), regardless of whether the 
department visit will result in a planned or unanticipated purchase (Kelly et al., 2000). 
Even when a particular purchase is planned, the customer may change their mind and 
go for a substitute product, if they buy at all. He or she will probably start browsing 
and after a certain amount of time, he or she may require help, queue at the till or 
leave the shop. If the customer requires help, he or she considers what to do and seeks 
help by looking for a staff member and will either immediately receive help or wait 
for attention. If no staff member is available, he or she has to join a queue and wait for 
help. If the queue moves very slowly it could result in a customer becoming fed up of 
waiting or running out of time and so he or she leaves the queue prematurely. This 
does not mean necessarily that he or she will not make a purchase. Sometimes 
customers would still make a purchase even without getting the advice they were 
seeking. Another reason why a customer might come into the department is to ask for 
a refund. We have added this activity to the conceptual model because we will later 
experiment with different refund policies. From an organizational point of view the 
refund process is very similar to the help process. The difference is that the refund 
process will take place at the till. After the refund process is concluded the customer 
will either continue shopping (i.e. start browsing) or leave the department. 
 
It is important to observe that there is a sequential order to these events which is 
incorporated into the customer state chart. Furthermore, there is a logical flow to these 
states. Thus, for example, a customer is unlikely to be queuing at the till in WW to 
buy something without having first picked up an item. Therefore, the condition for 
queuing at the till to buy something would be that the customer has been browsing 
before to pick up an item. These rules have been considered in the implementation 
(see Section 5.1 and Figure 3 for more details). 
 
During the process of conceiving the model we have questioned whether or not our 
agents are intelligent. Wooldridge (2002) stated that in order to be intelligent, agents 
need to be reactive, proactive and social. This is a widely accepted view. Being 
reactive means responding to changes in the environment (in a timely manner), being 
proactive means persistently pursuing goals and being social means interacting with 
other agents (Padgham & Winikoff, 2004). Our agents perceive a goal in that they 
intend to either make a purchase or return a previous purchase. The buying process 
has a sub goal; the customer is trying to buy the right thing. If the customer is not sure 
he or she may ask for help from a shop floor worker. Our agents are not only reactive 
but also flexible, i.e. they are capable to recover from a failure of action. They have 
alternatives inbuilt when they are unable to realize their goal in a timely manner. For 
example if a customer wants to pay but the queue is not moving he or she will always 
have the chance to leave a queue and pursue another action. This example illustrates 
that customers can respond in a flexible way to certain changes in their environment, 
in this case the length of the queue. Finally, as there is communication between agents 
and staff, they can also be regarded as social entities interacting with others1.  
                                               
1 An extensive discussion of the notion of ‘intelligence’, a topic which seems to split the simulation 
community (encompassing the ABM community) into two halves, can be found in SIMSOC (2008). 

 
8
 
4.2.4 Concept for a Customer Satisfaction Measure 
 
Customer perceptions are crucial to measuring the impact of retail management 
practices. Applied in conjunction with objective performance measures (e.g. sales 
turnover), it becomes possible to obtain a rounded view of retail performance. 
Customer service is by definition intangible, and an index of customer satisfaction 
offers an invaluable way of quantifying customers’ perceptions of this. Measures of 
customer satisfaction are important to provide an indicator of not only how the 
business is performing at present, but also an idea of how many recent customers will 
return to the retailer.  
 
Global customer satisfaction is a multi-dimensional construct, an accumulation of 
separate satisfaction evaluations of multiple facets (see for example Parasuraman et 
al., 1988; Bolton & Drew, 1991; Mihelis et al., 2001). We conceptualize a measure 
which draws upon a subset of these facets; focusing on those aspects of satisfaction 
which we observed to be most pertinent to customer satisfaction in a retail 
department. We will use customers’ perceptions of their in-store experiences, in 
particular the service that is provided, as an indicator of customer satisfaction. The 
aim is to go beyond the capabilities of existing measures to create a dynamic measure 
that considers each step of the entire shopping experience as each individual customer 
perceives it. The link between shop-floor management practices and this measure is 
salient because achieving a high level of customer satisfaction is hinges on the 
availability of suitably skilled staff when customers need them. Relating these to 
Mihelis and colleagues’ (2001) model of global satisfaction, for example, these 
components relate to two of five high-level components: service (e.g. waiting times, 
service processes) and personnel (e.g. skills and knowledge). 
 
Previous work examining service encounters in retail settings has shown that the 
attitudes and behaviors of employees can positively influence customers’ perceptions 
of quality, satisfaction, and hence purchase intentions (Babin et al., 1999; Baker et al., 
2002; Dabholkar et al., 1995; Parasuraman et al., 1994). Further to this, key aspects of 
customer service quality have been shown to impact positively on customer 
perceptions, and these include circumstances when employees have been perceived as 
respectful, friendly, knowledgeable about products, responsive to the customer’s 
needs and questions, able to give advice, and have not pursued a ‘hard sell’ (Darian et 
al., 2001; Leo & Philippe, 2002). Some businesses continue to gain competitive 
advantage through priding themselves on exceptional customer service. The 
importance of providing a high quality service to customers is widely accepted as a 
crucial topic for management success, as demonstrated by dedicated journals, such as 
‘Managing Service Quality’. A recent large-scale consumer satisfaction study 
(conducted by Which, cited by Fluke, 2008) surveyed more than 10,000 people and 
found that, “shoppers are increasingly willing to spend extra for better service.” This 
is convincing evidence that retailers who strive for high levels of customer 
satisfaction through a favorable in-store experience are reaping the benefits. 
 
Many methods of calculating customer satisfaction sample only those people who 
visit the store and leave with a purchase. These methods ignore the store visitors who 
could have made a purchase; in other words data is not collected from unrealized 
customers. We would argue that the satisfaction of all store visitors is important and 

 
9
valid for the long-term development and survival of the business. Everyone who visits 
the store will remember their experiences, whether they have been positive or 
negative, and this could influence his or her decision to come again or whether to 
make a future purchase (e.g. Meyer, 2008). For this reason our customer satisfaction 
measure draws on the perceptions of all department visitors, rather than restricting 
this measure only to those individuals who make a purchase.  
 
 
5 
MODEL IMPLEMENTATION 
 
Our simulation has been implemented in AnyLogic™ version 5.5 which is a Java™ 
based multi-paradigm simulation software (XJ Technologies, 2007). The simulation 
model is initialized from an Excel™ spreadsheet. We have implemented the 
knowledge, experience and data obtained from the case studies, resulting in a model 
which supports the simulation of the two types of departments (A&TV and WW) 
within which we conducted our case study work. 
 
5.1 
Implementing the Concept 
 
The simulation model can represent the following actors: customers, service staff 
(including cashiers, selling staff of two different training levels) and managers. Figure 
3 shows a screenshot of the customer and staff agent logic as it has been implemented 
in AnyLogic™. Boxes represent customer states, arrows transitions, circles with B 
branches (decision nodes) and numbers denote satisfaction weights which as a whole 
form the service level index. 
 
[INSERT FIGURE 3] 
 
There are two different types of customer goals implemented: making a purchase or 
obtaining a refund. If a refund is granted, the customer’s goal may then change to 
making a new purchase, or alternatively they will leave the shop straight away. The 
customer agent template consists of three main blocks which all use a very similar 
logic. These blocks are ‘Help’, ‘Pay’ and ‘Refund’. In each block, in the first instance, 
customers will try to obtain service directly and if they cannot obtain it (no suitable 
staff member available) they will have to queue. They will then either be served as 
soon as the right staff member becomes available or they will leave the queue if they 
do not want to wait any longer (an autonomous decision). A complex queuing system 
has been implemented to support different queuing rules. In comparison to the 
customer agent template, the staff agent template is relatively simple. Whenever a 
customer requests a service and the staff member is available and has the right level 
of expertise for the task requested, the staff member commences this activity until the 
customer releases the staff member. While the customer is the active component of 
the simulation model the staff member is currently passive, simply reacting to 
requests from the customer. In future we planned to add a more pro-active role for the 
staff members, for example offering services to browsing customers. 
 
5.2 
Input Parameters 
 
We have used frequency distributions and probabilities to assign different values to 
each individual agent. In this way a population is created that reflects the variations in 

 
10
attitudes and behaviors of their real human counterparts. Often agents are based on 
analytical models or heuristics and in the absences of adequate empirical data 
theoretical models are employed; we have incorporated data from the real system 
wherever possible. 
 
We have used frequency distributions for modeling delays between state changes, 
specifically triangular distributions supplying the time that an event lasts, using the 
minimum, mode, and maximum duration. Our triangular distributions are based on 
our own observation and expert estimates in the absence of numerical data. We have 
collected this information from the two branches and calculated an average value for 
each department type, building one set of data for A&TV and one set for WW. Table 
1 lists some sample frequency distributions that we have used for modeling the 
A&TV department (the values presented here have been slightly amended to comply 
with confidentiality restrictions). The distributions have been used as exit rules for 
most of the states. All remaining exit rules are based on queue development, i.e. the 
availability of staff. 
 
[INSERT TABLE 1] 
 
We have used probabilities to model the decision making processes. The probabilities 
are partly based on company data or published data (e.g. conversion rates, that is the 
percentage of customers who buy something) and where empirical data has not been 
available we have collected estimates from knowledgeable individuals working in the 
case study departments (e.g. the patience of a customer before prematurely leaving a 
queue). Some examples for the probabilities we have used to model the A&TV 
department can be found in Table 2, and as before we have calculated average values 
for each department type. The probabilities link to most of the transition rules at the 
branches where decisions are made about what action to take (e.g. decision to seek 
help). The remaining decisions are based on the state of the environment (e.g. leaving 
the queue, if the queue does not get shorter quickly enough). 
 
[INSERT TABLE 2] 
 
5.3 
Performance Measures 
 
We have built a number of performance measures into the system to help us 
understand the outcomes of a simulation run. In this paper we look at the number of 
transactions, staff utilization indices, the number of satisfied customers, and overall 
customer satisfaction. These measures are defined as follows. The number of 
transactions acts as a proxy for departmental sales turnover, and allows us to draw 
links between experimental results and the tangible financial outcomes of the real 
system. The staff utilization indices are presented by staff type, either normal or 
expert, and help us to understand whether the staff team’s composition is effectively 
meeting the demands placed on it by customers. Satisfaction measures have been 
introduced to allow the satisfaction of customers with their in-store experiences, and 
any service with which they have been provided, to be recorded throughout the 
simulated lifetime. The number of satisfied customers is the count of customers who 
have left the department with a positive service level index (i.e. the count of satisfied 
customers). Overall customer satisfaction is the sum of all customers’ service level 

 
11
indices when they leave the department (i.e. the sum of all customers’ individual 
satisfaction levels). 
 
To implement customers’ perceptions in the model, we have decomposed each 
customer’s shopping experience across different behavioral states and transitions 
between them (see Figure 3). The satisfaction weights define the relative contribution 
of each customer transition to the satisfaction score; actual figures are notional. The 
weightings have been allocated in line with empirical data, or where this has not been 
possible they have been allocated in an intuitive manner. For example, a large 
evidence base supports the contention that waiting for service can lead to a customer 
forming a negative impression of the service being received (Bitner et al., 1990; Katz 
et al., 1991; Taylor, 1994). Figure 3 displays how this finding has been incorporated 
into the model. If a customer seeks help and locates help immediately his or her 
satisfaction score is increased by 2 + 2 = 4. If the customer has to wait for help but 
gets the help in the end, the overall impact on his or her satisfaction cancels out: 2 – 2 
= 0. If, however, the customer gets fed up with waiting for help and leaves the queue 
prematurely, there is a strong adverse impact on his or her satisfaction score: -4. If 
this customer then leaves the department without buying anything an additional -2 is 
added to the satisfaction score, so that this customer at the end of his or her shopping 
trip would contribute zero to the number of satisfied customers count and -6 to the 
overall customer satisfaction measure. 
 
Implementing satisfaction weights allows us to account for the differential impact of 
different components of customers’ in-store experiences, and build a more realistic 
measure of customers’ satisfaction with their visit. In line with the empirical findings 
of Westbrook (1981), a simple linear additive model has been followed, whereby a 
customer’s individual satisfaction weights collected at each relevant transition can be 
summed up to calculate an overall level of satisfaction at the end of a department 
visit. We measure customers’ service satisfaction in two different ways derived from 
these weightings; number of satisfied customers and overall customer satisfaction. 
Applied in conjunction with an ABMS approach, we expect to observe interactions 
with individual customer differences; variations which have been empirically linked 
to differences in customers’ service satisfaction. This helps the analyst to find out to 
what extent customers underwent a positive or negative shopping experience. It also 
allows the analyst to put emphasis on different operational aspects and try out the 
impact of different management strategies. 
 
Individual differences between customers have already been built into the model and 
there is some potential to extend the modeled variability between customers by 
introducing heterogeneous customer types (as discussed in Section 7), and so the 
satisfaction weights remain static (unless the weights themselves are the experimental 
variable – see Section 6.3). The rationale for modeling the weights in this way is 
because although it is likely that any single situation will inevitably be perceived in 
different ways across individuals, it can also be argued that multiple responses will 
tend to a normal distribution, resulting in a single ‘most likely’ or mean response. It is 
the estimated ‘most likely’ response which has been implemented in the simulation 
model. Using static satisfaction weights in this way ensures that we can incorporate a 
dynamic measure of customers’ service satisfaction without introducing unnecessary 
variability.  
 

 
12
At the end of the simulation run, there are a certain number of customers who are 
satisfied, those who are neutral in opinion, and those who are dissatisfied. A higher 
count of the number of satisfied customers means that more customers are satisfied 
when they leave the store. A higher (or lower) level of overall customer satisfaction is 
likely to be the result of a combination of a higher number of customers holding that 
satisfied (or dissatisfied) point of view and also possessing a more extreme opinion. 
 
 
6 
EXPERIMENTING WITH THE MODEL 
 
In this section we present and describe the results from a series of experiments. Firstly 
we validate the model by varying the operational staffing configuration and 
examining the impact on sales figures and customers’ service satisfaction. Then we 
test the impact of management practices (task empowerment, empowerment to learn, 
and employee development) on key department performance measures including 
customers’ service satisfaction.  
 
Despite our prior knowledge of how the real system operates, we have been unable to 
hypothesize precise differences in variable relationships, instead predicting general 
patterns of relationships. Indeed, ABMS is a decision-support tool and is only able to 
inform us about directional changes between variables (actual figures are notional).  
 
In the broader simulation literature there is some divergence about whether or not it is 
appropriate to apply rigorous statistical tests in the analysis of simulation results (e.g. 
Schmeiser, 2001). Law and Kelton (2000) advocate the application of T-tests and not 
ANOVAs; nevertheless ANOVAs and T-tests are a similar type of statistical test (they 
are both parametric tests), and so both rely on the same key assumptions (e.g. see 
Howell, 2007, Pallant, 2001). Before applying any parametric test it is essential that 
appropriate preliminary tests check these assumptions, and where these are not met 
then appropriate corrections are applied. This systematic approach ensures that 
appropriate statistical tests are applied in the correct way. 
 
We conduct independent replications with our simulation model, resulting in 
independent observations. Specifically, in line with Law & Kelton (2000) each run 
uses: separate sets of different random numbers (i.e. not common random numbers); 
the same initial conditions; and resets the statistical counters. For these reasons we are 
confident that we can make an assumption fundamental to the application of rigorous 
statistical tests, specifically the assumption of independence of observations. 
 
6.1 
Model Validation 
 
To test the operation of our simulation model and ascertain confidence in the validity 
of our model we have designed and run two sets of validation experiments for both 
departments. Firstly we will look at the impact of varying the department staffing 
configuration on performance measures, and secondly the impact of satisfaction 
weights on overall customer satisfaction. All experiments hold the overall number of 
staffing resources constant at 10 staff and we run the simulation for a period of 10 
weeks. We have conducted 20 repetitions for every experimental condition. 
 
6.1.1 Staffing Configuration 

 
13
 
During our time in the case study departments, we observed that the number of 
cashiers available to serve customers would fluctuate over time. In the first 
investigation we vary the staffing arrangement (i.e. the number of cashiers) and 
examine the impact on the volume of sales transactions and two levels of customer 
satisfaction described earlier; number of satisfied customers and overall customer 
satisfaction. In reality, we observed that allocating extra cashiers would reduce the 
shop floor sales team numbers, and therefore the total number of customer-facing 
staff in each department is kept constant at 10. 
 
6.1.1.1 Hypotheses 
 
Our case study work has helped us to identify the distinguishing characteristics of the 
departments, for example higher customer arrival rates in WW compared to A&TV, 
and longer service times in A&TV compared to WW. We expect these inherent 
differences to impact on department performance, and we therefore predict that for 
each of our dependent measures: number of sales transactions (1), number of satisfied 
customers (2) and overall customer satisfaction (3): 
• H1a, H2a, H3a: An increase in the number of cashiers will be linked to 
increases in 1, 2 and 3 respectively to a peak level, beyond which 1, 2 and 3 
will decrease. 
• H1b, H2b, H3b: The peak level of 1, 2 and 3 respectively will occur with a 
smaller number of cashiers in A&TV than in WW. 
 
6.1.1.2 Results 
 
Preliminary analyses were conducted for each department. The distributions of all 3 
dependent variables are approximately normal (Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistics all 
p>.05). For 1 and 2, Levene’s test of equality of variances was violated (p<.05). It has 
been credibly established that this is not a problem; ANOVAs are robust to violations 
of this assumption provided that the size of the groups are reasonably similar 
(Stevens, 1996), and in our case the group sizes are identical (n=20). Therefore it is 
appropriate to analyze each dependent variable using a two-way between-groups 
analysis of variance (ANOVA). Where significant ANOVA results were found, post-
hoc tests have been applied where appropriate to investigate further the precise impact 
on outcome variables under different experimental conditions. To address the 
increased risk of a Type I error associated with multiple tests we have applied a 
Bonferroni correction to create more conservative thresholds for significance 
(corrected post-hoc p-value for 3 dependent variables = .0167). 
 
Each ANOVA revealed statistically significant differences (see Table 3 for 
descriptive statistics). For the number of sales transactions (1) there were significant 
main effects for both department [F(1, 190) = 356441.1, p<.001] and staffing [F(4, 
190) = 124919.5, p<.001], plus a significant moderating effect of department type 
[F(4, 190) = 20496.37, p<.001]. Tukey’s post hoc tests were run to explore the impact 
of staffing and revealed significant differences for every paired comparison (p<.001). 
 
[INSERT TABLE 3]  
 

 
14
There is clear support for Hla. We expected this to happen because the number of 
normal staff available to provide customer advice will eventually reduce to the extent 
where there will be a detrimental impact on the number of customers making a 
purchase. Some customers will become impatient waiting increasingly long for 
service, and will leave the department without making a purchase. Hlb is not 
supported, the data presents an interesting contrast, in that 1 plateaus in A&TV 
around 3 and 4 cashiers, whereas WW benefits greatly from the introduction of a 
fourth cashier. Nonetheless this finding supports the thinking underlying this 
hypothesis, in that we expected the longer average service times in A&TV to put a 
greater ‘squeeze’ on customer advice with even a relatively small increase in the 
number of cashiers. 
 
For the number of satisfied customers (2), there were significant main effects for both 
department [F(1, 190) = 391333.7, p<.001], and staffing [F(4, 190) = 38633.83, 
p<.001], plus a significant moderating effect of department type [F(4, 190) = 9840.07, 
p<.001]. Post hoc tests explored the impact of staffing, and revealed significant 
differences for every single comparison (p<.001). 
 
The results support both H2a and H2b. We interpret these findings in terms of 
A&TV’s greater service requirement, combined with the reduced availability of 
advisory sales staff. These factors result in a peak in the number of satisfied 
customers with a smaller number of cashiers (4) than in WW (5). 
 
For overall customer satisfaction (3), there were significant main effects for both 
department [F(1, 190) = 117214.4, p<.001], and staffing [F(4, 190) = 29205.09, 
p<.001], plus a significant moderation effect of department type [F(4, 190) = 6715.93, 
p<.001]. Tukey’s post hoc comparisons indicated significant differences between all 
staffing levels (p<.001). 
 
Our results support H3a for A&TV, showing a clear peak in overall customer 
satisfaction. H3a is only partially supported for WW, in that no decline in 3 is evident 
with up to 5 cashiers, although increasing this figure may well expose a peak because 
the overall customer satisfaction is starting to plateau out. The results offer firm 
support in favor of H3b. 
 
6.1.2 Sensitivity of the Service Level Index 
 
ManPraSim v1 incorporates a novel way of measuring customers’ service satisfaction. 
It is a new feature of the model, and before we progress to investigate management 
practices it is important to conduct a sensitivity study with the satisfaction weights 
and assess the impact on the overall customer satisfaction measure. 
 
For this series of experiments we will focus on the two main customer activities 
involving the interaction between customers and staff: buying and asking for help. We 
have switched off the refund loop because it would not add any relevant information 
to these results. Therefore we have two main customer blocks (pay block and help 
block) where we will systematically change the satisfaction weights settings to 
observe what effect these changes have on overall customer satisfaction. We will use 
the same staffing configuration for both departments; 3 cashiers, 6 normal selling 
staff, and 1 expert. 

 
15
 
Our original service level index configuration allocates a satisfaction weight at each 
relevant customer transition (see Figure 3). Depending on the impact of a transition, 
the linked satisfaction weights will be either 1, 2 or 4, and can be positive or negative 
depending on whether or not the customer perceives the interaction positively or 
negatively. We will investigate 3 different scenarios each with 3 levels of satisfaction 
weights. 
 
In scenario 1 each satisfaction weight has been set to the same value. Different 
experimental conditions have been created by systematically increasing this single 
value. This has changed the relative relationship between the weights from the 
standard model implemented described above (see Section 5.3). For scenario 2 the 
satisfaction weights have all been multiplied by the 3 different values for each level 
(1, 10, and 100). This keeps the inter-relationships between service level index values 
constant. In scenario 3 we have increased satisfaction weights within the same 
experiment in order to investigate more extreme inter-relationships between 
satisfaction weights. The first set are the standard satisfaction weights (see Section 
5.3, 1-2-4), the second set are the first set squared (see Section 5.3, 1-4-16), and the 
third set are the second set squared for a further time (1-16-256). Logically we expect 
that increasing the satisfaction weights will result in higher overall customer 
satisfaction. Comparing the two departments, we expect increments in satisfaction 
weights to be positively linked to higher overall customer satisfaction in WW than in 
A&TV, given the higher visitor arrival rates and higher conversion rates in WW. The 
A&TV department has a higher proportion of customers requiring advice, and when 
the staffing levels are held constant we expect this will mean a relatively small growth 
in overall customer satisfaction compared to WW. For the third scenario, in A&TV 
customer demand for A&TV department’s expert is likely to negatively impact on 
overall customer satisfaction. This occurs because a customer who leaves 
prematurely, whilst waiting for expert advice, results in the highest satisfaction 
penalty. 
 
6.1.2.1 Hypotheses 
 
Therefore we predict the following hypotheses: 
• H4. For scenario 1, we predict a uniformly positive and linear relationship 
between satisfaction weights and overall customer satisfaction in both 
departments. 
• H5. For scenario 1, we predict that increasing the satisfaction weights will 
have a greater positive impact in WW than A&TV. 
• H6. For scenario 2, we predict a uniformly positive and linear relationship 
between satisfaction weights and overall customer satisfaction in both 
departments.  
• H7. For scenario 2, we predict that increasing the satisfaction weights will 
have a greater positive impact in WW than A&TV. 
• H8. For scenario 3, we predict a uniformly positive and non-linear relationship 
between satisfaction weights and overall customer satisfaction in both 
departments.  
• H9. For scenario 3, we predict that increasing the satisfaction weights will 
have a greater positive impact in WW than A&TV.  
 

 
16
6.1.2.2 Results 
 
Preliminary tests confirmed that the distributions of overall customer satisfaction, for 
both departments, are approximately normal (Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistics all p 
>.05). For Scenarios 1, 2 and 3 Levene’s test of equality of error variances was 
violated (p<.01). Therefore the significance value has been set to a stricter level 
(p<.01). Where significant ANOVA results were found, post-hoc tests have been 
applied where appropriate to investigate further the precise relationship between 
satisfaction weights and overall customer satisfaction.  
 
Each ANOVA revealed statistically significant differences (see Table 4 for 
descriptive statistics). For scenario 1 there were significant main effects for both 
department [F(1, 114) = 30,363.42, p<.01] and satisfaction weights [F(2, 114) = 
2,943.58, p<.01], plus a significant interaction effect [F(2, 114) = 2,439.80, p<.01]. 
The effect sizes are very large (partial eta-squared = .996, .998, and .977 
respectively). Post-hoc comparisons confirmed that every single paired comparison 
exhibited a significant difference (p<.01). 
 
[INSERT NEW TABLE 4]  
 
Results for Scenario 1 offer support for both H4 and H5. The pattern of relationships 
can be clearly seen in Figure 4; overall customer satisfaction rises with the 
satisfaction weights in both departments, but to a greater extent in WW as confirmed 
by the significant interaction effect. 
 
[INSERT FIGURE 4] 
 
Investigating scenario 2, an ANOVA identified statistically significant main effects 
for department [F(1, 114) = 32,726.63, p<.01] and satisfaction weights [F(2, 114) = 
152,387.00, p<.01], with a significant interaction effect [F(2, 114) = 23,929.13, 
p<.01]. The effect sizes are substantial (partial eta-squared = .997, 1.00, and .998 
respectively). Tukey’s post-hoc tests revealed significant differences (p<.01) for every 
paired comparison. 
 
Findings support H6; the satisfaction weight is significantly related to overall 
customer satisfaction. Results also support H7 whereby department type is linked to 
significantly higher overall satisfaction values in WW than in A&TV. The pattern of 
relationships is graphically displayed in Figure 5. 
 
[INSERT FIGURE 5] 
 
Finally, for scenario 3, an ANOVA revealed statistically significant main effects for 
department [F(1, 114) = 13,280.03, p<.01] and satisfaction weight [F(2, 114) = 
2,771.02, p<.01], with a significant interaction effect [F(2, 114) = 8,544.38, p<.01]. 
The effect sizes are substantial (partial eta-squared = .991, .980, and .993 
respectively). Post-hoc comparisons revealed significant differences (p<.01) between 
every single paired comparison.  
 
For scenario 3 the use of multiple satisfaction weights made it impossible to fully 
account for the variability of values in a single experiment. For this reason a proxy 

 
17
has been used; the middle value (2, 4, 16). There is partial support for H8; for WW we 
can see a steady increase in the overall customer satisfaction with higher squared 
input values. Surprisingly however we observe the inverse for A&TV; with higher 
squared values the overall customer satisfaction falls considerably. It appears that the 
greater service requirement linked to A&TV customers interacts with more extreme 
overall customer satisfaction scores, resulting in very negative overall customer 
satisfaction. Figure 6 graphically displays these relationships and suggests non-linear 
associations (NB the A&TV non-linear relationship is in the opposite direction). 
Results support H9; WW is linked to higher overall customer satisfaction than 
A&TV. We expected this pattern because the greater service component of A&TV 
roles means that when customers’ demands increase, any surplus staff capacity for 
dealing with requests is filled and further customer requirements cannot always be 
satisfactorily met. In turn this triggers an increase in customer waiting times and 
customers are five times more likely to leave prematurely than in WW.  
 
[INSERT FIGURE 6] 
 
6.1.3 Validation Summary 
 
Investigation of the impact of staffing configuration has provided support for most of 
our hypotheses. As these general patterns in the data were as we would expect, this 
builds our confidence in the accuracy and validity of the model. Comparing different 
customers’ service satisfaction scenarios has demonstrated that changing the relative 
differences between satisfaction weightings, and not the absolute differences, has a 
greater impact on customers’ service satisfaction measures. These validation 
experiments have informed the standard configuration of ManPraSim v1 which has 
been used in the following experiments of management practices. 
 
The overall validation process permits us to conclude that our hypotheses have been 
largely supported. We are satisfied that we can have sufficient confidence in the 
ability of our model to provide valid results to progress and investigate more complex 
phenomena, specifically the impact of people management practices on performance 
measures. 
 
6.2 
Management Practice Experiments 
 
We have designed 3 experiments to investigate the impact of task empowerment, 
empowerment to learn, and employee development. Global model settings for A&TV 
(the department under investigation in these experiments) are held constant across 
these experiments; the staff group in every experiment consists of 3 cashiers, 7 normal 
selling staff and 2 experts, with a customer arrival rate of 70 per hour and a runtime of 
10 weeks. We have systematically manipulated only the independent variable of 
interest in each experiment. We have conducted at least 20 replications for every 
experimental condition enabling thorough analysis of the results. 
 
6.2.1 Task Empowerment  
 
During our case study work, we observed the implementation of a new refund policy. 
This new policy allows any cashier to decide independently whether to make a 
customer refund up to the value of £50, rather than being required to refer the 

 
18
authorization to an expert employee. To simulate the impact of this practice on key 
business outcomes, we have systematically varied the probability that employees are 
empowered to make refund decisions autonomously. Cashiers were configured to 
process a refund in 80% of cases, whereas experts were more critical and only accept 
70% of refund claims. 
 
6.2.1.1 Hypotheses 
 
As we increase the level of empowerment, we expect to see more transactions as work 
flows more effectively and cashiers can take more decisions autonomously and 
quickly without requiring expert assistance. We also anticipate greater levels of 
overall customer satisfaction (whether obtaining a refund or not), because staff time is 
less consumed by the delays of locating expert assistance, resulting in more employee 
time available to customers. As the level of empowerment increases, we predict: 
• H10. higher numbers of transactions. 
• H11. higher overall customer satisfaction (shopping). 
• H12. higher overall customer satisfaction (refund). 
 
6.2.1.2 Results 
 
Preliminary analyses tested the assumptions of rigorous statistical tests. The 
distributions of all 3 dependent variables approximate to the normal distribution 
(Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistics all p>.05). Levene’s test of homogeneity of variances 
was violated by the number of transactions only (p=.02), although this does not need 
to be corrected for, given the equal group sizes (n=20, Stevens, 1996). Consequently 
we can proceed to apply a series of one-way between groups ANOVAs. Where 
significant ANOVA results were found, post-hoc tests have been applied to 
investigate further the precise impact on outcome variables under different 
experimental conditions. To address the increased risk of a Type I error we have 
applied a Bonferroni correction (corrected post-hoc p-value for 3 dependent variables 
= .0167). 
 
ANOVAs revealed statistically significant differences across all three outcomes: 
number of transactions [F(4, 95)=26.77, p<.01], overall customer satisfaction 
(shopping) [F(4, 95)=12.35, p<.01], and overall customer satisfaction (refund) [F(4, 
95)=2001.73, p<.01]. Consulting Table 5, we see that H10 has not been supported, 
and the number of transactions actually decreases with empowerment, whereas H11 
and H12 are confirmed. The effect size, calculated using eta squared, reveals 
differences in the relative impact of empowerment on each outcome measure: 0.53 for 
the number of transactions, 0.34 for overall customer satisfaction (shopping) and 1.00 
for overall customer satisfaction (refund). Social scientists report 0.14 as indicative of 
a large effect (Cohen, 1988) suggesting we are looking at substantial effect sizes. 
 
[INSERT TABLE 5] 
 
Post-hoc comparisons using Tukey’s test indicated a number of significant differences 
between group means. Most notably the impact on overall customer satisfaction 
(refund) was great, with every single increment in empowerment resulting in a 
significant increase in overall customer satisfaction (refund). H10 has not been 
supported. This unforeseen reduction in transactions has occurred because less 

 
19
experienced employees take longer to make a decision on a refund, resulting in a 
knock-on impact for customer waiting times. H11 holds, and this finding is intuitive 
because customers prefer that one staff member can deal with their needs. H12 is 
strongly supported, and makes sense because cashiers are also more likely to approve 
a customer refund request. 
 
6.2.2 Empowerment to Learn  
 
Our case study work has revealed that a key way in which employees can develop 
their product knowledge occurs when they are unable to fully meet a customer’s 
request for advice. The employee calls over an expert colleague and the original 
employee is empowered to choose whether or not to stay with them to learn from the 
interaction. In this second set of experiments we are assuming that, given the 
opportunity to choose to learn, an employee will usually decide to take up that 
opportunity. We found that case study employees enjoyed providing excellent 
customer service, and given the opportunity would do what they could to stay abreast 
of product developments.  
 
In our model, a normal staff member gains knowledge points on every occasion that 
he or she stays with an expert to learn from a customer interaction. We have 
systematically varied the probability that a normal staff member learns in this way. 
Naturally we expect there to be a trade-off with short-term ability to meet customer 
demand, and a customer may leave prematurely if they have to wait for too long. A 
normal staff member will be occupied for longer when his or her will to learn is 
stronger. 
 
6.2.2.1 Hypotheses 
 
By allowing employees to acquire new product knowledge from expert colleagues, we 
anticipate performance improvements. We predict that increasingly empowering 
employees to learn will result in: 
• H13. an increase in the knowledge of normal staff. 
• H14. an increase in the utilization of normal staff. 
• H15. no change to the utilization of expert staff. 
• H16. a short term reduction in the number of sales transactions. 
• H17. a reduction in overall customer satisfaction. 
 
6.2.2.2 Results 
 
Preliminary tests confirm that the distribution of all2 5 dependent variables are 
approximately normal (Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistics all p>.05). Levene’s test of 
homogeneity of variances was violated by normal expertise3 only (p<.01); given the 
near-equal group sizes (n=20 or 21) we can safely continue (Stevens, 1996) and it is 
to appropriate to use a series of one-way between groups ANOVAs. Post-hoc tests 
                                               
2 Normal staff member expertise was not tested in the zero empowerment condition because it does not 
vary. 
3 This largely related to the fact that normal expertise is constant (=0) in the condition where the 
probability of an employee learning from a customer interaction equals zero. 

 
20
were run to follow-up significant ANOVA results, and again a Bonferroni correction 
was applied (corrected post-hoc p-value for 5 dependent variables = .01). 
 
The ANOVAs (see Table 6 for descriptives) exposed a significant impact of 
empowerment to learn on: normal staff expertise [F(4, 96)=2,794.12, p<.01], 
utilization of normal staff [F(4, 96)=112.53, p<.01], and overall customer satisfaction 
[F(4, 96)=29.16, p<.01]. Tests of expert staff utilization [F(4, 96)=1.28, p=.29] and 
sales transactions [F(4, 96)=1.25, p=.30] were insignificant. Effect sizes of significant 
relationships were all large (normal staff expertise = 0.99, normal staff utilization = 
0.83, overall customer satisfaction = 0.55). 
 
[INSERT TABLE 6] 
 
Tukey’s post-hoc comparisons were run for the three significant findings. Both 
normal staff expertise and utilization significantly increased with every single 
increment in employee empowerment to learn. The largest significant differences in 
overall customer satisfaction are observed at the polar ends of the scale. As predicted, 
employees who are empowered to learn become more knowledgeable (H13), leading 
to a more efficient utilization of employees as a whole (H14). H15 holds as expected, 
meaning there is no significant impact on the utilization of expert staff in terms of the 
time they spend engaged with customers. However we can see through the effects on 
other outcome measures that higher levels of learning empowerment result in better 
‘utilization’ of experts; in other words more efficient harnessing of their knowledge. 
H16 has not been supported as the number of transactions does not significantly differ 
between experimental conditions. The short-lived reduction that we had anticipated is 
so negligible, it is inconsequential. Nonetheless, the associated increase in customer 
waiting times has negatively influenced the customer service index, in support of 
H17. 
 
 
6.2.3 Employee development 
 
Our final investigation of management practices goes one step further and explores 
how time invested in learning impacts on medium-term system performance. Our 
model mimics an evolutionary process whereby staff members can progressively 
develop their product knowledge over a period of time. When a staff member has 
accumulated a certain number of knowledge points from observing expert service 
transactions, they are considered an expert. We have systematically varied the 
number of knowledge points required to attain expert-level competence. All normal 
staff members are programmed to take advantage of all learning opportunities. 
 
6.2.3.1 Hypotheses 
 
By investing time in developing and expanding employees’ specialist knowledge, we 
anticipate even greater future savings in terms of key outcomes, beyond those already 
observed in the previous experiment. The academic literature echoes the positive 
business impact of employing individuals with greater expertise to provide better 
customer service and advice (e.g. Crosby et al., 1990). We predict that increasing the 
rate of employee development (by lowering the threshold for attaining expert status) 
will result in more desirable outcome variables, specifically increases in: 
• H18. normal staff member expertise. 

 
21
• H19. normal staff utilization. 
• H20. expert staff utilization. 
• H21. the number of transactions. 
• H22. overall customer satisfaction. 
 
6.2.3.2 Results 
 
Preliminary tests confirmed the distribution of all4 5 dependent variables are 
approximately normal, with the exception of expert staff utilization for a promotion 
criteria level of 0.8 (Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistic p<.01). This non-normal 
distribution will have minimal impact on the significance or power of the test 
(Stevens, 1996, p.240). Levene’s test of homogeneity of variances was violated by all 
5 dependent variables5 (p<.05); again we rely on Steven’s (1996) empirical argument 
that because we have equal group sizes (n=20) this is acceptable. We have applied a 
series of one-way between groups ANOVAs with Tukey’s post-hoc tests to determine 
the specific nature of significant ANOVA results, and again a Bonferroni correction 
was applied (corrected post-hoc p-value for 5 dependent variables = .01). 
 
The final ANOVAs revealed statistically significant differences in expert utilization 
[F(5,114)=952.21, p<.01], volume of transactions [F(5,114)=193.14, p<.01] and 
overall customer satisfaction [F(5,114)=959.01, p<.01]. The effect sizes of significant 
relationships were again all very large (expert staff utilization = 0.98, volume of 
transactions = 0.89, and overall customer satisfaction = 0.98). We were unable to 
adequately test the impact of learning on normal staff expertise (H18) and utilization 
(H19), because we do not have this data for all experimental conditions (see Table 7: 
at the lower promotion thresholds, all normal staff have been promoted before the end 
of the simulation run and so these values are recorded as zero). 
 
[INSERT TABLE 7] 
 
Tukey’s post-hoc comparisons revealed significant differences between every single 
increment in the competence threshold for each variable, with the exception of the 
two upper levels. However, only expert utilization was in the predicted direction. Our 
evidence was strongly in favor of H20, whereas the exactly the contrary of H21 and 
H22 have been supported. This is counter-intuitive because we had expected that the 
greater the number of resulting experts, the greater the availability of top-quality 
advice to customers. Indeed, it is possible that our simulation run is too short at just 
ten weeks, and presents only a backward facing view of department performance; i.e., 
focusing on the time consumed in learning, and not on the time spent sharing their 
new competence with customers. If we ran the simulation for longer we would still 
expect our original hypotheses to hold true. In our model we are also assuming that 
staff acquire expertise purely by learning from their colleagues, whereas in reality this 
would be supported with other sources and forms of learning. 
 
                                               
4 The distributions of normal staff expertise and normal staff utilization have not been tested for 
promotion criteria levels 0, 0.2, 0.4, and 0.6 because these variables are constant (=0) under these 
conditions. 
5 The distributions of normal staff expertise and normal staff utilization have not been tested for 
promotion criteria levels 0, 0.2, 0.4, and 0.6 because these variables are constant (=0) under these 
conditions. 

 
22
6.2.4 Summary and Implications of Management Practice Experiments 
 
All in all we can conclude that through modeling and simulating the impact of 
management practices we are able to evaluate hypotheses regarding department 
performance. Although some empowerment effects may at first appear small or even 
the inverse of what we had expected, over time these changes can have a meaningful 
impact. For this reason it is important to incorporate management practices in a retail 
department model. It is also worth noting that the full benefits of empowering staff 
may also be in terms which our simulator does not currently measure, such as an 
employee’s satisfaction with their job or their intention to stay with the business. It is 
therefore likely that our performance figures are an under-estimate of the true impact 
of the various ways of empowering shop-floor staff that we have looked at. 
 
From our experimental investigations, it is apparent that some management practices 
offer greater potential for performance improvements than others. Our results lead us 
to make a number of suggestions for the A&TV department to which they pertain. 
The first experiment investigated the impact of empowering staff to make refunds and 
demonstrated improvements in overall customer satisfaction (shopping and refund), 
but the number of transactions did not increase as we had expected. Employees who 
are less experienced at processing refunds tend to take longer than someone who has 
more experience. The implication for retailers is to ensure that each employee 
receives sufficient training, and has the opportunity to fully familiarize himself or 
herself with the refund process. Carefully implementing such a scheme would 
minimize the amount of time these employees need to get fully ‘up to speed’ with 
their new responsibilities on the shop-floor. 
 
The second experiment examined the influence of employees being empowered to 
learn new product knowledge from expert colleagues advising customers on the shop-
floor. Our results suggest that there are performance improvements to be gained 
through encouraging expert employees to share their knowledge with less-
experienced colleagues ‘on-the-job’. Retailers need to be in it for the long-term, in 
that there is a short-term trade off with customers’ service satisfaction whilst less 
experienced staff develop new capabilities. In reality an employer would benefit from 
aligning this kind of scheme with a staff retention initiative to ensure that workers are 
committed to staying with the organization and contributing to its long-term success. 
 
The third and final experiment looked at the impact of employee development and 
how time invested in learning impacts on medium-term system performance. Our 
findings indicated that the time it takes to see performance benefits is longer than 10 
weeks. We can, nevertheless, advise that to establish the optimal level of employee 
training in a given context, the particulars of that situation would first need to be more 
closely examined. For example, the cost of employee wages, availability of skilled 
labor, and customers’ expectations of shop-floor staff can all vary to some extent by 
geography and the specific nature of the work. Consequently this example does not 
allow us to conclude more than illustrating the point that employee development takes 
time to positively impact on performance. 
 
 
7 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
 

 
23
In this paper we have described our first approach to modeling people management 
practices, in particular employee development and empowerment. We have also 
described the development of a novel performance measure to gauge customers’ 
service satisfaction. In this version of the simulation model we use customer agents 
that are fairly homogeneous and have no enduring memory (they only visit the shop 
once in their lifetime). Still, with this simulation model we have been able to 
demonstrate how one could implement different empowerment management practices 
in a simulation model to investigate their effect on customers’ service satisfaction, the 
development of staff knowledge and sales turnover. 
 
As far as we are aware, this is the first time that researchers have tried to use an agent-
based approach to simulate management practices such as employee development and 
empowerment. Although our simulation model has been driven by case studies from 
one retail organization, we believe that the general model could be adapted to other 
businesses operating in different industries and countries, for businesses which use 
management practices involving a high degree of human interaction. 
 
From what we can conclude from our current analyses, some findings are as we 
hypothesized whereas others are more mixed. Two sets of validation experiments 
provide us with confidence in the model’s ability to produce reliable and valid results. 
Early findings indicate that management practices tend to exert a subtle yet significant 
effect on performance, consistent with our case study findings. Further 
experimentation is required to explore the model’s operation, and more development 
work would bring the model closer to the real system and allow us to incorporate 
more complex and interesting features. 
 
We have identified two major limitations that we want to address in our future work. 
Firstly, the current version of the simulation model has a high level of abstraction 
which represents the actors of the real system and their behaviors in a simplistic way, 
cutting out some relevant features and behaviors. For example, the homogeneity of 
our customers prevents us from representing the true variability of customer 
perceptions of, and responses to, service. Currently the model represents customer 
perceptions and responses to the same situation in the same way. Secondly, in the 
current version we cannot measure any long-term performance effects because we 
have an infinite number of homogenous customers who only visit the department 
once. It is important to overcome this limitation because many organizations strive to 
retain their customers over time. 
 
In the second version of the simulation model we want to address the shortcomings 
we have identified above. Our main focus will be to make the simulation a better 
representation of the real system (i.e. the retail department) and the people in the real 
system, including their characteristics and behavior. We will incorporate realistic 
footfall data, heterogeneous customer types, a finite population in the form of a 
customer pool, a prompt departure of customers at closing time, and an enhanced 
version of our novel customer service satisfaction measure. 
 
Adding customer types and thereby diversifying the population will allow us to 
represent varied perceptions of and reactions to the shopping experience. Our case 
study organization has identified the particular customer types which are important to 
its business through market research, and we plan to find out how populations of 

 
24
certain customer types influence sales. Through introducing a finite population each 
customer agent will have a memory of his or her previous shopping experiences 
which will impact on how the agent perceives the customer service on his or her next 
visit. As we observed in Section 4.2.4 a bad experience might make him or her come 
less frequently or might reduce subsequent patience level thereby reducing the 
probability of that customer buying something. 
 
Taking a step back, we believe that researchers need to become more involved in this 
multi-disciplinary kind of work to gain new insights into the behavior of 
organizations. In our view, the main benefit from adopting this approach is the 
improved understanding of and debate about a problem domain, and the resulting 
explicit convergence of understanding and agreement about a system’s functioning. 
The very nature of the methods involved forces researchers to be explicit about the 
rules underlying behavior and to think in new ways about them. As a result, we have 
brought work psychology and ABM closer together to develop a new and exciting 
research area. 

 
25
