1
Injury risk prediction for trafﬁc accidents
in Porto Alegre/RS, Brazil (draft)
Christian S. Perone, Pontif´ıcia Universidade Cat´olica do Rio Grande do Sul (PUC-RS).
Abstract—This study describes the experimental application
of Machine Learning techniques to build prediction models that
can assess the injury risk associated with trafﬁc accidents. This
work uses an freely available data set of trafﬁc accident records
that took place in the city of Porto Alegre/RS (Brazil) during the
year of 2013. This study also provides an analysis of the most
important attributes of a trafﬁc accident that could produce an
outcome of injury to the people involved in the accident.
Index Terms—Injury risk assessment, classiﬁcation, trafﬁc
accidents, machine learning.
I. INTRODUCTION
Statistics provided by EPTC [1] – the trafﬁc managing
agency in Porto Alegre/RS (Brazil) – shows that in 2013,
approximately 22.447 trafﬁc accidents took place in the city
of Porto Alegre, an average of 1.870 trafﬁc accidents per
month. According to Saunier et al. [2], the social cost of
road collisions is the largest side effect of road transportation
. The costs of fatalities, injuries and property damage, as well
as medical care and trafﬁc delays accounts for a signiﬁcant
impact on the ﬁnance of the people involved, cities and the
government. According to Brazilian National Trafﬁc Depart-
ment (DENATRAN) [3], the average cost for an accident
(in federal highways) without victims is R$ 16.840,00, for
accidents with victims this cost increases to R$ 86.032,00 and
for accidents with fatalities, the cost is R$ 418.341,00.
Descriptive analysis of the situation in road safety and road
accidents are important, but understanding the factors related
with dangerous situations and patterns in data is of even
greater importance [4]. Being able to predict when an trafﬁc
accident will result in an injury, can help trafﬁc agencies to
provide faster medical care. Another example of the beneﬁts
of understanding the factors behind the injury risk is to
guide trafﬁc agencies to improve the road safety by means
of infrastructure design (which includes road signs and speed
control devices) or even through the pedestrian/driver behavior
improvements that could be obtained with targeted marketing
campaigns. Data-driven decisions can also help the trafﬁc
agencies to reduce the costs involved in a trafﬁc accident.
This paper describes the efforts and experimental results ob-
tained through the application of Machine Learning techniques
in order to provide a better understanding of the data that is
being collected today by the trafﬁc agency. The main purpose
of this work, is to get an overall understanding of the accident
data as well as build a predictor for the injury risk related to
the trafﬁc accidents in the city of Porto Alegre/RS (Brazil).
This study is organized as follows: in Section II, an
overview of the related work is provided, followed by the
Section III, where an overview of our proposed approach to
the problem is described. In Section IV, the experimental
methodology is provided, including which algorithms were
used an how they were used, while in Section V the results of
the experimental analysis are detailed followed by the Section
VI, that describes the conclusions and remarks related to future
work.
II. RELATED WORK
An attempt has been made to search for existing accident
analysis practice in the city of Porto Alegre, however no
published works were found related to the application of
Machine Learning techniques by the trafﬁc managing agency
(EPTC) in Porto Alegre. Only limited descriptive analysis
were published on the site of the trafﬁc agency [1], but
no deeper analysis of the factors or injury risk assessment
were published by the trafﬁc managing agency. The lack of
standardization for the data collection process and for the data
itself between different trafﬁc managing agencies worldwide
makes the experimental results comparison very limited.
Beshah et al. [4] explored a rich data set, comprising of
14.254 accident cases described with 48 attributes containing
information related to road users (drivers, pedestrians and
passengers), vehicles and road. In their study, two predictive
modeling methods were used: CART and Random Forests.
The experimental results done using CART analysis to assess
the injury risk, scored with respect to the area under the
ROC curve (AUC) a result of 0.8827. While running Random
Forests, the authors also found that the age of the victim,
victim occupation, among others, were the attributes with the
most predictive power.
Saunier et al. [2] investigated the collision factors and
processes (i.e. the chain of events that lead to collisions)
through the collection and analysis of microscopic data (road
users trajectories). Saunier et al. [2] avoided the use of
algorithms with a “black box” nature like ANNs (Artiﬁcial
Neural Networks) or SVMs (Support Vector Machines) and
used C4.5 (Decision Trees) instead and clustering analysis
to investigate the collision factors. In their work, they found
an strong relationship between the evasive actions and the
interaction outcome: in most collisions (62 out of 82), no
evasive action was attempted [2].
III. PROPOSED APPROACH
The work described in this paper aims to evaluate different
Machine Learning techniques in order to build a predictive
model for injury risk assessment of trafﬁc accident events
arXiv:1502.00245v1  [cs.LG]  1 Feb 2015

2
based on data that was collected by a trafﬁc managing agency.
Since the injury risk has a dichotomous nature in relation to
the dependent variable, this facilitates the use of binary clas-
siﬁers used in this study like Logistic Regression or Support
Vector Machines. This paper also evaluates the association
between the trafﬁc accident injury outcome and the possible
contributory factors, an effort to understand which are the most
important factors in an accident with an injury outcome.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL METHODOLOGY
This section describes the data set used, as well as the tools
and algorithms used to perform the analysis.
A. Trafﬁc Accident Data Set
The data set used in this study was obtained through
Datapoa [5], an initiative from the city hall of Porto Alegre to
provide open data access to many data sets related with the city
itself. The trafﬁc accident data set available at the Datapoa is
licensed under the Open Database License (ODbL) [6], which
is an Attribution and Share-Alike license for databases.
Although the time span of the available trafﬁc accident data
sets ranges from the year 2000 up to 2013, only the data from
the most recent data set was used (the data set related to the
accidents that happened in the year of 2013). The data set
is comprised of 20.798 accident records described using 44
attributes. Some attributes of the data set are irrelevant for
the purpose of this study and many attributes also presented
duplicated data or invalid records, thus a step of data cleansing
was required before using the data set. The data set also
lacks detailed information about vehicles (i.e. age, movement),
drivers (i.e. age of the driver, driver license level, driving
experience, sex, etc.) and victims (i.e. age).
B. Tools
To plot heat maps with the geospatial distribution of the
accidents, this study used the framework Django GIS Brasil
[7], an open source project from the same author of this study,
that aggregates geospatial information related with the Brazil-
ian territory. To provide data analysis, the author used Pandas
[8], an open source library providing high-performance, data
structures and data analysis tools for the Python programming
language. This study also used scikit-learn [9] – an open
source Machine Learning framework for the Python language
– to perform data pre-processing and to build the predictive
models.
C. Machine Learning Techniques
This study employed the following algorithms as classiﬁers
for the injury risk assessment: Logistic Regression, Support
Vector Machines, Naive Bayes, K-nearest neighbors and Ran-
dom Forests. The details about the use, parametrization and
model evaluation techniques used to assess the predictive
models are described in the next sections.
D. Logistic Regression
The Logistic Regression used in this study is the Logistic
Regression present in the scikit-learn framework [9], which
in turn uses the LIBLINEAR [10] implementation of the
Logistic Regression. The LIBLINEAR implementation solve
the following optimization problem:
min
w
1
2wT w + C
l
X
i=1
ξ(w; xi, yi)
(1)
Given a set of instance-label pairs (xi, yi), i = 1, . . . , l where
C is the penalty parameter and ξ(w; xi, yi) is the loss function,
which for Logistic Regression is:
log(1 + e−yiwT xi)
(2)
In this study we used L2 regularized Logistic Regression with
the penalty C equal to 1.0.
E. Support Vector Machines
The Support Vector Machine (SVM) from scikit-learn [9]
used in this work is based on the LIBSVM [11] implemen-
tation, which is a C-Support Vector Classiﬁcation. For more
details about the algorithm implementation, please refer to the
elucidative LIBSVM [11] original paper. The SVM algorithm
was parametrized with a linear kernel and with 9.0 as the
error term, both parameters were chosen using hyperparameter
optimization through a non-exhaustive grid search between
different kernel types (RBF, Polynomial and Linear) with
different error term and gamma values. It is also important
to note that Support Vector Machine algorithms are not scale
invariant, so the the author applied a scaling function over the
attributes before feeding attributes into the algorithm.
F. Naive Bayes
The Naive Bayes algorithm used in this study is also
from scikit-learn [9]. The different Naive Bayes classiﬁers
implement in scikit-learn differ mainly by the assumptions
they make regarding the distribution of P(xi | y) [9]. The
author decided to use the Gaussian Naive Bayes, where the
likelihood of the features is assumed to be Gaussian:
P(xi | y) =
1
q
2πσ2y
exp

−(xi −µy)2
2σ2y

(3)
And where the parameters σy and µy are estimated using
maximum likelihood [9].
G. K-nearest neighbors
The K-nearest neighbors (kNN) algorithm used in this study
is also from scikit-learn [9], which provides both unsupervised
and supervised neighbors-based learning methods. Despite the
simplicity of the algorithm, kNN has been successful in a large
number of classiﬁcation and regression problems. The number
of neighbors used in this study (for the k value) is 8. This
value was also found using a non-exhaustive hyperparameter
optimization through the grid search technique. Attribute scal-
ing was also performed before using kNN, to ensure that the
distance measure accords equal weight to each variable.

3
H. Random Forests
The author of the paper also used Random Forests from
scikit-learn [9] as a binary classiﬁer and also to evaluate
the feature importance in order to understand which are
the most important factors while predicting the injury risk.
Random forests are a combination of tree predictors, where
each tree depends on the values of a random vector sampled
independently and with the same distribution for all trees in
the forest [12]. When compared with the original publication
from Brainman [12], the scikit-learn implementation combines
classiﬁers by averaging their probabilistic prediction, instead
of letting each classiﬁer vote for a single class [13]. Random
Forests were also used to assess injury risk and the importance
of factors in the aforementioned study done by Beshah [4].
The number of estimators (trees in the forest) used was 200,
this number was chosen using non-exhaustive hyperparameter
optimization through grid search.
I. Model Evaluation
In order to evaluate the predictive models trained in this
study, the author used a cross-validation with a train data set
with 60% of the instances from the original data set and with
a test data set with 40% of the original data set. Both the
training and the testing data set were random sampled from
the original data set.
To evaluate the predictive models, the author used the Area
Under the Curve (AUC) – computed using the trapezoidal
rule – of the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC), which
is a graphical plot that shows the performance of a binary
classiﬁer varying the discrimination threshold. The curve in
this study was plotted using the true positive rate against the
false positive rate at various threshold settings (one for each
different predictive outcome from each model).
Also, complementary to the ROC and AUC, the author of
this study calculated tables presenting the Precision, Recall
and F1-Score for each class from each predictive model used.
Since some algorithms used in this study didn’t have a
natural probability estimate outcome like Logistic Regression
has for each class, the author hence used different estimating
techniques in order to be able to compare the ROC and AUC
between different classiﬁers:
1) Support Vector Machines: In this case, the probability
estimates were calculated by LIBSVM using Platt scaling [14].
2) K-nearest neighbors: For kNN, the predicted probability
for each class is the ratio of neighbors voting for each label,
i.e. if k = 5 and 4 neighbors predicted class 1 and only
one neighbor predicted class 0, then the probabilities for that
example is 0.2 and 0.8.
3) Random Forest: The probabilities of a forest are the
mean probabilities of the trees in the ensemble and the
probabilities returned by a single tree are the normalized class
histograms of the leaf that a sample lands in.
J. Data Cleansing
Some accident records present in the data set had an invalid
date/time format and since the amount of invalid records was
very low (less than 5) when compared with the amount of valid
records (greater than 20.790), these records were just removed
from the data set without causing any signiﬁcant loss in the
experimental analysis.
V. EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS
This section provides a brief descriptive analysis of the data
set used as well as the experimental results using different
predictive models together with their model evaluations.
A. Data set analysis
The data set (after applying data cleansing), is comprised
by 20.798 records of trafﬁc accident events that took place in
the city of Porto Alegre/RS (Brazil). The attributes of the data
set can be categorized in TODO different types:
1) Geospatial Attributes: These attributes, listed in Table I
represents where the accident happened in space. They weren’t
used in this study and were left for a further study.
TABLE I
GEOSPATIAL ATTRIBUTES
Attribute Name
Description
LOG1 and LOG2
Street names.
PREDIAL1
Street numbers.
REGION
Region of the city.
LATITUDE and LONGITUDE
The geographical coordinates.
LOCAL VIA and REGION
Concatenation of LOG1, LOG2 and PREDIAL1.
2) Irrelevant Attributes: These attributes are irrelevant to
the analysis of factors or injury risk assessment. They are
presented in Table II.
TABLE II
IRRELEVANT ATTRIBUTES
Attribute Name
Description
ID
The unique ID of the accident.
BOLETIM
The ID of the trafﬁc agency record.
3) Attributes with data leakage: Since the main goal of
this study is to predict the risk of injury/non-injury, an extra
care was taken to discover attributes that could leak to the
target class. The result of this evaluation is present in the
Table III. The attribute “FONTE” leaks information about the
injury target class because the police is usually involved only
when there was someone injuried. The attribute “UPS” also
leaks information about the target class because it assumes
3 different values: 1 (accident only with property damage),
5 (accident with someone injuried) and 13 (accident with
deaths), so when the UPS is 5 or 13 it will perfect predict
the injuried/non-injuried target classes.
4) Relevant attributes: These are attributes that were used
to train all the predictive models presented in this study. They
are shown in the Table IV. Except the counting attributes, all
attributes were preprocessed using one-hot encoding scheme
(aka. one-of-K scheme).

4
TABLE III
ATTRIBUTES WITH DATA LEAKAGE
Attribute Name
Description
FONTE
Whether the accident was registered by the trafﬁc managing
agency or by the police.
UPS
A severity measurement.
TABLE IV
RELEVANT ATTRIBUTES
Attribute Name
Description
LOCAL
Whether the accident happened on a street or in crossing streets.
TIPO ACID
The type of the accident (collision, ﬁre, etc...).
DIA SEM
The day of the week.
CONSORCIO
If a bus were involved, the name of the company.
AUTO
The count of cars involved.
TAXI
The count of cabs involved.
LOTACAO
The count of small bus involved.
ONIBUS URB
The count of urban bus involved.
ONIBUS MET
The count of bus (others) involved.
CAMINHAO
The count of trucks involved.
MOTO
The count of motorcycles involved.
CARROCA
The count of carts involved.
BICICLETA
The count of bikes involved.
OUTRO
The count of vehicles (others) involved.
TEMPO
How was the weather (raining, clear, etc.).
NOITE DIA
If it was night or day.
MES
The month of the accident.
FX HORA
The hour that accident happened.
CORREDOR
Whether the accident happened in the bus lane road or not.
5) Target attribute: Since the aim of this work is to predict
if the outcome of an trafﬁc accident was an injury/non-injury,
the author merged (summed) the features shown in the Table
V and then created a new attribute with this value that was
later converted to 0 (non-injury) if sum was less or equal than
zero, or 1 (injury) if the sum was greater or equal to 1.
TABLE V
ATTRIBUTES MERGED TO CREATE THE TARGET ATTRIBUTE
Attribute Name
Description
FERIDOS
The count of injured people involved in the accident.
FERIDOS GR
The count of serious injured people involved in the accident.
MORTES
The count of deaths (local deaths) in the accident.
MORTES POST
The count of deaths (posterior deaths) happened after the accident.
FATAIS
The sum of MORTES and MORTES POST attributes.
It is also important to note that the data set is imbalanced
and it has a ratio of records of at least 2:1 between the
target classes (injury/non-injury), totaling 14.247 non-injury
instances and 6.551 injury records.
The geospatial information related to the accident events
weren’t used in this study, but the heat map shown in Figure
1 shows an important pattern that clearly conﬁrms that the ac-
cidents density increases on crossing streets. This information
is represented not only in latitude/longitude attributes but also
in the “LOCAL” attribute used to train the predictive models
in this study.
Fig. 1.
Heat map of the trafﬁc accidents.
B. Model evaluation
The model evaluation results (Precision, Recall, F1-score)
using test data set for Logistic Regression and Support Vector
Machine (SVM) are shown in the Table VI, the results for
Naive Bayes and K-nearest neighbors are shown in the Table
VII and the results for the Random Forest model evaluation is
shown in the Table VIII. The ROC curves and the AUC value
for each model for the positive class (injury) prediction with
varying discriminative threshold is presented in the Figure 2.
As we can see, Logistic Regression and Support Vector
Machines models provided the best scores in AUC and av-
erage Precision/Recall/F1-score, they also were very similar
regarding the performance. Random Forest also performed
well with an AUC of 0.93 when compared with AUC of SVM
and Logistic Regression that scored an AUC of 0.94 each. K-
nearest neighbor performed below the scores of SVM, Logistic
Regression and Random Forest with an AUC of 0.90, but it
still performed better than the worst model which is Naive
Bayes with an AUC of 0.83.
TABLE VI
SUPPORT VECTOR MACHINE AND LOGISTIC REGRESSION EVALUATION
Support Vector Machine
Logistic Regression
Precision
Recall
F1-score
Precision
Recall
F1-Score
Non-injury
0.90
0.96
0.93
0.90
0.96
0.93
Injury
0.89
0.76
0.82
0.89
0.76
0.82
Average
0.90
0.90
0.89
0.89
0.90
0.89
TABLE VII
NAIVE BAYES AND K-NEAREST NEIGHBORS EVALUATION
Naive Bayes
K-nearest neighbors evaluation
Precision
Recall
F1-score
Precision
Recall
F1-Score
Non-injury
0.96
0.23
0.38
0.85
0.96
0.90
Injury
0.37
0.98
0.54
0.88
0.63
0.73
Average
0.78
0.47
0.43
0.86
0.86
0.85

5
TABLE VIII
RANDOM FOREST EVALUATION
Random Forest
Precision
Recall
F1-score
Non-injury
0.90
0.94
0.92
Injury
0.85
0.76
0.80
Average
0.88
0.88
0.88
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
False Positive Rate
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
True Positive Rate
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
Logistic Regression ROC curve (AUC = 0.94)
SVM ROC curve (AUC = 0.94)
Naive Bayes ROC curve (AUC = 0.83)
RandomForest ROC curve (AUC = 0.93)
KNN ROC curve (AUC = 0.90)
Fig. 2.
The Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) and Area Under Curve
(AUC) of each model for the positive class (injury).
C. Variable Importance
According to Strobl et al. [15], Random Forests have been
successfully applied to various problems and within a very
short period of time, random forests have become a major
data analysis tool, that performs well in comparison with many
standard methods. One of the factors that greatly contributed to
the popularity of Random Forests was that it produces variable
importance measures for each predictor variable.
The experimental results to evaluate the attributes that had
more importance while predicting the injury risk were obtained
using the same trained model with the evaluation presented in
the Table VIII. The ﬁrst 10 most important attributes that were
described by this model, with their respective importances, are
presented in the Table IX.
while predicting the injury risk, followed by other attributes,
like cars involved and if accident was a run over, among others.
As we can see in the Table IX, the motorcycle count attribute
had the largest importance
VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
As we can see, the experimental results demonstrated that
prediction models for injury risk assessment can be created
with good precision, even with limited data sets, like the one
used in this study that lacks information about vehicle drivers,
victims and vehicle movements. These results, together with
the variable importance analysis, can be used by trafﬁc man-
aging agencies to understand the provided data sets with an
even greater depth than the limited descriptive analysis that is
being carried today by these agencies.
TABLE IX
ATTRIBUTE IMPORTANCES
Importance
Attribute Name
Description
0.2108
MOTO
The count of motorcycles involved.
0.0948
AUTO
The count of cars involved.
0.0925
TIPO ACID
ATROPELAMENTO
If the type of the accident was a run over.
0.0391
LOCAL
LOGRADOURO
If the accident was on a normal street.
0.0368
LOCAL
CRUZAMENTO
If the accident was on crossing streets.
0.0267
TIPO ACID
COLIS ˜AO
If the type of the accident was a collision.
0.0205
TIPO ACID
QUEDA
If the type of the accident was a fall.
0.0203
CAMINHAO
The count of trucks involved.
0.0182
TIPO ACID
ABALROAMENTO
If the type of the accident
was a collision (on the side).
0.0181
NOITE DIA
DIA
If the accident happened during night time.
This study didn’t used the geospatial data, but the author
believes that this information is also a critical factor to the
prediction of the injury risk associated with an trafﬁc accident.
The use of the geospatial data was left to a future study
due to the very speciﬁc nature of the geospatial data format,
which requires different preprocessing approach before being
employed.
Future works can also include better hyperparameter opti-
mization with a more intensive search for better parameters
such as kNN neighbor size, SVM error term, SVM kernel
parameters, Random Forest estimators count, among others.
This study also didn’t applied feature selection techniques,
but the author believes that a future work could also improve
the models performance by using feature selection methods.
