Motif  Detection  Inspired by Immune Memory 
 
 
William Wilson1   and Phil Birkin1    and Uwe Aickelin1 
 
School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham, UK 

 
 
 
Abstract. The  search  for patterns or motifs  in data represents an area 
of key  interest  to many  researchers. In  this  paper  we  present  the Mo- 
tif  Tracking Algorithm,  a novel  immune  inspired pattern identification 
tool  that is able  to identify  variable length  unknown motifs  which  re- 
peat within time series data. The  algorithm searches  from a completely 
neutral  perspective  that is independent  of the data being  analysed and 
the underlying motifs.  In  this  paper  we test the flexibility  of  the  motif 
tracking algorithm by applying it to the search  for patterns in two indus- 
trial data sets. The  algorithm is able  to  identify  a population of motifs 
successfully  in both  cases, and the value  of these motifs  is discussed. 
 
 
1 Introduction 
 
The investigation and analysis  of time series data is a popular  and well studied 
area  of research.  Common  goals  of time series  analysis  include  the desire  to 
identify known patterns in a time series, to predict  future  trends given historical 
information and the ability to classify data into similar clusters. These processes 
generate summarised  representations of large data sets that can be more easily 
interpreted by the user. 
Historically, statistical techniques have been applied to this problem domain. 
However, the use of Immune System inspired (IS) techniques in this field has re- 
mained  fairly  limited.  In  our  previous  work  [15] we proposed  an  IS approach 
to identify patterns embedded  in price data using a population of trackers that 
evolve using  proliferation  and  mutation.  This  early  research  proved  successful 
on small data sets but  suffered when scaled to larger  data sets with more com- 
plex motifs. In this paper  we describe  the Motif Tracking  Algorithm (MTA),  a 
deterministic but  non-exhaustive approach  to identifying repeating patterns in 
time series data, that directly  addresses  this scalability issue. 
The MTA represents a novel Artificial Immune System (AIS) using principles 
abstracted from the human  immune system, in particular the immune memory 
theory  of Eric  Bell [16]. Implementing  principles  from immune  memory  to be 
used  as part of a solution  mechanism  is of great  interest  to the immune  sys- 
tem community and  here we are able to take advantage of such a system. The 
MTA implements the Bell immune memory  theory by proliferating and  mutat- 
ing a population of solution  candidates using a derivative of the clonal selection 
algorithm [3]. 

 
 
 
 
A subsequence of a time series that is seen to repeat within that time series is 
defined as a motif. The objective  of the MTA is to find those motifs. The power 
of the MTA comes from the fact that it has no prior knowledge of the time series 
to be examined  or what motifs exist. It searches  in a fast and  efficient manner 
and  the flexibility incorporated in its generic  approach  allows the MTA  to be 
applied  across a diverse range of problems. 
Considerable  research has already  been performed  on identifying known pat- 
terns in time series [9]. In contrast little research  has been performed  on looking 
for unknown motifs in time series. This provides an ideal opportunity for an AIS 
driven approach  to tackle the problem of motif detection, as a distinguishing fea- 
ture of the MTA is its ability to identify variable length unknown patterns that 
repeat in a time series using an evolutionary system. In many data sets there is 
no prior knowledge of what patterns exist so traditional detection techniques are 
unsuitable. In this paper  we test the generic properties of the MTA by applying 
it to motif identification in two industrial data sets  to asses its ability to find 
variable  length unknown motifs. 
The paper is structured as follows, Section 2 provides a discussion of the work 
that has been performed  in motif detection, then various  terms and  definitions 
used by the MTA are introduced in Section 3. The pseudo code for the MTA is 
described  in Section 4. Section 5 presents the results of the MTA when applied 
to the two industrial data sets before moving on to conclude in Section 6. 
 
 
2 Related Work 
 
The  search  for patterns in data is relevant  to a diverse  range  of fields, includ- 
ing biology, business,  finance, and  statistics. Work  by Guan  [6] addresses  DNA 
pattern matching  using  lookup  table  techniques  that exhaustively  search  the 
data set to find recurring  patterns. Investigations using a piecewise linear  seg- 
mentation scheme  [7] and  discrete  Fourier  transforms [4] provide  examples  of 
mechanisms  to search  a time series for a particular motif of interest. Work  by 
Singh  [12] searches  for patterns in  financial  time  series  by  taking  a  sequence 
of the most  recent  data items  and  looks for re-occurrences  of this  pattern in 
the historical  data. An  underlying  assumption in all these  approaches  is that 
the pattern to be found  is known  in advance.  The  matching  task  is therefore 
much simpler as the algorithm just has to find re-occurrences  of that particular 
pattern. 
The search for unknown motifs is at the heart of the work conducted by Keogh 
et  al. Keoghs probabilistic [2] and  viztree  algorithms [8] are very successful in 
identifying unknown motifs but they require additional parameters compared  to 
the MTA.  They  also assume  prior  knowledge of the length of the motif to be 
found,  so the motif is “only partially unknown”.  Motifs longer and  potentially 
shorter than this predefined  length may  remain  undetected in  full.  Work  by 
Tanaka [13] attempts to address this issue by using minimum description length 
to discover the optimal  length for the motif. Fu et al. [5] use self-organising maps 
to identify unknown patterns in stock market  data, by representing patterns as 

 
 
 
 
perceptually important points. This provides an effective solution  but  again the 
patterns found are limited to a predetermined length. 
A more flexible approach  is seen in the TEIRESIAS algorithm  [11] able to 
identify patterns in biological sequences.  TEIRESIAS finds patterns of an  ar- 
bitrary length by isolating individual  building  blocks that comprise the subsets 
of the pattern, these are then combined into larger  patterns. The  methodology 
of building  up motifs by finding and combining their component parts is at the 
heart of the MTA.  The  MTA  takes an  IS approach  evolving  a  population of 
trackers  that is able  to detect  motifs  by making  fewer assumptions about  the 
data set and  the potential  motifs. It focuses on the search  for unknown  motifs 
of an arbitrary length leading to a novel and unique solution. 
 
 
3 Motif Detection:  Terms and Definitions 
 
Here we define some of the terms used by the MTA. 
Definition 1. Time  series.  A time series T = t1 ,...,tm  is a time ordered  set 
of m real or integer valued variables.  In order to identify patterns in T  we break 
T  up into subsequences  of length n using a sliding window mechanism. 
Definition 2. Motif. A subsequence  from T  that is seen to repeat at least 
once throughout T  is defined as a motif. We use Euclidean  distance to examine 
the relationship  between  two  subsequences  C1    and  C2 , ED(C1 , C2 )  against  
a 
match  threshold  r. If ED(C1 , C2 ) ≤ r  the subsequences  are deemed  to match 
and thus are saved as a motif. The motifs prevalent in a time series are detected 
by the MTA through the evolution  of a population of trackers. 
Definition 3. Tracker. A tracker represents a signature for a motif sequence 
that is seen to repeat.  It has  within  it  a sequence  of 1 to w symbols  that are 
used  to represent a  dimensionally   reduced  equivalent  of a  subsequence.  The 
subsequences generated from the time series are converted into a discrete symbol 
string. The  trackers are  then used  as a tool to identify which of these symbol 
strings represent a  recurring  motif. The  trackers also  include  a  match count 
variable to indicate the level of stimulation received during the matching process. 
 
 
4 The Motif Tracking Algorithm 
 
This Section provides a listing of the MTA pseudo code along with a description 
of its  main  operations.  We  direct  the readers  attention to [16] for a  more  in 
depth  description of this algorithm, along with a review of the immunological 
inspiration behind  the MTA,  which  we do  not have  time to cover  here.  The 
parameters required  in the MTA  include  the length of a symbol  s, the match 
threshold r, and the alphabet size a. 
 
MTA Pseudo  Code 
 
Initiate  MTA   (s,  r, a) 
Convert  Time  series  T to  symbolic  representation 

 
 
 
 
Generate  Symbol  Matrix  S 
Initialise  Tracker  population  to  size  a 
While  ( Tracker  population  > 0  ) 
{ 
Generate  motif  candidate  matrix  M   from  S 
Match  trackers  to  motif  candidates 
Eliminate  unmatched  trackers 
Examine  T to  confirm  genuine  motif  status 
Eliminate  unsuccessful  trackers 
Store  motifs  found 
Proliferate  matched  trackers 
Mutate  matched  trackers 
} 
Memory  motif  streamlining 
 
 
Convert  Time Series T to Symbolic Representation.  The  MTA  takes 
as input  a univariate time series consisting of real or integer values. Taking  the 
first order  difference of T  we look at movements between  data points allowing 
a comparison  of subsequences  across different amplitudes. To further minimise 
amplitude scaling issues we normalise  the time series. In our previous  work [15] 
the algorithm investigated motifs through consideration of each data point in- 
dividually,  creating a solution  that was not scalable  to larger  data sets.  In the 
MTA this problem  is resolved as we investigate motifs by combining individual 
data points into sequences  and  comparing  and  combining  those sequences  to 
form motifs. 
Piecewise Aggregate Approximation (PAA)  [2] is used to discretise  the time 
series. PAA  is a powerful  compression  tool  that uses a discrete,  finite  symbol 
set  to generate  a dimensionally  reduced  version  of a time  series that consists 
of symbol  strings. This  intuitive representation has  been  shown to rival  more 
sophisticated reduction  methods  such as Fourier  transforms and wavelets  [2]. 
Using PAA we slide a window of size s across the time series T one point at a 
time. Each sliding window represents a subsequence from T. The MTA calculates 
the average  of the values  from  the sliding  window  and  uses  that average  to 
represent the subsequence.  The MTA converts this average into a symbol string. 
The user predefines the size a of the alphabet used to represent the time series T. 
Given T  has been normalised  we can identify the breakpoints for the alphabet 
characters that generate a equal sized areas  under  the Gaussian  curve [2]. The 
average  value  calculated for the sliding  window is then examined  against the 
breakpoints and converted into the appropriate symbol. This process is repeated 
for all sliding windows across T to generate m-s+1 subsequences, each consisting 
of symbol strings comprising  one character. 
 
Generate  Symbol Matrix  S.  The  string of symbols  representing a subse- 
quence  is defined as a word. Each  word generated from the sliding window is 
entered into the symbol matrix S. The  MTA  examines  the time series T  using 
these  words  and  not the original  data points  to speed  up  the search  process. 

 
 
 
 
Symbol string comparisons  can be performed  efficiently to filter out  bad  motif 
candidates, ensuring  the computationally expensive Euclidean  distance calcula- 
tion is only performed  on those motif candidates that are potentially genuine. 
Having generated the symbol matrix S, the novelty of the MTA comes from 
the way in which each generation a selection of words from S, corresponding  to 
the length of the motif under consideration, are extracted in an intuitive manner 
as a reduced  set and presented to the tracker population for matching. 
 
Initialise Tracker Population to Size  a. The trackers are the primary  tool 
used to identify motif candidates in the time series. A tracker comprises  a se- 
quence of 1 to w symbols. The  symbol string contained within the tracker rep- 
resents a sequence of symbols that are seen to repeat throughout T. 
Tracker  initialisation and evolution is tightly regulated to avoid proliferation 
of ineffective motif  candidates.  The  initial  tracker  population  is constructed  of 
size a  to contain  one of each of the viable alphabet symbols predefined  by the 
user. Each  tracker is unique,  to avoid unnecessary  duplication. 
Trackers  are  created of a length of one symbol  and  matched to motif can- 
didates  via the words presented  from the stage  matrix  S. Trackers  that match 
a word are stimulated and  become candidates for proliferation as they indicate 
words that are repeated in T. Given a motif and a tracker that matches part of 
that motif, proliferation enables the tracker to extend its length by one symbol 
each generation until its length matches that of the motif. 
 
Generate Motif Candidate Matrix M  from S. The symbol matrix S con- 
tains a time ordered  list of all words, each containing just one symbol, that are 
present in the time series T. Neighbouring words in S contain significant overlap 
as they were extracted via  sliding  windows.  Presenting all words  in S  to the 
tracker population would result in inappropriate motifs being identified between 
neighbouring  words.  To  prevent this issue such  ‘trivial’ match candidates are 
removed from the symbol matrix S in a similar fashion to that used in [2]. 
Trivial  match  elimination  is achieved  as a word  is only transferred  from S 
for presentation to the tracker population if it differs from the previous word ex- 
tracted. This allows the MTA to focus on significant variations in the time series 
and prevents time being wasted on the search across uninteresting variations. 
Excessively aggressive trivial match elimination is prevented by limiting the 
maximum  number  of consecutive  trivial match eliminations to s, the number  of 
data points encompassed  by a symbol. In this way a subsequence  can eliminate 
as trivial all subsequences generated from sliding windows that start in locations 
contained within that subsequence (if they generate the same symbol string) but 
no others. The  reduced  set of words selected from S is transferred to the motif 
candidate matrix M and presented to the tracker population for matching. 
 
Match Trackers to Motif Candidates. During  an iteration each tracker is 
taken in turn and  compared  to the set  of words  in M. Matching is performed 
using  a simple string comparison  between  the tracker and  the word.  A match 
occurs if the comparison  function returns a value of 0, indicating a perfect match 

 
 
 
 
between the symbol strings. Each matching tracker is stimulated by incrementing 
its match counter by 1. 
 
Eliminate Unmatched Trackers. Trackers  that have a match count >1 in- 
dicate symbols that are seen to repeat throughout T  and  are viable motif can- 
didates. Eliminating all trackers with a match count < 2 ensures the MTA only 
searches  for motifs  from amongst  these  viable  candidates.  Knowledge of possi- 
ble motif candidates from T  is carried  forward by the tracker population. After 
elimination the match count of the surviving  trackers is reset to 0. 
 
 
Examine T to Confirm Genuine Motif Status.  The surviving tracker pop- 
ulation indicates which words in M  represent viable motif candidates. However 
motif candidates with identical words  may  not represent a  true match when 
looking at the time series data underlying  the subsequences  comprising  those 
words.  In order  to confirm whether  two  matching  words X  and  Y, containing 
the same symbol strings, correspond  to a genuine motif we need to apply a dis- 
tance measure  to the original time series data associated with those candidates. 
The MTA uses the Euclidean  distance to measure  the relationship between two 
motif candidates ED(X,Y) [16]. 
If ED(X,Y) ≤ r a motif has been found and the match count of that tracker is 
stimulated. A memory motif is created to store the symbol string associated with 
X and Y. The start locations of X and Y are also saved. For further information 
on the derivation of this matching threshold please refer to [16]. 
The MTA then continues its search for motifs, focusing only on those words 
in  M  that match the surviving  tracker population in  an  attempt to find  all 
occurrences  of the potential  motifs.  The  trackers therefore act  as  a  pruning 
mechanism,  reducing the potential search space to ensure the MTA only focuses 
on viable candidates. 
 
 
Eliminate Unsuccessful Trackers.  The MTA now removes any unstimulated 
trackers  from the tracker  population.  These  trackers  represent  symbol  strings 
that were  seen  to repeat  but  upon  further  investigation  with  the underlying 
data were not proven to be valid motifs in T. 
 
 
Store Motifs Found. The motifs identified during  the confirmation stage are 
stored in the memory  pool for review.  Comparisons  are  made  to remove  any 
duplication. The final memory pool represents the compressed  representation of 
the time series, containing all the re-occurring  patterns found. 
 
 
Proliferate Matched  Trackers.  Proliferation and  mutation are  needed  to 
extend the length of the tracker so it can capture more of the complete motif. At 
the end of the first generation the surviving  trackers, each consisting of a word 
with a single symbol, represent all the symbols that are applicable  to the motifs 

 
 
 
 
in T. Complete  motifs in T  only consist of combinations of these symbols. These 
trackers are stored as the mutation template for use by the MTA. 
Proliferation and  mutation to lengthen trackers will only  involve  symbols 
from  the mutation template and  not the full symbol  alphabet, as  any  other 
mutations would lead to unsuccessful motif candidates. During proliferation the 
MTA takes each surviving tracker in turn and generates a number of clones equal 
to the size of the mutation template. The  clones adopt  the same symbol string 
as their parent. 
 
 
Mutate Matched Trackers. The clones generated from each parent are taken 
in turn and  extended  by adding  a symbol  taken  consecutively  from the muta- 
tion template. This  creates a tracker population with maximal  coverage  of all 
potential motif solutions  and  no duplication. This  process forms the equivalent 
of the short term memory  pool identified by Bell [1] and  is illustrated in more 
detail  in [16]. 
The tracker pool is fed back into the MTA ready  for the next generation. A 
new motif candidate matrix M consisting of words with two symbols must now 
be formulated to present to the evolved tracker population. In this way the MTA 
builds up the representation of a motif one symbol at a time each generation to 
eventually map to the full motif using feedback from the trackers. 
Given the symbol length s we can generate a word consisting of two consec- 
utive  symbols by taking the symbol from matrix S at position i and  that from 
position  i+s. Repeating  this  across  S, and  applying  trivial  match  elimination, 
the MTA obtains  a new motif candidate matrix M in generation two, each entry 
of which contains a word of two symbols, each of length s. 
The MTA continues to prepare  and present new motif candidate matrix data 
to the evolving  tracker population each  generation. The  motif candidates are 
built up  one symbol  at a time and  matched to the lengthening trackers. This 
flexible approach  enables  the MTA  to identify unknown  motifs of a  variable 
length.  This  process  continues  until  all trackers  are  eliminated  as non  match- 
ing and  the tracker population is empty.  Any further extension to the tracker 
population will not improve  their fit to any of the underlying  motifs in T. 
 
 
Memory Motif Streamlining.  The  MTA  streamlines the memory  pool, re- 
moving duplicates and those encapsulated within other motifs to produce a final 
list of motifs that forms the equivalent of the long term memory  pool. 
 
 
5 Results 
 
 
Here we examine  the MTA’s  performance  on two  publicly  available  industrial 
data sets.  The  MTA  was written in C++ and  run  on a Windows  XP  machine 
with a Pentium M 1.7 Ghz processor with 1Gb of RAM. 

 
 
 
 
5.1 Steamgen Data 
 
The  steamgen data set was generated using fuzzy models applied  to the model 
of a steam generator at the Abbott Power Plant in Champaign [10] and is avail- 
able  from  http://homes.esat.kuleuven.be/∼tokka/daisydata.html.  The  steam- 
gen data set consists of every tenth observation taken from the steam flow out- 
put,  starting with the first observation. This specific data selection was used by 
Keogh and has been followed for the purposes of comparison. 
The  steamgen data set  contains 960 items with significant amplitude vari- 
ation. Parameters s = 10, a  = 6, r  = 0.5  were  established as  suitable after 
numerous  runs  of the MTA.  Sensitivity analysis  on  these parameters can  be 
found in [16]. The MTA identified 104 motifs of lengths varying between ten and 
60 data points. Some of the motifs of length ten are seen to repeat up to 15 times 
throughout the data, others of length 20 are noted to repeat up to four times. 
One significant motif of length 60, seen to occur twice in the data, at locations 
75 and 833, dominates the motif pool. This motif is plotted in Figure  1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. The  plot  of a motif found in the steamgen data by the MTA.  It consists of the 
subsequences starting at locations 75 and  883, both  of length 60. The  X axis refers to 
the motif  length, whilst the Y axis refers to steam flow. 
 
 
In  order  to provide  some grounding  for the MTA,  we compared  the MTA 
result to that of the Keogh’s probabilistic motif search algorithm [2]. Keogh was 
kind enough to provide a teaching version of the algorithm which we applied  to 
the steamgen data, using parameters established by Keogh. Given a predefined 
length of 80, the algorithm was able to identify a dominant motif consisting of 
sequences starting at points 66 and 874, that is consistent with the motif found 
by the MTA,  as illustrated in Figure  2. 
Comparing  Figures  1 and  2 it appears  that the MTA  has  only detected a 
subset  of the motif  found  by  the probabilistic  algorithm,  missing  off the first 
and  last ten data points of the longer motif. However, the Euclidean  distances 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2. The  plot  of a motif  found  in the steamgen data by Keoghs probabilistic algo- 
rithm. It consists of the subsequences starting at locations 66 and  874, both  of length 
80. The  X axis refers to the motif  length, whilst the Y axis refers to steam flow. 
 
 
across  the first and  last ten point sequences  are  5.48 and  11.17 respectively. 
Given s = 10  and  r=0.5 per unit,  a match  threshold  of 5.0 is applied  to each 
ten point  sequence,  resulting  in the rejection  of both  omitted  subsequences  as 
non matching. Sensitivity analysis  was performed  on the MTA to changes in s, 
r, and  a [16]. The  MTA is sensitive to changes  in s and  r  but  not a. Reducing 
s  from  20 to 10 and  then to 5 increases  execution  times by  278% and  776% 
respectively,  the more detailed  search  takes significantly longer. Reducing  r  by 
50% reduces execution time by approximately 92% as the stricter bind condition 
reduces the number  of motif candidates investigated. 
If the user is aware of the motif length then Keogh’s probabilistic algorithm 
produces  satisfactory  results.  It could be run  for alternative  motifs  lengths  to 
find improved motifs, however this reduces the algorithms effectiveness. Without 
knowledge of motif length the MTA provides  a successful alternative. It is able 
to dynamically  build up identification of the motif, symbol by symbol, until the 
match threshold is exceeded. The search process is driven by the match criteria 
and not a predetermined motif length, leading to better fitting motifs. 
 
 
5.2 Power Demand Data 
 
Having  compared  the MTA  to an alternative approach  we now focus the MTA 
on the power demand  data set (www.cs.ucr.edu/∼eamonn/TSDMA/index.html) 
which  contains  35,040 fifteen  minute  averaged  values  of power  demand  (KW) 
for the ECN  research  centre  during  1997 [14].  A subset  of 5,000 data points 
was extracted from data point 5,000 onwards  for evaluation. Figure  3 plots this 
data subset,  the five week day peaks in power demand  are clearly evident, with 
minimal  demand  seen to occur over the weekends. 
Running  the MTA with the previously  determined alphabet size a = 6, and 
increasing  s = 500  and  r = 4  given the larger  data set and  the magnitude  of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3. Power demand data subset with Motif A of length  500 highlighted in light grey, 
with five occurrences (listed 1 to 5) starting at locations 508, 1182, 1854, 2525 and 3869 
 
 
 
actual  data values, the MTA is able to identify 18 motifs within 798,298ms. The 
most frequently repeated motif A is plotted in Figure  3. Motif A represents the 
power demand  from Thursday through to Tuesday,  including a normal  weekend 
with minimal demand  on Saturday and Sunday,  that is seen to occur five times. 
The intervals between the first four occurrences  of the motif are approximately 
675 data points, or seven days given that each data point is a 15 minute  interval, 
whilst that between  the fourth and  fifth occurrences  is 14 days. This  implies a 
potential motif is missing  from data point 3200 to 3700. However  this subse- 
quence  relates to the period  from the 26th to the 31st March  1997 and  in the 
Netherlands the 28th  and  31st  of March  are bank  holidays during  which there 
was no power demand.  The sequence from 3200 to 3700 is therefore not consis- 
tent with motif A and  was omitted. This  simple case shows the MTA has been 
able to find a motif  that represents  all occurrences  of a two  day weekend that 
has no associated bank  holidays. 
Reducing  the symbol  size s  to 400 for a  more  detailed  search,  the MTA 
identifies  21 motifs  in 661,902ms. One Motif  B, of length  400, is seen to occur 
twice at locations 2880 and  3648, see Figure  4. The  MTA  found  a motif that 
corresponds  to the two weeks that incorporate a bank  holiday. 
One could argue that the four day patterns found in motif B should be found 
to repeat as a subset of all the other five day working weeks. However the MTA is 
able to distinguish between the bank holiday weeks and normal five day working 
weeks as it identified another motif C of length 1308, seen to occur twice in the 
data at positions 539 and  1884. This  motif encapsulated a fortnight of normal 
working days that was seen to repeat twice, covering the period up to the start 
of motif B. Motif C did not occur for a third time after this due to the existence 
of the bank  holidays which broke the matching criteria for that sequence. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4. Power demand data subset with Motif B of length  400 highlighted in light grey, 
occurring  twice as labelled 1 and  2, at locations 3924 and  3648 
 
 
 
6 Conclusion 
 
 
Motifs and patterns are key tools for use in data analysis.  By extracting motifs 
that exist in data we gain some understanding as to the nature and characteris- 
tics of that data. The  motifs provide  an obvious mechanism  to cluster, classify 
and  summarise  the data, placing  great value  on  these patterns. Whilst most 
research  has  focused  on the search  for known  motifs, little research  has  been 
performed  looking for variable  length unknown  motifs in time series. The MTA 
takes up this challenge, building on our earlier work to generate a novel immune 
inspired  approach  to evolve a population of trackers that seek out  and  match 
motifs present in a time series. The MTA uses a minimal  number  of parameters 
with minimal  assumptions and  requires  no knowledge of the data examined  or 
the underlying  motifs, unlike  other alternative approaches.  Previous  issues of 
scalability were addressed  by using  a discrete,  finite symbol  set  to generate a 
dimensionally  reduced  version of the time series for investigation. 
The MTA was evaluated using two industrial data sets and the algorithm was 
able to identify a motif population for each. In the steamgen data set a dominant 
motif was identified and  compared  to results from an  alternative author. The 
ability of the MTA  to find improved  variable  length motifs due to it’s immune 
memory inspired tracker evolution was also highlighted, a distinguishing feature 
over  other algorithms. In  the power  demand  data set  the MTA  was  able  to 
identify motifs that had meaningful  significance to the user. The MTA found as 
motifs i) those periods  that correspond  to weekends not associated with bank 
holidays,  ii) the four day working  weeks that contain  a bank  holiday,  and  iii) 
the normal  five day  working  weeks.  From  these  results  we believe  the MTA 

 
 
 
 
offers a valuable  contribution to an area of research  that at present has received 
surprisingly  little attention.
