Blar-SQL: Faster, Stronger, Smaller NL2SQL
JOSÉ MANUEL DOMÍNGUEZ, Blar Spa, Chile
BENJAMÍN ERRAZURIZ, Blar Spa, Chile
PATRICIO DAHER, Blar Spa, Chile
Large Language Models (LLMs) have gained considerable notoriety in the
field of natural language to SQL tasks (NL2SQL). In this study, we show how
task decomposition can greatly benefit LLMs in database understanding and
query generation in order to answer human questions with an SQL query.
We fined-tuned open source models, specifically Llama-2 and Code Llama,
by combining 2 different models each designated to focus on one of two
tasks in order to leverage each model’s core competency to further increase
the accuracy of the final SQL query.
We propose a new framework to divide the schema into chunks in order
to fit more information into a limited context. Our results are comparable
with those obtained by GPT-4 at the same time being ~135 times smaller, 90
times faster and more than 100 times cheaper than GPT-4.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: NL2SQL, LLM, AI, Prompt Decomposi-
tion
ACM Reference Format:
José Manuel Domínguez, Benjamín Errazuriz, and Patricio Daher. 2023. Blar-
SQL: Faster, Stronger, Smaller NL2SQL. 1, 1 (January 2023), 6 pages.
1
INTRODUCTION
With recent advances in LLMs such as the Open AI’s GPT-4 and
Meta’s Llama-2, the field of translating human language questions
into SQL queries, commonly referred to as NL2SQL, has witnessed
significant advancements. These state-of-the-art language models
have opened up exciting opportunities for improving the accuracy
and efficiency of NL2SQL systems, enabling the end user to inter-
act with databases without having a deep understanding of SQL
language or the database’s schema.
Currently, most of the SOTA approaches use LLMs to achieve this
goal, particularly GPT-4, which has gained most of the attention as
being the largest and most capable model as of this paper’s writing.
In this paper, we explore how open-source models such as Llama-2
and CodeLlama when fine-tuned can achieve similar or even better
results than the ones achieved by GPT-4. Moreover, we explore
how dividing complex tasks into smaller steps can significantly
benefit these models. We build on DIN-SQL’s approach [Pourreza
and Rafiei 2023] and fine-tune two custom models, each specialized
in completing one sub-task achieving results comparable with GPT-4
on the BIRD-SQL data set.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a

© 2023 Association for Computing Machinery.
XXXX-XXXX/2023/1-ART $15.00
https://doi.org/
Another challenge frequently encountered in the text-to-SQL
domain is managing context. Large data schemas often exceed the
32K token context limit of the GPT-4 model. To address this, we
have introduced a novel method for selecting the necessary schema
link to answer a given query. We partition the schema into several
prompts, each tailored to fit within the maximum context length.
This approach enables models with a context limit of 4K tokens
or less to efficiently process databases with extensive schemas and
descriptions.
The contributions of this study are summarized:
(1) We divide the task of generating SQL queries into 2 steps,
the first is choosing the appropriate columns based on the
database schema, column descriptions and other external
knowledge that may be required.
(2) A new framework of sub-dividing very large schemas and
descriptions into chunks in order to better manage prompt
context and include the greatest amount of information pos-
sible.
(3) A new idea of using 2 different models trained with different
purposes in order to leverage their knowledge and create
better results.
2
RELATED WORK
Decomposing complex text-to-SQL tasks has shown great potential,
improving the performance of few shots LLMs on the Spider dataset
by over 10% [Pourreza and Rafiei 2023]. The main idea behind this
is that LLMs respond better when only one task is asked, to achieve
this you break the problem into simple pieces and solve each part
using prompting, trained models, or symbolic functions [Khot et al.
2022].
SDSQL model introduces the notion of capturing the interactions
between the question and the data schema. It uses a series of depen-
dency labels that link question tokens with schema tokens (W-Col,
S-Agg, W-Op).
There are several datasets designed for text-to-SQL research, such
as Spider [Yu et al. 2018] and WikiSQL [Zhong et al. 2017]. These
datasets not only provide a benchmark for comparing various ap-
proaches, but they also supply the data necessary for fine-tuning
models and achieving significant improvements. In this realm, the
BIRD dataset stands out. It encompasses a 33.4GB database empha-
sizing real-world applications. This benchmark offers a detailed in-
sight into how our frameworks would perform with actual databases,
making it the most rigorous benchmark available [Li et al. 2023].
3
METHODOLOGY
3.1
Error analysis
In order to further understand the current capabilities of open-
source LLMs we first evaluated the vanilla version of code-llama
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2023.
arXiv:2401.02997v1  [cs.CL]  4 Jan 2024

2
•
Dominguez and Errazuriz
against the development dataset of both Spider and Bird. We later
took a random subset of 60 data points and classified the errors in
order to understand what should be improved.
The most common error we found where schema linking, this
occurred when the model changed the name of some columns or
hallucinated columns and table-column associations. The second
most common error was when the model failed to understand the
content of the database, this error occurred when the model couldn’t
comprehend the column description and values. Figures 1 and 2
show examples of both errors.
Fig. 1. Example of a Schema Link Error
In this example the model got wrong the name of the columns ’CDSCODE’
and ’MailStreet’
Our results coincide with the results obtained by the team that
developed the Bird data set [Li et al. 2023]. The two most common
mistakes were "Wrong Schema Linking" (41.6%) and "Misunder-
standing Database Content" (40.8%), both occurred because the LLM
couldn’t understand the database schema correctly or recall the
correct structure of the database.
In order to further improve LLMs capability we divided the pro-
cess into two steps: 1) inferring the schema links (Schema-Link
model) and 2) Constructing the SQL using the previously generated
schema links (SQL model). The overall architecture is shown in
figure 3. The idea is to train both models specifically for their task
because it has been proven that dividing a problem into smaller
tasks generates better results when it comes to LLM inference [Khot
et al. 2022].
3.2
Making the data set
As we mentioned before we used the Bird dataset because is the first
benchmark focused on big databases with real applications. Thanks
to the work done by the Bird team, you can access 95 databases with
12,751 questions with their respective answer [Li et al. 2023].
In order to create the schema link dataset we reverse-engineered
the SQL answers and the schema. This process consisted of ex-
tracting only the tables and columns used in the query answers
Fig. 2. Example of a database content error
In this example the model assumed that the column ’Charter School (Y/N)’
had values "Y" or "N", but in reality the values are 1 or 0
Fig. 3. Prediction solution architecture
Here you can see in the first box the question and the database schema,
which the Schema-Link model take and infer the tables and columns needed
to answer the question. With the schema link the SQL model predicts the
final SQL to answer the question.
as well as the foreign keys. Figure 4 shows the process of schema
link generation. In order to achieve this we used a combination of
SQL metadata capturing packages (sql-metadata and sql-parse) for
Python combined with custom-made Regex.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2023.

Blar-SQL: Faster, Stronger, Smaller NL2SQL
•
3
Fig. 4. Schema Link Generation Process
3.3
Hypothesis
Our solution consists of two models working on two separate tasks,
making the schema linking and generating the SQL query. The way
that we train each model can impact how these two models interact
with each other to come up with a solution. Because of this, we
created two hypotheses:
(1) A non-trusting interaction: where the SQL model does not
rely only on the Schema-Link output, it also has access to the
original schema and column descriptions. The schema link
are presented as a suggestion more than a fact. By ensuring
that the SQL model does not solely rely on the output of
the first, there’s an added opportunity to correct potential
misinterpretations of the schema.
(2) A trusting interaction where the SQL model only takes the
output of the Schema-Link model to construct the query. This
enables us to manage the context length as well as teach the
model to focus purely on the construction of the SQL query
and the logic behind it.
Furthermore, we hypothesized that using a Llama-2 model for
the schema linking part would be beneficial as it has a better world
understanding [Rozière et al. 2023] and using code-llama for the
SQL part, as it has a better programming background [Touvron et al.
2023]. Unfortunately, due to a lack of time and resources we couldn’t
compare how a pure llama-2 and pure code-llama solution would
perform, so we leave this as a future work.
3.4
Context Management
One big limitation that open-source solutions such as llama-2, code-
llama or others have, is the smaller context they have in comparison
with Open AI’s GPT models. Even GPT-4 32K context may fall
short when the database is big enough or if it has detailed column
descriptions.
We experimented with two approaches in order to tackle this
problem. The first one consisted of reducing the prompt context
by excluding certain information such as column descriptions if it
exceeded the context. This traditional approach has the limitation
of the volume of context that we can provide our models to make a
prediction. We call this the non-descriptive approach.
The second approach is a more novel one, in which we propose a
new method of dividing the schema linking step according to the
maximum context length available.
First, we started by creating the template of the prompt which
consisted of four parts. The question, the database schema, column
descriptions and finally a hint or external knowledge required in
order to answer the question.
Then, we iterated over each table’s columns and descriptions,
adding one table at a time until the prompt could not further fit
another table. The question and external knowledge were fixed in
order to always be included. We then divided each question using
this method in one or more prompts.
Finally, we extracted the schema links from each segmented
prompt, producing a list of schema link predictions. When con-
catenated, this list provided the essential information required to
answer the question. We call this the schema chunking approach
and Figure 5 explains the whole process.
3.5
Training process
To train the models we used Google Colab’s A100 40GB GPU. To
achieve this we used 4bit model quantization as well as QLoRA for
fine-tuning. The training itself used a combination of the packages
available in huggingface such as transformers, peft and trl. The
training process usually lasted ~10hrs costing about $20 USD per
model.
We did supervised fine-tuning only updating weights from the
response (Schema links and SQL queries) similar to the approach
taken by Dail-SQL [Gao et al. 2023]. For the dataset, we used BIRD’s
Training set consisting of 8,952 examples, the dataset was subse-
quently partitioned randomly, resulting in 7,609 examples left for
training, while 1,343 were set aside for validation purposes.
We conducted the training process for a maximum of two epochs,
evaluating the model every 500 steps and selecting the best models
based on the validation set.
3.5.1
Schema Link models.
• Non-descriptive: In this approach, there was one single prompt
for each question, to achieve this we removed the column
descriptions if they couldn’t be fitted in the context due to
length limitations. The model’s task was to predict the whole
schema link generated previously. Using this approach some
examples of the training set were omitted as the pure schema
wouldn’t fit in the context.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2023.

4
•
Dominguez and Errazuriz
Fig. 5. Schema chunking process
• Chunked: In this approach, each question had N prompts,
each with a maximum length of 4,096 tokens, as we were
using the Llama-2 models. Both the schema and descriptions
were included in each prompt preventing information loss.
The model’s task was to predict only the schema links present
in the prompt and predict None if none of them were present.
3.5.2
Not trusting hypothesis. The training process begins by first
training the schema linking model. After fine-tuning this model,
we generated schema links for the entire data set. Subsequently,
the model that generates the SQL is later trained using the schema
link deduced by the first model and a resume version of the origi-
nal schema. This approach offers the advantage of distributing the
risk of inferring the structure of the database wrong to answer the
question between the two models.
One notable limitation of this approach is that the schema link
model generates better results for the training dataset, as the model
has previously "seen" these examples, potentially biasing the SQL
model to be more trustful of the schema link recommendations.
However, due to the limited data, we decided to make this trade-off
rather than further splitting the training dataset.
Table 1. Results Vanilla models
Model
Simple
Moderate
Challenging
Total
𝑁𝐷𝑝+ 𝑉
20.76%
5.81%
1.39%
14.41%
𝑁𝐷𝑝+ 𝑉𝑐
23.24%
7.96%
4.17%
16.82%
Table 2. Results direct fine-tune
Model
Simple
Moderate
Challenging
Total
𝑁𝐷𝑝+ 𝑉
20.76%
5.81%
1.39%
14.41%
𝑁𝐷𝑝+ 𝑉𝑐
23.24%
7.96%
4.17%
16.82%
𝑁𝐷𝑝+ SQL𝑓𝑡
35.79%
15.05%
5.56%
26.73%
3.5.3
Trusting hypothesis. Both the Schema-Link model and the
SQL model are trained using the schema links constructed using
reverse engineering from the BIRD dataset. This creates a trusting
scenario where the SQL model trusts the output given by the schema
link model, focusing solely on creating a syntactically and logically
correct SQL query.
4
RESULTS
We tested various models and combinations, the following section
describes each one of them and the results obtained. We used the
Dev partition of the BIRD-dataset and used the official Bird code in
order to evaluate our models.
4.1
Vanilla
First, we tested how the vanilla version of code-llama 13B would
perform in the Bird-SQL dataset. In order to fit the schema and
descriptions into the prompt we used a non-descriptive approach
(𝑁𝐷𝑝), that would leave out the column descriptions if they didn’t
fit in the prompt. We used 5000 tokens as the threshold.
In the prompt was specified that we only wanted the SQL query
with no explanation but sometimes the model would also include
an explanation of the query against what was prompted.
This led us to divide the vanilla model into two results "Vanilla"
(𝑉), which evaluates results exactly as the model outputs them, and
"vanilla clean" (𝑉𝑐) where we employed a post-processing step to
extract only the SQL query from the generated results.
Table 1 describes the execution accuracy results.
We conducted this test in order to understand the current capa-
bilities of the models and set a floor value in order to improve upon
it.
4.2
Zero shot fine-tune
Later we fine-tuned a single code-llama 13B model in order to predict
the SQL answer in a zero-shot environment (SQL𝑓𝑡). In this model,
we again used a non-descriptive approach (𝑁𝐷𝑝) for the prompt as
the only task required was to generate the final SQL query and this
generation could not be divided into multiple prompts. The results
are in the table 2. These results give us a comparison point between
a one-step process and our approach of sub-dividing the problem
into multiple steps.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2023.

Blar-SQL: Faster, Stronger, Smaller NL2SQL
•
5
Table 3. Results Non-Trusting
Model
Simple
Moderate
Challenging
Total
𝑁𝐷𝑝+ 𝑉
20.76%
5.81%
1.39%
14.41%
𝑁𝐷𝑝+ 𝑉𝑐
23.24%
7.96%
4.17%
16.82%
𝑁𝐷𝑝+ SQL𝑓𝑡
35.79%
15.05%
5.56%
26.73%
𝑁𝐷𝑝+ 𝑆𝐿+ 𝑁𝑇
42.16%
25.59%
19.44%
35.01%
𝐶𝐻𝑝+ 𝑆𝐿+ 𝑁𝑇
52.97%
39.35%
29.86%
46.68%
Table 4. Results Trusting
Model
Simple
Moderate
Challenging
Total
𝑁𝐷𝑝+ 𝑉
20.76%
5.81%
1.39%
14.41%
𝑁𝐷𝑝+ 𝑉𝑐
23.24%
7.96%
4.17%
16.82%
𝑁𝐷𝑝+ SQL𝑓𝑡
35.79%
15.05%
5.56%
26.73%
𝑁𝐷𝑝+ 𝑆𝐿+ 𝑁𝑇
42.16%
25.59%
19.44%
35.01%
𝐶𝐻𝑝+ 𝑆𝐿+ 𝑁𝑇
52.97%
39.35%
29.86%
46.68%
𝐶𝐻𝑝+ 𝑆𝐿+ 𝑇
32.22%
27.20%
9.03%
25.49%
4.3
Non-Trusting
For our model combination, we first evaluated our non-trusting
approach (𝑁𝑇). In this approach, the SQL model was trained with
the schema links predicted by the Schema-Link model which were
not always correct thus creating a non-trusting environment. This
model was evaluated using a non-descriptive (𝑁𝐷𝑝) and a chunk
approach (𝐶𝐻𝑝) for the schema link model.
In the chunk approach (𝐶𝐻𝑝), we divide the schema with the
column descriptions in N prompts, each prompt having a maximum
threshold length. We generate predictions for each prompt and later
join them to create the final schema link prediction.
Initially, we generated schema link predictions for both the non-
descriptive and chunked schema link models. Subsequently, we
provided these predictions to the SQL model, along with the schema
and column descriptions incorporating the latter when they could
be accommodated within the context without exceeding it.
4.4
Trusting
In the "trusting" version of the model, we generated the schema
link using the chunk approach immediately (𝐶𝐻𝑝+ 𝑆𝐿+ 𝑇). Sub-
sequently, only the question and this prediction were prompted to
the SQL model.
4.5
Upper Bound
Finally, we tested our model’s upper bound, specifically the SQL
model’s upper bound, we did this in order to further understand our
model’s limitations. To test this we prompted the SQL model with
the perfect schema links 𝑆𝐿𝑝extracted as detailed previously. This
way the model would have the perfect recommendation of columns,
tables and foreign keys to use.
We also tested how the non-trusting model would perform if only
the schema link and external knowledge were prompted in order to
not confuse the LLM with extra content, the extra information was
Table 5. Results Upper Bound
Model
Simple
Moderate
Challenging
Total
𝑆𝐿𝑝+ 𝑁𝑇
55.78 %
41.72%
29.86%
49.09%
𝑆𝐿𝑝+ 𝑇
53.73%
29.03%
24.31%
43.48%
𝑆𝐿𝑝+ 𝑁𝑇𝑠𝑙
35.46%
14.84%
11.81%
26.99%
not necessary given that the schema links are perfect (𝑁𝑇𝑠𝑙), Table
5 details our results.
4.6
Analysis
In this section, we are going to contrast the results of the different
models to see if our hypothesis were correct or not.
4.6.1
Vanilla v/s Zero shot fine-tune. The best vanilla results were
16.82% (𝑁𝐷𝑝+ 𝑉𝑐) and the worst of the fined-tuned models got
26.73%. This shows an improvement of ~10% proving the hypothesis
that trained models such as Llama get much better results when fine-
tuned and are a powerful tool in resolving text-to-SQL problems.
4.6.2
Trusting v/s Zero shot fine-tune. The Trusting version did not
perform well, as we can see in Table 4, getting only 25.49% losing
against the 𝑁𝐷𝑝+ SQL𝑓𝑡version.
This is due to the amount of responsibility that the schema linking
step took. The input of the SQL model was solely the schema link,
limiting the amount of context that the used model to create the SQL
prediction. What happened in the majority of cases was that the
𝑆𝐿failed to capture a column needed or captured the name wrong,
giving zero chance to the next step to get the answer well. From
this, we learned two things:
(1) Getting the exact amount of information from the data schema
that is needed to answer the question is not effective. It’s bet-
ter for the model to include extra columns than to risk having
too few to make the right SQL prediction.
(2) Prompting the schema to the SQL model gives the chance to
fix the 𝑆𝐿output, spreading the risk of not understanding the
database architecture and enhancing the performance of the
model greatly.
4.6.3
Non-Trusting v/s Zero shot fine-tune. Comparing the results
between our non-trusting approach and a zero-shot fine tune we
can see a big spike in performance, providing evidence that dividing
the tasks between models is beneficial when creating SQL queries.
The improvement was ~10% for a non-descriptive setup (similar
comparisons) and a ~20% improvement for a chunked setup, provid-
ing further evidence that chunking the schema can lead to better
results.
4.6.4
Trusting v/s Non-Trusting Upper Bound. To our surprise, the
Non-trusting model performed better than the trusting one, this is
a surprise because the trusting model was trained to create queries
based solely on the schema links prompted to it, leaving it only the
responsibility of creating SQL queries. A reason this could be the
case is that after two epochs the trusting SQL model continued to
learn i.e. the loss function on the validation set continually decreased
and was stopped at the end of the second epoch.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2023.

6
•
Dominguez and Errazuriz
To our surprise the model with just the schema linking (𝑁𝑇𝑠𝑙)
performed worse, this could be due to the fact that it was fine-
tuned with a different prompt layout confusing the model more
than helping it. One key takeaway is that fine-tuned models are
very sensitive to prompt changes, further studies are required in
order to explore this hypothesis.
5
CONCLUSION
Task division can be incredibly beneficial for LLM models, many
agents and prompt chaining approaches have risen lately. In this
study we proved how task division can be beneficial for NL2SQL
tasks, increasing performance by more than 10% compared to a
direct approach. We also explored the idea and proposed a new
framework to divide schema linking prompts in order to capture as
much information as possible for the database schema and descrip-
tions, this helped us improve by a further 10% when compared to the
non-descriptive approach. Finally, we tried combining two different
models in order to further enhance the performance. This study
proves that smaller fine-tuned and task-specific approaches can
deliver competitive results compared to GPT-4, it also presents an
affordable way of fine-tuning models using easy access Google-colab
notebooks.
6
LIMITATIONS
There are a few significant limitations of this study, first of all, we
couldn’t test the impact of having 2 different models each specialized
in one task, we encourage others to further validate the hypothesis
that using LLama 2 for the schema link and Code-Llama for the SQL
generation is actually beneficial.
The second limitation we encountered was coming up with a
chunking method that would prevent information loss. Sometimes
during our chunking two tables joined by a foreign key would get
split up, although the table information containing the foreign key
reference remained, the fact that the model didn’t have access to the
other table and its column could play an important part in picking
the correct columns.
Finally, due to time limitations, we couldn’t study what the new
error composition looked like, this could lead to an interesting study
of further modularizing the steps needed in order to generate a
correct SQL.
7
