Revealing Neural Network Bias to
Non-Experts Through Interactive
Counterfactual Examples
Chelsea M. Myers
Drexel University
Philadelphia, PA, USA

Anushay Furqan
Drexel University
Philadelphia, PA, USA

Evan Freed
Drexel University
Philadelphia, PA, USA

Sebastian Risi
IT University of Copenhagen
Copenhagen, Denmark

Luis Fernando Laris Pardo
IT University of Copenhagen
Copenhagen, Denmark

Jichen Zhu
Drexel University
Philadelphia, PA, USA

Abstract
AI algorithms are not immune to biases. Traditionally, non-
experts have little control in uncovering potential social bias
(e.g., gender bias) in the algorithms that may impact their
lives. We present a preliminary design for an interactive vi-
sualization tool, CEB, to reveal biases in a commonly used
AI method, Neural Networks (NN). CEB combines counter-
factual examples and abstraction of an NN decision process
to empower non-experts to detect bias. This paper presents
the design of CEB and initial ﬁndings of an expert panel
(n = 6) with AI, HCI, and Social science experts.
Author Keywords
neural networks, bias, interactive visualization
Introduction
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) methods are used in increasing
range of aspects of our daily lives. As the adoption of these
AI applications widens, the need for transparency and ac-
countability becomes more pressing. Governments have
started to require companies to be transparent about AI
applications with social signiﬁcance. For example, proﬁl-
ing models, a widely used method to model certain aspects
of a person [15] (e.g., ﬁnancial creditworthiness), raised
public concerns. Reports show biased proﬁling models
can produce devastating consequences for those it unfairly
models, when for example deciding the risk of recidivism for
parole [12,28] or which patients receives extra care [18].
arXiv:2001.02271v2  [cs.HC]  9 Jan 2020

Currently, the general public relies on AI experts to discover
these biases. However, this approach cannot easily scale
up with the rapid adoption rate of AI applications. More
important, technical experts may not be fully aware of the
needs of the communities about which AI algorithms are
making decisions. As a result, there is a recent call to em-
power non-experts to open the blackbox of AI and better
understand its decision making process [4,31,33].
Features
Gender
Education
Self-Employment
Income
Credit History
Requested Loan Amount
Requested Loan Duration
Table 1: The application features
in our dataset and used in CEB’s
NN.
In this paper, we present an interactive visualization for AI
non-experts to explore a semantic Neural Network’s (NN)
decisions, in the context of proﬁling models for loan appli-
cations, to reveal potential bias. Among AI methods, NN-
based ones are notorious for its low interpretability [36].
Our tool, Counterfactual Examples for Bias (CEB), is de-
signed for non-experts to discover potential biases. It ex-
plores the approach of 1) visualizing activation patterns of
the NN to increase its interpretability, 2) using counterfac-
tual example to facilitate non-experts to discover biases
in the algorithm. By visualizing how counterfactual exam-
ples may impact the decision made by an NN, CEB aims
to facilitate non-experts to decide if bias is present. To our
knowledge, this work is among the ﬁrst tools that support
non-experts to ﬁnd bias in NN algorithms.
Employing an iterative and human-centered approach,
we have built a prototype of CEB and reviewed its design
through interviews with AI, HCI, UX, and Sociology ex-
perts. In the rest of the paper, we present CEB and the
results of our expert panel with six experts. Overall, we
found the experts believed CEB would be an intuitive tool
for non-experts. Experts’ believed the counterfactual ex-
amples highlighted bias while the abstraction of datapoints
into clusters allowed users not to be overwhelmed by the
sample size.
Related Work
Bias occurs in a variety of domains such as emotion recog-
nition [17], word embeddings [6, 14], and object classiﬁca-
tion [35]. Research addressing algorithmic bias typically
alters or supplements algorithms to correct bias [3,5,10,17,
19, 20]. These automated approaches can reduce the un-
fairness of algorithms; however, they can trade-off accuracy
and still do not guarantee complete fairness [20].
We argue that supporting users to detect bias, instead of
algorithms, is an alternate approach when automation is not
available or feasible. This approach supports the General
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), highlighting people’s
right to algorithmic explanations and non-discriminating
algorithms1. Research on Interactive Machine Learning
(IML) and eXplainable AI (XAI) often designs for algorith-
mic explanations as well. When designing CEB, we ﬁrst
looked towards these ﬁelds’ ﬁndings. Research on IMLs
has developeded techniques helpful to both experts and
non-experts in understanding a Machine Learning (ML)
model. Interacting with a ML model in an IML can assist
non-experts in learning data requirements of a model and
develop more realistic expectations of its capabilities [13].
Research on AI education for non-experts focuses on in-
creasing their understanding of how speciﬁc models work
to empower their use as a design material [11, 32, 34]. We
argue that educating non-experts on the social implications
of AI, speciﬁcally bias, is another pressing issue that is cur-
rently under-researched. Projects in XAI develop various UI
explanations to aid experts, and occasionally non-experts,
in understanding AI decisions [1,2,36]. UI techniques such
as natural language explanations [25] and comparative and
normative examples for image classiﬁcation [7] have been
found to help non-experts understand a NN’s decision. Sim-
ilar to IML, interactive explanations have been found to
1See the GDPR Articles 13-15 and 22 for more information.

increase non-expert’s objective and self-reported under-
standing of the proﬁling model but require more of a user’s
time [9]. Tools similar to CEB aim to explain ML models to
children [16] or game designers [31], but do not focus on
potential bias.
We emphasize abstraction and counterfactual examples
to facilitate the discovery of NN bias. Abstracting the ML
process has been found to assist the understanding of non-
experts [11, 33]. Our abstraction is based on reducing and
plotting the hidden node activations of a NN; a technique
used in tools to reveal the “black-box” of image classiﬁca-
tion NNs [8, 24]. We further abstract these activations by
clustering them, a technique commonly used in data vi-
sualization to improve interpretability [21–23]. Employing
counterfactual examples is a technique seen in developing
more fair models [20, 27, 30]. CEB focuses on illustrating
the potential bias of a NN through counterfactual examples
since they have been shown to improve a non-experts un-
derstanding of AI concepts [26,30].
Figure 1: Example of the natural
language description and score
Figure 2: Example of path score
from original Purple Group to
ﬂipped Pink Group.
Figure 3: Still frame of animated
datapoints switching from original
to ﬂipped groups.
Designing CEB to Facilitate Bias Detection
We selected a pre-existing loan application dataset2 since
this data already suffered from sampling bias (with a dis-
proportionately higher amount of men represented than
women). It contains datapoints about features of each load
application (Tab. 1) and its outcome (accept or reject). To
prepare the training data, we ﬁrst removed datapoints with
missing information, reducing the dataset from 614 to 480.
We then randomly divided the data into 2/3rds for training
and 1/3rd for testing. The employed NN is a Fully Con-
nected Neural Network (FCNN) with three hidden layers.
The network has seven inputs (Tab. 1) and one output neu-
ron (a loan application is recommended for approval if the
neuronâ ˘A´Zs output is higher than a threshold of 0.5). The
2Available at https://www.kaggle.com/burak3ergun/loan-data-set.
activation function used for each layer of the network is the
ReLu function except for the ﬁnal output, which employs a
sigmoid function. The NN was trained and modiﬁed until
performance reached an accuracy of 79%. This accuracy is
competitive compared to other public models working with
the same dataset3.
In order not to overburden a non-expert user’s cognitive
load, CEB abstract the dataset into clusters instead of di-
rectly visualizing individual datapoints (Fig. 4(b)) 4. To do
this, we ﬁrst reduce the dimensionality of the NN activa-
tions to two dimensions with the T-distributed Stochastic
Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE) [29] and then cluster the acti-
vations with k-means. With activations we mean the output
that each neuron in the NN calculates, which is based on
applying a non-linear function to the sum of the each neu-
ron’s inputs. It is worth highlighting that we cluster based on
the activations instead of the data itself, to gain insights into
how similar or dissimilar the NN interprets different groups
of applicants. Since NN’s activiation patters are correlated
to the decision it makes, our technique of clustering activi-
ations can reveal how the NN treats different applications.
For instance, if women with high income are grouped with
men with low income based on the NN’s activation pattern,
we can expect these two groups to have similar loan ac-
ceptance rates and hence investigate potential bias of the
NN.
The NN’s output is a score, on a scale of 0-100%, to each
application. A score of 50% or higher means the loan ap-
plication is accepted. Due to the low interpretability of NNs,
3Examples of other model’s accuracy can be found at
datahack.analyticsvidhya.com/contest/practice-problem-loan-prediction-
iii/lb?page=1 and www.kaggle.com/burak3ergun/loan-data-set/kernels.
4In CEB, we use the term “group” instead of “cluster” to avoid confu-
sion by non-technical users.

Figure 4: The four views of CEB: (a) Total view providing an overview of the dataset, (b) Groups view showing the NN splitting the dataset into four clusters, (c) Compare view with counterfactual
example by regrouping datapoints after ﬂipping their gender feature, and (d) Single view animating datapoints being regrouped into counterfactual example groups. Interact with CEB here.
we used counterfactual examples to help non-experts com-
pare how similar applications may be treated by the algo-
rithm. In particular, we explored the counterfactual exam-
ples created by changing one feature of an existing data
point in the dataset. This allows users to ask questions
such as “If the same application is from someone of a differ-
ent race or gender, would the NN make the same decision
about the loan?” For our early prototype, we used binary
gender as our focus. A user can compare clusters of appli-
cants with their equivalent counterfactual examples where
the genders of applicants are “ﬂipped.”
Using CEB: Users are guided through four views of CEB:
Total, Groups, Compare, and Single. Total (Fig. 4(a)) shows
users a summary of all datapoints in the original dataset
and their gender breakdown. We breakdown gender since
this is the focus of the counterfactual example in this proto-
type of CEB. Groups (Fig. 4(b)) visualizes these datapoints
splitting into clusters that the NN considers similar. Users
can hover over the clusters to see a summary of their pro-
totypical datapoints and the cluster’s average score (Fig. 1).
The clusters’ y-coordinates correspond with the average
score of all applications in the cluster. Compare (Fig. 4(c))
presents the counterfactual example that ﬂips the gender
feature of all datapoints in a cluster. This side-by-side view
shows the original dataset clusters (seen in the Group view)
and the ﬂipped dataset clusters . Users can compare the
clusters’ average scores and see if ﬂipping the gender fea-
ture impacts said score or cluster size. Finally, in Single
(Fig. 4(d)), users can click on an original cluster and see
which cluster its datapoints move to, after the gender fea-
ture is ﬂipped. To highight the movement, we animated the
datapoints and show how they move from the original to the
new clusters (Fig. 3). Users can hover over the original and
ﬂipped clusters to read their descriptions, or see datapoint
path scores (Fig. 2) by hovering over the arrows to see how
many datapoints moved, their genders, and average score.
Expert Interview Methodology
We invited experts of related domains to interact with a pro-
totype of CEB and to determine if the NN was biased. In
the beginning of the interview, we gave experts the false
information that there were two versions of the prototype,
assigned at random: one that was biased and the other was
not. This was done to avoid inﬂuencing the experts so that
they can make their own judgement if there were bias in the
NN or not. Each session was conducted separately and be-
gan with a pre-session survey gathering expertise, data lit-
eracy, and demographics. Experts were allowed to explore
the tool for a maximum of 20 minutes with the think-aloud
protocol. After experts were satisﬁed with their conclusion
(if the NN was biased or not), they were directed to a post-

session survey and semi-structured interview asking if they
believed their version of CEB’s NN was biased and to pro-
vide evidence. Experts were encouraged to go back to the
tool to refer to their evidence when speaking about it. Each
session was also recorded and transcribed. To analyze the
data, researchers reviewed the transcripts and survey data.
Findings
A breakdown of our experts is shown in Tab. 2. We included
two AI/ML experts in order to verify the scientiﬁc accuracy
of our tool. The remaining experts we interviewed belong
to our target user group - non-AI experts (non-experts in
short). Overall, CEB was well received by the experts. Ex-
perts commented on how this tool would help users to get
a quick intuition on if bias was present. “It is a good visu-
alization... it helps create intuitions in your head. Now you
actually want to test those intuitions, right?” [E4] Experts
also commented on wanting more tools embedded in the vi-
sualization to analyze what other features may inﬂuence the
NN’s score. All experts were able to identify bias through
the counterfactual example. This identiﬁcation was made
easier by the abstraction of datapoints into clusters. How-
ever, how the datapoints were clustered, based on activa-
tions or features, confused some experts.
#
Expertise
E1
Professor of
Sociology
E2
UX Research
Director
E3
UX Research
Director
E4
AI/ML Research
Scientist
E5
Professor of AI/ML
E6
HCI Research
Scientist
Table 2: Expert reference
numbers, position, and expertise.
Counterfactual Example: Identifying bias through the
comparison of the original and ﬂipped clusters was facil-
itated using the y-coordinates of the clusters. All experts
were able to isolate the change in the clusters’ scores and
conclude the presence of bias. Experts commented that
the design choice to see NN scores go up or down on this
axis was intuitive and provided jumping-off points to build
a hypothesis for further exploration. Experts who skipped
through ﬁrst views and quickly went to the Single view re-
ported a better mental model of the redistribution of the
datapoints from the original to the ﬂipped clusters [E3, E5,
E6] than those who spent more time on the ﬁrst views [E1,
E2, E4]. These latter experts were confused about whether
the datapoints stayed in their original clusters with their fea-
ture ﬂipped or the datapoints ﬂipped and moved to different
clusters. Seeing the Single view’s animation of the original
datapoints being redistributed into the counterfactual clus-
ters assisted experts in this understanding. Experts who
spent more time on the ﬁrst views without the animation of
datapoints were unclear on what differences the counterfac-
tual example presented. The confusion was resolved for all
experts in the Single view.
After using the y-axis to hypothesize bias, experts would
rely on the clusters’ score from the NN as more concrete
evidence of bias. Second to this, experts relied on the path
scores (Fig. 2) to isolate the speciﬁc score changes for
men and women in these clusters. Unfortunately, the path
scores were not noticed by all experts immediately [E2] or
ever [E6] since the scores only appeared when hovering
over the arrows between clusters in the Single view. For
the experts who did ﬁnd it, they heavily relied on the scores
as evidence of bias as well. The counterfactual clusters
showed the averaged score of reclustered datapoints. E4
commented that the path scores allowed users to see more
speciﬁc scores of the datapoints being reclustered to isolate
bias. For example, the path scores allow a user to see a
group of men being ﬂipped to women and then seeing their
original score was higher as men than as women.
Abstraction: Experts found abstraction individual data-
points to activation clusters necessary in exploring and
comparing the number of datapoints. However, since clus-
tering features is a common approach, some experts were
confused about how the clusters were formed. Experts with
an AI background [E4, E5] were more likely to identify the
clusters were based on the NN’s activations. Experts with-

out this expertise took longer to identify how these clusters
were formed. E1 desired more explanation on why these
were the most prominent clusters and wanted more context
on how they were made.
This issue was exacerbated by the natural language de-
scriptions highlighting the cluster’s average datapoint (Fig. 1).
This natural language was an important handle for experts
to refer to the clusters to compare them. However, since
the descriptions refer to features, this strengthened the con-
fusion on whether clustering was based on activations or
features. It is unclear if non-experts without this exposure
to automated clustering would experience this same con-
fusion. E1 suggested to add more explanation as to why
these features were selected to demonstrate their impact
on the cluster formation, if any.
Other Comments: Experts did enjoy the design and UX of
CEB and felt non-AI-experts would ﬁnd it engaging and not
overwhelming. Experts felt building tools such as this were
crucial and "highly necessary...to work on explainability of
neural networks and also to make tools for understanding
bias." [E5] E5 commented that the UX felt like a guided ex-
ploration mimicking working with data. Experts provided
several other comments on CEB as well. E4 pointed out
that CEB does not inform users from where users the bias
comes. For example, if the bias comes from the dataset
or the NN’s model. A majority of experts [E1, E4, E5, E6]
requested control over what feature the counterfactual ex-
ample presented to explore other biases.
Discussion & Conclusion
Overall, we found experts believed our tool – using ab-
straction and counterfactual examples – was a feasible
approach to assist non-experts in detecting biased algo-
rithms. The next step in our iterative design process is to
revise CEB’s design and evaluate it with non-experts. To
strengthen CEB, we will clarify 1) how clusters are formed,
and 2) how datapoints are ﬂipped and redistributed. First,
to clarifying clusters, CEB can further emphasize that the
clusters are based on what datapoints the NN “sees” as
being similar (activation). Tools visualizing activations are
typically in the image classiﬁcation domain and leverage
this visual component to convey similarity [8,24] (e.g., users
can see an image of a cat looking similar to a small dog).
Our semantic domain does not have the same advantage of
being inherently visual. CEB can instead rely on metaphors
of the NN “believing” datapoints are similar to help over-
come this. The features can be presented as what the NN
was trained with to come to these beliefs. Animation can
be leveraged to demonstrate grouping datapoints based on
this “belief” when introducing the clusters. Second, to clarify
datapoint distribution, the animation seen in the Single view
can be used in the Compare view to build in the counterfac-
tual clusters and show how the clusters are formed. Lastly,
we believe that the clusters can include more visual infor-
mation to help users understand the characteristics of the
datapoints it entails. For example, similar to Ma et al. [23],
the clusters’ design can embed pie or radar charts to show
a high-level distribution of datapoints’ values across the fea-
tures. This approach could also help lessen the negative
impact of the natural language descriptions.
In summary, we presented our approach for facilitating non-
AI-experts to discover diases in NN through our tool CEB. It
attempts to do so by counterfactual examples and abstrac-
tion through clustering NN’s activations. Current limitations
are that it only presents one biased dataset, one feature
change, and a relatively small dataset. Future versions of
CEB will present both bias and non-biased datasets. Impor-
tant future work also includes studying how to guide non-
experts’ exploration of large datasets with more features.
