Presented at AAAI-16 conference, February 12-17, 2016, Phoenix, Arizona USA
Deep Tracking: Seeing Beyond Seeing Using Recurrent Neural Networks
Peter Ondr´uˇska and Ingmar Posner
Mobile Robotics Group, University of Oxford, United Kingdom

Abstract
This paper presents to the best of our knowledge the
ﬁrst end-to-end object tracking approach which directly
maps from raw sensor input to object tracks in sensor
space without requiring any feature engineering or sys-
tem identiﬁcation in the form of plant or sensor models.
Speciﬁcally, our system accepts a stream of raw sensor
data at one end and, in real-time, produces an estimate
of the entire environment state at the output including
even occluded objects. We achieve this by framing the
problem as a deep learning task and exploit sequence
models in the form of recurrent neural networks to learn
a mapping from sensor measurements to object tracks.
In particular, we propose a learning method based on a
form of input dropout which allows learning in an un-
supervised manner, only based on raw, occluded sen-
sor data without access to ground-truth annotations. We
demonstrate our approach using a synthetic dataset de-
signed to mimic the task of tracking objects in 2D laser
data – as commonly encountered in robotics applica-
tions – and show that it learns to track many dynamic
objects despite occlusions and the presence of sensor
noise.
Introduction
As we demand more from our robots the need arises for them
to operate in increasingly complex, dynamic environments
where scenes – and objects of interest – are often only par-
tially observable. However, successful decision making typ-
ically requires complete situational awareness. Commonly
this problem is tackled by a processing pipeline which uses
separate stages of object detection and tracking, both of
which require considerable hand-engineering. Classical ap-
proaches to object tracking in highly dynamic environments
require the speciﬁcation of plant and observation models as
well as robust data association.
In recent years neural networks and deep learning ap-
proaches have revolutionised how we think about classiﬁ-
cation and detection in a number of domains (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Szegedy, Toshev, and Erhan
2013). The often unreasonable effectiveness of such ap-
proaches is commonly attributed to both an ability to learn
Copyright c⃝2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
What the robot sees
True world state y
x
t
t
Recurrent neural network
Robot sensor
Figure 1: Often a robot’s sensors provide only partial ob-
servations of the surrounding environment. In this work we
leverage a recurrent neural network to effectively reveal oc-
cluded parts of a scene by learning to track objects from raw
sensor data – thereby effectively reversing the sensing pro-
cess.
relevant representations directly from raw data as well as
a vastly increased capacity for function approximation af-
forded by the depth of the networks (Bengio 2009).
In this work we propose a framework for deep track-
ing, which effectively provides an off-the-shelf solution for
learning the dynamics of complex environments directly
from raw sensor data and mapping it to an intuitive repre-
sentation of a complete and unoccluded scene around the
robot as illustrated in Figure 1.
To achieve this we leverage Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs), which were recently demonstrated to be able to
effectively handle sequence data (Graves 2013; Sutskever,
Hinton, and Taylor 2009). In particular we consider a com-
plete yet uninterpretable hidden state of the world and then
train the network end-to-end to update its belief of this state
using a sequence of partial observations and map it back into
an interpretable unoccluded scene. This gives the network a
freedom to optimally deﬁne the content of the hidden state

Presented at AAAI-16 conference, February 12-17, 2016, Phoenix, Arizona USA
and the considered operations without the need of any hand-
engineering.
We demonstrate that such a system can be trained in an
entirely unsupervised manner based only on raw sensor data
and without the need for supervisor annotation. To the best
of our knowledge this is the ﬁrst time such a system has
been demonstrated and we believe our work will provide a
new paradigm for an end-to-end tracking. In particular, our
contributions can be summarized as follows:
• A novel, end-to-end way of ﬁltering partial observations
of dynamic scenes using recurrent neural networks to pro-
vide a full, unoccluded scene estimation.
• A new method of unsupervised training based on a novel
form of dropout encouraging the network to correctly pre-
dict objects in unobserved spaces.
• A compelling demonstration and attached video 1 of the
method in a synthesised scenario of a robot tracking
the state of the surrounding environment populated by
many moving objects. The network directly accepts un-
processed raw sensor inputs and learns to predict posi-
tions of all objects in real time even through complete
sensor occlusions and noise 2.
Deep Tracking
Formally, our goal is to predict the current, un-occluded
scene around the robot given the sequence of sensor observa-
tions, i.e. to model P(yt|x1:t) where yt ∈RN is a discrete-
time stochastic process with unknown dynamics modelling
the scene around the robot containing other static and dy-
namic objects and xt ⊆yt are the sensor measurements of
directly visible scene parts. We use encoding xt = {vt, rt}
where {vi
t, zi
t} = {1, yi
t} if i-th element of yt is observed
and {0, 0} otherwise. Moreover, as the scene changes the
robot can observe different parts of the scene at different
times.
In general, this problem cannot be solved effectively if the
process yt is purely random and unpredictable, as in such a
case there is no way to determine the unobserved elements
of yt. In practice, however, the sequences yt and xt exhibit
structural and temporal regularities which can be exploited
for effective prediction. For example, objects tend to follow
certain motion patterns and have certain appearance. This
allows the behaviour of the objects to be estimated when
they are visible, such that this knowledge can be used later
for prediction when they become occluded.
Deep tracking leverages recurrent neural networks to ef-
fectively model P(yt|x1:t). In the remainder of this section
we ﬁrst describe the probabilistic model assumed to underly
the sensing process before detailing how RNNs can be used
for tracking.
The Model
Like many approaches to object tracking, our model is in-
spired by Bayesian ﬁltering (Chen 2003). Note, however,
1Video is available at: https://youtu.be/cdeWCpfUGWc
2The source code of our experiments is available at:
http://mrg.robots.ox.ac.uk/mrg people/peter-ondruska/
h0
h1
h2
y1
y2
x1
x2
h3
ht
y3
yt
x3
xt
Figure 2: The assumed graphical model of the genera-
tive process. World dynamics are modelled by the hidden
Markov process ht with appearance yt which is partially ob-
served by sensor measurements xt.
the process yt does not satisfy the Markov property: Even
knowledge of yt at any particular time t provides only partial
information about the state of the world such as object posi-
tions, but does not contain all necessary information such as
their speed or acceleration required for prediction. The latter
can be obtained only by relating subsequent measurements.
Methods such as the Hidden Markov Model (Rabiner 1989)
are therefore not directly applicable.
To handle this problem we assume the generative model
in Figure 2 such that alongside yt there exists another un-
derlying Markov process, ht, which completely captures the
state of the world with the joint probability density
P(y1:N, x1:N, h1:N) =
N
Y
t=1
P(xt|yt)P(yt|ht)P(ht|ht−1),
(1)
where
• P(ht|ht−1) denotes the hidden state transition probability
capturing the dynamics of the world;
• P(yt|ht) is modelling the instantaneous unoccluded sen-
sor space;
• and P(xt|yt) describes the actual sensing process.
The task of estimating P(yt|x1:t) can now be framed in the
context of recursive Bayesian estimation (Bergman 1999) of
the belief Bt which, at any point in time t, corresponds to a
distribution Bel(ht) = P(ht|x1:t). This belief can be com-
puted recursively for the considered model as
Bel−(ht)
=
Z
ht−1
P(ht|ht−1)Bel(ht−1)
(2)
Bel(ht)
∝
Z
yt
P(xt|yt)P(yt|ht)Bel−(ht)
(3)
where Bel−(ht) denotes belief prediction one time step into
the future and Bel(ht) denotes the corrected belief after the
latest measurement has become available. P(yt|x1:t) in turn
can then be expressed simply using this belief,
P(yt|x1:t)
=
Z
ht
P(yt|ht)Bel(ht).
(4)

Presented at AAAI-16 conference, February 12-17, 2016, Phoenix, Arizona USA
Raw occluded
sensor input
Filtered
output
Recurrent
neural network
t = 1
t = 2
t = 3
y1
B1
B2
B3
y2
y3
x1
x2
x3
B0
Figure 3: An illustration of the ﬁltering process using a re-
current neural network.
Filtering Using a Recurrent Neural Network
Computation of P(yt|x1:t) is carried easily by iteratively up-
dating the current belief Bt
Bt = F(Bt−1, xt)
(5)
deﬁned by Equations 2,3 and simultaneously providing pre-
diction
P(yt|x1:t) = P(yt|Bt)
(6)
deﬁned by equation 4. Moreover, instead of yt the same
method can be used to predict any state in the future
P(yt+n|x1:t) by providing empty observations of the form
x(t+1):(t+n) = ∅.
For realistic applications this approach is, however, lim-
ited by the need for the suitable belief state representation as
well as the explicit knowledge of the distributions in Equa-
tion 1 modelling the generative process.
The key idea of our solution is to avoid the need to spec-
ify this knowledge and instead use a highly expressive neu-
ral networks, governed by weights WF and WP , to model
both F(Bt−1, xt) and P(yt|Bt) allowing to learn their func-
tion directly from the data. Speciﬁcally, we assume Bt can
be approximated and represented as a vector, Bt ∈RM. As
illustrated in Figure 3, the function F is then simply a re-
current mapping from RM × R2N →RM corresponding
to an implementation by a Feed-Forward Recurrent Neural
Network (Medsker and Jain 2001) where the Bt acts as the
network’s memory passed from one time step to the next.
Importantly, we do not impose any restrictions on the con-
tent or function of this hidden representation. Provided both
networks for F(Bt, xt) and P(yt|Bt) are differentiable they
can be trained together end-to-end as a single recurrent net-
work with a cost function directly corresponding to the data
likelihood provided in Equation 4. This allows the neural
networks to adapt to each other and to learn an optimal hid-
den state representation for Bt together with procedures for
belief updates using partial observations xt and to use this
information to decode the ﬁnal scene state yt. Training of
the network is detailed in the next section while the concrete
architecture used for our experiment is discussed as a part of
the Experimental Results.
Training
The network can be trained both in a supervised mode, i.e.
with both known y1:N, x1:N as well as in an unsupervised
mode where only x1:N is known. A common method of su-
pervised training is to minimize the negative log-likelihood
of the true scene state given the sensor input
L = −
N
X
t=1
log P(yt|x1:t)
(7)
This objective can be optimised by the gradient descent with
partial derivatives given by backpropagation through time
(Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams 1985)
∂L
∂Bt
=
∂F(Bt, xt+1)
∂Bt
·
∂L
∂Bt+1
−∂log P(yt|Bt)
∂Bt
(8)
∂L
∂WF
=
N
X
t=1
∂F(Bt−1, xt)
∂WF
· ∂L
∂Bt
(9)
∂L
∂WP
=
−
N
X
t=1
∂log P(yt|Bt)
∂WP
.
(10)
However, a major disadvantage of the supervised training
is the requirement of the ground-truth scene state yt contain-
ing parts not visible by the robot sensor. One way of obtain-
ing this information is to place additional sensors in the envi-
ronment which jointly provide information about every part
of the scene. Such an approach, however, can be impractical,
costly or even impossible. In the following section we de-
scribe a training method which only requires raw, occluded
sensor observations alone. This dramatically increases the
practicality of the method, as the only necessary learning in-
formation is a long enough record of x1:N, as obtained by
the sensor in the ﬁeld.
Unsupervised Training
The aim of unsupervised training is to learn F(Bt−1, xt) and
P(yt|Bt) using only x1:t. This might seem impossible with-
out knowledge of yt as there would be no way to correct the
network predictions. However, some values of yt as xt ⊆yt
are known in the directly observed sensor measurements. A
naive approach would be to train the network using the ob-
jective from Equation 7 of predicting the known values of yt
and not back-propagating from the unobserved ones. Such
an approach would fail, however, as the network would only
learn to copy the observed elements of xt to the output and
never predict objects in occlusion.
Instead, and crucially, we propose to train the network not
to predict the current state P(yt|x1:t) but a state in the fu-
ture P(yt+n|x1:t). In order for the network to correctly pre-
dict the visible part of the object after several time steps the
network must learn how to represent and simulate object dy-
namics during the time when the object is not seen using F
and then convert this information to predict P(yt+n|Bt+n).
This form of learning can be implemented easily by con-
sidering the cost function from Equation 7 of predicting visi-
ble elements of yt:t+n and dropping-out all xt:t+n by setting
them to 0 marking the input unobserved. This is similar to

Presented at AAAI-16 conference, February 12-17, 2016, Phoenix, Arizona USA
standard node dropout (Srivastava et al. 2014) to prevent net-
work from overﬁtting. Here, we are dropping out the obser-
vations both spatially across the entire scene and temporarily
across multiple time steps in order to prevent the network to
overﬁt to the task of simply copying over the elements. This
forces the network to learn the correct patterns.
An interesting observation demonstrated in the next sec-
tion is that even though the network is in theory trained to
predict only the future observations xt+n, in order to achieve
this the network learns to predict yt+n. We hypothesise this
is due to the tendency of the regularized network to ﬁnd the
simplest explanation for observations where it is easier to
model P(yt|Bt) than P(xt|Bt) =
R
yt P(xt|yt)P(yt|Bt).
Experimental Results
In this section we demonstrate the effectiveness of our ap-
proach in estimating the full scene state in a simulated sce-
nario representing a robot equipped with a 2D laser scanner
surrounded by many dynamic objects. Our inspiration here
is a situation of a robot in the middle of a busy street sur-
rounded by a crowd of moving people. Objects are modelled
as circles independently moving with constant velocity in a
random direction but never colliding with each other or with
the robot. The number of objects present in the scene is var-
ied over time between two and 12 as new objects randomly
appear and later disappear at a distance from the robot.
Sensor Input
At each time step we simulated the sensor input as com-
monly provided by a planar laser scanner. We divided the
scene yt around the robot using a 2D grid of 50×50 pixels
with the robot placed towards the bottom centre. To model
sensor observations xt we ray-traced the visibility of each
pixel and assigned values xi
t = {vi
t, ri
t} indicating pixel vis-
ibility (by the robot) and presence of an obstacle if the pixel
is visible. An example of the input yt and corresponding ob-
servation xt is depicted in Figure 3. Note that, as in the case
of a real sensor, only the surface of the object as seen from
particular viewpoint is ever observed. This input was then
fed to the network as a stream of 50×50 2-channel binary
images for ﬁltering.
Neural Network
To jointly model F(Bt−1, xt) and P(yt|Bt) we used a small
feed-forward recurrent network as illustrated in Figure 4.
This architecture has four layers and uses convolutional op-
erations followed by a sigmoid nonlinearity as the basic in-
formation processing step at every layer. The network has in
total 11k parameters, and its hyperparameters, such as num-
ber of channels in each layer and size of the kernels, were
set by cross-validation. The belief state Bt is represented by
the 3rd layer of size 50×50×16 which is kept between time
steps.
The mapping F(Bt−1, xt) is composed of the stage of
input-preprocessing (the Encoder) followed by a stage of
hidden state propagation (the Belief tracker). The aim of the
Encoder is to analyse the sensor measurements, to perform
operations such as detecting objects directly visible to the
2
7x7 Kernel
16
8 
1
Input
Encoder
Belief
tracker
Decoder
5x5 Kernel
7x7 Kernel
t
t-1
5x5 Kernel
P(y  |B  )
t
t
F(B   , x  )
t-1
t
xt
50
50
Figure 4: The 4-layer recurrent network architecture used
for the experiment. Directly visible objects are detected in
Encoder and fed into Belief tracker to update belief Bt used
for scene deocclusion in Decoder.
sensor and to convert this information into a 50×50×8 em-
bedding as input to the Belief tracker. This information is
concatenated with the previous belief state Bt−1 and in Be-
lief tracker combined into a new belief state Bt.
Finally, P(yt|Bt) is modelled by a Bernoulli distribution
by interpreting the network ﬁnal layer output as a probabilis-
tic occupancy grid pt of the corresponding pixels being part
of an object giving rise to the total joint probability
P(yt|pt) =
Y
i
(pi
t)
yi
t(1 −pi
t)
(1−yi
t)
(11)
with its logarithm corresponding to the binary cross-entropy.
One pass through the network takes 10ms on a standard lap-
top drawing the method suitable for real-time data ﬁltering.
Training
We generated 10,000 sequences of length 200 time steps and
trained the network for a total of 50,000 iterations using
stochastic gradient descent with learning rate 0.9. The ini-
tial belief Bt was modelled as a free parameter being jointly
optimised with the network weights WF , WP .
Both supervised (i.e. when the groundtruth of yt is
known) and unsupervised training were attempted with al-
most identical results. Figure 5 illustrates the unsupervised
training progress. Initially, the network produces random
output, then it gradually learns to predict the correct shape of
the visible objects and ﬁnally it learns to track their position
even through complete occlusion. As illustrated in the at-
tached video, the fully trained network is able to conﬁdently
and correctly start tracking an object immediately after it
has seen even only a part of it and is then able to conﬁdently
keep predicting its position even through long periods of oc-
clusion.
Finally, Figure 6 shows example activations of layers
from different parts of the network. It can be seen that the
Encoder module learned to produce in one of its layers a
spike at the center of visible objects. Particularly interesting
is the learned structure of the belief state. Here, the network
learned to represent hypotheses of objects having different

Presented at AAAI-16 conference, February 12-17, 2016, Phoenix, Arizona USA
t = 1
t = 2
t = 3
t = 4
true positive
false positive
false negative
true negative (visible)
true negative (occluded)
Network output
Network input
1000
Training cost
100
200
500
10,000
20,000
30,000
40,000
50,000
Iteration
Figure 5: The unsupervised training progress. From left to right, the network ﬁrst learns to complete objects and then it learns
to track the objects through occlusions. Some situations can not be predicted correctly such as the object in occlusion on the
fourth frame not seen before. Note, the ground-truth for comparison was used only for evaluation, but not during the training.
motion patterns with different patterns of unit activations
and to track this pattern from frame to frame. None of this
behaviour is hard-coded and it is a pure result of the network
adaptation to the task.
Additionally we performed experiments changing the
shape of objects from circles to squares and also simulating
sensor noise on 1% of all pixel observations3. In all cases
the network correctly learned and predicted the world state,
suggesting the approach and the learning procedure is able
to perform well in a variety of scenarios. We expect more
complex cases will require networks having more intermedi-
ate layers or using different units such as LSTM (Hochreiter
and Schmidhuber 1997), however.
Related Works
Our work concerns modelling partially-observable stochas-
tic processes with a particular focus on the application
3See the attached video.
of tracking objects. This problem is commonly solved by
Bayesian ﬁltering which gives rise to tracking methods for a
variety of domains (Yilmaz, Javed, and Shah 2006). Com-
monly, in these approaches the state representation is de-
signed by hand and the prediction and correction operations
are made tractable under a number of assumptions on model
distributions or via sampling-based methods. The Kalman
ﬁlter (Kalman 1960), for example, assumes a multivariate
normal distribution to represent the belief over the latent
state leading to the well-known prediction/update equations
but limiting its expressive power. In contrast, the Particle ﬁl-
ter (Thrun, Burgard, and Fox 2005) foregoes any assump-
tions on belief distributions and employs a sample-based ap-
proach. In addition, where multiple objects are to be tracked,
correct data association is crucial for the tracking process to
succeed.
In contrast to using such hand-designed pipelines we
provide a novel end-to-end trainable solution allowing the
robot to automatically learn an appropriate belief state rep-

Presented at AAAI-16 conference, February 12-17, 2016, Phoenix, Arizona USA
Input
Encoder
Belief tracker
Decoder
t = 1
t = 2
t = 3
t = 4
t = 5
t = 6
t = 7
Figure 6: Examples of the ﬁlter activations from different parts of the network (one ﬁlter per layer). The Encoder adapts to
produce a spike at the position of directly visible objects. Interesting is the structure of the belief Bt. As highlighted by circles
in 2nd row, it adapted to assign different activation patterns to objects having different motion patterns (best viewed in colour).
resentation as well as the corresponding predict and update
operations for an environment containing multiple objects
with different appearance and potentially very complex be-
haviour. While we are not the ﬁrst to leverage the expressive
power of neural networks in the context of tracking, prior art
in this domain primarily concerned only the detection part of
the tracking pipeline (Fan et al. 2010), (J¨anen et al. 2010).
A full neural network pipeline requires the ability to learn
and simulate the dynamics of the underlying system state in
the absence of measurements such as when the tracked ob-
ject becomes occluded. Modelling complex dynamic scenes
however requires modelling distributions of exponentially-
large state representations such as real-valued vectors hav-
ing thousands of elements. A pivotal work to model high-
dimensional sequences was based on using Temporal Re-
stricted Boltzman Machines (Sutskever and Hinton 2007;
Sutskever, Hinton, and Taylor 2009; Mittelman et al. 2014).
This generative model allows modelling the joint distribu-
tion of P(y, x). The downside of using an RBM, however,
is the need of sampling, making the inference and learning
computationally expensive. In our work, we assume an un-
derlying generative model but, in the spirit of Conditional
Random Fields (Lafferty, McCallum, and Pereira 2001) we
directly model only P(y|x). Instead of RBM our archi-
tecture features Feed-forward Recurrent Neural Networks
(Medsker and Jain 2001; Graves 2013) making the inference
and weight gradients computation exact using a standard
back-propagation learning procedure (Rumelhart, Hinton,
and Williams 1988). Moreover, unlike undirected models,
a feed-forward network allows the freedom to straightfor-
wardly apply a wide variety of network architectures such as
fully-connected layers and LSTM (Hochreiter and Schmid-
huber 1997) to design the network. Our used architecture is
similar to recent Encoder-Recurrent-Decoder (Fragkiadaki
et al. 2015) and similarly to (Shi et al. 2015) which features
convolutions for spatial processing.
Conclusions
In this work we presented Deep Tracking, an end-to-end ap-
proach using recurrent neural networks to map directly from
raw sensor data to an interpretable yet hidden sensor space,
and employ it to predict the unoccluded state of the entire
scene in a simulated 2D sensing application. The method
avoids any hand-crafting of plant or sensor models and in-
stead learns the corresponding models directly from raw,
occluded sensor data. The approach was demonstrated on
a synthetic dataset where it achieved highly faithful recon-
structions of the underlying world model.
As future work our aim is to evaluate Deep Tracking on
real data gathered by robots in a variety of situations such as
pedestrianised areas or in the context of autonomous driving
in the presence of other trafﬁc participants. In both situa-
tions knowledge of the likely unoccluded scene is a pivotal
requirement for robust robot decision making. We further in-
tend to extend our approach to different modalities such as
3D point-cloud data and depth cameras.

Presented at AAAI-16 conference, February 12-17, 2016, Phoenix, Arizona USA
