To appear in Theory and Practice of Logic Programming (TPLP)
1
The role of semantics
in mining frequent patterns from knowledge bases
in description logics with rules
JOANNA J´OZEFOWSKA, AGNIESZKA  LAWRYNOWICZ, TOMASZ  LUKASZEWSKI
Institute of Computing Science, Poznan University of Technology,
ul. Piotrowo 2, 60-965 Poznan, Poland

Category: Regular Paper, Guest editors: Letizia Tanca and Giorgio Orsi
submitted 24 April 2009; revised 15 November 2009; accepted 1 January 2010
Abstract
We propose a new method for mining frequent patterns in a language that combines both
Semantic Web ontologies and rules. In particular we consider the setting of using a lan-
guage that combines description logics with DL-safe rules. This setting is important for
the practical application of data mining to the Semantic Web. We focus on the relation
of the semantics of the representation formalism to the task of frequent pattern discovery,
and for the core of our method, we propose an algorithm that exploits the semantics of the
combined knowledge base. We have developed a proof-of-concept data mining implemen-
tation of this. Using this we have empirically shown that using the combined knowledge
base to perform semantic tests can make data mining faster by pruning useless candidate
patterns before their evaluation. We have also shown that the quality of the set of patterns
produced may be improved: the patterns are more compact, and there are fewer patterns.
We conclude that exploiting the semantics of a chosen representation formalism is key to
the design and application of (onto-)relational frequent pattern discovery methods.
Note: To appear in Theory and Practice of Logic Programming (TPLP).
KEYWORDS: frequent pattern discovery, ontologies, Semantic Web, DL-safe rules
1 Introduction
The discovery of frequent patterns is a fundamental data mining task. It has been
studied for many diﬀerent forms of input data and the pattern. Within the relational
setting it has been investigated since the development of WARMR (Dehaspe and
Toivonen 1999). WARMR uses the Datalog subset of ﬁrst-order logic (FOL) as the
representation language for both data and patterns. As such, WARMR, and other
subsequently proposed relational frequent pattern miners, FARMER (Nijssen and
Kok 2001; Nijssen and Kok 2003) and c-armr (de Raedt and Ramon 2004), can
be classiﬁed as Inductive Logic Programming (ILP) (Nienhuys-Cheng and de Wolf
1997; Dzeroski and Lavrac 2001) methods. These ILP systems have been success-
fully applied to a number of domains, most notably bioinformatics (King et al.
arXiv:1003.2700v2  [cs.LO]  1 Apr 2010

2
J. J´ozefowska and A.  Lawrynowicz and T.  Lukaszewski
2000a; King et al. 2000b; King et al. 2001) and chemoinformatics (Dehaspe et al.
1998).
While relational frequent pattern mining methods have mostly assumed Datalog
as the representation language, currently most activity within the ﬁeld of knowl-
edge representation (KR) assumes the use of logic-based ontology languages such as
description logics (DLs) (Baader et al. 2003). Thanks to its signiﬁcant support for
modelling ontologies, and suitability to the inherently open and incomplete nature
of the Web environment, description logic has been chosen as the formal founda-
tion of the standard ontology language for the Web, the Web Ontology Language
(OWL) (McGuinness and van Harmelen 2004). OWL is now considered one of the
fundamental technologies underpinning the Semantic Web (Berners-Lee et al. 2001),
currently one of the most active application ﬁelds of artiﬁcial intelligence.
Research in KR is focused on developing deductive reasoning procedures, which
are also traditionally employed to reason with logic-based ontological data. How-
ever, to meet the challenges posed by the Semantic Web scale and use cases, such
deductive approaches are not enough. Therefore, there is a recent trend in Semantic
Web research to propose complementary forms of reasoning that are more eﬃcient
and noise-tolerant. A promising approach in this area is to use inductive methods to
complement deductive ones. This is in line with the recent trends in ILP research to
broaden the scope of the logical formalisms considered to description logics, or hy-
brid languages combining description logics with logic programs. Since description
logic knowledge bases are often equated with ontologies, ILP methods applied to
such knowledge bases have been referred to as ”ontology mining” methods (Fanizzi
and d’Amato 2006; Fanizzi et al. 2008; d’Amato et al. 2008), and the ones applied
to the hybrid knowledge bases to as ”onto-relational mining” methods (Lisi and
Esposito 2008). To the best of our knowledge, only one onto-relational frequent
pattern mining method, SPADA (Lisi and Malerba 2004), has been proposed.
This paper describes a method for frequent pattern mining in knowledge bases
represented in the formalism of DL-safe rules (Motik et al. 2005) that combine
Semantic Web ontologies (represented in description logic) and rules (represented
in disjunctive Datalog). This language meets the requirements of knowledge rep-
resentation for the Semantic Web and target application domains, and possesses
properties suitable for data mining applications. In the core of the method, we
propose an algorithm that exploits at various steps the semantics of a combined
knowledge base on which it operates. We show how to realize the proposed method
in terms of exploiting state-of-the-art reasoning techniques, and present a proof-
of-concept implementation of the method. For Semantic Web research, the paper
contributes to the general understanding of the role of ontologies and semantics in
helping to solve knowledge-intensive tasks by exploiting the meaning of the repre-
sented knowledge. For ILP data mining research, the method’s main novel feature
is its exploitation of the semantics of the chosen language.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 disusses a technical and an
application-oriented motivation of the work. In Section 3 we introduce the basics of
knowledge representation formalisms considered in this paper, and the problem of
frequent pattern mining from combined knowledge bases. In Section 4 we present

The role of semantics in mining frequent patterns
3
our method for mining frequent patterns. In Section 5 we present the experimen-
tal evaluation of the proposed approach. Section 6 contains the discussion of the
related work. Finally, Section 7 concludes the paper, and outlines future work.
2 Motivation
2.1 The Setting
The problem of combining ontologies with rules is central in the Semantic Web. In
the current stack of the Semantic Web languages, rules are placed in the same layer
as ontologies. There is an ongoing initiative to deﬁne an open format for rule inter-
change on the Semantic Web, the Rule Interchange Format (RIF)1, that will cover
a wide spectrum of rule types, among them deductive rules represented in Datalog.
As we will discuss further in the paper, some important application domains such
as life sciences require a language that combines description logic with some form
of Datalog rules.
Since a straightforward combination of DL and rules may easily lead to the un-
decidability of reasoning problems, the problem of developing such combinations
has received a lot of attention in KR and Semantic Web research. This has resulted
in several proposals which may be generally divided into the following approaches:
interaction of rules and ontologies with strict semantic separation (loose coupling),
interaction of rules and ontologies with strict semantic integration (tight coupling),
and reductions from DLs to logic programming formalisms.
In the ﬁrst approach, adopted by dl-programs (Eiter et al. 2004a; Eiter et al.
2004b; Eiter et al. 2008), DL and rule components are technically separate, and
can be seen as black boxes communicating via ”safe interface”.
In the second type of approach, ”safe interaction”, rules and DL knowledge bases
are combined in a common semantic framework. A straightforward, tight extension
of DL with ﬁrst-order implication as proposed for Semantic Web Rule Language
(SWRL) in (Horrocks et al. 2004), is trivially undecidable. On the other hand,
Description Logic Programs (DLP) (Grosof et al. 2003) describe a decidable inter-
section of description logic and logic programs. In between of these two opposite
approaches, there is a group of proposals such as AL-log (Donini et al. 1998),
CARIN (Levy and Rousset 1998), DL-safe rules (Motik et al. 2005) or DL+log
(Rosati 2006) where to obtain decidability, either DL, or rules or both are typically
constrained by various syntactic restrictions, e.g. in the form of a safety condition.
However, the usual syntactic restrictions may also be dropped, through changing
the usual perspective of the integration from DLs to the perspective of rule-based
systems, as proposed in (Lukasiewicz 2007) for the case of a tightly integrated form
of disjunctive dl-programs. Finally, the tight integration may also become a full
one, as in hybrid MKNF knowledge bases (Motik and Rosati 2007), where there is
no separation between vocabularies of a DL and rule component.
1 http://www.w3.org/2005/rules/wiki/RIF Working Group

4
J. J´ozefowska and A.  Lawrynowicz and T.  Lukaszewski
An interesting representative approach for the works consisting on reducing de-
scription logics to logic programming is proposed in (Hustadt et al. 2004; Hustadt
et al. 2007) for an expressive DL language SHIQ. In that approach, the consistency
checking and query answering is reduced to the evaluation of a positive disjunctive
Datalog program, which is obtained by a translation of a description logic knowl-
edge base to ﬁrst-order logic, followed by an application of superposition techniques,
and the elimination of function symbols from the resulting set of clauses.
Despite of the desired expressivity, there are also other important requirements
for a language to be used in frequent pattern mining applications, which are data-
intensive in nature. In the last decade, the focus of KR research has been mostly on
developing reasoning techniques for handling complex DL intensional knowledge,
and on decidability issues. However, new Semantic Web applications require eﬃ-
cient scalable procedures for query answering over ontologies, which now becomes
an intensively explored area of research. Scalability may be achieved by restricting
features of a DL language to obtain a lightweight one, but tailored for data-intensive
applications, as in the case of a tractable family of lanuages called DL-Lite (Cal-
vanese et al. 2007). An interesting recent study into this direction is presented in
(Cal`ı et al. 2009), where a family of expressive extensions of Datalog is proposed that
generalize the DL-Lite family, e.g. by admitting existentially quantiﬁed variables
in rule heads. The requirement for eﬃcient query answering over large amounts of
data (extensional knowledge) is crucial for frequent pattern mining applications.
Taking into account both criteria, that is suﬃciently interesting expressivity re-
quired for real applications, and eﬃcient query answering procedures, one combina-
tion of DLs and rules with interesting properties is the formalism of DL-safe rules
(Motik et al. 2005). In this formalism decidability is obtained by restricting the rules
to DL-safe ones that are applicable only to instances explicitly known by name. As
it was shown in (Hustadt et al. 2004; Hustadt et al. 2007), the restriction to DL-
safety enables the transformation of a DL knowledge base to a disjunctive Datalog
program. This in turn enables the application of well-known reasoning algorithms
and optimization techniques (such as magic-sets or join-order optimizations) de-
veloped for deductive databases in order to handle large data quantities. Some of
these methods have recently been extended for disjunctive Datalog (Cumbo et al.
2004). The algorithm proposed in (Motik et al. 2005) for query answering in DL
with DL-safe rules separates reasoning on the intensional part of a knowledge base
from that on the extensional part, which means that the inferences made on the in-
tensional part are not repeated for diﬀerent instances during query answering. This
in turn enables better complexity results for the query answering algorithm than
in case of the other state-of-the-art reasoning techniques developed for expressive
DLs (Hustadt et al. 2005; Motik and Sattler 2006). It should be noted that, if the
translation does not generate any disjunctive rules, then the algorithm applies the
least ﬁxpoint operator used to evaluate non-disjunctive Datalog programs. Since the
consequences of the least ﬁxpoint operator can be computed in polynomial time,
an important feature of the algorithm is that its behaviour becomes tractable while
it is applied for less expressive languages.

The role of semantics in mining frequent patterns
5
The discussed features make the chosen DL-safe rules formalism suitable for the
envisaged frequent pattern mining applications.
2.2 Possible applications
The primary motivation for our work is for the application of our method to real-
world data-mining applications. Arguably the most extensive use of Semantic Web
KR methods is in the domain of biology. Large amounts of data are increasingly
becoming openly available and described using real-life ontologies, represented in
Semantic Web languages, such as GO (Gene Ontology)2 or BioPax (biological path-
way knowledge)3. This opens up the possibility for interesting large-scale and real-
world onto-relational data mining applications.
Below we will describe why KR in biology requires a language able to model the
existence of unknown entities, disjunctions, and arbitrary composition of relations,
that is a language that combines description logic with some form of Datalog rules.
These requirements are a domain speciﬁc motivation for our language selection.
Information stored in biological knowledge bases is inherently incomplete. For
example, in functional genomics ”every protein has a function”, but often this
function is unknown. Similarly, it is known that certain genes exist because they
encode known proteins, but the identity of these genes are unknown (so-called ”lo-
cally orphan” genes). The existence of entities with unknown identity can be easily
represented in description logic4, while it cannot be represented in Datalog.
Another way of modelling incompletness is by use of disjunction, what is not
expressible in Datalog. For example, disjunction may be used to describe that one
instance of certain tertiary structure units must be present in a protein (”a classical
tyrosine phosphatase has at least one low molecular weight phosphotyrosine or one
tyrosine speciﬁc with dual speciﬁcity p-domain”(Stevens et al. 2007)).
In general, DLs employ the open-world assumption (OWA) which seems suit-
able for a domain characterized by information that is incomplete either due to the
limits in the current state of knowledge or due to omissions common in curation
processes. OWA is closely related to the monotonic form of reasoning, classically
assumed in FOL. The monotonicity of reasoning in DLs is in line with the need
for the knowledge held in scientiﬁc knowledge bases to only comprise information
that is generally accepted and experimentally validated, and, which is reasonable
to assume, will not be falsiﬁed. For example, one may state that ”In E. coli K-12,
the protein encoded by the gene ECK0647 when in inner membrane, facilitates the
transport of glutamate from the periplasm to the cytoplasm.”5 (Ruttenberg et al.
2005). This statement does not provide the reference to a particular enzyme and
any information whether the transport is active or passive. If we subsequently learn
such information, this does not change any positive or negative conclusions. Since
2 http://www.geneontology.org
3 http://www.biopax.org
4 Protein ⊑∃hasFunction
5 inMembrane ⊓inCytoplasm ⊑⊥, ECK0647 Protein ⊑inCytoplasm, glutamateTransport ⊑
∃participant.ECK0647 Protein ⊓inMembrane

6
J. J´ozefowska and A.  Lawrynowicz and T.  Lukaszewski
it is characteristic of the current state of biology that much information is only
known to a certain degree, the monotonicity of reasoning in DLs allows scientiﬁc
knowledge bases to be extensible and evolve with scientiﬁc knowledge.
However, while possessing features which are not available in Datalog, description
logic also has limitations. It does not allow relations of arbitrary arity and arbi-
trary composition of relations. Assume for example, that we would like to express
that ”whenever a metal ion is bound to a phosphatase which catalyses a dephos-
phorylation of some protein, then this ion regulates the dephosphorylation of this
protein”(Stevens et al. 2007)6. It requires modelling that a composition of relations
implies another relation, which may be expressed in the form of a rule.
The above arguments show the need for languages combining description logic
with some form of rules in the discussed ﬁeld, and the DL-safe rules formalism
meets all the necessary requirements for expressivity. It is also interesting to note
here, that in (Ruttenberg et al. 2005), while discussing problems concerned with
using description logic for modelling metabolic pathways, it has been already ar-
gued, there should be a way for modelling that certain axioms may be applied only
if there are known instances of some class. The solution to check this could be by
submitting a query with a DL-safety condition.
An interesting sample application of frequent pattern mining in the ﬁeld of bi-
ology may be in functional genomics with the goal of the identiﬁcation of frequent
patterns in the amino acid sequence descriptions. The results would be further used
to generate rules for predicting protein functional class. Such an approach would
constitute an onto-relational upgrade of the relational data mining application al-
ready proposed in the literature (King et al. 2000b). Another, novel application
may be in metabolic pathways analysis. The goal of the application would be to
identify common frequent pathways in human and other organisms that cause hu-
man diseases. The results of such analysis would allow for targeted drug design.
Despite of life sciences, frequent pattern mining applications on the Semantic
Web data may be valuable in many other domains. Let us take e-business as an-
other example. As rules provide a powerful business logic representation many use
cases7 provided for RIF are actually in this domain. Most value for e-business that
combinations of description logic ontologies and rules may provide is in increasing
interoperability. Description logic provide means for expressing common vocabular-
ies and domain knowledge, while rules enable to explicitely express business policies.
For example, annotation of product and service oﬀerings with terms from common
ontologies such as GoodRelations8 may enable customers and enterprises an auto-
matic search for suitable suppliers across the Web. Further, employing rules may
enable to automatically express business relations between oﬀerings and customers,
and to express business policies such as ”The discount for a customer who buys a
product is 5 percent if the customer is premium and the product is regular.”9.
6 regulates(x, y) ←metal ion(x), isBound(x, z), phosphatase(z), catalyses(z, y), dephosphorylation(y)
7 http://www.w3.org/TR/rif-ucr
8 http://www.heppnetz.de/projects/goodrelations
9 discount(x, y, percent5) ←premium(x), regular(y), buys(x, y)

The role of semantics in mining frequent patterns
7
In e-business domain, an interesting sample application of frequent pattern min-
ing may be in ﬁnding frequent customer buying behaviors to support personalisa-
tion, recommendation services and targeted marketing.
It should be stressed that for e-business applications, relatively lightweight on-
tologies may be suﬃcient, but the need for combining them with rules is essential
in this domain.
3 Preliminaries
3.1 Language of knowledge representation
In this section we introduce the language of knowledge representation based on
the formalism of DL-safe rules. Further in this paper we develop an algorithm for
frequent pattern discovery in this language. DL-safe rules combine description logics
with disjunctive Datalog, which we brieﬂy recall below.
3.1.1 Description logics
Description logics (DLs) (Baader et al. 2003) are a family of knowledge repre-
sentation languages, speciﬁcally suited to represent terminological knowledge in a
structured and formalized way. Two kinds of atomic symbols are distinguished in
any description logic language: atomic concepts (denoted by A) and atomic roles
(denoted by R and S). Atomic symbols are elementary descriptions from which we
inductively build complex descriptions (denoted by C and D) using concept con-
structors and role constructors. Description logics diﬀer by the set of constructors
they admit.
DLs are equipped with a logic-based model-theoretic semantics. The semantics is
deﬁned by interpretations I = (∆I, ·I), where the non-empty set ∆I is the domain
of the interpretation and the interpretation function ·I assigns a set AI ⊆∆I to
every atomic concept A and a binary relation RI ⊆∆I × ∆I to every atomic role
R. The interpretation function is extended to concept descriptions by an inductive
deﬁnition. The syntax and semantics of SHIF DL is deﬁned in Table 1.
A description logic knowledge base, KB, is typically divided into an intensional
part (terminological one, TBox), and an extensional part (assertional one, ABox).
The TBox contains axioms dealing with how concepts and roles are related to each
other (terminological axioms), while the ABox contains assertions about individuals
(assertional axioms). A semantics is given to ABoxes by extending interpretations
I = (∆I, ·I) by an additional mapping of each individual name a to an element
aI ∈∆I. The interpretation I satisﬁes a set of axioms (a TBox T or/and an ABox
A) iﬀit satisﬁes each element of this set.
3.1.2 Disjunctive Datalog
Disjunctive Datalog (Eiter et al. 1997) is an extension of Datalog that allows dis-
junctions of literals in the rule heads.

8
J. J´ozefowska and A.  Lawrynowicz and T.  Lukaszewski
Table 1: Syntax and semantics of SHIF.
Constructor
Syntax
Semantics
Concept constructors
Universal concept
⊤
∆I
Bottom concept
⊥
∅
Negation of arbitrary concepts
(¬C)
∆I\C I
Intersection
(C ⊓D)
C I ∩DI
Union
(C ⊔D)
C I ∪DI
Value restriction
(∀R.C)
{a ∈∆I|∀b : (a, b) ∈RI →b ∈C I}
Full existential quantiﬁcation
(∃R.C)
{a ∈∆I|∃b : (a, b) ∈RI ∧b ∈C I}
Functionality
≤1R

a ∈∆I |{b|(a, b) ∈RI}| ≤1

Role constructors
Inverse role
R−
{(a, b) ∈∆I × ∆I|(b, a) ∈RI}
Transitive role
Trans(R)
RI is transitive
Deﬁnition 1 (Disjunctive Datalog rule)
A disjunctive Datalog rule is a clause of the form
H1 ∨. . . ∨Hk ←B1, . . . , Bn
where Hi and Bj are atoms, and k ≥1, n ≥0. □
Deﬁnition 2 (Disjunctive logic program)
A disjunctive logic program P is a ﬁnite collection of disjunctive Datalog rules. □
We consider only disjunctive Datalog programs without negative literals in the
body, that is, positive programs.
For the semantics, only Herbrand models are considered, and the semantics of
P is deﬁned by the set of all minimal models M of P, denoted by MM(P). A
ground literal L is called a cautious answer of P, written P |=c L, if L ∈M for
all M ∈MM(P). FOL entailment coincides with cautious entailment for positive
ground atoms on positive programs.
3.1.3 DL-safe rules
We use the formalism of DL-safe rules introduced in (Motik et al. 2005). The
description logic SHIF and disjunctive Datalog rules are integrated by allowing
concepts and roles to occur in rules as unary and binary predicates, respectively.
Below we deﬁne DL-safe rules with respect to the description logic SHIF and
disjunctive Datalog rules.

The role of semantics in mining frequent patterns
9
Deﬁnition 3 (DL-safe rules)
Let KB be a knowledge base represened in the SHIF language. A DL-predicate
is an atomic concept or a simple role from KB. For t1 and t2 being constants or
variables, a DL-atom is an atom of the form A(t1), where A is an atomic concept in
KB, or of the form R(t1, t2), where R is a simple role in KB, or of the form t1 = t2.
A non-DL-predicate is any other predicate than =, an atomic concept in KB, or a
role in KB. A non-DL-atom is an atom with any predicate other than =, an atomic
concept in KB, and a role in KB. A (disjunctive) DL-rule is a (disjunctive) rule with
DL- and non-DL-atoms in the head and in the body. A (disjunctive) DL-program
P is a ﬁnite set of (disjunctive) DL-rules. A combined knowledge base is a pair
(KB, P). A (disjunctive) DL-rule r is called DL-safe if each variable in r occurs in
a non-DL-atom in the rule body. A (disjunctive) DL-program P is DL-safe if all its
rules are DL-safe. □
In order to deﬁne the semantics of a combined knowledge base (KB, P), the KB
axioms are mapped into a (disjunctive) Datalog program DD(KB), which entails
exactly the same set of ground facts as KB. The details concerning the mapping can
be found in (Motik 2006; Motik and Sattler 2006). It is proved that KB is satisﬁable
with respect to the standard model-theoretic semantics of SHIF iﬀDD(KB) is
satisﬁable in ﬁrst-order logic (Motik 2006). It is also proved in (Motik 2006) that for
a combined knowledge base (KB, P) consisting of a SHIF knowledge base KB and
a ﬁnite set of DL-safe rules P, (KB, P) |= α iﬀDD(KB)∪P |= α, for a ground atom
α, where α is of the form A(a) or R(a, b), and A is an atomic concept. Therefore,
reasoning in (KB, P) can be performed using the well-known techniques from the
ﬁeld of deductive databases.
DL-safety implies that each variable is bound only to constants explicitely in-
troduced in a (KB, P). Let us consider, for example, a combined knowledge base
(KB, P) such that KB contains the concept Person and roles livesAt and worksAt,
while P contains the following rule deﬁning Homeworker as a person who lives and
works at the same place:
Homeworker(x) ←Person(x), livesAt(x, y), worksAt(x, y)
(1)
This rule is not DL-safe. It is because the variables x and y that occur in the
DL-atoms Person(x), livesAt(x, y), worksAt(x, y) do not occur in the body in any
non-DL-atom. Let us introduce a special non-DL-predicate O such that the fact
O(a) occurs for each individual a in the ABox. In order to make rule (1) DL-safe,
we add non-DL atoms O(x) and O(y) in the rule body, obtaining:
Homeworker(x) ←Person(x), livesAt(x, y), worksAt(x, y), O(x), O(y)
(2)
In order to express a DL-safe rule intuitively, we just append to the original
rule the phrase: ”where the identity of all objects is known”. The rule (2) can be
intuitively expressed as follows: ”A Homeworker is a known person who lives at and
works at the same known place”.
A combined knowledge base (KB, P) may be divided into an intensional part,
which contains knowledge independent of any speciﬁc instances, and an extensional
part, which contains factual knowledge.

10
J. J´ozefowska and A.  Lawrynowicz and T.  Lukaszewski
3.2 Problem of onto-relational frequent pattern discovery
In this subsection we formally deﬁne the problem of frequent pattern discovery
from knowledge bases represented in the DL-safe rules, as it is addressed in this
paper. Initial formulation of this problem has been presented in (J´ozefowska et al.
2005). This subsection specializes it. Let us start with an example of a combined
knowledge base (KB, P).
Example 1 (Example knowledge base (KB, P))
Given is a knowledge base (KB, P) describing bank services, presented in Table 2.
For the clarity of presentation, non-DL-predicates are denoted with preﬁx p . This
knowledge base could not be represented in description logic or Datalog alone.
Deﬁnite Horn rules require all variables to be universally quantiﬁed, and therefore
it is impossible to assert the existence of unknown individuals. For example, it is
impossible to assert that each account must have an owner. Moreover, Horn rules
are unable to represent disjunctions in rule heads, and hence, it is not possible
to model that the range of the role isOwnerOf is a disjunction of Account and
CreditCard. In description logic, in turn, it is not possible to deﬁne a ”triangle”
relationship that is modelled by the rule deﬁning p familyAccount. □
The task addressed in this paper is frequent pattern discovery. The patterns
being found in our approach have the form of conjunctive queries over the combined
knowledge base (KB, P). An answer set of a query contains individuals of a user-
speciﬁed reference concept ˆC. We assume that the queries are positive, i.e. they do
not contain any negative literals. Moreover, we assume that the queries are DL-safe.
This means that all variables in a query are bound to instances explicitly occurring
in (KB, P), even if they are not returned as a part of the query answer. In this
context a query is deﬁned as follows.
Deﬁnition 4 (Conjunctive DL-safe queries)
Let (KB, P) be a combined knowledge base in DL-safe rules with KB represented
in SHIF. Let x = {x1, . . . , xm} be a set of undistinguished variables (the variables
whose bindings are not a part of the answer) and key be the only distinguished
variable (that is the variable whose bindings are returned in the answer). A con-
junctive query Q(key, x) over (KB, P) is a rule using a special predicate name (that
does not belong to the set of names occurring in (KB, P)) in the head, and whose
body is a ﬁnite conjunction of atoms of the form B(t1, . . . , tn), where B is an n-ary
predicate (either from the KB component or from the disjunctive Datalog program
P) and ti, i = 1, . . . , n, is the distinguished variable key or a variable from x. A
conjunctive query Q(key, x) is DL-safe if each variable occurring in a DL-atom also
occurs in a non-DL atom in Q(key, x).
The inference problems for conjunctive queries are deﬁned as follows:
• Query answering: An answer to a query Q(key, x) w.r.t. (KB, P) is an assign-
ment θ of an individual to the distinguished variable key such that (KB, P) |=
∃x : Q(keyθ, x).
• Query containment: A query Q2(key, x2) is contained in a query Q1(key, x1)
w.r.t. (KB, P) if (KB, P) |= ∀key : [∃x2 : Q2(key, x2) →∃x1 : Q1(key, x1)].□

The role of semantics in mining frequent patterns
11
Terminology in KB
Client ≡∃isOwnerOf
A client is deﬁned as an owner of something.
⊤⊑∀isOwnerOf .Account ⊔CreditCard
The range of isOwnerOf is a disjunction of
Account and CreditCard.
∃isOwnerOf −⊑Property
Having an owner means being a property.
Gold ⊑CreditCard
Gold is a subclass of CreditCard.
relative ≡relative−
The role relative is symmetric.
Account ⊑∃isOwnerOf −
Each account has an owner.
⊤⊑∀hasMortgage.Mortgage
The range of hasMortgage is Mortgage.
⊤⊑∀hasMortgage−.Account
The domain of hasMortgage is Account.
⊤⊑≤1hasMortgage−
A mortgage can be associated up to one ac-
count.
Account ≡¬CreditCard
Account is disjoint with CreditCard.
Rules in P
p familyAccount(x, y, z) ←Account(x),
p familyAccount is an account that is
isOwner(y, x), isOwner(z, x),
co-owned by relatives.
relative(y, z), O(x), O(y), O(z)
p sharedAccount(x, y, z) ←
Family account is a shared account.
p familyAccount(x, y, z)
p man(x) ∨p woman(x) ←Client(x), O(x) A client is a man or a woman.
Assertions in (KB, P)
p woman(Anna)
Anna is a woman.
isOwnerOf (Anna, a1)
Anna is an owner of a1.
hasMortgage(a1, m1)
Mortgage m1 is associated to account a1.
relative(Anna, Marek)
Anna is a relative of Marek.
isOwnerOf (Jan, cc1)
Jan is an owner of cc1.
CreditCard(cc1)
cc1 is a credit card.
isOwnerOf (Marek, a1)
Marek is an owner of a1.
Account(account2)
account2 is an account.
O(i) for each explicitly named individual i
Enumeration of all ABox individuals
Table 2: An example of a combined knowledge base.

12
J. J´ozefowska and A.  Lawrynowicz and T.  Lukaszewski
In our approach patterns are positive (i.e., without negative literals) conjunc-
tive DL-safe queries over the combined knowledge base (KB, P) addressing a user-
speciﬁed reference concept
ˆC. The atom with a reference concept as the predicate
contains the only distinguished variable key.
Deﬁnition 5 (Pattern)
Given is a combined knowledge base (KB, P). A pattern Q is a conjunctive, positive
DL-safe query over (KB, P) of the following form:
Q(key) =?−ˆC(key), B1, . . . , Bn, O(key), O(x1), . . . , O(xm)
where B1, . . . , Bn represent atoms of the query, Q(key) denotes that variable key
is the only distinguished variable, and x1, . . . , xm represent the undistinguished
variables of the query. Q(key) is called the head of Q, denoted head(Q), and
the conjunction
ˆC(key), B1, . . . , Bn, O(key), O(x1), . . . , O(xm) is called the body
of Q, denoted body(Q). A trivial pattern is the query of the form: Q(key) =
?−ˆC(key), O(key). □
We assume each query posseses the linkedness property, that is each variable in
the body of a query is linked to the variable key through a path of atoms.
Deﬁnition 6 (Linkedness)
A variable x is linked in a query Q iﬀx occurs in the head of Q or there is an atom
B in the body of Q that contains the variable x and a variable y (diﬀerent from
x), and y is linked. □
Examples of patterns that can be discovered from the knowlegde base introduced
in Example 1 are presented below.
Example 2 (Example patterns)
Consider the knowledge base (KB, P) from Example 1. Assuming that Client is the
reference concept ˆC, the following patterns over (KB, P), may be built:
Qref (key) =? −Client(key), O(key)
Q1(key) =? −Client(key), isOwnerOf (key, x), O(key), O(x)
Q2(key) =? −Client(key), isOwnerOf (key, x), p familyAccount(x, key, z)
Q3(key) =?−Client(key), isOwnerOf (key, x), isOwnerOf (key, y), O(key), O(x), O(y)
Q4(key) =? −Client(key), isOwnerOf (key, x), CreditCard(x), O(key), O(x)
where Qref is a reference query, counting the number of instances of ˆC. □
In order to deﬁne the task of frequent pattern discovery we need to deﬁne how
to calculate the pattern support.
Deﬁnition 7 (Support)
Let Q be a query over a combined knowledge base (KB, P), answerset( ˆC, Q, (KB, P))
be a function that returns the set of all instances of concept ˆC that satisfy query Q
with respect to (KB, P), and let Qref denote a trivial query for which the answerset
contains all instances of the reference concept ˆC in (KB, P).
A support of query Q with respect to the knowledge base (KB, P) is deﬁned as the

The role of semantics in mining frequent patterns
13
ratio between the number of instances of the reference concept ˆC that satisfy query
Q w.r.t. (KB, P) and the total number of instances of the reference concept ˆC:
support( ˆC, Q, (KB, P)) =
|answerset( ˆC, Q, (KB, P))|
|answerset( ˆC, Qref , (KB, P))|
□
The support is calculated as the ratio of the number of bindings of variable key in
the given query Q to the number of bindings of variable key in the reference query
Qref . The reference concept ˆC determines what is counted. Let us now calculate
the support of query Q2 from Example 2.
Example 3
For the illustration of the support notion, consider the queries from Example 2.
The reference query has 3 items in its answer set that is 3 individuals from (KB, P)
that are deduced to be Client due to the axiom deﬁning a client as an owner of
something. Query Q2, for example, has 2 items in its answer set that is the clients
that are co-owners of at least one account with their relatives (Anna, Marek). The
support of query Q2 is then calculated as: support( ˆC, Q2, (KB, P)) = 2
3 ≈0.66.□
Finally, we can formulate our task of frequent pattern discovery in a combined
knowledge base (KB, P).
Deﬁnition 8 (Frequent pattern discovery)
Given
• a combined knowledge base (KB, P) represented in DL-safe rules, where KB
is represented in SHIF and P is a positive disjunctive Datalog program,
• a set of patterns in the form of queries Q that all contain a reference concept
ˆC as a predicate in one of the atoms in the body and where the variable in
the atom ˆC is the only distinguished variable,
• a minimum support threshold minsup speciﬁed by the user,
and assuming that queries with support s are frequent in (KB, P) if s ≥minsup,
the task of frequent pattern discovery is to ﬁnd the set of frequent queries. □
Example 4
Let us assume the threshold minsup=0.5 and let us consider the queries from Ex-
ample 2. The set of frequent patterns is then {Qref , Q1, Q2, O3}. □
4 Solution algorithm
The main contribution of this paper is the algorithm for frequent pattern discovery
in combined knowledge bases represented in DL-safe rules as described in Section
3. Initial results on the algorithm development have been presented in (J´ozefowska
et al. 2006; J´ozefowska et al. 2008). This section advances them. Our method follows
the usual approach where the search starts with the most general patterns and
reﬁnes them to more speciﬁc ones in consecutive steps. Thus, ﬁrstly, we deﬁne
the generality relation and further the reﬁnement operator that computes a set of
specializations of a pattern.

14
J. J´ozefowska and A.  Lawrynowicz and T.  Lukaszewski
4.1 Generality relation
We use a semantic generality relation in order to fully utilize the information stored
in the combined knowledge base (KB, P). As we have deﬁned in Section 3, patterns
are represented as queries, so it seems natural to deﬁne the generality relation as
the query containment (or subsumption) relation.
Deﬁnition 9 (Generality relation)
Given two patterns Q1 and Q2 deﬁned as queries over a combined knowledge base
(KB, P) (see Deﬁnition 5) we say that pattern Q1 is at least as general as pattern
Q2 under query containment w.r.t. (KB, P), Q1 ⪰B Q2, iﬀquery Q2 is contained
in query Q1 w.r.t. (KB, P). □
Theorem 1 lays the foundations for an algorithm to test the pattern subsumption.
Theorem 1
[Testing ⪰B] Let Q1(key, x1) and Q2(key, x2) be two queries and (KB, P) be a
combined knowledge base. Let θ be a substitution grounding the variables in Q2
using new constants not occuring in (KB, P) (Skolem substitution). Then Q1 ⪰B Q2
if and only if there exists a ground substitution σ for Q1 such that
(i) head(Q2)θ = head(Q1)σ and
(ii) (KB, P) ∪body(Q2)θ |= body(Q1)σ
Proof
(⇐) Assume there exists a ground substitution σ for Q1 such that (i) and (ii).
Let a be some individual, Ia be some interpretation of (KB, P) which is a model
of (KB, P) such that a is an answer to the query Q2 in Ia. In order to prove
that Q1 ⪰B Q2 we need to prove that a is also an answer to the query Q1 in
Ia. By deﬁnition of query answering (Deﬁnition 4) there exists a substitution φ
such that a is identical to keyφ and ∃body(Q2)φ is true in Ia. Since Q2 is DL-safe
there must exist another substitution, φ′, such that Q2φ′ is ground, a is indentical
to keyφ′ and body(Q2)φ′ is true in Ia. Because formula (KB, P) ∪body(Q2)θ |=
body(Q1)σ is valid, by the uniform replacement of constants we have head(Q2)φ′ =
head(Q1)σ and (KB, P)∪body(Q2)φ′ |= body(Q1)σ, so body(Q1)σ is also true in Ia.
Because head(Q2)φ′ is identical to head(Q1)σ this implies a = keyφ′ is an answer to
the query Q1. This argument follows for any interpretation I satisfying the initial
constraints, so Q1 ⪰B Q2.
(⇒) Assume Q1 ⪰B Q2. The following arguments show that a ground substitution
σ exists. Let a substitution θ be given as in the theorem. Let I be a model of
(KB, P) ∪Q2θ. Since keyθ is an answer to Q2 in I, keyθ is also an answer to Q1 in
I. Moreover, since Q1 is DL-safe, there must exist a ground substitution φ such that
head(Q2)θ = head(Q1)φ, and body(Q1)φ is true in I. By the uniform replacement
of constants we obtain that head(Q2)θ = head(Q1)σ, and body(Q1)σ is true in I.
This argumentation is valid for any interpretation satisfying the constraints, so the
thesis follows.
Below we prove that appending an atom to a query results in an equally or more
speciﬁc query which gives an easy way to building specializations of a query.

The role of semantics in mining frequent patterns
15
Proposition 1
Let Q2 be a query over (KB, P), built from query Q1 by adding an atom. It holds
that Q1 ⪰B Q2.
Proof
Let us consider query Q1 =? −ˆC(key), B1, . . . , Bn and let us add atom Bn+1 to Q1
obtaining query Q2 =? −ˆC(key), B1, . . . , Bn, Bn+1. Let θ be an answer to query
Q2. According to Deﬁnition 4, (KB, P) |= ∃x : Q2(keyθ, x). But since a query is a
conjunction of atoms, it follows that also (KB, P) |= ∃x : Q1(keyθ, x). Thus, the
answer set of query Q2 is a subset of the answer set of query Q1 what completes
the proof.
A crucial property of the generality relation that allows to develop eﬃcient algo-
rithms is monotonicity with regard to support.
Proposition 2
Let Q1 and Q2 be two queries over the combined knowledge base (KB, P) that
both contain the reference concept ˆC. If Q1 ⪰B Q2 then support( ˆC, Q1, (KB, P)) ≥
support( ˆC, Q2, (KB, P)).
Proof
If Q1 ⪰B Q2 then, by Deﬁnition 9, query Q2 is contained in query Q1. Further, from
Deﬁnition 4 we conclude that since query Q2 is contained in query Q1 then for any
possible extensional part of (KB, P), while keeping the same intensional part, the
answer set of Q2 is contained in the answer set of Q1, and in consequence by
Deﬁnition 7, support( ˆC, Q1, (KB, P)) ≥support( ˆC, Q2, (KB, P)), what completes
the proof.
The monotonicity of the query containment with regard to the query support
means that none of the specializations of an infrequent pattern can be frequent.
The generality relation ⪰B is a reﬂexive and transitive binary relation, and so it
is a quasi-order on the space of patterns. It is known (Nienhuys-Cheng and de Wolf
1997) that any quasi-ordered space may be searched using reﬁnement operators. In
the next section we deﬁne the reﬁnement operator used in our algorithm.
4.2 Reﬁnement operator
We deﬁne a downward reﬁnement operator that computes a set of specializations of
a query. This set is obtained using both syntax and semantics of the query. Firstly,
a query is appended with a single atom according to the rules given in Deﬁnition
10. In the second step semantic tests are performed which may exclude further
patterns from consideration.
It is convenient to represent the results of the reﬁnement steps on a special trie
structure that was introduced in the FARMER method (Nijssen and Kok 2001;
Nijssen and Kok 2003). Trie is a tree with nodes corresponding to the atoms of
the query, so that each path from the root to any node corresponds to a query. In

16
J. J´ozefowska and A.  Lawrynowicz and T.  Lukaszewski
Fig. 1: A part of the trie constructed for the (KB, P) from Example 1, ˆC=Client,
minsup = 0.2.
consequence every node in a trie deﬁnes a query. According to Propositions 1 and
2 only nodes which correspond to frequent queries need to be expanded further.
An example of the trie data structure for a data mining problem deﬁned over
the knowledge base from Example 1 is presented in Figure 1. In order to build the
patterns the following predicates from the knowledge base were selected: Client,
isOwnerOf , relative, hasMortgage and p woman. Notice that the special purpose
predicates (the ones of the form O(x)) are omitted from the presentation in the trie.
The presence of such predicates indicates that a query is DL-safe. As we assume
that all queries within our approach are DL-safe, we can omit the special purpose
predicates for simplicity. The superscripts in Figure 1 correspond to the two ways
described in Deﬁnition 10 in which atoms are added to the query.
Deﬁnition 10
Let T be a trie data structure that imposes an order of atoms in a query. Let Q be
a query, let B be last(Q) that is the last atom in query Q, let Bp be the parent of
B in T. A variable is called new if it does not occur in any earlier atom of a query.
Atoms are added to trie T as:
1. dependent atoms (share at least one variable with last(Q), that was new in
last(Q)),
2. right brothers of a given node in T (these are the copies of atoms that have
the same parent Bp as the given atom B and are placed on the right-hand
side of B in Bp’s child list), new variables are renamed such that they are
also new in the copy.□
The ﬁrst rule introduces the dependent atoms that could not be added earlier.
The dependent atoms are brothers of each other in the trie. The second rule, the
right brother copying mechanism, takes care that all possible subsets but only one
permutation out of the set of dependent atoms is considered.
Let us now introduce the semantic tests which are performed as the second step
of the reﬁnement procedure in order to reduce the set of patterns submitted for
frequency evaluation. Due to the eﬃciency reasons semantic tests are performed

The role of semantics in mining frequent patterns
17
on a knowledge base (KB, P) with ground facts like concept and role assertions
removed. This reduced knowledge base is denoted by cp(KB, P). The ﬁrst test
consists in determining the query satisﬁability, further ones check for some kinds
of semantic redundancy as described later in this section.
The test for checking satisﬁability of query Q(key, x) with regard to knowledge
base cp(KB, P) consists in checking whether cp(KB, P)∪{∃key, x : Q } is satisﬁable
that is whether there is a model of cp(KB, P) in which there is some valuation for
the distinguished variable key and undistinguished variables x. The variables are
skolemized, and assuming that a and b are new constants, Q(a, b) is asserted to
cp(KB, P). Then it is checked whether the updated cp(KB, P) is satisﬁable. The
query satisﬁability test described above is deﬁned in Deﬁnition 11 below.
Deﬁnition 11
Query Q is satisﬁable w.r.t. a combined knowledge base (KB, P) iﬀ(KB, P) ∪Qθ
is satisﬁable, where θ is a Skolem substitution. □
Example 5
Let us consider the knowledge base (KB, P) from Example 1 and the query:
Q(key) =? −Account(key), CreditCard(key), O(key)
Since in (KB, P) the concepts Account and CreditCard are speciﬁed as disjoint,
we know a priori that it is useless to submit the query Q as it cannot have any
answer due to its unsatisﬁability. □
After performing the satisﬁability test, the queries are further pruned in order to
obtain only those candidates that are not semantically redundant. We consider two
kinds of semantic redundancy. The ﬁrst kind occurs when a query has redundant
atoms, that is atoms that can be deduced from other atoms in the query. The second
kind occurs when there are frequent queries already found in the earlier steps that
are semantically equivalent to the newly generated candidate.
In order to avoid the ﬁrst kind of redundancy, the queries are tested for semantic
freeness. Only semantically free queries are kept for further processing. The notion
of the semantic freeness has been introduced in (de Raedt and Ramon 2004). It is
adapted to our setting as follows.
Deﬁnition 12 (Semantically free pattern)
A pattern Q is semantically free or s-free w.r.t a combined knowledge base (KB, P)
if there is no pattern Q′, built from Q by removing any atom, such that Q ⪰B Q′.
□
Example 6
Given is the knowledge base from Example 1 and the following queries to this
knowledge base:
Q1(key) =? −Account(key), isOwnerOf (x, key), O(key), O(x)
Q2(key) =? −Account(key), isOwnerOf (x, key), Client(x), O(key), O(x)

18
J. J´ozefowska and A.  Lawrynowicz and T.  Lukaszewski
Query Q1 is s-free while query Q2 is not. The reason why the second query is not s-
free is that atom Client(x) can be deduced from the other atoms of this query. More
speciﬁcally, the atom Client(x) can be deduced from the atom isOwnerOf (x, key)
as from the axioms in the knowledge base it follows that any object being asserted
to the domain of isOwnerOf is a Client. □
Moreover, the test for semantic freeness is performed on a query with the atom
ˆC(key) removed. It is motivated by the fact, that some queries could be pruned
after the s-freeness test, that we do not necessarily would like to be pruned, just
because of the obligatory presence of the reference concept in each query.
Example 7
Consider the knowledge base from Example 1 and Client as a reference concept.
Then query:
Q(key) =? −Client(key), isOwnerOf (key, x), O(key), O(x)
does not pass the s-freeness test from Deﬁnition 12, because the atom Client(key)
can be deduced from the second atom of Q. However, the atom Client(key) contains
the reference concept, which is obligatory in each query. Consider now query Q′,
obtained by removing the atom with a reference concept from query Q:
Q′(key) =? −isOwnerOf (key, x), O(key), O(x)
The modiﬁed query, Q′, is s-free. Reconsider the queries from Example 2. Queries
Qref , Q1, Q2 and Q4 are s-free with regard to the modiﬁed s-freeness test, while
query Q3 is not s-free. □
A candidate query may be semantically redundant not only due to redundant
atoms. The second kind of redundancy occurs when a candidate query is seman-
tically equivalent to a frequent one already found. Such patterns are also pruned,
which is performed by searching the trie for a pattern equivalent to the given
one. So-called optimal reﬁnement operator assures that no pattern is generated
twice. Using the trie data structure and pruning the candidate patterns that are
semantically equivalent to the ones already found, make our reﬁnement operator
optimal. By pruning semantically equivalent patterns we achieve also the property
of properness of the reﬁnement operator, that is every pattern Q′ generated by the
reﬁnement operator is more speciﬁc than the pattern Q being reﬁned (Q′ is never
equivalent to Q).
4.3 The algorithm
The approach proposed in this paper follows the common scheme of algorithms for
ﬁnding frequent patterns which is a ”generate-and-test” approach. In such approach
candidate queries are repeatedly generated and tested for their frequency. In order
to generate candidates, a reﬁnement operator is applied.
The proposed, recursive node expansion algorithm is presented below. A node

The role of semantics in mining frequent patterns
19
being expanded is denoted by ni, Q(key, x) denotes a query with x being undistin-
guished variables, d denotes the depth of the current node in the trie T. The trie
is generated up to the user-speciﬁed MAXDEPTH depth.
Algorithm 1
expandNode(nd, Q(key, x), d, T, MAXDEPTH)
1. if d < MAXDEPTH then
2.
while all possible children of nd not constructed do
3.
construct child node nd+1 and associated query Qc(key, x) using the trie data
structure T and reﬁnement rules from Deﬁnition 10
4.
if Qc(key, x) is satisﬁable wrt (KB, P) then
5.
if Qc(key, x) is semantically free wrt (KB, P) then
6.
if Qc(key, x) is not semantically equivalent wrt (KB, P) to any frequent
query found earlier then
7.
evaluate candidate query Qc(key, x)
8.
if Qc(key, x) is frequent then
9.
addChild(nd, nd+1); //add nd+1 as a child of nd
10.
T ←T ∪nd+1;
11.
for all children nd+1 of node nd do
12.
expandNode(nd+1, Qc(key, x), d + 1, T, MAXDEPTH)
Completeness of search Below we prove the completeness of our method for pattern
reﬁnement, that is we prove that the proposed approach to pattern mining generates
for each pattern Q from the space of valid patterns a valid pattern Q′ such that Q′
is semantically equivalent to Q. Valid patterns are those, from the ones deﬁned in
Deﬁnition 5, that are linked and semantically free. In order to prove completeness,
we relate to the work on FARMER (Nijssen and Kok 2003), that originally used
trie data structure for relational, frequent pattern mining.
First we prove that pruning semantically equivalent patterns (after s-freeness test
or after the search on the trie) does not exclude adding all possible reﬁnements to
a pattern.
Lemma 1
Let (KB, P) be a combined knowledge base, and Q1, Q2 be two semantically equiv-
alent patterns (Q1 ≡B Q2) over (KB, P). Then for each variable x in Q1 there exists
a corresponding variable x ′ in Q2 to which the same bindings can be made as to
the variable x.
Proof
By deﬁnition (Deﬁnition 5) both patterns have the same distinguished variable key,
so the thesis follows for x = key. Let us now provide the following argumentation for
x being an undistinguished variable. Since Q1 ≡B Q2 then also Q1 ⪰B Q2. Suppose
θ is a Skolem substitution grounding variables in Q2 that satisﬁes the constraints
from Theorem 1. By deﬁnition, the substitution θ assigns a new individual a to
variable key. The individual a is an answer to Q2, and since Q1 ⪰B Q2, a is also an
answer to Q1. For Q1 ⪰B Q2 to be valid there must exist a grounding substitution σ
for Q1 that satisﬁes the constraints from Theorem 1. Since Q2 is linked, that is all of
its variables are linked to the variable key, then also all the constants introduced by

20
J. J´ozefowska and A.  Lawrynowicz and T.  Lukaszewski
θ are linked to the individual a. Since Q1 is linked, then all the constants that bind
to variables of Q1 to prove the answer a have to be linked to a as well. Since a and
all the constants introduced to the (KB, P) by θ are new, then any other constants
in the (KB, P) are not linked to a. In consequence, only the constants introduced
to the (KB, P) by θ can be a part of the substitution σ. Then for each variable
x in Q1 there must exist a constant b that is assigned to x by the substitution σ
and has been introduced by θ. That is why there must exist a variable x ′ in Q2
for which θ introduces b, and what follows the same bindings that can be made to
variable x in Q1 can be as well made to the corresponding variable x ′ in Q2. This
argumentation is valid for any variables x and x ′, what completes the proof.
The following corollary is a consequence of Lemma 1.
Corollary 1
Let (KB, P) be a combined knowledge base, and Q1, Q2 be two semantically equiv-
alent patterns (Q1 ≡B Q2) over (KB, P). Then for each variable x in Q1 there exists
a corresponding variable x ′ in Q2 such that any atom B that can be linked to Q1
through the variable x can be also linked to Q2 through the variable x ′.
Subsequently we prove that all possible reﬁnements of a pattern are generated.
Lemma 2
Given is a trie T, recursively generated by Algorithm 1, a query Q which occurs in
T, and an atom B /∈Q which is a valid reﬁnement of Q. Then either:
(i) valid query Q′ = (Q1, B, Q2) exists in trie T, for some subdivision of Q into
Q1 and Q2, such that Q = (Q1, Q2) or
(ii) valid query Q′′ exists in trie T, such that query Q′′ is semantically equivalent
to query Q′.
Proof
Consider case (i). As B is a valid reﬁnement of Q, there is a preﬁx (Qp, Bp) of Q
such that atom B is a dependent atom of Bp. If Bp is the last atom of Q, then it
is clear that B, as a dependent atom of Bp, is generated as a reﬁnement of Q to
be added at the end of the query. Dependent atom B is generated by the ﬁrst rule
from Deﬁnition 10 and checked for its validity (satisﬁability and s-freeness). Hence,
query Q′ is generated. Let us assume now that Bp is not the last atom and it has
diﬀerent successor Bp+1 in query Q. Atom Bp+1 is also a child of Bp in T. Then
let us consider the order of B and Bp+1 in the list of children of Bp in trie T, which
is one of the following:
• B occurs before Bp+1; then Bp+1 is a right-hand brother of B. The right brothers
copying mechanism, the second rule from Deﬁnition 10, will copy Bp+1 as a child
of B; the same operations that created Q will create query Q′ in subsequent steps.
• B occurs after Bp+1; B is copied as a child of Bp+1. In order to determine the exact
injection place of B, we recursively apply our arguments, taking into account Bp+1
and B.

The role of semantics in mining frequent patterns
21
It follows from the above arguments that query Q′ is always generated. After gener-
ation of query Q′, it is checked, in line 6 of Algorithm 1, if query Q′ is semantically
equivalent to some query Q′′, already present in the trie T. If it is the case, Q′′ is
kept in T, and Q′ is not added to T. Otherwise, the newly generated query Q′ is
added to the trie T. Thus, either query Q′ exists in the trie T or it is semantically
equivalent to query Q′′. This completes the proof.
Finally we prove the completeness.
Theorem 2 (Completeness)
For every valid, frequent query Q1 in the pattern space, there is semantically equiv-
alent valid query Q2 in the trie T.
Proof
Let us assume that queries are generated up to the user speciﬁed length (MAXDEPTH).
For query Q1 of length 1 it is obvious that there is a corresponding query Q2 of the
form Q(key) =? −ˆC(key), O(key) in the root of the trie (atoms of the form O(x)
are not taken into account as described earlier). For query Q1 of length ≥1, the
proof is by induction on the length of the query. Assume that an equivalent query
for Q1\last(Q1) exists in trie T. From Corollary 1 follows that any reﬁnement that
can be made to Q1\last(Q1) can be also made to any of its equivalent queries.
If atom last(Q1) is a valid reﬁnement of the equivalent query, Lemma 2 applies.
Hence, the thesis follows by induction.
4.4 Implementation
The proposed method employs several reasoning services run over a combined
knowledge base (KB, P) such as: (conjunctive) query answering, deciding knowledge
base satisﬁability, deciding concept subsumption, classifying the concept hierarchy.
In order to perform all these reasoning services, specialized and complex algorithms
are needed. As the implementation of such reasoning services is out of the scope of
this work, to test our ideas we decided to use an external reasoner KAON210.
In the core of KAON2 there is an algorithm for reducing a DL knowledge base
KB into a disjunctive Datalog program DD(KB) on which the actual reasoning
is performed using the techniques of deductive databases. In particular, KAON2
uses a version of Magic Sets optimization technique, originally deﬁned for non-
disjunctive programs and recently extended to disjunctive Datalog, in order to
identify the part of the database relevant to the query. And it applies semi-na¨ıve,
bottom-up evaluation strategy, in order to avoid redundant computation of the
same conclusions. Employing these techniques makes KAON2 well suited for a fre-
quent pattern mining application. It has been experimentaly shown that in case of
the knowledge bases with relatively small intensional part, but large number of in-
stances, KAON2 outperforms the reasoners using the classical tableaux algorithms
by one to two orders of magnitude (Motik and Sattler 2006; Parsia et al. 2006).
10 http://kaon2.semanticweb.org

22
J. J´ozefowska and A.  Lawrynowicz and T.  Lukaszewski
Query
DL  TBox
DL  ABox
Transformation to
Disjunctive Datalog
program 
Disjunctive Datalog
reasoning engine
Rules
e.g. instance retrieval
for named concepts
Fig. 2: Reasoning in KAON2.
Figure 2 presents an overview of the reasoning in KAON2.
We implemented the proposed method for pattern mining in a system called
SEMINTEC11 (Semantically-enabled data mining techniques). Our implementa-
tion is written in Java (version 1.5). It uses KAON2’s API to manipulate and
reason on combined knowledge bases. Figure 3 presents the input and output of
our system and illustrates the interaction with the reasoner. As an input to the
system, the user is expected to provide the following ﬁles: setup ﬁle (in XML for-
mat, with the parameters of the execution such as the logical and physical URI of
the knowledge base, reference concept, minimum support threshold etc.) and knowl-
edge base ﬁles (in OWL and SWRL12 formats). As an output the system generates
the ﬁles with: frequent patterns discovered during the execution, statistics of the
execution, and a ﬁle with a trie that stores patterns, in XML-based GraphML13
format. The implementation of SEMINTEC is publicly available14.
5 Experimental evaluation
In this section, we present an experimental evaluation of the proposed method for
frequent pattern mining with the focus on the usefulness of exploiting the semantics
of the knowledge base at diﬀerent steps of our algorithm. In particular, the goals of
the experiments were to investigate the inﬂuence of using intensional background
knowledge expressed in DL with DL-safe rules on the data mining eﬃciency (i.e.,
computing time) and the quality of the results (i.e., the number and the form of the
discovered patterns). We wanted to test how our method performs on datasets of
diﬀerent sizes and complexities, in order to obtain an idea what kinds of ontologies
11 http://www.cs.put.poznan.pl/alawrynowicz/semintec.htm
12 www.w3.org/Submission/SWRL/
13 http://graphml.graphdrawing.org
14 http://www.cs.put.poznan.pl/alawrynowicz/semintec.htm

The role of semantics in mining frequent patterns
23
SEMINTEC
Reasoner
(KAON2 reasoner)
(KB, P) Management
(KAON2 ontology
management API)
Setup file 
*.xml
Testing query
satisfiability
Testing query
s-freeness
Testing query
equivalency
Evaluating
query
Answering
conjunctive query
Testing (KB, P) 
satisfiability
(KB, P)
(KB, P) 
copy
Knowledge base (KB, P) 
*.owl
(OWL+SWRL)
Frequent
patterns
Statistics
Trie
*.graphml
Fig. 3: SEMINTEC input/output and interaction with the reasoner.
can be handled eﬃciently. In particular, the experiments were supposed to answer
the following questions:
• how using the intensional part of the background knowledge for the semantic
tests of generated patterns inﬂuences the execution time and the results of
pattern discovery?
• how the complexity of the intensional background knowledge, in particular
the types of DL constructors and DL axioms, inﬂuences the execution time
and the results of pattern discovery?
• how exploiting concept and role taxonomies inﬂuences the execution time of
pattern discovery?
Test datasets For the tests we used three datasets, whose general characteristics
is presented in Table 3. The (FINANCIAL)15 dataset was created on the basis of
a dataset from the PKDD’99 Discovery Challenge as a part of our research pre-
sented in this paper, and currently is the part of the benchmark suite of KAON2.
FINANCIAL ontology describes the domain of banking. FINANCIAL dataset
is relatively simple, as it does not use existential quantiﬁers or disjunctions. It
contains, however, functional roles and disjointness constraints. Thus, it requires
equality reasoning, which is diﬃcult for deductive databases.
SWRC ontology, as used in our experiments, was published at the 4th Inter-
national EON Workshop (EON2006)16. It was a part of the testbed17 used in the
ontology evaluation session at the workshop. SWRC ontology (”Semantic Web
15 FINANCIAL, http://www.cs.put.poznan.pl/alawrynowicz/ﬁnancial.owl
16 http://km.aifb.uni-karlsruhe.de/ws/eon2006
17 http://km.aifb.uni-karlsruhe.de/ws/eon2006/ontoeval.zip

24
J. J´ozefowska and A.  Lawrynowicz and T.  Lukaszewski
Table 3: Characteristics of the test datasets.
dataset
DL
#concepts
#obj. roles
#rules
#individuals
FINANCIAL
ALCIF
60
16
0
17941
rSWRC
ALI(D)
55
44
3
2156
rLUBM
SHI(D)
43
25
2
17174
Rules in rSWRC
p knowsAboutTopic(x, z) ←Person(x), worksAtProject(x, y), isAbout(y, z)
p coAuthoredByFullProfessor(x) ←Article(x), author(x, y), FullProfessor(y)
ﬁnances(x, z) ←Organization(x), ﬁnances(x, y), Project(y), isAbout(y, z)
Rules in rLUBM
GraduateStudent(x) ←Person(x), takesCourse(x, y), GraduateCourse(y)
p specialCourse(z) ←FullProfessor(x), headOf (x, y), teacherOf (x, z)
for Research Communities”) represents knowledge about researchers and research
communities. Instance data, published at the EON website, describes the AIFB
Institute of the University of Karlsruhe. The TBox of this ontology contains con-
cept inclusion axioms, universal quantiﬁcation, but no existential quantiﬁers, and
no disjunctions, so it is simple. By rSWRC we denote our extension of this dataset
by the rules presented in Table 3.
LUBM is a benchmark from the Lehigh University18, consisting of a university
domain ontology and a generator of synthetic data. Existential quantiﬁers are used,
but no disjunctions or number restrictions occur, hence the reduction algorithm of
KAON2 produces an equality-free Horn program, on which query answering can
be performed deterministically. In the experiments we used rLUBM, an extension
of LUBM ontology by two rules (presented in Table 3) which was proposed by the
authors of the DL-safe rules component of Pellet in (Parsia et al. 2006).
Test setting All tests were performed on a PC with Intel Core2 Duo 2.4GHz pro-
cessor, 2GB of RAM, running Microsoft Windows Server 2003 Standard Edition
SP1. The JVM heap size was limited to 1.5GB. We used the version of KAON2
released on 2008-01-14.
5.1 Results of the experiments
5.1.1 Analysis whether semantic tests of generated patterns are useful
The goal of this experiment was to compare the setting where intensional back-
ground knowledge was used for testing generated candidates as well as for evaluat-
18 LUBM, http://swat.cse.lehigh.edu/projects/lubm/

The role of semantics in mining frequent patterns
25
ing them with the setting where the background knowledge was used only during
the candidate evaluation. We were interested in eﬃciency and quality of the re-
sults. The bias consisted of restricting the predicates, used to build patterns, only
to those having any extension (to avoid testing predicates without any assertions),
and giving new names to all variables in the newly added dependent atoms, except
the variables shared with the last atom in a query.
In the ﬁrst setting, SEM, the original algorithm for query expansion was used,
that is Algorithm 1. In the second setting, NOSEM, the algorithm was run without
the steps for checking pattern satisﬁability, s-freeness and equivalence with already
found frequent patterns, that is, lines 4-6 from Algorithm 1 were omitted. However,
the other parts of the solution such as the trie data structure as well as the tech-
niques for reducing syntactic redundancy based on the trie were left unchanged, and
used in the second setting as well. Hence, some assumptions made for the kinds of
patterns expected as the result of the execution of our method were applied for both
settings. In particular, syntactically non-redundant copies of atoms, in which output
variables were given new names, were not generated as dependent atoms in both set-
tings. Not generating copies of atoms, which is based on the assumption of generat-
ing only s-free candidate patterns, greatly inﬂuences the time and the results of the
pattern mining, as without the semantic tests for redundancy, one could not avoid
chains like: Client(x), isOwnerOf (x, y1), isOwnerOf (x, y2), isOwnerOf (x, y3), · · ·.
Thus, we compare our proposed setting with the one which is not strictly naive
and which lacks the most time consuming operations.
The parameters measured during an execution of the experiment, were: (i) run-
ning time (runtime), (ii) number of candidate patterns (cand), (iii) number of fre-
quent patterns (freq). Good results are characterized by low number of candidates
and frequent patterns, and short running time. Additionally, a ratio of frequent
patterns to candidate patterns should be as high as possible, that is, as few as
possible unproductive candidate patterns should be evaluated.
Qualitative analysis Below we present and discuss some patterns discovered during
the experimental evaluation. We restrict the analysis to the ontologies with real
(nonsynthetic) data.
The following is one of the longest patterns discovered from the FINANCIAL
dataset, by our method (SEM setting):
QSEM1(key) = Client(key), hasOwner(x1, key), hasStatementIssuanceFrequency(x1, x2),
Monthly(x2), hasPermanentOrder(x1, x3), isPermanentOrderFor(x3, x5), Household−
Payment(x5), hasAgeValue(key, x7), hasSexValue(key, x8), FemaleSex(x8), livesIn(key, x10);
support =0.29
It describes ”a client who is an owner of an account with monthly statement is-
suance frequency, and with a permament order for household payment, who is a
female, lives in some region, and is at some age”. The information that Account is
here the domain of hasOwner and Region is the range of livesIn comes from the
FINANCIAL ontology. One may notice, that the region in which the client lives

26
J. J´ozefowska and A.  Lawrynowicz and T.  Lukaszewski
and the age at which she is, is not speciﬁed in this pattern. Example, shorter pat-
terns discovered, that involve roles hasAgeValue or livesIn and precise their range
are shown below:
QSEM2(key) = Client(key), hasOwner(x1, key), hasStatementIssuanceFrequency(x1, x2),
Monthly(x2), hasAgeValue(key, x4), From35To50(x4); support=0.21
QSEM3(key) = Client(key), livesIn(key, x1), NorthMoravia(x1); support=0.17
An example of a pattern discovered by running NOSEM setting is as follows:
QNOSEM1(key) = Client(key), livesIn(key, x1), Region(x1); support=1.0
The pattern QNOSEM1 has the semantically redundant atom, Region(x1), due to
the speciﬁcation of Region as the range of role livesIn in the FINANCIAL KB.
Let us now present the example patterns discovered from the rSWRC dataset.
By running the SEM setting, the following example patterns have been discovered:
QSEM4(key) = Person(key), author(x1, key), publication(x2, x1), p knowsAboutTo −
pic(x2, x3); support=0.70
QSEM5(key) = Person(key), author(x1, key), publication(key, x2), Publication(x2);
support=0.75
The meaning of pattern QSEM4 may seem unclear with regard to the rSWRC
knowledge base. In the knowledge base neither ranges nor domains of author and
publication are speciﬁed. However, from the rule deﬁning p knowsAboutTopic we
know that its ﬁrst argument represents Person and the second one Topic. Thus,
we may conclude that the pattern says that ”some person, who knows about some
topic, is related to the publication who is authored by the person represented by
the reference concept”. From the intensional part of the (KB, P) we do not know
about the nature of this relation for Person as role publication is missing domain
and range speciﬁcations. By deeper analysis of the knowledge base, we may notice
that concept AcademicStaﬀ, that is the subconcept of Person, is subsumed by con-
cept ∀publication.Publication. Thus for academic staﬀ, a particular type of persons,
publication range is Publication.
In pattern QSEM5, a person is related by role publication with some Publication.
By the common sense reasoning, this pattern carries redundant information. It is,
however, s-free, as the range of publication is not speciﬁed in the (KB, P).
With regard to the NOSEM setting let us discuss the following pattern:
QNOSEM2(key) = Person(key), publication(key, x1), Publication(x1), InProceedings(x1);
support=0.47
Since in the (KB, P), InProceedings is the subconcept of Publication, atom Publication(x1)
is semantically redundant.

The role of semantics in mining frequent patterns
27
Table 4: Results of the experiment on eﬀectiveness of the semantic tests.
Max
number of patterns
reduction
runtime[s]
speedup
Length
NOSEM
SEM
NOSEM/SEM
NOSEM
SEM
NOSEM/SEM
cand
freq
cand
freq
cand
freq
FINANCIAL, minsup=0.2, reference concept=Client
1
1
1
1
1
1.00
1.00
0.5
0.5
1.07
2
91
9
15
7
6.07
1.29
42.7
14.2
3.01
3
582
69
71
27
8.20
2.56
303.5
104.5
2.91
4
2786
479
253
68
11.01
7.04
2931.6
569.7
5.15
5
-
-
569
131
-
-
-
2166.9
-
6
-
-
1009
214
-
-
-
6042.7
-
7
-
-
1524
303
-
-
-
12204.8
-
8
-
-
1963
376
-
-
-
20200.0
-
9
-
-
2307
421
-
-
-
26346.1
-
10
-
-
2513
440
-
-
-
29614.2
-
11
-
-
2608
444
-
-
-
30309.6
-
12
-
-
2634
444
-
-
-
30821.6
-
rSWRC, minsup=0.3, reference concept=Person
1
1
1
1
1
1.00
1.00
0.1
0.1
1.01
2
92
3
92
3
1.00
1.00
7.4
16.5
0.45
3
279
22
271
14
1.03
1.57
23.0
155.2
0.15
4
1556
272
913
100
1.70
2.72
169.1
2533.5
0.07
rLUBM, minsup=0.3, reference concept=Person
1
1
1
1
1
1.00
1.00
0.3
0.3
1.00
2
68
7
67
6
1.01
1.17
12.5
16.5
0.76
3
361
63
269
31
1.34
2.03
82.8
142.6
0.58
4
2885
789
1438
194
2.01
4.07
9713.0
3486.7
2.79
Quantitative analysis Table 4 shows the results for a selected support threshold
for each dataset. The results are shown up to the lengths of patterns where either
an execution of the proposed method (SEM) has not exceeded the threshold of 24
hours of the running time (rSWRC, rLUBM) or the whole trie was generated in
this setting (FINANCIAL). From the presented results one can conclude that with
regard to the reduction in the number of patterns, there is a gain for all datasets,
reaching 11.01 times for candidate patterns and 7.04 times for frequent patterns in
case of the FINANCIAL dataset.
With regard to the running time, in case of FINANCIAL dataset, the speedup
has been reached for all maximum lengths of patterns. For longer patterns, the
NOSEM setting was unable to ﬁnish execution in 24 hours, while executing the SEM
setting allowed to generate the whole trie of frequent patterns for FINANCIAL
dataset. In case of rLUBM dataset, the speedup has been reached for the longest,
most important, maximum pattern length. For rSWRC, however, the NOSEM set-
ting was signiﬁcantly better with regard to the running time.

28
J. J´ozefowska and A.  Lawrynowicz and T.  Lukaszewski
We also measured the method performance for diﬀerent minimum support thresh-
olds. The results are reported in Figure 4. The bars representing the numbers of
frequent patterns are superimposed on those, representing the numbers of candidate
patterns. In case of the FINANCIAL dataset the diﬀerences between the numbers
of candidate patterns in the SEM setting in comparison to the NOSEM setting
are the largest from among those of the tested datasets. The number of candidate
patterns in the SEM setting constitutes about 9% of that in the NOSEM setting.
For the rLUBM dataset this ratio is about 45% on average and for rSWRC is
about 59% on average. The number of frequent patterns in the SEM setting is on
average equal to about 14% of the number of frequent patterns in the NOSEM set-
ting for the FINANCIAL dataset, about 22% for rLUBM dataset and about 37%
for rSWRC dataset. Since in case of the FINANCIAL dataset, the diﬀerences in
pattern numbers between the SEM setting and the NOSEM setting are the largest
from among the tested datasets, relatively the biggest number of semantically re-
dundant patterns is pruned away for this dataset, while for the rSWRC dataset
this number is the lowest one.
Let us now discuss the ratio between the number of frequent and the number of
candidate patterns in case of the SEM setting. For the FINANCIAL dataset this
ratio is equal 26% on average, for the rLUBM dataset 13% on average, and for
the rSWRC 11% on average. Thus, in case of the FINANCIAL dataset relatively
the least computation is done to evaluate useless candidate patterns. In case of the
rSWRC dataset the computational eﬀort is relatively the largest.
Summarizing, the semantic tests performed during the pattern generation were
useful in terms of the number of patterns for all datasets, and in the running
time for FINANCIAL and rLUBM datasets but not for rSWRC dataset. They
were most useful for the FINANCIAL dataset, where relatively the least number
of patterns were generated and tested in the SEM setting in comparison to the
NOSEM setting, and where the ratio between frequent and candidate patterns in
the SEM setting was the biggest. The semantic tests were least useful in case of
the rSWRC dataset.
After the analysis of the results for rSWRC dataset one may pose the following
question: should the semantic tests on patterns be performed together with check-
ing their frequency or they should be performed afterwards as a postprocessing step
of pattern mining? For the FINANCIAL and rLUBM datasets it is clear that it
was better to perform the tests together with pattern evaluation. The running times
in SEM setting (at least for the longest patterns in case of rLUBM) are already
shorter than those in NOSEM setting. For the rSWRC dataset we performed ad-
ditional test. We took the patterns generated as the output of NOSEM setting
(MAXLENGTH = 4) and postprocessed them, leaving at the ﬁrst step only s-free
ones, and at the second step only one representative of each equivalence class of
patterns. The additional execution time was 907.5s, which together with the exe-
cution time of NOSEM setting, 169.1s (as speciﬁed in Table 4), gives 1076.6s. This
time is shorter than the time of the SEM setting execution which is 2533.5s. That
is, in case of rSWRC dataset it was faster to perform data mining without semantic
tests at the ﬁrst step and then perform the tests as a postprocessing step.

The role of semantics in mining frequent patterns
29
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
number of patterns
Minsup
FINANCIAL
NOSEM_CAND
SEM_CAND
NOSEM_FREQ
SEM_FREQ
(a) Number of patterns
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
5000
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
runtime(s)
Minsup
FINANCIAL
NOSEM
SEM
(b) Running time
0
1000
2000
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
number of patterns
Minsup
rSWRC
NOSEM_CAND
SEM_CAND
NOSEM_FREQ
SEM_FREQ
(c) Number of patterns
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
runtime(s)
Minsup
rSWRC
NOSEM
SEM
(d) Running time
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
number of patterns
Minsup
rLUBM
NOSEM_CAND
SEM_CAND
NOSEM_FREQ
SEM_FREQ
(e) Number of patterns
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
runtime(s)
Minsup
rLUBM
NOSEM
SEM
(f) Running time
Fig. 4: Results of the experiment, MAXLENGTH=4, FINANCIAL: ˆC=Client,
rSWRC: ˆC=Person, rLUBM: ˆC=Person.
Why rSWRC dataset is especially hard for our approach, while the others are
not, is discussed in Section 5.1.2, which provides more insight into the inﬂuence
of using intensional background knowledge during pattern generation. It is also
noteworthy, that for the same intensional background knowledge, but for a big-
ger number of assertions (more probable case for data mining applications) it may
be better to perform the semantic tests together with pattern evaluation. As an

30
J. J´ozefowska and A.  Lawrynowicz and T.  Lukaszewski
0,00
2000,00
4000,00
6000,00
8000,00
10000,00
12000,00
14000,00
16000,00
FINANCIAL
FINANCIAL_2 FINANCIAL_3 FINANCIAL_4
runtime(s)
dataset size
FINANCIAL
SEM
NOSEM
(a) ˆC=Client, minsup=0.2
0,00
500,00
1000,00
1500,00
2000,00
2500,00
3000,00
3500,00
4000,00
rSWRC
rSWRC_2
rSWRC_3
rSWRC_4
rSWRC_5
rSWRC_6
rSWRC_7
rSWRC_8
rSWRC_9
rSWRC_10
rSWRC_11
rSWRC_12
rSWRC_13
rSWRC_14
rSWRC_15
rSWRC_16
rSWRC_17
rSWRC_18
rSWRC_19
rSWRC_20
rSWRC_21
rSWRC_22
rSWRC_23
rSWRC_24
rSWRC_25
rSWRC_26
runtime(s)
dataset size
rSWRC
SEM
NOSEM
(b) ˆC=Person, minsup=0.3
0,00
5000,00
10000,00
15000,00
20000,00
25000,00
30000,00
35000,00
40000,00
45000,00
50000,00
rLUBM
rLUBM_2
rLUBM_3
rLUBM_4
runtime(s)
dataset size
rLUBM
SEM
NOSEM
(c) ˆC=Person, minsup=0.3
Fig. 5: Results of the experiment, MAXLENGTH=4.
empirical proof of this claim we provide the experimental results in the following
paragraph.
Inﬂuence of the size of the dataset on the eﬀectiveness We measured how our
method scales in terms of the running time with growing instance data. For this
reason we used the replication of the axioms in the assertional part of the knowledge
base for FINANCIAL and rSWRC. Each assertional part of FINANCIAL n and
rSWRC n was obtained by replicating the original assertional part n times. For
rLUBM, we used the results of the execution of the generator of synthetic data
(downloaded from KAON2’s testbed). Each assertional part of rLUBM n was gen-
erated automatically for the number n of universities.
In the experimental results (Figure 5) one can observe that for all datasets, the
bigger extensional part of the background knowledge, the relatively better perfor-
mance of our method, SEM, compared to the method, where no semantic tests are
perfomed during the pattern generation, NOSEM. That is, the overhead needed
to compute the semantic tests becomes relatively smaller in comparison with the
time needed to evaluate more queries on bigger sets of data. Especially interesting
for us are the results on the problematic rSWRC dataset. One can observe that
together with the growth of the assertional part of the background knowledge, the
time needed to compute the NOSEM setting increases more then the time needed

The role of semantics in mining frequent patterns
31
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
2
3
4
Number of patterns
Max length
FINANCIAL
gen
sat
sfree
cand
(a) ˆC=Client, minsup=0.2
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
2
3
4
Number of patterns
Max length
rSWRC
gen
sat
sfree
cand
(b) ˆC=Person, minsup=0.3
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
2
3
4
Number of patterns
Max length
rLUBM
gen
sat
sfree
cand
(c) ˆC=Person, minsup=0.3
Fig. 6: Results of the experiment on the inﬂuence of the knowledge base expressivity
on eﬀectiveness, MAXLENGTH=4.
to compute the SEM setting. That’s why, we perfomed the tests to show that for
bigger volumes of data, described by the same intensional knowledge, a time needed
to compute a trie of patterns in NOSEM setting ﬁnally reaches and exceeds the
time needed to compute the trie in the SEM setting.
5.1.2 Inﬂuence of the expressivity of the dataset on the eﬀectiveness
In this experiment, additionally to the parameters measured in the experiment pre-
sented in Section 5.1.1, we collected the following information: (i) the number of
candidates generated by the syntactic reﬁnement rules (gen), (ii) the number of
satisﬁable candidate patterns (sat), (iii) the number of semantically free candidate
patterns (sfree). The goal was to investigate more deeply, how useful are the se-
mantic tests on diﬀerent types of datasets. Figure 6 shows the experimental results.
The most important remark to be made after the analysis of the results is that
after the satisﬁability test, in case of the FINANCIAL dataset many, while for the
other two datasets none of the patterns were pruned away. We conclude that it is
due to the disjointness constraints present only in the FINANCIAL dataset, but

32
J. J´ozefowska and A.  Lawrynowicz and T.  Lukaszewski
not in the other ones. If two concepts are deﬁned to be disjoint then adding an atom
where some variable is described by one of them, while the other one describing the
same variable is already present in a query is useless. For example, as concepts Man
and Woman are deﬁned to be disjoint in the FINANCIAL dataset, then testing
atom Woman(key) as a reﬁnement of the pattern Q(key) = Client(key), Man(key)
is useless, and such reﬁnement is pruned due to its unsatisﬁability. The impor-
tant property in the context of the presence of disjointness constraints is also
the co-occurrence of the role domain and range speciﬁcations. For instance, an
atom with a concept describing a variable that is already described by the range
of some role already present in a query, may be pruned away if the concept in
the role range and the given concept are disjoint. For example, in the FINAN-
CIAL dataset, the range of role hasCreditCard is CreditCard. Then, due to the
disjointness of concepts CreditCard and Account, a reﬁnement Account(x1) of query
Q(key) = Client(key), hasCreditCard(key, x1) is pruned after the satisﬁability test.
Furthermore, after the analysis of the results, we conclude that the features of
the intensional part of the knowledge base of the tested datasets, that helped to
prune patterns after the s-freeness test were: the organization of concepts and roles
in taxonomies, the speciﬁcation of domain and ranges of roles, the speciﬁcation of
role properties, such as role inverse, and concept deﬁnitions.
In the FINANCIAL dataset the hierarchy of roles is ﬂat, the hierarchy of con-
cepts maximum 4 levels deep. In the rSWRC dataset the hierarchy of roles is also
ﬂat, and the hierarchy of concepts is maximum 5 levels deep. In the rLUBM dataset
the hierarchy of roles is almost ﬂat, with two exceptions, 2 and 3 levels deep, the
hierarchy of concepts is maximum 5 levels deep.
In the FINANCIAL dataset all roles have domain and ranges explicitly speciﬁed.
There are also some axioms deﬁning inverse roles. In the rSWRC dataset domains
and ranges are nearly not speciﬁed explicitly (except with one exception). There
are, however, restrictions imposed on ranges of some roles while used with particu-
lar concepts in a role domain, for example when concept AcademicStaﬀis used as
a domain of the role headOfGroup the range of the role can only be ResearchGroup:
AcademicStaﬀ⊑∀headOfGroup.ResearchGroup. There are many axioms specify-
ing inverse roles in rSWRC. In rLUBM dataset domains and ranges of some roles
are explicitly speciﬁed, there are also some inverse role speciﬁcations.
Concept deﬁnitions are only present in the rLUBM dataset. The example con-
cept deﬁnition of concept Student as a person taking some course is: Student ≡
Person ⊓∃takesCourse.Course. Hence, the atom Student(key) as the reﬁnement
of query Q(key) = Person(key), takesCourse(x1), Course(x1) is pruned after the
s-freeness test.
In the context of the query equivalency test (when performed after the s-freeness
test), the important features of the intensional part of the tested datasets are: spec-
iﬁcation of role properties, such as role inverse, and concept deﬁnitions.
Let us consider for example the following queries, Q1 and Q2, tested for semantic
uniqueness w.r.t. the FINANCIAL dataset:
Q1(key) = Client(key), isOwnerOf (key, x1), hasPermanentOrder(x1, x2)

The role of semantics in mining frequent patterns
33
Table 5: Results of the experiment. FINANCIAL: minsup=0.2,
ˆC=Client,
rSWRC: minsup=0.3, ˆC=Person, rLUBM: minsup=0.3, ˆC=Person
Dataset
Max
runtime[s]
speedup
Length
SEM
SEM+TAX
SEM/SEM+TAX
FINANCIAL
12
30821.6
23146.4
1.33
rSWRC
4
2533.5
1594.4
1.59
rLUBM
4
3486.7
2232.4
1.56
Q2(key) = Client(key), hasOwner(x1, key), hasPermanentOrder(x1, x2)
Since the role hasOwner is an inverse of the role isOwnerOf , both patterns have
exactly the same meaning, and one of them is semantically redundant.
Concluding, from the analysis of the results and of the tested dataset features,
it follows that the presence or lack of the disjointness constraints in a dataset, is
a crucial feature. It is also desirable that disjointness constraints co-occur together
with the speciﬁcation of role domains and ranges. Disjointness constraints allow
to prune unsatisﬁable patterns before any query answering procedure execution,
either on (KB, P) or on a copy of (KB, P).
Moreover, the question posed in Section 5.1.1, why the rSWRC dataset is espe-
cially hard for our approach, has been indirectly answered by the analysis presented
in this section. The rSWRC is not very expressive, as it does not contain disjoint-
ness constraints, nor explicit role domain and range speciﬁcations, any concept
deﬁnitions, and its role hierarchy is ﬂat. Hence, the gain that may be achieved by
using intensional background knowledge for this dataset cannot be large.
5.1.3 Using taxonomies of concepts and roles in building pattern reﬁnements
Table 5 presents the results of the experiment on the use of concept and role tax-
onomies to build pattern reﬁnements in line with hierarchical information from a
KB (SEM + TAX ) in addition to the setting SEM . For all the datasets speedup
has been achieved, growing with the increasing maximum length of patterns.
6 Related work
We start the discussion in this section, from the features of knowledge representation
languages admitted by the (onto-)relational frequent pattern mining approaches.
Further we discuss how the related approaches exploit the semantics of their ad-
mitted representation languages.
The relational frequent pattern miners, WARMR, FARMER, and c-armr, are
designed to operate on knowledge bases represented as logic programs (generally
in a Datalog variant). Thus, by deﬁnition, they are not able to use the knowledge

34
J. J´ozefowska and A.  Lawrynowicz and T.  Lukaszewski
that has the form of description logic axioms that could not be rewritten into Dat-
alog. Consider the knowledge base from Example 1. In Datalog it is impossible to
assert that all accounts must have an owner without explicitly specifying who the
owner is. Let us show how this may aﬀect the properties of patterns generated by
a method. Consider the following pattern (query):
Q(x) =? −Account(x), Property(x)
The second atom of Q may be considered as redundant, as from the knowledge base
we already know that every account is a property, and we know also that if some-
thing has an owner, than it is a property. Moreover, it is stated that every account
has an owner. For example, account2 is a property, even if there is nowhere written
so, and the owner of account2 is nowhere speciﬁed. In Datalog such deduction, in
order to catch the redundancy, is impossible.
DL-safe rules formalism allows modelling the rules with disjunctions of atoms
in their heads. Hence, despite of admitting an additional component of the knowl-
edge base (in description logic), we also extend the language of logic programs used
by other methods from Datalog to disjunctive Datalog. Summarizing, WARMR,
FARMER and c-armr operate only on a part of the one of the two components
assumed in our approach, namely only on the Datalog part of disjunctive Datalog.
SPADA (in further versions named AL-QuIn) has been the only approach so
far to frequent pattern discovery in combined knowledge bases, more speciﬁcally
the knowledge bases expressed in AL-log (Donini et al. 1998). AL-log is the com-
bination of Datalog with ALC description logic, and hence our approach supports
more expressive language SHIF in the description logic component. The early ver-
sion of SPADA/AL-QuIn admitted only ALC atomic concepts as the structural
knowledge (i.e., taxonomies) whereas roles and complex concepts have been disre-
garded. AL-QuIn does not have this restriction. Rules in SPADA/AL-QuIn are
represented as constrained Datalog clauses. In these clauses, only DL concepts can
be used (as constraints in the body). While in DL-safe rules using both concepts
and roles in DL-atoms is allowed and DL-atoms can be used in rule heads as well.
DL-safe rules are applicable only to explicitly named objects. The fact that atoms
with concept predicates can occur only as constraints in the body of AL-log rules
has the similar eﬀect.
The actual representation considered in the SPADA/AL-QuIn is a special kind
of Datalog (where description logic concepts serve as constraints in the Datalog
clauses) (Lisi 2007). In the core of AL-QuIn, description logic axioms are compiled
into Datalog ones and appended to Datalog component (for the details see: (Lisi
2007)). In turn, the DL-safe rules extend expressive description logics with disjunc-
tive clauses. In the core of the reasoning mechanism proposed for DL-safe rules
there is an inverse direction: description logic knowledge base is translated into a
disjunctive Datalog program and rules are appended to the result of this transla-
tion. Note, that the ﬁrst approach, consisting on computing consequences of the
DL component ﬁrst, and then applying the rules to these consequences is incorrect
in general. Consider the following knowledge base (KB, P):

The role of semantics in mining frequent patterns
35
Human(x) ←Man(x), O(x)
Human(x) ←Woman(x), O(x)
(Man ⊔Woman)(Pat).
The assertion of individual Pat to concept (Man⊔Woman) means that Pat is a Man
or a Woman, but it is not known whether Pat is a man or a woman. Either of the
rules from (KB, P) derives that Pat is a Human, hence (KB, P) |= Human(Pat).
It could not be derived by applying these rules to the consequences of KB, since
KB ̸ |=Man(Pat) and KB ̸ |=Woman(Pat). Thus, in order to perform the trans-
lation from the description logic to Datalog, AL-QuIn has to assure that all the
concepts are named, which is not a restriction in our approach.
Eventually, the language used in SPADA/AL-QuIn corresponds to Datalog,
while that used in our approach to the, more expressive, disjunctive Datalog.
The relational data mining methods, WARMR and FARMER, use θ-subsumption
as the generality measure. The θ-subsumption is a syntactic generality relation and
as such it is not strong enough to capture semantic redundancies. For the knowledge
base from Example 1, WARMR may discover queries like the following one:
Q(x, y, z) =? −p familyAccount(x, y, z), p sharedAccount(x, y, z)
In the knowledge base, p familyAccount is deﬁned as a type of p sharedAccount.
This makes the second atom of Q, p sharedAccount(x, y, z), semantically redun-
dant. The θ-subsumption is to weak to use such taxonomic information. Using the
syntactic generality measure causes redundancy not only in a single pattern, but
also in a set of patterns. Consider, for example, the following queries that would be
both discovered by WARMR:
Q1(x, y, z) =? −p familyAccount(x, y, z)
Q2(x, y, z) =? −p familyAccount(x, y, z), p sharedAccount(x, y, z)
Under a semantic generality measure they would be equivalent to each other.
Both c-armr and SPADA have been conceived to use a semantic generality mea-
sure, but SPADA does not fully exploits it in an algorithm for pattern mining
to avoid generation of semantically redundant patterns. It is not used either to
prune patterns semantically redundant, due to redundant literals nor to prune se-
mantically equivalent patterns. That is, similar pattern as described above w.r.t.
WARMR, would be generated by SPADA:
q(y) ←p woman(y), p familyAccount(x, y, z), p sharedAccount(x, y, z)&Client(y)
Also, there is no solution in SPADA algorithm to check the redundancy using the
knowledge linking Datalog and description logic component (like the rule deﬁning
p familyAccount). The following clause may be generated:
q(x) ←p familyAccount(x, y, z), p woman(y) & Account(x), Client(y)
while from the (KB, P) already follows the constraint Client on variable y. Since
the second argument of p familyAccount describes an owner, and being an owner
implies being a client, the atom Client(y) is redundant w.r.t. (KB, P).

36
J. J´ozefowska and A.  Lawrynowicz and T.  Lukaszewski
It is also interesting to note here, that in c-armr not only semantically free (s-
free), but also semantically closed (s-closed) patterns are generated. Generation
of semantically closed patterns is based on the assumption that each s-free clause
has a unique s-closed clause (s-closure) and several s-free clauses may have the
same s-closure. This is valid for Datalog, as s-closures are computed based on the
computation of the least Herbrand models. In the context of our approach, this as-
sumption is not valid anymore. A combined knowledge base (KB, P) is translated
into a disjunctive Datalog program, where there may be possibly many minimal
models. Additionally, if there are transitive roles deﬁned in a knowledge base, in
order to be s-closed, a query should contain the transitive closure of atoms with
such role. It may cause that a query contains many, possibly not interesting atoms
and leads to additional computations. Taking into account the abovementioned is-
sues, we decided to generate only s-free queries.
Relational frequent pattern mining algorithms usually generate patterns accord-
ing to a speciﬁcation in a declarative bias. Declarative bias allows to specify the
set of atom templates describing the atoms to be used in patterns. Common so-
lution is to take one atom template after the other to build the reﬁnements of a
pattern, in order in which the templates are stored in a declarative bias directives.
Such solution is adopted in WARMR, FARMER, c-armr. However, the solution
does not make use of a semantic relationships between predicates in atoms, causing
redundant computations. Consider the patterns:
Q1(y) =? −p woman(y), p sharedAccount(x, y, z)
Q2(y) =? −p woman(y), p familyAccount(x, y, z)
Assume that pattern Q1 has been found infrequent. Thus, generating pattern Q2
is useless, since p familyAccount is more speciﬁc than p sharedAccount. However,
c-armr would generate and test both queries anyway. If some taxonomic informa-
tion was used to systematically generate reﬁnements, the redundant computation
could be avoided. In SPADA, taxonomic information is used only with regard to
the concept hierarchies. That is, patterns are reﬁned by replacing more general
concepts by more speciﬁc ones in the constraints of the constrained Datalog clause.
Any technique using taxonomic information is not reported with regard to the Dat-
alog predicates. It means, the same scheme of reﬁning patterns, described above, is
applied in SPADA/AL-QuIn, too.
Finally, in Table 6, we provide the comparison of the semantic features of the
approaches to (onto-)relational frequent pattern mining. In the last row we provide
the features of our approach, SEMINTEC.
With regard to the languages used, all of the approaches are able to operate
on a relational component. Only SPADA/AL-QuIn and our proposed approach,
SEMINTEC, are the systems designed to take a description logic component into
account. Moreover, SPADA/AL-QuIn is only able to use concepts in patterns,
but it is not able to use any roles. Additionally, only the representation used in
SEMINTEC allows disjunctions of atoms in rule heads. With regard to the fea-
tures of the algorithms, only c-armr, SPADA/AL-QuIn and SEMINTEC use the

The role of semantics in mining frequent patterns
37
Table 6: Semantic features of (onto-)relational frequent pattern mining methods.
Knowledge representation
Method
DL component
Datalog
component
disjunctive rules
semantic
generality
measure
semantically free
(non-redundant)
patterns
only one pattern
from each equiv-
alence class
taxonomies
directly used in
reﬁning patterns
WARMR
x
FARMER
x
c-armr
x
x
x
x
SPADA/AL-QuIn
x
x
x
x
SEMINTEC
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
semantic generality measure, with the consequences described earlier in this section.
Only c-armr and SEMINTEC apply a technique to prune semantically redundant
literals from patterns, by checking s-freeness property. Summarizing, SEMINTEC
is the only approach having all the features presented in Table 6.
7 Conclusions and future work
In this paper we have proposed a new method for frequent pattern discovery from
knowledge bases represented in a combination of SHIF description logic and DL-
safe rules. We have focused on the relation of the semantics of the representation
formalism to the task of frequent pattern discovery, as this is a key aspect to the
design of (onto-)relational frequent pattern discovery methods. For the core of our
method we have proposed an algorithm that applies techniques that exploit the
semantics of the combined knowledge base.
We have developed a proof-of-concept implementation of this method using the
state-of-the-art reasoning techniques. We have empirically shown that using the
intensional part of the combined knowledge to perform semantic tests on candidate
patterns can make data mining faster. This is because the semantic tests help to
prune useless patterns before their evaluation, and they help to avoid the futile
search of large parts of the pattern space. We have also shown that exploiting the
semantics of a knowledge base can improve the quality of the set of patterns pro-
duced: the patterns are more compact through the removal of redundant atoms,
and more importantly, there are fewer patterns, as only one pattern is produced
from each semantic equivalence class.
The primary motivation for our work is the real-world need of the Semantic Web
for data-mining methods. For example large amounts of biological data are now be-
ing represented using descriptions logics and rules, and there is a scientiﬁc need to
ﬁnd frequent patterns in this data. Our method is a baseline for future work in this
area that may be twofold. Firstly, after careful investigation of a particular needs

38
J. J´ozefowska and A.  Lawrynowicz and T.  Lukaszewski
of prominent application domains, the scope of the method may be extended by
considering more expressive languages falling into the framework of DL-safe rules.
Secondly, we plan to develop optimization techniques and heuristic algorithms for
which the proposed method (complete w.r.t. to the pattern space search) would be
a point of reference.
Acknowledgements. The authors acknowledge the support of the Polish Ministry of
Science and Higher Education (grant number N N516 186437). We are grateful to Boris
Motik for explanations on DL-safe rules formalism, and for providing KAON2 reasoner,
to Prof. Ross D. King for valuable discussions on KR and data mining in biology, and the
remarks on earlier versions of the paper, to Jan Ramon for explanations on the concept
of the semantic freeness of Datalog patterns. We are also very grateful to the anonymous
reviewers for all their comments.
