Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
Information Pursuit: A Bayesian Framework for Sequential Scene
Parsing
Ehsan Jahangiri · Erdem Y¨or¨uk · Ren´e Vidal · Laurent Younes · Donald Geman
Received: date / Accepted: date
Abstract Despite enormous progress in object detection and
classiﬁcation, the problem of incorporating expected con-
textual relationships among object instances into modern
recognition systems remains a key challenge. In this work
we propose information pursuit, a Bayesian framework for
scene parsing that combines prior models for the geometry
of the scene and the spatial arrangement of objects instances
with a data model for the output of high-level image classi-
ﬁers trained to answer speciﬁc questions about the scene. In
the proposed framework, the scene interpretation is progres-
sively reﬁned as evidence accumulates from the answers to
a sequence of questions. At each step, we choose the ques-
tion to maximize the mutual information between the new
answer and the full interpretation given the current evidence
obtained from previous inquiries. We also propose a method
for learning the parameters of the model from synthesized,
annotated scenes obtained by top-down sampling from an
easy-to-learn generative scene model. Finally, we introduce
a database of annotated indoor scenes of dining room tables,
which we use to evaluate the proposed approach.
Ehsan Jahangiri

Erdem Y¨or¨uk

Ren´e Vidal

Laurent Younes

Donald Geman

Center for Imaging Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
MD, USA.
Keywords Information Pursuit · Object Recognition · Con-
volutional Neural Networks · Coarse-to-Fine Annotation ·
Bayesian Inference
1 Introduction
The past few years have seen dramatic improvements in the
performance of object recognition systems, especially in 2D
object detection and classiﬁcation. Much of this progress has
been driven by the use of deep learning techniques, which
allow for end-to-end learning of multiple layers of low-,
mid- and high-level image features, which are used to pre-
dict, e.g., the object’s class, its 2D location, or its 3D pose,
provided that sufﬁciently many annotations for the desired
output are provided for training the corresponding deep net.
On the other hand, automatic semantic parsing of natural
scenes that typically exhibit contextual relationships among
multiple object instances remains a core challenge in com-
putational vision. As an example, consider the dining room
table scene shown in Figure 1, where it is fairly common for
collections of objects to appear in a speciﬁc arrangement on
the table. For instance, a plate setting often involves a plate
with a knife, a fork and a spoon to the left or right of the
plate, and a glass in front of the plate. Also, the knife, fork
and spoon often appear parallel to each other rather than in
a random conﬁguration. These complex spatial relationships
among object poses are often not captured by existing deep
networks, which tend to detect each object instance inde-
pendently. We argue that modeling such contextual relation-
ships is essential for highly accurate semantic parsing be-
cause detecting objects in the context of other objects can
potentially provide more coherent interpretations (e.g., by
avoiding object detections that are inconsistent with each
other).
arXiv:1701.02343v1  [cs.CV]  9 Jan 2017

2
Ehsan Jahangiri et al.
Proposed Bayesian Framework: We propose to leverage
recent advances in object classiﬁcation, especially deep learn-
ing of low-, mid- and high-level features, to build high-level
generative models that reason about objects in the scene
rather than features in the image. Speciﬁcally, we assume
we have at our disposal a battery of classiﬁers trained to an-
swer speciﬁc questions about the scene (e.g., is there a plate
in this image patch?) and propose a model for the output of
these high-level classiﬁers.
The proposed model is Bayesian, but can be seen as a
hybrid of learning-based and model-based approaches. By
the former, we refer to parsing an image by scanning it with
a battery of trained classiﬁers (e.g., SVMs or deep neural
nets). By the latter, we refer to identifying likely states un-
der the posterior distribution in a Bayesian framework which
combines a prior model over interpretations and a data model
based (usually) on low-level image features. In a nutshell,
we maintain the battery of classiﬁers and the Bayesian frame-
work by replacing the low-level features with high-level clas-
siﬁers. This is enabled by deﬁning the latent variables in
one-to-one correspondence with the classiﬁers. In particu-
lar, there are no low-level or mid-level features in the model;
all variables, hidden and measured, have semantic content.
We refer to the set which indexes the latent variables and
corresponding classiﬁers as “queries” and to the latent vari-
ables as “annobits”. For example, some annobits might be
lists of binary indicators of the presence or absence of vis-
ible instances from a subset of object categories in a spe-
ciﬁc image patch, and the corresponding classiﬁers might be
CNNs which output a vector of weights for each of these cat-
egories. Annobits can be seen as a perfect (noiseless) classi-
ﬁer and, vice-versa, the classiﬁer can be seen as an imperfect
(noisy) annobit. The data model is the conditional distribu-
tion of the family of classiﬁers given the family of annobits.
The prior model encodes our expectations about how
scenes are structured, for example encoding preferred spa-
tial arrangements among objects composing a dining room
table setting. Hence the posterior distribution serves to mod-
ulate or “contextualize” the raw classiﬁer output. We pro-
pose two prior models. The ﬁrst one combines a prior model
of the 3D scene and camera geometry, whose parameters
can be encoded by a homography, and a Markov random
ﬁeld (MRF) model of the 2D spatial arrangement of ob-
ject instances given the homography. The model is moti-
vated by our particular application to parsing dining room
table scenes, where most objects lie on the table plane. This
model is easy to sample from its posterior, but it is hard to
learn tabula-rasa due to lack of modularity and therefore the
need for a great many training samples. The second model is
based on an attributed graph where each node corresponds
to an object instance that is attributed with a category la-
bel and a pose in the 3D world coordinate system. The at-
tributed graph is built on top of a random skeleton that en-
codes spatial relationships among different object instances.
This model is easy to learn and sample, but sampling from
its posterior is much harder. We get the best of both worlds
by using the second model to synthesize a large number of
annotated scenes, which are then used to learn the parame-
ters of the ﬁrst model.
Proposed Scene Parsing Strategy: Depending on the scene,
running a relatively small subset of all the classiﬁers might
already provide a substantial amount of information about
the scene, perhaps even a sufﬁcient amount for a given pur-
pose. Therefore, we propose to annotate the data sequen-
tially, identifying and applying the most informative classi-
ﬁer (in an information-theoretic sense) at each step given the
accumulated evidence from those previously applied.
The selection of queries is task-dependent, but some gen-
eral principles can be articulated. We want to structure them
to allow the parsing procedure to move freely among differ-
ent levels of semantic and geometric resolution, for exam-
ple to switch from analyzing the scene as a whole, to local
scrutiny for ﬁne discrimination, and perhaps back again de-
pending on current input and changes in target probabilities
as evidence is acquired. Processing may be terminated at any
point, ideally as soon as the posterior distribution is peaked
around a coherent scene description, which may occur after
only a small fraction of the classiﬁers have been executed.
The Bayesian framework provides a principled way for
deciding what evidence to acquire at each step and for co-
herently integrating the evidence by updating likelihoods. At
each step, we select the classiﬁer (equivalently, the query)
which achieves the maximum value of the conditional mu-
tual information between the global scene interpretation and
any classiﬁer given the existing evidence (i.e., output of the
classiﬁers already implemented). Consequently, the order of
execution is determined online during scene parsing by solv-
ing the corresponding optimization problem at each step.
The proposed Information Pursuit (IP) strategy then alter-
nates between selecting the next classiﬁer, applying it to the
image data, and updating the posterior distribution on inter-
pretations given the currently collected evidence.
Application to 2D Object Detection and 3D Pose Esti-
mation in the JHU Table-Setting Dataset: We will use
the proposed IP strategy to detect instances from multiple
object categories in an image and estimate their 3D poses.
More precisely, consider a 3D scene and a semantic descrip-
tion consisting of a variable-length list of the identities and
3D poses of visible instances from a pre-determined family
of object categories. We want to recover this list by apply-
ing high-level classiﬁers to an observed image of the scene
acquired from an unknown viewpoint. As a proof of con-
cept, we will focus on indoor scenes of dinning room tables,
where the speciﬁc categories are plate, glass, utensil and bot-
tle. Such scenes are challenging due to severe occlusion,
complex photometry and intra-class variability. In order to

Information Pursuit: A Bayesian Framework for Sequential Scene Parsing
3
train models and classiﬁers we have collected and manually
labeled 3000 images of table settings from the web. We will
use this dataset for learning our model, training and test-
ing the classiﬁers, and evaluating system’s performance. We
will show that we can make accurate decisions about exist-
ing object instances by processing only a small fraction of
patches from a given test image. We will also demonstrate
that coarse-to-ﬁne search naturally emerges from IP.
Paper Contributions: In summary, the core contribution of
our work is a Bayesian framework for semantic scene pars-
ing that combines (1) a data model on the output of high-
level classiﬁers as opposed to low-level image features, (2)
prior models on the scene that captures rich contextual rela-
tionships among instances of multiple object categories, (3)
a progressive scene annotation strategy driven by stepwise
uncertainty reduction, and (4) a dataset of table settings.
Paper Outline: The remainder of the paper is organized
as follows. In section 2 we summarize some related work.
In section 3 we deﬁne the main system variables and for-
mulate information pursuit in mathematical terms. In sec-
tion 4 we introduce the annobits and the annocell hierarchy.
In section 5 we introduce our prior model on 3D scenes,
which includes a prior model on interpretation units and a
prior model on scene geometry and camera parameters. In
section 6 we introduce a novel scene generation model for
synthesizing 3D scenes, which is used to learn the parame-
ters of the prior model. The algorithm for sampling from the
posterior distribution, a crucial step, is spelled out in sec-
tion 7 and the particular classiﬁers (CNNs) and data model
(Dirichlet distributions) we use in our experiments are de-
scribed in section 8. In section 9 we introduce the “JHU
Table-Setting Dataset”, which is composed of about 3000
fully annotated scenes, which we use for training the prior
model and the classiﬁers. In section 10 we present compre-
hensive experiments, including comparisons between IP and
using the CNNs alone. Finally, there is a concluding discus-
sion in section 11.
2 Related Work
The IP strategy proposed in this work is partially motivated
by the “divide-and-conquer” search strategy employed by
humans in playing parlor and board games such as “Twenty
Questions,” where the classiﬁers would represent noisy an-
swers, as well as by the capacity of the human visual sys-
tem to select potential targets in a scene and ignore other
items through acts of selective attention (Serences and Yan-
tis 2006; Reynolds et al. 1999). An online algorithm im-
plementing the IP strategy was ﬁrst introduced by Geman
and Jedynak (1996) under the name “active testing” and
designed speciﬁcally for road tracking in satellite images.
Since then, variations on active testing have appeared in (Sznit-
man and Jedynak 2010) for face detection and localization,
in (Branson et al. 2014) for ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation, and
in (Sznitman et al. 2013) for instrument tracking during reti-
nal microsurgery. However, it has not yet been applied to
problems of the complexity of 3D scene interpretation.
CNNs, and more generally deep learning with feature hi-
erarchies, are everywhere. Current CNNs are designed based
on the same principles introduced years ago in (Homma
et al. 1988; Lecun et al. 1998). In the past decade, more ef-
ﬁcient ways to train neural networks with more layers (Hin-
ton et al. 2006; Bengio et al. 2007; Ranzato et al. 2007) to-
gether with far larger annotated training sets (e.g., large pub-
lic image repositories such as ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009))
and efﬁcient implementations on high-performance comput-
ing systems, such as GPUs and large-scale distributed clus-
ters (Dean et al. 2012; Ciresan et al. 2011) resulted in the
success of deep learning and more speciﬁcally CNNs. This
has resulted in impressive performance of CNNs on a num-
ber of benchmarks and competitions including the ImageNet
Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge (ILSVRC) (Rus-
sakovsky et al. 2015). To achieve better performance, the
network size has grown constantly in the past few years by
taking advantage of the newer and more powerful computa-
tional resources.
State-of-the-art object detection systems (e.g., RCNN Gir-
shick et al. (2016) and faster RCNN Ren et al. (2015)) ini-
tially generate some proposal boxes which are likely to con-
tain object instances; these boxes are then processed by the
CNN for classiﬁcation, and then regressed to obtain better
bounding boxes for positive detections. In RCNN Girshick
et al. (2016), the proposals are generated using the “selective
search” algorithm Uijlings et al. (2013). The selective search
algorithm generates candidates by various ways of group-
ing the output of an initial image segmentation. The faster
region-based CNN (faster RCNN) of Ren et al. (2015) does
not use the selective search algorithm to generate the candi-
date boxes; their network generates the proposals internally
in the forward path. These approaches do not use contex-
tual relations to improve disambiguation and prevent incon-
sistent interpretations, allow for progressive annotation, or
accommodate 3D representations. There is no image seg-
mentation in our approach.
There is a considerable amount of work attempting to in-
corporate contextual reasoning into object recognition. Fre-
quently this is accomplished by labeling pairs of regions
obtained from segmentation or image patches using Con-
ditional Random Fields or Markov Random Fields (Rabi-
novich et al. 2007; Mottaghi et al. 2014; Sun et al. 2014;
Desai et al. 2011). Compositional vision (Geman et al. 2002)
embeds context in a broader sense by considering more gen-
eral, non-Markovian models related to context-sensitive gram-
mars. While most of the work is about discriminative learn-
ing and reasoning in 2D (Choi et al. 2012; Sun et al. 2014;

4
Ehsan Jahangiri et al.
Desai et al. 2011; Felzenszwalb et al. 2010; Porway et al.
2010; Hoai and Zisserman 2014; Rabinovich et al. 2007),
several attempts have been made recently at designing mod-
els that reason about surfaces of 3D scenes and the interac-
tion between objects and their supporting surfaces (Bao et al.
2010; Hoiem et al. 2007; Lee et al. 2010; Silberman et al.
2012; Saxena et al. 2009; Liu et al. 2014). It has been shown
that reasoning about the underlying 3D layout of the scene
is, as expected, useful in recognizing interactions with other
objects and surfaces (Bao et al. 2010; Hoiem and Savarese
2011). However, most of the current 3D models do not en-
code contextual relations among objects on supporting sur-
faces beyond their coplanarity.
3 General Framework
3.1 Scenes and Queries
Let Z be a limited set of possible interpretations or descrip-
tions of a physical 3D scene and let I be a 2D image of the
scene. In this paper, a description Z ∈Z records the identi-
ties and 3D poses of visible instances from a pre-determined
family of object categories C. The scene description is un-
known, but the image I is observed and is determined by the
scene together with other, typically unobserved, variables
W, including the camera’s intrinsic and extrinsic parame-
ters. We will assume that Z, W and I are random variables
deﬁned on a common probability space.
The goal is to reconstruct as much information as pos-
sible about Z from the observation I and to generate a cor-
responding semantic rendering of the scene by visualizing
object instances. In our setting, information about Z is sup-
plied by noisy answers to a series of image-based queries
from a speciﬁed set Q. We assume the true answer Yq to a
query q ∈Q is determined by Z and W; hence, for each
q ∈Q, Yq = fq(Z, W) for some function fq. The depen-
dency of Yq on W allows the queries to depend on locations
relative to the observed image. We regard Yq as providing
a small unit of information about the scene Z, and hence
assuming a small set of possible values, even just two, i.e.,
Yq ∈{0, 1} corresponding to the answers “no” or “yes” to
a binary query. We will refer to every Yq as an “annobit”
whether or not q is a binary query. Also, for each subset of
queries V ⊂Q, we will denote the corresponding subset of
annobits as YV = (Yq | q ∈V ) and similarly for classiﬁers
XV (see below).
We will progressively estimate the states of the anno-
bits from a matched family of image-based predictors. More
speciﬁcally, for each query q ∈Q, there is a corresponding
classiﬁer Xq, where Xq = hq(I) for some function hq. We
will assume that each classiﬁer has the same computational
cost; this is necessary for sequential exploration based on in-
formation ﬂow alone to be meaningful, but can also be seen
as a constraint on the choice of queries Q. We will further
assume that YQ is a sufﬁcient statistic for XQ in the sense
that
P(XQ|Z, U) = P(XQ|YQ).
(1)
We will use a Bayesian model. The prior model is composed
of a scene model for Z, which encodes knowledge about
spatial arrangements of scene objects, and a camera model
for W. Combining the prior model P(Z)P(W) with the
data model P(XQ|YQ) then allows us to develop inference
methods based on (samples from) the posterior P(Z, W|XQ).
While the speciﬁc form of these models naturally depends
on the application (see section 5 for a description of these
models for our applications to tables scenes), the informa-
tion pursuit strategy is generally applicable to any prior and
data models, as explained next.
3.2 Information Pursuit
Let (q1, . . . , qk) be an ordered sequence of the ﬁrst k dis-
tinct queries and let (x1, . . . , xk) be possible answers from
the corresponding classiﬁers (Xq1, . . . , Xqk). Consider the
event
Ek = {Xq1 = x1, . . . , Xqk = xk},
(2)
where, qℓis the index of the query at step ℓof the process
and xℓis the observed result of applying classiﬁer Xℓon I.
Therefore, Ek is the accumulated evidence after k queries.
The IP strategy is deﬁned recursively. The ﬁrst query is
ﬁxed by the model:
q1 = argmax
q∈Q
I(Xq, YQ),
(3)
where I is the mutual information, which is determined by
the joint distribution of Xq and YQ. Thereafter, for k > 1,
qk = argmax
q∈Q
I(Xq, YQ|Ek−1)
(4)
which is determined by the conditional joint distribution of
Xq and YQ given the evidence to date, i.e., given Ek−1. Ac-
cording to (4) a classiﬁer with maximum expected informa-
tion gain given the currently collected evidence is greedily
selected at each step of IP.
From the deﬁnition of the mutual information, we have
I(Xq, YQ|Ek−1) = H(YQ|Ek−1)−H(YQ|Xq, Ek−1), (5)
where H denotes the Shannon entropy. Since the ﬁrst term
on the right-hand side does not depend on q, one sees that
the next query is chosen such that adding to the evidence
the result of applying Xq to the test image will minimize,
on average, the uncertainty about YQ. One point of caution
regarding the notation H(YQ|Xq, Ek−1): here YQ and Xq

Information Pursuit: A Bayesian Framework for Sequential Scene Parsing
5
are random variables, while Ek−1 is a ﬁxed event. The no-
tation then refers to the conditional entropy of YQ given Xq
computed under the conditional probability P(·|Ek−1), i.e.,
the expectation (with respect to the distribution of Xq) of the
entropy of YQ under P(·|Xq = x, Ek−1).
Returning to the interpretation of the selection criterion,
we can also write
I(Xq, YQ|Ek−1) = H(Xq|Ek−1)−H(Xq|YQ, Ek−1). (6)
This implies that the next question is selected such that:
1. H(Xq|Ek−1) is large, so that its answer is as unpre-
dictable as possible given the current evidence, and
2. H(Xq|YQ, Ek−1) is small, so that Xq is predictable given
the ground truth (i.e., Xq is a “good” classiﬁer).
The two criteria are however balanced, so that one could
accept a relatively poor classiﬁer if it is (currently) highly
unpredictable.
Depending on the structure of the joint distribution of
X and Y , these conditional entropies may not be easy to
compute. A possible simpliﬁcation is to make the approxi-
mation of neglecting the error rates of Xq at the selection
stage, therefore replacing Xq by Yq. Such an approximation
leads to a simpler deﬁnition of qk, namely
qk =
argmax
q∈Q\{q1,...,qk−1}
H(Yq|Ek−1).
(7)
Notice that (in above) the X and Y are not assumed to co-
incide in the conditioning event Ek−1 (which depends on
the X variables) so that the accuracy of the classiﬁers is still
accounted for when evaluating the implications of current
evidence. So here again, one prefers asking questions whose
(true) answers are unpredictable. For example, one would
not ask “Is it an urban scene?” after already having got a
positive response to “Is there a skyscraper?” nor would one
ask if there is an object instance from category c in patch
“A” if we already know it is highly likely that there is an ob-
ject instance from category c in patch “B”, a subset of “A”.
Removing previous questions from the search is important
with this approximation, since the mutual information in (6)
vanishes in that case, but not necessarily the conditional en-
tropy in (7).
Returning to the general situation, (6) can be simpliﬁed
if one makes two independence assumptions:
1. The classiﬁers are conditionally independent given YQ;
2. The classiﬁer Xq is conditionally independent of YQ\q
given Yq, i.e., the distribution of Xq depends on YQ only
through Yq.
Clearly H(Xq|YQ, Ek−1) = 0 if query q belongs to the his-
tory, so assume q ̸∈{q1, . . . , qk−1}. In what follows, let
y = (yq, q ∈Q), where yq represents a possible value of
Yq. Then, under assumptions 1 and 2, and using the fact that
Ek−1 only depends on the realizations of X, we have:
H(Xq|YQ, Ek−1)
=
X
y
H(Xq|YQ = y, Ek−1)P(YQ = y|Ek−1)
=
X
y
H(Xq|YQ = y)P(YQ = y|Ek−1)
=
X
y
H(Xq|Yq = yq)P(YQ = y|Ek−1)
=
X
yq
H(Xq|Yq = yq)P(Yq = yq|Ek−1).
(8)
This entropy H(Xq|Yq = yq) can be computed from the
data model and the mixture weights P(Yq = yq|Ek−1) can
be estimated from Monte Carlo simulations (see section 7).
Similarly, the ﬁrst term in (6), namely H(Xq|Ek−1), can be
expressed as the entropy of a mixture:
H(Xq|Ek−1)
= −
X
x
P(Xq = x|Ek−1) log P(Xq = x|Ek−1)
(9)
with
P(Xq = x|Ek−1)
= −
X
y
P(Xq = x|YQ = y, Ek−1)P(YQ = y|Ek−1). (10)
Arguing as with the second term in (6), i.e., replacing P(Xq =
x|YQ = y, Ek−1) by P(Xq = x|Yq = yq), the last expres-
sion is the entropy of the mixture distribution
X
yq
P(Xq = x|Yq = yq)P(Yq = yq|Ek−1).
(11)
where x is ﬁxed. Consequently, given an explicit data model,
the information pursuit strategy can be efﬁciently approxi-
mated by sampling from the posterior distribution.
As a ﬁnal note, we remark that we have used the vari-
ables YQ to represent the unknown scene Z. Writing
H(Z|Ek−1) = H(Z|YQ, Ek−1) + H(YQ|Ek−1),
(12)
we see that the residual uncertainty on Z given the current
evidence will only slightly differ from the residual uncer-
tainty of YQ as soon as the residual uncertainty of Z given
YQ is small, which is a reasonable assumption when the
number of annobits is large enough.
We now pass to a more speciﬁc description of the vari-
ables X, Y, Z and their distributions. In particular, the next
section provides our driving principles for the choice of the
annobits. We will then discuss the related classiﬁers, fol-
lowed by the construction of the prior and data models, their
training and the associated sampling algorithms.

6
Ehsan Jahangiri et al.
4 Annobits
4.1 General Principles
The choice of the functions fq that deﬁne the annobits, Yq =
fq(Z, W), q ∈Q, naturally depends on the speciﬁc applica-
tion. The annobits we have in mind for scene interpretation,
and have used in previous related work on a visual Turing
test (Geman et al. 2015), fall mainly into three categories:
– Scene context annobits: These indicate full scene la-
bels, such as “indoor”, “outdoor” or “street”; since our
application is focused entirely on “dinning room table
settings” we do not illustrate these.
– Part-of descriptors: These indicate whether or not one
image region is a subset of another, e.g., whether an im-
age patch is part of a table.
– Existence annobits: These relate to the presence or ab-
sence of object instances with certain properties or at-
tributes. The most numerous set of annobits in our sys-
tem ask whether or not instances of a given object cate-
gory are visible inside a speciﬁed region.
Functions of these elementary descriptors can also be of in-
terest. For example, we will rely heavily on annobits pro-
viding a list of all object categories visible in a given image
region, as described in section 4.3.
4.2 Annocell Hierarchy
Recall from section 3.1 that a scene description Z consists of
the object categories and 3D poses of visible instances from
a pre-determined family of object categories. Here, moti-
vated by our application to dining room table scenes where
objects lie in the table plane, we use a 2D representation
of the object pose, which can be put in one-to-one corre-
spondence with its 3D pose via the homography relating the
image plane and the table plane (see section 5.2 for details).
More speciﬁcally, an object instance is a triple (C, L, D),
where C ∈C denotes the object category in a set of pre-
deﬁned categories C, L ∈L denotes the locations of the
centers of the instances in the image domain L and D > 0
denotes their sizes in the image (e.g., diameter). The appar-
ent 2D pose space is therefore L × (0, +∞). More reﬁned
poses could obviously be considered.
To deﬁne the queries, we divide the apparent pose space
into cells. Speciﬁcally, we consider a ﬁnite, distinguished
subset of sub-windows, A, and subset of size intervals, M,
and index the queries q ∈Q by the triplet q = (C, A, M),
where C ∈C, A ∈A, and M ∈M. For every category
C ∈C, sub-window A ⊂A and size interval M ∈M,
we let YC,A,M = 1 if an instance of category C with size
in M is visible in A, and YC,A,M = 0 otherwise. If M =
(0, +∞), we simply write YC,A. We refer to A ∈A as an
Fig. 1 Some selected cells from different levels of the annocell hier-
archy. Rectangles with dashed lines are the nearest neighbor patches to
the rectangles with solid lines from the same color.
“annocell.” Speciﬁcally, assuming L = [0, 1]2 (by padding
and normalizing), A consists of square patches of four sizes,
2−l for l ∈{0, 1, 2, 3}. The patches at each “level” overlap:
for each level, the row and column shift ratio is 25% i.e.,
75% overlap between nearest windows. This leads to 1, 25,
169, and 841 patches for levels 0,1,2, and 3 respectively, for
a total of |A| = 1036 patches. Figure 1 shows some of these
regions selected from the four levels of the hierarchy.
Using a hierarchical annocell structure has the advantage
of allowing for coarse-to-ﬁne exploration of the pose space.
Note also that, by construction, annocells at low resolution
are unions of certain high-resolution ones. This implies that
the value of the annobits at low resolution can in turn be
derived as maximums of high-resolution annobits.
4.3 Extended Existence Annobits
Due to the nature of the classiﬁers we use in our application,
we also introduce annobits that list the categories that have
entirely visible instances in an annocell, i.e., the collection
Y cat
A
= (YC,A, C ∈C).
(13)
In addition, we also use category-independent, size-related
annobits: For each annocell A∈A and size interval M ∈M,
we deﬁne a binary annobit Y sc
A,M which indicates whether or
not the average size of the objects present in A belongs to M.

Information Pursuit: A Bayesian Framework for Sequential Scene Parsing
7
4.4 Classiﬁers for Annobits
The particular image-based predictors of the annobits we
use in the table-setting application are described in full de-
tail in section 8. Some examples include:
– Variables Xcat
A , A ∈A, which provide a vector of weights
on C for predicting Y cat
A .
– Variables Xsc
A , A ∈A, which provide a probability vec-
tor on M for predicting (Y sc
A,M, M ∈M).
Additional variables Xt
A, A ∈A′ (where A′ is a subset of
A) will also be introduced. They are designed to predict in-
formation units Y t
A = 1 if more than half of A overlaps the
table. Observe that the classiﬁer Xq assigned to Yq does not
necessarily assume the same value as Yq. However, this is
not a problem since we are only interested in the conditional
distribution of X given Y .
5 Prior Model
Following section 3, the joint distribution of the annobits
(Yq, q ∈Q) is derived from a prior model on the 3D scene
description, Z, and on camera parameters W. We assume
these variables to be independent and model them separately.
5.1 Scene Model P(Z | S)
Motivated by our application to dining room table scenes,
we assume a ﬁxed dominant plane in the 3D model, and
choose a coordinate system Oxyz in R3, such that the xy-
plane coincides with this dominant plane. The scene Z is
represented as a set of object instances, assumed to be sit-
ting on a bounded region of the dominant plane, in our case
a centered, rectangular table S characterized by its length
and width. Recall from section 4.2 that each object instance
i is represented by a category Ci ∈C, a location Li and
a size Di in the image. Here, we assume that objects from
a given category have a ﬁxed size, so that Z = {Zi} with
Zi = (Ci, Li). The distribution of Z will be deﬁned con-
ditional to S, since, for example, the size of S will directly
impact the number of objects that it can support. More gen-
erally the table can be replaced by some other variable S
representing more complex properties of the global scene
geometry. For convenience we sometimes drop S from our
notation. However, most of the model components intro-
duced below depend on S, and the proposed model is to be
understood conditional to S.
We partition the reference plane into small cells (5cm ×
5cm in the table-setting case) and use binary variables to in-
dicate the presence of instances of object categories centered
in each cell. In other words, we discretize the family (Ci, Li)
Fig. 2 Table ﬁtting mesh.
into a binary random ﬁeld that we will still denote by Z. Let-
ting J denote the set of cells, a conﬁguration can therefore
be represented as the binary vector z = (zj,c, j ∈J , c ∈C)
where zj,c = 1 if and only if an object of category c is cen-
tered in the cell j.
The conﬁguration z is obviously a discrete representa-
tion of the scene layout restricted to object categories C and
location L. Letting Ωdenote the space of all such conﬁg-
urations, we will use a Gibbs distribution on Ωassociated
with a family of feature functions ϕ = (ϕi, i = 1, . . . , n),
with ϕi : Ω7→{0, 1}, and scalar parameters λ = (λi, i =
1, . . . , n). The Gibbs distribution then has the following form:
p(z) =
1
κ(λ) exp
 λ · ϕ(z)

,
(14)
where κ(λ) is the normalizing factor (partition function) en-
suring that the probabilities sum up to one. Figure 2 shows
a table and its ﬁtted mesh where each of the cells is a 5cm ×
5cm square.
We use the following features:
– Existence features, which indicate whether or not an in-
stance from a given category is centered anywhere in a
given set of cells, therefore taking the form
ϕJ,c(z) = max(zj,c, j ∈J)
(15)
with J ⊂J . We consider sets J at three different gran-
ularity levels, illustrated in Figure 3. At the ﬁne level
J = {j} is a singleton, so that ϕJ,c(z) = zj,c. We also
consider middle-level sets (3×3 array of ﬁne cells) and
coarse-level sets (6×6 array of ﬁne cells) that cover the
reference plane without intersection.
– Conjunction features, which are products of two middle-
level existence features (of the same or different cate-
gories), and therefore signal their co-occurrence:
ϕJ1,c1,J2,c2(z) = ϕJ1,c1(z)ϕJ2,c2(z).
(16)

8
Ehsan Jahangiri et al.
Fig. 3 Domain of various types of feature functions.
To limit model complexity, only pairs J1, J2 whose cen-
ters are less than a threshold away are considered where
the threshold can depend on the pair c1, c2.
Invariance and symmetry assumptions about the 3D scene
are then encoded as equality constraints among the model
parameters thereby reducing model complexity. Grouping
binary features ϕi with identical parameters λi is then equiv-
alent to considering a new set of features that count the num-
ber of layout conﬁgurations satisfying some conditions on
the locations and categories. For table settings, it is natural
to assume invariance by rotation around the center of the ta-
ble. Hence we assume that existence features whose domain
J is of the same size and located at the same distance from
the closest table edge all have the same weights (λ’s), and
hence the probability only depends on the number of such
instances.
We group conjunction feature functions based on the dis-
tance of the ﬁrst patch to the edge of the table, and the rela-
tive position of the second patch (left, right, front, or back)
with respect to the ﬁrst patch.
Remark 1 : The model can be generalized to include pose
attributes other than location, e.g., orientation, size and height.
If Θ denotes the space of poses, then one can extend the state
space for zj,c to {0, 1} × Θ, interpreting zj,c = (1, θ) as the
presence of an object with category c and pose θ in cell j,
and zj,c = (0, θ) as the absence of any object with category
c, θ being irrelevant. Features can then be extended to this
state space to provide a joint distribution that includes pose.
The simplest approach would be to only extend univariate
features, so that object poses and other attributes are con-
ditionally independent given their categories and locations
(and the geometry variable S, since the model is always as-
sumed conditional to it). Other attributes (color, style, etc.)
can be incorporated in a similar way.
5.2 Camera Model P(W)
The second component of the prior model determines the
probability distribution of the extrinsic and intrinsic camera
parameters, such as its pose and focal length, respectively.
The deﬁnition of these parameters is fairly standard in com-
puter vision (see e.g., Ma et al. (2003)), but the deﬁnition
of generative models for these parameters is not. In what
follows we summarize the typical deﬁnitions, and leave the
details of the generative model to the Appendix.
Remember that we assumed a ﬁxed coordinate system in
3D in which the xy-plane coincides with the dominant “hor-
izontal” plane. Consider also a second camera coordinate
system O′x′y′z′, such that x′y′-plane is equal to the im-
age plane. The extrinsic camera parameters are deﬁned by
the pose (R, T) of the camera coordinate system O′x′y′z′
relative to the ﬁxed coordinate system Oxyz, where R is
the camera rotation, which maps the unit axis vectors of
Oxyz to the unit axis vectors of O′x′y′z′, and T = OO′
is the translation vector. We parametrize the rotation R by
three angles ψ = (ψx, ψy, ψz) representing, respectively,
counter-clockwise rotations of the camera’s coordinate sys-
tem about the x-axis, y-axis, and z-axis of the world coor-
dinate system (see equation (29) for conversion of unit vec-
tors to angles). Observe that one can express the coordinates
m = (x, y, z)⊤of a 3D point in the world coordinate sys-
tem as functions of its coordinates in the camera coordinate
system m′ = (x′, y′, z′)⊤in the form m = Rm′ + T. Since
in our case 3D points lie in a plane N ⊤m′ = d, where N
is the normal to the plane (i.e., table) measured in the cam-
era coordinate system and d is the distance from the plane
to the camera center, we further have m = Hm′, where
H = (R+TN ⊤/d) is the homography between the camera
plane and the world plane.
The intrinsic camera parameters are deﬁned by the coor-
dinates of the focal point, (x0, y0, −f), where f > 0 is the
focal length and (x0, y0) is the intersection of the principal
axis of the camera with the image plane, as well as the pixel
sizes in directions x′ and y′, denoted by γx and γy.
The complete set of camera parameters is therefore 11-
dimensional and given by W = (f, γx, γy, x0, y0, ψ, T).
Our generative model for W assumes that:
– Intrinsic camera parameters are independent from ex-
trinsic camera parameters.
– Pixels are square, i.e., γx = γy, but intrinsic parameters
are otherwise independent. The focal length f is uni-
formly distributed between 10 and 40 millimeters, x0
(resp. y0) is uniformly distributed between Wp/4 and
3Wp/4 (resp. Hp/4 and 3Hp/4), where Wp and Hp are

Information Pursuit: A Bayesian Framework for Sequential Scene Parsing
9
the width and height of the image in pixels, and γx = γy
is uniformly distributed between 1/Wp and 1.2/Wp.
– The vertical component of T is independent of the other
two and the distribution of the horizontal components is
rotation invariant. Speciﬁcally, letting T = (Tx, Ty, Tz),
we assume that (Tz −0.3)/2.7 follows a Beta distribu-
tion so that Tz ∈[0.3, 3] (expressed in meters). Then,
letting r =
q
T 2x + T 2y denote the distance between the
horizontal projection of T on the table plane and the cen-
ter of the table, we assume that r/4 follows a Beta distri-
bution. We assume independence of r and tz and invari-
ance by rotation around the vertical axis, which speciﬁes
the distribution of T.
– The distribution of the rotation angles ψ is deﬁned con-
ditionally to T. Speciﬁcally, we assume that the camera
roughly points towards the center of the scene and the
horizontal direction in the image plane is also horizon-
tal in the 3D coordinate system. Additional details of the
model for p(ψ|T) are provided in the Appendix.
5.3 Scene Geometry Model P(S) and Global Model
We assume that the scene geometry S takes value in a ﬁnite
set of “template geometries” that coarsely cover all possible
situations. Note that these templates are deﬁned up to trans-
lation, since we can always assume that the 3D reference
frame is placed in a given position relative to the geometry.
For table settings, where the geometry represents the table
itself, our templates were simply square tables with size dis-
tributed according to a shifted and scaled Beta distribution
ranging from 0.5 to 3 meters. This rough approximation was
sufﬁcient for our purposes, even though tables in real scenes
are obviously much more variable in shape and size.
Finally, the joint prior distribution p(z, s, w) = P(Z =
z, S = s, W = w) of all the variables is deﬁned by:
p(z, s, w) = p(z|s) p(s) p(w).
(17)
5.4 Learning the Prior Model
The models for P(S) and P(W) are simple enough that we
speciﬁed their model parameters manually, as described be-
fore. Therefore, the fundamental challenge is to learn the
prior model on scene interpretations P(Z | S). For this pur-
pose, we assume that a training set of annotated images is
available. The annotation for each image consists of a list
of object instances, each one labeled by its category (and
possibly other attributes) and apparent 2D pose represented
by an ellipse in the image plane. We also assume that suf-
ﬁcient information is provided to propagate the image an-
notation to a scene annotation in 3D coordinates; this will
allow us to train the scene model independently from the
unknown transformation that maps it to the image. This can
be done in several ways. For example, given four points in
the image that are the projections of the corners of a square
in the reference plane, one can reconstruct, up to a scale fac-
tor, the homography mapping this plane to the image. Doing
this with a reasonable accuracy is relatively easy in general
for a human annotator, and allows one to invert the outline
of every ﬂat object on the image that lies on the reference
plane to its 3D shape, up to a scale ambiguity. This ambi-
guity can be removed by knowing the true distance between
two points in the reference plane, and their positions in the
image. We used this level of annotation and representation
for our table settings, based on the fact that all objects of in-
terest were either horizontal (e.g., plates), or had easily iden-
tiﬁable horizontal components (e.g., bottoms of bottles), and
we assumed that plates had a standard diameter of 25cm to
remove the scale ambiguity.
As can be seen, the level of annotation required to train
our prior model is quite high. While we have been able to
produce rich annotations for 3,000 images of dining room
table settings (see section 9), this is insufﬁcient to train our
model. To address this issue, in the next section we propose
a 3D scene generation model that can be use to generate a
large number of annotations for as many synthetic images
as needed. Given the annotations of both synthetic images
(section 6) as well as real images (section 9), the param-
eters of our prior model are learned using an accelerated
version of the robust stochastic approximation (Nemirovski
et al. 2009) to match empirical statistics calculated based on
top-down samples from the scene generation model (see Ja-
hangiri (2016) for details).
6 Scene Generation Model
In this section we propose a 3D scene generation model that
can be used to generate a large number of annotations to
train the prior model described in the section 5. The pro-
posed model mimics a natural sequence of steps in compos-
ing a scene. First, create spontaneous instances by placing
some objects randomly in the scene; the distribution of lo-
cations depends on the scene geometry. Then, allow each
of these instances to trigger the placement of ancillary ob-
jects, whose categories and attributes are sampled condition-
ally, creating groups of contextually related objects. This re-
cursive process terminates when no children are created, or
when the number of iterations reaches an upper-bound.

10
Ehsan Jahangiri et al.
plate
bottle
glass
utensil
Fig. 4 An example master graph.
6.1 Model Description Using a Generative Attributed
Graph
To formally deﬁne this process, we will use the notation n =
(nc, c ∈C) to represent a family of integer counts nc ∈N
indexed by categories, so that n ∈N|C|. We will also let
|n| = P
c∈C nc.
We will assume a probability distribution p(0) on N|C|,
and a family of such distributions p(c), c ∈C. These distri-
butions (which are deﬁned conditionally to S = s) are used
to decide the number of objects that will be placed in the
scene at each step. More speciﬁcally:
1. p(0)(· | s) is the conditional joint distribution of the num-
ber of object instances from each category that are placed
initially on the scene.
2. For each category c ∈C, p(c)(· | s) is the joint distribu-
tion of the numbers of new object instances that are trig-
gered by the addition of an object instance from category
c. These distributions can be thought of as the basis dis-
tributions in a multi-type branching process (see Mode
(1971)).
The complexity of the process is controlled by a master graph
that restricts the subset of categories that can be created at
each step. More formally, this directed graph has vertices in
{0} ∪C and is such that p(v) is supported by categories that
are children of the node v ∈{0}∪C. Adjoining 0 to the node
labels avoids treating p(0) as a special case in the derivations
below. The master graph we used on table settings is pro-
vided in Figure 4, where we regard “plate” and “bottle” as
the children of category 0. Note that since we allow sponta-
neous instances from all categories every category is a child
to category 0.
The output of this branching process can be represented
as a directed tree G0 = (V, C, E) in which each vertex
v ∈V is attributed a category denoted by C(v) and E is a
set of edges. The root node of the tree, hereafter denoted by
0, essentially represents the empty scene whose “category”
is also denoted by 0 (note that 0 ̸∈C). All other nodes have
categories in C. Each non-terminal node v ∈V has |N(v)|
children where N(v) ∼p(c(v))(·|s) so that N (v)
c
of these
children have category c. We will refer to G0 as a skeleton
tree, which needs to be completed with the object attributes
(excluding its category since G0 already includes the cate-
1
2
3
4
6
5
8
18
9
7
10
12
11
13
20
14
15
16
17
19
plate
glass
utensil
7
8
9
18
10
11
12
19
13
3
14
20
15
16
17
1
2
4
5
6
Fig. 5 A table-setting scene (top) and its corresponding skeleton graph
(bottom) where the categories (plate, bottle, glass, and utensil) are
color-coded in the graph. Root nodes V0 initialize the generative pro-
cess; here there are six. The terminal nodes for this instance are
VT = {6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20}. According to the
base graph n(0)
plate = 4,n(0)
bottle = 0, n(0)
glass = 0 and n(0)
utensil = 2.
gory attribute) to obtain a complete scene description. The
probability distribution of G0 is
p(G0 | s) =
Y
v∈V \VT
p(c(v))(n(v) | s),
(18)
where VT is the set of terminal nodes and n(v) are the cat-
egory counts of the children of v (graphs being identiﬁed
up to category-invariant isomorphisms). An example of such
graph is provided in Figure 5.
To complete the description, we need to associate at-
tributes to objects, the most important of them being their
poses in the 3D world, on which we focus now. In the MRF
designed for our experiments, the only relevant information
about pose was the location on the table, a 2D parameter. It
is however possible to design a top-down generative model
that includes richer information, using for example a 3D
ellipsoid. Such representations involve a small number of
parameters denoted generically by θ: each vertex v in the
skeleton graph is attributed by parameters such as its pose
denoted by θ(v). When using ellipsoids, θ(v) involves eight
free parameters (ﬁve for the shape of the ellipsoid, which
is a positive deﬁnite symmetric matrix, and three for its cen-
ter). Fewer parameters would be needed for ﬂat objects (rep-
resented by a 2D ellipse), or vertical ones, or objects with
rotational symmetry. In any case, it is obvious that the dis-
tribution of an object pose depends heavily on its category.
In our model, contextual information is important: when
placing an object relative to a parent, the pose also depends

Information Pursuit: A Bayesian Framework for Sequential Scene Parsing
11
on the parent’s pose and category. This is captured by the
conditional distribution p(c)(θ | c′, θ′) of the pose parame-
ters for a category c, relative to a parent with category c′
and pose θ′. To simplify notation, we allow again for c′ = 0
(indicating objects without parent), in which case θ′ is ir-
relevant. The complete attributed graph associated with the
scene is now G = (V, C, Θ, E) (where Θ is the family of
poses) with distribution
p(G = g|s) =
Y
v∈V \VT
p(c(v))(n(v)|s)
Y
v∈V \{0}
p(c(v))(θ(v)|c(pa(v)), θpa(v)),
(19)
where pa(v) is the parent of v. In (19), we have mixed dis-
crete probability mass functions for the object counts and
continuous probability density functions for the pose attributes.
If one is only interested in the objects visible in the scene,
the scene description, Z, is obtained by discarding the graph
structure from G, i.e., only retaining the object categories
and poses. More complex scene descriptors could be inter-
esting as well, like object relationships or groupings (e.g.,
whether a family of plate, utensils, glasses can be consid-
ered as belonging to a single setting), in which case the
whole graph structure may also be of interest; we do not use
such “compositions” in our experiments. As a ﬁnal point,
we mention that the samples may require some pruning at
the ﬁnal stage, since the previous model does not avoid ob-
ject collisions or overlaps that one generally wants to avoid.
We removed physically impossible samples in which ver-
tical object categories (i.e., bottle and glass) were overlap-
ping in the world coordinate system. In general, one can add
undirected edges between the children of the same parent to
incorporate more context into a single setting. More details
on the scene model that we used for table-settings can be
found in the Appendix.
6.2 Algorithm for Learning the Scene Generation Model
Even though the annotation is assumed to describe the scene
in the world coordinate system, the information it provides
on G is still incomplete, because it does not include the
graph structure. To learn the parameters of the branching
process, we used the EM algorithm (Dempster et al. 1977)
or, more precisely, the Monte-Carlo version of the Stochas-
tic Expectation-Maximization (SEM) algorithm (Celeux and
Diebolt 1985), usually referred to as MCEM in the liter-
ature (Wei and Tanner 1990). In this framework, the con-
ditional expectation of the complete log-likelihood, which
is maximized at each step to update the parameters, is ap-
proximated by Monte-Carlo sampling, averaging a sufﬁcient
number of realizations of the conditional distribution of the
Fig. 6 Top-view icon visualization of table-settings considering only
plate, bottle, glass, utensil categories. Upper Panel: visualization of
some annotated images in the dataset that roughly match in size to
a 1.5 × 1.5 m2 table Lower Panel: samples from the generative at-
tributed graph model for a square table of size 1.5 × 1.5 m2.
complete data given the observed one for the current pa-
rameters. Note that the unobserved part of the graph given
(V, C, Θ) can be represented as a |V |-dimensional vector
ζ =
 ζ1 = pa(v1), ζ2 = pa(v2), ..., ζ|V | = pa(v|V |)

, with
pa(v) = ∅if v is an orphan. These conﬁgurations form a
subset of V ∪{∅}, given the constraints imposed by the mas-
ter graph and the fact that g is acyclic. The Gibbs sampling
algorithm iteratively updates each ζi according to its condi-
tional distribution given the observed variables and the other
ζj, j ̸= i, which can easily be computed using equation (19).
Recall that the graph distribution is learned conditional to a
given scene geometry S = s.
6.3 Simulated Table Settings
Figure 6 shows top-view visualization of some annotated
images in the dataset that roughly match in size to a 1.5 ×
1.5m2 table and some samples drawn from the generative
attributed graph model for a square table of size 1.5×1.5m2

12
Ehsan Jahangiri et al.
learned from matching annotated images. Visual similarity
of the samples taken from the generative attributed graph
model to natural scene samples conﬁrm suitability of this
model for table setting scenes although the proposed model
is quite general and can be used to model different types of
scenes.
Remark 2 : We developed algorithms for unconditional and
conditional sampling of the graph model in the context of
IP (the conditional distribution relative to the current his-
tory). The unconditional sampling is top-down, easy and
fast. However, our conditional sampling based on Metropolis-
Hastings (Hastings (1970); Metropolis et al. (1953)) is rela-
tively complex and slow to adapt to a new condition i.e., long
burn-in period; this is partly due to the innate low acceptance
rate of the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm, normally < 25%
(see Roberts and Rosenthal (2001) and Jahangiri (2016) for
details). This is why we have not used this model directly
in the IP framework, relying instead on the MRF model
described in section 5.1, in which the feature expectations
are learned on scenes generated by the generative attributed
graph model.
7 Conditional Sampling
Sampling from the posterior distribution over hidden vari-
ables given evidence is central to our method, being neces-
sary for both IP and performance evaluation. Writing Ξ =
(Z, S, W) for the unobserved scene-related variables, the
prior distribution p(ξ) = p(z, s, w) was given in (17). Re-
call that the annobits Yq are deterministically related to the
scene, with Yq = fq(Z, W). In this discussion, we will
work under the simplifying assumption that the classiﬁers
are conditionally independent given Ξ and that, for a given
q, the conditional distribution of Xq given these variables
only depends on Yq. (This assumption can be relaxed to a
large extent without signiﬁcantly increasing the complex-
ity of the algorithm. This will be discussed at the end of
this section.) Recall also (see Section 3.2) that at step k
of IP, in order to compute the conditional mutual informa-
tion and determine the next query qk, we require the mix-
ture weights P(Yq = y|Ek−1), where Ek−1 = {Xq1 =
x1, ..., Xqk−1 = xk−1} is the evidence after k −1 steps.
Clearly, then, P(Yq = y|Ek−1) can be estimated from sam-
ples from Ξ given the history.
The joint distribution of Ξ and all the data XQ therefore
takes the form
P(xQ, ξ) = p(z | s)p(w)p(s)
Y
q∈Q
p(xq | fq(z, w)).
(20)
Since the next query qk is a deterministic function of Ek−1,
the conditional distribution of Ξ given Ek−1 is
p(ξ | Ek−1) ∝p(z | s)p(w)p(s)
k−1
Y
q=1
p(xq | fq(z, w)),
(21)
for which we have again used the conditional independence
of the Xq’s given the scene.
7.1 General Framework
We use a Metropolis-Hastings sampling strategy to estimate
the conditional distribution of the scene variables given the
history. As a reminder, the algorithm relies on the fact that
any transition probability ψ(ξ, ξ′) can be modiﬁed by rejec-
tion sampling to be placed in detailed balance with p(ξ | Ek−1)
by letting
ψ∗(ξ, ξ′) =











ψ(ξ, ξ′) max

1, ψ(ξ′, ξ)p(ξ′ | Ek−1)
ψ(ξ, ξ′)p(ξ | Ek−1)

,
if ξ′ ̸= ξ
1 −
X
ξ′′̸=ξ
ψ∗(ξ, ξ′′), if ξ′ = ξ
(22)
provided ψ(ξ, ξ′) > 0 ⇒ψ(ξ′, ξ) > 0. The Metropolis-
Hastings strategy assumes a family of “elementary moves”
represented by transition probabilities {ψm(ξ, ξ′)}. At each
step, say t, of the algorithm, a move mt is chosen (based
on a random or deterministic scheme), and a new conﬁgura-
tion is created with probability ψ∗
mt(ξt−1, ·), where ξt−1 is
the current conﬁguration. The set of elementary moves and
the updating scheme must be chosen appropriately to ensure
that the chain is ergodic.
7.2 Application to the Scene Model
The feasibility of the method relies on whether the ratio
intervening in (22) is tractable. In this equation, all terms
can be relatively easily computed, with the exception of the
probabilities p(z|s) in (21) because of the normalizing con-
stant in (14) which depends on s. This constant cancels in
the ratio whenever the values of s in ξ and ξ′ coincide, i.e.,
the elementary move does not change the scene geometry.
Among moves that satisfy this property, moves involving the
camera properties w are generally computationally demand-
ing, because they modify all the annobits, while elementary
changes in z only have a local impact.

Information Pursuit: A Bayesian Framework for Sequential Scene Parsing
13
7.2.1 Changing the Scene Geometry
To process moves that modify s, the normalizing constant in
(14), namely
κ(λ) =
X
z∈Ω
exp(λ · ϕ(z))
(23)
must be computed (where λ, Ωand ϕ all depend on s).
Whereas an exact computation is intractable, approxima-
tions can be obtained, using, for example, the formula
log κ(λ) = log κ(λ0)
+
Z 1
0
E

(λ −λ0) · ϕ | λ0 + t(λ −λ0)

dt
(24)
in which λ0 is a parameter at which κ is computable (typ-
ically making all variables independent) and each expecta-
tion in a numerical approximation of the integral is com-
puted using Monte-Carlo sampling. This is a costly but can
be computed ofﬂine for each value of s (which can be dis-
cretized over a ﬁnite set).
In our application, however, we have used a simpler ap-
proach, relying on a good estimator of S that is ﬁxed in the
rest of the computation. Letting ˆS be this estimator, we sam-
pled S over a small neighborhood of ˆS, making the addi-
tional approximation that κ in constant (as a function of s)
in this neighborhood.
7.2.2 Changing the Camera Properties
For the camera properties, we use a proposal distribution
taking the form ψW (ξ, ξ′) = p(w′|I), where the z and s co-
ordinates in ξ and ξ′ coincide, and I is the observed image.
The dependency on I is implemented through an estimator
limiting the camera parameters, which will be described in
the next section. The proposal distribution of S can be as-
sumed to be uniform over the ﬁnite set of scene geometries
which is considered.
7.2.3 Changing object indicators
In our implementation, in which z = {zj} is a collection
of binary variables, elementary moves correspond to Gibbs
sampling, taking,
ψj(ξ, ξ′) = p(z′
j | Ek−1, {zl , l ̸= j})
if ξ = (z, w, s) and ξ′ = (z′, w′, s′) are such that w = w′,
s = s′ and zl = z′
l for l ̸= j; and taking ψj(ξ, ξ′) = 0 in all
other cases.
The overall updating scheme is based on nested loops,
where the inner loop updates z, the middle one updates w
and the outer one s. Each loop is run several times before an
update is made at a higher level.
8 Classiﬁers and Data Model
We trained three deep CNNs. The ﬁrst one, “CatNet,” is for
object category classiﬁcation; the second one, “ScaleNet,”
is to estimate the size of detected object instances, and the
third, “SceneNet,” is to estimate the scene geometry in a
given image. All of these CNNs borrow their network ar-
chitecture, up to the last weight layer, i.e., layer 15, from
the VGG-16 network (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014). The
last fully-connected layer (16-th weight layer) and the fol-
lowing softmax layer of these three CNNs were modiﬁed to
accommodate our design needs. All CNNs rely on “trans-
fer learning” by initializing the ﬁrst 15 weight-layers to the
corresponding weights from the VGG-16 network1 trained
on 1.2 million images from the ImageNet dataset (see Deng
et al. (2014)). However, since the last layer’s architecture for
all three CNNs is different from VGG-16, the correspond-
ing weights were randomly initialized during training. All
CNNs were trained and tested using the Caffe Deep Learn-
ing framework (Jia et al. 2014) using an Nvidia Tesla K40
GPU on a desktop computer with Intel i7-4790K Quad-Core
processor (8M Cache and up to 4.40 GHz clock rate) and
32-GB RAM running Ubuntu 15.04 operating system. The
processing time for each patch is about 12 seconds on our
end-of-the-line Intel i7-4790K CPU and 0.2 seconds on the
Tesla K40 GPU. Since the input patches are of the same size,
namely 224 × 224, and pass through the same network, the
classiﬁers all have the same computational cost during test
time. We describe the design, training, and performance of
these CNNs in the following subsections.
8.1 CatNet
For each object category c ∈C, we want to detect if there is
at least one instance in a given patch A. This will be done
simultaneously for all categories, including “background.”
Moreover, all patches are resized to 224 × 224 and only one
CNN is trained independently of the original size of A in
the image. This sufﬁces in our framework since patches are
restricted to the 4-level annocell hierarchy and the smallest
annocells remain at the scale of objects except in extreme
cases. CatNet is then a CNN with a softmax output layer,
which returns a vector of scores Xcat = (Xcat
c
, c ∈C ∪
{0}), where each Xcat
c
, for c ∈C, reﬂects a proportional
conﬁdence level about the presence of at least one object
from category c in the patch, while Xcat
0
corresponds to an
empty patch (or the ”No Object” category). The scores are
non-negative and sum to 1, but they should not be interpreted
as probability of existence, since the events they represent
are not incompatible i.e., they can co-occur.
1 Available
at:
http://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/˜vgg/
research/very_deep/

14
Ehsan Jahangiri et al.
The corresponding annobit Y cat
A
is a binary vector Y cat
A
=
(Y cat
c,A , c ∈C) where Y cat
c,A = 1 if and only if an object with
category c exists in A. The conditional distribution P(xcat|ycat)
is taken to be independent of A, and modeled as a Dirich-
let distribution separately for each of the 2|C| possible con-
ﬁgurations of Y cat. We used a ﬁxed-point (without projec-
tion) iterative schemes to perform MLE parameter estima-
tion (see Minka (2012)).
Figure 7 illustrates some samples from the learned Dirich-
let distribution versus some sample CNN outputs for the cor-
responding annobit Y cat for a few conﬁgurations. We have
|C| = 4 and therefore estimated 16 conditional distributions.
The ﬁgure shows stacked bar visualization of 25 samples
(per conﬁguration) drawn randomly from data collected by
running CatNet on patches (left column) and samples taken
from the Dirichlet model learned from CatNet output data
(right column) where each row corresponds to one of the 16
annobit conﬁgurations. We have shown stacked bars for only
four conﬁgurations as example. The length of each colored
bar represent the proportion of each category; therefore, the
total length of each stacked bar is equal to 1. Two interesting
observations are: (1) the length of bars corresponding to the
present categories are comparable and usually considerably
larger than the length of absent categories; (2) the color dis-
tribution of CatNet outputs and Dirichlet model samples are
very similar for the same conﬁguration. This supports the
argument for using a Dirichlet distribution in modeling the
data distribution p(xcat|ycat). Stacked bars are good means
to visually inspect and compare the true empirical distribu-
tion versus the Dirichlet model.
8.2 ScaleNet
Deﬁne the scale of an object in an image patch as the ra-
tio of its longest side to the patch size (therefore belonging
to (0, 1] when completely visible. The ScaleNet predictor is
designed to estimate the average scale of object instances in
a given patch, independent of their category.
Assume a quantization (τ0 = 0, τ1, . . . , τd−1, τd = 1)
of the unit interval (in our experiments, we used d = 4
and quantization levels of 0.1, 0.35, 0.65, and 1). We mod-
iﬁed the VGG-16 network by assigning d output values to
the softmax layer and trained by assigning to each patch in
the training data the index j ≥1 such that τj is closest to
the average scale of the objects it contains, using only non-
empty patches. The output of the CNN is a vector Xsc =
(Xsc
1 , . . . , Xsc
d ) of non-negative weights summing to one.
Again, there is only one CNN and patches of different sizes
are aggregated for training. The associated annobit Y sc ∈
{1, 2d −1} is the index of the Vorono¨ı cell that contains
the average scale, obtained by adding midpoints τj+1/2 =
(τj + τj+1)/2 to the initial sequence (which separates the
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Categories Present = { }
No Object
Plate
Bottle
Glass
Utensil
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Categories Present = { }
No Object
Plate
Bottle
Glass
Utensil
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Categories Present = {Utensil}
No Object
Plate
Bottle
Glass
Utensil
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Categories Present = {Utensil}
No Object
Plate
Bottle
Glass
Utensil
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Categories Present = {Glass}
No Object
Plate
Bottle
Glass
Utensil
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Categories Present = {Glass}
No Object
Plate
Bottle
Glass
Utensil
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Categories Present = {Glass,Utensil}
No Object
Plate
Bottle
Glass
Utensil
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Categories Present = {Glass,Utensil}
No Object
Plate
Bottle
Glass
Utensil
Fig. 7 Stacked bar visualization of samples from CatNet output (left)
and Dirichlet model (right).
0.1
0.35
0.65
1
0
Case 6
Case 7
Case 5
Case 2
Case 3
Case 4
Case 1
0.825
0.5
0.225
Fig. 8 Scale ratio intervals.
unit interval into 2d −1 regions; see Figure 8). The condi-
tional distribution P(xsc|ysc) is then modeled and trained as
a Dirichlet distribution for each value ysc = 1, . . . , 2d −1.
Figure 9 (similar to Figure 7) provides some ScaleNet
stacked bars visualizations for 4 (out of 2d −1 = 7) scale
conﬁgurations.

Information Pursuit: A Bayesian Framework for Sequential Scene Parsing
15
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Scale Ratio # 1 (Smaller)
Scale Ratio 1
Scale Ratio 2
Scale Ratio 3
Scale Ratio 4
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Scale Ratio # 1 (Smaller)
Scale Ratio 1
Scale Ratio 2
Scale Ratio 3
Scale Ratio 4
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Scale Ratio # 2 (Smaller)
Scale Ratio 1
Scale Ratio 2
Scale Ratio 3
Scale Ratio 4
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Scale Ratio # 2 (Smaller)
Scale Ratio 1
Scale Ratio 2
Scale Ratio 3
Scale Ratio 4
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Scale Ratio # 3 (Smaller)
Scale Ratio 1
Scale Ratio 2
Scale Ratio 3
Scale Ratio 4
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Scale Ratio # 3 (Smaller)
Scale Ratio 1
Scale Ratio 2
Scale Ratio 3
Scale Ratio 4
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Scale Ratio # 4 (Smaller)
Scale Ratio 1
Scale Ratio 2
Scale Ratio 3
Scale Ratio 4
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Scale Ratio # 4 (Smaller)
Scale Ratio 1
Scale Ratio 2
Scale Ratio 3
Scale Ratio 4
Fig. 9 Stacked bar visualization of samples from ScaleNet output (left)
and Dirichlet model (right).
8.3 SceneNet
SceneNet combines binary classiﬁers predicting whether or
not an input patch belongs to the dominant plane. The basic
architecture is the same as that of the CatNet and ScaleNet.
It returns a region ˆ
M in the image plane. For a given scene
geometry s and camera properties w, let M(s, w) be the
representation of s in the image plane. We discretize the
image plane into non-overlapping patches, and let Xg =
(Xg
j , j = 1, . . . , mt) be the corresponding SceneNet out-
puts. Let Y g
j
= 1 if the corresponding patch belongs to
M(s, w) and zero otherwise.
9 JHU Table-Setting Dataset
We collected and annotated the “JHU Table-Setting Dataset,”
which consists of about 3000 images of dining room table
settings with more than 30 object categories. The images
in this dataset were collected from multiple sources such as
Google, Flickr, Altavista, etc. Figure 10 shows a snapshot of
the dataset, which is made publicly available 2.
The images were annotated by three annotators over a
period of about ten months using the “LabelMe” online an-
notating website Russell et al. (2008). The consistency of
labels across annotators was then veriﬁed and synonymous
labels were consolidated. The annotation task was carried
out with careful supervision resulting in high quality annota-
tions, better than what we normally get from crowd-sourcing
tools like Amazon Mechanical Turk. Figure 11 shows the
annotation histogram of the 30 most annotated categories.
The average number of annotations per image is about 17.
To estimate the homography (up to scale) at least four
pairs of corresponding points are needed according to the
Direct Linear Transformation (DLT) algorithm (Hartley and
Zisserman 2004, p. 88). These four pairs of corresponding
points were located in the image coordinate system by anno-
tators’ best visual judgment about four corners of a square
in real world whose center coincides with the origin of the
table (world) coordinate system. We are able to undo the
projective distortion due to the perspective effect by back-
projecting the table surface in the image coordinate system
onto the world coordinate system. The homography matri-
ces are scaled appropriately (using object’s typical sizes in
real world) such that after back-projection the distance of
object instances in the world coordinate system (measured
in meters) can be computed. Figure 12 shows two typical
images from this dataset and their rectiﬁed versions. Clearly,
the main distortions occur for objects which are out of the
table plane.
Each object instance was annotated with an object cate-
gory label plus an enclosing polygon. Then, an ellipse was ﬁt
to the vertices of the polygon to estimate the object’s shape
and pose in the image plane. Figure 13 (left) shows an ex-
ample annotated image; Figure 13 (middle) shows the corre-
sponding back-projection of vertices of annotation polygons
for plates (in red), glasses (in green), and utensils (in black).
Note that non-planar objects (e.g., glass) often get distorted
after back projection (e.g., elongated green ellipses) since
the homography transformation is a perspective projection
from points on the table surface to the camera’s image plane.
Hence, we estimated the base of vertical objects (shown by
black circles in the middle ﬁgure) to estimate their location
in the table (world) coordinate system since the center of
ﬁtting ellipse to the back-projection of such objects’ annota-
tion points is not a good estimate of their 3D location in the
real world. Figure 13 (right) shows top-view visualization
of the annotated scene in the left using top-view icons of the
corresponding object instances for plates, glasses, and uten-
sils (note that all utensil instances are shown by top-view
knife icons).
2 Available
at:
http://www.cis.jhu.edu/˜ehsanj/
JHUTableSetting.html

16
Ehsan Jahangiri et al.
Fig. 10 A snapshot of the JHU Table-Setting Dataset.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
10000
glass
plate
fork
knife
spoon
table
bowl
cup
saucer
bottle
salt shaker
pepper shaker
pitcher
jar
bread
jug
teapot
chopstick
apple
pot
tray
chopsticks
dish
container
lemon
can
sauce bottle
milk jug
pear
sauce bowl
counts
Fig. 11 The number of annotated instances of each object category in
the whole dataset for the 30 top most annotated object categories.
Fig. 12 Rectiﬁcation of table surfaces after back-projection.
Fig. 13 Left: an annotated image from the table-setting dataset. Mid-
dle: back-projection of table (in blue), plates (in red), glasses (in
green), and utensils (in black). The unit of axes is centimeter. Right:
top-view visualization of the table-setting (all utensil instances includ-
ing fork, knife, and spoon are shown by knife icon).
Fig. 14 Synthetic table-setting scene samples.
We also utilized a synthetic table-setting scene renderer
for veriﬁcation purposes. This synthetic image renderer in-
puts the camera’s calibration parameters, six rotation and
translation camera’s extrinsic parameters, table length and
width, and 3D object poses in the table’s coordinate system
and outputs the corresponding table setting scene. Figure 14
shows some synthetic images generated by this renderer.
10 Experiments and Results
10.1 Classiﬁer Training
10.1.1 CatNet and ScaleNet
We ﬁne-tuned CatNet using a set of 344,149 patches. The
training set contained 170,830 patches from the “No Object”
category, 36,429 patches from the “Plate” category, 2,074
patches from the “Bottle” category, 49,401 patches from the
“Glass” category, and 85,415 patches from the “Utensil” cat-
egory. If a patch includes multiple object instances, it is re-
peated in the training set, once for each instance. The train
and test patches were extracted from the “JHU Table-Setting
Dataset” using the image partitioning scheme explained in
section 4.2. The “No Object” category patches were selected
from the set of annocell patches whose overlap with the table
area is less than 10% of the patch. The number of such back-
ground training patches was chosen to be twice the num-
ber of patches from the most frequent category (utensil). We
evaluated the performance of CatNet on a test set of 62,157
patches. Results from the raw output of CatNet are provided
in Table 1, which shows the average scores in the vector of
SoftMax scores returned by CatNet’s when it is applied to a
patch from the corresponding class at different levels of the
hierarchy. Unsurprisingly, for each category, the scores for

Information Pursuit: A Bayesian Framework for Sequential Scene Parsing
17
Table 1 Average score at different levels of resolution of the annocell
hierarchy when CatNet is applied to an input patch from the corre-
sponding class.
Category
Level-0
Level-1
Level-2
Level-3
“No Object”
0.31
0.72
0.96
0.99
“Plate”
0.32
0.34
0.39
0.44
“Bottle”
0.08
0.19
0.31
0.36
“Glass”
0.33
0.44
0.56
0.68
“Utensil”
0.48
0.54
0.71
0.81
1
2
3
4
Target Class
1
2
3
4
Output Class
ScaleNet CM: Test Set (max score)
4283
13.9%
3027
9.8%
130
0.4%
14
0.0%
57.5%
42.5%
1257
4.1%
11563
37.6%
1543
5.0%
81
0.3%
80.1%
19.9%
29
0.1%
2016
6.6%
4842
15.8%
363
1.2%
66.8%
33.2%
2
0.0%
83
0.3%
635
2.1%
874
2.8%
54.8%
45.2%
76.9%
23.1%
69.3%
30.7%
67.7%
32.3%
65.6%
34.4%
70.1%
29.9%
1
2
3
4
Target Class
1
2
3
4
Output Class
ScaleNet CM: Test Set ("2" top scores)
6746
21.9%
572
1.9%
122
0.4%
14
0.0%
90.5%
9.5%
5
0.0%
14182
46.1%
194
0.6%
63
0.2%
98.2%
1.8%
21
0.1%
217
0.7%
7003
22.8%
9
0.0%
96.6%
3.4%
2
0.0%
71
0.2%
149
0.5%
1372
4.5%
86.1%
13.9%
99.6%
0.4%
94.3%
5.7%
93.8%
6.2%
94.1%
5.9%
95.3%
4.7%
Fig. 15 ScaleNet confusion matrix on “training” and “test” set consid-
ering both max score classiﬁcation and top-2 classiﬁcation.
that category increase as the patch size decreases (usually
resulting in tighter patches to objects) when the category is
present in the patch, which leads to higher classiﬁcation ac-
curacy being achieved for patches from ﬁner levels of the
annocell hierarchy.
We ﬁne-tuned ScaleNet on 171,395 patches. Each patch
was labeled by one label l ∈{1, 2, 3, 4}, respectively asso-
ciated to the closest scale ratios in {0.1, 0.35, 0.65, 1}, the
number of patches in each category being 42,567, 82,509,
37,443 and 8,876.
We evaluated the performance of ScaleNet on a test set
of 30,742 patches. Figure 15 shows confusion matrices for
test set in two cases of classiﬁcation based on the maximum
score class and top-2 score classes. A match is declared
in the case of top-2 score classiﬁcation if the true class is
among the top two scores. It can be seen that the most com-
mon mistakes are made between consecutive classes which
makes sense since consecutive classes are associated with
consecutive scale ratios which have closer output distribu-
tions.
10.1.2 SceneNet
The main component of SceneNet is a CNN that detects
whether a patch is part of the table area. We used 270,410
training patches (including 153,812 background and 116,598
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
Relative Error
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Counts
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
Absolute Error
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Counts
Fig. 19 Histogram of the relative (left) and absolute (right) error made
by the table–size estimator.
table), and 38,651 test patches (including 18,888 background
and 19,763 table). The background and table patches are
deﬁned by having, respectively, at most 10% and at least
50% (of the patch) overlap with the table surface area. All
of the training and test patches were selected from level-2
and level-3 of the annocell hierarchy.
We classify a level-3 patch as part of the table if both
its associated CNN and the one run on one of the level-2
patches that contain it report a positive detection. The ﬁnal
table area prediction, ˆ
M, is deﬁned as the convex hull of the
largest connected component of the union of detected level-
3 patches. Figure 17 shows the estimated table area for some
example images. Figure 18 (left and middle) shows two ex-
amples in which misdetected off-table patches are removed
after post-processing. Figure 18 (right) shows a poor table
detection example which seem to happen due to the lack of
sufﬁcient texture on the tables. We tested our table detector
on 284 images and observed fewer than 5 poor table detec-
tions.
We estimate the table size (in 3D) by appropriately scal-
ing the diameter length of its convex hall. The scale was cal-
culated by running ScaleNet on patches from level 2 classi-
ﬁed as table, and assuming that the table-setting objects have
an average size of 20cm. Figure 19 shows the histogram of
the absolute and relative errors made by our table size esti-
mator. We calculated the true table size by back-projecting
the annotated table surface using the homography that was
estimated from the annotation of the images. The histogram
is centered roughly around 0 meaning that our table size es-
timator is relatively unbiased.
10.2 IP Experiments
Conditional inference on the posterior distribution p(ξ|Ek) =
P(Z = z, S = s, W = w|Ek) given the accumulated evi-
dence after k steps of IP, was described in section 7 (includ-
ing, in particular, approximations made to the sampling of
the scene geometry and camera properties). The templates
we used for the geometry S are square tables whose sizes
range from 0.9 to 2.7 meters with 20cm intervals. We se-
lected the template closest to the estimated table size and its
two nearest neighbors (or one neighbor if the closest table

18
Ehsan Jahangiri et al.
Fig. 16 CNN classiﬁer detections for “plate”, “bottle”, and “glass”, and “utensil” categories from left to right. The ordinal numbers in brackets
represent the conﬁdence rank of detections per category and the fractional values in parentheses indicate the scale ratio of detections.
size is 0.9 or 2.7). For each of them, we sampled 10 homo-
graphies which are consistent with the detected table surface
area (described in section 10.1.2).
To generate homography samples that conform with the
detected table area, assume a rectangular table with length
Ls and width Ws whose four corner points are (−Ls/2, −Ws/2),
(−Ls/2, Ws/2), (Ls/2, −Ws/2), and (Ls/2, Ws/2). We
draw samples from the distribution on camera parameters
p(W) proposed in section 5.2 and calculate the correspond-
ing homography matrix. Then, we project the four corners of
the table to the image coordinate system using this homogra-
phy matrix and check if the resulting polygon (quadrilateral)
ﬁts well to the detected table area using a similarity mea-
sure for 2D–shapes. We declare a “good ﬁt” between two

Information Pursuit: A Bayesian Framework for Sequential Scene Parsing
19
Fig. 20 Questions at “early” IP steps.
Fig. 21 Questions at “middle” IP steps.
shapes A1 and A2 if their distance deﬁned as d(A1, A2) =
|(A1 ∪A2) −(A1 ∩A2)| satisﬁes
d(A1, A2) < 0.25 min(|A1|, |A2|).
(25)
In an attempt to efﬁciently sample the homography (camera
parameter) distribution that is consistent with the detected
table area, we ﬁrst try to ﬁnd a set of camera parameters
that result in a table projection meeting a relaxation of (25),
namely d(A1, A2) < 0.4 min(|A1|, |A2|), and as soon as
we ﬁnd such a sample we start to greedily ﬁne–tune the
camera parameters to ﬁnally satisfy (25). During ﬁne-tuning
we randomly choose one camera parameter and change it
slightly by sampling a normal distribution with small vari-
ance centered at the previous value; we accept this change
if it resulted in a smaller distance d(A1, A2). We try a total
Fig. 22 Questions at “later” IP steps.
Fig. 23 An example showing a plate instance not captured by anno-
cells from the possibly best-ﬁtting level (in green).
of 10, 000 homographies obtained by sampling the camera
model p(W) (to satisfy the relaxed condition) or ﬁne-tuning
of parameters W (to satisfy (25)) and exit the loop as soon
as (25) is met; otherwise, if the condition (25) was not met
during 10, 000 trials, we output the camera parameters re-
sulting in the minimum d(A1, A2). Figure 24 shows some
example consistent homography samples.
Recall that at step k, IP maximizes the mutual informa-
tion I(Xq, YQ|Ek−1) over queries q ∈Q and that this mu-
tual information is the difference
H(Xq|Ek−1) −H(Xq|YQ, Ek−1) (see (6)). Moreover, un-
der our conditional independence assumptions, this reduces
to the entropy of a mixture minus a mixture of entropies
where in both cases the mixture weights are the conditional
probabilities of the annobit Yq given the evidence. In the cur-
rent case, the queries are indexed by the annocells A ∈A,
where Y cat
A
assumes sixteen possible values corresponding
to the possible subsets of the four object categories. There
are also scale annobits in correspondence with the classiﬁers
Xsc
A but we do not consider these in the selection of queries;
of course each time we execute a CatNet classiﬁer for an an-
nocell A we also execute the corresponding ScaleNet clas-
siﬁer for A and both the CatNet and ScaleNet results are

20
Ehsan Jahangiri et al.
part of the evidence. Once the weights P(Y cat
A
= y|Ek−1)
are computed by sampling (see below) from the posterior,
we can immediately evaluate the mixture of entropies since
the entropy of the Dirichlet distribution has a closed-form
solution. For the entropy of the mixture, namely the en-
tropy of the mixture of P
y Dir(Xcat
A |Y cat
A
= y)P(Y cat
A
=
y|Ek−1) of Dirichlet densities, we estimate the integral by
Monte Carlo integration. To generate a sample from the mix-
ture distribution for the Monte Carlo integration, we ﬁrst se-
lect one of the 16 Dirichlet densities with probabilities ac-
cording to the posterior P(Y cat
A
= y|Ek−1) and generate a
sample from the selected Dirichlet distribution. Given gener-
ated samples from the mixture distribution we then evaluate
negative logarithm of the mixture distribution at the gener-
ated samples and average to get an estimate of the entropy
of the mixture. A similar approach can be taken to estimate
the entropy of a Dirichlet distribution but since there is a
closed-form solution for the entropy of Dirichlet distribution
we used the closed-form solution in computing mixture of
entropies. Nevertheless, by comparing the closed-form cal-
culation of the Dirichlet distribution entropy and its Monte
Carlo integration estimation we got insight about the appro-
priate number of mixture samples to reasonably estimate the
entropy of mixture.
Turning back to the annobit posterior, we determine the
states of the annobits from posterior samples (ξ, s, w) by
projecting the 3D samples z to the image coordinate sys-
tem using the sampled homography. More speciﬁcally, the
projection of the sampled locations on the table plane in 3D
obviously allows us to answer any queries about locations
in the image plane appearing in the deﬁnition of an annobit.
However, in order to determine what instances of objects
are contained in a given annocell, and to measure the aver-
age sizes of the instances present, we need an estimate of
the set of pixels which constitute the image realization of
each instance sampled. For plates and utensils, which are
effectively 2D, we simply use the projected circle for plates
and projected ellipse for utensils, which of course are again
ellipses in the image plane. For glasses and bottles, which
are three-dimensional, we know the image representation
is larger than the image ellipse obtained by projecting the
base circle determined by the sample. Also, the projection
of these objects in 2D is oriented perpendicular to the orien-
tation of their base circle projection. Hence, we estimate the
projection we would obtain for instances from these cate-
gories with a fully 3D to image mapping by moving the cen-
ter of projection from the center of projected base upward (in
the image) and along a vector orthogonal to the main axis of
the projected base ellipse; we place the updated object cen-
ter at a distance from the projected base center equal to half
of its size where the size is proportional to the main diameter
of the projected base.
We ran IP on a dataset of 284 images. In each step of IP,
two most informative questions corresponding to annobits
with maximum mutual informations were asked, i.e., two
patches were processed by CNNs. Figure 20 shows the an-
nocells selected in the ﬁrst four steps of IP for a given test
image. Figure 21, 22 show the selected annocells at later IP
steps. We can see that the patches selected later are usually
from the ﬁner levels which follows a coarse-to-ﬁne scene
analysis paradigm. However, it is completely plausible, and
actually happened during our experiments, to go back again
to a coarser question after asking a sequence of ﬁner ques-
tions. Analogously, we as humans may focus on a particu-
lar area while analyzing a scene and then depending on the
collected evidence can zoom out and collect evidence at a
coarser level.
It is worthy to mention the difference between the IP se-
lection criterion in (4) and the approximate criterion in (7) in
terms of the resolution level of selected patches. According
to our experiments, the approximate selection criterion in (7)
usually starts with selecting coarser patches compared to the
IP selection criterion in (4); more speciﬁcally the approxi-
mate criterion starts with level-1 whereas the exact criterion
starts with level-2 (the reason of not starting with level-0, in
the approximate criterion, is that in level-0, which is basi-
cally the whole image, most of categories exist. Therefore,
analyzing the whole image will not result in much infor-
mation gain if we are considering only one type of scene
category). This is mainly due to the fact that the approx-
imate criterion ignores the error rates of classiﬁers Xq at
the selection stage by replacing Xq with Yq. We know that
our classiﬁers are more accurate at ﬁner levels which leads
to encouragement of their selection when using the IP crite-
rion in (4). Note that in both criterions the questions selected
at the early steps are usually coarser and they progressively
reﬁne (coarse-to-ﬁne analysis). This is an interesting con-
trast between the two criterions. In support of the IP crite-
rion in (4), assume Alice walks into a bookstore in Brooklyn,
where Bob is the Bookstore clerk, in search for a novel that
she does not remember its title. Bob wants to ﬁnd the book
that Alice is looking for by asking questions that are most
informative to him and at the same time Alice can provide
an answer to them. There is no point in asking a very infor-
mative question if Alice cannot provide an accurate answer
to it e.g., Alice may be able to tell Bob what is the color
of cover but most probably will not be able to mention the
name of a few non-ﬁrst characters in the novel. The IP se-
lection criterion in (4) is trying to strike a tradeoff between
the information gain of questions and the accuracy of the
classiﬁer at providing answer to them.
For the ﬁrst 100 steps of IP, Figure 25 shows the maxi-
mal mutual information I(Xcat
Ak , YQ|Ek−1) for the selected
annocell Ak at step k, and the corresponding conditional
entropy H(Y cat
Ak |Ek−1), both averaged across the 284 pro-

Information Pursuit: A Bayesian Framework for Sequential Scene Parsing
21
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Question
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Mutual Info and Entropy of Selected Question
Mutual Info
Entropy
Fig. 25 Mutual Information and Entropy of Selected Questions.
cessed images. Hence k = 1, ..., 100 but 200 classiﬁers are
involved which explains the ripples with period two in this
ﬁgure. This is because the second most informative question
asked in each step usually has slightly lower conditional mu-
tual information compared to the most informative question
of the next step. Naturally the mutual information is smaller
than the conditional entropy.
In order to deﬁne and visualize the detections generated
by sampling from the 3D posterior distribution we super-
impose a uniform grid of size 25 × 25 on the image plane.
We earlier explained how to associate a set of pixles with
the projection of each sampled object instance, which in
turn generates a rectangular bounding box. The center of
the bounding box then falls into one of the above cells. For
each cell and each category, we aggregate all samples from
that category whose center lies in the cell and compute the
average of the top-left corner and width/height of the cor-
responding bounding boxes; we take this average bounding
box as the detection for that cell. The score for every detec-
tion is proportional to the number of 2D projections con-
tributing to that detection (used to compute the average).
We then run non-maximum suppression on the detections
for each object category separately; two bounding boxes are
considered neighbors if their intersection size over mini-
mum size is greater than 0.3. This yields a ﬁnal set of scored
detections, each of which is labeled as a true positive if the
intersection of the ground-truth bounding box and the esti-
mated bounding box is at least 0.7 of the minimum of the
two boxes and the ratio of their longest sides is between 0.5
and 2. Otherwise it is labeled a false positive.
10.3 Experiments with Stand-Alone Classiﬁers
In this section we consider parsing an image with the results
of the classiﬁers alone, i.e., without the Bayesian model. For
CatNet, from the softmax layer output, Xcat
A , we estimate
the set of categories present in the annocell A as follows.
Let Sc(A) denote the weight for category c with input patch
A. Order the weights, starting with the top one, then add
new categories until the difference between the weights of
the previous one and the new one is greater than a thresh-
old Sg = 0.3, or until three categories have been selected
(including the “No Object” category).
For ScaleNet, from the output of Xsc
A (a sequence of
weights indexed by the scale categories), we compute an ex-
pected scale ratio c
SR as a weighted average of the top two
categories, i.e., letting s, s′ be the top two categories with
scores w, w′, we take c
SR = (ws + w′s′)/(w + w′). We im-
pose a selection criterion to declare an appropriate bounding
box detection, ensuring in particular that objects present in
the patch occupy a signiﬁcant portion of it, by requiring that:
c
SR ≥0.5 −cˆσSR
(26)
where ˆσSR =
p
(w2 + w′2)/(w + w′)3|s −s′| and c =
√2 log 2. The choice made for ˆσSR favors large differences
between the top two scales. Note that ScaleNet returns the
correct scale among its top two ratios more than 95% of the
time when run on the test set. We also assign a score to the
output of ScaleNet, namely Sscale(A) = exp(−max(0, 0.5−
c
SR)2/2ˆσ2
SR).
Finally, each patch A from the annocell hierarchy is given
a mixed “Category–Scale” score per category. The mixed
score for a given patch with scale score Sscale(A) and the
c-th category score Sc(A) is Sc(A) × Sscale(A). We declare
an annocell patch A to be the bounding box of a positive
detection for the c-th category if both Sscale(A) ≥0.5 and
Sc(A) is among the CatNet’s top-3 scores with score gap
Sg = 0.3. We perform “non-maximum suppression” on the
mixed scores of the positive detections per category to ob-
tain a sparse set of boxes. Non-maximum suppression is per-
formed by picking the most conﬁdent (maximum score) de-
tection and removing its neighboring detections; then, pick-
ing the second most conﬁdent detection left and removing its
neighbors, and continuing this process until there are no pos-
itive detections left. We consider two patches to be neigh-
bors if at least 30% of the smaller patch overlaps with the
bigger patch (intersection over minimum greater than 0.3).
It should be noted that an object instance may not nec-
essarily fall completely inside any cell from our annocell hi-
erarchy at a certain level even if there might exist a patch of
the same size outside the hierarchy that completely includes
that object instance. This is because the annocell hierarchy is
constructed with 75% overlap (= 25% shift) between neigh-
boring cells at the same level of resolution, and can there-

22
Ehsan Jahangiri et al.
fore miss some object instances at a given level even if the
cell size is large enough to include the object (e.g., see Fig-
ure 23). The only way to avoid this is to make the hierarchy
exhaustive at each resolution, i.e., shifting patches by only
one pixel at the time. Figure 16 illustrates some detection
examples after running non-maximum suppression on the
combined scores from the CatNet and ScaleNet.
10.4 Results
We generate PR-curves by thresholding the scores of sur-
viving detections after non-maximum suppression. Note that
we would like to detect as many true instances as possible
(high recall) for as few mistakes as possible (high preci-
sion or low false detection rate) which invariably necessi-
tates a trade-off. Figure 26 shows Precision–Recall curves
for twelve different methods that we ran on the data set
of 284 images for all object categories. According to Fig-
ure 26 the EP model-based detection performance improves
as more classiﬁers are run and incorporated into the model.
However, the full posterior detector seems to perform worse
than information pursuit after 140 questions (after 70 IP
steps with the batch size of 2) which seems counterintuitive
because we expect to achieve better performance by incor-
porating more evidence. Note that by incorporating more
classiﬁers we do not necessarily get better results due to
the classiﬁers’ noise and increased likelihood of inconsis-
tencies between the classiﬁers’ output. For example, con-
sider Figure 27 where the 1st, 3rd, and 4th most conﬁdent
plate detections (from CNN) are actually not a plate but the
top or bottom of glasses; all of the annocells correspond-
ing to these detections are from the ﬁnest level of the an-
nocell hierarchy that are expected to be chosen later during
the IP selection criterion and potentially degrade detection
performance. Hence, integrating these classiﬁers would re-
sult in poorer inference due to the added classiﬁers inconsis-
tency. Note that the model integrates the ScaleNet outputs
in an attempt to suppress conﬁgurations with scale incon-
sistency (e.g., the incorrect plate detections in Figure 27).
However, since a multiplication of CatNet and ScaleNet data
model are used during posterior sampling (see (21) and con-
sider the conditional independence assumption of CatNet
and ScaleNet Dirichlet distributions), the model may not be
able to completely suppress such conﬁguration if the output
of one of the CatNet or ScaleNet networks is large enough
to compensate for the smaller one.
In Figure 26 we have included the P-R curves of model-
based detection for two variations “Rand. 140 Q.” and “Rand.
30 Q.” with the same number of questions as in the two
IP tests except that the questions are chosen at random; we
have also included the result of CNN classiﬁers (no model)
when 140, 60, 30, and 10 patches are randomly chosen and
processed. One can see that the result with 140 randomly
Fig. 27 Confusing CNN detections example.
selected questions (the cyan curve in Figure 26) is almost
the same as IP with only 30 questions asked (the magenta
curve in Figure 26) which emphasizes the importance of
efﬁcient question selection in the Bayesian approach. The
Bayesian approach provides a natural framework unifying
the evidence collected from running tests and our prior knowl-
edge encoding the contextual relations between different scene
entities. Our experiments demonstrate that it makes signif-
icant difference to choose patches appropriately using our
IP strategy versus randomly choosing them. In addition to
saving the time it takes to process patches that do not pro-
vide much information, we can monitor the conﬁdence of
our detections (measured by conditional entropy) and stop
processing more patches once the uncertainty saturates or
starts to increase in case of conﬂicting evidence. The model-
based approach with enough questions asked outperforms
the CNN classiﬁers (higher precision at high recall area in
the right). The result of running the CNN classiﬁer on a
small fraction of randomly selected annocells does not achieve
high recall (see Figure 26).
Figure 28, 29, 30 show some qualitative model based de-
tections based on full posterior, IP, and random selection of
patches. One can see that detections based on IP outperform
random selection for the same number of patches.
11 Conclusion
We proposed a new approach for multi-category object recog-
nition, called “Information Pursuit” (IP), that sequentially
investigates patches from an input test image in order to
come up with an accurate description by processing as few
patches as possible. Our approach follows the Bayesian frame-
work with a prior model that incorporates the contextual re-
lations between different scene entities such as the spatial

Information Pursuit: A Bayesian Framework for Sequential Scene Parsing
23
and semantic relations among object instances, consistency
of scales, constraints imposed by coplanarity of objects, etc.
As proof of concept we applied the IP approach to table-
setting scenes. We designed a novel generative model on at-
tributed graphs with ﬂexible structure where each node in
the graph corresponds to an object instance attributed by its
category label and 3D pose. This scene generation model
model was not directly used in our IP framework, but the
statistics calculated from its samples were used to learn a
Markov Random Field (MRF) model employed directly by
IP. Whereas, the scene generation model could be learned
efﬁciently from the limited number of annotated images, the
MRF model offered faster conditional inference. The en-
tropy pursuit search strategy selects patches from the input
image sequentially and investigates them to collect evidence
about the scene. To investigate each patch we utilized state-
of-the-art convolutional neural networks (CNNs). We intro-
duced a new dataset of about 3000 fully annotated table-
setting scenes to learn the scene generation model, to train a
battery of CNN classiﬁers, and to test the performance of the
IP algorithm. In summary, we studied the possibility of gen-
erating a scene interpretation by investigating only a frac-
tion of all patches from an input image using the entropy
pursuit Bayesian approach. The Bayesian framework is the
natural approach for integrating contextual relations and the
evidence collected using tests. We were able to show that by
choosing the right patches in the right order we can identify
an accurate interpretation by processing only a fraction of
all patches from an input image.
Appendix
A Prior Distributions on Table Settings
We work with categories C = {plate, bottle, glass, utensil} which are
amongst the most annotated categories in our table-setting dataset. In-
stances from C are placed on a table whose geometric properties are
denoted by S. In the simpliﬁed case that the table is rectangular we
have S = (Ls, Ws) where Ls and Ws, respectively, represent the
length and width of the table. We consider a world coordinate system
whose origin is located at the center of the table’s surface, whose z axis
is orthogonal to the table’s surface, and assuming a rectangular table,
the x and y axes are parallel to the edges of the table as illustrated in
Figure 31. We also deﬁne a coordinate systems attached to the camera
as shown in Figure 31.
A.1 Attributed Graph Model
The general form of the attributed graph model is given by (19). We
assume that given S (and of course the scene type) the number of root
nodes from different categories are independent:
p(0)(n|S) =
Y
c∈C
p(0)
c
(nc|S),
(27)
X
u
Z
u
xu
y
u
zu
C
O
Image plane
T
z
y
x
t
t
t
O
O
)
,
,
(
t
C
W



T
y
x
)
,
(
W
O
Y
u
T
Z
Y
X
)
0
,
,
(

Fig. 31 Table and camera coordinate systems.
where each of the univariate conditional distributions is modeled using
a Poisson distribution with an average rate proportional to the scene
area As = LsWs, so that
p(0)
c
(nc|S) = e−αcAs (αcAs)nc
nc!
,
resulting in |C| = 4 parameters αc, c ∈C. We also decouple the
offspring counts, letting chM(c) denote the children of category c in
the master graph.
p(c)(n) =
Y
c′∈chM (c)
p(c)
c′ (nc′).
(28)
These distributions are modeled non-parametrically between 0 and lc0,c
chosen as follows (following edges c0 →c of the master graph):
lplate,utensil = lplate,glass = lutensil,utensil = 3 and lbottle,glass = 4. This
means that for example we allow at most three utensils to be adopted
by a plate instance.
We now describe the pose distributions, starting with the root (spon-
taneous) objects. For each category c, the table region is divided into
two parts: a rectangular strip of width dc starting from the edges, and
the remainder interior region. The object’s center is placed in the cen-
tral region with probability ρc and in the outer strip with probability
1 −ρc. Conditionally to this choice, the distribution is uniform within
each area. Plates are represented by circles on the table (they are ﬂat),
glasses and bottles by ellipsoids with a vertical principal direction and
rotation invariant around this axis. Utensils are represented as horizon-
tal ellipses (ﬂat also), with orientation following a Von Mises distri-
bution whose mean is set to be 90 degrees from the orientation of the
nearest table edge. The dispersion parameter of the von Mises distribu-
tion is set to zero if this instance is located farther than 40 centimeters
from all sides of the table and greater than zero otherwise. Note that
a von Mises distribution with zero dispersion parameter is basically a
uniform distribution in (0, 2π]. For simplicity, the object sizes are ﬁxed
(e.g., 25 centimeters for plate diameters).
We specify the pairwise pose distributions, p(c)(θ|c0, θ0, S), where
(c0, θ0) is the category and pose of the parent object, by a radial distri-
bution and a conditional angular distribution in a polar system centered
at the location of the parent object. We model the relative pose of a
parent-child object pair assuming that their relative location is indepen-
dent from their relative orientation. We chose a scaled beta distribution
for the radial distance between pairs of parent-child objects and either
a von Mises (single or mixture) or uniform distribution for the angular
location of the child in the periphery of the parent object. Normally,
we expect a c1-category parent and a c2-category child to be within
some distance from each other in order to justify their local contextual
relationship. Let d(c0,c) denote this user-deﬁned distance. The scale of

24
Ehsan Jahangiri et al.
the beta distribution used for the radial distance of a (c0, c) object pair
is set to d(c0,c) and kept ﬁxed throughout design and learning. The set
of pose distribution parameters therefore includes the set of beta and
von Mises distributions’ parameters for different categories.
B Prior Distribution on Camera Rotation
The distribution of the rotation angles ψ is deﬁned conditionally to
translation T. Let ux, uy, uz denote the orthonormal axes for world
coordinates, and ux′, uy′, uz′ the same axes for camera coordinates,
the following constraints will be used: uz′ ∼−T/∥T∥(the camera
points to the center of the table); ux′ ⊥uz (the horizontal direction
in the image plane is nearly horizontal in 3D space); u⊤
y′uz < 0 (the
vertical direction in image plane points upward in 3D). Let
¯uz′ = −T
∥T∥
¯ux′ =
¯uz′ × uz
∥¯uz′ × uz∥
¯uy′ = ¯uz′ × ¯ux′.
Letting µ = (µx, µy, µz) denote the angle deﬁning the rotation an-
gles mapping (ux, uy, uz) to (¯ux′, ¯uy′, ¯uz′), we take ψx, ψy, ψz
conditionally independent given translation T, the marginals being von
Mises distribution with means µx, µy and µz. These angles are explic-
itly given by the formula
µy = sin−1(−¯ux′ · uz)
µx = ∡
 ¯uz′ · uz
cos µy
, ¯uy′ · uz
cos µy

(29)
µz = ∡
 ¯ux′ · ux
cos µy
, ¯ux′ · uy
cos µy

where ∡(a, b) is the angle θ deﬁned by cos θ = a and sin θ = b.
