Sign Language Video Retrieval with Free-Form Textual Queries
Amanda Duarte1,2
Samuel Albanie3
Xavier Gir´o-i-Nieto1,4
G¨ul Varol5
1Universitat Polit`ecnica de Catalunya, Spain
2Barcelona Supercomputing Center, Spain
3Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, UK
4Institut de Rob`otica i Inform`atica Industrial, CSIC-UPC, Spain
5LIGM, ´Ecole des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, France
https://imatge-upc.github.io/sl_retrieval/
Abstract
Systems that can efficiently search collections of sign
language videos have been highlighted as a useful applica-
tion of sign language technology. However, the problem of
searching videos beyond individual keywords has received
limited attention in the literature. To address this gap, in
this work we introduce the task of sign language retrieval
with free-form1 textual queries: given a written query (e.g.
a sentence) and a large collection of sign language videos,
the objective is to find the signing video that best matches
the written query. We propose to tackle this task by learning
cross-modal embeddings on the recently introduced large-
scale How2Sign dataset of American Sign Language (ASL).
We identify that a key bottleneck in the performance of the
system is the quality of the sign video embedding which suf-
fers from a scarcity of labelled training data. We, therefore,
propose SPOT-ALIGN, a framework for interleaving itera-
tive rounds of sign spotting and feature alignment to expand
the scope and scale of available training data. We validate
the effectiveness of SPOT-ALIGN for learning a robust sign
video embedding through improvements in both sign recog-
nition and the proposed video retrieval task.
1. Introduction
Sign languages are the primary means of communica-
tion among deaf communities. They are visual, complex,
evolved languages that employ combinations of manual and
non-manual markers such as movements of the face, body
and hands to convey information [58].
Recent developments in automatic speech recognition
(ASR) for spoken languages [14,15,69,74] have enabled au-
tomatic captioning of vast swathes of video content hosted
1The terminology “natural language query” is commonly used to de-
scribe unconstrained textual queries in spoken languages. However, since
sign languages are also natural languages, we adopt for the term “free-form
textual query” instead.
sign language 
video database
video-subtitle pairs 
seen during training 
How to groom a cat
Text query
Joint  embedding space
…
I am going 
to teach you 
how to ...
…
cross-modal 
retrieval
Video representation
Text representation
Text encoder
Video encoder
sign language video
written translation
Figure 1. Text-based sign language video retrieval: In this work
we introduce sign language video retrieval with free-form textual
queries, the task of searching collections of sign language videos
to find the best match for a free-form textual query, going beyond
individual keyword search.
on platforms such as YouTube. In addition to rendering the
videos more accessible, this captioning yields a second im-
portant benefit: it allows the content of the videos to be
indexed and efficiently searched with text queries. By con-
trast, the same automatic captioning capability (and hence
searchability) does not exist for sign language content. In-
deed, recent work has drawn attention to the pressing need
to develop systems that can index archives of sign language
videos to render them searchable [6]. Without these tools,
sign language video creators must type the spoken language
translation of their content if they want to reach the same
discoverability as their spoken language counterparts.
One solution might appear to be to use sign language
translation systems to perform video captioning, analogous
to ASR cascading in spoken content retrieval [35].
Un-
fortunately, while promising translation results have been
demonstrated in constrained domains of discourse (such as
1
arXiv:2201.02495v2  [cs.CV]  15 Sep 2022

weather forecasts) [9, 10, 38], it has been widely observed
that these systems are unable to achieve functional per-
formance across the multiple domains of discourse [6, 30,
65] required for open-vocabulary video indexing (see Ap-
pendix E). An alternative solution would be to employ ex-
isting methods for sign spotting to perform keyword search.
However, such approaches are fundamentally brittle—they
work best when the user knows exactly which signs of in-
terest were used in the video. Moreover, to build an ac-
curate index of such signs using recent sign spotting tech-
niques [1,27,48] requires a list of appropriate query candi-
dates, which to date have often been obtained from subtitles
corresponding to speech transcriptions of the translation, for
example from an ASR engine. We focus on sign language
videos produced by and for signers, that may not contain
any speech track, so producing such speech transcriptions
is not an option.
In this work, we address the task of sign language video
retrieval with free-form textual queries by learning a joint
embedding space between text and video as illustrated in
Fig. 1. Cross-modal embeddings target only the task nec-
essary to enable search (i.e. ranking a finite pool of sign
language videos), rather than the more involved task of
full sign language translation. As we demonstrate through
experiments, this renders their practical application even
across multiple topics. Moreover, cross-modal embeddings
enable extremely efficient search (with the potential to scale
up to collections of billions of videos thanks to mature
approximate nearest neighbour algorithms for embedding
spaces [28]).
The task of sign language video retrieval is extremely
challenging for several reasons: (1) Translation mappings
between sign languages and spoken languages are highly
complex [60], with differing modalities and grammar struc-
tures (ordering is typically not preserved between signed
and spoken languages, for example); (2) In contrast to
the datasets used to train text-video retrieval models (mil-
lions of paired examples of videos with corresponding sen-
tences [5, 43]) sign language datasets are orders of magni-
tude smaller in scale; (3) In addition to a paucity of paired
data, the annotated data available for learning robust sign
embeddings is also extremely scarce (with sign recognition
datasets also considerably smaller than their counterparts
for action recognition [11,26], for example).
In this work, we propose to study sign language video
retrieval on the recently released How2Sign American Sign
Language (ASL) dataset [21]. To the best of our knowledge,
this dataset represents the largest public source of sign lan-
guage videos with aligned captions. In order to address the
first and second challenges highlighted above, we construct
cross-modal embeddings that leverage pretrained language
models to reduce the burden of data required to learn the
mapping between signing sequences and sentences. To ad-
dress the third annotation scarcity challenge, we propose
SPOT-ALIGN, a framework for automatic annotation that
integrates multiple sign spotting methods to automatically
annotate significant fractions of the How2Sign dataset. By
training on the resulting annotations, we obtain more robust
sign embeddings for the downstream retrieval task.
In summary, we make the following contributions: (1)
We introduce the task of sign language video retrieval with
free-form textual queries; (2) We provide several baselines
for this task, demonstrating the value of cross modal em-
beddings and the benefits of incorporating additional re-
trieval cues from a sign recognition method (whose predic-
tions provide a basis for text-based similarity search) on the
How2Sign and PHOENIX2014T datasets; (3) We propose
the SPOT-ALIGN framework for automatic annotation and
demonstrate its efficacy in producing more robust sign em-
beddings; (4) We contribute a new manually annotated test
set for the How2Sign benchmark.
2. Related Work
Our work relates primarily to existing research in text-
video embeddings for video retrieval, sign language video
retrieval and automatic annotation of sign language videos
with auxiliary cues, discussed next.
Text-video embeddings for video retrieval.
Recently,
there has been extensive research interest in enabling video
content search with textual queries via cross-modal em-
beddings. Following the seminal DeViSE model [24] that
demonstrated the strength of this approach for images and
text, a wide array of text-video embeddings have been ex-
plored [5, 17, 20, 25, 41, 42, 45, 46, 50, 68, 71]. Differently
from these works which target the retrieval of describable
events, our work focuses on retrieving signing content that
matches a spoken language query formulated with text. As
noted in Sec. 1, a key challenge that arises from this dis-
tinction is the relative paucity of training data available to
learn a robust sign video embedding—in this work, we pro-
pose SPOT-ALIGN (introduced in Sec. 3) to explicitly ad-
dress this challenge.
Sign language video retrieval. The task of sign language
video retrieval has primarily been investigated under the
query-by-example search paradigm, in constrained domains
and with small datasets. In this formulation, a user query
consists of an example of the sign(s) of interest, similarly
how most keyword-based search engines deal with text
databases. Two particular variants of this problem have re-
ceived attention for sign language video retrieval: searching
visual dictionaries of isolated signs, and searching continu-
ous sign language datasets, discussed next.
Sign language dictionaries are video repositories with
recordings of individual signs suitable for learners.
To
search such videos, Athitsos et al. [4] coupled hand motion
cues with Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) to enable signer-
independent search of an American Sign Language (ASL)
dictionary containing 3k signs and testing with 921 queries.
For continuous sign language datasets, the goal is retriev-
2

ing all occurrences of a demonstrated query sign in a target
video. Different techniques have been proposed for this pur-
pose, including hand features with CRFs [70], hand motion
with sequence matching [73], hand and head centroids [36],
per-frame geometric features coupled with HMMs [72], and
non-face skin distribution matching [67].
As an alternative to querying by example, a number of
works have investigated sign spotting with learned clas-
sifiers.
Ong et al. [49] tackled this problem with HSP-
Trees, a hierarchical data structure built upon Sequential
Interval Patterns. Later work combined human pose esti-
mation with temporal attention mechanisms to detect (but
not localise) the presence of a set of glosses among sign-
ing sequences [63]. This work was later extended to en-
able search for individual words [61] and further extended
to additionally incorporate hand-shape features, improving
performance [62]. More recently, Jiang et al. [27] showed
the effectiveness of the transformer architecture for the sign
spotting task, achieving promising results on the BSLCOR-
PUS [55] and Phoenix2014 [32] datasets.
However, to the best of our knowledge, no prior sign
language retrieval literature has considered the task that
we propose in our work, namely retrieving sign language
videos with free-form textual queries.
Automatic annotation of sign language with auxiliary
cues. The abundance of audio-aligned subtitles in broad-
cast data with sign language interpreters has motivated a
rich body of work that has sought to use them as an auxil-
iary cue to annotate signs. Cooper and Bowden [16] pro-
pose to use a priori mining to establish correspondences be-
tween subtitles and signs in news broadcasts. Alternative
approaches investigate the use of Multiple Instance Learn-
ing [7, 29, 51]. Other recent contributions leverage words
from audio-aligned subtitles with keyword spotting meth-
ods based on mouthing cues [1], dictionaries [48] and at-
tention maps generated by transformers [65] to annotate
large numbers of signs, as well as to learn domain invariant
features for improved sign recognition through joint train-
ing [39].
Similarly to these works, we also aim to automatically
annotate sign language videos by making use of audio-
aligned subtitles. To this end, we make use of prior keyword
spotting methods [1, 48]. However, differently from all the
other methods mentioned above we propose an iterative ap-
proach, SPOT-ALIGN, that alternates between repeated sign
spotting (to obtain more annotations) and jointly training on
the resulting annotations together with dictionary exemplars
(to obtain better features for spotting). We note that iterative
labelling frameworks have previously seen success in the
context of dense sequence re-alignment methods [31,33,52]
(differently, we target the sparse annotation problem). We
show that our methodology significantly increases the au-
tomatic annotation yield, and we demonstrate the value of
these additional annotations by using them to learn better
representations for downstream tasks.
3. Sign Language Retrieval
In this section, we first formulate the task of sign
language video retrieval with free-form textual queries
(Sec. 3.1). Next, we describe the cross-modal (CM) learn-
ing formulation considered in this work (Sec. 3.2), before
introducing our SPOT-ALIGN framework for annotation en-
hancement (Sec. 3.3). Finally, we present our text-based re-
trieval through our sign recognition (SR) model (Sec. 3.4).
Further implementation details are provided in Appendix B.
3.1. Retrieval task formulation
Let V denote a dataset of sign language videos of in-
terest, and let t denote a free-form textual user query. The
objective of the sign language video retrieval with textual
queries task is to find the signing video v ∈V whose sign-
ing content best matches the query t. We use text-to-sign-
video (T2V) as notation to refer to this task. Analogously
to the symmetric formulations considered in the existing
cross-modal retrieval literature [19, 42], we also consider
the reverse sign-video-to-text (V2T) task, in which a sign-
ing video, v, is used to query a collection of text, T .
3.2. Cross modal retrieval embeddings
To address the retrieval task defined above, we assume
access to a parallel corpus of signing videos with corre-
sponding written translations. We aim to learn a pair of
encoders, ϕV and ϕT, which map each signing video v
and text t into a common real-valued embedding space,
ϕV(v), ϕT(t) ∈RC, such that ϕV(v) and ϕT(t) are close
if and only if t corresponds to the content of the signing in
v. Here C denotes the dimensionality of the common em-
bedding space.
To learn the encoders, we adopt the cross modal ranking
learning objective proposed by Socher et al. [56]. Specif-
ically, given paired samples {(vn, tn)}N
n=1, we optimise a
max-margin ranking loss:
  \
m
a
t
hcal {L}
 = \ f rac  {1} { B} \ s um _ {i=1,i\neq j}^B [\eta _{ij} - \eta _{ii} + m]_+ + [\eta _{ji} - \eta _{ii} + m]_+ \label {eqn:margin-loss} 
(1)
where m denotes the margin hyperparameter, [·]+ denotes
the hinge function max(·, 0), B denotes the size of mini-
batch sampled during training, and ηij denotes the cosine
similarity between signing video vi and text tj.
Once learned, the embeddings can be applied directly
to both the T2V and V2T tasks. For the former, inference
consists of simply computing the cosine similarity between
the text query t and every indexed signing video v ∈V to
produce a ranking (and vice versa for the V2T task).
Encoder architectures. The sign video encoder, ϕV con-
sists first of an initial sign video embedding, ψv, which we
instantiate as an I3D neural network [12] over clips of 16
frames (motivated by its effectiveness for sign recognition
3

Sign 
Recognition
…
Would you need to improve your computer skills?
Subtitle (t)
Signing video (v)
Video-text pairs
Sign Video 
Embedding
Language 
Model
ψv
 
ϕv
휙T 
Text
encoder
Video 
encoder
sliding window
pooling
Cross-modal retrieval
Embedding
Similarity
Single sign
ψ′v
Automatic annotations
Lexicon exemplars
Trained jointly
with Di-1 and
lexicon exemplars
Trained with
Sign 
Recognition
computer skill
Text
Similarity
thresh.
Text-based retrieval
DL
M
Di
M
Trained with video-text pairs
(b) Sign language video retrieval
(a) Iterative enhancement of annotations
Spot-Align
Figure 2. Method overview: (a) We propose SPOT-ALIGN, a framework for iteratively increasing annotation yield to obtain a good sign
video embedding. At each iteration i, the current sign video embedding ψ′
v is trained for classification jointly on the How2Sign annotations
from iteration i −1 and lexicon exemplars from the WLASL [37] and MSASL [64] datasets. The resulting improved embedding is then
used to obtain a new set of sign spottings by re-querying How2Sign videos with lexicon exemplars. Our final sign video embedding, ψv, is
obtained by training on the mouthing spottings (M) together with the last iteration of dictionary sign spottings, DL (without joint training
across lexicon exemplars). We provide a detailed sketch of this pipeline in Appendix B.1 (b) To perform cross modal retrieval, we employ
ψv, together with a language model, to produce embeddings of videos and text. These are passed to a video encoder and text encoder,
respectively, which are trained to project them into a joint space such that they are close if and only if the text matches the video. The
embedding produced by ψv is additionally passed to a sign recognition model, providing the basis for text-based similarity search.
tasks [1, 37, 64]). The output of ψv is temporally aggre-
gated to a fixed size vector, and then projected to the C-
dimensional cross modal embedding space, ϕV(v) ∈RC.
To implement ϕT, each text sample, t, is first embedded
through a language model that has been pretrained on large
corpora of written text. The resulting sequence of word
embeddings are then combined via NetVLAD [3] and pro-
jected via Gated Embedding Unit following the formulation
of [42] to produce a fixed-size vector, ϕT(t) ∈RC.
In this work, we pay particular attention to the initial sign
video embedding, ψs, which, as we show through exper-
iments in Sec. 4, has a critical influence on performance.
In Sec. 4, we also conduct experiments to evaluate suitable
candidates for both the temporal aggregation mechanism on
ϕV, and the language model employed by ϕT.
3.3. Iterative enhancement of video embeddings
As noted above, an effective cross modal embedding for
our task requires a good sign video embedding. A key chal-
lenge in obtaining such an embedding is the relative paucity
of annotated sign language data for training. For example,
to the best of our knowledge, there are no large-scale pub-
lic datasets of continuous signing with corresponding sign
annotations in ASL.
To address this challenge, we propose the SPOT-ALIGN
framework (Fig. 2a) which we use to obtain large numbers
of automatic sign annotations on the How2Sign dataset.
This dataset provides videos with corresponding written En-
glish translations but currently lacks such annotations.
In summary, we first obtain a collection of candidate sign
annotations using sign spotting techniques proposed in re-
cent works that employ mouthing cues [1] and dictionary
examples [48]. We supplement these sparse annotations: it-
eratively increasing the amount of dictionary-based anno-
tations by retraining our sign video embeddings, and re-
querying dictionary examples. Next, we describe each of
these steps.
Mouthing-based sign spotting [1].
First, we use the
mouthing-based sign spotting framework of [1] to identify
sign locations corresponding to words that appear in the
written How2Sign translations. This approach, which re-
lies on the observation that signing sometimes makes use
of mouthings in addition to head movements and manual
gestures [60], employs the keyword spotting architecture
of [57] with the improved P2G phoneme-to-grapheme key-
word encoder proposed by Momeni et al. [47]. We search
for keywords from an initial candidate list of 12K words
that result from applying text normalisation [23] to words
that appear in How2Sign translations (to ensure that num-
bers and dates are converted to their written form, e.g. “7”
becomes “seven”) and filtering to retain only those words
that contain at least four phonemes.
Whenever the key-
word spotting model localises a mouthing with a confidence
over 0.5 (out of 1), we record an annotation. With this ap-
proach, we obtain approximately 37K training annotations
from a vocabulary of 5K words. We filter these words to
those that appear in the vocabulary of either WLASL [37]
or MSASL [64] lexical datasets. The resulting 9K training
annotations cover a vocabulary of 1079 words, which con-
sists of our initial vocabulary for training a sign recognition
model.
Dictionary-based sign spotting [48]. Next, we employ an
exemplar-based sign spotting method similar to [48]. This
approach considers a handful of video examples per sign
4

which are used as visual queries to compare against the
continuous test video. The location is recorded as an au-
tomatic annotation for the queried sign at the time where
the similarity is maximised. Such similarity measure be-
tween the query and the test videos requires a joint space.
In [48], a complex two-stage contrastive training strategy
is formulated. In this work, we opt for a simpler mecha-
nism in which we jointly train a sign recognition model with
an I3D backbone, denoted ψ′
v on the set of query videos
(which are often from an isolated domain such as lexical
dictionaries) and sign-annotated videos from our search do-
main (i.e. How2Sign sparse annotations obtained from the
previous step of mouthing-based spotting). The latent fea-
tures from this classification model (which are now approx-
imately aligned between the two domains) are then used to
compute cosine similarities.
Similarly to the mouthing method, we select candidate
query words for each video based on the subtitles. However,
when employing dictionary spotting, we look for both the
original and the lemmatised (removing inflections) forms of
the words, since the sign language lexicons we employ usu-
ally contain a single version of each word (e.g. ‘run’ instead
of ‘running’).
As the source of sign exemplars from which we construct
queries, we make use of the training sets of WLASL [37]
and MSASL [64], two datasets of isolated ASL signing,
with 2K and 1K vocabulary sizes, respectively. For joint
training, we select samples from their training subsets
that occur in the 1079-sign vocabulary from our previous
mouthing annotations. However, we use the full training
sets for querying, allowing us to automatically annotate
signs outside of the initial 1079 signs. We record all annota-
tions where the maximum similarity (over all exemplars per
sign) is higher than 0.75 (out of 1), resulting in 59K train-
ing annotations from an expanded vocabulary of 1887 signs.
We initialise the I3D classification from the pretrained BSL
recognition model released by the authors of [65].
Iterative enhancement via SPOT-ALIGN. From the previ-
ous two methods, we obtain an initial set of automatic an-
notations. However, the yield of the dictionary-based spot-
ting method is heavily limited by the domain gap between
the videos of How2Sign and the datasets used to obtain the
exemplars. It is therefore natural to ask whether we can im-
prove the yield from dictionary-based spotting by achieving
a better feature alignment between the dictionary exemplar
and How2Sign domains. To this end, we introduce a retrain-
and-requery framework, which we call SPOT-ALIGN, de-
scribed next.
At iteration i, we employ the I3D latent features ob-
tained by joint training between WLASL-MSASL lexicons
and How2Sign automatic annotations provided by iteration
i −1. We observe a significant increase in the yield (e.g.
160K annotations in D2 vs 59K annotations in D1) despite
using the same exemplars and same subtitles to construct
our queries. The key difference is then the better aligned
D1
D2
D3
M
Time
Figure 3. Iterative enhancement of automatic annotations: We
illustrate sparse annotations generated by different iterations of the
SPOT-ALIGN framework on six different video segments (rows)
over a fixed-duration interval of 50 seconds each (x-axis).
embeddings with which we compare the exemplar and test
videos. In Fig. 3, we illustrate the resulting sparse annota-
tions over a continuous timeline for sample videos where
we observe that the density of annotations significantly in-
creases with SPOT-ALIGN iterations. We denote with Di,
the set of automatic training annotations after applying iter-
ation i. An overview of this process is shown in Fig. 2a.
Given the annotations from the final iteration of this pro-
cess, we train a new sign recognition model (trained only on
the continuous dataset, i.e. How2Sign), from which we ob-
tain our ultimate video sign embedding ψv using the (1024-
dimensional) latent representation before the classification
layer of 1887 signs. As shown in Fig. 2b, this embedding
underpins the sign video encoder, ϕV, of our cross modal
embedding, and is also used to classify individual signs to
enable text-based retrieval, described next.
3.4. Text-based retrieval by sign recognition
The individual sign recognition model used to train the
sign video embedding ψv can naturally be used to obtain a
sequence of signs if applied in a sliding window manner on
the long signing videos from v. While the performance of
this model is not expected to be high (due to a lack of tem-
poral modelling stemming from the lack of continuous an-
notations), the output list of predicted sign categories gives
us a set of candidate words which can be used to check the
overlap with the query text. This is analogous to cascad-
ing ASR for spoken content retrieval [35], except that sign
recognition is significantly more difficult than speech recog-
nition (in part, due to a lack of training data [6]). Since
the order of signs do not necessarily follow word order in
the translated text, we simply compute an Intersection over
Union (IoU) to measure similarity between a query text and
the recognised signs. Before we compute the IoU, we lem-
matise both the query words and predicted words. We con-
strain the set of recognised signs by removing duplicates
and removing classifications that have probabilities below
a certain threshold (0.5 in our experiments). In Sec. 4, we
show that this text-based retrieval approach, while perform-
ing worse than the cross modal retrieval approach, is com-
plementary and can significantly boost overall performance.
Implementation details are described in Appendix B.
5

4. Experiments
We first present the datasets, annotations and evaluation
protocols used in our experiments (Sec. 4.1). Next, we pro-
vide retrieval results on How2Sign dataset, conducting ab-
lation studies to evaluate the influence of different compo-
nents of our approach (Sec. 4.2). Then, we establish base-
line retrieval performances on the PHOENIX2014T dataset
(Sec. 4.3). Finally, we discuss the limitations together with
qualitative analysis and societal impact (Sec. 4.4).
4.1. Data, annotation and evaluation protocols
Datasets.
In this work, we primarily focus on the re-
cently released How2Sign dataset [21], a multimodal open-
vocabulary and subtitled dataset of about 80 hours of con-
tinuous sign language videos of American Sign Language
translation of instructional videos.
The recorded videos
span a wide variety of topics. We use the videos and their
temporally aligned subtitles for training and evaluating the
retrieval model, taking subtitles as textual queries. There
are 31075, 1739 and 2348 video-subtitle pairs in training,
validation and test sets, respectively. Note that, we remove
a small number of videos from the original splits, where the
subtitle alignment is detected to fall outside the video dura-
tion (more details can be found in Appendix C). We use the
validation set to tune parameters (i.e. training epoch), and
report all results on the test set.
We also evaluate our sign language retrieval method to
provide baselines on the PHOENIX2014T dataset [10], (al-
though this is not our central focus due to its restricted
domain of discourse). PHOENIX2014T contains German
Sign Language (DGS) videos depicting weather forecast
videos. The dataset consists of 7096, 519 and 642 train-
ing, validation and test video-text pairs, respectively. The
benchmark is primarily used for sign language translation
where promising results can be obtained due to the re-
stricted vocabulary size of 3K German words. Here, we
re-purpose it for retrieval, providing baselines using both
our cross-modal embedding approach, and a text-based re-
trieval by sign language translation [10].
Annotations. For sign recognition, we train using the au-
tomatic sparse annotations produced by the SPOT-ALIGN
framework.
Summary statistics obtained across multiple
iterations of sign spotting are illustrated in Fig. 4 (left),
where we observe a significant increase in yield across con-
secutive iterations. To enable evaluation of sign recogni-
tion performance, we construct a manually verified test set.
This is done by providing annotators proficient in ASL with
sign spotting candidates using the VIA annotation tool [22].
This results in a recognition test set of 2,212 individual sign
video-category pairs, available at our project page.
Evaluation metrics. To evaluate retrieval performance, we
follow the existing retrieval literature [25,41,42] and report

and MedR (median rank, lower is better). For sign recog-
Figure 4. Iteratively increasing the sign annotations: Starting
from a small set of mouthing annotations, we apply sign spotting
through dictionaries several times, by retraining our I3D backbone
on the previous set of automatic annotations. The left plot demon-
strates the significant increase in the number of annotations, for
both the restricted (1079) and the full (1887) set of categories. The
right plot reports individual sign recognition (1079-way classifica-
tion) results on the manually verified test set.
Table 1. Effect of sign video embeddings: The iterative increase
of sign annotations with mouthing- (M) and dictionary-based (D)
spotting improves the performance for sign video retrieval tasks
with both sign recognition and cross-modal embeddings. The em-
beddings for the last seven rows are obtained from How2Sign
trainings, pretrained on BOBSL (second row), which itself was
pretrained on Kinetics (first row).
Sign Recognition
Cross-Modal Embeddings

Kinetics [12]
-
-
-
-
-
1.00.1
4.40.4
6.90.6
296.812.5
BOBSL [2]
-
-
-
-
-
17.20.6 32.50.7 39.51.3
30.52.2
M
1079
0.6
2.3
4.4
1174.5 16.41.2 31.10.8 38.20.8
32.73.1
M+D1
1079
10.2
21.2
26.5
136.3
20.61.1 36.70.6 43.30.9
22.02.6
M+D2
1079
15.6
29.0
33.9
92.0
21.80.4 38.00.6 44.60.8
18.22.0
M+D3
1079
16.7
29.1
33.3
95.3
21.91.2 38.20.7 44.80.5
18.70.6
M+D1
1887
14.1
26.1
31.4
88.0
20.40.6 36.40.3 43.50.7
20.01.0
M+D2
1887
18.3
31.3
35.8
69.8
23.70.5 40.80.1 47.10.2 14.70.6
M+D3
1887
18.4
32.2
36.6
68.0
24.50.2 40.71.1 46.70.7
15.71.5
nition baselines (for which the time required to retrain ψv
is more extensive), we report the results of a single model.
For cross modal embedding ablations (for which the sign
video embedding ψv is frozen, and only the text encoder,
ϕT, and video encoder, ϕV, are trained), we report the mean
and standard deviation over three randomly seeded runs.
4.2. Retrieval results on How2Sign
In this section, we present ablation studies experiment-
ing with: (i) different sign video embeddings, (ii) video
embedding aggregation mechanisms, and (iii) text embed-
dings. We further study (iv) the probability threshold hy-
perparameter for text-based retrieval via sign recognition.
We also highlight (v) the importance of having a sign lan-
guage aligned subtitle data by experimenting with using the
original speech-aligned timings provided by [21]. Finally,
we demonstrate the advantages of (vi) combining our cross-
modal embedding similarities with text-based similarities
via sign recognition.
(i) Comparison of sign video embeddings. Our main re-
6

Text query
Sign video retrieval
"I hope you're 
having fun."
(GT rank: 3)
Similarity 0.28
Similarity 0.27
“Cheers!”
“So just be 
relaxed and 
have, just do 
whatever you 
need to do to 
make your guest 
have a good 
"OK, we're going 
to make some 
lidded jars today 
and first thing 
you want to start 
off with obviously 
is your clay."
(GT rank: 1)
Similarity 0.36
Similarity 0.34
“It's first off 
books I bought a 
quite of few 
books I've gotten 
toy books...”
"OK, we're 
going to 
make some 
lidded jars 
today and 
first 
thing..."
Figure 5. Qualitative results on text to sign language retrieval:
For each query, we show frames from the top two ranked videos
as well as their corresponding sentences (these are not used during
retrieval, and are provided for visualisation purposes). The top
row shows a success case. The bottom row shows a failure case
in which the retrieval model struggles with a less detailed query.
More examples can be seen in Appendix A.
sults on sign language retrieval are summarised in Tab. 1.
Here, we assess the quality of our end-to-end video classifi-
cation model to obtain sign video embeddings from the last
layer of the I3D model. We report both the sign language
retrieval from the sign recognition outputs (using text-to-
text matching, as described in Sec. 3.4) on the left, and the
learned cross-modal embeddings (text-to-video matching)
on the right.
We first observe that our cross-modal embeddings
(which can potentially capture cues beyond the limited cat-
egories of the sign recognition model) perform significantly
better than their text-based counterparts. Next, we com-
pare various choices of backbone sign video embeddings
to evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed SPOT-ALIGN
framework. As a first baseline, we experiment with using
standard Kinetics [12] training—we observe that this pro-
duces video embeddings that (as expected) perform poorly
for our task.
We also include as a baseline the model
from [2] (pretrained on the BOBSL data) that was used to
initialise our I3D sign video embedding. The sensitivity of
our model to different initialisations is demonstrated in Ap-
pendix D. While strongly outperforming Kinetics features,
BOBSL features remain substantially weaker than the end-
to-end ASL sign recognition training on How2Sign enabled
by SPOT-ALIGN.
We observe improvements from each of our SPOT-
ALIGN iterations, instantiated from mouthing-only (M)
annotations, expanded first in the number of annotations
within the same vocabulary size of 1079, then expanded in
the number of sign categories with 1887-way classification.
The corresponding statistics for the training size are illus-
trated in Fig. 4 (left), and the sign recognition performance
of the corresponding models on the manually verified test
set can be seen in Fig. 4 (right). In light of their superior
performance, we use sign video embeddings trained with
M+D3 annotations from the 1887 large-vocabulary for the
rest of our experiments on How2Sign.
Table 2. Influence of sign video embedding aggregation strat-
egy: We compare temporal pooling strategies on the How2Sign
retrieval benchmark. Performance metrics are reported as means
and standard deviations over three randomly seeded runs.
Aggregation method

MedR↓
Max pooling
23.30.3
39.70.5
46.30.6
15.30.6
Avg. pooling
24.50.2
40.71.1
46.70.7
15.71.5
Table 3. Influence of the text embedding: We compare a variety
of text embeddings on the How2Sign retrieval benchmark. Perfor-
mance metrics are reported as means and standard deviations over
three randomly seeded runs.
Text Embedding

MedR↓
GPT [53]
15.40.4
30.50.4
37.60.4
30.21.3
GPT-2-xl [54]
17.00.3
32.50.4
39.60.4
25.71.2
Albert-XL [34]
19.70.3
36.70.3
43.80.4
19.20.8
W2V [44]
24.20.4
40.00.4
46.70.2
14.80.3
GrOVLE [8]
24.50.2
40.71.1
46.70.7
15.71.5
(ii) Video embedding aggregation. Next, we compare the
use of different temporal pooling strategies on the sequence
of sign video embeddings for a given sign language video.
While more sophisticated temporal aggregations are possi-
ble, in this work, we opt for a simple and efficient average
pooling mechanism, which has widely been shown to be ef-
fective for text-video retrieval tasks [17, 42]. In Tab. 2, we
compare average pooling with maximum pooling over the
temporal axis for each feature dimension. We observe that
average pooling performs best.
(iii) Text embedding. We then compare several choices
of text embedding for the training of cross modal em-
beddings.
We report the results in Tab. 3.
We observe
that word2vec [44] and GrOVLE [8] obtain competitive
performance, outperforming higher capacity alternatives
[34, 53, 54].
This phenomenon is also observed in [17],
where the authors show that for a number of source text dis-
tributions, simpler word embeddings can outperform their
“heavyweight” counterparts. We leave the end-to-end fine-
tuning of the language models with our sign language trans-
lations to future work, which can potentially provide further
improvements, and use GrOVLE embeddings for the rest of
the experiments.
(iv) Sign recognition probabilities. Here, we ablate the
text-based retrieval approach which employs a sign recog-
nition classifier.
Since the sliding window is applied at
each frame densely, we obtain one sign prediction per frame
(which can be very noisy).
Consequently, an important
hyperparameter for this method is the selection of which
classification outputs to consider in our set of predicted
words (which will in turn guides the text-based retrieval).
Concretely, the hyperparameter we vary is the confidence
threshold at which predictions are included as text tokens.
We explore several threshold values in Tab. 4 and report
retrieval performance. We observe that 0.5 performs best—
we adopt this value for our remaining experiments.
7

Table 4. Thresholding sign recognition probabilities: We inves-
tigate the influence of the confidence threshold hyperparameter on
How2Sign retrieval performance, and observe that 0.5 works best.
Threshold

MedR↓
0.00
13.1
26.5
32.0
75.5
0.10
13.4
26.4
32.4
74.0
0.25
17.5
30.9
35.4
56.5
0.50
18.4
32.2
36.6
68.0
0.75
15.0
27.9
32.4
91.0
Table 5. Effect of subtitle alignment: We report retrieval perfor-
mance on How2Sign for models trained and evaluated on subtitles
aligned to speech and to signing. We observe a significant drop in
performance when using speech-aligned subtitles.
Sign Recognition
Cross-Modal Embeddings
Alignment

MedR↓

MedR↓
Speech
9.5
16.1
19.0
418.0
5.90.6
13.60.6
18.00.2
483.517.9
Signing
18.4
32.2
36.6
68.0
24.50.2
40.71.1
46.70.7
15.71.5
Table 6. Combination of models: We report our final benchmark
performance on How2Sign for the retrieval models based on sign
recognition (SR) and cross modal (CM) embeddings. We observe
that the two approaches are highly complementary.
T2V
V2T
Models

MedR↓

MedR↓
SR
18.4
32.2
36.5
68.0
11.5
27.9
33.3
66.0
CM
24.7
39.6
46.0
17.0
17.9
40.8
46.6
15.0
SR + CM
32.8
47.7
52.9
7.0
23.3
48.5
53.7
7.0
(v) Effect of alignment. We next highlight the importance
of having aligned video-sentence pairs, motivating our se-
lection of How2Sign (which contains the largest public
source of aligned video-sentence pairs) as a test-bed for our
study of large-vocabulary retrieval. We retrain cross modal
embeddings on speech-aligned training data, and evaluate
both the recognition and cross modal embedding models on
the speech-aligned test data of How2Sign to compare with
signing-aligned version. The results are reported in Tab. 5,
where we observe that speech-aligned subtitles significantly
damage retrieval performance.
(vi) Combining several cues. Finally, in Tab. 6, we com-
bine our two types of models based on sign recognition (SR)
and cross-modal embeddings (CM). We perform late fusion
(averaging the similarities, with equal weights) computed
with individual models. We conclude that sign recognition
provides complementary cues to our cross-modal embed-
ding training, significantly boosting the final performance.
Tab. 6 presents both T2V and V2T performances establish-
ing a new benchmark on the task of retrieval for the recent
How2Sign dataset. Some qualitative examples of videos re-
trieved by our system are provided in Fig. 5.
4.3. Retrieval results on PHOENIX2014T
In addition to the How2Sign ASL dataset that formed
the primary basis of our study, we also provide retrieval
baselines on the PHOENIX2014T dataset [9,32]. For cross
modal embedding training, we employ a text embedding
Table 7.
Retrieval performance on the PHOENIX2014T
dataset: We report baseline performances for cross modal embed-
dings, as well as text-based retrieval by sign language translation
on the 642 sign-sentence pairs of the test set.
T2V
V2T
Text Embedding

MedR↓

MedR↓
Translation [10]
30.2
53.1
63.4
4.5
28.8
52.0
60.8
56.1
Cross-modal
48.6
76.5
84.6
2.0
50.3
78.4
84.4
1.0
Combination
55.8
79.6
87.2
1.0
53.1
79.4
86.1
1.0
model trained on German language corpora, GPT-2 [54] re-
leased by Chan et al. [13]. For text-based retrieval, here
we incorporate a state-of-the-art sign language translation
model [10], with which we compute an IoU similarity mea-
sure. Note that sign language translation performance is
high on this dataset due to its restricted domain of dis-
course, which is the reason why we opt for a translation-
based approach instead of the recognition-based retrieval as
in Sec. 3.4. In both experiments we use the video features
provided by [10, 31]. The results are reported in Tab. 7.
We observe that our cross-modal embeddings strongly out-
perform the translation-based retrieval. Their combination
performs best (as in Tab. 6).
4.4. Limitations and societal impact
One limitation of SPOT-ALIGN method is that it is not
able to discover new signs outside of the vocabulary of
queried lexicons. Qualitatively, we observe failure cases of
our cross-modal retrieval model (illustrated in Fig. 5), when
using more generic queries that lack precise detail. It is also
worth noting that all datasets used in our experiments are in-
terpreted sign language rather than conversational (e.g. con-
versations between native signers – see [6] for a broader dis-
cussion on how this can limit models trained on such data).
Societal Impact. The ability to efficiently search sign lan-
guage videos has a number of useful applications for con-
tent creators and researchers in the deaf community. How-
ever, by providing this technical capability, it also poten-
tially brings risk of surveillance of signers, since large vol-
umes of signing content can be searched automatically.
5. Conclusion
In this work, we introduced the task of sign lan-
guage video retrieval with free-form textual queries. We
provided baselines for this task on the How2Sign and
PHOENIX2014T datasets.
We also proposed the SPOT-
ALIGN framework to obtain automatic annotations, and
demonstrated their value in producing effective sign video
embeddings for retrieval.
Acknowledgements.
The authors would like to thank M. Fischetti,
C. Marsh and M. Dippold for their work on data annotation and also A.
Dutta, A. Thandavan, J. Pujal, L. Ventura, E. Vincent, L. Tarres, P. Cabot,
C. Punti and Y. Kalantidis for their help and valuable feedback. This work
was supported by the project PID2020-117142GB-I00, funded by MCIN/
AEI /10.13039/501100011033, ANR project CorVis ANR-21-CE23-0003-
01, and gifts from Google and Adobe. AD received support from la Caixa
Foundation (ID 100010434), fellowship code LCF/BQ/IN18/11660029.
SA thanks Z. Novak and N. Novak for enabling his contribution.
8
