arXiv:2401.02839v1  [eess.AS]  5 Jan 2024
PHEME: EFFICIENT AND CONVERSATIONAL SPEECH
GENERATION
Paweł Budzianowski, Taras Sereda, Tomasz Cichy, Ivan Vuli´c
PolyAI Limited
London, United Kingdom

ABSTRACT
In recent years, speech generation has seen remarkable progress, now achieving
one-shot generation capability that is often virtually indistinguishable from real
human voice. Integrating such advancements in speech generation with large lan-
guage models might revolutionize a wide range of applications. However, certain
applications, such as assistive conversational systems, require natural and conver-
sational speech generation tools that also operate efﬁciently in real time. Current
state-of-the-art models like VALL-E and SoundStorm, powered by hierarchical
neural audio codecs, require large neural components and extensive training data
to work well. In contrast, MQTTS aims to build more compact conversational TTS
models while capitalizing on smaller-scale real-life conversational speech data.
However, its autoregressive nature yields high inference latency and thus limits its
real-time usage. In order to mitigate the current limitations of the state-of-the-art
TTS models while capitalizing on their strengths, in this work we introduce the
PHEME model series that 1) offers compact yet high-performing models, 2) allows
for parallel speech generation of 3) natural conversational speech, and 4) it can be
trained efﬁciently on smaller-scale conversational data, cutting data demands by
more than 10x but still matching the quality of the autoregressive TTS models.
We also show that through simple teacher-student distillation we can meet signiﬁ-
cant improvements in voice quality for single-speaker setups on top of pretrained
PHEME checkpoints, relying solely on synthetic speech generated by much larger
teacher models. Audio samples and pretrained models are available online.
1
INTRODUCTION
A crucial requirement for wider adoption of many modern AI applications, and especially conver-
sational systems such as voice assistants, is the ability to synthesise natural, human-level or ‘life-
like’ speech (Latif et al., 2023; Xue et al., 2023). Owing to the use of deep learning architectures,
neural text-to-speech (TTS) synthesis has seen some tremendous improvements (Kim et al., 2021;
Wang et al., 2023; Kharitonov et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023; Li et al., 2022), and the pace of de-
velopment has been further accelerated recently. In particular, the progress has been unlocked
by casting speech processing from a continuous to a discrete domain via neural audio codecs
(Défossez et al., 2022; Zeghidour et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023b;a; Zhu et al., 2023): this enables
the use of standard and powerful Transformer-based sequence-to-sequence modeling paradigms
(Vaswani et al., 2017; Raffel et al., 2020), established in the work on large language models, for
audio generation. Such Transformer-based architectures have been successfully applied to text-
to-speech synthesis (Borsos et al., 2023a; Wang et al., 2023; Kharitonov et al., 2023; Borsos et al.,
2023b; Zhang et al., 2023), as well as to music generation (Agostinelli et al., 2023) and generation
of other audio signals (Kreuk et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023b).
Conversational TTS is ‘condition sine qua non’ of the lifelike user experience that would increase the
overall satisfaction of users interacting with assistive conversational systems. However, the majority
of current work on Transformer-based TTS still trains and evaluates models in controlled ‘upper
bound’ environments that rely on cleanly recorded reading (e.g., audiobooks) or acted speech. Such
environments effectively ignore the undeniable fact that human speech acts across many scenarios
are conversational in nature, and that the TTS systems must be highly adaptable to applications
1

across many different domains and should also be useful ‘in the wild’ (e.g., over the phone). More-
over, conversational TTS synthesis poses additional challenges as conversational speech conveys
additional paralinguistic information (e.g., emotions, pitch), and is much richer in terms of prosodic
variations and expressiveness (Zhang et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2022; Xue et al., 2023).
Another key practical imperative is the efﬁciency of the TTS systems (Miao et al., 2021), where efﬁ-
ciency covers the following pivotal aspects. First, parameter efﬁciency requires the TTS models to be
compact and thus shareable and runnable on consumer hardware. Second, data efﬁciency requires
the models to learn high-quality and competitive models for particular scenarios and voices even
with limited amounts of in-domain or in-voice data (or even in ‘zero-shot’ or ‘one-shot’ prompting
setups). In addition, smaller-scale pretraining data would enable quicker development cycles. Fi-
nally, inference efﬁciency (with low latency) makes the models production-friendly and usable in
‘real-life’ applications (e.g., as a component of conversational assistants speaking over the phone).
In this work, we ﬁrst take stock of the current progress in Transformer-based neural TTS models
(see later in §2): we start by detecting the limitations of the current models and then, inspired by
the previous work, adopt and adapt their desirable properties and features during the construction
of our efﬁcient and conversational Transformer-based TTS system: PolyAI’s PHEME.1 The main
goal of PHEME is to maintain high-quality TTS both in multi-speaker and single-speakers scenarios,
while simultaneously providing the following features: 1) synthesis of rich-in-prosody and naturally
sounding speech rather than acted and artiﬁcial speech; 2) compact, shareable and easily ﬁne-tunable
models which also work with unseen voices through one-shot prompting; 3) reduced pretraining time
and data requirements; 4) high inference efﬁciency and low latency. Further, as another contribution,
we propose and empirically validate that further gains in single-speaker specialization scenarios
could be achieved via leveraging synthetic data created by much larger models or 3rd-party software.
Our experiments assess all the key properties of PHEME such as speech intelligibility, naturalness
and diversity, as well as inference efﬁciency. The main comparison with the previous state-of-
the-art conversational TTS model, MQTTS (Chen et al., 2023a),2 reveal that PHEME offers im-
proved intelligibility and naturalness at the same or even reduced model size, while dramatically
increasing inference speed via incorporating non-autoregressive parallel decoding, and this way
providing true ‘real-time’ synthesis capabilities. Owing to this plus its design simplicity, PHEME
might serve as a solid framework for further developments in conversational and efﬁcient TTS,
and in hope to guide such developments we release our code and pretrained models online at
https://polyai-ldn.github.io/pheme/.
2
RELATED WORK AND BACKGROUND
This work builds upon a recent stream of research on the so-called Transformer-based large audio
models, where the key idea is to apply large language models (LLMs) in the ﬁeld of audio process-
ing and generation. For a broader overview, we refer the reader to a recent comprehensive survey
(Latif et al., 2023), while here we brieﬂy survey prior work related to conversational and efﬁcient
TTS, and key modeling choices for PHEME.
Discrete Speech Representations:
Semantic and Acoustic Tokens.
Neural audio codecs
(Défossez et al., 2022; Zeghidour et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023b; Zhang et al., 2023, among others)
provide the capability of reconstructing high-quality audio at very low bitrates, which in turn enables
speech modeling in the discrete domain (e.g., through standard sequence-to-sequence LLM-style
paradigms). Prior work typically divides the discrete speech representations into two core groups:
1) semantic tokens and 2) acoustic tokens. This duality aims to disentangle the content related to
pure semantics (which should be fully captured by semantic tokens) from the paralinguistic content
(e.g., speaker identity, prosody, timbre) which should be captured by acoustic tokens. Ideally, the
full disentaglement would enable fully separate development of the two core system components:
1) text-to-semantics (T2S) aiming to learn to generate the layer of semantic tokens and 2) acoustics-
to-speech (A2S) which learns to generate speech output from the generated acoustic tokens which
1In Greek mythology, PHEME is the goddess and personiﬁed spirit of, among others, fame and rumor and
is described as ‘she who initiates and furthers communication’. Moreover, the word PHEME is related to the
Greek word φάναι meaning ‘to speak’.
2MQTTS also showed improved performance on conversational TTS in comparison to some non-
autoregressive TTS models such as VITS (Kim et al., 2021), and is in spirit closest to our work.
2

were conditioned on the (previously generated) semantic tokens. This particular design is at the
heart of the most recent models such as SpearTTS (Kharitonov et al., 2023), MQTTS (Chen et al.,
2023a), SoundStorm (Borsos et al., 2023b), and USLM (Zhang et al., 2023), and we thus also adopt
this disentanglement into T2S and A2S modeling in this work.
Residual Vector Quantization for TTS. While there are some technical differences between differ-
ent TTS architectures related to how semantic and acoustic tokens are constructed, on a high level
the majority of recent work relies on the concept of residual vector quantisation (RVQ).3 Here, each
compressed audio frame gets quantized by multiple hierarchical layers of quantizers, where each
subsequent layer works with the residual of the previous layer. For instance, SoundStorm borrows
a hierarchical sequence-to-sequence approach of AudioLM (Borsos et al., 2023a) where semantic
tokens are used as an intermediate conditioning signal to generate acoustic tokens from the Sound-
Stream codec (Zeghidour et al., 2022). Other models that use RVQ include VALL-E (Wang et al.,
2023), RVQGAN (Kumar et al., 2023), NaturalSpeech 2 (Shen et al., 2023), MQTTS Chen et al.
(2023a), among others.
However, the work of Zhang et al. (2023) has empirically validated that the disentanglement desider-
ata between semantic and acoustic information in respective semantic and acoustic tokens are often
not fully met (i.e., there are undesirable residuals of semantic information in higher quantization
layers). They have thus proposed a uniﬁed SpeechTokenizer RVQ method which creates Q quanti-
zation layers, where the ﬁrst layer is treated as the layer of semantic tokens, while all the other Q−1
layers are treated as hierarchical layers of acoustic tokens. SpeechTokenizer shows a higher rate of
disentanglement than some other standard choices which is why we use this as our go-to model to
derive RVQ-based semantic and acoustic tokens. We discuss this in more detail in §3.
Conversational TTS. As mentioned before, the majority of prior TTS work has focused on reading
or acted speech environments and datasets such as LibriSpeech (Panayotov et al., 2015) or VCTK.4
VALL-E trains on a much larger LibriLight dataset (Kahn et al., 2020) covering 60k hours of speech
coupled with transcriptions generated by an automatic speech recognition (ASR) system. Concern-
ing truly conversational TTS, SoundStorm (Borsos et al., 2023b) trains a dialogue synthesis model
on a cleaned and publicly unavailable corpus of approximately 100,000 hours of dialogue.
In this work, following the relevant prior work on conversational TTS, MQTTS, we adopt and use
the GigaSpeech corpus Chen et al. (2021), which in its largest, ‘XL’ variant covers 10k hours of
noisy speech. Similar to LibriLight, GigaSpeech is also an ‘ASR-ed, silver transcriptions’ corpus
which spans transcribed audio from audiobooks, podcasts, and YouTube with a 16 kHz sampling
rate. This effectively creates a noisy conversational dataset, where noise might come from imperfect
speech transcriptions as well as from the actual speech sources with occasionally ill-deﬁned speech.
Our primary goal is to demonstrate that it is possible to pretrain good-quality conversational TTS
models even with such noisy data (or at least after ﬁltering noise from the data, see later in §4) which
is more than 10x smaller than what SoundStorm has been trained on, and more than 6x smaller than
the audiobooks-only pretraining dataset used by VALL-E.
Efﬁcient TTS. Next, in order to satisfy the efﬁciency criteria, we rely on the following ﬁndings
from prior work. First, the real-time usage of the current state-of-the-art conversational TTS model,
MQTTS, is limited by its autoregressive nature. In order to boost efﬁciency, we instead adopt the re-
cently proposed masking (non-autoregressive) parallel decoding scheme of MaskGIT (Chang et al.,
2022), further adapted to speech token sequences produced by RVQ in the work of Borsos et al.
(2023b). In a nutshell, MaskGIT starts from masked tokens and then, across multiple iterations, pre-
dicts a portion of the tokens based on their conﬁdence scores, where the portion typically increases
during the iterative procedure progression. Technical details of MaskGIT-style decoding for PHEME
are discussed in §4, and in §5 we show that the parallel decoding scheme does not compromise gen-
eration quality even when applied with very compact models such as PHEME while offering huge
boosts in inference speed.
Regarding parameter efﬁciency, our T2S and A2S components remain modest in size, again fol-
lowing the MQTTS design principle. For instance, we limit the T2S component (see later in §3)
to a standard T5-style (Raffel et al., 2020) sequence-to-sequence model with a maximum of 50M
3For
a
nice
and
didactic
overview,
we
refer
the
reader
to
the
following
write-up:
https://drscotthawley.github.io/blog/posts/2023-06-12-RVQ.html.
4https://datashare.ed.ac.uk/handle/10283/3443
3

or 100M parameters. Further details on PHEME model size are covered in §3 and §4. In com-
parison, SpearTTS uses by an order of magnitude larger T5-style T2S model (500M+ parameters)
while SoundStorm relies on a ByT5-Large model (Xue et al., 2022) for T2S: there, solely the T2S
component already stretches to 1.23B parameters, which makes the model very cumbersome in
production. Similarly, regarding data efﬁciency, for their T2S component SpearTTS relies on very
expensive unsupervised pretraining plus additional 60k hours of LibriLight data with an additional
back-translation step; SoundStorm learns the T2S component using the curated corpus of 100k hours
of spoken dialogue. Here, we aim to learn the T2S component again relying solely on supervised
training (without any time-consuming pretraining and back-translation) on much smaller datasets,
as discussed before.
Finally, as another efﬁciency aspect, following the rich body of work on distillation for speech mod-
els (Huang et al., 2023a; Peng et al., 2023), we investigate if efﬁcient and high-quality specialized
single-speaker models can be obtained (i.e., ﬁne-tuned) from pretrained PHEME checkpoints, relying
solely on modest amounts (e.g., 10h or less) of synthetic speech from larger TTS models.
3
METHODOLOGY
In what follows, we now delve deeper into the main components of PHEME, covering 1) speech
tokenization, 2) learning of the T2S component and 3) parallel non-autoregressive decoding for the
A2S component, showcasing its simple and efﬁcient design.
Speech Tokenization. As the source of semantic and acoustic tokens, we rely on the recent Speech-
Tokenizer model (Zhang et al., 2023).5 It operates on a single-channel audio signal represented as
a sequence x ∈RT , where T denotes the length of the input sequence, T = d · rs, where d de-
notes duration and rs is the sampling rate (e.g., 16 kHz in GigaSpeech). For simplicity, we use the
available off-the-shelf variant of the SpeechTokenizer which was pretrained on LibriSpeech, without
any additional adaptive ﬁne-tuning on GigaSpeech. The full implementation and training details of
SpeechTokenizer are available in the original work.
SpeechTokenizer, unlike other RVQ-based speech tokenization methods, uniﬁes semantic and acous-
tic tokens, aiming to better disentangle different aspects of speech information hierarchically across
the corresponding RVQ layers.6
The ﬁnal output comprises Q = 8 hierarchical RVQ layers
q1, . . . , q8 with the codebook size of C = 1, 024 in each RVQ layer, that is, it is a matrix
{1, . . . , C}Q×T . The row/layer q1 is taken as the layer of semantic tokens (for learning the T2S
component and conditioning the A2S component), and the remaining RVQ layers q2-q8 are treated
as hierarchical acoustic tokens.
T2S: Training and Inference. The ﬁrst critical functionality for TTS is learning the mapping (or
rather a sequence-to-sequence ‘translation’) from the input raw text to the representation in the
layer of semantic tokens: the output of the T2S component in practice is a T -dimensional vector of
integers sampled (with repetition) from the |C|-item set {1, . . . , C}. We treat T2S as the standard
sequence-to-sequence problem and train a T5-style encoder-decoder architecture from scratch.
The raw text tr is ﬁrst preprocessed into the sequence of IPA phones relying on the standard IPA
phonemizer: tipa = IPA(tr), where IPA() denotes the phonemization function.7 The T5 model
architecture is initialized from scratch with random weights and a specialised vocabulary of 1,119
items in total. The vocabulary comprises the 1,024 different codes (i.e., integers from 1 to 1024)
5https://github.com/ZhangXInFD/SpeechTokenizer
6The importance of this disentanglement was also evidenced in our preliminary experiments.
Besides
SpeechTokenizer, we (i) investigated the standard approach of using C k-means centroids of the embeddings
extracted from layers 7 or 9 of the HuBERT model (Hsu et al., 2021) as the layer of semantic tokens, cou-
pled with RVQ-based acoustic tokens obtained by DAC (Kumar et al., 2023; Garcia et al., 2023) and EnCodec
(Défossez et al., 2022). In order to match the sampling rates between the two heterogeneous sources of seman-
tic and acoustic tokens, we either duplicated neighboring semantic tokens or stretched audio we supplied as
input to the HuBERT model. Regardless of the chosen model combination or alignment strategy, the prelim-
inary experiments revealed much weaker, subpar performance when compared to the ﬁnally selected variant
based on SpeechTokenizer.
7We use https://github.com/bootphon/phonemizer.
4

from the codebook of SpeechTokenizer, plus all the phones from the IPA phonemizer, plus the
special tokens for begin-of-sequence and end-of-sequence.
In the basic form, the T5 model learns the following T2S function: st = T2S(tipa), where st is the
resulting vector of semantic tokens for the target text. The ground truth semantic tokens are obtained
by applying SpeechTokenizer directly on training data allowing for duplicated tokens. This is the
format we use during training.
At inference, we can additionally prompt the PHEME model by providing the speech prompt xp
along with its text transcription tp: we run the prompt through SpeechTokenizer to obtain its se-
mantic tokens sp (i.e., q1 output from the tokenizer) and 7 levels of acoustic tokens (denoted as
ap,1, . . . , ap,7, which correspond to RVQ output layers q2-q8 from the tokenizer). At inference, we
then provide the concatenation of [tipa,p,tipa,t] as the full input to the T2S component, where tipa,p
is the IPA-based representation of tp and tipa,t is the IPA-based representation of the target text for
which we want to generate speech. When generating semantic tokens, we then also directly provide
sp as the incomplete, ﬁrst part of the full output, and let the model generate the rest of the output
sequence, that is, st - the sequence of semantic tokens for the target text.
We acknowledge that this approach to T2S is only one plausible option among other poten-
tial variants, such as the ones that preprocess input text data into CMU-based sequences of
phonemes (Kharitonov et al., 2023) or apply byte-level models directly on raw text tr (Borsos et al.,
2023b); we leave other variants for future exploration.
A2S: Training and Inference.
We adopt the non-autoregressive procedure of SoundStorm,
which is in turn an extension of masking and conﬁdence-based parallel decoding scheme of
MaskGIT (Chang et al., 2022). The RVQ-based SpeechTokenizer by default provides the coarse-
to-ﬁne order of the RVQ hierarchy, which is a crucial requirement. As discussed by Borsos et al.
(2023b), this means that 1) the conditional dependencies between different RVQ levels are taken
into account during training and inference, and 2) sampling of ﬁner levels, given all the tokens from
coarser levels, can be conducted in parallel without loss of quality: they are responsible to capturing
very local and ﬁne-grained acoustic details, typically independent of each other. We further extend
the SoundStorm method via the use of SpeechTokenizer-obtained acoustic tokens, and via the in-
troduction of speaker embeddings in the pipeline. A brief description is provided in what follows,
and we refer the reader to prior work (Chang et al., 2022; Borsos et al., 2023b) for further technical
details.
Masking. First, a time step t ∈{1, . . . , T −1} is sampled uniformly at random, acting as the prompt
delimiter. We do not mask any tokens before the prompt delimiter, effectively preparing the model
for the ‘voice prompting’ setup at inference. Furthermore, we never mask the so-called condition-
ing tokens comprising the full level of semantic tokens (q1 from SpeechTokenizer at training or
obtained via the T2S component at inference). Furthermore, we propose to use speaker embeddings
at all T time steps as additional conditioning tokens: they are obtained via a state-of-the-art speaker
diarization model pyannote (Plaquet &Bredin, 2023).8 The idea is that the direct use of speaker em-
beddings would yield higher generation ﬁdelity than letting the model use the speaker information
only implicitly.
Next, the current RVQ level qc is sampled uniformly at random from the set {q2, . . . , q8}. Following
that, the binary T -dimensional mask M is sampled according to a cosine schedule for the current
level qc. More formally, the masking probability is p = cos(u) where u is uniformly sampled from
the interval [0, π/2], and Mi is then sampled from the Bernoulli distribution with the probability p.
Following that, we mask the selected non-prompt tokens at qc for which it holds: (i) they appear at
a time step tm where tm > t, (ii) Mtm = 1. Finally, we mask all non-prompt tokens at ﬁner RVQ
levels, that is, it holds that (i) they appear at a time step tm > t and (ii) their associated level q > qc.
Training. After obtaining the masked token sequence, the A2S model is trained via the standard
cross-entropy loss, where the loss is calculated on the masked tokens of the level qc (and not on
tokens from levels q > qc). The A2S model is a standard Conformer network with bidirectional
self-attention (Gulati et al., 2020) and rotary positional embeddings (Su et al., 2021).
Decoding. Given the conditioning tokens and (non-mandatory) prompt tokens, the iterative parallel
decoding scheme is exactly the same as with SoundStorm: it proceeds RVQ level-wise, moving to
8https://github.com/pyannote/pyannote-audio
5

the next RVQ level q + 1 only after all the tokens from all the previous levels 1, . . . , q have been
sampled. Within each RVQ level, we rely on the conﬁdence-based sampling regime of (Chang et al.,
2022). In summary, this level-wise iterative and parallel procedure substantially decreases the num-
ber of required forward passes in comparison to fully autoregressive models such as MQTTS; see
again (Borsos et al., 2023b) for other technical details.
This design with speaker embeddings then allows both for 1) one-shot speech generation: we provide
both the short prompt with or without the speaker embedding to the model at inference; 2) zero-shot
generation: we do not supply the prompt but provide the speaker embedding to the A2S component.
4
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Model Conﬁgurations. We train PHEME in two different sizes, labeled SMALL and LARGE. First,
the 100M parameter model (with ∼45M parameters allocated to the T2S component, and ∼55M
allocated to the A2S component) serves to run fair comparisons against the relevant prior work,
MQTTS, where both models are trained solely on ﬁltered conversational data from GigaSpeech (see
§4.1). Second, the 300M model (∼100M + ∼200M) aims to measure how well PHEME can scale
with more parameters and data provided (including non-conversational data), and how its increase in
size impacts its inference efﬁciency. The detailed model parameters are provided in Appendix A.1.
4.1
TRAINING AND INFERENCE SETUPS
Training Data. For training the smaller, 100M PHEME variant, we use a ﬁltered and preprocessed
version of GigaSpeech (Chen et al., 2021), where we remove a large number of ill-deﬁned and ex-
tremely noisy speech, following prior work (Chen et al., 2023a). In particular, we keep only utter-
ances from podcasts and YouTube portions of GigaSpeech XL, with estimated signal-to-noise-ratio
(SNR) >20 dB and with duration between 5 and 15 seconds. After the ﬁltering step, we resam-
ple all utterances to 16 kHz and normalize loudness to -20 dB. For the SNR estimation we use
WADA-SNR9 and for loudness normalization we use pyloudnorm10 The ﬁnal preprocessed and ﬁltered
GigaSpeech dataset contains a total of only 550 hours of speech.
For training the larger, 300M PHEME variant, we combine 1) the aforementioned 550 hours of pre-
processed GigaSpeech with 2) the full LibriTTS dataset (Zen et al., 2019) (585 hours, 24 kHz) and a
randomly subsampled 25% of the English portion of Multilingual LibriSpeech (MLS) (Pratap et al.,
2020) (∼10,000 hours, 24 kHz). All the data points were downsampled to 16 kHz. SpeechTokenizer
has a temporal downsampling factor of 320, that is, for an input waveform sampled at 16 kHz it will
produce quantized representations at 50 Hz.
For the single-speaker setup with synthetic data where we start from the pretrained multi-speaker
300M PHEME model, we select one voice from a well-known proprietary TTS provider11 which was
used in a real production system, and then set aside 270 generated utterances from real conversations
(a total duration of 17 minutes) for evaluation, while the remaining synthetic utterances are used for
training: there are two versions of training data spanning 7 hours and 10 hours of speech. The same
preprocessing and ﬁltering steps as with LibriTTS and MLS have been applied, including resampling
to 16 kHz.
Training Setup. For both T2S and A2S components, we use 10, 000 warmup steps, learning rate is
set to 5e−4, and we rely on the AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov &Hutter, 2019) with β1 = 0.9 and
β2 = 0.98. The learning rate is linearly decayed from 2×10−4 to 0. For non-GigaSpeech utterances,
we cut off the duration of each data point to 30 seconds. In both cases, training was carried out for
800k steps with 8 A10 GPUs in bf16 precision.
Inference Setup. For the T2S component, we run multinomial sampling with temperature set to 0.7
and top_k set to 210. For A2S, we perform greedy sampling in the ﬁrst level of acoustic tokens (q2)
and apply 16 steps of conﬁdence-based sampling for all the remaining levels.12
9https://gist.github.com/johnmeade/d8d2c67b87cda95cd253f55c21387e75
10https://github.com/csteinmetz1/pyloudnorm.
11Not disclosed for conﬁdentiality.
12The hyperparameters were obtained via grid search over the following candidate values: temperature over
the set [0.3, 0.7, 1.0], top_k over [60, 120, 150, 210] and inference steps for A2S over the set [1, 4, 8, 16, 25].
6

4.2
EVALUATION SETUP AND METRICS
We evaluate PHEME across four key dimensions of any multi-speaker (conversational) TTS system:
1) speech intelligibility, 2) voice preservation, 3) reconstruction error measuring proximity to the
reference ground truth speech, and 4) prosody diversity and naturalness. Further, 5) we assess
inference efﬁciency reﬂecting the usability of the model in ‘real-time’ production scenarios. The
actual metrics per each evaluation dimension are described in what follows.
Evaluation Data. Since we care about conversational aspects of the model, we designed a particular
evaluation set where each data point consists of two consecutive utterances pronounced by the same
speaker: the ﬁrst utterance always serves as the prompt both for T2S and A2S components of the
model (see §3). To create this evaluation dataset we measure the cosine similarity of the speaker
embeddings extracted from consecutive utterances of the GigaSpeech development split. We retain
only pairs of consecutive utterances where their cosine similarity is greater than 0.5. The ﬁnal dataset
comprises 227 (prompt, target) pairs used for model evaluation.
Speech Intelligibility: ASR Word Error Rate (WER). Following prior work (Hayashi et al., 2020;
Chen et al., 2023a), in order to assess synthesised speech intelligibility we rely on Word Error Rate
(WER) obtained by a state-of-the-art ASR system, Whisper13 large-v2. We convert text to lower-
case and remove punctuation.
Voice Preservation: Speaker Similarity Score (SSS). Since PHEME is a multi-speaker model, we
assess to what extent distinct speaker characteristics are preserved in synthesised speech, reporting
the standard SSS scores. For measuring speaker similarity we employ WavLM (Chen et al., 2022),
a state-of-the-art self-supervised model according to the SUPERB benchmark (Tsai et al., 2022).14
We use released model parameters and supplementary scripts15 for measuring speaker similarity.
This consists of extracting features from the WavLM backbone model for both ground-truth and
synthetic waveforms and measuring pairwise cosine similarity in the latent space.
Reconstruction Error: Mel-cepstral Distortion (MCD). This metric, also established in prior
work (Hayashi et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2023a), computes the reconstruction error between the
ground truth speech and synthesis, with the ﬁxed text and speaker. To time-align ground-truth
and synthesized utterances we use dynamic time warping (Müller, 2007) and compute mean Eu-
clidean distance between MEL-cepstral coefﬁcients of the corresponding time-aligned audio frames.
This measure characterizes distortion of acoustic information and is widely used to roughly evaluate
speech quality, because it correlates well with human perception (Kubichek, 1993).
Prosody Diversity and Naturalness: Fréchet Inception Distance (FID). We again follow prior
work (Chen et al., 2023a) for measuring prosody diversity and naturalness, reporting the FID
scores (Heusel et al., 2017). FID is an established objective metric in the evaluation of text-to-
image generation models, originally created to measure realism and diversity of generated images,
but its formalism makes it amenable also to a wider spectrum of generative models including the
speech-oriented ones. More formally, it calculates the 2-Wasserstein distance between the collec-
tions of real/true speech segments and the corresponding synthesized/fake distributions, aiming to
capture naturalness and diversity of the synthesised collection. This computation, of course, implies
the use of a sufﬁciently large speech collection such as GigaSpeech used in our work. We use an
open-source implementation of FID 16 score for our measurements following the MQTTS evaluation
setup.
Efﬁciency: Real-Time Factor (RTF). It is a standard metric of measuring the speed (or latency)
of an audio processing (or any other processing) system. If we deﬁne f(ts) as the time required to
process the input speech s of duration ts, RTF is computed as f(ts)/ts. Put simply, as a hardware-
dependent metric, RTF tells how many seconds of speech are generated in one second of wall time.
We used A10 and A100 NVIDIA GPUs for hardware tests.
We performed inference on the validation set for all the possible hyperparameter combinations and selected the
combination which minimized WER (see §4.2 on the details of how WER is computed).
13https://github.com/openai/whisper
14https://superbbenchmark.org
15https://github.com/microsoft/UniSpeech
16https://github.com/mseitzer/pytorch-fid
7

Model
WER ↓
SSS ↑
MCD ↓
FID ↓
MQTTS (100M)
14.2
0.682
9.568
19.690
PHEME-SMALL (100M)
12.4
0.594
8.838
20.349
PHEME-SMALL (100M), w/o SE
16.3
0.492
8.893
20.608
PHEME-LARGE (300M)
11.9
0.549
8.671
19.675
Table 1: Comparison of PHEME and MQTTS with GigaSpeech training and test data (see §4.1). ‘w/o
SE’ is an ablation that does not use speaker embeddings for conditioning in the A2S component
(§3). We also show the results of the PHEME-LARGE model for completeness (bottom row), but the
reader should be aware that it cannot be directly compared to the other models as it was trained on
a much larger (and different) training set (see §4.1 again).
Model
short
long
MQTTS (100M)
1.930
1.842
PHEME-SMALL (100M)
0.133
0.133
PHEME-LARGE (300M)
0.143
0.143
Table 2: Inference speed (RTFs, lower is better) on a single A100 GPU for two inference cases:
short and long sentences (see §4). Very similar RTFs with similar trends are obtained on an A10
GPU.
For the short sentence tests we used the following sentence: ‘Regrettably, we can’t accommodate
pets.’, which is expected to last less than 3 seconds in a casual conversation. For the long sentence
test, the following one is used: ‘Regrettably, we can’t accommodate pets. However, we do permit
assistance animals, provided they adhere to ADA regulations. For instance, if you’re making ar-
rangements for a stay at The Blue Finch Hotel in Naples, Italy, kindly ensure your service animal
complies with this.’ This sentence should take more than 10 seconds to utter in a casual conversation.
5
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
PHEME versus MQTTS. We ﬁrst aim to establish whether switching to fast parallel decoding hurts
overall quality of conversational TTS synthesis. In this experiment, we compare the SMALL PHEME
variant (100M parameters) against the same-sized MQTTS model (as a state-of-the-art conversa-
tional TTS model) trained on the same GigaSpeech corpus (550 hours of preprocessed and ﬁltered
data, see §4.1). The main results are summarized in Table 1. They reveal that, despite having much
quicker, non-autoregressiveinference, PHEME outperforms MQTTS on WER and MCD. As expected,
while both models have reasonably high WER scores due to noisy and modestly sized training data
(only 550 hours of training speech data in total), we note that PHEME is able to produce more diverse
and more intelligible speech (offering reductions in WER of almost 2 points and higher FID scores).
While slightly lower than those of MQTTS, speaker similarity scores still display high ﬁdelity rates
with production-ready potential.
Delving deeper into model failures, we observe that a signiﬁcant portion of errors (in terms of WER)
stems from the misspellings of proper nouns and homonyms. This suggests that using an ASR model
with language model-assisted decoding can further reduce WER by favoring output sequences that
contain out-of-distribution words such as proper nouns.
Table 1 also shows the scores of the 300M PHEME variant on the GigaSpeech test data, showcasing
slight gains over the 100M variant in WER, MCD, and FID scores, but the reader should be aware
that the 300M variant uses more abundant training data (beyond only preprocessed GigaSpeech)
than MQTTS and PHEME-SMALL.
Inference Efﬁciency. After establishing the relative synthesis quality, we investigate the efﬁciency
aspect. Inference speed (RTF) for MQTTS and PHEME is provided in Table 2. Coupled with the re-
sults from Table 1, these results suggest huge beneﬁts in terms of efﬁciency via non-autoregressive
decoding, without compromising the generation quality: for instance, while a speech utterance of
∼10 seconds would require 18.4 seconds to process with MQTTS, which is infeasible in production,
8

Fine-tuning [hours]
WER ↓
SSS ↑
MCD ↓
FID ↓
0
3.9
0.533
24.799
6.314
7
4.7
0.578
31.426
5.653
10
4.5
0.576
33.251
5.677
Table 3: Single voice quality with different amounts of artiﬁcial data for single-speaker ﬁne-tuning,
starting from the PHEME-LARGE (300M) multi-speaker checkpoint (ﬁrst row of the table).
Fine-tuning [hours]
WER ↓
SSS ↑
MCD ↓
FID ↓
0
4.7
0.445
28.761
6.436
7
4.1
0.502
34.703
5.813
10
4.5
0.504
33.020
5.829
Table 4: Ablation: A2S without speaker embeddings. Single voice quality with different amounts of
artiﬁcial data for single-speaker ﬁne-tuning, starting from the PHEME-LARGE (300M) multi-speaker
checkpoint (ﬁrst row of the table); cf. Table 3 for the results with the full PHEME model.
the 300M PHEME model requires only ∼1.4 seconds of processing time (a 14.5× speed-up). Even a
sentence with a duration of 3 seconds requires almost 6 seconds of processing with MQTTS, while
the processing time is only 0.4 seconds with PHEME. The scores further reveal that the RTF scores
with PHEME are not impacted at all by the expected output duration. Even more importantly, the
reported RTFs indicate that the 3x larger model maintains almost the same and very competitive
‘production-friendly’ inference speed while offering substantially higher quality synthesis. In sum,
PHEME is able to maintain all the desirable qualities of MQTTS (i.e., conversational nature, param-
eter efﬁciency, sample efﬁciency) while simultaneously offering the ability to easily scale the model
and increase its overall synthesis quality while maintaining unmatched inference speed.
Single-Speaker Specialization. Next, we take the PHEME-LARGE (300M) multi-speaker model and
evaluate it in a production scenario where the goal is to create a single ‘brand voice’, a specialised
TTS model that can output high-quality conversational TTS relying on a single speaker. We train the
300M variant on 7h and 10h of synthetic speech uttered in the same voice (see §4). The results are
provided in Table 3. First, we note that even the multi-speaker 300M PHEME without any special-
ization exhibits very strong performance with low WER rates. Further ﬁne-tuning on synthetic data
yields slight losses in WER scores, but it offers gains in speaker similarity and FID scores, showing
that the PHEME checkpoint can get ﬁne-tuned even with synthetic data to better capture the single
‘brand voice’. If the goal is single-speaker specialization of a multi-speaker model checkpoint, we
expect that further improvements might be achieved by (i) providing real human (instead of syn-
thetic) training data uttered in the target voice, and (ii) scaling up training data: this warrants further
investigation.
Ablation: A2S without Speaker Embeddings.
We also analyze the importance of including
speaker embeddings in A2S training through an ablation. As revealed both in GigaSpeech exper-
iments (Table 1) and in single-speaker specialization experiments (compare the results in Tables 3
and 4), the use of speaker embeddings has substantial positive impact on ﬁnal performance, espe-
cially in terms of achieved ﬁdelity (captured through the SSS scores). In the GigaSpeech evaluation,
inclusion of speaker embeddings in fact positively affects all the evaluation metrics.
On T2S and A2S. We also analyzed PHEME through the lens of its two pivotal components: T2S
and A2S. Our ﬁndings suggest that T2S is in fact the bottleneck of the entire system. While the
A2S component typically performs robustly (modulo hyperparameter tuning) even in low-parameter
setups (even lower than the 55M component used in PHEME 100M), further scaling down the T2S
component yields learning instability and much deteriorated generation quality. Furthermore, with
parallel decoding in A2S, the T2S component is now the main efﬁciency bottleneck: T2S pro-
cessing consumes roughly 90% of the total TTS processing time. This also means that relying
on highly parameterized, large models (even with ≥1B parameters) for T2S as typically used in
prior work (Kharitonov et al., 2023; Borsos et al., 2023b) is unsustainable for real-time production
systems. This preliminary analysis suggests that future work should pay more attention to further
9

enhancements of the T2S component, aiming to provide a better trade-off between performance and
efﬁciency of T2S.
6
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We introduced PHEME TTS models, with the goal of creating and steering high-quality and
production-friendly TTS systems that are conversational and highly parameter-, data-, and inference-
efﬁcient. To this end, we systematized and then adapted and extended recent advancements in
Transformer-based TTS models, showing that it is possible to build a highly efﬁcient TTS model
that is up to almost 15x quicker at inference than previous state-of-the-art conversational TTS
model (Chen et al., 2023a) while maintaining or even improving speech generation quality. We also
showed that multi-speaker PHEME models can be effectively scaled up and specialised for particular
voices via distillation with synthetic training data.
We hope that the models shared with the community will serve as a solid departure and reference
point for further developments of conversational and product-oriented TTS systems, aiming to fo-
cus on the interplay and trade-off between synthesis quality and efﬁciency. However, we have only
scratched the surface of possibilities in this work. As indicated before, future work might look into
other architectures and further improvements of the bottleneck text-to-semantics (T2S) component
or could explore other parallel and efﬁcient decoding strategies for TTS, e.g., speculative decod-
ing (Leviathan et al., 2023). Another avenue of future research might target the use of established
parameter-efﬁcient and modular designs (Pfeiffer et al., 2023) for quicker and more efﬁcient adap-
tation, or work on multilingual TTS (Pratap et al., 2023), or on synthesis of very long utterances.
Finally, our work indicated that there is still a large gap in high-quality conversational TTS data, so
future research should also put more focus on such data collection and curation.
7
