Tuffy: Scaling up Statistical Inference in
Markov Logic Networks using an RDBMS∗
Feng Niu
Christopher Ré
AnHai Doan
Jude Shavlik
University of Wisconsin-Madison

ABSTRACT
Markov Logic Networks (MLNs) have emerged as a powerful
framework that combines statistical and logical reasoning;
they have been applied to many data intensive problems in-
cluding information extraction, entity resolution, and text
mining. Current implementations of MLNs do not scale to
large real-world data sets, which is preventing their wide-
spread adoption. We present Tuffy that achieves scalabil-
ity via three novel contributions: (1) a bottom-up approach
to grounding that allows us to leverage the full power of the
relational optimizer, (2) a novel hybrid architecture that al-
lows us to perform AI-style local search eﬃciently using an
RDBMS, and (3) a theoretical insight that shows when one
can (exponentially) improve the eﬃciency of stochastic local
search. We leverage (3) to build novel partitioning, loading,
and parallel algorithms. We show that our approach outper-
forms state-of-the-art implementations in both quality and
speed on several publicly available datasets.
1.
INTRODUCTION
Over the past few years, Markov Logic Networks (MLNs)
have emerged as a powerful and popular framework com-
bining logical and probabilistic reasoning. MLNs have been
successfully applied to a wide variety of data management
problems, e.g., information extraction, entity resolution, and
text mining. In contrast to probability models like factor
graphs [23] that require complex distributions to be speci-
ﬁed in tedious detail, MLNs allow us to declare a rigorous
statistical model at a much higher conceptual level using
ﬁrst-order logic. For example, to classify papers by research
area, one could write a rule such as “it is likely that if one
paper cites another they are in the same research area.”
∗We gratefully acknowledge the support of Defense Ad-
vanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) Machine Read-
ing Program under Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL)
prime contract no. FA8750-09-C-0181. Any opinions, ﬁnd-
ings, and conclusion or recommendations expressed in this
material are those of the authors and do not necessarily re-
ﬂect the view of DARPA, AFRL, or the US government.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee. Articles from this volume were invited to present
their results at The 37th International Conference on Very Large Data Bases,
August 29th - September 3rd 2011, Seattle, Washington.
Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, Vol. 4, No. 6
Copyright 2011 VLDB Endowment 2150-8097/11/03... $ 10.00.
Our interest in MLNs stems from our involvement in a
DARPA project called “Machine Reading.” The grand chal-
lenge is to build software that can read the Web, i.e., extract
and integrate structured data (e.g., entities, relationships)
from Web data, then use this structured data to answer user
queries. The current approach is to use MLNs as a lingua
franca to combine many diﬀerent kinds of extractions into
one coherent picture. To accomplish this goal, it is critical
that MLNs scale to large data sets.
Unfortunately, none of the current MLN implementations
scale beyond relatively small data sets (and even on many
of these data sets, existing implementations routinely take
hours to run). The ﬁrst obvious reason is that these are in-
memory implementations: when manipulating large inter-
mediate data structures that overﬂow main memory, they
either crash or thrash badly.
Consequently, there is an
emerging eﬀort across several research groups to scale up
MLNs.
In this paper, we describe our system, Tuffy1,
that leverages an RDBMS to address the above scalability
and performance problems.
There are two aspects of MLNs: learning and inference [21].
We focus on inference, since typically a model is learned
once, and then an application may perform inference many
times using the same model; hence inference is an on-line
process, which must be fast. Moreover, MLN learning al-
gorithms typically invoke inference as a subroutine repeat-
edly. Conceptually, inference2 in MLNs has two phases: a
grounding phase, which constructs a large, weighted SAT
formula, and a search phase, which searches for a low cost
(weight) assignment (called a solution) to the SAT formula
from grounding (using WalkSAT [13], a local search proce-
dure). Grounding is a non-trivial portion of the overall in-
ference eﬀort: on a classiﬁcation benchmark (called RC) the
state-of-the-art MLN inference engine, Alchemy [7], spends
over 96% of its execution time in grounding. The state-of-
the-art strategy for the grounding phase (and the one used
by Alchemy) is a top-down procedure (similar to the proof
strategy in Prolog). In contrast, we propose a bottom-up
grounding strategy. Intuitively, bottom-up grounding allows
Tuffy to fully exploit the RDBMS optimizer, and thereby
signiﬁcantly speed up the grounding phase of MLN infer-
ence.
On an entity resolution task, Alchemy takes over
7 hours to complete grounding, while Tuffy’s grounding
ﬁnishes in less than 2 minutes.
1http://www.cs.wisc.edu/hazy/tuffy/
2We focus on maximum a posteriori inference which is crit-
ical for many integration tasks. We discuss marginal infer-
ence in Appendix A.5.
373

But not all phases are well-optimized by the RDBMS: dur-
ing the search phase, we found that the RDBMS implemen-
tation performed poorly. The underlying reason is a funda-
mental problem for pushing local search procedures into an
RDBMS: search procedures often perform inherently sequen-
tial, random data accesses.
Consequently, any RDBMS-
based solution must execute a large number of disk ac-
cesses, each of which has a substantial overhead (due to the
RDBMS) versus direct main-memory access. Not surpris-
ingly, given the same amount of time, an in-memory solu-
tion can execute between three and ﬁve orders of magnitude
more search steps than an approach that uses an RDBMS.
Thus, to achieve competitive performance, we developed a
novel hybrid architecture that supports local search proce-
dures in main memory whenever possible. This is our second
technical contribution.
Our third contribution is a simple partitioning technique
that allows Tuffy to introduce parallelism and use less
memory than state-of-the-art approaches. Surprisingly, this
same technique often allows Tuffy to speed up the search
phase exponentially. The underlying idea is simple: in many
cases, a local search problem can be divided into multiple
independent subproblems. For example, the formula that
is output by the grounding phase may consist of multiple
connected components. On such datasets, we derive a suf-
ﬁcient condition under which solving the subproblems inde-
pendently results in exponentially faster search than running
the larger global problem (Thm. 3.1). An application of our
theorem shows that on an information extraction testbed,
a system that is not aware of this phenomenon (such as
Alchemy) must take at least 2200 more steps than Tuffy
to reach a solution with the same quality. Empirically we
found that, on some real-world datasets, solutions found by
Tuffy within one minute have higher quality than those
found by non-partitioning systems (such as Alchemy) even
after running for days.
The exponential diﬀerence in running time for indepen-
dent subproblems versus the larger global problem suggests
that in some cases, further decomposing the search space
may improve the overall runtime. To implement this idea
for MLNs, we must address two diﬃcult problems: (1) parti-
tioning the formula from grounding (and so the search space)
to minimize the number of formula that are split between
partitions, and (2) augmenting the search algorithm to be
aware of partitioning. We show that the ﬁrst problem is NP-
hard (even to approximate), and design a scalable heuristic
partitioning algorithm. For the second problem, we apply
a technique from non-linear optimization to leverage the in-
sights gained from our characterization of the phenomenon
described above. The eﬀect of such partitioning is dramatic.
As an example, on a classiﬁcation benchmark (called RC),
Tuffy (using 15MB of RAM) produces much better result
quality in minutes than Alchemy (using 2.8GB of RAM)
even after days of running. In fact, Tuffy is able to an-
swer queries on a version of the RC dataset that is over two
orders of magnitude larger.
(We estimate that Alchemy
would need 280GB+ of RAM to process it.)
Related Work. MLNs are an integral part of state-of-the-
art approaches in a variety of applications: natural language
processing [22], ontology matching [29], information extrac-
tion [18], entity resolution [25], etc.
And so, there is an
application push to support MLNs.
Pushing statistical reasoning models inside a database sys-
tem has been a goal of many projects [5,10,11,20,27]. Most
closely related is the BayesStore project, in which the
database essentially stores Bayes Nets [17] and allows these
networks to be retrieved for inference by an external pro-
gram. In contrast, Tuffy uses an RDBMS to optimize the
inference procedure. The Monte-Carlo database [10] made
sampling a ﬁrst-class citizen inside an RDBMS. In contrast,
in Tuffy our approach can be viewed as pushing classical
search inside the database engine. One way to view an MLN
is a compact speciﬁcation of factor graphs [23]. Sen et al. [23]
proposed new algorithms; in contrast, we take an existing,
widely used class of algorithms (local search), and our focus
is to leverage the RDBMS to improve performance.
There has also been an extensive amount of work on prob-
abilistic databases [1, 2, 4, 19] that deal with simpler proba-
bilistic models. Finding the most likely world is trivial in
these models; in contrast, it is highly non-trivial in MLNs
(in fact, it is NP-hard [6]).
Finally, none of these prior ap-
proaches deal with the core technical challenge Tuffy ad-
dresses, which is handling AI-style search inside a database.
Additional related work can be found in Appendix D.
Contributions, Validation, and Outline. To summarize,
we make the following contributions:
• In Section 3.1, we design a solution that pushes MLNs
into RDBMSes.
The key idea is to use bottom-up
grounding that allows us to leverage the RDBMS opti-
mizer; this idea improves the performance of the ground-
ing phase by several orders of magnitude.
• In Section 3.2, we devise a novel hybrid architecture to
support eﬃcient grounding and in-memory inference.
By itself, this architecture is far more scalable and,
given the same amount of time, can perform orders of
magnitude more search steps than prior art.
• In Section 3.3, we describe novel data partitioning
techniques to decrease the memory usage and to in-
crease parallelism (and so improve the scalability) of
Tuffy’s in-memory inference algorithms.
Addition-
ally, we show that for any MLN with an MRF that
contains multiple components, partitioning could ex-
ponentially improve the expected (average case) search
time.
• In Section 3.4, we generalize our partitioning results
to arbitrary MLNs using our characterization of the
partitioning phenomenon. These techniques result in
our highest quality, most space-eﬃcient solutions.
We present an extensive experimental study on a diverse set
of MLN testbeds to demonstrate that our system Tuffy is
able to get better result quality more quickly and work over
larger datasets than the state-of-the-art approaches.
2.
PRELIMINARIES
We illustrate a Markov Logic Network program using the
example of classifying papers by topic area. We then deﬁne
the semantics of MLNs and the mechanics of inference.
2.1
The Syntax of MLNs
Figure 1 shows an example input MLN program for Tuffy
that is used to classify paper references by topic area, such
as databases, systems, AI, etc. In this example, a user gives
374

paper(PaperID, URL)
wrote(Author, Paper)
refers(Paper, Paper)
cat(Paper, Category)
weight
rule
5
cat(p, c1), cat(p, c2) => c1 = c2
(F1)
1
wrote(x, p1), wrote(x, p2), cat(p1, c) => cat(p2, c)
(F2)
2
cat(p1, c), refers(p1, p2) => cat(p2, c)
(F3)
+∞
paper(p, u) => ∃x. wrote(x, p)
(F4)
-1
cat(p, ‘Networking’)
(F5)
wrote(‘Joe’, ‘P1’)
wrote(‘Joe’, ‘P2’)
wrote(‘Jake’, ‘P3’)
refers(‘P1’, ‘P3’)
cat(‘P2’, ‘DB’)
· · ·
Schema
A Markov Logic Program
Evidence
Figure 1: A Sample Markov Logic Program: The goal is to classify papers by area. As evidence we are given
author and citation information of all papers, as well as the labels of a subset of the papers; we want to
classify the remaining papers. Any variable not explicitly quantiﬁed is universally quantiﬁed.
Tuffy a set of relations that capture information about the
papers in her dataset: she has extracted authors and cita-
tions and stored them in the relations wrote(Author,Paper)
and refers(Paper,Paper). She may also provide evidence,
which is data that she knows to be true (or false). Here, the
evidence shows that Joe wrote papers P1 and P2 and P1
cited another paper P3. In the relation cat (for ‘category’),
she provides Tuffy with a subset of papers and the cate-
gories into which they fall. The cat relation is incomplete:
some papers are not labeled. We can think of each possi-
ble labeling of these papers as an instantiation of the cat
relation, which can be viewed as a possible world [8]. The
classiﬁcation task is to ﬁnd the most likely labeling of papers
by topic area, and hence the most likely possible world.
To tell the system which possible world it should produce,
the user provides (in addition to the above data) a set of
rules that incorporate her knowledge of the problem.
A
simple example rule is F1:
cat(p, c1), cat(p, c2) => c1 = c2
(F1)
Intuitively, F1 says that a paper should be in one category.
In MLNs, this rule may be hard, meaning that it behaves
like a standard key constraint: in any possible world, each
paper must be in at most one category. This rule may also
be soft, meaning that it may be violated in some possible
worlds. For example, in some worlds a paper may be in two
categories. Soft rules also have weights that intuitively tell
us how likely the rule is to hold in a possible world. In this
example, F1 is a soft rule and has weight 5. Roughly, this
means that a ﬁxed paper is at least e5 times more likely
to be in a single category compared to being in multiple
categories. MLNs can also involve data in non-trivial ways,
we refer the reader to Appendix A.1 for a more complete
exposition.
Query Model. Given the data and the rules, a user may
write arbitrary queries in terms of the relations. In Tuffy,
the system is responsible for ﬁlling in whatever missing data
is needed: in this example, the category of each unlabeled
paper is unknown, and so to answer a query the system infers
the most likely labels for each paper from the evidence.
2.2
Semantics of MLNs
We describe the semantics of MLNs. Formally, we ﬁrst
ﬁx a schema σ (as in Figure 1) and a domain D. Given as
input a set of formula ¯F = F1, . . . , FN (in clausal form3)
with weights w1, . . . , wN, they deﬁne a probability distribu-
tion over possible worlds (deterministic databases). To con-
struct this probability distribution, the ﬁrst step is ground-
3Clausal form is a disjunction of positive or negative literals.
For example, the rule is R(a) => R(b) is not in clausal form,
but is equivalent to ¬R(a) ∨R(b), which is in clausal form.
ing: given a formula F with free variables ¯x = (x1, · · · , xm),
then for each ¯d ∈Dm, we create a new formula g ¯
d called
a ground clause where g ¯
d denotes the result of substitut-
ing each variable xi of F with di.
For example, for F3
the variables are {p1, p2, c}: one tuple of constants is ¯d =
(‘P1’, ‘P2’, ‘DB’) and the ground formula f ¯
d is:
cat(‘P1’, ‘DB’), refers(‘P1’, ‘P2’) => cat(‘P2’, ‘DB’)
Each constituent in the ground formula, such as cat(‘P1’,
‘DB’) and refers(‘P1’, ‘P2’), is called a ground predicate
or atom for short. In the worst case there are D3 ground
clauses for F3. For each formula Fi (for i = 1 . . . N), we per-
form the above process. Each ground clause g of a formula
Fi is assigned the same weight, wi. So, a ground clause of
F1 has weight 5, while any ground clause of F2 has weight
1. We denote by G = (¯g, w) the set of all ground clauses of
¯F and a function w that maps each ground clause to its as-
signed weight. Fix an MLN ¯F, then for any possible world
(instance) I we say a ground clause g is violated if w(g) > 0
and g is false in I or if w(g) < 0 and g is true in I. We
denote the set of ground clauses violated in a world I as
V (I). The cost of the world I is
cost(I) =
X
g∈V (I)
|w(g)|
(1)
Through cost, an MLN deﬁnes a probability distribution
over all instances (denoted Inst) as:
Pr[I] = Z−1 exp {−cost(I)} where Z =
X
J∈Inst
exp {−cost(J)}
A lowest cost world I is called a most likely world. Since
cost(I) ≥0, if cost(I) = 0 then I is a most likely world. On
the other hand the most likely world may have positive cost.
There are two main types of inference with MLNs: MAP
(maximum a posteriori) inference, where we want to ﬁnd a
most likely world, and marginal inference, where we want to
compute marginal probabilities. Tuffy is capable of both
types of inference, but we present only MAP inference in the
body of this paper. We refer the reader to Appendix A.5 for
details of marginal inference.
2.3
Inference
We now describe the state of the art of inference for MLNs
(as in Alchemy, the reference MLN implementation).
Grounding. Conceptually, to obtain the ground clauses of
an MLN formula F, the most straightforward way is to
enumerate all possible assignments to the free variables in
F. There have been several heuristics in the literature that
improve the grounding process by pruning groundings that
have no eﬀect on inference results; we describe the heuristics
that Tuffy (and Alchemy) implements in Appendix A.3.
375

The set of ground clauses corresponds to a hypergraph where
each atom is a node and each clause is a hyperedge. This
graph structure is often called a Markov Random Field (MRF).
We describe this structure formally in Appendix A.2.
Search. Finding a most likely world of an MLN is a general-
ization of the (NP-hard) MaxSAT problem. In this paper we
concentrate on one of the most popular heuristic search al-
gorithms, WalkSAT [13], which is used by Alchemy. Walk-
SAT works by repeatedly selecting a random violated clause
and “ﬁxing” it by ﬂipping (i.e., changing the truth value of)
an atom in it (see Appendix A.4). As with any heuristic
search, we cannot be sure that we have achieved the op-
timal, and so the goal of any system that executes such a
search procedure is: execute more search steps in the same
amount of time.
Problem Description. The primary challenge that we ad-
dress in this paper is scaling both phases of MAP inference
algorithms, grounding and search, using an RDBMS. Sec-
ond, our goal is to improve the number of (eﬀective) steps
of the local search procedure using parallelism and partition-
ing – but only when it provably improves the search quality.
To achieve these goals, we attack three main technical chal-
lenges: (1) eﬃciently grounding large MLNs, (2) eﬃciently
performing inference (search) on large MLNs, and (3) de-
signing partitioning and partition-aware search algorithms
that preserve (or enhance) search quality and speed.
3.
TUFFY SYSTEMS
In this section, we describe our technical contributions: a
bottom-up grounding approach to fully leverage the RDBMS
(Section 3.1); a hybrid main-memory RDBMS architecture
to support eﬃcient end-to-end inference (Section 3.2); and
data partitioning which dramatically improves Tuffy’s space
and time eﬃciency (Section 3.3 and Section 3.4).
3.1
Grounding with a Bottom-up Approach
We describe how Tuffy performs grounding.
In con-
trast to top-down approaches (similar to Prolog) that em-
ploy nested loops and that is used by prior MLN systems
such as Alchemy, Tuﬀy takes a bottom-up approach (sim-
ilar to Datalog) by expressing grounding as a sequence of
SQL queries. Each SQL query is optimized by the RDBMS,
which allows Tuffy to complete the grounding process or-
ders of magnitude more quickly than prior approaches.
For each predicate P( ¯A) in the input MLN, Tuffy creates
a relation RP (aid, ¯A, truth) where each row ap represents
an atom, aid is a globally unique identiﬁer, ¯A is the tuple
of arguments of P, and truth is a three-valued attribute
that indicates if ap is true or false (in the evidence), or not
speciﬁed in the evidence. These tables form the input to
grounding, and Tuffy constructs them using standard bulk-
loading techniques.
In Tuffy, we produce an output table C(cid, lits, weight)
where each row corresponds to a single ground clause. Here,
cid is the id of a ground clause, lits is an array that stores
the atom id of each literal in this clause (and whether or
not it is negated), and weight is the weight of this clause.
We ﬁrst consider a formula without existential quantiﬁers.
In this case, the formula F can be written as F(¯x) = l1 ∨
· · · ∨lN where ¯x are all variables in F. Tuffy produces a
SQL query Q for F that joins together the relations corre-
sponding to the predicates in F to produce the atom ids of
the ground clauses (and whether or not they are negated).
The join conditions in Q enforce variable equality inside
F, and incorporate the pruning strategies described in Ap-
pendix A.3. For more details on the compilation procedure
see Appendix B.1.
3.2
A Hybrid Architecture for Inference
Our initial prototype of Tuﬀy runs both grounding and
search in the RDBMS. While the grounding phase described
in the previous section has good performance and scalabil-
ity, we found that performing search in an RDBMS is often
a bottleneck.
Thus, we design a hybrid architecture that
allows eﬃcient in-memory search (in Java) while retaining
the performance beneﬁts of RDBMS-based grounding. To
see why in-memory search is critical, recall that WalkSAT
works by selecting an unsatisﬁed clause C, selecting an atom
in C, and “ﬂipping” that atom to satisfy C. Thus, Walk-
SAT performs a large number of random accesses to the
data representing ground clauses and atoms. Moreover, the
data that is accessed in one iteration depends on the data
that is accessed in the previous iteration. And so, this ac-
cess pattern prevents both eﬀective caching and parallelism,
which causes a high overhead per data access.
Thus, we
implement a hybrid architecture where the RDBMS per-
forms grounding and Tuffy is able to read the result of
grounding from the RDBMS into memory and perform in-
ference. If the grounding result is too large to ﬁt in memory,
Tuffy invokes an implementation of search directly inside
the RDBMS (Appendix B.2). This approach is much less ef-
ﬁcient than in-memory search, but it runs on datasets larger
than main memory without crashing. Appendix B.3 illus-
trates the architecture of Tuffy in more detail.
While it is clear that this hybrid approach is at least
as scalable as a direct memory implementation (such as
Alchemy), there are in fact cases where Tuffy can run
in-memory search whereas Alchemy would crash. The rea-
son is that the space requirement of a purely in-memory im-
plementation is determined by the peak memory footprint
throughout grounding and search, whereas Tuffy needs
main memory only for search. For example, on a dataset
called Relational Classiﬁcation (RC), Alchemy allocated
2.8 GB of RAM only to produce 4.8 MB of ground clauses.
On RC, Tuffy uses only 19 MB of RAM.
3.3
Partitioning to Improve Performance
In the following two sections, we study how to further im-
prove Tuffy’s space and time eﬃciency without sacriﬁcing
its scalability. The underlying idea is simple: we will try
to partition the data. By splitting the problem into smaller
pieces, we can reduce the memory footprint and introduce
parallelism, which conceptually breaks the sequential nature
of the search. These are expected beneﬁts of partitioning.
An unexpected beneﬁt is an exponentially increase of the
eﬀective search speed, a point that we return to below.
First, observe that the logical forms of MLNs often re-
sult in an MRF with multiple disjoint components (see Ap-
pendix B.4). For example, on the RC dataset there are 489
components. Let G be an MRF with components G1, · · · , Gk;
let I be a truth assignment to the atoms in G and Ii its pro-
376

jection over Gi. Then, it’s clear that ∀I
costG(I) =
X
1≤i≤k
costGi(Ii).
Hence, instead of minimizing costG(I) directly, it suﬃces
to minimize each individual costGi(Ii). The beneﬁt is that,
even if G itself does not ﬁt in memory, it is possible that
each Gi does. As such, we can solve each Gi with in-memory
search one by one, and ﬁnally merge the results together. 4
Component detection is done after the grounding phase
and before the search phase, as follows. We maintain an in-
memory union-ﬁnd structure over the nodes, and scan the
clause table while updating this union-ﬁnd structure. The
result is the set of connected components in the MRF. An
immediate issue raised by partitioning is I/O eﬃciency.
Efﬁcient Data Loading. Once an MRF is split into compo-
nents, loading in and running inference on each component
sequentially one by one may incur many I/O operations,
as there may be many partitions. For example, the MRF
of the Information Extraction (IE) dataset contains thou-
sands of 2-cliques and 3-cliques. One solution is to group
the components into batches. The goal is to minimize the
total number of batches (and thereby the I/O cost of load-
ing), and the constraint is that each batch cannot exceed the
memory budget. This is essentially the bin packing problem,
and we implement the First Fit Decreasing algorithm [26].
Once the partitions are in memory, we can take advantage
of parallelism. We use a round-robin scheduling policy.
Improving Search Speed using Partitioning. Although
processing each component individually produces solutions
that are no worse than processing the whole graph at once,
we give an example to illustrate that component-aware pro-
cessing may result in exponentially faster speed of search.
Example 1 Consider an MRF consisting of N identical
connected components each containing two atoms {Xi, Yi}
and three weighted clauses
{(Xi, 1), (Yi, 1), (Xi ∨Yi, −1)},
where i = 1 . . . N and the second component of each tuple
is the weight. Based on how WalkSAT works, it’s not hard
to show that, if N = 1, starting from a random state, the
expected hitting time5 of the optimal state, i.e. X1 = Y1 =
True, is no more than 4. Therefore, if we run WalkSAT on
each component separately, the expected runtime of reach-
ing the optimum is no more than 4N.
Now consider the
case where we run WalkSAT on the whole MRF. Intuitively,
reaching the optimal state requires “ﬁxing” suboptimal com-
ponents one by one. As the number of optimal components
increases, however, it becomes more and more likely that
one step of WalkSAT “breaks” an optimal component in-
stead of ﬁxing a suboptimal component.
Such check and
balance makes it very diﬃcult for WalkSAT to reach the
4Alchemy exploits knowledge-based model construction
(KBMC) [28] to ﬁnd the minimal subgraph of the MRF that
is needed for a given query. Alchemy, however, does not
use the fact that the MRF output by KBMC may contain
several components.
5The hitting time is a standard notion from Markov
Chains [9], it is a random variable for the number of steps
taken by WalkSAT to reach an optimum for the ﬁrst time.
optimum. Indeed, Appendix B.5 shows that the expected
hitting time is at least 2N – an exponential gap!
Let G be an MRF with components G1, . . . , GN. Component-
aware WalkSAT runs WalkSAT except that for each Gi, it
keeps track of the lowest-cost state it has found so far on
that Gi.
In contrast, regular WalkSAT simply keeps the
best overall solution it has seen so far. For i = 1, . . . , N,
let Oi be the set of optimal states of Gi, and Si the set of
non-optimal states of Gi that diﬀer only by one bit from
some x∗∈Oi; let Pi(x →y) be the transition probability of
WalkSAT running on Gi, i.e., the probability that one step
of WalkSAT would take Gi from x to y. Given x, a state of
Gi, denote by vi(x) the number of violated clauses in Gi at
state x; deﬁne
αi(x) =
X
y∈Oi
Pi(x →y), βi(x) =
X
y∈Si
Pi(x →y).
For any non-empty subset H ⊆{1, . . . , N}, deﬁne
r(H) = mini∈H minx∈Oi vi(x)βi(x)
maxi∈H maxx∈Si vi(x)αi(x).
Theorem 3.1. Let H be an arbitrary non-empty subset of
{1, . . . , N} s.t. |H| ≥2 and r = r(H) > 0. Then, in expec-
tation, WalkSAT on G takes at least 2|H|r/(2+r) more steps
to ﬁnd an optimal solution than component-aware WalkSAT.
The proof is in Appendix B.5. In the worst case, there is
only one component, or r(H) = 0 for every subset of compo-
nents H (which happens only if there is a zero-cost solution),
and partitioning would become pure overhead (but negli-
gible in our experiments).
On an information extraction
(IE) benchmark dataset, there is some H with |H| = 1196
and r(H) = 0.5. Thus, the gap on this dataset is at least
2200 ≈1060. This explains why Tuffy produces lower cost
solutions in minutes than non-partition aware approaches
such as Alchemy produce even after days.
3.4
Further Partitioning MRFs
Although our algorithms are more scalable than prior ap-
proaches, if the largest component does not ﬁt in memory
then we are forced to run the in-RDBMS version of inference,
which is ineﬃcient. Intuitively, if the graph is only weakly
connected, then we should still be able to get the exponential
speed up of partitioning. Consider the following example.
G1 
G2 
e 
a 
b 
Figure 2: Ex. 2
Example 2 Consider an MRF
consisting of two equally sized
subgraphs G1 and G2, plus an
edge e = (a, b) between them
(Figure 2).
Suppose that the
expected hitting time of Walk-
SAT on Gi is Hi. Since H1 and
H2 are essentially independent, the hitting time of WalkSAT
on G could be roughly H1H2. On the other hand, consider
the following scheme: enumerate all possible truth assign-
ments to one of the boundary variables {a, b}, say a – of
which there are two – and conditioning on each assignment,
run WalkSAT on G1 and G2 independently.
Clearly, the
overall hitting time is no more than 2(H1 + H2), which is
a huge improvement over H1H2 since Hi is usually a high-
order polynomial or even exponential in the size of Gi.
377

To capitalize on this idea, we need to address two chal-
lenges:
1) designing an eﬃcient MRF partitioning algo-
rithm; and 2) designing an eﬀective partition-aware search
algorithm. We address each of them in turn.
MRF Partitioning. Intuitively, to maximally utilize the
memory budget, we want to partition the MRF into roughly
equal sizes; to minimize information loss, we want to min-
imize total weight of clauses that span over multiple parti-
tions, i.e., the cut size. To capture this notion, we deﬁne a
balanced bisection of a hypergraph G = (V, E) as a partition
of V = V1 ∪V2 such that |V1| = |V2|. The cost of a bisection
(V1, V2) is |{e ∈E|e ∩V1 ̸= ∅and e ∩V2 ̸= ∅}|.
Theorem 3.2. Consider the MLN Γ given by the single
rule p(x), r(x, y) →p(y) where r is an evidence predicate.
Then, the problem of ﬁnding a minimum-cost balanced bi-
section of the MRF that results from Γ is NP-hard in the
size of the evidence (data).
The proof (Appendix B.6) is by reduction to the graph min-
imum bisection problem [14], which is hard to approximate
(unless P = NP, there is no PTAS). In fact, the problem
we are facing (multi-way hypergraph partitioning) is more
challenging than graph bisection, and has been extensively
studied [12, 24]. And so, we design a simple, greedy parti-
tioning algorithm: it assigns each clause to a bin in descend-
ing order by clause weight, subject to the constraint that no
component in the resulting graph is larger than an input
parameter β. We include pseudocode in Appendix B.7.
Partition-aware Search. We need to reﬁne the search pro-
cedure to be aware of partitions: the central challenge is
that a clause in the cut may depend on atoms in two dis-
tinct partitions. Hence, there are dependencies between the
partitions. We exploit the idea in Example 2 to design the
following partition-aware search scheme – which is an in-
stance of the Gauss-Seidel method from nonlinear optimiza-
tion [3, pg. 219]. Denote by X1, . . . , Xk the states (i.e., truth
assignments to the atoms) of the partitions. First initialize
Xi = x0
i for i = 1 . . . k. For t = 1 . . . T, for i = 1 . . . k, run
WalkSAT on xt−1
i
conditioned on {xt
j|1 ≤j < i}∪{xt−1
j
|i <
j ≤k} to obtain xt
i. Finally, return {xT
i |1 ≤i ≤k}.
Tradeoffs. Although ﬁne-grained partitioning improves per-
partition search speed (Theorem 3.1) and space eﬃciency, it
also increases cut sizes – especially for dense graphs – which
would in turn slow down the Gauss-Seidel inference scheme.
Thus, there is an interesting tradeoﬀof partitioning gran-
ularity. In Section B.8, we describe a basic heuristic that
combines Theorem 3.1 and the Gauss-Seidel scheme.
4.
EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we validate ﬁrst that our system Tuffy is
orders of magnitude more scalable and eﬃcient than prior
approaches. We then validate that each of our techniques
contributes to the goal.
Experimental Setup. We select Alchemy, the currently
most widely used MLN system, as our comparison point.
Alchemy and Tuffy are implemented in C++ and Java,
respectively. The RDBMS used by Tuffy is PostgreSQL
8.4. Unless speciﬁed otherwise, all experiments are run on an
1.0E+03
2.0E+03
3.0E+03
0
20
40
cost 
IE 
Alchemy 
Tuffy 
0.0E+00
1.0E+04
2.0E+04
3.0E+04
0
50
100
cost 
LP 
Alchemy 
Tuffy 
0.0E+00
1.0E+05
2.0E+05
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
cost 
ER 
Alchemy grounding took 7 hr. 
Tuffy 
0.0E+00
2.0E+03
4.0E+03
6.0E+03
0
2000
4000
6000
cost 
RC 
Alchemy 
Tuffy 
Figure 3: Time-cost plots of Alchemy vs. Tuﬀy; the
x axes are time (sec)
Intel Core2 at 2.4GHz with 4 GB of RAM running Red Hat
Enterprise Linux 5. For fair comparison, in all experiments
Tuffy runs a single thread unless otherwise noted.
Datasets. We run Alchemy and Tuffy on four datasets;
three of them (including their MLNs) are taken directly
from the Alchemy website [7]: Link Prediction (LP), given
an administrative database of a CS department, the goal
is to predict student-adviser relationships; Information Ex-
traction (IE), given a set of Citeseer citations, the goal is
to extract from them structured records; and Entity Resolu-
tion (ER), which is to deduplicate citation records based on
word similarity. These tasks have been extensively used in
prior work. The last task, Relational Classiﬁcation (RC),
performs classiﬁcation on the Cora dataset [15]; RC con-
tains all the rules in Figure 1. Table 1 contains statistics
about the data.
LP
IE
RC
ER
#relations
22
18
4
10
#rules
94
1K
15
3.8K
#entities
302
2.6K
51K
510
#evidence tuples
731
0.25M
0.43M
676
#query atoms
4.6K
0.34M
10K
16K
#components
1
5341
489
1
Table 1: Dataset statistics
4.1
High-level Performance
We empirically demonstrate that Tuffy with all the tech-
niques we have described has faster grounding, higher search
speed, lower memory usage, and in some cases produces
much better solutions than a competitor main memory ap-
proach, Alchemy.
Recall that the name of the game is
to produce low-cost solutions quickly. With this in mind,
we run Tuffy and Alchemy on each dataset for 7500 sec-
onds, and track the cost of the best solution found up to
any moment; on datasets that have multiple components,
namely IE and RC, we apply the partitioning strategy in
Section 3.3 on Tuffy. As shown in Figure 3, Tuffy of-
ten reaches a best solution within orders of magnitude less
time than Alchemy; secondly, the result quality of Tuffy
is at least as good as – sometimes substantially better (e.g.,
on IE and RC) than – Alchemy. Here, we have zoomed
the time axes into interesting areas. Since “solution cost”
is undeﬁned during grounding, each curve begins only when
grounding is completed6. We analyze the experiment results
in more detail in the following sections.
6The L-shaped curves indicate that search converges very
quickly compared to grounding time.
378

LP
IE
RC
ER
Alchemy
48
13
3,913
23,891
Tuffy
6
13
40
106
Table 2: Grounding time (sec)
0.0E+00
1.0E+04
2.0E+04
0
1000
2000
cost 
time (sec) 
LP 
Alchemy (solid) 
Tuffy-p (dash) 
Tuffy-mm 
0.0E+00
2.0E+05
4.0E+05
0
4000
8000
cost 
time (sec) 
RC 
Alchemy 
Tuffy-p 
Tuffy-mm 
Figure 4: Time-cost plots of Alchemy vs.
Tuﬀy-p
(i.e., Tuﬀy without partitioning) vs. Tuﬀy-mm (i.e.,
Tuﬀy with RDBMS-based search)
4.2
Effect of Bottom-up Grounding
We validate that the RDBMS-based grounding approach
in Tuffy allows us to complete the grounding process orders
of magnitude more eﬃciently than Alchemy. To make this
point, we run Tuffy and Alchemy on the four datasets,
and show their grounding time in Table 2. We can see that
Tuffy outperforms Alchemy by orders of magnitude at
run time in the grounding phase (a factor of 225 on the
ER dataset). To understand the diﬀerences, we dug deeper
with a lesion study (i.e., disabling one aspect of a system at
a time), and found that sort join and hash join algorithms
(along with predicate pushdown) are the key components of
the RDBMS that speeds up the grounding process of Tuffy
(Appendix C.2). Tuffy obviates the need for Alchemy to
reimplement the optimization techniques in an RDBMS.
4.3
Effect of Hybrid Architecture
We validate two technical claims: (1) the hybrid memory
management strategy of Tuffy (even without our parti-
tioning optimizations) has comparable search rates to exist-
ing main memory implementations (and much faster than
RDBMS-based implementation) and (2) Tuffy maintains
a much smaller memory footprint (again without partition-
ing). Thus, we compare three approaches: (1) Tuffy with-
out the partitioning optimizations, called Tuffy-p (read:
Tuﬀy minus p), (2) a version of Tuffy (also without parti-
tioning) that implements RDBMS-based WalkSAT (detailed
in Appendix B.2), Tuffy-mm, and (3) Alchemy.
Figure 4 illustrates the time-cost plots on LP and RC of
all three approaches. We see from RC that Tuffy-p is able
to ground much more quickly than Alchemy (40 sec com-
pared to 3913 sec). Additionally, we see that, compared to
Tuffy-mm, Tuffy-p’s in-memory search is orders of mag-
nitude faster at getting to their best reported solution (both
approaches ﬁnish grounding at the same time, and so start
search at the same time). To understand why, we measure
the ﬂipping rate, which is the number of steps performed by
WalkSAT per second. As shown in Table 3, the reason is
that Tuffy-mm has a dramatically lower ﬂipping rate. We
discuss the performance bound of any RDBMS-based search
implementation in Appendix C.1.
To validate our second claim, that Tuffy-p has a smaller
memory footprint, we see in Table 4, that on all datasets,
the memory footprint of Tuffy is no more than 5% of
Alchemy. Drilling down, the reason is that the interme-
diate state size of Alchemy’s grounding process may be
LP
IE
RC
ER
Alchemy
0.20M
1M
1.9K
0.9K
Tuffy-mm
0.9
13
0.9
0.03
Tuffy-p
0.11M
0.39M
0.17M
7.9K
Table 3: Flipping rates (#ﬂips/sec)
LP
IE
RC
ER
clause table
5.2 MB
0.6 MB
4.8 MB
164 MB
Alchemy RAM
411 MB
206 MB
2.8 GB
3.5 GB
Tuffy-p RAM
9 MB
8 MB
19 MB
184 MB
Table 4:
Space eﬃciency of Alchemy vs.
Tuﬀy-p
(without partitioning)
larger than the size of grounding results. For example, on
the RC dataset, Alchemy allocated 2.8 GB of RAM only to
produce 4.8 MB of ground clauses. While Alchemy has to
hold everything in memory, Tuffy only needs to load the
grounding result from the RDBMS at the end of grounding.
It follows that, given the same resources, there are MLNs
that Tuffy can handle eﬃciently while Alchemy would
crash. Indeed, on a dataset called “ER+” which is twice
as large as ER, Alchemy exhausts all 4GB of RAM and
crashes soon after launching, whereas Tuffy runs normally
with peak RAM usage of roughly 2GB.
From these experiments, we conclude that the hybrid ar-
chitecture is crucial to Tuffy’s overall eﬃciency.
4.4
Effect of Partitioning
In this section, we validate that, when there are multi-
ple components in the data, partitioning not only improves
Tuffy’s space eﬃciency, but – due to Theorem 3.1 – may
actually enable Tuffy to ﬁnd substantially higher quality
results. We compare Tuffy’s performance (with partition-
ing enabled) against Tuffy-p: a version of Tuffy with
partitioning disabled.
We run the search phase on each of the four datasets using
three approaches: Alchemy, Tuffy-p, and Tuffy (with
partitioning). Tuffy-p and Alchemy run WalkSAT on the
whole MRF for 107 steps. Tuffy runs WalkSAT on each
component in the MRF independently, each component Gi
receiving 107|Gi|/|G| steps, where |Gi| and |G| are the num-
bers of atoms in this component and the MRF, respectively.
This is weighted round-robin scheduling.
LP
IE
RC
ER
#components
1
5341
489
1
Tuffy-p RAM
9MB
8MB
19MB
184MB
Tuffy RAM
9MB
8MB
15MB
184MB
Tuffy-p cost
2534
1933
1943
18717
Tuffy cost
2534
1635
1281
18717
Table 5:
Performance of Tuﬀy vs.
Tuﬀy-p (i.e.,
Tuﬀy without partitioning)
As shown in Table 5, when there are multiple compo-
nents in the MRF, partitioning allows Tuffy to use less
memory than Tuffy-p.
(The IE dataset is too small to
yield notable diﬀerences). We see that Tuffy’s component-
aware inference can produce signiﬁcantly better results than
Tuffy-p. We then extend the run time of all systems. As
shown in Figure 5, there continues to be a gap between
Tuffy’s component-aware search approach and the original
WalkSAT running on the whole MRF. This gap is predicted
by our theoretical analysis in Section 3.3. Thus, we have
379

1000
1400
1800
2200
2600
0
20
40
60
80
cost 
time (sec) 
IE 
Tuffy 
Tuffy-p (dotted) 
Alchemy (solid) 
0
1000
2000
3000
0
100
200
300
cost 
time (sec) 
RC 
Tuffy 
Tuffy-p 
Alchemy grounding took over 1 hr. 
Figure 5: Time-cost plots of Tuﬀy vs Tuﬀy-p (i.e.,
Tuﬀy without partitioning)
0E+0
1E+3
2E+3
3E+3
0
100
200
300
cost 
time (sec) 
RC 
15MB
13MB
12MB
2.4E+3
2.6E+3
2.8E+3
3.0E+3
0
50
100
150
cost 
time (sec) 
LP 
9MB
5MB
3.5MB
0E+0
2E+4
4E+4
6E+4
8E+4
0
500 1000 1500
cost 
time (sec) 
ER 
200MB
100MB
50MB
Figure 6:
Time-cost plots of Tuﬀy with diﬀerent
memory budgets
veriﬁed that partitioning makes Tuffy substantially more
eﬃcient in terms of both space and search speed.
We also validate that Tuffy’s loading and parallelism
makes a substantial diﬀerence: without our batch loading
technique, Tuffy takes 448s to perform 106 search steps
per component on RC, while 117s to perform the same op-
eration with batch loading. With the addition of 8 threads
(on 8 cores), we further reduce the runtime to 28s. Addi-
tional loading and parallelism experiments in Appendix C.3
support our claim that our loading algorithm and partition-
ing algorithm contribute to improving processing speed.
4.5
Effect of Further Partitioning
To validate our claim that splitting MRF components can
further improve both space eﬃciency and sometimes also
search quality (Section 3.4), we run Tuffy on RC, ER, and
LP with diﬀerent memory budgets – which are fed to the
partitioning algorithm as the bound of partition size. On
each dataset, we give Tuffy three memory budgets, with
the largest one corresponding to the case when no compo-
nents are split. Figure 6 shows the experiment results. On
RC, we see another improvement of the result quality (cf.
Figure 5). Similar to Example 2, we believe the reason to be
graph sparsity: “13MB” cuts only about 420 out of the to-
tal 10K clauses. In contrast, while MRF partitioning lowers
RAM usage considerably on ER, it also leads to slower con-
vergence – which correlates with poor partitioning quality:
the MRF of ER is quite dense and even 2-way partition-
ing (“100MB”) would cut over 1.4M out of the total 2M
clauses. The dataset LP illustrates the interesting tradeoﬀ
where a coarse partition is beneﬁcial whereas ﬁner grained
partitions would be detrimental. We discuss this tradeoﬀin
Appendix B.8.
5.
CONCLUSION
Motivated by a large set of data-rich applications, we
study how to push MLN inference inside an RDBMS. We
ﬁnd that the grounding phase of MLN inference performs
many relational operations and that these operations are a
substantial bottleneck in state-of-the-art MLN implementa-
tions such as Alchemy. Using an RDBMS, Tuffy not only
achieves scalability, but also speeds up the grounding phase
by orders of magnitude. We then develop a hybrid solution
with RDBMS-based grounding and in-memory search. To
improve the space and time eﬃciency of Tuffy, we study a
partitioning approach that allows for in-memory search even
when the dataset does not ﬁt in memory. We showed that
further partitioning allows Tuffy to produce higher quality
results in a shorter amount of time.
6.
