Probabilistic Models for Computerized Adaptive Testing: Experiments
Martin Plajner
Institute of Information Theory and Automation
Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic
Pod vod´arenskou vˇeˇz´ı 4
Prague 8, CZ-182 08
Czech Republic
Jiˇr´ı Vomlel
Institute of Information Theory and Automation
Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic
Pod vod´arenskou vˇeˇz´ı 4
Prague 8, CZ-182 08
Czech Republic
Abstract
This paper follows previous research we have
already performed in the area of Bayesian net-
works models for CAT. We present models us-
ing Item Response Theory (IRT - standard CAT
method), Bayesian networks, and neural net-
works. We conducted simulated CAT tests on
empirical data.
Results of these tests are pre-
sented for each model separately and compared.
1
INTRODUCTION
All of us are in touch with different ability and skill checks
almost every day. The computerized form of testing is also
getting an increasing attention with the spread of comput-
ers, smart phones and other devices which allow easy con-
tact with target groups. This paper focuses on the Comput-
erized Adaptive Testing (CAT) (van der Linden and Glas,
2000; Almond and Mislevy, 1999; Almond et al., 2015)
and it follows a previous research paper (Plajner and Vom-
lel, 2015).
In this previous paper we explained the concept of CAT.
Next, we describe our empirical data set.
The use of
Bayesian networks for CAT was discussed and we con-
structed different types of Bayesian network models for
CAT. These models were tested on empirical data. The re-
sults were presented and discussed.
In this paper we present two additional model types for
CAT: Item Response Theory (IRT) and neural networks.
Moreover, new BN models are proposed in this paper. We
conducted simulated CAT tests on the same empirical data
as in the previous paper. This allows us to make compar-
isons of two new model types (BN and NN) with the CAT
standard IRT model. Results are presented for each model
separately and then they are all compared.
2
CAT PROCEDURE AND MODEL
EVALUATION
All models proposed in this paper are supposed to serve
for adaptive testing. In this section we brieﬂy outline the
process of adaptive testing1 with the help of these models
and methods for their evaluation. For every model we used
similar procedures. The speciﬁc details for each model type
are discussed in the corresponding sections. At this point
we discuss the common aspects.
In every model type we have the following types of vari-
ables. For some models they have a different speciﬁc name
because of an established naming convention of the corre-
sponding method. Nevertheless, the meaning of these vari-
ables is the same and we explain differences for each model
types. In this paper we use two types of variables:
• A set of n variables we want to estimate S
=
{S1, . . . , Sn}. These variables represent latent skills
(abilities, knowledge) of a student. We will call them
skills or skill variables. We will use symbol S to de-
note the multivariable S = (S1, . . . , Sn) taking states
s = (s1,i1, . . . , sn,in).
• A set of p questions X = {X1, . . . , Xp}. We will
use the symbol X to denote the multivariable X =
(X1, . . . , Xp) taking states x = (x1, . . . , xp).
We collected data from paper tests conducted by gram-
mar schools’ students. The description of the test and its
statistics can be found in the paper (Plajner and Vomlel,
2015). All together, we have obtained 281 test results. Ex-
periments were performed with each model of each type
that is described in following sections. We used 10-fold
cross-validation method. We learned each model from
9
10
of randomly divided data. The remaining
1
10 of the data
set served as a testing set. This procedure was repeated 10
times to obtain 10 learned student models with the same
structure and different parameters.
1Additional information about CAT can be found in (Wainer
and Dorans, 2015)
arXiv:1601.07929v2  [cs.AI]  1 Feb 2016

With these learned models we simulate CAT using test sets.
For every student in a test set a CAT procedure consists of
the following steps:
• The next question to be asked is selected.
• This question is asked and an answer is obtained.
• This answer is inserted into the model.
• The model (which provides estimates of the student’s
skills) is updated.
• (optional) Answers to all questions are estimated
given the current estimates of student’s skills.
This procedure is repeated as long as necessary. It means
until we reach a termination criterion, which can be, for ex-
ample, a time restriction, the number of questions, or a con-
ﬁdence interval of the estimated variables. Each of these
criteria would lead to a different learning strategy (Vomlel,
2004b), but ﬁnding a global optimal selection with these
strategies would be NP-hard (L´ın, 2005). We have cho-
sen an heuristic approach based on greedy optimization
methods. Methods of the question selection differ for each
model type and are explained in the respective sections. All
of them use the greedy strategy to select questions.
To evaluate models we performed a simulation of CAT test
for every model and for every student. During testing we
ﬁrst estimated the skill(s) of a student based on his/her an-
swers. Then, based on these estimated skills we used the
model to estimate answers to all questions X. Let the test
be in the step s (s −1 questions asked). At the end of the
step s (after updating the model with a new answer) we
compute marginal probability distributions for all skills S.
Then we use this to compute estimations of answers to all
questions, where we select the most probable state of each
question Xi ∈X:
x∗
i = arg max
xi P(Xi = xi|S).
By comparing this value to the real answer to i−th question
x′
i we obtain a success ratio of the response estimates for
all questions Xi ∈X of a test result t (particular student’s
result) in the step s
SRt
s
=
P
Xi∈X I(x∗
i = x′
i)
|X|
, where
I(expr)
=
 1
if expr is true
0
otherwise.
The total success ratio of one model in the step s for all test
data is deﬁned as
SRs
=
PN
t=1 SRt
s
N
.
SR0 is the success rate of the prediction before asking any
questions.
3
ITEM RESPONSE THEORY
The beginning of Item Response Theory (IRT) stem back
to 5 decades ago and there is a large amount of resources
available, for example, (Lord and Novick, 1968; Rasch,
1960, 1993). IRT allows more speciﬁc measurements of
certain abilities of an examinee. It expects a student to have
an ability (skill) which directly inﬂuences his/her chance
of answering a question correctly. When we have only one
variable2, it is common to refer to it as a proﬁciency vari-
able. This ability is called latent ability or a latent trait θ.
The trait θ corresponds to the general skill S1 deﬁned in the
Section 2. Every question of the IRT model has an associ-
ated item response function (IRF) which is a probability of
a successful answer given θ.
We ﬁtted our data on the 2 parametric IRT model. It means
that characteristic Item Response Functions, as the prob-
ability of a correct answer to i-th given the ability θ, are
computed by the formula
pi(θ) =
1
1 + e−ai(θ−bi)
where ai sets the scale of the question (this sets its discrim-
ination ability - a steeper curve better differentiate between
students), bi is the difﬁculty of the question (horizontal po-
sition of a curve in space).
For question selection step of CAT we use item information
of a question i that it is given by the formula
Ii(θ) =
(p′
i(θ))2
pi(θ)qi(θ)
where p′
i is the derivation of the item response function pi.
This item information provides one, and most straightfor-
ward, way of the next question selection. In every step the
question X∗which is selected is one with the highest item
information.
X∗(θ) = arg max
i
Ii(θ)
This approach minimizes the standard error of the test pro-
cedure (Hambleton et al., 1991) because the standard error
of measurement SEi produced by i −th item is deﬁned as
SEi(θ) =
1
p
Ii(θ)
.
This means that the better precision of difﬁculty we are able
to achieve while asking questions the smaller error of mea-
surement.
The result of CAT simulation is displayed in the Figure 1.
We can notice that this model is able to choose correct
2There are variants of multidimensional IRT model where it is
possible to have more then one ability but in this section we are
going to discuss only models with one only.

0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
step
success rate
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
IRT
Figure 1: Success rates of IRT model
questions to ask very quickly and its prediction success
rises after asking the ﬁrst two. After these questions it can
not improve much any more. This is caused by the simplic-
ity of the model.
4
BAYESIAN NETWORKS
In this section we use Bayesian networks (BN) as CAT
models. Details about BNs can be found in (Nielsen and
Jensen, 2007; Kjærulff and Madsen, 2008). The use of BNs
in educational assessment is discussed in (Almond et al.,
2015; Culbertson, 2015; Mill´an et al., 2010). This topic is
also discussed, for example, in (Vomlel, 2004a,b).
A Bayesian network is a probabilistic graphical model,
a structure representing conditional independence state-
ments. It consists of the following:
• a set of variables (nodes),
• a set of edges,
• a set of conditional probabilities.
Speciﬁc details about the use of BNs for CAT can be found
in (Plajner and Vomlel, 2015). Types of nodes in our BNs
correspond to types of variables deﬁned in the Section 2. In
this paper we use question nodes with only Boolean states,
i.e., question is either correct or incorrect. Edges are de-
ﬁned usually between skills and questions (we present ex-
amples of connections in ﬁgures). Conditional probability
values have been learned using standard EM algorithm for
BN learning.
In this paper we use a modiﬁed method for model scoring
compared to the method used in our previous research. The
current method is described in the section 2. The difference
is that in this case we estimate answers to all questions in
the question pool and then compare to real answers in ev-
ery step. In the previous version we were estimating an-
swers only to unanswered questions in every step. It led
to a skewed results interpretation because the value in the
denominator of the success rate
SRt
s =
P
Xi∈X I(x∗
i = x′
i)
|X|
was decreasing in every step. The modiﬁed version is com-
paring all questions and because of that the denominator
stays the same in every step.
From previous models we selected the model marked as
“b3” and “expert”. The former means that it has Boolean
answer values, there is one skill variable having 3 states and
no additional information (personal data of students) was
used. See Figure 2 for its structure. The later is an expert
model with 7 skill nodes (each having 2 states), Boolean
answer values and no additional information about students
was used. See Figure 3 for its structure.
In this paper we present three new BN models. The ﬁrst
two are modiﬁcations of “b3” model. They have the same
structure and differ only in the number of states of their
skill node. We present experiments with 4 and 9 states. We
performed experiments with different numbers of states as
well, but they do not provide more interesting results. Next,
we add a modiﬁed expert model. This modiﬁed model has
also Boolean questions and no additional information. We
have added one state to 7 skill nodes from the previous ver-
sion (they have 3 states in total now). The reason for this

Model name
Figure
No. of skill nodes
No. of states of skill nodes
simple 3s
2
1
3
simple 4s
2
1
4
simple 9s
2
1
9
expert old
3
7
2
expert new
4
7+1
3
Table 1: Overview of Bayesian network models
addition is an analysis of the question selection criterion.
We select questions by minimizing the expected entropy
over skill nodes. With only two states it means that we are
pushing a student into one or the other side of the spectrum
(basically, we want him to be either good or bad). With
3 states we allow them to approach mediocre skill quality
as well. Moreover, we realized that the model structure
as in the Figure 3 has only skills that are very specialized.
We introduce a new 8th skill node which connect previous
7 skill nodes. Its representation is an overall mathemati-
cal skill combining all other skills. It allows skills on the
lower level to inﬂuence each other and to provide evidence
between themselves. The ﬁnal model structure is in the
Figure 4.
All models are summarized in the Table 1. Results of CAT
simulation with BN models are displayed in the Figure 5.
Increasing the number of states of one skill node improved
prediction accuracy of the model (simple 4s, simple 9s),
but only slightly. As we can see, one additional state (4
states in total) is better than more states (9). This conﬁrms
our expectation that simply adding node states can not im-
prove the model quality for long due to over ﬁtting of the
model. Next, we can observe that there is a large difference
between the new and the old expert model. The success
rate of the new version exceeds all other models. Adding
additional skill node connecting other skills proved to be
a correct step. Possibilities in the model structure are still
large and it remains to be explored how to create the best
possible structure.
5
NEURAL NETWORKS
Neural networks are models for approximations of non-
linear functions. For more details about NNs, please refer
to (Haykin, 2009; Aleksander and Morton, 1995).
There are three different parts of a NN:
1. an input layer,
2. several hidden layers, and
3. an output layer.
We use NN as a student model. We feed student answers to
the input layer. These values are transformed to the hidden
layer(s). There is no general rule how to choose the number
of hidden layers and their size. In our case we performed
experiments with one hidden layer of different sizes. The
hidden layer then further transforms to the output layer.
NNs are not suitable for unsupervised learning. Because
of that, we do not estimate an unknown student skill in the
output layer. We would not have any target value needed
during the learning step of the NN. Instead of that, we es-
timate the score (the test result) of a student directly. The
score of a student is known for every student at the time of
learning. The output layer then provide an estimate of this
score. Nevertheless, this score is a corresponding variable
to skill variables described in the Section 2
To select the next question we use the following procedure.
We want the selected question to provide us as much in-
formation as possible about the tested student. That means
that a student who answers incorrectly should be as far as
possible on the score scale from another who answers cor-
rectly. Let the S|Xi,x be the score prediction after answer-
ing the i −th question’s state x, P(Xi,x) the probability
of state x to be the answer to the question i. P(Xi,x) can
be obtained, for example, by statistical analysis of answers.
We select a question X∗maximizing the variance of pre-
dicted scores:
X∗= arg max
i
Va
xr(SC|Xi,x)
=
X
x
P(Xi,x)(SC|Xi,x −SC|Xi), where
SC|Xi =
X
x
P(Xi,x)SC|Xi,x
is the mean value of predicted scores.
In our experiment we used only one hidden layer with many
different numbers of hidden neurons. From them we select
models with 3, 5, and 7 neurons in the hidden layer because
they provide the most interesting results. The structure of
the network with 5 hidden neurons is in the Figure 6. Re-
sults of CAT simulation with NN models are displayed in
the Figure 7. As we can see in this ﬁgure, the quality of es-
timates while using NNs increases very slowly. This may
be caused by the question selection criterion. If we were se-
lecting better questions, it is possible that the success rate
would be increasing faster. It remains to be explored which
selection criterion would provide such questions. Never-
theless, this better question selection does not change the
ﬁnal prediction power of the model (the maximal success

Figure 2: Bayesian network with one hidden variable and personal information about students
rate would not be exceeded). This prediction power could
be increased by using a different version of NNs. More
speciﬁcally, we will perform experiments with one of the
recurrent versions of NNs, i.e., Elman’s networks or Jor-
dan’s networks.
6
MODEL COMPARISON AND
CONCLUSIONS
We present a graphical comparison of all three model types
in the Figure 8. One model is selected from each type. We
can see that the neural network model scored the worst re-
sult. This may be further improved by a better NN structure
and better question selection process. The new BN expert
model is scoring the best. Even in this case we believe that
further improvements are possible to increase its success
rate. We will focus our future research into methods for
BN models creation and criteria for their comparison. Es-
pecially, we would like to use a concept of the local struc-
ture in BN models (D´ıez and Druzdzel, 2007). That would
allow us to create more complex models, yet with less pa-
rameters to be estimated during learning. Both previous
models can be compared with the IRT model which is the
standard in the ﬁeld of CAT.
