Covering the News with (AI) Style
Michele Merler
Cicero Nogueira dos Santos
Mauro Martino
Alﬁo M. Gliozzo
John R. Smith
IBM Research AI
New York, NY

Figure 1: AI-generated image of AI for the New York Times special session on AI
We introduce a multi-modal discriminative and generative framework capable of assisting humans in
producing visual content related to a given theme, starting from a collection of documents (textual,
visual, or both). This framework can be used by editors to generate images for articles, as well as
books or music album covers. Motivated by a request from the The New York Times (NYT) seeking
help to use AI to create art for their special section on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, we demonstrated the
application of our system in producing such image. The result is presented in Figure 11 2. Starting
from a corpus of documents and a keyword term, the goal of our system is to generate an image
reﬂecting those inputs. We accomplish it with the pipeline described in Figure 2, which involves three
major steps. In the following we describe the steps in detail, using the NYT “AI” image generation as
an example use case of the system.
1This image was published in page F7 of the NYT issue of October 19th, 2018
2“AI Self Portrait” was selected in the art gallery of the NeurIPS Workshop on Machine Learning for
Creativity 2018 (https://bit.ly/32HuHiJ)
arXiv:2002.02369v1  [eess.IV]  5 Jan 2020

𝓛𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡
𝓛𝑠𝑡𝑦𝑙𝑒
𝓛𝑑
𝓛𝑔
Figure 2: Pipeline of the Art Generation Process
Identify a core visual concept. As an input corpus we collected about 3,000 articles from the NYT
archives, half related to “AI” and half unrelated to it (to do so we use the metadata provided by
the publisher). Then, we applied basic natural language processing tools to identify terms for each
document and we used this representation to train a discriminative text model (DTM)a. Next, we used
the dimensions in the tf/idf vector space with the highest weights according to DTM and used them
to identify the top-30 most discriminative semantic concepts, 15 positives and 15negatives. Those
terms were used to collect images using a web image search engine, on top of which a VGG16 visual
recognition deep network was trained to visually determine in discriminative fashion "AI" appearance
(DAM AI model). Then, we applied the DAM AI network to rank images from the AI related NYT
articles according to their strength of depicting or representing “AI”. Finally, the human was included
in the loop to select one of the top ranked images: an image of a human and robot shaking hands.
This became the basis concept of the visual generative process.
Create an original image that captures the given concept. Using "Human-Machine Handshake"
as a query concept, we built a training dataset of approximately 1,000 images of human and robot
hands collected from the web. We then trained a generative neural network (GAN) to draw new
images of human and robot hands. Speciﬁcally for our use case we used a BEGAN [3] model, which
ran for 17K iterations and for the generator used a random input vector z of dimensionality 100.
Batch size was 16, image dimensions 128x128, learning rate 1e-4, γ = 0.5 and Adam optimizer.
Other generative models were tested as well (see Supplementary Material Figures 5 and 6).
Present the image in a way that ﬁts the magazine visual style. The GAN generated images at this
stage present two limitations from a publishing perspective: resolution (128x128, we did not try high
resolution GANs [5] at the time of this experiment) and style (the magazine content tend to be more
graphic and less photo-realistic (see detail in Supplemental Material Figure 3(a))). In order to solve
both issues, we adopted a neural style transfer approach [4]. Instead of transferring the style of a
single image, we collected a sample of cover art from the NYT, tiled them together in a single style
reference image, and trained a style transfer network with it. The base network for the style transfer
was the same DAM VGG16. Style was optimized for reconstruction in layers conv1_1, conv2_1,
conv3_1, conv4_1 and conv5_1, while content (any of the BEGAN-generated handshake images)
was optimized for layer conv4_2. In that way, we were able to produce images of "AI" matching
the NYT “visual language” for cover art. Furthermore, the output resolution of the style-transferred
image could be as high as 1048x1048. Finally, we chose among multiple generations the image
shown in Figure 1 based on overall concept clarity and artistic style.
In this speciﬁc work, we have opted to keep the human involved in various stages of the creative
process, since we view our system as an assistive editorial tool more than fully self-contained.
2

However, the entire pipeline could be automated. For example, one could use an image captioning
system [7] to automatically determine the concept out of the top ranked images by the DAM model.
Furthermore, components of the pipeline can be substituted or re-arranged during the creative process.
For example, one of the selected images could be directly employed as input to the neural style
transfer model (as illustrated in Supplementary Material Figure 3), instead of using a fully generative
solution. We envision this type of solution to be helpful for editorial purposes in general, as it could
be applied for example to book or music cover generation, perhaps even employing acoustics analysis
as well. Inserting tools capable of evoking emotions [1] as well as style can also be an interesting
future direction.
