Predicting Rapid Fire Growth (Flashover) Using Conditional 
Generative Adversarial Networks 
Kyongsik Yun, Jessi Bustos, Thomas Lu, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 

Abstract 
A flashover occurs when a fire spreads very rapidly 
through crevices due to intense heat. Flashovers present one of 
the most frightening and challenging fire phenomena to those 
who regularly encounter them: firefighters. Firefighters’ safety 
and lives often depend on their ability to predict flashovers 
before they occur. Typical pre-flashover fire characteristics 
include dark smoke, high heat, and rollover (“angel fingers”) 
and can be quantified by color, size, and shape. Using a color 
video stream from a firefighter’s body camera, we applied 
generative adversarial neural networks for image enhancement. 
The neural networks were trained to enhance very dark fire and 
smoke patterns in videos and monitor dynamic changes in smoke 
and fire areas. Preliminary tests with limited flashover training 
videos showed that we predicted a flashover as early as 55 
seconds before it occurred.  
Keywords: flashover prediction, generative adversarial 
networks, object recognition and segmentation, computer vision 
Introduction  
Reducing the number of firefighter injuries and deaths is a 
clear goal [1, 2]. To address this issue, the US Department of 
Homeland Security has launched a program called the Next 
Generation First Responder (NGFR) [3-5]. As a result of this 
program, firefighters will be fully aware of the situation with 
sensors and cameras that can be worn. The goal of this program 
is to help the first responder to be safe and healthy and to be 
successful in his or her mission. 
Adding sensors and providing more data to the first 
responder can cause data overload difficulties. If the data is 
overwhelming, the first responder may not be able to perform 
important activities [6, 7]. A first responder can make a wrong 
decision because he/she cannot quickly extract key insights from 
the flood of information. This is not because there is no relevant 
data. Information overload is a barrier to the first responder to 
perform his or her job safely and efficiently. 
It is important to manage the cognitive load of the first 
responder. Human working memory holds information for only 
a few seconds and holds only five to seven items at a time [8, 9]. 
Working memory can even manipulate information [10, 11]. 
Therefore, there is a great need for an automated system that can 
determine what important data is and how to convert it to 
actionable knowledge or insight. In the first responder scenario, 
real-time functionality is paramount and it is important to 
choose the information to send to the first responder. The 
information needs to be transformed into insight as well as 
relevant to the situation. 
One of the most important and contextual insights for 
firefighters is to predict flashover phenomena [12-14]. Flashover 
is an example of a fire that spreads very quickly across a gap 
because of the intense heat. Flashover is the most frightening 
phenomenon among firefighters. In particular, firefighters need 
years of training and experience to identify, predict, and plan 
how to engage flashovers [15, 16].  
Previous studies constructed mathematical models of 
flashover based on variables, including fuel, temperature, and 
ventilation [17-19]. A previous study applied a numerical model 
using oxygen concentration and mean flame surface size to 
predict flashover time, and the authors predicted flashover 
within 70 seconds before it occurred [20]. Another study 
developed a method to estimate the temperature of a fire before 
flashover [21]. However, these computational models of 
flashover fire require structural information of the area and 
temperature/oxygen data using special sensors that are not 
practical for real fire mission applications. 
The purpose of this study is to develop a computer vision 
algorithm that predicts flashover fires and provides early 
warning to firefighters. 
Methods 
The index of flashovers includes dark smoke, high heat and 
rollover (angel fingers) and can be quantified by color, size and 
shape. Firefighters use hand-held thermal imaging cameras to 
detect and analyze the quality of fire in dark situations [22]. 
Hand-held cameras require one hand for location and operation, 
leaving only one hand for other tasks. Due to the lack of a 
properly used thermal imaging camera, it has contributed to the 
injury and death of a firefighter [23, 24]. Moreover, due to the 
budget constraints of the fire department, the infrared camera 
system is not currently available for all firefighters [25].   
To solve this problem, we used a standard body camera and 
analyzed the color video stream. We applied generative 
adversarial neural networks [26] to enhance very dark fire and 
smoke patterns. We then monitored the dynamic changes of 
smoke and fire. Finally, we provided information on when 
flashover could occur. 
The basic idea comes from the fact that experienced 
firefighters can identify fire and smoke quality visually even in 
very dark conditions [27-29]. They can imagine a thermal image 
through a regular color image. So we applied image-to-image 
conversion techniques using conditional adversarial networks 
[30] that have been shown to be effective in synthesizing photos 
from label maps, reconstructing objects from edge maps, and 
colorizing images.  
Generative adversarial networks learn the loss of 
classifying whether the output image is real or not, while at the 
same time the networks learn the generative model to minimize 
this loss [26]. The conditional adversarial networks learn the 
mapping function from the input image to the output image as 
well as learning the loss function to train the mapping [30, 31]. 
We also used the U-Net architecture [32] and PatchGAN [33] 
for the discriminator.  

 
 
Training and testing data 
Conditional adversarial network training requires a thermal 
image (input) that matches a regular color image (output). The 
network maps the input image to the output image. 
Flashover training videos were provided by Lewisville Fire 
Department and Texas State Fire Marshal's Office. These videos 
show the fire generation and evolution through flashover at an 
early stage using the burn pod made by the department. The 
video includes both a regular video camera and a thermal 
camera view that can be seen by firefighters. A total of 40 
frames of regular and thermal image pairs were used in this 
preliminary study (30 images for training, 10 images for the 
test). 
Post-processing  
We calculated the number of pixels in the red, green, and 
blue channels. The yellow channel is defined as the average of 
the red and green channels. Red is 300-500°F, yellow is 200-
300°F, green is 100-200°F, and blue is 0-100°F depending on 
the temperature representation of the infrared camera. This drew 
the time variation of the number of pixels in each channel. 
Results 
 
Figure 1. Representative images of transformation from the visual to the 
thermal images using generative adversarial networks.  
In the test of the generative network, ten images were used 
as inputs from the beginning of the fire to the flashover 
transition (0-200 seconds). The output image was then created 
(Figure 1). During the early stages of the fire, the general 
structure of the objects (tables and sofas) and mild smoke were 
identified (Figure 1A). Even in very dark environments, the 
network successfully generated hot smoke from the input image 
(Figure 1B). In a flashover situation, a high heat was calculated 
and the table object was still identified (Figure 1C). 
The output images were further analyzed by counting 
pixels of each thermal component (red, yellow, green, blue) and 
then their temporal changes were plotted (Figure 2). Based on 
the temporal changes of high temperature components (300-
500°F and 200-300°F), we predicted a flashover as early as 55 
seconds before it occurred.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Size of smoke and flame over time. Based on the rate of 
changes in smoke and flame size, flashover fire was predicted as early 
as 55 seconds before it occurred.  
Discussion 
In this study, we showed that regular body camera images 
can be transformed and enhanced to represent thermal 
information, and this technique can be used to predict flashover 
55 seconds before it occurs. In order to fully understand the 
process of image enhancement from the regular visual image to 
the thermal image, we visualized the transformed intermediate 
results in each latent space of the networks (Figure 3). In the 
early part of the space, representative features (i.e., fire and 
smoke) were improved. In the deeper part of the space, fire and 
smoke were further subdivided by the estimated temperature. 
Then representative objects (i.e., tables and sofas) were detected. 
As a result, thermal information and representative objects of 
fire and smoke were reconstructed in the final output image. 
Visualization of the hidden layers of neural networks is 
particularly useful for understanding the internal dynamics of 
the whole process, which has often been considered a black box 
[34, 35].  
Conditional adversarial networks have shown good results 
in small datasets (fewer than 100 samples) [30]. The advantage 
of a small dataset is the speed of training. The results of this 
study were generated based on less than 2 hours of training on a 
single NVIDIA GTX1080 GPU. Because the test output image 
transformation takes less than 100 milliseconds, this study can 
be applied as a real-world solution for the first responder to 
integrate into augmented reality glasses to provide improved 
insight. 
 
 
 

 
 
Figure 3. Representative latent-space visualizations of the generative adversarial networks for image enhancement
A recent study presented a thermal camera system 
integrated into a firefighter helmet equipped with an OLED 
display [36]. Our proposed algorithm can also be applied to 
predict flashover by automatically analyzing thermal images and 
quantifying the time changes of thermal content of smoke and 
fire. We can also use the same technique to reconstruct the 
occluded objects to augment the vision for firefighters. As for 
information overload, a high level of information (i.e., flashover 
timing prediction) can be provided to firefighters without 
overlaying the heat/occluded information on the display. This is 
best not to disturb the firefighter's view, but still provides the 
most important information. 
Acknowledgment 
The research was carried out at the Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, under a contract 
with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. The 
research was funded by the U.S. Department of Homeland 
Security Science and Technology Directorate Next Generation 
First Responders Apex Program (DHS S&T NGFR) under 
NASA prime contract NAS7-03001, Task Plan Number 82-
106095.
