Adaptive Memory Networks
Daniel Li 1 Asim Kadav 2
Abstract
We present Adaptive Memory Networks (AMN)
that processes input-question pairs to dynamically
construct a network architecture optimized for
lower inference times for Question Answering
(QA) tasks. AMN processes the input story to
extract entities and stores them in memory banks.
Starting from a single bank, as the number of in-
put entities increases, AMN learns to create new
banks as the entropy in a single bank becomes too
high. Hence, after processing an input-question(s)
pair, the resulting network represents a hierarchi-
cal structure where entities are stored in different
banks, distanced by question relevance. At in-
ference, one or few banks are used, creating a
tradeoff between accuracy and performance.
AMN is enabled by dynamic networks that allow
input dependent network creation and efﬁciency
in dynamic mini-batching as well as our novel
bank controller that allows learning discrete deci-
sion making with high accuracy. In our results, we
demonstrate that AMN learns to create variable
depth networks depending on task complexity and
reduces inference times for QA tasks.
1. Introduction
Question Answering (QA) tasks are gaining signiﬁcance
due to their widespread applicability to recent commercial
applications such as chatbots, voice assistants and even med-
ical diagnosis (Goodwin & Harabagiu, 2016). Furthermore,
many existing natural language tasks can also be re-phrased
as QA tasks. Providing faster inference times for QA tasks
is crucial. Consumer device based question-answer services
have hard timeouts for answering questions. For example,
Amazon Alexa, a popular QA voice assistant, allows devel-
opers to extend the QA capabilities by adding new “Skills”
as remote services (Amazon, 2017). However, these service
1University of California-Berkeley, Berkeley, USA, Work done
as a NEC Labs Intern. 2NEC Laboratories America, Princeton,

APIs are wrapped around hard-timeouts of 8 seconds which
includes the time to transliterate the question to text on Ama-
zon’s servers and the round-trip transfer time of question
and the answer from the remote service, and sending the
response back to the device. Furthermore, developers are en-
couraged to provide a list of questions (“utterances”) apriori
at each processing step to assist QA processing (Amazon,
2017). We propose that apart from helping transliteration
these questions can also provide hints for reducing inference
times for QA tasks based on large knowledge bases.
Modeling QA tasks with LSTMs can be computationally
expensive which is undesirable during inference. Memory
networks, a class of deep networks with explicit addressable
memory, have recently been used to achieve state of the
art results on many QA tasks. Unlike LSTMs, where the
number of parameters grows exponentially with the size
of memory, memory networks are comparably parameter
efﬁcient and can learn over longer input sequences. How-
ever, they often require accessing all intermediate memory
to answer a question. Furthermore, using focus of attention
over the intermediate state using a list of questions does
not address this problem. Soft attention based models com-
pute a softmax over all states and hard attention models are
not differentiable and can be difﬁcult to train over a large
state space. Previous work on improving inference over
memory networks has focused on using unsupervised clus-
tering methods to reduce the search space (Chandar et al.,
2016; Rae et al., 2016). Here, the memory importance is
not learned and the performance of nearest-neighbor style
algorithms is often comparable to a softmax operation over
memories.
To provide faster inference for long sequence-based inputs,
we present Adaptive Memory Networks (AMN), that con-
structs a memory network on-the-ﬂy based on the input.
Like past approaches to addressing external memory, AMN
constructs the memory entity nodes dynamically. However,
distinct from past approaches, AMN stores the entities from
the input story in variable number of memory banks. The
entities represent the hidden state of each word in the story
while a memory bank is a collection of entities that are
similar w.r.t the question. As the number of entities grow,
and the entropy within a single bank becomes too high, our
network learns to construct new memory banks and copies
entities that are more relevant towards a single bank. Hence,
arXiv:1802.00510v1  [cs.AI]  1 Feb 2018

Adaptive Memory Networks
by limiting the decoding step to a dynamic number of rele-
vant memory banks, AMN achieves lower inference times.
AMN is an end-to-end trained model with dynamic learned
parameters for memory bank creation and movement of
entities.
Figure 1 demonstrates a simple QA task where AMN con-
structs two memory banks based on the input. During in-
ference only the entities in the left bank are considered
reducing inference times. To realize its goals, AMN intro-
duces a novel bank controller that uses reparameterization
trick to make discrete decisions with high accuracy while
maintaining differentiability. Finally, AMN also models
sentence structures on-the-ﬂy and propagates update infor-
mation for all entities that allows it to solve all 20 bAbI
tasks.
2. Related Work
Memory Networks:
Memory networks store the entire
input sequence in memory and perform a softmax over hid-
den states to update the controller (Weston et al., 2014;
Sukhbaatar et al., 2015). DMN+ connects memory to input
tokens and updates them sequentially (Xiong et al., 2016).
For inputs that consist of large number of tokens or en-
tities, these methods can be expensive during inference.
AMN stores entities with tied weights in different mem-
ory banks. By controlling the number of memory banks,
AMN achieves low inference times with reasonable accu-
racy. Nearest neighbor methods have also been explored
over memory networks. For example, Hierarchical Memory
Networks separates the input memory into groups using
the MIPS algorithm (Chandar et al., 2016). However, us-
ing MIPS is as slow as a softmax operation, so the authors
propose using an approximate MIPS that gives inferior per-
formance. In contrast, AMN is end to end differentiable,
and reasons which entities are important and constructs a
network with dynamic depth.
Neural Turing Machine (NTM) consists of a memory bank
and a differentiable controller that learns to read and write to
speciﬁc locations (Graves et al., 2014). In contrast to NTMs,
AMN memory bank controller is more coarse grained and
the network learns to store entities in memory banks instead
of speciﬁc locations. AMN uses a discrete bank controller
that gives improved performance for bank controller actions
over NTM’s mechanisms. However, our design is consistent
with the modeling studies of working memory by (Hazy
et al., 2006) where the brain performs robust memory main-
tenance and may maintain multiple working representations
for individual working tasks. Sparse access memory uses
approximate nearest neighbors (ANN) to reduce memory
usage in NTMs (Rae et al., 2016). However, ANNs are
not differentiable. AMN, uses a input speciﬁc memory
organization that does not create sparse structures. This
limits access during inference to speciﬁc entities reducing
inference times.
Graph-based networks, (GG-NNs (Li et al., 2015) and GGT-
NNs (Johnson, 2017)) use nodes with tied weights that are
updated based on gated-graph state updates with shared
weights over edges. However, unlike AMN, they require
strong supervision over the input and teacher forcing to
learn the graph structure. Furthermore, the cost of building
and training these models is expensive and if every edge is
considered at every time-step the amount of computation
grows at the order of O(N 3) where N represents the num-
ber of nodes/entities. AMN does not use strong supervision
but can solve tasks that require transitive logic by model-
ing sentence walks on the ﬂy. EntNet constructs dynamic
networks based on entities with tied weights for each en-
tity (Henaff et al., 2017). A key-value update system allows
it to update relevant (learned) entities. However, Entnet uses
soft-attention during inference to attend to all entities that
incur high inference costs. To summarize, majority of the
past work on memory networks uses softmax over memory
nodes, where each node may represent input or an entity.
In contrast, AMN learns to organize memory into various
memory banks and performs decode over fewer entities
reducing inference times.
Conditional
Computation
&
Efﬁcient
Inference:
AMN is also related to the work on conditional computation
which allows part of networks to be active during inference
improving computational efﬁciency (Bengio et al., 2015).
Recently, this has been often accomplished using a gated
mixture of experts (Eigen et al., 2013; Shazeer et al., 2017).
AMN conditionally attends to entities in initial banks during
inference improving performance.
For faster inference
using CNNs, pruning (Le Cun et al., 1989; Han et al., 2016),
low rank approximations (Denton et al., 2014), quantization
and binarization (Rastegari et al., 2016) and other tricks
to improve GEMM performance (Vanhoucke et al., 2011)
have been explored. For sequence based inputs, pruning
and compression has been explored (Giles & Omlin, 1994;
See et al., 2016). However, compression results in irregular
sparsity that reduces memory costs but may not reduce
computation costs. Adaptive computation time (Graves,
2016) learns the number of steps required for inferring
the output and this can also be used to reduce inference
times (Figurnov et al., 2016). AMN uses memory networks
with dynamic number of banks to reduce computation costs.
Dynamic networks:
Dynamic neural networks that
change structure during inference have recently been possi-
ble due to newer frameworks such as Dynet and PyTorch.
Existing work on pruning can be implemented using these
frameworks to reduce inference times dynamically like dy-
namic deep network demonstrates (Liu & Deng, 2017).

Adaptive Memory Networks
Mary moved to the bathroom.
John went to the hallway.
Daniel went back to the hallway.
Sandra moved to the garden.
John moved to the office.
Sandra journeyed to the bathroom.
Mary moved to the hallway.
Daniel travelled to the office.
John went back to the garden.
John moved to the bedroom.
Where is Sandra?
Bank Controller
Sandra
Memory Bank 1
Memory Bank 2
State of entities
List of 
questions
Strength GRU
Entities 
from the 
story
Figure 1. Overview of Adaptive memory networks. Multiple memory banks are created based on the story and input entities are
moved in them based on their relevance to the question. Inference is performed on a single (or less than all) banks most relevant
to the question(s).
AMN utilizes the dynamic architecture abilities to construct
an input dependent memory network of variable memory
bank depth and the dynamic batching feature to process a
variable number of entities. Furthermore, unlike past work
that requires an apriori number of ﬁxed memory slots, AMN
constructs them on-the-ﬂy based on the input. The learn-
able discrete decision-making process can be extended to
other dynamic networks which often rely on REINFORCE
to make such decisions (Liu & Deng, 2017).
Neuroscience:
Our network construction is inspired by
work on working memory representations. There is suf-
ﬁcient evidence for multiple, working memory represen-
tations in the human brain (Hazy et al., 2006). Semantic
memory (Tulving et al., 1972), describes a hierarchical or-
ganization starting with relevant facts at the lowest level and
progressively more complex and distant concepts at higher
levels. AMN constructs entities from the input stories and
stores the most relevant entities based on the question in the
lowest level memory bank. Progressively higher level mem-
ory banks represent distant concepts (and not necessarily
higher level concepts for AMN). Other work demonstrates
organization of human memory in terms of “priority struc-
ture” where attention is a gate-keeper of working memory-
guided by executive control’s goals, plans, and intentions as
in (Watzl, 2017), similar in spirit to AMN’s question guided
network construction.
3. Differentiable adaptive memory module
In this section, we describe the design process and motiva-
tion of our memory module. Our memory network architec-
ture is created during inference time for every story. The
architecture consists of different memory banks and each
memory bank stores entities from the input story. Hence,
a memory entity represents the hidden state of each entity
(each word in our case) from the input story while a memory
bank is a collection of entities. Intuitively, each memory
bank stores entities that have a similar distance score from
the question.
At a high level, entities are gradually and recurrently copied
through memory banks to ﬁlter out irrelevant nodes such
that in the ﬁnal inference stage, fewer entities are considered
by the decoder. Note that the word ﬁlter implies a discrete
decision and that recurrence implies time. If we were to
perform a strict cut off and remove entities that appear to
be irrelevant at each time step, learning the reasoning logic
that requires previous entities that were cut off would not
be possible. Thus, smoothed discretization is required.
We design ﬁltering to be a two-stage pseudo-continuous
process to simulate discrete cut offs (Πmove, Πnew), while
keeping reference history. The overall memory (M) consists
of multiple memory banks. A memory bank is a collection
or group of entities (m0...l), where m0 denotes the initial
and most general bank and ml denotes the most relevant
bank. Note that |l| is input dependent and learned. First,
entities are moved from m0 gradually towards ml based off
of their individual relevance to the question and second, if
ml becomes too saturated, ml+1 is created. Operations in
the external memory allowing for such dynamic restructur-
ing and entity updates are described below. Note that these
operations still maintain end to end differentiability.
1. Memory bank creation (Πnew), which creates a new
memory bank depending on the current states of en-
tities mi. If the entropy, or information contained
(explained below), of mi is too high, Πnew(mi) will
learn to create a new memory bank mi+1 to reduce
entropy.
2. Moving entities across banks (Πmove), which deter-
mines which entities are relevant to the current question
and move such entities to further (higher importance)
memory banks.

Adaptive Memory Networks
3. Adding/Updating entities in a bank (Πau), which adds
entities that are not yet encountered to the ﬁrst memory
bank m0 or if the entity is already in m0, the operation
updates the entity state.
4. Propagating changes across entities (Πprop), which up-
dates the entity states in memory banks based on node
current states Πprop(M) and their semantic relation-
ships. This is to communicate transitive logic.
Both Πnew, Πmove require a discrete decision (refer to sec-
tion 4.2.1.), and in particular, for Πnew we introduce the no-
tion of entropy. That is to say if mi contains too many nodes
(the entropy becomes too high), the memory module will
learn to create a new bank mi+1 and move nodes to mi+1
to reduce entropy. By creating more memory banks, the
model spreads out the concentration of information which
in turn better discretizes nodes according to relevance.
4. Adaptive Memory Networks
A high-level overview is shown in Figure 2, followed by
a mathematical detail of the model’s modules. Our model
adopts the encoder-decoder framework with an augmented
adaptive memory module. For an overview of the algorithm,
refer to Section A.4.
Notation and Problem Statement:
Given a story rep-
resented by N input sentences (or statements), i.e.,
(l1, · · · , lN), and a question q, our goal is to generate an an-
swer a. Each sentence l is a sequence of N words, denoted
as (w1, · · · , wNs), and a question is a sequence of Nq words
denoted as (w1, · · · , wNq). Throughout the model we refer
to entities; these can be interpreted as a 3-tuple of ew =
(word ID wi, hidden state w, question relevance strength s).
Scalars, vectors, matrices, and dot products are denoted by
lower-case letters, boldface lower-case letters and boldface
capital letters, and angled brackets respectively.
4.1. Encoder
The input to the model, starting with the encoder, are story-
question input pairs. On a macro level, sentences l1...N are
processed. On a micro level, words w1...Ns are processed
within sentences.
For each wi ∈li, the encoder maps wi to a hidden represen-
tation and a question relevance strength ∈[0, 1]. The word
ID of wi is passed through a standard embedding layer and
then encoded through an accumulation GRU. The accumula-
tion GRU captures the entity states through time by adding
the output of each GRU time step to its respective word,
stored in a lookup matrix. The initial states of ew are set to
this GRU output. Meanwhile, the question is also embedded
and encoded in the same manner sans accumulation.
In the following, the subscripts i, j are used to iterate
through the total number of words in a statement and ques-
tion respectively, D stores the accumulation GRU output,
and wi is a GRU encoding output. The last output of the
GRU will be referred to as wN, wNq for statements and
questions.
ui, uj = EMBED(wii), EMBED(wij)
(1)
wi = GRU(ui, wi−1)
(2)
D[i] += wi
(3)
wj = GRU(uj, wj−1)
(4)
To compute the question relevance strength s ∈[0, 1] for
each word, the model uses GRU-like equations. The node
strengths are ﬁrst initialized to Xavier normal and the inputs
are the current word states win, the question state wNq,
and when applicable, the previous strength. Sentences are
processed each time step t.
zt = σ(Uzwin + WzwNq + Xzst−1)
(5)
rt = 1 −σ(Ur⟨st−1, wNq⟩)
(6)
est = σ(Whwin + Uh(rt ⊙st−1))
(7)
st = zt ⊙st−1 + (1 −zt) ⊙est
(8)
In particular, equation (6) shows where the model learns to
lower the strengths of nodes that are not related the question.
First, a dot product between the current word states and
question state are computed for similarity (high correlation),
then it is subtracted from a 1 to obtain the dissimilarity.
We refer to these operations as SGRU (Strength GRU) in
Algorithm 1.
4.2. Adaptive Memory Module
The adaptive memory module recurrently restructures enti-
ties in a question relevant manner so the decoder can then
consider fewer entities (namely, the question relevant enti-
ties) to generate an answer. The following operations are
performed once per sentence.
4.2.1. MEMORY BANK CONTROLLER
As mentioned earlier, discrete decisions are difﬁcult for
neural networks to learn so we designed a speciﬁc mem-
ory bank controller Πctrl for binary decision making. The
model takes ideas from the reparameterization trick and uses
custom backpropagation to maintain differentiability.
In particular, the adaptive memory module needs to make
two discrete decisions on a {0, 1} basis, one in Πnew to
create a new memory bank and the other in Πmove to move
nodes to a different memory bank. The model uses a scalar
p ∈{0, 1} to parameterize a Bernoulli distribution where
the realization H, is the decision the model makes. How-
ever, backpropagation through a random node is intractable,

Adaptive Memory Networks
GRU
GRU
GRU
GRU
Bank Controller
Attention
Answer
Memory Banks
Story
Encoder
Semantic memory module
Decoder
Question
Strength 
GRU
Figure 2. Adaptive memory networks.
so the model detaches H from the computation graph and
introduces H as a new node. Finally, H is used as a mask to
zero out entities in the discrete decision. Meanwhile, p is
kept in the computation graph and has a special computed
loss (Section 4.4). The operations below will be denoted as
Πctrl and has two instances: one for memory bank creation
Πnew and one for moving entities across banks Πmove. In
equation 9, depending on what Πctrl is used for, q is a poly-
morphic function and will take on a different operation and
∗will be a different input. Examples of such are given in
their respective sections (4.2.2.1, 4.2.2.2).
p = q(∗)
(9)
H = Bernoulli(p)
(10)
4.2.2. MEMORY BANK OPERATIONS
1. Memory bank creation Πnew: To determine when a
new memory bank is created, in other words, if the cur-
rent memory bank becomes too saturated, the memory
bank controller (4.2.1.) will make a discrete decision
to create a new memory bank. Here, q (eq 9) is a
fully connected layer and the input is the concatena-
tion of all the current memory bank mi’s entity states
[w0...wi] ∈R1,n|ew|. Intuitively, q will learn a contin-
uous decision that is later discretized by eq 10 based
on entity states and the number of entities. Note this is
only performed for the last memory bank.
Πnew([w0...wi]) =
(
M.new()
if 1(Πctrl([w0...wi])) else
pass
(11)
2. Moving entities through memory banks: Similar to
Πnew, individual entities’ relevance scores are passed
into the bank controller to determine H as the input.
The relevance score is computed by multiplying an
entity state by its respective relevance ∈Rn,|ew|. Here,
q has a slight modiﬁcation and is the identity function.
Note that this operation can only be performed if there
is a memory bank to move nodes to, namely if mi+1
exists. Additionally, each bank has a set property where
it cannot contain duplicate nodes, but the same node
can exist in two different memory banks.
Πmove(si ∗wi) = m.add(1(Πctrl(si ∗wi)))
∀i ∈m
(12)
3. Adding/Updating entities in a bank: Recall that en-
tities are initially set to the output of D. However, as
additional sentences are processed, new entities and
their hidden states are observed. In the case of a new
entity ew, the entity is added to the ﬁrst memory bank
m0. If the entity already exists in m0, then ew’s corre-
sponding hidden state is updated through a GRU. This
procedure is done for all memory banks.
Πau([w0...wi]) =
(
m0.add(ei
w)
if ei
w ̸∈m0 else
wt+1
i
= GRU(wN, wt
i)
∀m ∈M
(13)
4. Propagating updates to related entities: So far, en-
tities exist as a bag of words model and the sentence
structure is not maintained. This can make it difﬁcult
to solve tasks that require transitive reasoning over
multiple entities. To track sentence structure informa-
tion, we model semantic relationships as a directed
graph stored in adjacency matrix A. As sentences are
processed word by word, a directed graph is drawn
progressively from w0...wi...wN. If sentence lk’s path
contains nodes already in the current directed graph, lk
will include said nodes in its path. After lk is added to
A, the model propagates the new update hidden state
information ai among all node states using a GRU. ai
for each node i is equal to the sum of the incoming
edges’ node hidden states.
Additionally, we add a particular emphasis on lk to
simulate recency. At face value, one propagation step
of A will only have a reachability of its immediate
neighbor, so to reach all nodes, A is raised to a consec-
utive power r to reach and update each intermediate

Adaptive Memory Networks
node. r can be either the longest path in A or a set
parameter. Again, this is done within a memory bank
for all memory banks. For entities that have migrated
to another bank, the update for these entities is a no-op
but propagation information as per the sentence struc-
ture is maintained. A single iteration is shown below:
a = (Ar)T [w0...wi] (14)
wt = GRU(a, wt−1) (15)
When nodes are transferred across banks, A is still
preserved. If intermediate nodes are removed from a
path, a transitive closure is drawn if possible.
After these steps are ﬁnished at the end of a sentence,
namely, the memory unit has reasoned through how large
(number of memory banks) the memory should be and
which entities are relevant at the current point in the story, all
entities are passed through the strength modiﬁed GRU (4.1,
eq 5-8) to recompute their question relevance (relevance
score).
4.3. Decode
After all sentences l1...N are ingested, the decode portion of
the network learns to interpret the results from the memory
banks. The network iterates through the memory banks
using a standard attention mechanism. To force the network
to understand the question importance weighting, the model
uses an exponential function d to weight important memory
banks higher. Cm are the hidden states contained in memory
m, sm are the relevance strengths of memory bank m, wNq
is the question hidden state, ps is the attention score, r, h are
learned weight masks, g are the accumulated states, and l is
the ﬁnal logits prediction. During inference, fewer memory
banks are considered.
Cm = sm · [w0, ...wi]
∀i ∈m
(16)
ps = Softmax(⟨Cm, wNq⟩)
(17)
g += d(⟨Cm, ps⟩)
(18)
ˆL = r(PReLU(h(g) + wNq)
if m is last
(19)
4.4. Loss
Loss is comprised of two parts, answer loss, which is com-
puted from the given annotations, and secondary loss (from
Πnew, Πmove), which is computed from sentence and story
features at each sentence time step l0...N. Answer loss is
standard cross entropy at the end of the story after lN is
processed.
Lp(ˆL) = CrossEntropy(ˆL, L)
After each sentence li, the node relevance sli is enforced by
computing the expected relevance E[sli]. E[s] is determined
by nodes that are connected to the answer node a in a di-
rected graph; words that are connected to a are relevant to
a. They are then weighted with a deterministic function of
distance from a.
Ls(s) = DKL(sli||E[sli])
Additionally, bank creation is kept in check by constraining
pli w.r.t. the expected number of memory banks. The
expected number of memory banks can be thought of as
a geometric distribution ∼Geometric(ˆpli) parameterized
by ˆpli, a hyperparameter. Typically, at each sentence step
ˆp is raised to the inverse power of the current sentence step
to reﬂect the amount of information ingested. Intuitively,
this loss ensures banks are created when a memory bank
contains too many nodes. On the other hand, the learned
mask q (eq. 9) enables the model to weight certain nodes a
higher entropy to prompt bank creation. Through these two
dependencies, the model is able to simulate bank creation
as a function of the number of nodes and the type of nodes
in a given memory bank.
Lb(pli) = DKL(pli||ˆp
1
β|li| )
All components combined, the ﬁnal loss is given in the
following equation
Ltotal = Lp(ˆL) +
|ln|
X
i=1
(Li
s(s) + Li
b(p))
5. Evaluation
In this section, we evaluate AMN accuracy and inference
times on the bAbI dataset (Weston et al., 2015) and extended
bAbI tasks dataset. We compare our performance with Ent-
net (Henaff et al., 2017), which recently achieved state of
the art results on the bAbi dataset. For accuracy measure-
ments, we also compare with DMN+ and encoder-decoder
methods. Finally we discuss the time trade offs between
AMN and current SOTA methods. The portion regarding
inference times are not inclusive of story ingestion. We
summarize our experiments results as follows:
• We are able to solve all bAbi tasks using AMN. Fur-
thermore, AMN is able to reason important entities and
propagate them to the ﬁnal memory bank allowing for
48% fewer entities examined during inference.
• We construct extended bAbI tasks to evaluate AMN
behavior. First, we extend Task 1 for multiple questions
in order to gauge performance in a more robust manner.
For example, if a reasonable set of questions are asked
(where reasonable means that collectively they do not
require all entities to answer implying entities can be
ﬁltered out), will the model still sufﬁciently reason

Adaptive Memory Networks
through entities. We ﬁnd that our network is able to
reason useful entities for both tasks and store them in
the ﬁnal memory bank. Furthermore, we also scale
bAbI for a large number of entities and ﬁnd that AMN
provides additional beneﬁts at scale since only relevant
entities are stored in the ﬁnal memory bank.
5.1. Experiment settings
We implement our network in PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2017).
We initialize our model using Xavier initialization, and the
word embeddings utilize random uniform initialization rang-
ing from −
√
3 to
√
3. The learning rate is set as 0.001
initially and updated with a learning rate scheduler. E[s]
contains nodes in the connected components of A containing
the answer node a which has relevance scores sampled from
a Gaussian distribution centered at 0.75 with a variance of
0.05 (capped at 1). Nodes that are not in the connected
component containing a are similarly sampled from a Gaus-
sian centered from 0.3 with a variance of 0.1 (capped at
0). ˆpli is initially set to 0.8 and β varies depending on the
story length from 0.1 ≤β ≤0.25. Note that for transitive
tasks, ˆpli is set to 0.2. We train our models using the Adam
optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2014).
5.2. bAbi dataset
The bAbI task suite consists of 20 reasoning tasks that in-
clude deduction, induction, path ﬁnding etc. Results are
from the following parameters: ≤200 epochs, best of 10
runs. Table 1 shows the accuracy and Table 4 shows the
inference performance in terms of the number of entities
examined. A task is considered passed if the error rate is
less than 5%.
We ﬁnd that AMN creates 1 −6 memory banks for different
tasks. We also ﬁnd that 8 tasks can be solved by looking at
just one memory bank and 14 tasks can be solved with half
the total number of memory banks. Lastly, all tasks can be
solved by examining less than or equal the total number of
entities (e ∈M ≤|V | + ϵ)1. Tasks that cannot be solved in
fewer than half the memory banks either require additional
entities due to transitive logic or have multiple questions.
For transitive logic, additional banks could be required as an
relevant nodes may be in a further bank. However, this still
avoids scanning all banks. In the case of multiple questions,
all nodes may become necessary to construct all answers.
We provide additional evaluation in Appendix to examine
memory bank behavior for certain tasks.
1The entities used to construct an answer and pass the task
are examined as the sum of all entities across the M which is
usually O(|V |). However, this is within an error margin of 6%
more entities on some experiments, and thus we included an ϵ
term.
Inference performance
Table 4 shows the number of
banks created and required to solve a task, as well as the
ratio of entities examined to solve the task. Table 3 shows
the complexity of AMN and other SOTA models. Entnet
uses an empirically selected parameter, typically set to the
number of vocabulary words. GGT-NN uses the number
of vocabulary words and creates new k new nodes intermit-
tently per sentence step.
For tasks where nodes are easily separable where nodes are
clearly irrelevant to the question(s), AMN is able to suc-
cessfully reduce the number of nodes examined. However
for tasks that require more information, such as counting
(Task 7), the model is still able to obtain the correct answer
without using all entities. Lastly, transitive logic tasks where
information is difﬁcult to separate due to dependencies of
entities, the model creates very few banks (1 or 2) and uses
all nodes to correctly generate an answer. We note that in
the instance where the model only creates one bank, it is
very sparse, containing only one or two entities.
Because variations in computation times in text are minute,
the number of entities required to construct an answer are
of more interest as they directly correspond to the num-
ber of computations required. Additionally, due to various
implementations of current models, their run times can sig-
niﬁcantly vary. However, for the comparison of inference
times, AMN’s decoder and EntNet’s decoder are highly sim-
ilar and contain roughly the same number of operations. We
provide inference wall-clock time performance and memory
bank behavior in supplementary behavior for representative
tasks.
5.3. Extended bAbi tasks
We extend the bAbI tasks by adding additional entities and
sentences and adding multiple questions for a single story,
for Task 1.
Scaled Task 1:
We increase the the number of entities to
100 entities in the task generation system instead of existing
38. We also extend the story length to 90 to ensure new
entities are referenced. We ﬁnd that AMN creates 6 memory
banks and the ratio of entities in the ﬁnal banks versus the
overall entities drops to 0.13 given the excess entities that
are not referenced in the questions.
Multiple questions:
We also augment the tasks with mul-
tiple questions to understand if AMN can handle when a
story has multiple questions associated with it. We extend
our model to handle multiple questions at once to limit re-
generating the network for every question. To do so, we
modify bAbi to generate several questions per story for tasks
that do not currently have multiple questions. For single
supporting fact (Task 1), the model creates 3 banks and

Adaptive Memory Networks
Task
AMN
Entnet
DMN+
MemN2N
EncDec
1 - Single Supporting Fact
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
52.0
2 - Two Supporting Facts
2.1
0.1
0.3
0.3
66.1
3 - Three Supporting Facts
4.7
4.1
1.1
2.1
71.9
4 - Two Arg. Relations
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
29.2
5 - Three Arg. Relations
2.7
0.3
0.5
0.8
14.3
6 - Yes/No Questions
3.1
0.2
0.0
0.1
31.0
7 - Counting
0.0
0.0
2.4
2.0
21.8
8 - Lists/Sets
0.0
0.5
0.0
0.9
27.6
9 - Simple Negation
1.3
0.1
0.0
0.3
36.4
10 - Indeﬁnite Knowledge
1.2
0.6
0.0
0.0
36.4
11 - Basic Coreference
2.7
0.3
0.0
0.1
31.7
12 - Conjunction
2.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
35.0
13 - Compound Coref.
4.6
1.3
0.0
0.0
6.80
14 - Time Reasoning
2.1
0.0
0.2
0.1
67.2
15 - Basic Deduction
1.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
62.2
16 - Basic Induction
4.2
0.0
45.3
51.8
54.0
17 - Positional Reasoning
4.3
0.5
4.2
18.6
43.1
18 - Size Reasoning
2.0
0.3
2.1
5.3
6.60
19 - Path Finding
2.4
2.3
0.0
2.3
89.6
20 - Agents Motivations
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
2.30
No. of failed tasks (>5%)
0
0
5
6
20
Table 1. Performance comparison of various models in terms of test error rate (%) and the number of failed tasks on the bAbI dataset. The
bold task scores are where AMN can solve the task using only 1 memory bank.
Task
Created Banks (Rounded Average)
Required Banks
Ratio ( e∈M
|V | )
1 - Single Supporting Fact
3
1
0.22
2 - Two Supporting Facts
5
1
0.41
4 - Two Arg. Relations
2
1
0.70
7 - Counting
5
2
0.81
10 - Indeﬁnite Knowledge
1
1
1.00
11 - Basic Coreference
3
1
0.43
12 - Conjunction
2
1
0.37
14 - Time Reasoning
3
1
0.60
15 - Basic Deduction
1
1
1.00
16 - Basic Induction
2
2
1.06
17 - Positional Reasoning
1
1
1.00
18 - Size Reasoning
3
2
0.82
19 - Path Finding
2
2
1.05
20 - Agents Motivations
2
1
0.26
Extended bAbi
1 - Single Supporting Fact, 100 Entities
6
1
.13
1 - Single Supporting, Multiple Questions
3
1
.38
Table 2. Memory bank analysis of indicative tasks.
requires 1 bank to successfully pass the task. Furthermore,
the ratio of entities required to pass the task only increases
by 0.16 for a total of 0.38.
6. Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we present Adaptive Memory Network that
learns to adaptively organize the memory to answer ques-
tions with lower inference times. Unlike NTMs which learn
to read and write at individual memory locations, Adaptive
Memory Network demonstrates a novel design where the
learned memory management is coarse-grained that is eas-
ier to train.Through our experiments, we demonstrate that
AMN can learn to reason, construct, and sort memory banks
based on relevance over the question set.
AMN presents a new design paradigm in memory networks.
Unlike NTMs, where the network learns where to read/write
to ﬁne-grained address information, AMN only learns to
write input entities to coarse-grained banks. As a result,
AMN is easier to train (e.g. does not require curriculum
learning like NTMs) and does not require a separate spar-
siﬁcation mechanism like approximate nearest neighbors
for inference efﬁciency. Apart from saving inference times,
AMN can learn to reason which speciﬁc entities contribute
towards the ﬁnal answer improving interpretability.
