22
How do Data Science Workers Collaborate? Roles,
Workflows, and Tools
AMY X. ZHANG∗, University of Washington & MIT, USA
MICHAEL MULLER∗, IBM Research, USA
DAKUO WANG, IBM Research & MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, USA
Today, the prominence of data science within organizations has given rise to teams of data science workers
collaborating on extracting insights from data, as opposed to individual data scientists working alone. However,
we still lack a deep understanding of how data science workers collaborate in practice. In this work, we
conducted an online survey with 183 participants who work in various aspects of data science. We focused
on their reported interactions with each other (e.g., managers with engineers) and with different tools (e.g.,
Jupyter Notebook). We found that data science teams are extremely collaborative and work with a variety
of stakeholders and tools during the six common steps of a data science workflow (e.g., clean data and train
model). We also found that the collaborative practices workers employ, such as documentation, vary according
to the kinds of tools they use. Based on these findings, we discuss design implications for supporting data
science team collaborations and future research directions.
CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing →Computer supported cooperative work.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: data science; teams; data scientists; collaboration; machine learning;
collaborative data science; human-centered data science
ACM Reference Format:
Amy X. Zhang, Michael Muller, and Dakuo Wang. 2020. How do Data Science Workers Collaborate? Roles,
Workflows, and Tools. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 4, CSCW1, Article 22 (May 2020), 23 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3392826
1
INTRODUCTION
Data science often refers to the process of leveraging modern machine learning techniques to
identify insights from data [47, 51, 67]. In recent years, with more organizations adopting a “data-
centered” approach to decision-making [20, 88], more and more teams of data science workers
have formed to work collaboratively on larger data sets, more structured code pipelines, and more
consequential decisions and products. Meanwhile, research around data science topics has also
increased rapidly within the HCI and CSCW community in the past several years [34, 50, 51, 54, 67,
81, 92, 93, 95].
From existing literature, we have learned that the data science workflow often consists of multiple
phases [54, 67, 95]. For example, Wang et al. describes the data science workflow as containing
3 major phases—Preparation, Modeling, and Deployment—and 10 more fine-grained steps [95].
∗Both authors contributed equally to this research.

USA.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires

© 2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
2573-0142/2020/5-ART22 $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3392826
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW1, Article 22. Publication date: May 2020.
arXiv:2001.06684v3  [cs.HC]  16 Apr 2020

22:2
Amy X. Zhang, Michael Muller, and Dakuo Wang
Various tools have also been built for supporting data science work, including programming
languages such as Python or R, statistical analysis tools such as SAS [58] and SPSS [63], integrated
development environments (IDEs) such as Jupyter Notebook [31, 52], and automated model building
systems such as AutoML [29, 60] and AutoAI [95]. And from empirical studies, we know how
individual data scientists are using these tools [49, 50, 81], and what features could be added to
improve the tools for users working alone [92].
However, a growing body of recent literature has hinted that data science projects consist of
complex tasks that require multiple skills [51, 62]. These requirements often lead participants to
juggle multiple roles in a project, or to work in teams with others who have distinct skills. For
instance, in addition to the well-studied role of data scientist [56, 64], who engages in technical
activities such as cleaning data, extracting or designing features, analyzing/modeling data, and
evaluating results, there is also the role of project manager, who engages in less technical activities
such as reporting results [43, 55, 70, 77]. The 2017 Kaggle survey reported additional roles involved
in data science [38], but without addressing topics of collaboration. In this work, we limit the roles
in our survey to activities and relationships that were mention in interviews in Muller et al. [67]
Unfortunately, most of today’s understanding of data science collaboration only focuses on
the perspective of the data scientist, and how to build tools to support distant and asynchronous
collaborations among data scientists, such as version control of code. The technical collaborations
afforded by such tools [100] only scratch the surface of the many ways that collaborations may
happen within a data science team, such as when stakeholders discuss the framing of an initial
problem before any code is written or data collected [79]. However, we have little empirical data to
characterize the many potential forms of data science collaboration.
Indeed, we should not assume data science team collaboration is the same as the activities from
a conventional software development team, as argued by various previous literature [34, 54]. Data
science is engaged as an “exploration” process more than an “engineering” process [40, 50, 67].
“Engineering” work is oftentimes assumed to involve extended blocks of solitude, without the
benefit of colleagues’ expertise while engaging with data and code [74]. While this perspective on
engineering is still evolving [84], there is no doubt that “exploration” work requires deep domain
knowledge that oftentimes only resides in domain experts’ minds [50, 67]. And due to the distinct
skills and knowledge residing within different roles in a data science team, more challenges with
collaboration can arise [43, 61].
In this paper, we aim to deepen our current understanding of the collaborative practices of
data science teams from not only the perspective of technical team members (e.g., data scientists
and engineers), but also the understudied perspective of non-technical team members (e.g., team
managers and domain experts). Our study covers both a large scale of users—we designed an
online survey and recruited 183 participants with experience working in data science teams—
and an in-depth investigation—our survey questions dive into 5 major roles in a data science
team (engineer/analyst/programmer, researcher/scientist, domain expert, manager/executive, and
communicator), and 6 stages (understand problem and create plan, access and clean data, select
and engineer features, train and apply models, evaluate model outcomes, and communicate with
clients or stakeholders) in a data science workflow. In particular, we report what other roles a team
member works with, in which step(s) of the workflow, and using what tools.
In what follows, we first review literature on the topic of data science work practices and
tooling; then we present the research method and the design of the survey; we report survey
results following the order of Overview of Collaboration, Collaboration Roles, Collaborative Tools,
and Collaborative Practices. Based on these findings, we discuss implications and suggest designs of
future collaborative tools for data science.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW1, Article 22. Publication date: May 2020.

How do Data Science Workers Collaborate? Roles, Workflows, and Tools
22:3
2
RELATED WORK
Our research contributes to the existing literature on how data science teams work. We start this
section by reviewing recent HCI and CSCW research on data science work practices; then we take
an overview of the systems and features designed to support data science work practices. Finally,
we highlight specific literature that aims to understand and support particularly the collaborative
aspect of data science teamwork.
2.1
Data Science Work Practices
Jonathan Grudin describes the current cycle of the popularity of AI-related topics in industry and
in academia as an “AI Summer” [33]. In the hype surrounding AI, many fancy technology demos
mark key milestones, such as IBM DeepBlue [15], which defeated a human chess champion for the
first time, and Google’s AlphaGo demo, which defeated the world champion in Go [96]. With these
advances in AI and machine learning technologies, more and more organizations are trying to apply
machine learning models to business decision-making processes. People refer to this collection of
work as “data science” [34, 47, 54, 67] and the various workers who participate in this process as
“data scientists” or “data engineers”.
HCI researchers are interested in data science practices. Studies have been conducted to un-
derstand data science work practices [34, 43, 50, 54, 61, 67, 75, 76, 81], sometimes using the label
of Human Centered Data Science [4, 66]. For example, Wang et al. proposed a framework of 3
stages and 10 steps to characterize the data science workflow by synthesizing existing literature
(Figure 1) [95]. The stages consist of Preparation, Modeling, and Deployment, and at a finer-grained
level, the framework has 10 steps from Data Acquisition to Model Runtime Monitoring and Im-
provement. This workflow framework is built on top of Muller et al.’s work [67], which mostly
focused on the Preparation steps, and decomposed the data science workflow into 4 stages, based on
interviews with professional data scientists: Data Acquisition, Data Cleaning, Feature Engineering,
and Model Building and Selection.
Preparation
Modeling
Deployment
Ensembling
Model Validation
Model 
Improvement
Data Acquisition
Data Cleaning & 
Labeling
Runtime 
Monitoring
Model 
Deployment
Hyperparameter 
Optimization
Feature 
Engineering
Model Selection
Fig. 1. A data science workflow, consisting of three high-level phases: data preparation, model building, and
model deployment [95]
Given these workflow frameworks and terminology [67, 95], we can position existing empirical
work within a data science workflow. For example, researchers have suggested that 80% of a data
science project is spent in the Preparation stage [34, 48, 67, 80, 103]. As a result, data scientists often
do not have enough time to complete a comprehensive data analysis in the Modeling stage [85].
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW1, Article 22. Publication date: May 2020.

22:4
Amy X. Zhang, Michael Muller, and Dakuo Wang
Passi and Jackson dug deeper into the Preparation stage, showing that when data scientists pre-
process their data, it is often a rule-based, not rule-bound, process [75]. Pine and Liboiron further
investigated how data scientists made those pre-processing rules [79].
However, most of the literature focuses only on a single data scientist’s perspective, despite
many interviewees reporting that “data science is a team sport” [95]. Even in the Muller et al. [67]
and Wang et al. [95] workflows, they focus only on the activities that involve data and code, which
were most likely performed by the technical roles in the data science team. The voices of the
non-technical collaborators within a data science team are missing, including an understanding of
who they worked with when, and what tools they used.
In contrast to the current literature in data science, software engineering has built a strong
literature on collaborative practices in software development [42, 53, 87], including in both open
source communities [9, 17] and industry teams [6]. As teams working on a single code base can
often be large, cross-site, and globally dispersed, much research has focused on the challenges and
potential solutions for communication and coordination [42]. These challenges can be exacerbated
by cultural differences between team members of different backgrounds [36, 44] and by the different
roles of team members such as project manager [101] or operator [86]. Many of the tools used by
software engineering teams are also used by data science teams (i.e., GitHub [17], Slack [73]), and
the lessons learned from this work can inform the design of collaborative tools for data science.
However, there are also important differences when it comes to data science in particular, such as
the types of roles and technical expertise of data science collaborators as well as a greater emphasis
on exploration, data management, and communicating insights in data science projects.
Many of the papers about solitary data science work practices adopted the interview research
method [34, 50, 54, 67, 92, 95]. An interview research method is well-suited for the exploratory
nature of these empirical works in understanding a new practice, but it also falls short in generating
a representative and generalizable understanding from a larger user population. Thus, we decided
to leverage a large-scale online survey to complement the existing qualitative narratives.
2.2
Collaboration in Data Science
Only recently have some CSCW researchers began to investigate the collaborative aspect of data
science work [11, 32, 75, 83, 91]. For example, Hou and Wang [43] conducted an ethnography study
to explore collaboration in a civic data hackathon event where data science workers help non-profit
organizations develop insights from their data. Mao et al. [61] interviewed biomedical domain
experts and data scientists who worked on the same data science projects. Their findings partially
echo previous results [34, 54, 67] that suggest data science workflows have many steps. More
importantly, their findings are similar to the software engineering work cited above [42, 53, 87]
opening the possibility that data science may also be a highly collaborative effort where domain
experts and data scientists need to work closely together to advance along the workflow.
Researchers also observed challenges in collaborations within data science teams that were not
as common in conventional software engineering teams. Bopp et al. showed that “big data” could
become a burden to non-profit organizations who lack staff to make use of those data resources
[10]. Hou et al. provided a possible reason—i.e., that the technical data workers “speak a different
language” than the non-technical problem owners, such as a non-profit organization (NPO) client, in
the civic data hackathon that they studied [43]. The non-technical NPO clients could only describe
their business questions in natural language, e.g., “why is this phenomenon happening?” But data
science workers do not necessarily know how to translate this business question into a data science
question. A good practice researchers observed in this context was “brokering activity”, where a
special group of organizers who understand both data science and the context serve as translators
to turn business questions into data science questions (see Williams’ earlier HCI work on the
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW1, Article 22. Publication date: May 2020.

How do Data Science Workers Collaborate? Roles, Workflows, and Tools
22:5
importance of “translators” who understand and mediate between multiple domains [99]). Also,
once the data workers generated the results, the “brokers” helped to interpret the data science
findings into business insights.
The aforementioned collaboration challenges [43] are not unique to the civic data hackathon
context. Mao et al. [61] interviewed both data scientists and bio-medical scientists who worked
together in research projects. They found that these two different roles often do not have common
ground about the project’s progress. For example, the goal of bio-medical scientists is to discover
new knowledge; thus, when they ask a research question, that question is often tentative. Once
there is an intermediate result, bio-medical scientists often need to revise their research question
or ask a new question, because their scientific journey is to “ask the right question”. However, the
data scientists were focused on transferring a research question into a well-defined data science
question so they could optimize machine learning models and increase performance. The behavior
of the bio-medical scientists was perceived by the data scientists as “wasting our time”, as they had
worked hard to “find the answer to the question” that later was discarded. Mao et al. argued that the
constant re-calibration of common ground might help to ease tensions and support cross-discipline
data science work.
These related projects focused only on a civic data hackathon [43] and on the collaborative
projects between data scientists and bio-medical scientists in scientific discovery projects [61].
Also, both of them used ethnographic research methods aiming for in-depth understanding of the
context. In this work, we wanted to target a more commonly available scenario—data science teams’
work practices in corporations—as this scenario is where most data science professionals work. We
also want to gather a broader user perspective through the deployment of an online survey.
2.3
Data Science Tools
Based on the empirical findings and design suggestions from previous literature [11, 32, 43, 61, 67,
75, 83, 91], some designers and system builders have proposed human-in-the-loop design principles
for science tools [2, 3, 28, 49, 50, 92]. For example, Gil et al. surveyed papers about building machine
learning systems and developed a set of design guidelines for building human-centered machine
learning systems [28]. Amershi et al. in parallel reviewed a broader spectrum of AI applications
and proposed a set of design suggestions for AI systems in general [3].
With these design principles and guidelines in mind [3, 28], many systems and features have
been proposed to support aspects of data science work practices. One notable system is Jupyter
Notebook [45] and its variations such as Google Colab [30] and Jupyter-Lab [46]. Jupyter Notebook
is an integrated code development environment tailored for data science work practices. It has a
graphical user interface that supports three key functionalities—coding, documenting a narrative,
and observing execution results [54]—that are central to data science work [50]. Moreover, the
ability to easily switch between code and output cells allows data scientists to quickly iterate on
their model-crafting and testing steps [50, 67].
However, only a few recent works have started to look at designing specific collaborative features
to support data science teams beyond the individual data scientist’s perspective [16, 68, 81, 92, 93].
For example, Jupyter Notebook’s narrative cell feature is designed to allow data scientists to leave
human-readable annotations so that when another data scientist re-uses the code, they can better
understand it. However, Rule et al. found a very low usage of these narrative cells (markdown cells)
among a million Jupyter notebooks that they sampled from GitHub [81]. Data scientists were not
writing their notebooks with a future collaborator or re-user in mind.
More recently, Wang and colleagues at University of Michigan have examined how data science
tools can better support collaboration. Their 2019 study [92] aimed to understand if the Jupyter
Notebook had a new feature that allows multiple data scientists to synchronously write code
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW1, Article 22. Publication date: May 2020.

22:6
Amy X. Zhang, Michael Muller, and Dakuo Wang
(as many people do in Google Docs today [71]), whether and how data scientists would use it
for their collaboration. They found the proposed feature can encourage more exploration and
reduce communication costs, while also promoting unbalanced participation and slacker behaviors.
In their 2020 paper [93], Wang et al. took up a related challenge, namely the documentation of
informal conversations and decisions that take place during data science projects. Building on prior
work [16, 68, 73], they built Callisto, an integration of synchronous chat with a Jupyter notebook.
In tests with 33 data science practitioners, Wang et al. showed the importance of automatic
computation of the reference point in order to anchor chat discussion in the code.
In sum, almost all of the proposed tools and features in data science focus only on the technical
users’ scenarios (e.g., data scientists and data engineers), such as how to better understand and
wrangle data [18, 41], or how to better write and share code [49, 81, 92, 93]. In this work, we
want to present an account that covers both the technical roles and the non-technical roles of a
professional data science team in corporations, so that we can better propose design suggestions
from a multi-disciplinary perspective.
3
METHOD
3.1
Participants
Participants were a self-selected convenience sample of employees in IBM who read or contributed
to Slack channels about data science (e.g., channel-names such as “deeplearning”, “data-science-at-
ibm”, “ibm-nlp”, and similar). Participants worked in diverse roles in research, engineering, health
sciences, management, and related line-of-business organizations.
We estimate that the Slack channels were read by approximately 1000 employees. Thus, the 183
people who provided data constituted a 20% percent participation rate.
Participants had the option to complete the survey anonymously. Therefore, our knowledge of
the participants is derived from their responses to survey items about their roles on data science
teams (Figure 2).
3.2
Survey Questions
The survey asked participants to describe a recent data science project, focusing on collaborations (if
any), the roles and skills among the data science team (if appropriate), and the role of collaborators
at different stages of the data science workflow. Next, we asked open-ended questions about
the tools participants used to collaborate, including at different workflow stages.1 Finally, we
asked participants to describe their collaborative practices around sharing and re-using code and
data, including their expectations around their own work and their documentation practices. To
encourage more people to contribute, we made all questions optional.
3.3
Survey Distribution
We posted requests to participate in relevant IBM internal Slack channels during January 2019.
Responses began to arrive in January. We wrote 2–4 reminder posts, depending on the size and
activity of each Slack channel. We collected the last response on 3 April 2019.
4
RESULTS
The 183 people who responded to the anonymous survey described themselves as being of varied
experience in data science but primarily 0–5 years (Figure 2A). Clearly, some saw connections
between contemporary data science and earlier projects involving statistical modeling, and that is
1Open-text responses were coded by two of the authors. We agreed on a set of coding guidelines in advance, and we resolved
any disagreements through discussion.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW1, Article 22. Publication date: May 2020.

How do Data Science Workers Collaborate? Roles, Workflows, and Tools
22:7
A)
B)
C)
Fig. 2. Self-reported information about survey respondents: A) Work experience in data science and machine
learning-related projects. B) Histogram of data science team sizes. C) Heatmap of the prevalence of a pair of
roles taken on by one respondent within in a data science project, with the diagonal showing the respondents
who only self-identified as one role.
why we see some long years of experience. Respondents worked primarily in smaller teams of six
people or fewer (Figure 2B). A few appeared to have solo data science practices.
Respondents reported that they often acted in multiple roles in their teams, and this may be due to
the fact that most of them have a relatively small team. Figure 2C is a heatmap showing the number
of times in our survey a respondent stated they acted in both roles out of a possible pair (with the
two roles defined by a cell’s position along the x-axis and y-axis). For cells along the diagonal, we
report the number of respondents who stated they only performed that one role and no other. As
can be seen, this was relatively rare, except in the case of the Engineer/Analyst/Programmer role.
Unsurprisingly, there was considerable role-overlap among Engineers/Analysts/Programmers
and Researchers/Scientists (i.e., the technical roles). These two roles also served—to a lesser extent—
in the roles of Communicators and Domain Experts.
By contrast, people in the role of Manager/Executive reported little overlap with other roles.
From the roles-overlap heatmap of Figure 2C, it appears that functional leadership—i.e., working
in multiple roles—occurred primarily in technical roles (Engineer/Analyst/Programmer and Re-
searcher/Scientist). These patterns may reflect IBM’s culture to define managers as people-managers,
rather than as technical team leaders.
4.1
Do Data Science Workers Collaborate?
Figure 3 shows patterns of self-reported collaborations across different roles in data science projects.
First, we begin answering one of the overall research questions: What is the extent of collabo-
ration on data science teams?
Table 1. Percentages of collaborations reported by each role.
Role
Percent Reporting Collaboration
Engineer/Analyst/Programmer
99%
Communicator
96%
Researcher/Scientist
95%
Manager/Executive
89%
Domain Expert
87%
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW1, Article 22. Publication date: May 2020.

22:8
Amy X. Zhang, Michael Muller, and Dakuo Wang
Fig. 3. Who collaborates with whom? Note: raw counts are reported in the stacked bar chart and normalized
percentages (along the columns) are reported in the heatmap.
4.1.1
Rates of Collaboration. The data behind Figure 3 allow us to see the extent of collaboration for
each self-reported role among the data science workers (Table 1). Among the five data science roles
of Figure 3, three roles reported collaboration at rates of 95% or higher. The lowest collaboration-rate
was among Domain Experts, who collectively reported a collaboration percentage of 87%. In the
following subsections, we explore the patterns and supports for these collaborations.
4.1.2
Who Collaborates with Whom? The stacked bar chart to the left in Figure 3 reflects the raw
numbers of people in each role who responded to our survey and stated that they collaborated
with another role. The heatmap to the right of Figure 3 shows a similar view of the collaboration
relationship—with whom they believe they collaborate—as the chart on the left, except that the
cells are now normalized by the total volume in each column. The columns (and the horizontal axis)
represent the reporter of a collaborative relationship. The rows (and the vertical axis) represent the
collaboration partner who is mentioned by the reporter at the base of each column. Lighter colors
in the heatmap indicate more frequently-reported collaboration partnerships.
When we examine a square heatmap with reciprocal rows and columns, we may look for
asymmetries around the major diagonal. For each pair of roles (A and B), do the informants report
a similar proportion of collaboration in each direction—i.e., does A report about the same level of
collaboration with B, as B reports about A?
Surprisingly, we see a disagreement about collaborations in relation to the role of Communicator.
Communicators report strong collaborations with Managers and with Domain Experts, as shown in
the Communicator column of Figure 3. However, these reports are not fully reciprocated by those
collaboration partners. As shown in the row for Communicators, most roles reported little collabo-
ration with Communicators relative to the other roles. A particularly striking difference is that
Communicators report (in their column) relatively strong collaboration with Managers/Executives,
but the Managers/Executives (in their own column) report the least collaboration with Communi-
cators. There is a similar, less severe, asymmetry between Communicators and Domain Experts.
We will later interpret these findings in the Discussion in Section 5.2.2.
4.1.3
Are there “Hub” Collaborator Roles? Are certain roles dominant in the collaboration network
of Figure 3? Figure 4 shows the reports of collaboration from Figure 3 as a network graph. Each
report of collaboration takes the form of a directed arc from one role to another. The direction of
the arc between e.g. (A->B) can be interpreted as “A reports collaboration with B.” The thickness
of each arc represents the proportion of people who report each directed-type of collaboration.
To avoid distortions due to different numbers of people reporting in each role, we normalized
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW1, Article 22. Publication date: May 2020.

How do Data Science Workers Collaborate? Roles, Workflows, and Tools
22:9
Fig. 4. Network graph of reported collaborative relationships. The arrow from Researcher to Communicator
may be interpreted as aggregated reports by Researchers about their collaboration with Communicators.
Note that some pairwise relationships do not have equal bidirectional symmetry. The thickness of each arc
represents the proportion of people who reported each directed-type of collaboration, normalized by number
of people in each role.
the width of each arc as the number of reported collaborations divided by the number of people
reporting from that role. Self-arcs represent cases in which the two collaborators were in the same
role—e.g., an engineer who reports collaborating with another engineer.
With one exception, this view shows relatively egalitarian strengths of role-to-role collaboration.
While we might expect to find Managers/Executives as the dominant or “hub” role, their collabora-
tive relations are generally similar to those of Engineers and Researchers. Domain Experts are only
slightly less engaged in collaborations.
The exception occurs, as noted above, in relation to Communicators. Communicators in this
graph clearly believe that they are collaborating strongly with other roles (thick arrows), but the
other roles report less collaboration toward Communicators (thin arrows).
The self-loop arrows are also suggestive. These arrows appear to show strong intra-role collabo-
rations among Engineers, Researchers, and Communicators. By contrast, Managers/Executives and
Domain Experts appear to collaborate less with other members of their own roles.
4.2
Collaborator Roles in Different Stages of the Data Science Workflow
As reviewed above in relation to Figure 1, data science projects are often thought to follow a series
of steps or stages—even if these sequences serve more as mental models than as guides to daily
practice [67, 75]. We now consider how the roles of data science workers interact with those stages.
Figure 5 shows the relative participation of each role as a collaborator in the stages of a data
science workflow. As motivated in the Related Work section, in this paper, we adopted a six-step
view of a reference-model data science workflow, beginning with creating a measurement plan
[79], and moving through technical stages to an eventual delivering stage of an analysis or model
or working system. Some organizations also perform a check for bias and/or discrimination during
the technical development [7]. However, because that step is not yet accepted by all data science
projects and may happen at different stages, we have listed that step separately at the end of the
horizontal axis of the stacked bar chart in Figure 5.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW1, Article 22. Publication date: May 2020.

22:10
Amy X. Zhang, Michael Muller, and Dakuo Wang
Fig. 5. The roles of collaborators during the stages of a data science project.
4.2.1
Where do Non-Technical Roles Work? The data for Figure 5 show highly significant differences
from one column to the next column (χ2
48 = 148.777, p< .001).
Through a close examination of Figure 5, we found that the degree of involvement by Man-
agers/Executives and by Communicators is roughly synchronized—despite their seeming lack of
collaboration patterns as seen in Figures 3 and 4. Each of these roles is relatively strongly engaged
in the first stage (measurement plan) and the last two stages (evaluate, communicate), but largely
absent from the technical work stages (access data, features, model). Perhaps each of these roles is
engaged with relatively humanistic aspects of the work, but with different and perhaps unconnected
humanistic aspects for each of their distinct roles.
4.2.2
Where do Domain Experts Work? The involvement of Domain Experts is similar to that of
Managers and Communicators, but to a lesser extent. Domain experts are active at every stage, in
contrast to Communicators, who appear to drop out during the modeling stage. Domain experts are
also more engaged (by self-report) during stages in which Managers have very little engagement.
Thus, it appears that Domain Experts are either directly involved in the core technical work,
or are strongly engaged in consultation during data-centric activities such as data-access and
feature-extraction. They take on even more prominent roles during later stages of evaluating and
communicating.
4.2.3
Where do Technical Roles Work? There is an opposite pattern of engagement for the core
technical work, done by Engineers/Analysts/Programmers, who are most active while the Managers
and Communicators are less involved.
The degree of involvement by Researchers/Scientists seems to be relatively stable and strongly
engaged across all stages. This finding may clarify the “hub” results of Figure 4, which suggested
relatively egalitarian collaboration relations. Figure 5 suggests that perhaps Researchers/Scientists
actively guide the project through all of its stages.
4.2.4
Who Checks AI Fairness and Bias? The stage of assessment and mitigation of bias appears to
be treated largely as a technical matter. Communicators and Managers have minimal involvement.
Unsurprisingly, Domain Experts play a role in this stage, presumably because they know more
about how bias may creep into work in their own domains.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW1, Article 22. Publication date: May 2020.

How do Data Science Workers Collaborate? Roles, Workflows, and Tools
22:11
Table 2. Categories of data science tools and the number of times each tool was mentioned by respondents.
Tool Category
Tools Mentioned by Respondents (number of times mentioned)
asynchronous discussion

synchronous discussion
meeting (13), e-meeting (12), phone (1)
project management
Jira (8), ZenHub (2), Trello (1)
code management
GitHub (56), Git (5)
code
Python (42), R (9), Java (3), scripts (3)
code editor
Visual Studio Code (11), PyCharm (11), RStudio (8), Eclipse (1), Atom
(1)
interactive code environment
Jupyter Notebook (66), SQL (6), terminal (4), Google Colab (4)
software package
Scikit-learn (3), Shiny App (2), Pandas (2)
analytics/visualization
SPSS (27), Watson Analytics (22), Cognos (7), ElasticSearch (4), Apache
Spark (3), Graphana (2), Tableau (2), Logstash (2), Kibana (1)
spreadsheet
Microsoft Excel (22), spreadsheets (3), Google Sheets (1)
document editing
wiki (2), LaTeX (2), Microsoft Word (2), Dropbox Paper (2), Google Docs
(1)
filesharing
Box (43), cloud (5), NFS (2), Dropbox (1), Filezilla (1)
presentation software
Microsoft Powerpoint (18), Prezi (1)
Note: code allows programmers to write algorithms for data science. code editor and interactive code
environment provide a user experience for writing that code. code management is where the code may be
stored and shared. By contrast, analytics/visualization provides “macro-level” tools that can invoke entire
steps or modular actions in a data science pipeline.
4.2.5
Summary. From the analyses in this section, we begin to see data science work as a conver-
gence of several analytic dimensions: people in roles, roles in collaboration, and roles in a sequence
of project activities. The next section adds a fourth dimension, namely the tools used by data
science workers.
4.3
Tooling for Collaboration
We asked respondents to describe the tools that they used in the stages of a data science project—i.e.,
the same stages as in the preceding section. We provided free-text fields for them to list their tools,
so that we could capture the range of tools used. We then collaboratively converted the free-text
responses into sets of tools for each response, before iteratively classifying the greater set of tools
from all responses into 13 higher-level categories, as shown in Table 2.2
When we examined the pattern of tools usage across project stages (Figure 6), we found highly
significant differences across the project stages (χ2
72 = 209.519, p< .001). As above, we summarize
trends that suggest interesting properties of data science collaboration:
4.3.1
Coding and Discussing. The use of coding resources was as anticipated. Coding resources
were used during intense work with data, and during intense work with models. Code may serve
as a form of asynchronous discussion (e.g., [13]): Respondents tended to decrease their use of
asynchronous discussion during project stages in which they made relatively heavier use of coding
resources.
4.3.2
Documentation of Work. We were interested to see whether and how respondents docu-
mented their work. Respondents reported some document-editing during the activities leading to a
2We discussed the classification scheme repeatedly until we were in agreement about which tool fit into each category. We
postponed all statistical analyses until we had completed our social process of classification.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW1, Article 22. Publication date: May 2020.

22:12
Amy X. Zhang, Michael Muller, and Dakuo Wang
Fig. 6. The tools used in each stage of a data science project. Note: on the left is the raw count of each tool
category for each stage, while on the right, each column is normalized to sum to 1.0.
measurement plan. There was also a small use of presentation software, which can of course serve
as a form of documentation.3 The use of these tools returned during the stage of delivery to clients.
4.3.3
Gaps in Documentation for Feature Engineering. In contrast, we were surprised that there
was little use of documents during the phase of feature-extraction and feature-engineering. This
stage is an important site for the design of data [23]. The meaning and nature of the data may be
changed [23, 67] during this time-consuming step [34, 48, 67, 80, 103]. During this phase, the use of
synchronous discussion tools dropped to nearly zero, and the use of asynchronous discussion tools
was relatively low. There was relatively little use of filesharing tools. It appears that these teams
were not explicitly recording their decisions. Thus, important human decisions may be inscribed
into the data and the data science pipeline, while simultaneously becoming invisible [67, 79]. The
implications for subsequent re-analysis and revision may be severe.
4.3.4
Gaps in Documentation for Bias Mitigation. We were similarly surprised that the stage of bias
detection and mitigation also seemed to lack documentation, except perhaps through filesharing.
We anticipate that organizations will begin to require documentation of bias mitigation as bias
issues become more important.
4.3.5
Summary. In Section 4.1, we showed that data science workers engage in extensive collabo-
ration. Then in Section 4.2 we showed that collaboration is pervasive across across all stages of data
science work, and that members of data science teams are intensely involved in those collaborative
activities. By contrast, this section shows gaps in the usage of collaborative tools. We propose that a
new generation of data science tools should be created with collaboration “baked in” to the design.
4.4
Collaborative Practices around Code and Data
Finally, we sought to understand how tool usage by a respondent relates to their practices around
code reading, re-use, and documentation, as well as data sharing, re-use, and documentation.
Particularly, if technical team members must collaborate with non-technical team members, then
tools and practices to support documentation will be key.
3We consider the use of spreadsheets to be ambiguous in terms of documentation. Spreadsheets function both as records
and as discardable scratch-pads and sandboxes. Baker et al. summarize the arguments for treating spreadsheets not as
documentation, but rather as tools that are in need of external documentation (e.g., [19]), which is often lacking [5].
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW1, Article 22. Publication date: May 2020.

How do Data Science Workers Collaborate? Roles, Workflows, and Tools
22:13
Table 3. Survey respondents clustered by their self-reported tool usage.
Respondent Clusters
Number of People
Per Cluster
Tools Frequently Mentioned
(number of times mentioned across questions)
0 (project managed)
19

1 (interactive)
13
Jupyter Notebook (82), GitHub (44), Slack (22)
2 (scripted)
44
Python (50), SPSS (44), GitHub (27), Jupyter notebook
(27), Slack (24)
To begin, we clustered the survey respondents into different clusters according to their self-
reported tool usage. To create a “tools profile” for each respondent, we used the questions regarding
tool usage, described in Section 4.3, and summed up all the mentions of each tool from all the
open-ended questions on tool usage. Thus, if a respondent answered only “GitHub” for all 7 stages
of their data science project, then they would have a count of 7 under the tool “GitHub” and a count
of 0 elsewhere.
Using the k-means clustering algorithm in the Scikit-learn Python library, we found that k=3
clusters resulted in the highest average silhouette coefficient of 0.254. This resulted in the clusters
described in Table 3. We only included respondents who had mentioned at least one tool across
all the tool usage questions; as the questions were optional, and we experienced some dropout
partway through the survey, we had 76 respondents to cluster.
We saw that the respondents in the first cluster (Cluster 0) mentioned using both GitHub and

Given these tools’ features for project management, including code management, issue tracking,
and team coordination, we characterize this cluster of respondents as project managed. In contrast,
respondents in Cluster 1 mentioned using Jupyter Notebook repeatedly, and only occasionally
mentioned other tools; thus we designate the cluster’s respondents as using interactive tools due to
Jupyter Notebook’s interactive coding environment. Finally, Cluster 2 had the most respondents and
a longer tail of mentioned tools. However, the tools most mentioned were Python and SPSS; thus,
we characterize this cluster of respondents as using scripted tools. We also noticed that Cluster 2
was predominately made up of self-reported Engineers/Analysts/Programmers at 80%. Meanwhile,
Researchers/Scientists had the greatest prevalence in Cluster 0 and Cluster 1, with 84.2% and 84.6%,
respectively.
4.4.1
Reading and Re-using Others’ Code and Data. In Figure 7, we report the answers in the
affirmative to questions asking respondents whether they read other people’s code and data and
re-used other people’s code and data, separated and normalized by cluster. One finding that stood
out is the overall lower levels of collaborative practices around data as opposed to code. This was
observed across all three clusters of tool profiles, despite the ability in some tools, such as GitHub,
to store and share data.
When comparing across the stages of planning, coding, and testing of code, there were few
noticeable differences between clusters except in the stage of testing code. Here, we saw that
Clusters 1 (interactive) and 2 (scripted) had relatively fewer respondents reading others’ code in
the testing phase (and Cluster 2 had few respondents re-using others’ code in the testing phase). It
may be that in an interactive notebook or scripting environment, there is relatively less testing, in
contrast to the practice of writing unit tests in larger software projects, and as a result, a relatively
lower need for alignment with others’ code when it comes to testing. We also saw that Cluster 0
(project-managed) had no respondents that did not read other people’s code or did not re-use other
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW1, Article 22. Publication date: May 2020.

22:14
Amy X. Zhang, Michael Muller, and Dakuo Wang
Fig. 7. Reading and re-use of others’ code and data across respondent clusters.
Table 4. Expectations around one’s own code and data being re-used.
Cluster 0
(Project managed)
Cluster 1
(Interactive)
Cluster 2
(Scripted)
All
Expect that their code will be re-used
68.4%
84.6%
80.9%
78.8%
Expect that their data will be re-used
73.7%
46.1%
50%
59.6%
Table 5. Code and data documentation practices according to each cluster.
Documentation Practice
Cluster 0
(Project managed)
Cluster 1
(Interactive)
Cluster 2
(Scripted)
Code
In-line comments
100%
84.6%
90.5%
Longer blocks of comments in the code
68.4%
30.8%
38.1%
Markdown cells in notebooks
63.2%
92.3%
38.1%
External documents
63.2%
61.5%
28.6%
Data
Column labels
66.7%
63.6%
75%
Data dictionary
50%
63.6%
40%
Extra text in JSON schema (or similar)
27.8%
18.2%
15%
External documents
77.8%
45.5%
50%
people’s code, which suggests that workers in this cluster are coordinating their code with others,
using tools like GitHub and Slack.
4.4.2
Expectations Around One’s Own Code and Data Being Re-used. In Table 4, we report on
respondents answers to their expectations for how their own code or data will be used by others.
Respondents were more likely to state that they expected others to re-use their code as opposed to
their data. In the case of code re-use, peoples’ expectations were slightly lower for respondents in
Cluster 0 and slightly higher for respondents in the other clusters, though this was not significant.
We also saw that the expectation that data would be re-used was more prevalent in Cluster 0 while
relatively low in Cluster 1 and 2. This may be because the native features for displaying structured
data or coordinating the sharing of data, such as using version control, are more rudimentary within
tools like Jupyter Notebook, although a few recent works have developed prototypes examined in
a lab environment [49, 92, 93].
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW1, Article 22. Publication date: May 2020.

How do Data Science Workers Collaborate? Roles, Workflows, and Tools
22:15
4.4.3
Code and Data Documentation Practices. In Table 5, we show respondents’ answers to how
they document their code as well as their data, broken down by cluster. Overall, we see higher rates
of self-reported code documentation in Cluster 0 (project managed) and 1 (interactive) compared
to 2 (scripted). For instance, 100% of members of Cluster 0 said they used in-line comments to
document their code. Cluster 2 also had high rates of using in-line comments, though other practices
were infrequently used. Unsurprisingly, the use of markdown cells in notebooks was most prevalent
in Cluster 1 (interactive), while longer blocks of comments in the code was least used (30.8%)
likely because markdown cells perform that function. A lack of code documentation besides in-line
comments in Cluster 2 suggests that it may be more difficult for collaborators to work with code
written by members of this cluster. We note that this is not due to a low expectation within Cluster
2 that code would be re-used.
We found that data science workers overall performed less documentation when it comes to
data as opposed to code, perhaps due to their perceptions around re-use. Even something basic like
adding column labels to data sets was not performed by a third to a quarter of members of each
cluster, as shown in Table 5. Instead, the most prevalent practice within any of the clusters was
the use of external documents by Cluster 0 (project managed) at 77.8%. While external documents
allow data set curators to add extensive documentation about their data, one major downside is
that they are uncoupled—there is little ability to directly reference, link to, or display annotations
on top of the data itself. This may lead to issues where the documentation can be lost, not noticed
by a collaborator, or misunderstood out of context.
4.4.4
Summary. In this section, we examined the collaborative practices of data science workers
in relation to the kinds of tools they use. Through clustering, we identified three main “tools
profiles”. The first makes heavy use of GitHub and Slack and is relatively active in reading other
people’s code, re-using other people’s code, expecting that others would use one’s code and data,
and documenting code. Out of all the three clusters, workers using this tool profile seem to have the
healthiest collaborative practices. However, even this cluster has relatively low rates of collaboration
and documentation around data.
The second cluster primarily uses Jupyter Notebook for data science work. While people in this
cluster were generally active in code collaboration and code documentation, we notice a lower rate
of reading others’ code while testing one’s code as well as a low expectation that one’s data would
be re-used.
The third cluster had a greater variety of tool usage but more emphasis on writing scripts in
Python or SPSS. This cluster had low rates of code documentation outside of in-line comments,
signaling potential difficulties for non-technical collaborators.
5
DISCUSSION
We began our Results by asking “Do data science workers collaborate?” The answer from this survey
dataset is clearly “yes.” These results are in agreement with prior work [11, 32, 43, 61, 75, 83, 91, 95].
In this paper, we provide a greater depth of collaboration information by exploring the interactions
of team roles, tools, project stages, and documentation practices. One of our strong findings is that
people in most roles report extensive collaboration during each stage of a data science project.
These findings suggest new needs among data science teams and communities, and encourage us
to think about a new generation of “collaboration-friendly” data science tools and environments.
5.1
Possible Collaborative Features
5.1.1
Provenance of data. We stated a concern earlier that there seemed to be insufficient use of
documentation during multiple stages of data science projects and fewer practices of documentation
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW1, Article 22. Publication date: May 2020.

22:16
Amy X. Zhang, Michael Muller, and Dakuo Wang
for data as opposed to code. Partly this may be due to a lack of expectations that one’s data will
ever be re-used by another. In addition, there are now mature tools for collaborating on code due
to over a decade of research and practice on this topic in the field of software engineering [17, 87];
however, fewer tools exist for data and are not yet widely adopted. The absence of documentation
may obscure the source of datasets as well as computations performed over datasets in the steps
involving data cleaning or transformation. The problem can be compounded if there is a need
to combine datasets for richer records. When teams of data science workers share data, then the
knowledge of one person may be obscured, and the organizational knowledge of one team may not
be passed along to a second team. Thus, there is a need for a method to record data provenance. A
method for embedding this information within the data themselves would be a superior outcome as
opposed to within external documents. As one example, the DataHub project [8] replicates GitHub-
like features of version control and provenance management but for datasets. In a similar vein, the
ModelDB project provides version control and captures metadata about machine learning models
over the course of their development [89]. Beyond provenance captured automatically, there needs
to be ways for collaborators to record discussions and decisions made with each transformation.
5.1.2
Provenance of code. There also remain subtle issues in the provenance of code. At first, it
seems as if the reliance of data science on code packages and code libraries should obviate any need
for documentation of code in data science. However, in Section 4.3.3, we discussed the invisibility
of much of the work on feature extraction and feature engineering. The code for these activities
is generally not based on a well-known and well-maintained software package or product. If this
code becomes lost, the important knowledge about the nature and meaning of the features [66, 67]
may also be lost.
However, lack of motivation to document lower-level decision-making may be a limiting factor
towards stronger documentation practices, particularly in an “exploration” mindset. In the software
engineering realm, tools have been proposed to support more lightweight ways for programmers
to externalize their thought processes, such as social tagging of code [84] or clipping rationales
from the web [59]. Other tools embed and automatically capture context while programmers are
foraging for information to guide decisions, such as search [12] and browsing history [24, 37].
Similar ideas could be applied in the case of data science, where users may be weighing the use of
different code libraries or statistical methods. Other decisions such as around feature engineering
may result from conversations between team members [73] that then could be linked in the code.
In addition, we noticed a drop-off in collaborative code practices when it came to testing already-
written code. This has important implications for developing standards around testing for data
and model issues of bias, which will only be more important in years to come. Thus, preserving
the provenance of code may also be important to keep the data processing steps transparent and
accountable.
5.1.3
Transparency. More broadly, data science projects may inadvertently involve many assump-
tions, improvisations, and hidden decisions. Some of these undocumented commitments may arise
through the assumption that everyone on the team shares certain knowledge—but what about the
next team that “inherits” code or data from a prior project? As we just noted, this kind of transparent
transmission of knowledge may be important with regard to the design of features [23, 67]. It can
also be important for the earlier step of establishing a data management plan, which may define, in
part, what qualifies as data in this project [79].
We advocate to make invisible activities more visible—and thus discuss-able and (when nec-
essary) debatable and accountable. This argument for transparency is related but distinct from
the ongoing “Explainable AI” (XAI) initiative—XAI emphasizes using various techniques (e.g.,
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW1, Article 22. Publication date: May 2020.

How do Data Science Workers Collaborate? Roles, Workflows, and Tools
22:17
visualization [97]) and designs to make machine learning algorithms understandable by non-
technical users [3, 21, 39, 57, 102], whereas we argue for the explanation of decisions among the
various data science creators of machine learning algorithms. Recent work in this space similarly
argues for more documentation to improve transparency, as well as greater standardization around
documentation [27, 65], particularly important when it comes to publicly-released datasets and
models.
5.2
Collaborating with Whom? and When?
These concerns for provenance and transparency may be important to multiple stakeholders. Team
members are obvious beneficiaries of good record-keeping. In the language of value sensitive
design [25], team members are direct stakeholders—i.e., people who directly interact with data
science tools in general, and the project’s code in particular. Again using concepts from value
sensitive design, there are likely to be multiple indirect stakeholders—i.e., people who are affected
by the data science system, or by its code, or by its data.
5.2.1
Indirect Stakeholders. For a data science project, indirect stakeholders might be future project
teams. These peers (or future peers) would benefit from understanding what decisions were made,
and how data were defined [79] and transformed [23, 67]. For data science projects that affect
bank loans [14, 72] prison sentences [78], or community policing [90], the public are also indirect
stakeholders as they worry about the possibility of inequitable treatment or faulty data. Finally,
another beneficiary of provenance and transparency is one’s own future self, who may return to
a data science project after a year or two of other engagements, only to discover that the team
has been dispersed, personal memories have faded, and the project needs to be learned like any
unfamiliar data science resource.
5.2.2
“Imbalanced” Collaboration. In Section 4.1.2, we observed that there is a mismatch around
perceived collaborations between different roles. For example, Communicators believed they collab-
orate a lot with Managers/Executives, but the Managers/Executives perceived they collaborated the
least with Communicators. This result is the normalized proportions of the reported collaborations
from each role in Figure 3, so it is possible that Managers/Executives may collaborate a lot with all
other roles and the collaboration with Communicators has the smallest proportion among these
collaborations.
We speculate that the collaborations reported by our informants may have been highly directional.
Communicators may have received information from other roles—or may simply have read shared
documents or observed meetings—to find the information that they needed to communicate. Their
role may have been largely to receive information, and they are likely to have been aware of their
dependencies on other members of the team. By contrast, the other roles may have perceived
Communicators as relatively passive team members. These other roles may have considered
that they themselves received little from the Communicators, and may have down-reported their
collaborations accordingly.
Different roles also reported different intra-role collaboration patterns in Section 4.1.3. These
patterns suggest that the people in these roles may have different relationships with their own
communities of practice [22, 98]. There may be stronger peer communities for each of Engineers,
Researchers, and Communicators, and there may be weaker peer communities for each of Managers
and Domain Experts. It may be that Domain Experts are focused within their own domain, and
may not collaborate much with Domain Experts who work in other domains. It may be that
Managers/Executives focus on one data science project at-a-time, and do not consult with their
peers about the technical details within each project.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW1, Article 22. Publication date: May 2020.

22:18
Amy X. Zhang, Michael Muller, and Dakuo Wang
5.3
AI Fairness and Bias
The detection, assessment, and mitigation of bias in data science systems is inherently complex
and multidisciplinary, involving expertise in prediction and modeling, statistical assessments in
particular domains, domain knowledge of an area of possible harms, and aspects of regulations and
law. There may also be roles for advocates for particular affected groups, and possibly advocates
for commercial parties who favor maintaining the status quo.
In these settings, a data science pipeline becomes an object of contention. Making sense of the
data science pipeline requires multiple interpreters from diverse perspectives, including adversarial
interpreters [25]. All of the issues raised above regarding provenance and transparency are relevant.
Our result confirmed that in data science collaborations, there are activities around AI fairness
and bias detection and mitigation happening along the data science workflow in Section 4.2.4, and
it appears to be treated largely as a technical matter. For example, data scientists and engineers are
involved in the process as they follow up with the latest technical algorithms on how to detect bias
and fix it. Our results also suggest that Domain Experts also plays a role in the Bias detection and
Mitigation process, presumably because they know more about how bias may creep into work in
their own domains.
However, we did not see much involvement from Communicators and Managers/Executives.
This is surprising, as Communicators and Managers are the ones who may know the most about
policy requirements and worry the most about the negative consequences of a biased AI algorithm.
We speculate that Managers may become more involved in this stage in the future, as bias issues
become more salient in industry and academia [1, 26, 35].
5.4
Limitations and Future Directions
Our survey respondents were all recruited from IBM—a large, multinational technology company—
and their views may not be fully representative of the larger population of professionals working
in the data science related projects.
One example of how our results might be skewed comes from the fact that almost all of our
respondents worked in small teams, typically with 5 or 6 collaborators in a team. While this number
is consistent to what previous literature reported (e.g., Wang et al. reported 2-3 data scientists in a
team [95], and our work also counts managers, communicators, researchers, and engineers), in other
contexts the size of data science teams may vary. Also, due to the fact that all these respondents
are from the same company, their preference in selecting tools and how to use these tools may be
dominated by the company culture. The findings may be different if we study data science teams’
collaborative practices in different scenarios, such as in offline data hackathons [43].
Another limitation is that our findings are based on self-reported data using an online survey.
Despite this research method’s power of covering a broader user population, it is also known that
survey respondents may have bias in answering those behavioral questions. We see this rather as
a new promising research direction than limitation, and we look forward to conducting further
studies with Contextual Inquiry [82], Participatory Analysis [69], or Value Sensitive Design [25] to
observe and track how people actually behave in a data science team collaboration.
We should also note that data science teams may not always appreciate the proposed features that
increase transparency and accountability of each team member’s contribution, as they may have
negative effects. In the co-editing activities enabled by Google Doc-like features, writers sometimes
do not want to have such high transparency [94]. Thus, we need additional user evaluations of
collaboration features before deploying them into the real world.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 4, No. CSCW1, Article 22. Publication date: May 2020.

How do Data Science Workers Collaborate? Roles, Workflows, and Tools
22:19
6
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented results of a large-scale survey of data science workers at a major
corporation that examined how data science workers collaborate. We find that not only do data
science workers collaborate extensively, they perform a variety of roles, and work with a variety
of stakeholders during different stages of the data science project workflow. We also investigated
the tools that data scientists use when collaborating, and how tool usage relates to collaborative
practices such as code and data documentation. From this analysis, we present directions for future
research and development of data science collaboration tools.
In summary, we hope we have made the following contributions:
• The first large in-depth survey about data science collaborative practices, and the first large
study to provide roles-based analyses of collaborations.
• The first large-scale study of data science activities during specific stages of data science
projects.
• The first analysis of collaborative tools usage across the stages of data science projects.
• The first large-scale analysis of documentation practices in data science.
