January 26, 2024
1:32
eprint
A generic model of consciousness
Mark Hadley∗
This is a model of consciousness. The hard problem of consciousness, what it feels like,
is answered. The work builds on medical research analyzing the source and mechanisms
associated with our feelings. It goes further by describing a generic model with wide
applicability. The model is fully consistent with medical pathways in humans, but easily
extends to animals and AI. The essence of the model is the interplay between associative
memory and physiology. The model is a clear and concrete counterexample to the famous
philosophical objections to a scientific explanation.
Keywords: AI; Associative memory; Consciousness; Mind; Physiology; Subjective expe-
rience.
1. Introduction
We are going to construct a model of “what it feels like”. The work is motivated
by the philosophical debates about consciousness. A dominant theme in the phi-
losophy literature is that the intractable problem of consciousness is to explain
what it feels like. Equivalent terms are “what it feels like”, “subjective experience”,
“conscious experience”, “consciousness”, “qualia”, “phenomenal experience”. This
work presents a generic model of what it feels like, informed by medical science, but
with much wider applicability. The model can assess artificial consciousness and
and design consciousness into AI.
The value of having a generic model cannot be overstated. Current questions
about AI and consciousness cannot be answered or informed by anatomical stud-
ies of human beings alone. The pathways and components will be different, non-
biological. This limitation is even true for conclusions about other animals. If an
organ or piece of anatomy is different to a human one, how can we decide if it is
relevant or materially significant? This generic model is the answer, it describes the
functionality to implement “what it feels like” and is independent of the platform,
animal, or agent.
Consciousness is a challenging subject, not least because there are several quite
different uses of the word consciousness, and the term is frequently invoked without
definition. Consciousness is an interdisciplinary topic and a major research front in
psychology and neuroscience as well as philosophy. Chalmers [1995] is an influential
introduction to the philosophical side of the subject. He draws a clear distinction
between the so-called easy problems which science knows how to approach and is
indeed making progress on:

1
arXiv:2401.13690v1  [q-bio.NC]  2 Jan 2024

January 26, 2024
1:32
eprint
2
Mark Hadley
“The easy problems of consciousness include those of explaining the
following phenomena: the ability to discriminate, categorize, and
react to environmental stimuli; the integration of information by a
cognitive system; the reportability of mental states; the ability of a
system to access its own internal states; the focus of attention; the
deliberate control of behavior; the difference between wakefulness
and sleep . . . . . . All of them are straightforwardly vulnerable to
explanation in terms of computational or neural mechanisms. . . . .
. . . . The really hard problem of consciousness is the problem of
experience”.
Chalmers [1997][p4] introduces subjective experience:
“When we perceive, think and act, there is a whir of causation
and information processing . . . . . . There is also an internal aspect;
there is something it feels like to be a cognitive agent. This internal
aspect is conscious experience.”
We are tackling the hard problem but are not endorsing it. Other commentators
do not accept Chalmers’ categorization and have conducted research to show that
the so-called hard problem is amenable to scientific understanding [Damasio &
Carvalho, 2013]. Indeed, the model presented here directly contradicts the existence
of an intractable hard problem. Despite contrary views and recent research, the
notion of a hard problem persists in current debates, so this work adds to the
weight of evidence for a scientific explanation of consciousness. But it goes further,
by extending the research from human anatomy to a generic model it has wider
applicability, answers more questions, and offers greater insight.
The equivalent terms used by philosophers for the hard problem are conscious-
ness, experiences, qualia, phenomenology, phenomenal, subjective experience, con-
scious experience, what it is like, what it feels like. They are used interchangeably.
Of interest are the inner feelings that accompany an event - not the information
transfers or firing of neurons, but why there is a feeling associated with it; a feeling
that we experience in the first person. Nagel [1974] paper “What is it like to be a
bat?” was most influential. Of course, he is not asking what it is like to be 10cm
tall and weigh 150g and hang upside down, he is exploring what it feels like to be
a bat. And how impossible it is for humans to imagine or explain. He equates the
hard problem of consciousness with understanding the origin of what it feels like to
be a bat. We will model what an experience feels like. There are several reasons to
pick the term “what it feels like” as our explanatory challenge:
(i) The hard problem of consciousness has been described with the phrase “what it
feels like” “or what it is like” consistently, continually, and repeatedly from Nagel
[1974] through to Chalmers [1997] and to the present day. That is consistent for
40 years.

January 26, 2024
1:32
eprint
A generic model of consciousness
3
(ii) The phrase has not been reinterpreted. No philosophical version of it has been
defined or described. It is used as is because we know what it means. There has
been no attempt to change the popular meaning. This contrasts with expressions
like subjective experience and phenomenal which have been reinterpreted by
philosophers specifically for the academic discipline and need to be explained in
books for the general public.
(iii) It is used in introductory academic texts and in books aimed at the general
public. It is the language chosen to relate complex philosophical concepts to the
public using language they understand.
We will model what it feels like and how those feelings arise in response to
different stimuli. The model is generic in terms of logical building blocks that can
be applied widely. This complements the medical research into the pathways and
mechanisms (predominantly in humans). The two approaches are fully compatible,
and we will repeatedly cross reference this generic model against medical detail.
2. Understanding what it feels like
We are in a good position to understand what it feels like. Contrary to assertions
that it encapsulates a hard intractable problem of consciousness, we can discuss,
analyze, and investigate it. We can attempt to explain what it feels like because the
expression and the response are intimately linked to medical diagnosis. As part of a
medical examination doctors will ask, how do you feel, and the patient will respond
in a way that gives the doctor information about the patient’s body. Indeed, for
some conditions such as fibromyalgia, what it feels like is the dominant contribution
to a diagnosis.
In general, we can recognize the connection between what it feels like and the
state of our bodies. This can be discussed and analyzed widely and across disciplines.
In specific terms medical research can, and does, investigate the pathways that
connect our physiology to a sense of what it feels like. These medical pathways,
that give us a sense of what it feels like, are being investigated with considerable
success. See for example Damasio & Carvalho [2013]. Some, but not all, aspects
of our physiology are sensed, and signals are returned to central nervous system
CNS. The exact parts of the CNS that generate emotions is still an active subject
of research but it is clear that more than one area is relevant.
We understand what it means to feel cold. If the individual is in an environment
with a low temperature for a prolonged period, the physiology will be a cold one.
We have a name for it in the English language. Core body temperature drops. For
a human, surface arteries will close. The skin color will change to blue. The skin
will have goose pimples (piloerection), and muscles contract to cause shivering.
There are other physiological changes known and probably more unknown. We say
the individual is cold. Being cold is a language label for that set of physiological
conditions. We will use the cold state as an example in the following discussions
because being cold is widely experienced, supported by shared language, and has

January 26, 2024
1:32
eprint
4
Mark Hadley
known biological mechanisms. The subset of physiological parameters that equate to
feeling like being cold are those which can send stimuli to the brain. The pathways
are well established by medical science: temperature is detected by sensory receptors
in the skin. This sends a signal via an afferent sensory neurone to the central nervous
system and then to the thalamus (part of the brain) via the spinothalamic tract.
See for example Waldman [2009]. Similarly, we know what it means to feel happy,
frightened, or hungry. There are many more feelings with distinct mechanisms. Some
are well understood, others less so. In detail, the receptors and pathways are varied.
The work of Damasio and others gives increasing understanding about why there
is a sense of what it feels like.
We take the essential features and encapsulate them in a simple generic model.
The first is that we have a body, a physiology. (Damasio and Carvalho emphasize
that the body is in homeostasis, this seems not to be fundamental to us, so we use the
term physiology.) An enormous number of parameters characterize our physiology.
A subset of them have receptors that feed signals back to the neuraxis. It is this
subset that gives rise to feelings. When we report against those signals, we report
what it feels like. Why we have evolved awareness of some parameters and not
others may well have evolutionary origins. And the degree to which other creatures
have signals from their physiology to mind, limits the scope of the model and the
attribution of conscious feelings.
This preliminary model is more than just information processing. The physiol-
ogy is essential. That is a conclusion shared by medical research studying feelings.
Already this feature distinguishes the model form speculations about AI and in-
formation processing. As Chalmers and others claim for the hard problem of con-
sciousness: a subjective feeling is more than just knowledge. It cannot be conveyed
by a transfer of information alone.
The philosophy literature focuses particularly on the feelings associated with
sensory perceptions. What does it feel like to see red is a common question claimed
to encapsulate the puzzle of human consciousness. Our answer to that is based on
associative memory.
3. Response to Stimuli
So far, we have been describing how we have a sense of what our bodies feel like.
We need a bit more than that. Much of the philosophical debate about subjective
experience relates to feelings associated with stimuli. What does it feel like to see
red, or to hear a bell ring; these are fundamental to the philosophical concept of
a hard problem of consciousness. Indeed, they could be characterized as definitive
of the hard problem, (to the extent that a hard problem is defined). To progress,
we need to consider how our body responds to stimuli and the key role played by
associative memory.
Human memory is associative, in contrast to computer memory which is address-
able. Although one type of memory can mimic the other, they are quite different

January 26, 2024
1:32
eprint
A generic model of consciousness
5
in principle. If we see a tomato, then we recall things associated with a tomato:
perhaps the sound of the word, or its spelling. Maybe a recipe etc. The associations
and recall are automatic and immediate, they do not arise at the end of a process,
unlike a rational or logical analysis. The associations will have been formed through
our lives and are not generally identical. They are subjective. The pattern of our
neurons changes to embody the associations; it is a feature of our brains called neu-
roplasticity. Again, it is in marked contrast to conventional computers which have
fixed structures and connections. For humans, the relationships are learned, they
can be taught. Associative memory is powerful in some applications and is being
harnessed with artificial neural network computing.
The tomato example above was about information processing. However asso-
ciative memory does more than just recall information, it can recall physiological
states. It is a primary mechanism in animals to respond to a stimulus by getting
their body ready for whatever is likely to happen next. This associative memory
and the responses are personal in two respects: it affects the person’s physiology,
and it can vary from person to person depending on what they have learned from
past experiences.
One famous example is Pavlov’s dog. Dr Pavlov rang a bell when his dog was
fed. After a while the dog would salivate when the bell rang. We do not know what
it feels like to be a dog, but we do have some clues. Eating food is pleasurable, and
necessary for survival. There are several scientific techniques to measure pleasure
in animals such has the level of the dopamine hormone. We know that salivation
is a physiological response when eating and we know salivation is nerve mediated.
Scientifically we know and understand the mechanisms: the salivary glands are
mainly supplied with parasympathetic innervation. The reflex: Afferent impulses
are sent to the salivary nuclei in the brain-stem, which in turn then send a signal
via the glossopharyngeal nerve to the salivary glands to increase saliva production.
See for example:Whelton [2012]. So, we know that some of the physiology of eating
is recalled when the dog hears the bell ring. We cannot empathize fully with the
dog’s subjective experience because our physiology is different to that of a dog.
However, we can approach an understanding of what it feels like, because we have
some physiology in common.
Another dog could be beaten whenever the bell rings. The physiological response
to the violence would be distinctive and pronounced: adrenaline would be released
from the adrenal glands along with cortisol (increases blood pressure and blood
sugar and some other stuff). Heart rate and respiratory rate increase, blood is di-
rected towards the muscles to prepare the body for ‘fight or flight’. Fatty (glycogen)
stores are broken down to release more glucose into the blood. The very different
stimuli that this dog experiences will result in a very different response to the sound
of the bell. It will not just think differently. Quite apart from logical rational re-
sponses, the physiology will change: the dog will feel frightened. The amygdala part
of the brain is known to be involved in the feelings of emotions, markedly fear
[LeDoux, 2008].

January 26, 2024
1:32
eprint
6
Mark Hadley
What it feels like when the respective dogs hear the same bell sound is very
different. It is a subjective experience, but we can explain it with medical knowl-
edge. By extracting the logical elements, we can create a model of what it feels
like. Stimuli excite receptors which in turn trigger associative memory that directly
causes changes in physiology.
4. The Generic Model
The examples are well known and familiar to us. The medical pathways in humans,
and animals, have been studied and identified to a greater or lesser extent. We
propose a generic model built with abstract functional units but based on current
knowledge and research.
The key feature is that the subject has a body, a physiology. Some signals from
the body give information about the state of the body. This set of information is
what it feels like. External sensory inputs trigger associative memory that partially
recalls a mixture of past physiological states. The state of the body changes directly,
and automatically, as a consequence of the structure of the associative memory. It
is not an analytical or rational process. The subject senses the change to their body
giving meaning to what it feels like.
5. The model with Subtle Stimuli
The examples above are gross. Very crude responses to strong stimuli. We stated
with these examples because they are common to us all and relatively easy to
describe with the English language. But the model applies to, and explains, all
subjective experiences. What does it feel like to see red? It is subjective, it is different
for different individuals. Even when individuals share the same factual information
about red, how they feel can be different - their physiology changes in an individual
way. Here it is unlikely to be a dramatic change to fundamental processes but a
more nuanced subtle effect. Our associative memory recalls experiences associated
with the red stimulus at the eyes. It is a parallel process, many historic experiences
will be recalled, and with each one, a subset of physiological parameters will be
recalled and moderated. The exact mix will be different for different individuals.
The recalled physiology is what red feels like to that individual.
We can readily construct examples of different red feelings. If red is associated
with the color of your happy family home or the color of hills near where you
were brought up. Then the hormones associated with pleasure and comfort will
increase - dopamine, serotonin, and endorphins. Conversely you will be calm because
hormones associated with stress are suppressed (cortisol, adrenaline). You will feel
relaxed and happy. In contrast you may associate red with danger, blood, and
distressful incidents.
As a further level of complexity, the red stimulus is unlikely to be isolated, it will
be presented as just one of a mix of stimuli interacting with all your senses. The
associative memory will recall a whole cocktail of physiological symptoms, some

January 26, 2024
1:32
eprint
A generic model of consciousness
7
reinforcing, others contradictory. In medical and psychology research the complex-
ity is unhelpful and experimental design tries to reduce it, but to understand the
subtlety of what it feels like the richness needs to be acknowledged.
As another example, consider looking at a picture of a loved one vs a stranger.
We all know that distinction and can measure it objectively with hormones concen-
trations, blood pressure etc. This pathway from stimulus to physiological state is
medically well known and testable. It is an example that is clearly subjective and
can also vary with time for the same individual.
In summary, what it feels like to see red is a subtle change in physiological
parameters such as hormone concentrations. That change is created automatically
from the complex patterns of interconnection in the individual’s associative memory.
Stimuli
“How are you 
feeling…?”
Associative memory
Associative memory
and rational 
Processing
Physiology
Associative memory
Associative 
memory
“I feel  …”
Goal Related 
behavior
Fig. 1. Schematic model of consciousness.
Stimuli acting through associative memory, directly influence physiology.
Selected signals from the physiology give feelings which can in principle be articulated in a rational
way
Consciousness will be recognised by behavior and and language influenced by the feelings.
6. Discussion
We have constructed and described a generic model of what it feels like. We have
an implementation of subjective experience which many philosophers consider to be

January 26, 2024
1:32
eprint
8
Mark Hadley
the essence of consciousness. We can now make several illuminating observations
6.1. Consciousness is graduated
Consciousness is graded. It depends upon the size of the associative memory, the
richness of the physiology and the measure of the interactions between them. The
components of the model have a breadth that can vary between agents, creatures,
organisms etc. The components can vary in complexity, from humans down to a
point where it not so much vanishes but instead has little or no value or interest.
This addresses a major deficiency in the philosophy literature where there is no
agreement about scope of consciousness.
6.2. Evolution
It is sometimes argued that consciousness serves no purpose, we could exist without
it. Such an argument adds to the mystery of the subject. We disagree. We have
evolved from much simpler mammals with limited ability for rational thought or
analysis and certainly unable to handle abstract concepts. But a mouse, for example,
must respond to its surroundings. There are times and places where it is appropriate
to gather food, eat, sleep, reproduce, fight or flee from danger. The mouse must
recognize these places, the environmental signals must be noticed and interpreted.
But simple recognition is inadequate, knowing it is in danger is not sufficient for
survival. It needs more than information. To survive its body must be ready for
the situation. The signals need to trigger appropriate physiological changes. There
will be a feeling associated with places and other stimuli. As those feelings and
experiences accumulate, they will fashion and adjust links in associative memory
to make the mouse more successful.
Conscious experiences, what it feels like, has evolved to allow more primitive
creatures to recognise situations and prepare their bodies appropriately. It is essen-
tial for survival. It is an implementation of a vital control system that is adaptive
and immediately responsive, but does not require rational analysis. It has both pre-
set responses from birth, but associative memory allows the responses to be refined
and more effective based on patterns of experience.
6.3. Goal related feelings
Humans and animals, presumably through evolution, have primal feelings that are
survival related. Consider the obvious: hunger, thirst, fear, pain, arousal. Geneti-
cally we try to satisfy hunger and thirst, respond to arousal and minimise fear and
pain. The feelings control our behavior. It is the understandable rational behav-
ioral responses in mammals that leads to a belief that they also experience feelings
Damasio & Carvalho [2013]. Nothing in the philosophical description of subjective
experience considers subsequent behavior to be definitive or even relevant. For that
reason it is not part of the generic model presented here. However, without a doubt

January 26, 2024
1:32
eprint
A generic model of consciousness
9
any model will be judged by behavioral responses to stimuli. Language descriptions
are one part of that, but other aspects of activity are also important.
7. AI implementation of consciousness
Modern computers cannot be conscious in the sense of having conscious experience.
It is not a programming issue, it is hardware and operating system dependent. The
physiology of a computer is vastly simpler than even the most primitive of insects,
and there is no link of associative memory that causes stimuli to recall and reproduce
physiological states. That is a hardware requirement. Arguably, some complicated
distributed systems could have a significantly rich physiology. Perhaps an airbus
350. but its mechanisms that manipulate the physiology are the result of rational
decision making. It does not seem like an appropriate platform to experiment with!
But since our model is generic it can apply to even a simple computer system.
We will do that to demonstrate the model and expose the challenges of a realistic
implementation. A hardware model with a unique operating system is also a good
starting point for a simulation.
7.1. Stimuli
The stimuli are all the various inputs that the computer responds to. Some inter-
esting ones are listed below:
• Keyboard strokes
• Camera and Facial recognition etc
• Microphone
• Time of day or Ambient light
In many respects the set of computer stimuli is as substantial as for humans. Touch,
taste and smell are largely missing, but if you add internet connectivity, the range is
large, varied and subtle. The missing senses would not be a barrier to consciousness.
There is no new hardware required to provide suitable stimuli, normal computer
inputs are sufficient and overlap sufficiently with humans to have credibility.
7.2. The physiology
For a PC we can identify a few attributes that correspond to physiology. Each in
turn can be parameterised in a fairly obvious way and we can draw some playful
analogies with human states.
(1) CPU Speed
This has some comparisons with heart rate, but also wakefulness.
(2) Fan Speed
As a cooling function it would compare with blood capillary dilation

January 26, 2024
1:32
eprint
10
Mark Hadley
(3) Background processes
Largely hidden from users a CPU will be running a wide variety of housekeeping
type functions. Amongst other things they provide checks and balances and
assure smooth running of user initiated processes. There is a loose comparison
with bodily processes that maintain homeostasis in mammals.
(4) Memory usage
(5) CPU utilisation
Together with memory usage they indicate a capacity to respond to new chal-
lenges. Perhaps related to how much of our bodily functions are taking place
and using resources like energy and blood flow.
(6) Screen brightness
The screen is a vital organ for functionality but also a big consumer of energy.
(7) Battery level
The obvious analogy is with energy reserves as fat, but on a shorter timescale
would correspond to the energy available to our muscles.
The list is limited and clearly not human nor even mammalian. It is a barrier to the
model being accepted. However the limitations are a matter of scale rather than a
fundamental limitation. The model will inevitably have more credibility if it is part
of a humanoid robot. The physiology would have more familiar aspects and some
of the subsequent behavior will seem familiar.
7.3. Feelings
The essence of subjective experience is that the entity has feelings. For humans
this is being investigated by neuroscientists; they trace nerve signals that transmit
information about some aspects of the physiology to the accessible [rational] part of
the brain. The information is a major subset of the physiological parameters listed
above but not necessarily all of it.
The model, or demonstration, of artificial consciousness will not work without
language, without some articulation of feelings. Not because the language is an
essential feature in principle, but because it is the only way to reveal the presence
of feelings. The hurdle is high. Talking is a type of behavior and authors such as
Chalmers deny that consciousness is defined or characterised by behavior. From
the zombie twin argument given below it is clear that some philosophers will never
accept a Turing test for consciousness. Although, in a contrary argument, mammals
are assumed to be conscious because they behave like us. Neurological studies also
reveal sufficient similarities to justify assignments of consciousness to mammals.
For computers, there is neither a neurological or behavioral similarity to sup-
port a claim of consciousness. Quite the contrary, the physical dissimilarities will
discourage any such claim. Language is important. Accessible physiological infor-
mation needs to be named and described. In humans that language is learned and
held in associative memory linked to the physiological information. It requires a

January 26, 2024
1:32
eprint
A generic model of consciousness
11
sense of self-awareness, though perhaps little more than a computer giving system
information. The feelings need to be stated, described and related to functionality.
We will give some examples.
How are computer feelings named? We suggest three options, perhaps depending
upon the audience.
(1) Human names
An obvious choice is to map computer physiology to well known human
feelings. Tired,sleepy, excited, headache, alert, nervous ... etc. This will
inevitably have limitations in scope and lack precise mapping, but has
obvious meaning as a feeling..
(2) Computer Jargon
One could use technical computer expressions and present them as
feelings. Defragmented, high power consumption, high CPU utilisation
etc. These will be manifestly correct, but not necessarily recognised
by the public as genuine feelings. Linguistically there is some overlap
with human emotions as computer science adopted words with similar
meanings. Sleep mode for example.
(3) Original words
Since artificial physiology is distinctly non human, it is appropriate to
use different language, made-up words. For example refranched when
it has recently been scanned and virus checked. Initially this may be
an obstacle to humans understanding. However the incomprehensibility
of consciousness was famously described by Nagel when he said that
the feelings of a bat could never be understood. Using novel language
manifestly highlights the first person nature of subjective experience
and the differences with human feelings. It may even be critical in
winning a philosophical debate.
Human feelings drive behavior and fundamental goals. For a computer the cor-
respondence is limited. Like humans, survival as a functioning entity is critical and
should be emphasised. For obvious reasons, the other goal is to provide computing
power (in all its dimensions) to users as and when they need it.
7.4. Associative link
Fundamental to the model is that patterns of stimuli and physiological states are
recorded in associative memory. This memory is not used to provide information,
but to directly recall similar states. Physiology is recalled to varying degrees de-
pending on how well the current stimuli match previous events. It is not a rational,
logical or analytical process and it is not algorithmic. This fundamental objection
is to some extent undermined because, as has been explained, conventional building
blocks can be used to create associative memory.
The operation of the associative link is automatic, more like an operating system

January 26, 2024
1:32
eprint
12
Mark Hadley
interrupt than a normal program. Ctrl-Alt-Del could be compared with a stab
of pain creating automatic physiological responses. This directness of operation is
important and should be considered as essential for a realistic model. Furthermore,
an important feature of the associative link is that it learns. The learning mechanism
serves to give more subtle feelings to a wider range of stimuli. It has an increasing
memory of stimuli and the related, usually subsequent, physiology. All patterns of
stimuli are pattern matched to the current stimuli to influence the physiology. The
influence will vary in type and magnitude depending on the degree the patterns
match. In a sense we are describing a computer where the operating system itself
monitors all incoming stimuli and learns.
We can give some illustrative examples. A user frequently logs on to the com-
puter at about 10pm and starts an intensive spell of gaming. It is CPU intensive,
high processor speeds are required and memory demands are high. The computer
warms up and cooling fan speeds are increased. You could give that set of parame-
ters a name. Associated linguistic terms could be: In human terms excited computer
terms preparing for high utilisation and perhaps a new adjective narksious. Now
that a pattern has been established, facial recognition and the time of day would
trigger pre-emptive changes: clearing out unnecessary functions, raising clock speed
and turning on cooling fans. There is now a feeling related to the sight of the user
at that time of day. An analogy might be adrenaline before participating in a sports
match. As you can see the response has some value and aspects might already be
programmed in a rational algorithmic way. However, with this construction any
response is learnt and becomes automatic.
Maybe a user regularly takes the computer with them on the train. CPU activ-
ity is low but the work continues for an extended period until low battery forces
powersaving modes and then a shutdown. Once the pattern is established, the asso-
ciative memory would link user. location and perhaps time of day and invoke some
powersaving modes before they are needed. In language terms it has similarities to
adrenalin flow and anxiety, in computer terms it is obviously power saving or for a
new term perhaps strential.
The first example is linked to the goal of providing computing power to the user.
The second is also a survival function. Other computer goals reside in user programs
as part of the rational processing. To extend the model these goals would need to
correspond with a physiological parameter described by a feeling. This is either
a major new hardware requirement or alternatively requires a dedicated system
function to monitor the goal. The system function then needs to be presented a part
of the physiology. The latter would inevitably blur the line between user algorithms
and feelings.
8. AI simulation of consciousness
Stepping back from an implementation, simulating consciousness should be straight-
forward. Certainly, a substantial amount of work, but the components and structure

January 26, 2024
1:32
eprint
A generic model of consciousness
13
should now be clear. It should be possible to produce a simulation indistinguishable
from a real consciousness.
An important choice is between simulating human consciousness, machine hard-
ware consciousness, animal consciousness or a deliberately alien consciousness. In
each case the starting point is to define a full set of physiology components with
parametrised activity levels. Secondly, define a set of feelings and language terms
related to the physiological states.
The richness, and one subjective aspect, comes from the associations between
stimuli and the recall of past states. Ideally this should be a learned association
starting from initial primitive survival related responses. It is unlikely that these
associations can be harvested from the internet because that lacks the individual-
ity. Stimuli invoke different feelings in different people. An average over the whole
population is unlikely to be effective.
The simulation can then receive a stimulus, recall a past physiological state in
whole or part, and describe the state. As a simulation it could also independently
report on the physiology. Humans know when they are happy, but cannot give a
numerical value to their dopamine concentration - medical interventions are required
for that information. The simulation can provide both. The simulation may also be
able to explain how the association has developed. ”That reminds me of ...” Again
this will reinforce the subjective nature of the experience.
The subjective experience will be evidenced by the descriptions of feelings and
diagnostic information like physiology levels and personal history. Evidence can be
taken further by adding goals that are moderated by the feelings. ”I’m stopping
now because I’m exhausted”. ”I am delighted that you are pleased, can we do that
again?”
9. Testing
Testing will be problematic. Consciousness, as subjective experience, is defined as
a first person phenomenon. It could be said that the very concept is designed to
be inaccessible to scientific explanation, to preserve at least one aspect of the mind
that science cannot explain away. Indeed Chalmers explicitly extracts other aspects
or meanings for the term consciousness, he labels them as the easy problems and
leaves the mysterious subjective experience as the hard problem for philosophers
to debate. It is remains a hugely influential philosophical approach. However much
the philosophical arguments are countered or neuroscience evidence accumulates, it
is the subjective experience concept that continues to be presented as an objection
to any AI progress. Of course the converse is also true: strict adherents of the first
person perspective will not be able to refute claims of artificial consciousness.
But there is some realistic hope. In practice assignations of consciousness are
widely attributed to creatures, frustratingly without justification. And all authors
assume their readers are conscious. They do so despite advocating a theory of
consciousness with supposedly no behavioral characteristics, and also while denying

January 26, 2024
1:32
eprint
14
Mark Hadley
the possibility of a reductionist approach. It is this illogical and contradictory aspect
of the philosophical arguments that gives an opening to tests and demonstrations.
Language and behavior will give acceptance and they are the only way a model can
be tested.
Whatever the implementation or simulation the following linguistic constructs
are essential:
(1) I’m in this state so I am feeling xyz Relates physiology to feelings, preferably
supported by evidence of the state. E.g. I’m feeling tired because I’m unplugged
and my battery is low The battery state can be independently verified.
(2) I’m doing this because I feel xyz. Relates the feelings to goals and behavior. E.g.
I’m turning down screen brightness because I feel tired
(3) Regarding a stimulus that makes me feel xyz relates a feeling to the stimuli
that caused it, preferably supported by evidence of the resultant physiology.
And possibly explained by how that association has been formed - some insight
into the learning process and consequential associative memory. E.g. It’s 9am
and I’m at the station, I am feeling a bit tired Frequently this time and place
has led to a long period before being charged. You might say that my battery
level is high but it does not feel like that. This distinguishes a physical battery
level to a feeling that the battery level is inadequate. An extreme example is a
person with a high fever being hot, but feeling cold and shivering.
The more that feelings are related to goals and consequential behavior, the
more feelings will appear to be real. And the existence of feelings and subjective
experience becomes not just a plausible explanation, but also the simplest one.
10. Conclusion
We have taken the hard philosophical model of consciousness, called subjective
experience. We have added to the neurological explanations and extracted a generic
model. There are many claims and arguments that this is not possible. In the
appendix we explain how this model is a counterexample to the main philosophical
arguments. We have also added the extra features of language, goals and behavior
so that the models can be readily demonstrated and tested.
Human consciousness can be simulated. Artificial consciousnesses can be simu-
lated and explained. With specific hardware a conscious computer could be created
and demonstrated. It could be argued that fiction, films, even cartoons, show that
the public will recognise language and behavior and label it as consciousness.
The cultural and academic relevance is profound. But as a utilitarian feature
to enhance computer systems it is hard to see any value. We can look at evolution
and consider feelings as an essential component of a primitive goal seeking control
system. A system that works without abstract thought or logical analysis. We might
owe our human existence to this structure, but the power of logical analysis surely
makes it redundant in artificial systems.

January 26, 2024
1:32
eprint
A generic model of consciousness
15
Appendix A.
Counterexamples
We have a model of human consciousness that can be simulated and implemented
to some degree. There are claims that this is impossible and such a model cannot
be found. Whether the reader regards subjective experience as the essence of con-
sciousness or not, it is interesting and instructive to relate the model to prevailing
arguments that it is not possible to construct a scientific model of consciousness.
The strength of the intractable philosophical problem of consciousness is not just
the puzzle of what it feels like, but various well-known arguments why it cannot
be explained by science. The following arguments are certainly controversial, and
they have been criticized and challenged. Despite criticisms and biomedical research
these arguments persist to this day. Given that we have a specific model we can
either support them or offer a counterexample.
10.1. Penrose
Penrose [1991] argues that we cannot explain consciousness with information pro-
cessing algorithms running on computers. Regardless of how convincing his argu-
ments are, we agree. We reach the same conclusion. The consciousness of subjective
experience requires an intimate link between the associative memory in our brain
and the physiology of our bodies. Storing recalling and processing information is
not sufficient. The model links our physical selves with our mental states.
10.2. Chalmers’ twin
Chalmers [1997] constructs an argument based on the logical possibility (actually,
he makes an argument that is lengthy, detailed and contains many subtleties) that
he has a twin, physically identical but without consciousness. The conceivability
of such a twin is considered as proof that a physical explanation cannot therefore
distinguish the conscious from the unconscious individual. We claim that this ar-
gument is intrinsically a circular argument, it admits simple counterexamples and
it is arguably inconsistent with itself.
We agree with Minsky [1998] that Chalmers twin argument fails because it is a
circular argument. The logical possibility of Chalmers’ twin, physically identical but
not being conscious, presumes consciousness does not have a physical explanation.
If a physical explanation for consciousness existed, then either the twin could not
exist or would necessarily have different physical characteristics. We offer a physical
explanation. Associative memory coupled with physiology gives rise to subjective
experience. Any individual with those characteristics would be conscious and a twin
with an identical history, would have the same subjective experiences.
Our model answers Chalmers simply. This is a physical model of consciousness.
Your twin without consciousness is not possible.

January 26, 2024
1:32
eprint
16
Mark Hadley
10.3. Nagel’s feeling like a bat
Nagel [1974] uses a perverse argument that if we could understand the consciousness
of a bat then we would have the same feelings as a bat. Since this is clearly impossible
for a human, he concludes that we cannot understand consciousness. For all other
phenomena an understanding would explain why we can or cannot reproduce it.
Understanding how a bird flies, does not imply that we will then be able to fly.
Quite the opposite, it explains why we cannot fly (Our power to weight ratio is too
low). We do not agree that subjective experience is fundamentally different as a
phenomenon.
Our model applies to humans, but because it is generic in nature, it can apply
to other, very different individuals. It is universal. The model applies to individuals
with very different physiology and explains why we cannot feel like a bat. Our
physiology is different. In that we agree with Nagel. The associative memory of a
bat records and recalls very different physiological responses. Responses that would
be impossible for a human.
What we have in common with Nagel is an agreement that we cannot have
experiences that feel like the experiences a bat has. We cannot have the same
subjective experiences as a bat. The different physiology does indeed prevent that,
but the model does apply to a bat, it does explain how bats will have feelings
associated with their experiences.
10.4. Color inversion
Color inversion is another Chalmers’ argument related to the Zombie argument
but more limited in scope. It is argued that a person could have red and blue
experiences inverted without there being any physical change. Hence the physical
details cannot explain personal experiences. In our model a person could have red
and blue experiences inverted. If their associative memory connected the visual
stimulus of blue with a history of warm pleasurable events and then recalled, to
some extent, the hormones and physiology of warmth and comfort. That would be
the opposite of many people, but quite possible.
However, the model only achieves color inversion due to physical differences. We
claim that the inversion of color experiences is not possible without corresponding
physical changes in the brain or body. The alternative is absurd. That a person has
a red stimulus and associative memory recalls warm comfortable experiences. The
warm comfortable physiology is recalled. For example, dopamine levels increase.
The person would have the physiological symptoms of warmth. Could they then
feel cold? It is not just implausible, the semantic definition of feeling cold is having
the physiology associated with low temperatures.
The argument only has some credibility because the physiological changes on
seeing a color are relatively weak. If the argument were applied to heat or cold, or
Pavlov’s dogs with pleasure and fear, it would be clear that the subjective experience
is not independent of the physical changes in the physiology.

January 26, 2024
1:32
eprint
