Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 35 (2009) 557-591
Submitted 11/08; published 07/09
Optimal Value of Information in Graphical Models
Andreas Krause

California Institute of Technology,
1200 E California Blvd.,
Pasadena, CA 91125 USA
Carlos Guestrin

Carnegie Mellon University,
5000 Forbes Ave.,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
Abstract
Many real-world decision making tasks require us to choose among several expensive obser-
vations. In a sensor network, for example, it is important to select the subset of sensors that is
expected to provide the strongest reduction in uncertainty. In medical decision making tasks, one
needs to select which tests to administer before deciding on the most effective treatment. It has
been general practice to use heuristic-guided procedures for selecting observations. In this paper,
we present the ﬁrst efﬁcient optimal algorithms for selecting observations for a class of probabilistic
graphical models. For example, our algorithms allow to optimally label hidden variables in Hidden
Markov Models (HMMs). We provide results for both selecting the optimal subset of observations,
and for obtaining an optimal conditional observation plan.
Furthermore we prove a surprising result: In most graphical models tasks, if one designs an
efﬁcient algorithm for chain graphs, such as HMMs, this procedure can be generalized to poly-
tree graphical models. We prove that the optimizing value of information is NPPP-hard even for
polytrees. It also follows from our results that just computing decision theoretic value of informa-
tion objective functions, which are commonly used in practice, is a #P-complete problem even on
Naive Bayes models (a simple special case of polytrees).
In addition, we consider several extensions, such as using our algorithms for scheduling obser-
vation selection for multiple sensors. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on several
real-world datasets, including a prototype sensor network deployment for energy conservation in
buildings.
1. Introduction
In probabilistic reasoning, where one can choose among several possible but expensive observations,
it is often a central issue to decide which variables to observe in order to most effectively increase
the expected utility (Howard, 1966; Howard & Matheson, 1984; Mookerjee & Mannino, 1997;
Lindley, 1956). In a medical expert system, for example, multiple tests are available, and each test
has a different cost (Turney, 1995; Heckerman, Horvitz, & Middleton, 1993). In such systems,
it is thus important to decide which tests to perform in order to become most certain about the
patient’s condition, at a minimum cost. Occasionally, the cost of testing can even exceed the value
of information for any possible outcome, suggesting to discontinue any further testing.
The following running example motivates our research and is empirically evaluated in Section 6.
Consider a temperature monitoring task, where wireless temperature sensors are distributed across a
c⃝2009 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

KRAUSE & GUESTRIN
building. The task is to become most certain about the temperature distribution, whilst minimizing
energy expenditure, a critically constrained resource (Deshpande, Guestrin, Madden, Hellerstein, &
Hong, 2004). Such ﬁne-grained building monitoring is required to obtain signiﬁcant energy savings
(Singhvi, Krause, Guestrin, Garrett, & Matthews, 2005).
Many researchers have suggested the use of myopic (greedy) approaches to select observa-
tions (Scheffer, Decomain, & Wrobel, 2001; van der Gaag & Wessels, 1993; Dittmer & Jensen,
1997; Bayer-Zubek, 2004; Kapoor, Horvitz, & Basu, 2007). Unfortunately, in general, this heuris-
tic does not provide any performance guarantees. In this paper, we present efﬁcient algorithms,
which guarantee optimal nonmyopic value of information in chain graphical models. For example,
our algorithms can be used for optimal active labeling of hidden states in Hidden Markov Mod-
els (HMMs, Baum & Petrie, 1966). We address two settings: subset selection, where the optimal
subset of observations is obtained in an open-loop fashion, and conditional plans, a sequential,
closed-loop plan where the observation strategy depends on the actual value of the observed vari-
ables (c.f., Figure 1). To our knowledge, these are the ﬁrst optimal and efﬁcient algorithms for
observation selection and diagnostic planning based on value of information for this class of graph-
ical models. For both settings, we address the ﬁltering and the smoothing versions: Filtering is
important in online decision making, where our decisions can only utilize observations made in the
past. Smoothing arises for example in structured classiﬁcation tasks, where there is no temporal
dimension in the data, and hence all observations can be taken into account. We call our approach
VOIDP as the algorithms use Dynamic Programming to optimize Value of Information. We eval-
uate our VOIDP algorithms empirically on three real-world datasets, and also show that they are
well-suited for interactive classiﬁcation of sequential data.
Most inference problems in graphical models, such as computing marginal distributions and
ﬁnding the most probable explanation, that can be solved efﬁciently for chain-structured graphs,
can also be solved efﬁciently for polytrees. We prove that the problem of selecting the best k
observations for maximizing decision theoretic value of information is NPPP-complete even for
discrete polytree graphical models, giving a complexity theoretic classiﬁcation of a core artiﬁcial
intelligence problem. NPPP-complete problems are believed to be signiﬁcantly harder than NP-
complete or even #P-complete problems commonly arising in the context of graphical models. We
furthermore prove that just evaluating decision-theoretic value of information objective functions is
#P-complete even in the case of Naive Bayes models, a simple special case of polytree graphical
models that is frequently used in practice (c.f., Domingos & Pazzani, 1997).
Unfortunately, these hardness results show that, while the problem of scheduling a single sen-
sor can be optimally solved using our algorithms, the problem of scheduling multiple, correlated
sensors is wildly intractable. Nevertheless, we show how our VOIDP algorithms for single sensor
scheduling can be used to approximately optimize a multi-sensor schedule. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of this approach on a real sensor network testbed for building management.
In summary, we provide the following contributions:
• We present the ﬁrst optimal algorithms for nonmyopically computing and optimizing value
of information on chain graphical models.
• We show that optimizing decision theoretic value of information is NPPP-hard for discrete
polytree graphical models. Just computing decision theoretic value of information is #P-
hard even for Naive Bayes models.
558

OPTIMAL VALUE OF INFORMATION IN GRAPHICAL MODELS
Tmorn =high?
Tnoon =high?
Teve =high?
yes
no
Figure 1: Example of a conditional plan.
• We present several extensions of our algorithms, e.g., to tree graphical models with few
leaves, and to multiple correlated chains (for multi-sensor scheduling).
• We extensively evaluate our algorithms on several real-world problems, including sensor
scheduling on a real sensor testbed and active labeling in bioinformatics and Natural Lan-
guage Processing.
2. Problem Statement
We will assume that the state of the world is described by a collection of random variables
XV = (X1, . . . , Xn), where V is an index set. For example, V could denote a set of locations, and Xi
models the temperature reading of a sensor placed at location i
∈
V.
For a subset
A = {i1, . . . , ik} ⊆V, we use the notation XA to refer to the random vector XA = (Xi1, . . . , Xik).
While some of our algorithms extend to continuous distributions, we generally assume that the vari-
ables XV are discrete. We take a Bayesian approach, and assume a prior probability distribution
P(XV) over the outcomes of the variables. Suppose we select a subset of the variables, XA (for
A ⊆V), and observe XA = xA. For example, A is the set of locations where we place sensors,
or a set of medical tests we decide to perform. After observing the realization of these variables
XA = xA, we can compute the posterior distribution over all variables P(XV | XA = xA). Based
on this posterior probability we obtain a reward R(P(XV | XA = xA)). For example, this re-
ward function could depend on the uncertainty (e.g., measured by the entropy) of the distribution
P(XV | XA = xA). We will describe several examples in more detail below.
In general, when selecting observation, we will not know ahead of time what observations we
will make. Instead, we only have a distribution over the possible observations. Hence, we will be
interested in the expected reward, where we take the expectation over the possible observations.
When optimizing the selection of variables, we can consider different settings: In subset selec-
tion, our goal is to pick a subset A∗⊆V of the variables, maximizing
A∗= argmax
A
X
xA
P(XA = xA)R(P(XV | XA = xA)),
(1)
where we impose some constraints on the set A we are allowed to pick (e.g., on the number of
variables that can be selected, etc.). In the subset selection setting, we commit to the selection of
the variables before we get to see their realization.
Instead, we can also sequentially select one variable after the other, letting our choice depend
on the observations made in the past. In this setting, we would like to ﬁnd a conditional plan π∗
559

KRAUSE & GUESTRIN
that maximizes
π∗= argmax
π
X
xV
P(xV)R(P(XV | Xπ(xV) = xπ(xV))).
(2)
Hereby, π is a conditional plan that can select a different set of variables for each possible state of
the world xV. We use the notation π(xV) ⊆V to refer to the subset of variables selected by the
conditional plan π in state XV = xV. Figure 1 presents an example of a conditional plan for the
temperature monitoring example. We will deﬁne the notion of conditional planning more formally
in Section 4.2.
This general setup of selecting observations goes back in the decision analysis literature to
the notion of value of information by Howard (1966) and in the statistical literature to the notion
of Bayesian Experimental Design by Lindley (1956). In this paper, we refer to the Problems (1)
and (2) as the problems of optimizing value of information.
In this paper, we show how the complexity of solving these value of information problems de-
pend on the properties of the probability distribution P. We give the ﬁrst algorithms for optimally
solving value of information for an interesting and challenging class of distributions including Hid-
den Markov Models. We also present hardness results showing that optimizing value of information
is wildly intractable (NPPP-complete) even for probability distributions for which efﬁcient infer-
ence is possible (even for Naive Bayes models and discrete polytrees).
2.1 Optimization Criteria
In this paper, we will consider a class of local reward1 functions Ri, which are deﬁned on the
marginal probability distributions of the variables Xi. This class has the computational advantage
that local rewards can be evaluated using probabilistic inference techniques. The total reward will
then be the sum of all local rewards.
Let A be a subset of V. Then P(Xj | XA = xA) denotes the marginal distribution of vari-
able Xj conditioned on observations XA = xA. For example, in our temperature monitoring
application, Xj models the temperature at location j ∈V. The conditional marginal distribution
P(Xj = xj | XA = xA) then models the conditional distribution of the temperature at location j
after observing the temperature at locations A ⊆V.
For classiﬁcation purposes, it can be more appropriate to consider the max-marginals
P max(Xj = xj | XA = xA) = max
xV P(XV = xV, Xj = xj | XA = xA),
that is, for Xj set to value xj, the probability of the most probable assignment XV = xV to all
other random variables (including Xj for simplicity of notation) conditioned on the observations
XA = xA.
The local reward Rj is a functional on the probability distribution P or P max over Xj. That
is, Rj takes an entire distribution over the variable Xj and maps it to a reward value. Typically, the
reward functions will be chosen such that “certain” or “peaked” distributions obtain higher reward.
To simplify notation, we write
Rj(Xj | xA) ≜Rj(P(Xj | XA = xA))
1. Local reward functions are also widely used in additively independent utility models, (c.f., Keeney & Raiffa, 1976).
560

OPTIMAL VALUE OF INFORMATION IN GRAPHICAL MODELS
to denote the reward for variable Xj upon observing XA = xA, and
Rj(Xj | XA) ≜
X
xA
P(XA = xA)Rj(Xj | xA)
to refer to expected local rewards, where the expectation is taken over all assignments xA to the
observations A. Important local reward functions include:
Residual entropy.
If we set
Rj(Xj | xA) = −H(Xj | xA) =
X
xj
P(xj | xA) log2 P(xj | xA),
the objective in the optimization problem becomes to minimize the sum of residual entropies. Op-
timizing this reward function attempts to reduce the uncertainty in predicting the marginals Xi. We
choose this reward function in our running example to measure the uncertainty about the tempera-
ture distribution.
Joint entropy.
Instead of minimizing the sum of residual entropies P
i H(Xi), we can also at-
tempt to minimize the joint entropy of the entire distribution,
H(XV) = −
X
xV
P(xV) log2 P(xV).
Note, that the joint entropy depends on the full probability distribution P(XV), rather than on the
marginals P(Xi), and hence it is not local. Nevertheless, we can exploit the chain rule for the joint
entropy H(XB) of a set of random variables B = {1, . . . , m} (c.f., Cover & Thomas, 1991),
H(XB) = H(X1) + H(X2 | X1) + H(X3 | X1, X2) + · · · + H(Xm | X1, . . . , Xm−1).
Hence, if we choose the local reward functions Rj(Xj | XA) = −H(Xj | X1, . . . , Xj−1, XA), we
can optimize a non-local reward function (the joint entropy) using only local reward functions.
Decision-theoretic value of information.
The concept of local reward functions also includes
the concept of decision theoretic value of information. The notion of value of information is widely
used (c.f., Howard, 1966; Lindley, 1956; Heckerman et al., 1993), and is formalized, e.g., in the
context of inﬂuence diagrams (Howard & Matheson, 1984) and Partially Observable Markov Deci-
sion Processes (POMDPs, Smallwood & Sondik, 1973). For each variable Xj, let Aj be a ﬁnite set
of actions. Also, let Uj : Aj × dom Xj →R be a utility function mapping an action a ∈Aj and an
outcome x ∈dom Xj to a real number. The maximum expected utility principle states that actions
should be selected as to maximize the expected utility,
EUj(a | XA = xA) =
X
xj
P(xj | xA)Uj(a, xj).
The more certain we are about Xj, the more economically we can choose our action. This idea is
captured by the notion of value of information, where we choose our local reward function
Rj(Xj | xA) = max
a
EUj(a | xA).
561

KRAUSE & GUESTRIN
Margin for structured prediction.
We can also consider the margin of conﬁdence:
Rj(Xj | xA) = P max(x∗
j | xA) −P max(¯xj | xA),
where
x∗
j = argmax
xj
P max(xj | xA) and ¯xj = argmax
xj̸=x∗
j
P max(xj | xA),
which describes the margin between the most likely outcome and the closest runner up. This reward
function is very useful for structured classiﬁcation purposes, as shown in Section 6.
Weighted mean-squared error.
If the variables are continuous, we might want to minimize the
mean squared error in our prediction. We can do this by choosing
Rj(Xj | xA) = −wj Var(Xj | xA),
where
Var(Xj | xA) =
Z
P(xj | xA)

xj −
Z
x′
jP(x′
j | xA)dx′
j
2
dxj
is the conditional variance of Xj given XA = xA, and wj is a weight indicating the importance of
variable Xj.
Monitoring for critical regions (Hotspot sampling).
Suppose we want to use sensors for detect-
ing ﬁre. More generally, we want to detect, for each j, whether Xj ∈Cj, where Cj ⊆dom Xj is a
“critical region” for variable Xj. Then the local reward function
Rj(Xj | xA) = P(Xj ∈Cj | xA)
favors observations A that maximize the probability of detecting critical regions.
Function optimization (Correlated bandits).
Consider a setting where we have a collection of
random variables XV taking numerical values in some interval [−m, m], and, after selecting some
of the variables, we get the reward P
i xi. This setting arises if we want to optimize an unknown
(random) function, where evaluating the function is expensive. In this setting, we are encouraged to
only evaluate the function where it is likely to obtain high values. We can maximize our expected
total reward if we choose the local reward function
Rj(Xj | xA) =
Z
xjP(xj | xA)dxj,
i.e., the expectation of variable Xj given observations xA. This setting of optimizing a random
function can also be considered a version of the classical k-armed bandit problem with correlated
arms. More details about the relationship with bandit problems are given in Section 8.
These examples demonstrate the generality of our notion of local reward. Note that most exam-
ples apply to continuous distributions just as well as for discrete distributions.
562

OPTIMAL VALUE OF INFORMATION IN GRAPHICAL MODELS
2.2 Cost of Selecting Observations
We also want to capture the constraint that observations are expensive. This can mean that each
observation Xj has an associated positive penalty Cj that effectively decreases the reward. In our
example, we might be interested in trading off accuracy with sensing energy expenditure. Alterna-
tively, it is also possible to deﬁne a budget B for selecting observations, where each one is associated
with an integer cost βj. Here, we want to select observations whose sum cost is within the budget,
but these costs do not decrease the reward. In our running example, the sensors could be powered
by solar power, and regain a certain amount of energy per day, which allows a certain amount of
sensing. Our formulation of the optimization problems allows both for penalties and budgets. To
simplify notation we also write C(A) = P
j∈A Cj and β(A) = P
j∈A βj to extend C and β to sets.
Instead of ﬁxed penalties and costs per observation, both can also depend on the state of the
world. For example, in the medical domain, applying a particular diagnostic test can bear different
risks for the health of the patient, depending on the patient’s illness. The algorithms we will develop
below can be adapted to accommodate such dependencies in a straight-forward manner. We will
present details only for the conditional planning algorithm in Section 4.2.
3. Decomposing Rewards
In this section, we will present the key observation that allows us to develop efﬁcient algorithms
for nonmyopically optimizing value of information in the class of chain graphical models. The
algorithms will be presented in Section 4.
The set of random variables XV = {X1, . . . , Xn} forms a chain graphical model (a chain), if
Xi is conditionally independent of XV\{i−1,i,i+1} given Xi−1 and Xi+1. Without loss of generality
we can assume that the joint distribution is speciﬁed by the prior P(X1) of variable X1 and the
conditional probability distributions P(Xi+1 | Xi). The time series model for the temperature
measured by one sensor in our example can be formulated as a chain graphical model. Note that the
transition probabilities P(Xi+1 | Xi) are allowed to depend on the index i (i.e., the chain models
are allowed to be nonstationary). Chain graphical models have been extensively used in machine
learning and signal processing.
Consider for example a Hidden Markov Model unrolled for n time steps, i.e., V can be parti-
tioned into the hidden variables {X1, . . . , Xn} and the emission variables {Y1, . . . , Yn}. In HMMs,
the Yi are always observed and the variables Xi form a chain. In many applications, some of which
are discussed in Section 6, we can observe some of the hidden variables Xi as well, e.g., by asking
an expert, in addition to observing the emission variables. In these cases, the problem of selecting
expert labels also belongs to the class of chain graphical models addressed by this paper, since the
variables Xi form a chain conditional on the observed values of the emission variables Yi. This idea
can be generalized to the class of Dynamic Bayesian Networks where the separators between time
slices have size one, and only these separators can be selected for observation. This formulation
also includes certain conditional random ﬁelds (Lafferty, McCallum, & Pereira, 2001) which form
chains, conditional on the emission variables (the features).
Chain graphical models originating from time series have additional, speciﬁc properties: In a
system for online decision making, only observations from the past and present time steps can be
taken into account, not observations which will be made in the future. This is generally referred
to as the ﬁltering problem. In this setting, the notation P(Xi | XA) will refer to the distribution
of Xi conditional on observations in XA prior to and including time i. For structured classiﬁcation
563

KRAUSE & GUESTRIN
Figure 2: Illustration of the decomposing rewards idea. The reward for chain 1:7 when observing
variables X1, X4 and X7 decomposes as the sum of chain 1:4 plus the reward for chain
4:7 plus the immediate reward for observing X4 minus the cost of observing X4. Hereby
for brevity we use the notation Rew(a : b) = Pb
j=a Rj(Xj | X1, X4, X7).
problems as discussed in Section 6, in general observations made anywhere in the chain must be
taken into account. This situation is usually referred to as the smoothing problem. We will provide
algorithms both for ﬁltering and smoothing.
We will now describe the key insight, which allows for efﬁcient optimization in chains. Consider
a set of observations A ⊆V. If the j variable is observed, i.e., j ∈A, then the local reward
is simply R(Xj | XA) = R(Xj | Xj). Now consider j /∈A, and let Aj be the subset of A
containing the closest ancestor (and for the smoothing problem also the closest descendant) of Xj
in XA. The conditional independence property of the graphical model implies that, given XAj, Xj
is independent of the rest of the observed variables, i.e., P(Xj | XA) = P(Xj | XAj). Thus, it
follows that R(Xj | XA) = R(Xj | XAj).
These observations imply that the expected reward of some set of observations decomposes
along the chain. For simplicity of notation, we add two independent dummy variables X0 and Xn+1,
where R0 = C0 = β0 = Rn+1 = Cn+1 = βn+1 = 0. Let A = {i0, . . . , im+1} where il < il+1,
i0 = 0 and im+1 = n + 1. Using this notation, the total reward R(A) = P
j Rj(Xj | XA) for the
smoothing case is given by:
m
X
v=0

Riv(Xiv | Xiv) −Civ +
iv+1−1
X
j=iv+1
Rj(Xj | Xiv, Xiv+1)

.
In ﬁltering settings, we simply replace Rj(Xj | Xiv, Xiv+1) by Rj(Xj | Xiv). Figure 2 illustrates
this decomposition.
4. Efﬁcient Algorithms for Optimizing Value of Information
In this section, we present algorithms for efﬁciently and nonmyopically optimizing value of infor-
mation in chain graphical models.
4.1 Efﬁcient Algorithms for Optimal Subset Selection in Chain Models
In the subset selection problem, we want to ﬁnd a most informative subset of the variables to observe
in advance, i.e., before any observations are made. In our running example, we would, before
deploying the sensors, identify k time points that are expected to provide the most informative
sensor readings according to our model.
564

OPTIMAL VALUE OF INFORMATION IN GRAPHICAL MODELS
First, deﬁne the objective function L on subsets of V by
L(A) =
n
X
j=1
Rj(Xj | XA) −C(A).
(3)
The subset selection problem is to ﬁnd the optimal subset
A∗=
argmax
A⊆V,β(A)≤B
L(A)
maximizing the sum of expected local rewards minus the penalties, subject to the constraint that the
total cost must not exceed the budget B.
We solve this optimization problem using a dynamic programming algorithm, where the chain
is broken into sub-chains using the insight from Section 3. Consider a sub-chain from variable Xa
to Xb. We deﬁne Lsm
a:b(k) to represent the expected total reward for the sub-chain Xa, . . . , Xb, in the
smoothing setting where Xa and Xb are observed, and with a budget level of k. Lflt
a:b(k) represents
the expected reward in the ﬁltering setting where only Xa is observed. More formally:
Lflt
a:b(k) =
max
A⊂{a+1...b−1}
β(A)≤k
b−1
X
j=a+1
Rj(Xj | XA, Xa) −C(A),
for the ﬁltering version, and
Lsm
a:b(k) =
max
A⊂{a+1...b−1}
β(A)≤k
b−1
X
j=a+1
Rj(Xj | XA, Xa, Xb) −C(A),
for the smoothing version. Note that in both cases, L0:n+1(B) = maxA:β(A)≤B L(A), as in Equa-
tion (3), i.e., by computing the values for La:b(k), we compute the maximum expected total reward
for the entire chain.
We can compute Lsm
a:b(k) and Lflt
a:b(k) using dynamic programming. The base case is simply:
Lflt
a:b(0) =
b−1
X
j=a+1
Rj(Xj | Xa),
for ﬁltering, and
Lsm
a:b(0) =
b−1
X
j=a+1
Rj(Xj | Xa, Xb),
for smoothing. The recursion for La:b(k) has two cases: we can choose not to spend any more of the
budget, reaching the base case, or we can break the chain into two sub-chains, selecting the optimal
observation Xj, where a < j < b. In both ﬁltering and smoothing we have
La:b(k) = max

La:b(0),
max
j:a<j<b,βj≤k {Rj(Xj | Xj) −Cj + La:j(0) + Lj:b(k −βj)}

.
565

KRAUSE & GUESTRIN
Input: Budget B, rewards Rj, costs βj and penalties Cj
Output: Optimal selection A of observation times
begin
for 0 ≤a < b ≤n + 1 do compute La:b(0);
for k = 1 to B do
for 0 ≤a < b ≤n + 1 do
sel(−1) := La:b(0);
for j = a + 1 to b −1 do sel(j) := Rj(Xj | Xj) −Cj + La:j(0) + Lj:b(k −βj);
La:b(k) = maxj∈{a+1,...,b−1,−1} sel(j);
Λa:b(k) = argmaxj∈{a+1,...,b−1,−1} sel(j);
end
end
a := 0; b := n + 1; k := B; A := ∅;
repeat
j := Λa:b(k);
if j ≥0 then A := A ∪{j}; k := k −βj;
until j = −1 ;
end
Algorithm 1: VOIDP algorithm for optimal subset selection (for both ﬁltering and smoothing).
At ﬁrst, it may seem that this recursion should consider the optimal split of the budget between the
two sub-chains. However, since the subset problem is open-loop and the order of the observations
is irrelevant, we only need to consider split points where the ﬁrst sub-chain receives zero budget.
A pseudo code implementation for this dynamic programming approach, which we call VOIDP
for subset selection is given in Algorithm 1. The algorithm ﬁlls the dynamic programming tables in
two loops, the inner loop ranging over all pairs (a, b), a < b, and the outer loop increasing k. Within
the inner loop, when computing the best reward for the sub-chain from a to b, it ﬁlls out a table sel,
where sel(j) is the reward that could be obtained by making an observation at j, and sel(−1) is the
reward if no observation is made.
In addition to computing the optimal rewards La:b(k) that could be achieved for sub-chain a : b
and budget k, the algorithm also stores the choices Λa:b(k) that realize this maximum score. Here,
Λa:b(k) is the index of the next variable that should be selected for sub-chain a : b with budget
k, or −1 if no variable should be selected. In order to recover the optimal subset for budget k,
Algorithm 1 uses the quantities Λa:b to recover the optimal subset by tracing the maximal values
occurring in the dynamic programming equations. Using an induction proof, we obtain:
Theorem 1 (Subset Selection). The dynamic programming algorithm described above computes
the optimal subset with budget B in (1
6n3 + O(n2))B evaluations of expected local rewards.
Note that if we do not consider different costs β for each variable, we would simply choose βj =
1 for all variables and compute La:b(N). Further note that if the variables Xi are continuous,
our algorithm is still applicable when the integrations and inferences necessary for computing the
expected rewards can be performed efﬁciently. This is the case, for example, in a Gaussian linear
model (i.e., the variables Xi are normally distributed) and the local reward functions are the residual
entropies or the residual variances for each variable.
566

OPTIMAL VALUE OF INFORMATION IN GRAPHICAL MODELS
4.2 Efﬁcient Algorithms for Optimal Conditional Planning in Chain Models
In the conditional plan problem, we want to compute an optimal sequential querying policy π: We
observe a variable, pay the penalty, and depending on all values observed in the past, select the next
query, proceeding as long as our budget sufﬁces. The objective is to ﬁnd the plan with the highest
expected reward, where, for each possible sequence of observations, the budget B is not exceeded.
For ﬁltering, we can only select observations in the future, whereas in the smoothing case, the next
observation can be anywhere in the chain. In our running example, the ﬁltering algorithm would be
most appropriate: The sensors would sequentially follow the conditional plan, deciding on the most
informative times to sense based on the previous observations. Figure 1 shows an example of such
a conditional plan.
4.2.1 FROM SUBSET SELECTION TO CONDITIONAL PLANNING
Note that in contrast to the subset selection setting that we considered in Section 4.1, in condi-
tional planning, the set of variables depends on the state of the world XV = xV. Hence, for each
such state, the conditional plan π could select a different set of variables, π(xV) ⊆V. As an ex-
ample, consider Figure 1, where the set of possible observations is V = {morn, noon, eve}, and
XV = {Tmorn, Tnoon, Teve}. If the world is in state xV = (high, low, high), then the conditional
plan
π
presented
in
Figure
1
would
select
π(xV)
=
{morn, eve},
whereas,
if
xV = (low, low, high), it would select π(xV) = {morn, noon}. Since the conditional plan is
a function of the (random) state of the world, it is a set-valued random variable. In order to optimize
Problem (2), we deﬁne the objective function2
J(π) =
X
xV
P(xV)
n
X
j=1

Rj(Xj | xπ(xV)) −C(π(xV))

,
i.e., the expected sum of local rewards given the observations made by plan π(xV) in state XV = xV
minus the penalties of the selected variables, where the expectation is taken with respect to the
distribution P(XV). In addition to deﬁning the value of a policy J(π), we also deﬁne the cost β(π)
β(π) = max
xV β(π(xV)),
as maximum cost β(A) (as deﬁned in Section 2.2) of any set A = π(xV) that could be selected by
the policy π, in any state of the world XV = xV.
Based on this notation, our goal is to ﬁnd a policy π∗such that
π∗= argmax
π∈Π
J(π) such that β(π) ≤B,
i.e., a policy that has maximum value, and is guaranteed to never have cost exceeding our budget
B. Hereby Π is the class of sequential policies (i.e., those, where the observations are chosen
sequentially, only based on observations that have been previously made).
It will be useful to introduce the following notation:
J(xA; k) = max
π∈Π J(π | XA = xA) such that β(π) ≤k,
(4)
2. Recall that, in the ﬁltering setting, R(Xj | xπ(xV )) ≜R(Xj | xA′), where A′ = {t ∈π(xV) s.t. t ≤j}, i.e., only
observations from the past are taken into account.
567

KRAUSE & GUESTRIN
where
J(π | XA = xA) =
X
xV
P(xV | XA = xA)
n
X
j=1

Rj(Xj | xπ(xV)) −C(π(xV))

.
Hence, J(xA; k) is the best possible reward that can be achieved by any sequential policy with cost
at most k, after observing XA = xA. Using this notation, our goal is to ﬁnd the optimal plan with
reward J(∅; B).
The value function J satisﬁes the following recursion. The base case considers the exhausted
budget:
J(xA; 0) =
X
j∈V
Rj(Xj | xA) −C(A).
For the recursion, it holds that
J(xA; k) = max


J(xA; 0), max
j /∈A



X
xj
P(xj | xA)J(xA, xj; k −βj)





,
(5)
i.e., the best one can do in state XA = xA with budget k is to either stop selecting variables, or
chose the best next variable and act optimally thereupon.
Note that we can easily allow the cost βj depend on the state xj of variable Xj. In this case, we
would simply replace βj by βj(xj), and deﬁne J(XA, r) = −∞whenever r < 0. Equivalently, we
can let the penalty C(A) depend on the state by replacing C(A) by C(xA).
Relationship to ﬁnite-horizon Markov Decision Processes (MDPs).
Note that the function
J(xA; k) deﬁned in (4) is analogous to the concept of a value function in Markov Decision Pro-
cesses (c.f., Bellman, 1957): In ﬁnite-horizon MDPs, the value function V (s; k) models the maxi-
mum expected reward obtainable when starting in state s and performing k actions. For this value
function it holds that
V (s; k) = R(s, k) + max
a
X
s′
P(s′ | s, a)V (s′; k −1),
where P(s′ | s, a) is the probability of transiting to state s′ when performing action a in state s,
and R(s, k) is the immediate reward obtained in state s if k steps are still left. This recursion,
which is similar to Eq. (5), is exploited by the value iteration algorithm for solving MDPs. The
conditional planning problem with unit observation cost (i.e., β(A) = |A|) could be modeled as a
ﬁnite-horizon MDP, where states correspond to observed evidence XA = xA, actions correspond
to observing variables (or not making any observation) and transition probabilities are given by the
probability of observing a particular instantiation of the selected variable. The immediate reward is
R(s, k) = 0 for k > 0, and R(s, 0) is the expected reward (in the value of information problem) of
observing assignment s (i.e., R(P(XV | s)) −C(s)). If all observations have unit cost, then for this
MDP, it holds that V (xA; k) = J(xA; k). Unfortunately, in the conditional planning problem, since
the state of the MDP is uniquely determined by the observed evidence XA = xA, the state space is
exponentially large. Hence, existing algorithms for solving MDPs exactly (such as value iteration)
cannot be applied to solve large value of information problems. In Section 4.2.2, we develop an
efﬁcient dynamic programming algorithm for conditional planning in chain graphical models that
avoids this exponential increase in complexity.
568

OPTIMAL VALUE OF INFORMATION IN GRAPHICAL MODELS
4.2.2 DYNAMIC PROGRAMMING FOR OPTIMAL CONDITIONAL PLANNING IN CHAINS
We propose a dynamic programming algorithm for obtaining the optimal conditional plan that is
similar to the subset algorithm presented in Section 4.1. Again, we utilize the decomposition of
rewards described in Section 3. The difference here is that the observation selection and budget
allocation now depend on the actual values of the observations. In order to compute the value
function J(xA; k) for the entire chain, we will compute the value functions Ja:b(xA; k) for sub-
chains Xa, . . . , Xb.
The base case of our dynamic programming approach deals with the zero budget setting:
Jflt
a:b (xa; 0) =
b−1
X
j=a+1
Rj(Xj | Xa = xa),
for ﬁltering, and
Jsm
a:b (xa, xb; 0) =
b−1
X
j=a+1
Rj(Xj | Xa = xa, Xb = xb),
for smoothing. The recursion deﬁnes Ja:b(xa; k) (or Ja:b(xa, xb; k) for smoothing), the expected
reward for the problem restricted to the sub-chain Xa, . . . , Xb conditioned on the values of Xa = xa
(and Xb = xb for smoothing), and with budget limited by k. To compute this quantity, we again
iterate through possible split points j, such that a < j < b. Here we observe a notable difference
between the ﬁltering and the smoothing case. For smoothing, we now must consider all possible
splits of the budget between the two resulting sub-chains, since an observation at time j might
require us to make an additional, earlier observation:
Jsm
a:b (xa,xb; k) = max

Jsm
a:b (xa, xb; 0), max
a<j<b
X
xj
P(Xj = xj | Xa = xa, Xb = xb)
n
Rj(Xj | xj) −Cj(xj) +
max
0≤l≤k−βj(xj)

Jsm
a:j (xa, xj; l) + Jsm
j:b (xj, xb; k −l −βj(xj))
o
.
Looking back in time is not possible in the ﬁltering case, hence the recursion simpliﬁes to
Jflt
a:b (xa; k) = max

Jflt
a:b (xa; 0),
max
a<j<b:βj(xj)≤k
X
xj
P(Xj = xj | Xa = xa)
n
Rj(Xj | xj) −Cj(xj) + Jflt
a:j (xa; 0) + Jflt
j:b (xj; k −βj(xj))
o
.
For both Jflt and Jsm, the optimal reward is obtained by J0:n+1(∅; B) = J(∅; B) = J(π∗).
Algorithm 2 presents a pseudo code implementation for the smoothing version – the ﬁltering case
is a straight-forward modiﬁcation. We call Algorithm 2 the VOIDP algorithm for conditional plan-
ning. The algorithm will ﬁll the dynamic programming tables using three loops, the inner loop
ranging over all assignments xa, xb, the middle loop ranging over all pairs (a, b) where a < b, and
the outer loop covers increasing values of k ≤B. Within the innermost loop, the algorithm again
computes a table sel such that sel(j) is the optimal reward achievable by selecting variable j next.
569

KRAUSE & GUESTRIN
This value is now an expectation over any possible observation that variable Xj can make. Note that
for every possible instantiation Xj = xj a different allocation of the remaining budget k −βj(xj)
to the left and right sub-chain (a : j and j : b respectively) can be chosen. The quantity σ(j, xj)
tracks this optimal budget allocation.
Input: Budget B, rewards Rj, costs βj and penalties Cj
Output: Optimal conditional plan (πa:b, σa:b)
begin
for 0 ≤a < b≤n + 1, xa ∈dom Xa, xb ∈dom Xb do compute Jsm
a:b (xa, xb; 0);
for k = 1 to B do
for 0≤a<b≤n+1, xa ∈dom Xa, xb ∈dom Xb do
sel(−1) := Jsm
a:b (0);
for a < j < b do
sel(j) := 0;
for xj ∈dom Xj do
for 0 ≤l ≤k −βj(xj) do
bd(l) :=
Jsm
a:j (xa, xj; l) + Jsm
j:b (xj, xb; k −l −βj(xj));
end
sel(j) := sel(j) + P(xj | xa, xb) · [Rj(Xj | xj) −Cj(xj) + maxl bd(j)];
σ(j, xj) = argmaxl bd(j);
end
end
Jsm
a:b (k) = maxj∈{a+1,...,b−1,−1} sel(j);
πa:b(xa, xb; k) = argmaxj∈{a+1,...,b−1,−1} sel(j);
for xj ∈dom Xπa:b(k) do σa:b(xa, xb, xj; k) = σ(πa:b(k), xj);
end
end
end
Algorithm 2: VOIDP algorithm for computating an optimal conditional plan (for the smoothing
setting).
Input: Budget k, observations Xa = xa, Xb = xb, σ, π
begin
j := πa:b(xa, xb; k);
if j ≥0 then
Observe Xj = xj;
l := σa:b(xa, xb, xj; k);
Recurse with k := l, Xa = xa and Xj = xj instead of Xb = xb;
Recurse with k := k −l −βj, Xj = xj instead of Xa = xa, and Xb = xb;
end
end
Algorithm 3: Observation selection using conditional planning.
The plan itself is compactly encoded in the quantities πa:b and σa:b. Hereby, πa:b(xa, xb; k)
determines the next variable to query after observing Xa = xa and Xb = xb, and with remain-
ing budget k. σa:b(xa, xb, xj; k) determines the allocation of the budget after the new observation
Xj = xj has been made. Considering the exponential number of possible sequences of observations,
570

OPTIMAL VALUE OF INFORMATION IN GRAPHICAL MODELS
it is remarkable that the optimal plan can be represented using only polynomial space. Algorithm 3
indicates how the computed plan can be executed. The procedure is recursive, requiring the param-
eters a := 0, xa := 1, b := n + 1, xb := 1 and k := B for the initial call. In our temperature
monitoring example, we could ﬁrst collect some temperature timeseries as training data, and then
learn the chain model from this data. Ofﬂine, we would then compute the conditional plan (for the
ﬁltering setting), and encode it in the quantities πa:b and σa:b. We would then deploy the computed
plan on the actual sensor node, together with an implementation of Algorithm 3. While computa-
tion of the optimal plan (Algorithm 2) is fairly computationally expensive, the execution of the plan
(Algorithm 3) is very efﬁcient (selecting the next timestep for observation requires a single lookup
in the πa:b and σa:b tables) and hence well-suited for deployment on a small, embedded device.
We summarize our analysis in the following Theorem:
Theorem 2 (Conditional Planning). The algorithm for smoothing presented above computes an
optimal conditional plan in d3 · B2 · (1
6n3 + O(n2)) evaluations of local rewards, where d is
the maximum domain size of the random variables X1, . . . , Xn. In the ﬁltering case, the opti-
mal plan can be computed using d3 · B · (1
6n3 + O(n2)) evaluations, or, if no budget is used, in
d3 · (1
6n4 + O(n3)) evaluations.
The faster computation for the ﬁltering / no-budget case is obtained by observing that we do not
require the third maximum computation, which distributes the budget into the sub-chains.
Also, note that contrary to the algorithm for computing optimal subsets in Section 4.1, Algo-
rithm 2 only requires evaluations of the form R(Xj | XA = xA), which can in general be computed
d2 times faster than the expectations R(Xj | XA). Under this consideration, the subset selection
algorithm is in general only a factor d·B faster, even though the conditional planning algorithm has
more nested loops.
4.3 Efﬁcient Algorithms for Trees with Few Leaves
In Sections 4.1 and 4.2 we have presented dynamic programming-based algorithms that can opti-
mize value of information on chain graphical models. In fact, the key observations of Section 3 that
local rewards decompose along chains holds not just in chain graphical models, but also in trees.
More formally, a tree graphical model is a joint probability distribution P(XV) over a collection
of random variables XV if P(XV) factors as
P(XV) = 1
Z
Y
(i,j)∈E
ψi,j(Xi, Xj),
where ψi,j is a nonnegative potential function, mapping assignments to xi and xj to the nonnegative
real numbers, E ⊆V × V is a set of edges that form an undirected tree over the index set V, and Z
is a normalization constant enforcing a valid probability distribution.
The dynamic programming algorithms presented in the previous sections can be extended to
such tree models in a straightforward manner. Instead of identifying optimal subsets and conditional
plans for sub-chains, the algorithms would then select optimal subsets and plans for sub-trees of
increasing size. Note however that the number of sub-trees can grow exponentially in the number
of leaves of the tree: A star on n leaves for example has a number of subtrees that is exponential
in n. In fact, counting the number of subtrees of an arbitrary tree with n vertices is believed to
be intractable (#P-complete, Goldberg & Jerrum, 2000). However, for trees that contain only a
571

KRAUSE & GUESTRIN
small (constant) number of leaves, the number of subtrees is polynomial, and the optimal subset
and conditional plans can be computed in polynomial time.
5. Theoretical Limits
Many problems that can be solved efﬁciently for discrete chain graphical models can also be efﬁ-
ciently solved for discrete polytrees3. Examples include probabilistic inference and the most prob-
able explanation (MPE).
In Section 4.3 however we have seen that the complexity of the dynamic programming algo-
rithms for chains increases dramatically when extended to trees: The complexity increases expo-
nentially in the number of leafs of the tree.
We prove that, perhaps surprisingly, for the problem of optimizing value of information, this
exponential increase in complexity cannot be avoided, under reasonable complexity theoretic as-
sumptions. Before making this statement more formal, we brieﬂy review the complexity classes
used in our results.
5.1 Brief Review of Relevant Computational Complexity Classes
We brieﬂy review the complexity classes used in the following statements by presenting a complete
problem for each of the class. For more details see, e.g., the references by Papadimitriou (1995)
or Littman, Goldsmith, and Mundhenk (1998). The class NP contains decision problems which
have polynomial-time veriﬁable proofs. A well-known complete problem is 3SAT for which the
instances are Boolean formulas φ in conjunctive normal form containing at most three literals per
clause (3CNF form). The complexity class #P contains counting problems. A complete problem
for the class #P is #3SAT which counts the number of satisfying instances to a 3CNF formula.
PP is a decision version of the class #P: A complete problem is MAJSAT, which decides
whether a given 3CNF formula φ is satisﬁed by the majority, i.e., by more than half of all its
possible assignments. If A and B are Turing machine based complexity classes, then AB is the
complexity class derived by allowing the Turing machines deciding instances of A oracle calls to
Turing machines in B. We can intuitively think of the problems in class AB as those that can be
solved by a Turing Machine for class A, that has a special command which solves any problem in B.
PP is similar to #P in that PPP = P#P, i.e., if we allow a deterministic polynomial time Turing
machine to have access to a counting oracle, we cannot solve more complex problems than if we give
it access to a majority oracle. Combining these ideas, the class NPPP is the class of problems that
can be solved by nondeterministic polynomial time Turing machines that have access to a majority
(or a counting) oracle. A complete problem for NPPP is EMAJSAT which, given a 3CNF on
variables X1, . . . , X2n, it decides whether there exists an assignment to X1, . . . , Xn such that φ
is satisﬁed for the majority of assignments to Xn+1, . . . , X2n. NPPP has been introduced and
found to be a natural class for modeling AI planning problems in the seminal work by Littman et al.
(1998). As an example, the MAP assignment problem is NPPP-complete for general graphical
models, as shown by Park and Darwiche (2004).
The complexity classes satisfy the following set of inclusions (where the inclusions are assumed,
but not known to be strict):
P ⊆NP ⊆PP ⊆PPP = P#P ⊆NPPP.
3. Polytrees are Bayesian Networks that form trees if the edge directions are dropped.
572

OPTIMAL VALUE OF INFORMATION IN GRAPHICAL MODELS
5.2 Complexity of Computing and Optimizing Value of Information
In order to solve the optimization problems, we will most likely have to evaluate the objective
function, i.e., the expected local rewards. Our ﬁrst result states that, even if we specialize to de-
cision theoretic value of information objective functions as deﬁned in Section 2.1, this problem is
intractable even for Naive Bayes models, a special case of discrete polytrees. Naive Bayes models
are often used in classiﬁcation tasks (c.f., Domingos & Pazzani, 1997), where the class variable is
predicted from noisy observations (features), that are assumed to be conditionally independent given
the class variable. In a sense, Naive Bayes models are the “next simplest” (from the perspective of
inference) class of Bayesian networks after chains. Note that Naive Bayes models correspond to the
“stars” referred to in Section 4.3, that have a number of subtrees that is exponential in the number
of variables.
Theorem 3 (Hardness of computation for Naive Bayes models). The computation of decision
theoretic value of information functions is #P-complete even for Naive Bayes models. It is also
hard to approximate to any factor unless P = NP.
We have the immediate corollary that the subset selection problem is PP-hard for Naive Bayes
models:
Corollary 4 (Hardness of subset selection for Naive Bayes models). The problem of determining,
given a Naive Bayes model, constants c and B, cost function β and a set of decision-theoretic value
of information objective functions Ri, whether there is a subset of variables A ⊆V such that
L(A) ≥c and β(A) ≤B is PP-hard.
In fact, we can show that subset selection for arbitrary discrete polytrees (that are more general
than Naive Bayes models, but inference is still tractable) is even NPPP-complete, a complexity
class containing problems that are believed to be signiﬁcantly harder than NP or #P complete
problems. This result provides a complexity theoretic classiﬁcation of value of information, a core
AI problem.
Theorem 5 (Hardness of subset selection computation for polytrees). The problem of determin-
ing, given a discrete polytree, constants c and B, cost function β and a set of decision-theoretic
value of information objective functions Ri, whether there is a subset of variables A ⊆V such that
L(A) ≥c and β(A) ≤B is NPPP-complete.
For our running example, this implies that the generalized problem of optimally selecting k sensors
from a network of correlated sensors is most likely computationally intractable without resorting to
heuristics. A corollary extends the hardness of subset selection to the hardness of conditional plans.
Corollary 6 (Hardness of conditional planning computation for polytrees). Computing condi-
tional plans is PP-hard for Naive Bayes models and NPPP-hard for discrete polytrees.
All proofs of results in this section are stated in the Appendix. They rely on reductions of complete
problems in NP, #P and NPPP involving boolean formulae to problems of computing / optimiz-
ing value of information. The reductions are inspired by the works of Littman et al. (1998) and Park
and Darwiche (2004), but require the development of novel techniques, such as new reductions of
Boolean formulae to Naive Bayes and polytree graphical models associated with appropriate reward
functions, ensuring that observation selections lead to feasible assignments to the Boolean formulae.
573

KRAUSE & GUESTRIN
1
4
8
12
16
20
24
0
2
4
6
8
10
Number of observations
Percent improvement
Optimal conditional plan
Optimal subset
Greedy heuristic
(a) Sensor scheduling
1
2
3
4
5
6
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Number of observations
Mean margin of optimal subset
Mean margin of greedy heuristic
Mean accuracy of
optimal subset
Mean accuracy of
greedy heuristic
(b) CpG island detection
0
10
20
30
40
50
0.86
0.88
0.9
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
1
Number of observations
Mean margin
Mean F1 score
(c) Part of Speech Tagging
Figure 3: Experimental results.
(a) Temperature data: Improvement over the uniform spacing
heuristic. (b) CpG island data set: Effect of increasing the number of observations on
margin and classiﬁcation accuracy. (c) Part-of-Speech tagging data set: Effect of increas-
ing the number of observations on margin and F1 score.
6. Experiments
In this section, we evaluate our algorithms on several real world data sets. A special focus is on the
comparison of the optimal methods with the greedy heuristic and other heuristic methods for select-
ing observations, and on how the algorithms can be used for interactive structured classiﬁcation.
6.1 Temperature Time Series
The ﬁrst data set consists of temperature time series collected from a sensor network deployed at
Intel Research Berkeley (Deshpande et al., 2004) as described in our running example. Data was
continuously collected for 19 days, linear interpolation was used in case of missing samples. The
temperature was measured once every 60 minutes, and it was discretized into 10 bins of 2 degrees
Kelvin. To avoid overﬁtting, we used pseudo counts α = 0.5 when learning the model. Using
parameter sharing, we learned four sets of transition probabilities: from 12 am - 7am, 7 am - 12 pm,
12 pm - 7 pm and 7 pm - 12 am. Combining the data from three adjacent sensors, we got 53 sample
time series.
The goal of this task was to select k out of 24 time points during the day, during which sensor
readings are most informative. The experiment was designed to compare the performance of the
optimal algorithms, the greedy heuristic, and a uniform spacing heuristic, which distributed the k
observations uniformly over the day. Figure 3(a) shows the relative improvement of the optimal al-
gorithms and the greedy heuristic over the uniform spacing heuristic. The performance is measured
in decrease of expected entropy, with zero observations as the baseline. It can be seen that if k is less
than about the half of all possible observations, the optimal algorithms decreased the expected un-
certainty by several percent over both heuristics. The improvement gained by the optimal plan over
the subset selection algorithms appears to become more drastic if a large number of observations
(over half of all possible observations) is allowed. Furthermore, for a large number of observations,
the optimal subset and the subset selected by the greedy heuristic were almost identical.
574

OPTIMAL VALUE OF INFORMATION IN GRAPHICAL MODELS
6.2 CpG-Island Detection
We then studied the bioinformatics problem of ﬁnding CpG islands in DNA sequences. CpG islands
are regions in the genome with a high concentration of the cytosine-guanine sequence. These areas
are believed to be mainly located around the promoters of genes, which are frequently expressed in
the cell. In our experiment, we considered the gene loci HS381K22, AF047825 and AL133174, for
which the GenBank annotation listed three, two and one CpG islands each. We ran our algorithm
on a 50 base window at the beginning and end of each island, using the transition and emission
probabilities from Durbin, Eddy, Krogh, and Mitchison (1999) for our Hidden Markov Model, and
we used the sum of margins as reward function.
The goal of this experiment was to locate the beginning and ending of the CpG islands more
precisely by asking experts, whether or not certain bases belong to the CpG region or not. Fig-
ure 3(b) shows the mean classiﬁcation accuracy and mean margin scores for an increasing number
of observations. The results indicate that, although the expected margin scores are similar for the
optimal algorithm and the greedy heuristic, the mean classiﬁcation performance of the optimal al-
gorithm was still better than the performance of the greedy heuristic. For example, when making 6
observations, the mean classiﬁcation error obtained by the optimal algorithm is 25% lower than the
error obtained by the greedy heuristic.
6.3 Part-of-Speech Tagging
In our third experiment, we investigated the structured classiﬁcation task of part-of-speech (POS)
tagging (CoNLL, 2003). Problem instances are sequences of words (sentences), where each word
is part of an entity (e.g., “European Union”), and each entity belongs to one of ﬁve categories:
Location, Miscellaneous, Organization, Person or Other. Imagine an application, where automatic
information extraction is guided by an expert: Our algorithms compute an optimal conditional plan
for asking the expert, trying to optimize classiﬁcation performance while requiring as little expert
interaction as possible.
We used a conditional random ﬁeld for the structured classiﬁcation task, where each node cor-
responds to a word, and the joint distribution is described by node potentials and edge potentials.
The sum of margins was used as reward function. Measure of classiﬁcation performance was the F1
score, the geometric mean of precision and recall. The goal of this experiment was to analyze how
the addition of expert labels increases the classiﬁcation performance, and how the indirect, decom-
posing reward function used in our algorithms corresponds to real world classiﬁcation performance.
Figure 3(c) shows the increase of the mean expected margin and F1 score for an increasing num-
ber of observations, summarized over ten 50 word sequences. It can be seen that the classiﬁcation
performance can be effectively enhanced by optimally incorporating expert labels. Requesting only
three out of 50 labels increased the mean F1 score from by more than ﬁve percent. The following
example illustrates this effect: In one scenario both words of an entity, the sportsman ‘P. Simmons’,
were classiﬁed incorrectly – ‘P.’ as Other and ‘Simmons’ as Miscellaneous. The ﬁrst request of the
optimal conditional plan was to label ‘Simmons’. Upon labeling this word correctly, the word ‘P.’
was automatically labeled correctly also, resulting in an F1 score of 100 percent.
575

KRAUSE & GUESTRIN
7. Applying Chain Algorithms for More General Graphical Models
In Section 4 we have seen algorithms that can be used to schedule a single sensor, assuming the time
series of sensor readings (e.g., temperature) form a Markov chain. This is a very natural assumption
for sensor networks (Deshpande et al., 2004). When deploying sensor networks however, multiple
sensors need to be scheduled. If the time series for all the sensors were independent, we could use
our algorithms to schedule all the sensors independently of each other. However, in practice, the
measurements will be correlated across the different sensors – in fact, this dependence is essential
to allow generalization of measurements to locations where no sensor has been placed. In the fol-
lowing, we will describe an approach for using our single-sensor scheduling algorithm to coordinate
multiple sensors.
More formally, we are interested in monitoring a spatiotemporal phenomenon at a set of lo-
cations S = {1, . . . , m}, and time steps T = {1, . . . , T}. With each location–time pair s, t, we
associate a random variable Xs,t that describes the state of the phenomenon at that location and
time. The random vector XS,T fully describes the relevant state of the world and the vector XS,t
describes the state at a particular time step t. As before, we make the Markov assumption, assuming
conditional independence of XS,t from XS,t′ given XS,t−1 for all t′ < t −1.
Similarly as in the single-chain case, we consider reward functions Rs,t that are associated with
each variable Xs,t. Our goal is then to select, for each timestep, a set At ⊆S of sensors to activate,
in order to maximize the sum of expected rewards. Letting A1:t = A1 ∪· · · ∪At, the expected total
reward is then given as
X
s,t
Rs,t(Xs,t | XA1:t)
for the ﬁltering setting (i.e., only observations in the past are taken into account for evaluating the
rewards), and
X
s,t
Rs,t(Xs,t | XA1:T )
for the smoothing setting (where all observations are taken into account). The generalization to
conditional planning is done as described in Section 2.
Note that in the case of a single sensor (ℓ= 1), the problem of optimal sensor scheduling can
be solved using Algorithm 1. Unfortunately, the optimization problem is wildly intractable even for
the case of two sensors, ℓ= 2:
Corollary 7 (Hardness of sensor selection for two chains). Given a model with two dependent
chains, constants c and B, a cost function β and a set of decision theoretic value of information
functions Rs,t, it is NPPP-complete to determine whether there is a subset A1:T of variables such
that L(A1:T ) ≥c and β(A1:T ) ≤B.
In the following, we will develop an approximate algorithm that uses our optimal single-chain al-
gorithms and performs well in practice.
7.1 Approximate Sensor Scheduling by Lower Bound Maximization
The reason for the sudden increase in complexity in the case of multiple chains is that the decompo-
sition of rewards along sub-chains (as described in Section 3) does not extend to the case of multiple
576

OPTIMAL VALUE OF INFORMATION IN GRAPHICAL MODELS
S(2)
1
S(2)
2
S(2)
3
S(2)
4
S(2)
5 
S(1)
1
S(1)
2
S(1)
3
S(1)
4
S(1)
5 
Figure 4: Scheduling multiple correlated sensors in dynamic processes.
sensors, since inﬂuence can ﬂow across chains. Figure 4 visualizes this problem – there, the distri-
bution for sensor (2) depends on all three observations S(1)
1
and S(1)
4
from sensor (1) and S(2)
2
from
sensor (2).
We address this complexity issue using an (approximate) extension of the decomposition ap-
proach used for single chains. We will focus on the decision-theoretic value of information objec-
tive (as described in Section 2.1), but other local reward functions, such as residual entropy, can be
used as well.
Considering only recent observations.
As a ﬁrst approximation, we only allow a sensor to take
into account the most recent observations. Intuitively, this appears to be a reasonable approximation,
especially if the potential scheduling times in T are reasonably far apart. Formally, when evaluating
the local rewards at time t, we replace the set of observations up to time t, A1:t ⊆T by a subset
A′
1:t ⊆A1:t such that
A′
1:t =

(s, t) ∈A1:t : t ≥t′ for all (s, t′) ∈A1:t
	
,
i.e, for each sensor s, only the last observation (with largest time index t) is kept.
We then
approximate Rs,t(Xs,t | A1:t) by Rs,t(Xs,t | A′
1:t). In Figure 4 for example, where A1:5 =
{(s1, 1), (s2, 2), (s1, 4)}, the total expected utility at time t5 would be computed using only ob-
servations A′
1:5 = {(s2, 2), (s1, 4)}, i.e., using time t4 for sensor one, and time t2 for sensor two,
ignoring inﬂuence originating from observation S(1)
1
and ﬂowing through the chains as indicated by
the dashed arrow. The following proposition proves that this approximation is a lower bound to the
true value of information:
Proposition 8 (Monotonicity of value of information). The decision-theoretic value of informa-
tion Rs,t(A) of a set A of sensors is monotonic in A,
Rs,t(A′) ≤Rs,t(A)
for all A′ ⊆A.
Proposition 8 proves that conditioning only on the most recent observations can only decrease our
objective function, hence maximizing this approximate objective implies maximizing a lower bound
on the true objective.
A coordinate ascent approach.
We propose the following heuristic for maximizing the lower
bound on the expected utility. Instead of jointly optimizing over all schedules (timesteps selected
for each sensor), the algorithm will repeatedly iterate over all sensors. For all sensors s, it will
optimize the selected observations As
1:T , holding the schedules for all other sensors ﬁxed. This
577

KRAUSE & GUESTRIN
procedure resembles a coordinate ascent approach, where each “coordinate” ranges over all possible
schedules for a ﬁxed sensor s.
When optimizing for sensor s, the algorithm ﬁnds a schedule As
1:T such that
As
1:T = argmax
A1:T
X
s,t
Rs,t

Xs,t | XA′
1:t
[
s′̸=s
XA′s′
1:t

such that β(As
1:T ) ≤B,
(6)
i.e., that maximizes, over all schedules A1:T , the sum of expected rewards for all time steps and
sensors, given the schedules As′
1:T for all non-selected sensors s′.
Solving the single-chain optimization problem.
In order to solve the maximization problem
(6) for the individual sensors, we use the same dynamic programming approach as introduced in
Section 4. The recursive case Lflt
a:b(k) for k > 0 is exactly the same. However, the base case is
computed as
Lflt
a:b(0) =
b−1
X
j=a+1
X
s
Rs,j

Xs,j | Xa
[
s′̸=s
XA′s′
1:j

,
i.e., it takes into account the most recent observation for all non-selected sensors s′.
Several remarks need to be made about the computation of the base case Lflt
a:b(0). First of all, in
a naive implementation, the computation of the expected utility
Rs,j

Xs,j | Xa
[
s′̸=s
XA′s′
1:j

requires time exponential in the number of chains. This is the case since, in order to compute the
reward Rs,t, for each chain, all possible observations XA′s
1:t = xA′s
1:t that could be made need to be
taken into account. This computation requires computing the expectation over the joint distribution
P(XA′
1:t), which is exponential in size. This increase in complexity can be avoided using a sampling
approximation: Hoeffding’s inequality can be used to derive polynomial bounds on sample com-
plexity for approximating the value of information up to arbitrarily small additive error ε, similarly
as done in the approach of Krause and Guestrin (2005a)4. In practice, a small number of samples
appears to provide reasonable performance. Secondly, inference itself becomes intractable with an
increasing number of sensors. Approximate inference algorithms such as the algorithm proposed
by Boyen and Koller (1998) provide a viable way around this problem.
Analysis.
Since all sensors maximize the same global objective L(A1:T ), the coordinated ascent
approach is guaranteed to monotonically increase the global objective with every iteration (ignoring
possible errors due to sampling or approximate inference). Hence it must converge (to a local
optimum) after a ﬁnite number of steps. The procedure is formalized in Algorithm 4.
Although we cannot in general provide performance guarantees for the procedure, we are build-
ing on an algorithm that provides an optimal schedule for each sensor in isolation, which should
beneﬁt from observations provided by the remaining sensors. Also, note that if the sensors are all
independent, Algorithm 4 will obtain the optimal solution. Even if the sensors are correlated, the
obtained solution will be at least as good as the solution obtained when scheduling all sensors inde-
pendently of each other. Algorithm 4 will always converge, and always compute a lower bound on
4. An absolute error of at most ε when evaluating each reward Rs,t can accumulate to a total error of at most |T ||S|ε
for all variables and hence to the error of the optimal schedule.
578

OPTIMAL VALUE OF INFORMATION IN GRAPHICAL MODELS
Input: Budget B
Output: Selection A1, . . . , Aℓof observation times for each sensor
begin
Select Ai, 1 ≤i ≤ℓat random;
repeat
for i = 1 to ℓdo
Use Algorithm 1 to select observations Ai for sensor i, but conditioning on current
sensor scheduling Aj, j ̸= i, for remaining sensors;
end
Compute improvement δ in total expected utility;
until δ small enough ;
end
Algorithm 4: Multi-Sensor scheduling.
the expected total utility. Considering the intractability of the general problem even for two chains
(c.f., , Corollary 7), these properties are reassuring. In our experiments, the coordinated sensor
scheduling performed very well, as discussed in Section 7.2.
7.2 Proof of Concept Study on Real Deployment
In the work by Singhvi et al. (2005), we presented an approach for optimizing light control in
buildings, with the purpose of satisfying building occupants’ preferences about lighting conditions,
and simultaneously minimizing energy consumption. In our approach, a wireless sensor network
is deployed that monitors the building for environmental conditions (such as the sunlight intensity
etc.). The sensors feed their measurements to a building controller that actuates the lighting system
(lamps, blinds, etc.) accordingly. At every timestep t ∈T , the building controller can choose
an action that affects the lighting conditions at all locations S in the building. Utility functions
Ut(a, xS,t) are speciﬁed that map the chosen actions and the current lighting levels to a utility
value. This utility is chosen to capture both users’ preferences about light levels, as well as the
energy consumption of the lighting system. Details on the utility functions are described in detail
by Singhvi et al..
We evaluated our multi-sensor scheduling approach in a real building controller testbed, as
described in detail by Singhvi et al.. In our experiments, we used Algorithm 4 to schedule three
sensors, allowing each sensor to choose a subset out of ten time steps (in one-hour intervals during
daytime). We varied the number of timesteps during which each sensor is activated, and computed
the total energy consumption and total user utility (as deﬁned by Singhvi et al.). Figure 5(a) shows
the mean user utility and energy savings achieved, for a number of observations varying from no
observations to continuous sensing (10 observations in our discretization)5. These results imply that
using the predictive model and our active sensing strategy, even a very small number of observations
achieves results approximately as good as the results achieved by continuous sensing.
Figure 5(b) presents the mean total utility achieved using no observations, one observation or ten
observations per sensor each day. It can be seen that even a single observation per sensor increases
the total utility close to the level achieved by continuous sensing. Figure 5(c) shows the mean energy
5. Note that in Figure 5(a), energy cost and utility are plotted in different units and should not be directly compared.
579

KRAUSE & GUESTRIN
0
1
2
3
10
6
8
10
12
14
Number of observations
User utility and energy cost
Energy cost
Measured user utility
(a) Sensing scheduling evaluation
10
12
14
16
18
−2
0
2
4
6
8
Hour of day
Total utility
10 Observ./
sensor
1 Observ./
sensor
No observ.
(b) Total utility
10
12
14
16
18
0
5
10
15
Hour of day
Energy cost
10 Observ./
sensor
1 Observ./
sensor
No observ.
(c) Energy cost
Figure 5: Active sensing results.
consumption required for the same experiment. Here, the single sensor observation strategy comes
even closer to the power savings achieved for continuous sensing.
Since the sensor network battery lifetime is in general inversely proportional to the amount of
power expended for sensing and communication, we conclude that our sensor scheduling strategy
promises to lead to drastic increases in sensor network lifetime, deployment permanence and re-
duced maintenance cost. In our testbed, the network lifetime could be increased by a factor of 3
without signiﬁcant reduction in user utility and increase in energy cost.
8. Related Work
In this section, we review related work in a number of different areas.
8.1 Optimal Experimental Design
Optimal experimental design is a general methodology for selecting informative experiments to infer
about aspects of the state of the world (such as the parameters of a particular nonlinear function,
etc.). There is a large literature about different approaches to experimental design (c.f., Chaloner &
Verdinelli, 1995; Krause, Singh, & Guestrin, 2007).
In Bayesian experimental design, a prior distribution over possible states of the world is as-
sumed, and experiments are chosen, e.g., to reduce the uncertainty in the posterior distribution. In
its general form, Bayesian experimental design was pioneered by Lindley (1956). The users encode
their preferences in a utility function U(P(Θ), θ⋆), where the ﬁrst argument, P(Θ), is a distribution
over states of the world (i.e., the parameters) and the second argument, θ⋆, is the true state of the
world. Observations xA are collected, and the change in expected utility under the prior P(Θ) and
posterior P(Θ | XA = xA) can be used as a design criterion. In this sense, the value of observa-
tion problems considered in this paper can be considered instances of Bayesian experimental design
problems. Typically, Bayesian Experimental Design is employed for continuous distributions, often
the multivariate normal distribution. By choosing different utility functions, different notions of
optimality are deﬁned, including A- and D- optimality can be developed (Chaloner & Verdinelli,
1995). If we have the posterior covariance matrix Σθ|A, whose maximum eigenvalue is λmax, then
Bayesian A-, D-, and E- optimality minimizes tr
 Σθ|A

, det
 Σθ|A

, and λmax
 Σθ|A

, respec-
tively. In the terminology of Section 2.1, D-optimality corresponds to choosing the total entropy,
and A-optimality corresponds to the (weighted) mean-squared error criteria.
580

OPTIMAL VALUE OF INFORMATION IN GRAPHICAL MODELS
Even for multivariate normal distributions, optimal Bayesian Experimental design is NP-hard
(Ko, Lee, & Queyranne, 1995). In some applications of experimental design, the number of experi-
ments to be selected is often large compared to the number of design choices. In these cases, one can
ﬁnd a fractional design (i.e., a non-integral solution deﬁning the proportions by which experiments
should be performed), and round the fractional solutions. In the fractional formulation, A-, D-, and
E-optimality criteria can be solved exactly using a semi-deﬁnite program (Boyd & Vandenberghe,
2004). There are however no known bounds on the integrality gap, i.e., the loss incurred by this
rounding process.
The algorithms presented in Section 4.1 can be used to optimally solve non-fractional Bayesian
Experimental Design problems for chain graphical models, even for continuous distributions, as
long as inference in these distributions is tractable (such as normal distributions). This paper hence
provides a new class of combinatorial algorithms for an interesting class of Bayesian experimental
design problems.
8.2 Value of Information in Graphical Models
Decision-theoretic value of information has been frequently used for principled information gath-
ering (c.f., Howard, 1966; Lindley, 1956; Heckerman et al., 1993), and popularized in decision
analysis in the context of inﬂuence diagrams (Howard & Matheson, 1984). In a sense, value of
information problems are special cases of Bayesian experimental design problems, where the prior
distribution has a particular structure, typically given by a graphical model as considered in this
paper.
Several researchers (Scheffer et al., 2001; van der Gaag & Wessels, 1993; Dittmer & Jensen,
1997; Kapoor et al., 2007) suggested myopic, i.e., greedy approaches for selectively gathering
evidence in graphical models, as considered in this paper, which, unlike the algorithms presented
in this paper. While these algorithms are applicable to much more general graphical models, they
do not have theoretical guarantees. Heckerman et al. (1993) propose a method to compute the
maximum expected utility for speciﬁc sets of observations. While their work considers more general
graphical models than this paper (Naive Bayes models and certain extensions), they provide only
large sample guarantees for the evaluation of a given sequence of observations, and use a heuristic
without guarantees to select such sequences. Bilgic and Getoor (2007) present a branch and bound
approach towards exactly optimizing value of information in more complex probabilistic models.
In contrast to the algorithms described in this paper however, their approach has running time that
is worst-case exponential. Munie and Shoham (2008) present algorithms and hardness results for
optimizing a special class of value of information objective functions that are motivated by optimal
educational testing problems. Their algorithms apply to a different class of graphical models than
chains, and only apply for speciﬁc objective functions, rather than general local reward functions as
considered in this paper. Radovilsky, Shattah, and Shimony (2006) extended the previous version
of our paper (Krause & Guestrin, 2005a) to obtain approximation algorithms with guarantees in the
case of noisy observations (i.e., selecting a subset of the emission variables to observe, rather than
selecting among the hidden variables as considered in this paper).
8.3 Bandit Problems and Exploration / Exploitation
An important class of sequential value of information problems is the class of Bandit problems. In
the classical k-armed bandit problem, as formalized by Robbins (1952), a slot machine is given
581

KRAUSE & GUESTRIN
with k arms. A draw from arm i results in a reward with success probability pi that is ﬁxed for each
arm, but different (and independent) across each arm. When selecting arms to pull, an important
problem is to trade off exploration (i.e., estimation of the success probabilities of the arms) and
exploitation (i.e., repeatedly pulling the best arm known so far). A celebrated result by Gittins
and Jones (1979) shows that for a ﬁxed number of draws, an optimal strategy can be computed in
polynomial time, using a dynamic programming based algorithm. While similar in the sense that
an optimal sequential strategy can be computed in polynomial time, Gittins algorithm however has
different structure from the dynamic programming algorithms presented in this paper.
Note that using the “function optimization” objective function described in Section 2.1, our
approach can be used to solve a particular instance of bandit problems, where the arms are not
required to be independent, but, in contrary to the classical notion of bandit problems, can not be
chosen repeatedly.
8.4 Probabilistic Planning
Optimized information gathering has been also extensively studied in the planning community.
Bayer-Zubek (2004) for example proposed a heuristic method based on the Markov Decision Pro-
cess framework. However, her approach makes approximations without theoretical guarantees.
The problem of optimizing decision theoretic value of information can be naturally formalized
as a (ﬁnite-horizon) Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP, Smallwood & Sondik,
1973). Hence, in principle, algorithms for planning in POMDPs, such as the anytime algorithm by
Pineau, Gordon, and Thrun (2006), can be employed for optimizing value of information. Unfor-
tunately, the state space grows exponentially with the number of variables that are considered in
the selection problem. In addition, the complexity of planning in POMDPs grows exponentially in
the cardinality of the state space, hence doubly-exponentially in the number of variables for selec-
tion. This steep increase in complexity makes application of black-box POMDP solvers infeasible.
Recently, Ji, Parr, and Carin (2007) demonstrated the use of POMDP planning on a multi-sensor
scheduling problem. While presenting promising empirical results, their approach however uses
approximate POMDP planning techniques without theoretical guarantees.
In the robotics literature, Stachniss, Grisetti, and Burgard (2005), Sim and Roy (2005) and
Kollar and Roy (2008) have presented approaches to information gathering in the context of Simul-
taneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM). None of these approaches however provide guarantees
about the quality of the obtained solutions. Singh, Krause, Guestrin, Kaiser, and Batalin (2007)
present an approximation algorithm with theoretical guarantees for the problem of planning an in-
formative path for environmental monitoring using Gaussian Process models. In contrast to the
algorithms presented in this paper, while dealing with more complex probabilistic models and more
complex cost functions arising from path planning, their approach requires submodular objective
functions (a property that does not hold for value of information as we show in Proposition 9).
8.5 Sensor Selection and Scheduling
In the context of wireless sensor networks, where sensor nodes have limited battery and can hence
only enable a small number of measurements, optimizing the value of information from the selected
sensors plays a key role. The problem of deciding when to selectively turn on sensors in order to
conserve power was ﬁrst discussed by Slijepcevic and Potkonjak (2001) and Zhao, Shin, and Reich
(2002). Typically, it is assumed that sensors are associated with a ﬁxed sensing region, and a spatial
582

OPTIMAL VALUE OF INFORMATION IN GRAPHICAL MODELS
domain needs to be covered by the regions associated with the selected sensors. Abrams, Goel,
and Plotkin (2004) present an efﬁcient approximation algorithm with theoretical guarantees for this
problem. Deshpande, Khuller, Malekian, and Toossi (2008) present an approach for this problem
based on semideﬁnite programming (SDP), handling more general constraints and providing tighter
approximations. The approaches described above do not apply to the problem of optimizing sen-
sor schedules for more complex utility functions such as, e.g., the increase in prediction accuracy
and other objectives considered in this paper. To address these shortcomings, Koushanfary, Taft,
and Potkonjak (2006) developed an approach for sensor scheduling that guarantees a speciﬁed pre-
diction accuracy based on a regression model. However, their approach relies on the solution of
a Mixed Integer Program, which is intractable in general. Zhao et al. (2002) proposed heuristics
for selectively querying nodes in a sensor network in order to reduce the entropy of the predic-
tion. Unlike the algorithms presented in this paper, their approaches do not have any performance
guarantees.
8.6 Relationship to Machine Learning
Decision Trees (Quinlan, 1986) popularized the value of information as a criterion for creating
conditional plans. Unfortunately, there are no guarantees on the performance of this greedy method.
The subset selection problem as an instance of feature selection is a central issue in machine
learning, with a vast amount of literature (see Molina, Belanche, & Nebot, 2002 for a survey).
However, we are not aware of any work providing similarly strong performance guarantees than the
algorithms considered in this paper.
The problem of choosing observations also has a strong connection to the ﬁeld of active learning
(c.f., Cohn, Gharamani, & Jordan, 1996; Tong & Koller, 2001) in which the learning system designs
experiments based on its observations. While sample complexity bounds have been derived for
some active learning problems (c.f., Dasgupta, 2005; Balcan, Beygelzimer, & Langford, 2006), we
are not aware of any active learning algorithms that perform provably optimal (even for restricted
classes of problem instances).
8.7 Previous Work by the Authors
A previous version of this paper appeared in the work by Krause and Guestrin (2005b). Some of
the contents of Section 7 appeared as part of the work by Singhvi et al. (2005). The present version
is much extended, with new algorithmic and hardness results and more detailed discussions.
In light of the negative results presented in Section 5, we cannot expect to be able to opti-
mize value of information in more complex models than chains. However, instead of attempting
to solve for the optimal solution, one might wonder whether it is possible to obtain good approxi-
mations. The authors showed (Krause & Guestrin, 2005a; Krause et al., 2007; Krause, Leskovec,
Guestrin, VanBriesen, & Faloutsos, 2008) that a large number of practical objective functions sat-
isfy an intuitive diminishing returns property: Adding a new observation helps more if we have few
observations so far, and less if we have already made many observations. This intuition can be for-
malized using the combinatorial concept called submodularity. A fundamental result by Nemhauser
et al. proves that when optimizing a submodular utility function, the myopic greedy algorithm in
fact provides a near-optimal solution, that is within a constant factor of (1−1/e) ≈63% of optimal.
Unfortunately, decision theoretic value of information does not satisfy submodularity.
583

KRAUSE & GUESTRIN
Proposition 9 (Non-submodularity of value of information). Decision-theoretic value of infor-
mation is not submodular, even in Naive Bayes models.
Intuitively, value of information can be non-submodular, if we need to make several observations in
order to “convince” ourselves that we need to change our action.
9. Conclusions
We have described novel efﬁcient algorithms for optimal subset selection and conditional plan com-
putation in chain graphical models (and trees with few leaves), including HMMs. Our empirical
evaluation indicates that these algorithms can improve upon commonly used heuristics for decreas-
ing expected uncertainty. Our algorithms can also effectively enhance performance in interactive
structured classiﬁcation tasks.
Unfortunately, the optimization problems become wildly intractable for even a slight general-
ization of chains. We presented surprising theoretical limits, which indicate that even the class of
decision theoretic value of information functions (as widely used, e.g., in inﬂuence diagrams and
POMDPs) cannot be efﬁciently computed even in Naive Bayes models. We also identiﬁed opti-
mization of value of information as a new class of problems that are intractable (NPPP-complete)
for polytrees.
Our hardness results, along with other recent results for polytree graphical models, the NP-
completeness of maximum a posteriori assignment (Park & Darwiche, 2004) and NP-hardness
of inference in conditional linear Gaussian models (Lerner & Parr, 2001), suggest the possibility of
developing a generalized complexity characterization of problems that are hard in polytree graphical
models.
In light of these theoretical limits for computing optimal solutions, it is a natural question to ask
whether approximation algorithms with non-trivial performance guarantees can be found. Recent
results by Krause and Guestrin (2005a), Radovilsky et al. (2006) and Krause et al. (2007) show that
this is the case for interesting classes of value of information problems.
