1
Coalition Game based Full-duplex Concurrent
Scheduling in Millimeter Wave Wireless Backhaul
Network
Haiyan Jiang, Yong Niu, Jiayi Zhang, Bo Ai, and Zhangdui Zhong
Abstract—With the development of self-interference (SI) can-
celation technology, full-duplex (FD) communication becomes
possible. FD communication can theoretically double the spectral
efﬁciency. When the time slot (TS) resources are limited and
the number of ﬂows is large, the scheduling mechanism of the
ﬂows becomes more important. Therefore, the effectiveness of
FD scheduling mechanism for the ﬂows is studied in millimeter
wave wireless backhaul network with the limited TS resources.
We proposed a full duplex concurrent scheduling algorithm based
on coalition game (FDCG) to maximize the number of ﬂows with
their QoS requirements satisﬁed. We transformed the problem
of maximizing the number of ﬂows with their QoS requirements
satisﬁed into the problem of maximizing sum rate of concurrently
scheduled ﬂows in each slot. We obtained the scheduled ﬂows with
maximum sum rate in ﬁrst slot by using coalition game.And then
with certain restrictions, the maximum sum rate of concurrently
scheduled ﬂows can also be achieved in subsequent time slots.
The simulation results show that the proposed FDCG algorithm
can achieve superior performance in terms of the number of
ﬂows that meet their QoS requirements and system throughput
compared with other three algorithms.
Index Terms—millimeter wave; wireless backhaul network;
coalition game; concurrent scheduling; maximum sum rate.
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, mobile data trafﬁc has increased exponen-
tially, and some industry and academic experts predict a 1000-
fold demand increase by 2020 [1]. To meet this requirement, a
ultra-dense cellular network with small cells densely deployed
become a promising solution for explosive trafﬁc growth
in the ﬁfth-generation (5G) network [2]. With a generous
number of base stations (BSs) deployed, the massive backhaul
trafﬁc turned into a great challenge. Because wired optical
ﬁber based backhaul network with large bandwidth is time-
consuming, costly and inﬂexible in densely deployed small
cells, wireless backhaul network will be widely used in 5G.
The traditional microwave band (such as the frequency band
below 5GHz) is limited to the achievable gain due to the
existing spectrum tension problems. Although there are many
new technologies that can improve the spectrum efﬁciency, it is
still difﬁcult to achieve the rate of over 1Gbps or even 10Gbps.
Millimeter-wave (mmWave) bands has huge bandwidth and
can reach multi-gigabit rates, so mmWave wireless backhaul
can provide a more cost-effective and feasible solution for
densely deployed small cells backhaul [3].
H. Jiang, Y. Niu, J. Zhang, B. Ai, and Z. Zhong are with the State Key
Laboratory of Rail Trafﬁc Control and Safety, and the School of Electronic
and Information Engineering, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044,

In order to compensate for high path loss in mmWave
communication, directional antennas and beamforming tech-
niques are often used [4]. The directional communication
is difﬁcult for the third party nodes to perform the carrier
sense and solve the deafness problem [5]. On the other hand,
it reduces the interference among ﬂows, so that concurrent
transmission can be used to improve the network capacity
to a great extent [6]. However, concurrent transmission of
multiple ﬂows lead to higher multi-user interference (MUI),
which conversely affect the network performance. Therefore,
how to effectively schedule the ﬂows transmitted concurrently
has drawn great attention of many researchers. For example, a
dual update concurrent scheduling algorithm in rate-adaptive
wireless networks was proposed in [7], but the inﬂuence of
millimeter-wave characteristics was not taken into account.
Then, in [8], considering the characteristics of mmWave
and the QoS requirements of ﬂows, Qiao et al. proposed a
concurrent scheduling algorithm, which was called STDMA.
And this algorithm selected the set of concurrent scheduling
ﬂows in a greedy way. But both non-interference ﬂows and
interference ﬂows can be scheduled at the same time to
maximize the throughput of the network, which reduce the rate
of concurrent scheduling. Qiao et al. [9] proposed a time-slot
resource sharing scheme for mmWave 5G cellular networks,
in which D2D communication technology and concurrent
scheduling technology were used to improve the network
capacity. However, in order to simplify the problem, only non-
interference ﬂows can share resources in each slot. And this
scheme doesn’t consider the QoS requirements of ﬂows. In
order to improve the performance of the system, Niu et al.
proposed a joint transmission scheduling scheme of access
and backhaul in mmWave small cell, called D2DMAC, to
schedule the ﬂows with the least time slots to meet the QoS
requirements of ﬂows [10]. Although latency is reduced, a
ﬂow that needs more time slots will not be transmitted in
subsequent slots. In [11], Zhu et al. introduced the concept
of QoS-aware independent set on the scheduling problem
in mmWave backhaul network, and proposed a method that
can further improve the system throughput and increase the
number of successfully transmition ﬂows (that is, the number
of ﬂows with their QoS requirements satisﬁed) compared with
STDMA, called MQIS (Maximum QoS-aware Independent
Set). It doesnt remove the ﬂow(s) spent too much slots, nor
does it evaluate the proﬁts when adding a new ﬂow. Niu et
al. [12] studied the energy efﬁcient scheduling for mmWave
backhauling of small cells in heterogeneous cellular networks.
arXiv:1901.00648v1  [cs.NI]  3 Jan 2019

2
The maximum independent set of each pair was obtained by
minimum greedy algorithm, and then the number of slots
to each pair and the transmission power to each ﬂow were
assigned by power control algorithm, so that energy efﬁcient
could be realized. In this paper, we remove the ﬂow(s) spend
too much slots and consider the QoS requirement of ﬂow.
We don’t consider power control. Maybe our future research
will involve power control in scheduling. The objective of this
paper is to maximize the number of completed ﬂows, i.e., the
number of ﬂows with the QoS requirements satisﬁed.
These concurrent scheduling schemes [7]-[12] in mmWave
bands hold the assumption of half-duplex (HD). In recent
years, with the development of self-interference (SI) cancella-
tion technology [13] [14], it becomes possible to enable full-
duplex (FD) communication in mmWave wireless backhaul
networks. But SI cannot be completely eliminated, there is still
residual self-interference (RSI). Here, the SI means that the
transmitted signal is received by the local receiver at the same
base station (BS). It seriously affects the performance of the
FD system [13]. FD communication is achieved by transmit-
ting and receiving information simultaneously at the same BS
over the same frequency, which may theoretically double the
spectral efﬁciency and provides an important opportunity for
concurrent scheduling in mmWave wireless backhaul networks
[13] [14]. In [15], Feng et al. introduced FD communication
into the 5G mmWave backhaul network scheduling scheme,
but the scheduling scheme was designed in the case of time
slots enough. Therefore, for mmWave backhaul networks, how
to satisfy the QoS requirements of ﬂows as much as possible
is still a challenge under the condition that the TS resources
are limited. This is also the content of this paper to study.
In [16], Ding et al. proposed a QoS-aware FD concurrent
scheduling scheme for mmWave wireless backhaul network
with limited time slot resources. This scheme largely improves
system throughout,but the number of ﬂows that satisfy the QoS
requirements compared with the total number of ﬂow increase
to a lesser extent. We consider the introduction of relative
interference which determined whether ﬂows can be scheduled
concurrently causes some ﬂows not to be scheduled, which
reduces the number of ﬂows. We choose to use the maximum
sum rate to determine whether ﬂows can be scheduled concur-
rently. When the sum rate of each slot reaches the maximum,
the number of completed ﬂows will reach the maximum.
Coalition game has also been widely explored in different
disciplines such as economics or political science. Recently,
cooperation has emerged as a new networking paradigm
that has a dramatic effect of improving the performance of
communication networks [17]. Coalition games prove to be
a very powerful tool for designing fair, robust, practical and
efﬁcient cooperation strategies in communication networks
[17]. In this paper, the coalition game is introduced to schedule
the concurrent scheduling ﬂows in mmWave wireless backhaul
network.
The above opportunities and challenges motivate us to
investigate a coalition game based full-duplex concurrent
scheduling in millimeter wave wireless backhaul network. The
contribution of this paper are summarized as follows.
• We formulate the optimization problem of concurrent
scheduling in FD mmWave wireless backhaul network
into a nonlinear inter programming (NLIP) problem,
i.e., maximizing the number of ﬂows with their QoS
requirements satisﬁed in case of the limited time slot
resources. Both RSI and MUI are simultaneously taken
into account.There are scheduled concurrently ﬂows with
the maximum sum rate in each slot to achieve the
completed ﬂows as many as possible.
• We propose a FD concurrent scheduling scheme based on
coalition game (FDCG) in mmWave wireless backhaul
network, which consists of a maximum independent set
(MIS) algorithm that can be achieved by the minimum-
degree greedy algorithm and a coalition game algorithm,
to efﬁciently solve the formulated problem. FDCG uses
the coalition game algorithm to select the set of concur-
rently scheduled ﬂows with the maximum sum rate in the
ﬁrst slot. In order to guarantee the set of concurrently
scheduled ﬂows with the maximum sum rate in the
subsequent slot, this scheme evaluate the proﬁts when
adding a new ﬂow, i.e., when the sum rate of the set of
ﬂows after added a new ﬂow is greater than that of the
set of ﬂows without added a new ﬂow, this new ﬂow will
be added to scheduled concurrently.
• Through evaluation under various system parameters, we
demonstrate that our scheme can signiﬁcantly increase the
number of ﬂows with their QoS requirements satisﬁed
and improve the total system throughput. Furthermore,
we also analyze respectively the impact of SI cancellation
level, MUI factor and different QoS requirement on the
performance improvement.
The structure of this paper is organized as follows. Section
II introduces system models and explain the formulated opti-
mization problem in detail. The coalition game based schedul-
ing algorithm is presented in Section III. Section IV shows
the simulation results and evaluates the performance compared
with existing schemes. Finally, we make a conclusion about
this paper in Section V.
II. SYSTEM MODEL AND PROBLEM
FORMULATION
A. System Model
We consider a typical FD mmWave wireless backhaul
network in the small cells densely deployed scenario [16].
As shown in Fig. 1, the network includes N BSs (only six
BSs are drawn in Fig.1) that are connected to each other by
backhaul links with mmWave band. When there are some
trafﬁc demands from one BS to another, we say there is a
ﬂow between them. There are one or more BSs connected
to the backbone network via the macrocell, which is (are)
called gateway(s) [12]. A backhaul network controller (BNC)
belongs to one of the gateways, which can synchronize the
network, receive the QoS requirements of ﬂows and obtain the
locations of BSs [17]. In Fig. 1, BS6 is both a gateway and a
full-duplex BS. Each BS operates in FD mode and is equipped
with two steerable directional antennas: one for transmitting
and another for receiving, as shown in Fig. 2. Therefore, a
BS can at most support two ﬂows at the same time. It can

3
BS2
BS6
BS3
BS5
Flow in backhaul 
link
Macrocell
Full-duplex BS
Gateway
BS4
BS1
Fig. 1.
Full-deplex mmWave wireless backhaul network in the small cells
densely deployed scenario.
Full-duplex BS1
Full-duplex BS3
Full-duplex BS2
TX
RX
TX
TX
RX
RX
Fig. 2. Full-duplex base stations.
simultaneously serve as the transmitter of one ﬂow and the
receiver of another, but it cant simultaneously serve as the
transmitters or receivers of both two ﬂows. When BS3 and
BS4 send data to BS5 at the same time in Fig. 1, two ﬂows
will fail. If one ﬂow is scheduled in next slot, another ﬂow can
be scheduled successfully in this slot. The effective scheduling
scheme can make full use of time slot resources and improve
system throughput.
We adopt the widely used realistic directional antenna
model, which is a main lobe of Gaussian from in linear scale
and constant level of sidelobes [18]. It is the reference antenna
model with sidelobe for IEEE 802.15.3c [19]. The gain of a
directional antenna in units of decibels (dB), which is denoted
by G(θ), can be expressed as
G(θ) =
 G0 −3.01 × (
2θ
θ−3dB )2,
0o ≤θ ≤θml/2;
Gsl,
θml/2 < θ ≤180o;
(1)
where θ denotes an arbitrary angle within the range [0o, 180o],
θ−3dB denotes the angle of the half-power beamwidth. θml
which can be calculated as θml = 2.6 · θ−3dB is the main
lobe width in units of degrees. The maximum antenna gain
G0 can be obtained by G0 = 10log(1.6162/sin(θ−3dB/2))2.
The sidelobe gain Gsl can be expressed as Gsl = −0.4111 ·
ln(θ−3dB) −10.579[18].
Because mmWave suffer from high attenuation in non-line-
of-sight (NLOS) transmissions, we use the line-of-sight (LOS)
path loss model for mmWave as described in [11]. For ﬂow i,
the received signal power at its receiver ri from its transmitter
ti can be expressed as
Pr(ti, ri) = kPtGt(ti, ri)Gr(ti, ri)d−n
tiri,
(2)
k is a factor that is proportional to ( λ
4π)2, where λ is the
wave length; Pt is the transmission power of transmitter;
Gt(ti, ri) denotes the transmitter antenna gain from ti to ri,
and Gr(ti, ri) denotes the receiver antenna gain from ti to ri;
dtiri denotes the distance between ti and ri, and n is the path
loss exponent [8].
We divided the interference between different ﬂows into
two cases: 1) the interference between two ﬂows without any
common node, namely, MUI; 2) the RSI after SI cancelation.
The MUI caused by the transmitter tl of ﬂow l to the receiver
ri of ﬂow i is deﬁned as
Pr(tl, ri) = ρkPtGt(tl, ri)Gr(tl, ri)d−n
tlri,
(3)
where ρ is the MUI factor related to the cross correlation of
signals from different links [8]. According to [20], after the
cancelation of SI, the inﬂuence of RSI can be simulated by
the loss of signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). So RSI can be express
as βnN0W, where non-negative parameters βn represent the
SI cancelation level of the nth BS. Due to various factors, we
assume the parameters for different BSs are different. N0 is
the onesided power spectral density of white Gaussian noise;
W is the channel bandwidth.
In mmWave communication, the multipath effect is reduced
because of the directional transmission [21], and the channel
can be approximated to Gaussian channel [16]. According to
Shannon’s channel capacity, the data rate of ﬂow i can be
recorded as
Ri = ηWlog2(1 +
Pr(ti, ri)
N0W + P
h βthN0W + P
l Pr(tl, ri)),
(4)
where η is the factor that depicts the efﬁciency of the
transceiver design, which is the range of (0,1) [12]. h denotes
the ﬂow whose transmitter is the same as the receiver of ﬂow
i. In fact, we assume the number of h is at most 1. βth is the
parameter of SI cancelation level at BS th. l denotes the ﬂow
that is transmitted simultaneously without any common node
with i.
B. Problem Formulation
In this paper, we consider the FD concurrent scheduling
problem for QoS when time slot resources are limited. The
system time is divided into a series of non-overlapping frames.
As shown in Fig. 3, each frame consists of a scheduling phase,
where a transmission schedule is computed by the BNC, and

4
Scheduling Phase
Transmission Phase
One Frame
1
2
3
......
M
Time Slots
Fig. 3. The structure of one frame.
a transmission scheduling phase, where the BNC and BSs
start concurrent transmissions following the schedule [6]. The
transmission phase is further divided into M equal TSs. We
assume there are F ﬂows in the network and each ﬂow i has
its QoS requirement qi. For each ﬂow i, we deﬁne a binary
variable ak
i to express whether ﬂow i is scheduled in the kth
TS. If so, ak
i = 1; otherwise ak
i = 0. Since there may be
different ﬂows to be transmitted in different TSs, we denote
Rk
i is the actual transmission rate of ﬂow i. According to (4),
Rk
i can be indicated as
Rk
i = ηWlog2(1+
ak
i Pr(ti, ri)
N0W + P
h ak
hβthN0W + P
l ak
l Pr(tl, ri).
(5)
Then we can deﬁne the actual throughput of ﬂow i as
Ti =
PM
k=1 Rk
i ∆t
Ts + M∆t ,
(6)
where Ts is the time of scheduling phase and ∆t is the time
of one TS. When the actual throughput Ti of ﬂow i is higher
than its QoS requirement qi, we deem that ﬂow i has satisﬁed
its QoS requirement, and call the ﬂow as a completed ﬂow.
A binary variable Ai is used to indicate whether ﬂow i is
completed. Ai = 1 expresses ﬂow i is completed, while Ai =
0 expresses ﬂow i is not completed.
With TDMA scheme, to satisfy the QoS requirement of
ﬂow, each ﬂow will be allocated a greater number of time slots.
In concurrent transmission, we should aim at maximizing the
number of ﬂows with their QoS requirements satisﬁed to better
provide services in network. For this purpose, the objective
function can be formulated as
max
F
X
i=1
Ai,
(7)
and the ﬁrst constraint is
Ai =
 1,
Ti ≥qi;
0,
otherwise.
(8)
Next, we analyze the other constraints. Firstly, we use
variable in to denote the ﬂow whose transmitter or receiver is
the nth BS Bn; so ak
in indicates whether ﬂow in is scheduled
in the kth TS, that is, whether in uses Bn in the kth TS. In this
paper, each BS is just equipped with two steerable directional
antennas, so the number of ﬂows that simultaneously using the
same BS Bn can’t exceed two; this constraint can be described
as
X
in
ak
in ≤2, ∀k, n.
(9)
Then we use i1
n and i2
n indicate the two ﬂows simultaneously
using Bn; use T(Bn) and R(Bn) indicate the wireless links
with Bn as the transmitter and receiver, respectively. As
assumed in section II for the two antennas of a FD BS, one
of them is a transmitting antenna and the other is a receiving
antenna. Therefore, when two ﬂows simultaneously use the
same BS, the BS can only serve as the transmitter for one
ﬂow and as the receiver for the other, which can be expressed
as
i1
n ∈T(Bn)&i2
n ∈R(Bn)
or
i2
n ∈T(Bn)&i1
n ∈R(Bn), if
X
in
ak
in = 2.
(10)
In short,the problem of optimal scheduling (P1) can be
formulated as
max
F
X
i=1
Ai
s.t.
Constraints
(8) −(10)
This is a nonlinear integer programming (NLIP) problem
and NP-hard [16]. Constraint (8) indicates if the throughput
of ﬂow i in the schedule is larger than or equal to its
throughput requirement, Ai = 1; otherwise, Ai = 0. There are
many variables in constraints of our optimization problem, so
the constraint is broaden. In each TS, every ﬂow is either
scheduled or unscheduled. Therefore, when the number of
TSs is M and the number of ﬂow is F, the computational
complexity using exhaustive search algorithm is 2MF , which
is exponential. In FD wireless backhaul network, the number
of ﬂows may be large, and thus its complexity is unbearable
for network. In the next section, we propose a FD concurrent
scheduling algorithm based on coalition game (FDCG) to
solve problem P1 with low complexity.
III. FULL-DUPLEX CONCURRENT SCHEDULING
ALGORITHM BASED ON COALITIONAL GAME
In this section, we use the idea of contention graph and the
maximum independent set (MIS) [12] to solve the situation
that FD can not be directly scheduled in parallel, and to
provide the basic set for coalition game algorithm which can
ﬁnd the maximum sum rate scheduling set. Accordingly, this
algorithm can schedule concurrently ﬂows with the maximum
sum rate. Therefore, it achieves the aim of maximizing the
number of completed ﬂows and improves network throughput.
Next, we introduce the relevant content of the proposed
algorithm and describe it in detail.
A. The Construction of Contention Graph
In FD mmWave wireless backhaul networks, not all the
ﬂows can be concurrently scheduled. In contention graph [12],
when the two ﬂows can’t be concurrently scheduled, we deﬁne
there is a contention between them. In this paper, only one
case that ﬂows can’t not be concurrently scheduled is deﬁned.
According to our assumption of FD, for a FD BS with two
antennas, one antenna is the transmitting antenna and the

5
Flow i
Flow l
BS1
BS2
BS3
Flow i
Flow l
BS2
BS3
BS1
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4.
The ﬂows that can’t be concurrently scheduled due to the FD
assumption.
Flow i
Flow l
BS1
BS2
BS3
Flow i
Flow l
BS2
BS3
BS1
(a)
(b)
Flow i
Flow l
BS1
BS2
BS4
(c)
Fig. 5.
The ﬂows that allowed concurrently scheduled under the FD
assumption.
other is the receiving antenna. Therefore, the two ﬂows using
the same BS as their transmitter (or receiver) at same time
can’t be concurrently scheduled. This case is showed as Fig.
4. Fig. 4 (a) shows that two ﬂows simultaneously use the
same BS as their transmitters. Similarly, Fig. 4 (b) shows that
two ﬂows simultaneously use the same BS as their receivers.
Accordingly, based on the analysis for this case, the ﬂows
that can be concurrently scheduled are divided into following
three cases. 1) As shown in Fig. 5 (a), the transmitter of ﬂow
i is the receiver of ﬂow l, but the receiver of ﬂow i is not the
transmitter of ﬂow l. 2) As shown in Fig. 5 (b), the transmitter
of ﬂow i is the receiver of ﬂow l, and the receiver of ﬂow i
is the transmitter of ﬂow l. 3) As shown in Fig. 5 (c), the
transmitter of ﬂow i is not the receiver of ﬂow l, and the
receiver of ﬂow i is not the transmitter of ﬂow l, either.
It should be noted that noise interference, multi-user inter-
ference (MUI) and residual self-interference (RSI) are consid-
ered in this paper. Each ﬂow has noise interference, while MUI
and RSI depend on the situation. For the case in Fig. 5 (a), the
interference from ﬂow l to ﬂow i is MUI, and the interference
from ﬂow i to ﬂow l is RSI ; the interference of ﬂow i and l
is both RSI in Fig. 5 (b); and in Fig. 5 (c) the interference of
ﬂow i and l is both MUI. We need to distinguish the different
interference when calculating the actual rate of the ﬂow. Next,
we construct the contention graph. In contention graph, each
vertex represents a ﬂow. If two ﬂows cant be concurrently
scheduled (i.e., there is a contention between them), an edge is
inserted between the two corresponding vertices. For example,
as shown in Fig. 6,there is a contention between ﬂow 1 and
ﬂow 4 (i.e., one of the situation in Fig. 4). In contrast, there
is no contention between ﬂow 1 and ﬂow 5 (i.e., one of the
situation in Fig. 5).
B. Maximum Independent Set
Because the coalition game adopted in this paper does not
consider the ﬂows that can not be concurrently scheduled
1
4
2
3
5
Fig. 6. The example of the contention graph.
directly under FD condition when selecting player, it is nec-
essary to exclude the ﬂows which can not be concurrently
transmitted before selecting player. In this paper, we use the
minimum degree of maximal independent set to achieve it.
The MIS of contention graph is the set of ﬂows that have
no edge between each other on the contention graph with the
maximum cardinality [12]. For example, in Fig. 6, the set of
ﬂow 1, 2, and 3, i.e., {1, 2, 3}, is a MIS of the contention
graph. Because obtaining the MIS of a basic graph is NP
complete, we adopt the minimum degree greedy algorithm to
approximate the MIS [22]. In this paper, G(V, E) is used to
denote the conﬂict graph, where V denotes the set of vertices
and E denotes the set of edges. If there is an edge between
two vertices, the two vertices are deﬁned as neighbors. For
any vertex, its neighbor vertices are represented by N(v). For
any vertex v ∈V , it is used d(v) is to indicate its degree. In
graph theory, the degree of a vertex of a graph is the number
of edges connected to the vertex [12].
In proposed algorithm, because the number of TSs in the
transmission phase is limited, not all requested ﬂows can
be scheduled. If the ﬂow is scheduled in all TSs of the
transmission phase without satisﬁng its QoS requirement, it
is a waste of time slot resources. To efﬁciently use time slot
resources, this ﬂow isn’t schedule. The number of TSs that
each ﬂow spends on completing its QoS requirement can be
calculated according to the following formula:
ξi = qi ∗(Ts + M∆t)
Ri ∗∆t
.
(11)
It is important to note that Ri is the rate of ﬂow i without
interference from others, that is,
Ri = ηWlog2(1 + Pr(ti, ri)
N0W
).
(12)
Algorithm 1 MIS Algorithm
1: Input: the contention graph G(V, E); the number of TSs
that each ﬂow spends to complete its QoS requirement;
2: Initialization: Vs = φ; Vus = φ; V1 = V ;
3: While |V1| > 0 do
4:
Obtain v ∈V1 such that d(v) = min
w∈V1 d(w);
5:
Vs = Vs ∪v;
6:
V1 = V1 −{v ∪N(v)};
7: Vus = V −Vs;
8: Return Vs,Vus

6
The pseudo-code of the MIS algorithm is presented in
Algorithm 1. V is the set of all ﬂows, V1 denotes the set of
potentially scheduled ﬂows, Vs denotes the MIS of ﬂows that
selected for concurrent scheduling and Vus is the remaining
ﬂows except for those in the MIS. A minimum degree greedy
algorithm is used to obtain the MIS, as indicated by lines 3-6.
In line 4, if there is more than one ﬂow with the minimum
degree, we give priority to scheduling the ﬂows with the
small number of TSs required. The computation complexity
of Algorithm 1 is O(|V1|).
C. Full Duplex Concurrent Scheduling Algorithm Based on
Coalition Game
The selected MIS mentioned in the previous subsection is
partitioned as players and divided into two coalitions. In the
coalition game, a key point is to choose which coalition to
join for all ﬂows. Therefore, it is very important to deﬁne the
preference relation. Based on the preference relation, each ﬂow
can compare and order its potential coalition. For any ﬂow i,
the preference relation ≻i is deﬁned as complete, reﬂexive,
and transitive binary relation over the set of all coalitions that
ﬂow i can possibly form. In other word, Fc ≻i Fc′ represents
the ﬂow i prefers to be a member of coalition Fc with i ∈Fc
than Fc′ with i ∈Fc′. In this paper, we deﬁne the preference
inequality for all ﬂows as follows [23],
Fc ≻i Fc′ ⇔R(Fc) > R(Fc′),
(13)
where R(Fc) and R(Fc′) denotes the utility of coalition Fc
and Fc′,respectively. The utility is the sum transmission rates
of the ﬂows in each coalition. Suppose there are L ﬂows in
the coalition Fc, R(Fc) is expressed as
R(Fc) =
L
X
i=1
Rk
i .
(14)
It can be seen from the inequality (13) that the ﬂow tends to
join coalition whose utility is higher , that is, to join coalition
in which the sum rates of ﬂows is greater. So we can select a
coalition with the highest sum rate for concurrent scheduling.
Full-duplex concurrent scheduling algorithm based on coali-
tion game is shown as Algorithm 2, where the ﬂows per-
form switch operation until the ﬁnal Nash-stable partition is
achieved. It has the worst case complexity of O(|N|2). In
the proposed algorithm, the line 1 is some preparation work
that BNC obtains the BS location (Loc), the SI cancellation
level (βn) of each ﬂow and the QoS requirement of each
ﬂow. In line 2, we calculate the number of TSs that the ﬂow
requires when there is no interference from other ﬂows. The
scheduling problem we study is carried out under the condition
of limited time slots. In order to improve the availability of
TSs, we ﬁrst remove the ﬂow whose TSs required is more than
M TSs in line 3. In actual scheduling, there is interference
from other ﬂows, so the rate of ﬂow will be further reduced,
and the number of TSs that the ﬂow requires will be further
increased. Therefore, before scheduling, we estimate whether
each ﬂow can satisfy the QoS requirements in the remaining
TSs, and if not, remove it. Removing ﬂows not only reduces
the complexity of the entire scheduling, but also saves more
TSs to schedule more worthy ﬂows which will be completed
in the remaining TSs.
In the line 4-5 , the remaining ﬂows are sorted in ascending
order according to the number of TSs that the ﬂow requires
and the sorted ﬂows are pre-scheduled set P. The next step is
to construct contention graph for all ﬂows in the pre-scheduled
set P. Then the MIS Vs is selected as the player of the
coalition game by algorithm 1. In order to further increase the
number of completed ﬂows and improve system throughput,
we don’t directly un-schedule the remaining ﬂows that are not
in the MIS. Instead, we put it in a set Vus for subsequent
scheduling. Then ﬂows in MIS Vs are randomly divided into
two coalitions. Initially, the system will choose one ﬂow i. In
addition to the current coalition Fc, another coalition Fc′ is
still possible to join for the ﬂow i. The BNC has complete
information of network topology. Based on these information,
it calculates respectively the sum transmission rate of coali-
tion Fc and Fc′ ∪{i}. In line 13, if the switch condition
meets the preference relation deﬁned in formula (13), the
system performs a switch operation. In order to achieve better
convergence and reduce the complexity of the algorithm, we
introduce the number of continuous unsuccessful switching
operations m. If the switch operation is complete, m = 0;
otherwise, m = m + 1. Until m is equal to the number of
ﬂows, the ﬁnal Nash stability point is reached, that is, the
maximum sum rate of coalition has come up.
Next, we deﬁne the higher total transmission rate of the
coalition as active and schedule it concurrently. The other
coalition is inactive. In line 20, we join Vus to the inactive
coalition Fc2 and form a new coalition Fc2′ . Then the coalition
Fc2′ is sorted in ascending order according to the number of
TSs. Thus, we give priority to scheduling the ﬂow with a small
number of required TSs in the inactive coalition. From line 23
to 27, we estimate whether the remaining TSs can meet the
QoS requirements of the ﬂow. In the process of judgment, it
is considered that there is no interference with other ﬂows
in the next TSs, that is, the corresponding transmission rate
is Ri. Remove the ﬂow if the QoS requirement of the ﬂow
is not satisﬁed in the remaining TSs. From line 29 to 41,
the throughput of ﬂow which has been scheduled in active
coalition is calculated in turn. If the throughput of ﬂow satisﬁes
its QoS requirement, the ﬂow is complete. Then it is removed
to avoid repeating scheduling. change = 1 denotes there is
a completed ﬂow. If change = 1, the ﬂow in the coalition
Fc2′ are estimated successively whether or not the ﬂow can
be scheduled in the k + 1 TS. The conditions for scheduling
are that there is no contention between the added ﬂow(s) and
the scheduled ﬂows, that is, there is no common transmitter
or receiver, and that the utility of the active coalition with the
joined ﬂow(s) is higher than that of the active coalition with
the unjoined ﬂow(s). This can ensure concurrent scheduling is
the maximum sum rate in each TS.
IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
In the case of limited time, the sum rate of scheduling ﬂows
in each slot reach maximum, which can increase the number
of completed ﬂows and improve system throughput. In order

7
Algorithm 2 Full-Duplex Concurrent Scheduling Algorithm
Based on Coalition Game
1: BNC obtain Loc,βn and qi;
2: Calculate the number of the TSs ξi that the ﬂow i requires
to meet the QoS requirement;
3: Remove D = {i|ξi > M};
4: The reminding F ﬂows are sorted incrementally according
to ξi and obtain the pre-scheduled set P;
5: Construct contention graph G for all ﬂows in the pre-
scheduled set P;
6: Use Algorithm 1 to select the MIS Vs and the remaining
ﬂows set Vus;
7: The N ﬂows in Vs are randomly partition two coalition
Fc1 and Fc2;
8: Set
the
current
partition
as
Fcur
=
{Fc1, Fc2} , sumthroughput = 0, number = 0, n = 0;
9: while n < N do
10:
Choose a ﬂow i, deﬁne its current coalition as Fc, other
coalition as Fc′;
11:
Fc′ ∪{i} →Fc′′;
12:
Calculate R(Fc) and R(Fc′′ );
13:
if
max {R(Fc \ {i}), R(Fc′′ )}
>
max {R(Fc), R(Fc′)} then
14:
Perform the switch operation, Fc \ {i} →Fc, Fc′ ∪
{i} →Fc′ ,obtain new partition Fcur; n = 0;
15:
else
16:
n = n + 1;
17:
end if
18: end whileuntil the partition reach the ﬁnal Nash stability.
19: Note the coalition with the maximum sum rate as Fc1 and
another coalition Fc2;
20: Add the remaining ﬂows set Vus to the coalition Fc2 ,
become the coalition Fc2′ ;
21: k = 1;
22: while k ≤M do
23:
for i(i ∈Fc1 do
24:
if
Rk
i ∆t+Ri(M−k)∆t+Pk−1
j=1 Rj
i ∆t
Ts+M∆t
< qi then
25:
Fc1 \ {i} →Fc1;
26:
end if
27:
end for
28:
Calculate the total throughput of all ﬂows in the coali-
tion Fc1 at k TSs as sumthroughput;
29:
Calculate successively the throughput of all ﬂows in the
coalition Fc1 at k TSs as th;
30:
if the throughput of ﬂow i th > qi ∗(Ts +M∆t) then
31:
Flow i is completed,Fc1 \ {i} →Fc1;
32:
number = number + 1; change = 1;
33:
if change = 1 then
34:
for j(j ∈Fc2′ ) do
35:
if ﬂow j and other ﬂows in coalition Fc1 without
the situation of Fig. 4. and R(Fc1 ∪j) > R(Fc1)
then
36:
Update Fc1 ∪{j} →Fc1,Fc2′ \ {j} →Fc2′ ;
37:
end if
38:
end for
39:
k = k + 1,change = 0;
40:
end if
41:
end if
42: end while
43: return sumthroughput and number;
to express the superiority of the algorithm more intuitively, we
simulate the algorithm and analyze the result accordingly.
A. Simulation Setup
In the simulations, we evaluate the performance of the
proposed algorithm in a 60GHz mmWave wireless back-
haul network that 10 BSs are uniformly distributed in a
100m × 100m square area [16]. Every BS has the same
transmission power Pt. The transmitters and receivers of ﬂows
are randomly selected, and the QoS requirements of ﬂows
are uniformly distributed between 1Gbps and 3Gbps. The
SI cancelation parameters β for different BSs are uniformly
distributed between 2 and 4. We also analyze the impact of SI
cancelation level, MUI factor and different QoS requirements
on the performance improvement. To be more realistic, other
parameters are shown in Table I. Because we focus on the
QoS of ﬂows, according to our optimization goal, we use the
number of completed ﬂows and the system throughput as eval-
uation metrics. When one ﬂow achieves its QoS requirement,
it is called a completed ﬂow. System throughput represents the
throughput of all ﬂows in the network per slot.
TABLE I
SIMULATION PARAMETERS
Parameter
Symbol
Value
Transmission power
Pt
1000mW
Path loss exponent
n
2
Transceiver efﬁciency factor
η
0.5
System bandwidth
W
1200MHz
Background noise
N0
-134dbm/MHz
Slot time
∆t
18us
Scheduling phase time
Ts
850us
Half-power beamwidth
θ−3dB
30o
In order to show the advantages of the proposed full-duplex
concurrent scheduling algorithm based on coalition game in
mmWave wireless backhaul network, we compare it with
the following three algorithms.The coalition game algorithm
proposed under FD condition is called FDCG algorithm.
1)TDMA: In TDMA, ﬂows are transmitted serially. Only
one stream is allowed to be scheduled in each slot during
the transmission phase. we use TDMA as the baseline for
evaluating performance without concurrent scheduling.
2)STDMA: This algorithm allows both interference and
non-interference ﬂows to be transmitted concurrently. The
differences between this algorithm and the proposed algorithm
are that STDMA is under half-duplex condition and doesn’t
choose the maximum sum rate of ﬂows in the ﬁrst TS.
3)SFD: This is an algorithm that removes the part of the
coalition game and does not consider whether the added ﬂows
increase the sum rate in the following TSs. The ﬂows in the
MIS are scheduled directly in the ﬁrst TS. When a ﬂow is
completed, the MIS can be added into the ﬂow that only has no
conﬂict with the scheduled ﬂows. It is a simple FD algorithm.
The proposed FDCG algorithm is compared with SFD to show
the idea that coalition game is more beneﬁcial to scheduling.
For the M TSs and F ﬂows, the computational com-
plexity of TDMA , STDMA, SFD and FDCG is O(M),

8
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Number of Flows
Number of Completed Flows
 
 
FDCG
SFD
STDMA
TDMA
Fig. 7. Number of completed ﬂows comparison of four scheduling algorithm
with different number of time slots.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
Number of Flows
System Throughput (Gbps)
 
 
FDCG
SFD
STDMA
TDMA
Fig. 8.
System throughput comparison of four scheduling algorithm with
different number of time slots.
O(kF)O(MF) and O(MF), respectively, where k is a con-
stant coefﬁcient.
B. Performance Evaluation
In order to make the simulation data more persuasive, each
simulation performs 10 times. The topology of the network,
the location of the base station and the QoS requirements of
all ﬂows vary with each simulation in this paper. From Fig. 7
to Fig. 14, MUI factor is 1. In Fig. 7, we set the number of
time slots to be 1000. Then, we plot the number of completed
ﬂows comparison of four scheduling algorithm varying the
number of ﬂows from 10 to 40. From the ﬁgure, we can
observe the proposed FDCG algorithm is better than the other
three. For TDMA, when the number of ﬂows increases and
the number of TSs remains constant, the number of completed
ﬂows remains essentially the same. Because only one ﬂow per
slot can be transmitted in TDMA. The number of completed
ﬂows in STDMA algorithm ﬂuctuates greatly because the QoS
requirements of the ﬂows and the position information are
random in every simulation. And the STDMA and SFD have
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Number of Time Slots
Number of Completed Flows
 
 
FDCG
SFD
STDMA
TDMA
Fig. 9. Number of completed ﬂows comparison of four scheduling algorithm
with different number of ﬂows.
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
Number of Time Slots
System Throughput (Gbps£©
 
 
FDCG
SFD
STDMA
TDMA
Fig. 10.
System throughput comparison of four scheduling algorithm with
different number of ﬂows.
little change with the increase of the number of ﬂows. For the
proposed FDCG algorithm in this paper, with the increase of
the number of ﬂows, the number of completed ﬂows is also
increasing. When the number of ﬂows is over 30, the number
of completed ﬂow tend towards stability because of the limited
time slots resources. It shows that the proposed algorithm
based on coalition game is more suitable for the current
situation in which the amount of trafﬁc data and the number of
users increase. In Fig. 8, we set the number of time slots to be
1000. Then, we plot the system throughput comparison of four
scheduling algorithm varying the number of ﬂows from 10 to
40. The system throughput by TDMA remains around 12Gbps,
mainly because the algorithm schedules only one ﬂow per
slot and the system capacity is limited. Therefore, no matter
how the number of ﬂows changes, the system throughput
will not increase too much. The throughput of the proposed
FDCG algorithm is about 30Gbps, and the lower throughput
is 17.5Gbps. When the ﬂow number is 30, the throughput of
FDCG is higher than that of SFD, STDMA and TDMA about
29.31%, 65.45% and 137.24%, respectively.

9
In Fig. 7 and Fig. 8, the proposed FDCG algorithm is
superior to the other three algorithms in both the number of
completed ﬂows and system throughput. FDCG is better than
SFD because FDCG has the maximum sum rate in each slot.
Moreover, we also give the priority to scheduling the ﬂows
with small number of required TSs, which will save more time
slots to satisfy the subsequent ﬂow transmission. When a ﬂow
is completed, the interference of other ﬂows will also reduce
and the rate of each ﬂow will increase. Therefore, the ﬂows
will spend less time slots on satisfying their QoS requirements
, which is a virtuous cycle. Due to the direct scheduling of the
MIS by SFD, many ﬂows are scheduled concurrently , which
leads to the increase of the total interference of each ﬂow and
the decrease of the transmission rate of each ﬂow. For this
reason, more time slots are needed, resulting in the long-term
occupation of time slot resources. For STDMA, the algorithm
is based on half-duplex condition, and concurrent scheduling
ﬂows are not the maximum sum rate of ﬂows. Even if the
rate is considered in the subsequent joined ﬂow, the scheduled
ﬂows will not become the maximum sum rate. As a result,
the number of completed ﬂows and the system throughput of
STDMA are not as good as that of FDCG algorithm.
In Fig. 9, we set the number of ﬂows to be 30.Then, we plot
the number of completed ﬂows comparison of four scheduling
algorithms varying the number of time slots from 500 to 2000.
From the ﬁgure, the FDCG algorithm achieves signiﬁcantly
better performance than other algorithms. When the number of
time slots is 1500, the number of completed ﬂows of the FDCG
algorithm is higher than that of SFDSTDMA and TDMA about
62.22%, 82.50% and 192.00%. However, with the increasing
number of slots up to 1500, the number of completed ﬂows of
FDCG decreases. Because the QoS requirement of each ﬂow
is converted to the number of bits in the simulation and the
number of bits transformed is proportional to the number of
time slots. That is to say, the larger the number of time slots
is the greater the number of bits per ﬂow. So ﬂows require
more time slots to satisfy their QoS requirements, which may
lead to many later scheduled ﬂows do not satisfy their QoS
requirements. This results in a reduction of the number of
completed ﬂows.
In Fig. 10, we set the number of ﬂows to be 30. Then, we
plot system throughput comparison of four scheduling algo-
rithms varying the number of time slots from 500 to 2000. The
system throughput of FDCG algorithm is obviously better than
that of the other three algorithms. With the increasing number
of time slots, the system throughput of TDMA algorithm does
not increase signiﬁcantly,but FDCG, SFD and STDMA have
an obvious increasing. However, with the increasing number
of time slots up to 1500, the system throughput of FDCG
decreases. It can be seen that with the increasing number of
slots from the formula (6), its effect on improving system
throughput is negative.
From Fig. 9 and Fig. 10, it can be seen that the three
algorithms, FDCG, SFD and STDMA, are better in terms of
the number of completed ﬂows and the system throughput in
the time slot range of 750-1500. The number of completed
ﬂows for SFD is higher than that of STDMA, but its system
throughput is lower than that of STDMA . The two algorithms
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Beta Level
Number of Completed Flows
 
 
FDCG
SFD
STDMA
TDMA
Fig. 11.
The number of completed ﬂows comparison of four scheduling
algorithm with different SI cancelation level.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
5
10
15
20
25
30
Beta Level
System Throughput (Gbps)
 
 
FDCG
SFD
STDMA
TDMA
Fig. 12.
System throughput comparison of four scheduling algorithm with
different SI cancelation level.
schedule the ﬂows in different ways. SFD algorithm give
priority to scheduling ﬂows with the small number of required
TSs in following TSs. The completed ﬂows are just the ﬂows
of low QoS requirements, resulting in a small increase in
system throughput. Although the number of completed ﬂows
is high, the system throughput is not necessarily high. At the
same time, it can be seen that the FD has twice as much
spectrum as the half-duplex, but if the scheduling algorithm
is not good enough, it will be better or worse than the half-
duplex scheduling algorithm. This also reﬂects the importance
of scheduling algorithms.
In Fig. 11 and Fig. 12, for the proposed FDCG and SFD,
the SI cancellation level β has an obvious effect on the
performance. We simulate the performance under different
magnitudes of β. For example, when x=3, β is uniformly
distributed in 2 × 103 −4 × 103. In this case, the total
number of ﬂows is 40 and M = 1000. We can ﬁnd the
performance of SFD deteriorates rapidly after β reaches 104
magnitude, but the proposed FDCG gradually deteriorates.
When β reaches 105 magnitude, the proposed FDCG has the

10
0.001
0.005
0.01
0.05
0.1
0.5
1
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
MUI factor
Number of Completed Flows
 
 
FDCG
SFD
STDMA
TDMA
Fig. 13.
The number of completed ﬂows comparison of four scheduling
algorithm with different MUI factor.
0.001
0.005
0.01
0.05
0.1
0.5
1
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
MUI factor
System Throughput (Gbps)
 
 
FDCG
SFD
STDMA
TDMA
Fig. 14.
System throughput comparison of four scheduling algorithm with
different MUI factor.
similar performance as the STDMA. This also indicates the
advantages of full duplex will not show up until SI cancelation
level is below a certain value.
In Fig. 13 and Fig. 14, for the proposed FDCG , SFD
and STDMA, the MUI factor ρ has an obvious effect on
the performance. In this case, the total number of ﬂows
is 40 and M = 1000. With the increasing value of MUI
factor, the number of completed ﬂows and system throughput
in three algorithms all decrease in the same trend. But the
performance of the proposed FDCG algorithm is higher. When
ρ = 0.05, the number of completed ﬂows of the proposed
FDCG algorithm is higher than that of STDMA about 61.53%.
We set the same Qos requirement for the 40 ﬂows and
M = 1000, and observe the performance changes of the
four algorithms with the increasing QOS requirement. In Fig.
15, with the increase of QoS requirement, the number of
completed ﬂows for the four algorithms decreases. When QoS
requirement is 4 Gbps, the number of completed ﬂows for the
proposed FDCG is still higher than that of STDMA , SFD and
TDMA. In Fig. 16, with the increasing QoS requirements, the
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
QoS Requirement (Gbps)
Number of Completed Flows
 
 
FDCG
SFD
STDMA
TDMA
Fig. 15.
The number of completed ﬂows comparison of four scheduling
algorithm with different QoS requirement.
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
10
15
20
25
30
35
QoS Requirement (Gbps)
System Throughput (Gbps)
 
 
FDCG
SFD
STDMA
TDMA
Fig. 16.
System throughput comparison of four scheduling algorithm with
different QoS requirement.
system throughput of the proposed FDCG increases by a small
margin and keep around 30 Gbps. For the proposed FDCG
algorithm, the increasing QoS requirements of ﬂows has little
effect on system throughput. But if the QoS requirements of
every request ﬂow is high, the number of completed ﬂows is
small.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we investigate the problem of concurrent trans-
mission scheduling in mmWave wireless backhaul network.
We propose a full-duplex concurrent scheduling algorithm
based on coalition game to solve the problem. The proposed
algorithm is to use the idea of coalition game to select the
concurrent scheduling set which has the maximum sum rate.
The simulation results show that the proposed algorithm is
superior to the other three algorithms in terms of the number
of completed ﬂows and the system throughput. In general,
the proposed algorithm can increase system throughput and
improve resource utilization efﬁciency.

11
