Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
OFFLINE BILINGUAL WORD VECTORS, ORTHOGONAL
TRANSFORMATIONS AND THE INVERTED SOFTMAX
Samuel L. Smith, David H. P. Turban, Steven Hamblin & Nils Y. Hammerla
babylon health
London, UK

ABSTRACT
Usually bilingual word vectors are trained “online”.
Mikolov et al. (2013a)
showed they can also be found “ofﬂine”; whereby two pre-trained embeddings
are aligned with a linear transformation, using dictionaries compiled from expert
knowledge. In this work, we prove that the linear transformation between two
spaces should be orthogonal. This transformation can be obtained using the singu-
lar value decomposition. We introduce a novel “inverted softmax” for identifying

mapping from 34% to 43%, when translating a test set composed of both common
and rare English words into Italian. Orthogonal transformations are more robust
to noise, enabling us to learn the transformation without expert bilingual signal
by constructing a “pseudo-dictionary” from the identical character strings which
appear in both languages, achieving 40% precision on the same test set. Finally,
we extend our method to retrieve the true translations of English sentences from a

1
INTRODUCTION
Monolingual word vectors embed language in a high-dimensional vector space, such that the simi-
larity of two words is deﬁned by their proximity in this space (Mikolov et al., 2013b). They enable
us to train sophisticated classiﬁers to interpret free ﬂowing text (Kim, 2014), but they require inde-
pendent models to be trained for each language. Crucially, training text obtained in one language
cannot improve the performance of classiﬁers trained in another, unless the text is explicitly trans-
lated. Increasing interest is now focused on bilingual vectors, in which words are aligned by their
meaning, irrespective of the language of origin. Such vectors may drive improvements in machine
translation (Zou et al., 2013), and enable language-agnostic text classiﬁers (Klementiev et al., 2012).
They can also be higher quality than monolingual vectors (Faruqui & Dyer, 2014).
Bilingual vectors are normally trained “online”, whereby both languages are learnt together in a
shared space (Chandar et al., 2014; Hermann & Blunsom, 2013). Typically these algorithms exploit
two sources of monolingual text alongside a smaller bilingual corpus of aligned sentences. This
bilingual signal provides a regularisation term, which penalises the embeddings if similar words in
the two languages do not lie nearby in the vector space. However Mikolov et al. (2013a) showed that
bilingual word vectors can also be obtained “ofﬂine”. Two sets of word vectors in different languages
were ﬁrst obtained independently, and then a linear matrix W was trained using a dictionary to
map word vectors from the “source” language into the “target” language. Remarkably, this simple
procedure was able to translate a test set of English words into Spanish with 33% precision.
To develop an intuition for these two approaches, we note that the similarity of two word vectors is
deﬁned by their cosine similarity, cos(θij) = yT
i xj/|yi||xj|. The vectors have no intrinsic meaning,
it is only the angles between vectors which are meaningful. This is closely analogous to asking a
cartographer to draw a map of England with no compass. The map will be correct, but she does
not know which direction is north, so the angle of rotation will be random. Two maps drawn by
two such cartographers will be identical, except that one will be rotated by an unknown angle with
respect to the other. There are two ways the cartographers could align their maps. They could draw
1
arXiv:1702.03859v1  [cs.CL]  13 Feb 2017

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
Figure 1: A 2D plane through an English-Italian semantic space, before and after applying the SVD
on the word vectors discussed below, using a training dictionary of 5000 translation pairs. The
examples above were not used during training, but the SVD aligns the translations remarkably well.
the maps together, thus ensuring that landmarks are placed nearby on both maps during “training”.
Or they could draw their maps independently, and then compare the two afterwards; rotating one
map with respect to the other until the major cities are aligned. We note that the more similar the
intrinsic geometry of the two maps, the more accurately this rotation will align the space.
The main contribution of this work is to provide theoretical insights which unify and enhance exist-
ing approaches in the literature. We prove that a self-consistent linear transformation between vector
spaces should be orthogonal. Intuitively, the transformation is a rotation, and it is found using the
singular value decomposition (SVD). The shared semantic space obtained by the SVD is illustrated
in ﬁgure 1. We build on the work of Dinu et al. (2014), by introducing a novel “inverted softmax” to
combat the hubness problem. Using the same word vectors, training dictionary and test set provided
by Dinu, we improve the precision of Mikolov’s method from 34% to 43%, when translating from
English to Italian, and from 25% to 37% when translating from Italian to English. We also present
three remarkable new results. First we exploit the superior robustness of orthogonal transformations,
by discarding the training dictionary and forming a pseudo-dictionary from the identical character
strings which appear in both languages. While Mikolov’s method achieves translation precisions
of just 1% and 3% respectively with this pseudo-dictionary, our approach achieves precisions of
40% and 34%. This is a striking result, achieved without any expert bilingual signal. Next, we
form simple sentence vectors by summing and normalising over word vectors, and we obtain bilin-
gual sentence vectors by applying the SVD to a phrase dictionary formed from a bilingual corpus of
aligned text. The transformation obtained aligns the underlying word vectors, achieving a translation
precision of 43% and 38%, en-par with the expert word dictionary above. Finally, we show that we
can also use our bilingual word vectors to retrieve sentence translations; identifying the translation
of an English sentence from a bag of 200k Italian candidate sentences with 68% precision.
2
OFFLINE BILINGUAL LANGUAGE VECTORS
2.1
PREVIOUS WORK
Ofﬂine bilingual word vectors were ﬁrst proposed by Mikolov et al. (2013a). They obtained a small
dictionary of paired words from Google Translate, whose word vectors we denote {yi, xi}n
i=1. Next,
they applied a linear transformation W to the source language and used stochastic gradient descent
to minimise the squared reconstruction error,
min
W
n
X
i=1
||yi −Wxi||2.
(1)
After training, any word vector in the source language can be mapped to the target by calculating
ye = Wx. The similarity between a source vector x and a target vector yt can then be evaluated by
the cosine similarity cos(θte) = yT
t ye/|yt||ye|. Astonishingly, this simple procedure achieved 33%
accuracy when translating unseen words from English into Spanish, using a training dictionary of
2

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
5k common English words and their Spanish translations, and word vectors trained using word2vec
on the WMT11 text datasets. Translations were found by a simple nearest neighbour procedure.
We note that the cost function above is solved by the method of least squares, as realised by Dinu
et al. (2014). They did not modify this cost function, but proposed an adapted method of retrieving
translation pairs which was more accurate when translating words from English to Italian. Faruqui &
Dyer (2014) obtained bilingual word vectors using CCA. They did not attempt any translation tasks,
but showed that the combination of CCA and dimensionality reduction improved the performance
of monolingual vectors on standard evaluation tasks. CCA had previously been used to iteratively
extract translation pairs directly from monolingual corpora (Haghighi et al., 2008). More recently,
Xing et al. (2015) argued that Mikolov’s linear matrix should be orthogonal, and introduced an
approximate procedure composed of gradient descent updates and repeated applications of the SVD.
CCA has been extended to map 59 languages into a single shared space (Ammar et al., 2016), and
non-linear “deep CCA” has been introduced (Lu et al., 2015). A theoretical analysis of bilingual
word vectors similar to this paper was recently published by Artetxe et al. (2016).
2.2
THE SIMILARITY MATRIX AND THE ORTHOGONAL TRANSFORM
To prove that a self-consistent linear mapping between semantic spaces must be orthogonal, we form
the similarity matrix, S = Y WXT . X and Y are word vector matrices for each language, in which
each row contains a single word vector, denoted by lower case x and y. The matrix element,
Sij
=
yT
i Wxj
(2)
=
yi · (Wxj),
(3)
evaluates the similarity between the jth source word and the ith target word. The matrix W maps
the source language into the target language. The largest value in a column of the similarity matrix
gives the most similar target word to a particular source word, while the largest value in a row gives
the most similar source word to a given target word. However we could also form a second similarity
matrix S′ = XQY T , such that the matrix Q maps the target language back into the source.
S′
ji
=
xT
j Qyi
(4)
=
xj · (Qyi),
(5)
also evaluates the similarity between the jth source word and the ith target word. To be self consis-
tent, we require S′ = ST . However ST = XW T Y T , and therefore the matrix Q = W T . If W
maps the source language into the target, then W T maps the target language back into the source.
When we map a source word into the target language, we should be able to map it back into the
source language and obtain the original vector. x ∼W T y and y ∼Wx and thus x ∼W T Wx. This
expression should hold for any word vector x and thus we conclude that the transformation W should
be an orthogonal matrix O satisfying OT O = I, where I denotes the identity matrix. Orthogonal
transformations preserve vector norms, so if we normalise X and Y , then the matrix element Sij =
|yi||Oxj| cos(θij) = cos(θij). The similarity matrix S = Y OXT computes the cosine similarity
between all possible pairs of source and target words under the orthogonal transformation O.
We now infer the orthogonal transformation O from a dictionary {yi, xi}n
i=1 of paired words. Since
we predict the similarity of two vectors by evaluating Sij = cos(θij), we ought to learn the trans-
formation by maximising the cosine similarity of translation pairs in the dictionary,
max
O
n
X
i=1
yT
i Oxi, subject to OT O = I.
(6)
The solution proceeds as follows. We form two ordered matrices XD and YD from the dictionary,
such that the ith row of {XD, YD} corresponds to the source and target language word vectors of
the ith pair in the dictionary. We then compute the SVD of M = Y T
D XD = UΣV T . This step is
highly efﬁcient, since M is a square matrix with the same dimensionality as the word vectors. U
and V are composed of columns of orthonormal vectors, while Σ is a diagonal matrix containing
the singular values. Our cost function is minimised by O = UV T . The optimised similarity matrix,
S
=
Y UV T XT .
(7)
Sij
=
yT
i UV T xj
(8)
=
(U T yi) · (V T xj).
(9)
3

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
Thus, we map both languages into a single space, by applying the transformation V T to the source
language and U T to the target language. We prove that this procedure maximises equation 6 in
the appendix. It was recently independently proposed by Artetxe et al. (2016), and provides a
numerically exact solution to the cost function proposed by Xing et al. (2015), just as the method of
least squares provides a numerically exact solution to the cost function of Mikolov et al. (2013a).
Our procedure did not use the singular values Σ, but these values do carry relevant information. All
of the singular values are positive, and each singular value si is uniquely associated to a pair of
normalised vectors ui and vi from the matrices U and V . Standard implementations of the SVD
return the singular values in descending order. The larger the singular value, the more rapidly the
mean cosine similarity of the dictionary decreases if the corresponding vectors are distorted. We can
perform dimensionality reduction by neglecting the vectors {ui, vi} which arise from the smallest
singular values. This is trivial to implement by simply dropping the ﬁnal few rows of U T and V T ,
and we will show below that it leads to a small improvement in the translation performance.
2.3
THE SVD AND CCA
Our method is very similar to the CCA procedure proposed by Faruqui & Dyer (2014), which can
also be obtained using the SVD (Press, 2011). We ﬁrst obtain the source dictionary matrix XD and
subtract the mean from each column of this matrix to obtain X′
D. We then perform our ﬁrst SVD to
obtain X′
D = QDΣXV T
X . We perform the same two operations on the target dictionary YD to obtain
Y ′
D = WDΣY V T
Y , and then perform another SVD on the product M ′ = QT
DWD = U ′Σ′V ′T . This
last step is identical to the alignment procedure we introduced above. Finally we obtain X′ and Y ′ by
subtracting the mean value of each column in XD and YD, before computing a new pair of aligned
representations of the full vocabulary, Qaligned = X′VXΣ−1
X U ′, and Waligned = Y ′VY Σ−1
Y V ′.
Once again, we perform dimensionality reduction by neglecting the ﬁnal few columns of U ′ and V ′.
Effectively, CCA is composed of two stages. In the ﬁrst stage, we replace our word vector matrices
X and Y by two new vector representations Q = X′VXΣ−1
X and W = Y ′VY Σ−1
Y . In the second
stage, we apply the orthogonal transformations {U ′, V ′} to align {Q, W} in a single shared space.
To the authors, the ﬁrst stage appears redundant. If we have already learned high-quality word
vectors {X, Y }, there seems little reason to learn new representations {Q, W}. Additionally, it is
unclear why the transformations VXΣ−1
X and VY Σ−1
Y
are obtained using only the dictionary matrices
{XD, YD}, rather than using the full vocabularies {X, Y }.
2.4
THE INVERTED SOFTMAX
Mikolov et al. (2013a) predicted the translation of a source word xj by ﬁnding the target word yi
closest to Wxj. In our formalism, this corresponds to ﬁnding the largest entry in the jth column of
the similarity matrix. To estimate our conﬁdence in this prediction, we could form the softmax,
Pj→i =
eβSij
P
m eβSmj .
(10)
To learn the “inverse temperature” β, we maximise the log probability over the training dictionary,
max
β
X
pairs ij
ln(Pj→i).
(11)
This sum should be performed only over valid translation pairs. Dinu et al. (2014) demonstrated
that nearest neighbour retrieval is ﬂawed, since it suffers from the presence of “hubs”. Hubs are
words which appear as the nearest neighbour target word to many different source words, reducing
the translation performance. We propose that the hubness problem is mitigated by inverting the
softmax, and normalising the probability over source words rather than target words.
Pj→i =
eβSij
αj
P
n eβSin .
(12)
Intuitively, rather than asking whether the source word translates to the candidate target word, we
assess the probability that the candidate target word translates back into the source word. We then
select the target word which maximises this probability. If the ith target word is a hub, then the
4

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
denominator in equation 12 will be large, preventing this target word from being selected. The
vector α ensures normalisation. The sum over n should run over all source words in the vocabulary.
However to reduce the computational cost, we only perform this sum over ns sample words, chosen
randomly from the vocabulary. Unless explicitly stated, ns = 1500.
2.5
PSEUDO DICTIONARIES
2.5.1
IDENTICAL CHARACTER STRINGS
Our method requires a training dictionary of paired vectors, which is used to infer the orthogonal
map O and the inverse temperature β, and also as a validation set during dimensionality reduction.
Typically this dictionary is obtained by translating common source words into the target language
using Google Translate, which was constructed using expert human knowledge. However most
European languages share a large number of words composed of identical character strings. Words
like “London”, “DNA” and “Tortilla”. It is probable that identical strings across two languages
share similar meanings. We can extract these strings and form a “pseudo-dictionary”, compiled
without any expert bilingual knowledge. Below we show that this pseudo dictionary is sufﬁcient to
successfully translate between English and Italian with high precision.
2.5.2
ALIGNED SENTENCES
The Europarl corpus is composed of aligned sentences in a number of European languages (Koehn,
2005). Chandar et al. (2014) showed that such corpora can be used alongside monolingual text
sources to learn online bilingual vectors, but to date, ofﬂine bilingual vectors have only been ob-
tained from dictionaries. To learn the orthogonal transformation from aligned sentences, we deﬁne
the vector q of a source language sentence by a normalised sum over the word vectors present,
q = P
i xi/ |P
i xi|. The vector w of a target language sentence is deﬁned by a normalised sum
of word vectors yi. We view the aligned corpus as a dictionary of paired sentences {wi, qi}, from
which we form two dictionary matrices WD and QD. We obtain the transformation O from an SVD
on the matrix M = W T
DQD, and use this transformation to translate individual words in the test set.
This simple procedure embeds words and sentences in the same vector space. The sentence embed-
ding can be thought of as the “average word” that the sentence conveys. Intuitively, each aligned
sentence pair gives us weak information about a possible word pair in the dictionary. By combining
a large number of such sentence pairs, we obtain sufﬁcient information to align the vector spaces
and infer the translations of individual words. However, we will go on to show that this orthogonal
transformation can be used, not only to retrieve the translations of words between languages, but
also to retrieve the translations of sentences between languages with remarkably high accuracy.
3
EXPERIMENTS
We perform our experiments using the same word vectors, training dictionary and test dictionary
provided by Dinu et al. (2014)1. The word vectors were trained using word2vec, and then the 200k
most common words in both the English and Italian corpora were extracted. The English word vec-
tors were trained on the WackyPedia/ukWaC and BNC corpora, while the Italian word vectors were
trained on the WackyPedia/itWaC corpus. The training dictionary comprises 5k common English
words and their Italian translations, while the test set is composed of 1500 English words and their
Italian translations. This test set is split into ﬁve sets of 300. The ﬁrst 300 words arise from the
most common 5k words in the English corpus, the next 300 from the 5k-20k most common words,
followed by bins for the 20k-50k, 50k-100k, and 100k-200k most common words. This enables us
to evaluate how word frequency affects the translation performance. Some of the Italian words have
both male and female forms, and we follow Dinu in considering either form a valid translation.
We report results using our own procedure, as well as the methods proposed by Mikolov, Faruqui,
and Dinu. We compute results for Mikolov’s method by applying the method of least squares, and
results for Faruqui’s method using Scikit-learn’s implementation of CCA with default parameters.
In both cases, we predict translations by nearest neighbour retrieval. We do not apply dimensionality
1These are available at http://clic.cimec.unitn.it/~georgiana.dinu/down/
5

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
Table 1: Translation performance using the expert training dictionary, English into Italian.
Precision
Mikolov
et al.
Dinu
et al.
CCA
SVD
+ inverted
softmax
+ dimensionality
reduction

0.338
0.385
0.361
0.369
0.417
0.431

0.483
0.564
0.527
0.527
0.587
0.607

0.539
0.639
0.581
0.579
0.655
0.664
Table 2: Translation performance using the expert training dictionary, Italian into English.
Precision
Mikolov
et al.
Dinu
et al.
CCA
SVD
+ inverted
softmax
+ dimensionality
reduction

0.249
0.246
0.310
0.322
0.373
0.380

0.410
0.454
0.499
0.496
0.577
0.585

0.474
0.541
0.570
0.557
0.631
0.636
reduction following CCA, to enable a fair comparison with our SVD procedure. We compute results
for Dinu’s method using the source code they provided alongside their manuscript. Their method
uses 10k source words as “pivots”; 5k from the test set and 5k chosen at random from the vocabulary.
By contrast, the inverted softmax does not know which source words occur in the test set.
3.1
EXPERIMENTS USING THE EXPERT TRAINING DICTIONARY
In tables 1 and 2 we present the translation performance of our methods when translating the test
set between English and Italian, using the expert training dictionary provided by Dinu. We evaluate
Mikolov and Dinu’s methods for comparison, as well as CCA- proposed by Faruqui & Dyer (2014).
All the methods are more accurate when translating from English to Italian. This is unsurprising
given that some English words in the test set can translate to either the male or female form of
the Italian word. In the fourth column we evaluate the performance of our SVD procedure with
nearest neighbour retrieval. This already provides a marked improvement on Mikolov’s mapping,
especially when translating from Italian into English. As anticipated, the performance of the SVD
is very similar to CCA. In the following two columns we apply ﬁrst the inverted softmax, and then
dimensionality reduction to the aligned vector space obtained by the SVD. The hyper-parameters of
these procedures were optimised on the training dictionary. Combining both procedures improves

respectively. These results are a signiﬁcant improvement on previous work. In table 3 we present

translating common words. This performance drops off for rare words; presumably either because
there is insufﬁcient monolingual data to learn high quality rare word vectors, or because the linguistic
similarities between rare words across languages are less pronounced.

achieve 69% precision on test cases selected from the 5k most common English words in the ukWaC,
Wikipedia and BNC corpora. The precision falls for less common words.
Word ranking
by frequency
Mikolov
et al.
Dinu
et al.
CCA
SVD
+ inverted
softmax
+ dimensionality
reduction
0-5k
0.607
0.650
0.633
0.637
0.690
0.690
5-20k
0.463
0.540
0.477
0.510
0.580
0.610
20-50k
0.280
0.350
0.343
0.323
0.380
0.403
50-100k
0.193
0.217
0.190
0.200
0.230
0.253
100-200k
0.147
0.163
0.163
0.173
0.203
0.200
6

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2017
Table 4: Translation performance using the pseudo dictionary of identical character strings.
Precision
English to Italian:
Italian to English:
Mikolov
et al.
Dinu
et al.
CCA
This
work
Mikolov
et al.
Dinu
et al.
CCA
This
work

0.010
0.060
0.291
0.399
0.025
0.115
0.270
0.343

0.028
0.263
0.464
0.576
0.064
0.0317
0.470
0.566

0.039
0.391
0.530
0.631
0.091
0.431
0.523
0.624
3.2
EXPERIMENTS USING IDENTICAL CHARACTER STRINGS
In the preceding section, we reported our performance using an orthogonal transformation learned
on an expert training dictionary of 5k common English and Italian words. We now report our per-
formance when we do not use this dictionary, and instead construct a pseudo dictionary from the list
of words which appear in both the English and Italian vocabularies, composed of exactly the same
character string. Remarkably, 47074 such identical character strings appear in both vocabularies.
There would be fewer identical entries for more diverse language pairs, but our main goal here is to
demonstrate the superior robustness of orthogonal transformations to low quality dictionaries.
We exhibit our results in table 4, where we evaluate our method (SVD + inverted softmax + dimen-
sionality reduction), when translating either from English to Italian or from Italian to English. Even
when using this pseudo dictionary prepared with no expert bilingual knowledge, we still achieve

Mikolov and Dinu’s methods achieve precisions of just 1% and 6% respectively. CCA also per-
forms well, although it became signiﬁcantly more computationally expensive when the vocabulary
size increased. Previously translation pairs have been extracted from monolingual corpora using
CCA by bootstrapping a small seed lexicon (Haghighi et al., 2008).
3.3
EXPERIMENTS ON THE EUROPARL CORPUS OF ALIGNED SENTENCES
The English-Italian Europarl corpus comprises 2 million English sentences and their Italian trans-
lations, taken from the proceedings of the European parliament (Koehn, 2005). As outlined earlier,
we can form simple sentence vectors in the word vector space by summing and normalising over the
words contained in a sentence. These sentence vectors can be used in two different tasks. First, we
can use the Europarl corpus as a training dictionary, whereby the matrices XD and YD are formed
from the sentence vectors of translation pairs. By applying the SVD to the ﬁrst 500k sentences in
this “phrase dictionary”, we obtain a set of bilingual word vectors from which we can retrieve trans-
lations of individual words. We exhibit the translation performance of this approach in table 5. We

translating from Italian into English, comparable to the accuracy achieved using the expert word dic-
tionary on the same test set. It is difﬁcult to compare the two approaches, since they require different
training data. However our performance appears competitive with Bilbowa, a leading method for
learning bilingual vectors online from monolingual corpora and aligned text (Gouws et al., 2015).
We do not include results for CCA due to the computational complexity on a dictionary of this size.
Second, we can apply our orthogonal transformation to retrieve the Italian translation of an English
sentence, or vice versa. To achieve this, we hold back the ﬁnal 200k English and Italian sentences
from our 500k sample of Europarl, and attempt to retrieve the true translation of a given sentence
in this test set. We obtain the orthogonal transformation by performing the SVD on either the
expert word dictionary provided by Dinu, or on a phrase dictionary formed from the ﬁrst 300k
Table 5: Translation performance, using the Europarl corpus as a phrase dictionary.
Precision
English to Italian:
Italian to English:
Mikolov et al.
Dinu et al.
This work
Mikolov et al.
Dinu et al.
This work

0.234
0.313
0.428
0.19
0.224
0.375

0.368
0.531
0.589
0.331
0.419
0.563

0.433
0.594
0.647
0.39
0.508
0.620
7

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

sentence from a bag of 200k Italian sentences, or vice versa, averaged over 5k samples. We ﬁrst
obtain bilingual word vectors, using either the word dictionary provided by Dinu, or by constructing
a phrase dictionary from Europarl. We set ns = 12800 in the inverted softmax.
English to Italian:
Italian to English:
Word dictionary
Phrase dictionary
Word dictionary
Phrase dictionary
Mikolov et al.
0.105
0.166
0.120
0.206
Dinu et al.
0.453
0.406
0.489
0.459
SVD
0.268
0.431
0.473
0.656
+ inverted softmax
0.546
0.678
0.429
0.486
sentences from Europarl. For simplicity, we do not apply dimensionality reduction here. Our results

Dinu’s method favours the word dictionary. We show in the appendix that all methods favour the

vectors, we are able to retrieve the correct translation of an English sentence with 67.8% precision.
This is particularly surprising, since we are using the simplest possible sentence vectors, which
have no information about word order or sentence length. It is likely that we could improve on these
results if we used higher quality sentence vectors (Le & Mikolov, 2014; Kiros et al., 2015), although
we might lose the ability to simultaneously align the underlying word vector space.
When training the inverted softmax, the inverse temperature β diverged, and the “translation” per-
formance from English to Italian signiﬁcantly exceeded the performance from Italian to English.
This suggested that sentence retrieval from Italian to English might be achieved better by nearest
neighbours, so we also evaluated the performance of nearest neighbour retrieval on the same or-
thogonal transformation, as shown in the third row of table 6. This improved the performance from
Italian to English from 48.6% to 65.6%, which suggests that the optimal retrieval approach would
be able to tune continuously between the conventional softmax and the inverted softmax.
4
SUMMARY
We proved that the optimal linear transformation between word vector spaces should be orthogonal,
and can be obtained by a single application of the SVD on a dictionary of translation pairs, as pro-
posed independently by Artetxe et al. (2016). We used the SVD to obtain bilingual word vectors,
from which we can predict the translations of previously unseen words. We introduced a novel “in-
verted softmax” which signiﬁcantly increased the accuracy of our predicted translations. Combining
the SVD with the inverted softmax and dimensionality reduction, we improved the translation pre-
cision of Mikolov’s original linear mapping from 34% to 43%, when translating a test set composed
of both common and rare English words into Italian. This was achieved using a training dictionary
of 5k English words and their Italian translations. Replacing this training dictionary with a pseudo-
dictionary acquired from the identical word strings that appear in both languages, we showed that
we still achieved 40% precision, demonstrating that it is possible to obtain bilingual vector spaces
without an expert bilingual signal. Mikolov’s method achieves just 1% precision here, emphasising
the superior robustness of orthogonal transformations. There are currently a number of approaches
to obtaining ofﬂine bilingual word vectors in the literature. Our work shows they can all be uniﬁed.
Finally, we deﬁned simple sentence vectors to obtain ofﬂine bilingual word vectors without a dic-
tionary using the Europarl corpus. We achieved 43% precision when translating our test set from
English into Italian under this approach, comparable to our results above, and competitive with on-
line approaches which use aligned text as the bilingual signal. We demonstrated that we can also
use our sentence vectors to retrieve the true translation of an English sentence from a bag of 200k
Italian candidate sentences with 68% precision, a striking result worthy of further investigation.
