1 
 
A Recent Survey on the Applications of Genetic 
Programming in Image Processing 
Asifullah Khan*1,2 , Aqsa Saeed Qureshi1, Noorul Wahab1, Mutawara Hussain1, Muhammad 
Yousaf Hamza3  
1 Patter Recognition Lab, Department of Computer and Information Sciences, Pakistan Institute 
of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Nilore 45650, Islamabad 
2 Deep Learning Lab, Centre for Mathematical Sciences, Pakistan Institute of Engineering and 
Applied Sciences, Nilore 45650, Islamabad 
3Department of Physiscs and Applied Mathematics, Pakistan Institute of Engineering and 
Applied Sciences, Nilore-45650, Islamabad  
 

 
Abstract 
Genetic Programming (GP) has been primarily used to tackle optimization, classification, and 
feature selection related tasks. The widespread use of GP is due to its flexible and 
comprehensible tree-type structure. Similarly, research is also gaining momentum in the field of 
Image Processing, because of its promising results over vast areas of applications ranging from 
medical Image Processing to multispectral imaging. Image Processing is mainly involved in 
applications such as computer vision, pattern recognition, image compression, storage, and 
medical diagnostics. This universal nature of images and their associated algorithm, i.e., 
complexities, gave an impetus to the exploration of GP. GP has thus been used in different ways 
for Image Processing since its inception. 
Many interesting GP techniques have been developed and employed in the field of Image 
Processing, and consequently, we aim to provide the research community an extensive view of 
these techniques. This survey thus presents the diverse applications of GP in Image Processing 
and provides useful resources for further research. Also, the comparison of different parameters 
used in different applications of Image Processing is summarized in tabular form. Moreover, 
analysis of the different parameters used in Image Processing related tasks is carried-out to save 
the time needed in the future for evaluating the parameters of GP. As more advancement is made 
in GP methodologies, its success in solving complex tasks, not only in Image Processing but also 
in other fields, may increase. Additionally, guidelines are provided for applying GP in Image 
Processing related tasks, the pros and cons of GP techniques are discussed, and some future 
directions are also set. 
1. Introduction 
The sense of vision plays an essential role in the process of human perception. Human vision is 
restricted only to the visual band of the electromagnetic spectrum, but machine vision covers 
nearly the whole electromagnetic spectrum, ranging from gamma rays to radio waves[1]. Image 
processing tries to emulate the capabilities of the human eye and brain in extracting features or 
segmenting regions. Therefore, image processing is a challenging task in the sense that these 
algorithms have to be accurate, fast, reliable, as well as robust. Development in image processing 

2 
 
has considerably increased with the decline in the prices of computers. Due to its diverse 
applications, image processing cannot be wholly distinguished from its closely related fields; 
computer vision and image analysis. This overlapping is because image processing is also 
involved in both computer vision and image analysis at different levels. In the somewhat 
restricted definition of image processing, it is a process whose inputs and outputs are images and 
can be extended to encompass processes that involve techniques of feature extraction from 
images to identify the individual objects [2]. 
Different intelligent techniques such as an Artificial Immune System (AIS), Genetic 
Algorithm (GA), Artificial Neural Network (ANN), Ant Colony Optimization (ACO), and 
Genetic Programming (GP) have been exploited in the field of image processing. The term 
“Computational Intelligence” (CI) is a broad term encompassing the different intelligent 
techniques mentioned above. CI can find optimum/near-optimum solutions to computationally 
hard problems in a variety of domains  [3]. Thus to split the various image processing 
techniques, we have two broad categories;   conventional image processing and CI-based image 
processing techniques.  
This survey focuses on the applications of GP in image processing. GP is one of the 
promising CI technique that comes under the sub-category of Evolutionary Computation (EC) 
techniques based on the Darwinian theory of evolution. GP evolves output in the form of a tree 
or a computer program. Different programs are generated depending on the terminal and function 
sets used. Other existing CI paradigms do not produce solutions in the form of computer 
programs, but instead involve specialized structures like weight vectors for neural networks, 
coefficients for polynomials, chromosome strings in the conventional GA, etc. [4]. GP comes 
under the umbrella of EC along with GA, Evolutionary Programming, Differential Evolution, 
and Evolutionary Strategies [5]. GP is a particular form of the GA, which uses a fixed (though 
variants now exist) length string of bits or real numbers to represent individuals called 
chromosomes. 
In contrast to GA, GP represents individuals as trees that can be evaluated to obtain results. 
Initially, a population of individuals is randomly generated using a terminal set (which contains 
constants, argument-less functions, variables) and a function set (e.g., +, -, /, if-else, etc.). Based 
on their fitness, the individuals are given chances for reproduction and allowed to change via 
crossover and mutation. Crossover is used to search for an optimal solution, whereas mutation 
introduces rapid changes in the population and thus helps to avoid trapping in local optima. 
GP has gained popularity in applications such as data modeling, symbolic regression, Image 
and Signal Processing, Medicine, Bioinformatics, Financial Trading, and Industrial Process 
Control. This popularity of GP is mainly through its flexible nature,  generality, almost no 
requirement of preprocessing,  its ability to provide the mathematical expression of the solution, 
and parallelization. 

3 
 
 This survey addresses GP’s applicability in image processing and is organized as follows. The 
background of GP and image processing is described in Section 2. The importance of the review 
is presented in Section 3. The similarities of the GP approaches in different categories of IP are 
given in Section 4 and further reviewed in Section 5. Section 6 is about the advantages and 
disadvantages of using GP in image processing. Section 7 presents guidelines for applying GP in 
image processing. The comparison and discussions are provided in Section 8, while Section 9 
concludes the article. 
2. Related Concepts 
This section briefly describes the very basics of the two subjects of this review; image processing 
and GP.  We also discuss the scope of GP in image processing. 
a) image processing 
Image is a visual representation of an object produced on a surface. Before the invention of 
paper, images were produced on stones and other materials. In the case of computers, a visual 
representation of an image is displayed on a monitor, a Liquid Crystal Display, or a multimedia 
projector. However, for computer storage, these images are defined as two-dimensional matrices 
of pixel (picture-element) values. These pixel values are the intensity or gray level of the image 
and can be represented in the form of a function F(x,y), where x and y are spatial coordinates. If 
the intensity values within an image are finite discrete quantities, then, such an image is a digital 
image. A pixel of size one byte (8 bits) can represent 256 intensity values from 0 (black) to 255 
(white). The values in between this range give different shades, as shown in Figure 1. When 
values of such a representation are processed/modified in some way, we call it image processing. 
For example, enhancing the image quality, removing noise, segmenting specific parts, making a 
comparison with other images, etc., all include processing the image in some way. For the image 
in Figure 1, if we want to change the center pixel to black, then we change its value from 78 to 0. 
 
Figure 1: a) a sample image b) its pixel representation 
b) GP 
GP is one of the promising EC techniques and is viewed as a specialization of GA. GP and GA 
mainly differ in the representation scheme. GA uses strings of bits, integers, or real numbers to 
represent individuals. In contrast, GP mainly represents individuals as trees and is well suited for 
mapping functions, model development, nonlinear regression, and other related problems. Koza 
has pointed out various exciting problems, where GP produced human-competitive results [6]. 
GP is a domain-independent method and can solve complex problems automatically [7].  
Moreover, pioneering works of Koza, Langdon, Poli, and Banzhaf has boosted research in the 
field of GP [7–12].  

4 
 
Figure 2 depicts the genetic search cycle of EC techniques, where an initial population is 
generated, and then, the fittest individuals are selected as parents based on some evaluation 
criterion. In the next step, genetic operators (e.g., crossover, mutation, and reproduction) are 
applied to produce offsprings. In the last step, fittest individuals are selected as a population for 
the next generation. The whole search cycle continues after each generation until a termination 
criterion fulfills, and the best candidate becomes the fittest individual.  
 
Figure 2: Genetic search cycle of EC techniques 
Similarly, Figure 3 depicts the basic flow of GP, in which an initial population is generated 
randomly. Then parents are selected randomly from this initial population, and different genetic 
operators are applied. After the application of genetic operators, the selected individuals become 
part of the next generation. This process is repeated until a termination criterion meets, and 
finally, the best-evolved GP tree is saved. 
 
 
 

5 
 
 
Fig 3: Flowchart of a generic GP 
c) Scope of GP in image processing 
Koza in 1992 introduced GP as a problem-solving paradigm, and since then, it has been applied 
in many image-related problems. Its expressive power has been utilized in various image 
processing tasks such as image preprocessing, region analysis, segmentation, object detection, 
classification, and post-processing. Notably, in the field of medical imaging, it is often applied 
for classifying cancerous and non-cancerous cells. Moreover, GP has been used for developing 
accurate classifiers for object detection, classification of medical images, and optical character 
recognition. Multiobjective GP [13][14][15][16] is also widely used for image processing related 
problems in which the optimization of more than one objective function is required. Most of the 
time, the objectives that are needed to optimize are conflicting. For example, in image 
watermarking techniques, the objective usually is to increase both the imperceptibility and 
payload of the watermarked image. However, there is always a tradeoff between the two 
objectives. Similarly, in military-related applications, Similarly, GP is used in military-related 

6 
 
applications such as detecting objects, and analysis of Satellite and infrared images. Besides 
medical and military applications, GP is also employed in other exciting fields such as 
environmental studies, exploration, crop production, and image indexing [7]. 
3. Importance of the Review 
 
Due to the rapid increase in the availability of images and videos over the last few years, GP has 
been successfully applied to many image processing applications. In this regard, assessing the 
prospects of GP in the field of image processing will be a useful guide for researchers. Generally, 
the performance of algorithms related to segmentation, edge detection, enhancement, and 
classification related problems suffer if the images are blurred. In this situation, GP can evolve 
suitable filters so that images are filtered before applying any image processing task. Owing to 
the importance of GP in image processing, GP based methodologies have been consistently 
evolving, and new ideas and techniques have been proposed. This survey can help to explore GP 
related approaches in different areas of image processing. The pros and cons of GP are discussed 
for practical purposes and further research. Additionally, the techniques presented in this article 
highlights many aspects of GP. 
4. Terminologies used in GP 
In this section, the various terminologies associated with GP are discussed. The GP techniques 
applied in different fields of image processing (presented in this article)  are different in terms of 
their domains. Still, they do share some similarities in solving the problems. 
Representation: In most of the approaches, GP individuals are represented as a tree structure. 
Moreover, the linear representation for GP, which is also constructed using functions and 
terminals, is employed in a few works[17].  
Function Set: The function set is chosen according to the problem at hand.  For example, for 
regression related problems, the function set might comprise of arithmetic operations (*,%,+,-). 
Similarly, for image processing applications, a specialized function set, according to the nature 
of the problem domain, may be used. 
Terminal Set: The terminals like functions, also do not have any specific predefined set.  The 
GP terminal set is comprised of variables (also called program input), constants, or random 
inputs. In the case of image processing applications, mostly raw pixel values are used as 
terminals. 
Fitness Function: Function and terminal sets, which are used to express a GP tree, also define 
the search space that GP explores during the search process. Fitness function measures how good 
or bad is a specific region within the search space. Different fitness functions, depending on the 
nature of the problem, have been used as an evaluation measure during the search process, such 

7 
 
as Root-Mean-Square-Error (RMSE), Peak-Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR), Accuracy, Area-
Under the Receiver Operating Characteristic (AUC-ROC) curve, etc. 
Initial Population: If prior knowledge about the properties of the desired solutions is not 
known, then the initial individuals are generated randomly. Moreover, other methods initialize 
the population with the help of a seed [4]. 
Selection Method: In GP evolution cycles, mainly two types of selection methods are used, i.e., 
parent selection and survivor selection. There are different types of selection methods, but 
tournament selection is the widely used selection mechanism. In parent selection, individuals 
having higher fitness are selected as parents for the next generation. Whereas, survivor selection 
is performed on individuals who are produced from selected parents. 
Genetic Operators: Different genetic operators (crossover, mutation, reproduction, etc.) are 
used for the generation of offspring to introduce diversity among the individuals of the 
population. 
5. Category-wise image processing Applications of GP 
This section presents the different GP techniques applied in various fields of image processing, 
such as image enhancement, compression, segmentation, retrieval, classification, and 
registration. 
5.1. 
GP in Image Enhancement  
Images can be enhanced to improve their visual appearance. Enhanced images can further 
improve the image processing related tasks such as image segmentation, object detection, and 
recognition. However, image enhancement for one application may not be the right candidate for 
another application, and this means that image enhancement has different semantics for different 
applications.  
Different image enhancement techniques can be carried out either in the original (spatial) or 
transformed (frequency) domain. In the original domain, the operations are carried out directly 
on the pixels. In contrast, in the case of the frequency domain, firstly, the image is transformed in 
the frequency domain, and then the enhancement is carried out. Sometimes the desired objects 
that need to be detected (called the region of interest) are emphasized during the enhancement 
step to help perceive them. For example, to make the process of object extraction easy, an image 
can be enhanced by decreasing the similarities between the specified object and the background. 
In an exciting work, Poli et al. [18]used a pseudo color transformation that utilized GP and 
developed a program for image enhancement. Similarly, Wang et al. [19] used GP algorithms to 
evolve morphological operations that converted a binary image into the desired image, which 
contained only the required features. In Wang’s approach, the automatic evaluation mechanism 
enabled the GP algorithm to generate practical morphological algorithms. On the other hand, 
Khan et al. [20] proposed a GP based hybrid filter that assisted in reducing the region noise. 
Their method helped to preserve the details related to edges and structure of the region. Block 
diagram of Khan’s technique is shown in Figure 4. It comprises of two phases. In the first phase, 
features were extracted from the noisy MRI images using three different types of filters. The 
extracted features were concatenated to form a feature vector. This feature vector was then used 
in the second phase to train a GP module. After the training phase, the best evolved GP 
expression was utilized to check the effectiveness of the proposed technique on new images. 

8 
 
 
 
Figure 4: GP based Image enhancement technique by Khan et al. [20] 
5.2. 
GP in Image Restoration  
During the process of acquiring and transmitting or capturing digital images, the image quality 
might degrade. Different techniques can be applied to restore the original image. In the case of 
image restoration, the cause of degradation is either known or unknown. Figure 5 shows the case 
when the cause of degradation is known. In this case, the original image can be restored using 
prior knowledge. In a case where there is no such information, then the degraded function can be 
estimated by image observation, experimentation, or modeling. In literature, blind deconvolution 
and image denoising based methods are reported for restoring the original image. Restoration by 
an estimated degradation function is sometimes called blind deconvolution. Whereas in the case 
of image denoising, spatial or frequency domain filters are used for the restoration of the original 
image. 
 
 
Figure 5: General block diagram of intelligent image restoration techniques 

9 
 
5.2.1. GP in Image Deconvolution  
In literature, GP is rarely used for image deconvolution [21] [22]. Among the few reported 
methods, GP based blind image deconvolution filter was proposed by Majeed et al.[22]. In 
Majeed’s technique, for a small neighborhood of each pixel of a degraded image, a set of feature 
vectors was formed. An estimator was then trained by exploiting GP based automatic feature 
selection ability, to select and combine useful features. The proposed technique was compared 
with Richardson–Lucy (LR) deconvolution and Wiener filtering approaches, and comparatively 
good results were reported in terms of RMSE and PSNR. 
5.2.2. GP in Image Denoising   
Many researchers used GP as an effective strategy to remove noise from an image [23–29]. 
Chaudhry et al.[24] proposed GP for restoring degraded images by evolving an optimal function 
that estimated pixel intensity. Their technique was a hybrid of GP and Fuzzy logic, which 
denoises gray level Gaussian noise images in the spatial domain. First, for deciding if a pixel 
needed to be rigged, mapping function based on fuzzy logic was used. Then, GP was applied to 
evolve an optimal pixel intensity-estimation function. 
Another denoising method based on local-adaptive learning (for Gaussian and salt & pepper 
noise) method was reported by Yan et al. [25]. In the training stage of their process, clustering 
was used to classify the image based on similar local structures. Then GP was applied to 
determine optimal filters (which themselves were tree-like individuals) for each cluster. The 
function set was composed of Gaussian and bilateral filters, as well as arithmetic operators. An 
increased PSNR was reported in comparison to other local learning-based methods such as K-
clustering with Singular-Value-Decomposition. 
On the other hand, to remove Racian noise from Magnetic-Resonance-Imaging (MRI), an 
optimal composite morphological filter was generated via GP [26]. In their method, a GP 
individual performs morphological operations on the corrupted image to obtain an observed 
copy. RMSE of the feature sets for the degraded image and the observed image was used to 
calculate the fitness of each individual. For evaluation, a noisy image was filtered by the 
developed filter to obtain an estimated copy. Moreover, their method (in terms of RMSE and 
PSNR) was also compared with other techniques. 
Another work for removing mixed/Gaussian noise using GP was reported by Petrovic et al. 
[27]. GP based two-step filter (each having its estimator), was used to remove the noisy pixels 
missed by the first detector.  
Harding et al. [28]used Cartesian GP to evolve image filters and evaluated their fitness 
functions on a Graphics Processing Unit (GPU). The average error on each pixel was used as the 
fitness score. Majid et al. [29] employed GP to estimate optimal values of noisy pixels for 
impulse noise removal. Noisy pixels were detected first using the directional derivative; then, 
their costs were estimated using GP estimator by incorporating noise-free pixels. Feature vectors 
were constructed using noisy pixels with at least three neighboring noise-free pixels. Recently, 
Beltran et al. [30] used a GP based restoration technique to remove haze from images. During 
training, GP based estimators were evolved based on MAE. Beltran’s method showed significant 
performance improvement when compared with the latest techniques. However, the quality of 
restored images was only evaluated against MAE and PSNR metrics. 

10 
 
5.3. 
GP in Image Registration  
Image registration involves matching different images of the same scene, which are captured at 
various intervals, from different directions or by different sensors. One objective of image 
registration is to bring into line the images in such a way so that high-level processing can be 
executed. 
 Only a few researchers have employed GP for image registration. Chicotay et al. [31]  presented 
GP based approach for massive size image registration, in which transformation T on an image 
mapped every pixel of the input image to a different pixel in the coordinate system of the 
referenced image. Mutual Information (MI) was used as a measure to search for a function that 
generated the highest value when there existed a maximum overlap between the referenced and 
the transformed image. RMSE was used to evaluate each individual. A comparison was made 
with the Scale-Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT) [32] based image registration. Though the 
results were not as good as a SIFT-based technique, they were still comparable, keeping in view 
that unlike the SIFT-based method, their technique did not make any assumptions about the 
transformation model to initiate or bound the registration process. The function set included 
transformation functions such as sine, cosine, power, rotation,  and radial basis function. 
Langdon et al. [33] employed GP optimization to improve GPU based implementation of 
Nifty Reg Software. Whereby the Nifty Reg is open-source software for medical image 
registration, and the optimization was performed for six different graphics cards. The 
implementation was carried-out using Compute Unified Device Architecture (CUDA). GP with 
linear variable-length genome specified changes to the CUDA kernel. Two parameters (compute 
level and size of the block) for CUDA were also tuned along with post-evolution bloat removal. 
Each genome was saved as a text line. Crossover and mutation were prohibited from including 
code lines to those parts of the kernel, where the containing variables might go beyond the scope. 
For each generation, a new image was created randomly, and each GPU kernel was run on it. 
GPU kernel generated an answer which was checked against that of the CPU.  And the runtime 
was compared with that of the original Kernel. 
Outliers within data significantly degrade the performance of a classifier. To overcome such 
degradation in the performance of an image registration classifier, Lee et al. [34] reported a 
novel GP based method. In their approach, firstly, feature extraction was performed using SIFT 
[32]. The features were then classified into three categories, i.e., inliers, outliers, and non-
classified features. Inliers and outliers extracted from the first phase were provided as training 
data to GP. GP then categorized the non-classified features into two groups, i.e., inliers and 
outliers. All the outliers were removed from the dataset. And the image registration was 
performed on the pre-processed data (after outlier removal). The Block diagram of Lee’s 
technique is shown in Figure 6. 
 
 
 

11 
 
 
 
Figure 6: GP based Image Registration technique by Lee et al. [34] 
 
5.4. 
GP in Image Compression  
The increasing use of images and their storage requirements initiated the need to compress them. 
The basic idea behind image compression is to remove redundant bits, and thus encode the 
information contained in the image so that while restoring, the encoded image is obtained 
without considerable loss. Restoring the exact image is vital in case of medical diagnosis or other 
security forensics. Transmitting images over the internet also requires compression to consume 
less bandwidth. 
Fukunage et al.  [35] described a GP system for lossless image compression, which learned a 
nonlinear model for pixel prediction based on a pixels. Four adjacent pixels were used as 
terminals for the GP. For each image, a unique model was generated and was represented as s-
expression. The high computational cost of evaluating the s-expression for each pixel was 
overcome by removing function call overhead by employing the Genome Compiler. This 
compiler translates s-expressions into efficient SPARC machine code before execution. The 
proposed method was compared with other compression techniques, including CALIC, LOCO-I, 
gzip, and was reported to be superior in the compression achieved, though it was slow. Figure 7 
depicts the steps of Fukunage’s method. 
 
Figure 7: GP based Image Compression technique by Funkunage et al. [35] 
In another technique, Parent et al. [17] proposed lossless compression of medical images. 
They used a linear GP driven by cGA and found a transformation, represented as T(d), which 
improved the compression ratio of data d. Moreover, this transformation could remove certain 
types of redundancy. The terminal set comprised of constants, and the function set included four 
transformation functions. These transformations acted as preprocessing before real compression 
and yielded enhanced compression as compared to standard GA based techniques. 

12 
 
 
5.5. 
GP in Image Segmentation  
The primary purpose of image segmentation is to segment out different gray levels of an image. 
If the pixels belonging to regions are homogeneous, then they are assigned the same label. 
Otherwise, various labels are attached. In other words, a good segmentation criterion is required 
to look for homogeneity within-region and heterogeneity between regions [36]. 
Developing a comprehensive way to check the accuracy of image segmentation algorithms is 
a significant problem. In the field of image processing, GP has been widely used to segment 
region of interest from images [37–46]. Vojodi et al. [40] used GP to combine different and 
unrelated evaluation measures. They selected three evaluation measures, which are based on the 
layout of entropy, similarity within the region, and disparity between the areas for the creation of 
composite evaluation measures. 
In another technique, Song et al. [41] used GP to evolve automatic texture classifiers, which 
were then used for texture segmentation. As opposed to conventional methods, their method does 
not require the manual construction of models to extract texture features because the classifier’s 
input is raw pixels instead of features. Also, the conventional methods are not universally 
applicable as they rely on the knowledge of the nature of texture, which may differ from region 
to region and image to image.  
GP can capture variation within images; that is why GP is popular in evolving a suitable 
image segmentation technique. However, GP based techniques mainly developed vast and 
expansive segmentation algorithms. In this regard, Liang et al.[44] proposed a multi-objective 
GP based segmentation technique, in which classification accuracy and program complexity are 
included within the fitness function. Liang’s method evolved a suitable solution with an optimal 
tradeoff between accuracy and program complexity. In another approach, the GP based 
segmentation technique developed an accurate and reliable figure-ground segmentation [45]. 
Their segmentation approach was evaluated against four different data sets. 
Similarly, another segmentation technique was reported that used strongly type GP and used 
two-stage during the GP evolution cycle [46]. Dong et al. [42] attempted to categorize the texture 
within an image to be either  Corpora Lutea (CL) (i.e., an endocrine gland that is generated from 
the follicular tissue after ovulation) or non-CL, based on local neighborhoods. A 16-bit invariant 
uniform Local Binary Patterns (LBP)  histogram of pixels in the neighborhood was formed to 
represent texture descriptions. Feature vector created by the histogram bin values was fed as 
input to GP. GP was used to train a classifier for distinguishing between CL texture and other 
textures. For segmentation, a sliding window was used to scan the image in raster order. The GP 
classifier then assigned each image pixel in the window, a class label. Majority voting was used 
in the case of multiple tags. For CL detection, properties related to the set of the region were 
computed for each image’s output region. Then a GP classifier was trained using these 
properties. Finally, the classifier was used to detect whether the segmented part of an image is a 
CL or not. 
To address the tradeoff between localization accuracy (requiring a small window) and noise 
rejection (requiring large window) posed by selecting the window size, Fu et al. [47]used GP to 
automatically search discriminating pixels and their neighbors for constructing edge detectors. 
Rather than using a set of pixels from a moving window, GP used a full image. The selected 
pixels were then used to form linear and nonlinear filters for detecting edges. The parameters of 
these filters were estimated via a hybrid of Particle-Swarm-Optimization (PSO) and Differential 

13 
 
Evolution. A shifting function, representing four directional shifting functions, was included in 
the function set. A comparison was made with other detectors showing good results for GP based 
detectors. They employed F-measure to evaluate the accuracy of the detectors. Similarly, another 
GP based image segmentation technique for extracting regions of interest from the background 
was proposed by Liang et al.[43]. Feature selection using GP  was used to find out the useful 
features that helped to segment out the desired region of interest. Three different types of GP 
based feature selection methods were proposed. In all of the three ways, fitness function within 
GP was either based on a single or multi-objective method. Their experimental results showed 
that the GP based feature selection, which used multi-objective fitness function, improved the 
performance of the classifier, and also reduced the computational complexity. The block diagram 
of Liang’s technique is shown in Figure 8. 
 
Figure 8: GP based image segmentation by Liang et al.[43] 
5.6. 
GP in Image Retrieval 
Due to the decline in the prices of image acquisition devices and the development of efficient 
image processing algorithms, the image databases are increasing in number. Consequently, it has 
become inevitable to design effective and fast methods for retrieving desired images from such 
significant collections. There are different techniques for image retrieval, such as associating 
some metadata  (tags, keywords) with the images, or using content-based retrieval, which is 
based on similarities of the contents of the given image (or feature) and the desired image. 
Different shapes, textures, colors, etc., can be used as features for Image retrieval related tasks. 
In an exciting work by Torres et al. [48], GP was applied for creating a merged similarity 
function for content-based image retrieval. They showed that features could be combined from 
multiple feature vectors, or weights can be assigned based on image similarities. In the case 
where combining images gets more complicated, then the GP is used for combining nonlinear 
image similarities. The resulting composite descriptor was simply a combination of pre-defined 
descriptors. This GP based composite descriptor combined the similarity values obtained from 
each descriptor and then produced a more effective similarity function. 
Ciesielski et al. [49] used a segmentation algorithm based on texture-versus-all-else 
classifiers. These classifiers were evolved by GP to retrieve from an extensive heterogeneous 
collection of images. 
Calumby et al. [50] used GP to iteratively combine multimodal similarity measures, such as 
those extracted from text and content, to generate new similarity functions that would fit the user 
preferences. For each discovered function, the evaluation returned a measure of quality that was 
based on how well that function ranked the training set objects. The proposed method showed 
higher efficiency when compared to Image CLEF Photographic Retrieval Task [51]. A 
somewhat similar framework was also reported by Ferreira et al.  [52]. 
Saraiva et al. [53], on the other hand, used GP to combine multiple textual sources of 
evidence, such as image file name, the content of HTML, page title, alt tag, keywords, 
description, and text passages around the image, to rank web-based image retrievals.  

14 
 
5.7. 
GP in Image Classification  
Image classification is the process of classifying images based on the visual contents. 
Various Artificial Intelligence (AI) based technologies, such as Artificial Neural Networks 
(ANNs) and fuzzy systems, have been applied to develop autonomous classification algorithms 
and have shown promising results [54]. 
Two broad families of machine learning approaches used in image classification are parametric 
(that requires learning phase) and nonparametric methods (that does not require learning phase). 
Some examples of parametric classifiers are Support Vector Machine (SVM), Decision Trees, 
and GA. Whereas, Nearest-Neighbor image classifier is an example of nonparametric classifiers. 
When  GP is used for classification, the inputs are features, and the output is a mathematical 
expression that returns different values for different classes. 
Using GP for classification requires a threshold to be set for the program output to specify 
different classes. In the case of static range selection, boundaries of program output space are 
fixed and predefined. However, in dynamic range selection, the boundaries are searched 
automatically [55].  In centered dynamic range selection, the class boundaries are dynamically 
determined by calculating the center of the program output values for each class. In the slotted 
dynamic class boundary determination method, the output value of a program is split into many 
slots. Each slot is assigned to a value for each class. It then dynamically determines the class by 
only taking the class with the highest value at the slot [56]. Several techniques have used GP for 
classification [57–63]. Nandi et al.[64] used GP for feature selection to classify breast masses in 
mammograms into benign and malignant groups. To narrow down the pool of features,  they 
used a few procedures like Sequential Forward Selection and Student’s t-test, etc. Once 
important features were selected, these were divided into two groups. Either union or intersection 
operation was performed over these groups to create a new set of data points for the GP 
classifier. 
Similarly, Kobashigawa et al. [54] showed that with the increase in problem difficulty level, 
GP achieves better results than ANN methods. Kobashigawa’s work also revealed the robustness 
of GP to unseen examples along with an inherent capability of optimal global searching, which 
could minimize efforts that are required during training processes. On the other hand, Smart et al. 
[56] employed the evolutionary process of GP to dynamically determine the boundaries between 
images of coins having different denominations. Pixel level domain-independent statistical 
features such as average intensity, variance, etc. were given as input to GP to automatically 
select features that were relevant to this multi-class image classification problem. As compared 
to a static range selection, reasonably good results were reported using the dynamic methods, 
centered dynamic range selection, and slotted dynamic range selection. 
Similarly, Atkins et al.[65] proposed a GP-based domain-independent technique for 
extracting features and image classification. The Block diagram of Atkins’s approach is shown in 
Figure 9. First raw images were preprocessed by the filtering layer whose outputs (the filtered 
images) were fed to the second layer, called the aggregation layer. The aggregation layer then 
performed feature aggregation and produced a real value. Finally, the output of the aggregation 
layer was passed on to the classification layer to perform classification. For this layer, a 
threshold of zero was used, so a negative output would mean class A and non-negative would 
classify the image as belonging to class B. The proposed procedure was tested on four different 
datasets, and the reported results suggested that it outperformed the basic GP methodology with 
increasing problem difficulty.  
 

15 
 
 
Figure 9: Three tier GP for image classification [65] 
 In another approach, Al-Sahaf et al.[66] presented a GP based approach that extended the 
work of Atkin’s et al. [65] and introduced aggregation functions that read in different shapes 
such as lines, circles, and rectangles to enable sampling windows that were not square. They did 
not use the filtering layer and still achieved better results as compared to a canonical GP that 
used extracted features and performed classification by the three-tier GP. Guo et al.[67] used a 
Modified Fisher criterion-based GP (MF-GP) for generating features. The generated features 
were evaluated for their discriminating ability by the Minimum Distance Classifier (MDC). 
Improved results were reported for MF-GP compared to Multi-layer perceptron, SVM, and 
Alternative Fisher criterion-based GP (AF-GP) with MDC.  
A semi-automatic approach for classifying Remote Sensing Images (RSI) was proposed by 
Santos et al. [68]. GP was used to learn user preferences via user indicated relevant as well as 
non-relevant regions. The image region descriptors were combined that encoded color and 
texture properties. The reported results showed that the method outperformed maximum-
likelihood-classification when used for RSI classification. In the same way, Santos et al. [69] 
improved the results of the previous work by combining Optimum-Path-Forest (OPF) with 
composite descriptors obtained using the GP framework. OPF classifier represents each class of 
objects by one or numerous optimal-path trees rooted at essential samples, called prototypes. The 
OPF-based classification system took into account user interaction. 
Choi et al. [70] proposed a system for automatic detection of pulmonary nodules, which first 
segmented the lung volume using thresholding, then detected and segmented nodule candidates 
using multiple thresholding and rule-based pruning. From these nodules, geometrical and 
statistical features were extracted, and a GP-based classifier was trained. The fitness function 
was constructed by combining the AUC-ROC curve, the True-Positive-Rate (TPR), and 
specificity. They reported that compared to the previously proposed methods for this application, 
this GP based classifier showed high sensitivity and a reduced false-positive rate. Zang et al.[71] 
developed fitness function for classification based on probabilities (derived from Gaussian 
distribution) that are associated with different classes. Two fitness functions (using the 
overlapped region and weighted distribution distance) were developed, assuming the outputs 
from different classifiers as random independent variables. Zang’s approach exploited many top 
GP programs for classification, and the class with the highest probability was used as the class of 

16 
 
the object pattern. In comparison to a primary GP classification, which also used multiple best 
programs and voting, the proposed technique was reported to have good results in terms of 
classification accuracy and execution time. Recently, Cava et al. [72] proposed GP based multi-
class classification technique in which transformation is performed against multi-dimensional 
feature space. Cava’s technique was compared to different techniques related to different 
domains. Results showed that the proposed solution could scale well to those problems that have 
high feature dimensions. Similarly, Burks et al. [73] proposed a GP based classification 
technique for detecting tuberculosis from X-ray images. Unlike traditional classification 
methods, proposed work no pre-processing and segmentation steps before the training of the GP 
based classification approach. Moreover, Burks’s technique needs less training time in 
comparison to other traditional proposed methods. 
5.8. 
GP in Image Watermarking  
The consistently broader use of information technology demands the protection of information. 
Therefore, in this regard, digital watermarking is used as a promising technique to overcome the 
issues related to the protection of information, especially for the authentication of medically 
related information. One of the measures to evaluate the quality of the watermarked image is to 
evaluate its imperceptibility. In watermarking techniques, imperceptibility shows that the visual 
appearance of the watermarked image should be close to the original image. However, when 
more information (payload) is embedded in the image, it causes distortion in the original image. 
That is why there is a tradeoff between imperceptibility and payload. In the past, many GP based 
watermarking techniques [74–81] have been proposed for the development of efficient and 
reliable watermarking systems. To increase the robustness and imperceptibility in digital image 
watermarking, GP was employed by Golshan et al. [75]. Instead of setting the Perceptual 
Shaping Function (PSF) to a constant function, GP was utilized to develop an intelligent PSF. A 
fitness function based on both robustness and imperceptibility was used to evaluate the 
performance of each PSF individual. Similarly, Golshan et al. [76] used a hybrid approach of GP 
and PSO for the same purpose. In technique, developed by Gilani et al. [77], GP was used to 
estimate the distortion within the distorted watermarked signals. Both the watermarked and the 
distorted watermarked signals were fed to a GP module. The best-estimated distortion function 
returned by GP was then applied to the original watermarked signal. Varying strengths of 
Gaussian and JPEG compression attacks were tested for the proposed technique. 
Similarly, Usman et al. [78] proposed evolving application specific Visual Tuning Function 
(VTF), in which GP optimizes the balance between imperceptibility and robustness while 
processing an 8x8 block of Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT) image. The watermark was 
structured according to the Human Visual System (HVS) and a cascade of attacks. VTF is given 
as: 
                                         αG(k1, k2) = f (X0,0, X(i, j), α (i, j)),  
                              (1) 
 
where X0,0 is the discrete cosine coefficient and signifies dependency of VTF on luminance 
sensitivity, X(i, j), is AC coefficient and symbolizes dependency of VTF on contrast masking, 
and α (i, j) shows frequency sensitivity. The current value of Watson’s VTF, DC, and AC (DCT) 
coefficients of 8x8 blocks were provided as variable terminals. Each potential VTF was 

17 
 
evaluated for imperceptibility related fitness, whereas for robustness, Bit Correct Ratio (BCR) 
represented an objective measure. Test images were then watermarked with the evolved VTF. 
To select the watermarking level, Jan et al. [79] proposed GP  based approach. Coefficients 
were selected using a 32x32 block, whose Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) was obtained. 
Luminance, contrast, and Noise-Visibility-Function (NVF) were used as terminals for GP trees. 
Watermarking level was given by: 
                    α = f (lum(i, j), cont (i, j), co(i, j), NVF(i, j)),                                             (2) 
where co is a selected coefficient, cont is contrast, and lum is luminance. Robustness against 
different attacks was reported, whereas to check the imperceptibility of the watermark, Mean 
Square Error (MSE) and PSNR were used. Similarly, Abbasi et al.  [80] used a similar approach 
but used a block size of 4x4. Khan et al. [81] presented a DCT based watermarking system that 
employed GP for finding optimal perceptual shaping function according to HVS. Each GP tree 
represented a perceptual shaping function, which was evolved to embed high strength watermark 
in areas of high variance and low strength watermark in areas of low variance. Change in a local 
variance of the watermarked image with respect to the original image was used as a fitness 
function. This technique was tested for JPEG compression and Gaussian noise. Recently another 
interesting reversible watermarking technique based on GP for the protection of medical-related 
information was proposed by Arsalan et al. [74]. The Block diagram of Arsalan’s technique is 
shown in Figure 10. First, the histogram modified image was formed after the pre-processing of 
the original image. Integer Wavelet Transform (IWT) was then applied to the histogram 
modified image. After applying IWT, GP was used to find out the coefficients within the wavelet 
domain for the purpose of embedding watermark. The aim of the proposed GP based intelligent 
watermarking scheme was to produce a watermarked image having low distortion and high 
payload.  
 
 
Figure 10: GP based watermarking technique by Arsalan et al. [74] 

18 
 
5.9. 
GP in Object Detection   
Object detection is the task of finding different types of objects belonging to different 
categories and is a challenging task especially, in the field of image processing and computer 
vision. In the field of image processing, GP has been used by many researchers [82–95] for 
accurate and efficient prediction of objects from cluttered and noisy scenes or images. In a 
review article, Krawiec et al. [96] analyzed the applications of GP in object detection related 
applications. 
Howard et al. [83] utilized GP to evolve detectors to detect ships in Synthetic Aperture Radar 
(SAR) imagery. Terminal nodes were real numerical values derived from random constants or 
pixel statistics. A value greater than zero was decided to be a target detection, while a value of 
zero or less was for ocean pixel. In Lin et al. approach [88], GP was used to synthesize 
composite operators and features from primitive operations and features for object detection. A 
composite operator was applied to primitive feature images; the output was segmented to obtain 
a binary image and was used to extract the target object from the original image. The size of a 
composite operator, as well as misclassified pixels, were taken into consideration, while the 
fitness function used in Lin’s technique was based on the Minimum Description Length (MDL) 
principle. In another work, Bhanu’s et al. [89]  have used a similar approach of composite 
operators, but instead of MDL based fitness function, they used the following fitness measure: 
                                 
 ,                                                                      (3) 
Where, 
 and 
 are foregrounds in the ground-truth and in the detected image respectively, n 
being the number of pixels in a given region. 
Martin et al.[90] used GP to create algorithms for obstacle detection, which analyzes a 
domain to find its constraints. Lowest non-ground pixels were manually marked, and these 
images were fed to GP, whose output was then compared to the ground truth images. A robot 
was then controlled by the best-evolved program.  
Edges are detected traditionally by using local window filters; however, in Fu et al.[91] 
work, GP was used for domain-independent global edge detection using the whole raw image as 
input. Different shifting functions were used along with other commonly used operators. F-
measure was used in constructing the fitness function: 
                                                   
,                                                            (4) 
where i represents image, N the number of images, 
 and 
 are  the recall and precision of a 
given image. Better results were reported as compared to Laplacian and Sobel edge detectors. 
In another work, Fu et al. [92] used GP to evolve edge detectors. Instead of distributing a 
fixed size window into small areas based on different directions, it searched for features based on 
flexible blocks, and the fitness function was based on F-measure. Similarly, GP was also used for 
improving the performance of an edge detection system, where the fitness function was based on 
the accuracy of the training data [93]. In another work by Fu et al. [94], composite features were 
constructed for edge detection by estimating the observations of the programs evolved by GP as 
triangular distributions. Gaussian filter gradient, histogram gradient, and normalized standard 
deviation were used as a terminal set. In order to detect edges, an unsupervised GP system was 
proposed in [95]. However, fitness function was based on the energy functions in the active 
'
'
(
)
(
)
n G
G
Fitness
n G
G
Ç
=
È
G
'
G
1
1
2
(1
)
N
i
i
m
i
i
i
r p
F
N
r
p
=
=
-
+
å
ir
ip

19 
 
contours. In comparison with a Sobel edge detector, the evolved GP edge detectors were reported 
to have better performance.  
Similarly, Liddle et al. [84] used a Multi-Objective GP (MOGP) for object detection. 
MOGP evolves a set of classifiers rather than a single classifier classifier, as in the case of 
Single-Objective GP (SOGP). The proposed technique used the NSGA-II algorithm, whose 
performance measure is Non-Dominance-Ranking and Crowding Distance. A two-phase training 
process applied the MOGP algorithm twice using different objectives e.g., maximizing both TPR 
and True Negative Rate (TNR); or maximizing Detection Rate (DR) while at the same time 
minimizing False Alarm Rate (FAR). In the interesting work of Zang et al. [89], GP was used for 
object detection, but instead of using raw pixels and terminals, they used pixel statistics such as 
mean, standard deviation, and moments. A new fitness measure termed as “false alarm area” was 
used along with a combination of DR and FAR. 
On the other hand, Zang et al. [82] presented domain-independent features such as mean and 
standard deviation as terminals for GP to detect multiple objects. They used three different ways 
(rectilinear: based on different rectangles; circular: using circles of different radii, and using an 
average of pixels) for obtaining pixel statistics. Evaluation of programs was performed with a 
fitness function based on DR and FAR as such: 
                             fitness= K1 · (1 − DR) + K2 · FAR,                                                          (5) 
where, K1 and K2 are constants. Zang et al. [86] introduced a two-phase GP approach for object 
detection. In the first phase, cutouts from the training images were used with classification 
accuracy as the fitness function. The second phase was initialized with the population from the 
first phase, and a window was moved over the whole image. For the second phase, the following 
fitness function was used: 
                     fitness = K1 (1−DR) + K2 × FAR +K3 × FAA +K4 × size                       (6) 
where FAR is the false alarm rate, DR stand for detection rate, FAA is the false alarm area 
(positive classifications – objects in the image), size is the program size, while K1, K2, K3, and 
K4 are constants. 
Hunt et al. [87] followed the previous two-phase approach [86], augmented with validation 
and sampling methods in order to avoid overfitting. Validation was performed after every two 
generations. Generalization ability is usually evaluated by calculating the hyper-area (area 
covered by the best Pareto-front), and distance (the difference between the performance of the 
classifier on training and validation set). Nguyen et al.[97] used GP for the detection of rice leaf. 
In Nguyen’s work, the dataset was created by taking images from the top of the rice field, and a 
total of 600 images of size 640
840 were captured from the camera. Out of the total 600, 300 
images were used for the training of the classifier. After capturing images, the next step was the 
conversion of color images into grayscale. The below equation shows the conversion of colored 
images into the grayscale images. 
                       (7) 
In order to deduce the positive and negative samples from the set of gray images, a window 
size of 
 pixels was used to extract sub-regions within the images. If each sub-image 
contained a portion of rice leaf then, it was labeled as a positive example; otherwise, the negative 
label was assigned to that subpart. After pre-processing of original images, a total of 9000 
images of size 
 pixels was generated in which half belonged to a positive class, and half 
belonged to the negative class. For training of GP program, pixels were considered as a terminal 
´
(
)
0.3 Re
_
0.59
_
0.11
_
Pixel gray
d
channel
Green channel
Blue channel
=
´
+
´
+
´
20 20
´
20 20
´

20 
 
set, whereas the function set was comprised of four different arithmetic operators and a square-
root function. The weighted sum of TPR and TNR was used as a fitness criterion. In order to 
ensure that the value of fitness was between 0 and 100 percent, the following constraint was  
followed 
. The block diagram of Nguyen’s technique is shown in Figure 11. 
 
                                             
                                                                   (8) 
 
 
 
Figure 11: GP based object detection technique by Nguyen et al.[97] 
 
5.10. 
GP in motion detection 
In the past, many modeling and background subtraction related techniques have been 
designed for motion detection. Moreover, to avoid manually coded motion detection systems, 
different researchers used GP based automatically evolved systems [98–103]. It was observed 
that generally, the GP based evolved programs outperformed manually coded programs. To 
tackle the unstable background (such as rainy background, moving background due to a moving 
camera) in motion detection, GP was employed in [104], where classification accuracy based on 
motion and non-motion was used as a fitness measure. 
Another difficult task in the case of motion detection is to detect motion from a noisy scene 
when there is no information about the noise. Pinto et al. [100] tackled this problem by using GP 
based approach in which motion detectors were generated during the testing phase on the basis 
of the fitness function. In this approach, Gaussian noise was added in the video [100] and 
showed better results for detecting motion in different environments. In another work [105], the 
GP program was used for analyzing the various type of motion detection techniques such as 
detecting simple motion, detection of fast-moving objects, motion detection from a noisy 
background. Another advantage of using GP for motion detection is that the evolved detectors 
can also tolerate noise; that is why GP may be considered as one of the best approaches for the 
detection of motion.  
Similarly, Xie e al. [98] used GP for anomaly detection from crowded scenes. In Xie’s approach, 
multi-frame Local Binary Patterns (LBP) difference based on LBP was used for extracting 
features from video frames. Training of GP was performed on extracted features. The proposed 
scheme detected abnormalities in real-time videos. Similarly, Song et al. [106] proposed GP 
based target motion detection approach that automatically evolved GP program and separated 
target motion from other irrelevant motions such as the noisy background. The technique 
proposed by Song et al.’s was comprised of two phases. In the first phase (evolution phase), the 
1
2
1
w
w
+
=
1
2
Fitness
w
TPR
w
TNR
=
´
+
´

21 
 
data used during training was divided into training and test parts. Parameter optimization during 
training was performed on the basis of the performance of GP based evolved programs on test 
data. After the evolution of the GP program, the next phase was the application phase, in which 
the best-evolved GP program from the evolution phase was used to check the performance on 
unseen data samples. The block diagram of Song’s technique is shown in Figure 12. This 
technique was used for detecting motion from the video, so the first two-dimensional array of 
size 20 x 20 was captured as video frames from different locations of videos. The image was 
assigned to the positive class if the majority of pixels within the frame were labeled as sampled 
by a human expert. During the GP training, program accuracy was used as a fitness function, 
whereas detection accuracy versus the number of generations was used as an evaluation measure. 
 
 
Figure 12:  GP based motion detection technique by Song et al. [106] 
6. Category wise Applications of GP 
This section presents different GP based techniques that are applied to different categories of 
image processing. Table 1 lists the references as well as the GP parameter settings for each 
category. An overall analysis of Table 1 shows that in all of the reported image processing 
related applications, a large population is used in comparison to the number of generations. The 
large population within each generation helps to increase diversity and hence increases the 
chance to obtain better individual in less number of generations. Moreover, most of the GP 
related image processing applications used tournament selection. The advantage of using the 
tournament selection method is that it helps to maintain constant selection pressure, and even 
programs with average fitness have chances to reproduce a child in the coming generation. Table 
1 shows that a higher crossover probability is used in comparison to mutation probability 
because higher values of mutation probability increase the search area within the search space, 
and the algorithm may get stuck in local minima. Also, in image processing related applications, 
ramped half and half is the commonly used population initialization method. This method 
produces the initial tree of variable length and thus help to increase the diversity of the initial 
population. The last column of Table 1 shows that several runs are carried out in most of the 
reported works  to show the effectiveness of proposed methods. 
 
 
 
 

22 
 
Category
