arXiv:2001.03923v2  [cs.CV]  6 Apr 2020
Bridging the Gap between AI and Healthcare
Sides: Towards Developing Clinically Relevant
AI-Powered Diagnosis Systems
Changhee Han1,2,3[0000−0002−4429−3859],
Leonardo Rundo4,5[0000−0003−3341−5483], Kohei Murao3,
Takafumi Nemoto6, and Hideki Nakayama1
1 Graduate School of Information Science and Technology,
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
2 LPIXEL Inc., Tokyo, Japan

3 Research Center for Medical Big Data,
National Institute of Informatics, Tokyo, Japan
4 Department of Radiology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
5 Cancer Research UK Cambridge Centre, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
6 Department of Radiology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan
Abstract. Despite the success of Convolutional Neural Network-based
Computer-Aided Diagnosis research, its clinical applications remain chal-
lenging. Accordingly, developing medical Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) ﬁt-
ting into a clinical environment requires identifying/bridging the gap
between AI and Healthcare sides. Since the biggest problem in Med-
ical Imaging lies in data paucity, conﬁrming the clinical relevance for
diagnosis of research-proven image augmentation techniques is essential.
Therefore, we hold a clinically valuable AI-envisioning workshop among
Japanese Medical Imaging experts, physicians, and generalists in Health-
care/Informatics. Then, a questionnaire survey for physicians evaluates
our pathology-aware Generative Adversarial Network (GAN)-based im-
age augmentation projects in terms of Data Augmentation and physician
training. The workshop reveals the intrinsic gap between AI/Healthcare
sides and solutions on Why (i.e., clinical signiﬁcance/interpretation) and
How (i.e., data acquisition, commercial deployment, and safety/feeling
safe). This analysis conﬁrms our pathology-aware GANs’ clinical rele-
vance as a clinical decision support system and non-expert physician
training tool. Our ﬁndings would play a key role in connecting inter-
disciplinary research and clinical applications, not limited to the Japanese
medical context and pathology-aware GANs.
Keywords: Translational research · Computer-aided diagnosis · Gener-
ative adversarial networks · Data augmentation · Physician training.
1
Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have enabled accurate/reliable Computer-
Aided Diagnosis (CAD), occasionally outperforming expert physicians [1,2,3].

2
C. Han et al.
However, such research results cannot be easily transferred to a clinical environ-
ment. Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) and Healthcare sides have a huge gap around
technology, funding, and people [4]. In Japan, the biggest challenge lies in med-
ical data sharing because each hospital has diﬀerent ethical codes and tends to
enclose collected data without annotating them for AI research. This diﬀers from
the US, where National Cancer Institute provides annotated medical images [5].
Therefore, a Research Center for Medical Big Data was launched in Novem-
ber 2017: collaborating with 6 Japanese medical societies and 6 institutes of in-
formatics, we collected large-scale annotated medical images for CAD research.
Using over 60 million available images, we achieved prominent research results,
presented at major Computer Vision [6] and Medical Imaging conferences [7].
Moreover, we published 6 papers [8,9,10,11,12,13] on Generative Adversarial
Network (GAN)-based medical image augmentation [14]. Since the GANs can
generate realistic samples with desired pathological features via many-to-many
mappings, they could mitigate the medical data paucity via Data Augmentation
(DA) and physician training.
Aiming to further identify/bridge the gap between AI and Healthcare sides
in Japan towards developing medical AI ﬁtting into a clinical environment in
ﬁve years, we hold a workshop for 7 Japanese people with various AI and/or
Healthcare background. Moreover, to conﬁrm the clinical relevance for diagnosis
of the pathology-aware GAN methods, we conduct a questionnaire survey for 9
Japanese physicians who interpret Computed Tomography (CT) and Magnetic
Resonance (MR) images in daily practice. Fig. 1 outlines our investigation.
Contributions. Our main contributions are as follows:
– AI and Healthcare Workshop: We ﬁrstly hold a clinically valuable AI-
envisioning workshop among Medical Imaging experts, physicians, and Health-
care/Informatics generalists to bridge the gap between AI/Healthcare sides.
– Questionnaire Survey for Physicians: We ﬁrstly present both qualita-
tive/quantitative questionnaire evaluation results for many physicians about
research-proven medical AI.
– Information Conversion: Clinical relevance discussions imply that our
pathology-aware GAN-based interpolation and extrapolation could overcome
medical data paucity via DA and physician training.
2
Pathology-aware GAN-based Image Augmentation
In terms of interpolation, GAN-based medical image augmentation is reliable
because acquisition modalites (e.g., X-ray, CT, MR) can display the human
body’s strong anatomical consistency at ﬁxed position while clearly reﬂecting
inter-subject variability [15,16]. This is diﬀerent from natural images, where
various objects can appear at any position; accordingly, to tackle large inter-
subject/pathology/modality variability, we proposed to use noise-to-image GANs
(e.g., random noise samples to diverse pathological images) for (i) medical DA
and (ii) physician training [8]. While the noise-to-image GAN training is much
more diﬃcult than training image-to-image GANs [17] (e.g., a benign image to
a malignant one), it can increase image diversity for further performance boost.

Bridging the Gap between AI and Healthcare Sides
3
General Medical AI
Pathology-aware GAN-based
Medical Image Augmentation
Questionnaire Survey to confirm
above applicationsʼ clinical relevance
Workshop to find intrinsic gap and its solutions
between AI researchers and Healthcare workers
Medical
DA
Physician
Training
Fig. 1: Overview of our discussions towards developing clinically relevant AI-powered
diagnosis systems: (i) A workshop for 7 Japanese people with various AI and/or Health-
care background to develop medical AI ﬁtting into a clinical environment in ﬁve years;
(ii) A questionnaire survey for 9 Japanese physicians to conﬁrm our pathology-aware
GAN-based realistic/diverse image augmentation’s clinical relevance—the medical DA
requires high diversity whereas the physician training requires high realism.
Regarding the DA, the GAN-generated images can improve CAD based on
supervised learning [18,19,20]. For the physician training, the GANs can dis-
play novel desired pathological images and help train medical trainees despite
infrastructural/legal constraints [21]. However, we have to devise eﬀective loss
functions and training schemes for such applications. Diversity matters more for
the DA to suﬃciently ﬁll the real image distribution, whereas realism matters
more for the physician training not to confuse the trainees.
So, how can we perform GAN-based DA/physician training with only limited
annotated images? Always in collaboration with physicians, for improving 2D
classiﬁcation, we combined the noise-to-image and image-to-image GANs [9,10].
Nevertheless, further DA applications require pathology localization for detec-
tion and advanced physician training needs the generation of images with ab-
normalities, respectively. To meet both clinical demands, we proposed 2D/3D
bounding box-based GANs conditioned on pathology position/size/appearance.
Indeed, the bounding box-based detection requires much less physicians’ anno-
tation eﬀort than segmentation [22].
In terms of extrapolation, the pathology-aware GANs are promising because
common and/or desired medical priors can play a key role in the conditioning—
theoretically, inﬁnite conditioning instances, external to the training data, ex-
ist and enforcing such constraints have an extrapolation eﬀect via model re-
duction [23]. For improving 2D detection, we proposed Conditional Progressive
Growing of GANs that incorporates rough bounding box conditions incremen-
tally into a noise-to-image GAN (i.e., Progressive Growing of GANs [24]) to place

4
C. Han et al.
realistic/diverse brain metastases at desired positions/sizes on 256×256 MR im-
ages [11]. Since the human body is 3D, for improving 3D detection, we proposed
3D Multi-Conditional GAN that translates noise boxes into realistic/diverse
32 × 32 × 32 lung nodules [25] placed at desired position/size/attenuation on
CT scans [12]. Interestingly, inputting the noise box with the surrounding tis-
sues has the eﬀect of combining the noise-to-image and image-to-image GANs.
We succeeded to (i) generate images even realistic for physicians and (ii)
improve detection using synthetic training images, respectively; they require
diﬀerent loss functions and training schemes. However, to exploit our pathology-
aware GANs as a (i) non-expert physician training tool and (ii) clinical decision
support system, we need to conﬁrm their clinical relevance for diagnosis—such
information conversion [26] techniques to overcome the data paucity, not limited
to our pathology-aware GANs, would become a clinical breakthrough.
3
Methods
3.1
AI and Healthcare Workshop
– Subjects: 2 Medical Imaging experts (i.e., a Medical Imaging researcher
and a medical AI startup entrepreneur), 2 physicians (i.e., a radiologist and
a psychiatrist), and 3 Healthcare/Informatics generalists (i.e., a nurse and re-
searcher in medical information standardization, a general practitioner and
researcher in medical communication, and a medical technology manufac-
turer’s owner and researcher in health disparities)
– Experiments: As its program shows (Table 1), during the workshop, we
conduct 2 activities: (Learning) Know the overview of Medical Image Analy-
sis, including state-of-the-art research, well-known challenges/solutions, and
the summary of our pathology-aware GAN projects; (Thinking) Find the
intrinsic gap and its solutions between AI researchers and Healthcare work-
ers after sharing their common and diﬀerent thinking/working styles. This
workshop was held on March 17th, 2019 at Nakayama Future Factory, Open
Studio, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
3.2
Questionnaire Survey for Physicians
– Subjects: 3 physicians (i.e., a radiologist, a psychiatrist, and a physiatrist)
committed to (at least one of) our pathology-aware GAN projects and 6
project non-related radiologists without much AI background. This paper’s
authors are surely not included.
– Experiments: Physicians are asked to answer the following questionnaire
within 2 weeks from December 6th, 2019 after reading 10 summary slides
written in Japanese about general Medical Image Analysis and our pathology-
aware GAN projects along with example synthesized images. We conduct
both qualitative (i.e., free comments) and quantitative (i.e., ﬁve-point Lik-
ert scale [27]) evaluation: Likert scale 1 = very negative, 2 = negative, 3 =
neutral, 4 = positive, 5 = very positive.

Bridging the Gap between AI and Healthcare Sides
5
Table 1: Workshop program to (i) know the overview of Medical Image Analysis and
(ii) ﬁnd the intrinsic gap and its solutions between AI researchers/Healthcare workers.
* indicates activities given by a facilitator (i.e., the ﬁrst author), such as lectures.
Time (mins) Activity
Introduction
10
1. Explanation of the workshop’s purpose and ﬂow*
10
2. Self-introduction and explanation of motivation for participation
5
3. Grouping into two groups based on background*
Learning: Knowing Medical Image Analysis
15
1. TED speech video watching: Artiﬁcial Intelligence Can Change the future of Medical Diagnosis*
35
2. Lecture: Overview of Medical Image Analysis including state-of-the-art research, well-known
challenges/solutions, and the summary of our pathology-aware GAN projects*
(its video in Japanese: https://youtu.be/rTQLknPvnqs)
10
3. Sharing expectations, wishes, and worries about Medical Image Analysis
(its video in Japanese: https://youtu.be/ILPEGga-hkY)
10
Intermission
Thinking: Finding How to Develop Robust Medical AI
25
1. Identifying the intrinsic gap between AI/Healthcare sides after sharing their common and diﬀerent
thinking/working styles
60
2. Finding how to develop gap-bridging medical AI ﬁtting into a clinical environment in ﬁve years
10
Intermission
Summary
25
1. Presentation
10
2. Sharing workshop impressions and ideas to apply obtained knowledge
(its video in Japanese: https://youtu.be/F31tPR3m8hs)
5
3. Answering a questionnaire about satisfaction and further comments
5
4. Closing remarks*
– Question 1: Are you keen to exploit medical AI in general when it achieves
accurate and reliable performance in the near future? (ﬁve-point Likert scale)
Please tell us your expectations, wishes, and worries (free comments).
– Question 2: What do you think about using GAN-generated images for
DA? (ﬁve-point Likert scale)
– Question 3: What do you think about using GAN-generated images for
physician training? (ﬁve-point Likert scale)
– Question 4: Any comments/suggestions about our projects towards devel-
oping clinically relevant AI-powered systems based on your experience?
4
Results
4.1
Workshop Results
We show the clinically-relevant ﬁndings from this Japanese workshop.
Gap between AI and Healthcare Sides
Gap 1: AI, including Deep Learning, provides unclear decision criteria, does
it make physicians reluctant to use it for diagnosis in a clinical environment?
– Healthcare side: We rather expect applications other than diagnosis. If
we use AI for diagnosis, instead of replacing physicians, we suppose a reli-
able second opinion, such as alert to avoid misdiagnosis, based on various

6
C. Han et al.
clinical data not limited to images—every single diagnostician is anxious
about their diagnosis. AI only provides minimum explanation, such as a
heatmap showing attention, which makes persuading not only the physicians
but also patients diﬃcult. Thus, the physicians’ intervention is essential for
intuitive explanation. Methodological safety and feeling safe are diﬀerent.
In this sense, pursuing explainable AI generally decreases AI’s diagnostic
accuracy [28], so physicians should still serve as mediators by engaging in
high-level conversation or interaction with patients. Moreover, according to
the medical law in most countries including Japan, only doctors can make
the ﬁnal decision. The ﬁrst autonomous AI-based diagnosis without a physi-
cian was cleared by the Food and Drug Administration in 2018 [29], but such
a case is exceptional.
– AI side: Compared with other systems or physicians, Deep Learning’s expla-
nation is not particularly poor, so we require too severe standards for AI; the
word AI is excessively promoting anxiety and perfection. If we could thor-
oughly verify the reliability of its diagnosis against physicians by exploring
uncertainty measures [30], such intuitive explanation would be optional.
Gap 2: Are there any beneﬁts to actually introducing medical AI?
– Healthcare side: After all, even if AI can achieve high accuracy and con-
venient operation, hospitals would not introduce it without any commercial
beneﬁts. Moreover, small clinics, where physicians are desperately needed,
often do not have CT or MR scanners [31].
– AI side: The commercial deployment of medical AI is strongly tied to di-
agnostic accuracy; so, if it can achieve signiﬁcantly outstanding accuracy at
various tasks in the near future, patients would not visit hospitals/clinics
without AI. Accordingly, introducing medical AI would become proﬁtable in
ﬁve years.
Gap 3: Is medical AI’s diagnostic accuracy reliable?
– Healthcare side: To evaluate AI’s diagnostic performance, we should con-
sider many metrics, such as sensitivity and speciﬁcity. Moreover, its general-
ization ability for medical data highly relies on inter-scanner/inter-individual
variability [32]. How can we evaluate whether it is suitable as a clinically ap-
plicable system?
– AI side: Generally, alleviating the risk of overlooking the diagnosis is the
most important, so sensitivity matters more than speciﬁcity unless their
balance is highly disturbed. Recently, such research on medical AI that is
robust to diﬀerent datasets is active [33].

Bridging the Gap between AI and Healthcare Sides
7
How to Develop Medical AI Fitting into a Clinical Environment in
Five Years
Why: Clinical signiﬁcance/interpretation
– Challenges: We need to clarify which clinical situations actually require AI
introduction. Moreover, AI’s early diagnosis might not be always beneﬁcial
for patients.
– Solutions: Due to nearly endless disease types and frequent misdiagnosis
coming from physicians’ fatigue, we should use it as alert to avoid misdi-
agnosis [34] (e.g., reliable second opinion), instead of replacing physicians.
It should help prevent oversight in diagnostic tests not only with CT and
MR, but also with blood data, chest X-ray, and mammography before tak-
ing CT and MR [35]. It could be also applied to segmentation for radiation
therapy [36], neurosurgery navigation [37], and pressure ulcers’ echo evalua-
tion. Along with improving the diagnosis, it would also make the physicians’
workﬂow easier, such as by denoising [38]. Patients should decide whether
they accept AI-based diagnosis under informed consent.
How: Data acquisition
– Challenges: Ethical screening in Japan is exceptionally strict, so acquir-
ing and sharing large-scale medical data/annotation are challenging—it also
applies to Europe due to General Data Protection Regulation [39]. Con-
sidering the speed of technological advances in AI, adopting it for medical
devices is diﬃcult in Japan, unlike in medical AI-ready countries, such as
the US, where the ethical screening is relatively loose in return for the re-
sponsibility of monitoring system stability. Moreover, whenever diagnostic
criteria changes, we need further reviews and software modiﬁcations. For
example, the Tumor-lymph Node-Metastasis (TNM) classiﬁcation [40] crite-
ria changed for oropharyngeal cancer in 2018 and for lung cancer in 2017,
respectively. Diagnostic equipment/target changes also require large-scale
data/annotation acquisition again.
– Solutions: For Japan to keep pace, the ethical screening should be adequate
to the other leading countries. Currently, overseas research and clinical trials
are proceeding much faster, so it seems better to collaborate with overseas
companies than to do it in Japan alone. Moreover, complete medical checkup,
which is extremely costly, is unique in East Asia, thus Japan could be supe-
rior in individuals’ multiple medical data—Japan is the only country, where
most workers aged 40 or over are required to have medical checkups once a
year regardless of their health conditions by the Industrial Safety and Health
Act [41]. To handle changes in diagnostic criteria/equipment and overcome
dataset/task dependency, it is necessary to establish a common database
creation workﬂow [42] by regularly entering electronic medical records into
the database. For reducing data acquisition/annotation cost, AI techniques,
such as GAN-based DA [12] and domain adaptation [43], would be eﬀective.

8
C. Han et al.
How: Commercial deployment
– Challenges: Hospitals currently do not have commercial beneﬁts to actually
introduce medical AI.
– Solutions: For example, it would be possible to build AI-powered hospi-
tals [44] operated with less staﬀ. Medical manufacturers could also stan-
dardize data format [45], such as for X-ray, and provide some AI services.
Many IT giants like Google are now working on medical AI to collect mas-
sive biomedical datasets [46], so they could help rural areas and developing
countries, where physician shortage is severe [31], at relatively low cost.
How: Safety and feeling safe
– Challenges: Considering multiple metrics, such as sensitivity and speci-
ﬁcity [47], and dataset/task dependency [48], accuracy could be unreliable,
so ensuring safety is challenging. Moreover, reassuring physicians and pa-
tients is important to actually use AI in a clinical environment [49].
– Solutions: We should integrate various clinical data, such as blood test
biomarkers and multiomics, with images [35]. Moreover, developing bias-
robust technology is important since confounding factors are inevitable [50].
To prevent oversight, prioritizing sensitivity over speciﬁcity is essential while
maintaining a balance [51]. We should also devise education for medical AI
users, such as result interpretation, to reassure patients [52].
4.2
Questionnaire Survey Results
We show the questions and Japanese physicians’ response summaries. Concern-
ing the following Questions 1,2,3, Fig. 2 visually summarizes the expectation
scores on medical AI (i.e., general medical AI, GANs for DA, and GANs for
physician training) from both 3 project-related physicians and 6 project non-
related radiologists.
Question 1: Are you keen to exploit medical AI in general when it achieves
accurate and reliable performance in the near future?
– Response summary: As expected, the project-related physicians are AI-
enthusiastic while the project non-related radiologists are also generally very
positive about the medical AI. Many of them appeal the necessity of AI-
based diagnosis for more reliable diagnosis because of the lack of physicians.
Meanwhile, other physicians worry about its cost and reliability. We may
be able to persuade them by showing expected proﬁtability (e.g., currently
CT scanners have an earning rate 16% and CT scans require 2-20 minutes
for interpretation in Japan). Similarly, we can explain how experts anno-
tate medical images and AI diagnoses disease based on them (e.g., multiple
physicians, not a single one, can annotate the images via discussion).

Bridging the Gap between AI and Healthcare Sides
9
Fig. 2: Bar chart of the expectations on medical AI, expressed by ﬁve-point Likert
scale scores, from 9 Japanese physicians: 3 project-related physicians and 6 project
non-related radiologists, respectively. The vertical rectangles and error bars denote the
average scores with 95% conﬁdence intervals.
Question 2: What do you think about using GAN-generated images for DA?
– Response summary: As expected, the project-related physicians are very
positive about the GAN-based DA while the project non-related radiolo-
gists are also positive. Many of them are satisﬁed with its achieved accu-
racy/sensitivity improvement when available annotated images is limited.
However, similarly to their opinions on general Medical Image Analysis, some
physicians question its reliability.
Question 3: What do you think about using GAN-generated images for physi-
cian training?
– Response summary: We generally receive neutral feedback because we do
not provide a concrete physician training tool, but instead general pathology-
aware generation ideas with example synthesized images—thus, some physi-
cians are positive, and some are not. A physician provides a key idea about
a pathology-coverage rate for medical student/expert physician training, re-
spectively. For extensive physician training by GAN-generated atypical im-
ages, along with pathology-aware GAN-based extrapolation, further GAN-
based extrapolation would be valuable.

10
C. Han et al.
Question 4: Any comments/suggestions about our projects towards developing
clinically relevant AI-powered systems based on your experience?
– Response summary: Most physicians look excited about our pathology-
aware GAN-based image augmentation projects and express their clinically
relevant requests. The next steps lie in performing further GAN-based ex-
trapolation, developing reliable and clinician-friendly systems with new prac-
tice guidelines, and overcoming legal/ﬁnancial constraints.
5
Conclusion
Our ﬁrst clinically valuable AI-envisioning workshop between people with various
AI and/or Healthcare background reveals the intrinsic gap between both sides
and its preliminary solutions. Regarding clinical signiﬁcance/interpretation, med-
ical AI could play a key role in supporting physicians with diagnosis, therapy,
and surgery. For data acquisition, countries should utilize their unique medical
environment, such as complete medical checkup for Japan. Commercial deploy-
ment could come as AI-powered hospitals and medical manufacturers’ AI service.
To assure safety and feeling safe, we should integrate various clinical data and
devise education for medical AI users. We believe that such solutions on Why
and How would play a crucial role in connecting inter-disciplinary research and
clinical applications.
Through a questionnaire survey for physicians, we conﬁrm our pathology-
aware GANs’ clinical relevance for diagnosis as a clinical decision support sys-
tem and non-expert physician training tool: many physicians admit the urgent
necessity of general AI-based diagnosis while welcoming our GAN-based DA to
handle the lack of medical images. Thus, GAN-powered physician training is
promising only under careful tool designing.
We ﬁnd that better DA and expert physician training require further gener-
ation of images with abnormalities. Therefore, for better GAN-based extrapola-
tion, we plan to conduct (i) generation by parts with coordinate conditions [53],
(ii) generation with both image and radiogenomic conditions [54], and (iii) trans-
fer learning among diﬀerent body parts and disease types. Whereas this paper
only explores the Japanese medical context and pathology-aware GANs, our
ﬁndings are more generally applicable and can provide insights into the clinical
practice in other countries.
