Handwritten Optical Character Recognition (OCR): A
Comprehensive Systematic Literature Review (SLR)
Jamshed Memon ∗1,4, Maira Sami3, and Rizwan Ahmed Khan1,2
1Faculty of IT, Barrett Hodgson University, Karachi, Pakistan.
2LIRIS, Universit´e Claude Bernard Lyon1, France.
3CIS, NED University of Engineering and technology, Karachi, Pakistan.
4School of Computing, Quest International University, Perak, Malaysia.
Abstract
Given the ubiquity of handwritten documents in human transactions, Optical Character Recognition
(OCR) of documents have invaluable practical worth. Optical character recognition is a science that
enables to translate various types of documents or images into analyzable, editable and searchable data.
During last decade, researchers have used artiﬁcial intelligence / machine learning tools to automatically
analyze handwritten and printed documents in order to convert them into electronic format. The objec-
tive of this review paper is to summarize research that has been conducted on character recognition of
handwritten documents and to provide research directions. In this Systematic Literature Review (SLR)
we collected, synthesized and analyzed research articles on the topic of handwritten OCR (and closely
related topics) which were published between year 2000 to 2018. We followed widely used electronic
databases by following pre-deﬁned review protocol. Articles were searched using keywords, forward ref-
erence searching and backward reference searching in order to search all the articles related to the topic.
After carefully following study selection process 142 articles were selected for this SLR. This review ar-
ticle serves the purpose of presenting state of the art results and techniques on OCR and also provide
research directions by highlighting research gaps.
Keywords:
Optical character recognition, classiﬁcation, languages, feature extraction, deep learn-
ing
1
Introduction
Optical character recognition (OCR) is a system that converts the input text into machine encoded format
[1]. Today, OCR is helping not only in digitizing the handwritten medieval manuscripts [2], but also helping
in converting the typewritten documents into digital form [3]. This has made the retrieval of the required
information easier as one doesnâĂŹt have to go through the piles of documents and ﬁles to search the
required information. Organizations are satisfying the needs of digital preservation of historic data [4], law
documents [5], educational persistence [6] etc.
An OCR system depends mainly, on the extraction of features and discrimination / classiﬁcation of these
features (based on patterns). Handwritten OCR have received increasing attention as a subﬁeld of OCR. It
is further categorized into oﬄine system [7, 8] and online system [9] based on input data. The oﬄine system
is a static system in which input data is in the form of scanned images while in online systems nature of
input is more dynamic and is based on the movement of pen tip having certain velocity, projection angle,
position and locus point. Therefore, online system is considered more complex and advance, as it resolves
overlapping problem of input data that is present in the oﬄine system.
One of the earliest OCR system was developed in 1940s, with the advancement in the technology over
the time, the system became more robust to deal with both printed and handwritten characters and this
∗All authors have contributed equally
1
arXiv:2001.00139v1  [cs.CV]  1 Jan 2020

led to the commercial availability of the OCR machines. In 1965, advance reading machine “IBM 1287” was
introduced at the “world fair” in New York [10]. This was the ﬁrst ever optical reader, which was capable of
reading handwritten numbers. During 1970s, researchers focused on the improvement of response time and
performance of the OCR system.
The next two decades from 1980 till 2000, software system of OCR was developed and deployed in
educational institutes, census OCR [11] and for recognition of stamped characters on metallic bar [12]. In
early 2000s, binarization techniques were introduced to preserve historical documents in digital form and
provide researchers the access to these documents [13, 14, 15, 16]. Some of the challenges of binarization of
historical documents was the use of nonstandard fonts, printing noise and spacing. In mid of 2000 multiple
applications were introduced that were helpful for diﬀerently abled people. These applications helped these
people in developing reading and writing skills.
In the current decade, researchers have worked on diﬀerent machine learning approaches which include
Support Vector Machine (SVM), Random Forests (RF), k Nearest Neighbor (kNN), Decision Tree (DT)
[17, 18, 19] etc. Researchers combined these machine learning techniques with image processing techniques
to increase accuracy of optical character recognition system. Recently researchers has focused on developing
techniques for the digitization of handwritten documents, primarily based on deep learning [20] approach.
This paradigm shift has been sparked due to adaption of cluster computing and GPUs and better performance
by deep learning architectures [21], which includes Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN), Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN), Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks etc.
This Systematic Literature Review (SLR) will not only serve the purpose of presenting literature in
the domain of OCR for diﬀerent languages but will also highlight research directions for new researcher by
highlighting weak areas of current OCR systems that needs further investigation.
This article is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses review methodology employed in this article.
Review methodology section includes review protocol, inclusion and exclusion criteria, search strategy, se-
lection process, quality assessment criteria and meta data synthesis of selected studies. Statistical data from
selected studies is presented in Section 3. Section 4 presents research question and their motivation. Section
5 will discuss diﬀerent classiﬁcations methods which are used for handwritten OCR. The section will also
elaborate on structural and statistical models for optical character recognition. Section 6 will present diﬀer-
ent databases (for speciﬁc language) which are available for research purpose. Section 7 will present research
overview of language speciﬁc research in OCR, while Section 8 will highlight research trends. Section 9
will summarize this review ﬁndings and will also highlight gaps in research that needs attention of research
community.
2
Review methods
As mentioned above, this Systematic Literature Review (SLR) aims to identify and present literature on
OCR by formulating research questions and selecting relevant research studies. Thus, in summary this review
was:
1. To summarize existing research work (machine learning techniques and databases) on diﬀerent lan-
guages of handwritten character recognition systems.
2. To highlight research weakness in order to eliminate them through additional research.
3. To identify new research areas within the domain of OCR.
We will follow strategies proposed by Kitchenham et al. [22]. Following proposed strategy, in subsequent
sub-sections review protocol, inclusion and exclusion criteria, search strategy process, selection process and
data extraction and synthesis processes are discussed.
2.1
Review protocol
Following the philosophy, principles and measures of the Systematic Literature Review (SLR) [22], this
systematic study was initialized with the development of comprehensive review protocol.
This protocol
2

identiﬁes review background, search strategy, data extraction, research questions and quality assessment
criteria for the selection of study and data analysis.
The review protocol is what that creates a distinction between an SLR and traditional literature review
or narrative review [22]. It also enhances the consistency of the review and reduces the researchers’ biasness.
This is due to the fact that researchers have to present search strategy and the criteria for the inclusion of
exclusion of any study in the review.
2.2
Inclusion and exclusion criteria
Setting up an inclusion and exclusion criteria makes sure that only articles that are relevant to study are
included. Our criteria includes research studies from journals, conferences, symposiums and workshops on
the optical character recognition of English, Urdu, Arabic, Persian, Indian and Chinese languages. In this
SLR, we considered studies that were published from January 2000 to December 2018.
Our initial search based on the keywords only, resulted in 954 research articles related to handwritten
OCRs of diﬀerent languages (refer Figure 1 for compete overview of selection process). After thorough review
of the articles we excluded the articles that were not clearly related to a handwritten OCR, but appeared
in the search, because of keyword match.
Additionally, articles were also excluded based on duplicity,
non-availability of full text and whether the studies were related to any of our research questions.
2.3
Search strategy
Figure 1: Compete overview of studies selection process
Search strategy comprises of automatic and manual search, as shown in Figure 1. An automatic search
helped in identifying primary studies and to achieve a broader perspective. Therefore, we extended the review
by inclusion of additional studies. As recommended by Kitchenham et al. [22], manual search strategy was
applied on the references of the studies that are identiﬁed after application of automatic search.
For automatic search, we used standard databases which contain the most relevant research articles.
These databases include IEEE Explore, ISI Web of Knowledge, ScopusâĂŤElsevier and Springer. While
3

there is plenty of literature available in magazine, working papers, news papers, books and blogs, we did
not choose them for this review article as concepts discussed in these sources are not subjected to review
process, thus their quality can’t be reliably veriﬁed.
General keywords derived from our research questions and title of study were used to search research
articles. Our aim was to identify as many relevant articles as possible from main set of keywords. All possible
permutations of Optical character recognition concepts were tried in the search, such as “optical character
recognition”, “pattern recognition and OCR”, “pattern matching and OCR” etc.
Once the primary data was obtained by using search strings, data analysis phase of the obtained research
papers began with the intention of considering their relevance to research questions and inclusion and ex-
clusion criteria of study. After that, a bibliography management tool i.e. Mendeley was used for storing all
related research articles to be used for referencing purpose. Mendeley also helped us in identifying duplicate
studies, because a research paper can be found in multiple databases.
Manual search was performed with automatic search to make sure that we had not missed anything. This
was achieved through forward and backward referencing. Furthermore, for data extraction all the results
were imported into spreadsheet. Snowballing, which is an iterative process in which references of references
are veriﬁed to identify more relevant literature, was applied on primary studies in order to extract more
relevant primary studies. Set of primary studies post snowball process was then added to Mendeley.
2.4
Study selection process
Figure 2: Distribution of sources / databases of selected studies after applying selection process
A tollgate approach was adopted for the selection of the study [23]. Therefore, after searching keywords
in all relevant databases, we extracted 954 research studies through automatic search. Majority of these 954
studies, 512 were duplicate studies and were eliminated. Inclusion and exclusion criteria based upon title,
abstracts, keywords and the type of publication was applied on the remaining 442 studies. This resulted in
exclusion of 230 studies and leaving 212 studies. In the next stage, the selection criteria was applied, thus
further 89 studies were excluded and we were left with 123 studies.
Once we ﬁnished automatic search stage, we started manual search procedure to guarantee exhaustiveness
of the search results. We performed screening of remaining 123 studies and went through the references to
check relevant research articles that could have been left search during automatic search. Manual search
added 43 further studies. After adding these studies, pre-ﬁnal list of 166 primary studies was obtained.
Next and ﬁnal stage was to apply the quality assessment criteria (QAC) on pre-ﬁnal list of 166 studies.
Quality assessment criteria was applied at the end as this is the ﬁnal step through which ﬁnal list of studies
for SLR was deduced. QAC usually identiﬁes studies who’s quality is not helpful in answering research
4

question. After applying QAC, 24 studies were excluded and we were left with 142 primary studies. Refer
Figure 1 for compete step-by-step overview of selection process.
Table 1 shows the distribution of the primary / selected studies among various publication sources, before
and after applying above mentioned selection process. The same is also shown in Figure 2.
Table 1: Distribution of databases of selected studies before and after applying selection process
Source
Count before applying
Count after applying
selection process
selection process
Elsevier
207
51
IEEE Xplore
293
46
Springer
273
19
others
182
26
Total
955
142
2.5
Quality assessment criteria
Quality Assessment Criteria (QAC) is based on the principle to make a decision related the overall quality of
selected set of studies [22]. Following criteria was used to assess the quality of selected studies. This criterion
helped us to identify the strength of inferences and helped us in selecting the most relevant research studies
for our research.
Quality Assessment criteria questions:
1. Are topics presented in research paper relevant to the objectives of this review article?
2. Does research study describes context of the research?
3. Does research article explains approach and methodology of research with clarity?
4. Is data collection procedure explained, If data collection is done in the study?
5. Is process of data analysis explained with proper examples?
We evaluated 166 selected studies by using the above mentioned quality assessment questions in order to
determine the credibility of a particular acknowledged study. These ﬁve QA schema is inspired by [23]. The
quality of study was measured depending upon the score of each QA question. Each question was assigned
2 marks and the study’s quality was considered to be selected if it scored greater than or equal to 5 at the
scale of 10. Thus, studies below the score of 5 were not included in the research. Following this criteria, 142
studies were ﬁnally selected for this review article (refer Figure 1 for compete overview of selection process).
2.6
Data extraction and synthesis
During this phase, meta data of selected studies (142) was extracted. As stated eralier, we used Mendeley
and MS Excel to manage meta data of these studies. The main objective of this phase was to record the
information that was obtained from the initial studies [22]. The data containing study ID (to identify each
study), study title, authors, publication year, publishing platform (conference proceedings, journals, etc.),
citation count, and the study context (techniques used in the study) were extracted and recorded in an
excel sheet. This data was extracted after thorough analysis of each study to identify the algorithms and
techniques proposed by the researchers. This also helped us to classify the studies according to the languages
on which the techniques were applied. Table 2 shows the ﬁelds of the data extracted from research studies.
3
Statistical results from selected studies
In this section, statistical results of the selected studies will be presented with respect to their publication
sources, citation count status, temporal view, type of languages and type of research methodologies.
5

Table 2: Extracted meta-data ﬁelds of selected studies
Selected Features
Description
Study identiﬁcation number
Exclusive identity for selected research article
Reference
Bibliographical Reference i.e. Authors, title, publication year etc
Type of paper
Journal, conference, workshop, symposium
Language
English, Urdu, Chinese, Arabic, Indian, Farsi / Persian
Citation Count
Number of Citations
Technique
Feature extraction and classiﬁcation techniques
3.1
Publication sources overview
In this review, most of the included studies are published in reputed journals and leading conferences.
Therefore, considering the quality of research studies, we believe that this systematic review will be used
as a reference to ﬁnd latest trends and to highlight research directions for further studies in the domain
of handwritten OCR. Figure 3 shows the distribution of studies derived from diﬀerent publication sources.
Majority of included studies (87) were published in research journals (61%), followed by 47 publications in
conference articles (33%). Whereas, few (5) articles were published in workshop proceedings and only 3
relevant articles were found to be presented in symposiums.
Figure 3: Study distribution per publication source
3.2
Research citations
Citation count was obtained from Google Scholar. Overall, selected studies have good citation count, which
shows that quality of selected studies is worthy to be added in the review and also implies that researchers
are actively working in this area of research. As presented in Figure 4, approximately 95% of the selected
studies have at least one citation, except few paper which are published recently in 2018. Among selected
studies, 33 studies have more than 100 citations, 15 studies have been cited between 61-100 times, 25 studies
were cited between 33-60 times, 14 studies were cited between 16-30 times and 46 studies were cited between
1 and 15 times. Overall, we predict that selected studies citations will increase further because research
articles are constantly being published in this domain.
6

Figure 4: Citation count of selected studies. Numeric value within bar shows number of studies that have
been cited x times (corresponding values on the x-axis).
Table 3 provides details of research publications with more than 100 citations each. These articles can
be considered to have strong impact on the researchers working to build robust OCR system.
7

Title of Study
Citations
Year
Ref
Oﬄine handwriting recognition with multidimensional recurrent neural networks.
719
2009
[24]
Handwritten numeral databases of Indian scripts and multistage recognition of mixed numerals.
262
2009
[25]
A novel connectionist system for unconstrained handwriting recognition.
1175
2009
[26]
Markov models for oﬄine handwriting recognition: a survey
210
2009
[27]
Gujarati handwritten numeral optical character reorganization through neural network.
148
2010
[28]
Handwritten character recognition through two-stage foreground sub-sampling.
112
2010
[29]
Deep, big, simple neural nets for handwritten digit recognition.
784
2010
[30]
Diagonal based feature extraction for handwritten character recognition system using neural network.
175
2011
[31]
Convolutional neural network committees for handwritten character classiﬁcation.
381
2011
[32]
Handwritten English character recognition using neural network.
128
2011
[33]
DRAW: A recurrent neural network for image generation.
995
2015
[34]
Online and oﬀ-line handwriting recognition: a comprehensive survey.
2909
2000
[35]
Template-based online character recognition.
173
2001
[9]
An overview of character recognition focused on oﬀ-line handwriting.
589
2001
[36]
IFN/ENIT-database of handwritten Arabic words.
477
2002
[37]
Oﬀ-line Arabic character recognitionâĂŞa review.
236
2002
[38]
A class-modular feedforward neural network for handwriting recognition.
131
2002
[39]
Individuality of handwriting.
552
2002
[40]
HMM based approach for handwritten Arabic word recognition using the IFN/ENIT-database.
172
2003
[41]
Handwritten digit recognition: benchmarking of state-of-the-art techniques.
573
2003
[42]
Indian script character recognition: a survey.
540
2004
[43]
Online recognition of Chinese characters: the state-of-the-art.
362
2004
[44]
A study on the use of 8-directional features for online handwritten Chinese character recognition.
145
2005
[45]
Oﬄine Arabic handwriting recognition: a survey.
551
2006
[18]
Recognition of oﬀ-line handwritten devnagari characters using quadratic classiﬁer.
168
2006
[46]
Connectionist temporal classiﬁcation: labeling unsegmented sequence data with RNN.
1404
2006
[47]
Text-independent writer identiﬁcation and veriﬁcation on oﬄine arabic handwriting.
128
2007
[48]
A novel approach to on-line handwriting recognition based on bidirectional LSTM networks.
172
2007
[49]
Fuzzy model based recognition of handwritten numerals.
148
2007
[50]
Introducing a very large dataset of handwritten Farsi digits and a study on their varieties.
155
2007
[51]
Unconstrained on-line handwriting recognition with recurrent neural networks
207
2007
[52]
ICDAR 2013 Chinese handwriting recognition competition.
177
2013
[53]
Automatic segmentation of the IAM oﬀ-line database for handwritten English text.
101
2002
[54]
Table 3: Research publications with more than 100 citations
8

3.3
Temporal view
Figure 5: Publications Over The Years. On the y-axis is the number of publications.
The distribution of number of studies over the period under study (2000 - 2018) can be seen in Figure 5.
According to the reference ﬁgure, it can be noticed that there is a variation in the publication count through
these years.
Statistics show sudden increase in number of publications in the domain of a handwritten
character recognition in the years 2002, 2007 and 2009. The number of publications remained steady in
the remaining years of 2000s. After 2010 there is again steady increase in the number publications i.e. 59
publications in last 8 years. Year 2017 and 2018 have seen a steady rise in number of publications. This is
conceivably not surprising, since the concept of a handwritten character recognition is catching interest of
more researcher because of the advancement of the research work in the ﬁelds of deep learning and computer
vision. We believe that application areas of Handwritten OCRs will further increase in the coming years.
3.4
Language speciﬁc research
Figure 6: Number of selected studies with respect to investigated language. Numeric value within bar shows
number of selected studies for the given language.
9

The distributions / number of selected studies with respect to investigated scripting languages are shown
in the Figure 6. Total number of selected studies are 142 and out of these 142 studies, English language has
the highest contribution of 45 studies in the domain of character recognition, 40 studies related to Arabic
language, 26 studies are on the Indian scripts, 17 on Chinese language, 14 on Urdu language, while 11 studies
were conducted on Persian language. Some of the selected articles discussed multiple languages.
Figure 7 represents publications count each year with respect to language. Reference ﬁgure shows com-
piled temporal view of handwritten OCR researches done in diﬀerent languages throughout the mentioned
era of 2000-2018, in this time period there are certain research articles that covers more than one language
of handwritten OCR.
Figure 7: Selected studies count each year with respect to speciﬁc language. y-axis shows the number of
selected studies. Speciﬁc color within each bar represents speciﬁc language as shown in the legend.
4
Research questions
Research questions play an important role in systematic literature review, because these questions determine
the search queries and keywords that will be used to explore research publications. As discussed above, we
chose research questions which not only help seasoned researchers but also to researchers entering in the
domain of optical character recognition to understand where the research in this ﬁeld stands as of today.
This review article answers research questions presented in Table 4. Reference table also presents motivation
for each research question.
Table 4: Research questions and motivation
Research question
Motivation
What diﬀerent feature extraction and classiﬁcations
methods are used for handwritten OCR?
To identify trends in used feature extractors and ma-
chine learning techniques over almost two decades.
What diﬀerent datasets / databases are available for
research purpose?
Availability of a dataset with enough data is always
fundamental requirement for buidling OCR system
[55]
What major languages are investigated?
To highlight which languages have usually been in-
vestigated. Thus identifying languages which needs
more research attention.
What are the new research domains in the area of
OCR?
To provide guidance for new research projects.
10

5
Classiﬁcation methods of handwritten OCR
In handwritten OCR an algorithm is trained on a known dataset and it discovers how to accurately categorize
/ classify the alphabets and digits. Classiﬁcation is a process to learn model on a given input data and map or
label it to predeﬁned category or classes [17]. In this section we have discussed most prevalent classiﬁcation
techniques in OCR research studies beginning from 2000 till 2018.
5.1
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANN)
Biological neuron inspired architecture, Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANN) consists of numerous processing
units called neurons [56]. These processing elements (neurons) work together to model given input data
and map it to predeﬁned class or label [57]. The main unit in neural networks is nodes (neuron). Weights
associated with each node are adjusted to reduce the squared error on training samples in a supervised
learning environment (training on labeled samples / data). Figure 8 presents pictorial representation of
Multi Layer Perceptron (MLP) that consists of three layers i.e. (input, hidden and output).
Feed forward networks / Multi Layer Perceptron (MLP) achieved renewed interest of research community
in mid 1980s as by that time “Hopﬁeld network” provided the way to understand human memory and
calculate state of a neuron [58].
Initially, computational complexity of ﬁnding weights associated with
neurons hindered application of neural networks. With the advent of deep (many layers) neural architectures
i.e. Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) and Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN), neural networks has
established it self as one of the best classiﬁcation technique for recognition tasks including OCR [59, 60, 61,
62]. Refer Sections 8 and 9.2 for current and future research trends.
Figure 8: An architecture of Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) [63]
The early implementation of MLP in handwritten OCR was done by shamsher et al.
[64] on Urdu
language. The researchers proposed feed forward neural network algorithm of MLP (Multi Layer Preceptrons)
[65]. Liu et al. [66] used MLP on Farsi and Bangla numerals. One hidden layer was used with the connecting
weights estimated by the error back-propagation (BP) algorithm that minimized the squared error criterion.
On the other hand, Ciresan et al [30] trained ﬁve MLPs with two to nine hidden layers and varying numbers
of hidden units for the recognition of English numerals.
Recently, Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) has reported great success in character recognition task
11

[67]. Convolutional neural network has been widely used for classiﬁcation and recognition of almost all the
languages that have been reviewed for this systematic literature review [68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73].
5.2
Kernel methods
A number of powerful kernel-based learning models, e.g. Support Vector Machines (SVMs), Kernel Fisher
Discriminant Analysis (KFDA) and Kernel Principal Component Analysis (KPCA) have shown practical
relevance for classiﬁcation problems. For instance, in the context of optical pattern, text categorization,
time-series prediction these models have signiﬁcant relevance.
In support vector machine, kernel performs mapping of feature vectors into a higher dimensional feature
space in order to ﬁnd a hyperplane, which is linearly separates classes by as much margin as possible. Given
a training set of labeled examples { (xi, yi) , i = 1 . . . l } where xi ∈ℜn and yi ∈{-1, 1}, a new test example
x is classiﬁed by the following function:
f(x) = sgn(
l
X
i=1
αiyiK(xi, x) + b)
(1)
where:
1. K(., .) is a kernel function
2. b is the threshold parameter of the hyperplane
3. αi are Langrange multipliers of a dual optimization problem that describe the separating hyperplane
Before popularization of deep learning methodology, SVM was one of the most robust technique for
handwritten digit recognition, image classiﬁcation, face detection, object detection, and text classiﬁcation
[74]. Kernel Fisher Discriminant Analysis (KFDA) and Kernel Principal Component Analysis (KPCA) are
also some of the most signiﬁcant kernel methods being used in oﬄine handwritten character recognition
system [75].
Boukharouba et al. [74, 76] used SVM for recognition of Urdu and Arabic handwritten digits. SVMs have
also been successfully implement in image classiﬁcation and aﬀect recognition [77, 78], text classiﬁcation [79]
and face and object detection[80, 81].
5.3
Statistical methods
Statistical classiﬁers can be parametric and non-parametric. Parametric classiﬁers have ﬁxed (ﬁnite) number
of parameters and their complexity is not a function of size of input data. Parametric classiﬁers are generally
fast in learning concept and can even work with small training set. Example of parametric classiﬁers are
Logistic Regression (LR), Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), Hidden Markov Model (HMM) etc.
On the other hand, non-parametric classiﬁers are more ﬂexible in learning concepts but usually grow in
complexity with the size of input data. K Nearest Neighbor (KNN), Decision Trees (DT) are examples of
non-parametric techniques as as their number of parameters grows with the size of the training set.
5.3.1
Non-parametric statistical methods
One of the most used and easy to train statistical model for classiﬁcation is k nearest neighbor (kNN)
[42, 82, 83]. It is a non-parametric statistical method, which is widely used in optical character recognition.
Non-parametric recognition does not involve a-priori information about the data.
kNN ﬁnds number of training samples closest to new example based on target function. Based upon
the value of targeted function, it infers the value of output class. The probability of an unknown sample q
belonging to class y can be calculated as follows:
p(y | q) =
P
kϵK Wk.1(ky=y)
P
kϵK Wk
(2)
12

Wk =
1
d(k, q)
(3)
where;
1. K is the set of nearest neighbors
2. ky the class of k
3. d(k, q) the Euclidean distance of k from q, respectively.
Researchers have been found to use kNN for over a decade now and they believe that this algorithm
achieves relatively good performance for character recognition in their experiments performed on diﬀerent
datasets [61, 18, 83, 84].
kNN classiﬁes object / ROI based on majority vote of its neighbors (class) as it assigns class most
prevalent among its k nearest neighbors. If k = 1, then the object is simply assigned to class of that single
nearest neighbor [57].
5.3.2
Parametric statistical methods
As mentioned above parametric techniques models concepts using ﬁxed (ﬁnite) number of parameters as
they assume sample population / training data can be modeled by a probability distribution that has a ﬁxed
set of parameters. In OCR research studies, generally characters are classiﬁed according to some decision
rules such as maximum likelihood or Bayes method once parameters of model are learned [36].
Hidden Markov Model (HMM) was one the most frequently used parametric statistical method earlier in
2000.
HMM models system / data that is assumed to be Markov process with hidden states, where in Markov
process probability of one states only depends on previous state [36]. It was ﬁrst used in speech recognition
during 1990s before researchers started using it in recognition of optical characters [85, 86, 87]. It is believed
that HMM provides better results even when availability of lexicons is limited [41].
5.4
Template matching techniques
Figure 9: An overview of template matching techniques
As the names suggests, template matching is an approach in which images (small part of an image)
is matched with certain predeﬁned template. Usually template matching techniques employ sliding sliding
13

window approach in which template image or feature are slided on the image to determine similarity between
the two. Based on used similarity (or distance) metric classiﬁcation of diﬀerent objects are obtained [88].
In OCR, template matching technique is used to classify character after matching it with predeﬁned tem-
plate(s) [89]. In literature, diﬀerent distance (similarity) metrics are used, most common ones are Euclidean
distance, city block distance, cross correlation, normalized correlation etc.
In template matching, either template matching technique employs rigid shape matching algorithm or
deformable shape matching algorithm. Thus, creating diﬀerent family of template matching. Taxonomy of
template matching techniques is presented in Figure 9.
One of the most applicable approach for character recognition is deformable template matching (refer
Figure 10) as diﬀerent writers can write character by deforming them in particular way speciﬁc to writer.
In this approach, deformed image is used to compare it with database of known images. Thus, matching
/ classiﬁcation is performed with deformed shapes as speciﬁc writer could have deformed character in a
particular way [36]. Deformable template matching is further divided into parametric and free form matching.
Prototype matching, which is sub-class of parametric deformable matching, matching of done based on stored
prototype (deformed) [90].
Figure 10: (a) Digit Deformations (b) Deformed Template superimposed on target image [36]
Apart from deformable template matching approach, second sub-class of template matching is rigid
template matching. As the name suggests, rigid template matching does not take into account shape defor-
mations. This approach usually works with features extraction / matching of image with template. One of
the most common approach used in OCR to extract shape features is Hough transform, like Arabic [91] and
Chinese [92].
Second sub-class of rigid template matching is correlation based matching. In this technique, initially im-
age similarity is calculated and based on similarity features from speciﬁc regions are extracted and compared
[36, 93].
5.5
Structural pattern recognition
Another classiﬁcation technique that was used by OCR research community before the popularization of
kernel methods and neural networks / deep learning approach was structural pattern recognition. Structural
pattern recognition aims to classify objects based on relationship between its pattern structures and usually
structures are extracted using pattern primitives (refer Figure 11 for an example of pattern primitives) i.e.
edge, contours, connected component geometry etc . One of such image primitive that has been used in OCR
is Chain Code Histogram (CCH) [94, 95]. CCH eﬀectively describes image / character boundary / curve,
thus helping in classify character [74, 57]. Prerequisite condition to apply CCH for OCR is that image should
be in binary format and boundaries should be well deﬁne. Generally, for handwritten character recognition
this condition makes CCH diﬃcult to use. Thus, diﬀerent research studies and publicly available datasets
use / provide binarized images [82].
In research studies of OCR, structural models can be further sub-divided on the basis of context of
structure i.e. graphical methods and grammar based methods . Both of these models are presented in next
two sub-sections.
14

Figure 11: (a) Primitive and relations (b) Directed graph for capital letter R and E [96]
5.5.1
Graphical methods
A graph (G) is a way to mathematically describe relation between connected objects and is represented by
ordered pair of nodes (N) and edges (E). Generally for OCR, E represents arc of writing stroke connecting
N. The particular arrangement of N and E deﬁne characters / digits / alphabets. Trees (undirected graph,
where direction of connection is not deﬁned), directed graphs (where direction of edge to node is well deﬁned)
are used in diﬀerent research studies to represent characters mathematically [97, 98].
As mentioned above, writing structural components are extracted using pattern primitives i.e. edge,
contours, connected component geometry etc. Relation between these structures can be deﬁned mathemat-
ically using graphs (refer Figure 11 for an example showing how letter “R” and “E” can be modeled using
graph theory). Then considering speciﬁc graph architecture diﬀerent structures can be classiﬁed using graph
similarity measure i.e. similarity ﬂooding algorithm [99], SimRank algorithm [100], Graph similarity scoring
[101] and vertex similarity method [102]. In one study [103], graph distance is used to segment overlapping
and joined characters as well.
5.5.2
Grammar based methods
In graph theory, syntactic analysis is also used to ﬁnd similarities in graph structural primitives using concept
of grammar [104]. Beneﬁt of using grammar concepts in ﬁnding similarity in graphs comes from the fact that
this area is well researched and techniques are well developed. There are diﬀerent types of grammar based
on restriction rules, for example unrestricted grammar, context-free grammar, context-sensitive grammar
and regular grammar. Explanation of these grammar and corresponding applied restrictions are out scope
of this survey article.
In OCR literature, usually strings and trees are used to represent models based on grammar. With
well deﬁned grammar, string is produced that then can be robustly classiﬁed to recognize character. Tree
structure can also models hierarchical relations between structural primitives [88]. Trees can also be classiﬁed
by analyzing grammmar that deﬁnes the tree, thus classifying speciﬁc character [105].
6
Datasets
Generally, for evaluating and benchmarking diﬀerent OCR algorithms, standardized databases are needed /
used to enable a meaningful comparison [55]. Availability of a dataset containing enough amount of data for
training and testing purpose is always fundamental requirement for a quality research [106, 107]. Research in
the domain of optical character recognition mainly revolves around six diﬀerent languages namely, English,
Arabic, Indian, Chinese, Urdu and Persian / Farsi script. Thus, there are publicly available datasets for
these languages such as MNIST, CEDAR, CENPARMI, PE92, UCOM, HCL2000 etc.
15

Following subsections presents an overview of most used datasets for above mentioned languages.
6.1
CEDAR
Figure 12: Sample image from CEDAR Dataset [42]
This legacy dataset, CEDAR, was developed by the researchers at University of Buﬀalo in 2002 and is
considered among the ﬁrst few large databases of handwritten characters [40]. In CEDAR the images were
scanned at 300 dpi. Example character images from CEDAR database are shown in Figure 12.
6.2
MNIST
Figure 13: Sample handwritten digits from MNIST Dataset [42]
The MNIST dataset is considered as one of the most used / cited dataset for handwritten digits [42, 108,
30, 109, 110, 111]. It is the subset of the NIST dataset and that is why it is called modiﬁed NIST or MNIST.
The dataset consist of 60,000 training and 10,000 test images. Samples are normalized into 20 x 20 grayscale
16

images with reserved aspect ratio and the normalized images are of size 28 x 28. The dataset greatly reduces
the time required for pre-processing and formatting, because it is already in a normalized form.
6.3
UCOM
The UCOM is an Urdu language dataset available for research [112]. The authors claim that this dataset
could be used for both character recognition as well as writer identiﬁcation. The dataset consists of 53,248
characters and 62,000 words written in nasta’liq (calligraphy) style, scanned at 300 dpi. The dataset was
created based on the writing of 100 diﬀerent writers where each writer wrote 6 pages of A4 size. The dataset
evaluation is based on 50 text line images as train dataset and 20 text line images as test dataset with
reported error rate between 0.004 -0.006%. Example characters from the dataset are presented in Figure 14.
Figure 14: Example hand written characters from UCOM Dataset [112]
6.4
IFN/ENIT
The IFN/ENIT [37] is the most popular Arabic database of handwritten text. It was developed in 2002 by the
researchers at Technical University Braunschweig, Germany for advancement of research and development
of Arabic handwriting recognition systems. The dataset contains 26459 handwritten images of the names of
towns and villages in Tunisia. These images consist of 212,211 characters written by 411 diﬀerent writers,
refer Figure 15.
Since inception, the dataset has been widely used by the researchers for the eﬃcient
recognition of Arabic characters [41, 113, 114, 48].
Figure 15: Sample writings from IFN/ENIT Dataset [37]
6.5
CENPARMI
The CENter for PAttern Recognition and Machine Intelligence (CENPARMI) introduced ﬁrst version of
Farsi dataset in 2006 [51, 115] . This dataset contains 18,000 samples of Farsi numerals. These numerals are
divided into 11,000 training, 2,000 veriﬁcation and 5,000 samples for testing purpose.
Another similar, but larger dataset of Farsi numerals was produced by Khosravi [51] in 2007. This dataset
contains 102,352 digits extracted from registration forms of high school and undergraduate students. Later
17

in 2009 [116], CENPARMI released another larger, extended version of Farsi dataset. This larger dataset
contains 432,357 images of dates, words, isolated letters, isolated digits, numeral strings, special symbols,
and documents. Refer Figure 16 for examples images from CENPARMI Farsi language dataset.
Figure 16: CENPARMI dataset example images [51]
6.6
HCL2000
The HCL2000 is an handwritten Chinese character database, refer Figure 17 to see sample images. The
dataset is publicly available for researchers. The dataset contains 3,755 frequently used Chinese characters
written by 1,000 diﬀerent subjects. The database is unique in a way that it contains two sub datasets, one is
handwritten Chinese characters dataset, while the other is corresponding writer’s information dataset. This
information is provided so that research can be conducted not only based on the character recognition, but
also on writer’s background such as age, gender, occupation and education [117].
Figure 17: HCL2000 dataset sample images [117]
6.7
IAM
The IAM [118] is handwritten database of English language based on Lancaster-Oslo/Bergen (LOB) corpus.
Data were collected from 400 diﬀerent writers who produced 1,066 forms of English text containing vocabu-
lary of 82,227 words. Data consists of full English language sentences. The dataset was also used for writer
18

identiﬁcation [48]. Researchers were able to successfully identify writer 98% of the time during experiments
on IAM dataset. Writing sample from the IAM dataset are presented in Figure 18.
Figure 18: Sample Image IAM dataset [118]
7
Languages
As mentioned above, researchers working in the domain of optical character recognition have mainly inves-
tigated six diﬀerent languages, which are English, Arabic, Indian, Chinese, Urdu and Persian. This is one
of the future work to built OCR systems for other languages as well.
Figure 19: Data from UNESCO’s report on “world’s languages in danger” [119].
According to the United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) report
on “world’s languages in danger” at least 43% of languages spoken in the world are endangered [119]. These
large number of languages need attention of OCR research community as well to preserve this heritage from
19

extinction or at least to built such system that translates documents from endangered languages to electronic
form for reference. Data from UNESCO’s report on “world’s languages in danger” is presented in Figure 19.
This section presents state-of-the art results for six language which are usually studied by researchers.
7.1
English language
English Language is the most widely used language in the world. It is the oﬃcial language of 53 countries
and articulated as a ﬁrst language by around 400 million people. Bilinguals use English as an international
language. Character recognition for English language has been extensively studied throughout many years. In
this systematic literature review, English language has the highest number of publications i.e. 45 publications
after concluding study selection process (refer Section 2.4 and Section 3.4). The OCR systems for English
language occupy a signiﬁcant place as large number of studies have been done in the era of 2000-2018 on
English language.
The English language OCR systems have been used successfully in a wide array of commercial applica-
tions. The most cited study for English language handwritten OCR is by Plamondon et al. [35] in 2000,
which have more than 2900 citations , refer Table 3. The objective of the research by Plamondon et al. was
to present a broad review of the state of the art in the ﬁeld of automatic processing of handwriting. This
paper explained the phenomenon of pen based computers and achieve the goal of automatic processing of
electronic ink by mimicking and extending the pen paper metaphor. To identify the shape of the charac-
ter, structural and rule based models like (SOFM) self-organized feature map, (TDNN) time delay neural
network and (HMM) hidden markov model was used.
Another comprehensive overview on character recognition presented in [36] by Arica et al. has more than
500 citations. Arica et al. concluded that characters are natural entities and it is practically impossible for
character recognition to impose strict mathematical rule on the patterns of characters. Neither the structural
nor the statistical models can signify a complex pattern alone. The statistical and structural information for
many characters pattern can be combined by neural networks (NNs) or harmonic markov models (HMM).
Connell et al. [9] demonstrated a template-based system for online character recognition, which is capable
of representing diﬀerent handwriting styles of a particular character. They used decision trees for eﬃcient
classiﬁcation of characters and achieve 86% accuracy.
Every language has speciﬁc way of writing and have some diverse features that distinguished it with other
language. We believe that to eﬃciently recognize handwritten and machine printed text of the English lan-
guage, researchers have used almost all of the available feature extraction and classiﬁcation techniques. These
feature extraction and classiﬁcation techniques include but not limited to HOG [120] , bidirectional LSTM
[121], directional features [122], multilayer perceptron (MLP) [123, 109, 124], hidden markov model(HMM)
[54, 52, 26, 61], Artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) [125, 126, 127] and support vector machine (SVM) [67, 29].
Recently trend is shifting away from using handcrafted features and moving towards deep neural networks.
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) architecture, a class of deep neural networks, has achieved classiﬁcation
results that exceeds state-of-the-art results speciﬁcally for visual stimuli / input [128]. LeCun [20] proposed
CNN architecture based on multiple stages where each stage is further based on multiple layers. Each stage
uses feature maps, which are basically arrays containing pixels. These pixels are fed as input to multiple
hidden layers for feature extraction and a connected layer, which detects and classiﬁes object [55].
7.2
Farsi / Persian script
Farsi, also known as Persian Language is mainly spoken in Iran and partly in Afghanistan, Iraq, Tajikistan
and Uzbekistan by approximately 120 million people.
The Persian script is considered to be similar to
Arabic, Urdu, Pashto and Dari languages. Its nature is also cursive so the appearance of the letter changes
with respect to positions. The script comprises of 32 characters and unlike Arabic language, the writing
direction of the Farsi language is mostly but not exclusively from right to left.
Mozaﬀari et. al [129] proposed a novel handwritten character recognition method for isolated alphabets
and digits of Farsi and Arabic language by using fractal codes.
On the basis of the similarities of the
characters they categorized the 32 Farsi alphabets into 8 diﬀerent classes. A multilayer perceptron (MLP)
(refer Figure 8 for overview of MLP) was used as a classiﬁer for this purpose. The classiﬁcation rate for
characters and digits were 87.26% and 91.37% respectively.
20

However, in another research [130], researchers achieved recognition rate of 99.5% by using RBF kernel
based support vector machine. Broumandnia et al. [131] conducted research on Farsi character recognition
and claims to propose the fastest approach of recognizing Farsi character using Fast Zernike wavelet moments
and artiﬁcial neural networks (ANN). This model improves on average recognition speed by 8 times.
Liu et al. [66] presented results of handwritten Bangla and Farsi numeral recognition on binary and
gray scale images. The researchers applied various character recognition methods and classiﬁers on the three
public datasets such as ISI Bangla numerals, CENPARMI Farsi numerals, and IFHCDB Farsi numerals and
claimed to have achieved the highest accuracies on the three datasets i.e. 99.40%, 99.16%, and 99.73%,
respectively.
In another research Boukharouba and Bennia [74] proposed SVM based system for eﬃcient recognition
of handwritten digits. Two feature extraction techniques namely chain code histogram (CCH) [132] and
white-black transition information were discussed. The feature extraction algorithm used in the research
did not require digits to be normalized. SVM classiﬁer along with RBF kernel method was used for clas-
siﬁcation of handwritten Farsi digits named âĂŸhodaâĂŹ. This system maintains high performance with
less computational complexity as compared to previous systems as the features used were computationally
simple.
Lately, as discussed above researchers are using Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) in conjunction
with other techniques for the recognition of characters. These techniques are being applied on diﬀerent
datasets to check the accuracy of techniques [69, 82, 73, 72].
7.3
Urdu language
Urdu is curvasive language like Arabic, Farsi and many others [133]. An early notable attempt to improve
the methods for Urdu OCR is by Javed et al. in 2009 [134]. Their study focuses on the Nasta’liq (calligraphy)
style speciﬁc pre-processing stage in order to overcome the challenges posed by the Nasta’liq style of Urdu
handwriting. The steps proposed include page segmentation into lines and further line segmentation into
sub-ligatures, followed by base identiﬁcation and base-mark association. 94% of the ligatures were accurately
separated with proper mark association.
Later in 2009, the ﬁrst known dataset for Urdu handwriting recognition was developed at Centre for
Pattern Recognition and Machine Intelligence (CENPARMI) [135].
Sagheer et al.
[135] focused on the
methods involving data collection, data extraction and pre-processing. The dataset stores dates, isolated
digits, numerical strings, isolated letters, special symbols and 57 words. As an experiment, Support Vector
Machine (SVM) using a Radial Base Function / kernel (RBF) was used for classiﬁcation of isolated Urdu
digits. The experiment resulted in a high recognition rate of 98.61%.
To facilitate multilingual OCR, Hangarge et al. [108] proposed a texture-based method for handwritten
script identiﬁcation of three major scripts: English, Devnagari and Urdu. Data from the documents were
segmented into text blocks and / or lines. In order to discriminate the scripts, the proposed algorithm extracts
ﬁne textural primitives from the input image based on stroke density and pixel density. For experiments,
k-nearest neighbor classiﬁer was used for classiﬁcation of the handwritten scripts. The overall accuracy for
tri-script and bi-script classiﬁcation peaked up to 88.6% and 97.5% respectively.
A study by Pathan et al. [7] in 2012 proposed an approach based on invariant moment technique to
recognize the handwritten isolated Urdu characters.
A dataset comprising of 36800 isolated single and
multi-component characters was created. For multi-component letters, primary and secondary components
were separated, and invariant moments were calculated for each. The researchers used SVM for classiﬁcation,
which resulted an overall performance rate of 93.59%. Similarly, Raza et al. [136] created an oﬄine sentence
database with automatic line segmentation. It comprises of 400 digitised forms by 200 diﬀerent writers.
Obaidullah et al. [137] proposed a handwritten numeral script identiﬁcation (HNSI) framework to identify
numeral text written in Bangla, Devanagari, Roman and Urdu. The framework is based on a combination of
daubechies wavelet decomposition [138] and spatial domain features. A dataset of 4000 handwritten numeral
word image for these scripts was created for this purpose. In terms of average accuracy rate, multi-layer
perceptron (MLP) (refer Figure 8 for pictorial depiction of MLP) proves to be better than NBTree, PART,
Random Forest, SMO and Simple Logistic classiﬁers.
In 2018, Asma and Kashif [139] presented comparative analysis of raw images and meta features from
UCOM dataset. CNN (Convolutional Neural Network) and a LSTM (Long short-term Memory), which is
21

a recurrent neural network based architecture were used on Urdu language dataset. Researchers claim that
CNN provided accuracy of 97.63% and 94.82% on thickness graph and raw images respectively. While, the
accuracy of LSTM was 98.53% and 99.33%.
In another study Naseer et al. [140] and Tayyab et al. [141] proposed an OCR model based on CNN
and BDLSTM (Bi-Directional LSTM). This model was applied on dataset containing urdu news tickers and
results were compared with google’s vision cloud OCR. researchers found that their proposed model worked
better than google’s cloud vision OCR in 2 of the 4 experiments.
7.4
Chinese language
Our research includes 17 research publications on the OCR system of Chinese language after concluding
study selection process (refer Section 2.4 and Section 3.4). One of the Earliest research on Chinese language
was done in 2000 by Fu et al. [142]. The researchers used self-growing probabilistic decision-based neural
networks (SPDNNs) to develop a user adaptation module for character recognition and personal adaption.
The resulting recognition accuracy peaked up to 90.2% in ten adapting cycles.
Later in 2005, a comparative study of applying feature vector-based classiﬁcation methods to character
recognition by Cheng and Fujisawa [67] found that discriminative classiﬁers such as artiﬁcial neural network
(ANN) and support vevtor machin (SVM) gave higher classiﬁcation accuracies than statistical classiﬁers when
sample size was large. However, in the study SVM demonstrated better accuracies than neural networks in
many experiments.
In another study Bai and Huo [45] evaluated use of 8-directional features to recognize online handwritten
Chinese characters. Following a series of processing steps, blurred directional features were extracted at
uniformly sampled locations using a derived ﬁlter, which forms a 512-dimensional vector of raw features. This,
in comparison to an earlier approach of using 4-directional features, resulted in a much better performance.
In 2009, Zhang [117] presented HCL2000, a large-scale handwritten Chinese Character database.
It
stores 3,755 frequently used characters along with the information of its 1000 diﬀerent writers. HCL2000
was evaluated using three diﬀerent algorithms; Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), Locality Preserving
Projection (LPP) and Marginal Fisher Analysis (MFA). Prior to the analysis, a Nearest Neighbor classiﬁer
assigns input image to a character group. The experimental results show MFA and LPP to be better than
LDA.
Yin et al. [53] proposed ICDAR 2013 competition which received 27 systems for 5 tasks âĂŞ classiﬁcation
on extracted feature data, online/oﬄine isolated character recognition and online/oﬄine handwritten text
recognition. Techniques used in the systems were inclusive of LDA, Modiﬁed quadratic discriminant function
(MFQD), Compound Mahalanobis Function (CMF), convolutional neural network (CNN) and multilayer
perceptron (MLP). It was explored that the methods based on neural networks proved to be better for
recognizing both isolated character and handwritten text.
During the study in 2016 on accurate recognition of multilingual scene characters, Tian et al.
[120]
proposed an extension of Histogram of Oriented Gradient (HOG), Co-occurrence HOG (Co-HOG) and Con-
volutional Co-HOG (ConvCo-HOG) features. The experimental results show the eﬃciency of the approaches
used and higher recognition accuracy of multilingual scene texts.
In 2018, researchers on Chinese script used neural networks to recognize CAPTCHA (Completely Auto-
mated Public Turing test to tell Computers and Humans Apart) recognition [70], Medical document recog-
nition [143], License plate recognition [144] and text recognition in historical documents [71]. Researchers
used Convolutional Neural Network(CNN) [70, 71], Convolutional Recurrent Neural Network(CRNN) [143]
and Single Deep Neural Network(SDNN) [144] during these studies.
7.5
Arabic script
Research on handwritten Arabic OCR systems has passed through various stages over the past two decades.
Studies in the early 2000s focused mainly on the neural network methods for recognition and developed
variants of databases [145]. In 2002, Mario Pechwitz [37] developed the ﬁrst IFN/ENIT-database to allow
for the training and testing of Arabic OCR systems. This is one of the highly cited databases and has been
cited more than 470 times. Another database was developed by Saeed Mozaﬀari [146, 147] in 2006. It stores
gray-scale images of isolated oﬄine handwritten 17,740 Arabic / Farsi numerals and 52,380 characters.
22

Another notable dataset containing Arabic handwritten text images was introducted by Mezghani et al.
[148]. The dataset has open vocabulary written by multiple writers (AHTID / MW). It can be used for word
and sentence recognition, and writer identiﬁcation [149].
A survey by Lorigo and Govindaraju [18] provides a comprehensive review of the Arabic handwriting
recognition methodologies and databases used until 2006.
This includes research studies carried out on
IFN/ENIT database.
These studies mostly involved artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs), Hidden Markov
Models (HMM), holistic and segmentation-based recognition approaches. The limitations pointed out by
the review included restrictive lexicons and restrictions on the text appearance.
In 2009, Alex et al. [24] introduced a globally trained oﬄine handwriting recognizer based on multi-
directional recurrent neural networks and connectionist temporal classiﬁcation. It takes raw pixel data as
input. The system had an overall accuracy of 91.4% which also won the international Arabic recognition
competition.
Another notable attempt for Arabic OCR was made by Lutf et al. [150] in 2014, which primarily focused
on the specialty of Arabic writing system. The researcher proposed a novel method with minimum compu-
tation cost for Arabic font recognition based on diacritics. Flood-ﬁll based and clustering based algorithms
were developed for diacritics segmentation. Further, diacritic validation is done to avoid misclassiﬁcation
with isolated letters. Compared to other approaches, this method is the fastest with an average recognition
rate of 98.73% for 10 most popular Arabic fonts.
An Arabic handwriting synthesis system devised by Elarian et al. [151] in 2015 synthesizes words from
segmented characters. It uses two concatenation models: Extended-Glyphs connection and the Synthetic-
Extensions connection. The impact of the results from this system shows signiﬁcant improvement in the
recognition performance of an HMM based Arabic text recognizer.
Hicham and Akram [152] discussed an analytical approach to develop a recognition system based on HMM
Toolkit (HTK). This approach requires no priori segmentation. Features of local densities and statistics are
extracted using vertical sliding windows technique, where each line image is transformed into a series of
extracted feature vectors. HTK is used in the training phase and Viterbi algorithm is used in the recognition
phase. The system gave an accuracy of 80.26% for words with âĂĲArabic-numbersâĂİ database and 78.95%
with IFN / ENIT database.
In study conducted in 2016 by Elleuch et al. [153], convolutional neural network (CNN) based on support
vector machine (SVM) is explored for recognizing oﬄine handwritten Arabic.
The model automatically
extracts features from raw input and performs classiﬁcation.
In 2018, researchers applied technique of DCNN (deep CNN) for recognizing the oﬄine and handwritten
Arabic characters [68]. An accuracy of 98.86% was achieved when strategy of DCNN using transfer learning
was applied on two datasets. In another similar study [154] an OCR technique based on HOG (Histograms of
Oriented Gradient) [155] for feature extraction and SVM for character classiﬁcation was used on handwritten
dataset. The dataset contained names of Jordanian cities, towns and villages yielded an accuracy of 99%.
However, when the researchers used multichannel neural network for segmentation and CNN for recognition
on machine printed characters, the experiments on 18pt font showed an overall accuracy of 94.38%.
7.6
Indian script
Indian script is collection of scripts used in the sub-continent namely Devanagari [128], Bangla [156], Hindi
[157], Gurmukhi [62], Kannada [158] etc. One of the earliest research on Devanagari (Hindi) script was
proposed in 2000 by Lehal and Bhatt [159]. The research was conducted on Devanagari script and English
numerals. The researchers used data that was already in isolated form in order to avoid the segmentation
phase. The research is based on statistical and structural algorithms [160]. The results of Devanagari scripts
were better than English numerals. Devanagari had recognition rate of 89% with 4.5 confusion rate, while
English numerals had recognition rate of 78% with confusion rate of 18%.
Patil et. al [161] was the ﬁrst researcher to use neural network approach for the identiﬁcation of Indian
documents.
The researchers propose a system capable of reading English, Hindi and Kannada scripts.
Modular neural network was used for script identiﬁcation while a two stage feature extraction system was
developed, ﬁrst to dilate the document image and second to ﬁnd average pixel distribution in the resulting
images.
Sharma et al. [46] proposed a scheme based on quadratic classiﬁer for the recognition of Devanagari script.
23

The researchers used 64 directional features based on chain code histogram [132] for feature recognition. The
proposed scheme resulted in 98.86% and 80.36% accuracy in recognizing Devanagari characters and numeral
respectively. Fivefold cross validation was used for the computation of results.
Two research studies [50, 162] presented in 2007 were based on use of fuzzy modeling for character
recognition of Indian script. The researchers claim that the use of reinforcement learning on a small database
of 3500 Hindi numerals helped achieve recognition rate of 95%.
Another research carried out on Hindi numerals [25] used relatively large dataset of 22,556 isolated
numeral samples of Devanagari and 23,392 samples of Bangla scripts. The researchers used three Multi-layer
perceptron classiﬁers to classify the characters. In case of a rejection, a 4th perceptron was used based on
the output of previous three perceptrons in a ﬁnal attempt to recognize the input numeral. The proposed
scheme provided 99.27% recognition accuracy vs the fuzzy modeling technique, which provided the accuracy
of 95%.
Desai [28] used neural networks for the numeral recognition of Gujrati script. The researcher used a
multi-layers feed forward neural network for the classiﬁcation of digits. However, the recognition rate was
low at 82%.
Kumar et al. [163, 164] proposed a method for line segmentation of handwritten Hindi text. An accuracy
of 91.5% for line segmentation and 98.1% for word segmentation was achieved. Perwej et. al [165] used
back propagation based neural network for the recognition of handwritten characters. The results showed
that the highest recognition rate of 98.5% was achieved. Obaidullah et al. [137] proposed Handwritten
Numeral Script Identiﬁcation or HNSI framework based on four indic scripts namely, Bangla, Devanagari,
Roman and Urdu. The researchers used diﬀerent classiﬁers namely NBTree, PART, Random Forest, SMO,
Simple Logistic and MLP and evaluated the performance against the true positive rate. Performance of
MLP was found to be better than the rest. MLP was then used for bi and tri-script identiﬁcation. Bi-script
combination of Bangla and Urdu gave the highest accuracy rate of 90.9% on MLP, while the highest accuracy
rate of 74% was achieved in tri-script combination of Bangla, roman and Urdu.
In a multi dataset experiment[156], researchers applied a lightweight model based on 13 layers of CNN
with 2-sub layers on four datasets of Bangla language. An accuracy of 98%, 96.81%, 95.71%, and 96.40% was
achieved when model was applied on CMATERdb, ISI, BanglaLekha-Isolated dataset and mixed datasets
respectively. CNN based model was also applied on ancient documents written in Devanagari or Sanskrit
script in another study. Results, when compared with Google’s vision OCR gave an accuracy of 93.32% vs
92.90%.
8
Research trends
Lately, the research in the domain of optical character recognition has moved towards deep learning approach
[166, 167] with little to no emphasis on hand crafted features. In this section we have analyze research trend
/ techniques mainly used in the publications of last three years (2015-2018). Our analysis is summarized in
Table 5.
Table 5 includes script under investigation, techniques or classiﬁcation technique employed for OCR, year
of publication and respective reference number. This table gives holistic view of how researchers working on
some of the widely used languages are trying to solve the problem of optical character recognition. We can
see that neural network, specially CNN is being used extensively for the recognition of optical characters.
However, traditional techniques like SVM, HMM, SIFT etc. are also being used in conjunction with CNN.
24

Script
Technique Employed
Year
Ref
Chinese
English
Indian
Two new feature descriptors Co-HoG and ConvCo-HoG based on Histogram of Oriented Gradient(HoG)
based on CNN.
2016
[120]
Chinese
Convolutional Neural Network(CNN), Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM), Hidden Markov Model(HMM)
2016
[168]
Chinese
Neural Network language model, Convolutional Neural Networks
2017
[169]
Chinese
English
Indian
BOW based representation for characters, DSN-SVM,HOG-SVM, FV-SVM
2017
[170]
Chinese
English
Convolutional neural network (CNN)
2017
[171]
Chinese
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
2018
[70]
Chinese
Convolutional-Recurrent Neural Network (CRNN)
2018
[143]
Chinese
Single Deep Neural Network (SDNN)
2018
[144]
Chinese
Recognition of Chinese Text in Historical Documents with Page-Level Annotations. CNN, CNN followed
by LSTM
2018
[71]
English
Urdu
Indian
Features: Discrete wavelet transforms (DWT), Daubechies wavelet transforms, textural and entropy
features. Classiﬁers: NBTree, PART, LIBLinear, Random Forest, SMO, MLP
2015
[137]
English
Indian
SVM and Shortest Path Algorithm
2017
[172]
English
Heat Kernel Signature (HKS), HKS with SIFT and triangular mesh structure
2015
[173]
English
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) architecture
2015
[34]
English
word graphs (WG) based Line-level keyword spotting (KWS).
2016
[121]
English
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) model with two multi-layer RNNs trained with Long Short Term
Memory (LSTM) and connectionist temporal classiﬁcation (CTC), CNN
2017
[174]
English
Box Approach, Mean, Standard Deviation, Centre of Gravity, Neural Network
2017
[123]
Arabic
Kashida features, width feature and Hidden Markov Model (HMM)
2015
[151]
Arabic
Elliptic grapheme codebook features, X2 distance metric
2015
[175]
Arabic
Features of local densities and features statistics, Hidden Markov Model (HMM)
2016
[152]
Arabic
Support Vector Machine(SVM), Convolutional Neural Network(CNN)
2016
[153]
Arabic
Recurrent connectionist language modeling
2017
[176]
Arabic
DCNN (Deep Convolutional neural network)
2018
[68]
. . . continued on next page
25

Script
Technique Employed
Year
Ref
Arabic
Edge operators (Canny, Sobel, Prewitt, Roberts, and Laplacian of Gaussian), Transforms (Fourier (FFT),
discrete cosine (DCT), Hough, and Radon), Texture features (Gray-level range and standard devia-
tion, entropy of the gray-level distribution, and the properties of the gray-level co-occurrence matrix
(GLCM)), Moments (HuâĂŹs seven moments and Zernike moments) and Ensemble of Support Vector
Machine(SVM)
2018
[177]
Arabic
Histograms of Oriented Gradient (HOG)Âă, SVM
2018
[154]
Arabic
Multi-Channel Neural Network (MCNN)
2018
[178]
Arabic
Fast Automatic Hashing Text Alignment (FAHTA)
2018
[179]
Arabic
Deep Siamese Convolutional Neural Network and SVM
2018
[69]
Urdu
Hierarchical combination of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN), Multi-dimensional Long Short-Term
Memory Neural Networks (MDLSTM)
2017
[166]
Urdu
BDLSTM (Bi-Directional Long Short-Term Memory), Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)
2018
[141]
Urdu
Histogram of Oriented Gradient (HOG), Support Vector Machine (SVM), k Nearest Neighbors (kNN),
Random Forest (RF) and Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP)
2018
[83]
Urdu
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)
2018
[140]
Indian
Multi-column Multi-scale Convolutional Neural Network (MMCNN)
2017
[180]
Indian
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
2018
[156]
Indian
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
2018
[128]
Indian
Histogram of oriented gradient (HOG) and Support Vector Machine (SVM)
2018
[181]
Indian
Convolutional Recurrent Neural Network (CRNN) with Spatial Transformer Network (STN) layer
2018
[157]
Indian
Zoning, Discrete Cosine Transformations (DCT), gradient features, k Nearest Neighbors (kNN), Support
Vector Machine (SVM), Decision Tree and Random Forest
2018
[84]
Persian
Chain Code Histogram (CCH), transition information in the vertical and horizontal directions, Support
Vector Machine(SVM)
2017
[74]
Persian
Zoning, chain code, outer proﬁle, crossing count, k Nearest Neighbors (kNN), Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
and Support Vector Machine (SVM)
2018
[82]
Persian
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
2018
[182]
Persian
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
2018
[73]
Table 5: Summary of frequently used feature extraction and classiﬁcation techniques: Data corresponding to last three years (2015-2018). Studies
corresponding to “Indian” script do include research on scripts belonging to Devanagari, Bangla, Hindi, Gurmukhi, Kannada etc.
26

9
Conclusion and future work
9.1
Conclusion
1. Optical character recognition has been around for last eight (8) decades. However, initially products
that recognize optical characters were mostly developed by large technology companies. Development
of machine learning and deep learning has enabled individual researchers to develop algorithms and
techniques, which can recognize handwritten manuscripts with greater accuracy.
2. In this literature review, we systematically extracted and analyzed research publications on six widely
spoken languages. We explored that some techniques perform better on one script than on another
e.g. multilayer perceptron classiﬁer gave better accuracy on Devanagri and Bangla numerals [25, 129]
but gave average results for other languages [123, 109, 124]. The diﬀerence may have been due to the
fact that how speciﬁc technique models diﬀerent style of characters and quality of the dataset.
3. Most of the published research studies propose solution for one language or even subset of a language.
Publicly available datasets also include stimuli that are aligned well with each other and fail to in-
corporate examples that corresponds well with real life scenarios i.e. writing styles, distorted strokes,
variable character thickness and illumination [183].
4. It was also observed that researchers are increasingly using Convolutional Neural Networks(CNN) for
the recognition of handwritten and machine printed characters. This is due to the fact that CNN
based architectures are well suited for recognition tasks where input is image. CNN were initially
used for object recognition tasks in images e.g. the ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Chal-
lenge (ILSVRC) [184]. AlexNet [185], GoogLeNet [186] and ResNet [187] are some of the CNN based
architectures widely used for visual recognition tasks.
9.2
Future work
1. As mentioned in Section 7, research in OCR domain is usually done on some of the most widely
spoken languages. This is partially due to non-availability of datasets on other languages. One of the
future research direction is to conduct research on languages other than widely spoken languages i.e.
regional languages and endangered languages. This can help preserve cultural heritage of vulnerable
communities and will also create positive impact on strengthening global synergy.
2. Another research problem that needs attention of research community is to built systems that can
recognize on screen characters and text in diﬀerent conditions in daily life scenarios e.g.
text in
captions or news tickers, text on sign boards, text on billboards etc. This is the domain of “recognition
/ classiﬁcation / text in the wild”. This is complex problem to solve as system for such scenario needs
to deal with background clutters, variable illumination condition, variable camera angles, distorted
characters and variable writing styles [183].
3. To build robust system for “text in the wild”, researchers needs to come up with challenging datasets
that is comprehensive enough to incorporate all possible variations in characters. One such eﬀort is
[188]. In another attempt, research community has launched “ICDAR 2019: Robustreading challenge
on multi-lingual scene text detection and recognition” [189]. Aim of this challenge is invite research
studies that proposes robust system for multi-lingual text recognition in daily life or “in the wild”
scenario. Recently report for this challenge has been published and winner methods for diﬀerent tasks
in the challenge are all based on diﬀerent deep learning architectures e.g. CNN, RNN or LSTM.
4. Published research studies have proposed various systems for OCR but one aspect that needs to
improve is commercialization of research. Commercialization of research will help building low cost
real-life systems for OCR that can turn lots of invaluable information into searchable / digital data
[190].
27
