Projective simulation with generalization
Alexey A. Melnikov,1, 2, ∗Adi Makmal,1 Vedran Dunjko,1 and Hans J. Briegel1, 3
1Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of Innsbruck, Technikerstraße 21a, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria
2Institute for Quantum Optics and Quantum Information,
Austrian Academy of Sciences, Technikerstraße 21a, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria
3Department of Philosophy, University of Konstanz, Fach 17, 78457 Konstanz, Germany
The ability to generalize is an important feature of any intelligent agent. Not only because it
may allow the agent to cope with large amounts of data, but also because in some environments, an
agent with no generalization capabilities cannot learn. In this work we outline several criteria for
generalization, and present a dynamic and autonomous machinery that enables projective simula-
tion agents to meaningfully generalize. Projective simulation, a novel, physical approach to artiﬁcial
intelligence, was recently shown to perform well in standard reinforcement learning problems, with
applications in advanced robotics as well as quantum experiments. Both the basic projective simu-
lation model and the presented generalization machinery are based on very simple principles. This
allows us to provide a full analytical analysis of the agent’s performance and to illustrate the beneﬁt
the agent gains by generalizing. Speciﬁcally, we show that already in basic (but extreme) envir-
onments, learning without generalization may be impossible, and demonstrate how the presented
generalization machinery enables the projective simulation agent to learn.
INTRODUCTION
The ability to act upon a new stimulus, based on previ-
ous experience with similar, but distinct, stimuli, some-
times denoted as generalization, is used extensively in
our daily life. As a simple example, consider a driver’s
response to traﬃc lights: The driver need not recognize
the details of a particular traﬃc light in order to respond
to it correctly, even though traﬃc lights may appear dif-
ferent from one another. The only property that matters
is the color, whereas neither shape nor size should play
any role in the driver’s reaction. Learning how to react
to traﬃc lights thus involves an aspect of generalization.
A learning agent, capable of a meaningful and useful
generalization is expected to have the following charac-
teristics: (a) an ability for categorization (recognizing
that all red signals have a common property, which we
can refer to as redness); (b) an ability to classify (a new
red object is to be related to the group of objects with the
redness property); (c) ideally, only generalizations that
are relevant for the success of the agent should be learned
(red signals should be treated the same, whereas square-
shaped signals should not, as they share no property that
is of relevance in this context); (d) correct actions should
be associated with relevant generalized properties (the
driver should stop whenever a red signal is shown); and
(e) the generalization mechanism should be ﬂexible.
To illustrate what we mean by “ﬂexible generaliza-
tion”, let us go back to our driver. After learning how to
handle traﬃc lights correctly, the driver tries to follow ar-
row signs to, say, a nearby airport. Clearly, it is now the
shape category of the signal that should guide the driver,
rather than the color category. The situation would be
even more confusing, if the traﬃc signalization would

suddenly be based on the shape category alone: square
lights mean “stop” whereas circle lights mean “drive”.
To adapt to such environmental changes the driver has
to give up the old color-based generalization and build
up a new, shape-based, generalization. Generalizations
must therefore be ﬂexible.
Refs. [1, 2] provide a broad account of generalization
in artiﬁcial intelligence. In reinforcement learning (RL),
where an agent learns via interaction with a rewarding
environment [3–5], generalization is often used as a tech-
nique to reduce the size of the percept space, which is
potentially very large. Two useful recent summaries can
be found in Refs. [6, 7]. For example, in the Q-learning [8]
and SARSA [9] algorithms, it is common to use function
approximation methods [3–5, 10], realized by e.g. tile cod-
ing (CMAC) [11, 12], neural networks [13–15], decision
trees [16, 17], constructive function approximation [18],
or support vector machines [4, 19, 20], to implement
a generalization mechanism.
Alternatively, in learning
classiﬁer systems (LCS), generalization is facilitated by
using the wildcard # character, which, roughly speak-
ing, means that a particular category is irrelevant for the
present task environment [21–23]. This relates to recent
works on state abstraction, which maps diﬀerent states
to which the agent should react similarly, to a single, ab-
stract one [24–26]. Temporal abstraction or grouping of
actions is addressed in what is known as hierarchical-RL
[27, 28].
These methods are usually applied to prob-
lems where the states and/or actions are factored into
categories (such as, e.g., factored Markov decision pro-
cesses [6]). More modern approaches to generalization
include relational-RL [6, 29] and feature-RL [30–32].
In this work we contribute to the development of
the recently introduced model of projective simulation
(PS) [33], by exhibiting an approach for generalization
within the PS framework.
PS is a physical approach
to artiﬁcial intelligence which is based on stochastic
processing of experience.
It uses a particular type of
arXiv:1504.02247v2  [cs.AI]  31 Oct 2017

2
memory, denoted as episodic & compositional memory
(ECM), which is structured as a directed, weighted net-
work of clips, where each clip represents a remembered
percept, action, or sequences thereof. Once a percept is
observed, the network is activated, invoking a random
walk between the clips, until an action clip is hit and
couples out as a real action of the agent.
The generalization process within PS is achieved in this
work by, roughly speaking, the generation of abstracted
clips, which represent commonalities between percepts,
or more precisely, subsets of the percept space. These,
in turn, inﬂuence behavior in new situations based on
similar previous experiences. The method we introduce
is a step toward more advanced approaches to general-
ization within PS and is suitable for medium-scale task
environments.
In more complicated environments, the
large number of possible abstractions may harm the per-
formance of the agent. We address the question how this
could be combated in the discussion section.
The PS approach to artiﬁcial intelligence, arguably,
stands out as promising from diﬀerent perspectives:
First, random walks, which constitute the basic internal
dynamics of the model, have been well-studied in the con-
text of randomized algorithm theory [34] and probabil-
ity theory, thus providing an extensive theoretical tool-
box for analyzing related models; second, the PS model,
by design, represents a stochastic physical system which
points to possible physical (rather than computational)
realizations. This relates PS to the framework of embod-
ied artiﬁcial agents [35]; last, the physics aspects of the
model oﬀer a route toward the research into quantum-
enhanced variants of PS: the underlying random walk
was already shown to naturally extend to a quantum
many-body master equation [33].
Related to this, the
fact that the deliberation of the agent centers around
a random walk process, opens up a route for advances
by using quantum random walks instead. In quantum
random walks, roughly speaking, the probabilistic re-
positioning of the walker is replaced by a quantum su-
perposition of moves, by switching from a stochastic to a
coherent quantum dynamics. This allows one to exploit
quintessential quantum phenomena, including quantum
interference and quantum parallelism. Quantum walks
have been increasingly more employed in recent times as
a new framework for the development of new quantum
algorithms.
Over the course of the last decade, poly-
nomial and exponential improvements in computational
complexity have been reported, over classical counter-
parts [36–38]. Utilizing this methodology in the context
of reinforcement learning, it was recently shown, by some
of the authors and collaborators, that a quantum variant
of the PS agent exhibits a quadratic speed-up in delib-
eration time over its classical analogue, which leads to a
similar speed-up of learning time in active learning scen-
arios [39–42]. This quantum advantage in the decision-
making process of the quantum PS agent was recently ex-
perimentally demonstrated using a small-scale quantum
information processor based on trapped ions [43].
In the PS model, learning is realized by internal modi-
ﬁcation of the clip network, both in terms of its structure
and the weights of its edges. Through interactions with
a rewarding environment, the clip network adjusts itself
dynamically, so as to increase the probability of perform-
ing better in subsequent time steps (see below, for a more
detailed description of the model). Learning is thus based
on a “trial and error” approach, making the PS model
especially suitable for solving RL tasks. Indeed, recent
studies showed that the PS agent can perform very well in
comparison to standard models, in both basic RL prob-
lems [44] and in standard benchmark tasks, such as the
“grid world” and the continuous-domain “mountain car
problem” [45]. Due to the ﬂexibility of the PS frame-
work it can also be used in contexts beyond textbook
RL. Recent applications are, for instance, in the problem
of learning complex haptic manipulation skills [46] and
in the problem of learning to design complex quantum
experiments [47].
Here we present a simple dynamical mechanism which
allows the PS network to evolve, through experience, to
a network that represents and exploits similarities in the
perceived percepts, i.e. to a network that can generalize.
Using such a network we address the problem of RL in
task environments, which require some aspects of gener-
alization (function approximation) to be solved. Stand-
ard approaches to such task environments rely on ex-
ternal machinery, a function approximator, which then
has to be combined to otherwise “raw”, tabular, RL
machinery, e.g. temporal diﬀerence learning model-free
methods such as Q-learning and SARSA. In contrast, to
achieve the same goal, here we use the more elaborate
structure of the PS model, which is not represented by a
table, but by a directed graph, rather than external ma-
chinery, e.g., such as in the case of Q-learning [10, 15].
Naturally, our proposed machinery also internally real-
izes a function approximator, but its structure and up-
dates arise from the very basic learning rules of the PS
model. The generalization mechanism, which is inspired
by the wildcard notion of LCS [21–23], is based on a pro-
cess of abstraction which is systematic, autonomous, and,
most importantly, requires no explicit prior knowledge of
the agent. This is in contrast with common RL models
with a function approximator, which often require addi-
tional prior knowledge in terms of an additional input [7].
Moreover, we show that once the PS agent is provided
with this machinery which allows it to both categorize
and classify, the rest of the expected characteristics we
listed above follow directly from the basic learning rules
of the PS agent. In particular, we show that relevant gen-
eralizations are learned, that the agent associates correct
actions to generalized properties, and that the entire gen-
eralization scheme is ﬂexible, as required.
PS with generalization, in comparison with other solu-
tions, does not rely on external machinery. Instead, it is
a homogeneous approach where the generalization mech-
anism is based on the basic PS principles, in this case
speciﬁcally the dynamic growth of the clip network. One

3
can see several advantages to our approach: First, it al-
lows for a relatively straightforward theoretical treatment
of the performance, including analytic formulas charac-
terizing the performance of generalization and learning.
Second, we do not rely on powerful classifying machinery
which can signiﬁcantly increase the model complexity
of the agent (in particular if neural networks are util-
ized), which may be undesirable.
Finally, and for our
agenda very relevant, sticking to just the basic random
walk mechanism oﬀers a natural and systematic route to
quantization of the overall dynamics. As we have men-
tioned earlier, this can lead to improvements in compu-
tational complexity and, in principle, also in space com-
plexity of the model. In contrast, for heterogeneous ap-
proaches, e.g. Q-learning combined with a neural net-
work, there exist no clear routes for useful quantization,
and no ﬁrm results proving improvements have been es-
tablished for the quantization of either, let alone for a
combination.
While in most RL literature elements of generalization
are considered as means of tackling the “curse of dimen-
sionality” [5], as coined by Bellman [48] and discussed
above, they are also strictly necessary for an agent to
learn in certain environments [3].
Here we consider a
type of environment where, irrespective of its available
resources, an agent with no generalization ability can-
not learn, i.e. it performs no better than a fully random
agent.
Following this, we show that the PS model, when en-
hanced with the generalization mechanism, is capable of
learning in such an environment. Along numerical illus-
trations we provide a detailed analytical description of
the agent’s performance, with respect to its success- and
learning-rates (deﬁned below). Such an analysis is feas-
ible due to the simplicity of the PS model, both in terms
of the number of its free parameters, and its underlying
equations (see also Ref. [44]), a property we extensively
exploit. The main contribution of this paper is thus to
demonstrate how the inherent features of the PS model
can be used to solve RL problems that require nontrivial
notions of generalization, importantly without relying on
external classiﬁer machinery. While it is also possible to
sacriﬁce homogeneity, and combine PS with external ma-
chinery (in which case a direct comparison between the
PS and other RL models both enhanced by external ma-
chinery would be warranted), in this work we strive to
develop the theory of the PS model on its own.
RESULTS
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows.
We ﬁrst begin, for completeness, with a description of the
PS model and a formal comparison of the PS model to
standard RL techniques. We then present the proposed
generalization mechanism, examine its performance in a
simple case and illustrate how it gives rise to a meaning-
ful generalization, as deﬁned above. Next, we study the
central scenario of this paper, in which generalization is
an absolute condition for learning. After describing the
scenario and showing that the PS agent can cope with
it, we analyze its performance analytically. Finally, we
study this scenario for an arbitrary number of categories,
and observe that the more there is to categorize the more
beneﬁcial is the proposed mechanism.
The PS model
In what follows we shortly summarize the basic prin-
ciples of the PS model, for more detailed descriptions we
refer the reader to Refs. [33, 44, 45, 49].
The central component of the PS agent is the so-called
clip network, which can, abstractly, be represented as a
directed graph, where each node is a clip, and directed
edges represent allowed transitions, as depicted in Fig. 1.
Whenever the PS agent perceives an input, the corres-
ponding percept clip is excited (e.g. Clip 1 in Fig. 1).
This excitation marks the beginning of a random walk
between the clips until an action clip is hit (e.g. Clip 6 in
Fig. 1), and the corresponding action is performed. The
random walk is carried out according to time-dependent
probabilities pij to hop from one node to another.
Formally, percept clips are deﬁned as K-tuples s =
(s1, s2, ..., sK) ∈S ≡S1 × S2 × ... × SK, si ∈{1, ..., |Si|},
where |S| = |S1| · · · |SK| is the number of possible per-
cepts. Each dimension may account for a diﬀerent type
of perceptual input such as audio, visual, or sensational,
where the exact speciﬁcation (number of dimensions K
and the perceptual type of each dimension) and resol-
ution (the size |Si| of each dimension) depend on the
physical realization of the agent.
In what follows, we
regard each of the K dimensions as a diﬀerent cat-
egory.
Action clips are similarly given as M-tuples:
a = (a1, a2, ..., aM) ∈A ≡A1 × A2 × ... × AM, ai ∈
{1, ..., |Ai|}, where |A| = |A1| · · · |AM| is the number of
possible actions. Once again, each of the M dimensions
provides a diﬀerent aspect of an action, e.g. walking,
jumping, picking-up, etc. Here, however, we restrict our
analysis to the case of M = 1 and varying |A1|.
input
output
percept clip
action clip
Clip 1
...
Clip 2
Clip 3
Clip 4
Clip 5
Clip 6
...
p12
p13
p23
p32
p35
p56
p41
Figure 1. The PS clip network.
Each directed edge from clip ci to clip cj has a time
dependent weight h(t)(ci, cj), which we call the h-value.
The h-values deﬁne the conditional probabilities of hop-

4
ping from clip ci to clip cj according to
p(t)(cj|ci) =
h(t)(ci, cj)
P
k h(t)(ci, ck).
(1)
At the beginning, all h-values are initialized to the same
ﬁxed value h0 = 1. This ensures that, initially, the prob-
ability to hop from any clip to any of its neighbors is com-
pletely uniform. The conditional probabilities deﬁned by
Eq. (1) will be used throughout the paper unless stated
otherwise. One can also deﬁne a diﬀerent function for
conditional probabilities known as the softmax function
p(t)(cj|ci) =
eβh(t)(ci,cj)
P
k eβh(t)(ci,ck) ,
(2)
where β is an inverse temperature parameter, the lower
the temperature – the higher the chance to traverse an
edge with the largest h-value.
Learning takes place by the dynamical strengthening
and weakening of the internal h-values, in correspondence
to an external feedback, i.e. a reward λ, coming from the
environment. Speciﬁcally, the update of the h-values is
done according to the following update rule:
h(t+1)(ci, cj) = h(t)(ci, cj) −γ(h(t)(ci, cj) −1)
+
X
l
δ(ci, ckl)δ(cj, cml)λ(t+1),
(3)
where the reward λ is non-negative (λ = 0 implies no
reward), and is added only to the h-values of the edges
(ckl, cml) that were traversed in the last random walk.
The update rule can also handle negative rewards given
that the probability function is deﬁned by Eq. (2) so that
the transition probabilities p(cj|ci) are guaranteed to re-
main non-negative. The damping parameter 0 ≤γ ≤1
weakens the h-values of all edges and allows the agent
to forget its previous experience, an important feature in
changing environments [33, 44, 49]. The damping term
in Eq. (3) with a nonzero γ is however not needed in
stationary environments, such as the contextual bandit
task [50].
In the contextual bandit task the PS agent
with the update rule in Eq. (3) with γ = 0 realizes the
optimal policy in the limit. Note that although the up-
date rule in Eq. (3) does not have an explicit tunable
learning rate, the eﬀective separation between diﬀerent
h-values are tunable by changing the inverse temperat-
ure parameter β in the probability function.
In order to cope with more general environments,
which may include temporal correlations, for instance
through delayed rewards, the PS model utilizes the so-
called glow mechanism [44]. In this mechanism, to each
edge an additional variable g(ci, cj) ∈[0, 1] is assigned.
The edge g-value is set to 1 whenever an edge is traversed,
and for each time-step that the edge was not used, it dis-
sipates according to the rule
g(t+1)(ci, cj) = (1 −η) g(t)(ci, cj),
(4)
where the rate η ∈[0, 1] is a parameter of the model.
The h−value update rule for the non-traversed edges,
with glow, assumes the form
h(t+1)(ci, cj) = h(t)(ci, cj) −γ(h(t)(ci, cj) −1)
+ g(t+1)(ci, cj)λ(t+1).
(5)
To clarify, with glow, the edges whose transition did not
result in obtaining a reward still obtain a fraction of
a later issued reward proportional to the current glow
value. The latter corresponds to how far in the past, rel-
ative to the later rewarded time-step, the particular edge
was used. The glow mechanism thus allows for a future
reward to propagate back to previously used edges, and
enables the agent to perform well also in settings where
the reward is delayed (e.g.
in the grid world and the
mountain car tasks [45]) and/or is contingent on more
than just the immediate history of agent-environment
interaction, such as in the n-ship game, as presented in
Ref. [44]. The described learning mechanisms speciﬁed
by Eq. (4)-(5) fully deﬁne the basic PS agent with ﬁxed
learning parameters γ and η. The values of these learning
parameters, or meta-parameters, have to be set properly
such that the agent performs optimally in a certain task.
However, as it was shown in Ref. [49], the PS model can
naturally be extended to account for self-monitoring of
its own meta-parameters and one and the same agent can
reach near-optimal to optimal success rates in diﬀerent
kinds of reinforcement learning problems.
In this work, we present extensions which make use
of the capacity of the PS model to generate new clips
dynamically, for the purpose of generalization. To focus
our study of the performance of such a PS agent, here we
introduce simplest environmental scenarios which high-
light the critical aspects of generalization, and analyze
how the PS with generalization performs. While these
simple settings all ﬁt into the contextual bandit frame-
work [50] and hence do not require glow, the same mech-
anism is of course readily applied to more complex task
environments (e.g. with temporal correlations) and ana-
logous generalization results will hold. In the next sec-
tion we will brieﬂy reﬂect on the relation of the basic PS
model (without generalization) with the more standard
reinforcement learning machinery, which will further put
this work into context.
Projective simulation and reinforcement learning
The basic PS model can be viewed as an explicitly
reward-driven RL model. Unlike most standard RL mod-
els, it does not include an explicit approximation of
the state-value or the action-value function. As a con-
sequence of this, PS is also simpler in the sense that the
value function and the policy are not optimized over sep-
arately, but rather the optimization occurs concurrently.
Despite these structural diﬀerences, the PS model can
be related to other standard RL approaches.
Quant-
itively, the PS model was shown to perform similar in

5
comparison to the standard RL models in benchmark
tasks [44, 45, 51]. In addition to this quantitative rela-
tionship, a formal relationship between the h-value mat-
rix and the action-value Q-matrix can be derived on a
formal level, from which many fundamental properties
of RL algorithms are qualitatively recovered in PS as
well. For instance, in the setting of stationary environ-
ments with immediate rewards, the update rule of the
basic two-layered PS model, given percept s and action
a reads as
h(t+1)(s, a) = h(t)(s, a) + λ(t+1).
(6)
It is clear that the h−values, when normalized by the
number of realized transitions over the history, converge
to the (immediate) value of this transition. Moreover,
given the policy-generating rule given in Eq. (1), it holds
that the probability of outputting the action of the most
rewarded transition converges to unity. This is equivalent
to employing a greedy policy over a converged action-
value function in standard RL, hence also implies that
this basic PS handles stationary contextual bandit prob-
lems.
Nonetheless, the h−values in PS are not meant
to represent action values, but actually stem from de-
scriptions of physical dynamics (as coupling coeﬃcients).
Going a few steps further, in the setting of more gen-
eral MDP environments (with delayed rewards) we can
contrast Eq. (5) of the basic PS to the standard SARSA
Q-matrix update [3, 9]. For the latter we have the ex-
pression
Q(t+1)(s, a) = Q(t)(s, a) + α

λ(t+1) + γRLQ(t)(s′, a′)
−Q(t)(s, a)

,
(7)
where the discounted value of the next state s′ and ac-
tion a′, γRLQ(s′, a′) (note, this γRL does not correspond
to the γ term in the basic PS, but constitutes the dis-
count factor), ensures the current action value obtains a
fraction of the value of the subsequently realized step.
In PS, the update rule is represented in Eq. (4) and (5).
Note that this edge h-value is updated regardless whether
this edge was traversed, that is, in each time-step. On
the other hand, this h−value plays an active role in the
outputs of the PS agent only in some subsequent time-
step t′′ when a transition from clip ci is required. In this
interval, from t′ when the edge (ci, cj) was traversed last,
until t′′ when the clip ci is encountered again, this edge
accumulates discounted rewards. At time step t′′ when
this particular edge may be used again, the relevant h-
value reads as
h(t′′)(ci, cj) = h(t′)(ci, cj)+λ(t′+1)+
t′′
X
k=t′+2
(1−η)t′′−kλ(k),
(8)
where we have set the damping γ term to zero to sim-
plify the expression. The term Pt′′
k=t′+2(1 −η)t′′−kλ(k)
accounts for all the future rewards which followed
the (ci, cj) transition, which occurred at time-step t′.
The term Pt′′
k=t′+2(1 −η)t′′−kλ(k) is closely related to
γRLQ(s′, a′) – the ﬁrst term captures the discounted fu-
ture rewards experienced by this particular agent in its
future realized steps, starting from the next step. The
term γRLQ(s′, a′), captures the current approximation
of what the future rewards will be (under the current
policy), also starting from the next step, discounted by
γRL.
In other words, γRL in SARSA plays the same
functional role as the g−value decay rate (1 −η) in PS.
To further clarify, note that γRLQ(s′, a′) corresponds
to the Pt′′
k=t′+2(1 −η)t′′−kλ(k) term, but computed for
an averaged agent, averaged over the sequences of sub-
sequent moves, given the agent’s policy.
Note, how-
ever, that in the case of PS, the edge (ci, cj) will be
traversed many times over the course of learning, lead-
ing to an eﬀective averaging of the future-reward term
Pt′′
k=t′+2(1−η)t′′−kλ(k). In the case of non-zero damping,
all the rewards in the sum would also undergo propor-
tional damping, but this yields a complicated expression
which obfuscates the general trends in behavior.
We note that this heuristic analysis certainly does not
constitute any formal statement about the relationship
of the basic PS with other reinforcement learning mod-
els. While a full analysis goes beyond the scope of this
paper, already this heuristic suggests that the expec-
ted performance of it should not diﬀer, qualitatively,
from other models. This has been conﬁrmed empirically
through benchmarking against other models [44, 45, 51],
and while in some occasions PS outperformed Q-Learning
or Dyna-planning, and in some it underperformed, the
global trends were comparable.
Having discussed the similarities between the basic PS
model and other standard RL algorithms, now we turn
our attention to the diﬀerences, which is the topic of this
paper. Unlike in the mentioned RL models, where learn-
ing revolves around the estimation of value functions, in
PS learning is embodied in the re-conﬁguration of the clip
network. This includes the update of transition probab-
ilities but also the dynamical network restructuring (via
e.g.
clip creation [33] applied here for generalization).
The latter has no analog in standard RL approaches we
discussed previously, and only makes sense since the clip
network is manifestly not a representation of value func-
tions, but conceptually a diﬀerent object. In this work we
further explore this capacity of the PS model, by showing
how it can be utilized to handle problems of generaliza-
tion. Other possibilities, related to action ﬁne-graining,
were previously studied in Refs. [44, 52]. Here, the PS
approach diverges from standard methodology, which, to
our knowledge without exception, tackles this problem
by using external machinery like classiﬁers (developed in
the context of e.g. supervised learning), or, more gen-
erally, function approximators. We reiterate that such
additional machinery could also be used with PS, but
this comes at a cost which we elaborated on previously.
In the next section we focus on how simple tasks which
require generalization can be resolved using PS with dy-
namic clip generation.

6
(a)
(b)
⇐
⇒
⇒
⇐
+
−
t = 1
⇐
+
−
t = 2
⇐
⇒
+
−
t = 3
⇐
⇒
⇒
+
−
⇒
#
t = 4
⇐
⇒
⇒
⇐
+
−
⇒
⇐
#
Figure 2. (a) The basic PS network as it is built up for the driver scenario. Four percept clips (arrow, color) in the ﬁrst row
are connected to two action clips (+\−) in the second row. Each percept-action connection is learned independently. (b) The
enhanced PS network as it is built up for the driver scenario, during the ﬁrst four time steps. The following sequence of signals
is shown: left-green (t = 1), right-green (t = 2), right-red (t = 3), and left-red (t = 4). Four percept clips (arrow, color) in the
ﬁrst row are connected to two layers of wildcard clips (ﬁrst layer with a single wildcard and second layer with two) and to two
action clips (+\−) in the fourth row. Newly created edges are solid, whereas existing edges are dashed (relative weights of the
h-values are not represented).
Generalization within PS
Generalization is usually applicable when the percep-
tual input is composed of more than a single category.
In the framework of the PS model, this translates to the
case of K > 1 in percept space.
In particular, when
two (or more) stimuli are similar, i.e. share a set of com-
mon features, or, more precisely, have the same values for
some of the categories, it may be useful to process them
in a similar way. Here we enhance the PS model with a
simple but eﬀective generalization mechanism based on
this idea.
The key feature of this mechanism is the dynamical
creation of a class of abstracted clips that we call wildcard
clips. Whenever the agent encounters a new stimulus, the
corresponding new percept clip is created and compared
pairwise to all existing clips. For each pair of clips whose
1 ≤l ≤K categories carry diﬀerent values, a new wild-
card clip is created (if it does not already exist) with all
the diﬀerent l values replaced with the wildcard symbol
#. Such a wildcard clip then represents a categorization
based on the remaining K −l common categories.
A wildcard clip with l wildcard symbols is placed in
the lth layer of the clip network (we consider the per-
cept clip layer as the zeroth layer).
In general, there
can be up to K layers between the layer of percept clips
and the layer of action clips, with
 K
l

wildcard clips in
layer l for a particular percept. From each percept- and
wildcard-clip there are direct edges to all action clips and
to all matching higher-level wildcard clips. By matching
higher-level wildcard clips, we mean wildcard clips with
more wildcard symbols, whose explicit category values
match with those of the lower-lever wildcard clip. In es-
sence, a matching higher-level wildcard clip (e.g. the clip
(s1, s2, #, #)) generalizes further a lower-level wildcard
clip (e.g. (s1, s2, s3, #)).
To demonstrate how this mechanism operates we con-
sider the example from the introduction. An agent acts
as a driver who should learn how to deal with traﬃc
lights and arrow signs. While driving, the agent sees a
traﬃc light with an arrow sign and should choose among
two actions (|A1| = 2): continue driving (+) or stop the
car (−). The percepts that the agent perceives are com-
posed of two categories (K = 2): color and direction.
Each category has two possible values (|S1| = |S2| = 2):
red and green for the color, and left and right for the
direction. At each time step t the agent thus perceives
one of four possible combinations of colors and arrows,
randomly chosen by an environment, and chooses one
of the two possible actions. In such a setup, the basic
PS agent, described in the previous section, would have
a two-layered network of clips, composed of four percept
clips and two action clips, as shown in Fig. 2(a). It would
then try to associate the correct action for each of the
four percepts separately. The PS with generalization, on
the other hand, has a much richer playground: it can, in
addition, connect percept clips to intermediate wildcard
clips, and associate wildcard clips with action clips, as
we elaborate below.
The development of the enhanced PS network is shown
step by step in Fig. 2(b) for the ﬁrst four time steps of
the driver scenario (a hypothetical order of percepts is
considered for illustration). When a left-green signal is
perceived at time t = 1, the corresponding percept clip is
created and connected to the two possible actions (+\−)
with an initial weight h0. In the second time step t = 2,
a right-green signal is shown. This time, in addition to
the creation of the corresponding percept clip, the wild-
card clip (#, green) is also created (since both of the
encountered percepts are green) and placed in the ﬁrst
layer of the network.
To simplify the visualization we
draw the wildcard clip (#, green) as a green circle with
no direction (and without the # symbol). In general, we
omit one # symbol in all ﬁgures. Newly created edges are
shown in Fig. 2(b) as solid lines, whereas all previously
created edges are shown as dashed lines. Next, at time
t = 3, a right-red signal is presented. This leads to the
creation of the (⇒, #)-clip, because both the second and
the third percepts have a right arrow. Moreover, since
the ﬁrst percept does not share any similarities with the

7
(i) t ≤1000
⇐
⇒
⇒
⇐
+
−
⇒
⇐
#
(ii) 1000 < t ≤2000
⇐
⇒
⇒
⇐
+
−
⇒
⇐
#
(iii) 2000 < t ≤3000
⇐
⇒
⇒
⇐
+
−
⇒
⇐
#
(iv) 3000 < t ≤4000
⇐
⇒
⇒
⇐
+
−
⇒
⇐
#
Figure 3. The enhanced PS network conﬁgurations (idealized) as built up for each of the four phases of the driver scenario
(see text). Only indirect strong edges are shown. Diﬀerent wildcard clips allow the network to realize diﬀerent generalizations.
Categorization and classiﬁcation are realized by the structure of the network, whereas relevance, correctness and ﬂexibility
come about through the update rule of Eq. (3).
third percept, the full wildcard clip (#, #) is created and
placed in the second layer, as shown in Fig. 2(b) (depic-
ted as a circle with a single # symbol). Last, at t = 4,
a left-red signal is shown.
This causes the creation of
the (⇐, #)-clip (the left-arrow is shared with the ﬁrst
percept) and the (#, red) clip (the red color is shared
with the third clip). After the fourth time step the net-
work is fully established and from this point on will only
evolve through changes in the weights of the edges, i.e.
by modifying the h-values.
The mechanism we have described so far, realizes, by
construction, the ﬁrst two characteristics of meaningful
generalization: categorization and classiﬁcation. In par-
ticular, categorization, the ability to recognize common
properties, is achieved by composing the wildcard clips
according to similarities in the coming input.
For ex-
ample, it is natural to think of the (#, red) wildcard
clip as representing the common property of redness. In
that spirit, one could interpret the full wildcard clip (#,
#) as representing a general perceptual input. Likewise,
classiﬁcation, the ability to relate a new stimulus to the
group of similar past stimuli, is fulﬁlled there by connect-
ing of the lower-level wildcard clips to matching higher
lever wildcard clips, as described above (where percept
clips are regarded here as zero-order wildcard clips). Note
that classiﬁcation is done, therefore, not only on the level
of the percept clips, but also on the level of the wildcard
clips.
While categorization and classiﬁcation are realized by
the very structure of the clip network, the remaining list
of requirements, namely, relevant, correct, and ﬂexible
generalization, is fulﬁlled via the update of the h-values.
To illustrate this on a simple domain, we next confront
the agent with four diﬀerent environmental scenarios, one
after the other. Each scenario lasts 1000 time steps, fol-
lowing by a sudden change of the rewarding scheme, to
which the agent has to adapt. The diﬀerent scenarios are
listed below:
(i) At the beginning (1 ≤t ≤1000), the agent is re-
warded for stopping at red light and for driving at
green light, irrespective of the arrow direction.
(ii) At the second phase (1000 < t ≤2000), the agent is
rewarded for doing the opposite: stopping at green
light and driving at red light.
(iii) At the third phase (2000 < t ≤3000), the agent
should only follow the arrows: it is rewarded for
driving (stopping) when the arrow points to the
left (right). Colors should thus be ignored.
(iv) In the last phase (3000 < t ≤4000), the envir-
onment rewards the agent whenever it chooses to
drive, irrespective of either the signal’s color or its
arrow.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
average reward
time step
Figure 4. The average reward obtained by the PS agent with
generalization as simulated for the four diﬀerent phases of the
driver scenario (see text). At the beginning of each phase, the
agent has to adapt to the new rules of the environment. The
average reward drops and revives again, thereby exhibiting
the mechanism’s correctness and ﬂexibility. A damping para-
meter of γ = 0.005 was used, and the average was taken over
104 agents.
Figure 3 sketches four diﬀerent network conﬁgurations
that typically develop during the above phases.
Only
strong edges of relative large h-values are depicted, and
we ignore direct edges from percepts to actions, for clar-
ity, as explained later. At each stage a diﬀerent conﬁgur-
ation develops, demonstrating how the relevant wildcard
clips play an important role, via strong connections to

8
(a)
(b)
percept clips
action clips
⇐
⇐
⇒
⇓
⇑
⇒
⇒
⇑
⇓
...
⇐
←
↑
...
↓
percept clips
(arrow, #) clips
(#, #) clip
action clips
⇐
⇐
⇒
⇓
⇑
⇒
⇒
⇑
⇓
...
⇐
←
↑
...
↓
#
⇐
⇓
⇑
...
Figure 5. The basic (a) and the enhanced (b) PS networks as they are built up in the neverending-color scenario. (a) Each
percept clip at the ﬁrst row is independently connected to all n action clips at the second row. (b) Each percept- and wildcard-
clip is connected to higher-level matching wildcard clips and to all n action clips. For clarity, only one-level edges to and from
wildcard clips are solid, while other edges are semitransparent. The thickness of the edges does not reﬂect their weights.
action clips. Moreover, those wildcard clips are connec-
ted strongly to the correct action clips. The relevant and
correct edges are built through the update rule of Eq. (3),
which only strengthens edges that, after having been tra-
versed, lead to a rewarded action. Finally, the presented
ﬂexibility in the network’s conﬁguration, which reﬂects
a ﬂexible generalization ability, is due to: (a) the exist-
ence of all possible wildcard clips in the network; and
(b) the update rule of Eq. (3), which allows the network,
through a non-zero damping parameter γ to adapt fast
to changes in the environment. We note that Fig. 3 only
displays idealized network conﬁgurations.
In practice,
other strong edges may exist, e.g. direct edges from per-
cepts to actions, which may be rewarded as well. In the
next section we address such alternative conﬁgurations
and analyze their inﬂuence on the agent’s success rate.
Figure 4 shows the PS agent’s performance, that is, the
average reward obtained by the agent, in the driver scen-
ario, as a function of time, averaged over 104 agents. A
reward of λ = 1 is given for correct actions and a damp-
ing parameter of γ = 0.005 is used. In the PS model
there is a trade oﬀbetween adaptation time and the
maximally achievable average reward. A high damping
parameter, γ, leads to faster relearning, but to lower av-
eraged asymptotic success rates, see also Ref. [44]. Here
we chose γ = 0.005 to allow the network to adapt within
1000 time steps. It is shown that on average the agent
managed to adapt to each of the phases imposed by the
environment, and to learn the correct actions. We can
also see that the asymptotic performance of the agent is
slightly better in the last phase, where the correct action
is independent from the input. To understand this, note
that: (a) The relevant edge can be rewarded at each time
step and thus be less aﬀected by the non-zero damping
parameter; and (b) Each wildcard clip necessarily leads
to the correct action. This observation indicates that the
agent’s performance improves when the stimuli can be
generalized to a greater extent. We will encounter this
feature once more in the next section, where it is analyt-
ically veriﬁed.
The driver’s scenario is given here to explain and
demonstrate the underlying principles of the proposed
generalization mechanism within PS. The problem itself
can, of course, be solved by the basic PS alone, as well
as by other methods, without a generalization capabil-
ity. In what follows, however, we consider scenarios in
which such an ability to generalize is indeed crucial for
the agent’s success.
Experimental and analytic results
A simple example
Sometimes it is not only helpful but a plain necessity
for the agent to have a mechanism of generalization, as
otherwise it has no chance to learn. Consider, for ex-
ample, a situation in which the agent perceives a new
stimulus every time step. What option does it have, other
than trying to ﬁnd some similarities among those stimuli,
upon which it can act? In this section we consider such
a scenario and analyze it in detail. Speciﬁcally, the en-
vironment presents one of n diﬀerent arrows, but at each
time step the background color is diﬀerent. The agent
can only move into one of the n > 1 corresponding direc-
tions and the environment rewards the agent whenever it
follows the direction of an arrow, irrespective of its color.
We call it the neverending-color scenario.
In this scenario, the basic PS agent has a two-layered
clip network, of the structure presented in Fig. 5(a). At
each time step, a new percept clip is created, from which
the random walk leads, after a single transition, to one
of the n possible action clips the agent can perform. The
problem is that even if the agent takes the correct direc-
tion, the rewarded edge will never take part in later time
steps, as no symbol is shown twice. The basic PS agent
has thus no other option but to choose an action at ran-
dom, which will be correct only with probability of 1/n,
even after inﬁnitely many time steps. In contrast to the
basic PS, the PS with generalization does show learning
behavior. The full network is shown in Fig. 5(b). Percept
clips and wildcard clips are connected to matching wild-
card clips and to all actions. Note that the wildcard clips
(#, color) are never created, as no color is seen twice.
To illustrate the fundamental diﬀerence in performance
between the basic PS and the PS with generalization
we consider their asymptotic eﬃciencies. As explained
above, the basic PS agent can only be successful with

9
(a)
(b)
...
+
+
+
 
"
...
#
+
+
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
#
1
(
(
...
(
(
 
"
...
#
1
1
1
1
1
1
Figure 6. (a) The enhanced PS network as it is built up for the neverending-color scenario with K = 2 categories. Only the
subnetwork corresponding to the left-arrow is shown. The weight of the edge from the wildcard clip (⇐, #) to the correct action
clip (←) goes to h = ∞with time. Hopping to the (⇐, #) clip then leads to the rewarded action with certainty. Otherwise,
hopping randomly to any of the other clips is only successful with probability 1/n. (b) The enhanced PS network as it is built
up for the neverending-color scenario with K = 3 categories (direction, color, shape). Only the subnetwork corresponding to
the down-arrow is shown. The weights of the edges from the wildcard clips (⇓, #, pentagon) and (⇓, #, #), in the ﬁrst and
second layer, respectively, to the correct action clip (↓), go to h = ∞with time. (a) and (b): Edges that are relevant for the
analysis are solid, whereas other edges are semitransparent. The thickness of the edges does not reﬂect their weights.
probability 1/n. To see that the PS agent with general-
ization can do better, we take a closer look on the (arrow,
#) clips. These clips will, eventually, have very strong
edges to the correct action clip. In fact, in the case of
zero damping (γ = 0) we consider here, the h-values of
these edges will tend to inﬁnity with time, implying that
once an (arrow, #) clip is hit, the probability to hop to
the correct action clip becomes unity. This is illustrated
for the left-arrow case in Fig. 6(a).
At each time step, the agent is confronted with a cer-
tain colored arrow. The corresponding new percept clip
is created and a random walk on the network begins. To
determine the exact asymptotic performance of the PS
agent with generalization, we should consider two pos-
sibilities: Either the wildcard corresponding clip (arrow,
#) is hit, or it is not. In the ﬁrst case, which occurs with
probability p = 1/(n + 2), the excitation will hop to the
correct action with unit probability and the agent will
be rewarded. In the second case, no action is preferred
over the others and the correct action will be reached
with probability 1/n. It is possible that an edge from
the full wildcard clip (#, #) to some action clip was pre-
viously rewarded, yet when averaging over all agents we
still get an averaged success probability of 1/n. Overall,
the performance of the PS agent with generalization is
thus given by:
E∞(n) = p + (1 −p) 1
n =
1 + 2n
n(n + 2) > 1
n,
p =
1
n + 2,
(9)
which is independent of the precise value of the reward
λ (as long as it is a positive constant). Recall that n > 1
in the considered environment.
In Fig. 7(a), the average performance of the PS agent
with generalization, obtained through numerical simula-
tion, is plotted as a function of time, in solid red curves,
for several values of n. Initially, the average performance
is 1/n, i.e. completely random (which is the best per-
formance of the basic agent). It then grows, indicating
that the agent begin to learn how to respond correctly,
until it reaches its asymptotic value, as given in Eq. (9)
and marked in the ﬁgure with a dashed blue line.
It
is seen that in these cases, the asymptotic performance
is achieved already after tens to hundreds of time steps
(see the next section for an analytical expression of the
learning rate). The simulations were carried out with 105
agents and a zero damping parameter (γ = 0). Since the
asymptotic performance of Eq. (9) is independent of the
reward λ and to ease the following analytical analysis, we
chose a high value of λ = 1000. Setting a smaller reward
would only amount to a slower learning curve, but with
no qualitative diﬀerence, as one can see in Fig. 7(b) for
a reward of λ = 1. In Fig. 7(a) and whenever the reward
λ is not 1, we normalize the average reward obtained by
the PS agent in order to compare to the probability of
obtaining the maximum reward given by Eq. (9).
We have therefore shown that the generalization mech-
anism leads to a clear qualitative advantage in this scen-
ario: without it the agent can not learn, whereas with it,
it can. As for the quantitative diﬀerence, both Eq. (9)
and Fig. 7(a) indicate that the gap in performance is not
large. Nonetheless, any such gap can be further ampli-
ﬁed. The idea is that for any network conﬁguration of
which the probability to take the correct action is larger
than the probability to take any other action, the success
probability can be ampliﬁed to unity by “majority vot-
ing”, i.e. by performing the random walk several times,
and choosing the action clip that occurs most frequently.
Such ampliﬁcation rapidly increases the agent’s perform-
ance whenever the gap over the fully random agent is not
negligible given that the full wildcard clip (#, #) is not
used. In Fig. 8 we show the simulations of the PS agent
with majority voting. The results demonstrate the con-
vergence to the optimal performance, regardless of the
value of the reward.
The presented performance of the PS model (includ-
ing generalization, but without any external classifying
machinery) in the neverending-color scenario can in prin-
ciple be contrasted to other standard “raw” RL models.
However this is clearly not a reasonable comparison, be-
cause standard RL models, e.g. SARSA or Q-learning,

10
(a)
(b)
λ = 1000
λ = 1
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
n = 5
n = 3
n = 2
average normalized reward
time step
Simulations
Asymptote Eq. (9)
Approximation Eq. (10)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
n = 5
n = 3
n = 2
average reward
time step
Simulations
Asymptote Eq. (9)
Figure 7. Learning curves of the PS agent with generalization in the neverending-color scenario for n = 2, 3 and 5 actions.
Simulations of 105 agents are shown in red, asymptotic average reward lines E∞(n) (Eq. (9)) are shown in dashed blue, the
corresponding analytical approximation curves (Eq. (10)) are shown in dotted black. (a) A high reward of λ = 1000 was used.
(b) A reward of λ = 1 was used.
cannot learn anything in this task environment without
an external classifying machinery (decision trees, neural
networks or SVM). On the ﬂip side, the capacity of a
combination of basic RL models with classiﬁer machinery
may beat the performance of our model. But again, this
is arguably not an instructive comparison as we do not
combine the PS with external classiﬁer machinery. The
latter could in principle be done, but all such solutions
come at the price of loss of homogeneity, and (sometimes
dramatic) increase in model complexity, which we avoid
in this work for the reasons we elaborated on earlier.
Analytical analysis: learning curve
To analyze the PS learning curves and to predict the
agent’s behavior for arbitrary n, we take the following
simplifying assumptions: First, we assume that all pos-
sible wildcard clips are present in the PS network from
the very beginning; second, for technical reasons, we as-
sume that edges from the partial wildcard clips (arrow,
#) to the full wildcard clip (#, #) are never rewarded;
last, we set an inﬁnite reward λ = ∞(or, equivalently,
one can use the softmax function in Eq. (2) with β = ∞
instead of Eq. (1)).
As shown below, under these as-
sumptions, the analysis results in a good approximation
of the actual performance of the agent.
While Eq. (9) provides an expression for E∞(n), the
expected average reward of the agent at inﬁnity, here we
look for the expected average reward at any time step t,
i.e. we look for Et(n). Taking the above assumptions into
account and following the same arguments that led to
Eq. (9), we note that at any time t, at which the arrow a is
shown, there are only two possible network conﬁgurations
that are conceptually diﬀerent: Either the edge from the
(a, #) clip to the (a) action clip was already rewarded
and has an inﬁnite weight, or not. Note that while this
edge must eventually be rewarded, at any ﬁnite t this is
not promised. Let plearn(t) be the probability that the
edge from the wildcard clip (a, #) to the action clip (a)
has an inﬁnite h-value at time t, i.e. the probability that
the correct association was learned, then the expected
performance at time t is given by:
Et(n) = plearn(t) E∞(n) + (1 −plearn(t)) 1
n.
(10)
The probability plearn(t) can be written as
plearn(t) = 1 −

1 −
1
n(n + 1)(n + 2)
t−1
,
(11)
where the term 1/n(n + 1)(n + 2) corresponds to the
probability of ﬁnding the rewarded path (labeled as “∞”
in Fig. 6(a)): 1/n is the probability that the environment
presents the arrow (x), then the probability to hop from
the percept clip (x, color) to the wildcard clip (x, #) is
1/(n + 2), and the probability to hop from the wildcard
clip (x, #) to the (x) action clip is 1/(n + 1). Finally,
we take into account the fact that, before time t, the
agent had (t −1) opportunities to take this path and be
rewarded.
The analytical approximation of the time-dependent
performance of PS, given in Eq. (10) is plotted on top
of Fig. 7(a) in dotted black, where it is shown to match
the simulated curves well (in red). The diﬀerence, which
one can see in detail in Fig. 9(a), in the very beginning
is caused by the assumption that all wildcard clips are
present in the network from the very beginning, whereas
the real agent needs several time steps to create them,
thus reducing its initial success probability. Nonetheless,
after a certain number of time-steps the simulated PS
agent starts outperforming the prediction given by the
analytic approximation, because the agent can be rewar-
ded for transition from the wildcard clip (arrow, #) to
the full wildcard clip (#, #), leading to higher success
probability. Note that despite the described diﬀerence for
early time steps, which is shown in Fig. 9(a), both curves
converge to the same value as one can see in Fig. 7(a).

11
(a)
(b)
λ = 1000
λ = 1
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
n = 5
n = 3
n = 2
average normalized reward
time step
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
n = 5
n = 3
n = 2
average reward
time step
Figure 8. Learning curves of the PS agent with generalization augmented with majority voting in the neverending-color scenario
for n = 2, 3 and 5 actions. Curves are obtained by averaging over 103 agents, majority voting consists of 100 random walks. In
order to achieve shorter learning times, the creation of the (#, #)-clip was suppressed in these simulation. (a) A high reward
of λ = 1000 was used. (b) A reward of λ = 1 was used.
Analytical analysis: learning time
The best performance a single PS agent can achieve
is given by the asymptotic performance E∞(n) (Eq. (9)).
For each agent there is a certain ﬁnite time τ at which
this performance is achieved, thus all agents reach this
performance at t = ∞. plearn(t), as deﬁned before, is the
probability that the edge from the relevant wildcard clip
to the correct action clip was rewarded up to time t, and
can be expressed as a cumulative distribution function
P(τ ≤t −1), so that P(τ = t) = P(τ ≤t) −P(τ ≤
t −1) = plearn(t + 1) −plearn(t).
The expected value of τ can be thought of as the learn-
ing time of the agent and can be expressed as a power
series
E[τ] = P∞
t=1 tP(τ = t) = P∞
t=1 t
 
1 −
1
n(n+1)(n+2)
t−1
−

1 −
1
n(n+1)(n+2)
t
!
= n(n + 1)(n + 2).
(12)
Note that the “not learning” probability (1 −plearn(t))
decays exponentially, with the decay rate reﬂected in the
learning time E[τ] (see Eq. (11)).
More than two categories
We next generalize the neverending-color task to the
case of an arbitrary number of categories K. The color
category may take inﬁnite values, whereas any other cat-
egory can only take ﬁnite values, and the number of pos-
sible actions is given by n > 1.
As before, only one
category is important, namely the arrow direction, and
the agent is rewarded for following it, irrespective of all
other input. With more irrelevant categories the envir-
onment thus overloads the agent with more unnecessary
information, would this aﬀect the agent’s performance?
To answer this question, we look for the corresponding
averaged asymptotic performance. As before, in the limit
of t →∞, the wildcard clips which contain the arrows
lead to a correct action clip with unit probability (for any
ﬁnite reward λ and zero damping parameter γ = 0), as
illustrated in Fig. 6(b). On the other hand, choosing any
other clip (including action clips) results with the correct
action with an averaged probability of only 1/n. Accord-
ingly, either the random walk led to a wildcard clip with
an arrow, or it did not. The averaged asymptotic per-
formance for K categories and n actions can hence be
written as
E∞(n, K) = p + (1 −p) 1
n = n + (1 + n)2K−2
n (n + 2K−1)
,
(13)
where p = 2K−2/(n + 2K−1) is the probability to hit a
wildcard clip with an arrow, given by the ratio between
the number of wildcard clips with an arrow (2K−2), and
the total number of clips that are reachable from a per-
cept clip (n + 2K−1). In this scenario, where no color is
shown twice, all wildcard clips have their color category
ﬁxed to a wildcard symbol #. There are thus 2K−1 wild-
card clips that are connected to each percept clip, where
half of them, i.e. 2K−2 contain an arrow. Note that for
two categories Eq. (13) correctly reduces to Eq. (9).
We can now see the eﬀect of having a large number K
of irrelevant categories on the asymptotic performance
of the agent. First, it is easy to show that for a ﬁxed
n, E∞(n, K) increases monotonically with K, as also il-
lustrated in Fig. 9(b).
This means that although the
categories provided by the environment are irrelevant,
the generalization machinery can exploit them to make
a larger number of relevant generalizations, and thereby
increase the agent’s performance. Moreover, for large K,
and, more explicitly, for K ≫log n, the averaged asymp-
totic performance tends to (1 + 1/n) /2. Consequently,
when the number of possible actions n is also large, in
which case the performance of the basic agent would drop

12
(a)
(b)
0
5
10
15
20
0.50
0.52
0.54
0.56
0.58
0.60
n = 2
average normalized reward
time step
Simulations
Approximation Eq. (10)
0
10
20
30
40
50
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
number of categories K
asymptotic average reward E1(n, K)
n = 210
n = 2
Figure 9. (a) A part of Fig. 7(a): The diﬀerence between the PS agent’s performance approximation, which is given by Eq. (10),
and numerical simulations for n = 2. (b) The asymptotic average reward E∞(n, K) for the neverending-color scenario (see
Eq. 13), as a function of K, the number of categories, for n = 2, 210.
to 0, the PS agent with generalization would succeed with
a probability that tends to 1/2, as shown in Fig. 9(b) for
n = 210.
Similarly, we note that when none of the categories
is relevant, i.e. when the environment is such that the
agent is expected to take the same action irrespective of
the stimulus it receives, the agent performs even better,
with an average asymptotic performance of E∗
∞(n, K) =
 1 + 2K−1
/
 n + 2K−1
. This is because in such a scen-
ario, every wildcard clip eventually connects to the re-
warded action. Accordingly, since each percept clip leads
to wildcard clips with high probability, the correct ac-
tion clip is likely to be reached. In fact, in the case of
K ≫log n the asymptotic performance of the PS with
generalization actually tends to 1.
DISCUSSION
When the environment confronts an agent with a new
stimulus in each and every time step, the agent has no
chance of coping, unless the presented stimuli have some
common features that the agent can grasp. The recogni-
tion of these common features, i.e. categorization, and
classifying new stimuli accordingly, are the ﬁrst steps
toward a meaningful generalization as characterized at
the beginning of this paper. We presented a simple dy-
namical machinery that enables the PS model to realize
those abilities and showed how the latter requirements of
meaningful generalization - that relevant generalizations
are learned, that correct actions are associated with the
relevant properties, and that the generalization mechan-
ism is ﬂexible - follow naturally from the PS model itself.
Through numerical and analytical analysis, also for an
arbitrary number of categories, we showed that the PS
agent can then learn even in extreme scenarios where
each percept is presented only once.
The generalization machinery introduced in this paper,
enriches the basic PS model: not only in the practical
sense, i.e. that it can handle a larger range of scenarios,
but also in a more conceptual sense. In particular, the en-
hanced PS network allows for the emergence of clips that
represent abstractions or abstract properties, like the red-
ness property, rather then merely remembered percepts
or actions. Moreover, the enhanced PS network is mul-
tilayered and allows for more involved dynamics of the
random walk, which, as we have shown, gives rise to a
more sophisticated behavior of the agent. Yet, although
the clip network may evolve to more complicated struc-
tures than before, the overall model preserves its inherent
simplicity, which enables an analytical characterization of
its performance.
Our approach assumes that the percept space has an
underlying Cartesian product structure, that is, there are
established categories. This is a natural assumption in
many settings, for instance where the categories stem
from distinct sensory devices, in the case of embodied
agents. For the generalization procedure to produce func-
tional generalizations, however, it is also vital that the
reward function of the environment indeed does reﬂect
this structure. This implies that the status of some cat-
egories matters, where other categories may not matter.
Nonetheless, in the settings where the underlying simil-
arity structure on the percept space (e.g. a metric which
establishes which subsets of the percept space require
similar responses) does not follow the Cartesian feature
axes, the agent will still learn, provided the percept space
is not inﬁnite. In this case, no improvements will come
about from the generalization procedure. While restric-
ted, the provided notion of generalization still captures
an exponentially large collection of subsets of the percept
space, in the number of categories.
Regarding the computational complexity of the model,
we can identify two main contributions. The ﬁrst is the
deliberation time of the model – that is, the number of
transitions within the ECM which have to occur at any
time-step of the interactions.
This is eﬃcient, as the
number of steps is upper bounded by the number of lay-
ers, which scales linearly with the number of categories.
The second contribution stems from the updates of the

13
network – the number of wildcard clips which have to
be generated – which also has an immediate impact on
the expected learning time of the agent. In principle, the
total number of wildcard clips can grow exponentially
with the number of categories (that is, typically as a low
order polynomial in the size of the percept space). Note
that this is a necessity, as there are exponentially many
subspaces of the percept space which the agent must ex-
plore to ﬁnd the relevant generalizations. Conﬁning this
space to a smaller subspace would necessarily restrict the
generality of the generalization procedure. Thus there is
an unavoidable trade-oﬀ: how general is the generaliz-
ation procedure versus how large is the generalization
space – one has to balance.
In the approach to generalization we have presented,
we have built upon the capacity of the PS model itself
to dynamically generate novel clips, and the restriction
we have mentioned (combinatorial space complexity due
to the overall clip number) could be mitigated by em-
ploying external classiﬁcation machinery. This latter ap-
proach is the norm in other RL approaches, but as we
have clariﬁed earlier, it comes with other types of issues
we have avoided: the use of external machinery increases
the complexity of the model, and makes it inhomogen-
eous. In contrast, the homogeneity of the PS approach
allows for high interpretability of results, including ana-
lytic analyses, and advantages with respect to embodied
implementations.
Moreover, our approach has a clear
route for quantization of the model, which may become
increasingly more relevant as quantum technologies fur-
ther develop. Thus, it is of great interest to develop a
method that can deal with the issue of combinatorial
space complexity while maintaining homogeneity.
In particular, a clip-deletion mechanism can be used for
PS to deal with the combinatorial growth of the number
of clips. This mechanism deletes clips, thereby maintain-
ing a stable population of a controlled size and prioritiz-
ing the deletion of less used, hence less useful clips. The
size of the population constitutes a sparsity parameter of
the model, and makes the combinatorial explosion in the
clip number controllable, while still allowing the agent to
explore the complete space of axes-speciﬁed generaliza-
tions. A proof of principle of this approach was given in
Ref. [53]; a more detailed analysis of the deletion mech-
anism is ongoing work.
