Adversarially Guided Self-Play for Adopting Social
Conventions
Mycal Tucker
MIT
Cambridge, Massachusetts

Yilun Zhou
MIT
Cambridge, Massachusetts

Julie Shah
MIT
Cambridge, Massachusetts

ABSTRACT
Robotic agents must adopt existing social conventions in or-
der to be effective teammates. These social conventions, such
as driving on the right or left side of the road, are arbitrary
choices among optimal policies, but all agents on a successful
team must use the same convention. Prior work has identified
a method of combining self-play with paired input-output data
gathered from existing agents in order to learn their social
convention without interacting with them. We build upon
this work by introducing a technique called Adversarial Self-
Play (ASP) that uses adversarial training to shape the space of
possible learned policies and substantially improves learning
efficiency. ASP only requires the addition of unpaired data:
a dataset of outputs produced by the social convention with-
out associated inputs. Theoretical analysis reveals how ASP
shapes the policy space and the circumstances (when behav-
iors are clustered or exhibit some other structure) under which
it offers the greatest benefits. Empirical results across three
domains confirm ASP’s advantages: it produces models that
more closely match the desired social convention when given
as few as two paired datapoints.
KEYWORDS
Communication and coordination; human-robot interaction;
adversarial training
1
INTRODUCTION
Humans routinely conform to social norms in order to success-
fully collaborate with others. For example, drivers in France
learn to drive on the right side of the road, while their coun-
terparts in England drive on the left side, because doing so
matches each respective community’s social norm. However, a
French driver is capable of quickly understanding the change
in convention when in England by leveraging their previous
experience and observing other drivers within the new envi-
ronment; in short, for humans, explicit instruction is helpful
but not necessary.
If robots are to be capable teammates in multi-agent sys-
tems, they should behave similarly to a French driver in Eng-
land by adopting the social norms or conventions of their
partners. In many ways, robots that interact with humans in
daily life are already programmed to conform to conventions:
voice assistants, for example, use language as a convention for
communication, and self-driving cars drive on the correct side
of the road.
While pre-programming agents to conform to fixed social
conventions works in some cases, it necessarily fails to han-
dle unforeseen scenarios. Theoretically, learning techniques
could address this gap, but most approaches to learning social
conventions in multi-agent systems (such as policy cloning or
interacting directly with other agents) require large amounts
of data [20].many orders of magnitude of data [20]. However,
if a French driver can switch to driving on the left side of the
road after only a few glimpses of English traffic, autonomous
agents should be able to make similar adjustments to their
own behavior.
Prior work has introduced observationally augmented self-
play (OSP), a technique that takes a step toward learning social
conventions with limited data [20]. The authors’ key insight
is to combine self-play with paired data (inputs and outputs
generated by agents conforming to a given social convention
that can be used for supervised learning).
While the results presented by Lerer and Peysakhovich [20]
represent a significant advance in learning social conventions,
gathering the paired data required by OSP may be difficult in
the real world. For the French driver mentioned above, paired
data would take the form of all the factors English drivers
consider and the actions they subsequently take. Acquiring
such data may be impossible, and humans do not find it neces-
sary; instead, we desire that our agents learn in the same way
that humans learn how to drive on English roads by merely
observing that drivers persistently remain on the left side of
the road regardless of their state.
In this work, we propose adversarial self-play (ASP), a new
technique that uses unpaired data (i.e., only the outputs of
agents using a social convention without associated inputs)
in adversarial training in order to increase the likelihood of
newly trained agents adopting the desired pre-existing social
convention. Our method incorporates a discriminator to dis-
tinguish between outputs produced by a training agent and
those generated from the desired social convention while the
training agent tries to fool the discriminator. Combined with
self-play and limited paired data, ASP consistently produces
agents that better conform to social conventions compared
with those produced by existing techniques. Adversarial train-
ing of social conventions is a sufficiently general approach
that ASP is well-suited for a variety of domains regardless of
the number of agents, exact task, or learning technique.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in three
applications: a temporally-extended speaker-listener domain,
an autoencoder, and a multi-agent coordination game involv-
ing multiple communication steps. Our findings indicate that
ASP enables improved behavior across all settings, even when
provided with only two or three examples of paired data.
arXiv:2001.05994v2  [cs.AI]  7 Oct 2020

2
PRELIMINARIES
We wish to train a new agent such that, when the agent is
introduced into a team, the entire team performs well. The
team’s task may vary widely: perhaps a speaker must direct a
listener to a target location, or perhaps multiple agents must
coordinate to pull different levers. In many cases, the tasks we
are interested in may be formulated as multi-agent Markov
decision processes (MDPs) in which the optimal actions of all
agents depend only upon the current state. Our goal, therefore,
is for a new agent to learn a policy that maximizes the overall
mixed-team reward (defined more formally below) in a joint
MDP.
2.1
Learning Policies for MDPs
A (single agent) MDP is represented by the tuple of ⟨𝑆,𝐴,𝑇, 𝑅,
𝛾⟩, where 𝑆is the state space, 𝐴is the action space,𝑇: 𝑆×𝐴→
P𝑆is the transition function that maps the current state and
action to a distribution over next state, and 𝑅: 𝑆× 𝐴× 𝑆→R
is the reward function that produces a real-valued reward [29].
The reward function can depend upon the current state, the
current action, and the next state, even if it only depends on
a subset of these in most problems. 𝛾∈[0, 1] is the discount
factor representing how much current reward is favored over
future reward.
The goal of solving an MDP is to identify a policy 𝜋: 𝑆→
𝐴that maximizes E𝜋
Í∞
𝑡=1 𝛾𝑡−1𝑟𝑡
, where 𝑟𝑡is calculated
according to reward function 𝑅based on state action trajectory
(𝑠1,𝑎1,𝑠2,𝑎2, ...) as determined by transition function 𝑇and
policy 𝜋.
With 𝑁agents, each agent 𝑖has its own action set, 𝐴𝑖,
and the transition function 𝑇: 𝑆× Î𝑁
𝑖=1 𝐴𝑖→P𝑆takes all
agent actions and produces a distribution over the next state
(assuming instantaneous actions). Each agent may have its
own reward function 𝑅𝑖, which can also depend upon the joint
actions. The goal, then, is for each agent to learn its own policy
𝜋𝑖: 𝑆→𝐴𝑖in order to maximize individual reward. In our
case, because we are working in cooperative settings, we use
a single reward function 𝑅that all agents share.
2.2
Mixed Team Rewards
In the previous section, we framed the problem of learning
optimal joint policies for an MDP. This work, however, focuses
on how mixed teams - teams composed of agents that have
not been trained together - perform a multi-agent task.
Consider a team of size 𝑁composed of 𝑖instances of an
agent𝑎, each agent executing policy 𝜋𝑎, and 𝑗= 𝑁−𝑖instances
of an agent 𝑏executing policy 𝜋𝑏. The joint policy of the team
can be expressed as 𝜋(𝑎,𝑖),(𝑏,𝑗) with an associated expected
discounted reward calculated similarly to any joint policy:
𝑅(𝜋(𝑎,𝑖),(𝑏,𝑗)) = E𝜋(𝑎,𝑖),(𝑏,𝑗)
Í∞
𝑡=1 𝛾𝑡−1𝑟𝑡

.
The previous expression describes the expected discounted
reward for a particular mixed team; we wish, however, to mea-
sure the expected performance of all mixed teams, calculated
as follows:
¯𝑅𝑚=
1
𝑁−1
𝑁−1
∑︁
𝑖=1
𝑅(𝜋(𝑎,𝑖),(𝑏,𝑁−𝑖))
(1)
In this work, we assume a fixed “base” agent with policy 𝜋𝑏
and wish to identify a policy 𝜋𝑎that maximizes the mixed team
reward. We instantiate 𝜋𝑎as a neural net with parameters 𝜃, so
the task of learning the optimal policy becomes one of learning
settings for 𝜃. Solving for optimal 𝜃∗can be accomplished
directly by training in mixed teams:
𝜃∗= argmax
𝜃∈Θ
E𝜋
" ∞
∑︁
𝑡=1
𝛾𝑡−1 ¯𝑅𝑚,𝑡
#
(2)
Numerous methods exist for training neural nets to maxi-
mize such functions (e.g. those outlined in [9, 16, 21], among
others), but they often require large amounts of data and, there-
fore extensive queries of how the base agent would behave
in a given state. In other words, if other agents are treated as
part of the environment, training a new agent requires that
all agents participate in each training episode.
The French driver in our earlier example learned to drive on
the left side of the road without explicit coaching and without
crashing into English drivers; autonomous agents should learn
in a similar manner. Therefore, we combine findings from two
fields of existing research in order to yield more data-efficient
learning of social conventions.
3
RELATED WORK
3.1
Adversarial Training
ASP incorporates insights gleaned from previous uses of ad-
versarial techniques in neural nets but applies them, to the
best of the authors’ knowledge, to learning social conventions
for the first time.
In one branch of adversarial training research, generative
adversarial networks (GANs) are now used to produce lifelike
images from random noise [11, 17]. In a GAN trained to gen-
erate photorealistic images of people, for example, a generator
network produces candidate images that an adversary (or dis-
criminator) then attempts to differentiate from photos of real
people.
Moving beyond GANs generating images from random
noise, multiple extensions demonstrate the power of adver-
sarial training in image translation tasks. The pix2pix toolkit
uses conditional adversarial networks to convert images from
one type to another (e.g. to transform a photo taken during
the day to a nighttime photo) [14]. Similarly, CycleGAN uses
discriminator losses and a cycle-consistency loss to transform
images between classes with zero paired data. For example,
using a set of photos of zebras and a separate set of photos of
horses, CycleGAN can produce the “horse version” of a zebra
photo, and vice versa [31]. Although such applications are of-
ten rooted in image processing, they indicate that adversarial
training can be used to learn complex functions with little or
no labeled data.
One potential weakness of adversarial training is its inabil-
ity to discriminate between policies that produce the same
marginal distribution over outputs. For example, in CycleGAN,
if horses and zebras each face left 50% of the time and right
50% of the time, the GAN could learn to map left-facing horses
to right-facing zebras and vice versa. However, such permuta-
tions do not appear to occur often in practice: in CycleGAN,
2

the fake zebras resemble the input horses with stripes painted
on top.
Outside the image domain, and independently from GANs
but still leveraging adversarial techniques, co-training agents
in adversarial, zero-sum games has produced agents that can,
for example, play Go better than humans do [26]. Pitting two
neural nets against each other encourages policy exploration
until an optimal strategy is found.
We focus on cooperative games in our work, but apply the
broad insight that adversarial training encourages exploration
and prunes away large policy spaces in order to shape how
cooperative agents behave. Training in collaborative games
often converges to locally sub-optimal strategies without fur-
ther exploration; we aim to use the advantages of adversarial
training to overcome this weakness [1].
3.2
Social Conventions
Social conventions (strategies employed by multi-agent sys-
tems in cooperative settings) have been observed among both
humans and autonomous agents, and have therefore been stud-
ied in the fields of cognitive science and artificial intelligence.
Within cognitive science, researchers have studied the emer-
gence of conventions both among small teams and within so-
ciety more broadly [25]. In partnerships working on referring
tasks (wherein one partner describes an object that the other
partner must identify), partners collaborate to form conven-
tions [4, 7]. Such conventions may emerge quite rapidly and
based on little information: for example, when discussing New
York City landmarks, partners quickly establish each other’s
levels of expertise and modify their speech accordingly [13].
Likewise, Hawkins et al. [12] found that strangers developed
efficient communication patterns when repeatedly referring
to objects. After the use of initially uncertain language, pairs
begin to shorten the length of their expressions, effectively
compressing their communication into a more efficient but
less generalizable convention.
Complementing studies of how humans form or adopt so-
cial conventions, research into multi-agent artificial intelli-
gence teams has assessed how social conventions among au-
tonomous agents are created and what forms they take. Draw-
ing directly upon referring-task literature that studies humans,
numerous techniques have been developed for training re-
ferring agents that work well with humans; however, such
work often uses hand-coded, pragmatic models to generate
references [22, 30]. In other words, the models do not learn
an existing social convention but exhibit behavior designed
ahead of time to match peoples’ preferences.
In conjunction with human-facing agents, other researchers
have studied how autonomous agents develop conventions
among themselves [3]. While many multi-agent training tech-
niques do not explicitly formulate their problems as related
to forming social conventions, their agents nevertheless learn
to cooperate and communicate effectively [10, 15, 19, 24, 28].
Occasionally, authors have attempted to interpret the learned
social conventions (e.g. Sukhbaatar et al. [28]), but the em-
phasis of this work has primarily been on having a social
convention emerge at all. We, however, focus on adopting a
particular existing social convention.
Lastly, and most directly related to this work, some recent
research has explored how autonomous agents may learn and
adopt existing social conventions [2, 20, 27]. Broadly, such
techniques depend upon paired data or interactions with other
agents; however, because gathering such data may be difficult,
this is exactly the type of data we seek to use as little as possible
in ASP. As our work is most closely related to that presented
in Lerer and Peysakhovich [20], we explain their approach in
greater detail here.
Lerer and Peysakhovich [20] introduced observationally
augmented self-play (OSP), a technique for combining self-
play with paired data, 𝑃, which takes the regular form of
supervised-learning data (input-output pairs). The addition
of such data grows the “basin of attraction,” or the set of ini-
tial conditions that will lead to learning the social convention
through self-play. Furthermore, supplementing self-play train-
ing by initializing a model trained on such data can only im-
prove the likelihood of learning the desired policy. (Even just
one data point in 𝑃may help, but it can never hurt.) Although
the theoretical arguments for the advantages of 𝑃hold when
𝑃is only used in model initialization, in practice the authors
interleave supervised training throughout.
While OSP produces impressive results, it requires paired
data: the dataset 𝑃must consist of input-output pairs that
describe how the base agent behaves in a particular state.
Unfortunately, paired data may be difficult or impossible to
gather; in our earlier French driver example, inputs would
have to span everything from views in the rear-view mirror to
the mental workload of English drivers. This seems difficult to
obtain and probably unnecessary for learning to stay on the
left side of the road.
4
TECHNICAL APPROACH
4.1
Development of Approach
Unlike paired data, unpaired datasets 𝑈are often easier to
gather. For example, our French driver could simply observe
that English drivers take actions consistent with driving on
the left side of the road, without bothering to record what
caused such behavior. The problem we seek to solve, therefore,
is learning a social convention using limited paired data (𝑃),
and we aim to do so by uncovering patterns in unpaired data
(𝑈).
As indicated earlier, adversarial techniques lend themselves
quite naturally to scenarios involving large amounts of un-
paired data. Therefore, we build a loss function that augments
self-play and supervised learning terms (as introduced in OSP)
with a third term for adversarial training with unpaired data.
Adversaries are trained to predict, given an element of dataset
𝑈and an output of the training model 𝑢′, which entry has
been produced by the model. Conversely, the model attempts
to fool the adversary.
Thus, we optimize the parameters, 𝜃, of our model via gra-
dient descent along a loss function composed of the weighted
sum of three terms representing self-play, paired data, and
unpaired data:
3

𝐿𝐴𝑆𝑃(𝜃, 𝑃,𝑈) = 𝐿𝑠𝑝(𝜃) + 𝜆0𝐿𝑝(𝜃, 𝑃) + 𝜆1𝐿𝑢(𝜃,𝑈)
(3)
In our experiments, the paired loss is mean squared error
(MSE), while the adversary loss function is negative binary
cross-entropy. We use the negative of the cross-entropy to
encourage the model to fool the adversary, and the adversary
is trained to minimize positive binary cross-entropy when
classifying fake or real outputs.
While expected performance is non-decreasing as the size
of 𝑃increases, the relationship between 𝑈and performance is
more complex.
Assuming a sufficiently expressive adversary, adversarial
training drives the main model to produce outputs that con-
form to the distribution of the unpaired data 𝑈. This is the
danger of adversarial training: the adversary will force ASP
to learn a different social convention if 𝑈does not properly
approximate the true social convention’s distribution. In an
extreme example, if 𝑈comprises only a single datapoint, the
adversary will try to force ASP to only use that single action,
even if doing so results in sub-optimal self-play. Thus, it is crit-
ical for the 𝑈dataset to be large enough to properly capture
the desired distribution.
4.2
Analysis of Policy Space
Assuming that 𝑈matches the social convention’s distribution,
adversarial techniques offer benefits by shrinking, or pruning,
the set of acceptable policies.
Consider a single-step discrete MDP with 𝑆= |S| discrete
states, 𝐴discrete actions, and a pre-trained and deterministic
social policy 𝜋𝑆𝐶. We further assume that all of the initial states
are equally likely. Without additional information about how
the policy behaves or the reward structure of the environment,
𝐴𝑆possible policies exist, as the policy could take any of 𝐴
actions for each state.
If, however, 𝜋𝑆𝐶produces actions according to a distribu-
tion where 𝑝𝑖= Í
𝑠∈S𝑠.𝑡.𝜋𝑆𝐶(𝑠)=𝑎𝑖𝑃(𝑠), the set of possible
policies shrinks significantly. Specifically, policies must now
belong to the set of all policies for which subsets of the state
space with state probabilities that sum to 𝑝𝑖map to action 𝑎𝑖.
A large number of such policies still exists, and dividing
the state space into groups of states that all result in the same
action is a combinatorics problem. Thus, we conclude that
there are  𝑆
𝑝0𝑆,𝑝1𝑆,...,𝑝𝐴−1𝑆
,the multinomial coefficient, policies
allowed by adversarial training.
Two important implications arise from this conclusion:
(1) The advantage of adversarial training depends upon the
distribution being mimicked. The multinomial coeffi-
cient has the well-known property of being maximized
for a uniform distribution and minimized for a delta
function [5].
(2) Even in the worst case of a uniform distribution of
actions, the set of possible policies decreases from 𝐴𝑆,
as demonstrated below.
We measure the degree of pruning (how many policies are
eliminated) through adversarial training by evaluating the
worst case, wherein all actions are equally likely. Specifically,
we examine the log ratio 𝑙𝑟of adversarially allowed policies
and the set of all possible policies.
𝑙𝑟= ln ©­
«
 𝑆
𝑝0𝑆,...𝑝𝐴−1𝑆

𝐴𝑆
ª®
¬
(4)
= ln ©­
«
𝑆!
( 𝑆
𝐴!)𝐴
ª®
¬
−𝑆ln(𝐴)
(5)
= ln(𝑆!) −𝐴ln
 𝑆
𝐴!

−𝑆ln(𝐴)
(6)
= 𝑆ln(𝑆) −𝑆+ 𝑂(ln(𝑆)) −𝑆ln
 𝑆
𝐴

+ 𝑆
−𝐴𝑂

ln
 𝑆
𝐴

−𝑆ln(𝐴)
(7)
= 𝑂

ln(𝑆) −𝐴ln
 𝑆
𝐴

(8)
In Equation 4, we define the log ratio as the log of the num-
ber of policies permitted by ASP divided by the number of all
policies. Equations 5 and 6 follow from the application of log
rules and substituting the factorial form of the multinomial
coefficient. We apply Stirling’s approximation (which remains
accurate even for small values) to transform the factorials
into a more familiar form in Equation 7, leading to the can-
cellation of terms [8]. Lastly, further application of log rules
and cancellations results in our final form, presented in big-O
notation.
Analyzing the final expression yields insight into ASP’s
performance. First, the log ratio decreases as 𝑆increases; con-
versely, as 𝐴increases, to the upper limit of 𝐴= 𝑆(correspond-
ing to a unique action for each state) the log ratio increases.
Thus, ASP’s advantage is maximized for big state spaces and
a small set of actions, while its effect is muted as the number
of actions reaches parity with the number of states.
The above analysis considers only the worst case for ASP:
a uniform distribution over actions. In other scenarios, as the
probability distribution of actions concentrates over fewer
actions, the combinatorial term decreases, magnifying the
benefits of ASP.
5
RESULTS
Here, we demonstrate the benefits of ASP in experiments
across three applications. The idea of using an adversary to
shape the policy space is independent of the task itself or
the learning technique being used for self-play. Thus, we test
ASP in RL and autoencoder settings with different learning
algorithms and numbers of agents.
In our first domain, a speaker and actor net must coordi-
nate over multiple timesteps as the speaker (which observes
the entire world) directs the actor (which only observes the
speaker’s commands) to move to a fixed target location. Mixed
human-robot teams often must coordinate in such a manner;
as such, this domain suggests how a robot could learn a hu-
man’s communication convention. In the second setting, an
MNIST variational autoencoder, a new VAE must learn the
same encoding and decoding functions as a pre-trained net;
4

thus, representation itself becomes the social convention to
adopt. Finally, our third domain tests three-agent teams in a
multi-step coordination game involving multiple communica-
tion conventions.
For all domains, we measured the task-specific performance
of mixed teams (teams composed of copies of a pre-trained
base agent that already exhibits a social convention and a new
agent trained using ASP). This metric corresponds with the
expected mixed team reward introduced in Equation 1. Given
the high variance in performance possible due to complex
team interactions, we report median values along with first
and third quartiles1.
For each trial across all experiments, we trained a new base
model before training new models to learn its convention, mit-
igating the observed effect of some models serving as better
or worse partners in mixed teams. Within a given trial, we
trained new models using ASP and two other techniques: a
policy cloning (PC) strategy that trains exclusively on paired
examples without self-play and OSP. As previously reported,
we expected PC to fail in high dimensional domains and ex-
pected OSP to perform well with sufficient paired data [20]. By
using unpaired data, we intended to demonstrate that ASP bet-
ter learns social conventions with the same amount of paired
data as OSP.
(Accompanying code will be released online after the anony-
mous portion of peer review. All code is written in Python,
using Keras with a tensorflow backend [6].)
5.1
Particle World
Figure 1: An actor in blue and a target in red spawn in
random locations. The speaker observes the world and
communicates to the actor, which then chooses an ac-
tion to move within some radius of the target.
We tested ASP in a two-agent particle world inspired by
those used in Mordatch and Abbeel [23], Lowe et al. [21], and
Lerer and Peysakhovich [20]. However, for simplicity, we only
spawned a single target in a randomly chosen location, which
remained fixed for the course of training and testing for a given
trial, as shown in Figure 1. Because the target stayed fixed,
its location was never provided: the pair implicitly learned
where the target was by following high reward. During an
episode, which spanned 40 timesteps, a speaker agent received
a two-dimensional state representation of the actor agent’s 𝑥
and 𝑦location. At each timestep, the speaker agent produced a
1Analysis of the means exhibited similar trends.
128-dimensional communication vector, which was provided
to the listener agent, yielding a softmax distribution over five
possible actions, corresponding to moving one unit in any
of the cardinal directions or remaining in place. Reward was
calculated as the inverse Euclidean distance from the actor to
the target, unless the actor was within 1.4 units of the target,
at which point the reward was set to 10. The speaker and the
listener shared the reward. When trained in self-play with
A2C, the team regularly achieved an average reward of 350
during a 40 timestep trial. If a base model did not achieve a
score of over 300 during self play, we discarded it and trained
a new base.
The social convention to be learned was 1) what communi-
cation vector the speaker should produce given the state and
2) what action the actor should take given the communica-
tion vector. We trained a speaker-actor pair to near-optimal
behavior on its own; the subsequent task was to then train a
new speaker-actor pair (speaker′ and actor′) such that, when
speaker′ was paired with the base actor or the base speaker
was paired with actor′, the mixed pair achieved high reward.
We tested ASP, OSP, and PC over 30 trials with the number
paired examples of state-communication data ranging from 0
to 6. ASP was given 4,096 unpaired data examples of commu-
nication vectors that the speaker produced. Both paired and
unpaired data were generated by running the desired num-
ber of trials and sampling uniformly at random from the 40
timesteps per trial. Training consisted of 25,000 batches of
size 8 sampled uniformly from the experience replay buffer,
plus the full set of paired examples and an equal number of
unpaired samples. We measured mixed-team performance for
a given trial by running 1000 trials with the base speaker and
the new actor, and 1,000 trials of the new speaker with the
base actor, and then recorded the mean score; the results are
depicted in Figure 2. Much of the variance in the graph is
attributable to the different base models used for each trial.
We employed the non-parametric Friedman test on the data
for trials with two, three, and four paired examples, viewing
ASP, OSP, and PC as different “treatments,” and observed sig-
nificant pairwise differences between ASP and both OSP and
PC (𝑝< 0.01 for each).
Figure 2: Agents trained with ASP performed better in
mixed teams once paired data resolved initial ambigu-
ity. Medians and quartiles plotted.
5

The advantage of ASP is most apparent in the presence of
paired data. With only zero or one paired data, the adversary
alone could not resolve mapping ambiguity for which states
should cause specific communication vectors. As more paired
data were introduced, the adversary allowed speaker′ to “snap”
to the correct policy faster than either OSP or PC. All three
techniques benefited from additional paired data.
ASP derives its advantage from two sources. First, the ad-
versarial training prunes away large sections of the high-
dimensional communication vector space. Second, as noted
in Section 4, ASP benefits most from non-uniform probability
distributions. Given that the target location is selected at ran-
dom in the 2D world, it is likely that the target is off-center;
therefore, the distribution of communication vectors produced
is unlikely to be uniform. For example, if the target is located
near the bottom of the world, it is reasonable to expect very
few messages corresponding to “move up” commands.
5.2
Autoencoder
Adversarial shaping of social conventions is not limited to RL
settings. We evaluated ASP in a classic representation learn-
ing problem - an MNIST Variational Autoencoder (VAE) - to
demonstrate how an adversary can shape learned latent rep-
resentations to match the representation of an independently-
trained VAE. In order for the encoder of a separately trained
VAE to work well with the decoder of another, it must learn
the social convention of mappings from images to encodings.
(a) Base model
(b) ASP + 0 paired
(c) ASP + 8 paired
Figure 3: a) The base VAE clusters encodings by digit.
ASP yielded a similarly-shaped latent space but for the
wrong digits (b) until provided with eight paired exam-
ples (c).
MNIST VAEs often learn somewhat interpretable represen-
tations that cluster images of the same digit near each other
(Figure 3) [18]. Plotting the neuron activations using a two-
dimensional latent space and coloring by digit demonstrates
both the benefits and limitations of ASP: on one hand, even
without paired data, ASP effectively guides a new model to
use a similarly-shaped latent space as the base model’s; on
the other hand, until paired data are introduced, the actual
meaning of such points remains ambiguous.
We measured how well a VAE learned the social convention
of another net by wiring the representation produced by one
VAE’s encoder into the decoder of the other VAE and calcu-
lating the mean squared error between the true MNIST input
and its reconstruction. Paired data are input image, encoding,
and reconstructed image tuples, where the first two elements
were used to train the encoder and the last two were used to
train the decoder. Unpaired data consisted of a set of 2,048
encodings.
It is worth noting that, in VAEs, the traditional training
loss function comprises one reconstruction loss term (often
the mean squared error - henceforth MSE - between the input
image and the reconstructed image) and a regularization term
that penalizes the net if the distribution of points in the latent
space diverges from a unit Gaussian. This second term acts
similarly to the adversary in ASP: it constrains the distribution
without specifying the exact mapping from inputs into the
encoding space. Therefore, when using ASP with a VAE, we
must examine whether the adversary has any effect at all or if
the latent distribution always matches a Gaussian.
We trained 10 VAEs over 5,000 batches of size 128 using
the full MNIST dataset. Those 10 models were each used in a
single trial as the base model with social conventions that the
new VAEs had to learn.
In our first set of experiments, we used ASP, OSP, and PC
for a VAE with latent dimension 32 and depicted in Figure 4
how each mixed model’s reconstruction error changed as the
number of paired examples increased. Mixed models were
composed of either the base encoder and the new decoder, or
the new encoder and the base decoder.
Figure 4: At extremes, OSP and ASP performed simi-
larly, but ASP produced better reconstructions for in-
termediate amounts of paired data.
As expected, all three models benefited from a larger amount
of paired data. In interpreting the plotted MSE values, a useful
rule of thumb is that an MSE of 0.06 roughly corresponded to
reconstructing the right digit, while an MSE of 0.006 (achieved
during self-play with this experiment’s settings) reproduced
style as well. Starting with just 16 examples, ASP began to
generate reconstructions that were better than merely getting
the digit right and that with 32 examples, reconstructions are
nearly as good as those generated by a VAE trained entirely
on its own. More broadly, the same pattern of diverging and
converging ASP and OSP played out in MNIST and the particle
world: ASP offered the most benefit when sufficient paired
data were provided to resolve mapping ambiguity but not so
much that all behavior was prescribed.
We also analyzed how ASP, OSP, and PC performed as
the encoding dimension changed. A larger encoding dimen-
sion enables lower-error reconstructions in autoencoders, but
mapping to and from a higher-dimensional space is more com-
plex. The results for a VAE of varying encoding dimension
(all trained with 32 paired and 2,048 unpaired examples) are
depicted in Figure 5.
6

Figure 5: ASP maintained good performance as the en-
coding dimension increased, despite all models using 32
paired examples.
While PC and OSP tended to suffer as the latent dimension
(and therefore social convention complexity) increased, ASP
actually improved initially before eventually degrading like the
other models. The improvement in performance from a latent
dimension of 8 to 32 can be explained as ASP not suffering as
much from the additional complexity while benefiting from
the improved expressivity of higher-dimensional embeddings.
5.3
CommNet Levers
In our final domain, we adopted the communicative multi-
agent architecture proposed by Sukhbaatar et al. [28] (Comm-
Net) to use ASP in a lever-pulling game, played as follows:
three neural nets with shared weights were each given a
unique integer agent ID from 0 to 9. Based solely upon that ID
and inter-net communication, the nets each simultaneously
chose one of three levers. Because they chose simultaneously,
two nets could choose to pull the same lever; however, the
reward (referred to as the “supervised reward” by the authors)
was the proportion of levers for which the 𝑖𝑡ℎlever was pulled
by the net with the 𝑖𝑡ℎordered ID. For example, if the nets
were given IDs 8, 3, and 5 and pulled levers 0, 1, and 1, re-
spectively, they received a score of 1
3 because the net with the
middle ID (5) pulled the middle lever (1), but the rest were out
of order.
Using the neural architecture proposed in CommNet and
training using epsilon-greedy deep Q learning, we trained a net
to pull levers in the right order over 95% of the time. Figure 6
depicts a diagram of the mixed CommNet architecture. The
nets learned to coordinate by broadcasting information to each
other about their agent ID and then sorting themselves.
Given the complex interactions enabled by the CommNet
architecture, a new net must learn multiple social conventions
in order to succeed. We therefore introduced two adversaries
when training with ASP: one for the outputs of each layer of f
blocks (as shown in Figure 6). Theoretically, a single adversary
could suffice, but we observed better results with different
adversary instances.
ASP achieved high reward when given few paired exam-
ples. We tested mixed teams by using one or two instances of
a newly trained agent with two or one instances of the base
agent (respectively). In Figure 7, we demonstrate that the me-
dian error (defined as one minus the reward) of mixed teams
Figure 6: The architecture of a CommNet mixed team.
In testing mixed teams, agent 𝑎must coordinate across
multiple steps with base agent 𝑏despite having been
trained in isolation.
Figure 7: One minus reward in the lever task. ASP ben-
efited most from a small amoutn of paired data.
over 20 trials decreased as the number of paired examples in-
creased. Both OSP and ASP outperformed PC by large margins,
but ASP benefited more from a small number of examples. As
in the particle world domain, much of the variation in results
came from differences among the different base models used
in the trials: a Friedman’s test on all results for 4, 6, and 8
paired examples was significant for ASP compared with OSP
(𝑝< 0.05) and for ASP compared with PC (𝑝< 0.01).
As in analysis of the MNIST VAE, the communication vec-
tors produced by CommNet are somewhat interpretable. Fig-
ure 8 depicts the plot of the two-dimensional principal compo-
nent analysis of the communication vectors produced in the
last f module, colored by the agent ID fed into the encoder at
the top of the net. As reported in the original CommNet paper,
the communication shows a pattern of sorting and cluster-
ing by agent ID. ASP successfully recreated the base model’s
communication space, but needed paired examples to resolve
the ambiguity of which agent ID corresponded with which
communication cluster.
7

(a) Base model
(b) ASP + 0 paired
(c) ASP + 8 paired
Figure 8: a) In a 2D projection colored by agent ID, com-
munication vectors clustered; without paired data, ASP
could not resolve ambiguity (b) until given paired data
(c).
6
DISCUSSION AND FUTURE
DIRECTIONS
Beyond domain-specific analysis, a broad pattern emerged
across all experiments: for some number of paired examples in
all tests, ASP produced agents that learned social conventions
as well as agents trained with other techniques but with twice
as much paired data. This improvement is enabled through ad-
versarial training in ASP that drives agents to match patterns
in unpaired data. While ASP does require an unpaired dataset,
unpaired data are often far easier to gather than paired data.
Although we have demonstrated the utility of ASP in mul-
tiple domains, it is worth noting the technical and ethical
concerns associated with its use.
First, using adversarial training with too little data may actu-
ally worsen performance by forcing a new model to exclusively
employ a limited and sub-optimal set of actions. Fortunately,
such behavior is easily detectable in ASP: the adversary is
fooled while self-play performance suffers. We observed this
behavior in early development and addressed it by decreas-
ing the relative weight of the adversarial reward term and
increasing the size of the unpaired dataset 𝑈.
Second, although this paper is based on the premise that we
wish models to adopt existing social conventions, it is worth
considering whether fully conforming to a social convention
is always desirable. In cooperative environments, it is easy
to imagine how teams composed of heterogeneous agents,
each with its own strength, might outperform homogeneous
teams. Furthermore, diversity in learning may allow a team
to learn new strategies that might have been overlooked if
all team members had adopted a uniform strategy early on.
Finally, and most perniciously, if adversarial techniques are
used to force behaviors to resemble existing social conventions,
a byproduct of training is a well-trained adversary. Such an
adversary, although potentially useful in cases such as fraud
detection, could serve to target or penalize persons who do
not behave like the majority.
7
CONTRIBUTIONS
In this work, we have introduced ASP, an adversarial approach
to learning social conventions with limited paired data. Moti-
vated by a French driver watching English traffic, we exploited
patterns in unpaired data to lead new agents to the correct
social convention. ASP itself is broadly applicable: it works
well in time-extended reinforcement domains, multi-agent
coordination games, and even an autoencoder setting.
ASP’s generality hints at possible directions for future work.
ASP could be used in human-robot teams to train robots to
adapt to their human partners by merely observing them (gath-
ering unpaired data) instead of asking how to behave in spe-
cific scenarios (gathering paired data). In a similar vein, ad-
versarial shaping of outputs could be used in interpretability
research by encouraging representations to conform to under-
standable forms without explicitly prescribing all behavior.
