193 
Toward Case-Based Preference Elicitation: Similarity Measures on 
Preference Structures 
Vu Ha 
Peter Haddawy 
Decision Systems and Artificial Intelligence Lab 
Dept. of EE&CS 
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee 
Milwaukee, WI 53201 

Abstract 
While decision theory provides an appealing 
normative framework for representing rich 
preference structures, eliciting utility or value 
functions typically incurs a large cost. For 
many applications involving interactive sys­
tems this overhead precludes the use of for­
mal decision-theoretic models of preference. 
Instead of performing elicitation in a vacuum, 
it would be useful if we could augment di­
rectly elicited preferences with some appro­
priate default information. In this paper we 
propose a case-based approach to alleviat­
ing the preference elicitation bottleneck. As­
suming the existence of a population of users 
from whom we have elicited complete or in­
complete preference structures, we propose 
eliciting the preferences of a new user inter­
actively and incrementally, using the closest 
existing preference structures as potential de­
faults. Since a notion of closeness demands a 
measure of distance among preference struc­
tures, this paper takes the first step of study­
ing various distance measures over fully and 
partially specified preference structures. We 
explore the use of Euclidean distance, Spear­
man's footrule, and define a new measure, the 
probabilistic distance. We provide computa­
tional techniques for all three measures. 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
We are interested in the problem of building interac­
tive systems for which task objectives will be commu­
nicated in the form of user preferences. Utility the­
ory, the branch of decision theory that deals with rep­
resentation of preferences, provides a rich normative 
framework that is capable of capturing such aspects 
of preferences as tradeoffs among objectives and atti-
tudes toward risk. But the task of eliciting a utility 
function is typically time consuming and tedious. For 
many applications involving interactive systems such 
overhead can preclude the use of utility theory since 
the cost in time and effort may be too large relative to 
the value of the sought after solution or because time 
may simply be limited. For example, we would be very 
unhappy if a system designed to help us select a video 
to watch required as much time as the entire length of 
the film just to elicit our preferences. 
To reduce elicitation overhead, practitioners typically 
make use of assumptions (e.g. additive independence) 
that simplify the elicitation task by allowing a high­
dimensional utility function to be decomposed into 
a simple combination of lower-dimensional sub-utility 
functions. But even under such assumptions, elici­
tation of a complete utility function can still be too 
time consuming and, furthermore, the assumptions 
preclude representation of many kinds of interesting 
and common preferences. 
In previous work [6), we investigated an approach in 
which we first elicit partial preference information to 
produce a set of candidate solutions. We then use the 
set of candidate solutions to identify the additional in­
formation to elicit that would likely be most helpful 
in narrowing down this set. But in order to be able 
to make useful inferences based only on some prefer­
ence information, we were forced to assume additive 
independence of the underlying utility function and to 
assume that the sub-utility functions are known. 
In contrast, Linden, etal. [11) supplement elicited pref­
erences with default information to obtain a complete 
utility function, which is to be continually adjusted 
based on the user's feedback. This default preference 
information represents preferences that are assumed 
applicable to all users, such as preferences for reduced 
cost. The user is presented with the optimal solu­
tion according to the constructed utility function, to­
gether with some extreme points in the solution space 
(e.g., cheapest and shortest-time flights). The utility 

194 
Ha and Haddawy 
function is then modified based on the user's critiques. 
This approach too assumes an additive utility model in 
order to facilitate the incorporation of user feedback. 
In this paper we also take the approach of supplement­
ing elicited preferences with default information. But 
rather than applying one default uniformly to all users, 
we use elicited preferences to select an appropriate de­
fault from a set of defaults. Specifically, we investigate 
a case-based approach to providing such default infor­
mation. The idea is based on the observation that 
people tend to form clusters according to their prefer­
ences or tastes, an observation that has been analyzed 
in a large amount of literature in the area of market 
segmentation [5]. We envision our system to maintain 
a population of users with their preferences partially or 
completely specified in a given domain. When encoun­
tering a new user A, the system elicits some preference 
information from A and then determines which user 
in the population has the preference structure that is 
closest to the preference structure of A. The prefer­
ence structure of that user will be used to determine 
an initial default representation of A's preferences. In 
contrast with the previously discussed work of [6] and 
[11], we do not make any restrictive assumptions con­
cerning the form of the underlying utility functions. 
Realization of this approach to elicitation requires that 
we have a distance measure on preference structures. 
In this paper we investigate various distance measures 
from both theoretical and computational perspectives. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 
deals with distance measures among completely speci­
fied preference structures. We revisit some well-known 
measures such as Spearman's footrule and Euclidean 
distance and propose to extend these measures to be 
defined among utility functions. We also propose to 
define the probabilistic distance that measures the dif­
ference between two preference structures by the prob­
ability that they disagree on the rankings of two ran­
dom alternatives. In Section 3, we extend all of these 
definitions to define distance measures among partially 
specified preference structures. We provide a compu­
tational technique for approximating these distance 
measures. In Section 4, we describe MovieFinder, an 
experimental recommender system that recommends 
movies for people based on this case-based preference 
elicitation approach. We discuss related work and fu­
ture research in Section 5. 
2 
DISTANCE MEASURES ON 
PREFERENCE ORDERS 
We start out with a brief revie:w of utility theory for 
decision making. The reader is refered to [10] for more 
details. 
The process of making decisions is generally modeled 
as the identification of the optimal alternative(s) from 
a set M of alternatives, using in effect a weak order 
-<, i.e. an asymmetric (a -< b =? b -/< a), negatively 
transitive (a -/< b, b -/< c =? a -/< c) binary relation 
on the set of alternatives. We will call this relation 
the preference structure of the decision maker: a -< b 
indicates that the decision maker prefers alternative b 
to alternative a. When neither of the two alternatives 
is prefered to the other (a-/< b, b-/< a), we say that the 
decision maker is indifferent between them and denote 
this relation by a "' b. We also use the notation a j b 
to denote that the decision maker prefers b to a or is 
indifferent between them. If for all distinct alternatives 
a and b, either a -< b or b -< a, the -< relation is said 
to be a strict order. 
An important technique that is often used in associ­
ation with preference orders i& the use of consistent 
functions that capture preference orders. 
Definition 1 A real-valued function f : M O X is 
said to be consistent with a preference order -< on M 
if for all a, b E  M, a-< b {::} f(a) < f(b). 
2.1 
THE CERTAINTY CASE 
When a decision problem involves no uncertainty 
about the alternatives, we call the alternatives out­
comes, and denote the set of outcomes by n. For ease 
of exposition, we will assume throughout the paper 
that n is finite and n = { S1' .
.
•
 ' 
Sn}. It can be proven 
(10] that for any preference order -< over n there exists 
a function v, called a value function, that is consistent 
with -<, and we sometimes write -< as -<v to empha­
size this relationship. In the case when -< is a strict 
order, and suppose that the elements of n are indexed 
in such a way that s1 -< 82 -< ... -< 8n, we can define 
a value function v as v(83) = j,j = 1, ... ,nand call 
this the height of Sj· Two value functions that induce 
identical orders are said to be strategically equivalent. 
Otherwise, they are said to be strategically different. 
Suppose that there are two users with corresponding 
preference orders -<1 and -<2, which are weak orders 
On the finite set S1 
= { 81, 82, ... , 8n} of outcomes. 
We study three distance measures between these two 
preference orders: Spearman's footrule, Euclidean dis­
tance, and probabilistic distance. 
On the set of strict orders, the classical distance mea­
sure is Spearman's footrule [16]. Suppose that hij, i = 
1, 2,j = 1, ... , n is the height of s3 with respect to -<i· 
Then the Spearman's footrule is defined as: 
1 
n 
Spearman's footrule: 8s(-<1, -<2) := 2 L lh13-h2jl· 
i=1 

It is well-known that Spearman's footrule is a metric 
on strict orders and has the range [0, ln2 /4J] (see, for 
example [4]). The three requirements for a measure 
to be a metric are the following (for all strict orders 
-<i, i = 1, 2, 3): 
(i) Reflexivity. d(-<1. -<2) 2:: 0, 
"=" iff -<1 and -<2 are identical. 
(ii) Symmetry. d( -<1, -<2) = d( -<2, -<1). 
(iii) Triangle Inequality. d( -<1, -<3) ::; d( -<1, -<2) + 
d( -<2, -< 3)· 
Another popular distance measure among strict orders 
is the Euclidean distance, defined as: 
n 
Euclidean distance: oE(-<1, -<2) = L(h1j- h2j)2. 
i=1 
The Euclidean distance and Spearman's footrule are 
defined on the set of strict orders and it is not ob­
vious how to extend their definitions to weak orders. 
This is a limitation, since we do not want to rule out 
cases when there are equally prefered alternatives. In 
this paper we investigate yet another distance mea­
sure, called probabilistic distance that is defined on the 
broader class of weak orders. This distance measure 
captures the intuition that the difference in preferences 
of two users should be proportional to the chance that 
a uniformly randomly chosen pair (a, b) of alternatives 
will cause a conflict between the two users, i.e, the 
two users will rank a and b differently. We use an in­
dicator function to capture conflicts; a conflict occurs 
when the indicator function takes on the value 1: 
! 1 if (a 81 b 1\ b -<2 a)V 
(a -<1 bl\ b s2 a)V 
C-<1,-<2(a,b)= 
(as2 bl\b-<1 a)V 
(a -<2 b 1\ b 91 a) 
0 otherwise. 
Given this definition of conflict, the distance between 
two weak orders (n, -<1) and (n, -<2) is defined as: 
where the last equality means that the probability of 
conflict is the proportion of conflicting pairs of out­
comes (out of n(n- 1)/2 pairs). 
Proposition 1 The probabilistic distance on the set 
of weak orders on n is a metric with range [0, 1]. 
Case-Based Preference Elicitation 
195 
Proof: It is evident that the probabilistic distance only 
takes values between 0 and 1, the distance between 
two identical orders is zero, and zero distance implies 
two identical weak orders. The symmetry of the dis­
tance function trivially follows from the symmetry of 
the conflict function. Finally, to prove the triangle in­
equality, we note that for all weak orders -<i, i = 1, 2, 3 
and alternatives a, b, c-<t.-<a (a, b) = 1 implies either 
c-<t.-<2(a,b) = 1 or C-<2,-<3(a,b) = 1, and for all events 
X, Y, Pr(X V Y) ::; Pr(X) + Pr(Y). D 
Example 1 Suppose that there are three kinds of 
night entertainment in Milwaukee: going to watch a 
basketball game {B }, a movie {M }, and going to a 
blues pub {P ). Suppose that Xaviera's preference or­
der -<x is such that B -<x M -<x P and Yvette's 
preference order -<Y is such that M -<Y P -<y B. The 
distance between their preferences according to Spear­
man's footrule, Euclidean distance, and probabilistic 
distance, is Os(-<x,-<Y) = 2, OE(-<x,-<y) 
= v'6, 
Op( -<x, -<y) = 2/3, respectively. If we want these 
distances to be normalized so that their ranges are 
the interval [0, 1], by dividing by their correponding 
upper bounds, then the normalized distances are 1, 
y3l4 = .8660, and 2/3 = .6667, respectively. 
Now suppose that Zelda's preference order -<z is such 
that P -<z M -<z B, then the normalized distance 
between -<x and -<z, according to Spearman's footrule, 
Euclidean distance, and probabilistic distance, is 1, 1, 
and 1 (two orders that are reverses of one another have 
maximum distance). 
It is clear from Example 1 that according to Eu­
clidean ( o E) and probabilistic distances ( o p), the pref­
erences of Yvette are closer to Xaviera's than Zelda's 
are, while according to Spearman's footrule (o8), they 
are equally distant. We say that two distance mea­
sures 81 and 02 on a set M are relatively equivalent 
if for all a, b, c E M, 81 (a, b) < 01 (a, c) {:} o2(a, b) < 
82 (a, c). For example, the Euclidean distance is rel­
atively equivalent to the negative of the rank order 
correlation coefficient ( -p). On the other hand, os is 
not relatively equivalent to OE and Op. It can be shown 
that OE and Op are also not relatively equivalent. 
Intuitively, if two distance measures on M are rela­
tively equivalent, then for any element a E M and a 
subset K ċ M of M, the sets of elements of K that are 
closest to a according to the two measures are identi­
cal. Since os, OE, and Op are relatively different, it 
remains an open question which one we should use for 
our framework. 

196 
Ha and Haddawy 
2.2 
THE UNCERTAINTY CASE 
When the decision alternatives are uncertain, they are 
usually modeled by probability distributions over out­
comes and are called prospects. We denote the set of 
all probability distributions over 0 by S. The cen­
tral result of utility theory is a representation theorem 
that identifies a set of conditions guaranteeing the ex­
istence of a function consistent with the preferences of 
a decision maker [19, 14]. The theorem states that if 
the preference order of a decision maker satisfies a few 
"rational" properties, then there exists a real-valued 
function, called a utility function u : n -+ X. over 
outcomes such that p -< q ¢:? (p, u) < (q, u). Here 
(p, u), the inner product of the probability vector p 
and the utility vector u, is the expected value of func­
tion u with respect to the distribution p. It is often 
convenient to extend u, by means of expectation, to 
a function u : S -+ X that maps a prospect p E S 
to (p, u). This function is clearly consistent with the 
preference order (S, -<),and we sometimes write -< as 
-<u to emphasize this relationship. 
In this paper, we assume that the preference struc­
tures (which are weak orders over the set of prospects) 
of the users satisfy the required "rational" conditions 
and thus can be represented using utility functions. 
We now focus attention on defining a distance mea­
sure among such preference structures. We investigate 
two approaches to defining a distance measure: utility­
based and non-utility-based, according to whether util­
ity functions of the preference structures are explicitly 
used in the definitions. 
Utility-Based Distance Measures 
Suppose that the preference structures (S, -<1) and 
(S, -<2) of two users are represented by their corre­
sponding utility functions U1' U2 : n -+ X- We shall 
define the distance between the preference structures 
-<1 and -<2 as a function of two utility functions u1 
and u2, which can be view as two vectors in the n­
dimension vector space Xn. 
It is well-known that utility functions are unique up 
to a positive linear transformation, i.e., if v1 is also 
a utility function that represents -<1, then there are 
a, f3 E X.a > 0 such that v1 = o:u1 + {3. u1 and v1 are 
called strategically equivalent utility functions. Thus, a 
distance measure among preference structures should 
be defined on the strategic equivalence classes of Xn. 
This can be done by selecting a representative vector 
for each equivalence class, and define some distance 
measure such as Euclidean, or Spearman's footrule­
like distance among the representatives. To select a 
representative for each equivalence class, we can spec­
ify a set of conditions so that exactly one member of 
each equivalence class satisfies those conditions and 
thus will be chosen as the representative for that class. 
Example 2 Suppose that Xaviera and Yvette are in­
volved in a decision problem involving lotteries over 
three possible outcomes a, b, and c. Furthermore sup­
pose that Xaviera's preferences and attitude toward 
risks are captured by a utility function ux such that 
ux(a) = O,ux(b) = 1,ux(c) = 2, and Yvette's prefer­
ences and attitude toward risks are captured by a utility 
function uy such that uy(a) = 1, uy(b) = 3, uy(c) = 
4. Note that Xaviera and Yvette agree on the ranking 
of certain outcomes, but have different attitudes to­
ward risky decisions. Suppose that we require that the 
representatives for strategic equivalence classes must 
have 0 as their minimum and 1 as their maximum 
values, i.e., we scale the utility functions from 0 to 
1. With respect to these conditions, the representa­
tive utility functions of Xaviera and Yvette are ux 
and uy where ux(a) = O,ux(b) = 1/2,ux(c) = 1, 
and uy(a) = 0, uy(b) = 2/3, ux(c) = 1. Thus, the 
Euclidean (8E) and Spearman footrule-like {8s) dis­
tance between the preference structures of Xaviera and 
Yvette are: 8E(ux,uy) = JL:8(ux(s) -uy(s))2 
= 
1/6 and 8s(ux, uy) = 1/2 L:siux(s) -uy(s)l = 1/12. 
Non-Utility-Based Distance Measures 
Note that the above utility-based definitions of dis­
tance measures are sensitive to the choice of the con­
ditions to select representative utility functions. Since 
there appears no rule of thumb to select the represen­
tatives, these definitions are rather ad-hoc. The same 
can be said of the Euclidean distance and Spearman's 
footrule in the certainty case, since the used heights 
{1, 2, ... , n} of the outcomes, which are a particular 
choice of value functions, are also arbitrary; any in­
creasing sequence of numbers can be used instead. 
The probabilistic distance overcomes this tricky prob­
lem by relying on the preference structures themselves, 
rather than a particular choice of value functions. This 
idea can be extended to the uncertainty case as follows. 
The distance between two preference orders (S, -<1), 
(S, -<2) is defined as: 1 
8p(-<1, -<2) = Pr(-<1 & -<2 rank p and q differently) 
= Is Is 
C-<1,-<2 (p, q)dpdq, 
where the conflict function c-<1,-<2 is defined over a pair 
(p, q) of prospects in the obvious way. Here we take 
1Note that although this formal definition of the proba­
bilistic distance does not involve utility functions, any oper­
ational definition of this measure inevitably does. In fact, 
any specification of a preference structure over the (infi­
nite) set of prospects has to involve utility functions. 

all probability distributions into consideration. In the 
case when the set of candidates is only a subset of 
S, then it would be more reasonable to integrate over 
only that set 2• Based on this definition, we can define 
the probabilistic distance of two utility functions u1, u2 
to be the probabilistic distance of the two preference 
structures they represent: Op(ul, u2) = Op( -<uu -<u2). 
Proposition 2 The probabilistic distance on the set 
of weak orders on S is a metric with range [0, 1]. 
Proof: [Sketch] The proof of this proposition is identical 
to that of Proposition 1, except for the somewhat non­
obvious part that shows that if the distance between 
two utility functions is 0, then they must be positive 
linear transformations of each other. The idea here is 
that for two utility functions u1 and u2, the subset of 
S x S that consists of pairs of prospects that cause 
conflict between -<u1 and -<u2 is a union of two convex 
cones, and it can be shown that this union has zero 
volume if and only if the two utility functions u1 and 
u2 are positive linear transformations of each other. D 
Example 3 (Continuation of Example 2) The 
probabilistic distance between preference structures of 
Xaviera (-<x) and Yvette (-<y) is: 
d(-<x, -<y) 
=Is Is cN .. x .Nuy (p, q)dpdq 
= fs fs Neg[(ux o (p- q))(uy o (p- q)]dpdq 
= 1/9. 
Here p and q run over the probability simplex S, 
which is the equilateral triangle in R3 with vertices 
(0, 0, 1), (0, 1, 0), (1, 0, 0), UX = (0, 1, 2), Uy = (0, 2, 3), 
and Neg is the function that returns 1 if its argument 
is negative and 0 otherwise. 
Now suppose that Zelda's utility function is uz = 
(0, 2, 1), which implies that, unlike Xaviera and Yvette, 
she prefers c with certainty to b with certainty. Cal­
culations show that o(ux,uz) = 1/3 > 1/9, which is 
what we would expect: Yvette's preferences are more 
similar to Xaviera's than Zelda's are. 
Closely related to the distance concept is the similar­
ity concept in fuzzy-set theory [20, 12]. A similarity 
relation s is a binary fuzzy relation on a set U that 
satisfies the following three properties, 'Vu, v, w E U: 
(i) Reflexivity. s(u,u) = 1. 
(ii) Symmetry. s(u,v) = s(v,u) . 
(iii) *-Transitivity. s(u,v) * s(v,w) c s(u,w), 
2Provided that the set is measurable. 
Case-Based Preference Elicitation 
197 
where * is a t-norm, that is, a commutative, associa­
tive, non-decreasing operation on [0, 1], with 1 being 
the neutral element (1 * x = x * 1 = x, 'Vx E [0, 1]) and 
0 being the absorbent element (0 * x = x * 0 = 0, Vx E 
[0, 1]). 
Noticeable t-norms are min, product, and 
Lukasiewicz operation (l(x,y) = max{O,x + y -1}). 
Note that the complement of the probabilistic dis­
tance, defined as s(-<1,-<2) = 1- Op(-<1, -<2)- the 
probability that two users with preference orders -<1 
and -<2 will have the same preference over a uniformly 
randomly chosen pair (a, b) of alternatives- is a fuzzy 
similarity relation with respect to Lukasievicz t-norm. 
3 
DISTANCE MEASURES ON 
PARTIALLY SPECIFIED 
PREFERENCE ORDERS 
While the distance functions proposed in the previous 
section provide various similarity measures that could 
be used to cluster preferences of multiple users, they 
are not much good for preference elicitation. For the 
purpose of elicitation we need to be able to compute 
the distance when at least one of the preference orders 
is only partially specified. 
We first clarify what we mean by "partially specified" 
preference orders. Recall that a completely specified 
preference structure -< on the set M of alternatives is a 
weak order, i.e., an asymmetric, negatively transitive 
binary relation on M. For a decision maker whose pref­
erence structure we have completely elicited, given any 
two alternatives a and b, we know that there are only 
three possibilities: either she prefers b to a (a -< b), a 
to b (b -< a), or indifferent between a and b (a "' b). 
However, when we have little information about the 
preferences of the decision maker, it might be the case 
that we can not say anything about her preferences 
over some two alternatives a and b, meaning that none 
of the above three possibilities applies. In such cases, 
we say that the preference between a and b is not spec­
ified, or a and b are incomparable, denoted by a II b. 
Thus, a partially specified order can be viewed as a 
partial order, or generalized weak order where for any 
pair of alternatives (a, b), exactly one of the four rela­
tions -<, >-, "', and II holds. 
For simplicity, we will call a partially specified prefer­
ence order, which is a 3-tuple ( -<,"',II), a partial pref­
erence order and denote it by -<. We need a slightly 
different definition of consistent functions - functions 
that are consistent with partial preference orders. 
Definition 2 A real-valued function f : M O lR is 
said to be consistent with a partial preference order -< 
on M if for all a,b E M, a -<  b => f(a) < f(b) and 
a"' b => f(a) = f(b). 

198 
Ha and Haddawy 
Note that the above definition does not specify what 
happens when a II b. Intuitively, consistent functions 
capture all information contained in the partial orders, 
and they might contain more than that. 
We now turn our attention to defining a distance mea­
sure among partially specified preference orders. In 
this paper we focus on the certainty case and define a 
distance measure among partial orders on n. 
Suppose the preference structures of two users are 
partially specified by two partial preference orders 
(0, -<i), i = 1, 2. Let V:* be the set of all functions 
that are consistent with partial order -<i, and "Vi be 
the set of equivalence classes of Vi* with respect to the 
strategic equivalence of value functions. We can also 
view "Vi as a subset of Vi* that contains strategically 
different functions, and any member function of Vi* is 
strategically equivalent to some member of "Vi. We will 
use this interpretation from now on. 
We can also view each partial order -<i as a set of 
complete orders that are consistent· with it, where con­
sistency means that any relation between any pair of 
elements that holds with respect to the partial order 
also holds with respect to the complete orders. In the 
literature of graphs and orders, partial orders are also 
called posets, and the consistent complete orders of a 
poset are called its linear extensions. It is not hard to 
see that { -<v,: Vi E "Vi} is just the set of linear exten­
sions of the partial order -<i· For simplicity, we will 
refer to Vi as a linear extension, and "Vi is the set of all 
linear extensions of -<i· 
So the problem now reduces to the problem of defining 
a distance measure on the space of finite posets over 
0. To the best of our knowledge, there is no general 
theory that addresses this problem. In this paper we 
study two approaches to defining such a measure. 
Average-Case Distance 
In the first approach, we consider the average-case be­
havior of the partial orders. We define the distance 
between two partial orders -<1 and -<2 to be the aver­
age of the distances between pairs of complete orders 
that are consistent with -<1 and -<2, respectively. The 
distance between two complete orders can be any of 
the distance measures discussed in the previous sec­
tion: Euclidean (8E), Spearman's footrule (8s), and 
probabilistic ( 8 p). Formally: 
where X can be any of the letters "E", "S", and "P" 
that denote Euclidean distancE), Spearman's footrule, 
and probabilistic distance, respectively. 
Note that 
these measures are not metrics on the set of partial or-
ders, since the distance between two identical partial 
orders that are not complete orders is always positive. 
But this is desirable if the two orders represent the 
preferences of two different users, since the complete 
preference orders for the two may actually differ. 
The next question is how to compute these distances. 
A simplistic answer is to compute 8 x ( v1, v2) for all 
pairs of linear extensions (v1,v2) E Vi X V2, which 
involves generating all linear extensions of the partial 
orders. This approach is computationally prohibitive 
since the number of linear extensions of a poset can 
be exponential in terms of its cardinality. In fact, the 
much easier problem of counting linear extensions of 
posets, a fundamental problem in the theory of ordered 
sets with applications in computer science (sorting) 
and social sciences, was shown to be #P-complete 3 
by Brightwell and Winkler [1]. 
Given the hardness of counting and generating linear 
extensions, we turn to approximation techniques to 
estimate 8x( -<1, -<2). Let Y be the random variable 
defined as Y = 8x(v1,v2), where v1,v2 are indepen­
dent uniform random variables on v1 and v2 respec­
tively. We note that E Y = 8x( -<1> -<2). We thus can 
appeal to the Monte Carlo simulation method to es­
timate 8 x (-< 1 , -< 2), provided that we have an efficient 
algorithm to generate Vi uniformly randomly from "Vi. 
It turns out that counting (approximately) and gener­
ating (uniformly randomly) elements of large combi­
natorial sets are two closely related problems. In fact, 
Sinclair [15] showed that an efficient algorithm for one 
problem can be used to construct an efficient algorithm 
for the other, provided the combinatorial sets have a 
certain structural property called self-reducibility. The 
set of linear extensions of a poset has this property 
and, not suprisingly, a number of algorithms for gen­
erating (almost) uniformly randomly linear extensions 
of posets have been developed [8, 2] in order to ad­
dress the fundamental problem of counting linear ex­
tensions. These algorithms are all randomized algo­
rithms based on the Markov chain Monte Carlo tech­
nique 4• In the Appendix we describe the best known 
algorithm, due to Bubley and Dyer [2] that has a run-
3The complexity class #P, introduced by Valiant (18], 
consists of all counting problems whose solutions are 
the number of accepting states of some non-deterministic 
polynomial-time Turing Machine. A counting problem is 
#P-complete if the problem of counting the number of sat­
isfying assignments to a 3-SAT problem can be reduced 
to it in polynomial time. 
#P-complete problems, which 
are analog counting counterparts of NP-complete prob­
lems, are considered very difficult, especially in the view 
of Toda's results (17], which implies that one call to a #P­
complete oracle suffices to solve any problem in the poly­
nomial hierarchy in deterministic polynomial time. 
4See [7] for a recent survey of this method. 

ning time of O(n3 lognc1 ), where n is the poset's car­
dinality, and tis the desired accuracy. 
Now with the help of the routine that almost uni­
formly randomly generates linear extensions of a poset, 
we can estimate c5x(-<1, -<2) by randomly generat­
ing Vij E Vi(i 
= 1, 2; j 
= I, ... , k), computing 
c5 x ( v1i, V2j), j = I, ... , k, and taking the sample mean 
J x = t :2:7=1 c5 x ( V1j, v2j). This sample mean is an 
unbiased estimator 5 of E Y = cSx(-<1, -<2) with vari­
ance (Var Y) I k. We can derive a confidence interval 
for c5x as follows. Lett be the ratio of Y's variance and 
square of its expectation: t = Var Y I (E Y)2, a non­
negative quantity that can usually be bounded above 
by T, which is polynomial in terms of n, the input size. 
Thus VarY c r(E Y)2 and Var Jx c (r(E Y)2)lk = 
(rc5"i )lk. For any positive number c, Chebysev's in­
equality says that: 
Pr((Jx-c5x)2 > cVar Jx)  Ilc, 
and thus: 
Pr((Jx- c5x)2 > crc5'3clk) c Ilc, 
or equivalently: 
Pr((I-vfci]k)c5x c Jx c (I+ vfci]k)c5x) 2:: I-IIc. 
As a consequence, if we want our estimator J x to be 
within a multiplicative factor of I + t of c5 with proba­
bility of at least I-I I c, it is sufficient to take a sample 
of size k = f4crlt2l 
There is also another possible way to define the dis­
tance measure among partial orders based on their 
average-case behavior. 
Note that in the previous 
section, the Euclidean distance and the Spearmans's 
footrule are defined among complete orders based on 
the heights of the outcomes. Accordingly, we can de­
fine the corresponding, generalized Euclidean distance 
and generalized Spearman' footrule based on the aver­
age heights of the outcomes with respect to their con­
sistent complete orders. In the literature on ordered 
sets, the average height of an element with respect to 
a partial order is simply called its height. Denote the 
height of an element s i, j = I, ... , n with respect to 
the partial order -< i, i = I, 2 by hii , we can define the 
distance between -<1 and -<2 as: 
Generalized c5s : 
c58( -<1. -<2) := ! I:j=1 jh1j-h2il 
Generalized c5 E : c5k (-< 1, -<2) = JI:j=l ( h1j -h2j )2. 
5To be more precise, Jx is not an unbiased estimator for 
8x, since the routine only generates almost uniform linear 
extensions. 
The incurred bias is insignificant and often 
simply ignored in Markov chain Monte Carlo analysis. 
Case-Based Preference Elicitation 
199 
In contrast to the previously discussed average-case 
distance measures, these distance measures are metrics 
on the set of partial orders over S. Determining the 
heights of elements of a poset, however, is also a #P­
complete problem [I] and requires the approximation 
technique described above. 
Extreme-Case Distance 
In the second approach, we consider the extreme be­
haviors of the partial orders -<i· Specifically, we de­
fine the distance Cx( -<1, -<2) to be an interval whose 
endpoints are the minimum and the maximum of 
c5x(-<v1,-<v2), where ViE Vi,i = I,2, and X is either 
"E", or "S", or "P": 
This approach gives us the flexibility in defining the 
concept of closeness among partial preference orders. 
For example, given three partial preference orders -<i 
, i = I, 2, 3, we can take the conservative approach and 
say that -<1 is closer to -<2 than to -<3 if the upper 
bound of :X ( -<vu -<v2) is less than the lower bound 
of Cx ( -<vu -<va). We can also take other approaches 
such as the optimistic approach (minim in: closer when 
the lower bound is smaller) and pessimistic approach 
(minimax: closer when the upper bound is smaller). 
Computing Cx(-<1, -<2) seems to be a difficult combi­
natorial optimization problem. A reasonable approach 
is to take the minimum and the maximum of a random 
sample of sufficiently large size as approximations for 
the bounds of CX· 
4 
AN IMPLEMENTATION 
In this section, we describe MovieFinder 6, an experi­
mental recommender system that recommends movies 
for people based on this case-based preference elicita­
tion approach. Our main goal of this experiment is 
to see if the probabilistic distance 8p is a reasonble 
measure of distance on preference structures. 
The problem of deciding what movie to see is one of 
certainty, where the outcomes are the movies them­
selves. Each movie is characterized by 5 attributes: di­
rector, casting, genre, star rating, and time length. We 
interviewed IO graduate students to fully elicit their 
preferences over a set of 50 movies. We then stored 
these preference structures in our case base in the form 
of IO value functions. We then chose one student, say 
Xaviera, out of the IO students and "simulated" a rep­
etition of the elicitation of her preferences. We looked 
6The system is available on the World Wide Web at 
http:/ /cs.uwm.edu/ nguyenfmovie/moviemain.htm 

200 
Ha and Haddawy 
at the partial preference structure of Xaviera at vari­
ous points during the elicitation process and estimated 
its probabilistic distance from the 10 preference struc­
tures in the case base (one of which is hers), using the 
method described in Section 3. 
At the beginning, there was no information about 
Xaviera's preferences, i.e., the partial preference struc­
ture we had was vacuous. This structure was of an 
equal distance from the structures in the case base, 
with large variances. We expected that as the sim­
ulation progressed, the partial preference structure 
would become more informative, and the set of closest 
matches in the case base would become increasingly 
smaller, eventually to a set of preference structures 
that were strategically equivalent with Xaviera's pref­
erence structure. Our experiments with various stu­
dents confirmed this expectation. 
In order to quickly narrow down the set of closest 
matches, it was crucial to ask the elicitation ques­
tions in the right order. For example, if half of the 
50 films are action films and the other half are drama 
films, and half of the 10 students prefer action films 
to drama films, then the answer to a single question 
about preferences over the attribute "genre" can give 
us preferences over 25 x 25 = 625 pairs of movies, 
which in turn can halve the size of the set of closest 
matches. 
5 
DISCUSSION 
Choosing an appropriate distance measure is only the 
first step in realizing our envisioned case-based ap­
proach ·to preference elicitation and several difficult 
technical problems remain to be solved. The first is 
how to represent the case base. Since our analyses 
suggest that computing the distance between two pref­
erence structures can be computationally complex, it 
may be desirable to reduce the number of structures 
with which we must perform comparisons. One possi­
bility is to perform hierarchical clustering on the case 
base and to store prototype representations of each 
cluster. We could then use the hierarchical organi­
zation to guide the search for a best matching case 
or could retrieve one of the prototypes. Our distance 
measure could be used for the clustering but how to 
create a prototype representation of a set of prefer­
ences is an open question. 
In the case of certainty, another possible way to speed 
up the process of identifying the closest match is to 
limit the number of outcomes and thus to reduce the 
complexity of distance computing algorithms. For ex­
ample, suppose that there are. 100 outcomes, and we 
take into consideration only the top 10 outcomes with 
respect to each partial order. In other words, we ignore 
information regarding the suboptimal outcomes in de­
termining the distance among partial preference struc­
tures. For each pair of partial orders, we then compute 
their distance based on their restrictions to the union 
of their corresponding top 10 elements, which is a set 
of at most 20 elements. This approach computes only 
an approximate of the actual distance, but can provide 
significant computational savings. 
In a recent paper, Chajewska et al. [3] discuss an ap­
proach to preference elicitation similar to ours. Given 
a data base of user utility functions, they propose clus­
tering them and describing each cluster by a prototype. 
They propose building a decision tree for associating 
a user with a prototype utility function based on some 
elicited pairwise preferences. Their approach requires 
having a data base of complete utility functions. Their 
retrieval scheme depends on asking the user questions 
and ruling out utility functions that conflict with the 
user's answers. Since no prototype is likely to exactly 
match the user's preferences, this approach has the 
problem that the utility function retrieved is sensitive 
to the order in which questions are asked. In contrast, 
our approach would retrieve the closest matching pref­
erence structure, independent of the order of questions. 
Since Chajewska and Getoor are initially focusing on 
the problem of building a working system and we are 
initially focusing on the theoretical underpinnings, we 
see their work as complementary to ours. 
The closest matching preference structure will in most 
cases not perfectly match all the preferences expressed 
by the user. In this case, we would want to modify it to 
incorporate the unrepresented preferences. For prefer­
ences that are simply lacking in the stored structure, 
this is trivial. For preferences that conflict, we would 
want to reconcile these differences by modifying the 
retrieved structure in some minimal way. Minimality 
could be defined relative to our distance measure. 
The case-based approach we are advocating was in­
spired by the work on collaborative filtering [13, 9], in 
which the filtering system predicts how interesting a 
user will find items he has not seen based on the ratings 
that other users give to items. Each user in a popu­
lation rates various alternatives, e.g. newsgroup post­
ings or movies, according to a numeric scale. The sys­
tem then correlates the ratings in order to determine 
which users' ratings are most similar to each other. 
Finally, it predicts how well users will like new arti­
cles based on ratings from similar users. The work on 
collaborative filtering is not cast in the framework of 
decision theory and no theoretical framework or justi­
fication are provided for the similarity measures used. 
The work that we present here can be viewed as an at­
tempt to provide a formal basis for some of the work 
in this area.
