Hybrid Gradient Boosting Trees and Neural
Networks for Forecasting Operating Room Data
Hugh Chen
University of Washington

Scott Lundberg
University of Washington

Su-In Lee
University of Washington

Abstract
Time series data constitutes a distinct and growing problem in machine learning. As
the corpus of time series data grows larger, deep models that simultaneously learn
features and classify with these features can be intractable or suboptimal. In this
paper, we present feature learning via long short term memory (LSTM) networks
and prediction via gradient boosting trees (XGB). Focusing on the consequential
setting of electronic health record data, we predict the occurrence of hypoxemia
ﬁve minutes into the future based on past features. We make two observations: 1)
long short term memory networks are effective at capturing long term dependencies
based on a single feature and 2) gradient boosting trees are capable of tractably
combining a large number of features including static features like height and
weight. With these observations in mind, we generate features by performing "su-
pervised" representation learning with LSTM networks. Augmenting the original
XGB model with these features gives signiﬁcantly better performance than either
individual method.
1
Background
In hospitals, data is constantly recorded – often in the form of physiological signals such as blood
oxygen, heart rate, blood pressure and more. In this paper, we address the problem of hypoxemia (low
arterial blood oxygen) within operating rooms; one of the common yet potentially serious concerns
that anesthesiologists deal with while safeguarding patients. In particular, one recent study found that
hypoxemic events occur every 29 surgery hours on average for two hospitals’ operating rooms [1].
These events can cause serious patient harm during general anesthesia and surgery and are correlated
with cardiac arrest, cardiac arryhythmias, decreased cognitive function, and more [2, 3].
In order to assist anesthesiologists, Lundberg et. al. (2017) developed a method for hypoxemia
prediction on operating room data with the aim of interpretability [4]. They compared parzen
windows, linear SVM, linear lasso, and gradient boosting trees. They found that gradient boosting
trees with pre-processed features was the most performant method for hypoxemia predictions. In their
evaluation of their machine learning technique, they found that their method made more accurate
hypoxemia predictions than ﬁve practicing anesthesiologists. Lundberg et. al. showed that gradient
boosting trees are very powerful methods for prediction (particularly for encoding interactions),
but the preprocessed time series features used – exponential moving averages/variances – can be
improved. Representation learning would take advantage of the recurrence/memory that neural
networks can encode, and pass latent representations into a gradient boosting tree to further improve
on doctor performance. In general, representation learning has already achieved great success in
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.
arXiv:1801.07384v2  [cs.LG]  24 Jan 2018

speech recognition, signal processing, object recognition, and natural language processing [5]. It is
well suited to time series biomedical data because inherent/latent structure is a reasonable assumption
in physiological data. We explore this approach and present a framework for forecasting biomedical
time series data.
2
Methods
Long short term memory networks Long short term memory networks are a sophisticated way
to explicitly retain memory [6]. In comparison to the autoregressive methods used in the previous
exploration of hypoxemia (Lundberg et. al.), recurrent neural networks like LSTM networks are
capable of capturing more complex dependencies. We train these networks in Python using Keras, an
open source neural network library, with a Tensorﬂow backend [7, 8]. We utilize 72 CPUs (Intel(R)

In terms of the design, the networks in this paper simply utilize two layers, because adding too many
layers made convergence difﬁcult for our application. We found that important steps in training LSTM
networks for operating room data are to impute missing values by the training mean, standardize
data, and to randomize sample ordering (for time series in particular) prior to training. To prevent
overﬁtting, we utilized dropouts between layers as well as recurrent dropouts for the LSTM nodes
[9]. Using a learning rate of 0.001, rmsprop for an optimizer, and a sigmoid output layer gave us the
best ﬁnal results. The LSTM models were run until their validation accuracy did not improve for
twenty rounds.
To the best of our knowledge this is one of the ﬁrst applications of RNNs within an operating room
setting, and we are unaware of any others. RNNs have been applied in other health settings: Lipton et
al., (2015) applied LSTM networks in a clinical setting, Che et al. applied GRUs for imputation in
clinical and synthetic data sets (2016) [10, 11]. Chauhan and Vig (2015) and Rajpurkar et. al. (2017)
have done work that focused on univariate applications of neural networks in health settings [12, 13].
Gradient Boosting Trees Gradient boosting trees work well in practice due to their ease of use
and ﬂexibility. Imputing, standardizing, and randomizing are all unnecessary because gradient
boosting trees are based on splits in the training data. We postulate that gradient boosting trees
are better at incorporating important static features in predictions than LSTM networks and saw
very good performance with simple methods of processing time series features (exponential moving
averages/variances). We found that a learning rate of 0.02, a max tree depth of 6, subsampling rate
of 0.5, and a logistic objective gave us good performance. All XGB models were run until their
validation accuracy was non-improving for ﬁve rounds. We train these models in Python using
xgboost, an open source library for gradient boosting trees [14].
Methodology
1. Run XGB using processed times series data (EMA/EMV) and raw static data.
2. Identify the most important features.
3. Run supervised learning with univariate LSTM networks on these features.
4. Use second to last LSTM layer to create features for XGB.
5. Retrain XGB model with additional hidden features for the ﬁnal model.
3
Experimental Results
Data 57,000 surgeries containing real-time features sampled minute by minute such as SaO2 (blood
oxygen), ETCO2 (exhaled carbon dioxide), etc. as well as static summary information such as height,
weight, ASA codes, etc. obtained under appropriate Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval. After
splitting surgeries into multiple time points, there are ≈8, 000, 000 samples with ≈120, 000 positive
examples. These labels represent a time series binary hypoxemia classiﬁcation problem where SaO2
less than 92% is considered hypoxemia.
Evaluation Metric Area under the precision-recall (PR) curve is our evaluation metric. PR curves
are widely used for binary classiﬁcation tasks to summarize the predictive accuracy of a model.
Rather than ROC curves, PR curves are better suited to classiﬁcation problems with imbalanced
labels. True positives (TP) are positive sample points that are classiﬁed as positive whereas true
negatives (TN) are negative sample points that are classiﬁed as negative. Then, false positives (FP)
2

are negative sample points that are classiﬁed as positive whereas false negatives (FN) are positive
sample points that are classiﬁed as negative. Precision is deﬁned as
tp
tp+fp and recall is
tp
tp+fn. The
PR curve is plotted with precision (y-axis) for each value of recall (x-axis). In order to summarize
this curve, it is conventional to use area under the curve (AUC) to measure prediction performance.
Performance We demonstrate that long short term memory networks outperform autoregressive
methods.
Figure 1: Univariate models trained on SaO2 only (the feature that determines hypoxemia) with
different lookbacks. All methods attempt to predict whether there will be desaturation in the next ﬁve
minutes.
Figure 1 reveals two things. First, we see that on a univariate signal, LSTM networks substantially
outperform autoregressive methods – even performant ones like gradient boosting trees. Second,
we see that LSTM networks improve in performance even after the autoregressive methods saturate
in terms of accuracy. Utilizing lookbacks of 60 rather than 30 markedly improves LSTM network
performance – suggesting that they successfully identify complex long term patterns relevant to
prediction. Moving forward, the LSTM networks use lookbacks of 60 minutes to predict desaturation.
Table 1: LSTM network Performance on Hypoxemia
Model
Test PR-AUC
Train Time
1
LSTM network (200x200) on raw (SaO2)
0.23183
≈43.00 hours
2
LSTM network (400x400) on raw (40 features)
0.23315
≈62.67 hours
PR-AUC on the test set. We also evaluate the time required to train the neural network. Here
(200x200) denotes that there were two layers each with 200 LSTM nodes. The raw (SaO2) denotes
the input to the LSTM network.
Although multivariate LSTM networks to predict hypoxemia appear promising, they take a substantial
amount of time to train. Despite having twice as many nodes, Table 1 Model 2 (a multivariate LSTM
network with 40 features) only gives a slight improvement over Table 1 Model 1 (a univariate LSTM
network with SaO2). Based on training the gradient boosting model, we suspect that static features
contain more information relevant to prediction than the multivariate LSTM networks are capable of
utilizing (Figure 2 justiﬁes the importance of static features). Additionally, the cost of training the
LSTM network is already increasing drastically with the model size. In order to successfully capture
all relationships in a complete multivariate network, the network size would need to increase to an
intractably large size. Preliminary results with a GeForce GTX 1050 GPU were approximately three
times faster, but a multivariate network would likely still be intractable.
Then, Table 2 shows that XGB utilizing only processed SaO2 (Table 2 Model 1) does not immediately
do well. Yet when XGB has access to all 40 processed features (Table 2 Model 2) PR-AUC increases
drastically – from 0.20580 to 0.22999. This result suggests that gradient boosting trees are able to
leverage the 39 remaining features to improve predictive accuracy in a way that LSTM networks alone
could not. In ﬁgure 2, SaO2 dominates the top 10 most important features for hypoxemia prediction,
but static features like weight and age are also of importance. Training models to effectively utilize
3

Figure 2: Feature attribution for Table 2 Model 2.
Table 2: XGB Performance on Hypoxemia
Model
Test PR-AUC
1
XGB on processed (SaO2 only)
0.20580
2
XGB on processed (40 features)
0.22999
3
XGB on LSTM hidden (200 features)
0.23354
4
XGB on processed (40 features) + LSTM output (1 feature)
0.24714
5
XGB on processed (40 features) + LSTM hidden (200 features)
0.24836
6
XGB on processed - no SaO2 (39 features) + LSTM output (1 feature)
0.24251
7
XGB on processed - no SaO2 (39 features) + LSTM hidden (200 features)
0.24678
PR-AUC on the test set. We don’t report the time to train the gradient boosting trees because the
training times were fairly short – with the slowest model taking approximately 4 hours to train.
Processed denotes three exponential moving averages (EMA) with α = 5.0, 1.0, and 0.1 as well
as an exponential moving variance (EMV) with α = 5.0 for all time series features. LSTM output
denotes using the probability for hypoxemia output by the ﬁnal sigmoid layer as an input to XGB.
LSTM hidden denotes using the outputs from the penultimate LSTM layer as inputs to XGB. The
LSTM output/hidden features are generating using Model 1 from Table 1.
these additional features did not appear tractable with LSTM networks (Table 1), thus motivating our
exploration of a hybrid approach.
Then, in Model 3 of Table 2 XGB utilizing LSTM latent representations gives slightly better perfor-
mance than the LSTM network alone, suggesting that gradient boosting trees are able to capture the
non-linearity in the ﬁnal layer of the LSTM network. Next, Model 4 shows that augmenting XGB
with a supervised latent representation of SaO2 from our LSTM network gives substantially better
performance than either individual model. Since gradient boosting trees work well on hidden features
alone (Model 3), we combine them in Model 5 with the processed features, which yields the most
performant model for hypoxemia prediction. Because we included the EMAs/EMV in Models 4 and
5, how much of the predictive performance is due to the EMAs/EMV and how much is due to the
hidden LSTM features is still an open question. In Models 6 and 7 the hidden features are revealed to
be much more informative than the single predictive probability, suggesting that the hidden features
not only serve as fairly powerful surrogates for the EMAs/EMV, but that they also capture additional
information that EMAs/EMV features do not. This suggests that supervised representation learning is
capable of ﬁnding sensible representations. If these representations can be learned for many tasks and
data sets, machine learning research scientists may be able to work additively on impactful questions
in health. Through representation learning, motifs in time series data can be conveyed between
research groups with access to different data sets in anonymous yet meaningful ways – protecting
patient privacy.
At a high level, this hybrid approach is very simplistic. Yet this simplicity offers two nice properties,
the ﬁrst being generalizability – our hybrid approach to machine learning can easily be applied to
any problem that would beneﬁt from more sophisticated time series processing. The second property
being accessibility – using the open source packages available, these two methodologies can easily
be combined in very performative ways for biomedical data. Accessibility ideally encourages a
4

trend towards representation learning as a means to make additive progress (collaboration rather than
competition) on biomedical prediction tasks.
