Towards a Common Implementation of Reinforcement Learning for
Multiple Robotic Tasks
Angel Mart´ınez-Tenor, Juan Antonio Fern´andez-Madrigal, Ana Cruz-Mart´ın and
Javier Gonz´alez-Jim´enez
Machine Perception and Intelligent Robotics (MAPIR). Dept. Ingenier´ıa de Sistemas y Autom´atica
Instituto de Investigaci´on Biom´edica de M´alaga, Universidad de M´alaga. Spain.
Abstract
Mobile robots are increasingly being employed for performing complex tasks in dynamic environments. Reinforce-
ment learning (RL) methods are recognized to be promising for specifying such tasks in a relatively simple manner.
However, the strong dependency between the learning method and the task to learn is a well-known problem that
restricts practical implementations of RL in robotics, often requiring major modiﬁcations of parameters and adding
other techniques for each particular task. In this paper we present a practical core implementation of RL which
enables the learning process for multiple robotic tasks with minimal per-task tuning or none. Based on value itera-
tion methods, this implementation includes a novel approach for action selection, called Q-biased softmax regression
(QBIASSR), which avoids poor performance of the learning process when the robot reaches new unexplored states.
Our approach takes advantage of the structure of the state space by attending the physical variables involved (e.g.,
distances to obstacles, X, Y , θ pose, etc.), thus experienced sets of states may favor the decision-making process of
unexplored or rarely-explored states. This improvement has a relevant role in reducing the tuning of the algorithm
for particular tasks. Experiments with real and simulated robots, performed with the software framework also in-
troduced here, show that our implementation is eﬀectively able to learn diﬀerent robotic tasks without tuning the
learning method. Results also suggest that the combination of true online SARSA(λ) (TOSL) with QBIASSR can
outperform the existing RL core algorithms in low-dimensional robotic tasks.
1
Introduction
The operation of mobile robots in real environments
requires coping with unforeseen situations that human
programmers ﬁnd diﬃcult or impossible to catalog and
therefore to code into a program. Therefore, it is highly
desirable that the robot itself modiﬁes its behavior to cope
with them. An ideal solution would consist of an archi-
tecture capable of automatically evolving the controller to
improve the performance of any task over time; the same
implementation should be employed in diﬀerent robots
and environments without considering the scenario or the
hardware involved, and without reprogramming or manu-
ally tuning the resulting controllers, i.e., such architecture
could be employed for new tasks by making minor changes
to already implemented ones, e.g., by reprogramming the
objective and the devices required to accomplish them.
We can consider two paradigmatic examples of robotics
projects that would be beneﬁted from such an ideal, found
in our research group, but common in many others: i)
The implementation of several pick and place tasks with
a complex 6DOF low-weight robotic arm, whose model is
not available but that is required to execute complicated
trajectories; in this case, top-down implementations de-
manded many hours of work, usually employed to adapt
small variations of the same task.
ii) A set of mobile
robotics platforms that must be used for autonomous
navigation, teleoperation, and collaborative control; dif-
ferences between the behavior of the mobile bases, even
among identical robots, often require the navigation pro-
grams to be tuned from one robot to another, and other
features such as the variations of the wear of the wheels
and the battery levels contribute to worsen the perfor-
mance of the tasks as well.
The work presented in this paper is a ﬁrst step towards
the ideal solution explained before. It focuses on building
a common implementation of a machine learning core ap-
proach intended for solving multiple low-dimensional tasks
found in service robotics, such as wandering, 2D mobile
navigation, 3D arm motion, etc. For this purpose, the
robots should learn by themselves the eﬀects of their ac-
tions, with minimal tuning by the engineer. A well-known
machine learning and decision-making methodology, re-
inforcement learning (RL), has been chosen as the basic
mechanism for that. RL is based on the explicit imple-
mentation, by the engineer, of a set of rewards that deﬁne
the objectives of the task to learn.
Most RL publications, including those based on low-
realistic simulated robots (see section 2), show their ad-
vantages by measuring the eventual convergence to the
optimal solution to the task at hand, or the level of per-
formance, often based on the average obtained reward,
after a relatively large number of steps, episodes, and
repetitions of the learning process. Unfortunately, direct
application of most of these methods in real scenarios
would require days or months of learning to achieve a fair
1
arXiv:1702.06329v1  [cs.AI]  21 Feb 2017

performance, even in relatively simple tasks such as 2D
navigation in small environments.
Consequently, other
techniques must be added when dealing with RL prob-
lems in robotics to make them tractable, such as those
based on a clever use of approximate representations, prior
knowledge, and models. These methods, in turn, need
to be carefully selected and hand-tuned for each speciﬁc
task to learn, even for very closely related ones. All of
this makes RL not applicable to robotics out of the box
yet (Kober, Bagnell & Peters 2013).
The present work has been motivated for this lack
of practical, task-independent RL mechanisms for real
robots, and it contributes a core method suitable for learn-
ing multiple tasks, although possibly non-optimally. This
core method intends to avoid the use of representations,
prior knowledge and models, and to be extendable with
most advanced RL techniques. We also present here a
study of the performance of our core RL solution com-
pared to combinations of basic RL algorithms, i.e., those
updating their Q-values without using approximators and
models, and also with several action selection techniques.
We have performed empirical comparisons of the learning
processes in diﬀerent robotic tasks. At this state of our
research, only the tabular case of RL with low-dimensional
state spaces (easy hand-crafted feature representations)
has been addressed, leaving generalization and function
approximators, needed for higher-dimensional tasks, for
future work.
More concretely, our approach combines the recent
true online SARSA(λ) algorithm (TOSL) (van Seijen
& Sutton 2014) with a novel action selection tech-
nique. That combination outperforms the state-of-the-art
RL methods for multiple low-dimensional robotic tasks.
In particular, our action selection technique, called Q-
BIASed Softmax Regression (QBIASSR), has a relevant
role in reducing the eﬀort of tuning the method for diﬀer-
ent tasks; it has been developed after observation of the
learning processes in a realistic robotic simulator, espe-
cially when the robots reach new states that were closely
related to already explored ones, something that occurs
in many applications. QBIASSR copes with the informa-
tion of those related states in a simple and intuitive way,
using information from previous experiences to minimize
exploration and therefore achieving good learning results
independently of the particular task. Our contribution is
completed with a new RL software framework for robotics
called RL-ROBOT, developed from scratch with the in-
tention of easing the inclusion of new tasks for robotics
researchers. It is also useful as a hands-on tool for begin-
ners.
The structure of the paper is summarized as follows:
section 2 provides a brief introduction to RL and the state
of the art of its application to robotics. Our approach is
described in section 3, that deals with both the combi-
nation of already existent techniques and the QBIASSR
algorithm. Section 4 describes the RL-ROBOT software
framework implemented for the simulated and real experi-
ments shown in section 5. Finally, results and future work
are summarized in section 6.
2
Background and related work
In this section we provide a brief summary of the core
RL algorithms related to this work and their application
to robotics.
2.1
Reinforcement learning
The autonomous learning concept in robotics dates
back to Alan Turing’s idea of having robots that learn in a
way similar to children (Turing 1950). This evolved to the
modern concept of developmental robotics (Lungarella,
Metta, Pfeifer & Sandini 2003), a today still emergent
paradigm analogue to the one of mental development in
human psychology. In autonomous learning, mechanisms
for decision-making under uncertainty are an important
and increasingly popular approach. They represent cog-
nitive processes capable of selecting a sequence of ac-
tions that are expected to lead to a speciﬁc outcome.
Markov decision processes (MDP) (Murphy 2002) are the
most exploited paradigm in this sense. They are dynamic
Bayesian networks whose nodes deﬁne system states and
whose arcs deﬁne actions along with their associated re-
wards and probability of occurrence. Formally, an MDP is
a tuple (S, A, T, R), where S is a ﬁnite set of states, A a
ﬁnite set of actions, T the state transition function, and
R the reward function, deﬁned as R : (S × A × S) →R.
An important concept in MDPs is the one of policy, a
function π : S →A that deﬁnes the action a to execute
when the agent is in state s. The term policy value or V
indicates the goodness of a policy measured through some
deﬁnition of the expected reward when it is executed.
Most RL problems use the total expected discounted re-
ward gathered after inﬁnite steps of the decision process
as the policy value, thus decreasing the importance of fu-
ture rewards as the agent moves forward in time. The
expected total reward from taking a speciﬁc action in a
given state is deﬁned then as:
Qπ(s, a) =
X
s′∈succ(s)
T(s, a, s′) · E[R(s, a, s′)]
+
X
s′∈succ(s)
γ · T(s, a, s′) · Vπ(s′)
(1)
being γ ∈(0, 1) the discount rate and succ(s) the set of
states that can be reached from state s. Then, V (s) =
maxaQ(s, a).
With those deﬁnitions, Bellman equations (Bellman
1956) can be used recursively for improving an arbitrary
initial policy until it converges to the optimal one (the
one with greatest value). A classical algorithm for ﬁnding
optimal policies through Bellman equations is value itera-
tion, which computes Qk(s, a) and Vk(s) = maxaQk(s, a)
incrementally in every step k.
RL algorithms address the problem that arises in
MDPs when no information about the transition function
T(s, a, s′) is given, but can be estimated from the real
system by making observations. In particular, Q-learning
(Watkins 1989) is one of the most practical algorithms
employed in RL; it belongs to the class of temporal dif-
ference (TD) learning methods, which combine several
2

aspects of Monte Carlo and supervised programming for
handling delayed rewards. Equation 2 represents the gen-
eral form of Q-learning, used in this work as the algorithm
of reference:
Qk(s, a) = Qk−1(s, a) + αk · δk
(2)
where αk is the learning rate ∈(0, 1), and δk the TD
error, deﬁned as:
δk = R + γ · Vk−1(s′) −Qk−1(s, a)
(3)
Algorithm 1: Q-learning
1 for every learning step k do
2
select new action a (exploration strategy)
3
execute a (wait step-time if needed)
4
observe reached state s′ and get reward R
5
update Q(s, a):
δk ←R + γ · Vk−1(s′) −Qk−1(s, a)
Qk(s, a) ←Qk−1(s, a) + αk · δk
6
Vk(s) = maxaQk(s, a)
7
s ←s′
8 end
The success of Q-learning (in pseudocode in algorithm
1), as well as of most RL methods, depends on the ac-
curate choice of the parameters α and γ, along with a
set of suitable rewards R(s, a, s′), that deﬁne the task to
learn, and an action selection strategy. The latter refers
us to the exploitation-exploration dilemma, which consists
in deciding whether the agent should exploit its current
learned policy or explore other actions at each learning
step.
A practical upgrade of Q-learning came with SARSA
(Rummery & Niranjan 1994), which updates the Q-values
for the action the agent will execute in the next learning
step instead of the optimal action learned so far. Hence
a′, the action to perform in the next step, must also be
selected before updating Q(s, a). The TD error in this
case is:
δk = R + γ · Qk−1(s′, a′) −Qk−1(s, a)
(4)
SARSA often reduces the number of steps needed for
learning a task, and it also avoids policies close to large
negative rewards, which could harm a real robot.
Another mechanism widely used for improving RL is
eligibility traces (ET) (Klopf 1972), (Kaelbling, Littman
& Moore 1996), (Sutton & Barto 1998) and (Lin 1992),
and its variant replacing traces (Singh & Sutton 1996).
Based on a time decaying memory trace, this mechanism
is able to simultaneously update many Q-values in each
step, accelerating the learning process: when an agent us-
ing ET reaches a state associated with a large reward, the
previously visited Q-values will receive a decaying fraction
of this reward, the more recent the higher the reward; this
encourages the execution of high-rewarded sequences of
actions in future decisions. On-policy RL algorithms such
as SARSA are directly compatible with ET, resulting in
the mechanistic or backward view of TD(λ) (Sutton &
Barto 1998); The ET factor λ ∈(0, 1) must be accurately
set to deﬁne the fraction of the reward to feedback. A
recent improvement to TD(λ) came with true online TD
learning (van Seijen & Sutton 2014), which addresses the
bias-variance dilemma of the former. Particularly, the true
online SARSA(λ) algorithm (TOSL) has demonstrated
having both better theoretical properties and empirically
more eﬃcient learning processes than traditional TD(λ)
algorithms (van Seijen, Mahmood, Pilarski, Machado &
Sutton 2015).
So far the algorithms mentioned are derived from the
classical value iteration, but there are other eﬀective TD-
based algorithms, such as actor-critic methods (Barto,
Sutton & Anderson 1983), R-learning (Schwartz 1993),
and those based on policy iteration.
We found them
less suitable as practical core RL methods for multiple
tasks since they explicitly bias the learning process by
adding detailed knowledge of the task. For example, pol-
icy iteration is often tuned to avoid extensive searches
in the policy space in order to guarantee a good perfor-
mance of the learning process. Other contributions that
also fall out of the scope of this work include the com-
binations of RL algorithms with other mechanisms and
function approximators that help with high-dimensional
tasks, such as those from machine learning (e.g., Monte
Carlo methods, dynamic programming, and exhaustive
search), hierarchical RL, batch RL, neural RL, or that
extend the problem, such as partially observable Markov
decision processes (POMDP), policy gradient RL, inverse
RL, bioinspired RL, etc.
(Kaelbling et al. 1996) and
(Wiering & Van Otterlo 2012). Although in many works
learning and exploiting a model of the environment have
proved to boost the learning process (Campbell, Givigi
& Schwartz 2016) and (Sutton, Szepesv´ari, Geramifard
& Bowling 2012), like in prioritized sweeping (Moore &
Atkeson 1993), model-based RL has not been included in
this work so as to focus on the study of generic model-
free algorithms, that nevertheless can be easily extended
to model-based ones.
A careful review of publications reveals the diﬃculty
of RL convergence to quasi-optimal solutions still to-
day:
the learning process often results incomplete or
falls into local minima when the algorithm parameters
are not properly tuned.
The problem worsens when
trying to solve diﬀerent tasks (Kaelbling et al. 1996),
(Sutton & Barto 1998), (Szepesv´ari 2010) and (Wiering
& Van Otterlo 2012).
An adequate approach to the
exploration-exploitation dilemma (Thrun 1992), (Wiering
1999), (Tokic & Palm 2011), (Lopes, Lang, Toussaint
& Oudeyer 2012), (Hester, Lopes & Stone 2013) and
(Pecka & Svoboda 2014) is also proved to be essential
for the performance of the learning process, especially for
practical applications.
Finally, a noticeable improvement in RL have come with
the recent works in deep reinforcement learning (DRL)
(Mnih, Kavukcuoglu, Silver, Graves, Antonoglou, Wier-
stra & Riedmiller 2013), (Lillicrap, Hunt, Pritzel, Heess,
Erez, Tassa, Silver & Wierstra 2015), (Mnih, Badia,
Mirza, Graves, Lillicrap, Harley, Silver & Kavukcuoglu
2016), (Stadie, Levine & Abbeel 2015), (Schaul, Quan,
Antonoglou & Silver 2015) and (Osband, Blundell, Pritzel
3

& Van Roy 2016), which successfully integrate the ad-
vantages of deep learning with RL, leading to eﬀective
learning processes for high-dimensional tasks. Integrating
such approaches in our core algorithm has been planned
for future work for the reasons commented already.
2.2
Reinforcement learning in robotics
Today the eﬃcacy of RL algorithms has been demon-
strated in many diﬀerent ﬁelds, such as game theory,
control engineering, statistics, or even robotics when toy
models or very low-realistic robot simulators are used
(Sutton & Barto 1998), (Kaelbling et al. 1996), (Wiering
& Van Otterlo 2012) and (Kober et al. 2013). RL re-
searchers can also resort to more advanced techniques to
deal with the limitations arising with the practical aspects
of RL, like the curse of dimensionality (Bellman 1957).
However, when RL is applied to accurate physical re-
alistic simulators or to real robots, we must face addi-
tional issues that are speciﬁc of this area, such as the
curse of real-world samples (Kober et al. 2013), which ob-
struct the execution of RL-based methods, often making
them unviable. Moreover, as RL in robotics is based on
the environment-robot interaction, these diﬃculties are
increased by the constraints posed by real-world time, of-
ten neglected in simulated scenarios where high number
of steps and episodes are possible. Despite these limi-
tations, many works have implemented RL-based meth-
ods for learning complex but particular robotic tasks,
overcoming some of these problems (Lin 1992), (Smart
& Kaelbling 2002), (Gaskett 2002), (Abbeel, Coates &
Ng 2010), (Yen & Hickey 2002), (Peters, Vijayakumar
& Schaal 2003), (Ng, Coates, Diel, Ganapathi, Schulte,
Tse, Berger & Liang 2006), (Wicaksono 2011), (Degris,
Pilarski & Sutton 2012), (Hester, Quinlan & Stone 2012),
(Navarro-Guerrero, Weber, Schroeter & Wermter 2012),
(Hester & Stone 2013), (Kober et al. 2013), (Kormushev,
Calinon & Caldwell 2013), (Vidal, Rodr´ıguez, Gonz´alez
& Regueiro 2013), (Kober 2014), (Deisenroth, Fox &
Rasmussen 2015) and (Garc´ıa & Fern´andez 2015). At the
time this work was in progress the ﬁrst studies of DRL in
robotics began to appear (Zhang, Leitner, Milford, Up-
croft & Corke 2015) and (Sigaud & Droniou 2016), ad-
dressing some high-dimensional tasks, usually with visual
perception only.
The main conclusion to be drawn from this is that the
complexity of RL in robotics requires the learning method
to be complemented through advanced representation,
prior knowledge, and models in order to make the prob-
lem tractable (Kober et al. 2013); this biases the learn-
ing process with knowledge from the task, resulting in a
task-dependent learning method. Although some studies
have searched for techniques adaptable to multiple tasks
(Kober 2014), they usually rely on closely related ones,
sometimes leading to poor performance.
3
Reducing
the
task
depen-
dency:
Overview of true on-
line
SARSA(λ)
with
Q-biased
softmax action selection
An RL problem, deﬁned as a set of states, actions, and
rewards, looks abstract and task-independent by itself;
however solving a task in a RL approach (i.e., converging
to a near-optimal value function), depends on the struc-
ture of the unknown transition matrix, that is, on how
easy is to explore all interesting states frequently enough.
Therefore, our eﬀorts to decrease the dependence on the
particular task have been focused on accelerating the es-
timation of the Q-values for relevant states-actions pair
that sometimes are diﬃcult to explore in that task.
Firstly we have carried out a set of experiments to
ﬁnd a learning method among the existing RL techniques
that has good properties when confronted with diﬀerent
tasks. The RL-ROBOT software framework, that will be
described in depth in section 4, has been used together
with the very realistic V-REP robotic simulator (Rohmer,
Singh & Freese 2013) to conduct these comparative ex-
periments. The methods shown in table 1 have been the
ones evaluated for diﬀerent robotic tasks, being the re-
sulting average reward per step used to measure the per-
formance of the learning processes for all of them. The
setups and experiments of this preliminary stage will be
described in more detail in sections 4 and 5 along with
the rest of experiments.
These tests show that true online SARSA(λ) (TOSL) is
the best algorithm, with parameters λ = 0.9, α = 0.1, and
γ = 0.9 that work well for diﬀerent tasks; the exploration
strategy with best results is softmax action selection with
a Boltzmann distribution (equation 5), with T = 1.
P(a) =
e
Q(s, a)
T
P
i e
Q(s, ai)
T
(5)
Since eligibility traces (ET) update the value function
in more states than the current one, therefore favoring the
estimation of V even when there are states that are diﬃ-
cult to explore frequently, we have enriched the method of
the ﬁrst experiments with a practical low-computational
cost version of ET. The update rule of SARSA with ET,
SARSA(λ), is (compare with equation 2):
Qk(s, a) = Qk−1(s, a) + α · δk · ek(s, a)
(6)
where ek(s, a) is the trace for Q(s, a), being increased or
set to 1 (replacing traces) whenever the state-action pair
is explored, and decreased in every unexplored step as:
ek(s, a) = γ · λ · ek−1(s, a)
(7)
For a practical implementation, instead of updating all the
Q-values at each learning step with their respective traces,
a reduced ET register (RETR) has been deﬁned that con-
tains only a subset of traces with ek(s, a) ≥threshold.
4

Table 1: RL core techniques evaluated in the preliminary tests
Core algorithms:
Q-learning, SARSA, SARSA(λ), true online SARSA(λ)
Parameters sensibility:
learning rate α, discount rate γ, ET factor λ, Boltzmann temperature T
Exploration-exploitation:
ϵ-greedy, softmax regression (Boltzmann)
We have empirically selected threshold ≥0.01, i.e, those
traces contributing less than 1% of the current state-
action pair (replacing traces case with e = 1) were dis-
carded. The number of steps n elapsed from the last visit
of a particular Q-value until its trace become negligible
can be obtained from equation 7 as:
(γ · λ)n > threshold ⇒n < log(threshold)
log(γ · λ)
(8)
Applying the values resulting from the preliminary tests to
equation 8 with threshold = 0.01 results in n < 21.85,
i.e., RETR will be formed by the most recent 21 traces
that will update Q in each learning step, besides the cur-
rent state. A comparative test between standard ET and
reduced ET with threshold = 0.01 exhibits no diﬀer-
ences in their learning performances, as shown in section
5.
By observing the behavior of the robot on the simulator
in these preliminary tests, we detected that the learning
process was highly ineﬃcient whenever the agent reached
a new state with strong resemblance to already explored
states; the robot had to learn from scratch an accurate
action for that new state, or, in other words, intensive ex-
ploration was performed instead of trying suitable actions
already learned in similar situations, resulting in an inac-
curate and disappointing behavior from the human point
of view. In order to avoid the use of task-dependent tun-
ing for addressing this issue, we have devised the next
contribution.
When designing a robotic task for a discrete state-space
RL, physical input variables involved in the learning pro-
cess are usually identiﬁed, discretized, and hand-crafted
before being mixed to generate structured states (struc-
tured states are thus states composed of a number of
parts, each one representing an input variable (Moore &
Atkeson 1993)). Fortunately, by having identiﬁed these
variables, areas of the Q matrix associated to one or
several combined set of them can be used for deciding
what to do when an unexplored or poor-explored state is
reached, i.e., we can use the information from states with
similar values of these variables. This intuition has led us
to the novel Q-biased softmax regression (QBIASSR).
In QBIASSR, when selecting an action to execute, in-
stead of applying a softmax directly to the values of Q(s)
for the current state, this softmax is performed over an-
other, virtual vector Q(s)biased, deﬁned as:
Q(s)biased = Q(s) + bias(s)
(9)
being bias(s) a vector resulting from processing the val-
ues of other states of Q that can be similar to s. This
bias is calculated at each step of the learning process us-
ing averaged information from sets of states that share
some structure with the current state s. In this way, the
probabilities of choosing each action from s will be biased
by the previous experience obtained in similar states.
Many approaches can be used to deﬁne a suitable
bias(s), ranging from the processing of all the informa-
tion of Q prioritizing states with closer features to s, to
use part of the state structure that has values similar to s;
even being assisted by a hierarchy of sets of these parts.
In our work we have deﬁned bias(s) empirically as the
averaged contribution of subsets of values of Q.
This
turns out to be computationally simple and leads to the
good results shown in section 5. Each subset results from
removing each input variable from the state space S and
averaging the Q-values for those states with equal values
for the remaining input variables. A precise deﬁnition of
QBIASSR is shown in algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2: Q-biased softmax regression (QBI-
ASSR)
1 A = {a1, a2, ...ap}
▷the set of actions
2 S = {s1, s2, ...sm}
▷the set of states
3 X = {x1, x2, ...xn}
▷the vector of input variables
4 X(s ∈S) = {x1(s), x2(s), ...xn(s)}
▷values of input
variables for the state s
5 SS(s ∈S, xi ∈X) = subset of states ss ∈S with
xj(ss) = xj(s)
∀j ∈[1, 2, ...n] ̸= i
6 SQ(s ∈S, xi ∈X) = subset of Q for SS(s, xi)
7 Agent in state s must select and action a′ given Q
8 forall xi ∈x do
9
bias(s, xi) ←avg(SQ(s, xi))
∀ss ∈SS(s, xi) ▷
resulting in a vector with same size of
Q(s) = [Q(s, a1), Q(s, a2), ...Q(s, ap)]
10 end
11 bias(s) ←1/n · Pn
i=0 bias(s, xi)
12 Q(s)biased ←Q(s) + bias(s)
13 a′ ←softmax selection(Qbiased, Temperature)
As an example, consider a simple mobile robotic agent
with four discretized input variables {X, Y , θ, d}, with
X ∈{0, 1}, Y ∈{0, 1}, θ ∈{0, 90, −90}, and d ∈
{F, T}, thus composing 24 structured states. The agent
has one output variable MOV ∈{advance, spin left,
spin right} representing the available actions.
If the
robot reaches an unexplored state s with (X, Y , θ, d) =
(1, 1, 90, T) being Q(s) = (0, 0, 0), a classical softmax
will use an uniform distribution for selecting each avail-
able action since the state is unexplored. On the con-
trary, QBIASSR will create a biased distribution, involving
those states with at least 3 values of (X, Y , θ, d) equal
5

to (1, 1, 90, T), as follows:
biasx(s) = Q(0,1,90,T) + Q(1,1,90,T)
2
biasy(s) = Q(1,0,90,T) + Q(1,1,90,T)
2
biasθ(s) = Q(1,1,0,T) + Q(1,1,90,T) + Q(1,1,−90,T)
3
biasd(s) = Q(1,1,90,T) + Q(1,1,90,F)
2
bias(s) = biasx(s) + biasy(s) + biasθ(s) + biasd(s)
4
For assessing the goodness of our approach, sev-
eral experimental comparatives between three settings,
Q-learning with softmax regression (Q+SR), true on-
line SARSA(λ) with softmax regression (TOSL+SR), and
true online SARSA(λ) with Q-biased softmax regression
(TOSL+QBIASSR), have been carried out. The exper-
iments include wandering, 2D navigation, and 3D arm
motion tasks, performed in sample-modeled simulations,
V-REP simulations, and real-robot implementations. The
setups and results will be described in sections 4 and 5.
This comparative study has proven that QBIASSR out-
performs classical softmax action selection by improving
the learning process. Neither convergence issues nor in-
compatibilities of this approach with approximation func-
tions or other advanced techniques are expected, since
the Q matrix remains updated with a correct algorithm.
The computational cost of QBIASSR will be discussed in
section 5.
Unfortunately, preliminary tests with TOSL+QBIASSR
in V-REP, although improving TOSL+SR, have also ev-
idenced a known issue: the chance of falling in cyclic
sequences of states before exploring the actions leading
to the goal, preventing the robot to eﬃciently learn the
desired task. We believe this is more evident in QBIASSR
since it reaches useful sequences of actions sooner than
less eﬃcient algorithms; cyclic sequences are also present
with softmax occasionally.
A simple ad-hoc (but task-independent) controller
called low-reward-loop evasion (LRLE) has been intro-
duced to solve this problem; it detects whether the agent
is selecting low-reward cyclic sequences of actions, and
acts by increasing the temperature of the softmax regres-
sion, thus favouring the selection of other actions out of
the detected low-rewarded sequences.
Algorithm 3 de-
scribes the implementation of LRLE.
Finally, since the probabilities resulting from the soft-
max regression are aﬀected by the magnitude of the
Q-values involved (which, in turn, come form rewards)
and our goal is to build a RL method independent on
the hand-crafted parameters for multiple tasks, we also
propose to apply the action selection over a normalized
vector. We have employed the theoretical maximum value
of Q as a reference for such normalization, being the nor-
malized vector:
Q(s)normalized = Q(s) · 100
Qmax
(10)
For any temporal diﬀerence error seen above, Qmax can
Algorithm 3: Low-reward-loop evasion (LRLE)
1 T: Boltzmann temperature
2 retr: reduced eligibility traces register (states)
3 seq: FIFO queue of recently visited states. size(seq)
= size(retr) limited to [4, states/4]
4 rew: FIFO queue of recently rewards obtained
5 Before every softmax selection:
6
Push the current state s into seq
7
if s is redundant in seq then
8
a = True
▷s was visited recently
9
Push the current state R into rew
10
if avg(rew) < 0 then
11
b = True
▷low reward sequence detected
12
u seq = seq without repeated states
13
redundancy = size(seq) / size(u seq)
14
if redundancy > 2 then
15
c = True
▷repeated behavior detected
16
if a and b and c then
17
T = T + 0.25 · redundancy
▷evasion rule
18
else
19
T = 1
be obtained from equation 2 by calculating the limit of Q
for inﬁnite steps, resulting in equation 11.
Qmax = Rmax
1 −γ
(11)
After that, the learning process will not be aﬀected by
the absolute hand-crafted rewards, which contributes to
the independence between the decision-making process
and the task to learn.
4
Implementation:
the
RL-
ROBOT software framework
For this work we have developed a RL Python-based
software framework, which is focused on performing ex-
periments with a variety of robots and environments for
diﬀerent robotic tasks, and that includes TOSL and QBI-
ASSR along with other standard RL algorithms and action
selection techniques. The framework, called RL-ROBOT,
can be used stand-alone, with the physically realistic robot
simulator V-REP, or with the Robot Operating System
(ROS) (Quigley, Conley, Gerkey, Faust, Foote, Leibs,
Wheeler & Ng 2009), providing then a link to real robots.
Related works in the RL software arena include several
successful tools such as RL-Glue (Tanner & White 2009),
RLPy (Geramifard, Dann, Klein, Dabney & How 2015),
and the robot-oriented rl-texplore-ros-pkg (Hester &
Stone 2013), widely used for testing RL algorithms and
generalization approaches in several environments. The
recent advances in deep learning and deep reinforcement
learning (DRL) with software libraries such as Tensorﬂow
(Abadi, Agarwal, Barham, Brevdo, Chen, Citro, Corrado,
Davis, Dean, Devin, Ghemawat, Goodfellow, Harp, Irv-
ing, Isard, Jia, Jozefowicz, Kaiser, Kudlur, Levenberg,
Man´e, Monga, Moore, Murray, Olah, Schuster, Shlens,
6

Steiner, Sutskever, Talwar, Tucker, Vanhoucke, Vasude-
van, Vi´egas, Vinyals, Warden, Wattenberg, Wicke, Yu
& Zheng 2015) has also accelerated the development
of DRL applications for high-dimensional tasks, mostly
based on learning from the input images of a camera,
trained by teacher, and sometimes transferred from sim-
ulations to real robots. A recent notable contribution, re-
leased while this work was in progress, was OpenAI Gym
(Brockman, Cheung, Pettersson, Schneider, Schulman,
Tang & Zaremba 2016), which oﬀers a growing suite of
environments for RL, including robotic simulations.
RL-ROBOT provides a framework for robotics re-
searchers that have minimum RL knowledge, and it is
ready to perform experiments just by setting their pa-
rameters and creating new tasks. A single module serves
to specify the parameters of the experiment, including
the type of environment, task id, speed rate, repetitions,
episodes, steps, algorithm id and its parameters, action
selection strategy id, output options (ﬁles, charts), etc.
Each task module contains the deﬁnition of input vari-
ables or features (later codiﬁed as states automatically),
output variables (actions), set of rewards, and the physi-
cal devices of the robot (laser rangeﬁnders, motors, etc.).
The deﬁnition of input variables instead of states, a dis-
tinctive feature of our framework, besides of easing the
implementation of the task, is used by the QBIASSR algo-
rithm to determine which similar states of Q will inﬂuence
the decision-making process of a speciﬁc state s.
Another feature of RL-ROBOT that sets it aside ex-
isting RL frameworks is the independence between the
abstract learner, portrayed by the artiﬁcial agent, and the
perceptual robot. We consider that any RL task must
deﬁne the information of the later; thus a change in the
robot, a device, or any input-output variable results in
a diﬀerent task. At the beginning of the learning pro-
cess, the agent automatically structures itself to connect
the learning process with the desired task, no matter the
RL algorithm, the action selection technique, the environ-
ment, or any hand-crafted deﬁnition of the task to learn.
The general architecture of RL-ROBOT is summarized in
ﬁgure 1.
RL-ROBOT
LEARNING 
 PROCESS
  LEARNING 
ALGORITHM
ACTION 
SELECTION
AGENT
I/O, 
 logs,  
charts
ROBOT
TASK
EXP
Q-BIASSR
ROS 
node
Python  
sim
V-REP 
sim
Figure 1: RL-ROBOT software architecture.
RL-ROBOT also includes two built-in generic robots:
a mobile base with a laser rangeﬁnder, and a 3DOF arm.
They can be used separately or together as a single robot
(a mobile manipulator).
Modules V-REP sim and ROS
node implement links with V-REP and ROS, only exe-
cuted if required, thus connecting our framework with
both realistic simulators and real robots.
The speciﬁc robot that has been used for our V-REP
simulations is a Pioneer 3-DX mobile base with 8 laser
pointers and a WidowX arm (ﬁgure 2).
These models
have been employed for the simulated experiments of sec-
tion 5. Since communications with the simulator are via
TCP/IP socket using the V-REP remote API, some addi-
tions were needed to avoid the inﬂuence of network delays
and to guarantee the reproducibility of the learning pro-
cesses in diﬀerent machines; they include threaded ren-
dering, streaming sensory values, and a limited speed-up
ratio of 3 (minimum: Intel Core i3-3110M processor).
Physical parameters and scenarios were also tuned to en-
sure reproducibility.
A ROS node is automatically launched only when a
real robot is required. The node is subscribed to odom
and laser scan topics, and publishes to cmd vel topic.
Modules V-REP sim and ROS node can be extended with
minimal modiﬁcations to connect RL-ROBOT with other
robots, as well as other environments implemented in
Python.
Figure 2: V-REP implemented robot: 3-DX Pioneer mo-
bile base with a WidowX arm.
Three sets of tasks are included in the framework; they
have been used for the experiments of section 5:
(i) wandering (non-episodic): the robot learns to wan-
der avoiding obstacles. The input variables are a re-
duced set of laser measures around the robot, each
distance being discretized within a range. The two
output variables are the speeds of the wheels. Posi-
tive rewards are received if the robot advances above
a distance threshold and negative ones if it collides
(where frontal collisions yield a highly negative re-
ward).
(ii) 2D mobile navigation (episodic):
the robot must
reach a static point in the scenario.
The input
variables here extend the wandering ones with the
discretized pose (X, Y , θ) of the robot.
Rewards
maintain the colliding penalties and include positive
and negative rewards according to the distance ap-
proached to or moved away from the target, respec-
tively.
(iii) 3D arm motion (episodic): a 3DOF arm must reach
an object on a table.
The input variables are the
7

(X, Y , Z) positions of the gripper and the object.
The outputs are the speeds of up to 3 joints. Posi-
tive and negative rewards are received if the gripper
approaches to or moves away from the object, re-
spectively.
The particular tasks implemented are listed in table 2,
while ﬁgure 3 shows the scenarios designed in V-REP
for the above tasks. RL-ROBOT has been released as
an open source project, Python PEP8 style, available on
Github (Mart´ınez-Tenor 2016).
Figure 3: V-REP scenarios for our experiments.
top)
2x2m and 6x6m with obstacles, for wandering. bottom-
left) 32x12cm for 3D arm motion. bottom-right) 4x4m
with obstacles for 2D mobile navigation.
5
Experiments and discussion
The experiments of this paper have been conducted in
RL-ROBOT with both simulated and real robots. Peri-
ods of time of up to 60 minutes were used in simulated
experiments so as to be reproducible on real robots. A
learning curve showing the evolution of the average re-
ward obtained over time (steps) has been found suitable
as both a stable measurement of the performance of the
learning process and a reliable indicator for comparing
diﬀerent techniques. For episodic tasks, the evolution of
the average reward of the last episode was used as indi-
cator instead of the classical evolution per episode, since
the number of episodes required were low. The results
include the average learning curve of several repetitions,
along with an analysis of variance and a post-hoc Tukey
test (Tukey 1949) for each task in order to assess the
signiﬁcance of the conclusions.
5.1
Sample-modeled
and
V-REP
simu-
lated experiments
Simulated experiments have been performed for both
sample models and realistic simulators. Sample-modeled
experiments are based on Markovian models consisting of
T(s, a, s′) and R(s, a, s′) that are built oﬄine after explor-
ing the tasks in the V-REP simulator. On the contrary,
in the realistic simulated experiments, each learning step
has been performed in one second of simulation time di-
rectly in V-REP. The total time for each learning process
ranges from 1 to 60 minutes (3600 steps) according to
the task to learn.
The preliminary tests described in section 3 have been
performed to obtain a basic algorithm valid for multiple
tasks, chosen from existing RL ones; this led to TOSL, as
it has been explained. Both sample-modeled and V-REP
simulations have been used with multiple tasks in that
stage. Figure 4 shows some results that exemplify the
selection of this algorithm and its parameter λ.
0
600
1200
1800
2400
3000
3600
STEP
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
AVERAGE REWARD
Sample model wander-1K (x100)
TOSL
SARSA(λ)
SARSA
Q
0
600
1200
1800
2400
3000
3600
STEP
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
AVERAGE REWARD
Sample model wander-1K (x100)
λ = 0. 8
λ = 0. 85
λ = 0. 9
λ = 0. 95
Figure 4: Sample-modeled preliminary tests for the tasks
wander-1K in a 6x6m scenario with obstacles. top) true
online SARSA(λ) vs SARSA(λ) vs SARSA vs Q-learning.
bottom) true online SARSA(λ) for diverse ET factor val-
ues.
Once TOSL is taken as the basic core algorithm, the
rest of our simulated experiments have been focused
on the performance of true online SARSA(λ) with Q-
biased softmax regression (TOSL+QBIASSR) in com-
parison to true online SARSA(λ) with softmax regres-
sion (TOSL+SR) and Q-learning with softmax regression
(Q+SR). Two sets of experiments have been carried out
here: oﬄine sample-modeled simulations and V-REP sim-
ulations. Three algorithms have been evaluated for the
8

Table 2: Tasks implemented for the learning experiments.
Set
Name
States
Actions
Wandering
wander-simple
4
4
wander-1K
1024
9
wander-4K
4096
25
3D arm motion
3D-arm-1K
1024
9 (2 joints)
3D-arm-4K
4096
27 (3 joints)
2D mobile navigation
2D-navigation-1K
1024
9
tasks described in section 4, with diﬀerent number of
states and actions, inside the scenarios that were shown
in ﬁgure 3.
The results of the learning processes in Markovian sam-
ple models have been averaged from 1000 repetitions for
wandering and 3D arm motion, and from 200 repetitions
for 2D mobile navigation. Figure 5 shows the learning
curves for a set of sample-modeled tests. Experiments
involving more than 2K states where not performed due
to memory limitations when creating the reward function
from datasets with variable rewards.
The results show
that TOSL+QBIASSR only outperformed TOSL+SR in
two of the four tasks. Diﬀerent sample models extracted
from V-REP were tested with unexpected diverse results.
This led us to focus on realistic V-REP simulations instead
of the sample-modeled ones.
The learning experiments with the non-Markovian re-
alistic V-REP simulations gave accurate results. Besides,
without the above memory restriction, we could extend
the study to the tasks wander-4K and 3D-arm-4K. The re-
sulting learning curves are shown in ﬁgures 6 and 7, where
it is shown how the novel TOSL+QBIASSR outperforms
TOSL+SR in ﬁve of the six tasks tested, never aﬀect-
ing negatively any learning process, nor even the simplest
wandering task, where better results than TOSL+SR were
unlikely.
However, an analysis of variance of the average reward
obtained in each repetition (table 4) and a post-hoc Tukey
test (table 5) show that the eﬀect on the learning process
of QBIASSR over SR is signiﬁcant (p<0.01) only for two
of the six tasks: wander-1K and wander-4K. This is due to
the large variance existing in non-wandering tasks (the ex-
ploration before getting the high-rewarded goal produces
a lot of uncertainty in episodic tasks). Other tasks with
smaller variance (i.e., wandering) lead to a clear improve-
ment of QBIASSR in the learning process, shown by the
diﬀerences in the average curves appreciable in ﬁgure 6.
We also can conﬁrm that most sample-modeled learning
simulations performed worse than the realistic ones, espe-
cially the basic Q-learning algorithm, showing poor learn-
ing even in the most simple task. This behavior suggests
that the Markovian models used in the ﬁrst place were
too simple to accurately represent real robotic environ-
ments, and also that non-Markovian real-world and phys-
ically realistic simulated environments oﬀer more suitable
scenarios than Markovian models for robotic tasks.
5.2
Real robot experiments
The next set of experiments have been conducted with
the Giraﬀrobot shown in ﬁgure 8, that is equipped with
two diﬀerential drive and two caster wheels, and a Hokuyo
laser rangeﬁnder. The same tasks designed for the simu-
lated mobile robot can be learned by Giraﬀjust by spec-
ifying the physical parameters of the task. RL-ROBOT
launches the ROS node in this case, giving access to the
real sensors and actuators.
Giraﬀmust learn the task wander-1K in a 1.5x1m
hexagonal scenario.
Up to 20 learning processes of 30
minutes each have been executed for TOSL+QBIASSR,
TOSL+SR, and Q+SR. The results shown in ﬁgure 9
highlight the diﬀerences between the evaluated methods.
The learning curve of TOSL+QBIASSR presents a con-
tinuous drop (collisions) during the ﬁst 3 minutes (180
steps), after which we consider the robot has learned to
perform the task. Moreover, the slope of the average re-
ward curve at the last steps suggests that in 3 minutes,
TOSL+QBIASSR learns to wander more eﬀectively than
the rest of the algorithms do after 30 minutes. Q+SR,
for instance, results in a much ﬂatter learning process.
The analysis of variance (table 6) indicates that the ef-
fect of the RL method executed by Giraﬀis signiﬁcant,
F(2, 57) = 16.36, p = 2 · 10−6. A Tukey post-hoc test
(table 7) reveals that TOSL+QBIASSR signiﬁcantly over-
comes TOSL+SR at p<0.01, resulting unexpectedly bet-
ter than the improvement of TOSL over Q-learning.
5.3
Reduced eligibility traces
A comparison test between the reduced version of eligi-
bility traces (ET) proposed in section 3 and standard ET
has also been performed in sample-modeled simulation to
verify that the reduced ET used in this work has a negli-
gible eﬀect over the learning process. This conclusion is
clearly shown in ﬁgure 10.
5.4
Computational cost
Finally, a last set of tests has been carried out to mea-
sure the computational cost of the algorithms used in this
work. For this purpose the tests were executed in sample-
modeled simulation for the wander-1K task. Diﬀerent RL
implementations were tested, executing 30 learning pro-
cess of 3600 steps each.
The measurement of choice
to assess the computational impact of the learning algo-
rithms is the average CPU time consumed in each learning
step. The results, obtained with RL-ROBOT in an Intel
9

0
50
100
150
200
250
300
STEP
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
AVERAGE REWARD
Sample model wander-simple  (x1000)
TOSL+QBIASSR
TOSL+SR
Q+SR
0
600
1200
1800
2400
3000
3600
STEP
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
AVERAGE REWARD
Sample model wander-1K (x1000)
TOSL+QBIASSR
TOSL+SR
Q+SR
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
STEP
0
2
4
6
8
10
AVERAGE REWARD
Sample model 3D-arm-1K. Episode 3 (x1000)
TOSL+QBIASSR
TOSL+SR
Q+SR
0
600
1200
1800
2400
3000
3600
STEP
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
AVERAGE REWARD
Sample model 2D-navigation-1K. Episode 10 (x200)
TOSL+QBIASSR
TOSL+SR
Q+SR
Figure
5:
Sample-modeled
simulations.
TOSL+QBIASSR
vs
TOSL+SR
vs
Q+SR
learning
four robotic tasks.
Core i5-4460 processor under Ubuntu 64 bits, are shown
in table 3. The execution times obtained for TOSL, us-
ing the reduced ET discussed in section 3, are up to 17
times faster than the standard ET implementation, with-
out aﬀecting the performance of the learning algorithm;
they even have the same order of magnitude as the refer-
ence times of Q-learning and SARSA, which we consider
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
STEP
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
AVERAGE REWARD
V-REP wander-simple (x100)
TOSL+QBIASSR
TOSL+SR
Q+SR
0
600
1200
1800
2400
3000
3600
STEP
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
AVERAGE REWARD
V-REP wander-1K (x6)
TOSL+QBIASSR
TOSL+SR
Q+SR
0
600
1200
1800
2400
3000
3600
STEP
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
AVERAGE REWARD
V-REP wander-4K (x6)
TOSL+QBIASSR
TOSL+SR
Q+SR
Figure 6:
V-REP simulations.
TOSL+QBIASSR vs
TOSL+SR vs Q+SR learning three wandering tasks.
negligible for RL applications. The computational cost
of TOSL (reduced ET) with QBIASSR action selection
also results in the same order of magnitude as the above
methods. Though QBIASSR uses extensive information
from many states, its reduced computational impact has
been achieved due to the fact that all the structure of the
sets of states biasing a particular state can be generated
just by knowing the input variables involved. This allows
an eﬃcient implementation, computing most of the QBI-
ASSR algorithm beforehand, and obtaining a delay of ≈1
second before beginning the learning process, measured in
the same conditions as before. For real-time robotic appli-
cations, even non-reduced ET could be used with minimal
impact on the learning process, since the waiting time for
reaching a new state is usually much longer than the one
needed for updating Q for all the states.
10

Table 3: Computational cost. Sample-modeled wander-1K
RL algorithm
Reduced ET
Avg CPU time per step (s)
Total CPU time (3600 steps)
(s)
Q+SR
-
0.19 · 10−3
0.70
SARSA+SR
-
0.20 · 10−3
0.72
SARSA(λ)+SR
Yes
0.31 · 10−3
1.13
TOSL+SR
Yes
0.31 · 10−3
1.13
TOSL+QBIASSR
Yes
0.45 · 10−3
1.62
TOSL+SR
No
5.32 · 10−3
19.17
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
STEP
0
2
4
6
8
10
AVERAGE REWARD
V-REP 3D-arm-1K. Episode 3 (x24)
TOSL+QBIASSR
TOSL+SR
Q+SR
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
STEP
0
2
4
6
8
10
AVERAGE REWARD
V-REP 3D-arm-4K. Episode 3 (x24)
TOSL+QBIASSR
TOSL+SR
Q+SR
0
600
1200
1800
2400
3000
3600
STEP
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
AVERAGE REWARD
V-REP 2D-navigation-1K. Episode 10 (x3)
TOSL+QBIASSR
TOSL+SR
Q+SR
Figure 7:
V-REP simulations.
TOSL+QBIASSR vs
TOSL+SR vs Q+SR learning 3D arm motion and 2D
navigation tasks.
6
Conclusions and future work
We have demonstrated in this paper that state-of-the-
art value-iteration-based RL algorithms that evolved from
classical Q-learning, such as TOSL, can be eﬀective when
applied in multiple real tasks, something still unachieved
in robotics. For that, we have found suitable common,
Figure 8: Giraﬀrobot in the wandering task scenario.
0
300
600
900
1200
1500
1800
STEP
0
1
2
3
4
AVERAGE REWARD
Giraff wander-1K (x20)
TOSL+QBIASSR
TOSL+SR
Q+SR
Figure 9: Giraﬀrobot. TOSL+QBIASSR vs TOSL+SR
vs Q+SR learning wander-1K task.
basic parameters for TOSL, and we have introduced a
novel exploration technique, QBIASSR, which improves
the classical softmax action selection. QBIASSR takes ad-
vantage of the physical input variables used by the robot,
thus the action selection can be inﬂuenced by other pre-
viously visited states with similar inputs. A complemen-
tary low-reward-loop evasion algorithm has been added
to prevent local optima sequences. The combined algo-
rithm TOSL+QBIASSR has the advantage of being both
task-independent and compatible with most advanced RL
techniques for improving learning in higher dimensional
tasks, with a negligible computational cost.
A comparative study with other RL techniques has
11

0
100
200
300
400
500
600
STEP
0
1
2
3
4
5
AVERAGE REWARD
Sample model wander-1K (x1000)
TOSL+QBIASSR
TOSL+QBIASSR (non reduced ET)
Figure 10: Reduced vs standard ET in sample-modeled
wander-1K (10 minutes).
been performed, including both non-episodic and episodic
robotic tasks. Realistic simulations and real robot exper-
iments reveal that the learning processes with the novel
TOSL+QBIASSR outperform those with TOSL+SR in
most tasks, being equivalent to TOSL+SR in the worst
case scenario. An additional result has been that Marko-
vian sample-modeled learning processes are unrealistic for
robotic tasks because of the gap of the performance de-
tected between V-REP simulations and the models ex-
tracted from them.
The RL-ROBOT software framework has also been in-
troduced in this paper. It is an open source project de-
signed to ease the implementation of new tasks for both
simulated and real robots, including V-REP and ROS
interfaces.
Just by deﬁning the physical variables and
parameters involved, each task provides structured per-
ceptual information of the environment to the abstract
agent regardless the learning method used. RL-ROBOT
contributes a novel implementation that achieves inde-
pendence between the abstract and perceptual aspects
involved in RL in robotics.
Future work includes the addition of advanced tech-
niques for boosting the learning process in robotics, e.g.,
by constructing a model (model-based RL), such as pri-
oritized sweeping, by human interaction as teaching, and
by transferring (Taylor & Stone 2009), (Barrett, Taylor &
Stone 2010) and (Bianchi, Celiberto, Santos, Matsuura &
de Mantaras 2015) from simulations to real robots. We
also believe that these techniques will contribute to de-
crease the variance of the learning processes seen here,
which sometimes have produced inconclusive results, es-
pecially in episodic tasks.
TOSL+QBIASSR can be extended for more practi-
cal high-dimensional tasks as well, instead of the low-
dimensional tasks shown here. Advanced generalization
methods for RL include a wide variety of function ap-
proximators, techniques for continuous states and action
spaces, Bayesian methods, etc. A suitable generalization
exploiting the basis of QBIASSR could be hierarchical RL
(Barto & Mahadevan 2003) and (Botvinick 2012), where
complex tasks could be formed by adding more input vari-
ables to existing tasks. However, for maintaining a strong
independence between the task and the RL method, we
contemplate the recent advances of DRL as promising
techniques to extend this work to more complex robotic
tasks.
Finally, we plan to integrate the RL-ROBOT framework
with the OpenAI gym toolkit, where TOSL+QBIASSR
and the upcoming changes can be evaluated and com-
pared for a wide variety of tasks.
Funding
This work has been supported by the Spanish Govern-
ment through the research project DPI2014-55826-R.
