UMIE: Unified Multimodal Information Extraction with Instruction Tuning
Lin Sun1*, Kai Zhang2∗, Qingyuan Li3∗, Renze Lou4
1Department of Computer Science, Hangzhou City University, China
2Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Ohio State University, USA
3College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
4Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Pennsylvania State University, USA

Abstract
Multimodal information extraction (MIE) gains significant
attention as the popularity of multimedia content increases.
However, current MIE methods often resort to using task-
specific model structures, which results in limited gener-
alizability across tasks and underutilizes shared knowledge
across MIE tasks. To address these issues, we propose UMIE,
a unified multimodal information extractor to unify three
MIE tasks as a generation problem using instruction tun-
ing, being able to effectively extract both textual and vi-
sual mentions. Extensive experiments show that our single
UMIE outperforms various state-of-the-art (SoTA) methods
across six MIE datasets on three tasks. Furthermore, in-
depth analysis demonstrates UMIE’s strong generalization
in the zero-shot setting, robustness to instruction variants,
and interpretability. Our research serves as an initial step
towards a unified MIE model and initiates the exploration
into both instruction tuning and large language models within
the MIE domain. Our code, data, and model are available at
https://github.com/ZUCC-AI/UMIE.
Introduction
Information extraction (IE), a task aiming to derive struc-
tured information from unstructured texts, plays a cru-
cial role in the domain of natural language processing.
As the popularity of multimedia content continues to in-
crease (Zhu et al. 2022), multimodal information extrac-
tion (MIE) has drawn significant attention from the research
community (Zhang et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2022; Li et al.
2022). MIE aims to deliver structured information of inter-
est from multiple media sources such as textual, visual, and
potentially more. It is considered a challenging task due to
the inherent complexity of media formats and the necessity
to bridge cross-modal gaps, where traditional text-based IE
methods often struggle.
MIE includes multimodal named entity recognition
(MNER) (Moon, Neves, and Carvalho 2018; Zhang et al.
2018; Sun et al. 2021), multimodal relation extraction
(MRE) (Zheng et al. 2021b; Wang et al. 2022a), and mul-
timodal event extraction (MEE) (Li et al. 2020, 2022). Cur-
rent methods for usually focus on a specific task mentioned
*These three authors contributed equally to this work.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
UMIE
MNER
MRE
MEE
Event
transport
Trigger
carrying
Artifact
girl, O1
Agent
O2
O3
O1
[Task Instructor] A Turkish
man helps a Syrian woman
carrying a wounded Syrian
girl to a hospital in  Kilis.
Head
woman
Relation held on
Tail
girl
 Person
man, girl,
woman
Location hosptial, Kilis
woman, O2
Figure 1: Unifying three key MIE tasks in a single multi-
modal model. Given a task instructor, UMIE performs the
corresponding task by extracting textual and visual mentions
(MNER and MEE) or inferring the relationship between two
given mentions (MRE). O1, O2, and O3 are visual objects.
above, which mostly uses a task-specific model structure
with dataset-specific tuning for the task at hand. Such a
paradigm leads to a few limitations: Firstly, it results in a
lack of generalizability as they often overfit the patterns of
a specific task or even dataset. Secondly, the need to design,
train, and maintain a separate model for each task is time-
consuming, impeding the progress of deploying practical
multimodal systems at scale. Lastly, due to their independent
training nature, these methods fail to effectively leverage the
shared knowledge across different MIE tasks, undermining
the performance of each task.
To address these challenges, in this work, we propose a
unified multimodal information extractor (UMIE), a single
model that unifies different MIE tasks as generation prob-
lems with instruction tuning (Ouyang et al. 2022; Wang et al.
2022d). As shown in Figure 1, given the same text and im-
age, UMIE can perform various MIE tasks following differ-
ent task instructors and generate corresponding structured
outputs. In particular, UMIE enables both extraction of tex-
tual span and visual objects (e.g., MEE), which is rarely con-
sidered by previous MNER and MRE works.
Specifically, we repurpose all MIE datasets and train a
arXiv:2401.03082v1  [cs.AI]  5 Jan 2024

UMIE model to perform each task in a generation fashion by
following corresponding instructions. In addition, we design
a visual encoder and a gated attention module to dynam-
ically integrate visual clues from images for robust cross-
modal feature extraction. Consequently, our singular UMIE
model outperforms various SoTA methods on each of the six
MIE datasets across all three tasks, demonstrating the effec-
tiveness of our framework. Furthermore, in-depth analysis
showcases strong generalization ability and robustness to in-
structions. Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• We present UMIE, an end-to-end model that unifies MIE
tasks into a generation problem. To the best of our knowl-
edge, this study is the first step towards unified MIE and
initiates exploration into both instruction tuning and large
language models in the MIE field.
• We propose a gate attention module to dynamically uti-
lize visual features and conduct in-depth quantitative
analysis on each MIE task, shading light into the role
of visual features and validating our gate mechanism’s
effectiveness and importance in our model.
• Extensive experiments show the effectiveness across six
datasets of three MIE tasks, generalization ability in the
zero-shot setting, and instruction robustness of our UMIE
model. We will release all MIE datasets with standard
format and models trained on them, as a benchmark and
starting point for future studies in this area of unified
multimodal information extraction.
Related Work
Multimodal Named Entity Recognition (MNER). The
MNER task aims to recognize mentions and classify them
into predefined categories from texts, using additional visual
clues provided in images. Pioneering work (Moon, Neves,
and Carvalho 2018; Lu et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2018) fo-
cuses on utilizing visual features for improved representa-
tion learning. Several works (Arshad et al. 2019; Yu et al.
2020) point out that failure recognitions are due to unre-
lated images that corrupt visual attention and mislead en-
tity recognition. As a remedy, Yu et al. (2020) propose the
Unified Multimodal Transformer (UMT), in which a visual
gate dynamically utilizes visual information for final rep-
resentation. Additionally, RIVA (Sun et al. 2020) and Rp-
BERT (Sun et al. 2021) explicitly predict the relevance of
the given image and text, using text-image relationship bi-
nary classification as an auxiliary task, thus addressing the
misleading issue introduced by irrelevant visual content.
Recently, ITA (Wang et al. 2022b) capitalizes on the ob-
jects in the given image and inputs with all text, thus leading
to a unified representation and a better attention mechanism
over texts. MNER-QG (Jia et al. 2023) frames MNER as a
machine reading comprehension task, querying the models
for entity recognitions. MoRe (Wang et al. 2022a) enhances
the MNER model with related texts obtained via information
retrieval techniques (Zhang et al. 2023; Shen et al. 2023).
Multimodal Relation Extraction (MRE). MRE (Zheng
et al. 2021b,a) aims to identify the semantic relationships be-
tween two entities based on the given text image pair. HVP-
NeT (Chen et al. 2022) fuses image information as a pre-
fix for better text representation. MoRe (Wang et al. 2022a)
retrieves related texts from the entire Wikipedia dumps for
boosting both MNER and MRE performance. Follow-up
work (Hu et al. 2023) further retrieves relevant images to the
object, text, and image for better retrieval augmentation (Xie
et al. 2023; Yue et al. 2023). However, they involve time-
consuming retrieval over a large-scale collection and require
an external knowledge base. Therefore, these two retrieval-
augmented methods cannot be directly compared with our
work, which focuses on model development itself.
Multimodal Event Extraction (MEE). MEE aims to ex-
tract events (i.e., Event Detection) and arguments for the
event (i.e., Event Argument Extraction) from multiple
modalities. VAD (Zhang et al. 2017) leverages additional
images to enhance event extraction by alleviating ambigu-
ity in the text modality. Tong et al. (2020) propose DRMM,
which recurrently uses related images from a constructed
supplementary image set for augmenting text-only event
detection, thereby improving the disambiguation of trigger
words. Li et al. (2020) propose M2E2 data and obtain weak
supervision from text-only, image-only, and image-caption
data to encode visual and textual data into a joint represen-
tation space for extraction. Follow-up work (Li et al. 2022)
pre-trains a vision and language model in an event-level
alignment with a contrastive learning fashion over a large
event-rich dataset and generalize to the M2E2 dataset. Re-
cently, Unicl (Liu, Chen, and Xu 2022) proposes a unified
contrastive learning framework to bridge the modality gaps.
Notably, MRE and MNER focus on leveraging visual in-
formation to enhance extraction from texts, rather than ex-
traction over images while MEE may extract visual objects
as arguments in an event. To the best of our knowledge, our
proposed UMIE unifies the extraction from text and image
in the multimodal IE domain for the first time.
Unified Information Extraction. Despite the diversity and
heterogeneity of information extraction (IE) tasks, sev-
eral works unify these IE tasks as text-to-structure gener-
ation (Lu et al. 2022b) or semantic matching (Lou et al.
2023). However, these models focus on text-only IE tasks.
Our UMIE model solves multimodal IE tasks universally.
Meanwhile, instruction tuning (Lou, Zhang, and Yin
2023) fine-tunes models to follow instructions, showing un-
precedented zero-shot generalization abilities when models
perform unseen tasks given new instructions (Sanh et al.
2022; Ouyang et al. 2022; Chung et al. 2022). However,
as pointed out by recent works (Zhang, Guti´errez, and Su
2023), such instruction-tuned LLMs fail to achieve decent
results in IE tasks due to the low incidence of these tasks
during instruction tuning. Additionally, Chen et al. (Chen
and Feng 2023) provide evidence that LLMs like ChatGPT 1
and GPT-4 (OpenAI 2023) yield poor results on both MNER
and MRE tasks. Given high long-term costs and potential
risks of using test data for training, such LLMs are not ideal
choices for information extraction tasks. Therefore, open-
sourced IE-specific models are more transparent, effective,
and cost-efficient in practice, which is the focus of our work.
1https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt

Unified Multimodal Information Extractor
Model Overview
As shown in Figure 2, the Unified Multimodal Informa-
tion Extractor (UMIE) consists of four major modules: 1)
Text encoder for instruction-following and text comprehen-
sion; 2) Visual encoder for visual representation; 3) Gated
attention for cross-modal representation; 4) Text decoder
for information extraction. The UMIE model utilizes a
transformer-based encoder-decoder architecture to perform
MIE and generate structured outputs in an auto-regressive
fashion. For the textual input prefixed with a task instructor,
we use a text encoder to generate text representations. For
the image, we equip it with visual understanding abilities via
our proposed visual encoder and gated attention mechanism
for dynamic visual clue integration, the details of which will
be introduced in the following sections. Finally, we employ a
text decoder to generate the structural results for MIE tasks.
In this work, we utilize FLAN-T5 (Chung et al. 2022), a
Transformer-based encoder-decoder large language model
(LLM), to initialize the structure and parameters of the en-
coder and decoder components of the UMIE model.
Specifically, the UMIE computes the hidden vector rep-
resentation he = {h1, . . . , hn} ∈Rn×dt of the input text
{w1, . . . , wn} where dt is the dimension of token embed-
dings:
he = Text-Encoder(w1, . . . , wn).
(1)
In the gated attention module, we use the textual feature
he as the query and the visual feature hv as the key and
value for the cross-attention computation. For dynamic in-
corporation of the text-aware visual representation, we de-
sign a gated signal g to control the final output of the cross-
modal representation c (refer to Section “Gated Attention
Module”):
c = Gated-Attention(he, hv).
(2)
Using the cross-modal representation c, the text decoder
generates the output structure in an autoregressive manner,
starting with the input of the start token <s> as the ini-
tial step. Such a generation process ends with the end token
</s>. At step i, the text decoder represents the state Hd
i
conditioned on the cross-modal state c and previous states
[Hd
1, . . . , Hd
i−1]. Formally,
Hd
i = Text-Decoder([c ; Hd
1, . . . , Hd
i−1]),
(3)
The text decoder consists of N-layer Transformers, addi-
tionally inserting a third sub-layer that performs multi-head
attention over the output c of the gated attention module,
a similar approach as described in (Vaswani et al. 2017).
Based on the states [Hd
1, . . . , Hd
i ], we can decode a text se-
quence via a linear projection and softmax function.
Visual Encoder
In MIE tasks, the associated image typically offers a valu-
able visual clue, directing the models towards the informa-
tion of interest. Therefore, to incorporate semantic knowl-
edge, we encode the local objects. Furthermore, we consider
bounding box
I
O1
...
O36
Text encoder
+
bbox0 bbox1
...
bbox36
FC1
 Multi-Head 
Attention
Masked
Multi-Head
Attention
 Text decoder
Add & Norm
Add & Norm
×N
Gated attention
ResNet
FC2
c
he
hv
Feed Forward
Add & Norm
Transformer ×2
ev
Visual encoder
[Task Instructor] A Turkish
man   helps a Syrian woman
carrying a   wounded Syrian
girl to a hospital in Kilis.
Figure 2: Illustration of the UMIE model. The visual en-
coder encodes an image and objects into features that are
dynamically integrated with textual features in the gated at-
tention module and the text decoder generates information
extraction results autoregressively.
the image’s global feature for additional context informa-
tion. By collecting both global and regional images, our vi-
sual encoder has the potential to extract more visual clues,
leading to improved information utilization and more accu-
rate extraction.
Specifically, we utilize semantic objects detected by off-
the-shelf visual grounding toolkit (Tan and Bansal 2019).
This toolkit provides up to 36 local region-of-interest (RoI)
features as well as bounding box (bbox) coordinates which
are x and y coordinates of the top left corner and the bottom
right corner of the object rectangle. If the number of objects
are less than 36, the remaining object features are padded
with zeros. To unify the RoI inputs, we rescale the image
and a series of visual objects to a size of 224 × 224 pixels.
Given an image I and its objects {O1, . . . , O36}, the
backbone ResNet-101 (He et al. 2016) extracts visual fea-
tures as f = {fI, fO1, . . . , fO36} ∈R37×dv. Then two fully
connected (FC) layers are applied to visual features fi and
their corresponding bounding box coordinates bboxi to ob-
tain visual embeddings ev
i :
ev
i = FC1(fi) + FC2(bboxi),
(4)
where FC1
∈Rdv×dt and FC2
∈R4×dt. The visual
embeddings ev are further processed by a 2-layer Trans-
former (Vaswani et al. 2017) to obtain the final visual fea-
tures hv ∈R37×dt:
hv = Transformer×2(ev).
(5)
The features hv can represent the integration of global image
and RoI local visual information.
Gated Attention Module
Previous work illustrated the potential irrelevance of im-
ages (Sun et al. 2021) or inductive bias (Yu et al. 2020) intro-
duced by the images. To alleviate such an issue, we design a

Task
Task Instructor
MNER
Please extract the following entity type: person, location, miscellaneous, organization.
MRE
Please extract the following relation between [head] and [tail]: part of, contain, present in, none, held on,
member of, peer, lace of residence, locate at, alternate names, neighbor, subsidiary, awarded, couple
parent, nationality, place of birth, charges, siblings, religion, race.
MEE
MED
Please extract the following event type:
arrest jail, meet, attack, transport, demonstrate, phone write, die, transfer.
MEAE
Given an [TYPE] event, please extract the corresponding argument type: [Argument Roles].
(e.g., given an arrest jail event, please extract the corresponding argument type: person, place, agent...)
Table 1: The description of task instructors. As shown in the last row of the table, the specific instruction of MEAE will be
determined by the event type detected by MED.
Cross Attention
g
M
c
he
hv
Q
K
V
Figure 3: Illustration of the gated attention module.
gate attention module shown in Figure 3 to dynamically in-
tegrate visual and textual features and the gate module con-
trols the contribution of visual features for the text decoder.
Visual-textual Cross Attention. In the attention module,
the visual features hv serve as the key and value, while the
textual representations he from the text decoder serve as the
query. In this way, the textual representations are used to
attend to the most relevant visual features, generating the
text-aware visual representation M ∈Rn×dt:
M
=
Cross-Attention(Q = he, K = hv, V = hv)
=
softmax(QKT
√dt
)V,
(6)
where Q, K, and V respectively represent query, key, and
value. The softmax function is applied on the matrix multi-
plication of Q and the transpose of K, divided by the square
root of the model dimension and used as weights multiplied
with V .
Gate Control. To control the text-aware visual feature M,
we design a gate signal g to denote the contribution of the
visual feature in the text decoding process. The gate signal
g is dynamically calculated by the following equation:
g = LeakyReLU(K Q
T ),
(7)
where K is the mean of vectors in K and Q is the mean of
vectors in Q.
Finally, the gate signal g controls the weight of text-aware
visual feature M to deliver the cross-modal information
c ∈Rn×dt by textual features he and gated residual visual
features g · M,
c
=
Gated-Attention(he, hv)
=
he + g · M.
(8)
Such cross-modal representation is used for structure gener-
ation by the text decoder in an auto-regressive fashion, thus
dynamically incorporating visual features for multimodal in-
formation extraction.
Task Instructor and Text Decoding
With multimodal understanding and generation abilities,
UMIE could perform various multimodal information ex-
traction tasks, given different instructions. Tables 1 and 2
show our task instructors and input and output formats used
for MNER, MRE, and MEE, where MEE is conducted as
multimodal event detection (MED) and multimodal event
argument extraction (MEAE) in a cascaded fashion. Such
instructors will be used as prefixes during both training and
evaluation. For MRE, UMIE simply decodes the triples, in-
cluding the relationship. For MNER, MED, and MEAE, we
introduce <spot> to separate the classes. Specifically for
event extraction tasks, we detect events by finding and iden-
tifying the triggers first by MED, based on which we further
extract corresponding arguments by MEAE.
Experiments
We train the UMIE with instruction tuning on various MIE
datasets and evaluate the model in both supervised learn-
ing and zero-shot settings. In addition, we evaluate the ro-
bustness of instruction following of UMIE and showcase the
unified extraction abilities of our model.
Experiment Setup
Datasets. We train and evaluate UMIE on several datasets
commonly used in MNER, MRE, and MEE tasks: 1)
For MNER, we consider Twitter-15 (Zhang et al. 2018),
SNAP (Lu et al. 2018), and Twitter-17 (Yu et al. 2020) (a
refined version of SNAP), all curated from the social media
platform; 2) For MRE, we adopt the MNRE dataset (Zheng
et al. 2021b) constructed from the social media domain via
crowdsourcing; 3) For MEE, following previous work (Tong

Task
Image
Text
Output
MNER
[MNER Task Instructor] Support the
Salvation Arm free kids soccer program
by donating a ball or two this summer !
UEFAcom # uclfinal
Person, kids <spot> Organization, Salvation Army
MRE
[MRE Task Instructor] Star Fox will be
an exclusive character in Starlink.
Star Fox, member of, Starlink
MEE
O1
[MED Task Instructor] Smoke rises over
the Syrian city of Kobani , following a US
led coalition airstrike, seen from outside Suruc.
Attack, airstrike
[MEAE Task Instructor] Smoke rises over
the Syrian city of Kobani , following a US
led coalition airstrike, seen from outside Suruc.
Attacker, coalition <spot> Target, O1
Table 2: The input and output format of three tasks. In particular, the MEE task is be conducted as two cascaded tasks, namely
MED and MEAE, with the same input example.
Task
Dataset
Train
Dev
Test
MNER
Twitter-15
4,000
1,000
3,257
Twitter-17
2,848
723
723
SNAP
3,971
1,432
1,459
MRE
MNRE-V1
7,824
975
1,282
MNRE-V2
12,247
923
832
MEE
M2E2
-
-
309
Table 3: The statistics of six MIE datasets.
et al. 2020), we employ datasets such as ACE2005 (Walker
et al. 2006), SWiG (Pratt et al. 2020) for training, and the
M2E2dataset for evaluation. ACE2005 features textual event
annotations with 33 event types and 36 argument types.
We utilize the M2E2 dataset from (Li et al. 2020), contain-
ing 245 documents labeled with parallel textual and visual
events. The M2E2 event schema aligns with 8 ACE types and
98 SWiG types. The event instances are divided into 1,105
text-only events, 188 image-only events, and 385 multime-
dia events. Due to partial overlap between the Twitter-17
and SNAP datasets, we have removed 319 Twitter-17 testing
samples from the SNAP training set, while retaining 2848
Twitter-17 training samples, ensuring that no data overlaps
between the training and test sets. Detailed statistics of data
are listed in Table 3. We have reformatted all datasets into a
standardized JSON format for training our UMIE model.
Training Configuration. We train our model by employing
label smoothing and AdamW, with a learning rate of 5e-5
for FLAN-T5-large and 1e-4 for FLAN-T5-base. The num-
ber of training epochs is set to 40. All experiments are con-
ducted on 8 NVIDIA A100 GPUs, each possessing a mem-
ory capacity of 40GB. Due to GPU memory limitations, we
use different batch sizes: 8 for FLAN-T5-large and 16 for
FLAN-T5-base. During the training process, we restrict the
output of the text input to a maximum length of 256 and the
generated length to 128. We add the task instructor as the
prefix in the default setup for FLAN-T5.
Evaluation Metrics. Among these four MIE tasks (MNER,
MRE, MED, and MEAE), we conduct comprehensive com-
parisons between our UMIE and state-of-the-art multimodal
approaches in each task. We use the reported performances
from the respective papers for comparison. In terms of the
evaluation metrics, we follow the F1 metric commonly used
in each task as described in the respective papers.
Main Results
Table 4 shows the comparison in detail. Our UMIE achieves
on-par or significantly better performances compared to the
previous baselines.. In particular, the UMIE-XL achieves the
SoTA performance on all six datasets, when compared to
the best model in each dataset. UMIE marginally outper-
forms previous SoTA methods on both MRE datasets, with
more than a 10% absolute F1 advantage on MNRE-V2. This
performance superiority strongly indicates the effectiveness
and generality of UMIE in handling various multimodal in-
formation extraction tasks, also demonstrating the success
of our proposed visual encoder, gated attention module, and
training strategies. More importantly, such a unified single
checkpoint with capable performance across the board can
serve as a reliable starting point for their various MIE tasks.
Therefore, MIE practitioners do not need to train and main-
tain separate models for each specific scenario or dataset.
The M2E2 dataset has only a test set available while
UMIE can generalize well on this M2E2, outperforming pre-
vious SoTA results by a large margin. This demonstrates the
strong generalization capability of UMIE and the effective-
ness of multi-task training. Further in-depth generalization
evaluation on MNER and MRE tasks will be discussed in
the following experiment.
In addition, the UMIE can achieve even better results by
using more powerful backbone models. For instance, transi-
tioning from Base to Large, and then to XLarge size in the
FLAN-T5 model family, consistently improves the perfor-
mance. This indicates the effectiveness and versatility of our
model design and training strategies.

Method
MNER
MRE
MEE
Twitter-15
Twitter-17
SNAP
MNRE-V1
MNRE-V2
M2E2 MED
M2E2 MEAE
UMT (Yu et al. 2020)
73.4
73.4
-
-
65.2
-
-
UMGF (Zhang et al. 2021)
74.9
85.5
-
-
-
-
-
MEGA (Zheng et al. 2021a)
72.4
84.4
66.4
-
-
-
-
RpBERT (Sun et al. 2021)
74.4
-
85.7
-
-
-
-
R-GCN (Zhao et al. 2022)
75.0
87.1
-
-
-
-
-
HVPNeT (Chen et al. 2022)
75.3
86.8
-
81.8
-
-
-
ITA (Wang et al. 2022b)
78.0
89.8
90.2
-
66.9
-
-
MoRe (Wang et al. 2022a)
77.3
88.7
89.3
-
65.8
-
-
MNER-QG (Jia et al. 2023)
75.0
87.3
-
-
-
-
-
HamLearning (Liu et al. 2023a)
76.5
87.1
-
-
-
-
-
EviFusion (Liu et al. 2023b)
75.5
87.4
-
-
-
-
-
BGA-MNER (Chen et al. 2023)
76.3
87.7
-
-
-
-
-
WASE (Li et al. 2020)
-
-
-
-
-
50.8
19.2
Unicl (Liu, Chen, and Xu 2022)
-
-
-
-
-
57.6
23.4
UMIE-Base (Ours)
76.1
88.1
87.7
84.3
74.8
60.5
22.5
UMIE-Large (Ours)
77.2
90.7
90.5
85.0
75.5
61.0
23.6
UMIE-XLarge (Ours)
78.2
91.4
91.0
86.4
76.2
62.1
24.5
Table 4: Performance comparison on three multimedia information extraction tasks in F1 score (%). The best performance is
marked on bold and the second best result is marked underline.
Method
Twitter-17
MNRE-V2
UMT (Yu et al. 2020)
60.9
-
UMGF (Zhang et al. 2021)
60.9
-
FMIT (Lu et al. 2022a)
64.4
-
CAT-MNER (Wang et al. 2022c)
64.5
-
BGA-MNER (Chen et al. 2023)
64.9
-
ChatGPT
57.5
35.2
GPT-4 (OpenAI 2023)
66.6
42.1
UMIE-Base (Ours)
66.8
67.3
UMIE-Large (Ours)
68.5
68.8
UMIE-XLarge (Ours)
69.9
69.6
Table 5: Performance comparison on zero-shot setting (%).
We report the results of each paper and adopt the results of
ChatGPT and GPT-4 from Chen and Feng (2023).
Zero-shot Generalization
We evaluate the generalization ability of our UMIE models
to unseen MIE tasks in the zero-shot setting. Specifically,
we exclude the corresponding training set (e.g., Twitter-17
or MNRE-V2) and train a checkpoint with the rest of the
training data. The baselines are trained with the same rule of
the training set exclusion. Therefore, these models are evalu-
ated purely on their ability to generalize from related tasks to
unseen MNER (Twitter-17) and MRE (MNRE-V2) datasets.
Table 5 reports final results and we could observe that our
UMIE substantially outperforms other zero-shot baselines
and such advantages continually enlarge as model size in-
creases. In particular, UMIE outperforms LLMs including
ChatGPT and even GPT-4 in both MNER and MRE tasks,
strongly indicating the effectiveness of our model. Consid-
ering that the generalization is also verified in MEE, these
experiments indicate the ability of UMIE to adapt and gen-
eralize to new tasks effectively, even without direct train-
MNER
Task Instructor
I0
Given the entity types: person, location,
miscellaneous, organization. Please extract
the specified entity type.
I1
Identity the following entity type from the
given sentence: person, location,
miscellaneous, organization.
I2
Please extract entity type in the sentence.
Option: person, location, miscellaneous,
organization.
Table 6: Three variants of MNER instructor.
ing on corresponding task data. The high performance of
UMIE in zero-shot setting can be attributed to instruction-
following ability and multi-task learning on multiple MIE
tasks which allow our model to transfer knowledge from one
task to another. This proves that our model is not only capa-
ble of learning from different sources of multimodal data but
also successfully applying learned knowledge to unseen task
data, underscoring its flexibility and versatility.
Robustness to Instruction-Following
An ideal model with instruction-following capability would
understand and execute instructions correctly, regardless of
their phrasing. In such context, users can get decent results
without carefully crafting the instructions, which requires
time-consuming and tricky prompt engineering. Therefore,
to evaluate the robustness of the instruction-following abil-
ity of UMIE models, as shown in Table 6, we provide UMIE
models with three kinds of task instructors for the MNER
task. The results in Table 7 demonstrate that UMIE models
have decent robustness to various instructions, maintaining

Method
Twitter-15
Twitter-17
SNAP
I0
UMIE-Base
75.8
88.0
87.8
UMIE-Large
76.8
90.7
90.1
UMIE-XLarge
78.0
92.1
91.7
I1
UMIE-Base
75.9
88.1
87.6
UMIE-Large
77.2
90.4
90.0
UMIE-XLarge
77.9
91.0
90.8
I2
UMIE-Base
76.0
88.2
87.5
UMIE-Large
77.0
90.5
90.4
UMIE-XLarge
78.2
91.2
91.0
Table 7: Performance of UMIE with three MNER instructors
in F1 score (%).
D
0
2
4
6
8
10
20
g
70
75
80
85
90
Avg. F1 of MNER and MRE
MNER
MRE
MEE
25
30
35
40
45
Avg. F1 of MEE 
1e-2
(a)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10
g
1e
2
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
MNER
MRE
MEE
(b)
Figure 4: (a) Performances of UMIE-Base averaged over
three MIE tasks w.r.t fixed gate value g where D denotes the
dynamic gate value of the UMIE; (b) g value distribution of
our dynamic gate module in three MIE tasks of UMIE-Base.
consistently high performances with all model sizes.
Gate Control Ablation
To disentangle the effects of the gated fusion mechanism and
visual information in our UMIE model, we conduct an abla-
tion study. Concretely, we fix gate value g in Eq. (7) for using
visual information and observe the impact on our model’s
performance in Figure 4. Based on Figure 4(b), it is evident
that in the UMIE model, the effective range of the gate value
is limited to 0-0.1. When the fixed gate value exceeds 0.1, a
significant drop in performance is observed across all MIE
tasks. Therefore, our primary focus is to present and analyze
the performance specifically within the range of g ∈[0, 0.1].
In comparison to our dynamic gate value (D), any fixed
gate value results in a decline in performance, particularly
in MRE and MEE tasks. Specifically, when compared to
g = 0, representing only text without visual information, the
dynamic gate value shows an average improvement of 0.1%
F1 score in MNER, 2.3% in MRE, and 3.3% in MEE. This
indicates that MRE and MEE are more heavily influenced
by visual features, whereas MNER is hardly sensitive to vi-
sual aids. This observation can be attributed to the fact that
the MRE task involves inferring relationships between enti-
ties based on visual information, and the MEE task utilizes
visual mentions as arguments, both of which require a high
level of understanding of images. Further evidence support-
ing this can be seen in the distribution of the g values shown
1:0.6
1:0.8
1:1
1:2
1:3
Data Twitter: Data News
60
70
80
90
100
Avg. F1 of MNER and MRE
MNER
MRE
MEE
10
20
30
40
50
Avg. F1 of MEE 
Figure 5: Averaged performance of three MIE tasks w.r.t
training sampling ratios of Twitter and News corpora.
in Figure 4(b). Specifically, the peak values of the histogram
for MEE (≈6.3e-2) and MRE (≈8e-2) are higher compared
to that of MNER (≈5.5e-2), implying a stronger emphasis
on visual features in the former two tasks.
Figure 4(b) demonstrates the effectiveness of our gate
module in assigning appropriate weights to each task. The
peak values of the histogram for MRE (≈6.3e-2) and MEE
(≈8e-2) coincide with the highest performances observed in
the fixed gate value experiments, represented by the yellow
dotted line for MEE and the green dotted line for MRE in
Figure 4(a). By dynamically adjusting the weights for indi-
vidual input instances based on their specific characteristics,
our model achieves optimal results. This finding serves as
strong evidence for the effectiveness and necessity of our
dynamic gated fusion mechanism.
Training Materials
We also delve deep into the effects of training corpus,
namely Twitter including Twitter-15, Twitter-17, SNAP,
MNRE-V1, and MNRE-V2, and News including ACE2005
and M2E2, on the performance of the UMIE model. In Fig-
ure 5, using UMIE-Base as an example, we observe that the
Twitter corpus primarily contributes to MNER and MRE
tasks, while the News corpus helps UMIE adapt to MEE.
Importantly, increasing training examples from the News
domain does not negatively affect the tasks from the Twit-
ter domain. This indicates that UMIE series models exhibit
strong compatibility when trained on cross-domain corpora
and have the potential to benefit even more from larger-scale
training materials.
Conclusion
This work proposes a unified framework for all MIE tasks
with instruction tuning and multi-task learning based on
encoder-decoder LLMs. The gated attention module can ef-
fectively yield cross-modal information for decoding the
MIE results. Extensive experiments over three MIE tasks
and six datasets show that our single UMIE model outper-
forms various prior task-specific SoTA methods across the
board by a large margin, i.e., on average + 0.9% for MNER,
+ 7.0% for MRE, and + 2.8% for MEE. Our framework has
strong generalization ability and robustness to instruction.
These desired properties make UMIE a foundation model in
the MIE domain, demonstrating its broad applicability and
promising potential for future work.
