Learning Intuitive Physics with Multimodal Generative Models
Sahand Rezaei-Shoshtari,1,2 Francois R. Hogan,1 Michael Jenkin,1,3
David Meger,1,2 Gregory Dudek1,2
1 Samsung AI Center Montreal, 2 McGill University, 3 York University

Abstract
Predicting the future interaction of objects when they come
into contact with their environment is key for autonomous
agents to take intelligent and anticipatory actions. This paper
presents a perception framework that fuses visual and tactile
feedback to make predictions about the expected motion of
objects in dynamic scenes. Visual information captures object
properties such as 3D shape and location, while tactile infor-
mation provides critical cues about interaction forces and re-
sulting object motion when it makes contact with the environ-
ment. Utilizing a novel See-Through-your-Skin (STS) sensor
that provides high resolution multimodal sensing of contact
surfaces, our system captures both the visual appearance and
the tactile properties of objects. We interpret the dual stream
signals from the sensor using a Multimodal Variational Au-
toencoder (MVAE), allowing us to capture both modalities of
contacting objects and to develop a mapping from visual to
tactile interaction and vice-versa. Additionally, the perceptual
system can be used to infer the outcome of future physical
interactions, which we validate through simulated and real-
world experiments in which the resting state of an object is
predicted from given initial conditions.
Introduction
Recently, several authors have pointed out the synergies be-
tween the senses of touch and vision: one enables direct
measurement of 3D surface and inertial properties, while
the other provides a holistic view of the projected appear-
ance. Methods such as Li et al. (2019) have trained joint
perceptual components, allowing better inference of physi-
cal properties from images, for example. This paper extends
this reasoning into dynamic prediction: how can we predict
the future motion of an object from visual and tactile mea-
surements of its initial state? If a previously unseen object
is dropped into a human’s hand, we are able to infer the ob-
ject’s category and guess at some of its physical properties,
but the most immediate inference is whether it will come
to rest safely in our palm, or if we need to adjust our grasp
on the object to maintain contact. Vision allows rapid in-
dexing to capture overall object properties, while the tactile
signal at the point of contact ﬁlls in a crucial gap, allow-
ing direct physical reasoning about balance, contact forces
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Figure 1: Predicting the outcome of physical interactions.
Given an external perturbation on a bottle, how can we pre-
dict if the bottle will topple or translate? This paper reasons
across visual and tactile modalities to infer the motion of
objects in dynamic scenes.
and slippage. This paper shows that the combination of these
signals is ideal to predict the object motion that will result
in dynamic scenarios. Namely, we predict the ﬁnal stable
outcome of passive physical dynamics on objects based on
sensing their initial state with touch and vision.
Previous research has shown that it is challenging to pre-
dict the trajectory of objects in motion, due to the unknown
frictional and geometric properties and indeterminate pres-
sure distributions at the interacting surface (Fazeli et al.
2020). To alleviate these difﬁculties, we focus on learning a
predictor trained to capture the most informative and stable
elements of a motion trajectory. This is in part inspired by re-
cent ﬁndings in Time-Agnostic Prediction (Jayaraman et al.
2018), where the authors show that the prediction accuracy
and reliability of predictive models can be vastly improved
by focusing on outcomes at key events in the future. Fur-
thermore, this approach mitigates the error drift from which
visual prediction typically suffer; where uncertainties and
errors propagate forward in time to produce blurry and im-
precise predictions. For example, in Fig. 1, when predicting
the outcome of an applied push on a bottle, an agent should
reason about the most important consequence of this action:
will the bottle topple over or will it translate forward? To
study this problem, we present a novel artiﬁcial perception
arXiv:2101.04454v2  [cs.LG]  19 Jan 2021

Figure 2: The visuotactile multimodal output of the See-
Through-your-Skin (STS) sensor. Using controlled internal
illumination, the surface of the sensor can be made to be
transparent, as shown in the top left, allowing the camera
to view the outside world. In the lower left ﬁgure, the sensor
provides a tactile signature by maintaining the interior of the
sensor bright relative to the outside.
system, composed of both hardware and software contribu-
tions, that allows measurement and prediction of the ﬁnal
resting conﬁguration of objects falling on a surface. We pro-
totype a novel sensor able to simultaneously capture visual
images and provides tactile measurements. The data from
this new See-Through-your-Skin (STS) sensor is interpreted
by a multimodal perception system inspired by the multi-
modal variational autoencoder (MVAE) (Wu and Goodman
2018). The main contributions of this paper are:
Generative Multimodal Perception that integrates vi-
sual and tactile feedback within a uniﬁed framework.
The system, built on Multimodal Variational Autoencoders
(MVAE), exploits visual and/or tactile feedback when avail-
able, and learns a shared latent representation that encodes
information about object pose, shape, and force to make pre-
dictions about object dynamics. To the best of our knowl-
edge, this is the ﬁrst study that learns multimodal dynamics
models using collocated visual and tactile perception.
Resting State Predictions that predicts the resting state
of an object during physical interactions. We show that this
approach is able to learn generalizable dynamics model ca-
pable of learning physical scenarios without explicit consid-
eration of a full physical model.
Visuotactile Dataset of object motions in dynamic
scenes. We consider three scenarios: objects freefalling on
a ﬂat surface, objects sliding down an inclined plane, and
objects perturbed from their resting pose. Our code is made
publicly available 1.
Related Work
Optical Tactile Sensors
utilize visual information to en-
code touch-based interactions (Shimonomura 2019; Abad
and Ranasinghe 2020). Using a combination of a camera
and a light source to capture distortions in the contact sur-
face introduced by tactile interactions, optical sensors such
1https://github.com/SAIC-MONTREAL/multimodal-dynamics
as GelForce (Vlack et al. 2005), Gelsight (Johnson and
Adelson 2009), Omnitact (Padmanabha et al. 2020), DIGIT
(Lambeta et al. 2020), GelSlim (Donlon et al. 2018), and
Soft-Bubble (Kuppuswamy et al. 2020) render a high reso-
lution image of the contact geometry. These optical tactile
sensors make use of an opaque membrane that obscures the
view of the object at the critical moment prior to contact.
This research builds on recent developments to optical sen-
sors enabling them to simultaneously render both tactile and
visual feedback from a same point of reference, such as the
Semi-transparent Tactile Sensor (Hogan et al. 2020) and Fin-
gerVision (Yamaguchi and Atkeson 2017).
Multimodal Learning of Vision and Touch
have been
shown to produce rich perceptual systems that exploit the in-
dividual strengths of each modality. Multimodal approaches
have been proposed for 3D shape reconstruction (Allen
1984; Bierbaum, Gubarev, and Dillmann 2008; Ottenhaus
et al. 2016; Yi et al. 2016; Driess, Englert, and Toussaint
2017; Luo et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2018; Luo et al. 2018;
Smith et al. 2020), pose estimation (Izatt et al. 2017), robotic
manipulation (Li et al. 2014; Calandra et al. 2017, 2018;
Lee et al. 2019; Watkins-Valls, Varley, and Allen 2019),
and dynamics modeling (Tremblay et al. 2020). The con-
nections between both modalities have been investigated in
(Li et al. 2019; Lee, Bollegala, and Luo 2019) using GANs
and concatenation of embedding vectors from different sens-
ing modes (Yuan et al. 2017; Lee et al. 2019). The percep-
tual system proposed in this research maps vision and touch
to a shared latent space in an end-to-end framework, result-
ing in a robust predictive model capable of handling missing
modalities. We focus on learning dynamic models involving
objects interacting with their environment rather than explic-
itly studying the connection between the two modes.
Temporal Abstraction
in planning and prediction can
mitigate the challenges in long-horizon tasks (Sutton, Pre-
cup, and Singh 1999) by temporally breaking down the tra-
jectories into shorter segments. This can be achieved through
the discovery of prediction bottlenecks, shown to be effec-
tive at generating intermediate sub-goals (McGovern and
Barto 2001; Bacon, Harb, and Precup 2017) used by agents
in a hierarchical reinforcement learning paradigm (Nair and
Finn 2019; Nair, Savarese, and Finn 2020; Pertsch et al.
2020). Recent work on Time-Agnostic Prediction has shown
that the notion of predictability can be exploited to identify
bottlenecks (Jayaraman et al. 2018; Neitz et al. 2018), by
skipping frames with high prediction uncertainty and focus-
ing on frames that are more stable and easier to predict. This
paper draws inspiration from this work by deﬁning the state
bottlenecks as stable object conﬁgurations during dynamic
interactions and show that this assumption allows to learn
more accurate and robust dynamics models.
Approach
This section outlines our approach for learning intuitive
physical models that reason across visual and tactile sens-
ing. Our long term objectives are twofold. First, we aim to
understand how to develop reliable sensory perceptual mod-
els that integrate the senses of touch and sight to make infer-

ences about the physical world. Second, we seek to exploit
these models to enable autonomous agents to interact with
the physical world. This paper focuses on the former, by
investigating the core capability of a visuotactile sensor to
make predictions about the evolution of dynamic scenarios.
While dynamic prediction is most often formulated as
a high resolution temporal problem, we focus on predict-
ing the ﬁnal outcome of an object’s motion in a dynamic
scene, rather than predicting the ﬁne-grained object trajec-
tory through space. With an understanding that the main
purpose of predictive models is to allow autonomous agents
to take appropriate actions by reasoning through the con-
sequences of those actions on the world, we believe that
in many scenarios, reasoning about targeted future events
is sufﬁcient to make informed decisions. Importantly, we
examine the relevant tactile information to make such pre-
dictions. Whereas motion prediction is most commonly ap-
proached as a purely visual product, we highlight the im-
portance of reasoning through physical phenomena such as
interaction forces, slippage, contact geometry, etc., to make
informed decisions about the object state.
Visuotactile Sensing
This section describes a novel visuotactile sensor, named
the See-Through-your-Skin (STS) sensor, that renders dual
stream high resolution images of the contact geometry and
the external world, as shown in Fig. 2. The key features are:
Multimodal Perception. By regulating the internal light-
ing conditions of the STS sensor, the transparency of the
reﬂective paint coating of the sensor can be controlled, al-
lowing the sensor to provide both visual and tactile feedback
about the contacting object.
High-Resolution Sensing. Both visual and tactile signals
are given as a high resolution image of 1640 × 1232. We
use the Variable Focus Camera Module for Raspberry Pi
by Odeseven, which provides a 160◦ﬁeld of view. This re-
sults in two sensing signals that have the same point of view,
frame of reference, and resolution.
Sensor design
Inspired by recent developments in the GelSight technology
(Yuan, Dong, and Adelson 2017), the STS visuotactile sen-
sor is composed of a compliant membrane, internal illumina-
tion sources, a reﬂective paint layer, and a camera. When an
object is pressed against the sensor, a camera located within
the sensor captures the view through the “skin” as well as
the deformation of the compliant membrane, and produces
an image that encodes tactile information, such as contact
geometry, interactions forces, and stick/slip behavior.
While optical tactile sensors typically make use of an
opaque and reﬂective paint coating, we developed a mem-
brane with a controllable transparency, allowing the sen-
sor to provide tactile information about physical interactions
and visual information about the world external to the sen-
sor. This ability to capture a visual perspective of the region
beyond the contact surface enables the sensor to visualize
color and the appearance of the objects as they collide with
the sensor. We control the duty cycle of tactile versus visual
measurements of the sensor by changing the internal light-
ing condition of the STS sensor, which sets the transparency
of the reﬂective paint coating of the sensor. More details on
the design can be found in Hogan et al. (2020).
Simulator
We developed a visuotactile simulator for the STS sensor
within the PyBullet environment that reconstructs high reso-
lution tactile signatures from the contact force and geometry.
We exploit the simulator to quickly generate large visuotac-
tile datasets of object interactions in dynamic scenes to val-
idate the performance of perception models. The simulator
maps the geometric information of the colliding objects via
the shading equation (Yuan, Dong, and Adelson 2017):
I(x, y) = R( ∂f
∂x , ∂f
∂y ),
(1)
where I(x, y) is the image intensity, z = f(x, y) is the
height map of the sensor surface, and R is the reﬂectance
function modeling the environment lighting and surface re-
ﬂectance (Yuan, Dong, and Adelson 2017).
Following Gomes, Wilson, and Luo (2019), we imple-
ment the reﬂectance function R using Phong’s reﬂection
model, which breaks down the lighting into three main com-
ponents of ambient, diffuse, and specular for each channel:
I(x, y) = kaia +
X
m∈lights
kd(ˆLm · ˆ
N)im,d +ks( ˆRm · ˆV )αim,s, (2)
where ˆLm is the direction vector from the surface point to
the light source m, ˆN is the surface normal, ˆRm is the reﬂec-
tion vector computed by ˆRm = 2(ˆLm· ˆN) ˆN −ˆLm, and ˆV is
the direction vector pointing towards the camera. Additional
information is provided in the supplemental material.
Multimodal Perception
We present a generative multimodal perceptual system that
integrates visual, tactile and 3D pose (when available) feed-
back within a uniﬁed framework. We make use of Multi-
modal Variational Autoencoders (MVAE) (Wu and Good-
man 2018) to learn a shared latent representation that en-
codes all modalities. We further show that this embedding
space can encode key information about objects such as
shape, color, and interaction forces, necessary to make in-
ferences about intuitive physics.
The predicted outcome of a dynamic interaction can be
formulated as a self-supervision problem, where the target
visual and tactile images are generated given observed con-
text frames. Our objective is to learn a generator that maps
the current available observations to the predicted conﬁgu-
ration of the resting state. We show that the MVAE architec-
ture can be trained to predict the most stable and informative
elements of a multimodal motion trajectory.
Variational Autoencoders
Generative latent variable models learn the joint distribu-
tion of the data and the unobservable representations in the
form of pθ(x, z) = pθ(z)pθ(x|z), where pθ(z) and pθ(x|z)

Figure 3: Multimodal dynamics modelling. A generative
perceptual system that integrates visual, tactile and 3D pose
feedback within a uniﬁed Multimodal Variational Autoen-
coder framework. The network gets the current object con-
ﬁguration and predicts its resting conﬁguration.
denote the prior and the conditional distributions, respec-
tively. The objective is to maximize the marginal likelihood
given by pθ(x) =
R
pθ(z)pθ(x|z)dz. Since the integra-
tion is in general intractable, variational autoencoders (VAE)
(Kingma and Welling 2013) optimize a surrogate cost, the
evidence lower bound (ELBO), by approximating the poste-
rior pθ(x|z) with an inference network qφ(z|x). The ELBO
loss is then given by:
ELBO(x) ≜Eqθ(z|x)

λlog pθ(x|z)

−βKL
 qφ(z|x)||pθ(z)

,
(3)
where the ﬁrst term denotes the reconstruction loss measur-
ing the expectation of the likelihood of the reconstructed
data given the latent variables and the second term is the
Kullback-Leibler divergence between the approximate and
true posterior and acts as a regularization term. In order to
regularize the terms in the ELBO loss, β (Higgins et al.
2017) and λ are used as weights.
Multimodal Variational Autoencoders
The VAE uses an inference network to map the observa-
tions to a latent space, followed by a decoder to map the
latent variables back to the observation space. While this ap-
proach is practical with a constant observation space, it be-
comes challenging when using multiple modalities, where
the dimensions of the observation space vary with the avail-
ability of the modalities. For example, tactile information
only becomes available when contact is made with the sen-
sor. For such multimodal problems that present variabil-
ity in the availability of data, we would require training
an inference network q(z|X) for each subset of modalities
X ⊆{x1, x2, . . . , xN}, resulting in a total of 2N combina-
tions. To deal with this combinatorial explosion of modali-
ties, Wu and Goodman (2018) propose the notion of Product
of Experts (PoE) to efﬁciently learn the approximate joint
posterior of different modalities as the product of individual
posteriors of each modality. This method has the advantage
of training only N inference networks, one for each modal-
ity, allowing for better scaling.
Multimodal generative modeling learns the joint distribu-
tion of all modalities as:
pθ(x1, . . . , xN, z) = p(z)pθ(x1|z) . . . pθ(xN|z),
(4)
where xi denotes the observation associated with mode i, N
is the total number of available modes, and z is the shared
latent space. Assuming conditional independence between
modalities, we can rewrite the joint posterior as:
p(z|x1, . . . , xN) = p(x1, . . . , xN|z)p(z)
p(x1, . . . , xN)
=
p(z)
p(x1, . . . , xN)
N
Y
i=1
p(xi|z)
=
p(z)
p(x1, . . . , xN)
N
Y
i=1
p(z|xi)p(xi)
p(z)
∝
QN
i=1 p(z|xi)
QN−1
i=1 p(z)
.
(5)
By approximating p(z|xi) in Equation (5) with q(z|xi) ≡
eq(z|xi)p(z), where eq(z|xi) is the inference network of
modality i, we obtain:
p(z|x1, . . . , xN) ∝p(z)
N
Y
i=1
eq(z|xi),
(6)
that is recognized as the Product of Expert (PoE). In the case
of variational autoencoders where p(z) and eq(z|xi) are mul-
tivariate Gaussians, the PoE can be computed analytically as
the product of two Gaussians (Cao and Fleet 2014).
An important advantage of the MVAE is that unlike other
multimodal generative models, it can be efﬁciently scaled up
to several modalities, as it requires training only N inference
models rather than the 2N multimodal inference networks.
Additionally, the notion of PoE allows for continuous infer-
ence in the case of discontinuous and unavailable modalities.
Learning Intuitive Physics with MVAEs
We use the MVAE architecture to learn a shared represen-
tation that exploits multiple sensing modalities for learning
the underlying dynamics of intuitive physics. A key advan-
tage of this formulation is that it enables combining sensing
modalities, while naturally dealing with intermittent con-
tacts, during which tactile measurements are discontinuous.
While variational autoencoders are often trained by recon-
structing the encoder inputs, we introduce a time-lag ele-
ment into the network architecture (Hern´andez et al. 2018;
Kipf et al. 2018), where the outputs of the decoder are set to
predict future frames. We adapt the ELBO loss in Eq. (3) to:
ELBO(xt, xT ) ≜Eqθ(z|xt)

λlogpθ(xT |z)

−βKL
 qφ(z|xt)||pθ(z)

,
(7)
where t and T denote the input and output time instances.
Figure 3 describes our dynamics model learning frame-
work, where visual, tactile, and 3D pose are fused together to
learn a shared embedding space via three unimodal encoder-
decoders connected through the Product of Experts. To train

(a) Freefalling objects on a ﬂat surface.
(b) Objects sliding down an inclined plane.
(c) Objects perturbed from a stable resting pose.
Figure 4: Simulated example episodes for three dynamic
simulated scenarios. The top row shows the 3D object view
while the middle and bottom rows show the visual and tac-
tile measurement captured by the STS sensor, respectively.
Some frames have been removed for clarity.
the model loss, we follow the sampling methodology pro-
posed in (Wu and Goodman 2018), where we compute the
ELBO loss by enumerating the subsets of the modalities
M = {visual, tactile, pose}:
L(xt) =
X
X∈P(M)
ELBO(Xt, XT ),
(8)
where P(M) is the powerset of the modalities set M.
In the cases where there is an input to the dynamics model
(e.g., force perturbation in the third simulated scenario), we
include the conditional dependence of the input condition c
on the ELBO loss as:
ELBO(xt, xT |c) ≜Eqθ(z|xt,c)

λlog pθ(xT |z, c)

(9)
−βKL
 qφ(z|xt, c)||pθ(z|c)

,
Data Collection
The simulated dataset was collected using the PyBullet sim-
ulator described earlier, and the real-world dataset was col-
lected using a prototype of the STS sensor. While more de-
tails are provided in the supplemental material 2, we give an
overview of the experimental setup.
2Supplementary video for the experiments available at:
https://youtu.be/BWQ6n0mGRNc
Figure 5: Real-world data collection. An electronic device
(GoPro camera) is released from an unstable initial conﬁgu-
ration. The task is to predict the resting conﬁguration of the
object from its initial measurements.
Simulated Dataset
We consider three simulated physical
scenarios, as shown in Fig. 4, involving eight household ob-
ject classes3 drawn from the 3D ShapeNet dataset (Chang
et al. 2015). The tasks ordered in increasing difﬁculty are:
Freefalling objects on a ﬂat surface. This experiment
releases objects with random initial poses over the STS sen-
sor, where they collide multiple times with the sensor prior
to coming to rest. We collect a total of 1700 trajectories com-
prising 100k images.
Objects sliding down an inclined plane. This experi-
ment, inspired by Wu et al. (2015), places objects with ran-
dom initial poses atop an inclined surface, where they can ei-
ther stick due to friction or slide down. While sliding down,
the objects can roll, causing the ﬁnal conﬁguration to be sig-
niﬁcantly different than the initial. We collect a total of 2400
trajectories comprising 145k images.
Objects perturbed from a stable resting pose. In this
scenario, we consider an object initially stably resting on the
sensor, that is perturbed from its equilibrium by a randomly
sampled quick lateral acceleration of the sensor. This exper-
iment only considers bottles due to their elongated and un-
stable shape allowing for different outcomes (e.g., toppling,
sliding or standing) based on the direction and magnitude of
the applied force. Due to such diverse outcomes, this task is
considerably more complicated than the other two. We col-
lect a total of 2500 trajectories comprising 150k images.
Real-World Dataset
We validate the predictive accuracy
of our proposed framework on a small real-world dataset
collected manually using the STS sensor. We collect 2000
images from 500 trajectories using a small electronic device
(GoPro). This object has been selected due to its small form
factor (small enough to ﬁt on the 15cm×15cm sensor pro-
totype) and its mass (heavy enough to leave a meaningfully
tactile signature on the sensor). Each trajectory includes the
initial and ﬁnal visual and tactile images, obtained by rapidly
turning on/off the internal lights of the sensor. The object
is released from an unstable initial position, while being in
contact with the sensor, as illustrated in Fig. 5, and the end
of the episode is determined once the object is immobile.
3Object classes: bottle, camera, webcam, computer mouse, scis-
sors, fork, spoon, and watch.

(a) Freefalling objects on a ﬂat surface. The motion starts from a
non-contacting initial position, accounting for the initial unavailabil-
ity of tactile measurements.
(b) Objects sliding down an inclined plane. The motion starts in prox-
imity to the surface, accounting for the the initially availability of tac-
tile measurements that may be either active or inactive.
Figure 6: Multimodal predictions for three simulated scenarios evaluated on the validation set. The model predicts the ﬁnal
resting pose in addition to the visual and tactile measurements of the STS sensor. The bottom row compares the predicted pose
(solid coordinates) with the ground truth (dashed coordinates).
Experimental Results
We validate the ability of our approach to predict the evolu-
tion of physical conﬁgurations on simulated and real scenes.
We downsample the sensor images to a resolution of 64×64
images and an identical network architecture and training
parameters consistent across all evaluations. More details
are provided in the supplemental material.
Simulation
We compare the performance of our proposed
framework against two baselines. First, we highlight the
value of multimodal sensing for learning dynamics models.
Second, we compare our model against dynamic models pa-
rameterized using higher temporal resolutions.
In Fig. 6 and 7, we present the multimodal predictions
for three simulated scenarios evaluated on the validation set.
We show the MVAE’s ability to predict the raw visual and
tactile measurements of the resting conﬁguration of an ob-
ject with high accuracy, with the predictions closely match-
ing the ground truth labels. Interestingly, the model learns
a mapping between the visual, tactile and 3D pose modes
allowing it to sample correlating outputs from the learned
shared embedding. Fig. 6(a) highlights the ability of the
MVAE model to handle missing modalities, such as when
tactile information is unavailable in the input. Finally, the
model learns to accurately predict instances where the ob-
ject has fallen from the surface of the sensor, resulting in
empty output images.
In Figure 7, we present the prediction results for the sce-
nario where objects are perturbed from an initial stable pose.
Unlike the ﬁrst two experiments, this scenario includes a
random lateral force applied on the system that plays a sig-
niﬁcant role in determining the resting state of the objects,
thus making it considerably more complicated. To account
for this, we condition the MVAE with information about the
magnitude and direction of the lateral force using Eq. (9).
The results in Fig. 7 indicate that the model successfully in-
tegrates information about applied forces by correctly pre-
dicting the outcome about the object motion (i.e., toppling
or falling). Further comparison with the unimodal models
shows that the tactile mode has played an important role in
Figure 7: Qualitative comparison of visual and tactile predic-
tions of MVAE with unimodal VAE for the simulated force
perturbation scenario obtained on the validation set. MVAE
leverages the tactile mode to provide clearer predictions of
resting conﬁguration.

Figure 8: Qualitative comparison of visual predictions of
MVAE with unimodal VAE for the real dataset obtained on
the validation set. MVAE leverages the tactile mode to pro-
vide more accurate and clearer visual predictions of the rest-
ing conﬁguration.
reducing the uncertainty and blurriness of the predictions.
In Table 1, we present the quantitative results compar-
ing the multimodal and unimodal models for both one-step
(high temporal resolution) and resting state predictions (rest-
ing object conﬁguration). We draw two conclusions from
this analysis. First, models that exploit multimodal sensing
outperform those relying on visual/tactile modalities alone.
Importantly, we ﬁnd that tactile information improves the
prediction accuracy (for both visual and tactile predictions)
by reasoning about interaction forces and the geometry of
contact. Second, we show that predicting the resting state of
the object outperforms dynamic models using high tempo-
ral resolution. This is due to the fact that uncertainties and
errors propagate forward in time, leading to blurry and im-
precise predictions. The results show that in dynamic sce-
narios where the intermediate states are not of interest, we
can learn to predict the ﬁnal outcome with higher accuracy
without explicitly reasoning about intermediate steps.
Real Sensor
This section validates the predictive abilities
of the perceptual system on a real-world experiment setup
using the STS sensor. In Figure 8, we show the network’s
ability to predict the resting object conﬁguration, reasoning
through both the visual and tactile images. Qualitative com-
parison of visual predictions of MVAE with unimodal VAE
shows that the MVAE model leverages the tactile mode to
reason more accurately about the resting conﬁguration. In
Table 2, we quantitatively compare the predictive perfor-
mances of multimodal and unimodal models, highlighting
the important role played by both visual and tactile measure-
ments to determine the outcome of physical interactions.
Conclusion
We have designed and implemented a system that exploits
visual and tactile feedback to make physical predictions
about the motion of objects in dynamic scenes. We exploit a
novel visuotactile sensor, the See-Through-your-Skin (STS)
sensor, that represents both modalities as high resolution im-
ages. The perceptual system uses a multimodal variational
←Task
Setting →
Visual Perf.
Tactile Perf.
(×1e-4)
(×1e-4)
Model ↓
Multi
Final
Multi
Final
Step
Step
Step
Step
Freefall
VAE-visual only
6522
5750
NA
NA
VAE-tactile only
NA
NA
6770
6703
MVAE w/ pose
6548
5741
6726
6703
MVAE w/o pose
6635
5752
6735
6703
Inclined
VAE-visual only
6751
5895
NA
NA
VAE-tactile only
NA
NA
6714
6711
MVAE w/ pose
6625
5891
6719
6709
MVAE w/o pose
6549
5890
6713
6710
Perturb.
VAE-visual only
7369
6158
NA
NA
VAE-tactile only
NA
NA
6879
6705
MVAE w/ pose
7552
6054
6868
6701
MVAE w/o pose
6967
6095
6896
6702
Table 1: Prediction performance of ﬁxed-step and ﬁnal-step
predictions for unimodal and multimodal VAE models for
the three simulated scenarios. Performance is reported as the
average of the binary cross-entropy error on the validation
set. The bold cells indicate preferred values.
Setting →
Visual
Tactile
Model ↓
(×1e-4)
(×1e-4)
VAE-visual only
3532
NA
VAE-tactile only
NA
2872
MVAE w/o pose
3509
2819
Table 2: Prediction performance of ﬁnal-step predictions for
unimodal and multimodal VAE models on the real dataset.
The performance is reported as the average of the binary
cross-entropy error (BCE) on the validation set. The bold
cells indicate the best values.
autoencoder (MVAE) neural network architecture that maps
the sensing modalities to a shared embedding, used to in-
fer the stable resting conﬁguration of objects during physi-
cal interactions. By focusing on predicting the most stable
elements of a trajectory, we validate the predictive abilities
of our dynamics models in three simulated dynamic scenar-
ios and a real-world experiment using the STS sensor. Re-
sults show that the MVAE framework can accurately predict
the future state of objects during physical interactions with a
surface. Importantly, we ﬁnd that predicting object motions
beneﬁts from exploiting both modalities: visual information
captures object properties such as 3D shape and location,
while tactile information provides critical cues about inter-
action forces and resulting object motion and contacts.
Ethics Statement
The research in this work is related to the development of
smarter devices, possibly including assistive devices, but we
do not foresee any other substantive ethical implications.
