Learning to Emphasize:
Dataset and Shared Task Models for Selecting Emphasis in Presentation Slides
Amirreza Shirani†, Giai Tran†, Hieu Trinh†, Franck Dernoncourt‡,
Nedim Lipka‡, Paul Asente‡, Jose Echevarria‡, and Thamar Solorio†
†University of Houston
‡Adobe Research

Abstract
Presentation slides have become a common addition to the
teaching material. Emphasizing strong leading words in pre-
sentation slides can allow the audience to direct the eye to cer-
tain focal points instead of reading the entire slide, retaining
the attention to the speaker during the presentation. Despite
a large volume of studies on automatic slide generation, few
studies have addressed the automation of design assistance
during the creation process. Motivated by this demand, we
study the problem of Emphasis Selection (ES) in presentation
slides, i.e., choosing candidates for emphasis, by introducing
a new dataset containing presentation slides with a wide va-
riety of topics, each is annotated with emphasis words in a
crowdsourced setting. We evaluate a range of state-of-the-art
models on this novel dataset by organizing a shared task and
inviting multiple researchers to model emphasis in this new
domain. We present the main ﬁndings and compare the re-
sults of these models, and by examining the challenges of the
dataset, we provide different analysis components.
Introduction
The use of presentation slides has become so common-
place that researchers have developed resources meant to
guide presenters in the design of effective slides (Alley and
Robertshaw 2004; Alley and Neeley 2005; Jennings 2009).
However, these guidelines cover only advice with respect to
the overall style, such as colors and font size to ensure text is
readable from a distance, as well as considerations with re-
spect to graphical representations of content. However, users
can beneﬁt from complementary design recommendations
during slide creation. The result not only can be aesthetically
appealing but can enhance the slides’ content communica-
tion. Moreover, related recommendations can potentially re-
duce the amount of time users spend in authoring and design.
In this study, the main focus is on predicting emphasis
words in presentation slides. Emphasis is the use of spe-
cial formatting (e.g., boldface or italics) to make a word or
set of words stand out from the rest. Generally, word em-
phasis may use to express emotions, show contrast, capture
a reader’s interest, or clarify a message with a variety of
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
applications on different platforms. Speciﬁcally, in presen-
tation slides, well-designed slides annotated with emphasis
can signiﬁcantly increase the audience’s retention by guid-
ing the audience into focusing on a few words (Alley and
Robertshaw 2004). Instead of reading the entire slide, the
audience can read only the emphasized parts and retain their
attention in the speaker. As an example of expected results,
consider the slides shown in Figure 1 below. The slide on
the top (a) is plain, and while the text is readable, the slide
on the bottom (b) is easier for the audience to process.
(a)
(b)
Figure 1: The ﬁgure shows side by side comparison of slides
w/o emphasis. The slide on the top does not make use of any
special formatting to highlight salient content while the one
on the bottom does highlight key points.
arXiv:2101.03237v1  [cs.CL]  2 Jan 2021

Emphasis selection (ES) task is initially introduced in
(Shirani et al. 2019) with the focus on social media short
written text and has been featured and attracted attention in
SemEval’s 2020, Emphasis Selection for Written Text in Vi-
sual Media Task (Shirani et al. 2020b). In contrast to the
previous works on ES, we introduce a new corpus focusing
on presentation slides as well as automated approaches to
predict emphasis on presentation slides with the goal of fa-
cilitating the understanding of the message and enhancing
the visual appeal of the slides. This task is among the ﬁrst to
provide automated design assistance for presentation slides
by relying on the content of the slides.
Task Characteristics
The emphasis selection task on pre-
sentation slides poses new challenges associated with the
nature of the task: (1) Presentation slides can be found in
different shapes and structures. Users depending on the us-
age, prefer to follow either traditional corporate presenta-
tion styles or modern styles with more visuals and less tex-
tual content. Due to their diverse usage, slides cover a wide
range of topics from technical or legal presentations to non-
technical ones such as children’s illustrations. The require-
ment to generalize to different domains and cover a variety
of topics poses new challenges and encourages the develop-
ment of robust language understanding models. (2) To select
emphasis words, we only rely on input text rather than other
additional context from the user or the rest of the design.
Therefore, to tackle the subjective nature of this task, we
investigate models which by utilizing natural language un-
derstanding techniques aim to understand the most common
interpretation of a slide page, so the right emphasis can be
obtained automatically or interactively.
CAD21 Shared task
As part of this study, we organized
a shared task1 and invited researchers to work on the new
corpora. The goal of this shared task is to examine and in-
troduce the state-of-the-art approaches to model emphasis in
presentation slides. This shared task is part of the workshop
on Content Authoring and Design (CAD21) at AAAI 2021.
In the following sections, we describe the top-performing
systems, pointing out the insights gained from the task, the
strength and limitations of these models, as well as future
directions in this area.
Related Work
In visual communication, a wide range of design compo-
nents are typically used to increase the comprehension of
content and to convey the author’s intent. Different author-
ing and graphic design applications perform automatic de-
sign assistance that include images and text in different
forms and shapes. However, a majority of publicly available
tools are mainly driven by some basic heuristics in assist-
ing users during authoring. Recent works in the area started
to employ AI-based models to assist users during author-
ing by recommending appropriate design components based
on the content such as (Shirani et al. 2020a). Considering
1https://competitions.codalab.org/competitions/27419
a wide range of applications and its unique challenges, this
interdisciplinary area hasn’t been fully studied and has little
cross-disciplinary collaboration.
Many studies on prior works explored the automatic gen-
eration of presentation slides from documents such as scien-
tiﬁc articles (Beamer and Girju 2009; Wang, Wan, and Du
2017; Hu and Wan 2013; Shibata and Kurohashi 2005; Sra-
vanthi, Chowdary, and Kumar 2009). These studies mainly
rely on a general assumption that a slide region is a form
of summarization of the associated paper. Therefore, a wide
range of summarization methods have been proposed to im-
prove the effectiveness of the generation of slides. As the
next step for this research line, automatic design assistance
for presentation slides can help the users have more effective
presentations.
In a different context, some studies provide presenters
with guidelines or alternatives to the traditional designs
to communicate the presentation’s content more effectively
(Alley and Robertshaw 2004; Jennings 2009; Alley et al.
2006; Atkinson 2005; Doumont 2005). These studies are
in support of creating slides that feature sentence headlines
and visual evidence to reinforce ideas and increase the audi-
ence’s retention of the information during presentation.
Emphasis Selection for written text in visual media was
ﬁrstly proposed by (Shirani et al. 2019). An end-to-end se-
quence tagging architecture was proposed, which utilizes la-
bel distribution learning (LDL) to handle the subjectivity of
the task and predict emphasis scores on short written texts.
In a more recent study, 31 teams participated in SemEval’s
2020, (Shirani et al. 2020b) and proposed different novel
approaches to model emphasis effectively. For training and
evaluation purposes, an emphasis selection dataset with so-
cial media short texts from Adobe Spark and publicly avail-
able quotes was introduced. Top-performing teams, ERNIE
(Huang et al. 2020), Hitachi (Morio et al. 2020), and IITK
(Singhal et al. 2020) were able to achieve the ﬁrst, second,
and third places respectively by utilizing rich contextualized
pre-trained language models such as ERNIE 2.0 (Sun et al.
2020), XLMRoBERTa (Conneau et al. 2019), XLNet (Yang
et al. 2019), and T5 (Raffel et al. 2019). In this study, we fo-
cus on a new domain, presentation slide, which emphasizes
the importance of utilizing visual tools to convey a more ef-
fective presentation. Our work is quite different from prior
works focusing on social media data as emphasis in presen-
tation slides has different usage purposes in areas such as
e-learning and marketing. Therefore, identifying emphasis
in presentations brings unique challenges due to the differ-
ences in topic, length, and slide structure.
Task Deﬁnition
Given a sequence of tokens in a slide page, C
=
{x1, ..., xn}, the task is to compute a real value yi ∈[0, 1]
for each xi in C, indicating the degree to which the token
needs to be emphasized.

Data Collection
The Presentation Slides Emphasis Dataset (PSED)2 is a col-
lection of presentation slides, covering a wide range of top-
ics from technical slides to non-technical ones such as chil-
dren’s material. Each instance of PSED represents one slide
page along with eight annotations. To cover a wide range
of topics and areas, we collected data from different sources
such as websites with .ORG and .GOV domains and slides
available on ACL anthology3. Since the slides are in dif-
ferent forms and shapes, we needed to apply some pre-
processing steps to make sure the slide pages include clean
pieces of text. Therefore, we removed slides that only con-
tain equations, mathematical formulas, tables, or ﬁgures. To
extract text and transcribe slide pages to written texts, we
employed a python library called Pdfminer4. We followed
some quality control steps to ensure the text and the slide
match together.
Annotation Process
In an MTurk experiment, we asked nine annotators to la-
bel each sample text by selecting word(s) on a slide page.
More speciﬁcally, we showed the image of the slides as well
as the corresponding raw texts. Workers were asked to se-
lect words that need to be emphasized as if they prepare
the slides for their own presentation. To monitor the label-
ing process’s quality, we included carefully-designed quality
questions in 10 percent of the hits to make sure the annota-
tors read the slides.
We observed a low Fleiss’ Kappa score (Shrout and Fleiss
1979) of 0.1414 on the dataset. With a closer examination,
we noticed some technical and domain-speciﬁc slides ex-
ist in the dataset that are not entirely understandable for the
general audience. Therefore, we removed slides with Fleiss’
Kappa score lower than -0.05. As a result, the overall Fleiss’
Kappa score increased to 0.1797. We also noticed that in
many cases, there is at least one annotator with a very dif-
ferent sets of selection. So to improve the agreement in the
dataset and help to have a better training, for each slide, we
identiﬁed and removed the annotator with the lowest agree-
ment to the rest of the annotators. So the ﬁnal dataset con-
tains annotation from eight annotators and a Fleiss’ Kappa
score of 0.2092. Such a Kappa score indicates the existence
of multiple points of view about emphasis in the dataset. Ta-
ble 1 shows an example of a bullet point annotated with the
BIO annotations. As it is shown, there are more agreements
in selecting words such as “risk” and “management” com-
pared to the rest.
Data Analysis
Table 2 provides details about the length of instances in
PSED datasets. The table describes the minimum, mean,
and maximum number of words in slides for each split. The
dataset contains 1,776 high-quality slides, randomly split up
2The dataset along with the annotations can be found
online: https://github.com/RiTUAL-UH/Predicting-Emphasis-in-
Presentation-Slides-Shared-Task
3https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/
4https://github.com/pdfminer/pdfminer.six
between (70%) training, (10%) development, and (20%) test
sets for further analysis. More information on the number of
slides, sentences, and words in PSED dataset are provided
in Table 3.
Many
systems
reported
performance
improvement
through employing Part-of-Speech-Tags (POS) as features
to their models. In this section, we choose the top 20 POS
tags, which frequently occur in the training and develop-
ment sets, to analyze the feature’s effectiveness. We used
spaCy library 5 as a Part-of-speech tagger to obtain POS
tags for all tokens. To closely examine how the emphasis
probabilities are distributed, we divided them into four
intervals (0-0.25, 0.25-0.50, 0.50-0.75, and 0.75-1.00).
Figure 2 shows the occurrence of the top 20 POS tags in
four emphasis probability intervals for all token labels in
our training and development sets. POS tags such as “IN”,
“,”, “.”, and “:” are more favored to have low emphasis
probabilities (0-0.25). Interestingly, some POS tags like
“DT”, “CD,” and “VBZ” have zero words in the highest
emphasis probability interval (0.75-1.0). Overall, most
tokens fall into the lowest emphasis probability, and the
difference lies in (0.25-0.5) interval, where POS tags like
“NN”, “NNS,” and “VBG” mostly fall into. Similar to POS
tags, other hand-crafted features such as punctuations or
uppercased tokens helped improve the results of some mod-
els. This motivates us to examine the degree of emphasis
probability for different lexical features. Figure 3 shows the
average emphasis scores for each category in the training
and development sets. Comparing all lexical features, “Up-
perCase start” has the highest average emphasis score, and
“Contain numbers” and “Punctuations” are more favored to
have the lowest average scores. This indicates some general
trends for emphasized words in the slides with respect to
the categories of words.
Figure 2: Frequencies of the top 20 POS tags in 0-0.25,
0.25-0.5, 0.5-0.75, 0.75-1.00 intervals of emphasis proba-
bilities. The vertical values correspond to the percentage of
tag counts over the total number of words in the training and
development sets.
5https://spacy.io/usage/linguistic-features

Table 1: An example of the collected data along with its eight annotations and emphasis probabilities. In the table, “B”’s indicate
the beginning of the emphasis and “I”s indicate the inside and “O”s indicate the non-emphasis words. “Freq.” column represents
the frequency of “B”s, “I”s and “O”s. The last column, “Emphasis Probs.”, shows the emphasis probability (“B+I”) over eight
annotations.
Words
A1
A2
A3
A4
A5
A6
A7
A8
Freq. [B,I,O]
Emphasis Probs. [B+I]
•
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
[0,0,8]
0.0
Demonstrate
O
B
O
O
O
O
O
O
[1,0,7]
0.125
how
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
[0,0,8]
0.0
operational
O
O
O
O
O
O
B
O
[1,0,7]
0.125
agencies
O
O
O
B
O
O
O
O
[1,0,7]
0.125
are
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
[0,0,8]
0.0
using
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
[0,0,8]
0.0
NASA
O
B
O
O
B
O
O
O
[2,0,6]
0.25
data
O
O
O
O
I
O
O
O
[0,1,7]
0.125
for
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
[0,0,8]
0.0
risk
O
O
B
O
O
O
B
B
[3,0,5]
0.375
management
B
O
I
B
O
B
I
I
[3,3,2]
0.75
Table 2: Statistics on the lengths of the samples
Section
Min
Mean
Max
Train
13
78
180
Dev
15
71
164
Test
17
79
181
Table 3: Dataset Statistics
Section
#Slides
#Sentences
#Words
Train
1241
9645
96934
Dev
180
1251
12822
Test
355
2754
28108
Total
1776
13650
137864
CAD21 Shared Task
To better examine the challenges of the dataset and bench-
mark the task, we organized a shared task and invited the
community to participate in modeling emphasis in a new
challenging domain. There is a total of four teams participat-
ing in CAD21 shared task during the evaluation phase. We
observed many novel and interesting set of solutions for this
particular task, from non-transformer-based models such as
BiLSTM-ELMo to more advanced pre-trained models such
as XLNet, RoBERTa, ERNIE 2.0 and SciBERT. The most
popular approach was ensemble Transformer-based models.
Many hand-crafted features such as Part-of-speech (POS)
tags, keywords, and lexical features (such as words with cap-
ital letters and punctuation) were explored to improve the
models’ performance.
Evaluation Metric
We followed a similar evaluation method used in (Shirani
et al. 2020b). We compute Matchm metric for 1, 5, and 10
Figure 3: The ﬁgure shows average emphasis scores on the
training and development sets for four different lexical fea-
tures.
words with top probabilities on the test set. This metric is
speciﬁcally designed to meet the subjectivity of the task.
Matchm
For each slide page x in the test set Dtest, we se-
lect a set S(x)
m of m ∈{1, 5, 10} words with the top m prob-
abilities according to the ground truth. Similarly, we select
a prediction set ˆS(x)
m for each m ∈{1, 5, 10}, based on the
prediction probabilities. The Matchm is deﬁned as follows:
Matchm :=
P
x∈Dtest |S(x)
m ∩ˆS(x)
m |/m
|Dtest|
In order to better compare the results, we compute the aver-
age value of Matchm for all m ∈{1, 5, 10} and we call this
averaged value (RANK). We treat words in the ground truth
with the same probability equally, so if the model predicts
either of the tokens, we consider it as a correct answer.

Table 4: List of teams that participated in CAD21 Shared Task with their ranks and score
Teams
RANK
Score 1
Score 5
Score 10
UBRI-604
0.525
0.335 (1)
0.686 (1)
0.554 (2)
DeepBlueAI
0.519
0.330 (2)
0.667 (3)
0.559 (1)
Cisco
0.518
0.330 (2)
0.675 (2)
0.551 (3)
Baseline
0.475
0.301 (3)
0.634 (5)
0.489 (5)
Zouwuhe
0.474
0.285 (4)
0.638 (4)
0.500 (4)
Table 5: Length vs. Performance on the test set
Length/Performance
RANK
Score 1
Score 5
Score 10
Short (<60 tokens, 112 slides)
0.601
0.42 (1)
0.634 (1)
0.75 (1)
Medium (60 - 90 tokens, 126 slides)
0.55
0.349
0.589
0.713
Long (>90 tokens, 116 slides)
0.485
0.293
0.526
0.635
Baseline Model
In this section, we discuss the baseline model used for this
task. To demonstrate the challenges of this task compared to
(Shirani et al. 2020b), we decided to use the same baseline
model (DL-BiLSTM-ELMo), which is introduced in (Shi-
rani et al. 2019). With a sequence-labeling architecture, this
model utilizes ELMo contextualized embeddings (Peters et
al. 2018) as well as two BiLSTM layers to label empha-
sis. Moreover, the Kullback-Leibler Divergence (KL-DIV)
(Kullback and Leibler 1951) is used as the loss function dur-
ing the training phase.
Systems and Results
Four teams participated in CAD21 shared task during the
evaluation phase. The results of the four scores, as well as
the RANK score, are shown in Table 4. UBRI-604 (Hu et al.
2021) and Cisco (Ghosh et al. 2021) submitted system de-
scription papers including their data analysis, detailed exper-
iments and reported results. In total, three teams performed
higher than the baseline, and one team performed lower.
The top-performing team, UBRI-604 (Hu et al. 2021),
ranked in the ﬁrst place with RANK score of (0.525) on
the leader board in the evaluation phase. UBRI-604 achieved
the highest score on both Score 1 and Score 5. DeepBlueAI
team stood in second place (0.519), with a 0.006 RANK
score lower than the ﬁrst team. DeepBlueAI outperformed
all teams in Score 10 by achieving 0.559. Finally, Cisco
(Ghosh et al. 2021), with 0.001 scores lower than the sec-
ond team ranked third. In the next section, we describe and
compare the approaches the three teams used to model em-
phasis.
Top Performing Systems and Novel Architectures
UBRI-604 (Hu et al. 2021) proposed an end-to-end
Transformer-based approach. Different rich Transformer-
based pre-trained language models were explored during the
experiment, such as ALBERT (Lample and Conneau 2019),
GPT-2 (Radford and Wu 2019), ROBERTA (Liu et al. 2019),
ERNIE 2.0 (Sun et al. 2020), XLNET(Yang et al. 2019),
XLM-ROBERTA and BERT (Devlin et al. 2019). Com-
paring the results of all seven models, XLM-ROBERTA-
LARGE performed the best. Besides pre-trained language
models, UBRI-604 explored hand-crafted features. Their
model leveraged the lexical features (such as words with
capital letters and punctuations) for further improvement.
The second team, DeepBlueAI, introduced an ensemble
Transformer-based model with two fully-connected layers
combined with POS tags embedding and hand-crafted fea-
tures. The ensemble model takes advantage of BERT, SciB-
ERT (Beltagy, Lo, and Cohan 2019) and ERNIE 2.0 pre-
trained language models by taking the average of the scores
predicted by these models.
Cisco (Ghosh et al. 2021) explored two approaches based
on BiLSTM+ELMo (Shirani et al. 2019) architecture and
Transformer-based pre-trained models with the base model
of RoBERTa and XLNET. They enriched the ELMo con-
textual embedding in BiLSTM+ELMo model by incorpo-
rating a character-level BiLSTM Network. Interestingly, the
reported results show an increase of 0.026 when POS tags
and keyphrases are added to the model. This shows the ef-
fectiveness of these two features for this task. Cisco’s best
score on the evaluation phase was obtained using an en-
semble of XLNet and RoBERTa that makes them the third
in the leaderboard. They boosted the model further in the
Post Evaluation phase by ensembling XLNet and BiLSTM-
ELMo models and incorporating hand-crafted features like
POS and Keyphrase. In an interesting analysis, they showed
the model’s performance deteriorates with the slides’ in-
creasing length.
Discussion
PSED dataset contains slides with different lengths. To bet-
ter examine how the length of slides can affect the predic-
tion, we perform an error analysis to examine this relation-
ship. We divided the test set into three sections based on
the instances length, namely <60, 60-90, and >90 tokens.
Then we compute the average Matchm scores over all sub-
missions for every example in each section. As shown in

Table 5, short slides always achieve better scores compared
to the longer ones (medium and long slides) across all score
1, 5, and 10.
Many slides in PSED dataset contain scientiﬁc words.
Besides using pre-trained models, trained on a general do-
main, some teams decided to handle scientiﬁc words differ-
ently. For example, DeepBlueAI explored using the SciB-
ERT (Beltagy, Lo, and Cohan 2019) model, which is pre-
trained on scientiﬁc articles. On the other hand, Cisco ex-
plored training a scientiﬁc keywords predictor and use the
output as a feature to the model. Extending the proposed ap-
proaches to more efﬁciently address the diverse vocabulary
of the dataset is an important future direction.
Conclusion
We have presented a new dataset for emphasis selection on
presentation slides. The dataset poses new challenges for
modeling emphasis. As part of this study, we set out a shared
task and invited researchers to model emphasis for the ﬁrst
time on the domain of presentation slides. We provided dif-
ferent analysis on the dataset and summarized the insights
gained from the shared task. A future extension could ex-
plore more robust techniques to address the challenges in
PSED dataset with a large number of slides diverse in topic,
structure and length.
