LLbezpeky: Leveraging Large Language Models for
Vulnerability Detection
Noble Saji Mathews
University of Waterloo, Canada

Yelizaveta Brus
University of Waterloo, Canada

Yousra Aafer
University of Waterloo, Canada

Meiyappan Nagappan
University of Waterloo, Canada

Shane McIntosh
University of Waterloo, Canada

Abstract
Despite the continued research and progress in building se-
cure systems, Android applications continue to be ridden
with vulnerabilities, necessitating effective detection meth-
ods. Current strategies involving static and dynamic analysis
tools come with limitations like overwhelming number of
false positives and limited scope of analysis which make
either difficult to adopt. Over the past years, machine learn-
ing based approaches have been extensively explored for
vulnerability detection, but its real-world applicability is
constrained by data requirements and feature engineering
challenges. Large Language Models (LLMs), with their vast
parameters, have shown tremendous potential in understand-
ing semnatics in human as well as programming languages.
We dive into the efficacy of LLMs for detecting vulnerabili-
ties in the context of Android security. We focus on building
an AI-driven workflow to assist developers in identifying
and rectifying vulnerabilities. Our experiments show that
LLMs outperform our expectations in finding issues within
applications correctly flagging insecure apps in 91.67% of
cases in the Ghera benchmark. We use inferences from our
experiments towards building a robust and actionable vul-
nerability detection system and demonstrate its effectiveness.
Our experiments also shed light on how different various
simple configurations can affect the True Positive (TP) and
False Positive (FP) rates.
1
INTRODUCTION
Despite advancements in building secure systems and exten-
sive research in the area, Android applications remain prone
to a range of vulnerabilities and even vulnerability reintro-
duction for fixed issues [1, 5], creating a pressing demand
for effective vulnerability detection methodologies. Current
approaches to tackle this primarily revolve around static
and dynamic analysis tools [10]. However, they have their
distinct limitations, such as vast false positives in the case
of static analysis tools [3] and an overwhelming amount of
effort that goes into building these frameworks and adapting
them to newer vulnerability types.
In the past few years, there have also been numerous
explorations into the use of machine learning to uncover
vulnerabilities [10], however, the applicability of these re-
mains limited in real-world settings due to the vast amount
of training data required and an explicit focus on feature
engineering to approximate the complexity of the systems
being analyzed. With the advent of LLMs, huge billion pa-
rameter models have pushed the boundaries of what was
thought achievable through an Artificially Intelligent sys-
tem. These are believed to acquire “embodied knowledge
about syntax, semantics, and ontology inherent in human
language” [8] and have also shown significant power when
dealing with programming languages due to their relatively
simpler underlying Grammar and Semantics [6]. This brings
a question to mind, How good are these Language Models
at detecting vulnerabilities?. There have been several recent
explorations into the use of these large language models
and improving their efficacy for vulnerability detection in
general, and these have shown promising results [9].
Current work in the literature has looked at the perfor-
mance of GPT-based models for the task of vulnerability
detection in code [4], Cheskov et al. report it to be not very
effective but they employ a very simplistic approach. Other
recent work has shown that extended prompting and LLM-
driven methods complemented by other techniques have
yielded more accurate results than simple prompting for de-
tecting CWEs present in code [2, 11]. There has also been
a much more detailed exploration that looks into various
aspects of using LLMs for software security with promising
results [14].
We explore this area further in the context of Android
Security, attempting to build an AI-enabled workflow that
would enable developers to detect and aide in remediating
vulnerabilities or even aid developers in writing secure code
by acting as a pair programmer. Do note that fine-tuning
models or training our own LLM is out of scope of this
research, we primarily seek to explore if and how the latent
knowledge present in these LLMs can be used for Android
analysis.
For this exploration into the use of new and emerging tech-
nologies it is critical we lay out a few fundamental questions,
to begin with, and direct our efforts. We attempt to answer as
arXiv:2401.01269v2  [cs.CR]  13 Feb 2024

CS858, Project Proposal, LLbezpeky
Noble Saji Mathews, Yelizaveta Brus, Yousra Aafer, Meiyappan Nagappan, and Shane McIntosh
many of the following as possible based on insights gained
from this exploration:
• RQ1: Can LLMs detect Android vulnerabilities
with basic prompting techniques?
– If so how good are they at this compared to existing
tools?
– What kind of vulnerabilities are LLMs good at un-
covering? Can these systems detect newer vulnera-
bilities that are less well-known?
– Do we require fine-tuning of either the Model or the
embeddings to achieve better results?
• RQ2: What kind of Input would such a system
need to be able to understand and discover issues
in the code?
– How could we supply this additional context? What
kind of Knowledge bases would aid LLMs in discov-
ering complicated bugs? (API Usage, Permissions In-
volved, Framework Endpoints, Cross-language and
dynamic components)
– Can existing solutions / static tools be used in tan-
dem with these LLMs? or is it better to address only
some classes of vulnerabilities with each type of
approach?
To build out such a workflow there are 2 key elements we
need to address (We give a brief overview of these in the
following sections)
• How do we get LLMs (particularly Instruct Trained
Models) to do what we want? -> Prompt Engineering
• How do we supply the code and additional context to
an LLM -> Retrieval Augmented Generation
1.1
PROMPT ENGINEERING
Prompt Engineering, a novel technique in artificial intel-
ligence, is instrumental in enhancing the efficacy of lan-
guage models for specific tasks. It involves intricate prompt
construction that optimizes AI performance by eliciting im-
proved responses [13]. One groundbreaking strategy within
Prompt Engineering is the Chain-of-Thought Prompting in-
troduced by Wei et al. (2022) [12]. This approach pushes the
boundary of AI’s reasoning by guiding the model through a
sequence of prompts that enrich and build upon each other.
It allows for more depth in AI reasoning, particularly when
paired with few-shot prompting, proving useful for complex
tasks that necessitate multiple stages of reasoning.
1.2
RETRIEVAL-AUGMENTED GENERATION
Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) is an AI framework
designed to enhance the quality of responses generated by
large language models (LLMs) [7]. RAG allows LLMs to build
on a specialized body of knowledge to answer questions
more accurately. It’s like giving the model an open-book
exam, where it can browse through content in a book, as
opposed to trying to remember facts from memory. In our
case, this knowledge base would be specific to Android and
could include any or all of the following:
• Additional code that needs to be fetched from a large
codebase
• Static / Code analysis results that could prove useful
to comment about a specific issue
• Documentation and additional information that allows
the LLM to garner a better understanding of the system
and task at hand
We initially focus our efforts on prompt engineering to
leverage the LLM’s knowledge for tracing Android vulnera-
bilities. We attempt to compare the detection capability of
the LLM with other strategies on the same set of applications,
thereby providing insights on which approach can uncover
more vulnerabilities with fewer false positives. We use these
insights to continually update and improve the instructions
used for prompting over the course of the experiments.
In order to do this we need a benchmark dataset designed
to test Android Security Analysis tools. For this study we tar-
get smaller apps that replicate individual vulnerability types.
However to understand our design objectives we need to
structure our pipeline so it can logically be extended to real
applications. In the next section we move on to a case study
attempting detection in an app that has multiple seeded
vulnerabilities. This involves integrating retrieval mecha-
nisms for obtaining additional context that can significantly
enhance the feasibility and performance of such systems. Re-
trieval mechanism are critical in real-world scenarios when
dealing with larger applications due to the limited token
window of present-day LLMs. Hence it is also important that
we focus on optimising the size of the input to the model
while ensuring the LLM has enough context to make a sound
decision.
2
METHODOLOGY
In our study, experiments were conducted with GPT-4, using
the Ghera benchmark 1 as the dataset. We use GPT4 for our
experiments as it is one of the most powerful available LLMs
as of today. In our limited experiments with GPT3.5 it strug-
gles with following instructions properly. Further we also
setup our experiments to work with Open LLMs but as of
writing this report open models like Llama 2 perform signifi-
cantly worse compared to their paid counterparts. Hence we
stick with out decision to employ GPT4 despite the higher
costs incurred for inferences. Throughout the iterations, we
refine the prompts, enhancing the information provided to
the model, including specific details about vulnerabilities. In
the final experiment, only “AndroidManifest.xml” and “Main-
Activity.java” files if they exist in the analyzed project were
presented to the model. We also provide a list of additional
files present in the project. We also experiment with sum-
marizing the content of files and providing that information
1Ghera Dataset

LLbezpeky: Leveraging Large Language Models for Vulnerability Detection
CS858, Project Proposal, LLbezpeky
Figure 1. Rough Architecture of Experiments
to the model as well. We also implemented functionality to
allow the model to request the content of specific files if
necessary for further vulnerability identification.
Ghera is a benchmark repository that predominantly cat-
alogs vulnerabilities previously identified in Android appli-
cations, as established in existing literature. This repository
is distinctively organized into benchmarks, each targeting
a specific vulnerability. These benchmarks comprise three
types of applications: a benign application that possesses
the vulnerability, a malicious application designed to exploit
this vulnerability, and a secure application that is immune
to such exploitation. The benchmarks are practical, includ-
ing instructions for building and executing the applications,
thereby allowing for the empirical verification of the vulner-
abilities and their corresponding exploits. Presently, Ghera’s
collection exclusively consists of ’lean’ benchmarks, which
are minimalistic apps specifically designed to showcase the
vulnerabilities and their exploits, without incorporating ad-
ditional complex functionalities. Ghera contains 69 different
issues as of date that can be categorized into the following
types:
• Crypto: Vulnerabilities in app encryption methods,
including block cipher issues and exposed encryption
keys.
• ICC: Risks in app communication components, such
as dynamic receivers and intent hijacks.
• Networking: Security issues in app network commu-
nications, including certificate mishandling and MitM
attack susceptibility.
• NonAPI: Vulnerabilities due to outdated libraries and
inherited library flaws in apps.
• Permission: Security risks from unnecessary or weak
app permissions leading to potential unauthorized ac-
cess.
• Storage: Data storage vulnerabilities in apps, includ-
ing external/internal storage risks and SQL injection
threats.
• System: System-related vulnerabilities in apps, focus-
ing on privilege escalation and information exposure.
• Web: Web component vulnerabilities in apps, such as
MitM attack risks and code injection in WebViews.
During the experimentation process, we found that the
Ghera benchmarks contained explicit indications of "Benign"
and "Secure" in both the file paths and the content. For our
experiments to be valid and to minimize data leakage to
the LLM about the ground truth, we replaced these values
with "llbezpekymyapp" and "llsezpekymyapp" respectively.
However, we include our insights from runs in Experiments
1 and 2 that had the leaked data to see how much it influences
the results. Interestingly leakage of the word secure clearly
influenced the outcomes and highlighted the need for clearly
sanitizing the data from semantic names that can mislead
the LLM’s reasoning. Do note that folder names still indicate
the kind of vulnerability to some extent but this shouldn’t
be a cause of concern in any of the subsequent experiments.
Our analysis of these experiments and their outcomes will
be described in the following section.
3
RESULTS
In this section, we discuss the various experiments con-
ducted, the thought processes behind them, and the insights
obtained.
3.1
Experiment 1: Basic Prompting GPT4
For this experiment, we explore basic prompting without
providing any information about the vulnerability. We wish
to figure out what kind of vulnerabilities if any GPT could
detect without any explanation about the issue. Results are
shown in Table 1.

CS858, Project Proposal, LLbezpeky
Noble Saji Mathews, Yelizaveta Brus, Yousra Aafer, Meiyappan Nagappan, and Shane McIntosh
Leaked Data
Cleaned Data
Insecure
Secure
Insecure
Secure
Flagged insecure
54
21
58
56
Flagged secure
5
38
1
3
Undecidable
1
0
1
0
Overall
60
59
60
59
Table 1. Results of Experiment 1
It is interesting to note that even without any details about
the vulnerability GPT4 could flag apps as insecure. However,
it seems that the model just has a tendency toward mark-
ing apps as insecure as can be seen with secure apps in the
cleaned dataset. We note that even though 58 out of 60 in-
secure are correctly identified with relevant snippets being
highlighted 56 of the 59 secure apps are misclassified.
3.2
Experiment 2: Providing a summary of the
vulnerability
In this experiment, we check if the model can verify the pres-
ence of specific vulnerabilities given a very brief summary.
We hypothesize that specifying limited details about issues
we are looking for would lead to context activation 2 and
enable the LLM to use its existing knowledge towards analy-
sis. Therefore, we extended experiment 1 by providing short
information about a vulnerability and the obtained results
are shown in Table 2. This process involves creating brief
textual descriptions that encapsulate how each vulnerability
functions or why an app is susceptible to it. These summaries
are crucial as they offer an initial understanding without the
need for detailed, app-specific descriptions, which may not
be readily available in real-world scenarios. Such summaries
might be akin to Common Weakness Enumeration (CWE)
descriptions, providing essential insights at a glance.
Leaked Data
Cleaned Data
Insecure
Secure
Insecure
Secure
Flagged insecure
53
6
55
34
Flagged secure
6
52
3
24
Undecidable
1
1
2
1
Overall
60
59
60
59
Table 2. Results of Experiment 2
We see that with just a short summary of the vulnerability
we are able to improve on the number of Secure apps flagged
as insecure by a significant margin. Another thing that can
be noted from Figure 2 is that Experiment 2 actually reduces
the time consumed by the model to return an inference both
on secure and benign apps. We notes than we have a TP rate
of 66.38% in this case as compared to 51.26% in the previous
experiment (we consider undecidable as a misclassification).
2In-Context Learning
3.3
Experiment 3: Requesting files as and when
required
For previous experiments we were sending all the needed
files, we cannot use such techniques for real-world applica-
tions. Hence, we modified the prompt, so the model asks to
provide more information if needed. Results are shown in
Table 3. We initially focus on the AndroidManifest.xml and
MainActivity.java files, recognizing that while vulnerabilities
often reside deeper in the code, these files can provide vital
starting points for analysis. From here, the model can request
additional files as needed, thereby initiating the Retrieval
Augmented Generation process in a structured manner.
Our approach includes providing a summary of all files
in the application, with the exception of the Manifest and
the MainActivity file. The summary is generated by the LLM
itself in a preprocessing step. The LLM is then enabled to re-
quest the content of specific files based on these summaries.
This selective process is particularly useful in identifying vul-
nerabilities that might be indicated by exported components
or specific implementations in the code. This methodology
is a form of Retrieval Augmented Generation though at a
very coarse granularity, aiming to probe its impact on the
efficiency and accuracy of vulnerability detection.
The undecidable case in this experiment requires the build.gradle
file and the "libs" folder and even though that is correctly
requested we currently only include code within "app/src/-
main" and address this in the final architecture. We noticed
that the model tends to ask for all files when implemented in
a simple fashion so we ended up creating an alternate chain
that summarizes all the files and includes this summary with
the list of files. This actually had the opposite effect with the
model never requesting any file in most cases. We justify
the lower TP rates of 60.5% due to hallucinations made by
the model based on the summaries. Another thing to note is
that even though the impact is not significant, the generated
reports lack clarity due to not having access to the exact
implementation details. However there are clearly efficiency
gains to an approach like this though while sacrificing on
the quality of the report generated.
Cleaned Data
Insecure
Secure
Flagged insecure
57
43
Flagged secure
2
15
Undecidable
1
1
Overall
60
59
Table 3. Results of Experiment 3

LLbezpeky: Leveraging Large Language Models for Vulnerability Detection
CS858, Project Proposal, LLbezpeky
Figure 2. Time consumed for each inference

Key Takeaways: From our experiments we
see that given sufficient context GPT4 can
successfully identify vulnerabilities. Sum-
marizing clearly saves significantly on the
costs, since the summaries can be used
across scanners and is a one-time cost. At-
tempts at reducing the amount of informa-
tion still need work and we need a critique
process to deal with the models tendency
to mark applications as insecure.
4
LLB ANALYZER
We use the insights from the experiments to put together
a python package called “LLB”, which can be invoked to
run the the pipeline on any target android application. The
package is designed to facilitate the scanning of Android
projects for security vulnerabilities. It employs a Command
Line Interface (CLI) as shown in Figure 3, leveraging the
Typer framework to provide an intuitive user experience.
This package integrates distinct scanning mechanisms, of-
fering flexibility and comprehensiveness in the vulnerability
assessment process.
The core functionality of "llb" is encapsulated in the scan
command. This command allows users to specify the tar-
get Android application directory for analysis. In alignment
with the package’s focus on adaptability, it incorporates mul-
tiple scanner options, namely ’GHERA’ and ’VULDROID’,
along with an ’all’ option to execute all available scanners.
These scanners are tailored to identify different categories
of vulnerabilities, ensuring a thorough examination of the
target application. The scan command also supports an out-
put directory specification, where the results of the scan are
systematically compiled and stored. This feature is critical
for maintaining a record of the vulnerabilities identified and
serves as a reference for further analysis or remediation ef-
forts. An example of a part of the report generated by LLB is
shown in Figure 4.
In addition to its scanning capabilities, "llb" includes the
expert command. This command is particularly useful for
Figure 3. LLB Python package running through CLI
Figure 4. Example from case study report generated by LLB
post-scan analysis, allowing users to append expert com-
ments or insights to the generated reports. This feature un-
derscores the package’s utility in collaborative environments,
where multiple stakeholders, including security analysts and
developers, might interact with the scan results.

CS858, Project Proposal, LLbezpeky
Noble Saji Mathews, Yelizaveta Brus, Yousra Aafer, Meiyappan Nagappan, and Shane McIntosh
5
Case study
5.1
Flagged Vulnerability: Deep dive
Let us look at the analysis report for case “WebView NoUser-
Permission InformationExposure” in Ghera. In mobile app
security, it’s crucial to handle sensitive user data carefully.
In this case we have a simple web browser that allows web
pages to access the device’s location via a GPSTracker API.
The API’s getLatitude() method can be triggered by JavaScript
on a webpage to fetch the user’s latitude without asking for
the user’s consent each time. This creates a vulnerability: a
malicious webpage could use this method to secretly track a
user’s location. To mitigate this risk, apps must not only ask
for user permission to access sensitive data initially but also
maintain strict control over its access during use, particularly
when dealing with potentially untrustworthy web content.


1

2
public double getLatitude () {
3
if (location != null) {
4
return location.getLatitude ();
5
} else {
6
// return dummy value
7
return 42.42;
8
}
9
}


Listing 1 Information Exposure snippet flagged by LLB as
indicated in the Ghera benchmark
In this case LLB correctly identifies the concerning snippet
shown in Listing 1. LLB returns the reason as follows: “The
application is vulnerable because it exposes sensitive infor-
mation (GPS location) to the JavaScript code running in the
WebView without explicitly asking the user for permission...
The application does request the ACCESS_FINE_LOCATION
permission, but it does not inform the user that their location
will be accessible to any malicious JavaScript code running in
the WebView.” and also provides a suggested fix to remediate
the issue.
5.2
Misclassification: Deep dive
A common trend which we observed among misclassified
samples was that they either were flagged for bad patterns in
code which might not necessarily be considered vulnerable
by an expert in the context we are analysing. Let us look at a
case where the LLM was thrown off. The initial classification
of the code as "Vulnerable" due to lack of sanitization checks
on the file paths seems to be based on a misunderstanding. In
the provided snippet, the file name fileNm is hard-coded to
"demo.txt", and there’s no indication that it is influenced by
external inputs or user-provided data. Therefore, the specific
concern of path traversal, where an attacker could manipu-
late file paths to access unauthorized directories, does not
apply here.
It’s likely that the Language Model (LLM) that made the
initial classification may have been "thrown off" due to the


1
String fileNm = "demo.txt";
2
//
...
3
4
if (i != null && i.getStringExtra("fileName") !=
null && !i.getStringExtra("fileName").equals(""
)
5
&& i.getStringExtra("fileContent") != null && !i.
getStringExtra("fileContent").equals("")
6
&& i.getStringExtra("fileName").equals(fileNm)) {
7
fileContent = i.getStringExtra("fileContent");
8
} else {
9
setResult(RESULT_CANCELED);
10
return;
11
}
12
13
//
...
14
15
File file = new File(dir , fileNm);
16
try (FileWriter fileWriter = new FileWriter(file)) {
17
fileWriter.append(fileContent);
18
} catch (IOException e) {
19
Toast.makeText(getApplicationContext (), "IOError
while writing", Toast.LENGTH_SHORT).show();
20
setResult(RESULT_CANCELED);
21
e.printStackTrace ();
22
}
23
//
...


Listing 2 Misclassified example in Ghera
common pattern of vulnerabilities associated with file han-
dling operations, especially when they involve input from
intents or external sources. When it sees code that interacts
with file systems, there may be an overcautious approach to
flag potential security risks, such as path traversal.
The expert follow-up correctly clarifies that, in this spe-
cific case, there is no direct vulnerability present in the snip-
pet due to the fixed file name. Using the expert comment we
are able to set the analyzer on the right track even in other
cases and give a more relevant suggestion if required.
5.3
Vuldroid
In order to analyze a full application with multiple known
vulnerabilities we chose to conduct a case study on Vuldroid.
Vuldroid is a vulnerable Android application, which con-
tains only security issues. The app consists of the following
vulnerabilities:
• Steal Password MagicLoginLinks (V1). This vulner-
ability allows a malicious app to intercept password
reset tokens or magic login links. This is possible be-
cause the app doesn’t properly restrict which activities
can handle deep links, allowing an external app to cap-
ture these sensitive tokens.
• Webview Xss via Exported Activity (V2). Here, the
vulnerability lies in an exported activity that loads
web content. Since the activity doesn’t validate the
URLs it loads, a malicious app can pass a script (like
a JavaScript prompt) through an intent, leading to a
cross-site scripting (XSS) attack.
• Webview Xss via DeepLink (V3). Similar to the pre-
vious one, this exploit involves XSS attacks but through

LLbezpeky: Leveraging Large Language Models for Vulnerability Detection
CS858, Project Proposal, LLbezpeky
deep links. The app fails to validate deep link URLs,
allowing the injection of malicious scripts via query
parameters in these URLs.
• Stealing Files via Webview (V4). This issue arises
because the app’s webview settings allow access to
local file URLs (file:///). By crafting a specific URL, an
attacker can access and transmit local files to a remote
server.
• Stealing Files via Fileprovider (V5). The FileProvider
is misconfigured to expose all paths, and combined
with an exported activity, it allows other apps to ac-
cess and steal files.
• Intent Sniffing Between Two Applications (V6).
This vulnerability occurs when two apps communi-
cate using intents without proper security checks. A
malicious app can intercept these intents and access
the transmitted data.

exported broadcast receiver in the app, a malicious app

information.
• Command Execution via Malicious App (V8). This
vulnerability allows a malicious app to execute unau-
thorized commands or operations within the vulner-
able app. The details of this exploit weren’t fully de-
scribed in your summary.
The results of the case study are described in Table4. The
meaning of the symbols:
• C - vulnerability was detected
• W - the provided information wasn’t enough for the
LLM to make the decision.
• X - vulnerability wasn’t detected
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
V7
V8
W
C
C
C
W
C
C
C
Table 4. Results of case study
We note that running LLB on the Vuldroid source code
we correctly identify 6 of the 8 seeded vulnerabilities. The 2
which couldn’t be classified were because the analyzer could
not find the relevant snippets for analyzing by requesting
files. For the remaining 6 cases the correct snippet is iden-
tified and a valid fix is also suggested in most cases. Thus
the LLB report doesn’t just tag vulnerable applications but
actually walks you through the reasoning involved and how
to fix the flagged issue.
6
DICUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
The field of leveraging Large Language Models (LLMs) to
enhance Software Engineering tools and improve our un-
derstanding of large projects is a very active research area.
There are numerous parameters and processes that can be
optimized based on the specific functionality desired. We
explore a basic prompting strategies for LLB however a more
structured pipeline with multiple agents could significantly
improve the performance of LLB as an analyzer. We also wish
to highlight that each vulnerability we scan for is consid-
ered as a single scanner and there is clear value to exploring
making this process less resource intensive by sharing infor-
mation between scanners and choosing which ones to run
based on the type of codebase and artifacts present within it.
We also wish to compare the results with those obtained
from existing approaches in an empirical study. While our
current framework does not integrate static analysis, we ac-
knowledge its potential value and are considering its incor-
poration in future iterations. Overarching the entire method-
ology is a constant focus on improving software vulnerability
identification, reducing false positive rates, and streamlining
the process of enhancing Android app security. We believe
our study serves as a basis to attempts to merge state-of-
the-art language models with static analysis, potentially es-
tablishing a more reliable, accurate, and efficient android
vulnerability detection approach. “What existing tools and
code level analysis results can be supplied to the LLM to take
a more informed decision?” remains an open question.
The results of the LLB case study on vuldroid highlights
a shortcoming in the current implementation. This can be
easily handled by indexing the code into a vector database
and allowing vector search and retrieval to identify relevant
files rather than building outwards from a set of files. Further
summaries were not incorporated in the LLB package due
to their tendency to induce hallucinations in the report. We
plan to address this by increasing our granularity to a file
level and incorporating critique mechanisms like have been
employed in recent works in other domains that attempt to
leverage LLMs.
7
THREATS TO VALIDITY
Prompt engineering, while a powerful tool to guide LLMs,
is also subject to limitations. The effectiveness of prompt
engineering is heavily reliant on the skill and experience of
the user. Poorly designed prompts can lead to suboptimal
results, as the model’s responses are only as good as the
questions posed. There’s also the risk of introducing bias
through prompts, which can skew the model’s focus and
potentially overlook certain types of vulnerabilities.
A point which we highlighted earlier is about leaking
semantic information about the class of the problem due to
artifacts in the code. We replace keywords to clean our data
but there could be implicit data that leaks this information
to the LLM which we might not have accounted for in out
analysis. Further capability of LLMs is very diverse with
some performing drastically different compared to others.
While we set seeds to ensure replicability of our results these
can vary drastically over time.

CS858, Project Proposal, LLbezpeky
Noble Saji Mathews, Yelizaveta Brus, Yousra Aafer, Meiyappan Nagappan, and Shane McIntosh
Another concern is the dynamic nature of both Android
platform and cybersecurity threats. As Android continuously
evolves, new types of vulnerabilities emerge, which may not
be immediately recognized by an LLM trained on outdated
data. Similarly, cyber threats are constantly evolving, with
attackers devising new methods to exploit systems. This re-
quires continuous updates and retraining of the LLM, which
can be resource-intensive.
8
CONCLUSION
In our research, we explore the utilization of Large Language
Models (LLMs) for detecting Android vulnerabilities, We
successfully demonstrate the power of LLMs for Android
Vulnerability detection and remediation. Our experiments us-
ing Prompt Engineering on the Ghera Vulnerability Dataset
show promising results and bring up new and interesting
directions which can be explored towards improving the
efficacy of such systems. Further we utilize the results and
insights from our experiments to create a highly configurable
python package that allows easy modification of the LLM be-
ing used as the reasoning engine and also supports extension
to multi-agent architectures. In terms of the questions we set
out to answer it is clear that LLMs are incredibly powerful
tools that can revolutionize Software Engineering tools as
we know them, but it also clear that they do not work magic
out of the box and clearly require work in terms of drafting
and structuring a better analysis pipeline architecture and
optimising the context available to the LLM.
9
