Graph Attentional Autoencoder for Anticancer
Hyperfood Prediction
Guadalupe Gonzalez1∗
Shunwang Gong1∗
Ivan Laponogov1
Kirill Veselkov1
Michael Bronstein1,2,3
1Imperial College London
2Twitter
3USI Lugano
United Kingdom
United Kingdom
Switzerland
Abstract
Recent research efforts have shown the possibility to discover anticancer drug-
like molecules in food from their effect on protein-protein interaction networks,
opening a potential pathway to disease-beating diet design. We formulate this
task as a graph classiﬁcation problem on which graph neural networks (GNNs)
have achieved state-of-the-art results. However, GNNs are difﬁcult to train on
sparse low-dimensional features according to our empirical evidence. Here, we
present graph augmented features, integrating graph structural information and raw
node attributes with varying ratios, to ease the training of networks. We further
introduce a novel neural network architecture on graphs, the Graph Attentional
Autoencoder (GAA) to predict food compounds with anticancer properties based
on perturbed protein networks. We demonstrate that the method outperforms the
baseline approach and state-of-the-art graph classiﬁcation models in this task.
1
Introduction
Even though cancer is the second leading cause of death in the United States [9], almost 40% of all
cancers are preventable through dietary and lifestyle changes. It has been experimentally shown that
fruits and vegetables are particularly rich in various types of cancer-beating molecules [13, 2]. In
light of this, increasing research efforts aim at elucidating the biological compounds and molecular
mechanisms responsible for the observed anticancer properties of foods.
Experimental studies have elucidated disease-preventing properties of several food compounds.
However, the low efﬁciency and high cost of experimental studies have motivated the adoption of
computational techniques to study food compounds’ properties. Veselkov et al. [2019] introduced a
novel study on large-scale prediction of anticancer food compounds based on their commonality to act
on protein-protein networks similarly to clinically-approved anticancer drugs. Using Random Walk
with Restarts (RWR) to generate vector representations of protein-protein networks characterizing
drugs, a supervised method was used to classify drugs into anticancer and non-anticancer classes. The
trained classiﬁer was then used to predict anticancer food compounds. We formulate this problem as
a graph classiﬁcation task in which all graphs (drugs and food compounds) share the same topology
(human protein-protein network) differing only in node features (protein targets of drugs: binary
feature on each node).
Graph neural networks. Graph neural networks, developed as part of the recent trend of deep learn-
ing on graphs [1, 5], have been particularly useful for classifying properties of graphs corresponding
to different molecules [3, 4, 15]. These graph classiﬁcation models have produced state-of-the-art
results in graph classiﬁcation benchmarks [11, 15, 16]. However, one remarkable difference between
∗Equal contribution.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.
arXiv:2001.05724v1  [cs.LG]  16 Jan 2020

drug-protein datasets and the common benchmarks is that, in the former, only sparse 1-dimensional
binary node features (1.36% positive ratio) are provided, and drugs (or food compounds) share the
same topology, which makes it a challenge for the majority of graph classiﬁcation models.
Contribution. To address the difﬁculty of training GNNs with sparse 1-dimensional node features,
we propose to convert raw features to the continuous space by integrating the structural information
of the graph and raw node attributes, with varying ratios. The model proposed here, GAA, is
capable of learning from these graph augmented features and ﬁnding the balanced integration
ratio, outperforming baseline models and state-of-the-art graph classiﬁcation models in this task.
Additionally, we show that we are able to inject prior biological knowledge in the neural network
architecture producing biologically-meaningful graph embeddings.
2
Our Approach
In this section, we introduce our model, GAA. The model consists of three major steps: (i) it converts
raw discrete node feature vectors to the continuous space by integrating them with the graph topology;
(ii) a graph attentional autoencoder further fuses the structural information of the graph and its node
attributes, generating low-dimensional graph embeddings in the middle layer; (iii) embeddings are
then fed into multilayer perceptrons for prediction.
Deﬁnitions. We consider an undirected graph G = (V, E) with its node feature matrix X ∈RN×F
and adjacency matrix A, where N is the number of nodes, and F is the number of features in each
node.
Graph augmented features. To address the issue of low dimensional discrete node features, we
consider enhancing node feature vectors by integrating raw features and the graph topology. Inspired
by the RWR algorithm [8], we extend its deﬁnition to allow diffusion of node attributes as Xt+1 =
αX + (1 −α) ˆAXt, where ˆA is the column-normalized adjacency matrix, and α denotes the restart
probability controlling the trade-off between prior information and graph smoothing. α →1
represents higher weight on node prior information (or attribute), whereas α →0 represents higher
weight in diffusing node attributes to the whole graph. This process converges to a steady-state
distribution:
X∗= α(I −(1 −α) ˆA)−1X = kαX
(1)
where X∗∈RN×F is the steady-state node feature matrix and x∗
ij denotes the normalized proximity
(or importance) score of node i with respect to nodes with nonzero initial j-th feature. Based on Eq.
1, we deﬁne the graph-augmented features as follows:
XG = [kα1X, kα2X, ..., kαtX] ∈RN×F ′
(2)
with F ′ = tF and where [kα1X, kα2X, ..., kαtX] are the concatenated feature matrices with varying
ratios of prior information and network smoothing integration. The graph attentional autoencoder is
capable of learning from XG to ﬁnd the optimal diffusion ratio.
Graph attentional encoder. To allow the network propagation to leverage the unique property of
our graph augmented features, our encoder is designed by stacking two layers of graph attentional
networks (GATs) [10] in the ﬁrst two layers, which allows for (implicitly) assigning different
importances to different nodes within a neighborhood. The output feature matrix of the GAT layer is
described as:
H∗= σ

∥K
k=1
X
j∈Ni
αk
ijW kH


(3)
where ∥represents concatenation and σ is a nonlinear activation function, and the input of the ﬁrst
GAT layer, H(0) ∈RF ′×N denotes the transpose of the graph augmented feature matrix XG. The
attentional coefﬁcients αk
ij are computed as:
αij =
exp

LeakyReLU

⃗a⊤[W⃗hi ∥W⃗hj]

P
k∈N(i) exp

LeakyReLU

⃗a⊤[W⃗hi ∥W⃗hj]
.
(4)
2

where ·⊤represents transposition and ∥is the concatenation operation. ⃗α ∈R2F ′ and W ∈RF ′′×F ′
are weight parameters. Note that to stabilize the model training, we do not use multi-heads on the
second GAT layer.
To convert each graph to an ﬁnite dimensional vector in RD, we deﬁne a pooling layer based on
our prior knowledge of the graph, which follows the previous GAT layers. Suppose we know any
node i belongs to a ﬁnite set of supermodules Uj = {y1, y2, ..., yk} with D = | ∪Uj| < |V|, and
each supermodule yi contains a ﬁnite set of nodes {i1, i2, ..., it}, we aggregate node feature vectors
{⃗xi1, ⃗xi2, ..., ⃗xit} with a differentiable, permutation invariant function, e.g., sum, mean or max. We
deﬁne it as SupPool, namely, supermodule pooling:
⃗xyi = SupPooli∈yi(⃗xi)
(5)
which yields the output node feature matrix Xy ∈RD×C assume the input feature dimensionality
is C. The embedding vector ⃗z ∈RD is then obtained from ⃗z⊤= ⃗w⊤X⊤
y +⃗b⊤where ⃗w ∈RC and
⃗b ∈RD are weight and bias vector respectively.
Graph attentional decoder. Our decoder is used to recover the graph augmented features XG. We
calculate the reconstructed feature matrix ˆXG as follows:
ˆXG =
X
j∈Ni
αijW2 GAT(W1⃗z +⃗b, A), with⃗z = Enc(XG, A).
(6)
where W1 ∈R|V|×D and W2 ∈RF ′×F are weight matrices, assuming the dimensionality of the
output feature matrix of GAT layer is F.
Multilayer perceptrons. Given a set of graph embeddings {⃗zG1,⃗zG2, ...,⃗zGk} and the corresponding
graph labels {y1, ...., yk}, the aim of the MLP is to learn a mapping function f : ⃗zGk →yk. The
output of the MLP is obtained from the below equation:
⃗y = σ2

W2 σ1

W1⃗z +⃗b1

+⃗b2

(7)
where σ1 and σ2 are the ELU and softmax function respectively. W1, W2 and⃗b1,⃗b2 are weight and
bias matrices respectively.
Optimization. The model loss combines the reconstruction loss Lr = ||Enc ◦Dec (XG, A) −XG||2
encouraging the encoder-decoder pair to be a nearly identity transformation, and the cross-entropy
loss Lc. We optimize the total loss computed as L = Lc+γLr. γ can be considered as an equilibrium
term γ ∈[0, 1], which is used to maintain the balance of the loss expectation of the graph attentional
autoencoder and the MLP.
3
Evaluation and Discussion
Datasets. We followed the procedure similar to Veselkov et al. [2019] to compile our datasets: a
human protein-protein network, drug and food compounds features. We ﬁltered the human protein-
protein network to include only experimentally-validated interactions, removed isolated nodes and
kept the biggest connected component of the network (15,135 nodes and 177,848 edges). This
interactome network is then considered as the shared graph structure. There were 2,048 small
molecule drug compounds and 7,793 food compounds, each one represented by a 15, 135-dim binary
feature vector ⃗x ∈RN, where xi = 1 if the drug or food compound targets gene i, and 0 otherwise.
Each drug was associated with a binary label indicating anticancer or non-anticancer class. It is
worth noting that the drug dataset was highly unbalanced with only 10.2% of anticancer drugs, and
drug features were quite sparse with drugs targeting around 1.36% of genes in average. We used the
Molecular Signature Database [7] to build 186 biological pathways (supermodules) for aggregation
of genes.
Baselines. We compared our model against the method introduced in [12] (Baseline) as well
as a number of state-of-the-art deep learning architectures for graph classiﬁcation, i.e., Graph
Convolutional Networks (GCN) [6], Graph Isomorphism Networks (GIN) [15]. To allow GCNs
and GINs to achieve their best possible performance, we compute graph-level outputs after each
convolutional layer and combine them via concatenation, inspired by the Jumping Knowledge
framework [14]. Furthermore, to explore the importance of the graph augmented features with regard
3

DNA replication
Nucleotide excision repair
P53 signaling
Apoptosis
Cancer
Colorectal cancer
Renal cell carcinoma
Pancreatic cancer
Endometrial cancer
Glioma
Prostate cancer
Thyroid cancer
Basal cell carcinoma
Melanoma
Bladder cancer
Chronic myeloid leukemia
Acute myeloid leukemia
Small-cell lung cancer
Non small-cell lung cancer
Value
Anticancer
Non-anticancer
Value
Anticancer
Non-anticancer
(a)
(b)
Pathway
DNA replication
Nucleotide excision repair
P53 signaling
Apoptosis
Cancer
Colorectal cancer
Renal cell carcinoma
Pancreatic cancer
Endometrial cancer
Glioma
Prostate cancer
Thyroid cancer
Basal cell carcinoma
Melanoma
Bladder cancer
Chronic myeloid leukemia
Acute myeloid leukemia
Small-cell lung cancer
Non small-cell lung cancer
Pathway
Figure 1: Visualization of drug embedding values for cancer-related pathways for (a) the baseline
model, and (b) our model
to these graph classiﬁcation models, we trained GCNs and GINs in two settings: with raw features or
graph augmented features (denoted with +).
Model conﬁgurations. We randomly split the drug-protein dataset into train/validation/test sets in
the ratio of 8:1:1 (stratiﬁed splits with respect to labels). For the conﬁgurations of GCNs and GINs,
3 GNN layers (including the input layer) are used, and 2 MLP layers follow. We apply the same
graph-level mean readout for GCNs and GINs. In terms of the input graph augmented features, we
use XG = [k0.1X, k0.2X, ..., k0.9X]. Additionally, biological pathways are used as supermodules
among genes for the SupPool layer. To balance the positve/negative classes, we re-scaled weights to
be inversely proportional to class frequencies of each class during training. All models were trained
on NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPUs.
Table 1: Summary of results (%) on
anticancer drug prediction. ACC rep-
resents accuracy. F1 denotes the har-
monic mean of the precision and recall.
AUPR is area under the precision-recall
curve. Graph-augmented features de-
noted with +.
Method
ACC
F1
AUPR
Baseline
79.02
46.91
56.26
GCN
70.73
25.00
21.87
GIN
84.88
45.61
48.01
GCN+
69.76
31.11
27.67
GIN+
90.24
54.54
43.64
GAA+
88.29
58.62
62.04
Results. Results of our experiments are summarized in
Table 1. We show that our proposed model (GAA) signif-
icantly improves performance of the baseline and graph
classiﬁcation models in this dataset. It is worth noting that
most of the metrics of GCNs and GINs using our proposed
graph augmented features improve remarkably. It is also
interesting to observe that embeddings of anticancer drugs
show higher values in cancer-related pathways as compared
to embeddings of non-anticancer drugs. Importantly, the
differences are signiﬁcantly increased in embeddings gener-
ated by our model (Figure 1 (b)) compared with the baseline
(Figure 1 (a)). This visualization provides insights into how
our model can learn biologically-meaningful embeddings
that are useful for the anticancer class prediction.
Anticancer foods prediction. Among the predicted an-
ticancer compounds with a probability ⩾0.9 we found
several additional compounds to those reported in [12],
supported by experimental evidence (see Supplementary
materials), which are present in tea, root vegetables, coffee,
bay, and breadfruit. Although our initial results are very encouraging, as part of our future work we
are planning to do extensive sensitivity analysis of the GAA model predictions.
4
Conclusion
In this paper, we introduce a novel graph augmented feature for easing training of graph neural
networks with sparse low-dimensional node features. Our model allows end-to-end training and
prediction while providing meaningful biological embeddings. Experiments suggest that the proposed
GAA model is capable of encoding both graph structure and node features in a way useful for
graph classiﬁcation. In this setting, our model outperforms the baseline method and several recently
proposed graph neural networks by a signiﬁcant margin.
4

5
